[1a]
[página ilustrada]

[1b]
joy? isheeteathiritee

30

eialass ties? oie * trates . } se: O atte nae . ‘ 5) Blpetat hat oor aro
A  Hl  Tih seat erotcite tice it at i =t34 9g wif atet ii a a) arsine ea
ld rales 2 ideitetete ae i tsi ye “br He ete = tee aati ah ;

Hsiecipeaelts inteiates +5 ? eke La Teptit Pi ¢ fi rae!

: obs a ' pte] " bd

3 ee

(Arete oi Ul ateteats te jon fe Ani:

i  sats  iesipfedeea grata tong ]tceatetaterct be iLthesedeset Pati Seat
eetete rites iieeeabtctalnaidti eaten inate eect eet te [oM [ttel i Reet
TRIS ISTH feat HSE se ales meer es he Sor 3 elatay f ie pth etd i ( ra i
Pr  Attys  ALA  Ty ie oy (th este pale pease ite site nits ( 1 pastti re
Pye o)%67 Cpa es a ed ad tetentilis area

:  .)  ie! 4: beesotidranatcaatesertsees tasetatatats an icretecutiliats
Scania  ania  eo  BMP chen i oa vee Oe na AM HAL ti. is ar c “3 $ret; He
Otel:  sielesa  ie  Samide bd ecto eeu ieee tions Biers tilts Bales eet:
sat t ihe iE: heh Tet tates ‘ orig clay one oy te = “i

ote

Late OL

eis 4 . Py ee== bt 9) Ae ores vat = a tgilace

ue  SING ie?) fir, Bastien tt fiteiare ere Ltitte estat srelaytilite tes
hy  Ieualsnaanceea nat ped + r,t igh sacar tegta SUE pans aie pean dg ht
iM He lale 10g!

eect he

rpoireaselee : Bi

[2a]
»*  Introductory Volumes: 1. The Great Conversation 2. The Great Ideas I
3.  The  Great Ideas II M »» MM « MMM »» MMMM » M t MM »»MMMM » 4. HOMER
5. AESCHYLUS SOPHOCLES EURIPIDES ARISTOPHANES 6. HERODOTUS THUCYDIDES 7.
PLATO  8.  ARISTOTLE  I 9. ARISTOTLE II 10. HIPPOCRATES GALEN 11. EUCLID
ARCHIMEDES APOLLONIUS NICOMACHUS

[2b]
12.  LUCRETIUS  EPICTETUS  MARCUS  AURELIUS  13. VIRGIL 14. PLUTARCH 15.
TACITUS  16.  PTOLEMY  COPERNICUS  KEPLER 17. PLOTINUS 18. AUGUSTINE 19.
THOMAS  AQUINAS  I  20.  THOMAS  AQUINAS  II  21.  DANTE 22. CHAUCER 23.
MACHIAVELLI  HOBBES  24.  RABELAIS  25.  MONTAIGNE 26. SHAKESPEARE I 27.
SHAKESPEARE II

[3a]
28. GILBERT GALILEO HARVEY 29. CERVANTES 30. FRANCIS BACON 31. DESCARTES
SPINOZA 32. MILTON 33. PASCAL 34. NEWTON HUYGENS 35. LOCKE BERKELEY HUME
36.  SWIFT  STERNE  37. FIELDING 38. MONTESQUIEU ROUSSEAU 39. ADAM SMITH
40. GIBBON I

[3b]
41.  GIBBON  II  42. KANT 43. AMERICAN STATE PAPERS THE FEDERALIST J. S.
MILL  44. BOSWELL 45. LAVOISIER FOURIER FARADAY 46. HEGEL 47. GOETHE 48.
MELVILLE  49.  DARWIN  50.  MARX  ENGELS  51. TOLSTOY 52. DOSTOEVSKY 53.
WILLIAM JAMES ^&i 54. FREUD

[4a]

[4b]

[5a]
[página ilustrada]

[5b]
[página ilustrada]

[6a]
[página ilustrada]

[6b]
[página ilustrada]

[7a]

[7b]

[8a]
[página ilustrada]

[8b]
[página ilustrada]

[9a]

[9b]
- - se'°A 95129.U1897

[10a]

[10b]

[11a]
Appendix II. The Principles and Methods of

[11b]
25390

[12a]
[página ilustrada]

[12b]
[página ilustrada]

[13a]
.  Explanation  of Reference Style ix Man 1 Chapter 5 1 52 - Mathematics
42  53-  Matter  63  54-  Mechanics  80  55-  Medicine "3 56. Memory and
Imagination  *33  57-  Metaphysics 158 58. Mind 171 59- Monarchy 204 60.
Nature  22 5 61. Necessity and Contingency 251 62. Oligarchy 270 63. One
and  Many  282 64. Opinion 3°3 65. Opposition 323 66. Philosophy 342 67.
Physics 363 68. Pleasure and Pain 377 69. Poetry 400 70. Principle 420 7
1  -  Progress 437 72 - Prophecy 454 73- Prudence 472 74- Punishment 488
75- Quality 5i3 76. Quantity 527

[13b]
Chapter  77.  Reasoning  546  78.  Relation  569  79.  Religion  588 80.
Revolution  626  81. Rhetoric 645 82. Same and Other 665 83. Science 682
84.  Sense  706  85. Sign and Symbol 730 86. Sin 753 87. Slavery 774 88.
Soul 791 89. Space 811 90. State 826 91. Temperance 866 92. Theology 882
93.  Time 896 94. Truth 9i5 95. Tyranny 939 96. Universal and Particular
957  97. Virtue and Vice 975 98. War and Peace 1010 99. Wealth 1038 100.
Will 1071 101. Wisdom 1 102 102. World 1118 Appendices : I. Bibliography
of  Additional Readings 1 143 II. Syntopical Construction 1219 Inventory
of Terms 1303

[14a]
[página ilustrada]

[14b]
[página ilustrada]

[15a]
EXPLANATION   OF   REFERENCE   STYLE   THE  references  have  a  uniform
typographical  style,  but  the  manner of referring to particular works
varies in certain respects. The Explanation of Reference Style describes
the  typographical  construction of the references, with some comment on
the  variations. It is divided into four parts: I. General Typographical
Style   II.   Style  of  Bible  References  III.  Punctuation,  Symbols,
Abbreviations IV. Table of Authors, Titles, and Author's Divisions Cited
I.  GENERAL  TYPOGRAPHICAL  STYLE  The two examples below illustrate the
general  typographical  pattern of the references to Great Bool^s of the
Western World) and the headings above the examples call attention to the
five  elements  commonly  present in the construction of the references.
Volume  Author's  Page  Number  Name  Title  of  Work Author's Divisions
Sections  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxi 178a-200d 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 365b-378d (i) Volume Number: The volume number
indicates  in  which volume of Great Boohj of the Western World the work
or  passage  referred  to can be found. Most volumes contain the work of
one  author.  When  a  single  volume  contains the works of two or more
authors,  the volume number is given for each author. When the work of a
single author is contained in two volumes, the volume number is assigned
according to the contents of the volume. (2) Author's Name: The author's
name  immediately  follows  the volume number, except in the case of the
American  State  Papers and the Federalist, which are included in Volume
43. Authors' names are usually given in shortened form. ix

[15b]

[16a]
x  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (3) Title of Work: in which the works appear in the
volume.  (4) Author's Divisions: example, do not. tive for all the tales
written in verse.

[16b]
The  title  follows  the  author's  name,  with the two exceptions above
noted.  Titles are also frequently abbreviated or shortened. When two or
more  works  are cited for a single author, the titles are listed in the
order  By  "author's divisions" is meant all such subdivisions of a work
as  book,  part,  section,  chapter,  paragraph, line number. The phrase
"author's  divisions"  does  not  necessarily mean divisions made by the
author;  they  may  have  been  made  by an editor of his work. Author's
divisions  are  given only for some works, according as, in the judgment
of the editors, their inclusion would prove meaningful or helpful to the
reader.  References  to  Locke,  for instance, as in the example, always
cite  author's  divisions;  whereas  references to Gibbon, as in the For
some  works,  author's divisions are completely given, as for Locke. For
other  works,  only  the  most important or largest divisions are given.
Thus  for  Rabelais  only  the  book  but not the chapter is given. Line
numbers, in brackets, are given for all works of poetry, including those
published  in  prose  translations. For Goethe's Faust, the line numbers
cited  refer  to  the lines of the English translation as well as to the
lines   of   the   original   German.   For   other  poetical  works  in
translation—the works of Homer, the Greek dramatists, Lucretius, Virgil,
and  Dante—the  line  numbers  cited  refer to the lines of the works in
their  original  languages; for these works, the line numbers printed on
the  pages of this edition furnish only an approximate indication of the
location  of  the  equivalent  lines in the English translation. For all
poetical  works  written in English, the line numbers are the numbers of
the  English  lines.  In  the  case  of  Chaucer's Canterbury Tales, the
numbering of the lines is consecuIn references to the works of Aristotle
(in  Volumes  8 and 9), the figures and letters enclosed in the brackets
signify  the page, column, and approximate line in the Berlin edition of
the  Greek text edited by Immanuel Bekker. In references to the American
State Papers (in Volume 43),

[17a]
:  :  the bracketed line numbers refer to the lines on the pages of this
edition  only.  In  references to the Summa Xheologiea of Thomas Aquinas
(in  Volumes  19  and  20), the author's division "Part I—II" stands for
Part  I  of  the Second Part, and "Part II—II" stands for Part II of the
Second  Part. In the case of the Summa Theologies the author's divisions
cited  may include not only questions and articles, but the subdivisions
of  articles.  In  such  cases the page sections correspond in extent to
that  of a whole article, to enable the reader to see the subdivision of
an  article, when it is cited, in the context of other parts to which it
is  related. Author's divisions precede page sections except in the case
of footnote and note numbers, which follow page sections. When more than
one  passage  is  cited  within the same author's division, the author's
division is not repeated ; as, for example 38 Rousseau: Social Contract,
bk  ii, 403a-404a; 405d-406a (5) Page Sections: The pages of Great Boo\s
of the Western World are printed in either one or two columns. The upper
and lower halves of a one-column page are indicated by the letters a and
b. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to
the  upper  and lower halves of the lefthand column, the letters c and d
to  the  upper and lower halves of the right-hand column. These half and
quarter  page  sections are based on divisions of a full text page. Page
sections  give  the  page numbers and locate the sections of the page in
which  the  passage  referred  to  begins  and ends. For example, in the
reference 53 James : Psychology, 1 1 6a- 1 1 9b the passage cited begins
in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half of page 119. In
the  reference:  7 Plato: Symposium, 163b- 164c the passage cited begins
in  the  lower  half of the left-hand column of page 163 and ends in the
upper  half of the right-hand column of page 164. In references to works
printed in two columns, the format of the page

[17b]
REFERENCE STYLE xi

[18a]
xii  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  a,c  or  b,d.  For  example:  14 Plutarch: Solon
64b,d-77a,c  the  upper half of page 77. cated in the body of that text.
divide  each  page  only into an upper and a lower half. a (D), follows.
For example: ter. For example Old Testament: Exodus, 6:1-4,16-18

[18b]
sometimes  places  continuous  reading matter in the a and c sections of
the upper half of the page, or in the b and d sections of the lower half
of  the  page. This occurs when a work or an author's division begins in
the  lower,  or  ends  in  the upper, half of the two-column page. Where
continuous  reading  matter thus appears in discontinuous page sections,
it is indicated by means that the work cited begins in the lower half of
page  64 and ends in Footnotes or notes are sometimes specifically cited
by  themselves  in the references, in which case the page sections given
correspond  to  their location on the pages referred to. When a footnote
or  a  note  is not specifically cited, the page sections given mark the
beginning and the end of the text referred to. The reader is expected to
consult  the  footnotes  or notes indiChaucer's works (in Volume 22) are
printed  in  two  columns;  the  inside column of each page contains the
Middle  English text, the outside column a Modern English version. Since
both  columns contain equivalent passages, the references to this volume
employ  page  sections (a and b) which II. STYLE OF BIBLE REFERENCES All
Bible  references are to book, chapter, and verse in both the King James
and  Douay versions of the Bible. When the King James and Douay versions
differ  in the title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses,
the  King  James  version  is cited first and the Douay, indicated by In
references  to  the Bible, a colon is used to separate chapter and verse
numbers ; and a comma separates the numbers of verses in the same chap-

[19a]
: III. PUNCTUATION, SYMBOLS, ABBREVIATIONS (i) Punctuation ^"~~ Diagonal
line:  When a series of references to one author includes two or more of
his  works  published  in  the  same  volume, a diagonal line is used to
separate references to one work from references to another. The diagonal
line  is  used in the same way to separate references to different books
of  the  Bible.  For example: Old Testament: Exodus. 33:12-23 / Job, 1 1
7-g 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-303a / Representative Government, 327b,d-332d
Semi-Colon:  When a series of references includes the citation of two or
more  passages  in  the  same work, a semi-colon is used to separate the
references  to these passages. For example: Old Testament: Genesis, 1 :i
2— 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 403a-404a; 405d-406a Comma: When
a  comma  separates  the  title  of a work, or an author's division of a
work,  from  the  page  sections which follow, passages cited are only a
part  of  the  whole  work  or  of  the author's division indicated. For
example,  in  the  references:  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-b; 44d-45c 36
Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 73a- 74b the passages from Plutarch are only a
part  of  Lycurgus,  and the passage from Swift is only a few pages from
Part  II of Gulliver s Travels. When the title of a work, or an author's
division  of  a work, is not separated by a comma from the page sections
which  follow, the reference is to the whole work or to the whole of the
indicated author's division. For example, in the references 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus  32  a-48d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii 45a-87b the whole of
Lycurgus and the whole of Part II of Gullivers Travels are cited.

[19b]
REFERENCE STYLE xiii

[20a]
XIV  THE GREAT IDEAS (2) Symbols sage or a whole work that has just been
cited.  example  example  intermittently  rather  than continuously. For
example  Constitution,  ch 1-4 i 553a-572d passim (3) Abbreviations used
for  both  singular and plural words. A ARTICLE AA . ARTICLES ANS ANSWER
APH  APHORISM  BK . . BOOK CH . . CHAPTER COROL . COROLLARY (D). . DoUAY
DEF . DEFINITION DEMONST DEMONSTRATION DIV . DIVISION EXPL EXPLANATION
[&].
. . footnote INTRO . INTRODUCTION

[20b]
esp:  The  abbreviation  "esp"  precedes one or more especially relevant
passages  which  are  contained  within  the page boundaries of a larger
pasWhenever  passages contained within a single reference are especially
referred  to,  a comma after the page sections separates these passages.
For  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435a-441d  esp  435c-436b,  437c-d,
438d-441d  Whenever  passages contained within a single reference to the
Bible are especially referred to, a comma is also used to separate these
passages.  For New Testament: Romans, 1-8 esp 2:11-16, 2:27-29, 7:21-25,
8:27  passim: The word "passim" following a reference signifies that the
work or passage referred to discusses the topic under which it is cited,
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7 461d-463c passim / Athenian The
following  is a list of the abbreviations used in the references. Unless
an   abbreviation   for   the  plural  is  listed  below,  the  singular
abbreviation  is  In]  .  . . note OT. . . Old Testament par . paragraph
PREF  PREFACE PROP PROPOSITION Q . . QUESTION QQ • . QUESTIONS REP REPLY
sc  .  SCENE  SCHOL  .  SCHOLIUM  SECT SECTION SUPPL . SUPPLEMENT TR . .
TRACTATE

[21a]
IV.  TABLE  OF  AUTHORS, TITLES, AND of the Western World, Volumes 4-54.
The  authors  are  enumerated  in  the order in which they appear in the
successive  volumes  of the set; and under each author's name the titles
of  his works are listed in the order of their appearance. ened form. In
this  table,  their  full  names are given, followed by their life dates
when  these are ascertainable. Because some volumes contain the works of
two  or  more  authors  who  may be separated by centuries, the order in
which  the  authors  are  cited  in the references sometimes departs the
authors  and  their  works in the right chronological order. ened title,
the  full  title  follows.  The  table  also  includes a notation of the
author's  divisions  that  are  used  in references to particular works.
cited  are the same for several titles, they are named only once, either
opposite the set of titles as a whole, or opposite the last title in the
group.  Volume Number, Author, and Title 4 Homer The Iliad The Odyssey 5
Aeschylus (c. 525-456 b.c.) The Suppliant Maidens Agamemnon The Persians
Choephoroe The Seven Against Thebes Eumenides Prometheus Bound

[21b]
REFERENCE STYLE xv Author's Divisions Cited book, Line Line

[22a]
XVI THE GREAT IDEAS Sophocles (c. 495-406 b.c.) Oedipus the King Electra
Oedipus  at  Colonus  Trachiniae Antigone Philoctetes Ajax Euripides (c.
480-406  b.c.)  Rhesus  Electra  Medea  The Bacchantes Hippolytus Hecuba
Alcestis  Heracles Mad Heracleidae The Phoenician Maidens The Suppliants
Orestes  The  Trojan  Women  Iphigenia  Among the Tauri Ion Iphigenia at
Aulis Helen The Cyclops Andromache Aristophanes (c. 445-^. 380 b.c.) The
Acharnians   The  Frogs  The  Knights  The  Lysistrata  The  Clouds  The
Thesmophoriazusae  The  Wasps The Ecclesiazusae The Peace The Plutus The
Birds  6  Herodotus  (c.  484-r.  425 b.c.) The History 6 Thucydides (c.
460-r.  400 B.C.) Peloponnesian Wai The History of the Peloponnesian War
7  Plato  (c. 428-c. 348 b.c.) Charmides Phaedo Lysis Gorgias Laches The
Republic  Protagoras  Timaeus  Euthydemus  Critias  Cratylus  Parmenides
Phaedrus  Theaetetus  Ion  Sophist  Symposium  Statesman  Meno  Philebus
Euthyphro Laws Apology The Seventh Letter Crito

[22b]
Line Line Line BOOK BOOK except Republic and Laws, book

[23a]
Volume  Number,  Author, and Title 8 Aristotle (384-322 b.c.) Categories
Interpretation  On  Interpretation  Prior  Analytics Posterior Analytics
Topics   Sophistical  Refutations  On  Sophistical  Refutations  Physics
Heavens  On  the  Heavens  Generation  and  Corruption On Generation and
Corruption  Meteorology  Metaphysics  Soul  On  the  Soul  Sense and the
Sensible On Sense and the Sensible Memory and Reminiscence On Memory and
Reminiscence   Sleep   On  Sleep  and  Sleeplessness  Dreams  On  Dreams
Prophesying   On  Prophesying  by  Dreams  Longevity  On  Longevity  and
Shortness  of  Life  Youth, Life, and Breathing On Youth and Old Age, On
Life  and  Death,  On  Breathing 9 Aristotle History of Animals Parts of
Animals  On  the  Parts  of  Animals  Motion of Animals On the Motion of
Animals  Gait of Animals On the Gait of Animals Generation of Animals On
the  Generation  of  Animals  Ethics  Nicomachean  Ethics  Politics  The
Athenian Constitution Rhetoric Poeftcs On Poetic* 10 Hippocrates (f. 400
b.c.) The Oath Ancient Medicine On Ancient Medicine Airs, Waters, Places
On Airs, Waters, and Places Prognostics The Bool^ of Prognostics Regimen
in  Acute  Diseases  On  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases  Epidemics  Of the
Epidemics  Injuries  of  the Head On Injuries of the Head Surgery On the
Surgery  Fractures  On  Fractures  Articulations  On  the  Articulations
Instruments of Reduction

[23b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  xvn  Author's  Divisions  Cited  chapter. Line \ book,
chapter,  Line  chapter,  Line  book,  chapter, Line chapter, Line book,
chapter, Line chapter, Line book, chapter, Line chapter, paragraph book,
chapter, Line chapter, Line paragraph paragraph, appendix book, section,
paragraph, case paragraph

[24a]
XV111  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Volume Number, Author, and Title 10 Hippocrates
(continued)  Aphorisms  The  Law  Ulcers  On Ulcers Fistulae On Fistulae
Hemorrhoids On Hemorrhoids Sacred Disease On the Sacred Disease 10 Galen
(c.  130-r.  200  a.d.)  Natural  Faculties  On the Natural Faculties 11
Euclid  (fl.  c.  300  b.c.)  Elements  The  Thirteen BooJ{s of Euclid's
Elements  11  Archimedes  (c.  287-212  b.c.) Sphere and Cylinder On the
Sphere  and  Cylinder,  Books  I-II  Measurement of a Circle Conoids and
Spheroids  On  Conoids  and  Spheroids Spirals On Spirals Equilibrium of
Planes  On  the  Equilibrium  of  Planes,  Books  I-II The Sand-Reckoner
Quadrature  of  the  Parabola  Floating Bodies On Floating Bodies, Books
I-II  Boo\of Lemmas Method The Method Treating of Mechanical Problems 11
Apollonius  of  Perga  (c.  262-c. 200 B.C.) Conies On Conic Sections 11
NlCOMACHUS  OF  GERASA  {fl.  C.  IOO  A.D.)  Arithmetic Introduction to
Arithmetic  12  Lucretius  (c.  98-c.  55  b.c.) Nature of Things On the
Nature  of  Things  12  Epictetus  (c. 60-c. 138 A.D.) The Discourses 12
Aurelius  (Marcus  Aurelius)  (121-180  a.d.)  The Meditations 13 Virgil
(70-19 b.c.) The Eclogues The Georgics The Aeneid

[24b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited  section,  paragraph  paragraph book, chapter
book,  definition,  postulate,  common  notion, proposition, lemma book,
definition,   assumption,   proposition,  corollary,  lemma  proposition
definition,  lemma, proposition proposition, definition book, postulate,
proposition  proposition,  definition  book,  postulate,  proposition  >
proposition  BOOK, DEFINITION, PROPOSITION BOOK book, Line BOOK, CHAPTER
BOOK, SECTION Number of Eclogue, Line Number of Georgic, Line book, Line

[25a]
Volume Number, Author, and Title 14 Plutarch (c. 46-r. 120 a.d.)
[The Lives of the Noble Grecians and Romans]
Cimon  Theseus  Romulus  Lucullus  Romulus-Theseus  Romulus  and Theseus
Compared  Nicias  Lycurgus Numa Pompilius Crassus Lycurgus-Numa Lycurgus
and  Numa  Compared  Sertorius  Solon Eumenes Poplicola Poplicola -Solon
Poplicola  and  Solon  Compared  Agesilaus  Themistocles Pompey Camillus
Pericles Fabius Fa bius- Pericles Fabius and Alexander Pericles Compared
A  leiblades  Caesar  Phocion  Coriolanus  Agis  Alcibiades-  Coriolanus
Alcibiades  and  Coriolanus  Compared Cleomenes Timoleon Aemilius Paulus
Aemilius Paulus-Timoleon Aemilius Paulus and Timoleon Compared Pelopidas
Demosthenes Marcellus Marcellus-Pelopidas Marcellus Cicero and Pelopidas
Compared   Aristides   Marcus  Cato  Demetrius  Aristides-  Marcus  Cato
Aristides  Antony  and  Marcus Cato Compared Philopoemen Dion Flamininus
Flamininus-Philopoemen   Flamininus   and  Philopoemen  Compared  Aratus
Pyrrhus Caius Marius Artaxerxes Galba Lysander Otho Sulla Lysander-Sulla
Lysander and Sulla Compared

[25b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  xix Author's Divisions Cited Cimon- Lucullus Cimon and
Lucullus  Compared Crassus- Nicias Crassus and Eumenes-Sertorius Eumenes
and  Sertorius  Compared  Agesilaus-Pompey Agesilaus and Pompey Compared
Caius  and  Tiberius  Gracchus-  Agis  and  Cleomenes Caius and Tiberius
Gracchus  and Agis and Cleomenes Compared Demosthenes-Cicero Demosthenes
and  Cicero  Compared  Antony-Demetrius  Antony  and  Demetrius Compared
Brutus-Dion Brutus and

[26a]
XX  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Volume  Number,  Author, and Title 15 Tacitus, P.
Cornelius  {c.  55-c.  117 a.d.) The Annals The Histories 16 Ptolemy (c.
100-c.  178  a.d.)  The  Almagest  16  Copernicus,  Nicolaus (1473-1543)
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly Spheres On the Revolutions ofthe Heavenly
Spheres 16 Kepler, Johannes (1571-1630) The Harmonies of the World: V 17
Plotinus  (205-270)  First-Sixth  Ennead  The  Six Enneads 18 Augustine,
Saint  (354-430)  The  Confessions The City of God Christian Doctrine On
Christian  Doctrine  19  Aquinas,  Saint Thomas (c. 1225-1274) The Summa
Theologica,  First  Part;  Part  I of the Second Part. Questions 1-48 20
Aquinas,  Saint  Thomas  The Summa Theologica, Part I of the Second Part
(continued),  Questions  49-114;  Part  II of the Second Part, Questions
1-46,  179-189;  Third  Part,  Questions  1-26, 60-65; Supplement to the
Third  Part,  Questions  69-99 21 Dante Alighieri (1265-1321) The Divine
Comedy,  hell,  purgatory,  paradise 22 Chaucer, Geoffrey (c. 1340-1400)
Troilus and Cressida
[The Canterbury Tales]
The  Prologue  The Knight's Tale The Miller's Prologue The Miller's Tale
The  Reeve's  Prologue  The  Reeve's Tale The Cool(s Prologue The Coo)(s
Tale Introduction to the Man of Law's Prologue The Prologue of the Man of
haw's Tale

[26b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited  BOOK BOOK BOOK Epitome Epitome of Copernican
Astronomy:  IV  and  V  book  tractate,  chapter  book,  paragraph BOOK,
PREFACE,  CHAPTER  PREFACE,  BOOK,  CHAPTER  PROLOGUE,  PART,  QUESTION,
ARTICLE,  ANSWER,  CONTRARY,  REPLY  PROLOGUE,  PART, QUESTION, ARTICLE,
ANSWER,  CONTRARY, REPLY Number of Canto, Line BOOK, STANZA Line, except
prose  parts  (see  below)  The  Tale ofthe Man of Law The Wife of Bath's
Prologue  The  Tale  of  the  Wife  of  Bath  The  Friar's  Prologue The
Summoner's   Prologue  The  Summoner's  Tale  The  Clerks  Prologue  The
Merchant's Prologue The Merchant's Tale Epilogue to the Merchant's Tale

[27a]
Volume Number, Author, and Title 22 Chaucer, Geoffrey (continued)
[The Canterbury Tales]
The  Squire's Tale The Words of the Fran{tin The Franklin s Prologue The
Franklin's  Tale The Physician s Tale The Words of the Host The Prologue
of  the  Pardoner's  Tale The Pardoner's Tale The Shipman's Prologue The
Shipman's  Tale  The Prioress's Prologue The Prioress's Tale Prologue to
Sir  Thopas  Sir  Thopas  L'Envoi  Prologue  to Melibeus 23 Machiavelli,
Nicolo  (1469-1527)  The Prince 23 Hobbes, Thomas (1588-1679) Let'iathan
Leviathan, or, Matter, Form, and Power of a Commonwealth, Ecclesiastical
and  Civil 24 Rabelais, Francois (c. 1495-1553) Gargantua and Pantagruel
25  Montaigne,  Michel  Eyquem de (1533-1592) The Essays 26 Shakespeare,
William  (1564-1616) 1st Henry VI The First Part of King Henry the Sixth
2nd  Henry  VI  The Second Part of King Henry the Sixth 3rd Henry VI The
Third  Part  of  King  Henry  the  Sixth Richard III The Tragedy of King
Richard  the  Third  The Comedy of Errors Titus Andronicus The Taming of
the  Shrew  The  Two  Gentlemen of Verona Love's Labour's Lost Romeo and
Juliet

[27b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  xxi  Author's  Divisions  Cited  The  Tale of Melibeus
paragraph  The  Monl(s  Prologue The Prologue of the Nun's Priest's Tale
The  Nun's  Priest's Tale Epilogue to the Nun's Priest's Tale The Second
Nun's  Prologue  The Second Nun's Tale The Canon's Yeoman's Prologue The
Canon's  Yeoman's  Tale  The  Manciple's  Prologue The Parson s Prologue
paragraph  CHAPTER  INTRODUCTION,  PART,  CONCLUSION BOOK Richard II The
Tragedy  of King  Richard  the Second A Midsummer-Night's Dream King John
The  Life and Death of King John The Merchant of Venice 1st Henry IV The
First Part of King Henry the Fourth 2nd Henry IV The Second Part of King
Henry  the  Fourth Much Ado About Nothing Henry V The Life of King Henry
the Fifth As You Like It prologue, act, scene, epilogue, Line

[28a]
Volume  Number,  Author, and Title 27 Shakespeare, William Twelfth Night
Twelfth  Night;  or,  What You Will Hamlet Hamlet, Prince of Denmark The
Merry  Wives  of  Windsor  Troilus and Cressida Alls Well That Ends Well
Measurefor Measure Othello Othello, the Moor of Venice King Lear Macbeth
Sonnets  28  Gilbert, William (1540-1603) Loadstone On the Loadstone and
Magnetic   Bodies  28  Galileo  Galilei  (1564-1642)  Two  New  Sciences
Concerning the Two New Sciences 28 Harvey, William (1578-1657) Motion of
the Heart On the Motion of the Heart and Blood in Animals Circulation of
the  Blood  On  the Circulation of the Blood On Animal Generation On the
Generation  of  Animals  Cervantes, Miguel de (1547-1616) 29 Don Quixote
The History of Don Quixote de la Mancha Bacon, Sir Francis (1561-1626) 30
Advancement  of  Learning  Novum  Organum  New  Atlantis Descartes, Rene
(1596-1650)  31  Rules  Rulesfor  the  Direction  of  the Mind Discourse
Discourse  on  the  Method  Meditations  Meditations on First Philosophy
Objections  and  Replies  Objections Against the Meditations and Replies
The Geometry Spinoza, Benedict de (1632-1677) 31

[28b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited Antony and Cleopatra Timon of Athens Pericles
Pericles, Prince of Tyre The Winter's Tale Henry VIII The Famous History
of  the  Life  of  King Henry the Eighth prologue, act, scene, epilogue,
Line  Number  of  Sonnet  PREFACE, BOOK DAY PART PREFACE, BOOK, APHORISM
Number  of  Rule PART Number of Meditation DEFINITION, POSTULATE, AXIOM,
PROPOSITION  BOOK  scholium,  corollary,  lemma, postulate, explanation,
appendix

[29a]
32 Milton, John (1608-1674)
[English Minor Poems]
Christs  Nativity  On  the  Morning  of  Christs Nativity and The Hymn A
Paraphrase  on  Psalm  114  Psalm  116  The  Passion  On  Time  Upon the
Circumcision  At  a  Solemn  Music/{  An  Epitaph  on the Marchioness of
Winchester  Song  on  May  Morning On Shakespear. 1610 On the University
Carrier  Another  on  the  Same  L 1Allegro 11 Penseroso Arcades Lycidas
Comus  Paradise  Lost  Samson  Agonistes  Areopagitica 33 Pascal, Blaise
(1623-1662)  The  Provincial  Letters  Pensees  Vacuum  Preface  to  the
Treatise  on  the Vacuum and New Experiments Concerning the Vacuum Great
Experiment Account of the Great Experiment Concerning the Equilibrium of
Fluids  Equilibrium  of  Liquids  and  Weight  of  Air  Treatises on the
Equilibrium  of  Liquids  and  on  the  Weight  of  the  Mass of the Air
Geometrical  Demonstration  On  Geometrical  Demonstration  Arithmetical
Triangle  Treatise  on  the  Arithmetical  Triangle  Correspondence with
Fermat  Correspondence  with  Fermat  on  the Theory of Probabilities 34
Newton,   Sir   Isaac  (1642-1727)  Principles  Mathematical  Principles
of Natural Philosophy Optics

[29b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  xxin  Line,  except Sonnets and Psalms Death of a Fair
Infant  On  the  Death  of  Vacation Exercise At a Vacation Exercise The
Fifth  Ode  of Horace The Fifth Ode of Horace, Lib. 1 Sonnets, 1, vn-xix
New  Forcers  of  Conscience  On the New Forcers of Conscience under the
Long  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  On  the  Lord  Gen.  Fairfax  at the siege of
Colchester  Lord Gen. Cromwell To the Lord Generall Cromwell May 1652 Sr
Henry  Vane  To  Sr  Henry  Vane  the Mr. Cyriac\ Skinner To Mr. Cyriac\
Skinner upon his Blindness Psalms, i-viii, lxxx-lxxxviii book, Line Line
Number  of  Pensee  DEFINITION,  SCHOLIUM,  LAW,  COROLLARY, BOOK, RULE,
LEMMA, PROPOSITION, PHENOMENON, HYPOTHESIS BOOK

[30a]
XXIV  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Volume  Number,  Author,  and Title 34 Huygens,
Christiaan   (1629-1695)   Light   Treatise  on  Light  35  Locke,  John
(1632-1704)  Toleration  A Letter Concerning Toleration Civil Government
Concerning  Civil  Government, Second Essay Human Understanding An Essay
Concerning  Human  Understanding  35  Berkeley, George (1685-1753) Human
Knowledge  The  Principles  of Human Knowledge 35 Hume, David (1711-1776)
Human  Understanding An Enquiry Concerning Human Understanding 36 Swift,
Jonathan  (1667-1745)  Gulliver  Gulliver's  Travels 36 Sterne, Laurence
(1713-1768) Tristram Shandy 37 Fielding, Henry (1707-1754) Tom Jones The
History  of  Tom Jones, A Foundling 38 Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat,
Baron  de  (1689-1755)  The  Spirit  of Laws  38  Rousseau,  Jean Jacques
(1712-1778)  Inequality On the Origin of Inequality Political Economy On
Political  Economy The Social Contract 39 Smith, Adam (1723-1790) Wealth
of  Nations  An  Inquiry  Into  the  Nature  and Causes of the Wealth of
Nations  40  Gibbon, Edward (1737-1794) Decline and Fall The Decline and
Fall  of  the  Roman Empire, Chapters 1-40 41 Gibbon, Edward Decline and
Fall The Decline and Fall ofthe Roman Empire (continued), Chapters 41-71

[30b]
Author's Divisions Cited PREFACE, CHAPTER CHAPTER, SECTION INTRODUCTION,
BOOK,  CHAPTER,  SECTION  PREFACE,  INTRODUCTION,  SECTION INTRODUCTION,
SECTION, DIVISION BOOK INTRODUCTION, BOOK

[31a]
Volume  Number,  Author,  and  Title  42 Kant, Immanuel (1724-1804) Pure
Reason  The  Critique  of Pure  Reason  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals
Fundamental  Principles of the Metaphysic of Morals Practical Reason The
Critique  of  Practical  Reason  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics
Preface  and  Introduction to the Metaphysical Elements of Ethics With a
Note  on  Conscience Intro. Metaphysic of Morals General Introduction to
the  Metaphysic  of  Morals  The Science of Right Judgement The Critique
of Judgement  43 Declaration of Independence 43 Articles of Confederation
43 Constitution of the U.S. 43
[Hamilton, Alexander (1757-1804), Madison, James (1751-1836),
Jay,  John  (1745-1829)] The Federalist 43 Mill, John Stuart (1806-1873)
Liberty  On Liberty Representative Government Utilitarianism 44 Boswell,
James  (1740-1795)  Johnson Life of Samuel Johnson, L.L.D. 45 Lavoisier,
Antoine  Laurent  (1743-1794)  Elements  of  Chemistry  45 Fourier, Jean
Baptiste  Joseph (1768-1830) Theory of Heat Analytical Theory of Heat 45
Faraday,  Michael  (1791-1867)  Researches  in  Electricity Experimental
Researches  in Electricity 46 Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1770-1831)
The  Philosophy  of  Right  The  Philosophy of History 47 Goethe, Johann
Wolfgang  von  (1749-1832)  Faust,  Parts  I  and II 48 Melville, Herman
(1819-1882) Moby Dicl{ Moby Dickj or, The Whale

[31b]
REFERENCE  STYLE  XXV  Author's  Divisions Cited Line Number of Article,
Line  ARTICLE,  SECTION, AMENDMENT, Line Papers, by number preface, part
preface,  introduction,  part,  paragraph,  ADDITION  INTRODUCTION, PART
DEDICATION, PRELUDE, PROLOGUE, PART, Line

[32a]
XXVI THE GREAT IDEAS Volume Number, Author, and Title 49 Darwin, Charles
(1809-1882)  Origin of Species The Origin of Species by Means of Natural
Selection  Descent of Man The Descent of Man and Selection in Relation to
Sex  50  Marx,  Karl  (1818-1883)  Capital  50  Marx,  Karl  and Engels,
Friedrich  (1820-1895)  Communist  Manifesto  Manifesto of the Communist
Party  51  Tolstoy,  Leo (1828-1910) War and Peace 52 Dostoevsky, Fyodor
Mikhailovich  (1821-1881)  The  Brothers  Karamazo*'  53  James, William
(1842-1910)  Psychology  The  Principles of Psychology 54 Freud, Sigmund
(1856-1939)  The  Origin  and  Development  of  Psycho-Analysis Hysteria
Selected  Papers  on Hysteria, Chapters 1-10 The Sexual Enlightenment of
Children  Psycho-Analytic Therapy The Future Prospects of PsychoAnalytic
Therapy  "Wild"  Psycho-Analysis  Observations on "Wild" Psycho-Analysis
The   Interpretation   of  Dreams  Narcissism  On  Narcissism  Instincts
Instincts and Their Vicissitudes

[32b]
Author's  Divisions  Cited BOOK, EPILOGUE BOOK, EPILOGUE The Unconscious
General  Introduction  A  General Introduction to Psycho-Analysis Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle  Group  Psychology  Group  Psychology  and  the
Analysis  of  the  Ego  The  Ego  and  the Id Inhibitions, Symptoms, and
Anxiety   War   and  Death  Thoughtsfor  the  Times  on  War  and  Death
Civilization   and   Its   Discontents  New  Introductory  Lectures  New
Introductory Lectures on Psycho-

[33a]
[página ilustrada]

[33b]
is fi RS » iy

runt gr taaey ean el Ae ni bo mh rie

eshte’ ee iAasbl oi tino Sale.

I ape enpol els oan en dey <\ pert Bs Bet

cist,  ‘pve  “a  in  modé off ch and such a Body (of purt a y by this of
that  cause and for'this's fa | In Saat of the burnan sail, however, yes
" ycholopist can employ a ne tb >a ble to other things, The hurts ae ree
to  cxamuie  ioelf. Mind caf Tints tenn a) ge about mihd which are not :
rok  ans  ne subject matter of vey hasta “what when, ata later moment te
Whe  tae  the  study’  Of  mind  tends  16  reyilace  the y of man! This
parrowing  takes  place  galt  Though  Deskgrtes  identifies  “with i or
intellect,  he  tifats  of  rhe’ ait will as well as thought and ie oe 3
Diig  from  Descartes  with regard tw bexdy and “Hobbes and Splitozs iso
give  ay  much  at  ion  to  the emotions as to vine and ressoedBut with
Locke,  Berkeicy,  and  Phume there ) increating tendency to analyze the
cory  Sof  consciousness  arid  tlie  acts  of  thet  ny  ding,  fieated
exclusively  asa  feutty" GF ee king or knowing. Where in the eyrlier te
ye  the  ‘observation  of  Human behavior ani Tues behavior of ee ba iar
Rast \- in; eee ere “thie main “source sh

14

[34a]
[página ilustrada]

[34b]
[página ilustrada]

[35a]
Chaffer  ^i: MAN INTRODUCTION WHETHER or not the proper study of mankind
is  man, it is the only study in which the knower and the known are one,
in which the object of the science is the nature of the scientist. If we
consider  every  effort  men  have  made  in  response  to  the  ancient
injunction   "know  thyself,"  then  psychology  has  perhaps  a  longer
tradition  than  any  other  science.  But  by  a stricter conception of
science, more is required than individual insight or self-consciousness.
Definitions,   principles,  analyses  applicable  to  all  men  must  be
established,   and   it  has  been  questioned  whether  the  method  of
introspection  suffices for this purpose. What methods should be used by
the  psychologist  depends  in part upon the precise object and scope of
his  inquiry.  According  as  different  subject  matters  and different
methods  define psychology, there seem to be several disciplines bearing
that  name,  each  with  its  own  tradition  in western thought. In one
conception,  psychology  begins  with  the  dialogues  of Plato and with
Aristotle's treatise On the Soul. As Aristotle's title indicates, and as
the  Greek  roots of the word "psychology" connote, the soul rather than
man  is  the  object  of the science. Anthropology, Kant later suggests,
would  be  a  more  appropriate  name  for the science of man. The Greek
inquiry  into  the soul extends, beyond man, to all living things. It is
because  "the  soul  is  in  some  sense  the principle of animal life,"
Aristotle writes, that "the knowledge of the soul admittedly contributes
greatly  to  the  advance  of  truth  in general, and, above all, to our
understanding  of  Nature."  Nevertheless,  psychology for the Greeks is
principally  concerned  with the study of man. The analysis of the parts
or faculties of the human soul is an analysis of the properties of human
nature—  the  powers which man has and the characteristically human acts
or functions he 1

[35b]
can  perform.  The  methods by which this analysis is developed are, for
the  most  part,  the  same  methods which the Greek philosophers use in
physics.  "The  study  of the soul," Aristotle writes, "falls within the
science  of  Nature." The definitions of the psychologist, like those of
the  physicist, give "a certain mode of movement of such and such a body
(or  part  or  faculty  of a body) by this or that cause and for this or
that  end." In the case of the human soul, however, the psychologist can
employ  a  method not applicable to other things. The human intellect is
able  to  examine itself. Mind can thus know things about mind which are
not  otherwise  observable.  The  subject  matter  of psychology narrows
somewhat  when,  at  a  later moment in the tradition, the study of mind
tends to replace the study of man. This narrowing takes place gradually.
Though  Descartes  identifies  soul with mind or intellect, he treats of
the  passions  and  the will as well as thought and knowledge. Differing
from  Descartes  with  regard  to body and soul, Hobbes and Spinoza also
give  as  much  attention to the emotions as to ideas and reasoning. But
with  Locke,  Berkeley,  and  Hume  there  is  an increasing tendency to
analyze the contents of consciousness and the acts of the understanding,
treated  exclusively  as  a faculty of thinking or knowing. Where in the
earlier  tradition the observation of human behavior and the behavior of
other  animals  appears to be useful in psychology, here the main source
of  psychological  knowledge  seems  to be introspection. The Principles
of Psychology  by  James  and the writings of Freud represent a return to
the broader conception of the science. According to James, "it is better
...  to let the science be as vague as its subject ... if by so doing we
can throw any light on the main business in hand."

[36a]
If   psychology   "takes  into  account  the  fact  that  minds  inhabit
environments  which  act  on  them  and on which they in turn react" and
"takes  mind in the midst of all its concrete relations, it is immensely
more fertile than the old-fashioned 'rational psychology,' which treated
the  soul as a detached existent, sufficient unto itself, and assumed to
consider  only  its nature and properties. I shall therefore feel free,"
James  goes  on  to  say, "to make any sallies into zoology or into pure
nerve-physiology which may seem instructive for our purposes." Though in
the  hands of James and Freud the scope of psychology extends no further
than  the  range of topics Aquinas covers in his treatise on man and his
treatise on human acts and passions, their return to the study of man as
a  whole  is  accompanied by an interest in or invention of new methods,
experimental and clinical. "As a science," Freud writes, "psychoanalysis
is  characterized by the methods with which it works, not by the subject
matter  with  which it deals." Those who distinguish between science and
philosophy  in  terms  of  empirical  research  date  the  beginning  of
psychology  from  the  inception  of these new methods. They regard most
psychological  writings  earlier  than  James  and  Freud  as  works  of
speculation  or philosophy. Controversy over the validity of conclusions
in psychology sometimes turns on the conflicting claims of rival methods
to  be  the  only  way  of arriving at the truth; and sometimes, as with
Kant,  the  issue  of  method  seems  to  be subordinate to the issue of
subject  matter.  Kant admits the possibility of an empirical psychology
which would confine its inquiries to the phenomenal processes of thought
and  feeling,  because  with respect to such an object "we could call in
aid  observations  on  the  play  of  our  thoughts,"  and thence derive
"natural  laws  of the thinking self." But, he goes on to say, "it could
never  be available for discovering those properties which do not belong
to  possible  experience." What Kant calls "rational psychology" aims at
what  is  for  him  impossible,  namely,  knowledge  of  the  reality or
substance  of  the  soul itself. It is impossible, he says, to make "any
dogmatical  affirmation  concerning  an  object of experience beyond the
boundaries of experience."

[36b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS Kant's critique of rational psychology thus appears to
be  based  on  the  same  principles  which  underlie  his  critique  of
metaphysical  assertions  concerning  God's existence and the freedom of
the  will.  Those principles are in turn based on an elaborate theory of
the  human  faculties, such as sense, understanding, and reason, and the
role they play in the constitution of experience and knowledge. But Kant
does  not  regard his own theory of the faculties as psychology. Writers
like  Locke  and Hume, on the other hand, seem to make their psychology—
certainly  in  its principal concern with how the content of the mind is
acquired  and formed— the basis for appraising the validity of all other
knowledge.  They do not question the validity of psychology itself. They
seem  to assume that self-knowledge has unique advantages over all other
inquiries.  These  issues of the scope and validity of psychology are in
one  sense  more  relevant  to the chapters on Knowledge, Mind, and Soul
than  to  this  one. Their relevance here is limited by their connection
with  the  main issues about the nature of man. Not merely the tradition
of  psychology,  but  the  whole  tradition  of western thought seems to
divide  on  the  question of man's essence. The question can be put in a
number of ways. Is man a rational animal, and does that definition imply
that only man has reason? Does it imply that man has free will, and that
only man has free will ? Like the question about the distinction between
living   and  non-living  things  or  the  similar  question  about  the
difference  between  plants and animals, this question can also be asked
in  terms  of  the contrast between difference in kind and difference in
degree. Does man differ essentially or in kind from other animals, or do
all  animals  possess  the  same fundamental properties? Does man differ
from  the  others only in the degree to which he possesses some of these
shared  qualities? Some, like Darwin, think that "the difference in mind
between  man and the higher animals, great as it is, certainly is one of
degree  and  not of kind. We have seen," he writes, "that the senses and
intuitions,  the  various  emotions and faculties, such as love, memory,
attention, curiosity, imitation, reason, etc., of which man

[37a]
Chapter  51: MAN boasts, may be found in an incipient, or even sometimes
in  a  well-developed  condition,  in  the  lower animals. They are also
capable  of  some inherited improvement, as we see in the-tiornestic dog
compared  with  the  wolf  or jackal. If it could be proved that certain
high  mental  powers,  such  as the formation of general concepts, self-
consciousness,  etc.,  were  absolutely  peculiar  to  man,  which seems
extremely doubtful, it is not improbable that these qualities are merely
the  incidental results of other highly-advanced intellectual faculties;
and  these  again  mainly  the  result of the continued use of a perfect
language."  Such  a view clearly takes the position that man varies from
other  animals  in  the  same way that one species of animal varies from
another. Those who take the opposite position do not always agree on the
precise  nature  of  the  difference  in  kind.  For the most part, they
attribute  rationality  to man alone and use the word "brute" to signify
that  all  other  animals totally lack reason, no matter how acute their
intelligence  or  the  apparent sagacity of their instinctive reactions.
Milton,  for example, in common with many others, describes man as ... a
creature  who  not  prone  And brute as other creatures, but endued With
sanctity  of  reason,  might  erect  His stature, and upright with front
serene  Govern  the  rest,  self-knowing, and from thence Magnanimous to
correspond  with heaven. Those who find a difference in kind between man
and  other  animals  also  tend  to  think  that human society and human
language  are  essentially  different from the beehive or the ant mound,
from  bird  calls, jungle cries, or parroting, because they are the work
or  expression  of  reason.  Unlike  Darwin,  some of them find in human
speech  not  the  cause  of man's apparent difference in kind from other
animals,  but  the  consequence  of  his  real  difference  in  kind—his
distinctive  rationality.  The fact that man does certain things that no
other animal does at all means to them that man possesses certain powers
which  no  other  animal  shares to any degree, even the slightest. They
would  therefore  interpret  Darwin's  admission  that an anthropoid ape
could  not  fashion  "a  stone  into  a  tool"  or  "follow  a  train of
metaphysical  reasoning,  or solve a mathematical problem, or reflect on
God, or

[37b]
admire  a  grand  natural  scene," as an indication that the ape totally
lacked human reason or intellect, however acute his animal intelligence.
But  the  writers  who  agree  that  man is radically different from the
brutes do not all agree in the account they give of human reason; nor do
they  all  affirm free will as the natural accompaniment of rationality.
Locke,  for  example,  begins  his essay on Human Understanding with the
remark that "the understanding . . . sets man above the rest of sensible
beings."  Men  and other animals alike have the powers of sense, memory,
and  imagination, but, he says, "brutes abstract not. . . . The power of
abstracting  is  not at all in them." This power of having"general ideas
is  that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt man and brutes, and is
an  excellency  which the faculties of brutes do by no means attain to."
But  Locke  denies  that man has free will in the sense of a free choice
among  alternatives.  Rousseau,  on the other hand, declares that "every
animal  has  ideas  .  . . and it is only in degree that man differs, in
this  respect,  from  the  brute.  ... It is not, therefore, so much the
understanding  that  constitutes the specific difference between the man
and  the  brute,  as  the  human  quality of free agency . . . and it is
particularly  in his consciousness of this liberty that the spirituality
of  his soul is displayed." James agrees with Locke that "it is probable
that  brutes neither attend to abstract characters nor have associations
by  similarity," but it is the latter fact which James himself makes the
principal  distinction  between  man  and  brute.  "We may," he asserts,
"consider  it  proven that the most elementary single difference between
the human mind and that of brutes lies in this deficiency on the brute's
part   to  associate  ideas  by  similarity."  James  enumerates  "other
classical  differentiae  of man besides that of being the only reasoning
animal."  Man  has  been called, he says, "the laughing animal" and "the
talking  animal,"  but  these  distinctive traits, like human reasoning,
James regards as "consequences of his unrivalled powers ... to associate
ideas by similarity." Reason and speech are for James the effects, where
for Adam Smith they are the cause, of man's peculiarly human attributes.
"The propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one

[38a]
thing for another," Smith writes, is "common to all men, and to be found
in  no  other  race  of  animals."  This seems to him to be a "necessary
consequence of the faculties of reason and speech" which are peculiar to
man.  Hobbes,  as  we shall see presently, takes still another position,
since  he  explains  man's  reasoning  power  in terms of his faculty of
speech,  a  faculty  which  is possessed by no other animal. Despite all
these variations in theory or explanation, writers like Locke, Rousseau,
James, Smith, and perhaps Hobbes seem to agree that man and brute differ
in  kind.  On  that  point  they  agree  even  with  writers like Plato,
Aristotle,  Augustine,  Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza, Kant, and Hegel who
hold,  as they most definitely do not, that man has a special faculty of
mind,  reason,  or  intellect. The contradictory position is, therefore,
not  to  be found in the denial of some particular theory of reason, but
rather  in  the denial that any faculty or attribute which man possesses
warrants our calling him "rational" and other animals "brute." The issue
is  sharply  drawn  between  these  contradictory  positions.  Yet it is
avoided  by  those  who  go no further than to see in human civilization
certain  distinctive  features,  such  as the arts and sciences, or law,
government, and religion. Mill, for example, discussing the sentiment of
justice,  finds its root in the natural impulse "to resent, and to repel
or  retaliate,  any harm done or attempted against ourselves, or against
those  with  whom  we sympathise . . . common to all animal nature." Man
differs  from  other  animals,  he  writes,  "first, in being capable of
sympathising, not solely with their offspring, or, like some of the more
noble  animals,  with some superior animal who is kind to them, but with
all  human and even with all sentient beings. Secondly, in having a more
developed  intelligence, which gives a wider range to the whole of their
sentiments,  whether  self-regarding  or  sympathetic.  By virtue of his
superior intelligence, even apart from his superior range of sympathy, a
human  being  is capable of apprehending a community of interest between
himself  and the human society of which he forms a part." A view of this
sort  would seem to leave open the question whether such typically human
de-

[38b]
velopments signify the possession by man of special powers which set him
apart  as  different  in kind. While admitting extraordinary differences
between  the  behavior or accomplishments of men and other animals, this
view  does  not  reject  the  possibility  that such accomplishments may
represent  merely  wide  differences  in degree of power, which give the
appearance  of  differences  in  kind.  As we have already observed, the
issue about man and brute cannot be separated from the controversy about
the so-called "higher faculties" of man. Except for the view that man is
a  purely  spiritual being, who merely inhabits or uses a physical body,
no  theory  of  human  nature  doubts  that  man,  as a living organism,
possesses  in  common  with  plants and animals certain bodily powers or
functions.  The  vegetative  functions  which  Galen  calls "the natural
faculties" are indispensable to human as to all other forms of corporeal
life.  Similarly,  the  powers of sensitivity and appetite or desire are
obviously  present in man as in other animals. To the observer, who sees
only  the  externals  of  human  and animal behavior, men and the higher
animals  appear  to  react  to  the  physical stimulation of their sense
organs with a similar repertoire of bodily movements, which vary only as
their  skeletal  structure  and  their organs of locomotion differ. They
also  manifest outward signs of inner emotional disturbance sufficiently
similar to warrant treating emotions like fear and rage as common to men
and  other  animals. On all this there seems to be little dispute in the
tradition  of  the  great  books. But difficult questions arise when the
inner  significance  of these external movements is considered. Both men
and  animals  have  the  familiar sense organs and such powers as touch,
taste,  smell,  hearing,  and  vision.  But  do  sensations give rise to
knowledge  in  the  same way for both men and animals ? Do the powers of
memory  and imagination extend an animal's range of apprehension as they
do  man's?  Do  these powers affect the perception of present objects in
the  same  way  for  men  and  animals?  Such  questions are not readily
answered  by  observation  of  external behavior alone. What seems to be
called  for—a  comparison  of  human  and  animal  experience—cannot  be
obtained. The difficulty of the problem becomes most in-

[39a]
Chapter  51: MAN tense when a special faculty of knowledge or thought is
attributed  to  man, for animal and human sense perception, imagination,
or   even   emotion   may   be  incommensurable  if^rSpecial  factor  of
understanding  or reason enters into all human experience and is totally
absent  from  that of animals. In the ancient and mediaeval periods, the
sensitive faculty, including the interior sensitive powers of memory and
imagination,  is generally distinguished from another faculty, variously
called  "intellect," "reason," or "mind." Writers like Plato, Aristotle,
Plotinus,  Lucretius,  Augustine, and Aquinas have different conceptions
of  intellect  or  mind,  in  itself  and  in  its relation to sense and
imagination,  but  they  do  not  question  its  existence as a separate
faculty.  The  range of the sensitive powers does not extend to ideas or
intelligible  objects,  nor  is sensitive memory or imagination for them
the  same  as  rational thought. Not only does it seem unquestionable in
the  ancient  and  mediaeval  tradition  that man has these two distinct
faculties  of  knowledge, but it is generally assumed that other animals
have  to  a  greater or less degree, the power of the senses alone. Only
men  can understand as well as perceive; only men can know the universal
as  well  as  the particular; only men can think about objects which are
neither  sensible  nor,  strictly,  imaginable—objects such as atoms and
God,  the  infinite  and  the  eternal,  or  the  intellect  itself. The
affirmation of an essential difference between reason and sense seems to
be  inseparable  from the affirmation of an essential difference between
men  and  brutes.  Doubts  or  denials  with regard to both affirmations
achieve  considerable  prevalence  in  modern  times. But though the two
affirmations  appear  inseparable,  they are not always denied together.
Montaigne,  for  example, does not so much doubt that men have reason as
he does that other animals lack it. He considers the matter in the light
of  external  evidences,  in terms of the comparable performances of men
and animals. The light of reason seems to shine in both. He repeats many
stories  from  Plutarch and Pliny which supposedly reveal the comparable
mentality of animals and men. One is the story

[39b]
of  the hound who, following the scent, comes to a triple parting of the
ways. After sniffing along the first and second paths and discovering no
trace  of  the  scent,  the  hound,  without  a  moment's  hesitation or
sniffing,  takes  up  the pursuit along the third trail. This, Montaigne
suggests,  is  a  kind  of syllogizing; as if the dog reasoned thus with
himself:  "I  have followed my master by foot to this place; he must, of
necessity,  be  gone by one of these three ways; he is not gone this way
nor  that; he must then infallibly be gone this other." It is noteworthy
that  Aquinas  tells  exactly  the same story in order to make the point
that  such  appearances  of  reasoning  in  animals  can be explained as
instinctively  determined conduct. "In the works of irrational animals,"
he  writes, "we notice certain marks of sagacity, in so far as they have
a  natural  inclination  to  set  about  their actions in a most orderly
manner through being ordained by the supreme art. For which reason, too,
certain  animals  are  called prudent or sagacious; and not because they
reason  or  exercise any choice about things." That such behavior is not
the  work  of  reason,  he claims, "is clear from the fact that all that
share  in  one nature invariably act in the same way." Unlike Montaigne,
Machiavelli  seems  to imply that men and brutes are alike not in having
reason,  but  in lacking it. The passions control behavior. Intelligence
exhibits  itself  largely as craft or cunning in gaining ends set by the
passions.  Man  is no less the brute in essence because in the jungle of
society  he  often succeeds by cunning rather than by force. He may have
more  cunning  than the fox, but without armor he also has less strength
than  the  lion.  The  prince,  Machiavelli  remarks,  "being  compelled
knowingly  to  adopt  the  beast,  ought to choose the lion and the fox,
because the lion cannot defend himself against snares and the fox cannot
defend  himself  against wolves." For the most part, however, the modern
dissent  from  the  ancient and mediaeval view takes the form of denying
that  reason  and  sense are distinct powers. In its most characteristic
expression,  this denial is accompanied by a denial of abstract ideas as
in the writings of Hobbes, Berkeley, and Hume. Their position, discussed
more  fully in the chapter on Universal and Particular, is that men only
give the appear-

[40a]
ance  of  having  abstract  or  general ideas because they employ common
names which have general significance. Language, according to Hobbes, is
the  root  of  all  other  differences  between man and brute. Sense and
imagination  are  "common to man and beast." Reasoning, or the "train of
thoughts,"   can   take  place  in  any  animal  which  has  memory  and
imagination.  But  that  type of understanding which Hobbes describes as
"conception caused by speech" is peculiar to man. His statement that "by
the  help of speech and method, the same faculties" which belong to both
men  and  beasts "may be improved to such a height as to distinguish men
from  all  other  living  creatures,"  would  seem  to imply that Hobbes
regards  man  as  superior  to other animals only in degree. Yet, on the
other  hand,  he  enumerates a variety of institutions peculiar to human
life,  such  as  religion, law, and science, which imply a difference in
kind. Like Hobbes, Berkeley thinks that men use general names but do not
have  general  or  abstract  ideas.  But he seems much less willing than
Hobbes  to  assert  man's  clear superiority, even on the basis of man's
attainments  through  the  power  of  speech.  If  the fact that "brutes
abstract  not,"  he  says in reply to Locke, "be made the distinguishing
property of that sort of animals, I fear a great many of those that pass
for  men  must  be  reckoned  into their number." Hume goes further than
either  Berkeley  or  Hobbes. Agreeing with them that man has no faculty
above  sense  and imagination, and hence no faculty which animals do not
also  possess,  he  alone  explicitly  draws  the  conclusion which that
implies.  "Animals  as  well as men," he writes, "learn many things from
experience  and  infer  that the same events will always follow from the
same  causes."  Such  inferences, in animals or men, are not "founded on
any  process  of  argument  or  reasoning."  They  are the result of the
operation  of  custom  and  instinct. "Were this doubtful with regard to
men, it seems to admit of no question with regard to the brute creation;
and  the  conclusion being once firmly established in the one, we have a
strong  presumption,  from all the rules of analogy, that it ought to be
universally admitted, without any exception or reserve."

[40b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  But if custom and instinct underlie the appearance of
reasoning  in  both men and animals, it may be asked, says Hume, "how it
happens  that  men  so much surpass animals in reasoning, and one man so
much  surpasses  another?"  His  answer seems to be entirely in terms of
degree  of  the  same factors. The same sort of difference which obtains
between  a  superior  and  an  inferior  intelligence  among men obtains
between  men  and  other  animals.  All  the evidence which Darwin later
assembles on the characteristics of human mentality is offered by him in
proof  of  the  same point. But to those who think that man alone has an
intellect  or  a  rational  faculty,  over  and  above all his sensitive
powers,  such  evidence remains inconclusive. As in the case of the dog,
whose  behavior  Aquinas  and  Montaigne interpret differently, the same
observed facts seem to be capable of quite opposite explanation by those
who  hold  opposite  theories of human and animal intelligence. Is there
internal  evidence,  obtained from man's introspective experience of his
own  thought,  which can resolve the controversy ? As Descartes sees it,
the  interpretation  of  such evidence also seems to depend on the prior
assumption one makes about the sameness or difference of men and brutes.
"We  cannot  help at every moment experiencing within us that we think,"
he  writes;  "nor  can anyone infer from the fact that it has been shown
that  the  animate  brutes  can  discharge all these operations entirely
without  thought,  that  he  therefore does not think; unless it be that
having  previously  persuaded himself that his actions are entirely like
those  of  the  brutes, just because he has ascribed thought to them, he
were  to  adhere  so pertinaciously to these very words, 'men and brutes
operate  in the same way,' that when it was shown to him that the brutes
did  not think, he preferred to divest himself of that thought of his of
which  he  could not fail to have an inner consciousness, rather than to
alter  his  opinion that he acted in the same way as the brutes." On the
other hand, Descartes continues, those who hold ''that thought is not to
be  distinguished  from  bodily  motion,  will  with  much better reason
conclude that it is the same thing in us and

[41a]
Chapter  51:  MAN  in  them,  since  they  notice  in them all corporeal
movements as in us; they will add that a difference merely ofgreater and
less   makes  no  difference  to  the  essence,  and  will  infer  that,
though~-pcrchance  they  think  that  there is less reason in the beasts
than  in  us,  our  minds  are  of  exactly the same species." The issue
concerning  the  senses  and  the  reason is more fully discussed in the
chapters  on  Mind  and  Sense,  and  also  in  the chapters on Idea and
Universal  and  Particular,  where  the  problem  of  abstract  ideas or
universal  notions  is  considered. The issue concerning soul in general
and  the  human  soul  in particular belongs primarily to the chapter on
Soul,  and  also  to the chapter on Mind. But like the issue about sense
and intellect, its bearing on the problem of man's nature deserves brief
comment  here.  The  question is not whether man has a soul, but whether
only  man  has  a soul; a rational soul; a soul which is, in whole or in
part, immaterial; a soul capable of separate existence from the body; an
immortal  soul.  If  soul  is  conceived as the principle of life in all
living organisms— as Aristotle conceives it— then having a soul does not
distinguish  man  from  plants or animals. If, furthermore, the rational
soul is distinguished from the sensitive and vegetative soul in the same
way that men are distinguished from brute animals and plants, namely, by
reference  to  certain  powers,  such  as  intellect  and will, then the
statement  that  men alone have rational souls would seem to add nothing
to  the  statement  that  men alone are rational. But if the human soul,
through  being  rational,  confers  a  mode of immaterial, or spiritual,
being upon man, then man's possession of such a soul sets him apart from
all other physical things, even further than the special power of reason
separates  him  from  the  brutes. The position of Lucretius illustrates
this  distinction  in  reverse.  He  does  not deny that man has a soul.
Unlike  other living things which also have souls, man's soul includes a
special  part  which Lucretius calls "mind." He describes it as the part
"which  we  often  call the understanding, in which dwells the directing
and governing principle of life, [and] is no less part of the

[41b]
man than hand and foot and eyes are parts of the whole living creature."
So  far  as  his  having  this  special faculty is concerned, man is set
apart.   But  for  Lucretius  nothing  exists  except  atoms  and  void.
Consequently, "the nature of the mind and soul is bodily," consisting of
"seeds  exceedingly round and exceedingly minute, in order to be stirred
and set in motion by a small moving power." In his physical constitution
man  does not differ in any fundamental respect from any other composite
thing.  The  materiality  of  his soul, furthermore, means that it is as
perishable  as  any  composite  At  the  other  extreme  from Lucretius,
Descartes  conceives  man  as  a  union  of two substances. "I possess a
body,"  he  writes,  "with  which  I  am  very intimately conjoined, yet
because,  on  the  one  side, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself
inasmuch  as  I  am only a thinking and unextended thing, and as, on the
other,  I  possess a distinct idea of body as it is only an extended and
unthinking  thing, it is certain that this I (that is to say, my soul by
which  I am what I am), is entirely and absolutely distinct from my body
and  can  exist  without it." Nevertheless, "sensations of pain, hunger,
thirst, etc." lead Descartes to add: "I am not only lodged in my body as
a pilot in a vessel, but . . . I am very closely united to it, and so to
speak so intermingled with it that I seem to compose with it one whole."
Only  man  has  a  dual  nature,  thus  compounded. Other living things,
Descartes  seems  to  hold,  are merely bodies, having the structure and
operation of complex machines. If, like the "automata or moving machines
.  .  .  made  by  the  industry  of  man,"  there  were "such machines,
possessing the organs and outward form of a monkey, or some other animal
without  reason, we should not have . . . any means of ascertaining that
they were not of the same nature as those animals." It is indifferent to
Descartes  whether  other  animals are conceived as automata or whether,
because  they  have  life,  sensation, and imagination, they are granted
souls.  "I  have  neither  denied  to  the  brutes," he writes, "what is
vulgarly  called  life, nor a corporeal soul, or organic sense." What he
has  denied  is  thought,  and  it  is  this  one  factor which makes it
impossible for a

[42a]
8 THE GREAT IDEAS machine to imitate human speech and action. It is this
one  factor which also requires man's soul, unlike that of the brute, to
be  an  incorporeal  substance.  Unlike sensations and passions, acts of
thought  and will, according to Descartes, cannot be functions of bodily
organs.  "Even  though I were to grant," he says, "that thought existed"
in dogs and apes, "it would in nowise follow that the human mind was not
to  be  distinguished  from the body, but on the contrary rather that in
other  animals  also  there  was  a mind distinct from their body." When
Descartes  affirms man's uniqueness, he is therefore affirming more than
that  man  alone  has  reason and free will. He is affirming that of all
things  man alone is "formed of body and soul"—not a corporeal soul, but
a  spiritual substance. The angels, in contrast, are simply spirits. The
remark of Plotinus, that "humanity is poised midway between the gods and
the beasts," applies with somewhat altered significance to the Cartesian
view.  But  there are other conceptions of the human constitution which,
though  they  preserve the sense of man's dual nature, do not make him a
union  of  two  separate  substances.  Spinoza,  for  example, gives man
special  status  in  the  order  of  nature  by  conferring on him alone
participation  in  the  divine  mind. "The human mind," he writes, "is a
part  of  the  infinite  intellect of God." The human body, on the other
hand, is "a mode which expresses in a certain and determinate manner the
essence of God in so far as He is considered as the thing extended." Man
is  thus  "composed  of  mind and body," but for Spinoza this duality in
human nature is a duality of aspects, not a duality of substances. There
is  still  another  way  in  which a certain immateriality is attributed
toman.  In  Aristotle's  theory,  the soul is not a substance in its own
right,  but the substantial form of an organic body. This is true of all
kinds  of  souls—whether  of plants, animals, or men. But when Aristotle
enumerates  the  various powers which living things possess—such as "the
nutritive, the appetitive, the sensory, the locomotive, and the power of
thinking"—he  assigns  to man alone, or "possibly another order like man
or superior to him, the power of thinking, i.e., mind." Fur-

[42b]
thermore,  of  all  the  parts  or powers of the soul, thinking seems to
Aristotle  to afford "the most probable exception" to the rule that "all
the  affections of soul involve body." Apart from thinking, "there seems
to  be  no  case,"  he says, "in which the soul can act or be acted upon
without  involving  body."  Whereas  the  sensitive powers are seated in
bodily  organs  and cannot act except as bodily functions, the intellect
is  immaterial. It has no bodily organ which is comparable to the eye as
the  organ  of  vision  and  the  brain  as  the  organ  of  memory  and
imagination.  The  act  of  understanding  is not a function of physical
matter.  According to this theory, man as a whole is a single substance,
composite  of  correlative  principles of being—matter and form, or body
and  soul.  But man differs from all other physical substances which are
similarly  composite  in  that  he  has  a  faculty and mode of activity
separate  from  matter.  In  the  later  development  of  this theory by
Aquinas,  the  immateriality  of  the  intellect  becomes  the basis for
arguing  that  the rational soul of man can exist apart from matter when
the composite human substance is disintegrated by death. As indicated in
the  chapters on Immortality and Soul, this is not the only argument for
the  immortality  of  the soul. We are not here concerned, however, with
the  various  arguments  and  their  merits, but only with the fact that
certain  conceptions  of  man's  constitution attribute to man something
more  than the power of rationality, namely, the distinction of having a
spiritual  and  immortal life. His future and his past color the present
life  of  man and alter the aspect under which he conceives his place in
the   general  scheme  of  things.  Immortality  promises  release  from
mutability  as  well as salvation from death. With an immortal soul, man
belongs  to  eternity  as  well as to time. He is not merely a transient
character  in the universe. His stature and his dignity are not the same
when  man  regards  himself  as  completely  dissolvable  into dust. The
question  of man's past or origin is, perhaps, even more critical in its
bearing on man's present status. Ancient poetry and history contain many
myths  of  man's  kinship  with the gods. The heroes trace their lineage
back to the

[43a]
Chapter  51:  MAN  gods.  Through them or through the progenitors of the
race, man conceives himself as of divine descent or, at least, as having
more  affinity  with  the immortal gods than with all other^jea-rthbound
things.  In  the  Descent  of  Man, Darwin paints a different picture of
human  origin.  Two  propositions  determine  its  general outlines. The
first, already stated, is that man belongs to the animal kingdom without
any  differentiation  except in degree. Not only in anatomy, physiology,
and embryology are there marks of man's affinity with the mammals; man's
behavior  and  mentality  also  show,  according  to  Darwin,  that  man
possesses  no attribute so peculiarly human that some trace of it cannot
be  found  in the higher forms of animal life. The second proposition is
that  man's  origin  on  earth  has  come  about by a process of natural
variation from an ancestral type, exactly as other new species of plants
or  animals  have  originated  by  descent  with variation from a common
ancestor.  This  theory  of  the  origin  of species is discussed in the
chapter  on  Evolution.  Its  special  application  to the human species
involves the notion of a common ancestor for both man and the anthropoid
apes,  and  the disappearance not only of the ancestral form, but of the
intermediate  varieties—  the  so-called "missing links" in the chain of
variation.  These  two propositions are logically interdependent. If the
proposition is false that man differs from other animals only in degree,
the  proposition  cannot  be  true  that  man  originated along with the
anthropoid  apes  by  descent from a common ancestor. Conversely, if the
Darwinian theory of man's origin is true, it cannot be true that men and
brutes  differ  in  kind.  But  though  the  truth  of each of these two
propositions  implies  the  truth  of  the  other,  the  problem  of the
difference  between man and other animals has a certain logical priority
over  the  problem  of  man's  origin,  simply  because more evidence is
available  to solve it. That question calls for an examination of man as
he  is  today in comparison with other extant species; whereas the other
question  necessarily  requires  the  collection  and  interpretation of
historical evidence, which may have some bearing on hypothetical missing
links. It should be added that if, in regard to the

[43b]
first  question, the evidence favored the affirmation of a difference in
kind,  that  would not entail the denial of biological evolution, though
it  would  necessarily  challenge  the  Darwinian  theory  of  how  such
evolution took place. One alternative to the Darwinian hypothesis is the
theory of emergent evolution, according to which lower forms of life may
give  rise  to  new  organic  forms  which  are  not only higher but are
distinct  in  kind. Whether or not Christian theology and some theory of
biological evolution can be reconciled, there seems to be an inescapable
contradiction  between  Darwin's  view  of  man's origin and the Judaeo-
Christian  conception of man as a special creation, special above all in
the  sense that "God created man in his own image." As God is in essence
a perfect intelligence and a spiritual being, man, according to Aquinas,
"is  said  to  be  to  the  image  of  God by reason of his intellectual
nature."  In  all creatures "there is some kind of likeness to God," but
it  is  only  in  man  that  that  likeness is an image. Man's finitude,
imperfection,   and   corporeal   existence  make  the  image  a  remote
resemblance;  yet,  according  to  the theologians, it is precisely that
likeness which separates man from all other earthly creatures and places
him in the company of the angels. But man is no more an angel than he is
a  brute.  He is separated from the one by his body as from the other by
his reason. Nor does he in the present life have the spiritual existence
of  a  disembodied  and  immortal  soul. To these three negatives in the
definition  of man not an angel, not a brute, not a. soul— the Christian
theologian  adds  a  fourth,  drawn  from man's past. Man is of the race
begotten  by  Adam,  but  he  does  not  have  the attributes which Adam
possessed  before  the  fall.  The  dogma  of  man's  fall from grace is
discussed  in  the  chapter  on Sin. Here we are concerned only with its
implications  for the understanding of man's present nature, as not only
being  deprived  of  the extraordinary gifts of life and knowledge which
Adam  lost through disobedience, but as also being wounded in perpetuity
by  Adam's  sin. Weakness, ignorance, malice, and concupiscence, Aquinas
declares, "are the four wounds inflicted on the whole of human nature as
a result of our first parent's

[44a]
10  THE GREAT IDEAS sin." Man in the world is not only disinherited from
Adam's  gifts, but with the loss of grace, he also suffers, according to
Aquinas,  a diminution in "his natural inclination to virtue." There are
other  divisions in the realm ofman, but none so radical as that between
Eden  and the world thereafter. As retold by Plato, the ancient myths of
a  golden age when men lived under the immediate benevolence of the gods
also  imply  a  condition of mankind quite different from the observable
reality, but they do not imply a decline in human nature itself with the
transition  from  the  golden age to the present. The modern distinction
between  man living in a state of nature and man living in civil society
considers  only  the  external  circumstances of human life and does not
divide   man   according   to   two   conditions   of  his  soul.  Other
dichotomies—such  as  that  between  prehistoric  and  historic  man, or
between primitive and civilized man—are even less radical, for they deal
even  more  in  gradations  or  degrees of the same external conditions.
These  considerations  lead  us to another phase of man's thinking about
man. Where the previous problem was how man differs from everything else
in  the  universe,  here the question is how man is divided from man. If
men  are  not  equal as individuals, to what extent are their individual
differences  the  result  of  the  unequal endowment of the natures with
which  they  are  born,  and  to  what  extent  are  they  the result of
individual  acquirement  in  the  course  of  life  ? The range of human
differences, whether innate or acquired, may itself become the basis for
a  division  of  men  into the normal and the abnormal, a division which
separates  the  feebleminded and the insane from the competent and sane.
From  a  moral  and  political  point  of view, this is perhaps the most
fundamental  of  all classifications. It must be admitted, however, that
traditionally  the  problem  of the difference between men and women and
the  problem  of the difference between the ages of man from the extreme
of  infancy  to  the  extreme  of  senility  seem to have exercised more
influence   on   the   determination   of  political  status  and  moral
responsibility. One other differentiation of man from man

[44b]
seems  to  have  significance  for  the  theory of human society and the
history  of  civilization.  That  is  the  division  of men into groups,
sometimes  by reference to physical and mental traits which separate one
race  from  another—whether  these  traits are supposed to be determined
biologically  as inheritable racial characteristics or are attributed to
environmental  influences;  sometimes  by  reference  to the customs and
ideals  of  a  culture.  Both  sets of criteria appear to be used in the
traditional  discussion  of  the opposition between Greek and barbarian,
Jew  and gentile, European and Asiatic. The ultimate questions which man
asks  about  himself are partly answered by the very fact of their being
asked.  The answer may be that man is the measure of all things; that he
is  sufficient  unto  himself  or at least sufficient for the station he
occupies  and  the  part  he plays in the structure of the universe. The
answer  may  be that man is not a god overlooking the rest of nature, or
even at home in the environment of time and space, but rather that he is
a  finite  and  dependent  creature aware of his insufficiency, a lonely
wanderer  seeking  something  greater than himself and this whole world.
Whatever  answer is given, man's asking what sort of thing he is, whence
he comes, and whither he is destined symbolizes the two strains in human
nature  man's  knowledge  and  his  ignorance,  man's  greatness and his
misery.  Man,  writes  Pascal,  is  "a  nothing  in  comparison with the
Infinite,  an All in comparison with the Nothing, a mean between nothing
and  everything.  Since  he is infinitely removed from comprehending the
extremes,  the  end  of things and their beginning are hopelessly hidden
from  him  in  an impenetrable secret; he is equally incapable of seeing
the  Nothing  from  which  he  was made, and the Infinite in which he is
swallowed  up.  "Man,"  Pascal  goes on, "must not think that he is on a
level either with the brutes or with the angels, nor must he be ignorant
of both sides of his nature; but he must know both." In recognizing both
lies  his  wretchedness and grandeur. "Man knows that he is wretched. He
is  therefore  wretched,  because  he  is  so;  but he is really greater
because he knows it."

[45a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS i. Definitions of man: conceptions of the properties
and  qualities  of  human  nature  13  1  a.  The  conception  of man as
essentially   distinct,  or  differing  in  kind,  from  brute  lb.  The
conception  of  man  as  distinguished  from  brutes  by  such powers or
properties  ic.  The  conception  of man as an animal, differing only in
degree of intelligence and of other qualities possessed by other animals
2.  Man's  knowledge  of  man 17 2a. Immediate self-consciousness: man's
intimate or introspective knowledge of himself 2b. The sciences of human
nature:  anthropology and psychology; rational and empirical psychology;
experimental and clinical psychology (1) The subject matter and scope of
the  science  of  man  (3) The relation of psychology to physiology: the
study  of  organic factors in human behavior (4) The place of psychology
in  the  order  of  sciences: the study of man as prerequisite for other
studies  3. The constitution of man $a. Man as a unity or conjunction of
matter  and  spirit,  body  and  soul,  extension  and thought (2) Man's
spirituality  as  limited to his immaterial powers or functions, such as
reason  and  will  3^.  Comparisons of man with God or the gods, or with
angels or spiritual substances 20 3c Man as an organization of matter or
as  a  collocation  of  atoms  4.  The analysis of human nature into its
faculties,  powers,  or  functions:  the  id,  ego, and super-ego in the
structure  of  the  psyche  40. Man's vegetative powers: comparison with
similar  functions  in  plants  and  animals  21 \b. Man's sensitive and
appetitive  powers:  comparison  with similar functions in other animals
4c.  Man's  rational  powers:  the  problem  of  similar powers in other
animals  22 ^d. The general theory of faculties: the critique of faculty
psychology  23  5.  The order and harmony of man's powers and functions:
contradictions  in  human nature; the higher and lower nature of man 50.
Cooperation  or  conflict among man's powers 24 5^. Abnormalities due to
defect or conflict of powers: feeble-mindedness, neuroses,

[45b]
Chapter 51: MAN 11 PAGE

[46a]
12  THE  GREAT IDEAS temperament, habit ya. Biological aspects of racial
type  Sa.  The  race  of  men as descendants or products of the gods Sb.
God's  special creation of man Sc. Man as a natural variation from other
forms  of  animal  life  9.  The two conditions of man ga. The myth of a
golden  age:  the age of Kronos and the age of Zeus 10. Man's conception
of  himself  and  his place in the world 10a. Man's understanding of his
relation  to  the  gods  or  God  ioc.  Man  as  an integral part of the
universe:  his  station in the cosmos I I a. Man as made in the image of
God  11b. The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man 12. Man as an
object of laughter and ridicule: comedy and satire

[46b]
PAGE  6.  Individual differences among men 25 6a. The cause and range of
human   inequalities:  differences  in  ability,  inclination,  6b.  The
differences  between  men and women: their equality or inequality 27 6c.
The  ages  of  man:  infancy,  youth,  maturity,  senescence 28 7. Group
variations  in  human  type:  racial differences 29 yb. The influence of
environmental factors on human characteristics: climate and yc. Cultural
differences  among  men:  Greek and barbarian, Jew and gentile, European
and  Asiatic  30  8. The origin or genealogy of man 31 gb. The Christian
doctrine  of  Eden  and  of  the  history of man in the world 32 (2) The
condition  of  man  in the world: fallen man; corrupted or wounded human
nature  (3) The Christian view of the stages of human life in the world:
law  and  grace  33 gc. Secular conceptions of the stages of human life:
man  in  a state of nature and in society; prehistoric and historic man;
primitive  and  civilized  man  10b. Man as the measure of all things 35
lod.  The  finiteness  and  insufficiency  of  man:  his  sense of being
dependent and ordered to something beyond himself I Of. Man's comparison
of  himself with other creatures and with the universe as a whole 36 11.
The  theological  conception of man 37 lie. God incarnate in human form:
the human nature of Christ 38 13. The grandeur and misery of man 39

[47a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand side of the page. Forexample, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand sideof page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of  the right-hand sideof page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases: e.g., Iliad, bk 11 [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. , Definitions of man: conceptions
of  the properties and qualities of human nature Old Testament: Genesis,
1:20-30  / Psalms, 8:5-9 5 Sophocles: Antigone [^2-575] 134a-b; [683684]
137a   5   Euripides:   Suppliants   [195-213]   260a  b  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk i, 368b-c; bk iv, 461d-462a; bk v, 506b-c 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  116c-d  /  Symposium, 157b159b / Gorgias, 270d / Republic, bk
ix,  425c427b  / Timaeus, 452c-454a; 466a-467d / Critias, 485b-c / Laws,
bk  i, 649d-650b; bk iv, 685a-c; bk v, 686d-687c; bk vi, 704a-b; bk vii,
715b; 723c-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch i
[i28b i5-i6]
178b; ch 3 [132^-9] 182d; [132*17-22] 183a; ch 4
[133*15-23]
184b;
[133^8-33]
184c;
[i33b8-i3] 184d; ch 5 [134*8-17] 185b-c; ch 7
[i36b i9~22]
188d; bk vi, ch 3
[140*32-37]
193c  /  Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [292b i-u] 384a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*22-981*27]  499a-d / Soul, bk 11, ch 3 [4i4b i7-2o] 644d; [415*712]
645b; bk in, ch 3 [427b7-i4] 659d-660a;
[428*20-24]
660c; ch 10
[433*8-13] 665d
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453*5-14]
695b

[47b]
Chapter 51: MAN 13 9Aristotlf: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488*6-10]
9a;
[488*27]
9b;
[488^0-27] 9d;
ch 11
[492*31] 14b; ch 16 [494^8] 17a; bk
ii, ch 1
[497
b32-498*4] 20b; bk hi, ch ii
[517^7]
42b; ch 19
[521*3]
45d; ch 22
[523*14-15] 48c; bk iv, ch 9 [536b i-8] 63a-b;
bk vni, ch 1 [588*i8-b 4] 114b, d; bk ix, ch i
[6o8*io-b i9] 133b,d-134a / Parts of Animals,
bk 1, ch 1
[64i b5-8]
164b-c; bk ii, ch 7
[653*29^2] 178c-d; ch
10 [656*4-13] 182a-b; ch 14 [658*15-27] 184d-185a; [658^-8] 185b; ch 16
[659b28]-CH
17
[66ob3] 186d-187c; bk
hi, ch 1
[662b2i-22] 190a; ch 6
[669*18-20]
197c; [669V5] 197d-198a; ch 10
[673*4-10]
201d-202a;
[673*28]
202b; bk iv, ch 10
[686*25-687b
5] 217d-219a;
[689^1-12]
221c;
[690*28-30]
222b / Gait of Animals, ch 4
[706*19-25] 244d-245a; ch 5 [7o6b8-io] 245b
/ Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 20 [728b i4~ 21] 268d; bk 11, ch 6
[744*27-31]
285c; b i6-i9] 286d; bk iv, ch 4
[772^-8]
314b-c; ch 8
[776^3-27] 318d-319a; bk
v,  ch  2 [78i b i7-23] 323d-324a; ch 7 [786b i5~22] 328c-d / Ethics, bk
i, ch 7 [1097^-1 1] 342d343a;
[i097b23-i098*7] 343a-b; ch 13 [1102*
[745
27-1103*3]  347d-348c;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [nn  b612]  357b-c; bk vii, ch i
[1145*15-33] 395a-b; ch 3
[ii47*25-b5]
397c-d; bk viii, ch 12

[48a]
14 THE GREAT IDEAS (1. Definitions of man: conceptions of the properties
and qualities of human nature?)
[1162*16-25] 414c; bk
ix, ch 9 [n69b i7-i9] 423b;
[1170*16-18]
423d-424a; bk x, ch 7
[ii77b26-ii78a8] 432c; ch 8 [ii78b23-27] 433c
/ Politics, bk 1, ch 2 [i253a i-39] 446b-d; ch 5
[i254b i5-25] 448b; bk vii, ch 13 [i332a39~b
7] 537a-b; ch 15 [i334b i2-28] 539c-d / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 1
[i355b i-3J 594d
/ Poetics, ch 4
[1448V24I 682c-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3 108b-c; ch 9 114c-116b; ch 23
128c-d;  ch  28, 134a-d; bk 11, ch 8, 146a-147a; ch ii 150a-151b; bk iv,
ch 5, 228c-229b; ch ii 240d-242d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i
256b,  d;  bk  in, sect 4 260b-261a; bk iv, sect 4 264a; sect 24 265c-d;
sect 29 266a; bk v, sect 5 269b; sect 16 271c-d; bk vi; sect 23 276b; bk
vn,  sect  13  280c;  sect  55  283bc;  bk viii, sect 12 286b-c; sect 34
288a-b:  bk ix, sect 1 291a-c; sect 9 292b-d; sect 23 293c; bk x, sect 6
297a-b;  bk  xi,  sect  8  303a-b;  bk  xii, sect 30 310a-b 14 Plutarch:
Pompey,  512c-d  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  ii,  219d; bk iv, 271b 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr i la-6b; tr iv, ch 14 18a-c / Third Ennead,
tr  hi,  ch 4 94c95c; tr iv, ch 2 97d-98a / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 4-6
323c-325a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 12 113b-d; par 35-37
120b-121a  /  City of God, bk v, ch 11 216c-d; bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; bk
xi,  ch  26-28  336d-338d  / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 8 626c-627a 19
Aquinas:  Sumtna  Theologica, part i, qq 7583 378a-440b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, viii
[91148] 117d-118c
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii,  24a-c;  ch xviii 25a-26a passim 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, intro 47a-d; part i, 76c-d; 79b-d; 83a; 84c-86b; part
ii,   99a-b;   104d;   138d-139a;  141a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  la,c;  65c-d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 119b-d; 207a-c;
215a232c  esp  216c-219a,  231d-232c;  381b-c;  462d463a 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [314-322] 43d; act iv, sc iv [31-66] 59a-c 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 454a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
20c-d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv 51b-54b passim / Meditations, 11
77d-81d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  axiom  1-2 373c-d; prop 10-13
376c-378c;  part  iv, prop 18, schol 429a-d; prop 35 433b-434a; appendix
447a-450d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk ii [345-353] 118b119a; bk in
[80-216] 137a-140a; bk iv [288-

[48b]
369] 158b-160b; bk vii
[519-640] 228b-231a
/ Samson Agonistes
[667-709]
354a-355a  /  Areopagitica,  384a 33 Pascal: Pensees, in 194a; 115 194b;
125-183  195b-204b;  365  236a; 396-424 240b-243b / Vacuum, 357a-358a 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect 67 39c-d; ch vn, sect 77 42b /
Human  Understanding,  bk  11, ch xxvii, sect 8 221a-222a; bk in, ch vi,
sect  22 273d-274a; sect 33 278b-c; ch x, sect 17 295d-296b; ch xi, sect
20  304c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  13-16 326d-328d; ch vii, sect 16-18
344a-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  12, 370c-371a; ch xvii, sect i 371c-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv,  151b-152a;  159b160a  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
383a-384a;  394a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  lb-d; 187d-188d; 205a-c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk i, ld-2d; bk xxiii, 187d; bk xxviii,
259b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-348a,c  passim,  esp 329a-334a,c,
343a-345c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 71b-d; bk ii, 147d-148a; bk
v,  343a-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 409d-410a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
199c-200c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  270c-d;  271d-273b;
284b-285a  /  Practical  Reason,  316c-317a;  348a-b / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  372a-b;  373d / Science of Right, 400b,d-402a esp
401b-402a;  421c-422d  /Judgement, 479a-c; 571c-572a; 583b-c; 584d-585c;
587a-588a;  591b-592d  43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-9]  la  43
Federalist:  number 6 38d-41c passim; number 10, 50b-d; number 15, 65bc;
number  17, 69c; number 27, 95d; number 34, HOc-d; number 37, 120d-121a;
number  49,  160a;  number  51,  163b-c;  number  55, 174c-d; number 57,
177b-c;  number  71, 214bc; number 76, 226d-227b 43 Mill: Liberty, 273d;
294a-297b   esp   295a-b   /  Utilitarianism,  448d-449b;  459c-464d  44
Bos\vell:/o/i^ow, 377d; 403a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
190 66a-b; par 209 69d; par 270, 86d-87b
[fn
1];  additions,  34  122a-b;  121 136c-d / Philosophy of History, intro,
178a-179d 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue
[280-292]
8a;  part  1  [1110-1117]  27b-28a; [3240-3250] 79b; part 11 [8082-8131]
197a-198a  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 84b-85a; 236a-239a; 306a; 313b-314a;
343a;  345b-347b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 286a-287b; 287d; 291a; 302b;
310a-314a  esp 310a-d, 312a-b; 319b-d; 349d; 597c 50 Marx: Capital, 98a;
159a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 431b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689b-c  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi,
54a-b; bk v, 127b-137c

[49a]
\a  Chapter  51: MAN 15 53 James: Psychology, 49b-50a; 712b-737a passim,
esp   716a-717b,  721a,  730a,  736b-737a;  826a-827a  54  Freud:  Group
Psychology,  684d-686c  espji86c / War and Death, 758a / Civilizationand
Us  Discontents,  787a  /  New  Introductory  lectures,  883b-c  la. The
conception  of  man  as essentially distinct, or differing in kind, from
brute  animals:  man's  specific  rationality and freedom Old Testament:
Genesis,  1:20-30  esp  1:26-30;  5:1-2;  9:6 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
17:1-9—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-9 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a /
Timaeus, 452d453a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*22b27l 499a-b
/ Soul, bk ii, ch 3
[4i4b i7-2o]
644d; [415*7-12] 645b; bk hi, ch 3 [427b7-i4] 659d-660a;
[428*20-24] 660c; ch
10
[433*813] 665d
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[45WM]695b
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch i
[588*i8-b4] 114b,d
/ Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 1
[64i b5-8] 164b-c; bk iv, ch 10 [686*2733] 217d-218a; [687*4-10] 218c-d / Generation
of Animals, bk ii, ch 6
[744*27-31] 285c
/ Ethics, bk 1, ch 7
[i097b23-io98*7] 343a-b;
ch 13 [1102*27-1103*3] 347d-348c; bk hi, ch 2 [nii b6-i2]357b-c; bk vii,
ch i [1145*15-33] 395a-b: ch 3
[1 147*25^5] 397c-d; bk
ix, ch 9 [1170*16-18] 423d-424a; bk x, ch 7 [ii77b261178*8] 432c; ch 8
[1 i78b23-27] 433c / Politics,
bk  1,  ch  2 [1253*1-39] 446b-d; ch 5 [i254b i5~ 25] 448b; bk vn, ch 13
[i332*39-b  7]  537a  b;  ch  15  [i334b  i2-28]  539c-d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3 108b c; ch 6 110c-112b; ch 9 114c-116b; ch 16
121d122d; ch 28, 134a-d; bk ii, ch 8, 146a-147a; bk in, ch 7, 183c-184a;
bk  iv,  ch  i  213a223d;  ch  5,  228c-229b;  ch 7, 233a-b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk ii, sect 16 259a; bk in, sect 16 262d-263a,c; bk v, sect
16  271c-d;  bk vi, sect 23 276b; bk viii, sect 7 286a; sect 41 288d; bk
ix,  sect 9 292b-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i la-6b esp ch 10, 5a /
Third  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  4  94c-95c  /  Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 4-6
323c-325a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 12 113b-d; par 35-37
120b-121a  /  City of God, bk v, ch 11 216c-d; bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; bk
viii,  ch 6, 269a; bk xi, ch 26-28 336d-338d / Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  8 626c-627a; ch 22 629b-630a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3, a 1, rep 2 14b-15b; q 18, a 2, rep i 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q
19,  a  10, ans 117d-118b; q 23, a 1, ans and rep 2-3 132c-133b; q 30, a
2,  rep  3  168a-169b;  q  59,  a  3, ans 308b309a; q 72, a i, rep 1,3-4
368b-369d; qq 75-

[49b]
83  378a-440b; q 86, a 4, rep 3 463d-464d; q 91, a 3, rep 1-3 486b-487d;
q  92,  a  i,  ans  488d-489d;  q  96  510a-513c  esp a i 510b-511b, a 4
512d-513c;  part  i-ii, prologue 609a,c; q 1, aa 1-2 609b-611b; q 6, a 2
646a-c; q ii, a 2 667b-d; q 12, a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q 15, a
2  682a-c; q 17, a 2 687d688b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
50, a 3, rep 2 8b-9a; q ho, a 4, rep 3 350d-351d; part hi suppl, q 79, a
i, ans 951b-953b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvi
[1 12-120]
39b; xxxi [46-57] 46c; purgatory, xxv [3478] 91d-92a; paradise, v
[19-24]
112b; vn
[121-148] 116b-c
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1303-1333]
181b182a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  184b-c; 215a-232c esp 216c 219a, 231d
232c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act iv, sc iv [32-39] 59a 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  i,  41b,  d;  part  iv  51b-54b passim; part v, 56a-b;
59a-60c / Meditations, 11 77d-81d esp 78b-c; iv 89a-93a / Objections and
Replies, 156a-d; 209b; 226a-d; 276c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 2
373d;  part  in,  prop  57 414d-415b; part iv, prop 35, schol 433d-434a;
prop  37,  schol  1-2  434d436a  passim 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii
[449-549] 227a229a; bk viii
[369-451]
240a-242a; bk ix
[549-566] 259b; bk xii [63-110] 320b-321b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  140  199a-b; 339-348 233a234a; 418 243a 35 Locke:
Civil  Government, ch vi, sect 56-63 36d-38c; ch xiv, sect 163-164 63a-c
/ Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, sect io-ii 145d146a; ch xxvii, sect
8  221a-222a;  sect 12 223a-b; bk hi, ch vi, sect 26-27 274d-276a; ch x,
sect 17 295d-296b; ch xi, sect 20 304c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  i,  ld-2b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338c; 357c-358b / Social
Contract,  bk  1, 393 b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 6d-7b; 8a-b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  164a-165c  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
264d-265a;  279b,d;  281c-282c / Practical Reason, 291a-293b; 316c317a /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378b-c  /  Science  of Right,
400b,d-402a  esp  401b-402a;  420d-421a  I judgement, 584d-585c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  294a-297b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 21 17a-c;
part  1,  par  47  24a-b;  part  ii,  par  132 46b-47a; par 139 48d-49b;
additions,  4  116a-d;  10  117d-118a;  22  120c-d;  28  121b; 62 126a /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156c;  168b-d;  178a-b;  186a; part i,
257d-258a; part in, 304d-305a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 287b-c; 319b-d;
331b-332a

[50a]
(  1  .  Definitions of man: conceptions of the properties and qualities
ofhuman  nature,  la.  The conception of man as essentially distinct, or
differing   in   kind,from  brute  animals:  man'  specific  rationality
andfreedom.)  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c690a 52
Dostoevsky:   Brothers   Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim  lb.  The
conception  of  man  as  distinguished  from  brutes  by  such powers or
properties  as  abstraction or relational thought, language and law, art
and  science  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:19-20 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus
Bound [442-506] 44c45a 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[195-213]
260a-b   /  Trojan  Women  [665-672]  275d  7  Plato:  Laches,  35b-d  /
Protagoras, 44a-45a / Theaetetus, 534d-536a esp 535d-536a / Laws, bk 11,
653a-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch i
[i28b i5-i6]
178b; ch 3 [132*1-9] 182d; [132*17-22] 183a; ch 4 [133*15-23] 184b; ch 5
[134*8-17] 185b-c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12
[292^-1 1] 384a
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [98ob25-98i a27] 499b-d / Soul, bk in, ch 3
[427b7~i4] 659d-660a;
[428*20-24] 660c / Memory and Reminiscence,
ch 2 [453*5-14! 695b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488^0-27] 9d; bk iv, ch 9 [536b i-8] 63a-b;
bk viii, ch i [588*i8-b 4] 114b,d; bk ix, ch i
[6o8*io-b i9] 133b,d-134a / Parts of Animals,
bk 11, ch 10
[656*8-9] 182a; ch
16  [659^8] ch 17 [66ob 3] 186d-187c; bk hi, ch 6 [669*1820] 197c; ch 10
[673*4-10] 201d-202a; bk iv, ch 10 [686*25-687b 5] 217d-219a esp
[686b24]
218b, [687*4-23] 218c-d / Generation of Animals, bk 11, ch 6 [744*27-31]
285c; bk v, ch 2
[78^17-23]
323d-324a; ch 7
[786^5-22]
328c-d  / Ethics, bk i, ch 7 [1097^-1 1] 342d343a; bk hi, ch 2 [nnb6-i2]
357b-c;  bk  vii, ch 1 [n45ai5-33l 395a-b; ch 3 [u 47*25-b 5] 397c-d; bk
viii, ch 12 [1162*16-25] 414c; bk ix, ch 9 [n69b i7-i9] 423b / Politics,
bk  i,  ch  2  [1253*1-39]  446b-d;  bk vii, ch 13 [1332*39b 7] 537a-b /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355^-3]
594d / Poetics, ch 4
[1 448^-24] 682c-d
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; ch 28, 134a-d; bk iv, ch ii
240d-242d  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 16 262d263a,c; bk ix,
sect  9  292b-d  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xviii,  25a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  52b; 53a-b; 54a; 54c; 57d; 59b-c; 63a; 79b-d; part
ii,  lOOa-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 215b-216b; 218a-c 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  427d-428a  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d / Novum
Organum, bk ii, aph 35, 163d-164a

[50b]
16  THE  GREAT IDEAS lb to \c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59c-60b /
Objections and Replies, 226a-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[369-451]
240a-242a;  bk  ix  [549-566] 259b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro,
sect  1  93a-b;  bk ii, ch xi, sect 4-1 i 144d-146a esp sect 10 145d; bk
hi,  ch  i,  sect 1-3 251b,d-252a; ch vi, sect 33 278b-c; bk iv, ch xii,
sect  ii,  361c-d; ch xviii, sect ii, 384b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
intro,  sect  ii  407b-408a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 4,
452bc  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341d;  349d-350a  39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  6d-8b  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 164a- 165c; 199c-200c /
Practical  Reason,  316c-317a  /  Pref  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
372a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-d / Judgement, 479a-c; 602b,d
[fn 1] 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448a-449c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par 211 70a-c; additions, 26 121a-b; 121 136c-d; 157 142b-c /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  168b-d  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,
278a-279a;  294c304a  esp  294c-d,  297a-298a, 304a; 311d; 320a-b; 349d;
591d-593c  50  Marx:  Capital,  85b-c;  86b-c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  v, 122d-123a; bk vi, 167c-d 53 James: Psychology, 85a-b;
677a;  678b-686b esp 678b, 683b-684a, 686a-b; 691a-b; 704a706b esp 706b;
873a  54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 385b-c / Unconscious, 429c-d /
General  Introduction,  616b-c  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 778a
\c.  The  conception  of  man  as an animal, differing only in degree of
intelligence  and  of  other  qualities  possessed  by  other animals 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 79, a 1, ans 951b-953b 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b; 53a-b; 53d54a; 59b; 64a-c; 79c; part ii,
112d-113a;  part  iv,  267b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 207a-c; 215a-232c esp
216c-219a, 231d-232c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35, 163d164a 32
Milton:   Paradise   Lost,   bk   ix  [549-566]  259b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b; ch x, sect 17 295d-296b;
ch  xi, sect 20 304c-d; bk iv, ch xvi, sect 12, 370c-371a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  ix  487b488c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 334b,d-338d;
348d349c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  199c-200c  43  Mill: Utilitarianism,
448a-449c; 469b-d

[51a]
2  to  2b{\)  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 286a 319d esp 287a-b, 294c,
304a-305c,  319b  d;  331b-332a;  591d-592a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  689c  690a  ^^ 53 James: Psychology, 677a; 690b 54 Freud:
Sexual  Enlightenment  of Children, 121d; 122c 2. Man's knowledge of man
2a.   Immediate  self-consciousness:  man's  intimate  or  introspective
knowledge of himself 7 Plato: Charmides, 7b-c; 8b d / Phaedrus, 116c-d /
Philebus, 629b c b 5~9] 661d; 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 4 [429
[ 429b25-29] 662b; [430*2-9] 662 b c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 9
[ii7oa28-b i]
424a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch i, 105a b; ch 27, 133a-b 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk xi, sect i 302a b 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  x, par 3 72a; par 7 73a / City of God, bk xi, ch 26 336d337b; ch 27,
33  7d  338a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 87, a 1, ans 465a
466c;  a 2, ans 466c 467b; a 4, ans 468b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  112,  a  5,  ans  and rep 1,5 359c 360c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[49-60] 80b-c
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 6d-7a; 69d-70c;
177d181d  esp  180b-d;  253d  254a;  319d  320b;  322b  323b; 388c 389c;
485c-486a;  520b 522a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 332b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 54b-c; 88c89b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv,
51c-52a  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d  /  Objections  and Replies, 207b;
224b,d;  276b-c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 19-23 382b383c 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  396-399 240b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
i, sect 1-8 121a-123a esp sect 7-8 122c-123a; ch ix, sect 1-2 138b-c; ch
xix  175b-176b;  ch  xxi, sect 30 185a-c; ch xxiii, sect 15 208c-d; sect
32-33  212c-213a; ch xxvii, sect 9 222a-b; bk iv, ch ix, sect 2-3 349a-c
35  Hume: Human Understanding sect i, div 8, 454a-b; sect vii, div 51-53
472b-474b  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 349b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 32a-c;
55a-56c; 99a-101b; 121a-123b / Practical Reason, 292d
[fn 1];
307d-310c  /  Judgement,  599d-600d  43  Mill: Liberty, 303b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  intro.  par 5 13a-c; par 7 14a-c; part i, par 35
21a-b; additions, 5 116d-117a; 22 120c-d; 25 121a /

[51b]
Chapter  51:  MAN  17 Philosophy of History, part i, 257d-258a; part 11,
278a-c; part hi, 304a-b; 310d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3217-3239]
79a-b;  part  11 [11,433-452] 278a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
ii,  688b689b; 693d-694c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bkxi,341c 53
James:  Psychology,  121a-b;  122b-126a;  191a197a  esp 193a, 196a-197a;
221b;  223b-224a;  233ab  54  Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 383 b-c /
Unconscious,  429c-430c  /  General Introduction, 451a-b; 620a / Ego and
Id,  702d-703a  2b.  The  sciences  of  human  nature:  anthropology and
psychology; rational and empirical psychology; experimental and clinical
psychology 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk vi, ch i
[1026s
5-6] 548a / Soul, bk i, ch i 631a-632d; bk ii, ch 4 [415*14-22] 645b-c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1 102^-25]
347bc  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 261c-269b passim 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  54b-c  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i 451a455b passim;
sect  viii, div 65 479b-480a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-330b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c  esp  lb-d  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
253b-254b;   271ac  /  Practical  Reason,  294a-b;  307d-310c  /  Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 388a-c / Judgement, 599d-600d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  intro,  par  11 15a b 53 James :Pi>rAo/o^y,xiiib-xiva;la-4a;
120a-129b   54   Freud:  Unconscious,  431b-d  /  General  Introduction,
451a-453a esp 451b-452a / Group Psychology, 664a-665a / New Introductory
Lectures,  864a-868d  esp  868b-c;  873c-d  2£(1) The subject matter and
scope  of  the science of man 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch i 631a 632d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, o 87 464d-468d 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  49d-50b; 54b-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect
1-4  93a-94b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i 451a455b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  329a-331d  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  294a-b  /  Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 388b-c / Judgement, 599d-600d esp 600d 53 James:
Psychology,  xiiib-xiva;  3b-4a;  120a121a;  129b;  236a; 825a [fn 1] 54
Freud:   Unconscious,   428a-429c   esp  429b  /  General  Introduction,
452a-454b;  467b-d;  550a-b;  606a  /  Group Psychology, 664a-665b / New
Introductory Lectures, 866a-b

[52a]
(2b. The sciences of human nature: anthropology and psychology; rational
and  empirical  psychology; experimental and clinical psychology.) 2b(2)
The  methods  and  validity  of psychology 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch i
631a-632d;  bk ii, ch 4 [415*14-22] 645b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch
13
[1102*5-25]
347b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 87 464d-468d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[49-60] 80b-c
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d; part ii, 163a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  49d-50b;  54b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 145
441d-442a;  sect  148 442b-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 8
454a-c; sect ix, div 82 487b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 55a-56c; 121a-123b;
126c-d  /  Practical Reason, 292d [fa 1]; 294a-b; 307d-310c / Judgement,
599d-600d  43  Federalist:  number  79,  234b-c  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  xii,  386c-387d  53  James: Psychology, 17b-18b; 56a-66a
passim;  121a-129b  esp 126a-129b; 146a; 165a; 235b236a esp 236b [fn 1];
259a-b;   822b;  825a  [fn  1]  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of
PsychoAnalysis,   13c-14a   /   Unconscious,   429b-c;  434c  /  General
Introduction,  451d-452a;  548a-550c  esp  550a-b;  606a-b  / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle, 639a-b; 661c-662b / Ego and Id. 706d-707a 2^(3) The
relation  of  psychology  to physiology: the study of organic factors in
human  behavior  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  240d-242b  /  Timaeus,  474b475d  8
Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246b20248*8] 330a-d / Soul, bk
i, ch i
[403*2-b i9]
632a-d; bk ii, ch i 642a-643a; ch 9 [42^22a28-b4] 661c-d; ch 9
[432b26-433a i]
665c / Sleep 696a-701d esp ch 1 696a-697c / Dreams 702a-706d passim, 26]
653b; bk in, ch 4 [429 esp ch 2 703a-704d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals,
bk  ii, ch 4 175b-176a; ch 7 [653^-7] 178d-179a; bk hi, ch 6 [669*18-20]
197c;  bk  iv,  ch  10 [686b2229] 218b-c / Motion of Animals, ch 7 [70i b
i3]-  ch 8 [702*22] 237a-c; ch ii 239a-d 10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease,
155d-160d  esp  159a-c  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk hi [94-829]
31b-40c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75,  a  3, rep 3
380c-381b; a 4 381b-382a; q 76, a 5 394c-396a; q 84, aa 7-8 449b-451b; q
85, a 7 459c-460b; part i-ii, q 41, a i, ans 798b-d

[52b]
18  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2b(2) to la 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 271a-b;
296d  /  Circulation  of  the  Blood,  321d-322a;  322c-d  /  On  Animal
Generation,  431d-432a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of learning, 48d-50b 31
Descartes: Discourse, part v, 60b-c; part vi, 61c / Meditations, vi, 99d
/  Objections  and Replies, 207d 208a; 209c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop  14  380c;  prop  16-17 380d-381d; prop 26, demonst 384a-b; part v,
pref  451a-452c;  prop  39 462a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338a 42 Kant:
Judgement, 538d-539a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a 53
James:  Psychology, 2b-4a; 7a; 9a-56a esp 9a-b, 52a-53b; 66b-71a passim;
690b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  154c-155a  / Unconscious,
429a-b;   431c-d   /   General   Introduction,  451d-452a;  605b-606b  /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 721a / New Introductory Lectures,
872c-d 2£(4) The place of psychology in the order of sciences: the study
of  man as prerequisite for other studies 7 Plato: Charmides, 7b-c; 8b-d
/ Phaedrus, 116c-d / Phaedo, 240d-242b / Republic, bk ii, 316a-b; bk iv,
350a-b / Philebus, 629b-c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk vi, ch i
[1026*
5-6] 548a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102*5-25]
347b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 2 [1356*21-29] 595d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
intro, 47b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 69d-70c; 259a-260b; 308c-d 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation, 443b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 51c-52a /
Meditations,  11  77d-81d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  207b 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 66 180b; 144-146 200b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 87d; intro
93a-95d  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i, div 7-8 453c-454c 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-330b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c esp lb-d /
Practical Reason, 307d-310c; 331a-332d / judgement, 511a-512a; 599d-600d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 4 12d13a; par 19 16d-17a 54
Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  868b  d;  874a-c;  883c-d  3.  The
constitution  of  man  5a.  Man  as a unity or conjunction of matter and
spirit, body and soul, extension and thought Old Testament: Genesis, 2:7
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 9:14-15; 15:11 — (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom,
9:14-15;  15:11  New Testament: Romans, 7:14-23; 8:4-13 / / Corinthians,
15:36-49

[53a]
3a  to  la{2)  Chapter  51:  MAN 19 7 Plato: Cratylus, 93b-d / Phaedrus,
124b-d / Phaedo, 231b 234c / Republic, bk hi, 338a339a / Timaeus, 453b-c
/  Laws,  bk  v,  686d687c  ^__^  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk vii, ch
r6^\io^5h 13-32] 559a-b; bk viii, ch 3
[ic>43 a29-b
4]  567d;  ch  6  569d-570d; bk xii, ch 10 [io75b a2-b i9] 34-37] 606d /
Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[403
632a-d; ch 5
[4iob io-i6]
640c;
[4ii b5-i8]
641c-d; bk 11, ch 1-2 642a-644c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 5
[i254 a 33-b
7]  448a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [94-176] 31b-32b;
[370-395] 34d-35a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; bk iv, ch
11,  240d-241b  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 21 265bc; bk vii,
sect  55 283b-c; bk ix, sect 8 292b; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 14 Plutarch:
Romulus, 29a b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i la 6b / Second Ennead, tr
i,  ch  5, 37c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 19-23 151d 154b esp ch 20 152b
153a;  tr  vii,  ch 1 191c-d; ch 8, 197c-198b / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch
4-6  323c-325a  18  Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch ii, 216c; bk ix, ch
8-17  289d-295c passim; bk x, ch 29 316d-318b: bk xiii, ch 16 367a-d; ch
19  369c-370c; bk xiv, ch 2-3 377a 378d; ch 5 379c380b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  8,  a i, rep 2 34d-35c: a 2, rep 2 35c-36b; qq
75-76 378a-399b: 118, a 2, ans and rep 2 601c603b; a 3, \ss 603b 604b; q
119.  a  i, ans 604c-607b; part i-ii. q 4, a 5, rep 2 632c634b; 17, a 4,
ans and rep 3 688d 689c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, a 1,
ans and rep 2 710a-711c; a 5 715a-716b; q 17, a 2, rep 4 808d-809d; part
hi  suppl,  q  79,  a  i-q  80,  a  2 951b 958b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxv
[34-78] 91d-92a
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 311a-b; 432b-d; 538a543a,c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 48d-49c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 51d-52a; part v,
60b-c  / Meditations. 11 77d-81d; vi, 98c-99a; 99d-100a / Objections and
Replies,  119d-120a;  def  vi-vii  130c-d;  def  x  130d;  prop iv 133c;
135d-136b;  152b,d-156a;  170b-c;  207d-208a; 209c; 224d-225d; 231a232d;
248b;  276b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 10-13 376c378c; part hi,
prop 2 396c-398b; part v, pref 451a-452c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 512 262a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 4, 113b; bk 11, ch xxvn,
sect  6-8  220c222a  esp  sect  8,  221d-222a;  sect  15  224bc; sect 21
225d-226a;  sect  27-29 227d-228c; bk iv, ch in, sect 6 313c-315b passim
35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 52 472c-473c

[53b]
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  229b-230a; 270b; 277a-b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  198ac  42  Kant:  Judgement,  557c-558b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part i, par 47-48 24a-c; additions, 2 115d 53 James: Psychology,
la-4a  esp  2b-3a,  4a;  84a93b esp 88a-90b; 116a-119b; 130a; 139a-140a;
208a  b;  221a-226a esp 221a-222b, 225b-226a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  154c-155a  3a(l)  Man  as a pure spirit: a soul or mind using a
body  7 Plato: Cratylus, 93b-d / Phaedrus, 124b-126c / Meno, 179d-180b /
Phaedo, 231b-234c; 250a-d / Timaeus, 452d-454a 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  iv,  ch ii, 240d241a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [724-751] 230b-231a 17
Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr i la-6b esp ch 5-7 2d-4a / Second Ennead, tr
i,  ch  5,  37c  / Third Ennead, tr iv, ch 2 97d-98a / Fourth Ennead, tr
vii,  ch i 191c-d / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 4-6 323c-325a 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  xiii, ch 16 367ad; ch 19 369c-370c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 29, a 1, rep 5 162a-163b; q 75, a 4 381b-382a; q
76, a 1, ans 385d-388c; a 4, ans 393a-394c; a 7, ans 396d-397d; q 118, a
3, ans 603b-604b 20 Aouinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl. q 79, a 1,
ans  and rep 4 951b-953b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 51c-52a; part
v,  60bc  / Meditations, 11 77d-81d; vi, 98c-d / Objections and Replies,
119d-120a; def vi-vii 130c-d; def x 130d; prop iv 133c; 135d 136b; 152d;
155c-156a; 207d-208a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 2 396c-398b; part
v,  pref  451a-452c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvn, sect
6-8 220c-222a esp sect 8, 221d222a; sect 21 225d-226a; sect 28-29 228a-c
35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 2 413b; sect 89 430b-c; sect 135-142
440a-441c; sect 148 442b-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 35 21a-b; par 47 24a-b; additions, 5
116d-117a; 22 120c-d; 25 121a; 28 121b / Philosophy of History, part hi,
310d  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 28a; 380b-381a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk vii, 295b-c 53 James: Psychology, 220b-226a 3tf(2) Man's spirituality
as  limited  to  his  immaterial powers or functions, such as reason and
will 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 4 [4o8b i8-29] 638c; ch 5 [4ii b i3-i8]
641c-d;  bk  ii,  ch  2  [413^429] 643d-644a; bk hi, ch 4-5 661b-662d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 7, a 2, rep 2 31d-32c; q 29, a i,
rep 5 162a-163b; q 75, a 2 379c-380c; aa 5-6 382a-384c; q 76

[54a]
(3a.  Man as a unity or conjunction of matter and spirit, body and soul,
extension  and  thought.  3<z(2)  Man's  spirituality  as limited to his
immaterial  powers  or  functions,  such  as reason and will.) 385c-399b
passim; q 77, a 5 403d-404c; q 78, a 1, ans 407b-409a: q 79 413d-427a; q
80,  a 2 428a-d; qq 82-83 431d-440b; q 84, a i, ans and rep 1 440d-442a;
a  2, ans 442b-443c; a 6, ans 447c-449a; q 85, a i, ans 451c-453c; q 86,
a 1, rep 3 461c-462a; q 87, a i, rep 3 465a-466c; q 91, a i, ans and rep
i  484a485b;  q 96, a 2 511b-d; q 98, a i, ans 516d517c; q 118, a 2, ans
601c-603b 3b. Comparisons of man with God or the gods, or with angels or
spiritual  substances Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-27; 5:1-2; 9:6 / Job,
4:16-21  /  Psalms,  8:5—  (D)  Psalms, 8:6 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
2:23— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 2 :23 New Testament: Matthew, 22:23-30 / /
Corinthians,  11:7  /  Hebrews,  2:7  /  James,  3:9 / 11 Peter, 1:3-4 /
Revelation,  22:8-9— (D) Apocalypse, 22:8-9 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a
/ Republic, bk \t, 382c / Timaeus, 476a-b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals,
bk iv, ch 10
[686*27-33] 217d-218a
10  Hippocrates:  Sacred Disease, 155c-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  3 108b-c; ch 12, 119b-120a; ch 14 120d-121c; bk ii, ch 16, 158b-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi, par 4 36a-b; bk xii, par 20 103c-d; bk
xiii, par 32 119a b / City of God, bk viii, ch 25 283b-c; bk ix, ch 8-17
289d-295c;  bk xii, ch 21 357a-b; ch 23 357d-358a; bk xiii, ch i 360a-b;
bk  xvi, ch 6 426c-427a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22, 629b-c; ch 23
630a-c;  ch  30 632c-633b; ch 33 633d-634b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 7, A 2, rep 2 31d-32c; q 30, a 2, rep 3 168a-169b; q 47, a 2,
ans  257b-258c;  qq  50-64  269a-338d  passim; q 75, a 7 384d-385c; q 93
492a-501c;  q  96,  a 2 511b-d; qq 106-107 545c-552b passim; q 108, a 1,
ans  552c-553c;  a 8 561a-562a; q 112, a 1, rep 4 571d-573a; q 117, a 2,
rep  3  597c-598c;  a  3, ans 598c-599b; q 118, a 3, ans 603b-604b; part
i-ii, q 4, a 5, rep 6 632c-634b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  50,  a  6 lla-12a; part hi, q 6, a 3, rep 2 742a743a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, vii
[121148] 116bc; xxix [13-84] 150b-151a
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162c; part hi, 183d-184a 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [314-324] 43d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[345-353] 118b-

[54b]
119a; bk iv [358-393] 160a-161a; bk v [388450] 183b-185a;
[469-505] 185b-186a; bk vi
[320-353]
203a-204a; bk x
[888-908]
293b294a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  140  199a-b;  418  243a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch x, sect 9 143a-c; ch xxiii, sect 13 207d-208b;
bk iv, ch in, sect 17 317c; sect 23 320a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  8i  428c-d  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 394a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
33a-d  /  Practical Reason, 350c-351b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [482-517]
14a-b; [602736] 16b-19b passim; part ii
[8094-8097]
197a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vii, 295b-c 53 James: Psychology,
745a 3c. Man as an organization of matter or as a collocation of atoms 7
Plato:  Sophist,  567a-568a  / Laws, bk x, 761b 8 Aristotle : Generation
and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6
[334*10-15] 435a
/  Soul, bk i, ch 2-5 633a-641d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12
172d173c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d; bk in
[94-869] 31b-41a; bk
iv  [722817] 53d-54d; [877-961] 55d-56d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i,
ch 3 79b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr vii 191c-200c esp ch 1-4 191c-193c, ch 8,
195b-196a,  196c-197c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 75, a 1
378b-379c;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  442b-443c; a 6, ans 447c-449a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  intro,  47a;  part  i,  49a-  d;  80a-b;  part iv, 251a-b 31
Descartes: Objections and Replies, 226a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk ii, ch xxvn, sect 21 225d-226a; sect 28-29 228a-c; bk iv, ch in, sect
6  313c-315b;  ch  x, sect 5 350a-b; sect 10 351b-352a; sect 17 353bc 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 93 431b; sect 137 440bc; sect 141 441a-b
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 126c-d /Judgement, 557c559d: 575b-578a; 578d-582c;
599d-600d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 255d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c690a  53  James: Psychology, 95a-119b 54
Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 829a-b 4. The analysis of human nature
into  its faculties, powers, or functions: the id, ego, and super-ego in
the  structure  of  the  psyche  7  Plato:  Republic, bk iv, 350a-353d 8
Aristotle:  Soul, bk ii-iii 642a-668d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, qq 7783 399b-440b 31 Descartes: Meditations, vi 96b-103d passim

[55a]
4a  to  4b  Chapter  51: MAN 21 42 Kant: Judgement, 465c-467a; 475b-d 49
Darwin: Descent of Man, 287a-302b passim 54 Freud: General Introduction,
501d-504b;  531d-532b  /  Group Psychology, 681a-blMgo and Id, 701d-708c
esp702c,  706d-707cf;  715a716c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety,
721d-722c  / New Introductory Lectures, 830a840a esp 836c-838d 4a. Man's
vegetative  powers:  comparison  with  similar  functions  in plants and
animals  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  361c-362a  / Timaeus, 469d-471d 8
Aristotle:  Generation  and  Corruption, bk i, ch 5 417b-420b / Soul, bk
ii, ch 2 [413*20b i3] 643b-d; ch 4 645b-647b; bk hi, ch 9
[432b8-io] 665a; ch 12 [434*22-26] 667a-b
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch i
[588b23-589a8] 115b / Generation of Animals,
bk 1, ch 23 271b-d; bk ii, ch i
[735*13-24]
275d-276a; ch 4
[740
b9-74i a 5l 281c-282a / Ethics, bk 1, ch 7
[io97b33-ic>98 a i] 343b;
ch 13 [ii02a33-b i3] 347d-348a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties 167a-215d esp
bk 1, ch 1 167a-b, ch 5-8 169b 171a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr iv, ch
2  97d98a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 19, 152a; tr ix, ch }, 206b 18
Augustine: City of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256bc; bk xiv, ch 26 395d 396c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 18, a 3, rep 3 106b-107c; q 76, a
4,  ans  393a-394c;  q  78,  aa  1-2  407b  410a; q 96, a 2 511b-d; q 98
516d-519a;  q 118, a 1 600a-601c; a 2, rep 2 601c-603b; q 119 604c-608d;
part  i-ii,  q 17, a 8 692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
50,  a  3,  rep  1  8b-9a:  part  hi  suppl,  q 80, a 4, ans and rep 4-5
959c-963a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-84] 91d-92b
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 143a- 144c 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  427d-428b  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 27,
158a-b  31  Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 207a; 244b-c 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  256a-257c  54 Freud: Sexual Enlightenment of Children,
121d  4b. Man's sensitive and appetitive powers: comparison with similar
functions  in  other animals 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 319c-320c; bk iv,
351b-353d  /  Timaeus,  466a-467d  /  Theaetetus,  534d-535b / Philebus,
620b-622b  /  Laws, bk vii, 715b-c; bk xii, 796a-b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
i, ch 5 [41 ^27-31] 641d; bk 11, ch 2
[413*20^13] 643b-d; bk
ii, ch 5-bk in, ch 3 647b-661b / Sense and the Sensible 673a-689a,c

[55b]
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk iv, ch 810 59d-64b; bk viii, ch i
[588*18-589*10]
114b,d-115b; bk ix, ch i [6o8*io-b i9] 133b,d134a / Parts of Animals, bk
ii, ch 16 [660*13]- ch 17
[660*23]
187a  /  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  6-1 1 235d-239d esp ch 10 238c-239a /
Generation  of Animals, bk hi, ch 2 [753*7-16] 294a-b / Ethics, bk i, ch
7 [1097^3-1098*20] 343a-c; ch 13
[uo2b i3-i 103*3]
348a-c; bk hi, ch 1 [nn*2i-b3] 357a-b; ch 2 [un b7-9] 357b; ch 10
[in8*i7-b
7]  364d-365a; bk vi, ch2 [1 139*17-21] 387d; bkvii, CH3 [ii47b3-5] 397d
/ Politics, bk i, ch 2 [1253*9-15] 446bc 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i, ch i 167a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [522-721] 51a-53d;
[1 192-1208] 59d-60a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c 12 Airelius: Meditations, bk
hi, sect 16 262d263a, c; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  i  la-6b passim / Third Ennead, tr iv, ch 2 97d-98a / Fourth Ennead,
tr  hi,  ch 19 151d-152b; tr iv, ch 20-21 167d-168c; ch 23-25 169c-171b;
ch 28 172a 173b; tr ix, ch 3 206a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
11  74a-b  /  Citv  of  God,  bk v, ch 9, 215a; bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 75, a 3, ans 380c-381b; q 76, a 3,
ans  391a-393a;  a  5,  ans  394c-396a;  q  78,  a  1  407b-409a; aa 3-4
410a-413d;  qq  80-81 427a-431d; q 91, a 3, rep 1,3 486b-487d; q 96, a 2
511b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  22, a 3 722d-723b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 50, a 3 8b-9a; part hi, q 2, a 2, rep 2 711d-712d; q 18, a
2,  ans  811d-812b;  part hi suppl, q 79, a 2, rep 3 953b-955c 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-84] 91d-92b
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1303-1333]
181b182a  /  Manciple's  Tale  [17,104-144] 490a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  49a-54c;  61a-c; 64ac; part ii, 139a; 141a-b; part iv, 267b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 192b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
285c-292d; 424d-425c 27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act iv, sc vi
[109-191] 274c-275b
28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 347c-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  27,  157b-c;  aph  40,  173c-d  31 Descartes: Rules, xii, 19a-20d /
Discourse,  part  v,  59a-b / Objections and Replies, 156a-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part hi, prop 57, schol 415b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[369-451]
240a-242a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 77-81 42b-43a / Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix,  sect  11-15  140b-141a; ch x 141b-143d
passim, esp sect 10 143c-d; ch xi, sect 4-7 144d145b

[56a]
7   (4.   The   analysis   ofhuman  nature  into  itsfaculties,  powers,
orfunctions:  the  id, ego, and superego in the structure of the psyche.
Ah.   Man's   sensitive   and   appetitive   powers:   comparison   with
similarfunctions  in  other animals.) 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
ix  487b488c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  147b-148b  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  331a-b; 337d-338d; 348d-349c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 164b-c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-d  /  Judgement,  479a-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  121  136c-d  48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
134b-135a;  244a245b;  286b-288a;  289b-291a  49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
261c-262a;  287d291c;  294c; 301c-302b; 304a-313a; 568d-571b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk hi, 54a-b 53 James: Psychology, 49a-50a; 198b-199b; 702ab; 704a-706b;
712b-737a  54  Freud:  Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 20a-d /
Narcissism,  400c-401d  /  Instincts 412a-421a,c esp 413a-415b / General
Introduction,  569c-585a  esp  574a-d,  579b581c,  584b-c  /  Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle 639a-663d esp 640b-c, 647a-648a, 651d654c, 659d-661c
/  Ego  and  Id,  708c-712a  esp  708d-709b / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and
Anxiety,  720b-721a; 737b-738a; 752a / Civilization and Its Discontents,
782a-d
[fn 1]; 784d785a / New Introductory Lectures, 840a-853b
esp  843d-844c,  846a-850a,  850d-851d  4c.  Man's  rational powers: the
problem  of  similar  powers  in  other animals 7 Plato: Laches, 35b-c /
Republic,  bk  hi,  338a339a;  bk  iv,  352b-353d / Timaeus, 452c-454a /
Theaetetus, 535b-536a / Laws, bk ii, 653a-c; bk vii, 723c-d 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk v, ch 3
[i32a i7~22]
183a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98ob25-27]
499b;  bk  ix,  ch  2  571c-572a; ch 5 573a-c; ch 7 [1049*5-12] 574c-d /
Soul, bk 11, ch 3
[41^17-20] 644d; [4i5 a7-i2] 645b; bk hi, ch
3-8  659c-664d;  ch  10  [433*8-13] 665d / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453*5—14] 695b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488b20-27] 9d; bk iv, ch 9 [536b i-8] 63a-b;
bk  viii,  ch  1 [588*1 8-b 4] 114b,d / Parts of Animals, bk 1, ch 1 [64i
b5-io] 164b-c; bk ii, ch 16
[659b28]-cH
17 [66ob3] 186d-187c; bk hi, ch 6
[669*18-20]
197c; ch 10
[673*4-1°]
201d202a; bk iv, ch 10
[686*2 5 -68
b  5]  217d-219a  / Generation of Animals, bk v, ch 7 [786^522] 328c-d /
Ethics, bk i, ch 7 [i097b23-ic>98 a 20] 343a-c; ch 13
[ii02b i3-i 103*3]
348a-c; bk in, ch 2 [uu b6-9] 357b; bk vi, ch i

[56b]
[ii38b35]-cH 2
[ii39b i4] 387b-388b; bk
vii, ch 3
[ii47b2-5] 397d; bk ix, ch 9 [ii7oai618] 423d-424a; bk x, ch 7-8 431d-434a
passim, esp ch 7
[ii77b26-ii78a8]
432c, ch 8
[ii78b23-3i] 433c / Politics, bk
1, ch 2 [1253* 7-18] 446b-c; bk vii, ch 13
[i332a39-b io]
537a-b;  ch  15  [i33  4 b8-28] 539b-d / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 1 [1355^1-3]
594d  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 12, 173a-c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c-112b; ch 28, 134a-c; bk ii, ch 8, 146a-b; ch
ii  150a-151b;  bk  hi, ch 7, 183c-184a; bk iv, ch 6-7, 231d-233b; ch 7,
234d-235a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 16 262d263a, c; bk v,
sect 16 271c-d; bk vi, sect 23 276b; bk viii, sect 7 286a; sect 41 288d;
bk  ix. sect 8-9 292b-d; bk xi, sect i 302a-b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead,
tr iv, ch 2 97d-98a / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 10, 213d-214a 18 Augustine:
City  of  God, bk v, ch ii 216c-d; bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; bk xii, ch 23,
357d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  8 626c-627a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 3, a i, rep 2 14b-15b; q 7, a 2, rep 2 31d-32c; q
59,  a  3,  ans  308b-309a;  q  76,  a 5, rep 4 394c396a; q 78, a 1. ans
407b-409a;  a  4,  ans  and rep 4-6 411d-413d; q 79 413d-427a; q 80, a 2
428a-d; q 81, a 3 430c-431d; qo 82-89 431d480c; q 96, a 2 511b-d; q 118,
a  2,  ans 601c603b; part i-ii, q 12, a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q
15,  a  2  682a-c; q 17, a 2 687d688b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  50,  a  3, rep 2 8b-9a; aa 4-5 9a-10d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xviii
[19-75] 80a-c; xxv [34-84] 91d-92b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 52b; 53a b; 54a; 57d; 59b; 63a; part ii,
lOOa-c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 119b-d; 184a-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act
iv,  sc  iv  [32-39]  59a  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 427d-428a 30
Bacon:- Novum Organum. bk ii, aph 35, 163d-164a 31 Descartes: Rules, xn,
19a-20d  /  Discourse,  part 1, 41b, d; part iv, 51d-52a; part v, 56a-b;
59c-60b  /  Meditations,  71b-d;  11  77d81d  /  Objections and Replies,
156a-d;  209b-c;  226a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 2 373d; part
hi, prop 57, schol 415b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii
[499-528]
228a-b; bk viii
[369-451] 240a-242a; bk ix
[549-566] 259b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 339-349 233a-234a; 365 236a / Vacuum, 357a-358a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect  i 93a-b; bk i, ch i, sect i
95b,d-96a;  ch hi, sect 12 115b-116a; sect 17 117a-c; sect 23 119b-120a;
sect  25  120c-d;  bk  ii,  ch vi 131b-c; ch xi 143d-147b esp sect 8-1 i
145b-

[57a]
146a;  ch  xxi, sect 5-6 179c-180a; sect 15-16 181c-182a; ch xxvii, sect
12  223a  b;  bk  iv,  ch  xiv,  sect  3-4  364d-365a; ch xvii, sect 1-3
371c-372b  ^^^ 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 62 478b-c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  ld-2b  38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-338c;  349b-c  / Social Contract, bk 1, 393 b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  6d-8b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  164a-165c;  199c-200c  /  Fund.  Prtn.  Metaphvsic  of  Morals,
264d-265a;  271c-d;  279b;  281c  282c;  284d-285a  /  Practical Reason,
303b-d;  316c-317a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 372a-b /
Judgement,  465c-467a esp 466a-c; 474b-475d; 479a-d; 522b; 568c-575b esp
568c-d, 570c571c, 572b-575b; 584d-585c; 587d-588a; 602b,d
[fn
1] 43 Mill: Liberty, 294a-297b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions,
4-5  116a-117a; 121 136c-d / Philosophy of History, Intro, 156c; 168b-d;
186a;  part  i,  257d258a; part hi, 304d-305b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
278a-b;  287a  b;  292a-294c;  296c-300a esp 297d-298a, 299b; 312a-313a;
319c;  331b-332a;  591d-592a 50 Marx: Capital, 85a-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue ii, 689c690a 53 James: Psychology, 85a-b; 184a-187b esp
186a187a;   664a-693b  esp  664a-b,  677a-686b,  691a;  873a  54  Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  363b-364b;  367b-c;  377c-379c  esp 379a-b;
384c-385c  /  Unconscious,  429c-d  / General Introduction, 532a 4d. The
general  theory  of  faculties:  the  critique  of  faculty psychology 8
Aristotle: Soul, bk ii, ch 2-3 643a-645b; ch 5 [417*21-418*6] 647d-648d;
bk hi, ch 9 664d-665c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 1-2, 167a-b;
ch  4 169a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 77 399b-407a; q 78, a
1  407b-409a;  a  4,  ans 411d-413d; q 83, a 2, rep 2 438a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 3, ans and rep 2 4b-5a; a 4 5a-6a;
q  50,  a  2  7c-8a;  q 54, a 1 22d-23d; q 56, a i, ans 30a-c; q no, a 4
350d-351d  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv [1-18] 57c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning,  49d-50b  esp 50b; 54b 31 Descartes: Rules, xn,
18b-20d  /  Meditations, iv 89a-93a; vi, 98d-99a; 101d-102a / Objections
and Replies, 135b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 48-49 391a394d

[57b]
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 1 95b,d-96a; ch hi, sect
12  115b-116a; sect 17 117a-c; sect 23 119b-120a; sect 25 120c-d; bk 11,
ch   xxi,  sect  6  179d-180a;  sect  15-20  181c-183a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect i, div 8, 454b-c 42 Kant -.Judgement, 461a-475d esp
466a-c,  474b475d  53 James: Psychology, la-2a; 17b-18b 5. The order and
harmony  of  man's powers and functions: contradictions in human nature;
the  higher  and  lower nature of man Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:15—
(D)  OT,  BooJ{ of Wisdom, 9:15 New Testament: Romans, 5-8 esp 7:15-25 /
Galatians,  4-5 / James, 4:1-3 7 Plato: Phaedo, 231b-234c / Republic, bk
iv,  350a-355a;  bk  ix,  421a-427b; bk x, 431b-434a / Timaeus, 466a-c /
Laws, bk v, 686d-687c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[i097b221098*17] 343a-c; bk vii, ch 6 [1150*1-5] 400c
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 24 203c210a; bk iv, ch ii 240d-242d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk i, sect i 253a; bk in, sect 6 261a-c; bk
iv,  sect  27  266a;  sect  39 267a; bk v, sect 26 272c; bk vii, sect 13
280c;  bk ix, sect i 291a-c; sect 7-8 292b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr
iv, ch 2 97d-98a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 18 166d-167b / Sixth Ennead,
tr  iv, ch 15, 304c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 10-n, 55d;
par 19-24 58b-60a; bk xiii, par 12 113b-d / City of God, bk xi, ch 26-28
336d338d;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  361a-c;  ch  15  366c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 77, aa 4-7 403a-406b; q 95, a 2 507c-508a; PART
I-II, Q 13, A I, ANS 672d-673cj Q l6, A I 684b-d; q 17, a 4 688d-689c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  82, a 1 168a-d; a 4, rep i
170b-171a;  q  85,  a  i,  ans  178b-179b;  q  91, a 6, ans 212c-213c 22
Chaucer:  Manciple's Tale [17,104-1 4^]490a-b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch
xviii,  25a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 63a; 85b-86b esp 86b; part 11,
141a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 105c-107a; 161a; 162b; 326b-327b; 381b-c 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc iv
[23-38]
36a-b  / Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc ii [82106] 121a-b / King Lear,
act iv, sc ii [38-50] 270d-271a / Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[1-132]
303b-304d  /  Coriolanus,  act  iv,  sc  vii  [28-57]  384c-d  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
207d-208a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  106-117  193b-194b; 125-183 195b-204b;
396-424 240b-243b; 532 265a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 151b-152a

[58a]
(5.  The order and harmony of man's powers and functions: contradictions
in  human  nature; the higher and lower nature of man.) 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  198a-c;  205a-c  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, Id 2b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 337d-338d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 164a-165c / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282b-283d / Practical Reason, 292a-293b;
316c-317a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385c-386b / Judgement, 584d585c;
587a-588a  43  Federalist:  number  55,  174c-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
448a-450a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part ii, par 139 48d-49b /
Philosophy of History, part hi, 304b-306b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1110-1117] 27b-28a;
[3217-3250] 79a-b
48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 204b-205a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 304a-305a;
316a317a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  304b-305a 53 James:
Psychology,  lab;  188b-191a;  717a  54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
377c-382a,   esp  379c-d  /  General  Introduction,  590c-d;  592b-593b;
615c-616c  esp  616b-c  /  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 640b-d / Group
Psychology,  689d-690c  /  Ego  and  Id,  699a-c;  711b  /  Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  746c747b esp 747a / New Introductory Lectures,
830a-832c;  834b-c  5a.  Cooperation  or conflict among man's powers New
Testament:  Matthew,  5:29-30;  26:41  / Mar\, 9:43-47; 14:38— (D) Mar\,
9:42-46;  14:38  /  Romans,  7:18-23  /  Galatians, 5:16-26 I Ephesians,
4:17-18  /  /  Peter,  2:11  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 128a-d / Republic, bk i,
308b-309b;  bk  hi,  338a-339a;  bk  iv,  346a355a;  bk  ix, 425c-427b /
Timaeus,  453b-454a;  474b-d;  476a-b  /  Laws, bk i, 641a-b; 649d650b 8
Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  hi,  ch  6-13  662d-668d  9  Aristotle: Motion of
Animals, ch ii 239a-d / Ethics, bk 1, ch 7
[1098*3-7] 343b; ch
13 347b-348d; bk v, ch ii
[ii38b5-i3] 387a,c;
bk  ix,  ch 4 [n66b i2-24] 419d-420a / Politics, bk 1, ch 5 [i254a33-b8]
448a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 2-5 106d110c; bk in, ch 2,
177c-178a;  ch  15  190a-191a; ch 24 203c-210a; bk iv, ch i 213a-223d 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk i, sect i 253a bk iv, sect 33 266c-d; bk vii,
sect 13 280c sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect i 285a-b sect 39 288c; bk ix,
sect  i  291a-c;  sect  8  292b 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 18
166d167b / Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch 15, 304c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk viii, par 10-11 55c-56b; par 19-27 58b-60c; bk x, par 39

[58b]
24  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5a 81b-c; bk xiii, par 47, 123d-124a / City of God,
bk xiii, ch 3, 361c; ch 15 366c-d; bk xiv, ch 5-10 379c-385d; bk xix, ch
12-14  517b-520d;  ch  21,  524c-525a  / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 24
630c-631a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3 430c-431d; q
84,  a  3, ans 443d-444d; q 91, a 3, ans and rep 1 486b-487d; q 95, a i,
ans  506b-507c;  a  2 507c-508a; q 96, a 2 511b-d; part 1-11, q 37, a 1,
ans  783d-784c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 77, aa 1-2
145a-147c; qq 82-83 168a-174b; part ii-ii, q 29, a 1, ans 530b-531a; a 2
531a-d;  part  in, q 15, a 9, rep 3 794c-795b; part hi suppl, q 96, a 11
1063d-1064d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  iv  [1-18]  57c 22
Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale, par 12, 503b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, conclusion,
279a-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  5a-6c;  36c-41a  esp 39b40a; 159a-162c;
274d-276a; 344a-347c; 405c 406a 26 Shakespeare: Richard II 320a-351d esp
act  v, sc v [1-41] 349d-350a / Merchant of Venice, act 1, sc 11 [11-24]
408b-c  27  Shakespeare: Othello, act i, sc hi [329-337] 212c 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  347c-d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 72b;
78a-d  31  Descartes: Meditations, 1 75a-77c; iv 89a93a esp 90b-91b; vi,
102d-103a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  155d-156a;  207d-208a;  209c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  1-2 396a398b; part iv, prop 7, corol
426b; prop 60 442d-443a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[561-594]
244b-245a;  bk  xi [466-543] 309b-311a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 125-131 195b;
411-413  242a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  239b  38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk i, 393b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 192b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 282b-283d / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  368d-369a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b,d-394a,c  /
Judgement,  509c-d  43 Mill: Liberty, 293b-302c passim / Utilitarianism,
448a-450a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 135c-d; 455a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-521]
lla-15a;
[1110-1117] 27b-28a; [3217-3250] 79a-b
49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 311a-314b esp 312a313a, 313d-314b; 318d-319a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  15a-b; bk vi, 235a-238c; bk xii,
554b-555c;  bk  xiii,  577a578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk xv, 630c-631a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk ii, 39a40a; bk in, 53b-54b; bk iv,
95b-100c;  bk  v,  127b-137c passim; bk vi, 164b-d 53 James: Psychology,
199b-204b  esp  199b-200b;  717a-718a;  734b-735a;  799a-800a  54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  370b;  379a380d  /  Narcissism,  407a-408a;
409d-410b /

[59a]
d  5b to 6a Chapter 51: MAN 25 Unconscious, 433c / General Introduction,
589c-591a;  635b-c  /  Ego and Id, 702c-d; 704a-d; 708d-712a passim, esp
711c-d;  715b716c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 720a-722c esp
721d-722c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 785b
[fn
i];  787a-788b;  790a791  d;  797c-  799a;  800d-801a / New Introductory
Lectures,  837d-839b  5b.  Abnormalities  due  to  defect or conflict of
powers:  feeble-mindedness,  neuroses,  insanity,  madness  5 Aeschylus:
Choephoroe [1021-1076] 80a-d 5 Sophocles: Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[1-330]
143a-146a 5 Euripides: Orestes 394a-410d esp
[1-423]
394a-398b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 96b-98a 7 Plato: Republic, bk ix,
416a-417b / Timaeus, 474b-d / Laws, bk vi, 712b 8 Aristotle: Categories,
ch 8 [0^34- ioa6] 15a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[686b22-29]
218b-c / Ethics, bk hi, ch 10
[m8 ai7-b7]364d-365a; bk vii, ch
i [1145*2733] 395a b; ch 3
[1147*10-19]
397b;  ch  5  399a-d;  ch  6  [ii49b24-i  150*8]  400b-c  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5  HOb-c;  bk 11, ch 15 155c-156b 12 Aurelii's:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  i 259b, 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vii [323-405]
245a-247b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  84,  a  7, ans
449b-450b;  q  115,  a  5,  rep  i 590d591c; part 1— 11, q 6, a 7, rep 3
650a-d;  q io, a 3, ans and rep 2 664d-665c; q 24, a 2 727d728c; q 28, a
3, ans and rep i 742a-d; q 31, a 7 757c-758b; q 37, a 4, rep 3 785d-786d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  r,  66d-67b;  68b-d;  69b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  5a-6c;  10b-llb; 25c26d; 36c-41a; 166a-167a; 235b-c; 274d-276a;
316b-c  26  Shakespeare:  Richard HI 105a-148a,c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act iv, sc v 59c-62a; act v, sc 11 [236-255] 70b-c / Othello, act iv, sc
1
[1-59] 229d-230b
/ King Lear, act iv, sc iv
[1-19] 272b-c; sc vii [16-82] 276d-277c
/  Macbeth,  act  v,  sc  1  306b-307a; sc m [3756] 308a-b 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  347c-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote esp part I, la-3b,
part  11,  205a-209d  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 155d156a 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 60 37d38a / Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xi,  sect  12-13 146a-c; bk iv, ch iv, sect 13-16 326d-328d esp
sect  13  326d-327a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 109c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
13a-14a; 214b-c; 354c355a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[4405-4612]
110a114b

[59b]
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 122b-124a; 136a-b; 232a-236a; 380b-381a; 388b
389a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 299c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
510b-d;  515a517a;  524c-527a;  bk xv, 616a-617a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk ii, 21d22b; bk xi, 337a-348d; bk xii, 364b-369a 53 James:
Psychology,  23b-26b  esp 25b-26b; 32a-34a; 35b-37a; 132a-137b esp 137a;
147b149a;  241b-258b  esp  242a,  244b,  251b-252a,  258a-b;  749a-750b;
753b-754b;   799b-807a;   818a-819a;  828b-829a  54  Freud:  Origin  and
Development   of  PsychoAnalysis,  7a-8b  /  Hysteria,  35b-c;  52d-53c;
81d-86c;  97b-106c;  110a-115a / Interpretation of Dreams, 176a-d; 328c;
364c-  d;  370b-c;  380d-382a / Narcissism, 409c-d / Unconscious, 433c /
General Introduction, 558a-c; 585b623b esp 586a-592b, 593c-595b, 600b-c,
604c606a,  616b-c,  623a-b;  624b-d;  627a-b; 635b-c / Group Psychology,
690a-691c  / Ego and Id, 713a-715a / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
721c;  722b-723d;  728b-731d  passim;  746c-  748a  /  New  Introductory
Lectures,  812a;  830d-832a;  872a-d 6. Individual differences among men
6a.  The  cause and range of human inequalities: differences in ability,
inclination,  temperament,  habit  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-15;
38:24-34—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  33:10-15;  38:25-39 New Testament:
Romans, 12:3-8 / / Corinthians, 12 / II Timothy, 2:20-21 4 Homer: Iliad,
bk xiii
[723-734] 95d-96a
/ Odyssey, bk viii [165-185] 223d-224a; bk xiv
[199-232] 262b-c
5 Sophocles: Ajax [1226-1263] 153c-154a 5 Euripides: Rhesus
[105-108] 204a
/ Electra
[358-400] 330b-d
/ Heracles Mad [632-636] 370c / Iphigenia at Aulis
[558-572]
429d430a  5  Aristophanes:  Frogs  [1482-1499]  581d-582a  6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a-c;  383d-384a;  bk hi, 425b-c 7 Plato:
Euthydemus, 70c / Gorgias, 2 74a- 2 75c / Republic, bk ii, 316c-320c; bk
hi,  329c330a;  339b-341a; bk v, 357b-360d; bk vi, 373c-375b; 383c-d; bk
viii,  404a-405c;  bk  ix,  421a-c  / Theaetetus, 540c-541a / Statesman,
605d-608a  /  Laws, bk vi, 699d-700b; 704a-c / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d
esp 810c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[8b25~9a i3] 13db9-ioa io] 14c-15a / Posterior Analytics,
bk  1,  ch  34  122c  /  Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch 1 [449^-9] 690a;
[450*25-^2] 691a-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i 14a;
[9
[582*5-16]
107c-d; ch 2
[583*4-14]
108c / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[686^2-29]
218b-c / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 18
[725^5-726*6]
266a; bk iv, ch 3
[767*35-

[60a]
(6.  Individual  differences among men. 6a. The cause and range of human
inequalities:  differences in ability, inclination, temperament, habit.)
769b  io]  308d-311b  /  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  5  359c361a  passim,  esp
[ni4a32-b25] 360c-d; bk vi, ch 13
[ii44b i-i4] 394b; bk
vii,  ch  7  400d401c  /  Politics, bk 1, ch 5-6 447d-449b; bk hi, ch 13
481b-483a;  ch  17  486c-487-a;  bk  v,  ch  12  [1316*1-10] 518d-519a /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6
[i363b i-3]
604c; ch 9
[i367a32-b8]
610a-b; ch 10
[i369a5~28]
612b-c; ch 12
[i372b8-i373a i7] 616b-617a; ch 15 [1377*6-8]
621d; bk 11, ch 2
[i378b28-i379a
624a;  ch  5  [i382b  i9-22]  628d;  ch  16-17  638b639a;  bk  hi,  ch 7
[1408^7-33] 659b-c 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 3-7 9c-12a;
par  10 13b-14a; par 12-24 14b-19a,c / Epidemics, bk hi, sect hi, par 14
59b  /  Sacred  Disease, 155d-156a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[231-322] 33a-34b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 2-3 106d108c; ch 5,
110b;  bk  ii,  ch  15, 156a-b; bk hi, ch 6, 182a-b; ch 24, 203c-206a 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk xi [243-295] 334b-336a 14 Plutarch: Pompey, 512c-d 17
Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3 10a11a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch
17,  166d  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  i  246c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 85, a 7 459c-460b; q 96, aa 3-4 512a-513c; q 113,
a  2,  rep  3  576d-577d;  part i-ii, q 46, a 5, ans 815d-816d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, vii
[121-123] 64a; paradise,
viii
[91-148] 117d118c
22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 5-7 22a-b / Tale of Wife
of  Bath  [6691-6788]  274b-276a  /  Clerks  Tale [8269-8317] 302b303a /
Parson  s  Tale,  par  27-28,  514b-515a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
60a-61a; 61c-d; 66d-67a; 67d-68c; 71a; 84c-d; 94b-c; part ii, 112d; 154a
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  17c-18c;  60a-c;  63d-64b;  71d-72b; 126b-127c;
150b-151a:  240a-c;  264b265a;  279b-c;  310d-312a;  317b-c;  367b-368a;
451a-c;  491d-493a; 513a-514a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i,
sc i
[1-104] 406a-407b; sc
11
[39-133] 408c-409b;
act iv, sc 1 [40-62] 426a / 1st Henry IV, act i, sc in [1-21] 437d-438a;
act hi, sc i [165-191] 451d-452a; sc 11
[93-161] 453d-454c
/ 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc m
[92-135] 492b-c
/ Much Ado About Nothing, act i, sc hi [1-41] 506d-507a; act hi, sc i
[47-116] 514d-515c
/Julius  Caesar, act i, sc ii [33-47] 569d; [97161] 570b-571a; [192-214]
571b-c; sc 111 [89iii] 573c-d; act iv, sc i [1-40] 587a-c; sc in
[1-123] 588b-589c; act v, sc v [68-75] 596a,c
/ As You Like It, act iv, sc i [1-20] 617a-b

[60b]
26 THE GREAT IDEAS 6a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii
[66-86]
32b; act 11, sc ii [307-324] 43d; act iv, sc iv
[31-66] 59a-c / Troilus and Cressida, act
i, sc ii
[19-31] 105b;
[201-270] 106d-107c
/  Macbeth,  act in, sc 1 [92-108] 295d-296a / Antony and Cleopatra, act
ii, sc hi
[10-39] 321c-d;
act v, sc 11 [76-100] 347a-b / Cymbeline, act iv, sc 11
[2-5] 472c
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning. 76a- 78a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph
42  109d;  aph  53-58 110c-112b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 41b,d /
Meditations,  70b-d  33 Pascal: Pensees, 7 173a; 97 190b 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch vi, sect 54 36c / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect
8 142d-143a; ch xi, sect 2 144a-c; bk hi, ch vi, sect 26-27 274d-276a 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect viii, div 66 480b-c; sect ix, div 84,
488b,d  [fn  1]  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  191b-192b;  269b273a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 274a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 2b-d
passim;  bk  viii,  52a; bk xiv, 102b,d-104a; bk xv, 110a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality  323a-366d  esp  329a334a,c,  347a-b,  348b,d-363a,c / Social
Contract,  bk 1, 387b,d-390d esp 388bc; 394d; bk in, 411c-412c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8a;  54d55b;  71b-d; bk v, 340c-343d 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 343c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 31b,d-32a
42  Kant:  Judgement,  525c-532a  esp  526a-d,  528c530c;  586a-587a  43
Federalist:  number  10,  50b-c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  293b-302c passim /
Representative Government, 336b-c; 346c-348c; 384a387d / Utilitarianism,
448a-449c;   472d-473a   44  Boswell:  Johnson,  8a-c;  HOd;  124d-125d;
145d-146a;  283c; 413c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 200
67c-68a;   additions,   126  137a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
166b-168a;  184b-d;  196d199d;  part 1, 222d; 250a-c; part hi, 289b-d 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [1064-1141]  26b-28a  48  Melville: Moby Dick,
54b-55a;  59a-60b;  83a-88b;  107a-b;  117a-131a;  137b-138a;  317a321a;
417b-418a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 266a-271a 50 Marx: Capital, 25c-d
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk i, 15a-b; 53c-d; bk v, 215b-c; bk vii,
278c;  281a-d; 283d284a; bk ix, 349d; bk xi, 480a-482b; bk xiii, 576a-b;
578b;  bk  xv,  632d-633a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov esp bk i
la-15a,c,  bk  ii,  18b-21b,  32d-37b, 38d-40b, 41c-45d, bk in, 53c-62a,
63d-64c,  bk  iv,  91c92b, 95b-100c, 105c-107a, bk v, 109a-114b, bk vii,
180a-189a, bk x, 272a-274d, bk xi, 368a-c, bk xii, 370b-372d, 373c-374b,
376b-

[61a]
6b  Chapter  51:  MAN  27  d,  380d-382b,  393a-c,  395d-396a, epilogue,
402a-404c 53 James: Psychology, 14b-15a; 197b-198a; 201b202a; 274a-275a:
315a   b;  345b:  381a^43Tb432a;  448a-b;  484a-496b;  686b-690ar69la^b;
692b-693a;  759b-760b;  795b;  797a;  798b801a;  826a-827a; 856b-858a 54
Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  18c-d  /  General
Introduction,  594d595b;  600b-c / Group Psychology, 681b / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,   and   Anxiety,   744b745b  /  War  and  Death,  758d-759c  /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 775c-776a; 787d-788b
[fn 3]
6b.  The differences between men and women: their equality or inequality
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:26-30; 2:18-25; 3:16:5:1-2 New Testament: /
Corinthians,  11:1-16;  14:3435 / Galatians. 3:28 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 /
Colossians,  3:18-19  /  / Timothy, 2:9-15 / / Peter, 3:1-7 5 Aeschylus:
Seven Against Thebes
[181-202]
29a-b  5  Euripides: Medea [263-266] 214b; [401-430] 215c-d; [1086-1092]
221b / Andromache [269273] 317c-d; [929-953] 323a b / Hecuba
[1 177—
1  1  86] 362d-363a / Phoenician Maidens [193201] 379d / Iphigenia Among
the Tauri [10521066] 420c / Iphigenia at Aulis
[558-572]
429d-430a 5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata 583a 599a, c / Thesmophoriazusae
[785-847]
609b 610b / Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 56c; bk
iv,  153a-b;  bk  viii, 275b; bk ix, 311a b 7 Plato: Cratylus, 89d-90a /
Symposium,  157b158b  / Meno, 174d-175c / Apology, 208d-209a / Republic,
bk  v,  357b-360d;  bkvii,  401b-c  / Timaeus, 442d; 452d-453a; 476b-d /
Critias,  480a  /  Laws,  bk  vi, 711b-d; bk vn, 720d721a; 721d-722d; bk
viii, 734a-735a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk x, ch 9 586a-c 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk i, ch 7
[49i b3~5]
13a; bk ii, ch 3
[50^20-22]
24a;  bk  in, ch 20 [522ai2-22] 47a-b; BK IV, CH 11 a22-b i5] 64d-65a,c;
bk v, ch 8 [542^2-
[538
b26~3o] 72c; bk vn, ch 3
[583^4-29] 109b-c; bk ix, ch
1
[6o8a2i-b2o]
133b,d-134a / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 19-20 266c-269c; bk iv, ch
6 [775*5-27] 317a-b; bk v, ch 3 [783b8-784a io] 325c-326a 33] 69a; ch 14
[545 / Ethics, bk vn, ch 7
[ii5ob i-4]
401a-b;
[ii5ob i2-i6] 401b; bk viii, ch 7 [ii58b i2-29]
410c-d; ch 10 [u6ob32-n6i a2] 413a-b; ch 11
[u6i a23-24] 413c; ch 12
[11 62^5-29] 414c-d
/ Politics, bk 1, ch 2
[i252a26-b
9] 445c-d; ch 5
[i254b i3-i5] 448b; ch
12 453d-454a; ch 13
[i259b29-i26oa3i] 454b-d; bk
11, ch 5
[i264b i-7] 459d / Rhetoric, bk
1, ch 5 [i36ob 38-1361*12] 601b-c; ch 9 [1367*17-18] 609d;

[61b]
bk in, ch 7
[1408^7-29]
659b-c  /  Poetics,  ch 15 [1454^5-24] 689a-b 10 Hippocrates: Aphorisms,
sect vii, par 43 142d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[13501360] 78c-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 16, 122b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv
[554-570]  182b-183a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa,  62d-63c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  hi,  53a-b  /  Histories,  bk  iv,  285d-286a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  xiii,  par  47,  123d-124a / City of God, bk xii, ch 21
357a-b;  bk  xix,  ch 14, 520c-d; bk xxii, ch 17 603a-c 19Aqltnas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 92 488d-491d; q 93, a 4, rep i 494c-495b; a 6, rep
2  496b-498a; q 96, a 3, ans 512a-c; q 99, a 2 520a-d; q 115, a 3, rep 4
588c-589c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 81, a 3 966a-c
22  Chaucer:  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue 256a270a / Tale of Wife of Bath
litem* esp
[6612-6627] 273a-b / Clerks Tale [8808-8814]
312b / Merchant's Tale
[10,110-164]
335t>-  336a / Tale of Melibeus, par 14-16 405a-407b / Nuns Priest's Tale
[15,258-272]  457a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 109c-110a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 159b-d; 164d-165c; 191c-193c; 195a-196b
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  84a-b;  188c-191c;  399cd;  406a-434d passim 26
Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act i, sc iv
[128-142] 75d-76a / Comedy of Errors, act
ii, sc 1 152a-153b / 1st Henry IV, act ii, sc hi
[105-115] 444b
/ Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i
[261-309] 577b-c; sc iv 579d-580b
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  hi,  sc  1 [122-157] 48b-c / Troilus and
Cressida, act v, sc ii [107112] 136a / All's Well That Ends Well, act i,
sc hi
[62-94] 146b-c /
Othello, act ii, sc i
[101-167] 214c-215a; act hi, sc iv [103-106]
228c;  act  iv,  sc  111  [60-108]  236c-237a / King Lear, act iv, sc ii
[59-68]  271a-b; sc vi [109135] 274c-d / Cymbeline, act ii, sc v 463a-c;
act in, sc iv
[19-35] 466d-467a;
[156-168]
468b-c  /  Sonnets, xx 589b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 123c-124a
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 84b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv
[288-301]  158b159a;  [440-502]  162a-163a;  [634-658]  166a-b;  bk viii
[452-594]  242a-245a;  bk x [144-156] 277b; [867-936] 293b-294b / Samson
Agonistes
[210-214]
344a;
[871-902]
358b-359a;
[9971060] 361b-362b
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  82  43b  35  Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  viii,  div  66,  480b  36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
29b-31a;  part  hi, 98b-99a; part iv, 163a; 166b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
30a-32a  esp  30d-31a; 100b-102a; 120c-121a ;c; 126d-127b; 203b; 219a-b;
219d-220a; 235b-238d; 283bc

[62a]
(6.  Individual  differences  among men. 6b. The differences between men
and  women:  their  equality  or  inequality.) 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  vti,  47c; 50d; bk xvi, 116a-c; bk xxiii, 189d-190a; bk xxvi,
217d-218a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 346a / Political Economy, 367d-368a
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 92d-93b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 404d;
419c-420a; 436d-437c 43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, xix 19d 43
Mill:  Liberty, 311a-312a; 317c-d / Representative Government, 387d-389b
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  132a;  165b-c;  312a; 312c; 391c-392a; 537a-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 165166 59d-60a; additions, 104
133d;  106-107  134a-b  / Philosophy of History, part i, 222d 47 Goethe:
Faust, part i
[3522-3535]
86a;
[3978-3985] 97a; part
ii  [9127-9134]  222a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  257c;  264d-265a;
372d-373c;  383b-384d;  562a-567c  esp 566a567b; 584c-585d; 588d-589a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk i, 51d; bk iv, 184b; bk vi, 263b-264b; bk
vti,  287a-b;  bk xi, 488b-c; bk xii, 543b-544a; bk xv, 639a-b; epilogue
i, 659b; 660d-661b 53 James: Psychology, 691b-692a: 720a; 887b
[fn 3 l
54  Freud:  Narcissism,  405b-406a  /  Ego  and  Id,  705a-706a;  707d /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 785a
[fn
1]  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 853b-864a esp 854a-855a, 862a863c 6c.
The  ages  of  man:  infancy, youth, maturity, senescence Old Testament:
Genesis,  17:15-19; 18:9-15: 21:1-8; 27:1 / Deuteronomy, 34:7 / / Kings,
1:1-4—  (D)  ///  Kings, 1:1-4 / Job, 32:6-9 / Proverbs, 20:29 / Isaiah,
65:20—  (D)  Isaias,  65:20 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 14:17-18— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  14:18-19  New  Testament:  John, 21:18 / / Corinthians,
13:11 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xxiii [448-499] 165d-166b;
[566-649] 167a-168a; [785-792] 169c: bk xxiv
171a-179d  esp  [349-551] 175a-177a 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [71-82] 52d 5
Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[1211-1248]
125b-c / Antigone
[631-767]
136c-137d  /  Philoctetes  [96-99]  183a 5 Euripides: Alcestis [629-705]
242c-243a  5  Aristophanes: Acharnians [676-718] 463a-c 7 Plato: Laches,
31c  / Symposium, 166a / Meno, 174b-175c / Republic, bk i, 295d-297b; bk
11,  320c-321d;  bk  iv,  353b-d;  bk  vi, 380d381a; bk vii, 398c-401d /
Timaeus, 471d-472a

[62b]
28  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6c  /  Theaetetus,  514b-c / Laws, bk ii, 653b-c;
655b-656c;  659c-d;  bk vti, 713d-714a; 723c-d; bk xii, 796a-d / Seventh
Letter, 802b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2 [117^6-34] 164a / Physics,
bk vii, ch 3
[247b i3-248 a6]
330c-d  /  Soul, bk 1, ch 4 [4o8b i8-29] 638c / Memory and Reminiscence,
ch 1
[45oa26-b
9] 691a-b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk ii, ch i
[500^5-501*4] 23a-b; ch 4 24a-b; bk hi, ch
ii
[5i8a6-b29] 42c-43c; bk
iv, ch 9 [536^-81 63a-b; ch 10
[537
b i4-2o] 64b; bk v, ch 14 b i3-27l 71b-c;
[545^6-30]
72c;  bk  vii,  ch 1 106b,d-108a; ch 5 [585^3]-^ 6 [585^9] 110b-d; ch 10
[587
[544
b5-i8] 113d-114a; bk vm, ch 1
[588a24-b
5]  114b,d  / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10 [686b5-3o] 218a-c / Gait of
Animals, ch 11
[7iob i2-i8] 248d / Generation of
Animals, bk i, ch 18 [725 b i8-25] 265d-266a; ch 19 [727^-10] 267a-b; bk
iv, ch 2 [766^734] 308b; ch 6
[775V28]
317a-b; ch 8
[776b i5-28] 318d-319a; bk
v, ch i [778^0b i3] 321a-d;
[78oa
i 4-b io] 322b-d; ch 3
[78i b3o-782a2o]
324a-b; ch 3
[783b2]-cH
4 779 7l 325c-327a / Ethics, bk 1. ch 3
[i094b
a
[7 8 5
29-io95 a i2] 340a-b; ch 9
[1099^3-1 iooa
9] 345b-c; bk hi, ch 12
[ni9a34-b i9]
366a,c; bk vt, ch 8
[ii42ai2-i9] 391b; bk
x, ch 3
[ii74a i-4] 428b / Politics, bk i, ch 13 [1259^91260^3] 454b-455a; bk
vii,  ch  14  [i332b3641]  537c-d;  bk  vtii,  ch  7  [1342^8-33] 548c /
Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 5 [i36i b6-i5] 602a-b; bk ii, ch 12-14 636a-638a 10
Hippocrates: Injuries of the Head, par 18 69a-b / Aphorisms, sect i, par
13-14  131d; sect ii, par 39 133c; par 53 133d; sect hi, par 3 134a; par
18  134d;  par 24-31 135a-b: sect vi, par 6 140c; par 29-30 141a; par 57
141d;  sect  vti,  par 82 144a / Sacred Disease, 157b-158b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk hi
[445458] 35d-36a; bk
iv
[1037-1057] 57d; bk v
[222-234] 64a
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk viii
[152
174] 263a-b:
[510-520] 272b-273a
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 7-13 2c4c; par 30-31 8b-9a / City
of  God, bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
77,  a  8, rep 3 406b-407a; q 96, a 3, ans 512a-c; part 1-11, q 34, a 1,
rep  2  768c-769d; q 40, a 5, rep 2 795d-796c; a 6 796c-797a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 1, rep to contrary 221ad; PART III
suppl,  q  70,  a 1, rep 7 893d-895d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvi  [85105]  77d  22  Chaucer:  Reeve's  Prologue [3862-3896] 224a-b 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxv, 36b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53d; 60b;
78b-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 14c-19a

[63a]
6c to lb Chapter 51: MAN 29 25 Montaigne: Essays, 43a-c; 63d-64b; 72b-c;
74b;  156d-158a,c;  185d-188d;  339a-d;  394a395b; 406a-408b; 432d-434a;
535c-536a  26  Shakespeare:  1st Henry VI, act ii, scjvJl^ 16] 12d-13a /
2nd  Henry  VI,  act  v, strT~[i6i174] 66d / 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc ii
[321357]  486d-487a  / Henry V, act i, sc i [22-69] 533b-c / As You Like
It, act ii, sc vii [137166] 608d-609a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc
ii [197-209] 42c-d / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii [163173] 115b /
King Lear 244a-283a,c esp act i, sc 1
[291-312]
247c-d, sc 11
[48-53] 248b-c,
[75-79] 248c-d, sc in
[12-21] 249d-250b, sc
iv
[258-344]
252c-253c, act ii, sc iv
[148158] 260a, act
iv,  sc  vn 276c-277d / Macbeth, act v, sc in [20-28] 307d 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  450a-b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 70b-c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [527-543]  310b311a  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch  vi  36a-42a  passim  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
vtii,  div  66,  480b  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 127a-128a 36 Sterne:
Tristram Shandy, 352b 353b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiii, 188a
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 336a-b / Social Contract, bk 1, 387d-388a; bk
ii,  402d  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 309d-310a 43 Federalist:
number  79,  234c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 271d-272a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 8b;
55c-56a;  126d;  128b;  146b-d;  360b;  381a;  407d-408a; 422c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  169d;  187d-188b; 203d-206a,c; part i,
222d; 257cd; part 11, 259a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude i
[184-213]
5a-b;
[2337-2365] 56b-57a; [4076-4087] 99b; part ii
[6685-6818]
164a-166b;
[10,331-344]
251b252a  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 297b; 562c-563a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  hi,  132b-c;  153d-154b;  bk  iv,  168d-169b;  171c-d; bk v,
206d-207b;  bk  viii,  305b-310d  passim; bk x, 391d-394d; 400c-401d; bk
xii,  559d; bk xiii, 584c; epilogue i, 659d-660b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  i,  7a8d;  bk  v,  117c-127b;  bk  vi,  167c-168a;  bk x
272a-297d;  epilogue,  411b-412d  53 James: Psychology, 206b-207a; 242a;
270a; 409a-b; 413b
[fn'2]; 431b-433a; 649b-650a;
711b-717a  54  Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 15a-16c;
17b-18a   /  Sexual  Enlightenment  of  Children  119a-122a,c  passim  /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  191b-193a; 238b-246b passim, esp 238c-239a,
241   be,   243ac  /  Narcissism,  400a-b;  406b-407c;  410b  /  General
Introduction,  495a-496b;  526d-527b;  528d531d;  572d-576d;  579b-584d;
592c; 594d-

[63b]
599d;  612d-614b  / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 641d-643c esp 643b-c;
644d-645a;  651b-c  /  Group Psychology, 685b-686a; 693a-c / Ego and Id,
704d-706c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 725d-726a; 738b-740c;
743a744a;  746c-  747a;  75 Id- 753c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
768b-d  /  New Introductory Lectures, 855b-863c esp 855d-858d, 860b861c;
869a-870c  7.  Group  variations  in  human type: racial differences la.
Biological aspects of racial type 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 69b-d; bk
hi,  91b-c;  113d;  114a-b;  bk  iv, 128a-c; 131b-c; 143b-c 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk hi, ch 9
[5i7a i2-2o]
41c; ch 22
[523*17-19]
48c;  bk  vii, ch 4 [584b8-i5] 110b / Generation of Animals, bk 11, ch 2
[736^-13] 276d; bk v, ch 3
[782b30-783a2] 324d-325a
10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 3-7 9c-12a; par 12-15 14b-15c;
par 19-24 16c19a,c 26 Shakespeare: Titus Andronicus, act iv, sc ii
[51-127]
188b-189a; act v, sc i
[20-53]
192c-d 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act i, sc ii
[62-81]
208bc;  sc  hi  [94-106]  210a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiv,
102b,d-104c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 546d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  49d  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 113a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  iv,  352a353a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 304a-305a 49 Darwin: Descent
of Man, 342a-359d esp 348c-350b, 356a-359d; 562d-565a passim; 573d-576d;
578a-589d  esp  583b-584d,  586a,  589c-d;  591a-c  lb. The influence of
environmental factors on human characteristics: climate and geography as
determinants  of racial or national differences 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i,  31d-32a;  bk  hi,  91b-c;  bk ix, 314a,c 7 Plato: Laws, bk v, 696d 9
Aristotle:   Politics,   bk   vii,  ch  7  [i327b  i9~38]  531d-532a  10
Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places, par 3-7 9c-12a; par 12-13 14b-15a;
par  15-16 15b-16a; par 19-21 16c-17b; par 23-24 18a-19a,c 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk vi
[110611 13] 94d-95a
14 Plutarch: Solon, 72d / Pompey, 512c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 279b-c 26
Shakespeare:  Henry  V, act hi, sc v 547a-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii,
79a-80a; part iv, 168a-b

[64a]
(7.  Group  variations  in  human  type:  racial  differences,  lb.  The
influence of environmental factors on human characteristics: climate and
geography  as  determinants  of  racial  or  national  differences. ) 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  203a-204a; 224a b; 295b-296b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk xiv 102b,d108d; bk xv, 110a-b; bk xvi, 116a-120a; bk
xvii,  122a-124d  passim;  bk  xviii,  125a-129c;  bk xxi, 153a-154a; bk
xxiii,  190c-d  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 349a / Social Contract, bk in,
415b-417c  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 291a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  45d;  87d-88a; 397c-398a; 409d-412c esp 410a-411a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 220b-223c passim, esp 221b-c; 338b-c; 341b-342c; 778a
[n  i]  43 Federalist: number ii, 55d-56b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par 346 111b / Philosophy of History, intro, 190b201a,c; part
i,  235c-d;  236d-237a;  251d252d; part 11, 259d-260a 49 Darwin: Descent
of Man,  267a-c;  268b-269a;  343c-344a;  356b-358d;  584a-b lc. Cultural
differences  among  men:  Greek and barbarian, Jew and gentile, European
and  Asiatic  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  12:1-4; 15; 17:1-18:19; 26:1-6;
27:46;  35:9-13  / Exodus, 34:1-17 / Leviticus, 26 / Deuteronomy, 7:1-8;
10:15;  14:1-2;  26:17-19; 28:1-10,58-65 /judges, 1416 / Ruth I I Kings,
8:38-43,51-53;  11:110—  (D)  ///  Kings,  8:38-43,51-53;  11:1-10  /  /
Chronicles,  17:21-24—  (Z))  /  Paralipomenon,  17:21-24  / Esther— (D)
Esther,  1:1-10:3  / Eze^iel, 37:21-22— (D) Ezechiel, 37:21-22 / Daniel,
1:1-8  Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther—  (D)  OT,  Esther,  10:4-16:24 / II
Maccabees, 6:1-11; 11:22-26— (£>) OT, // Machabees, 6:1-11; 11:22-26 New
Testament:  Matthew,  10:5-6  / Acts, 15:129 esp 15:9, 15:17; 16:16-24 /
Romans, 2:929; 3:29-30; 4:11-12; 10:12 / / Corinthians, 1:22-24; 12:13 /
Galatians,  3:26-29; 4:21-31 / Ephesians, 2:11-22 / Colossians, 3:9-11 4
Homer:  Iliad,  bk  iv  [422-445] 28a-b 5 Euripides: Medea 212a-224a,c /
Andromache 315a-326a,c esp
[147-244]
316c-317b,
[445453] 319a-b, [590-601] 320b / Hecuba [11961201]
363a / Iphigenia Among the Tauri 411a-424d / Iphigenia at Aulis
[1395-1401]
437d 6 Herodotus: History la-314a,c passim, esp bk 1, 12d-13b, 35b-c, bk
ii, 57d-58a, 61d. 69b-d, bk in, 97d-98a, bk iv, 137a-138c, 140d-141a, bk
v,  163d-164a,  bk  vii,  216b-d,  232d233d,  253b-254a,  bk viii, 264c,
287c-d, bk ix, 291c-292a, 298a-302c, 305d-306a, 308d310c

[64b]
30  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lc  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350bd;
366a-c;  370a-c; bk ii, 395d-397d; bk viii, 589d-590a 7 Plato: Cratylus,
106b-c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350c-d;  bk  v,  357d-358a;  367b-368c  /
Statesman,  582d-583b  / Laws, bk i, 645b-647c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
i, ch 2
[i252b5~9]
445d; ch 6 [1255^8-37] 448d-449a; bk hi, ch 14 [i285 a i7-29] 483b-c; bk
vii,  ch  7  [i327b  i9~  38]  531d-532a  10 Hippocrates : Airs, Waters,
Places,  par 16 15d-16a; par 23 18a-c 14 Plutarch: Themistocles, 99b-c /
Marcellus,  254c-256b / Flamininus, 303a-310d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
23d 24a / Histories, bk v, 295d-296a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch
1-17  129d140b; bk iv, ch 34 206d-207a,c; bk xvi, ch 16 433c-434a; ch 18
434c;  ch 21-28 435a440b; ch 32, 442b-c; bk xix, ch 22 525bc 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  98,  aa  4-5  242b-244b;  qq 102-105
270b-321a  passim  22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 3-7
22a-b / Tale of Man of Law [4631-4644] 238a / Prioress's Tale
[13,418-620]
392a395b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part iv, 267c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
44b-48a;  91d-98b esp 93b-94a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i,
sc  hi  409c-411b;  act ii, sc hi 414a-b; act hi, sc 1 418d-420a; sc 111
423b-d; act iv, sc i
[386-400] 429c-d
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  46b-c  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,
266c-269b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xiv 102b,d-108d; bk xv,
HOa-d;  bk  xvi,  116a120a; bk xix 135a-146a,c passim; bk xxi, 153a-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  352b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  11, 402d-403a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 99c; 179d-183a; 207b-208d; 260d-261a; 402a;
409d-410a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  32d-34c; 35b-36c; 222d-226a
passim, esp 224b; 300a-c; 336c339b passim; 341b-343a; 508d-509d 42 Kant:
Judgement,  504a-b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  300d-302c;  307d-308c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 351 112a-b / Philosophy of History
153a-369a,c   passim,   esp   intro,  161a-c,  174b-d,  176b,  177b178a,
182d-183a, 183d-188b, 192a-194a, 196d199d, part 1, 211a-221a, 222a-233a,
235c-d,  245d-247b,  250a-c,  part ii, 276d-277a, 277d278a, 279c-d, part
hi,  289b-d,  312c-313a,  part  iv,  352a-353a  48  Melville: Moby Dic\,
17a-19a;  36b-46a; 60b-65a; 350b-354b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 323a-b;
571b577d esp 573b-c, 575d, 577b-c; 584a-b

[65a]
b  $  to 9a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 140d-141b; bk iv, 171b; bk
vni,  309b-c;  bk ix, 358b-365c passim, esp 362d-363a; bk xi, 497c-499c;
515c-521c;  bk  xiii,  575d-577a;  bk  xv,  624d626d  ^^  52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 123b-125c 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures,
882c-d  8.  The  origin  or  genealogy  of  man  8a.  The race of men as
descendants or products of the gods 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 79c-80a
7   Plato:   Protagoras,  43d-45a  /  Symposium,  157b-158b  /  Timaeus,
452c-454a;  466a-467d / Laws, bk ix, 743a12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  }  108b-c;  ch  6,  lilac;  ch  13 120b-c; ch 17, 123d; bk hi, ch 11
187a-b;  ch  24,  204b-c  14 Plutarch: Alexander, 553d-554b 17 Plotinus:
Second  Ennead,  tr  i, ch 5 37bc 18 Augustine: City of God, bk hi, ch 4
170c  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 345b-346b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 265d
8b.  God's  special  creation  of  man  Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-27;
2:7,18,21-23;  5:1-2  /  Job,  10:8-12  /  Psalms, 8:4-6; 100:3; 119:73;
139:14-16—   (D)  Psalms,  8:5-7;  99:3;  118:73;  138:14-16  /  Isaiah,
29:15-16;  43:7;  45:12—  (D)  Isaias, 29:15-16; 43:7; 45:12 / Jeremiah,
27:5— (D) Jeremias, 27:5 / Malachi, 2:10— (D) Malachias, 2:10 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon, 2:23; 6:7; 10:1 15:10-11 — (D) OT, Boof{ of Wisdom,
2:23;  6:8;  10:1;  15:10-11 / Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3; 33:10-13— {D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  17:1-3;  33:10-14  /  // Maccabees, 7:23,28— (D) OT, II
Machabees,  7:23,28  New  Testament:  Matthew, 19:4 / Mar\, 10:6 / Acts,
17:24-29 / / Corinthians, 15:45 / Colossians, 3:10 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  vii,  ch  29-30,  261a-c; bk x, ch 31 319b-d; bk xii, ch 10-13
348b-350d; ch 20-21, 356d-357b; ch 23 357d358a; ch 26-27 359a-360a,c; bk
xiii, ch 24 373d-376a,c; bk xxii, ch i 586b,d-587b / Christian Doctrine,
ek i, ch 22, 629b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 72, a 1, rep
1  368b-369d;  q 73, a i, rep 3 370a371a; q 75, a 6, rep i 383c-384c; qq
90-92 480c-491d; q 118 600a-604b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[8590] 77d; xxv [34-78] 91d-92a; paradise, vii
[64-84] 115d-116a; [121-148] 116b-c; xiii [5287] 126a-b
22 Chaucer: Monf(s Tale [14,013-020] 434b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
176d; part iv, 251a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 41b-c; 54bc

[65b]
d  Chapter  51:  MAN  31  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  56a-b  /
Meditations,  in, 87d-88d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [650-659] 107b;
bk 11
[345-353] 118b-119a; bk vii
[139-161]
220a-b;
[499-550]
228a-229a; bk viii
[452499] 242a-243a; bk xi [497-511] 310a-b
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect 6 26b-c; ch vi, sect 56-57
36d-37a  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 187d-188a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
228a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 265d; 590b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii, 689b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 120d-121c 53
James:  Psychology, 420a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 562d 8c. Man as
a  natural  variation  from  other  forms  of  animal  life 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  334b,  42 Kant: Judgeme?it, 578d-580a esp 579b-c 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[8245-8264]
201a;
[8321-8326] 202b-203a
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  253a-287b  esp 253a-254a, 255ac, 265a-d,
284c-285c;  331a341d  eso 341a-d; 590a-591d; 596d-597a,c 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a 53 James: Psychology, 51b-52b; 95a-98a
54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  509d-510a;  562 d; 591 d- 592a / New
Introductory Lectures, 881a 9. The two conditions of man 9a. The myth of
a  golden  age:  the  age  of  Kronos  and  the age of Zeus 5 Aeschylus:
Prometheus  Bound  40a-51d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk ii, 80a 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  92b-d  /  Timaeus, 444c-446b / Critias 478a-485d / Statesman,
586c-589c  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  681b-d  13  Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b /
Georgics, 1
[11 8-1 46]
40a-41a / Aeneid, bk i
[254-296]
HOa-110a;  bk  viii  [306-336]  267a-268a  14  Plutarch: Numa Pompilius,
59d-60b  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk hi, 51b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xiv
[94-120]
20c-d; purgatory, xxii
[130-154] 87d-88a;
xxviii  [136-148]  97c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi,
143b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 215b 27 Shakespeare: Tempest, act ii, sc i
[143168] 532d-533a
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, 27b-28a; part 11, 208a-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 71d-72a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi,
div   106-107  499b-500b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 188c

[66a]
9b.  The  Christian  doctrine  of  Eden and of the history of man in the
world  9b{\)  The  condition of man in Eden: the preternatural powers of
Adam  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1:26-30;  2:7-25  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of
Solomon,  1:13-16;  2:2324—  (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom, 1:13-16; 2:2325 /
Ecclesiasticus,  17:1-15—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-13 18 Augustine:
City  of God,  bk  xi,  ch 12 329b-c; bk xii, ch 21 357a-b; bk xiii, ch i
360a-b; ch 13-14 366a-c; ch 23 372a-373c; bk xiv, ch 10-13 385b-388c; ch
15-17 388d-391a; ch 21-24 392b-395b; ch 26-27 395d-397a; bk xxii, ch 30,
617c-618a  19  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 76, a 5, rep 1
394c-396a;  qq  94-102  501c-527a,c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  89,  a  3  200d-201d;  q  109,  a  2,  ans 339c-340b; a 3, ans
340c-341b; a 4, ans 341c-342a; a 8, ans 344d-346a; part ii-ii, q 2, a 7,
ans  396a397c;  q  5,  a  1,  ans  410a-411b;  part  hi, q i, a 3, rep 1
704d-706a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxviii
[9i]-xxix [36] 97a-98a; paradise, vii [64-93]
115d-116a;  xiii  [31-87] 125d-126b 22 Chaucer: Mon/(s Tale [14,013-020]
434b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  18, 507a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
191b-192c; part iv, 250c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17d-18a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  68, schol 445a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk i [650-654] 107b; bk in
[56-371]
136b-143b; bk iv
[32-538]
153a-164a esp [131-171] 155a-156a,
[205-392]
157a-161a;
[610-775]
165b-169a; bk v
[i560]
175a-187b; bk vii-viii 217a-246b esp bk viii
[1-560]
232a-244a; bk ix
[1-1004]
247a-269a; bk xi
[45-71]
300a-b; bk xii
[63-110] 320b-321b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  560  272b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
179d180c;  part in, 304d-306a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii, 275a 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 125a126a 9b{2) The condition ofman
in  the  world:  fallen  man;  corrupted  or  wounded  human  nature Old
Testament:  Genesis,  3 esp 3:15-19; 6:5-13; 8:21 / job, 5:7; 8:9; 14-15
passim;   25:4-6   /  Psalms,  8;  14:2-3;  39:5-6,11;  51:2-5;  53:1-3;
103:13-15; 144:3-4— (D) Psalms, 8; 13:2-3; 38:6-7,11-12; 50:4-7; 52:1-4;
102:13-15;  143:3-4  /  Proverbs, 20:9 / Ecclesiastes esp 2:18-26, 3:19,
5:16-19,  6:1-12,7:20, 7:27-29, 9:3— (D) Ecclesiastes esp 2:18-26, 3:19,
5:1518, 6:1-11, 7:21, 7:28-30, 9:3 / Jeremiah, 17:9— (D) Jeremias, 17:9

[66b]
32  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 9b to 9b{2) Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:13-16;
2:112,23-24—   (D)   OT,   Boof^of  Wisdom,  1:13-16;  2:1-12,23-25  New
Testament:  Matthew,  15:10-20  /  Mar\, 7:14-23 / John, 8:3-8 / Romans,
3:9-23;  5:12-21;  7:14-24;  8:20-23;  9  :29  /  I  Corinthians, 3:1-4;
15:21-22  / Galatians, 3:22; 4:1-3; 5:19-21 / Ephesians, 2:1-5 / I John,
2:15-17  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk xii, ch 22 357c; bk xiii, ch 3
361a-c;  ch  10  364a-c;  ch 13-14 366a-c; ch 23 372a-373c; bk xiv, ch i
376b,d377a; ch 3 378a-d; ch 12 387a-b; ch 15-26 388d-396c; bk xxi, ch 12
571a-c;  ch  15  572c573b; bk xxii, ch 22-23 606d-609a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a 9, rep 3 692d-693d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  parti-ii,  qq 8183 162d-174b; q 85, a i, ans 178b-179b; a 3
180b-181b;  a  5  181d-182d;  q  91, a 6, ans 212c-213c; q 109 338a-347d
passim;  part  hi,  q  8, a 5, rep 1 760a-d; qq 14-15 784a796a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xiv
[94-120]
20c-d;  purgatory,  in  [16-45]  56a-b;  x  [121129] 68c-d; xvi [52-114]
77b-78a; xxviii [9196] 97a; paradise, vii
[19-148]
115b-116c;  xiii  [31-87] 125d-126b 22 Chaucer: Monl(s Tale [14,013-020]
434b / Second Nun's Prologue [15,497-552] 461b-462b / Second Nun's Tale
[15,788-822] 467a-b
/  Parson's  Tale  495a-550a  esp  par 18 506b-507b, par 53 526b-527a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part hi, 191b-193c passim; 195d; part iv, 250c-251b;
253b-255b  passim 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 81a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  238c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 52, 195a-d
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[1-26] 93b-94a;
bk 11 [496-505] 122a; [1021-1033] 133b; bk hi
[167-216] 139a-140a; [274-343] 141b-143a; bk
iv [304-320] 159a-b; bk vii
[542-547] 229a;
bk ix [780-1189] 264b-273a; bk x
[103-117]
276b-277a;
[229-414]
279b-283b;
[585-640]
287a-288b; [720-844] 290a-292b; [1046-1104] 297a-298b; bk xi
[45-71]
300a-b;
[84-98]
301a;
[162-180] 302b-303a;
[251-262] 304b305a; bk xi [334]-bk xii [649] 306b-333a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 434-435 248a-251a; 439-450 251a-253a;
560  272b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  38d 44 Boswell -.Johnson, 482a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  14  118c-d  /  Philosophy of
History,  part  hi,  304d306a 50 Marx: Capital, 354b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk vii, 275a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 54a-b; bk
v, 125a-126a; 127b-137c passim; bk vi, 165b-169c

[67a]
93(3)  to  10* Chapter 51: MAN 33 9£(3) The Christian view of the stages
of  human  life  in  the  world:  law  and grace New Testament: Matthew,
y.\"i-\\IJLMke,  16:16-17  /  John,  1:173  3:3-8  I Acts, 10; 13:3839 /
Romans,  2-8 / // Corinthians, 3; 5:17 / Galatians / Ephesians, 2:14-15;
4:17-24  /  Philippians, 3:8-10 / Colossians, 2-3 / // Timothy, 1:8-10 /
Hebrews / / Peter, 1:1-2:10 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 4951
124a-d  / City of God, bk x, ch 14 307c308a; ch 25 313c-314c; bk xii, ch
22  357c;  bk xv-xvin 397b,d-507a,c esp bk xv, ch 1-3 397b,d-399c, ch 21
415b-416a,  bk  xvi,  ch  26 438c-439a, ch 37 444b-445a, bk xvii, ch 1-4
449a-455c,  bk  xviii,  ch  ii 477c-d; bk xx, ch 4 532b-c; bk xxi, ch 16
573b574a;  bk  xxii,  ch  30,  618c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk in, ch 33
670bc  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 51, a 2, rep 1 276b-277a;
q  73, a i, rep i 370a371a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 98
239b-245b;  qq  106-107 321a-330d; part ii-ii, q 1, a 7, rep 4 385c-387a
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[19148] 115b-116c
22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 53 526b-527a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi [56-415] 136b144b esp [130-134] 138a,
[227-238] 140b; bk
xi
[1-21] 299a-b; [251-262] 304b-305a; bk xi
[334]-bk xii [649] 306b-333a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 560 272b; 655 292b; 699 302b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk v, 127b-137c passim 9c. Secular conceptions of the stages
of  human life: man in a state of nature and in society; prehistoric and
historic  man;  primitive  and  civilized  man  4  Homer: Odyssey, bk ix
[105-141] 230b-c 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp
[196-256] 42b-d [442-506] 44c-45a
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 349a354b 7 Plato: Protagoras,
44a-45a  / Symposium, 157b-159b / Republic, bk ii, 311b-c / Laws, bk in,
663d-667b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 8
[1269*4-8]
465a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[9251457] 73b-80a,c
13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk viii [306-336] 267a-268a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi, 51b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 84c-86b; 94b-c; part iv, 267c-268a
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  91d-98b  esp  93b-94a;  237d-238c; 440b-443d 26
Shakespeare:  As You Like It 597a-626a,c esp act 11, sc 1 [1-20] 603c-d,
act in, sc 11 [11-90] 609d-610c

[67b]
27 Shakespeare: Cymbeline, act hi, sc in 465c-466c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  20c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 37, schol 2
435b-436a  35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch 11 25d-28c
esp  sect 14-15 28b-c; ch hi, sect 19 29bc; ch vii, sect 94 46a-c; ch ix
53c-54d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk i, 2b-3a; bk viii, 52a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-366d  esp  329a334a,  c, 362a-366d / Social
Contract,  bk i 387b,d-394d esp 393bc; bk ii, 398a-b; 400d401a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  lb-c;  bk i, 6a-d; bk hi. 163d-164a; bk v,
309a-311c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 53b-c; 86b,d-96d passim, esp 88d,
89d,   92c-d;   398d-399a;  409d-414a  passim,  esp  409d-410a;  566a-b;
632b-634a,c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 86d-87b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
222b-c  /  Science  of  Right,  402c;  405d-406c;  408c-409c; 412c-414c;
433c434d; 435c-436b; 450d-451a 43 Federalist: number 51, 164c-d 43 Mill:
Liberty,  272a  /  Utilitarianism,  472b-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  HOd;
124d-126a;  164d;  204c-205a; 209a; 214b; 221c-d; 311b; 408d409a; 510b-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 187 65a-c; par 194 66c-d;
par  256  79d-80a;  additions,  126  137a-b;  129  137c  / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  171c-172b;  179d-182c;  188c; 196d-i99d; part i, 209b;
235d-236a;  240a-b;  243d-244c;  part ii, 260b-261a; 267b-268b: part iv,
317d-318a  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 9b-23b; 136b-137a; 171b; 221b-223b';
354a  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 13c / Descent of Man, 314c-316a;
317c-d;  320a-330a,c  passim, esp 323a-b, 328d-330a,c; 349b-d; 351a-355d
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  421c  54  Freud:  War and Death
755a-766d   passim,   esp  759c-d,  763a-766c  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  776c-782d  esp  776c-777b,  780d781a;  788d-789b 10. Man's
conception   of   himself   and  his  place  in  the  world  10a.  Man's
understanding  of  his  relation  to  the  gods or God Old Testament New
Testament 4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d esp bk i 3a-9a,c, bk ii
[340-447]
13b-14c, bk iv
[1-183]
24a-25d,  bk  v  30a-39a,c,  bk viii 51a-56d, bk xiv-xv 98a-110d, bk xvi
[431-461]  117a-b,  [843-867] 121c-d, bk xviii [1-137] 130a-131c, bk xx-
xxi 142a-154d, bk xxiv
[513-551]
176d-177a / Odyssey 183a-322d

[68a]
(10. Man's conception of himself and his place in the world. 1 Oa. Man's
understanding  of  his  relation  to  the  gods  or  God.)  5 Aeschylus:
Suppliant  Maidens  [86-103]  2a-b  / Persians [798-831] 23d-24a / Seven
Against  Thebes  27a-39a,c  /  Prometheus  Bound  40a-  5 Id / Agamemnon
52a-69d  /  Choephoroe  70a-80d / Eumenides 81a-91d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
the King [863-910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp [258-291]
116c-d,  [959-999]  123b-c, [1751-1753] 129d / Antigone 131a-142d / Ajax
143a-155a,c esp
[430-459]
146d-147a,
[666-677]
148d *
[74 8~
783] 149c-d / Trachiniae 170a-181a,c esp [94140] 171a-b,
[1264-1278]
181c / Philoctetes
[441-463] 186a; [1316-1347] 193d-194a
5 Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[9361466] 232d-236d
/ Alcestis [962-996] 245c / Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp
[195-245]
260a-c,
[734-749] 264d /
Trojan Women 270a-281a,c esp
[895-990]
277c-278b,
[1277-1283]
280d / Ion 282a-297d esp
[237-451]
284a-286c / Helen 298a-314a,c esp [711-721] 304d-305a / Andromache
[1 070-1 288] 324b-326a,c / Electra
327a-339a,c esp
[1233-1359]
338b-339a,c  / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Heracles Mad [13011356] 376b-d /
Orestes 394a-410d esp
[316347] 397a-b,
[1 625-1 693] 410b-d
/ Iphigenia Among the Tauri 411a-424d esp
[378-391]
414b,
[570-575] 416a,
[903-911] 419a,
[14351499] 424a-d / Iphigenia at Aulis [1034-1035]
434c; [1279-1335] 436d-437a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[356-411] 492b-493c
/ Birds
[1 189-1266]
557c-558b;
[1494-1765]
560c-563d / Plutus 629a-642d esp
[76-146]
630a-d  6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 7b-10a esp 9d10a; 12d-13b; 20b-22a;
39a-d; 40d-41a; bk hi, 98b-c; 99a; bk iv, 124d-125a; 159d; bk vii, 217c;
224d-225a;  250b;  bk  viii, 262b-c; 279d280a; bk ix, 309d 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk v, 506b-c 7 Plato: Cratylus, 94a; 106b / Phaedrus,
125b126c  /  Ion,  144b-145c / Euthyphro 191a-199a,c / Apology, 206b-d /
Phaedo,   222b-d  /  Republic,  bk  11,  314c-d;  320c-324c  /  Timaeus,
447a477a,c passim / Critias 478a-485d / Theaetetus, 530b-531a / Laws, bk
i,  650a-b;  bk ii, 653b-c; bk iv, 682d-683d; bk v, 686d-689c passim; bk
vii,  721a-c; bk x 757d-771b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii [i05 a2-6]
148c / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 2
[982b28~983a
5] 501a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch i
[1145*15-33]
395a-b; bk viii, ch 7
[1 158^9-1 159*13]
410d-411a / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 5 [i383a33~b8] 629c-d; ch 17 [i39i a30-b
3] 638d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [581-660] 22b-23b;
[1090-1104] 29a; bk hi
[978-1023]
42d-43b;  bk  v  [146-234]  63a-64a;  [1161-1240] 76b-77b; bk vi [43-79]
80d-81b

[68b]
34 THE GREAT IDEAS 10a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; ch 6
110c-112b;  ch 12 118d-120b; ch 14 120d121c; ch 17, 123c-124a; bk ii, ch
8  146a-147c; bk iv, ch 1, 218b-219d; ch 3 224b-d; ch 4, 226d-228a; ch 7
232c-235a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii, sect i 256b, d; sect 3-4
257a-b;  sect  11-13  258a-c;  bk hi, sect 6 261a-c; sect 13 262c; bk v,
sect  8  269d-270b;  sect  27 272d; bk vi, sect 40 277d; sect 42 278a-b;
sect  44  278b-c;  bk  ix,  sect  1  291a-c; bk xii, sect 2 307b; sect 5
307d-308a;  sect  23  309a-b; sect 30 310a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid 103a-379a
esp bk ix [77-122] 281a-282a, bk x
[96-117]
304b-305a,
[621632] 319a-b
14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius, 50d-51c / Coriolanus, 189a-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk hi, 59d-60c; bk vi, 91b-d; bk xvi, 179d; 183d / Histories, bk
i, 189d-190a; bk ii, 235a-c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 9, 71a
/  Third  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  8-9  86c-88a  18  Augustine: Confessions
la-125a,c  passim  /  City  of  God 129a-618d / Christian Doctrine, bk 1
624a-636a,c; bk ii, ch 7 638d-639c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  8,  a  3, ans and rep 4 36b-37c; q 17, a i, ans lOOd-lOld; q 22, a 2,
rep  4-5  128d-130d;  qq 23-24 132b-143c; q 83, a i, rep 2-4 436d438a; o
103, a 5, rep 3 531b-532b; a 8, rep 1-2 533d-534b; q 116 592d-595c; part
i-ii,  qq  1-48  609a-826a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq
49-114 la-378a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy esp paradise, i
[94142] 107b-d, vii [19-120] 115b-116b, xix [4066] 135c-d
22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 30-35 5a-b; bk hi, stanza
89  66a; bk iv, stanza 136-155 106a-108b; bk v, stanza 259-267 154a-155a
/ Knight's Tale
[12511274]
180b-181a;
[1303-1333]
181b-182a / Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b esp
[48694931] 242b-243b,
[5240-5253] 249b
/ Friar's Tale
[7056-7085]
281a-b / Franklin's Tale
[11,177-206] 353b-354a / Prioress's Tale 391a395b / Tale of Melibeus, par 17 407b-408a /
Monies  Prologue 432a-434a / Monl(s Tale 434a-448b / Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,236-256]  456b-457a  /  Second  Nun's Tale 463b-471b / Parson's Tale
495a-550a esp par 1 495a-b, par 12, 503b-504a, par 52-56, 526a-528a, par
103  549b-550a  23  Machiavelli  :  Prince,  ch  xxv,  35a-b  23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c; 78d-83a; part 11, 113b-c; 159d-164a,c; part
iv,  254b;  260b-c; 272b-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk iv,
265a-d   25   Montaigne:   Essays,  98b-99a;  208a-294b  esp  209a-212d,
233a-234a, 246a-258b

[69a]
10a  to  \0d  Chapter 51: MAN 35 26 Shakespeare: Richard U, act v, sc ii
[23-40]  346c-d  27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii [129-134] 32d; act
in, sc in
[36-96] 53d-54b
/ King Lear, act iv, sc i [30-37] 269d; so-rT[46-8i] 271a-b; sc vi
[34-80]
273d-274b  /  Antony and Cleopatra, act ii, sc i [i-8] 31 7d / Pericles,
act in, sc 1
[1-26] 433c-434a
/  Cymbeline,  act  v, sc iv [1-151] 481a-482c; sc v [425-485] 488b-d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part ii, 267b-c; 408c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  80b-81a  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part iv 51b-54b passim /
Meditations,  in  81d-89a  passim;  iv  89a93a / Objections and Replies,
122a-b; 123c-d; 142b-c; 213b-214d; 226d-227a; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i, prop 25, corol 365b; prop 29, schol 366b-c; appendix 369b-372d;
part  ii,  prop  5  374c-d;  prop 10 376c-377a; part iv, pref, 423a-b 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[80-134] 137a138a; bk iv [411-439] 161b-162a; bk v [224245] 180a-b; [506-543] 186a-187a; bk x [610640] 287b-288b / Samson Agonistes [373-419]
347b-348b;
[667-709] 354a-355a / Areopagitica, 394b-395b
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  78b-80b  / Pensees, 389 239b; 425-555
243b-270a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  h,  sect  6 26b-c / Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  vii,  sect  5-6  132c-d  35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect 155-156 444b-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii,
div  78-81  485c-487a;  sect  xi,  div  106-109 499b501a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk i, la-2b; bk xii, 85d-86a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
366b-d  / Social Contract, bk iv, 435a-439c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
292d-296c;  409b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 258a; 259b-260a 42 Kant:
Fund.   Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  278b-279d  /  Practical  Reason,
291a-292a;  325a-328b;  334a-335c; 345c-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
383b,d-384a,c  /  Judgement,  502d-503a;  594d  [fn 1] 43 Mill: Liberty,
296b-d  44  Boswell  -.Johnson,  392d-393a;  394a-c;  481d482d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 158c160b; 169d; part i, 224a-225a; 236a-c;
245d246c;  part  11,  263d-265c;  266d;  268b-271c;  280b 281b; part hi,
291b-292b;  303c-307b;  308a-b;  part  iv,  322a-c;  339b-d; 349c350c 47
Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-517]
lla-14b;
[1810-1815] 43a; part
ii  [8582-8590]  209a  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 28a-36b; 84b-85a; 123a-b;
306b-307a; 318b; 380a-381a; 396b397a

[69b]
49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 302b-303d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
50b-c;  bk v, 196a-198b; 216d-218b; bk ix, 357d-358b; bk xiv, 608a-b; bk
xv,  631a-c;  epilogue  11,  675a-676b;  680b-c;  684b-d  52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 54a-b; 64c-67a; bk v, 121d-137c passim; bk vi
146b,d-170d;  bk  vii,  177b-180a;  185a-c;  bk xi, 313c-314d; 337a-346a
passim  53  James:  Psychology,  203a-204b  54  Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  246c-247d / Geneial Introduction, 582a-b / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 771a-b; 793c 10b. Man as the measure of all things 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  85a-86d  /  Theaetetus, 517b532a esp 517b-c, 522b, 525a-526c,
531b-c; 534b / Laws, bk iv, 683a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5-6
528c531c; bk x, ch 1
[i053 a3i-b3]
580a; ch 6
[1057*7-11]
584b; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b i2io63b i4] 590d-592a
23  Hobbes: leviathan, part i, 50a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
ii,  279d280b  10c. Man as an integral part of the universe: his station
in  the  cosmos 7 Plato: Laws, bk x, 767c-768c 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  1,  ch  2  106d-108b:  ch 12 118d-120b; ch 14 120d-121c: bk ii, ch 8
146a-147c;  bk  hi,  ch  13  188b-189c;  ch  24  203c-210a;  bk iv, ch i
213a-223d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d: sect 4 257b;
sect  9  257d;  sect 16 259a; bk iv, sect 14 264d; sect 23 265c; sect 48
267d-268a;  bk  v,  sect  3-4  269a; sect 8 269d-270b; bk vi, sect 40-46
277d-278d;  bk  vii,  sect  9-10  280b-c; sect 13 280c; bk viii, sect 27
287c;  sect  34  288a b; bk ix, sect 1 291a-c; sect 9 292b-d; bk x, sect
6-7  297a-c; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch
14 89b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 25, corol 365b; prop 29, schol
366b-c;  prop  31 366d367a; part ii, prop i-io 373d-377a; prop ii, corol
377b-c;  part hi, 395a-d; part iv, prop 2-6 425a-426a; appendix, vi-viii
447c-d;  xxvi  449c;  xxxn  450c-d; part v, prop 40, schol 462d \0d. The
finiteness  and  insufficiency  of man: his sense of being dependent and
ordered  to  something  beyond  himself Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-30;
3:16-24 / Numbers, 23:19 / Deuteronomy, 8:3 / Job, 4:17-21; 9; 12-14; 25
/ Psalms, 8; 39:4; 103:14-16; 119-120; 139:1-16; 144:3-4— (D) Psalms, 8;
38:5;  102:14-16;  118-119; 138:1-16; 143:3-4 / Proverbs, 16:33; 20:24 /
Jeremiah, 17:5-8— (D) Jeremias, 17:5-8

[70a]
36 THE GREAT IDEAS (10. Man's conception of himself and his place in the
world.  10d. The finiteness and insufficiency of man: his sense of being
dependent and ordered to something beyond himself.) Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  9:14-17;  16:26  —  (D)  OT,  Bookof  Wisdom, 9:14-17; 16:26 /
Ecclesiasticus,  18:7-11;  33:10-15—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 18:6-10;
33:10-15  New Testament: Luke, 4:4 / Romans, 14:7-9 / / Corinthians, 2-3
/ James, 4:13-16 / / Peter, 1:24 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [86-103]
2a b 5 Euripides: Alcestis
[962-996]
245c / Suppliants
[195-245]
260a-c;
[734-749]
264d / Heracles Mad
[1 301-1356] 376b-d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 7b-8a; 20b-21a; 46c-d; bk 11, 65b; bk hi,
98b-c;  99a;  103d104b;  bk  iv, 153b-d; bk vii, 252b-c; bk ix, 291b-c 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  246c  /  Laws,  bk  i,  650a-b;  bk  vii, 721a-c; bk x,
767c-768c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 10 [1075 12-24] 605d-606a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv, ch 7 232c235a 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  ii,  sect 3 257a-b; sect 17 259b-d; bk hi, sect 10 261d-262a; bk iv,
sect  33-36  266c-d;  bk v, sect 10 270c-d; sect 33 273b-c; bk vii, sect
44-50  282b-283a;  bk  xii,  sect  32 310c 14 Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus,
225b-c;  229a-c  /  Sulla,  370c-371b  /  Demetrius, 739c-740d; 744bc 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk hi, 49c; bk iv, 68d-69b; bk vi, 91b-d / Histories,
bk i, 194a-c; bk ii, 232d-233a; bk iv, 281a-b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead,
tr  ii,  ch 9, 87d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1-2 la-c; bk iv,
par  15-19  23a-24b;  bk v, par 1-2 27a-c; bk vii, par 16-17 48c-49a; bk
ix,  par 23-26 68a-d; bk x, par 7-8 73a-c; par 33-40 79d81c; bk xii, par
10  101c; bk xiii, par 9 112c-d / City of God, bk xii, ch i 342b,d-343c;
bk  xix,  ch  4-10 511a-516d / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 38 635c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 12, a 1, ans 50c-51c; a 8, rep 4
57b-58b;  q  60,  a  5, ans 313b-314c; part i-ii, q 2, a 3 617b618a; a 8
621c-622b;  q  3, aa 6-8 627b-629c; q 5, a 3 638b-639a; a 5 640b-641a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
10b-c; purgatory, hi [16-45] 56a-b; x [121129] 68c-d; xi
[1-30] 68d-69a; xvi
[52-105]
77b-d;  paradise, vii 115a-116c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 163d-164a
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  6d-10a passim; 149b-d; 208a-294b esp 213a-215b,
231d-234a,  251c252b.  269d-270a,  294a-b;  503b-d;  514d-515a;  520b-d;
528c-529b  31 Descartes: Meditations, in 81d-89a passim / Objections and
Replies, 122a-b; 214a-d

[70b]
\0dto  \0e  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part 1, appendix 369b372d; part iv, pref
422b,d-424a;  prop  2-6 425a-426a 32 Milton: Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Lord
Gen.  Cromwell  69a-b  /  Mr. Cyriac\ Skinner 70a / Paradise Lost, bk vi
[168-188] 200a / Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp
[164-175]
343a-b,
[373-419] 347b-348b, [667-704] 354a-355a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b;  205 211a; 208 211b; 227 213a; 233
213b-216a   /   Geometrical   Demonstration,   439b   35   Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch ii, sect 3 128b-c; ch vii, sect 5-6 132c-d; ch
xv,  sect 12 165b-c; ch xxiii, sect 12-13 207a-208b; bk iv, ch xiv, sect
1-2  364bc  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk i, la-2b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 366b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270, 85c;
par 340 HOb-c / Philosophy of History, Intro, 162a-170b; 196d-198b; part
ii,  266d;  280b-281b;  part  hi,  304c-306c  47 Goethe: Faust, prologue
7a-9b; part i
[652-655] 17b; [997-1010] 25b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  50b-c;  bk  v, 196a-198b; bk vi,
243d-250a;  262c;  bk  vm,  303a-305b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d; bk xv, 631a-c;
epilogue 1, 646d-647b; 650b-d; 659c-d; 671c-672a; epilogue ii, 692c-694d
10*?.  Man's  comparison  of  himself  with other creatures and with the
universe  as a whole 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447b-455c esp 452c-453c; 466a-b /
Philebus, 618c-619c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 7
[ii4i a2o-b2]
390a-b  /  Politics, bk i, ch 8 [1256^5-22] 450c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  vi  [647-652]  89a  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 5,
143d144a;  bk  hi,  ch  13, 189a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 4
264a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 915b-916a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
ix, ch 7 69c-70a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 17. a 8, rep
2  692a-c  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 31-35 5a-b; bk
v, stanza 263 154b / Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b esp [4610-4623] 237b,
[4701-4729] 239a-b
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 135b-139b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  213d-215a;  259a-d  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  ii
[303-331]  43d; act in, sc 1 [122-132] 48b; sc iv [53-63] 55a-b; act iv,
sc hi
[17-33] 58a-b
/ King Lear, act hi, sc ii 262d-263d; sc iv 264a266b esp
[1 05-1 14] 265b
/ Macbeth, act v, sc v
[16-28] 308d-309a
/  Antony and Cleopatra, act v, sc 11 [76-100] 347a-b / Pericles, act 1,
sc 1
[41-55] 422b; act
ii, sc i
[i-ii]
427b  /  Tempest, act iv, sc i [148-158] 543b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part ii, 237c; 427a

[71a]
11  to \\b Chapter 51: MAN 37 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 50c-51d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 13, schol 378a-c 32 Milton: Sonnets,
vn 63b / Paradise Lost^jBjs. iv
[411-735]
161b-168b esp
[4ii^4^rf"T61b163a,
[721-735]
168a-b; bk vm
[249-559]
237b-244a / Samson Agonistes
[164-175]
343a-b;  [667-704]  354a-355a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 347-348
233b234a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxiii, sect 12-13
207a-208b; bk hi, ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b esp 272b; bk iv, ch xvt, sect
12,  370c-371a  36  Swift: Gulliver, part i 3a-42a; part ii 45a87b; part
iv,  172b-173a  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 383a-384a; 394a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 349b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 175b
[fn
1] / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 271d-273b esp 271d272c; 274a-277b
/  Practical  Reason,  32  7d328b; 348a b; 360d-361d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  373d / Judgement, 583b-c; 584d-587a; 591b-592d 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 168b-d 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue
[280-292]
8a; part 1
[652-655]
17b; part 11
[11,404-419]
277b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\ esp 84b-85a, 123a-b, 168a-b, 171b, 204a,
209b,  236a-239a,  313b314a,  318a,  319a-b,  341b-343a, 347b, 353b354b,
360b-361a,  363a-364a,  370b-371b,  381a,  409b-410b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk hi, 156d; 162b164a,c; bk v, 217b-218b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  v,  117c-127b passim 53 James: Psychology, 655a-659a esp
655b-657b  54  Freud: General Introduction, 562c-563a / New Introductory
Lectures, 874a 11. The theological conception of man l\a. Man as made in
the  image  of  God Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-27; 5:1; 9:6 Apocrypha:
Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23— (D) OT, Boo/{ of Wisdom, 2:23 / Ecclesiasticus,
17:1-3—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  17:1-3 New Testament: / Corinthians,
11:7;  15:49 / II Corinthians, 3:18 / Colossians, 3:8-10 / James, 3:9 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk vi, par 4 36a-b; bk xiii, par 12 113b-d; par
32  119a-b  /  City  of  God,  bk  xi, ch 26-28 336d-338d; bk xii, ch 23
357d-358a;  ch 27, 359c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22 629b-630a 19
Aquinas  : Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 1, rep 2 14b-15b; q 14, a 2,
rep 3 76d-77d; q 32, a 1, rep 2 175d-178a; q 35, a 2, rep 3 189d-190d; q
59,  a i, contrary 306c-307b; q 72, a 1, rep 3 368b-369d; q 77, a 2, rep
i 401b-d; q 88, a 3, rep 3 472c-473a; q 91, a 4,

[71b]
d  rep  1-2 487d-488c; q 93 492a-501c; q 106, a 1, rep 3 545d-546d; part
i-ii,  prologue  609a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 55, a
2,  rep  3  27a-d;  q  no,  a  4, ans 350d-351d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  v [19-24] 112b; vii [64-84] 115d-116a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and
Cressida, bk v, stanza 263 154b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 41b-d
31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 88c-d / Objections and Replies, 214a-d 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [285-294] 158b;
[35 6-3 6 5] 160a-b; bk vii [519-528] 228b; bk
xi
[466-522] 309b-310b / Areopagitica, 384a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  430-431,  246b-247b;  434435, 249b-251a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  168b-d;  part  in,  304d-305b; 310d 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [486-517]  14a-b;  [614685]  17a-18a 54 Freud:
Civilization and Its Discontents, 790 ll£. The fatherhood of God and the
brotherhood   of   man  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:1-15  /  Leviticus,
19:11,13-18,33-34  /  Deuteronomy,  10:17-19 / Psalms, 82:6; 103:13— (D)
Psalms,  8i:6; t 102:13 / Isaiah, 2:1-4; 45:11-13; 63:15-16— (D) Isaias,
2:1-4;  45  :II  ~  I  3;  63:15-16 / Micah, 4:1-5— (D) Micheas, 4:1-5 /
Malachi,  2:10— (D) Malachias, 2:10 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 13:15-17;
25:1—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 13:19-21; 25:1-2 New Testament: Matthew,
5:38-48;  12:46-50;  19:19;  22:39;  23:8-9;  25:34-40 / Mar{, 12:3133 /
Luke,  10:27  I John, 1:12; 8:41-42; 13:3435; 15:12-17 / Acts, 1 7 ^2-34
esp  17:24-26  /  Romans,  3:29;  8:14-19;  12;  13:8-10;  14:10-13 / //
Corinthians, 6:17-18 / Galatians, 3:26-28: 5:13-14 / Ephesians, 2:13-22;
3:6,14-15; 4:16,25; 5:1-2 / Colossians, 3:9-14 / / Thessalonians, 4:9-10
/ / Peter, 1:22; 2:17 / I John, 2:9-11; 3:1-2,10-18; 4:7-11,20-21; 5:1-2
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 9 114c- 116b; ch 13 120b-c; bk in, ch
n  187a-b;  ch  22,  199b-d;  ch  24,  203c-204c;  207a-b  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect 4 260b261a; sect ii 262a-b; sect 13 262c; bk
vi,  sect  42 278a-b; bk ix, sect i 291a-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xii,  ch  21-22  357a-c;  ch  27, 359d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22
629b-630a;  ch 30 632c-633b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq
25-27  501a-527a; q 29, a 3, ans 531d-532c; a 4, ans 532c-533a; q 44, aa
2-3  593d-595b;  a  7 597b-598a; q 184, a 2, rep 3 629d-630d 22 Chaucer:
Parson's  Tale,  par  31  517b-518b  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
31d-32a  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  392b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part hi, 308a-b; 310d-311a

[72a]
1 (11. The theological conception of man. \\b. The fatherhood of God and
the brotherhood of man.) 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 84b-85a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk v, 196a-198b; 213a-218b; bk xi, 525c-526b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 117c-137c passim; bk vi 146b,d-170d passim 53
James:  Psychology,  887a-b  54 Freud: Group Psychology, 674c-d lie. God
incarnate  in  human  form:  the  human  nature of Christ New Testament:
Matthew,  1:18-25;  2:11;  11:1819;  13:54-56;  M :33; 16:13-17; 17:1-9;
22:4146;  26:63-66; 27:26-54 / Mar\, 3:9-12; 6:2-3; 14:61-62; 15:15-39 /
Luke,  1-2  esp  1:26-38,  2:8-12; 5:18-26; 7:33-34; 11:27-28; 22:67-70;
23:24-47;  24:2-7,36-43  /  John,  1:1-18 esp 1:14; 1:30-34; 5:16-47 esp
5:27;  6:42;  8:12-28;  10:22-38;  11:27;  14;  19:25-34;  20:24-21:14 /
Romans,  1:3-4; 8:3 / // Corinthians, 5:16 / Galatians, 4:4 / Ephesians,
2:14-16  /  Philippians,  2:5-8  / Colossians, 1:12-20 / / Timothy, 2:5;
3:16 / Hebrews, 1:1-6; 2:14-18; 4:14-15; 5:7-8; 7:20-25 / 1 John, 1:1-4;
2:18-29;  4  :2-3 / II John, 7-1 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 20
32d33a;  bk  vii,  par 13-14 47c-48b; par 24-25 50d-51c; bk x, par 67-70
88b-89a;  bk xi, par 4 90a-b / City of God, bk ix, ch 15 293a294a; ch 17
295a-c;  bk  x,  ch  20  311b-c; ch 22 312a-b; ch 24 312d-313c; ch 27-29
315b318b;  bk  xi,  ch  2 323a-c; bk xxi, ch 15-16 572c-574a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  11-14  627b-628b;  ch 34 634b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 51, a 2, rep 1 276b-277a; a 3, rep 5 277a-278c; q
95,  a 1, rep 1 506b-507c; part i-ii, q 5, a 7, rep 2 642a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part hi, qq 1-26 701b,d-846d esp qq 4-15 730c-796a, q
26  845a-846d;  part  hi suppl, q 76, a i, ans 939d-941a; q 95, a 3, ans
1045b-1046d;  a  4,  ans 1046d-1047d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xxix
[106-120] 98d-99a; xxxi
[76-126] 101c-102a;
xxxii
[28-48]
102c-d; paradise, ii
[37-45]
108a; vii 115a-116c; xm
[31-87] 125d-126b;
xxxiii  [76-145]  157a-d  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza
264  154b  /  Prioress's  Tale  [13,383-417] 391a-b / Parson's Tale, par
12-13 503b-505a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 182a-b 32 Milton: Christs
Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a esp
[15-21] 10b-lla / Upon the
Circumcision  12b-13a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi  [56415] 136b-144b esp
[238-241I 140b, [281-343] 141b-143a; bk xi
[22-36] 299b-300a; bk xii
L355-465] 327a-329a

[72b]
s  38  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lie  to  12  33 Pascal: Pensees, 512 262a; 553
268a-270a;  763-765 322a; 785 325b; 862 342b-343a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  308a-b  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 134a-161a,c esp 134a-138a;
230d-231a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part in, 306b307b; 308a-b 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127a-137c 12. Man as an object of
laughter  and  ridicule:  comedy  and  satire 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
455a-469a,c / Knights 470a-487a,c / Clouds 488a-506d / Wasps 507a-525d /
Peace  526a-541d  /  Birds  542a-563d  /  Frogs 564a-582a,c / Lysistrata
583a-599a,c  /  Thesmophoriazusae  600a-614d / Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d /
Plutus  629a-642d  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  237b-c  /  Philebus, 629a-630c 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781052]
42d-43c; bk iv
[1073-1191]
58a-59d;  bk  v  [1007-1010] 74b 14 Plutarch: Antony, 774a-b 22 Chaucer:
Miller's Prologue 211a-212b / Miller's Tale 212b-223b / Reeve's Prologue
224a225a  /  Reeve's  Tale  225a-232a  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvii,
24a-c;  ch  xviii  25a-26a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 59b-c; 63c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel 25 Montaigne: Essays, 6d-10a passim,
esp  6d7a;  10b-llb;  42a-b; 145d-147b; 159a-162c; 165c-167a; 168d-169a;
208a-295a   esp   213a219a,  231d-234a,  251c-252b;  300d-301c;  308c-d;
326b-327b;  388c-395b; 424d-426b; 478c-482b; 538a-543a,c 26 Shakespeare:
Comedy  of  Errors  149a-169d / Taming of the Shrew 199a-228a,c / Love's
Labour's  Lost  254a-284d / Midsummer-Night' Dream 352a-375d / 1st Henry
IV, act ii, sc iv
[510-550] 449a-c / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc
hi [92-135] 492b-c / Much Ado About Nothing 503a-531a,c / As You Like It
597a-626a,c  27  Shakespeare:  Twelfth  Night  la-28d  /  Merry Wives of
Windsor  73a-102d / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc hi [1-82] 115d-116c
/ All's Well That Ends Well, act iv, sc hi
[76-87]
164c  /  Measurefor  Measure, act ii, sc 11 [110123] 183b; act in, sc ii
[234-245] 191d-192a;
[275-286] 192b / King Lear, act hi, sc ii [8095] 263d
36  Swift:  Gulliver  3a-184a esp part ii, 71a-76b, part iv 135a-184a 36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy 191a-556a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 59c-d; 173b-c;
186c189a,c;  205ac;  274a-b; 275d-276a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xxv, 208d209a 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude
[109-132]
3b-4a; prologue
[280-292] 8a; part
i
[1202-1209]
30a;
[1868-2054] 44b-48b;
[3251-3344]
79b81b; part ii
[4917-4922]
122a;
[5061-5064]

[73a]
13 Chapter 51: MAN 39 125a;
[5457-5470]
134b-135a;
[6956-6966]
170b 13. The grandeur and misery of man Old Testament: Genesis, 1:26-30;
3:17-^;  11  :i9 / // Samuel, 14:14— (D) // Kings, 14:14 / / Chronicles,
29:15—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  29:15  /  Job  esp  3:1-26, 5:7, 7:1-21,
14:1-12,   15:14-16,  21:23-26,  25:4-6,  29:1-30:31  /  Psalms,  8:4-8;
39:4-6,11;  49:12-14;  51:2-5; 89:47-48; 103:13-16; 144:3-4— (D) Psalms,
8:5-9;  38:5-7,11-12;  48:13-15;  50:4-7;  88:4849; 102:13-16; 143:3-4 /
Ecclesiastes  passim  /  Isaiah,  40:6-8—  (D) Isaias, 40:6-8 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  9:1-3,13-16;  10:1-2—  (D)  OT,  Boo{  of  Wisdom,
9:1-3,1316;    10:1-2   /   Ecclesiasticus.   8:7;   10:9-11;   14:1719;
17:1-4,30-32;  40:1-11 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 8:8; 10:9-13; 14:18-20;
17:1-4,29-31;  40:1-11 New Testament: Romans, 7:21-25 / Hebrews, 2:6-8 /
James, 4:14 / / Peter, 1 124 4 Homer: Iliad, bk vi
[1 44-1 51] 41c; bk xvii
[420-455] 126b-d
5  Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound [442-506] 44c45a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the
King
[1186-1195]
HOb-c;
[1 524-1 530]
113c / Oedipus at Colonus [1211-1248] 125b-c / Antigone [332-375] 134a-b
/  Trachiniae  [94-140] 171a-b 5 Euripides: Suppliants [195-245] 260a-c;
[734749]  264d  5  Aristophanes:  Birds  [685-692]  551b-c  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk i, 2b; 7b-8a; 20b21a; bk v, 160c-d; bk vii, 224d-225a; 252b
c;  bk  ix,  291b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk 11, 322a-b / Timaeus, 476a-b /
Laws, bk vi, 704b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi
[31-93]
30b-31b;
[1053-1075]
43c-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3-4 108b110a; ch 24 129a-d; ch
28  133b-134d;  bk  ii,  ch  16 156b-158d; bk hi, ch 22 195a 201a; ch 24
203c-210a  17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 3 93d-94c / Fourth
Ennead, tr hi, ch 8 145d-146d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ix, ch 14-15
293a-294a;  bk xii, ch i, 343a-c; bk xiii, ch 10 364a-c; bk xix, ch 4-10
511a-516d;  ch  20  523d-524a; ch 27 529a-d; bk xxi, ch 15 572c-573b; bk
xxii,  ch  22-24  606d-612a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvi [49-142]
38c-39c 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1303-1333]
181b182a  / MonJ(s Prologue 432a-434a esp [13,971996] 433b-434a / MonJ(s
Tale 434a-448b esp
[13,997-14,004] 434a, [14,679-684] 446b-447a
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 76c-d; 79c-d

[73b]
b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 149b-d; 381b-c; 528c529b 26 Shakespeare: Richard
II  320a-351d  27 Shakespeare -.Hamlet 29a- 72a,c / Troilus and Cressida
103a-141a,c  / King Lear 244a-283a,c / Timon of Athens 393a-420d / Henry
VIII,  act in, sc 11 [350-372] 572c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
49b  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk ii [496-505] 122a; bk xi [466-529]
309b-310b / Samson Agonistes
[164-175] 343a-b; [667-709] 354a-355a
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 103 192b193a; 125-183 195b-204b; 195
209b-210b;  199  210b;  351 234a; 366 236a; 386 239a; 397-424 240b-243b;
430-431  245a-247b;  434-435, 249a-251a; 443 251b; 510-511 261b; 513-517
262a-263b;  524-555  264a-270a;  693,  301b  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
383a-384a;  394a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338c; 363a-366d / Social
Contract, bk i, 393b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 633d-634a,c 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason, 300a-d; 321b-329a esp 327d-328d; 345a-347a; 360d-361d
/ Judgement, 584d-586a; 587a-588a; 591b-592d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 58b-c;
94d-95d;  102a-b; 102d-103a; 312b; 362c-363a; 401a-b; 540b542a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  39  21d;  part  in, par 358 113c;
additions,  22 120c-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 165a170b; part 11,
280b-281b;  part  hi,  285a-b;  304c-306c;  310d  47  Goethe:  Faust esp
dedication [5]-prelude
[78] la-3a, prologue [280-292] 8a, [300-329]
8b-9a, parti [354-517] lla-14b, [606-807] 16b " 21a,
[1064-1117]
26b-28a,
[1 178-1237]
29b30b,
[1544-1571]
37b-38a,
[1583-1706] 38b41a, [1765-1815] 42a-43a, [1851-1867]
44a-b,
[3217-3250] 79a-b, [3431-3458] 84a-b, [44054612]
110a-114b, part 11
[8094-8131]
197a198a,
[9695-9944]
235a-241b,
[11,219-272]
273a-274a,
[11,384-419]
277a-b,
[11,573-603]
281b-282a,  [11,934-12,111]  290b-294b  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 54b-55a;
59a-60b;  84b-85a;  88b-91a;  107a-b;  313a-314a;  318a;  343a;  403a-b;
418a-419a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 597a,c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace
esp  bk  vi,  235a238c,  243d-250a,  262c-263a,  bk  vii, 294b, bk villi
303a-305b,  311a-313a,  bk ix, 355c358b, bk x, 430a-b, 439b-440a, bk xi,
514c-d,  bk xiv, 605b-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 54a-b;
bk  v,  127b-137c 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 246c-248c / Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle,  654a-c  /  Civilization  and  Its Discontents
767a-802a,c  esp  771c776b,  778d-779a,  799a-802a,c  / New Introductory
Lectures, 853a-

[74a]
40  THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES the state, see Family 5a~5c. to God
or  the  gods, see Desire 7b; God 3-3^ World 2. The tragedy or comedy of
human life, see Happiness 4b; Poetry 4b.

[74b]
For:  Other discussions of the difference between men and other animals,
see  Animal  ic-ic(2);  Knowledge 7d; Memory and Imagination i, 6b; Mind
3a~3b;  Sense 2c; Will 6c. Matters relevant to the science of psychology
and  its  relation  to  other  sciences,  see Knowledge 5e; Mind 6; Soul
5a~5b.  The  issues  concerning matter and spirit in the constitution of
man,  see  Element  5f;  Matter  2d, 3a, 4C~4d; Mind 2a-2e; One and Many
3^4);  Soul  3a~3d;and for comparisons of human with angelic nature, see
Angel  4;  Soul  4d(2).  Discussions  bearing  on  the analysis of human
faculties or powers, see Animal ic(i)-ic(2), 8d; Desire 30-3^2); Emotion
i, ic; Habit 3; Memory and Imagination i-ia, ic, 5; Mind ia-ig(3); Sense
ia-id;  Soul  2c(i)-2c(3),  4a;  Will 3a, 9a. The problem of harmony and
conflict  in  human  nature and the discussion of human abnormality, see
Emotion  3a,  3c;  Medicine  6a-6c(2);  Mind  8-8c;  One  and Many 3K5);
Opposition  4~4e;  Will  9b. Another consideration of the cycle of human
life,  see  Life  and  Death  6b-6c;  and for the consideration of human
immaturity,  or  childhood,  see Family 6c, 6e; Mind 4b. The relation of
men  and  women in the domestic community, and for the place of women in
Matters  relevant  to  the problem of individual and racial differences,
see  Animal 10; Evolution ib; Mind 4a. The issue concerning the ultimate
origin  of  man,  see Evolution 7a~7b. Other statements of the myth of a
golden  age, see Labor ia; Progress ic; Time 8b; and for the distinction
between  prehistoric  and  historic man, or for the progress of historic
man, see Art 12; Evolution 7c; Time 8a. The distinction between man in a
state of nature and in a state of civil society, see Law 4b; Liberty ib;
Nature  2b;  State  3c;  and  for  the  consideration of man as a social
animal, see Family i; State 3b(i). Other discussions of the condition of
Adam  before  and  after original sin, and of the condition of the human
race as a result of Adam's sin, see God 9c; Justice ib; Sin 3-3C; Virtue
and  Vice 8b; Will 7e(i); and for theological doctrines concerning man's
life  on  earth  and  his  immortal destiny, see History 5a; Immortality
5d~5g;  Punishment  3d;  Sin  6c-6e.  The teaching of Christian theology
concerning  Christ,  see God 90-9^3) ; One and Many 6c. Matters relevant
to  man's  understanding  of  himself,  his  place in the world, and his
relation  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below  are works not included in
Great  Books  ofthe  Western  World,  but  relevant to the For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great Ideas. Aquinas. Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq
161i-  .65  Plutarch.  "That Brute Beasts Make Use of ReaDante. Convivio
{The  Banquet), fourth treatise, son," in Moralia ch 23-28 Augustine. On
Nature  and  Grace  F. Bacon. "Of Nature in Men," "Of Youth and Aquinas.
Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, q 18 Age," in Essays

[75a]
Hobbes.  The  Elements  of  Law, 'Natural and Politic . The Whole Art of
Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 14Kant. Anthropologic ^___^- J. S. Mill. A System of
Logic,   bk   vi,   cffy^   Freud.  An  Outline  of  Psychoanalysis  II.
Theophrastus.  The  Characters Cicero. De Finibus {On the Supreme Good),
iv-v  Horace.  Satires  Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the Logicians, bk 1
(Concerning  Man) Boethius. Contra Eutychen (A Treatise Against Eutyches
and  Nestorius)  Erigena.  De  Divisione Naturae, bk iv Ibn Gabirol. The
Improvement  ofthe  Moral  Qualities  Abailard.  Ethics  (Scito Teipsum)
Bonaventura.  Breviloquium  ,  part  ii (9-1 1), iv Petrarch. On His Own
Ignorance Albo. The Boo{ of Principles {Sefer ha-I/farim), bk in, ch 1-7
Nicolas  of  Cusa.  De  Docta Ignorantia, bk in G. Pico della Mirandola.
Oration  on the Dignity of Man Luther. A Treatise on Christian Liberty .
The  Magnificat  Vives.  A  Fable  About  Man  Calvin.  Institutes ofthe
Christian Religion, bk i, ch 15; BK II, CH I-3 Ben Jon son. Every Man in
His  Humour  Moliere.  Le  misanthrope {The Man-Hater) Marvell. Dialogue
Between  the Soul and the Body Defoe. Robinson Crusoe Pope. Essay on Man
Lamettrie.  Man  a Machine Buffon. "On Man," in Natural History Hartley.
Observations  on Man, His Frame, His Duty and His Expectations Ferguson.
An  Essay  on  the History of Civil Society, part 1, sect i-iv Voltaire.
Candide  . "Contradictions," "Man, Woman," in A Philosophical Dictionary
.  The  Huron,  or  Pupil  of Nature (L' ingenue) Goldsmith. The Deserted
Village  Helvetius.  A Treatise on Man Kames. Sketches of the History of
Man Bentham. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and Legislation,
ch  7 J. G. Fichte. The Dignity of Man . Addresses to the German Nation,
iv-viii Schleiermacher. The Christian Faith, par 60-61

[75b]
Chapter  51:  MAN 41 D. Stewart. Elements of the Philosophy of the Human
Mind,  part  hi, ch 2 . Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of Man
Gogol.  The  Overcoat  Kierkegaard.  Either/Or . Concluding Unscientific
Postscript . The Sickness Unto Death Schopenhauer. The World as Will and
Idea,  vol  i,  bk  iv;  vol  hi, sup, ch 31-32 . On Human Nature Comte.
System  of  Positive  Polity, vol iv, Theory of the Future of Man, ch i,
3-4  Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  iv,  ch  4-5; bk vi, ch 2, 4-5 Renouvier.
Essais  de  critique  generale,  11, part i T. H. Huxley. Man's Place in
Nature  .  Methods  and Results, vn Galton. Inquiries into Human Faculty
and  Its  Development  Meredith.  Earth  and Man C. S. Peirce. Collected
Papers,  vol  vi,  par  238-271  Wundt.  Outlines of Psychology, (20-21)
Royce.  The  World and the Individual, series ii (6-7) Santayana. Reason
in  Common  Sense, ch 12 Mark Twain. What Is Man? France. Penguin Island
Unamuno.  The  Tragic  Sense  of  Life  Jung.  Two  Essays on Analytical
Psychology  .  Psychological  Types Shaw. Bac\to Methuselah Buber. / and
Thou  Chesterton.  The  Everlasting Man B. Russell. What I Believe, ch i
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  i; part vi, note (The Crucifixion of
Christ);  part  vii . Man, God, and Immortality, part i-ii Spearman. The
Abilities  of  Man J. S. Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lect vi-x
M.  R.  Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk ii, ch 4 Jaspers. Man in the Modern
Age  Blondel.  Uaction  Dewey.  Human  Nature  and Conduct . Freedom and
Culture, ch 2 Maritain. Ransoming the Time, ch i Niebuhr. The Nature and
Destiny  of  Man J. S. Huxley. Evolution, the Modern Synthesis, ch 10 T.
S.  Eliot.  Four  Quartets  Cassirer.  An Essay on Man Lubac. Surnaturel
Weiss. Nature and Man Sartre. Existentialism Keith. A New Theory of Human
Evolution Wiener. Cybernetics Von Weizsacker. The History of Nature

[76a]
is  necessary  for  us  to observe the difference IT between problems in
mathematics  and the problem of the truth about mathematics. In the case
of   any   science—in   physics,  logic,  or  metaphysics,  as  well  as
mathematics—  it  is one thing to examine the discourses or treatises of
the  scientists  on the special subject matter of their field, and quite
another  to  examine  discussions  of  the  science  itself,  its scope,
branches,  and unity, its objects, its methods and its relation to other
disciplines.  The  chapter  on Quantity deals with the subject matter of
arithmetic,  geometry,  and  other  branches of mathematics; here we are
primarily  concerned  with  the  nature  of mathematical science itself.
Sometimes  reflections  on  the  nature  of  a  science are expressed by
experts  in  its subject matter who comment on the scientific enterprise
in which they are engaged in prefaces or interspersed remarks. Sometimes
such reflections are the commentary on a particular science by those who
may  claim  to speak with competence on the processes of the human mind,
the  nature  of  knowledge  or  of  science in general, but who claim no
special  competence  in the particular science under consideration. This
is  usually the commentary of philosophers who may assert their right to
make all knowledge, as well as all reality, their province. The same man
may,  of  course,  be  both  a  mathematician and a philosopher; as, for
example,  Plato,  Descartes,  Pascal.  In  the  case of mathematics, the
disparity between discourse in and about the science could hardly escape
notice. Even if no preliminary rule of caution were laid down, we should
be struck by the contrast between the agreement mathematicians have been
able  to reach in the solution of their problems and the disagreement of
the commentators on basic questions about mathematics. To this there may
be one significant exception. Mathematics is honored for

[76b]
the  precision  of  its  concepts,  the rigor of its demonstrations, the
certitude  of  its  truth.  Even  its detractors— like Swift or Berkeley
concede  the  exactitude and brilliance of mathematics while questioning
its  utility; or they admit its intellectual austerity while challenging
some  application  of  its  method.  Its  "clearness  and  certainty  of
demonstration,"  Berkeley writes, "is hardly anywhere else to be found."
This  general  agreement  about  the quality of mathematical thought may
explain  why  in all epochs mathematics has been looked upon as the type
of  certain  and  exact  knowledge. Sometimes it is taken as more than a
model  for  other sciences; it is regarded as the method of pure science
itself  or  as  the  universal  science.  Sometimes  its excellences are
thought  to  be  qualified  by  the  limited or special character of its
objects;  or  it  is  contrasted with other disciplines which, employing
different   methods,   deal   with  more  fundamental  matters  no  less
scientifically.  But  always  the  conclusions  of  mathematics serve to
exemplify  rational  truth;  always the method of mathematics represents
the  spirit  of  dispassionate  thought;  always  mathematical knowledge
symbolizes   the  power  of  the  human  mind  to  rise  above  sensible
particulars   and   contingent   events   to   universal  and  necessary
relationships.  Mathematics  means  this  not only to mathematicians and
philosophers,  but  also  to  moralists  and  statesmen. "The objects of
geometrical  inquiry,"  writes  Alexander  Hamilton,  "are  so  entirely
abstracted  from  those pursuits which stir and put in motion the unruly
passions of the human heart, that mankind, without difficulty, adopt not
only  the  more  simple theorems of the science, but even those abstruse
paradoxes  which,  however they may appear susceptible of demonstration,
are at variance with the natural conceptions which the mind, without the
aid

[77a]
a  of  philosophy, would be led to entertain upon the subject. . . . But
in  the  sciences  of  morals  and  politics,  men  are  found  far less
tractable."  This,  Hamilton  points  out,  is  not  due^rnerely  to the
passionate  interest  in  their  problems.  "It cannot be pretended," he
says,  "that  the  principles  of moral and political knowledge have, in
general,  the  same  degree  of  certainty  with  those of mathematics."
Admiration  for  mathematics  often  extends  beyond  enthusiasm for its
exemplary   virtues  or  delight  in  its  intellectual  beauty  to  the
recognition  of  its influence on the whole history of thought. Yet here
differences  of  opinion begin to appear. In the ancient world Plato and
Aristotle  represent opposite estimates of the importance of mathematics
for  the  rest  of  philosophy.  For  the  Platonists,  Aristotle  says,
"mathematics  has  come to be identical with philosophy, though they say
that it should be studied for the sake of other things." He complains of
those  students  of  science  who "do not listen to a lecturer unless he
speaks  mathematically."  They  make  the  error  of supposing that "the
minute  accuracy  of  mathematics  is  ... to be demanded in all cases,"
whereas,  according  to Aristotle's own view, "its method is not that of
natural   science."   In   the  modern  world,  thinkers  who  are  both
mathematicians and philosophers, like Descartes and Whitehead, represent
a  return  to  the  Platonic  point  of view; while Kant, even more than
Aristotle, insists that the philosopher is grievously misled if he tries
to  follow  the  method  of  mathematics in his own inquiries. Whitehead
charges Aristotle with having deposed mathematics from its high role "as
a  formative  element  in the development of philosophy"— demotion which
lasted until, with Descartes and others in the 17th century, mathematics
recovered the importance it had for Plato. Attempting to qualify his own
enthusiasm, Whitehead admits that he would not "go so far as to say that
to  construct  a  history  of  thought  without  a profound study of the
mathematical ideas of successive epochs is like omitting Hamlet from the
play  which  is named after him. That would be claiming too much. But it
is certainly analogous to cutting out the part of

[77b]
Chapter 52: MATHEMATICS 43 Ophelia. This simile is singularly exact. For
Ophelia  is  quite  essential  to  the  play, she is very charming—and a
little  mad.  Let  us  grant that the pursuit of mathematics is a divine
madness  of  the  human  spirit,  a  refuge  from the goading urgency of
contingent  happenings." For Kant the madness lies not in the pursuit of
mathematics  itself,  but in the delusion of the philosopher that he can
proceed  in  the  same  way.  "The science of mathematics," Kant writes,
"presents the most brilliant example of how pure reason may successfully
enlarge  its  domain  without  the  aid of experience. Such examples are
always  contagious,  particularly  when  the  faculty is the same, which
naturally  flatters  itself  that  it will meet with the same success in
other  cases  which it has had in one." The expectation naturally arises
that  the method of mathematics "would have the same success outside the
field  of  quantities."  But philosophers who understand their own task,
Kant  thinks, should not be infected by the "confidence ... of those who
are  masters  in  the  art  of  mathematics  ...  as to their ability of
achieving  such  success"  by  applying its method in other fields. "The
exactness  of mathematics," Kant holds, "depends on definitions, axioms,
and  demonstrations.  . . . None of these can be achieved or imitated by
the  philosopher  in  the  sense  in  which  they  are understood by the
mathematician,"   because,  according  to  Kant,  the  validity  of  the
mathematician's definitions and demonstrations ultimately depends on the
fact that he is able to construct the concepts he uses. The point is not
that mathematics obtains its objects from reason rather than experience,
but  rather  that  it  obtains them from reason by construction; as, for
example, Euclid begins by constructing a triangle which corresponds with
his  definition  of that figure. Hence, Kant maintains, "we must not try
in  philosophy  to  imitate  mathematics  by beginning with definitions,
except  it  be by the way of experiment. ... In philosophy, in fact, the
definition in its complete clearness ought to conclude rather than begin
our  work";  whereas  in  mathematics  we  cannot  begin  until  we have
constructed  the  objects  corresponding to our definitions. "It follows
from all this," Kant concludes, "that it is not in accordance with the

[78a]
44  THE GREAT IDEAS very nature of philosophy to boast of its dogmatical
character,  particularly in the field of pure reason, and to deck itself
with  the  titles  and  ribands  of mathematics." Differences of opinion
about   mathematics   represent,   for   the  most  part,  philosophical
controversy  concerning  the  nature  of  science  or the objects of its
knowledge. Mathematicians who engage in such controversy assume the role
of  philosophers  in  doing  so, for mathematics itself is not concerned
with  questions  of  this  sort.  But  there  are  some  questions about
mathematics  which  seem to call for a close study of the science itself
and  even for proficiency in its subject matter and operations. They are
questions  about the scope of mathematics and about the divisions of the
science,  in  relation to one another and to its unity. On these issues,
mathematicians disagree not only with philosophers, but among themselves
and  in  their  capacity as mathematicians. These issues usually involve
different  interpretations of the history of mathematics. The problem is
not  one  of  the  origin  of mathematics. The ancient opinion, found in
Herodotus,  Plato, and Aristotle, that the mathematical arts, especially
geometry,  were first developed by the Egyptians, is of interest because
of  the  questions  it  raises  about the circumstances of the origin of
mathematics. Herodotus seems to suggest that geometry arose as an aid in
the practice of surveying land. "From this practice," he says, "geometry
first  came  to  be  known  in  Egypt,  whence  it  passed into Greece."
Aristotle,  on  the  other  hand,  separating from the useful arts those
which  "do  not  aim  at utility," thinks the latter arose "first in the
places  where  men  first  began  to  have  leisure.  That  is  why  the
mathematical  arts  were  founded in Egypt, for there the priestly caste
was  allowed to be at leisure." The Greek development ofmathematics very
early distinguishes between the pure sciences of arithmetic and geometry
and  their  useful  applications  in the arts of measurement. The Greeks
conceived  mathematics  as essentially speculative rather than practical
or productive. They also divorced it from empirical investigation of the
sensible  world.  As  arithmetic  is  concerned  with  numbers, not with
numbered

[78b]
things,  and  geometry with figures, not with physical shapes, areas, or
volumes,  so  Plato  points  out  that music and astronomy belong to the
mathematical sciences when they deal not with audible harmonies but with
their  numerical  ratios,  not  with  visible celestial motions but with
their  geometrical configurations. Provoked by Glaucon's interest in the
usefulness  of the mathematical arts, Socrates excludes their utility as
being  of  no  interest to the philosopher. He recommends arithmetic and
its sister disciplines only so far as these sciences entirely ignore the
world  of  sensible  things.  The reason why the philosopher "who has to
rise  out  of the sea of change and lay hold of true being . . . must be
an  arithmetician,"  he  explains,  is  that arithmetic can have "a very
great  and  elevating effect," when it compels "the soul to reason about
abstract  number"  and  rebels  "against  the introduction of visible or
tangible  objects  into  the  argument."  In  the same way, only when it
concerns  itself  with  "knowledge  of  the eternal," not with measuring
earthly  distances,  will  geometry  "draw  the  soul towards truth, and
create  the  spirit  of  philosophy." The astronomer, like the geometer,
"should employ problems, and let the heavens alone, if he would approach
the  subject in the right way"; and, like the astronomer, the student of
harmony  will  work  in vain, if he compares "the sounds and consonances
which  are  heard  only" and so fails to "reach the natural harmonies of
number."  About  the  non-empirical  or  non-experimental  character  of
mathematics  there  has been little dispute. It is seldom suggested that
the growth of mathematical knowledge depends upon improvement in methods
of  observation.  But  on  the relation of mathematics to physics, which
raises  the  whole  problem  of  pure  and  applied  mathematics,  or of
mathematical  and experimental physics, there has been much controversy,
especially  in  modern  times.  Bacon,  for  example, adopts the ancient
division  of  mathematics  into  pure  and  mixed,  the  former  "wholly
abstracted   from   matter  and  physical  axioms."  Though  he  regards
mathematics  as  a  useful  instrument in physics— "the investigation of
nature"   being   "best   conducted  when  mathematics  are  applied  to
physics"—he also insists upon the primacy of physics and

[79a]
upon its essentially experimental character. Physics has been corrupted,
he  says,  by  logic  and  by  mathematics  when these seek to domi nate
instead  of to serve it. "It is a strarige-fatality that mathematics and
logic,  which  ought  to be but handmaids to physics, should boast their
certainty  before  it,  and  even  exercise  dominion  against  it." The
certainty  and clarity which Hume is willing to attribute to mathematics
cannot,  in  his opinion, be extended to mathematical physics. "The most
perfect philosophy of the natural kind," he thinks, "only staves off our
ignorance  a  little  longer. . . . Nor is geometry, when taken into the
assistance  of  natural  philosophy, ever able to remedy this defect, or
lead  us  into the knowledge of ultimate causes, by all that accuracy of
reasoning  for  which  it  is  so justly celebrated. Every part of mixed
mathematics," Hume continues, "proceeds upon the assumption that certain
laws   are  established  by  nature  in  her  operations;  and  abstract
reasonings are employed, either to assist experience in the discovery of
these  laws,  or  to  determine their influence in particular instances,
where  it depends upon any precise degree of distance or quantity." When
mixed  with  physics, mathematics remains subordinate— at best an aid in
the  formulation  and  the  discovery of the laws of nature. A different
view seems to be taken by the great mathematicians and physicists of the
17th  century.  Galileo, Descartes, and Newton tend to make mathematical
analysis  an  integral part of physics. As the structure of the world is
mathematical,  so,  too,  must  the  science  of nature be mathematical.
Geometry,  says  Descartes,  is  "the  science which furnishes a general
knowledge  of  the  measurement of all bodies." If we retain the ancient
distinction  between  geometry and mechanics, it can only be in terms of
the  assumption, "confirmed by the usage" of these names, that "geometry
is  precise  and  exact,  while mechanics is not." In the preface to his
Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy, Newton also says that
"geometry  is  founded  in  mechanical practice, and is nothing but that
part  of  universal mechanics which accurately proposes and demonstrates
the  art  of measuring." What is called "rational mechanics" must not be
confused

[79b]
Chapter 52: MATHEMATICS 45 with the manual arts of measurement which are
imperfect and inexact; and it is therefore wrong to distinguish geometry
from  mechanics  as  that which is perfectly accurate from that which is
less  so.  "But since the manual arts are chiefly employed in the moving
of  bodies,  it  happens  that  geometry  is  commonly referred to their
magnitude, and mechanics to their motion." Newton himself does not abide
by  this  distinction. His aim is to subject all the phenomena of nature
"to  the  laws of mathematics" and to cultivate mathematics as far as it
relates  to  natural  philosophy. "I offer this work as the mathematical
principles of philosophy, for the whole burden of philosophy consists in
this—  from the phenomena of motions to investigate the forces of nature
and  from  these  forces to demonstrate the other phenomena." He regrets
that  he has not been able to deduce all the phenomena of nature "by the
same  kind  of  reasoning from mechanical principles." Fourier goes even
further.  "Mathematical  analysis,"  he says, is "as extensive as nature
itself."  Mathematical  analysis  has "necessary relations with sensible
phenomena." In laying hold "of the laws of these phenomena," mathematics
"interprets  them  by  the  same  language as if to attest the unity and
simplicity  of  the plan of the universe, and to make still more evident
that  unchangeable  order  which presides over all natural causes." This
much  had  been said or implied by Descartes and Newton. But in addition
to   all  this,  Fourier,  from  his  own  experience  in  developing  a
mathematical  theory  of  heat,  comes  to the conclusion that "profound
study of nature is the most fertile source of mathematical discoveries."
Mathematics itself benefits from its alliance with physics; it increases
in  analytical  power  and  in  the  generality  of  its formulations as
physical  inquiries  extend  the  range  of phenomena to be analyzed and
forThe  relations  of  mathematics  to  physics  are  considered  in the
chapters on Astronomy, Mechanics, and Physics. Mathematical physics must
be examined in the light of the opinion that mathematics and physics are
separate  sciences,  distinct in object and method. Furthermore, whereas
some of the major contributions to mathematics appear in the great books
of

[80a]
46  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  physics or natural philosophy (e.g.., Archimedes,
Kepler,  Newton,  Fourier),  even  more  fundamental formulations of the
science  occur  in  great  books  devoted  exclusively  to  mathematics:
Euclid's Elements (on geometry), Apollonius' treatise On Conic Sections,
Nicomachus'   Introduction   to  Arithmetic,  Descartes'  Geometry,  and
Pascal's  mathematical papers. Others belonging to this latter group are
listed  in  the  Additional  Readings.  The  great  modern  advances  in
mathematics   are  exemplified  by  the  works  of  Gauss,  Lobachevski,
Hamilton,  Riemann,  Boole,  Dedekind, Peano, Frege, Cantor, Hilbert. It
would  be  both  natural  and  reasonable  to inquire about the relation
between  the  great  works  of  mathematics included in this set and the
equally   great  treatises  or  monographs,  listed  in  the  Additional
Readings,  which  represent for the most part the contributions of the 1
9th century. But since the major question which immediately confronts us
in   such  an  inquiry  concerns  the  relation  of  modern  to  ancient
mathematics,  we  can examine the problem in terms of the works included
in   this   set,   for  they  represent  both  the  continuity  and  the
discontinuity  in  the  tradition  of  mathematical science. Galileo and
Newton  are disciples of Euclid and Archimedes; Fourier is a disciple of
Newton  and Descartes. But Descartes is the great innovator. He seems to
be  quite  self-conscious of his radical departure from the ancients and
from  the  state  of  mathematics as he found it in his own day. Yet the
truth  and  power of his mathematical discoveries seem so evident to him
that  he  cannot doubt the ancients must have had some inkling of it. "I
am quite ready to believe," he writes, "that the greater minds of former
ages  had  some  knowledge  of it, nature even conducting them to it. We
have  sufficient  evidence  that the ancient Geometricians made use of a
certain  analysis which they extended to the resolution of all problems,
though  they  grudged  the  secret to posterity. At the present day also
there  flourishes  a  certain  kind of Arithmetic, called Algebra, which
designs to effect, when dealing with numbers, what the ancients achieved
in  the  matter  of figures. These two methods," he claims, "are nothing
else than the spontaneous fruit sprung from the inborn principles of the
discipline here in question."

[80b]
Descartes  does  not  regard his success as consisting in the advance of
mathematical   truth   through  discoveries  based  upon  principles  or
conclusions  already  established. Nor would he even be satisfied to say
that  his use of algebra in developing analytical geometry created a new
branch  of  mathematics. Rather, in his own view, it tended to unify all
existing  branches and to form a single universal method of analysis. In
effect,  it  revolutionized  the whole character of mathematics and laid
the  foundation  for  the  characteristically modern development of that
science  since  his  day.  "To speak freely," he writes, "I am convinced
that  it  is a more powerful instrument of knowledge than any other that
has  been  bequeathed  to us by human agency, as being the source of all
others."  One  need  not  quite  agree  with  Bertrand Russell that pure
mathematics  was  not  discovered  until  the  19th century, in order to
perceive  that the discoveries made in that century carry out the spirit
of  the  Cartesian revolution. If one understands the difference between
the  universal  mathematics  of  Descartes  and the separate sciences of
arithmetic and geometry as developed by the ancients; if one understands
the  difference  between  the  theory  of equations in Descartes and the
theory  of  proportions  in  Euclid;  if  one  understands how algebraic
symbolism,  replacing  numbers  by  letters,  frees  both arithmetic and
geometry  from  definite  quantities,  then  the  profound discontinuity
between  modern  and ancient mathematics begins to be discernible. There
are  other  differences  contributing to that discontinuity, such as the
modern treatment of the infinite, the invention of the calculus, and the
theory  of functions. But what is of prime importance for the purpose of
understanding  the  nature of mathematics, its objects, and its methods,
is  the  perception  of  the  discontinuity in any one or another of its
manifestations.  Here  is a fundamental disagreement about the nature of
mathematics  which  is  not  an issue between philosophers disputing the
definition  of  the science, but rather an issue made by the actual work
of  mathematicians  in  ancient  and  modern times. In his Battle of the
Boo\s—ancient   and   modern—  Swift  sees  only  the  great  poets  and
philosophers of the two epochs set against one

[81a]
another.  The  battle  between  the  ancient  and  the  modern  books of
mathematics  might be as dramatically represented. In such affairs there
is  a  natural  tendency  to  prejudge  the^issue in favor of the modern
contender.  That  prejudice  has reason on its side in certain fields of
knowledge  where  the perfection of new instruments and the discovery of
new facts work to the advantage of the latecomer. But it is questionable
whether  in  this  dispute  over  the  nature  of  mathematics  the same
advantage  prevails. When the issue is fairly explored by an examination
of  the differences between the great masterpieces of ancient and modern
mathematics,  it  may be found impossible to say that truth lies more on
one  side  than  on  the other, or that one conception of mathematics is
more  fruitful than another, because the two versions of the science may
seem  to  be  incommensurable  in  their aims, methods, and standards of
accomplishment. One example will illustrate this incommensurability. The
ancient  notion of number, as may be seen in Nicomachus' Introduction to
Arithmetic,  limits  the  variety  of numbers. A number always numbers a
number  of  things, even though we can deal with the number itself apart
from  any  set  of numbered things. It is always a positive and integral
quantity  which,  excepting unity itself, "the natural starting point of
all  numbers,"  contains  a  multitude  of  discrete  units. Numbers are
classified  according  to the way in which they are constituted of parts
and  according  to the constitution of these parts. The primary division
of  numbers is into even and odd. "The even is that which can be divided
into  two  equal parts without a unit intervening in the middle; and the
odd  is that which cannot be divided into two equal parts because of the
aforesaid  intervention  of  a  unit."  The  even numbers are capable of
subdivision into the even-times-even, the odd- times-even, and the even-
times-odd; and the odd into the prime and incomposite, the secondary and
composite,  and the number which, in itself, is secondary and composite,
but  relatively  is  prime  and  incomposite. The peculiarities of these
types  of  number  are  explained  in the chapter on Quantity. There are
still further classifica-

[81b]
Chapter   52:  MATHEMATICS  47  tions  of  numbers  into  superabundant,
deficient,  and  perfect; and of the parts of numbers in relation to the
numbers  of  which  they  are  parts. Finally, numbers are considered in
terms  of  their geometrical properties, to be observed when their units
are  disposed  discretely in spatial patterns, and in one, two, or three
dimensions.  There are linear, plane, and solid numbers, and among plane
numbers,   for   example,  there  are  triangular,  square,  pentagonal,
hexagonal  numbers,  and  so  on. The arithmetic operations of addition,
subtraction,   multiplication,   and   division  are  performed  in  the
production  of numbers or in the resolution of numbers into their parts.
But  though  any  two  numbers  can be added together or multiplied, the
inverse  operations  cannot always be performed. A greater number cannot
be  subtracted  from  a  less, for subtraction consists in taking a part
from  the whole, and leaving a positive remainder. Since division is the
decomposition  of a number into its parts, a number cannot be divided by
one  greater  than  itself,  for  the greater cannot be a part of the In
short, in Nicomachus' theory of numbers what later came to be treated as
negative  numbers  and fractions can have no place. Nico machus will not
carry  out  arithmetical  operations  in all possible directions without
regard  to  the  result obtained. He refuses to perform these operations
when  the  results  which  would  be  obtained  do  not have for him the
requisite  mathematical reality. He does not find it repugnant to reason
that  subtraction  and division, unlike addition and multiplication, are
not  possible for any two numbers; as, for example, subtracting a larger
from  a  smaller  number,  or using a divisor which does not go into the
dividend  evenly, and so leaves a fractional remainder. On the contrary,
Nicomachus  finds  it repugnant to reason to perform these operations in
violation  of their proper meaning, and to produce thereby results, such
as  negative  quantities  and  fractions, which are for him not numbers,
i.e.,  which  cannot  number  any real Understanding the nature ofsquare
numbers,  Nicomachus  would  be able to understand a square root, but he
would not see why the operation of extracting the square root should be

[82a]
48  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  applied  to  numbers  which are not square. Hence
another  kind  of  modern  number,  the  irrational  fraction  which  is
generated by such operations as the extraction of the square of positive
integers   which   are  not  perfect  squares,  would  never  appear  in
Nicomachus' set of numbers; nor would the imaginary number, which is the
result  of  applying the same operation to negative quantities. When the
arithmetical  operations  are  performed algebraically, with unknowns as
well  as  definite  quantities,  the  solution of equations requires the
employment  of  terms  which  Nicomachus  would not admit to be numbers—
negatives,  fractions  (both  rational and irrational), imaginaries, and
complex  numbers,  which are partly real and partly imaginary. Descartes
finds  nothing  repugnant in these novel quantities. On the contrary, he
would find it repugnant not to be able to perform the basic arithmetical
operations without restriction. Algebra would be impossible, and with it
the  general  method  of  analysis  that proceeds in terms of the purely
formal  structure  of  equations from which all definite quantities have
been  excluded.  It would also be impossible to do what Descartes thinks
essential  to the unity of mathematics, namely, to represent geometrical
operations  algebraically  and  to  perform  most  algebraic  operations
geometrically.   Geometrical  loci  cannot  be  expressed  by  algebraic
formulae  or  equations,  unless  there are as many numbers as there are
points  on  a  line. The number series for Nicomachus, without fractions
and  irrationals,  is  neither  dense  nor  continuous.  There are fewer
numbers  than  there  are points on a line. And without the use of zero,
negative  numbers,  and  fractions—none  of  which  would be regarded as
numbers by Nicomachus— it would be impossible for Descartes to construct
a  set  of  coordinates for the geometrical representation of equations,
whereby   all  the  points  in  a  plane  have  their  unique  numerical
equivalents.  The  Cartesian synthesis of algebra and geometry, which in
his  view  vastly  increases  the  power  of  each, violates the ancient
distinction  between  continuous and discontinuous quantities—magnitudes
(like  lines  and  planes)  and  multitudes  (or  numbers).  Euclid, for
example, treats the irrational or the incommensurable

[82b]
always as a relation of magnitudes, never of multitudes, or numbers; for
him  certain  geometrical relationships cannot be expressed numerically.
Arithmetic  and geometry are not even coordinate, much less co-extensive
sciences. Arithmetic is the simpler, the more elementary science, and is
presupposed  by geometry. Other examples arising from the innovations of
Descartes might be employed to show the chasm between the arithmetic and
geometry  of  the ancients, and modern mathematics—such as the treatment
of  infinite  magnitudes  and  numbers, the theory of functions, and the
method of the calculus. But the multiplication of examples does not seem
necessary  to  suggest  that  there may be no answer to the question, Is
Descartes  right,  and  Nicomachus and Euclid wrong? or to the question,
Are   the   modern   innovations  improvements  or  corruptions  of  the
mathematical  arts  and sciences? These questions are not like questions
concerning  the  truth or falsity of a proposition in mathematics or the
validity of a proof. A given theorem in Euclid must, in the light of his
definitions,  axioms,  and  postulates,  be  either  true  or false; and
accordingly  Euclid's  demonstrations or constructions are either cogent
or  fallacious.  The same rules apply to Descartes. But whether Euclid's
or  Descartes'  conception of the whole mathematical enterprise is right
seems  to present a choice between disparate worlds, a choice to be made
by  reference  to  principles  and  purposes  which  are  themselves not
mathematical. Modern mathematics may be much more useful in its physical
applications,  especially  in  the  analysis and calculation of variable
notions or quantities. It may have a special elegance and simplicity, as
well  as  greater  unity  and  even  systematic  rigor.  But it may also
purchase  these  qualities at the expense of the kind of intelligibility
which  seems  to  characterize  ancient  mathematics  as a result of the
insistence  that  its  objects have an immediately recognizable reality.
Ancient mathematics never occasioned such an extreme remark as that made
by Bertrand Russell about modern mathematics— that it is "the science in
which  we  never know what we are talking about, nor whether what we are
saying is true."

[83a]
. The question of the reality of the objects of mathematics is in part a
problem   for   the  mathematician  and  in  part  a  question  for  the
philosopher.  The  problem  for  the  mathematician  seems  to be one of
establishing  the  existence  of  the  objects  he  defines. This can be
illustrated  by reference to Euclid's Elements. The basic principles, as
Euclid   expounds  the  science,  seem  to  be  threefold:  definitions,
postulates,  and axioms or common notions. The axioms are called "common
notions" because they are truths common to other branches of mathematics
as  well  as to geometry. The common notions are called "axioms" because
their  truth is supposed to be self-evident. In contrast, the postulates
are peculiar to geometry, for they are written as rules of construction.
They  demand  that  certain  operations be assumed possible, such as the
drawing of a straight line or a circle, or the transposition of a figure
from  one  portion of space to another without alteration of its form or
quantity. Euclid's definitions include the definition of a straight line
and  a  circle.  His  first two postulates, therefore, seem to ask us to
assume  that  space is such that these defined geometrical objects exist
in   it   as  they  are  defined;  or,  in  other  words,  that  objects
corresponding to the definitions have geometrical reality. But there are
many  definitions—of  a  triangle,  of  an  equilateral  triangle,  of a
parallelogram—  for  which  Euclid states no postulate demanding that we
assume  the  geometrical  reality of the object defined. Hence before he
undertakes  to  demonstrate the properties of these figures, he finds it
necessary  to  prove  that  they  can  be  constructed.  Until  they are
constructed,  and  the  construction demonstrated, the definitions state
only  possibilities  to  which  no  geometrical  realities  are known to
correspond  in the space determined by Euclid's postulates. In his first
constructions,  Euclid  can  employ  only  the  definition of the figure
itself, his axioms, and those postulates which permit him to use certain
mechanical  devices—  the  straight  edge and the compass, which are the
mechanical  equivalents  of  his  postulates that a straight line can be
drawn between any two points and a circle described with any radius from
any  point  upon a plane. When, for example, in the first proposition of
Book  I, Euclid thus demonARCHBISHOP MITTY HIGH SCHOOL LIBRARY San Jose,
California woat&tfix*

[83b]
Chapter  52:  MATHEMATICS  49 strates the construction of an equilateral
triangle, he has proved the geometrical existence of that figure, or, in
other  words,  its  reality  in the space of his postulates. A number of
questions can be asked about this and many other similar demonstrations.
The  postulates  being assumptions, their truth can be questioned and an
effort  made  to prove or disprove them. This type of questioning led to
the  development  of  the  non-Euclidean  geometries. After centuries of
trying  unsuccessfully to prove Euclid's postulate about parallel lines,
geometers  like  Lobachevski  and  Riemann  postulated  other conditions
concerning  parallels,  with  consequences  for  the properties of other
geometrical  figures.  The  interior angles of a Euclidean triangle, for
example,  equal  the  sum  of two right angles; in certain non-Euclidean
triangles,   they   add  up  to  more  or  less  than  two  rights.  One
interpretation  of  this  situation  is that the truth of conclusions in
geometry is entirely dependent on arbitrary assumptions. Another is that
the several variants of the parallel postulate indicate the selection of
different  spaces  in  which to construct figures; and under each set of
spatial  conditions  postulated,  there  is only one body of geometrical
truths  concerning  the  properties  of the figures therein constructed.
Another  type  of  question  concerns  the  logical,  as  opposed to the
geometrical,   conditions   of   geometrical  proof.  In  his  essay  On
Geometrical  Demonstration,  Pascal  declares the geometric method to be
the  most  perfect available to men, for it "consists not in defining or
in  proving  everything,  nor  in  defining  or  proving nothing, but in
maintaining  itself in the middleground of not defining things which are
clear  to all men and in defining all others; and not proving everything
known  to  men,  but  in  proving all the other things." This method, it
seems, is not restricted to the subject matter of geometry; to Descartes
and  Spinoza,  at least, it seems to be the method for demonstrating any
theoretical  truth.  Descartes  presents  "arguments  demonstrating  the
existence  of God and the distinction between soul and body, drawn up in
geometrical  fashion";  and  as  its  title page indicates, the whole of
Spinoza's  Ethics  is  set  forth  "in  geometrical  order."  It  may be
questioned whether the postulates

[84a]
50  THE  GREAT IDEAS which Descartes adds to his definitions and axioms,
or  those which Spinoza introduces beginning with Proposition 13 of Book
II,   function   as  postulates  do  in  geometry,  i.e.,  as  rules  of
construction;   it  may  similarly  be  questioned  whether  Spinoza  is
following the geometrical method in Book I where he proceeds without any
postulates  at  all. But the more general question concerns the criteria
for   testing   the  consistency  and  the  adequacy  of  the  primitive
propositions—  the  definitions,  axioms,  postulates—laid  down  as the
foundation for all that is to be demonstrated. The investigation of this
problem  calls  for  an  examination of the whole process of proof, from
which  has  developed  the  modern  theory  of  mathematical  logic that
challenges  the  universality  and  adequacy of the traditional logic of
Aristotle,  and  asserts  that mathematics and logic are continuous with
one  another—  essentially  the  same  discipline.  The issues raised by
mathematical  logic  or  the  logic of mathematics are considered in the
chapters  on Hypothesis, Logic, and Reasoning. Here we must turn finally
to   one  other  question  which  is  of  interest  principally  to  the
philosopher  rather  than  the mathematician. It concerns the objects of
mathematics.  It  is a question about their reality or mode of existence
which  cannot  be  answered by the mathematical proof of a construction.
When, for example, Euclid constructs an equilateral triangle, the figure
established  cannot  be  the  one  imperfectly  drawn  upon  paper.  The
postulated  permission  to  use  a ruler and compass does not remove the
imperfection  of these mechanical instruments or the inaccuracy in their
physical  use.  The  triangle  whose  properties  the  geometer tries to
demonstrate  must  be  perfect,  as no actually drawn figure can be. The
philosophical  question, therefore, concerns the reality or existence of
this  ideal,  perfect  figure. The same question can be asked about pure
numbers—numbers  apart  from  all  numbered  things.  Are the objects of
mathematics  purely intelligible beings existing apart from the sensible
world  of  material things ? Or are they ideal entities—not in the sense
of  existing  outside  the  mind, but in the sense of being ideas in the
mind itself rather than perceptible particulars?

[84b]
As  indicated  in  the  chapters  on  Being,  Form,  and Idea, Plato and
Aristotle  seem  to  answer  these  questions differently. But there are
further  differences  among  those  who  regard  mathematical objects as
having being only in the mind. Aristotle, Aquinas, Locke, and James, for
example,  think  of  the  objects of mathematics as universals formed by
abstraction   from  the  particulars  of  sense  and  imagination.  "The
mathematical,  "  such  as  numbers and figures, Aquinas writes, "do not
subsist  as  separate  beings."  Apart from numbered things and physical
configurations,  numbers  and figures "have a separate existence only in
the  reason,  in  so far as they are abstracted from motion and matter."
Hobbes,  Berkeley,  and  Hume, on the other hand, deny abstract ideas or
universal concepts. "Let any man try to conceive a triangle in general,"
Hume  declares,  "which  is  neither isosceles nor scalenum, nor has any
particular  length or proportion of sides; and he will soon perceive the
absurdity  of  all the scholastic notions with regard to abstraction and
general  ideas."  Despite  these  differences, there seems to be general
agreement  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books  that the truths of
mathematics  are  rational rather than empirical; or, in the language of
Kant  and  James,  a priori rather than a posteriori. But the meaning of
this  agreement  is  not  the  same  for  those  who think that truth in
mathematics  does  not differ from truth in other sciences and those who
think  that  mathematical  truths stand alone precisely because they are
not about matters of fact or real existence. Plato, for whom all science
is  knowledge  of  purely intelligible objects, regards the mathematical
sciences  as  inferior  to  dialectic  in  the knowledge of such objects
"because  they  start  from hypotheses and do not ascend to principles."
The  students  of  such  sciences, Plato writes, "assume the odd and the
even  and  the  figures  and three kinds of angles and the like in their
several  branches of science; these are their hypotheses, which they and
everybody  are supposed to know, and therefore they do not deign to give
any  account of them either to themselves or others; but they begin with
them,  and  go on until they arrive at last, and in a consistent manner,
at their conclusion."

[85a]
For   Aristotle,   what  differentiates  mathematics  from  physics  and
metaphysics  is  the  special  character  of  its  objects.  Physics and
metaphysics  both  deal  with substances-aTtriey exist outside the mind,
whereas  the objects of mathematics are abstractions. Though figures and
numbers  "are  inseparable  in  fact" from material substances, they are
"separable   from   any   particular  kind  of  body  by  an  effort  of
abstraction." This does not deny, for example, that physical things have
perceptible  figures. It merely insists that the geometer does not treat
figures  as  sensible,  but as intelligible, that is, as abstracted from
matter.  Nevertheless,  the truths of mathematics, no less than those of
physics  and  metaphysics,  apply  to  reality.  All  three sciences are
further  alike in demonstrating their conclusions rationally rather than
by  experiment.  All  three employ induction to obtain their principles,
though metaphysics aione attains to the first principles of all science.
For   Kant,  "mathematical  cognition  is  cognition  by  means  of  the
construction  of  conceptions."  To explain this he cites the example of
the  construction  of  a  triangle.  "I  construct  a  triangle,  by the
presentation  of the object which corresponds to this conception, either
by  mere  imagination  (in  pure  intuition) or upon paper (in empirical
intuition); in both cases completely a priori without borrowing the type
of  that figure from any experience. . . . We keep our eye merely on the
act  of  the construction of the conception, and pay no attention to the
various  modes  of  determining it, for example, its size, the length of
its  sides,  the  size  of  its  angles." The a priori character of such
intuitions,  on  which  rests  the  a  priori  character of mathematical
truths,  does  not mean that mathematics has no relevance to experience.
Arithmetic  and  geometry  are like physics, according to Kant; they are
sciences of experience or nature but like pure (as opposed to empirical)
physics,  they  are  a priori sciences. Since Kant holds that experience
itself  is  constituted  by a priori forms of perception, he can ascribe
the validity which mathematics has for all possible experience to the "a
priori  intuition  of  the  pure  forms  of  phenomena—space  and time."
Bertrand Russell rejects this "Kantian view which
[asserts] that mathematical reasoning
is not strictly formal, but always uses intuitions,

[85b]
Chapter  52:  MATHEMATICS  51  i.e., the a priori knowledge of space and
time.  Thanks  to  the progress of Symbolic Logic . . . this part of the
Kantian  philosophy,"  Russell  holds,  "is  now  capable of a final and
irrevocable  refutation."  Leibnitz,  before  Kant,  had  advocated "the
general  doctrine  that  all  mathematics  is  a  deduction from logical
principles,"  but,  according  to Russell, he had failed to substantiate
this  insight, partly because of his "belief in the logical necessity of
Euclidean geometry." The same belief is, in Russell's opinion, the cause
of  Kant's  error.  "The actual propositions of Euclid ... do not follow
from the principles of logic alone; and the perception of this fact," he
thinks,  "led  Kant  to  his innovations in the theory of knowledge. But
since  the  growth  of non-Euclidean geometry, it has appeared that pure
mathematics  has  no  concern  with  the question whether the axioms and
propositions  of  Euclid  hold  of actual space or not." Russell asserts
that  "by the help of ten principles of deduction and ten other premises
of  a  general  logical  nature (e.g., 'implication is a relation'), all
mathematics  can be strictly and formally deduced." He regards "the fact
that  all  Mathematics  is  Symbolic  Logic"  as  "one  of  the greatest
discoveries  of  our  age;  and when this fact has been established, the
remainder  of  the principles of Mathematics consists in the analysis of
Symbolic  Logic  itself."  Though  this  view  of mathematics may not be
worked out in detail except in such treatises as Russell's Principles of
Mathematics  and  in the Principia Mathematica, on which he collaborated
with  Whitehead,  the  conception  of  mathematics  as  a  purely formal
science,  analogous  to  (if  not  identical with) logic, does have some
anticipations  in  the  great  books.  For James, as for Locke and Hume,
mathematics is strictly a science of the relations between ideas, not of
real  existences.  "As  regards  mathematical  judgments," James writes,
"they  are  all  rational  propositions' ... for they express results of
comparison  and  nothing  more.  The  mathematical  sciences  deal  with
similarities  and  equalities exclusively, and not with coexistences and
sequences."  Both James and Locke, however, differ from Hume in thinking
that  there  are  sciences other than those of number and quantity which
can demonstrate their conclusions with certitude.

[86a]
52  THE  GREAT  IDEAS tions of arithmetic and geometry 2. The objects of
mathematics:   number,   figure,   extension,   relation,   order  tion,
construction;  the  forms  of  time  and  space  irrational definitions,
postulates, axioms, hypotheses 3<r. Analysis and synthesis: function and
variable  3d.  Symbols  and  formulae:  the  attainment of generality 4.
Mathematical  techniques 4*7. The arithmetic and algebraic processes 4c.
The  use  of proportions and equations qd. The method of exhaustion: the
theory  of  limits  and  the  calculus  5^.  Mathematical  physics:  the
mathematical structure of nature

[86b]
The  foregoing discussion indicates some of ern philosophers, especially
Berkeley,  Hume, the differences among philosophers concerning and Kant,
raise  against  the  notion  of infinite the objects of mathematics, the
conditions  of  quantities  seem  to  favor  the ancient rather than its
truth,  and  its  relation  to  other  sciences.  the  modern  tenor  of
mathematical thought. These disagreements do not seem to take the Though
the  reasons  they  give  do  not  derive  form of an opposition between
ancient  and  from  the  same  principles as those to which Plato modern
thought,  like that between ancient and Aristotle appeal, they, like the
ancients, and modern mathematicians concerning the appear to insist upon
a  certain  type of intelnature of their science. The two oppositions do
ligibility  in the objects of mathematics, which not run parallel to one
another.  seems to have been sacrificed in the matheOn the contrary, the
objections  which modmatical development initiated by Descartes. OUTLINE
OF TOPICS PAGE i. The science of mathematics: its branches or divisions;
the  origin  and  development  of  mathematics 53 la. The distinction of
mathematics  from physics and metaphysics: its relation to logic lb. The
service of mathematics to dialectic and philosophy: its place in liberal
education 54 ic. The certainty and exactitude of mathematical knowledge:
the   a  priori  foundaid.  The  ideal  of  a  universal  mathesis:  the
unification  of  arithmetic  and  geometry  55  ia.  The apprehension of
mathematical  objects:  by intuition, abstraction, imagina2.b. The being
of  mathematical  objects: their real, ideal, or mental existence 56 ic.
Kinds  of  quantity:  continuous and discrete quantities; the problem of
the  3.  Method in mathematics: the model of mathematical thought 57 30.
The conditions and character of demonstration in mathematics: the use of
3#.  The  role  of  construction:  its  bearing  on  proof, mathematical
existence,  and  the scope of mathematical inquiry 58 4#. The operations
of geometry 59 5#. The art of measurement 60

[87a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  The  science  of  mathematics:  its  branches or
divisions;  the  origin  and  development  of  mathematics  5 Aeschylus:
Prometheus Bound
[442-472]
44c-d  esp  [459-460]  44d  6  Herodotus: History, bk ii, 70b-c 7 Plato:
Charmides,  7d-8a  /  Phaedrus,  138c-d / Gorgias, 254a-c / Republic, bk
vii,  391b397a / Timaeus, 451b-c / Statesman, 581a / Philebus, 633b-634b
8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  7 103c-d; ch 27 119b /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98ib i3~24] 500a; ch 9 [992*29-34] 510c; bk ii,
ch 3 513c-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812b-813d; bk 11, 831d-832a
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres, bk i, 510a-b 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch ii,
250c-d 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a  8,  ans 779c-780c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 72a-d; part iv, 268c-d; 269b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 46a-c

[87b]
Chapter  52:  MATHEMATICS  53 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 5c-d; 6c-7c; xiv,
31c32a  /  Discourse,  part i, 43b-c; part ii, 47b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  appendix,  370b-c  34 Newton: Principles, la-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, sect 7 360b-c; sect 15 363a-b 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect iv, div 20 458b; sect vii, div 48 470d-471c;
sect  xii,  div 131 508d-509a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 290a; 299b 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 5d-6b; 17d-18d; 46a-c; 68a-69c esp 68c-69a; 211c-218d
/ Practical Reason, 295b-d; 330d-331a /Judgement, 553d
[fn
1]  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 40 122d-123b / Philosophy
of  History,  part  i,  219a  53  James:  Psychology,  874a-878a la. The
distinction of mathematics from physics and metaphysics: its relation to
logic  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  75b / Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; bk vii,
391b-398c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 12
[77^7-34] 107a;
[78*10-13] 107b-c /
Physics, bk 11, ch 2
[i93b22-i94an]
270a-c; ch 9
[200*15-29]
277c-d / Heavens, bk i, ch 10
[279b32-28oan] 371b-c
/ Metaphysics, bk 1,

[88a]
(1.  The  science  of mathematics: its branches or divisions; the origin
and  development of mathematics, la. The distinction of mathematics from
physics and metaphysics: its relation to logic.) ch 8 [989^9-990^] 508a;
ch  9  [992^9^9]  510c-d;  bk  11,  ch  3 [995 ai5-2o] 513d; bk hi, ch 2
[996*21-36] 514d-515a; bk iv, ch i 522a; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk xi,
ch i [io59b i5~ 21] 587c-d; ch 3
[io6i a29-b i2] 589c-d; ch 4
589d-590a; ch 7 592b-593a; bk xii, ch 8
[i073b i-7J 603d / Soul, bk
i, ch i [403b io-i6] 632d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 8
[1 142*12-19]
391b  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk i, 5a-6a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q i, a i, rep 2 3b-4a; q 7, a 3, ans 32c-33c; q 44, a i, rep 3
238b-239a; q 85, a i, rep 2 451c-453c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii, q 9, a 2, rep 3 424b-425a; part hi, q 7, a 12, rep 1 754c-755c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b-57a;  58a-c;  59b-c;  72a-d; part iv,
267a-b;  268c-269a  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 190b-c 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3b; iv
5a-7d;  vin,  12b-13a;  xiv,  31c-32a  /  Discourse,  part 11, 46c-47a /
Meditations,  70b-c;  1,  76b-c  /  Objections  and  Replies, 128d-129a;
169c-170a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  445a-b  34  Newton:
Principles,  la-2a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 29
322c-323a;   ch   xii,   sect   7-13  360b362d  passim  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  vii, div 48 470d-471c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v, 335b337a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-9a; 15c-16c; 17d-19a; 211c-218d
esp 215d-217a; 243c-248d passim, esp 244d-245a, 248c / Practical Reason,
295b-d;  311d-313d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 376c-d 43
Mill:   Utilitarianism,  445b-c  53  James:  Psychology,  867a-870a  esp
869a-870a  lb.  The  service of mathematics to dialectic and philosophy:
its  place  in liberal education 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; bk
vii,   391b-398c;  bk  viii,  403a-d  /  Timaeus,  448b450a;  453b-454a;
458b-460b  /  Theaetetus,  515a-d  /  Philebus,  633a-635a / Laws, bk v,
691d-692a;  695c-697a; bk vii, 728b-730d 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk hi, ch
i
[299*1300*19]
390b-391c;  ch  7-8 396d-399a,c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch i
[329*524]  428d-429a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  5-6  503d-506b;  ch 8
[989b29-990*32]  508a-c;  ch  9]  510c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  8 [io73b 3-7] 9
[992*24-b

[88b]
b  54  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lb  to  1 603d; bk xiv, ch 3 622d-623d; ch 5-6
624d626d  / Soul, bk 1, ch 4 [4o8b33-409*9] 638d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
vi, ch 8
[1142*12-19]
391b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-813d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk
i,  5b-6a  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the Heavenly Spheres, bk i,
510a-b  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 863b-872b passim 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  3 10d-lla 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 30
26b-c  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 16, 644d-645d; ch 38-39 654b-655b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 56b-57a; 59b c; part 11, 164c; part iv,
268c-d;  269b  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 27d; bk iv,
278b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 70a-d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second
day,   190b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a-b;  46a-c  31
Descartes:  Rules,  11  2a-3b; iv 5a-7d; xiv, 29a-b / Discourse, part i,
43b-c;  pari  ii,  46c-48b  / Geometry, bk i, 297a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part i, appendix, 370b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-2 171a-172b / Geometrical
Demonstration,  442a-446b  34  Newton:  Principles,  lb-  2a  36  Swift:
Gulliver, part hi, 97a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 46a-c; 211c 218d
esp  215a-c  /  Judgement,  551a-552c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
47b-48d 53 James: Psychology, 882a-883a \c. The certainty and exactitude
of  mathematical  knowledge:  the a priori foundations of arithmetic and
geometry  7 Plato: Philebus, 633b-634b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch 27 119b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982*25-28]
500c; bk 11, ch 3 513c-d; bk xiii, ch 3 609a610a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 3
[i094b i2-28]
339d-340a  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-814b  16  Ptolemy:
Almagest, bk i, 5b-6a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 59b-c; part iv,
268c-d;  269b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 252a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 61b-c; 65b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 59 112b-c
31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b; iv 5a-7d / Discourse, part 1, 43b-c; part
11,  47b-c;  part  iv,  52d-53a; part v, 54c / Meditations, 1, 76b-c; v,
93a-95b  /  Objections  and Replies, 128a-129a / Geometry, bk 11, 304a31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  370b-c  33  Pascal: Pensees, 1-2
171a-172b; 33 176b / Geometrical Demonstration, 430a-434a; 442a446b

[89a]
Id  to 2a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch ii, sect 9-10 311b-c;
ch  in,  sect  18-20 317d319c passim; sect 29 322c-323a; ch iv, sect 6-9
325a-326b;  ch  xii,  sect  1-8  358CJ360C passim, esp sect 7 360b-c; ch
xiitTsect  3 364a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 118 436b-c 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20 458a-b; sect vii, div 48 470d-471c;
sect  xii,  div  131 508d-509a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-8d;  15c-16c;  31b  d; 35b-36a; 46a-b; 68a 69c;
86b-c;  110a; 211c218d / Practical Reason, 295b-d; 312c-d; 330d -33 la /
Pre/. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 376c-d / Science of Right, 399a b
/  Judgement,  551a-552a 43 Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a; number 85,
257d  258d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  283d  284b  / Utilitarianism, 445b-c 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref, la; 2b 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  173a-b 53 James: Psychology, 175a- 176a; 874a 878a; 879b 882a Id.
The  ideal  of  a  universal mathesis: the unification of arithmetic and
geometry  7 Plato: Meno, 180d 182c / Theaetetus, 515a-c b20-5*i4] 9a-c 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[4
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  1,  ch 7 103c-d / Metaphysics, bk 11, ch 3
513c-d; BK VI, ch 1
[1026*18-27]
548b; bk xi, ch 7
[io64b6-9J
592d-593a; bk xiii, ch 2
[1077*9-10] 608b;
ch 3 [io77b i7-23] 609a 11 Euclid: Elements, bk ii 30a-40b; bk v 81a98b;
bk  vii,  definitions, 16-19 127b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 831d
841c 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1012b1014b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  58a-c 31 Descartes: Rules la-40a,c esp 11, 2d-3b, iv 5a-7d, vi
8a-10a,  xiv-xxi 28a-40a,c / Discourse, part 11, 46c-48b; part hi, 50d /
Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 295a-298b 33 Pascal: Arithmetical Triangle,
447a-456a  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 109b-110a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
68a-69c  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  172a-173b  2.  The  objects of
mathematics:   number,  figure,  extension,  relation,  order  7  Plato:
Charmides, 7d-8a / Meno, 176d-177a; 180b-183c / Republic, bk vi, 387b-c;
bk vii, 393d / Philebus, 633d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6 9a-lla; ch 8
[ioa i 1-16] 15a-b / Physics, bk iv, ch ii [2i9b5~
8]  299b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  hi,  ch 1 [996*1315] 514c; ch 5 520c-521b
passim; bk vii, ch 2
[i028bi8-28] 551a-b; bk xi, ch 3 [io6i a29-b
4] 589c

[89b]
Chapter  52:  MATHEMATICS 55 ch 2 [i355b26-32] 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk
595b  11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  i,  BK VII, DEFINITIONS 1, definitions
la-2a;  2 127a; bk xi, definitions, 1 301a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk
i,  811d-812b  16  Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-b 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7,
a  3, ans 32c-33c; a 4, ans 33d-34c; q 30, a i, rep 4 167a-168a; q 85, a
i,  rep  2  451c-453c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 72a-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 46a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 3a-b; iv, 7a-b;
vi  8a10a;  xiv, 30d-33b / Discourse, part ii, 47b-d; part iv, 52d-53a /
Meditations,  1,  76b-c  / Objections and Replies, 217b-d / Geometry, bk
11,  304a-306a;  316a-b  34  Newton:  Principles,  lab  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xii,  sect 3-5 147d-148b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  1  18-132 436b-439c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
xii,  div  131  508d-509a  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 46a-c; 62a-d; 68a-69c;
211c-213a  53 James: Psychology, 874a-878a esp 874a 2a. The apprehension
of   mathematical   objects:  by  intuition,  abstraction,  imagination,
construction;  the  forms  of  time and space 7 Plato: Meno, 180b-183c /
Republic,  bk  vi,  387b-d;  bk  vii,  393a-394a  / Theaetetus, 535b-c 8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c / Metaphysics, bk ix,
ch  9  [1051*2333]  577b-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  609a-610a  /  Memory  and
Reminiscence,  ch  2  [452^-23]  694b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[ui2b2o-24]  358d; bk vi, ch 8 [1142*13-19] 391b 11 Euclid: Elements, bk
i,  postulates,  1-3  2a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i,
rep  2  3b-4a;  q  85,  a i, rep 2 451c-453c 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv-xv
28a-33d  /  Discourse, part 11, 46d / Meditations, v, 93a-d; vi, 96b-d /
Objections  and  Replies,  217b-d;  218c; 228c-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-2
171a-172b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 16 99b-c; bk
ii, ch xiii, sect 5-6 149b-d; ch xvi 165c-167c passim 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  15-16  409a-d;  sect 12-13 415b-c; sect 118122
436b-437c  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect xii, div 122 505c-d; div
124-125  506a-507a esp div 125, 507b [fn 1] 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 16a-c;
17d-18d;  24d-25b; 31b-d; 35b-36a; 46a-c; 55c-56a; 62a-d; 68a69c; 86b-c;
87b-c; 110a; 211c-212a / Practical

[90a]
(2.  The  objects  of  mathematics: number, figure, extension, relation,
order.  2a.  The  apprehension  of  mathematical  objects: by intuition,
abstraction,  imagination,  construction;  theforms  of time and space?)
Reason,  295b-  d  /  Science  of  Right, 399a / Judgement, 551a-553c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  121a-b  53 James: Psychology,
302a-304b; 549a-552a esp 552b
[fn i]; 869a-870a; 874b-878a passim
2b.  The  being  of  mathematical  objects: their real, ideal, or mental
existence  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  228b-230c;  242c-243c  / Republic, bk vi,
387b-c; bk vii, 391b-398c / Theaetetus, 535b-c; 541b-d / Sophist, 562c /
Philebus,   636b-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810b  8  Aristotle:  Prior
Analytics,  bk  i, ch 41 [49^237] 68c / Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 10
[76b39a6-io]  108c;  ch  18  [81*40b 3] 105d; ch 13 L79 a 77 5] 110b-c /
Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[1 43^1-33]
197b-c / Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[i93b23-i94au]
270a-c;  bk  hi, ch 5 [204^-34] 282a-b; bk iv, ch 1 [2o8b i9-24] 287b c;
ch 11 [2i9b5-8] 299b; ch 14
[223^1-29] 303a
/ Heavens, bk hi, ch i
[299
ai-300a i9] 390b-391c; ch 7
[306*1b2] 397b-d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 5 [985^2986a2i] 503d-504b; ch 6
[987^0-34]
505c506a; ch 8 [989b29-99oa32] 508a-c; ch 9 [99i b 9-992b i8] 509d-511a;
bk hi, ch 1
[995
18] 514a;
[996*13-15] 514c; ch 2
[996*22-}6]
514d-515a;
[997
b i2-998*i9] 516b-d; ch 5
[iooi b26]-CH
6
[ioo2b25]
520c-521c; bk vii, ch 2
[io28b i8-28]
551a-b; ch 10
[io35b
32-1036*12] 559b-c; ch ii
[io36b32-io37*4]
560b-c; bk xi, ch i [i059b2-i3] 587b-c; ch 2
[io6oa36-b i9] 588c-d; ch 3 [io6i a29-b
4J 589c; bk xii, ch 1 [1069*30-37] 598b; bk xii, ch 10
[i075b25]-BK
xiii, ch 3
[io78b
5]  606c-610a;  bk xiii, ch 6-9 611d-618c; bk xiv 619b, d626d / Soul, bk
in, ch 7
[43i b
i 3-19] 664b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[i096ai7-i9]
341b;  bk  vi,  ch  8  [1142*13-19]  391b  11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk i,
postulates, 1-3 2a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-812a; 813d-814b
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 19 76a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk
ii,  ch  38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 3, rep 4
25a-d;  q  10,  a  6,  ans 45c-46d; q ii, a 1, rep 1 46d-47d; a 3, rep 2
49a-c;  q  30, a i, rep 4 167a-168a; q 44, a i, rep 3 238b-239a; q 85, A
I, REP 2 451c-453c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, a 12, rep
1  754c-755c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  83,  a  2, ans 976c-978c; a 3, rep 2
978c-980d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiv,  30b  32a  / Discourse, part iv,
52d-53a / Meditations, 1, 76b-c; v, 93a-d; 96a / Objections and Replies,
169c-170a; 217b-d; 218c; 228c-229a

[90b]
56 THE GREAT IDEAS 2b to 2c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 370b-c
33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  373a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi,
sect  6  113c-d;  bk hi, ch hi, sect 19 259c260a; bk iv, ch iv, sect 5-8
324d-325c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 12-16 408a-409d;
sect  12-13  415b-c;  sect  1  18-128 436b-438d passim, esp sect 121-122
436d-437c,  sect  125-126  438a-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv,
div  20  458a-b; sect xii, div 122 505c-d; div 124-125 506a 507a esp div
125,   507b   [fn   1]   42   Kant:  Pure  Reason,  16a-c;  24a-33d  esp
31d32c;35b-36a;                    46a-c;                   62a-d;87b-c;
91c-d;94b95a;211c-213aesp211c-212a/Prtf<r//az/fo^077,  295b-d;  312c-d /
Judgement,  551a-553c  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  183a-b 53 James:
Psychology.  874a-878a  esp  875a-876b; 880b-881a 2c. Kinds of quantity:
continuous  and  discrete  quantities;  the  problem of the irrational 7
Plato:  Meno,  180d-181c  /  Republic,  bk  viii,  403a-d  / Parmenides,
499d-500c  /  Theaetetus,  515a-c  8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5 ^32-4^]
8a-b;  ch 6 [4^3-^14] 9a-c; ch 8 [iob26-u a i4] 15d16b / Physics, bk iv,
ch 4
[2ii a29~b
4] 290c; ch 5
[2i2b3-6] 291d; bk v, ch 3 [227*10-34]
307d-308b; bk vi, ch 1-2 312b,d-315d / Heavens, bk i, ch i
[268*6-11] 359a; bk hi,
ch  1  [299  ai-30oa  i9]  390b-391c; ch 7 [306*26b2] 397c-d; ch 8 [3o6b
i7-26] 398a / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[3i5b25-3i7a i7]
411b-413a; bk ii, ch 10
[337^2-34] 439b-c
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [983^1-20] 501b-c; bk 11, ch 2
[994
b23~26] 513a; bk hi, ch 4
[iooi b7-25] 520b-c; bk v, ch6 [ioi5b35-ioi6a
17] 536b-c: [ioi6b6-32] 537a-b; ch 13 [1020s 9-14] 541b; bk viii, ch 3
[i043b33-i044*i4]
568b-d; bk x, ch i [i052a i5-37] 578b,d; ch 3
[1054^0-29]
581a; bk xi, ch 12
[io68b261069*18] 597d-598a,c; bk xiv, ch
i  fio87b34io88 a i4l 620a-b 11 Euclid: Elements, bk v, definitions, 4-5
81a;  bk  vii,  definitions,  2 127a; 20 127b; bk x 191a-300a esp prop i
191b-192a  11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, assumptions, 5 404b
/  Spirals,  484b  /  Quadrature  of the Parabola, 527a-b 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic, bk i, 811d-812a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7, 52c
/ Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 139d / Sixth Ennead, tr 1, ch 4 253b-254b;
tr  hi, ch 13, 287d-288a; ch 15 289ac 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 3, a i, rep 1 14b-15b; q 7, a 3, rep 3-4 32c-33c; a 4, ans 33d-34c;
q  ii,  a  2,  rep 2 47d-48d; q 30, a 3, ans 169b-170c; q 42, a i, rep i
224b225d;  q  48.  a 4, rep 3 262a-263a; q 52, a 1 278d-279b 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,

[91a]
3  to 3a Chapter 52: MATHEMATICS 57 q 24, a 4, rep i 491d-492b; part hi,
q  7,  a  12,  rep  1 754c-755c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
139c153a passim; third day, 201a-202a ^^^^ 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
iv,  52cT53a  / Meditations, v, 93b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15,
schol 360b361d 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 434a439b 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk i, lemma i 25a; lemma 11, schol, 31a 32a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xv, sect 9 164b-d; ch xvi, sect 3-4 165d-166b
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  123-132  437c-439c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  66d-72c;  124d-125b; 135a-137a,c; 152a-d; 161d-163a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  469a-d 3. Method in mathematics: the model of
mathematical  thought 7 Plato: Meno, 179d 183a / Republic, bk yi, 387b-d
/ Theaetetus, 515b-c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 41
[49
15  32-50*4] 68c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 10 104d-105d / Physics,
bk ii, ch 9 [200*15-29] 277c-d / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996*2236]
514d-515a; bk ix, ch 9
[1051*22-34]
577bc; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i*29-b
4]  589c;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  609a-610a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[ni2b2o-24J 358d 11 Archimedes: Method 569a-592a esp 569b570a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 56b; 58ac; 59bc 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth
day,  252a-b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 65b / Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph  59 112b-c 31 Descartes: Rules la-40a,c esp 11 2a-3b, iv, 5c-7d,
xiv-xxi  28a-40a,c  /  Discourse,  part ii, 46c-48b / Meditations, 73a /
Objections  and  Replies,  128a-129a  /  Geometry  295a-353b  esp  bk 1,
295a-298b,  bk  ii,  304a-306a, 316a-317a, bk in, 331b, 353a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  1,  appendix,  370b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-3 171a-172b /
Geometrical Demonstration, 430a-434a; 442a-446b / Arithmetical Triangle,
451b-452a; 458b-459b; 464a466a 34 Newton: Principles, bk ii, lemma 2 and
schol  168a-170a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch ii, sect 9-10
311b-c;  ch in, sect 18-20 317d319c passim; sect 29-30 322c-323c passim;
ch  iv, sect 6-9 325a-326b; ch vii, sect ii, 340c-341a; ch xii, sect 1-8
358c-360c  passim;  sect  14-15  362d-363b;  ch  xvii,  sect  ii 378b 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 12 408a-b; sect 19 410c; sect
118-132 436b439c passim

[91b]
35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20 458a-b; sect vii, div 48
470d-471c;  sect  xii,  div  131  508d-509a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
118b-119a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-8d;  17d-18d; 46a-b; 211c-218d /
Practical  Reason,  302d-303b;  330d-331a  / Science of Right, 399a-b 43
Mill:  Liberty,  283d-284a 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2b
45  Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
469a-  d;  epilogue ii, 695bc 53 James: Psychology, 175a-176a; 874a-878a
3<z.  The  conditions and character of demonstration in mathematics: the
use of definitions, postulates, axioms, hypotheses 7 Plato: Meno, 183b-c
/  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d388a;  bk  vii,  397c-d  8  Aristotle:  Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 41
[49
b 32-37] 68c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[71*1-16] 97a-b; ch
2
[72*22-24] 98d; ch 5
101b-102b; ch 10 104d-105d; ch 12 106c-107c; ch 23
[84b6-9]
115b-c; ch 24
[85*20-31]
116b c; [85V14] H6d-117a; [86*22-30] 117d118a; ch 31 [87b33-39] 120a; bk
ii,  CH3 191*15] 124b; ch 7 [92b i2-25] 126c-d; ch 9 [93 b2i25] 128a-b /
Topics, bk i, ch i
[101*5-17]
143c-d;  bk  v, ch 4 [132*32-34] 183b; bk vi, ch 4 [i4i b3-22]194d-195a;
bk vii,ch3 [153*611] 208a-b; bk viii, ch i [157*1-3] 213a; ch 3
[i58b29-i59*i] 215c / Sophistical Refutations,
ch 11
[I7i b i2-i8]236b;[i7i b34-i72*7]236d/
Physics, bk 11, ch 9
[200*15-29]
277c-d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 4
[302b27-3i]
394a / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996*21-36] 514d515a;
[996
b i8-2i] 515b; ch 3
[998*25-27]
517a; bk v, ch 3 [ioi4*36-b i] 534c; bk vii, ch 10
[1036*2-13] 559b-c; bk xi, ch 3 [1061*
29-b 4] 589c; ch 4 [106^17-25] 589d-590a; ch 7 [io63b36-io64*9] 592b; bk
xiii, ch 2
[1077**
i]-ch 3
[1078*32]
608d-609d; bk xiv, ch 2
[1089*22-26] 621c-d
9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 6
[742b23-33] 283d-284a / Ethics, bk
vii, ch 8
[1151*15-19] 402a
11  Euclid:  Elements la-396b esp bk i, definitions-common notions la-2a
11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, definitions-assumptions 404a-b
/ Spirals, 484b / Quadrature ofthe Parabola, 527a-b / Method, 569b-570a;
prop  i 571a-572b esp 572b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 85, a
8,  rep  2  460b-461b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58a-c; 59b-c 28
Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, lb-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day,
252a-b  31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 3a; xiv-xxi 28a-40a,c / Discourse, part
i,  43b-c;  part  ii, 46d; 47b-c; part iv, 52d-53a / Meditations, 70b-d;
73a;

[92a]
(3.  Method  in  mathematics: the model of mathematical thought. 3a. The
conditions  and  character  of  demonstration in mathematics: the use of
definitions,  postulates, axioms, hypotheses.) v, 93a-d / Objections and
Replies,  128a-d  /  Geometry,  bk  ii,  304a-b;  316a-b; bk hi, 353a 33
Pascal: Pensees, 1-5 171a-173a / Vacuum, 365b-366a; 373a-b / Geometrical
Demonstration,  430a-434a; 442a-446b / Arithmetical Triangle, 451b-452a;
458b-459b;  464a-466a  34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b 34 Huygens: Light,
pref,  551b-552a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi, sect 4
166a-b;  bk  iv, ch i, sect 9 308c-309b; ch 11, sect 9-10 311b-c; ch in,
sect  29,  322c;  ch vii, sect 11, 340c-341a; ch xii, sect 1-8 358c-360c
passim;  sect  14-15 362d-363b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect
12   408a-b;   sect   15-16  409a-d;  sect  118  436bc  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  vii, div 48 470d-471c; sect xii, div 131 508d-509a
42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 17d-18d; 46a-b; 68a-69c; 91c-d; 110a; 110d-110a;
211c-218d  / Practical Reason, 302d-303b; 330d-331a / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  376c-d  43  Federalist:  number 31, 103c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 445 b-c 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2b 53
James:  Psychology,  869a-870a;  874a-878a 3b. The role of construction:
its   bearing  on  proof,  mathematical  existence,  and  the  scope  of
mathematical inquiry 7 Plato: Meno, 180b-182c / Republic, bk vt, 387bc 8
Aristotle: Heavens, bk i, ch 10
[279^228oa i2] 371b-c
/ Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 9
[105^22-34] 577b-c
11  Euclid:  Elements, bk i, postulates, 1-3 2a; prop 1 2b-3a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  iv,  267a-b  31  Descartes:  Rules, xiv-xvni 28a-39d /
Geometry,  bk ii, 304a-306a; 316a-b; bk hi, 331b-332b 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
373a-b 34 Newton: Principles, la-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 31b-d; 68a-69c;
86b-c;  91c-d;  94b-95a;  211c-215a; 217c-d / Science of Right, 399a-b /
Judgement,  551a-553c  53  James:  Psychology,  673b  3c.  Analysis  and
synthesis:  function  and  variable  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk hi, ch 3
[ui2b2o-24]  358d  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder, bk ii, prop 1
434b-435b;  prop  3-7  437a-443b  /  Method,  569b-570a; prop i, 572b 11
Apollonius: Conies, bk ii, prop 44-47 710b-

[92b]
b  b 58 THE GREAT IDEAS 3b to 4a 713a; prop 49-51 714b-726a; bk hi, prop
5456  793b-798b  31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 5c-7a; vi 8a-10a; xn, 20d-23b;
24a-b;  xm  25b-27d;  xiv,  31a-33b;  xvi-xxi 33d-40a,c / Objections and
Replies,  128a-d / Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 296b297b, 298b-304a," bk
ii,  308a-314b  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration, 430a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk i, lemma 19 57b-58b / Optics, bk in, 543a35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv, ch xii, sect 15 363a-b; ch xvii, sect ii 378b 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of Chemistry , pref , la; 2b 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  172a-173b;  196a251b  3d. Symbols and formulae: the attainment of
generality  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  41 b32-37] 68c
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
[49
10  [76b39-77 a2] 105d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk 11, 832a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  pari  1.  56a  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiv-xxi  28a-40a,c  /
Discourse, part 11, 46d; 47b-d Geometry 295a353b esp bk i, 295a-298b. bk
ii,  314a-b,  bk  hi,  353a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi,
sect  19  318b-319a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 16 409b-d;
sect  121-122  436d-437c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  68a-69c;  211d-212a;
212d-213a  45  Fourier:  Theory of Heat, 172b 173b; 181a-b; 233b-240b 4.
Mathematical  techniques  4a.  The  arithmetic and algebraic processes 8
Aristotle:  Topics, bk vm, ch 14 [16^23-28] 222b 11 Euclid: Elements, bk
vei-ix  127a-190b  11  Archimedes:  Measurement  of  a  Circle,  prop  3
448b-451b  /  Conoids  and  Spheroids,  lemma 455b-456a; lemma to prop 2
456b-457b  /  Spirals,  prop io-ii 488a-489b / SandReckoner 520a-526b 11
Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 814b-821d 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 990a23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56a;  58a-b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
second  day,  193b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xvi  33d-35c; xvm 36b39d /
Discourse,  part  ii, 46d; 47b-d / Geometry, bk 1, 295a -296a 33 Pascal:
Arithmetical  Triangle  447a-473b  esp 451b-452a, 458b-459b, 464a-466a /
Correspondence   with   Fermat   474a-487a   passim   35   Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvii,  sect  11  378b  35  Berkeley:  Human
Knowledge, intro, sect 19 410c; sect 121-122 436d-437c

[93a]
Wto  5  Chapter  52:  MATHEMATICS  59  42  Kant: Pwre /toz*?rt, 17d-18d;
68a-69c;  212d213a;  217c-d  53  James:  Psychology,  874b-876b  4b. The
operations  of  geometry  7  Plato:  Meno,  180b-183c / Republic, bk vi,
387b-c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[7
b29~33]  12c-d  11 Euclid: Elements, bk i-iv la-80b esp bk i, postulates
2a,  prop  1-4  2b-4b, prop 9-12 7a-9a, prop 22-23 13b-15a, prop 31 19b,
prop  42  24b-25a,  prop  44-46  25b-28a,  bk  ii,  prop 14 40a-b; bk vi
99a-126a  esp  prop 9-13 106b-109a, prop 18 112a-b, prop 25 119a-b, prop
28-29   121a-123a;  bk  xi-xiii  301a-396b  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and
Cylinder, bk i-ii 403a-446a / Measurement of a Circle 447a451b / Conoids
and  Spheroids 452a-481b / Spirals 482a-501a / Quadrature ofthe Parabola
527a-537b / Boo{ of Lemmas 561a 568b 11 Apollonius: Conies 603a-804b esp
bk  i,  prop  11-13  615a-620a  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
149d-150d 31 Descartes: Rules, xvi 33d-35c; xvm 36b39d / Discourse, part
iv,  52d-53a / Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 295a-296a, 297b 298b, bk 11,
304a-308a  34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b;  bk i, lemma 15prop 29, schol
50a-75b  esp  lemma  19  57b58b  42 Kant: Judgement, 551a-552a 53 James:
Psychology, 550b
[fn
1]; 673b; 876b878a 4c. The use of proportions and equations 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 17
[99*8-10] 135a / Topics, bk viii, ch 3 [i58b29~
35] 215c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 11, ch 6
[1106*26-36]
351d-352a; bk v, ch 3
[ii3i a30-b i5] 378d379b
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk v-vi 81a-126a esp bk v, definitions, 5 81a, 7
81a-b,  bk  vi, prop 23 117a-b; bk vii, definitions, 20 127b; prop 11-14
134b-136a;  prop  17-22 137a-140a; prop 33 145a-146a; bk viii, prop 1-13
150a161b;  prop  18-27 163b-170a; bk ix, prop 8-13 174a-180a; prop 15-19
181a-183b; prop 35-36 188b-190b; bk x, prop 5-9 195a-198b; prop ii 199b;
prop  14 201a-202a; bk xi, prop 25 320b-321b; prop 32-34 327b-332b; prop
37  335b-336a;  bk  xii  338a-368b 11 Archimedes: Conoids and Spheroids,
prop  4  459b-460b 11 Apollonius: Conies 603a-804b passim 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic, bk i-ii, 821d-831d; bk ii, 841c-848d 16 Kepler: Harmonies of
the  World,  1012b1014b  31  Descartes:  Rules, vi 8a-10a; xiv, 28b-29a;
xviii-xxi 36b-40a,c / Discourse, part ii,

[93b]
47b-d  /  Geometry  295a-353b  esp  bk  hi, 332b341b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk xiv, 590a-c 4d. The method of exhaustion: the theory of limits
and  the  calculus  11 Euclid: Elements, bk x, prop i 191b-192a; bk xii,
prop  2 339a-340b; prop 10-12 351b359a; prop 18 367a-368b 11 Archimedes:
Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk i, assumptions, 5 404b; prop 13-14 411a-414a;
prop 33-34 424b-427a; prop 42 431b-432b; prop 44 433a-b / Measurement of
a  Circle,  prop  1 447a-448a / Conoids and Spheroids, prop 4 459a-460b;
prop  21-22  470a-471b;  prop  25-30  473a-479b  /  Spirals,  prop 18-20
492b-495b;  prop 24-27 496b-500a / Equilibrium of Planes, bk i, prop 6-7
503b-504b  /  Quadrature  of  the  Parabola  5  2  7a-53  7b esp prop 16
533b-534a,  prop 24 537a-b / Method 569a-592a passim 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  v,  973a-975a;  979b983b  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day,
193b-194d;  third  day,  205b-d;  224b-c  31 Descartes: Geometry, bk ii,
316b-317a   33   Pascal:  Equilibrium  of  Liquids,  395a-b  34  Newton:
Principles,  bk  i,  lemma  i-ii  and schol 25a-32a esp lemma ii, schol,
31a-b  bk  11,  lemma  2  and schol 168a-170a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
172b;  177a;  181a-b  221a-248b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d
epilogue  ii,  695b  5.  The  applications  of  mathematics  to physical
phenomena:  the  utility  of  mathematics  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk vii,
391b-398c;  bk  viii,  403b-d;  bk  ix,  424d-425b  / Timaeus, 448b450a;
453b-454a  /  Statesman,  585a-b  /  Philebus,  633c-d  /  Laws,  bk  v,
691d-692a; 695c697a; bk vii, 728b-730d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch 9
[76*3-25] 104b-d; ch 13 [78b3i-79*i6] 108b-c;
ch 27 [87*32-33] 119b / Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[194*7-11]
270b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  5 333a-d / Heavens, bk ii, ch 14 [297*4-7] 3^8c /
Meteorology,  bk in, ch 3 477a-478a; ch 5 480a481c / Metaphysics, bkiii,
ch2  [997  b  i  2-998*1  9]  516b-d  9 Aristotle: Gait of Animals, ch 9
247a-248a  /  Politics, bk v, ch 12 [1316*1-17] 518d-519a 11 Archimedes:
Equilibrium   of   Planes   502a519b  /  Floating  Bodies  538a-560b  11
Nicomachus:   Arithmetic,   bk  i,  812d-813a  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,
252a-255a 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 510b
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 964b-965a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par
3-6 27c28c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29 650d651c

[94a]
(5.  The  applications of mathematics to physical phenomena: the utility
of mathematics.) 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 35, a 8, ans
779c-780c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 9, a 2, rep 3
424b-425a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 73b; part iv, 267a-b; 268c-d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv, 278b 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first  day,  131d132a;  second  day-fourth day 178a-260a,c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  46b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a-b;
xiv,  31b-d  /  Discourse,  part  i,  43b-c  /  Objections  and Replies,
169c-170a / Geometry, bk ii, 322b-331a 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; def
viii  7b-8a;  corol  11  15a-16b;  bk  i,  prop  69,  schol, 131a; bk in
269a-372a 34 Huygens: Light 551a-619b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
120  436d; sect 131 439b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 27
460c-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 78b; part hi, 94b103a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  661c-662c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 68a-69c / Practical
Reason, 300d [fn 1]; 330d-331a / Judgement, 551a-552a 45 Fourier: Theory
of Heat, 169a-173b; 175b; 177a-251b esp 183a-184a 45 Faraday: Researches
in Electricity, 831b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d; bk xiv,
589c-590c; 609b; epilogue ii, 694d-695c 53 James: Psychology, 348a-359a;
882a-884b  5a.  The  art of measurement 5 Aristophanes: Birds [992-1020]
555a-b  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  70b-c;  bk iv, 139b-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  x,  431b-d / Statesman, 594a-595a / Philebus, 633a-634d /
Laws,  bk  v,  691d-692a;  695c-697a  8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 12
[22ob  i5-3i]  300c-d;  ch  14  [223b  i2-224a  i]  303c-d; bk vii, ch 4
330d-333a / Heavens, bk ii, ch 14
[298*15-20] 389d
/ Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2 b27~33] 516c; bk v, ch 6
[ioi6b i8-3i]
537b; bk x, ch 1
[io52b i5-io53a3i]
579a580a
[997
11 Euclid: Elements, bk v 81a-98b esp definitions, 5 81a, 7 81b; bk vii,
definitions,  20  127b 11 Archimedes: Sand-Reckoner 520a-526b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk vi [847-853] 233b-234a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 14a- 28b;
bk  ii,  38b-39b;  bk  v, 143a-144a; 165a-176a; bk viiviii, 233a-258b 16
Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 532b-556b; bk ii,
558b-559b; 567b; 586b-621b; bk iv, 705a-725a

[94b]
60 THE GREAT IDEAS 5a to 5b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a
5,  rep  2  17c-18b;  q  10, a 6, ans and rep 4 45c46d; q 66, a 4, rep 3
348d-349d  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  iv,  85c-89c;  bk v, 92a-95a 28
Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, first day, 136d-137c; 148d-149c; 164a-166c;
third day, 207d-208c 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 286c-288c 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  44-48 175d-188b 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv,
31b-33b  / Geometry, bk 1, 296a 33 Pascal: Great Experiment 382a-389b 34
Newton: Principles, la-b; laws of motion, schol, 20a-22a; bk ii, general
schol  211b219a;  prop  40,  schol  239a-246b  34  Huygens: Light, ch i,
554b-557b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi, sect 8 167c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 14b 42 Kant: Judgement, 497a-498d esp
498b-d  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry, part i, 14a-c; 33b-36a;
41a-44d; part hi, 87d-90a; 91a-95a; 96b-103b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
184b-185b;  249a251b 50 Marx: Capital, 20b 5b. Mathematical physics: the
mathematical structure of nature 7 Plato: Timaeus, 448b-450a; 453b-454a;
458a-460b  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 9 104b-d; ch 13
[78b3i-79a i6] 108b-c / Physics, bk 11, ch 2
[194*7-11] 270b-c
/ Heavens, bk ai-300a i9] 390b-391c / Metahi, ch 1
[299
physics,  bk 1, ch 9 [992*29^9] 510c-d; bk ii, ch 3 [995*15-17] 513d; bk
hi, ch 2 [997 b i2a i9] 516b-d; bk xii, ch 8
[io73b i-i7]
603d-604a;  bk xiii, ch 3 609a-610a 998 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i,
812b-d;  813d814a  16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5b-6a 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  iv,  863b-872b  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1023b-1080b passim 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 1, rep 2 3b-4a; q 32, a i, rep
2  175d-178a;  part  1-11,  q  35, a 8, ans 779c-780c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 9, a 2, rep 3 424b-425a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i, 72a-d; part iv, 268c-d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
131b-132a;  133b;  fourth  day,  245b-d; 252a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  46b-c / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 8 140b 31 Descartes: Rules,
iv,  7a-c  /  Discourse,  part  1,  43b-c; part hi, 50d / Objections and
Replies, 169c-170a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 119 195a

[95a]
5b  Chapter  52:  MATHEMATICS  61 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; def viii
7b-8a;  42  Kant: Judgement, 551a-552a bk i, 111b; prop 69, schol, 131a;
bk  hi,  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat, 169a-b; 172a-173b; 269a; general
schol,   371b-372a  175b;  177a;  183a-184a  34  Huygens:  Light,  pref,
551b-552a ^-^ 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 831b-c 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, sect 119 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 436c
121a-b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 53 James: Psychology,
126a-b;  348a-359a;  675b;  27 460c-d 876a-b; 882a 884b CROSS-REFERENCES
For:  The  relation  of  mathematics  to  other  arts  and sciences, see
Astronomy 2c; Mechanics 3; Metaphysics 3b; Philosophy ib; Physics ib, 3;
Science  5c. The quality of necessity in mathematical truth, and for the
theory  of the a priori foundations ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are
works  not included in Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but relevant to
the  idea  and  topics  with  which  this chapter deals. These works are
divided  into  two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors  represented in this
collection. II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works
cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the
last chapter of The Great Ideas. J. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk i, ch
5  ** . An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's Aquinas. On the Trinity
of  Boethius,  qq  5-6  Philosophy,  ch  27  Hobbes.  Six Lessons to the
Savilian  Professors  of  Mathematics **-• Newton. The Method of Fluxions
and Infinite Series R. Bacon. Opus Majus, part iv . Universal Arithmetic
Oreme.  Treatise  on  the  Breadth  of Forms Berkeley. A Defence of Free
Thinking  in  MatheSuarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  iv (9), x (3),
matics  xl (3, 5-6), xli (4), xlvii (13) Kant. Prolegomena to Any Future
Metaphysic,   par   Barrow.   Lectiones  Mathematicae  6-13  .  Thirteen
Geometrical  Lectures  Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind, intro Leibnitz.
Early Mathematical Manuscripts

[95b]

[96a]
62  THE GREAT IDEAS Saccheri. Euclides Vindicatus (Vindication of Euclid)
Voltaire.  "Geometry,"  in A Philosophical Dictionary Euler. Elements of
Algebra  Carnot.  Reflexions sur la metaphysique du calcul infinitesimal
Gauss.  Untersuchungen uber hohere Arithmetic Schopenhauer. The World as
Will  and  Idea,  vol  ii,  sup,  ch  13  De  Morgan.  On  the Study and
Difficulties  of Mathematics  Comte.  The Philosophy of Mathematics . The
Positive  Philosophy,  bk  i  Lobachevski. Geometrical Researches on the
Theory  of  Parallels Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,
VOL  I, BK II, CH 11-12, 14 G. Peacock. A Treatise on Algebra B. Peirce.
An  Elementary Treatise on Curves, Functions, and Forces W. R. Hamilton.
Lectures   on  Quaternions  Riemann.  Uber  die  Hypothesen  welche  der
Geometrie  zu  Grunde  liegen  (  The  Hypotheses  of Geometry) Boole. A
Treatise  on  Differential  Equations  .  A  Treatise on the Calculus of
Finite  Differences  Dedekind. Essays on the Theory of Numbers Clifford.
Preliminary  Sketch  of  Biquaternions  .  On  the  Canonical  Form  and
Dissection  of  a  Riemann'  s  Surface Jevons. On Geometrical Reasoning
Lewis  Carroll.  Euclid and His Modern Rivals Gibbs. Collected Worlds C.
S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  hi,  par  553-562I, 609-645 Frege.
Grundgesetze  der  Arithmetic Burnside. Theory of Groups of Finite Order
Cantor.  Contributions  to  the  Founding  ofthe  Theory  of Transfinite
Numbers   Hilbert.  The  Foundations  of  Geometry  Peano.  Arithmetices
Principia  . Formulaire de mathemalique . Arithmetica generate e algebra
elementare  Bonola.  Non-Euclidean  Geometry E. W. Hobson. The Theory of
Functions of a Real Variable and the Theory of Fourier's Series

[96b]
O.  Veblen  and  Lennes.  Introduction  to Infinitesimal Analysis Klein.
Famous  Problems of Elementary Geometry . Elementary Mathematics from an
Advanced  Standpoint  Poincare.  Science  and  Hypothesis, part ii . The
Value  of Science, part i, ch 1 ; part ii . Science and Method, bk i, ch
2-3;  bk  ii, ch 3 Cassirer. Substance and Function, part i, ch 2-3; SUP
VI  E.  V.  Huntington. The Continuum, and Other Types of Serial Order .
The  Fundamental  Propositions  of  Algebra  J.  W.  Young.  Lectures on
Fundamental  Concepts  of  Algebra  and Geometry Jourdain. The Nature of
Mathematics  O.  Veblen  and  Young.  Projective  Geometry  B.  Russell.
Principles of Mathematics, ch i . Philosophical Essays, ch 3 . Mysticism
and Logic, ch 4-5 . Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, ch 18 N. R.
Campbell.  What  Is  Science?,  ch  6-7  Maritain.  An  Introduction  to
Philosophy,  part  11(3)  .  Theonas, Conversations of a Sage, vi Nicod.
Foundations of Geometry and Induction Whitehead. A Treatise on Universal
Algebra . An Introduction to Mathematics . Science and the Modern World,
ch  2  G.  N.  Lewis.  The  Anatomy  of  Science, essay i-ii Hilbert and
Ackerman.  Grundziige  der  theoretischen  Logi\  Buchanan.  Poetry  and
Mathematics  M.  R.  Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk ii, ch i A. E. Taylor.
Philosophical   Studies,   ch   hi  Gilson.  The  Unity  of Philosophical
Experience,  ch  5  Dewey.  Logic,  the Theory of Inquiry, ch 20 Carnap.
Foundations   of   Logic   and  Mathematics  Bell.  The  Development  of
Mathematics  G. H. Hardy. A Course of Pure Mathematics . A Mathematician
s Apology Kasner and Newman. Mathematics and the Imag- } ination Courant
and  Robbins.  What  Is Mathematics? Weyl. The Philosophy of Mathematics
and Natural Science

[97a]
Chapter^:  MATTER INTRODUCTION AFTER we came out of the church," says l\
Boswell  in his Life of Johnson, "we stood talking for some time together
of  Bishop  Berkeley's  ingenious sophistry to prove the nonexistence of
matter,  and that everything in the universe is merely ideal. I observed
that  though we are satisfied his doctrine is not true, it is impossible
to  refute  it.  I  shall  never  forget the alacrity with which Johnson
answered,  striking  his  foot  with mighty force against a large stone,
till  he rebounded from it, 'I refute it thus."' But Berkeley's argument
anticipated  Dr.  Johnson's  style  of  refutation. "I do not argue," he
says,  "against  the  existence  of  any one thing that we can apprehend
either  by  sense  or  reflexion. That the things I see with my eyes and
touch  with  my  hands  do  exist,  really  exist,  I make not the least
question.   The  only  thing  whose  existence  I  deny  is  that  which
philosophers call Matter or corporeal substance. And in doing this there
is  no  damage  done to the rest of mankind, who, I dare say, will never
miss  it." The rest of mankind does need to be instructed, however, that
when  they  use  the word "matter," they speak of nothing. They may from
careless  habit suppose they are referring to the most obvious something
there  is  in  the  world—  the  solid,  massy,  concrete stuff of which
tangible,  visible,  movable,  and  moving  things  are  made.  Of them,
Berkeley  would  ask  how  they know such stuff exists. It is not itself
perceptible.  We  perceive  a  variety  of  qualities—  colors,  shapes,
temperatures,  textures,  sizes,  or  extensions—  but  these,  Berkeley
argues,  have  their  being in being perceived. Even if certain of these
sensible qualities, sometimes called "primary," such as figure, size, or
weight,  are  supposed  to  belong  to bodies when they are not actually
being  sensed,  they  are  not  matter,  but only its properties. Matter
itself is not sensible. Those 63

[97b]
;  who  assert its existence postulate it as a substratum or support for
the  sensible  qualities  they  perceive.  The  question,  therefore, is
whether  such  a substratum is a necessary or an unnecessary hypothesis.
Berkeley  does not deny the existence of beings which cannot be directly
sensed.  He  affirms the existence of the human spirit or mind, of minds
other  than  his  own,  and  the  spiritual  being of God. These must be
inferred  to  exist  in  order  to explain the phenomena of our sensible
experience  and  the  experience  of  our  own  activities  in thinking,
imagining,  willing.  If,  in  addition,  the  existence  of matter or a
material  substance  were  necessary  to explain the phenomena, Berkeley
would  not  object  to  affirming its existence by inference, even if it
could  in no way be directly perceived. His argument therefore involves,
first,  a  denial  of  Locke's distinction between primary and secondary
qualities.  Supposing  it  to  be  generally agreed that colors, sounds,
odors  have no actual existence except in the perceiving mind, he denies
that perceptible figure, size, or motion can exist otherwise. "It having
been  shown that none even of these can possibly exist otherwise than in
a Spirit or Mind which perceives them, it follows that we have no longer
any  reason  to  suppose the being of Matter." Matter is not needed as a
substratum  or support for the qualities we perceive. This is the second
main  point  in  Berkeley's  argument.  "Though we give the materialists
their external bodies, they by their own confession are never the nearer
knowing  how  our ideas are produced since they own themselves unable to
comprehend  in  what  manner  body  can  act  upon  spirit, or how it is
possible  it  should  imprint  any idea in the mind. Hence it is evident
that the production of ideas or sensations in our minds can be no reason
why we should suppose Matter or

[98a]
64  THE  GREAT IDEAS corporeal substances, since that is acknowledged to
remain   equally   inexplicable   with  or  without  this  supposition."
Berkeley's  arguments  against  matter, which occupy the greater part of
his  Principles of Human Knowledge, may not have the same force when they
are  applied  against  different  theories  of matter. Berkeley seems to
regard  his  attack  on materialism as the refutation of an error at the
root  of skepticism, atheism, and irreligion. He also thinks materialism
creates  difficulties  for  the  sciences.  But  are all affirmations of
matter  to  be  lumped  together  as  materialism in the same sense} Are
Aristotle,  Plotinus,  Descartes, Spinoza, and Locke materialists in the
same  sense  as  Lucretius,  Hobbes,  and  perhaps Marx? Does it make no
difference  whether  bodies  are said to be the only real existences, or
whether,  in  addition  to  bodies,  immaterial  substances or spiritual
beings  are also said to exist? Does it make no difference how matter is
conceived—whether  as  a  self-subsistent  substance  in  its own right,
capable of existing apart from any qualities except extension and motion
which  belong  to  its  very  essence,  or  merely  as one factor in the
constitution  of  bodies,  the  factor of potentiality which, as will be
presently  explained,  has  no  existence  apart  from  the  forms which
actualize  it?  Are skepticism, atheism, and irreligion to be associated
with  all  affirmations  of matter, in view of the fact that theologians
like  Augustine  and  Aquinas  seem to think that a sound view of matter
supports the truths of religion against the errors of the materialists ?
There seem to be, in short, three distinct positions to which Berkeley's
blanket denial of matter stands opposed. The diametrically opposite view
seems to be the blanket denial of anything except bodies, or of anything
which cannot be reduced to a property or function of matter. The atomism
of  Lucretius,  discussed  in  the  chapter  on Element, may be taken as
representative of this view, though Engels would insist that materialism
can  be dialectical rather than atomistic or mechanical. Between the two
extremes,  there  appear  to  be  two  middle  positions which are alike
insofar  as both affirm the immaterial as well as the material. Although
they are alike in asserting

[98b]
the  existence  of spiritual substances, they may, of course, define the
nature of these immaterial things differently, and differently interpret
their relation to the realm of matter. But, as theories of matter, their
principal  difference  consists  in  the  way in which they conceive the
being  of  bodies, material substances, or the bodily mode of substance.
In  the  conceptions  of  Descartes and Locke, for example, it is matter
which  gives  actuality  to  sensible  bodies. We have "no other idea or
notion  of  matter,"  Locke  writes,  "but  something wherein those many
sensible  qualities,  which  affect  our  sense, do subsist." The entire
substance  of  sensible  bodies consists of matter. All their properties
derive  from  the essence or nature of matter. But in the conceptions of
Aristotle  and  Plotinus,  bodies  would  not  exist at all if they were
composed  only  of  matter,  for  matter  is no more than a capacity for
being, not something which by itself actually is. Sensible bodies derive
their being and all their attributes from the forms which matter assumes
when its potentialities are actualized. Matter totally devoid of form is
not  the  nothing  Berkeley  calls it, but it is so near to nothing that
Plotinus  says  it  is  "more  plausibly  called a non- being ... a bare
aspiration  towards  substantial existence." These theories of matter or
corporeal  being  seem to be as contrary to one another as together they
are  contrary  to  Berkeley's  doctrine.  Yet  each  of  the  two middle
positions  leans  toward one of the opposite extremes. The conception of
matter  seems  to  be  very much the same in the complete materialism of
Lucretius  and  Hobbes and in the view of Descartes, Spinoza, and Locke.
In  the former, only bodies exist. In the latter, bodies do not comprise
the whole of existence, but matter is the whole substance of bodies. The
separation  of  body  and  mind,  or  matter  and  spirit, into distinct
substances,  or modes of substance, leaves matter the same kind of stuff
that  it  is  in  a  world  which  admits  of no other reality. Atomism,
furthermore, may be common to both theories, at least to the extent that
it  is  held  that the complex bodies we perceive are composed of minute
and  insensible  particles.  Unlike Lucretius, Locke may not insist upon
the  absolute  indivisibility  of the particles, or upon the eternity of
the uncreated atoms of matter;

[99a]
but  he,  like  Hobbes  and Newton, carries the division of the familiar
bodies  of  sense-experience down to parts which cannot be perceived and
yet have, in a way, a more ultima te-reafity as units of matter than the
complex  bodies  they constitute. "Had we senses acute enough to discern
the minute particles of bodies, and the real constitution on which their
sensible  qualities  depend,"  Locke writes, "I doubt not but that would
produce  quite  different  ideas in us; and that which is now the yellow
color  of gold, would then disappear, and instead of it we should see an
admirable  texture of parts, of a certain size and figure." At the other
extreme,  Berkeley's  complete  denial of matter has less in common with
the  view of Aristotle, Plotinus, Augustine, and Aquinas than the theory
of  Descartes,  Spinoza, and Locke has with the materialism of Lucretius
and  Hobbes. They would appear to be close enough, for one seems to hold
that  matter  is  almost  non-being  and the other that matter is simply
nothing  at all. But where Berkeley denies any role to matter, Aristotle
and  those who take his view affirm matter to be an indispensable factor
in the constitution of physical things. They do not question the reality
of  bodies  or  their existence apart from mind. On both of these points
they  are  as opposed to Berkeley as they would be if they were complete
materialists.  Nevertheless they lean toward Berkeley rather than toward
the other extreme in one respect. Where Berkeley denies the existence of
matter,  they deny its substantiality. Where Berkeley says matter has no
being,  they  say  it has the lowest grade of being—on the very verge of
not being! In spite of all the differences noted, the idea of matter has
a  certain constant meaning throughout the tradition of the great books.
It is generally associated with the idea of quantity, and especially the
basic  magnitudes,  such  as time, space, and mass. Sometimes it is said
that   the  essence  of  matter  itself  is  extension;  sometimes  that
bodies—not matter itself —have the property of tridimensionality. But in
either  case  that  which  is  or  has matter in it necessarily occupies
space. The manner of that occupation is also gener-

[99b]
Chapter  53:  MATTER  65  ally  agreed  upon. Two bodies or two distinct
quantities  of  matter  cannot occupy the same place at the same time. A
body  may  not be impenetrable in the sense of being indivisible, but so
long  as  it remains the whole that it is, it offers resistance to other
bodies  tending  to  move  into  the place it occupies. There is another
connection  between matter and quantity. To those who ask what makes two
otherwise  identical  things  two  in  number—or what is involved in the
merely  numerical difference of things alike in every other respect— the
usual answer is in terms of matter. Matter is traditionally spoken of as
"the  principle  of  individuation."  Aquinas,  for  example, holds that
angels, unlike physical substances, cannot differ from one another as do
numerically  distinct individuals. Because they are immaterial, thev can
differ  only  as do species or kinds. "Such things as agree in species,"
he  writes,  "but differ in number, agree in form, but are distinguished
materially.  If,  therefore,  the  angels  be not composed of matter and
form,  it  follows  that  it  is  impossible for two angels to be of one
species;  just  as  it  would  be  impossible  for  there  to be several
whitenesses  apart,  or  several  humanities,  since whitenesses are not
several, except in so far as they are in several substances." The way in
which  matter is related to individual differences can be exemplified in
works  of  art. Two coins, stamped out of the same kind of matter by the
impression  of  the same die, may differ in no other discernible respect
than  that  they  are  two  of  the same kind. Their twoness seems to be
somehow related to the fact that each consists of a distinct quantity of
matter. But it may be asked how two units of matter have the distinction
of  being  two while they differ in no other respect. One answer to this
difficult question is that their distinction consists in their occupying
different  places.  In  the  Platonic  theory  of  the  origin  of  many
particulars all participating in the same form, diversity of place seems
to  play  the role which matter plays for Aristotle and Aquinas. Plato's
doctrine  of  the receptacle, which is discussed in the chapter on Form,
is  sometimes  interpreted  by  conceiving  the receptacle as space, and
sometimes  by conceiving it as matter. The receptacle, it is said in the
Timaeus, is that which, "while receiving all things, never

[100a]
66  THE  GREAT IDEAS departs at all from her own nature and never in any
way, or at any time, assumes a form like that of any of the things which
enter  into  her." This, according to Plotinus, means that "its one form
is  an  invincible  formlessness."  But  Plotinus,  who combines Plato's
doctrine  of  the  receptacle  and  the forms with Aristotle's theory of
potentiality and actuality, holds that it is matter, not space, which is
"the  receptacle  and  nurse of all generation." He says that "recipient
and nurse" is a better description of matter than the term "mother," for
that  term  "is  used  by  those  who think of a mother as matter to the
offspring,  as  a  container  only,  giving nothing to them." In his own
view,  matter  is  more than space or mere receptivity. He is willing to
admit  the "parallel with motherhood" only to the extent that "matter is
sterile,  not  female to full effect, female in receptivity only, not in
pregnancy."   Traditionally,   the  distinction  between  universal  and
particular  is  understood as a distinction between the intelligible and
the  sensible.  This  indicates another traditional meaning of matter or
the  material.  The realm of sensible things is the realm of bodies. But
the  atoms  which  are  the  elementary  bodies  are also usually called
"insensible  particles  of matter." This, however, can be interpreted to
mean,  not that a definite material mass or bulk is in itself absolutely
intangible  or  imponderable, but that, because of the limitation in our
senses,  it is imperceptible to us. On this interpretation it would then
seem  possible  to  say that all bodily existence is sensible existence.
But  if  we  ask  about the sensibility of matter itself, rather than of
bodies  large  or  small,  questions  arise  which are more difficult to
solve.  On  one theory of matter, matter devoid of form is as insensible
as  it is unintelligible, yet forms which are not material, that is, not
in  matter, are also insensible but not unintelligible. On the contrary,
they  are  regarded  as more perfectly intelligible than embodied forms.
How,  then, does matter which is itself insensible cause the forms which
it  assumes to become sensible when they are materialized? The theory of
matter  which does not regard it as a co-principle with form seems to be
confronted with a different problem of sensibility.

[100b]
It  is  supposed that some of the qualities which we sense in bodies are
actually  in  them whether we sense them or not—such properties as size,
figure, weight, motion. Other sensible qualities, such as colors, odors,
temperatures,  or  sounds,  are  supposed  to be effects produced by the
motions  of  material  particles  acting  on  the sensitive apparatus of
animals.   This  distinction  between  what  Locke  calls  "primary  and
secondary qualities"—found also in Lucretius and Descartes is more fully
considered  in  the  chapters  on  Quality  and Sense, but here it calls
attention  to  the  problem  ofhow  matter,  devoid  of certain sensible
qualities,  causes  these qualities to arise. For Lucretius the peculiar
difficulty  of  the  problem seems to lie in the fact that the sensitive
animal  is itself nothing but a material system. All its powers and acts
are  conceived  as functions of matter in motion. How, then, does moving
matter  within  the  organism  generate  certain  qualities which do not
belong  to  moving  matter  outside  the organism? For Locke the problem
raises  a difficulty of still another sort. Secondary qualities, such as
colors,  sounds,  odors,  exist  only  as  sensations  in  the  mind. In
corporeal substances, or bodies, such qualities, he writes, "are nothing
but  the  powers those substances have to produce several ideas in us by
our senses; which ideas are not in the things themselves, otherwise than
as  anything  is  in  its  cause." Though they result from the impact of
moving  particles  on the bodily sense-organs, they do not belong to the
world  of  matter  at all, but to the realm of spirit. How, then, do the
motions  of  matter  cause  effects  which  exist only in the immaterial
domain of mind ? These questions indicate some of the problems of matter
as  an  object, condition, or cause of knowledge. They also show how the
nature  of the problem varies with different conceptions of matter, both
in  itself  and  in its relation to mind. There are still other problems
which confront those theories of mind which separate reason or intellect
from  the  sensitive  faculty.  In  such  theories  the consideration of
matter's  relation  to  mind  goes  beyond the question of the origin of
sensations.  It  takes sensations and images as somehow the functions of
living  matter—  the acts of the various sense-organs and the brain. But
sensations  and  images, because they are acts of corporeal organs, have
the

[101a]
same  limitation which belongs to everything material. As matter is said
to  cause  the  individuality or numerical diversity of bodies, so is it
said  to make sensations and images "particular intentions of the mind"—
that  is,  capable  of representing only particular objects, not general
kinds  or  classes. Hence such theories face the problem of the relation
of  sensations and images to the "universal intentions of the mind," its
general  concepts  or  abstract  ideas.  One more traditional meaning of
matter remains to be mentioned. The sciences of physics or mechanics are
concerned  with change or motion. They are not concerned with mutability
in  general,  but  with  the  kind  of  mutability that is manifested by
material  things.  Material  things  are never conceived as immovable or
unchangeable.   The  question  whether  matter  itself  is  immutablehas
differentmeaningsfordifTerent   theories   of   matter.  On  the  theory
(discussed  in  the chapter on Change) that matter and form are together
principles  of  change  in changing substances, it is neither matter nor
form but the substance composite of matter and form which changes. Those
who  think  that the motions of the physical world are without beginning
and  end,  attribute  a  similar  eternity  to matter and conceive it as
imperishable. The theologians who think that God can annihilate whatever
He   creates,do   not   hold  that  matteris  indestructible,  but  they
nevertheless  attribute  everlasting  endurance to matter in God's plan.
Aquinas, for example, in his treatise on the end of the world, describes
the final conflagration which will purge the material universe but leave
its matter in existence under the forms of the elements and the heavenly
bodies.  "The  world  will  be renewed," he writes, "in such a way as to
throw  off all corruption and remain forever at rest." Hence nothing can
be   "the   subject   of  that  renewal,  unless  it  be  a  subject  of
incorruption,"  such as "the heavenly bodies, the elements, and man." On
other  theories  of  matter  the  fact  that  motion  is  regarded as an
intrinsic  property  of bodies seems to be similarly consistent with the
notion   that   matter  itself  is  immutable  or  indestructible.  This
indestructibility   may   be   conceived   in   terms  of  the  absolute
indivisibility of

[101b]
Chapter  53:  MATTER 67 the atoms, as in Lucretius and Newton; or, as in
Spinoza,  it  may  be established by the uncreated and eternal nature of
God.  "By body," Spinoza writes, "I understand a mode which expresses in
a  certain  and determinate manner the essence of God in so far as He is
considered  as  the  thing  extended."  In the modern development of the
science  of  mechanics the law of the conservation of matter seems to be
another  expression  of  the  same  insight.  "We  may lay it down as an
incontestable  axiom,"  Lavoisier writes, "that in all the operations of
art  and  nature, nothing is created; an equal quantity of matter exists
both   before  and  after  the  experiment."  What  appears  to  be  the
destruction  of  a  body is merely the transformation of its matter into
another  physical  condition,  without  loss  of mass unless there is an
equivalent  gain  in  energy.  The  total  quantity of matter and energy
remains  constant  throughout all physical changes. But though change or
motion  seems  to  be  inherent in the material world, the mutability of
bodies,  as  well as the immutability of matter, seems to be differently
conceived  according  to different conceptions of matter. The difference
between  the  physics  of  Aristotle and the physics of Descartes can be
expressed  in  terms  of  contrary  definitions  of motion, or divergent
notions  of  causality,  but  neither  of  these  differences  is  fully
intelligible  apart from the variance of these theories from one another
on  the  nature  of  matter.  When  matter is an actual substance, whose
essence  is  extension  and  whose  chief  property is local motion, the
principles  of physics are mechanical. The laws of mechanics, with time,
space,  and  mass  as  their  fundamental  variables,  seem  to  have  a
universality  adequate for describing all natural phenomena. All changes
in  material things are either the local motions of bodies or the result
of  the  local  motions  of their parts. Motions are determined in their
magnitude  and  direction  by  the impressed force which one body exerts
upon  another  and  the  resistance  of  that  other.  Motion  is itself
completely  actual,  as  matter  is; and the only type of cause to which
physics need appeal is the efficient cause, that is, the push or pull of
one body upon another. Physicists who share this conception of mat-

[102a]
68 THE GREAT IDEAS ter may not agree, as Descartes and Newton do not, in
their  mechanical  formulations.  They  may or may not be atomists. They
may,  like Lucretius, think that local motion is an absolutely intrinsic
property  of  the eternal particles; or, like Descartes and Newton, they
may  think  that  God  first  imparted  motion  to matter at the world's
creation. They may hold that all subsequent motions issue therefrom in a
continuous chain of cause and effect. But when matter is the only factor
in the constitution of bodies, and one body differs from another only in
its  quantitative  determinations,  the  consequence for physical theory
seems  to  be one or another sort of mechanical formulation. When matter
is  nothing more than a body's potentiality for change, and when neither
what the body is nor how it changes can be explained by reference to its
matter  alone,  physical  theory  seems  to be constructed in other than
mechanical terms. Its concepts and principles resemble those of biology.
It finds natural tendencies or desires, and ends or final causes, in the
motion  of  inert  as  well  as  animate  bodies. Central to Aristotle's
physics  are  his theory of the four causes, discussed in the chapter on
Cause,  and  his  theory  of  the four types of change, discussed in the
chapter on Change. But even more fundamental is his definition of motion
as the actualization of that which is potential in a respect in which it
is  potential.  With  motion  so defined, the principles of physics must
include  the  correlative  factors  of  potentiality and actuality which
Aristotle  conceives in terms of matter and form. Remove matter entirely
from  a  thing  and, according to Aristotle, you remove its capacity for
physical  change. Remove form, and you remove its existence, for nothing
can  exist without being actual or determinate in certain respects. When
a thing changes physically, it loses certain determinate characteristics
and  acquires  others.  The determinations it acquires it had previously
lacked,  yet  all  the  while  it must have had a capacity for acquiring
them.  The  thing is "capable both of being and of not being," Aristotle
says,  "and  this capacity," he goes on to say, "is the matter in each."
The  matter of an existing substance is thus conceived as that which has
certain forms (the

[102b]
respects  in  which  the  substance  is actually determinate), and lacks
certain  forms  which it can assume (the respects in which the substance
is  both  indeterminate and potential). As the chapter on Art indicates,
Aristotle  frequently  uses  artistic  production  to  afford  a  simple
illustration  of  his theory of matter and form as principles of change.
When  a  man  sets out to make a bed, he chooses material, such as wood,
which can be shaped in a certain way. The same wood could have been made
into  a  chair  or  a  table.  With  respect  to  these various possible
determinations  in  structure,  the  wood  is  itself  indeterminate and
determinable.  Before the artist has worked on it productively, the wood
is in a state of both privation and potentiality with regard to the form
of  a  bed,  a  chair,  or  a table. The transformation which the artist
effects  consists  in  his  actualizing  certain  potentialities  in the
material  for  forms  or determinations which the material at the moment
lacks. When the bed is made, the wood or matter which is now actually in
the  form of a bed may still have the potentiality for being remade into
a  chair or table. The wood, of course, remains actually wood throughout
these  artificial  changes,  as  it does not when it suffers the natural
change  of combustion. This indicates that though the wood may be called
matter  or  material by the artist, it is not matter, but a substance, a
thing  composite  of  matter  and  form; for when the wood is reduced to
ashes  by  fire,  the  matter which had the form of wood assumes another
form.  In  the  analysis of accidental change, which artistic production
illustrates,  it  suffices  to treat a composite substance, like wood or
iron  or  bronze,  as  the  material  principle.  But in the analysis of
substantial  change,  when  matter itself changes from being one kind of
matter  to  being  another in the coming to be or perishing of composite
substances,  the  material  principle must be pure matter—matter totally
devoid of form. Where a whole substance can be regarded as the matter or
substratum  of  accidental  change  (in quality, quantity, or place) the
substratum  of substantial change, which Aristotle calls "generation and
corruption," must be matter in a condition of absolute indeterminacy and
pure potentiality. Referring to this ultimate substratum as "the

[103a]
underlying  nature,"  Aristotle says that it "is an object of scientific
knowledge by analogy. For as the bronze is to the statue, the wood tojhe
bed, so is the matter and the formless before receiving form to anything
which has form, and so also is the underlying nature to substance, i.e.,
the actually existing." Aristotle's definition of matter as "the primary
substratum   of   each   thing,  from  which  it  comes  to  be  without
qualification,  and  which persists in the result" not only signifies an
object  which  the  physicist  must  apprehend  analogically  (i.e.,  by
comparison  with  substantially formed matter like wood and bronze), but
also  indicates  that  matter,  by  definition,  must  be in itself both
unintelligible  and  non-existent.  What  Aristotle  calls  "the primary
substratum"  is  later  called by Plotinus "primal matter," by Augustine
"formless  matter,"  and by Aquinas "prime matter." Since they all agree
that  that  which is without form lacks all determination and actuality,
they  deny  that  it  can  have  existence  by itself or be an object of
knowledge,  either by sense or reason. Augustine and Aquinas go further.
They deny even to God's omnipotence the power of creating matter without
form.  They  speak of matter not as created, but as concreated, that is,
united at the very instant of its creation with the forms it must assume
in  order to exist. God "made formless matter of absolutely nothing, and
the  form of the world from this formless matter," Augustine writes. Yet
He  "created  both simultaneously, so that form came upon matter with no
space  of time intervening." In the tradition of Aristotle's physics and
metaphysics,  especially as developed by Aquinas, matter and form become
basic  analytic  terms,  often  having  a significance remote from their
original  meaning in the analysis of change. The conception of prime (or
formless)  matter  as  the substratum of substantial change leads to the
designation of the formed matter underlying accidental change as "second
matter."  This,  in turn, is called "signate matter" when, considered as
the  matter  of  an  individual  substance,  it  is viewed as having the
limiting  determinations  of individuality. "Matter is twofold," Aquinas
writes, "com-

[103b]
Chapter  53:  MATTER  69 mon, and signate or individual; common, such as
flesh  and  bones;  and individual, as this flesh and these bones." When
the  intellect forms concepts of different kinds of physical substances,
it  abstracts  "from  the  individual  sensible matter, but not from the
common  sensible matter." In defining the nature of man, for example, we
abstract,  Aquinas  says, from "this flesh and these bones, which do not
belong  to  the  species  as such, but to the individual"; but we do not
abstract from the fact that man, consisting of body and soul, is a thing
of  flesh  and  To say that man consists of body and soul is to indicate
that  common  matter  enters  into  the  definition of man as a physical
substance.  But  in distinction from definitions of this type, which are
proper  to  physics, mathematical and metaphysical definitions carry the
abstraction from matter still further. In mathematics, Aquinas declares,
the  intellect  abstracts "not only from individual sensible matter, but
also  from  common  sensible matter." In conceiving numbers and figures,
the intellect does not, however, abstract from matter entirely, but only
from  individual  intelligible  matter.  The  common intelligible matter
which is represented by "substance as subject to quantity" underlies all
mathematical  notions.  "But  some  things,"  Aquinas maintains, "can be
abstracted  even  from common intelligible matter, such as being, unity,
potency,  act and the like, all of which can exist without matter." Such
abstraction  characterizes  the  concepts  of  metaphysics. Aquinas thus
differentiates  the  three speculative sciences of physics, mathematics,
and   metaphysics   in  terms  of  three  grades  of  abstraction,  each
distinguished  by  the  type  of  matter  from which the concepts of the
science  are  abstracted. With one exception physical matter is not said
to  be  of different kinds when it exists under different forms. The one
exception  for  both  Aristotle and Aquinas is the matter of terrestrial
and celestial bodies. Basing his inference on the observations available
to  him,  Aristotle  holds  that  the  heavenly bodies are eternal— "not
subject  to  increase  or  diminution,  but  unaging and unalterable and
unmodified." Immutable in every other way, they are, however, subject to
local motion. Since they are eternal, both their matter and

[104a]
70  THE  GREAT  IDEAS form; participation and the receptacle terrestrial
and  celestial  motion  mon matter; sensible and intelligible matter 2a.
The properties of matter: hypotheses concerning its constitution 2b. The
motions  of  matter  or  bodies  2d. The diremption of body and mind, or
matter  and  spirit  3.  The  existence of matter 30. Matter as the sole
existent:  materialism,  atomism  y. Matter as a fiction of the mind 3^.
The relation of God to matter: the creation of matter and its motions 4.
Matter  as  an  object  or condition of knowledge 40. The knowability of
matter:  by  sense,  by reason 4c. The material conditions of sensation,
imagination,  and  memory  acts of the mind 6. Criticisms of materialism
and its consequences

[104b]
their motion must be different from that of difference between celestial
and  terrestrial  matperishable terrestrial bodies. "All things that ter
or  motion,  and  as the chapter on Astronchange have matter," Aristotle
writes,  "but  omy  shows,  by  so  doing  he not only gives immatter of
different sorts; of eternal things those petus to the Copernican system,
but  also  paves  which are not generable but are movable in the way for
Newton  to  frame  laws  of  motion  space  have  matter—not  matter for
generation,  applicable  to matter everywhere in the unihowever, but for
motion  from one place to verse. Because their matter is the same, it is
another."  That motion from place to place is, possible, Kepler insists,
to explain the motion of unlike terrestrial motion, circular; it has the
the heavenly bodies by the same principles appropriate characteristic of
endlessness. which account for the motion of bodies on Kepler challenges
this  theory  of  a  radical  earth.  OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE of changing
things:  the  receptacle or substratum 71 \a. Matter and the analysis of
change: prime and secondary matter; privation and \b. Matter in relation
to the kinds of change: substantial and accidental change; 72 \c. Matter
and  the  distinction  between  individual  and  universal:  signate and
comatoms  and  compound  bodies 73 2c. Matter as the support of sensible
qualities  74 3b. Matter as the most imperfect grade of being or reality
75 4#. The role of matter in the concepts and definitions of the several
sciences:  the  grades  of  abstraction  in  physics,  mathematics,  and
metaphysics  76 j\d. The material conditions of thought: the relation of
matter to the existence and 5. Matter in relation to good and evil 77

[105a]
To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type, which are the
volume  and  page numbers of the passages referred to. For example, in 4
Homer:  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the number of the
volume  in  the  set;  the  number  12d indicates that the passage is in
section  d  of page 12. of the left-hand sideof page 163 and ends in the
upper half of the right-hand sideof page 164. Author's Divisions: One or
more  of  the  main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are
sometimes  included  in  the  reference;  line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather
than  continuously  in  the  work or passage cited. 1. The conception of
matter  as  a principle of change and as one constituent of the being of
changing   things:  the  receptacle  or  substratum  7  Plato:  Timaeus,
455c-458b  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i, ch 4-9 262a-268d; bk hi, ch 7
[207b35-2o8 a 4] 286c / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 6 [987b i9]-cH 7
[988b
5] 505d-506c; ch 8 [988b22-989b24] 506d-508a; bk ii, ch 3
[995*15-17]
513d; bk v, ch 2
[1013*24-27]
533b;  ch 4 534d-535c; bk vii, ch 3 551b552a; ch 7-17 555a-566a,c esp ch
7-9 555a558a, ch 17 565a-566a,c; bk viii 566a-570d; bk xii, ch 10
[1075*25-33] 606a
/  Soul,  bk hi, ch 5 [430*10-14] 662c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii,
sect  23 281b; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 16 Ptolemy : Almagest, bk i, 5b 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr viii, ch 10, 32a-b / Second Ennead, tr iv-v
50a-60c;  tr  vii, ch 3 64b-c / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 7-19 110d-119a /
Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2-8 281c-285d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii,
par  6  lOOb-c; par 14 102b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a
2, ans and rep 3 15c-16a; q 4, a 1, ans

[105b]
Chapter  53:  MATTER 71 and rep 2 20d-21b; q 7, a 1, ans 31a-d; a 2, ans
and rep 3 31d-32c; q 14, a 2, rep 1,3 76d-77d; q 15, a 3, rep 3 93b-94a;
q  18,  a  4,  rep  2-3  107d-108c;  q 47, a i, ans 256a-257b; q 86, a 3
463b-d;  part  i-ii,  q  10,  a  i,  rep  2  662d-663d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 52, a 1, ans 15d-18a; part hi, q 2, a i, ans
and  rep  2  710a-711c  28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 25b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  x,  sect  15  295a-c  35  Berkeley  : Human
Knowledge,  sect  ii  415a-b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 72c-76c esp 74b-76c;
186b-d  /Judgement,  565b-d;  566d-567a  la.  Matter and the analysis of
change:  prime  and  secondary matter; privation and form; participation
and  the receptacle 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455c-458b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
i, ch 4-9 262a-268d; bk 11, ch 1
[193*9^21]
269b-270a; ch 3
[i94b i6-i95*2i]
271a-d;  bk  ii,  ch  7-BK in, ch 3 275b-280c; bk iv, ch 2 [209^-210*13]
288b-289a; ch 4 [21^5-212*2] 290c-291a; ch 9 [2i7*20-b26] 297a-c; bk vi,
ch  10 [240b8241*26] 324c-325b / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 360d362a; bk hi, ch
2 [30^33-302*9] 393b; bk

[106a]
(1.  The  conception  of  matter  as  a  principle  of change and as one
constituent   of  the  being  of  changing  things:  the  receptacle  or
substratum,  la.  Matter  and the analysis of change:prime and secondary
matter;  privation  andform;  participation and the receptacle) iv, ch 5
403d-404d  /  Generation  and  Corruption  409a-441a,c  esp  bk  i, ch 3
413c-416c  /  Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  12  [389b22-390a  7] 493d494a /
Metaphysics,  bk  i, ch 6 [987b3o-988 a8] 506a; bk ii, ch 2 [994 ai9-b8]
512c-d; bk in, ch 4 [999 ai-6] 512b;
[994
a24-b24]  518a-c;  bk  v,  ch  4  [ioi4b27-ioi5 aio] 535a-b; ch 6 [ioi6a
17-24] 536c-d; bk vi, ch 2 [io26b27-io27ai5] 549a-b; ch 3
[i027b i5-i7J 549d; bk vii, ch
7-9 555a-558a; bk viii, ch i
[i042a24-b
7]  566b-d;  ch  4-6  568d-570d;  bk  ix,  ch  7  574c575a;  bk xi, ch 9
[io65b2o-35]  594a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  2-5 598c-601a; ch 10 [i075 a25-b24]
606a-c  9  Aristotle:  Generation  of Animals,  bk  i,  ch  20 aio]-cH 22
]73ob33J 269b-271a
[729
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk vii, sect 23 281b 16 Kepler: Harmonies of
the  World,  1078a-b  17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 18tr v, ch 5
49c-60c  / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 7-19 110d-119a / Sixth Ennead, tr hi,
ch  2-8  281c-285d;  tr  v, ch 8 307d-308c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
xii,  par  3-6  99d-100c;  par  8 lOla-b; par 14-16 102b-103a; par 24-26
104c-105b;  par  28-31  105c-107a;  par 38-40 108d-110a; bk xiii, par 48
124a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2, ans 15c-16a; a 8,
ans  19d-20c;  q 4, a 1, ans and rep 2 20d-21b; q 5, a 3, rep 3 25a-d; q
7,  a  2,  rep  3  31d-32c;  q  9,  a 1, ans 38c-39c; q 29, a 2, rep 3-5
163b-164b;  q  45, a 2, rep 2 242d-244a; a 8 249b-250a; q 46, a 1, rep 6
250a-252d;  q 47, a i, ans 256a257b; q 48, a 3, ans 261b-262a; q 66, a 1
343d-345c; q 77, a i, rep 2 399c-401b; q 84, a 3, rep 2 443d-444d; q 86,
a  3  463b-d;  q 92, a 2, rep 2 489d-490c; a 3, rep i 490c491b; a 4, ans
and  rep  i 491b-d; q 103, a i, rep 2 528b-529a; q 104, a i, ans and rep
1-2  534c-536c;  q no 564c-568b*; q 117, a 3 598c599b; part 1—n, q 22, a
1,  rep  1  720d721c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60, a 1
49d-50c;  q  85,  a  6 182d-184a; part ii-ii, q 24, a 11, ans 498b-499c;
part  hi  suppl,  q 92, a 1, rep 12 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c; xm [52-87] 126a-b
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  25b  28  Harvey: On Animal Generation,
407c-409b;  412a-415b;  494a-496d  esp  494b,  495c-496a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk hi, ch x, sect 15 295ac 35 Berkeley : Human Knowledge,
sect ii 415a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 74b-76c; lOOd-lOlb

[106b]
72  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lit  to \c lb. Matter in relation to the kinds of
change:  substantial  and  accidental  change; terrestrial and celestial
motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch i
[2oob2620^14] 278bc; ch 3 [202^2-29] 280c; bk iv,
ch 9 296b-297c esp
[2i7a2o-b26] 297a-c; bk
v,  ch  1-2  304a-307b  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2-5  359d-364a; ch 9-12
369a-375d; bk ii, ch 4
[287b i5-2i] 379b: bk iv, ch 3 [3iob22-3n a i2]
402b-c;  ch  4  [312^-22] 403c-d / Generation and Corruption 409a-441a,c
esp bk i, ch 4
[32oa2-6] 417a / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 7-9
555a-558a  esp ch 7 [1032^5-22] 555a-b; bk viii, ch 1 [1042^4^7] 566b-d;
ch 4 [1044^]- ch 5 [1044^9] 569a-c; bk ix, ch 7 [i049a i9b i] 574d-575a;
ch 8
[io5ob2o-28]
576c-d; bk xi, ch 11
[io67b i]-cH
12
[io68b25] 596a597d; bk xii, ch 2-5 598c-601a esp ch 2 [io69b
24-27] 599a / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[4o6b26-407b
13]  636b-637b  16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a; 8b; 10b-llb; bk xiii,
429a-b  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk i,
517b-518a;  519b-520a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-890b;  894a;
929b-930b  17  Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 1-4 35a37b; tr iv, ch 6
51d-52a;  tr v, ch 6 103b104a / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-19 111c119a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 7, a 2, ans and rep 3 31d-32c; q
45,  a  2, rep 2 242d-244a; q 46, a i, rep 1,3,5-6 250a-252d; q 48, a 3,
ans  261b-262a;  q 55, a 2, ans 289d-290d; q 66, a i, ans 343d-345c; a 2
345d-347b; q 84, a 3, rep i 443d-444d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  49,  a  4,  ans  5a-6a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, HOb-c Ic.
Matter and the distinction between individual and universal: signate and
common   matter;   sensible   and   intelligible   matter  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  6 [987b i9988a i6] 505d-506b; bk hi, ch 3 [998
a2o-b i3J 517a-b; ch 4 [999^4-1000^] 518a-d; ch 6
[1003^-16]
521d-522a,c;  bk  vii,  ch  io-ii 558a-561a; ch 15 [io39b27-3i] 563d; bk
viii, ch 6 [1045^3-36] 570a-b; bk x, ch i [1052s 28-37] 578d; bk xii, ch
4-5 599d-601a; bk xiii, ch 10 618c-619a,c / Soul, bk ii, ch i
[4i2a6-8j 642a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  2-5  50b-51d / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 3 282a-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 3, a 2, rep 3 15c-16a; a 3, ans
16a-d;  q  4,  a  1, rep 3 20d-21b; q 7, a 1, ans 31a-d; q 14, a 11, ans
84c-85c;  q  15,  a  3,  rep  4 93b-94a; q 29, a 1 162a-163b; a 2, rep 3
163b-164b; a 3, rep 4 164c-165c; q 47, a 2, ans 257b-

[107a]
d  258c;  q  50, a 4, ans 273b-274b; q 56, a i, rep 2 292a-d; q 65, a 3,
ans  341c-342b;  q  75, a 4, ans 381b-382a; a 5, ans 382a-383b; a 7, ans
384d-385c;  q 76, a 2 388c-391a+-o/85> a 1, rep 2 451c-453c; q 115, a i,
ans  and  rep 1-3 585d-587c; q 119, a 1, ans 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q 2, a 2, ans 711d-712d; a 3, rep 3 713a-714c 2.
The  conception  of  matter as extension, as a bodily substance, or as a
mode   of  substance:  atoms  and  compound  bodies  10  Galen:  Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12 172d173c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[146-448] 2d-6c; [4S3-634I 7a-8d 17 Plotims: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7,
52c;  ch  12 54c 55b: tr vh, ch 3 64b-c / Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d;
tr  vi,  ch  7,  Ilia;  ch  12.  114b  c:  ch 16-19 116c 119a 23 Hobbes:
leviathan,  part  iv, 271d-272a 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
131d132a  31 Descartes: Rules, \iv 28a 33b / Meditations, 11 77d 81d esp
78c-d, 80b d / Objections and Replies, 114d 115a,c; def vil 130c d; 153c
154b; 231a 232a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 14, corol 2prop 15 360a
361  d;  part ii, def i 373a; prop 2 374a 34 Newton: Optics, bk in, 537a
b;  541b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiii, sect 11-27
150d-154d  passim;  ch  xxiii  204a  214b  passim;  bk hi, ch x, sect 15
295a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  x.  sect  9-19 351b-354c passim 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect 9-17 414d-416b passim: sect 37 419d; sect 50 422c; sect
91-96  430d-431d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 123 506a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15b-c;  99a-100d  esp  lOOc-d  / Judgement, 580c45
Lavoisier:  Elements of Chemistry, pref, 3b-4a 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  850b,d855a,c  53 James : Psychology, 876a-b; 882a-884b 2a.
The  properties of matter: hypotheses concerning its constitution a3-b8]
394b-d  /  Generation  and Corruption, bk i, ch 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk
hi, ch 4
[303
2  410d-413c;  ch 8 423b-425d / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 4 [985^-19] 503c-d
10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things,  bk  i  [146-920] 2d-12b; bk ii [333-990] 19b-27c 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  936a-937a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 271d-272a 28
Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 29c-30a

[107b]
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second day 178a-196d passim 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph 8 140b; aph 25 155a-d; aph 40 170c-173d; aph
48  179d-188b  31  Descartes: Meditations, 11, 78c-d; 80b-d / Objections
and  Replies, def vh 130c-d; 154a; 231a-232a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop  14,  corol 2prop 15 360a-361d; prop 25, corol 365b; part 11, def 1
373a;  prop  2  374a  34 Newton: Principles, def i 5a; def hi 5b; bk 11,
prop  40,  schol, 246a-b; bk hi, rule hi 270b-271a; prop 6, corol iii-iv
281b;  prop 7 281b 282b; general schol, 371b / Optics, bk 11, 479b-485b;
bk  hi,  531a-543b esp 541b-543a 34 Huygens: Light, ch hi, 566b-569b; ch
v,  601b  603b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch iv 129b-131a; ch
viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b passim; ch xiii, sect 21-27 152d-154d; ch xxi,
sect  2-4  178c-179c;  sect  75  200b-d;  ch  xxiii, sect 1-32 204a-212d
passim;  ch  xxxi,  sect 2 239b-d esp 239d; bk hi, ch vi, sect 5, 269bc;
sect  21  273c-d; ch x, sect 15 295a-c; bk iv, ch hi, sect 6 313c315b 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  9-18 414d-416c passim; sect 37 419d;
sect  47 421c-422a; sect 85 429c; sect 91 430d431a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
99a-100d  esp  lOOc-d;  137a-140c;  152a-d  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of
Chemistry,  part  i,  9a-10c;  12d-13d; 16b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
169b-170a  45  Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 273a-276a; 386c-390d;
604c-632d  esp  604c-607a,c,  626c632d;  819a-c; 850b,d-855a,c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 160c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
ii, 695c 53 James: Psychology, 68a-b 2b. The motions of matter or bodies
8   Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  6-9  292c297c  /  Generation  and
Corruption,  bk  i, ch 8 423b-425d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch
12 172d173c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [329-397] 5b-6a;
[951-1113]
12d-14d; bk ii
[62-332]
15d-19b;  bk  hi [177-205] 32b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
47, a 1, ans 256a-257b; q 115, a i, ans and rep 3,5 585d-587c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 50a-b; part iv, 268d; 271d-272a 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences, first day, 157b-171b; third day-fourth day 197a260a,c

[108a]
(2.  The conception of matter as extension, as a bodily substance, or as
a  mode  of  substance:  atoms  and  compound bodies. 2b. The motions of
matter  or  bodies.) 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 66 114d-115c; bk
ii,  aph  35-36  162a-168d;  aph  40  170c-173d;  aph  48  179d-188b  31
Descartes:   Discourse,   part  v  54b-60c  /  Objections  and  Replies,
114d-115a; def vii 130c-d; 231a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, lemma 1-7
378c380b  34  Newton: Principles la-372a / Optics, bk hi, 541b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 2-4 178c-179c; ch xxiii, sect
17  209a;  sect  22  209d;  sect  28-29 211b-212a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws,  bk  i, lb 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 41b-c 45
Fourier:  Theory of Heat, 169a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
694d695c  53 James: Psychology, 882a; 883a-884b passim 2c. Matter as the
support  of sensible qualities 8 Aristotle: Sense and the Sensible, ch 4
a3o-b24] 680a-c; ch 6
[445
b4~446a2o] 683b-684c
[442
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii [398-477] 20a-21a; [730-885]
24b-26b;  bk  iv [522-721] 51a-53d 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch
8-13 52c-55d / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 6-19 109d119a / Fourth Ennead, tr
vii,  ch  8,  196a-b  /  Sixth  Ennead, tr i, ch 29 267c-268b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 49b-d; 57a-b; part in, 172b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk  ii,  aph  40 170c-173d 31 Descartes: Meditations, 11, 78c-d; 80b-d /
Objections  and  Replies, def vii 130c-d; 228c229b; 229d-230c; 231a-b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b passim;
ch  xxiii  204a-214b  passim,  esp sect 1-6 204a-205c, sect 15 208c-d 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 7-21 414b-417a; sect 37 419d; sect 49
422b;  sect  73 427b-c; sect 76-78 427d-428b; sect 91 430d-431a 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect xii, div 122-123 505c-506a esp div 123 506a 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 15b-c; lOOc-d 53 James: Psychology, 185a; 331a; 503a
2d.  The  diremption of body and mind, or matter and spirit 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr  i la-6b esp ch 3-7 ld-4a / Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch i
297b-d; ch 4-6 299a-300b

[108b]
74  THE GREAT IDEAS 2c to 3a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 76,
a  4  393a-394c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 48d-50b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a  /  Meditations,  11  77d-81d  passim; vi
96b-103d  passim  / Objections and Replies, def vi-vii 130c; def x 130d;
prop  iv 133c; 153c-155c; 224d-225d; 231a-232d; 248b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  prop 14, corol 2 360a; prop 15, schol 360b-361d; part ii, prop
1-7  373d-375c; prop 10-13 376c-378c; part hi, prop 2 396c-398b; part v,
pref  451a-452c  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 16
151d-152a;  ch  xxiii,  sect  5  205a-b; sect 15-32 208c-212d passim; ch
xxvii,  sect 27 227d-228a; bk iv, ch hi, sect 28 322a-c; ch x, sect 9-19
351b-354c  passim  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 18-20 416b-417a 53
James: Psychology, 84a-93b esp 88a 90a; 95b98a; 115a-119b esp 118b-119b;
139a-140a; 221a-226a esp 221a-222b, 225b-226a 3. The existence of matter
3a.  Matter as the sole existent: materialism, atomism 7 Plato: Sophist,
567a-568a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[193^-28]
269b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch 4
[303
a3~b8]  394b-d  /  Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2 410d-413c; ch 8
423b-425d / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 3
[983b7]-cH 4 [985^1] 501d-503d;
ch 8
[988b23-989b2o] 506d-507d; bk vii, ch
13  [1039^-11]  562d;  bk  xii,  ch  10 [1075^5io76a 5] 606a-d 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  i  [146-634] 2d-8d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 39 295a; bk
x,  sect  6  297a-b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch i 50a-b; ch 7,
52c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr i, ch 3 79b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 2-4
192a-193c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  25-30  265b-268c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  v,  par  19-21, 32c-33b; par 25 34b-c; bk vii, par 1-2
43b44a; par 7 45a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 47, a 1, ans
256a-257b;  q 50, a i, ans 269b270a; q 75, a i, ans 378b-379c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part hi, 172b; part iv, 269b-272b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
ii,  aph  8  140b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch x, sect 8-17
351a-353c passim 53 James: Psychology, 95b-98a; 106a; 671b
[fn
1]; 882a-884b

[109a]
lb  to  4tf Chapter 53: MATTER 75 3b. Matter as the most imperfect grade
of  being  or  reality  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ix,  423c-424a ^^.^ 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ix,  Sect  36  294d-295a 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  vim, ch 4-5 28c-29c; ch 7-8 30c-31c / Second Ennead, tr iv,
ch  5  51b-d;  ch 15-16 56c-57c; tr v, ch 4-5 59c-60c / Third Ennead, tr
vi,  ch  11-14  113a-116a  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xii, par 3-8
99d-101b;  par 15 102b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 8,
ans  and rep 3 19d-20c; o 4, a i, ans and rep 2 20d-21b; o 5, a 3, rep 3
25a-d;  o  7,  a 2, rep 3 31d-32c; q 14, a ii, rep 3 84c-85c; q 15, a 3,
rep 3 93b-94a; o 46, a i, rep i 250a 252d; q 84, a 3, rep 2 443d-444d; q
103,  a 1, rep 2 528b-529a; o 115, a i, rep 4 585d-587c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, xxix
[13-36] 150b-c
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 2 178c; ch xxiii,
sect  28  211b d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 123 506a 3c
Matter  as a fiction of the mind 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 1-96
413a-431d  passim; sect 133 439c-440a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
xii,  div  123 506a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 85d-91d esp 88b-c 44 Boswell :
Johnson,  134c-d  "bd.  The  relation  of God to matter: the creation of
matter  and its motions Old Testament: Genesis, 1-2 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  11:17—  (D)  OT,  Boo{  of  Wisdom,  11:18  7  Plato: Timaeus,
448b-449a;  450b-451b;  458a-b; 466a-b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii,
ch 6
[i07i b i9-32]
601c; ch 10
[io75b i6-24J
606c  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [146-158]  2d-3a; bk v
[146-194]  63a-c  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 7 45ad; bk xi,
par  7  90d-91a; bk xii, par 3-9 99d-101c; par 15-16 102b-103a; par 2426
104c-105b;  par  28-31  105c-107a;  par 38-40 108d-110a; bk xiii, par 45
123a; par 48 124a / City of God, bk xi, ch 23 334c335c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 8, a 4, ans and rep 1 37c-38c; q 15, A3, rep 3-4
93b-94a;  q  16, a 7, rep 2 99a-d; q 44, a 2 239b-240a; q 45, a 2, rep 2
242d-244a; a 8 249b-250a; q 46, a 1 esp rep 1,3,5-6 250a252d; q 47, a 1,
ans  256a-257b;  q 65, a 3 341c-342b; q 66 343d-349d; q 75, a 5, rep 1,4
382a-383b; q 84, a 3, rep 2 443d-444d;

[109b]
q  91 484a-488c; q 92, a 2, rep 2 489d-490c; a 4 491b-d; q 103, a i, rep
2  528b-529a; q 105, aa 1-2 538d-540c; q iio, a 2, ans 565d-566d; q 117,
a  3,  ans and rep 2 598c599b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
85, a 6 182d-184a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c; xiii [52-84] 126a-b; xxix [13-45]
150b-c   22   Chaucer:   Knight's  Tale  [2987-3016]  209a-b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 17b-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-56b
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15 360a-361d; part 11, def 1 373a; prop
2  374a;  prop 7, schol 375b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [694-735]
150b151b  esp  [708-735]  150b-151b; bk v [468-505] 185b-186a; [577-599]
187b-188a; bk vii
[59640] 218b-231a esp [70-108] 218b-219b, [192386] 221b-225b
34  Newton:  Optics, bk hi, 541b- 543a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  2 178c; ch xxiii, sect 28 211b-d; bk iv, ch x, sect
9-19 351b-354c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 6779 426b-428b passim;
sect  91-94  430d431c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 1 32,
509d  [fn  1] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 156d157b 4. Matter
as an object or condition of knowledge 4a. The knowability of matter: by
sense, by reason 7 Plato: Phaedo, 228d-229c / Republic, bk ix, 423c-424a
/ Timaeus, 456a-458a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 7
[i9i a8-n]
266d / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 15
[io39b2o1040^] 563c-564a; bk
ix, ch 7
[i049a i9-b i]
574d-575a  /  Soul,  bk hi, ch 4 [429b 10-430*9] 661d-662c 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [265-328]  4b-5a;  bk  ii  [80-141] 16a-d 17
Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr viii, ch 9 31c32a / Second Ennead, tr iv, ch
10  53b-d;  ch  12  54c-55b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 3-6
99d-100c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 3, ans 16a-d; q
14,  a ii 84c-85c; q 15, a 3, rep 3-4 93b-94a; q 50, a i, ans 269b-270a;
q  57, a 1 295a-d; q 66, a i, rep i 343d-345c; qq 84-86 440b-464d; q 87,
a  i,  ans 465a466c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 92, a
1,  ans  and  rep  12  1025c-1032b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 66
114d-115c

[110a]
(4.  Matter  as an object or condition of knowledge. 4a. The knowability
of matter: by sense, by reason?) 31 Descartes: Meditations, i-ii 75a-81d
passim;  vi  96b-  103d  passim  /  Objections and Replies, 229d-230c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  15,  schol  360b361d  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b passim; ch xxiii,
sect 5 205a-b; sect 15-17 208c-209a; sect 22-32 209d-212d; bk iv, ch hi,
sect  6  313c-315b;  sect  9-17  315c-317c  passim; sect 23-27 320a-322a
passim; ch vi, sect 14 335d336b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 16-24
416a-417d;  sect 54 423b 35 Hume: Human Understanding* sect xii, div 123
506a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 186b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i,
par  52  25a-c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  231a  53  James: Psychology,
140b-145a;  502a-503b  passim 4b. The role of matter in the concepts and
definitions  of  the  several  sciences:  the  grades  of abstraction in
physics,  mathematics,  and  metaphysics  7  Plato: Timaeus, 455c-458b 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  270a-271a;  ch  7-9  275b-278a,c /
Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 3
[995*15-20]
513d; bk in, ch 3
[998*20b i4]
517a-b; bk vi, ch 1
[io25b28-i026a6]
547d-548a; bk vii, ch io-ii 558a-561a; ch 15
[i039b20-i040a8]
563c-564a;  ch 17 565a566a,c; bk viii, ch 2-3 566d-568d; ch 6 569d-570d;
bk  x,  ch  8-9  585b-586c;  bk xi, ch 7 [1064*19-28] 592c; bk xii, ch 9
[1074 37-1075*2] 605c; bk xiii, ch 2
[1077^1]-
ch 3
[1078*31]
609a-d / Soul, bk i, ch i
[403*i5-b i9] 632b-d; bk hi, ch 7 [43i b i3-i9]
664b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, BK I, CH I
[641*14-31] 163d-164a
16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i
rep 2 3b-4a; q 3, a 3, ans 16a-d; q 18, a 4, rep 3 107d-108c; q 29, a 2,
rep 3 163b-164b; q 50, a 2, rep 1 270a-272a; q 75, a 4 381b382a; q 85, a
i,  rep  2 451c-453c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 9, a 2,
rep  3  424b-425a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 43d-44c / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  51  111c;  aph 66 114d-115c; bk 11, aph 8 140b 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19a-c;  xiv  28a-33b  / Objections and Replies,
169c-170a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  50 422c; sect 118-131
436b-439c

[110b]
76  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4£ to 4d 4c. The material conditions of sensation,
imagination,  and  memory 7 Plato: Meno, 177b-c 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i,
ch i
[403*5-20]
632a-b; bk ii, ch 12 [424*25^19] 656a-d; bk hi, ch 3
[429*4-7]
661b; ch 4
[429*29-b
4] 661c-d / Sleep, ch i
[454*1-12] 696b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [398-477] 20a-21a;
[730-864]
24b-26a; bk iv
[26-268]
44b-47d;  [324-336] 48c; [522-817] 51a-54d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 75, a 2, ans 379c 380c; a 3, ans and rep 2 380c381b; q 76, a
5,  ans 394c-396a; q 78, a 3, ans 410a-411d; q 84, a 2, ans 442b-443c; a
6,  ans  447c-449b: a 7, ans 449b-450b; a 8, rep 2 450b-451b; q 86, a 4,
rep  2  463d464d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 49a-51b; 62b; part in,
172b-d;  part  iv,  258b c; 261a; 262a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, xn 18b 25b
passim Meditations, vi 96b 103d passim 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop
17-18 380d382b 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 518b 519b: 522a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch i, sect 23 127b; ch viii, sect 4 133d; ch x,
sect  5 142a-b; sect 10 143c d; ch xxix, sect 3 234bc; ch xxxiii, sect 6
249a-b  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 18-20 416b-417a; sect 25 417d
418a; sect 102 432d-433a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 123
506a  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 14a 49 Darwin: Origin
of  Species,  85d  87a / Descent of Man, 568d-569a 53 James: Psychology,
2b-3a;  13a  19b  esp  15b17b, 19a-b; 26b-42a; 49b 50a; 98b-106b passim;
348a-359a  esp  348a,  358a-b; 367a373a esp 368b-369a, 370a b; 427b-433a
esp  428b-430a;  453a; 455b-457a; 459a-479a passim, esp 460a-464a, 469a;
497a-501b;  520a521a;  758a-759a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams,
351c-352d  esp  352a-b  /  Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 646b-648a esp
646c-d,  647d-648a  4d. The material conditions of thought: the relation
of matter to the existence and acts of the mind 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i,
ch 4
[408^8-32]
638c-d; bk hi, ch 4-5 661b-662d; ch 7
[43i*i4-b i9]663d-664b
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [94-176] 31b-32b; bk iv [722-817]
53d-54d  17  Plotinus  : Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 8, 195b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a i, rep 2 14b-15b; q 7, a 2, rep 2
31d-32c; q 14, a 2, rep 1-3 76d-77d; a ii, rep i 84c-85c; q 50, a 2, ans
270a-272a; q 55, a 2, ans and

[111a]
rep  2  289d-290d;  q  57,  a i, rep 3 295a-d; q 75, a 5 382a 383b; q 76
385c-399b;  q  77,  a 5 403d-404c; a 8 406b-407a; q 79, a 3 416a417a; qq
84-88  440b-473a  esp  q  84,  a6^Q  85, a 3 447c-457a; q no, a 2, rep i
565d-566d;  q  117,  a  3  598c-599b;  part i-ii, q 22, a i 720d-721c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  85, a 6 182d-184a; part hi
suppl,  q 92, a i, ans and rep 10 1025c-1032b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  49a-d;  52b-c;  54b-c;  part 11, 162c; part iv, 262b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  51  111c 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 18b 20d; xiv-xv
28a-33d  /  Discourse,  part  iv,  53b;  part  vi,  61c / Objections and
Replies,  215b-c;  229d230c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch
xxvii,  sect  27 227d-228a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23a-24a esp 23b; 34a b;
36b-c;  45d-46a; 48d-49a; 63a; 63d-64a; 69c72c; 81b-83b; 85d-91d; 95a-d;
115b-c;  117b119a; 173b-174a; 187a-c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
281c-282d   /  Practical  Reason,  349b-350c  esp  350b-c  /  Judgement,
542b-543c;  570b-572c;604a  b  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 288c-d 50 Marx:
Capital,  llb-c  53  James:  Psychology,  xiiib-xiva;  2b 3b; 8a-67a esp
9a-12b,  15b-17b,  43a-44a,  46a-47a, 51b52a, 53a-54a, 66b-67a; 69b 73b;
82b;  84a  93b  esp  84a-85a,  88a-90b,  91a-93a;  116a-119b  esp  119b;
151a-153a;  291a  295b;  367a-373a  esp 368a-369a, 370b-371a; 455b-456a;
690a  b;  758a-759a;  827b-835a;  856b  858a  54  Freud: Hysteria, 87a /
Interpretation   of   Dreams,  154d-155a;  367b-c;  382a-c;  384c385a  /
Unconscious,  431c-d / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 646b-649c . Matter
in  relation  to  good  and evil 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-226c; 231c-234c /
77maeus,  452d-453b;  474b-d / Statesman, 587a589c 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk  i,  ch  9  [i9i  b35-i  92*24]  267d-268c  / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 6
[988*7-16]  506a-b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 1, ch 9 114c-116b CROSS-
REFERENCES 2c(3); Infinity 4c; Man 3a; Mind 2b; One and Many 3b(4); Soul
3c.

[111b]
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 3 260b; bk ix, sect 36 294d-295a
17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr viii 27b-34a esp ch 3-5 28a-29c, ch 7, 30d
/ Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 16 57b-c / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch 10, 250c /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr vii, ch 27-29 334d-336b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
v,  par  19-21,  32c-33b; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 18-22 49a-50a; bk
xiii,  par  45  123a  /  City of God, bk xi, ch 23 334c-335c 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part 1, q 3, a 2, ans 15c-16a; q 4, a 1, ans and rep 2
20d-21b;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a 8, rep i 692ac 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  i  [97-142] 107b-d; xiii [52-87] 126a-b 41 Gi b bon : Decline
and  Fall,  330a-b  6.  Criticisms of materialism and its consequences 7
Plato:  Sophist,  567a-568a  8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 2-5 633a-641d 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640b5-64i a33] 163a-164b
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c; bk 11, ch 3, 185a; ch
6  188c-191a  17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d; ch 3 79b-c /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr vii, ch 6-8, 194b-197b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  75, a 1, rep 1 378b-379c; q 84, a i, ans 440d442a; a 6, ans
447c-449b   28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  355b-d;  495c-496d  35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  21 417a; sect 35 419c; sect 50 422c;
sect  85-88  429c-430b;  sect 92-96 431a-d; sect 102 432d-433a; sect 133
439c-440a;  sect  141  441a-b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 126c-d / Judgement,
558b-559d;  579d-580a;  582b-c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 140b;
143a-c;  bk  x,  449b-c;  bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  570d;  bk xiv,
589c-590c;  609b;  epilogue  11,  678a-b; 689c-690a; 694d-696d 53 James:
Psychology, 5a; 8b-9a; 84a-119b; 291a-295b; 655b-656a; 745a-b; 823a-825a
54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 882b-884c 2a; Form id(i)-id(2); and
for  the  theory  of  celestial  and  terrestrial  matter as distinct in
physical  substances  as  composite of matter and form, see Being 7b(2),
7^3);  Form  2c(i)-  principle  of individuality in material things, see
Same and Other ia; Universal and Particular 3.

[112a]
78  THE  GREAT IDEAS . On the Power of God, q 4 xxxvi 7-8, 11-12, 62-65;
part  11,  22-23;  part i"i 48Digby. The Nature of Bodies J. S. Mill. An
Examination of Sir William HamilHolbach. The System of Nature

[112b]
For:  The conception of matter or extension as a substance, or as a mode
of  substance,  see  Being  7b(4);  Form  2d;  Man 3a; Mind 2d; Soul 3c.
Atomism  as  a  theory  of  matter  and as a materialistic philosophy of
nature,  see  Element  5a5h;  Mind  2e;  and  for discussions bearing on
materialism as a philosophy of nature, society, and history, see Element
5;  History  4a(2); Man 3c; Will 5c. Matter in relation to mind, or body
in  relation  to  soul, see Man 3a; Mind 2a-2e; Soul 3c, 3e; and for the
discussion  of  immaterial  substances,  spirits,  or beings which exist
apart  from  matter,  see Angel 2, 3b; BEiNG7b(2); Eternity 4a; Form 2a,
2d;  God  4c; MAN3a(i); Mind 2a; Soul 3a~3c. The theological problems of
matter,  its  creation  and conservation, see God 7a; World 4c4e(i). The
physical  properties  of  matter or bodies and the laws of their motion,
see  Astronomy  8c(3);  Mechanics  4a,  5a-5f(2), 6a-6e; Quantity 5d~5e;
Space  ia-id;  and  for  the  problem of the infinity of matter or of an
infinite body, see Infinity 4a~4b. Matter as an object of knowledge, see
Knowledge  5a(2).  Matter  in  relation  to  sensation  and  to sensible
qualities,  see  Element 5e; Mechanics 4b; Quality i; Sense 3^3). Matter
in  relation  to thought, abstract ideas, or definitions, see Definition
6a;  Form  3c;  Idea 2g; Memory and Imagination 6c(i); Mind ia(2); Sense
5a;  Universal  and  Particular 4c. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are
works  not included in Great Booths ofthe Western World, but relevant to
the  For  the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of
the  works  cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which
follows  the  last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. . De Natura Materiae et
Dimensionibus InterJohn of Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus Tho-

[113a]
Maxwell. Matter and Motion Lotze. Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 5-6 Planck. Das
Prinzip  der  Erhaltung  der Energie C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol
vi,  par  238-286 Pearson. The Grammar of Science, ch 8""^ Mach. "On the
Principle of the Conservation of Energy," in Popular Scientific Lectures
Bergson.  Matter and Memory, ch 4 Plekhanov. In Defense of Materialism .
Essays  in the History of Materialism Meyerson. Identity and Reality, ch
4-5, 7-8 Lenin. Materialism and Empiriocriticism Cassirer. Substance and
Function,   sup  iv  Weyl.  Space—  Time—Matter  Whitehead.  An  Enquiry
Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge, ch 15

[113b]
Chapter  53:  MATTER 79 McTaggart. The Nature of Existence, ch 34 Stout.
Mind  and  Matter Broad. The Mind and Its Place in Nature, ch 4 Descoqs.
Essai  critique  sur Vhylemorphisme G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of Science,
essay  iv B. Russell. Principles of Mathematics, ch 53 . The Problems of
Philosophy, ch 2-4 . Mysticism and Logic, ch 7 . The Analysis of Matter,
ch  1-14 McDougall. Modern Materialism and Emergent Evolution Santayana.
Scepticism  and Animal Faith, ch 19-20 . The Realm of Matter, ch 2-3, 10
Lenzen.  The  Nature  of  Physical  Theory,  part  iv, ch 15 Koninck. Le
probleme de Vindeterminisme

[114a]
INTRODUCTION  MECHANICS,  taken as the name for just one of the physical
sciences,  would  merit  no place on a small list of basic, focal terms.
But  the  word  "mechanics"  means  more  than that. In the tradition of
western  thought  it  signifies  a  whole  philosophy  of nature, and it
connotes  a  set  of  fundamental  principles  under  which, it has been
thought,  all  the  physical  sciences can be unified. The principles of
mechanics  have been applied not only in statics and dynamics, which are
concerned  with  the action and reaction of bodies at rest or in motion,
but  also  in  acoustics and optics and the sciences of heat, magnetism,
and  electricity.  They  have been extended to astronomical phenomena to
constitute  what is called "celestial mechanics." They have been thought
to  govern  the action or motion of invisible particles or waves as well
as  the familiar bodies of ordinary experience. In the range and variety
of the phenomena it covers, mechanics would seem to be co-extensive with
physics.  Such  at  least  appears  to  be its scope at one stage in the
development   of  natural  science.  We  shall  presently  consider  the
dissatisfaction   with   the  mechanical  point  of  view  which  causes
scientists  in  our  own  day  to  hail  the  replacement  of "classical
mechanics"  by  the  "new  physics"  as  a great advance in science. The
intellectual  significance  of  this  change  can  be compared with that
earlier  revolution  in  the  17th  century when the new natural science
founded on the achievements of Galileo, Huygens, and Newton replaced the
physics   of  Aristotle  which  had  long  reigned  as  the  traditional
philosophy  of  nature. What Einstein calls "the rise and decline of the
mechanical  point  of  view"  thus seems to provide an apt title for the
story  of  three  stages in the history of science, in only one of which
does the whole of physics appear to be dominated by mechanics.

[114b]
Chapter  54: MECHANICS One way, then, of understanding the importance of
mechanics  is in terms of that story. Other chapters, such as Astronomy,
Change,  Element,  Matter,  Physics,  Space,  and Time —and perhaps also
Cause and Hypothesis— tell part of that story, especially the part which
turns  on  the differences between Aristotle's physics (which is neither
experimental  nor mathematical) and modern physics (which is both). This
chapter  focuses  on  issues  which  fall largely within modern physics—
issues  belonging  to  that part of the story which, in the great books,
begins  with  Galileo,  Huygens,  and  Newton  and  runs  to Fourier and
Faraday.  The  story  itself  does not end there, but the point to which
Faraday  carries  it  suggests the sequel in Clerk Maxwell and Einstein,
just  as Galileo's point of departure reflects antecedents in Aristotle.
The  great  books state the issues sufficiently well, though they do not
tell  the  whole  story.  That can be fully documented only by a host of
supplementary  scientific  classics in various fields, such as the works
listed  in  the Additional Readings. In modern times it is accepted that
physics  should  be both experimental and mathematical. No one questions
the  ideal  of  unifying  the physical sciences and finding the unity in
nature's  laws.  But  the  question  is  whether that unification can be
achieved  under the aegis of mechanics; and the issue is whether physics
should   gather   its   experimental   findings  together  under  purely
mathematical  formulations or should also try to give those mathematical
formulae  a  mechanical  interpretation.  The issue involves more than a
question  of  scientific method. It concerns the ultimate aim of natural
science  and  the kind of concepts it should employ to fulfill this aim.
Should the scientist seek to do no more than describe the 80

[115a]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS phenomena of nature in terms of the simplest and
most   universal   mathematical   relations?  Or  should  he  go  beyond
description to an explanation of the phenomena in terms ^ofrfieir causes
?  When  the issue is thus stated as a choice between being content with
description  or  striving for explanation, it appears to be broader than
the  question  whether  physics should or should not be mechanical. Even
granted  that  explanation is desirable, does it necessarily follow that
physical   explanation  must  employ  the  principles  and  concepts  of
mechanics?  Aristotle's  physics,  it can be argued, provides a negative
answer. His various physical treatises represent a natural science which
tries to explain the phenomena without doing so mechanically, just as it
tries  to  describe  the phenomena without doing so mathematically. That
the  connection  of  these  two  features  of Aristotle's physics is not
accidental  seems  to be indicated by the conjunction of their opposites
in  modern  physics.  When  in  the 17th century the physicist describes
natural  phenomena  in mathematical terms, he explains them— if he tries
to  explain  them  at all— in mechanical terms. "The laws of Mechanics,"
writes  Descartes,  "are the laws of Nature." Huygens opens his Treatise
on  Light  by  referring  to  optics  as  the  kind of science "in which
Geometry  is  applied to matter"; but he at once expresses the desire to
advance this branch of mathematical physics by investigating "the origin
and the causes" of the truths already known, in order to provide "better
and  more satisfactory explanations." Such explanations, he thinks, will
be found only if we conceive "the causes of all natural effects in terms
of  mechanical  motions."  He  declares  it  his  opinion  that "we must
necessarily  do  this,  or else renounce all hopes of ever comprehending
anything  in  Physics."  Galileo  and  Newton,  as will be noted, do not
unqualifiedly share Huygens' view that it is proper for the mathematical
physicist  to  inquire  about  causes.  But they would agree that if any
explanation  is to be given for laws of nature expressed in mathematical
form,  one or another type of mechanical hypothesis would be required to
state the causes. Postponing for the moment the consideration of whether
the

[115b]
81  investigation  of  causes  belongs  to  mathematical physics, let us
examine  what is involved in giving a mechanical explanation of anything
and  why  this  type  of  explanation  tends  to  occur  in  the  causal
interpretation  of  mathematically formulated laws of nature. Two points
seem   to   constitute  the  essence  of  mechanical  theory.  Both  are
fundamental notions and both are philosophical in the sense that they do
not seem to result from the findings of experimental research. The first
point  is  an  exclusive emphasis upon efficient causes, which means the
exclusion  of other types of causes, especially final and formal causes,
from   mechanical  explanation.  As  the  chapter  on  Cause  indicates,
efficient  causality  consists  in  one thing acting on another. But not
every  sort  of action by which one thing affects another is mechanical.
According  to  the doctrine, an efficient cause is mechanical only if it
consists in a moving body acting on another by impact, or if it consists
in  a  force exerted by one body to cause motion in another or to change
its  quantity  or  direction.  The notion of a force which does not work
through  the  impact of one moving thing upon another raises the problem
of  action-at-a-distance  to  which  we  shall  return subsequently. The
second  fundamental  point  is  an  exclusive  emphasis upon quantities.
Mechanical  explanation  makes  no  references  to  qualities  or  other
attributes of things. Paradoxically this point is sometimes expressed in
terms  of a distinction between primary and secondary qualities; but, as
the  chapters  on  Quantity and Quality point out, the primary qualities
are  all  quantities. According to Locke, they are "solidity, extension,
figure, motion or rest, and number"; according to Newton, "the universal
qualities   of   all   bodies   whatsoever"  are  "extension,  hardness,
impenetrability,  mobility,  and  inertia."  Others,  like  Galileo  and
Descartes, give still different enumerations, but the point remains that
the  only  attributes  of  bodies which have mechanical significance are
measurable  quantities. Such secondary qualities, for example, as colors
and tones belong to the physical world (as it is mechanically conceived)
only  by  reduction  to  the  local  motion of particles or waves having
certain velocities, lengths, or other quantitative attributes.

[116a]
82  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  We  need  not be concerned here with what sort of
reality  is  assigned  to  secondary qualities, or how their presence in
experience  is  accounted  for.  These  problems  are discussed in other
chapters,  such  as  Quality  and  Sense.  However  they are solved, the
philosophy  of  mechanism excludes from the physical world whatever does
not consist in, or cannot be reduced to, quantities of matter (or mass),
motion, or force, and such related quantities as those of time and space
(or  distance).  The  two  points  of  mechanical  theory  are obviously
connected, for the kind of cause which mechanical explanation employs to
the  exclusion  of  all  others  consists  in a quantity of motion or of
force.  Just  as  obviously,  mechanical  explanation,  dealing  only in
quantities  and  in  causes  which  are  quantitatively  measurable,  is
precisely  the type of explanation which would seem to be appropriate if
one  felt  called  upon  to  give  an interpretation of the mathematical
relationships  which  the  mathematical  physicist formulates as laws of
nature.  These  mathematical  laws  are  after  all  statements  of  the
relations  among  physical  quantities  which  have  been  subjected  to
experimental determination or measurement. As a philosophical theory the
mechanical  view  of  nature  antedates  modern  physical  science.  The
atomistic  conception  of  the world, which Lucretius expounds, contains
both of the fundamental points of mechanism— the doctrine of primary and
secondary  qualities  and  the  doctrine  that all effects in nature are
produced  by  efficient moving causes. The controversy over mechanism is
also  ancient. Aristotle denies both points of doctrine in his criticism
of  the  Greek atomists, Democritus and Leucippus; and in the exposition
of  his  own  physical theories he states an opposite view. To qualities
and  qualitative  change he assigns physical reality. He explains change
in  terms  of  four  types  of  causes, not one. He does not exclude the
mechanical  type  of  cause  in  his explanation of local motion. On the
contrary,  with respect to local motion his theory that a body in motion
must  be  directly acted upon by a moving cause throughout the period of
its  motion,  seems to be more mechanical than the modern theory that no
cause need be

[116b]
assigned  for  the  continuing uniform motion of a body along a straight
line  but only for a change in its direction or velocity. What is new in
modern  times  is  not  the philosophical doctrine of mechanism, but the
introduction   of   mechanical   explanation   into   experimental   and
mathematical physics, and the controversy about whether it belongs there
or  can  be  defended  as  useful. The so-called rise and decline of the
mechanical  view  in  modern  physics  is  connected  with  experimental
discoveries  and  mathematical  formulations.  It  is not an alternation
between  success  and  failure  on  the  level of philosophical argument
concerning  the  ultimate  truth  of  mechanical conceptions. When these
conceptions  are  rejected,  it  is  not  for  the  sake of returning to
opposite  notions  in  physical  theory, such as those of Aristotle, but
rather  because,  as Einstein says, "science did not succeed in carrying
out the mechanical program convincingly, and today no physicist believes
in  the possibility of its fulfillment." There is a touch of prophecy in
the  conversation  Swift imagines taking place between Aristotle and the
physicists  of  the 17th century. According to Swift, when Aristotle was
confronted  with Descartes and Gassendi, he "freely acknowledged his own
mistakes in natural philosophy, because he proceeded in many things upon
conjecture, as all men must do; and he found that Gassendi, who had made
the  doctrine  of Epicurus as palatable as he could, and the vortices of
Descartes,  were  equally  exploded.  He  predicted  the  same  fate  to
attraction,  whereof  the present learned are such zealous asserters. He
said  that new systems of nature were but new fashions, which would vary
in  every  age;  and  even  those  who  pretend to demonstrate them from
mathematical  principles, would flourish but a short period of time, and
be  out  of  vogue when that was determined." Both Galileo and Descartes
re-state  the  philosophical  doctrine  which  first  appears in ancient
atomism,  but both re-state it in a way that suggests its utility for an
experimental  investigation  of nature. It is significant that Galileo's
statement  occurs  in  the  context  of  his concern with the nature and
causes of heat. He wishes to explain, he writes in // Saggiatore, why he
thinks that "motion is the cause of

[117a]
heat."  To  do this he finds it necessary to question a prevalent notion
"which  is very remote from the truth"— the belief that "there is a true
accident,  affection,  or  quality, -really inherent in the substance by
which  we feel ourselves heated." He denies the physical reality of heat
as  an  inherent quality of bodies on the same ground that he denies the
physical  reality  of  other qualities. "I do not believe," he declares,
"that  there  exists  anything  in  external bodies for exciting tastes,
smells,  and  sounds,  but  size,  shape, quantity, and motion, swift or
slow;  and if ears, tongues, and noses were removed, I am of the opinion
that shape, quantity, and motion would remain, but there would be an end
of  smells, tastes, and sounds, which, apart from the living creature, I
regard  as  mere words." Descartes' statement of the doctrine is bolder,
perhaps,  in  its  suggestion  of  a  mechanical  program  for  physical
research.  "Colors,  odors,  savors,  and  the  rest of such things," he
writes, are "merely sensations existing in my thought." They differ from
the  real  properties  of  bodies just as much as "pain differs from the
shape and motion of the instrument which inflicts it." The true physical
properties,  such  as  "gravity,  hardness,  the  power  of  heating, of
attracting  and  purging"  consist,  in  Descartes'  opinion, "solely in
motion  or  its  absence,  and  in  the  configuration  and situation of
[bodily] parts." As a philosophical doctrine, the mechanical view is not
necessarily  tied  to  atomism.  Descartes opposes atomism as plainly as
does  Aristotle.  Furthermore, Newton, who is an atomist, disagrees with
both  Descartes  and  the  Greek  atomists  on  one fundamental point in
mechanical  theory.  The  ancient atomists make the actual motion of one
particle  in  collision with another the indispensable cause of a change
of  motion  in  the latter. Descartes likewise requires one motion to be
the  cause  of  another  and  explains gravity in terms of actual bodily
motions.  Newton  rejects  Descartes'  mechanical hypothesis of material
vortices as the cause of gravitation. He seems to have this in mind, and
to  put  Descartes  in  the same class with Aristotle, when he says that
"hypotheses,   whether  metaphysical  or  physical,  whether  of  occult
qualities or mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy."

[117b]
Chapter 54: MECHANICS 83 The force of gravity, according to Newton, is a
power  of  attraction  which  one  body exercises on another without the
first  being  in  motion  or coming into contact with the second. Newton
acknowledges  the  problem  of  action-at-a-distance  which  his  theory
raises.  For  the most part he lets it stand as a problem which does not
affect  the  mathematical  results  of  his  work. But in the Queries he
attaches  to  his Optics he suggests, by way of solution, the hypothesis
of  an  ether as the continuous medium through which gravitational force
is  exerted.  In the opinion of later physicists, Newton's hypothesis is
no  less  mechanical  than  Descartes'.  Nor  does  there seem to be any
philosophical  grounds  for  preferring one hypothesis to the other. But
Newton's  quarrel  with  Descartes  is  not on a philosophical issue. It
turns  on  which  mechanical conception, if any at all is to be offered,
fits best with the mathematical laws of terrestrial and celestial motion
which  Newton  had succeeded in formulating as universal laws of nature.
Those mathematical laws, moreover, had the merit of fitting the observed
phenomena  and  so,  of  realizing  the  scientific  ideal  of  accurate
description  stated  in the most generalized form. Newton's triumph over
Descartes,  then, is a triumph in mathematical and experimental physics,
not a triumph in philosophy. Pope's couplet Nature and Nature's Laws lay
hid  in  Night,  God said, Let Newton be, and all was light records that
triumph,  and celebrates the illumination of nature by the mechanical as
well  as  the  mathematical  principles  of  Newton's  physics. Newton's
picture  of  the  world dominates the mind of a century and controls its
science. Locke speaks of "the incomparable Mr. Newton" and of "his never
enough  to  be admired book"; Hume refers to him as the philosopher who,
"from  the  happiest  reasoning . . . determined the laws and forces, by
which  the  revolutions  of  the planets are governed and directed"; and
even   Berkeley,  who  challenges  his  theories  of  space,  time,  and
attraction,  regrets  that  he must take issue with "the authority of so
great  a  man,"  a  man "whom all the world admires" as the author of "a
treatise on Mechanics, demonstrated and applied to nature."

[118a]
84  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Newton's  achievement  is to have accomplished an
extraordinary  synthesis  of  all  that  was good in previous scientific
work,  and  a sweeping criticism of all that was considered stultifying.
That   so   many   and   such   varied  phenomena  should  be  organized
mathematically  by  a  theory  as  simple  as  Newton's,  is  altogether
impressive. Equally astonishing is the predictive power of Newton's laws
and  the  explanatory  power  of  his  mechanics,  not  to  mention  the
technological  fruits  of  the  latter in mechanical engineering and the
invention  of machinery of all sorts. Whatever difficulties are implicit
in the Newtonian mechanics—subsequently to become, with new discoveries,
more  and more perplexing— the scope and grandeur of Newton's book gives
mechanics  a  commanding  position with respect to the future of science
for  at  least  two centuries. In the century between the publication of
Newton's   Mathematical  Principles  and  the  publication  in  1787  of
Lagrange's   Mecanique   analytique,   "the  notion  of  the  mechanical
explanation  of all the processes of nature," writes Whitehead, "finally
hardened  into  a  dogma ofscience." In the next century, the mechanical
dogma  spreads from physics and chemistry throughout the whole domain of
natural  science— into biology and psychology—and even beyond that, into
economics  and  sociology.  Books  bear  such  titles as The Mechanistic
Conception  of  Life,  The  Mechanism of Human Behavior, Social Statics,
Social  Dynamics.  At  the  end  of  the  19th  century, James notes the
conquests  which  are  being  made  on all sides by the mechanical idea.
"Once  the  possibility  of  some  kind  of mechanical interpretation is
established,"  he writes, "Mechanical Science, in her present mood, will
not  hesitate  to  set  her  brand  of ownership upon the matter." James
himself  testifies  to  the persuasiveness and success of the mechanical
dogma,  though  not  without  some  resentment.  "The  modern mechanico-
physical  philosophy,  of  which  we are so proud," he says, "because it
includes  the nebular cosmogony, the conservation of energy, the kinetic
theory  of  heat  and  gases, etc., etc., begins by saying that the only
facts  are  collocations  and motions of primordial solids, and the only
laws the changes in motion which changes in collocation bring. The ideal
which

[118b]
this  philosophy strives after," he continues, "is a mathematical world-
formula, by which, if all the collocations and motions at a given moment
were  known,  it  would  be  possible  to reckon those of any wished-for
future   moment,   by  simply  considering  the  necessary  geometrical,
arithmetical,  and logical implications." Laplace had in fact pictured a
lightning  calculator who, given the total configuration of the world at
one  instant,  would  be  able to bring the whole future "present to his
eyes."  And  James quotes Helmholtz to the effect that the whole problem
of  physical science is "to refer natural phenomena back to unchangeable
attractive  and  repulsive  forces  whose  intensity depends wholly upon
distance.  The  solubility  of  this  problem  is  the  condition of the
complete  comprehensibility  of  nature."  In  commenting on this, James
admits  that  "the  world  grows  more orderly and rational to the mind,
which  passes  from one feature of it to another by deductive necessity,
as  soon as it conceives it as made up of so few and so simple phenomena
as bodies with no properties but number and movement to and fro." But he
also  insists that it is "a world with a very minimum of rational stuff.
The  sentimental facts and relations," he complains, "are butchered at a
blow. But the rationality yielded is so superbly complete inform that to
many  minds  this atones for the loss, and reconciles the thinker to the
notion  of a purposeless universe, in which all the things and qualities
men  love  .  .  . are but illusions of our fancy attached to accidental
clouds of dust which will be dissipated by the eternal cosmic weather as
careless  as  they  were formed." With the 20th century a change occurs.
The dogma of mechanism may continue to spread in other sciences and gain
even  wider  acceptance as a popular philosophical creed, but within the
domain  of  the physical sciences, certain mechanical conceptions become
suspect  and a wholesale rejection of classical mechanics (which becomes
identified with Newtonian physics) is called for. Einstein, for example,
quotes  the  passage  from  Helmholtz  that  James  had  cited, in which
Helmholtz  goes on to say that the vocation of physics "will be ended as
soon as the reduction

[119a]
of  natural  phenomena  to  simple forces is complete." This "mechanical
view,  most clearly formulated by Helmholtz," Einstein concedes, "played
an  important  role in its time^but, he adds, it "appears dull and naive
to  a  twentieth  century  physicist."  Einstein reviews the assumptions
which  physicists  had to make in order to construct a mechanical theory
of light, gravitation, and electricity. "The artificial character of all
these  assumptions," he says, "and the necessity for introducing so many
of  them  all quite independent of each other, was enough to shatter the
belief  in  the  mechanical  point  of  view.  .  .  . In the attempt to
understand  the  phenomena of nature from the mechanical point of view,"
he  continues,  "throughout  the  whole development of science up to the
twentieth  century,  it was necessary to introduce artificial substances
like   electric  and  magnetic  fluids,  light  corpuscles,  or  ether."
According  to  Einstein,  "attempts to construct an ether in some simple
way"  have  been "fruitless"; but what is more important in his opinion,
such   failures  "indicate  that  the  fault  lies  in  the  fundamental
assumption  that  it  is possible to explain all events in nature from a
mechanical  point  of  view."  Does  this  mean  that  the  contemporary
physicist  has  found  another  and  better way of explaining nature? Is
there  a  non-mechanical way of explaining the phenomena, which fits the
mathematical  laws of experimental physics; or does discarding mechanics
mean  relinquishing all efforts to explain nature? Eddington suggests an
answer.  "One  of the greatest changes in physics between the nineteenth
century  and  the  present  day," he writes, "has been the change in our
ideal  of  scientific  explanation.  It  was  the boast of the Victorian
scientist  that  he would not claim to understand a thing until he could
make  a  model  of  it; and by a model he meant something constructed of
levers,  geared  wheels,  squirts,  and other appliances familiar to the
engineer.  Nature  in building the universe was supposed to be dependent
on  just the same kind of resources as any human mechanic. . . . The man
who  could  make  gravitation out of cogwheels would have been a hero in
the  Victorian  age."  Today,  however,  Eddington continues, "we do not
encourage the engineer to build the world for us out of his

[119b]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS 85 material, but we turn to the mathematician to
build  it  out  of  his  material."  We  may turn to the mathematician's
construction  of the world in his terms; but in the tradition of western
thought,  mathematically  formulated  laws  of  nature are not, with the
single  exception  perhaps of the Pythagoreans, regarded as explanations
of  why  things  behave as they do or how they work. The change from the
19th  to  the  20th  century  with  respect  to "our ideal of scientific
explanation"  cannot,  then, be the substitution of the mathematical for
the  mechanical  account  of  why  and  how. The shift from mechanics to
mathematics  is  rather a shift from explanation as the scientific ideal
to  the statement of laws which, while having maximum generality, remain
purely  descriptive.  What  Eddington means by building the world out of
the  material of mathematics seems to be the same as what Galileo means,
four centuries earlier, when he says that the book of nature "is written
in mathematical language." The materials are such symbols as "triangles,
circles,  and  other  geometrical  figures."  Without the help of these,
Galileo writes to Kepler, nature "is impossible to comprehend." But does
the  mathematical  comprehension  of nature mean a causal explanation of
it? More explicitly than Eddington, Galileo insists that explanation— at
least  in  the  sense  of stating the causes— is not the business of the
mathematical  physicist.  In a passage which cannot be read too often or
examined  too  closely,  he  names three opinions which the philosophers
have  expressed about "the cause of the acceleration of natural motion."
Some,  he  says,  "explain  it  by  attraction  to the center, others to
repulsion  between  the very small parts of the body, while still others
attribute  it to a certain stress in the surrounding medium which closes
in  behind  the  falling body and drives it from one of its positions to
another.  Now  all  of  these fantasies," he continues, "and others too,
ought to be examined, but it is not really worthwhile." They ought to be
examined  by  philosophers, perhaps, but debating them is not worthwhile
in  "those  sciences  where  mathematical  demonstrations are applied to
natural  phenomena."  Perfectly  defining  the  program  of mathematical
physics, Galileo sets himself a limited task:

[120a]
86  THE  GREAT  IDEAS "merely to. investigate and to demonstrate some of
the  properties  of  accelerated  motion  (whatever  the  cause  of this
acceleration  may  be)."  It  should be noted that of the three opinions
about  causes  which  Galileo  mentions,  the  first,  which anticipates
Newtonian  attraction,  is  no  less summarily dismissed than the third,
which  summarizes  the  Aristotelian  theory.  "What I call Attraction,"
Newton later writes, "may be performed by impulse or by some other means
unknown to me. I use that word here to signify only in general any force
by  which  bodies tend towards one another, whatsoever be the cause." It
is  well  known,  he  asserts  in  the same passage of the Optics, "that
bodies  act  one  upon another by the attractions of gravity, magnetism,
and  electricity";  but,  he  goes  on,  "how  these  attractions may be
performed  I  do not here consider." Newton's attitude toward causes and
explanation  would  seem  to  be identical with Galileo's. Galileo calls
opinions  about causes "fantasies" and dismisses them; Newton calls them
"hypotheses" and seems to banish them as resolutely. "Hypotheses are not
to  be  regarded  in experimental philosophy," he declares in one place;
and  in  another,  having  just  referred  to  predecessors  who feigned
hypotheses  "for  explaining  all things mechanically," he says that, on
the  contrary, "the main business of natural philosophy is to argue from
phenomena without feigning hypotheses." The task of the physicist who is
both experimental and mathematical in his method, Newton plainly states,
is  "to derive two or three general principles of motion from phenomena,
and  afterwards  to  tell  us  how  the  properties  and  actions of all
corporeal things follow from those manifest principles.
[This] would
be  a  very  great  step  in  philosophy,  though  the  causes  of those
principles  were  not yet discovered. And therefore," he says of his own
work,  "I  scruple  not  to  propose  the  principles  of  motion  above
mentioned,  they being of very general extent, and leave their causes to
be  found  out." The two or three principles of motion mentioned in this
passage from the Optics are the foundation of Newton's other great work,
the  Mathematical  Principles of Natural Philosophy. Its title indicates
the clearly conceived inten-

[120b]
tion  of  its  author  to  limit  himself to the program of mathematical
physics  on  which both he and Galileo seem to agree. He will not try to
define  "the  species  or  physical  qualities  of forces"; he will only
investigate  "the  quantities  and mathematical proportions of them." In
the  General  Scholium with which the Mathematical Principles concludes,
Newton  disavows once more any knowledge of the cause of gravity. "To us
it  is  enough,"  he  says,  "that  gravity  does really exist, and acts
according  to the laws which we have explained, and abundantly serves to
account  for  all  the motions of the celestial bodies, and of our sea."
Admitting  that  he  has  "not been able to discover the causes . . . of
gravity  from  phenomena," Newton flatly reiterates his policy: "I frame
no hypotheses." Ix view of this policy, how does the name of Newton come
to  be  associated  with  the triumph of the mechanical point of view in
physics? Why do contemporary scientists like Einstein identify Newtonian
physics  with  classical  mechanics?  If  a mathematical physicist, like
Newton  or  Galileo,  refrains from guessing at or asserting causes, how
can  he  be charged with having indulged in the impurity of a mechanical
explanation  of  the  phenomena,  and  with  having foisted a mechanical
conception of the universe upon mankind ? The answer to these questions,
so  far as Newton is concerned, may be partly found in his own writings.
He  did  not,  it  seems,  entirely disavow an inquiry into the cause of
attractive  force,  as  in  itself  either  misguided  or  irrelevant to
science.  "We  must  learn  from  the phenomena of nature," he tells us,
"what  bodies  attract one another, and what are the laws and properties
of  the  attraction, before we enquire the cause by which the attraction
is  performed."  This  statement  postpones,  but  does  not exclude, an
inquiry into causes. In another statement, Newton even gives us a reason
for  the postponement. "In mathematics," he says, "we are to investigate
the  quantities  of  force  with  their  proportions consequent upon any
conditions  supposed; then, when we enter upon phvsics, we compare those
proportions  with  the phenomena of nature, that we may know the several
kinds  of  attractive  bodies. And this preparation being made, we argue
more safely

[121a]
concerning the physical species, causes, and proportions of the forces."
These  remarks of Newton do not give the whole answer. For the other and
perhaps-more  important part of it, we must go to the actual development
of  physical science in the 17th century. The steps in this development—
largely  discoveries  and  formulations  made  by  Galileo, Huygens, and
Newton—  lead  to  crises  from which the scientists could not extricate
themselves  without  discussing causes— the causes of gravity and of the
propagation of light. We may thus be able to understand why Newton could
not  abandon  the search for causes; and why, in the Queries he appended
to  the  Optics, he proposes a mechanical hypothesis in order to explain
how   the  attractive  force  of  gravity  exerts  itself  across  great
distances,  and  also defends his mechanical theory of light against the
equally mechanical but different hypothesis of Huygens. It might well be
argued   that,   though   Galileo's   pure   position  initiated  modern
mathematical physics, it was the persistence of impurity in the worrying
about  causes,  or even the inescapability of such concern, which caused
great  scientific advances to be made. The concern about causes seems to
provide,  time and time again, the pivot for new discoveries. The causes
are  not  found,  but new hypotheses are made, and these, when employed,
lead  to  wider,  more  general  results  in the form of more inclusive,
unifying  laws.  We see this happen not only in the study of gravitation
and  light,  but  also in the investigation of heat and electricity. The
concern  of  Faraday,  for example, to explain electrical attraction and
repulsion  in  terms  of  the  action  of  contiguous  particles, and to
establish  the  existence of physical lines of force, leads to Maxwell's
theory  of the electro-magnetic field; and his field equations, combined
with  Faraday's  speculations concerning the relation between electrical
and  gravitational  attraction,  lead  to  the  attempt,  on the part of
contemporary  physics,  to construct a unified field theory covering all
physical phenomena. Physics may return in the 20th century to the purely
mathematical   character   it   had  at  the  beginning  of  its  modern
development. But as may be seen in any introduction to recent

[121b]
Chapter 54: MECHANICS 87 physics written for the layman, it is necessary
to   mark  the  influence  of  mechanical  conceptions  upon  scientific
discovery and thought, in order to understand the difference between the
unifying  mathematical  laws  of  the 17th and the 20th centuries. As we
retrace   the  steps  we  see  how  fertile  is  the  interplay  between
mathematical  insights  and  mechanical hypotheses. As Fourier tells the
story of "rational mechanics," the "discoveries of Archimedes" begin the
science.  "This  great  geometer,"  he says, "explained the mathematical
principles  of  the  equilibrium  of  solids  and fluids. About eighteen
centuries  elapsed before Galileo, the originator of dynamical theories,
discovered the laws of motion of heavy bodies." Statics and dynamics are
related as the two parts of mechanics when that is conceived narrowly as
the  science  which  treats  of  the local motions of inert or inanimate
bodies.  The  rest  or  equilibrium  of  bodies, which is the subject of
statics, can be thought of as a limiting case of their motions, to which
the  principles  of  dynamics  apply.  In the eighteen centuries between
Archimedes  and Galileo, little progress is made in mechanics. So far as
statics is concerned, Archimedes, according to Galileo, by the "rigor of
his demonstration" established the science in all its essentials; "since
upon  a  single  proposition in his book on Equilibrium depends not only
the  law  of the lever but also those of most other mechanical devices."
Pascal  may  later  enlarge  statics,  by showing in his treatise On the
Equilibrium  of  Liquids that "a vessel full of water is a new principle
of  Mechanics,  a new machine which will multiply force to any degree we
choose";  in other works Pascal extends these conceptions further, as in
his  treatment  of  the  pressure of air. But at the time of Galileo, it
could be said that although Archimedes had offered an exemplary model of
mathematical  physics,  no progress was made until the work of Galileo's
immediate predecessors. Not without assistance from certain predecessors
like  Stevin, Galileo founds the science of dynamics. It may be wondered
why,  with  the  start made by Archimedes, no earlier application of his
principles  and  method  had  been  made. The answer may be found in the
physics of Aristotle. His theory of the four elements

[122a]
88  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  carried  with it a doctrine of natural motions to
different  natural  places,  drawn  from the observation of fire rising,
stones  dropping,  air  bubbling up through water. Such a doctrine would
prevent  the search for laws of motion applicable to all bodies; and the
general  character of Aristotle's physics, treating qualities as well as
quantities,  seems  to  have  discouraged the application of mathematics
even  to  the study of local motions. The mathematical expression of the
laws of motion is Galileo's objective. His interest in the new astronomy
which  affirmed  the motion of the earth led him, he told Hobbes, to the
careful  study  of movements on the earth. His aim is simply to describe
with precision the motions to be found in a child's play— stones dropped
and  stones  thrown,  the one the natural motion of free fall, the other
the  violent motion of a projectile. It is clear to observation that the
motion  of  a  freely  falling  body  is  accelerated.  But though, as a
mathematical  physicist, Galileo refrains from asking why this is so, he
is  not  satisfied  to  know  simply that it is so. He wants to know the
properties  of  such  acceleration.  What is the relation of the rate of
increase  in  velocity  to the durations and distances of the fall ? How
much  increase  in velocity is acquired and how fast? What is the body's
velocity  at  any given point in the fall? Similarly, when Galileo turns
to  projectiles,  he  wants to know, not merely that their trajectory is
consistently  curvilinear,  but  precisely  what  curve  the path of the
projectile  describes. Galileo succeeds in answering all these questions
without  being  perturbed  by  any  of  the  philosophical  perplexities
connected  with  space  and  time; nor does he allow questions about the
forces  involved  in  these  motions to distract him from his purpose to
"demonstrate  everything  by  mathematical  methods."  With mathematical
demonstration he combines observation and experiment and uses the latter
to   determine   which   mathematical  conclusions  can  be  applied  to
nature—which   principles   can  be  empirically  verified  as  well  as
mathematically  deduced.  One of Galileo's principles, however, seems to
outrun ordinary experience and to defy experimental verification. In the
interpretation

[122b]
of  his  experiments  on  inclined  planes, Galileo expresses an insight
which  Newton  later  formulates  as  the first law of motion, sometimes
called  the  "law of inertia." It declares that "every body continues in
its  state  of  rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, unless it is
compelled  to  change  that  state  by forces impressed upon it." Though
Newton   describes   his  method  as  one  of  "making  experiments  and
observations,   and   in   drawing  general  conclusions  from  them  by
induction,"  the  law  of  inertia  seems  to be an exception; for it is
difficult  to say, as Hume does, that "we find by experience that a body
at  rest  or in motion continues forever in its present state"— that is,
unless  it  is  acted  on by some new force. The condition introduced by
"unless"  raises  Poincare's question: "Have there ever been experiments
on  bodies  acted  on by no forces?" If not, and if they are impossible,
then  James  may  be  right  in  saying  that  "the  elementary  laws of
mechanics"  are  "never  matters  of  experience  at all, but have to be
disengaged  from  under experience by a process of elimination, that is,
by ignoring conditions which are always present." Because "the idealized
experiment
[which
it  calls for] can never be performed," the law of inertia, according to
Einstein,  can  be derived "only by speculative thinking consistent with
observation."  In  any  case,  the  first  law of motion initiates a new
departure in physics. So far as local motion is concerned, Aristotle and
his  followers look for the cause which keeps a moving body in motion or
a  stationary  body  at  rest.  According to Galileo and Newton, uniform
motion  continues naturally without cause. Only a change in the velocity
or  direction of that motion requires a cause, such as a force impressed
upon  it.  How  radical  this  innovation  is  may  be  judged  from its
consequences  in celestial mechanics, which in turn lead to a completely
unified  dynamics  for  both  celestial  and  terrestrial motions. These
advances  are  the  work of Newton's mathematical genius, but the ground
for  them  had  been  laid by the investigations of Galileo. Galileo had
resolved  the  curvilinear  motion  of  a  projectile  into the imparted
rectilinear  motion and the deflecting pull of gravity. This composition
of forces—sometimes called the "parallelogram law"—explains why the path
of

[123a]
the  projectile  is a parabola. The path of the planets in their orbits,
Kepler  had  previously  shown, is another conical curve—an ellipse. But
Kepler,  lacking  the  first  law  ofjaaetion, could theorize physically
about  the  cause  of  the planetary orbits only by looking for a force,
projected  outward  from  the  sun, which would sweep around to keep the
planets moving in their paths. On the other hand, a follower of Galileo,
as  Whitehead  points  out, would seek "for normal forces to deflect the
direction  of  motion along the curved orbit." He would look for a force
pulling the planet off its own rectilinear course inward toward the sun.
That  is  precisely  what Newton did. When the problem, which others had
been  able  to formulate, was put to Newton, he simply went to his study
for  the  solution. He had solved that problem some years before. He had
found  the  law  of  the force which, attracting the planets to the sun,
would  produce  their  elliptical  paths and the other proportionalities
stated  in Kepler's purely descriptive laws. With that single discovery,
Galileo's  terrestrial  dynamics  becomes  a celestial one, too; and the
traditional separation of the heavens from the earth is overcome. Newton
goes  even  further.  He guesses, and then shows by arithmetic, that the
force  deflecting  the  planets  around  the sun and the moon around the
earth, is the same force which makes apples fall and stones heavy in the
hand.  He  generalizes  this  insight in his famous inverse -square law:
"Every particle of matter attracts every other particle of matter with a
force  proportional to the mass of each and to the inverse square of the
distance between them." Accordingly, the world can be pictured as one in
which  material  particles  each  have  position in absolute space and a
determinate velocity. The velocity of each particle causes the change of
its  position, and changes in velocity are caused by forces, the amounts
of  which  are determined by positions. From his laws of motion and this
simple  law  of  force  Newton  is  able,  by mathematical deduction, to
account  for the perturbations of the moon, the oblateness of the earth,
the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  the solar and lunar tides, and the
paths of the comets. But is Newton's law of force as simple as it

[123b]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS  89  appears  to  be  at first? Its mathematical
meaning  is  plain  enough,  and  its  application to measured phenomena
reveals  its descriptive scope. When we ask, however, about its physical
significance, we raise difficult questions concerning the nature of this
attractive  force and how it operates. To call it the "force of gravity"
and  to  point  out  that  this  is  a  familiar  force  which  everyone
experiences in his own person hardly answers the question. Galileo would
not  have  tried to answer it. In his Dialogues Concerning the Two Great
Systems  of  the World, one of the characters, Simplicio, refers to that
manifest  cause  which  "everyone  knows  is  gravity." To this Salviati
replies:  "You should say that everyone knows it is called gravity. I do
not  question  you about the name," he continues, "but about the essence
of  the  thing";  and  that,  he  concludes, is precisely what cannot be
defined.  A  physicist  like  Huygens,  who  expects  the explanation of
natural  effects  to  be  expressed  in the familiar mechanical terms of
bodily  impact,  has  other  objections.  "I  am not at all pleased," he
writes  to  Leibnitz about Newton, "with any theories which he builds on
his  principle  of  attraction,  which  seems to me absurd." What shocks
Huygens  is a scandal that Newton himself cannot avoid facing. It is the
scandal of action-at-a-distance—of the force of gravity being propagated
instantaneously  across  great  distances  and producing effects at some
remote  place  but  no  effects  along  the  way.  Newton recognizes the
strangeness  of such a force. In a letter to Bentley, he echoes Huygens'
protest  to  Leibnitz.  "That  gravity  should  be  innate, inherent and
essential to matter," he says, "so that one body may act on another at a
distance  through  a  vacuum, without the mediation of anything else, by
and  through  which  their  action and force may be conveyed from one to
another,  is  to me so great an absurdity, that 1 believe no man who has
in  philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall
into  it."  The absurdity of action-at-a-distance seems to be recognized
by  common  sense and philosophy alike. "No action of an agent," Aquinas
remarks,  "however powerful it may be, acts at a distance except through
a medium"; and

[124a]
90 THE GREAT IDEAS Kant, who regards Newtonian physics as the model of a
rational  science  of  nature,  speaks of "a force of attraction without
contact" as a "chimerical fancy" which "we have no right to assume." How
can  Newton avoid this absurdity without violating his rule of method in
mathematical  physics—  not  to  frame hypotheses ? Newton's dilemma can
perhaps   be   stated   in   the   following  alternatives:  either  the
inversesquare  law  of  gravitational  attraction  is to be treated as a
purely  mathematical,  and  hence  a  purely descriptive, proposition of
great simplicity and generality; or it must be given physical meaning by
a  causal  explanation of how gravitational force operates. On the first
alternative,  Newton  can  avoid  framing  hypotheses,  but the physical
meaning of the concepts he employs to state the mathematical law is then
left  dark.  On  the  second  alternative,  he  can solve the mechanical
problem  created by such words in his law as "attracts" and "force," but
only  by  going beyond mathematical physics into the realm of mechanical
hypotheses.   Newton   seems  to  take  the  first  alternative  in  his
Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy, and the second in his
Optics.  There  he  proposes  the  hypothesis  of  an ethereal medium to
explain  the attractive force of gravity. "Is not this medium," he asks,
"much  rarer  within  the  dense  bodies of the sun, stars, planets, and
comets, than in the empty celestial spaces between them ? And in passing
from  them  to  great  distances,  doth  it  not  grow denser and denser
perpetually, and thereby cause the gravity of those great bodies towards
one  another,  and  of  their  parts  towards  the  bodies;  every  body
endeavoring to go from the denser parts of the medium towards the rare ?
.  .  .  And  though  this increase of density may at great distances be
exceeding  slow,  yet  if  the elastic force of this medium be exceeding
great,  it  may  suffice  to  impel  bodies from the denser parts of the
medium  towards  the  rarer, with all that power which we call gravity."
The  hypothesis  fits  the law of gravitation if, as Maxwell points out,
"the diminution of pressure
[in the ether]
is  inversely  as  the distance from the dense body." Newton recognized,
according  to  Maxwell,  that  it then becomes necessary "to account for
this inequality of pressure in this medium; and as he was not able to

[124b]
do  this,  he  left the explanation of the cause of gravity as a problem
for succeeding ages. . . . The progress made towards the solution of the
problem  since  the  time  of  Newton,"  Maxwell  adds, "has been almost
imperceptible."  The problem of the mechanical properties of an ethereal
medium  occurs  in  another  form  in  the  field  of optics. Here it is
complicated  by  the  rivalry  between  two  theories  of light—Newton's
corpuscular theory and Huygens' undulatory or wave theory. Each involves
a  mechanical  hypothesis—one concerning the motion of particles emitted
from  the  light source, and one concerning the wave-like propagation of
the  light impulse through a medium. Both theories involve the motion of
particles.  In  their  explanation  of the oar which appears bent in the
water,  both  appeal  to  the  action of the particles in the refracting
medium  on  the  light  corpuscles  or  the  light waves. Both theories,
furthermore, are expressed by their authors in a mathematical form which
permits  the  deduction  of  quantitative facts like the equality of the
angles  of  incidence  and of reflexion, the bending of the light ray in
refraction  according  to  the law of sines, and the recently discovered
fact  of the finite velocity of light. Huygens' book gives prominence to
the  explanation  of the strange phenomena of double refraction found in
"a certain kind of crystal brought from Iceland"— Iceland spar. But both
theories  seem  to  be equally competent in dealing with the established
facts  of  reflexion and refraction, and the new facts about dispersion.
For  a  century  at  least,  their  rivalry  resembles  that between the
Ptolemaic  and  Copernican  theories  at a time when they seemed equally
tenable so far as accounting for the phenomena was concerned. Later, new
discoveries,  such as those by Young and Fresnel, tend to favor the wave
theory  of  light;  but  the rivalry continues right down to the present
day.  It  remains  unresolved,  at  least  to  an  extent  which prompts
Eddington,  in  reviewing  contemporary  controversy about the nature of
light and electricity, to suggest the invention of the word "wavicle" to
signify  the complementary use of both particles and waves in the modern
theory of radiation.

[125a]
Unlike  the  rivalry between the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems, which
seemed  for  a  while  to be entirely a matter of different mathematical
descriptions  of  the  same  phenomena,  the  conflict between these two
theories  of  light  involves  from  the very beginning an issue between
diverse  mechanical  hypotheses  to explain the phenomena. That issue is
argued not only with respect to the adequacy of either theory to explain
such phenomena as the rectilinear propagation of light and its different
behavior  in  different  mediums; but it is also debated in terms of the
underlying  mechanical  conceptions.  As gravitational force acting at a
distance raises a mechanical problem which Newton's ether is not finally
able  to  solve,  so Huygens' ether as the medium through which light is
propagated  in  waves raises mechanical problems which, if insoluble (as
they seem to be), contribute even more heavily to the general scientific
scandal  of  mechanics.  The two authors take different attitudes toward
hypotheses  and mechanical explanation. Huygens, as we have seen, begins
his  book  with  the express intention to "investigate . . . the causes"
and  to  express  them  "in terms of mechanical motions." Newton, on the
other   hand,  begins  his  with  a  reiteration  of  his  disavowal  of
hypotheses.  "My design in this book," he writes, "is not to explain the
properties  of  light  by  hypotheses,  but to propose and prove them by
reason  and  experiments." Nevertheless, Newton's explanation of how the
prism produces from white light the band of colors in the spectrum seems
to require the assumption of a distinct kind of light corpuscle for each
color;  and,  in  addition,  the  assumption  that,  although  all light
particles  have the same velocity when they travel together making white
light,   separate   particles   for  different  colors  are  differently
refrangible,  that  is,  differently  susceptible  to  the action of the
particles  in  the  refracting  medium  of  the  glass.  Perhaps only in
Newton's somewhat artificially restricted sense of the word "hypothesis"
could  these  assumptions  escape  that  denomination.  In any case, the
existence  of Huygens' rival theory prevented his escaping a controversy
about  hypotheses.  In the Queries attached to his Optics, he engages in
that controversy with an acumen which shows another side of his genius.

[125b]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS  91  Huygens'  wave theory requires what anybody
would  have  to  call an hypothesis and requires it from the very start.
"It  is  inconceivable," he writes, "to doubt that light consists in the
motion  of  some sort of matter." He immediately rejects the notion that
light  rays  consist  in  the "transport of matter coming to us from the
[luminous]  object,  in the way in which a shot or an arrow traverse the
air"—  if  for  no  other reason, because "the rays traverse one another
without  hindrance."  The  similarity between the phenomena of light and
the phenomena of sound suggests to him the "way that light spreads," and
causes  him  to  extend  the  mechanics  of  sound—conceived  as  a wave
motion—to  light.  "We  know that by means of air, which is an invisible
and  impalpable  body,"  Huygens  argues, "sound spreads around the spot
where   it  has  been  produced,  by  a  movement  which  is  passed  on
successively  from one part of air to another; and that the spreading of
this  movement,  taking  place  equally  on  all  sides,  ought  to form
spherical  surfaces  ever enlarging and which strike our ears. Now there
is  no  doubt at all that light also comes from the luminous body to our
eyes  by some movement impressed on the matter which is between the two.
...  If,  in  addition,  light  takes time for its passage . . . it will
follow  that  this  movement,  impressed  on  the intervening matter, is
successive;  and  consequently  it  spreads, as sound does, by spherical
surfaces  and  waves;  for  I  call them waves from their resemblance to
those  which  are seen to be formed in water when a stone is thrown into
Huygens  is  aware, however, that the analogy between light and sound is
far  from  perfect. "If one examines," he says, "what this matter may be
in  which  the movement coming from the luminous body is propagated, one
will  see  that  it  is  not the same that serves for the propagation of
sound. . . . This may be proved," he goes on, "by shutting up a sounding
body  in a glass vessel from which the air is withdrawn." An alarm clock
beating  its bell in a jar without air makes no sound, but a jar without
air  is  no  less  transparent than one with air. Since when "the air is
removed  from  the  vessel  the  light  does not cease to traverse it as
before,"  and since waves have to be waves of something, and light waves
cannot be waves of air, they

[126a]
92  THE GREAT IDEAS must be waves of a substance, says Huygens, "which I
call  ethereal  matter." This ether, a transparent medium permeating the
whole  universe, proves to be what Einstein calls the enfant terrible in
the family of hypothetical physical substances. Postulated by Huygens in
order  to  explain light mechanically, it in turn calls for a mechanical
account of its own extraordinary properties. Huygens does not avoid this
new  problem,  but  neither  does  he  undertake to solve it completely.
Suppose  "one takes a number of spheres of equal size, made of some very
hard substance, and arranges them in a straight line, so that they touch
one another." Then, says Huygens, "one finds, on striking with a similar
sphere  against the first of these spheres, that the motion passes as in
an  instant  to  the  last of them, which separates itself from the row,
without one's being able to perceive that the others have been stirred."
This type of motion in the ether would account for "the extreme velocity
of  light" and yet "this progression of motion is not instantaneous," as
the  motion of light also is not. "Now in applying this kind of movement
to  that  which produces light," Huygens continues, "there is nothing to
hinder  us  from  estimating  the  particles  of  the  ether  to be of a
substance  as  nearly  approaching  to perfect hardness and possessing a
springiness  as  prompt  as we choose." Beyond this Huygens does not go.
"It  is  not  necessary  to  examine here," he says, "the causes of this
hardness,  or of that springiness. . . . Though we shall ignore the true
cause  of  springiness  we  still  see  that there are many bodies which
possess  this  property;  and thus there is nothing strange in supposing
that it exists also in little invisible bodies like the particles of the
ether."  But  difficulties  which Huygens did not foresee make his ether
more  than  a  strange  supposition—almost  a  mechanical impossibility.
Huygens had thought that light waves are transmitted in the ether in the
way  that  soundwaves  are  in  the  air,  that  is, longitudinally, the
direction  in  which  the individual particles vibrate being the same as
the  direction of the wave motion itself. But when, in the 19th century,
it  was  found that the phenomena of the polarization of light could not
be explained by the cor-

[126b]
puscular  theory,  but only by the wave theory (thus shifting the scales
decisively  in  favor  of  the  latter), it was also found that the wave
theory could explain polarization only on the assumption that the motion
of   the   ether   particles  which  produce  the  light  waves  is  not
longitudinal,  but  transverse, that is, in a direction perpendicular to
the waves produced by the vibration of the particles. As Fresnel pointed
out  at  the  time, "the supposition that the vibrations were transverse
was  contrary  to  the  received ideas on the nature of the vibration of
elastic  fluids."  They  had  all involved, as in the case of air as the
medium  for  sound,  a  longitudinal  transmission. The character of the
ether   is  changed  by  the  requirement  that  its  particles  vibrate
transversely.  It ceases to be an air-like ether and must be imagined as
a  jelly-like ether. The task which Huygens had postponed that of giving
a  mechanical  explanation of the ether he had posited in order to state
the  mechanics  of  light— becomes in consequence far more difficult, if
not impossible. In their efforts to construct "the ether as a jelly-like
mechanical substance, physicists," according to Einstein, had to make so
many  "highly  artificial  and unnatural assumptions," that they finally
decided  to  abandon  the  whole  program  of mechanical explanation. Of
Newton's  two  objections  to  the  wave  theory of light, the second by
itself  seems  to  create  an insuperable difficulty for Huygens' ether,
even  before  the  realization  that  it  must  be  a jelly-like medium.
Newton's  first  objection  is that any wave theory is inconsistent with
the fact of the rectilinear propagation of light. "If light consisted in
pression or motion, propagated either in an instant or in time, it would
bend into the shadow; for," he points out, "pression or motion cannot be
propagated  in  a  fluid  in right lines, beyond an obstacle which stops
part  of  the  motion,  but  will  bend  and  spread  every way into the
quiescent medium which lies beyond the obstacle. . . . The waves, pulses
or  vibrations of the air, wherein sound consists, bend manifestly, even
though  not  so  much  as  the waves of water." This objection loses its
force when, in the

[127a]
19th century, light's bending is experimentally discovered. But Newton's
other  objection  gains  force  when,  two centuries after he made it, a
jelly-like  density  is imposed upon the^etrleTby the experimental facts
of  polarization. This second objection does not point to the inadequacy
of  the  wave  theory  with  respect  to  the  phenomena  which  must be
described,   but  rather  calls  attention  to  its  inconsistency  with
celestial  mechanics.  Light travels through inter-stellar space. But so
also  do  the planets. Newton's astronomy accounts for the motion of the
planets  with  great precision, only on the supposition of no resistance
from  a  medium. "To make way for the regular and lasting motions of the
planets and comets," he writes, "it is necessary to empty the heavens of
all  matter,  except  perhaps  .  .  . such an exceedingly rare ethereal
medium  as  we  described above." Here he refers to the ether he himself
had  posited  as  a  possible  cause  of  gravitational  attraction. Its
resistance,  he  thinks,  is  "so  small  as  to be inconsiderable." The
"planets  and  comets  and  all gross bodies [can] perform their motions
more  freely  in this ethereal medium than in any fluid, which fills all
space  adequately  without leaving any pores." Such "a dense fluid . . .
serves only to disturb and retard the motions of those great bodies, and
make  the frame of nature languish." Since it "hinders the operations of
nature,"  and  since  "there  is  no evidence for its existence," Newton
concludes  that  "it  ought to be rejected." The next conclusion follows
immediately.  "If  it be rejected, the hypotheses that light consists in
pression  or motion, propagated through such a medium, are rejected with
it."  Newton  would  seem entitled to draw these conclusions because, no
matter  how  slight the density of ethereal matter, the use of the ether
in  the  wave  theory  of  light  involves  some interaction between the
particles  of ether and the particles of matter. Unless such interaction
takes  place,  no explanation can be given of the change in the velocity
of  light when it enters a medium like glass or water. Since in Newton's
universe  there  is  no  difference  between  terrestrial  and celestial
matter, Newton cannot accept an ether which interacts with the matter of
glass or water, but does not interact with the matter of the planets.

[127b]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS  93  This  objection of Newton's, pointing to an
inconsistency  between  the kind of ether required by the wave theory of
light  and  the unretarded motion of the heavenly bodies, appears not to
have  been  answered,  but only waived, at the time of the wave theory's
ascendancy.  The famous Michelson-Morley experiment on ether drift later
re-opens  Newton's penetrating query about the ether. But this occurs at
a  time  when physicists are prepared to give up not only the ether, but
also  with  it the mechanical explanations of gravity and light which it
had  brought into conflict with one another. Before the mechanical dogma
runs  its  course,  it has a career in other fields of physical inquiry.
The  phenomena  of  heat,  magnetism,  and  electricity are explored and
explained under its inspiration. The history of these subjects is marked
by  a  very  rash  of  hypotheses.  Each  time mechanical explanation is
attempted  for  a new domain of phenomena, new substances are added. The
postulated  entities—  calorific,  magnetical,  and electric fluids— are
unobservable  and  without weight. In Newton's terms, they are "occult";
though,  it must be added, they are no more occult than the ether Newton
himself postulated to explain gravity or the ether Huygens postulated to
explain  light.  In fact, each of these new substances seems to resemble
the  aeriform  or  fluid  ether,  just  as  each  is  conceived,  as the
gravitational  or optical ether was earlier conceived, in the context of
the  issue  of action-at-a-distance as opposed to action-bycontact. They
would  seem  to be unavoidable in a mechanical account of the radiations
of  heat,  magnetism,  and electricity. The phenomena of heat, Lavoisier
writes, are "difficult to comprehend . . . without admitting them as the
effects  of  a  real  and  material  substance,  or  very  subtle  fluid
Wherefore,"  he  continues, "we have distinguished the cause of heat, or
that  exquisitely  elastic  fluid  which  produces  it,  by  the term of
caloric."  Lavoisier declares himself "unable to determine whether light
be  a  modification  of  caloric,  or  if caloric be, on the contrary, a
modification  of  light."  But  in  terms  of  observed  effects he does
attribute ether-like properties to caloric. "This

[128a]
94  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  subtle  matter," he says, "penetrates through the
pores  of all known substances"; for "there are no vessels through which
it  cannot  escape."  The theory of caloric serves its purpose before it
gives  way to the theory of heat as molecular motion, a conception which
can  be integrated with the molecular, or kinetic, theory of gases. "The
development  of  the kinetic theory of matter," writes Einstein, "is one
of  the  greatest  achievements  directly  influenced  by the mechanical
view." It is all the more striking, therefore, that in the opening pages
of  Fourier's  Analytical Theory of Heat—wherein he reviews the triumphs
of  explanation  achieved by Newton and his successors Fourier should so
flatly  assert:  "But  whatever may be the range of mechanical theories,
they  do not apply to the effects of heat. These make up a special order
of  phenomena  which cannot be explained by the principles of motion and
equilibrium."  It  is  equally  striking  that  Lavoisier  seems to have
anticipated  not only the mechanical theory of heat, but the possibility
of a purely mathematical treatment of the phenomena. "We are not obliged
to  suppose  [caloric]  to  be  a  real  substance,"  he  writes;  it is
sufficient  "that it be considered as the repulsive cause, whatever that
may be, which separates the particles of matter from each other, so that
we  are  still  at liberty to investigate its effects in an abstract and
mathematical  manner."  The second of these two things is precisely what
Fourier  proposes  to  undertake,  but  he  disavows any interest in the
first,  namely,  the  explanation  of  heat  in  terms of the mechanical
separation  of  particles  by  repulsion.  In  language  which resembles
Newton's  disavowal  of  concern  with  the cause of attraction, Fourier
declares  that  "primary  causes  are  unknown to us, but are subject to
simple  and  constant  laws, which may be discovered by observation." In
another  place  he  writes:  "Of  the  nature  of  heat  only  uncertain
hypotheses  could  be formed, but the knowledge of the mathematical laws
to  which  its  effects  are  subject is independent of all hypothesis."
Fourier's  aim,  therefore, with respect to "the very extensive class of
phenomena,  not produced by mechanical forces, but resulting simply from
the presence and accumulation of heat," is "to reduce

[128b]
the physical questions to problems of pure analysis" and "to express the
most  general  conditions  of  the  propagation  of heat in differential
equations."   He  expresses  his  indebtedness  to  Descartes  for  "the
analytical  equations"  which  that  mathematician  "was  the  first  to
introduce  into  the  study  of curves and surfaces," but "which are not
restricted  to the properties of figures, and those properties which are
the  object of rational mechanics." These equations, he insists, "extend
to  all  general  phenomena," and "from this point of view, mathematical
analysis  is  as  extensive  as  nature  itself."  This  strongly worded
statement  affirms  the  mathematical character of nature as the support
and  justification  for  a  purely  mathematical  physics.  If Fourier's
remarks  about  causes  and  hypotheses are reminiscent of Newton in his
mathematical mood, how much more is Fourier's faith in pure mathematical
analysis  reminiscent  of  Galileo.  Like  Galileo,  and  unlike Newton,
Fourier never deviates from his indifference to causes and never softens
his  judgment  of  the  incompetence and irrelevance of mechanics to the
subject  he  is investigating. His trust in mathematical analysis, which
is  able  by itself to yield and organize physical discoveries, not only
revives  the  spirit  of  Galileo, but also seems to have inspired Clerk
Maxwell   to  turn  from  a  mechanical  to  a  mathematical  theory  of
electricity. Certain of Fourier's mathematical achievements, such as his
theory  of dimensions, prove useful to Maxwell. More important, perhaps,
is the fact that Maxwell's predictions about the propagation of electro-
magnetic  waves,  later experimentally verified by Hertz, are the result
of  mathematical  analysis.  With  such  a demonstration of the power of
mathematics to work fruitfully with experiment, and without any aid from
mechanical  hypotheses,  Maxwell  gives  up  the  attempt to formulate a
mechanics for his equations describing the electro-magnetic field. He is
quite  content  to let his field theory state the mathematical structure
of  the phenomena. Between Fourier and Maxwell comes Faraday. One of the
greatest  experimenters  in  the  whole  tradition  of  science, Faraday
discovers  the  phenomena  whose  mathematical  structure  Maxwell later
develops. He prepares the way

[129a]
for  Maxwell's  application  to  electricity and magnetism of the method
Fourier  had  practiced.  His  speculations  concerning  the relation of
electrical  and  gravitational force point ahead, beyond Maxwell, to the
possibility  ofa  field  theory which might unify all physical phenomena
under a single set of mathematical laws. Faraday sees no incompatibility
between  experimentation  and  speculation. On the contrary he says that
"as  an experimentalist I feel bound to let experiment guide me into any
train  of thought which it may justify; being satisfied that experiment,
like  analysis,  must  lead to strict truth, if rightly interpreted; and
believing  also  that  it  is  in  its nature far more suggestive of new
trains  of thought and new conditions of natural power." Faraday's faith
seems  to have been amply justified. His experiments not only discovered
a  stunning  number of new facts, but the speculations to which they led
transformed  the whole mode of thinking about electricity and magnetism,
and, to some extent, the whole of physics. The Elizabethan Gilbert, with
his  bold and brilliantly handled thesis that the earth is a magnet, had
made   magnetism   appear   something  more  than  a  random  phenomenon
occasionally  met  with  in nature. But not until Faraday's discovery of
diamagnetism,  announced  in  a  memoir On the Magnetic Condition of All
Matter,  would  anyone  have dared to say that "all matter appears to be
subject   to  the  magnetic  force  as  universally  as  it  is  to  the
gravitating,  the  electric  and  the  chemical  or cohesive forces." Of
electricity,  he  can  only  predict,  as  the  result of his protracted
experimental  investigations,  that  "it  is  probable that every effect
depending  upon  the powers of inorganic matter . . . will ultimately be
found  subordinate  to it." These remarks indicate the controlling theme
of Faraday's researches, namely, the convertibility and unity of natural
forces.  It  seems  to  have been suggested to him by the discovery that
both  electrical and magnetic forces obey the same simple inverse-square
law  as  the  force  of  gravitational attraction. The fact that certain
forces  obey  the  same law or that their action can be described by the
same  equations,  would not of itself reveal whether one of these forces
is primary or all are de-

[129b]
Chapter  54: MECHANICS 95 rivative from some other primary force. But it
would  suggest questions to be asked by experiGilbert compares magnetism
and  electricity  but  he  is  not  able  to convert one into the other.
Oersted,  before  Faraday, is the first to establish one aspect of their
convertibility. He shows that an electric current has a magnetic effect.
Faraday  succeeds  in  showing  the reverse— that a magnetic current has
electrical power. He expresses his fascination with such reversibilities
in  his  remarks  on  the electrical torpedo fish. "Seebeck," he writes,
"taught  us  how  to commute heat into electricity; and Peltier has more
lately given us the strict converse of this, and shown us how to convert
electricity  into  heat.  .  .  .  Oersted showed how we were to convert
electric into magnetic forces, and I had the delight of adding the other
member  of  the  full  relation,  by  reacting back again and converting
magnetic  into electric forces. So perhaps in these organs, where nature
has  provided  the  apparatus  by  means of which the fish can exert and
convert  nervous into electric force, we may be able, possessing in that
point  of  view a power far beyond that of the fish itself, to reconvert
the electric into the nervous force." Faraday demonstrates still another
such  reversibility  in nature. The nature of his discovery is indicated
by  the  titles  of  the  papers  in  which  he  announces  it:  On  the
Magnetization  of  Light and the Illumination of Magnetic Lines of Force
and  The  Action  of  Electric  Currents  on Light. These papers, in his
opinion,  "established  for  the first time, a true, direct relation and
dependence  between  light and the magnetic and electric forces"; and he
concludes  them  with  an explicit statement of the central theme of all
his  researches  and  speculations.  "Thus a great addition is made," he
writes,  "to  the  facts and considerations which tend to prove that all
natural  forces  are  tied together and have one common origin. It is no
doubt  difficult  in  the  present state of our knowledge to express our
expectation  in exact terms; and, though I have said that another of the
powers of nature is, in these experiments, directly related to the rest,
I  ought, perhaps, rather to say that another form of the great power is
distinctly and directly related to the other forms."

[130a]
96  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  One  form  of  the  "great  power" remained to be
connected  with such "other forms" as those of light, heat, electricity,
and  magnetism. That was the power of gravitational force. Faraday comes
to  this last stage of his speculations concerning the unity of nature's
powers  in terms of his conception of "lines of force" and of what later
came  to  be  called  "the  field  of  force."  The earliest theories of
electricity  and magnetism, in an orthodox atomistic vein, had conceived
them  as  exerting  an  influence  by  means  of the effluvia which they
emitted.  Newton,  for  example,  speculates  on  "how the effluvia of a
magnet  can  be  so rare and subtle, as to pass through a plate of glass
without  any  resistance or diminution of their force, and yet so potent
as  to  turn  a  magnetic  needle  beyond  the  glass."  When electrical
conduction  is later discovered, effluvia are replaced by fluids, on the
analogy  of  caloric  as  the  fluid conductor of heat. But when Faraday
finds  that  he  can  induce  from  one  current  to another, he becomes
interested in the dielectric, non-conducting medium around the circuits.
He is strongly averse to any theory which involves action-at-a-distance,
and  so he argues that induction takes place by the action of contiguous
particles.  To  support  that  argument  he  shows  experimentally  that
electrical  induction  can  "turn  a  corner." From his study of all the
phenomena of magnetism, Faraday forms the conception of "lines of force"
and  concludes  that  there is "a center of power surrounded by lines of
force  which are physical lines essential both to the existence of force
within  the magnet and to its conveyance to, and exertion upon, magnetic
bodies  at  a  distance."  He says of this "idea of lines of force" that
"all  the  points  which  are  experimentally established with regard to
[magnetic] action, i.e., all that is not hypothetical, appear to be well
and  truly  represented by it"; and he adds: "Whatever idea we employ to
represent the power ought ultimately to include electric forces, for the
two  are  so  related  that  one  expression  ought  to serve for both."
Subsequently  Faraday  satisfies  himself  as to the physical reality of
electrical  lines  of  force  in  addition  to  the  magnetic lines. The
compulsionof  his  interest  in  the  unity of nature then drives him to
speculate  about  gravitational  force. He begins by admitting that, "in
the case

[130b]
of  gravitation,  no  effect  sustaining  the  idea of an independent or
physical line of force is presented to us; as far as we at present know,
the  line  of  gravitation  is  merely  an  ideal  line representing the
direction  in  which  the power is exerted." But encouraged, perhaps, by
Newton's  repeated references to "the attractions of gravity, magnetism,
and  electricity," and by Newton's letter to Bentley which he interprets
as  showing  Newton to be "an unhesitating believer in physical lines of
gravitating  force,"  Faraday goes to work experimentally. The report of
these  researches  On  the  Possible  Relation of Gravity to Electricity
opens  with  the  re-statement of Faraday's central theme. "The long and
constant   persuasion  that  all  the  forces  of  nature  are  mutually
dependent,  having  one origin, or rather being different manifestations
of  one  fundamental  power, has made me often think of establishing, by
experiment,   a  connexion  between  gravity  and  electricity,  and  so
introducing  the  former  into  the group, the chain of which, including
also  magnetism,  chemical force and heat, binds so many and such varied
exhibitions  of force together by common relations." His experiments, he
tells  us, unfortunately "produced only negative results," but that does
not  shake  his  "strong  feeling of the existence of a relation between
gravity  and  electricity."  Though  Faraday fails to prove "that such a
relation exists," he does bequeath, as a legacy to 20th century physics,
the problem of a field theory which would embrace both gravitational and
electrical force. But whereas Faraday conceives the problem mechanically
in  terms  of  the  physical  reality, as well as unity, of all lines of
force,  in  which  contiguous  particles  act  on one another, those who
inherit  the  problem  from  him  cease  to  concern themselves with the
physical existence of "lines of force" and their mechanical basis in the
action  and  reaction  of  bodies.  Influenced by the amazing generality
implicit  in  Maxwell's  field  equations,  they proceed to search for a
purely  mathematical statement of nature's structure. In the judgment of
the  20th  century  physicist  mathematics  may at last succeed in doing
precisely  what  mechanics,  from  Newton to Faraday, kept promising but
forever failing to

[131a]
do.  If  the  unity  of nature can be expressed in a single set of laws,
they  will be, according to Einstein, laws of a type radically different
from  the  laws  of mechanics. Taking the form o£ Maxwell's equations, a
form  which appears in all other equations of modern physics," they will
be, he writes, "laws representing the structure of the field." In saying
that  "Maxwell's  equations are structure laws" and that they provide "a
new  pattern  for the laws of nature," Einstein means to emphasize their
non-mechanical  character.  "In Maxwell's theory," he writes, "there are
no  material  actors."  Whereas "Newton's gravitational laws connect the
motion of a body here and now with the action of a body at the same time
in  the  far distance," Maxwell's equations "connect events which happen
now  and  here  with  events  which  will  happen  a little later in the
immediate  vicinity."  Like the equations which describe "the changes of
the electromagnetic field, our new gravitational laws are," according to
Einstein,   "also   structure   laws   describing  the  changes  of  the
gravitational  field."  The heart of the difference between a "structure
law"  and a mechanical law seems to be contained in Einstein's statement
that  "all  space  is the scene of these laws and not, as for mechanical
laws, only points in which matter or changes are present." This contrast
between  matter  and space brings to mind the difference between physics
and  geometry.  Yet  Einstein's repeated reference to "changes" in these
spacestructures  also  reminds  us that the electrical and gravitational
fields  are  not purely geometrical, but physical as well. The structure
laws  of  the new physics may be geometrical in form, but if they are to
have  any physical meaning, can they entirely avoid some coloring by the
mechanical conceptions which have been traditionally associated with the
consideration  of matter and motion? At least one contemporary physicist
appears  to think that mechanics survives to bury its undertakers. After
describing the development in which geometry progressively "swallowed up
the  whole of mechanics," Eddington observes that "mechanics in becoming
geometry   remains  none  the  less  mechanics.  The  partition  between
mechanics  and  geometry," he continues, "has broken down and the nature
of

[131b]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS 97 each of them has diffused through the whole";
so  that  "besides  the  geometrisation  of  mechanics, there has been a
mechanisation  of  geomAccording  to this view, it is not mechanics, but
classical  mechanics, which the new physics has abandoned. The character
of  the  mechanics  seems  to  have  altered  with  the character of the
mathematical  formulations.  Field theory, dealing with contiguous areas
and  successive  events,  avoids the problem of action-at-a-distance and
also apparently that problem's classical solution in terms of the action
of  contiguous  particles. But another sort of mechanics may be implicit
in  the  field equations which connect events in one area with events in
the  immediate  vicinity.  If those equations had been available to him,
Newton   might   have   expressed   his   theory  of  a  variably  dense
ether—analogous  to  the  modern  conception  of  a  variably  filled or
variably  curved  space—  in  terms  of  structure  laws  describing the
gravitational  field.  We  are  left  with a number of questions. Is the
story of mechanics the story of its rise and decline or the story of its
changing role—now dominant, now subordinate; now more manifest, now more
concealed—  at  all  stages  in  the  development  of a physics which is
committed to being both mathematical and experimental? Do the status and
character  of  mechanical conceptions change with changes in the form of
the  mathematical  laws  which  describe  the phenomena ? Can physics be
totally  devoid  of mechanical insight and yet perform experiments which
somehow  require  the scientist to act on bodies and to make them act on
one  another?  Could a pure mathematical physics have yielded productive
applications  in  mechanical  engineering  without the intermediation of
mechanical  notions  of cause and effect ? Whichever way these questions
are   answered,   we   face   alternatives   that  seem  to  be  equally
unsatisfactory.  Either  experimental physics is purely mathematical and
proclaims  its  disinterest  in  as  well as its ignorance of causes; or
physics  cannot  be  experimental  and  mathematical  without also being
mechanical,  and without being involved in a search for causes which are
never found. To the layman there is something mysterious

[132a]
98  THE  GREAT IDEAS about all this. He stands in awe of the physicist's
practical  mastery  of matter and its motions, which he naively supposes
to  depend upon a scientific knowledge of the causes, while all the time
the scientists protest that the causes remain unknown to an experimental
and  mathematical  physics.  Mechanical explanations may be offered from
time  to time, but the various "forces" they appeal to can be understood
only  from their effects, and are nothing more than verbal shorthand for
the  formulae or equations which express the mathematical laws. Yet they
remain  cause-names,  and  seem  to  stimulate advances in science— both
experimental   and   mathematical—almost   as   a   consequence  of  the
exasperating  elusiveness  of  these hidden causes. Certain philosophers
hold  a  view which suggests that the clue to the mystery may lie in the
word  "hidden."  Causes  exist and we can control them to build machines
and  explode bombs, but we cannot with our senses catch them in the very
act  of  causing,  or perceive the inwardness of their operation. If the
fact  that  they  are thus unobservable means that they are occult, then
all  causes  are  occult—  not least of all the mechanical type of cause
which consists in the impact of one body upon another. In the century in
which  physicists  tried  to  avoid  the  scandal  of forces acting at a
distance  by postulating mechanical mediums through which one body acted
directly  on  another,  philosophers  like  Locke and Hume express their
doubts  that  such causal action is any less occult than Newton had said
Aristotle's  causes  were.  "The  passing of motion out of one body into
another,"  Locke  thinks,  "is  as obscure and unconceivable, as how our
minds  move  or stop our bodies by thought. . . . The increase of motion
by  impulse,  which  is observed or believed sometimes to happen, is yet
harder  to  understand.  We  have by daily experience, clear evidence of
motion  produced  both  by  impulse  and by thought; but the manner how,
hardly comes within our comprehension; we are equally at a

[132b]
loss  in  both."  In Locke's judgment we will always remain "ignorant of
the  several  powers,  efficacies,  and  ways  of operation, whereby the
effects,  which  we daily see, are produced." If scientific knowledge is
knowledge  of  causes,  then  "how far soever human industry may advance
useful and experimental philosophy in physical things, scientifical will
still  be  out of our reach." When we try to observe efficient causes at
work,  what do we see? Hume answers that we only see one thing happening
after another. "The impulse of one billiard-ball is attended with motion
in  the  second.  This is the whole that appears to the outward senses."
Nor  can  we  form  any  "inward  impression" of what takes place at the
moment  of impact. "We are ignorant," he writes, "of the manner in which
bodies operate on each other"; and we shall always remain so, for "their
force  or  energy is entirely incomprehensible." As the chapter on Cause
indicates,  Aristotle  holds  an opposite view of the matter. What takes
place  in  efficient  causation  may  be  imperceptible,  but  it is not
incomprehensible.  All  causes  may  be  occult so far as the senses are
concerned,  but  they  are  not  obscure to the intellect. But Aristotle
would  also  insist  that  the  action  of  efficient  causes  cannot be
understood  if  they  are  totally  isolated from other causes material,
formal,  final.  A  purely  mechanical  physics, in his opinion, defeats
itself  by  its basic philosophical tenets, which exclude all properties
that  are  not  quantitative and all causes except the efficient. Only a
different  metaphysics —one which conceives physical substances in terms
of  matter  and  form, or potentiality and actuality—can yield a physics
which is able to deal with causes and explain the phenomena; but such an
Aristotelian physics, from the modern point of view, stands condemned on
other  grounds.  It  is not experimental. It is not productive of useful
applications. It is not mathematical; nor is it capable of comprehending
all the phenomena of nature under a few simple, universal laws.

[133a]
OUTLINE OF TOPICS i. The foundations of mechanics 101 i a. Matter, mass,
and  atoms:  the  primary  qualities  of  bodies ib. The laws of motion:
inertia;  the  measure  of  force;  action and reaction 2. The logic and
method  of  mechanics  2a.  The  role  of  experience,  experiment,  and
induction in mechanics ic. Theories of causality in mechanics 3. The use
of  mathematics in mechanics: the dependence of progress in mechanics on
mathematical  discover}'  3#.  Number  and  the continuum: the theory of
measurement  $b.  The  geometry  of  conies:  the  motion of planets and
projectiles  3d.  Calculus:  the  measurement  of  irregular  areas  and
variable  motions  4.  The  place,  scope,  and  ideal of the science of
mechanics:  its  relation to the philosophy of nature and other sciences
40.  Terrestrial and celestial mechanics: the mechanics of finite bodies
and  of  particles  or  atoms  4^.  The  explanation  of  qualities  and
qualitative  change  in terms of quantity and motion 4c. The mechanistic
account  of the phenomena of life 5. The basic phenomena and problems of
mechanics: statics and dynamics 105 50. Simple machines: the balance and
the lever 5b. The equilibrium and motion of fluids: buoyancy, the weight
and  pressure  of  air,  the effects of a vacuum 5c. Stress, strain, and
elasticity:  the  strength  of  materials  $d. Motion, void, and medium:
resistance  and  friction  (1)  Uniform  motion: its causes and laws (2)
Accelerated  motion:  free  fall  5/  Motion  about  a  center: planets,
projectiles,  pendulum  (1)  Determination of orbit, force, speed, time,
and period (2) Perturbation of motion: the two and three body problems

[133b]
Chapter 54: MECHANICS 99 PAGE

[134a]
100  THE GREAT IDEAS 6a. Center of gravity: its determination for one or
several bodies 6b. Weight and specific gravity: the relation of mass and
weight  6d.  Force:  its kinds and its effects (2) Action-at-a-distance:
the  field  and medium of force 6e. Work and energy: their conservation;
perpetual  motion ya. Light: the corpuscular and the wave theory (1) The
laws  of  reflection and refraction (2) The production of colors (3) The
speed  of  light  yb.  Sound:  the  mechanical  explanation  of acoustic
phenomena  yc.  The  theory  of heat of caloric yd. Magnetism: the great
magnet   of  the  earth  (1)  Magnetic  phenomena:  coition,  verticity,
variation,  dip (2) Magnetic force and magnetic fields decomposition (5)
The measurement of electric quantities

[134b]
PAGE  6. Basic concepts of mechanics 106 6c. Velocity, acceleration, and
momentum:  angular  or rectilinear, average or instantaneous 107 (3) The
parallelogram  law:  the  composition  of  forces and the composition of
velocities  108  (4)  The  medium  of  light:  the  ether  109  (1)  The
description and explanation of the phenomena of heat: the hypothesis (2)
The  measurement and the mathematical analysis of the quantities of heat
ye.  Electricity:  electrostatics and electrodynamics no (2) Electricity
and matter: conduction, insulation, induction, electrochemical

[135a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface. 1. The foundations of mechanics la. Matter, mass,
and  atoms:  the  primary qualities of bodies a3-b8] 394b-d / Generation
and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  410d-413c;  ch 8 423b-425d 8 Aristotle:
Heavens, bk hi, ch 4
[303
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12, 173a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk i [146-328] 2d-5a; [483-634] 7a-8d; bk ii [333-568] 19b22b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 115, a 1, ans and rep 3,5 585d-587c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 72a-d; part hi, 172a-b; part iv, 269d 28
Gilbert:   Loadstone,   bkii,  29c-34besp29c-30a  28  Galileo:  Two  New
Sciences, first day, 134a-153a passim 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph
66  114d115c;  bk  11,  aph  8  140b;  aph  48  179d-188b  31 Descartes:
Meditations,  11,  78c-d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  def  vii 130c-d;
231a-232a  33 Pascal: Vacuum, 367a-368b 34 Newton: Principles, def i 5a;
def  hi  5b;  bk  1,  prop  73,  schol  133b-134a; bk ii, general schol,
218a-219a;  prop  40,  schol,  246a-b; bk in, rule in 270b-271a; prop 6,
corol iii-iv 281b; prop 7 281b-282b / Optics, bk

[135b]
Chapter  54:  MECHANICS  101  ii,  479b-485b;  bk  hi,  520a-522a; 528b;
531a543a esp 537a-b, 541b-542a 34Huygens: Light, ch i, 558b-560a; ch hi,
566b-569b;  ch  v, 601b-603b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch iv
129b-131a;  ch  viii,  sect  7-26  134b-138b passim; ch xiii, sect 11-27
150d-154d  passim;  ch  xxi,  sect  2-4  178c-179c;  ch xxiii, sect 7-17
205d-209a passim; sect 22-32 209d-212d; ch xxxi, sect 2, 239d; bk hi, ch
x,  sect  15  295a-c  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 9-18 414d-416c
passim;  sect  50  422c;  sect  102  432d-433a 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  pref,  3b4a;  part 1, 9a-15c passim, esp 9b-c, 13a-b; 16b-c;
41b-c  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat, 169a-170a 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  685d-686c;  850b,d-855a,c  53  James: Psychology, 68a-b 54
Freud:  Narcissism,  400d-401a  lb.  The  laws  of  motion: inertia; the
measure  of force; action and reaction 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch
10 [266^7267*21] 354b-d / Heavens, bk hi, ch 2
[3oi a2i-b3i] 392c-393b

[136a]
102  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (1. The foundations of mechanics. \b. The laws of
motion:   inertia;  the  measure  of  force;  action  and  reaction.}  9
Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals, ch 2-4 233c235c / Gait of Animals, ch 3
243d-244a  /  Generation  of Animals,  bk iv, ch 3 [768b 16-24] 310b-c 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[80-99]
16a-b; [184-250] 17b-18b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 894a-895b; 899a900a;
905a-906b; 933b-934b; 936a-937a; 938b-939a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q 84, a 3, rep 2 985d-989b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a;
72a-d; part iv, 271d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 56b-c 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences,  third  day,  209a-210a; 224d-225d; fourth day, 240a-d 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35-36  162a-168d  passim;  aph 48
179d-188b  34  Newton: Principles, def hi 5b; laws of motion 14a-24a; bk
ii,  prop  40,  schol, 246a-b / Optics, bk hi, 541b-542a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 2-4 178c-179c; ch xxiii, sect 17 209a
35   Berkeley:   Human   Knowledge,   sect   hi,  434d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect iv, div 27, 460c; sect vii, div 57, 475d-476b
[fn 2]
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk 1, lb 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
169a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 695a-c Ic. Space and time
in  the  analysis  of  motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vi 312b,d-325d 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 201a-202a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk  ii,  aph  45-46  176a-179a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,
434a439b 34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol 8b13a; bk in, general
schol,  370a-371a  /  Optics,  bk  in, 528b-529a; 542a-543a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect 110-117 434b-436a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 24a-29d;
74b-76c;  160b163a  45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 249a-251b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  xi,  469a-d  2.  The  logic  and method of mechanics 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  second  day,  179c-d;  third day, 200a-b;
202d-203a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 34b / Novum Organum, pref
105a-106d;  bk  i,  aph  8  107c-d;  aph  50  111b;  aph 64 114b; aph 70
116b-117a; aph 82 120d-121b; aph 99-100

[136b]
\c  to  2a  127b-c;  aph  121  132b-d;  bk  ii 137a-195d / New Atlantis,
210d-214d 31 Descartes: Rules, vm, 12b-13a / Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c
33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  355a-358b  passim; 365b366a 34 Newton: Principles,
la-2a;  bk  1, prop 69, schol 130b-131a; bk hi, 269a-b; rules 270a-271b;
general schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk in, 531b; 543a-b 34Huygens: Light,
pref,  551b-552a;  ch i, 553b-554a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  hi,  sect  16 317a-c; sect 25-29 321a-323a passim; ch xii, sect 9-13
360d-362d  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  104  433a-b; sect 107
433d-434a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 23-27 459a-460d esp
div  26-27  460b-d;  sect  vn,  div  57,  475d-476b [fn 2] 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  6b-c;  17d-18d;  32a;  69c72c  esp  71b-72a  45 Fourier: Theory
of Heat,   169a-170a  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  440b,d;
758a-759c;  831a-d;  850b,d-855a,c  esp  850b,d851c 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  239c  53  James:  Psychology,  882a-884b  54 Freud: Instincts,
412a-b  2a.  The  role  of  experience,  experiment,  and  induction  in
mechanics  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, la-b; bk i, 6a-7a esp 6d-7a; bk
ii,  27b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 200a-b; 207d-208a 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 16a; 33d34b;42ac 31 Descartes: Rules,
vm,  12b-13a  / Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 356a-357a
34  Newton:  Principles,  bk 1, prop 69, schol 130b-131a; bk hi, rule iv
271b; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk 1, 379a; bk hi, 542a; 543a-b
34  Huygens : Light, ch i, 553a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  16  317a-c;  sect  25-29  321a-323a passim; ch xii, sect 9-13
360d-362d  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 58-59 424a-b; sect 104
433a-b;  sect  107  433d434a  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div
24-27 459b-460d esp div 26 460b-c; sect vii, div 57, 475d-476b [fn 2] 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  6bc;  227b-c  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
pref,  lc2b;  part  1,  23c;  part hi, 87b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
175b;  181b; 184a 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 385b-c; 440b,d;
467a-b; 607a,c; 659a; 774d-775a 53 James: Psychology, 864a

[137a]
lb  to  3b  Chapter  54:  MECHANICS  103  2b.  The  use of hypotheses in
mechanics 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-533] 67d-68a ^^-— 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  fourth  day, 240d-241c 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
367a-370a  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk hi, rule iv 271b; general schol,
371b-372a  /  Optics,  bk  i, 379a; bk hi, 528b; 543a 34 Huygens: Light,
pref,  551b-552a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 16
317a-c;  ch xii, sect 12-13 362a-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 50
422c;  sect  105-106  433b-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div
57,  475d-476b  [fn  2]  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  227b-c 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 9d10b
45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  181b;  184a  45  Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  467a-b;  607a,c;  758a-759c;  777d-778c; 850b,d-855a,c esp
850b,d-851c  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 239c 53 James: Psychology,
884a  b  54  Freud:  Narcissism,  400d-401a 2c. Theories of causality in
mechanics  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk v [509-533] 67d-68a 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 202d-203a 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part v, 59a 34 Newton: Principles, def viii, 7b-8a; bk i, prop 69, schol
130b-131a;  bk hi, rule i-ii 270a; general schol, 369b-372a / Optics, bk
in,  528b-529a;  531b;  541b-542a  34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553b-554a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 1-4 178b-179c; bk iv, ch
hi, sect 25-26 321a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 50-53 422c-423a
passim;  sect  60-66  424b-426a;  sect  102-109 432d-434b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect iv, div 24-27 459b-460d esp div 26 460b-c; sect vii,
div 55, 474c-d; div 56-57 475a-d esp div 57, 475d
[fn 2]; sect viii, div 64, 478d
36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a;
183a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, epilogue ii, 687d; 695b-c 53 James:
Psychology,  885b-886a  3.  The  use  of  mathematics  in mechanics: the
dependence   of  progress  in  mechanics  on  mathematical  discovery  8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk i, ch 9 104b-d; ch 13 [78^ 1-79^6]
108b-c / Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[194*7-11] 270b-c; bk
vii, ch 5

[137b]
333a-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xiii, ch 3 [1078*517] 609b-c 11 Archimedes:
Equilibrium  of  Planes  502a519b  /  Floating Bodies 538a-560b / Method
569a-592a  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus, 252a-255a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v,
964b-965a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 35, a 8, ans
779c-780c  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d; 73b; part iv, 268c-d 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 131b-132a; 133b; second day-fourth
day  178a-260a,c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 46b-c 31 Descartes:
Rules,  iv,  7a;  xiv,  31c-d / Discourse, part 1, 43b-c; part in, 50d /
Objections and Replies, 169c-170a / Geometry, bk ii, 322b331a 34 Newton:
Principles,  la-2a;  def  viii 7b-8a; bk 1, prop 1-17 and schol 32b-50a;
prop  3098  and  schol  76a-157b  esp  prop  69,  schol 130b 131a; bk ii
159a-267a;  bk  hi, 269a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 27
460c-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  94b-103a  42  Kant: Judgement,
551a-552a  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat, 169a-b; 172a-173b; 175b; 177a;
182b-184a; 249a-b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 831a-d 50 Marx:
Capital,  170a-c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 53 James:
Psychology,  675b;  876a-b;  882a 883a 3*. Number and the continuum: the
theory of measurement 11 Euclid: Elements, bk v 81a-98b esp definitions,
5  81a; bk vii, definitions, 20 127b; bk x, prop 1-2 191b-193a; prop 5-9
195a-198b  11  Archimedes:  Measurement  ofa  Circle, prop 3 448b-451b /
Conoids and Spheroids, prop 3-6 458b-460b / Equilibrium of Planes, bk i,
prop  6-7  503b-504b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 18b-20b 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences, third day, 197b-200a; 205b-206c 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv,
31b-33b / Geometry, bk 1, 295a-296b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma 1
25a  42 Kant: Judgement, 551a-552a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 183a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 3b. The geometry of conies: the
motion  of  planets  and  projectiles  11  Archimedes: Quadrature of the
Parabola 527a-537b 1 1 Apollonius : Conies 603a-804b 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  v,  975a-979b  28  Galileo:  Two New Sciences, second day 191c-195c;
fourth day 238a-260a,c passim, esp 238b-240a

[138a]
104  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (3.  The  use  of  mathematics in mechanics: the
dependence  of progress in mechanics on mathematical discovery. 3 b. The
geometry   of  conies:  the  motion  of  planets  and  projectiles.)  31
Descartes:  Geometry,  bk  i-ii,  298b-314b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i,
prop  11-29  an<^  schol  42b-75b esp prop 11-13 42b-46a; bk in, prop 13
286a-b;  prop  40 337b-338a 34Huygens: Light, ch v, 583b-598a; 604b606b;
ch  vi, 607b-611a 42 Kant: Judgement, 551a-552a 3c. Algebra and analytic
geometry:  the symbolic formulation of mechanical problems 31 Descartes:
Rules,  iv,  5c-d;  xiv,  30d-33b;  xvi  33d-35c; xvm 36b-39d / Geometry
295a353b  esp bk i-ii, 298b-314b, bk ii, 322b331a 34 Newton: Principles,
bk  i,  lemma  19  57b58b 34 Huygens: Light, ch vi, 610a-b 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry, pref, la 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b;
177a251b  3d.  Calculus: the measurement of irregular areas and variable
motions  11  Archimedes:  Equilibrium  of  Planes,  bk  i, prop 7 504b /
Quadrature   of  the  Parabola  527a-537b  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,
973a-975a; 979b983b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 193b-194d;
third  day,  205b-d;  224b-c 33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 395a-b /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 434b-435b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma
i-ii  and  schol  25a-32a  esp lemma ii, schol, 31a b bk 11, lemma 2 and
schol  168a-170a  45  Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172b; 177a; 181a-b 183a-b;
221a-248b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d epilogue ii, 695bc 4.
The place, scope, and ideal of the science of mechanics: its relation to
the  philosophy  of nature and other sciences 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  72a-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning.  16a-b; 33d34b / Novum
Organum, bk i, aph 74 118b; bk 11, aph 9 140b-c / New Atlantis, 210d214d
31  Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a; v, 8a / Discourse, part v, 54d-56a; 59a 34
Newton:  Principles,  lb-2a; bk i, prop 69, schol 130b-131a / Optics, bk
hi,  541b-542a  34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  553b-554a  35  Hume: Human
Understanding, sect i, div 9, 454c-d

[138b]
3c  to  4c  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 94b-103a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
32a;  69c-72c  esp  71b-72a / Judgement, 563a-564c 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,   169a-b;   172a-173b;   182a-184a   45   Faraday:  Researches  in
Electricity,  468d-469a  53  James:  Psychology,  69b-70a; 882a-886a esp
883a-884b;  889a-890a  4a.  Terrestrial  and  celestial  mechanics:  the
mechanics of finite bodies and of particles or atoms 9 Aristotle: Motion
of Animals,  ch 3 [699*11]- ch 4 [7ooa5] 234a-235a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  888b-905a  passim;  919b;  929a-933a;  935b; 940b-941a; 959a960a 28
Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, fourth day, 245b-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk  ii,  aph  5  138b139a;  aph 35 162a-164a; aph 36, 165c-166c; aph 46,
178c; aph 48, 186c-d 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rules 270a-271b; prop
7  281b-282b  /  Optics,  bk  hi, 539a542b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xiii,  563a-b;  epilogue  ii, 694d-696d 4b. The explanation of qualities
and  qualitative  change in terms of quantity and motion b3~i9] 503c-d /
Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  4  [442*30b24]  680ac  10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2, 167b168b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 4
[985 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [398-521] 20a-21c;
[677-687]
23c-d;
[730-1022]
24b28a;  bk  iv  [522-721]  51a-53d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49b-d;
part  hi,  172b  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 231a-b 34 Newton:
Optics,  bk i, 431a-455a esp 450a453a 34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553b-554a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, sect 4 133d; sect 7-26
134b-138b;  ch  xxi,  sect  3  178d;  sect 75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect 8-9
206a-c;  sect ii 206d-207a; sect 37 213d214b; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d esp
239d;  bk in, ch iv, sect 10 261b-d; bk iv, ch ii, sect 11-13 311c-312b;
ch  hi,  sect  6,  314b;  sect 12-14 316a-d; sect 28 322a-c 35 Berkeley:
Human Knowledge, sect 25 417d418a; sect 102 432d-433a 45 Fourier: Theory
of  Heat,  169b;  182a-b 4c. The mechanistic account of the phenomena of
life  7  Plato: Phaedo, 240d-242b / Sophist, 567a568a 8 Aristotle: Sense
and the Sensible, ch 4 a30-b24] 680a-c
[442

[139a]
9  Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals, bk i, ch i [640b 5-641*19] 163a-164a /
Motion of Animals, ch 7
[70i b i-3o] 236d-237b; ch
8
[702*22]-
ch 10
[703b i]
237c-239a  / Gait of Animals 243a-252a,c / Generation of Animals, bk ii,
ch  1  [734  b3-2o]  275a-b;  ch  5  [74i  b5-io] 282c 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk i, ch 12-bk ii, ch 8 172d-195c esp bk i, ch 12 172d-173c,
bk  11,  ch  3,  185a,  ch  6  188c-191a;  bk hi, ch 14-15, 213b-214c 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[8651022] 26a-28a; bk hi [94-869] 31b-41a; bk v
[783-836] 71b-72a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  intro,  47a-b  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
355b-d;  495c-496d  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v, 56a-60b 34 Newton:
Optics,  bk i, 384b-385b; 428a b; bk in, 518b-519b; 522a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch ix, sect ii 140b-c; ch x, sect 10 143c-d; ch
xi,  sect  11  145d-146a; ch xxvii, sect 5 220b-c; bk iv, ch hi, sect 25
321a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a / Political Economy, 368d-369a
42  Kant:  Judgement,  571c-572a;  575b-578a;  578d-582c  45  Lavoisier:
Elements   of   Chemistry,   part  i,  14a  45  Faraday:  Researches  in
Electricity,  440b,d; 540a-541a,c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 89b c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk x, 449b-c; epilogue 11, 689c 690a 53 James:
Psychology,  5a  6b;  9a-17b;  44a-52a;  68a-  7  la;  95b 98a 54 Freud:
Instincts,  412c-414c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 651d-657d passim,
esp  651d,  652d;  659d-661c esp 660a / Ego and Id, 708d-709b; 711c-d 5.
The  basic phenomena and problems of mechanics: statics and dynamics 5a.
Simple  machines:  the  balance  and  the lever 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
viii,  ch  4  [255*20-22] 339d 10 Hippocrates: Fractures, par 31, 87c 11
Archimedes:  Equilibrium  of Planes, bk i, postulates, 1-3 502a: 6 502b;
prop 1-3 502b-503a; prop 6-7 503b-504b 14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252c-d 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk iv, 933b-934b; bk v, 970b-972a 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  second  day,  178b-180c;  third  day,  209a-210a; fourth day,
258c-d   33   Pascal:  Equilibrium  of  Liquids,  390a-394b  34  Newton:
Principles,  corol  ii  15a-16b; laws of motion, schol, 23a-24a 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect iv, div 27, 460c 50 Marx: Capital, 181a

[139b]
5b.  The  equilibrium  and  motion  of  fluids: buoyancy, the weight and
pressure of air, the effects of a vacuum 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk iv, ch
6  404d-405a,c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 16, 181a- d; bk 11,
ch  1-2,  183b,d-184c;  ch  6  188c-191a;  bk in, ch 14-15, 213b-214c 11
Archimedes:  Floating  Bodies  538a-560b  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day,  135b138b; 163a-166c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48,
180a  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  359a-365b  /  Great  Experiment  382a 389b /
Equilibrium  of Liquids  390a403a  /  Weight  of Air 403a-429a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  ii,  prop 19-23 and schol 194b-203a; prop 36 226a-231b;
hypothesis-prop  53  and  schol  259a-267a;  bk hi. prop 41, 356b-357b /
Optics,  bk  hi,  518a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiil
sect  23-24  209d-210c  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry, part i,
10c12d;  15c-16d;  part  hi,  88d-89d;  96b-99a  5c. Stress, strain, and
elasticity:  the  strength  of  materials  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day,  131a139c;  second  day  178a-196d  passim  30  Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  11,  aph  48,  180a-d; 187d 34 Newton: Principles, laws of
motion,  schol, 21b-22a; bk ii, prop 23 and schol 201b-203a / Optics, bk
in,  540b-541a  34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  1,  558b-559b  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii,  sect  23-27 209d-211b 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  14c15c; part in, 96b-99a 45 Fourier:
Theory  of  Heat,  192a-b  5d.  Motion, void, and medium: resistance and
friction  7  Plato:  Timaeus, 460c-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 6-9
292c-297c  / Heavens, bk hi, ch 2 [30i a2i-b3i] 392c-393b / Dreams, ch 2
[459*28-34] 703b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [329-448] 5b-6c;
[951-1051]
12d-14a; bk ii
[142-166]
16d-17a; [225-242] 17d-18a; bk vi [830-839] 91b-c 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  857a-b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi, q 84, a 3, rep 2
985d-989b  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  vi,  110c  28  Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first  day,  134a135b;  157b-171b;  fourth  day, 241d-243c 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 8 140b; aph 36, 167b-c; aph 48, 186a;
187a;  187c  34  Newton: Principles, bk ii 159a-267a passim, esp general
schol  211b-219a;  bk  hi,  prop  6,  corol hi 281b; prop 10 284a-285a /
Optics, bk in, 521b-522a; 527a-528b

[140a]
(5. The basic phenomena and problems of mechanics: statics and dynamics.
5d.  Motion,  void, and medium: resistance andfriction.} 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 22-23 153b-d; ch xvii, sect 4 168b-d
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  7  lb- 72a 5e. Rectilinear motion 8 Aristotle:
Physics,   bk  v,  ch  4  [228b  i5-229a  7]  309d-310a;  bkViii,  ch  8
[26^27-263*3]  348b349c  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  2 [268b i5~24] 359d 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 157b171b; third day 197a-237a,c 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 186b-c 34 Newton: Principles, law
i-ii  14a-b;  bk i, prop 32-39 81a-88a; bk ii, prop 1-14 159a189a passim
5^(1)  Uniform motion: its causes and laws 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day,  162c163a;  third  day, 197b-200a 34 Newton: Principles, def
iii-iv  5b-6a; law i 14a: corol iv-v 18a-19a; bk ii, prop i, corol 159a;
prop  2  159b-160a;  prop  5-6  165a-167a;  prop  n-12  183a-184b  5e{2)
Accelerated motion: free fall 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8
[215*242i6a2i] 295a-d
/  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  2 [30i b 16-31] 393a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  ii [225-242] 17d-18a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 10b-llb 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  115,  a 1, rep 3 585d-587c 28
Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, first day, 157b171b; third day, 200a-237a,c
30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 166b-c; aph 48, 181d 34 Newton:
Principles,  def iv 6a; law ii 14a-b; corol vi 19b; bk 1, prop 32-39 81a
88a:  bk  ii,  prop  3-4  160b-165a;  prop  8-10  170a-179a;  prop 13-14
184b-189a;  prop 32-40 and schol 219a-246b esp prop 40, schol 239a-246b;
prop  41-50  and  schol  247a-259a  5/.  Motion about a center: planets,
projectiles,  pendulum 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 8-10 348b355d /
Heavens,  bk  i, ch 2 359d 360d; ch 4 362a-c; bk ii, ch 3-12 377c-384c /
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8 603b-605a / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[4o6b26-407b i3] 636b-637b
16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 895b 905a passim; 913a; 914b-915a; 918b 928a
passim;  933a946a  csp  939a-940b;  bk  v,  965a-966a / Harmonies of the
World,  1015b-1023a  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, fourth day, 240a-d 30
Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36, 167b-c; aph 46, 177c-178a; aph 48,
186b-d

[140b]
34  Newton:  Principles, def v 6a-7a; laws of motion, schol, 19b-20a; bk
i,  lemma  i-ii and schol 25a-32a; prop 1-3 and schol 32b35b esp prop 3,
schol  35b;  prop  46  lOla-b; bk 11, prop 51-53 and schol 259a-267a esp
prop  53,  schol  266a-267a;  bk hi, phenomena 272a-275a: prop 13 286a-b
5/(1)  Determination  of  orbit,  force,  speed,  time,  and  period  12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [614-649] 69a-c 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv.  905a-907a;  bk  v,  968a-985b  esp  975a-979b  28  Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first day, 166d-168a; 171b-172d; third day. 203d205b; 235b-d:
fourth day 238a-260a,c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 186b-d 34
Newton:  Principles, laws of motion, schol, 19b-22a; bk i, prop 1-17 and
schol  32b-50a:  prop  30-31 and schol 76a-81a; prop 40-42 88b-92b; prop
46-47 and schol 101a-102a; prop 51-56 105b-110a; bk ii, prop 4 161b165a;
prop  10 and schol 173b-183a; lemma 3-prop 18 189b-194b; prop 24-general
schol  203a-219a:  bk  hi, prop 1-5 and schol 276a-279a: prop 13 286a-b;
prop   20   291b294b;   lemma   4-PROP  42  333a-368b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv,  sect  21  159a-d  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  iii,  434d  5/(2)  Perturbation of motion: the two and
three  body  problems  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 920b-921b; 922b926a;
957b-959a  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  54c-d;  55c-56b 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  i,  prop  43-45  92b101a;  111b;  prop  57-69 and schol
110b-131a;  bk  in,  prop  5,  corol  iii  279a;  prop  12-14  and schol
285a-287b;  prop  21-39 294b-333a 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
817a-b  6.  Basic  concepts  of  mechanics  6a.  Center  of gravity: its
determination  for  one  or several bodies 11 Archimedes: Equilibrium of
Planes  502a519b  /  Method,  prop  6  578a-579a;  prop 8-9 580b-582b 31
Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  231c-d  33 Pascal: Equilibrium of
Liquids,  393b-394a  34  Newton:  Principles,  corol iv 18a- 19a; bk hi,
hypothesis  i-prop  12  285a-286a  6b.  Weight and specific gravity: the
relation  of  mass  and  weight 7 Plato: Timaeus, 462d-463c 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk iv, ch 8
[216*12-20]
295c-d  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  3  [269b  i8-27oa  i2]  360d-361b; ch 6
[273*22-274^8] 364c-365b;

[141a]
6c to GJ{2) bk in, ch 2
[30i a2i-b32] 392c 393b; bk
iv,  ch 1-3 399a-402c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [358-369] 5c;
bk  11  [80-108] 16a-b; [294-296] I85L 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres, bk I, 521a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 970b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  26,  a  2,  ans 734d-735c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  iv,  271d  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 115d 116a 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 158b c; 160a-164a passim 30 Bacon:
Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 24, 154d-155a; aph 35, 163c-d; aph 36, 166b-c;
aph  40,  172a-b  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies. 231b 232a 34
Newton:  Principles,  def  i 5a; bk ii, prop 24 203a 204a; bk hi, prop 6
279b-281b;  prop  8  282b  283b;  prop 20 291b 294b passim 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  hi,  88d-89d 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
249a-251b  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity, 632a 6c. Velocity,
acceleration,   and   momentum:   angular  or  rectilinear,  average  or
instantaneous 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8
[215*242i6a2i]
295a-d; bk v, ch 4
[228*20-229*7]
309b-310a; bk vi, ch 1-2 312b,d-315d; bk vti, ch 4 330d-333a 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 166d168a; third day, 197b-c; 200a 207d;
209a210a;  224b-225d;  fourth  day,  240a-d;  243d249b  30  Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii, aph 46, 177d178d 34 Newton: Principles, def ii 5b; def
vii-viii  7a-8a;  law ii 14a-b; corol hi 16b-17b; laws of motion, schol,
20a-22a; bk i, lemma 10 28b-29a; lemma ii, schol, 31b-32a; prop i, corol
1  33a / Optics, bk hi, 540a-541b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv,
div  27,  460c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 470d-471a; bk xiv, 589d
6d.  Force: its kinds and its effects 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 5
333a-d; bk viii, ch 10
[266*25-267*20] 353c-354d
/  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  2 [30i b2-32] 392d-393b 9 Aristotle: Motion of
Animals,  ch  3  234a-c  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 938b-939a; bk v,
969a-971b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 105, a 4, rep 1
541c-542a;  part i-ii, q 23, a 4 726a-727a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q  84,  a  3,  rep  2 985d-989b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii,
26d-40b  passim  31  Descartes: Rules, ix, 15c / Objections and Replies,
231c-232a

[141b]
c  Chapter  54: MECHANICS 107 34 Newton: Principles, def iii-viii 5b-8a;
definitions,  schol, lla-13a; law ii 14a-b; bk i, lemma 10 28b-29a; prop
6  37b  38b;  bk  hi,  prop  6,  corol v 281b; general schol, 371b372a /
Optics,  bk  hi,  531b;  541b-542a  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect
103-106  433a-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  118b-119a 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity,  338a  b; 514d-532a; 595a; 603d; 646b-655d;
670a674a; 685d-686b; 817a-818d; 819b,d; 850b,d855a,c csp 855a, 54 Freud:
Narcissism,  400d-40 la 6d{\) The relation of mass and force: the law of
universal  gravitation  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  910b 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  ii,  51c-52c  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 24,
154d-155a; aph 36, 166b-c; aph 40 170c-173d 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  231c-232a  34  Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 69-93 anc^ schol
130a-152b esp prop 75-76 134b-136a; bk in, prop 1-7 276a-282b esp prop 7
281b282b;  general  schol, 371b / Optics, bk hi, 531b-543a esp 541b-542a
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  103-106  433a  d  35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vii, div 57, 475d [fn 2] 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity, 850 b,d855a,c esp 855a,c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239c
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 695c 54 Freud: Narcissism,
400d-401a  6d{2)  Action-at-a- distance: the field and medium of force 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  viii, ch 10 [266^7267*21] 354b-d / Heavens, bk
hi, ch 2
[30^16-31] 393a-b
/ Dreams, ch 2
[459*2834] 703b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk vi
[9061089] 92b-94c
16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 897b-905a esp 900b901b; 906a-b; 922a-b; 934b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  8,  a 1, rep 3 34d-35c 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  10a-c; bk ii, 26d40b esp 30a-32c; 42b-43c;
45d-47b;  51a-c;  54d-55c;  bk v, 102d-104b; bk vi, 112d 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences,  third  day,  202d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 37
168d169c;  aph  45  176a-177c; aph 48, 183a-c; 186a 31 Descartes: Rules,
ix,  15c  /  Discourse,  part  v,  55c 34 Newton: Principles, def v-viii
6a-8a; bk 1, prop 69, schol 130b-131a; bk hi, general schol, 371b-372a /
Optics,  bk  hi,  507a-516b;  520a-522a  esp 521a-b; 531b-542a passim 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect vii, div 57, 475d [fn 2] 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 227b

[142a]
108  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (6d.  Force:  its  kinds  and its effects. 6d(2)
Actionat-a-distance:  the  field  and  medium  of  force.) 45 Lavoisier:
Elements   of Chemistry,   part   i,   9b-c  45  Faraday:  Researches  in
Electricity,  441a-442b;  451a-454a;  463d-465d;  513d-514c;  521a-524a;
528c-532a;  604bc;  631b-c;  648b-d;  685d686c;  816b,d-819a,c;  819a-d;
824a-b;  832a-c;  840c-842c;  855a,c  6d(3)  The  parallelogram law: the
composition  of  forces  and  the  composition  of velocities 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  v,  969a-970a  28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, third day,
224d-225c;  fourth  day, 240a-d; 243d-249b passim 34 Newton: Principles,
corol  i-ii  15a-16b  45  Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 691b-692a;
788c-793c;  817a-b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 570d 53 James :
Psychology,  105a  6e.  Work  and  energy: their conservation; perpetual
motion  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone, bk ii, 56b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, xiii,
27c  33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 392b-394b 34 Newton: Principles,
corol  ii 15a-16b; laws of motion, schol, 23a-24a 45 Faraday: Researches
in  Electricity,  582b-584a; 837bc; 837d-840c 53 James: Psychology, 884a
7.  The  extension  of mechanical principles to other phenomena: optics,
acoustics, the theory of heat, magnetism, and electricity la. Light: the
corpuscular  and  the  wave  theory  8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch 7
[418*26-419*24] 649b-650b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[364378] 48d-49a
16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  896b;  901a-903a;  922b-926a  passim  17
Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr v 183a-189b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 53, a 3, ans and rep 2 283b-284d; q 67 349d354a; q 104, a i,
ans and rep 1,4 534c-536c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q
92,  a  1,  rep  15  1025c-1032b  28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 43a-b 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph 36, 167a-b; aph 37, 169ac; aph 48,
185a-c  /  New  Atlantis,  212d-213a  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part v,
54d-55b  33  Pascal: Vacuum, 366b-367a 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop
94-98  and  schol 152b-157b; bk ii, prop 41-42 247a249b; prop 50, schol,
257b / Optics 377a-

[142b]
6d(3)  to  7a(3)  544a  passim, esp bk i, 379a, bk ii, 492a-495b» bk in,
525b-531b  34  Huygens:  Light  551a-619b  passim, esp ch i 553a-563b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk hi, ch iv, sect 10 261b-d; bk iv, ch ii,
sect 11-13 311c312b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 10bc 45
Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 595a607a,c; 817bc 49 Darwin: Origin
of  Species,  239c  7a(l) The laws of reflection and refraction 7 Plato:
Timaeus,  454c-455a  8  Aristotle: Meteorology, bk hi, ch 2-6 476b482d /
Soul, bk 11, ch 8
[41 9^8-33] 651a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv [269-323] 47d-48b; [436-442]
49d-50a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 82, a 4, rep 5
972d-974c   21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv  [1624]  75c  31
Descartes:  Rules,  vni, 12b-13a / Geometry, bk 11, 322b-331a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  i,  prop 94 152b-153b; prop 96-98 and schol 154b-157b /
Optics,  bk  1,  379a-423b  passim,  esp  379a-386b,  409a412a;  bk  ii,
478b-479b;  485b-495b;  bk hi, 520b; 522b-530b passim 34 Huygens: Light,
ch  ii-vi  563b-619b  esp  ch  ii-iii  563b-575a 7^(2) The production of
colors  7 Plato: Meno, 177b-c / Timaeus, 465 b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk ii [730-841] 24b-25c; bk vi [524-526] 87b 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk iv, 901b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 6, ans 80a-81c
30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 23, 154a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  v, 55c-d / Objections and Replies, 231b 34 Newton: Optics, bk i-ii
379a-506b  passim,  esp  bk  1,  424a-428b, 440a-441b, 453a-455a, bk 11,
481a-482a;  bk  hi,  519a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 144b-145a 7<z(3) The
speed  of light 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [176-208] 46c-47a;
bk  vi [164-172] 82b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 148b149c
30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46, 178a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  v, 55b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, prop 96, schol, 155a / Optics,
bk  i, 379b; bk ii, 488b-492a 34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 554b-557b; ch hi,
570a-575a 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 817b

[143a]
7</(4) to 7d(2) Chapter 54: MECHANICS 109 7a(4) The medium of light: the
ether  8  Aristotle: Soul, bk ii, ch 7 [418*27-419*24] 649b-650b; bk hi,
ch  12 {^^22-j^ii} 667c-668a / Sense and the Sensible, ch 3 676a678b; ch
6  [446*20-447*12]  684c-685c  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk v
[449-508]  67a-c  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 857a-b; 901a-b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  14,  a  6,  ans 80a-81c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  48, 186a 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 366a-367a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk hi, general schol, 372a / Optics, bk hi, 520a 522b; 525b
529a  34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  i,  553b-560b  esp  557b560b 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity,  595b  [fn  2]  lb.  Sound:  the mechanical
explanation  of acoustic phenomena 7 Plato: Meno, 177b-c / Timaeus, 471b
8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch 8 650c 652c 9 Aristotle: Generation of
Animals, bk y, ch 7 328c-330b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iy
[524614] 51a-52b
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  5 186b d 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences, first day, 172b-177a,c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 46,
178a; aph 48, 185a-c; 186a / New Atlantis, 213b 31 Descartes: Rules, xm,
25c  34 Newton: Principles, bk ii, prop 41-50 and schol 247a-259a passim
/  Optics, bk hi, 525b-526a 34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 554b-558b passim 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  485b-486b 7c. The theory of heat
7c(l)  The  description  and  explanation  of the phenomena of heat: the
hypothesis  of  caloric  7 Plato: Timaeus, 462c-d / Theaetetus, 533b-c 8
Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk ii, ch 7 380c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk v
[592613] 68d-69a; bk vi [132-322] 82a-84c; [848905] 91c-92b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  67,  a 3, ans and rep 1,3
351b-352a; q 104, a i, ans 534c-536c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
10-20  140c-153a;  aph  24,  154c-d; aph 26, 157a; aph 33, 161c; aph 36,
168b-d;  aph  48, 182b; 183d; 184d-185a; aph 50, 190b-192b 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies,  231a-b  34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general
schol, 372a / Optics, bk hi, 516b-518b; 520a-b; 541a-b

[143b]
42  Kant: Judgement, 545b-546b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part
i,  9a-16d  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat 169a- 25 lb passim 45 Faraday:
Researches  in Electricity, 812b-c; 813b-815b; 857a-858d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk xiii, 587bc; epilogue 11, 687d 7c(2) The measurement and
the  mathematical  analysis  of  the quantities of heat 33 Pascal: Great
Experiment,  388a  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry, part i, Mac;
33b-36a;  part  hi,  99d-103b  45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 184b-185b Id.
Magnetism: the great magnet of the earth 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i, ch 14, 177a178c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk vi
[9061089] 92b-94c
28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 23b 25d; bk vi 106a 121a,c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  36, 166c-167a; aph 45, 176b-c; aph 48, 183b-c 36
Swift:   Gulliver,   part   hi,  100a-102a  45  Faraday:  Researches  in
Electricity,  286a-294a;  697b  757d  ld{\) Magnetic phenomena: coition,
verticity,  variation,  dip  7  Plato:  Ion,  144b  / Timaeus, 471 b-c 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 10
[266b30267*2] 354b-c
16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk iv, 897b-898b; 935a936a; 941b-942a 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone, bk i-v 3a-105d passim 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 25,
155c-d;  aph  35,  163c-d;  aph  36,  166c-167a; aph 37, 169b-c; aph 42,
174b-c;  aph  45, 176b-c; aph 48, 182c; 183b-c; 184a; 185a-d 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity,  595a-600a;  607a-669d; 673b,d-757d; 812bc;
813b-815b;  855a-866a,c  ld{2)  Magnetic  force  and  magnetic fields 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  897b-898b;  935a936a;  941b-942a 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk ii, 26d-43c esp 38a39b; 45d-47b; 54d-55c; bk v, 102d-105d
30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 37, 169bc; aph 45, 176b-c 34 Newton:
Principles, bk i, prop 69, schol, 130b; bk 11, prop 23, schol 202b-203a;
bk  hi, prop 6, corol v 281b; prop 7, corol i 282a / Optics, bk hi, 531b
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  281c-282c 298d-301a; 302a-d;
528c-532a;   603d-604c   679a-b;   690a-697b;   758a-795d;   816b,d-824b
830b-848a,c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 376b-379a

[144a]
110  THE GREAT IDEAS (7. The extension of mechanical principles to other
phenomena:  optics,  acoustics,  the  theory  of  heat,  magnetism,  and
electricity?)  7e.  Electricity:  electrostatics  and electrodynamics 28
Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 26d-34b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop 7,
corol  i  282a;  general  schol,  372a  /  Optics,  bk hi, 531b; 542a 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  514d-528c  7e(l)  The  source of
electricity:  the  relation  of  the  kinds  of  electricity 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity, 269a-273a; 277a-316a esp 281d-282c, 302a-d,
315d-316a;   386c-422a,c;433a-440a,c;   532b-539b;  541b.d594d;  813a-b;
824b-830b esp 826a-b, 829d830a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 89b-c 7e(2)
Electricity    and    matter:    conduction,    insulation,   induction,
electrochemical  decomposition  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48,
181b-c 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 265a269a; 273a-277a; 306a;
309a-312a;  312c-313d;  314b;  315a-b;  319b,d-345d;  361a-432d;  CROSS-
REFERENCES tity 5a~5e; Space 2a; Time i.

[144b]
le  to  7e(5) 440b,d-514c; 515a-d; 522b,d-532d; 541b,d584a,c; 824b-830b;
848b,d-855a,c  7e(3)  The  relation  of  electricity  and magnetism: the
electromagnetic  field  28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 26d-34b 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  prop  7,  corol  i  282a 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  266b- d; 269a-302d; 305d-306a; 307a-309a; 313d 314c; 315a;
520b-521a; 528c-532a; 595a; 615a-619c; 658b,d-667c; 685d-686b; 759c788c;
795b,d-813a; 816b,d-819a,c 7e(4) The relation of electricity to heat and
light:  thermoelectricity  34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol,
372a  /  Optics, bk hi, 516b-517a 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
305b-d;   306d-307a;   313d-314a;  314c-d;  315a;  404b405a;  476a-506a;
515d-516a;  518a-d;  561b,d569b;  580d-582b; 595a-607a,c 51 Tolstoy: War
and   Peace,  epilogue  ii,  687d  7^(5)  The  measurement  of  electric
quantities  45  Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 277d279a; 316b-318c;
366d-371d; 377d-390d; 444a-451a; 465d-467a,c; 768d-773d; 778b,d788c For:
Considerations relevant to the basic concepts and laws of mechanics, see
Change  yd;  QuanDiscussions  of  the role of experiment, induction, and
hypotheses in physical science, see Experience 5a~5c; Hypothesis 40-4^!;
Induction  5;  Logic  4b;  Physics  4a~4d;  Science  5a~5e;  and for the
physicist's  treatment  of  causes,  see  Cause  2, 5b, 6; Nature 3c(3);
Physics  2b;  Science  4c.  The general theory of applied mathematics or
mathematical  physics,  see Astronomy 2c; Mathematics 5b; Physics ib, 3;
Science  5c.  Other  discussions of the mathematical ideas or operations
which  are  applied in mechanics, see Mathematics 4a~4d; Quantity 3d(i),
4c,  6b.  The  relation  of mechanics to the philosophy of nature and to
other  natural sciences, see Philosophy ic; Physics 2; Science ic. Other
treatments  of  the  problem  of  qualitative  change, see Change 6a-6b;
Quality  3a,  3c; Quantity ia. Mechanism as a philosophy of nature, man,
and  history,  see Animal ie; Element 5e~5g; History 43(2); Man 3c; Mind
2e;  Will  5c;  World  ib. Other discussions of motion and its laws, see
Astronomy  8c-8c(3);  Change  7~7d;  Matter  2b;  and  for  the  related
consideration  of  the  void and action-at-a-distance, see Astronomy 3b;
Element  5c; Space 2.b(2)-2c. Another discussion of mass and weight, see
Quantity  3d;  for  another  discussion  of  velocity, acceleration, and
momentum, see Quantity 5c; for another discussion of force, see Quantity
5e;  and  for  another  discussion  of  the  composition  of forces, see
Opposition 3d.

[145a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas. I. Kepler. Dioptri\ Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy, part
ii,  6-7,  19,  24-27,  48-64; part in, 48-102, 121-125; PART IV, 20-27,
I33—  l87  Hobbes.  Concerning  Body,  part  iv,  ch  30 . Examinatio et
Emendatio  Mathematicae  Hodiernae  . Dialogus Physicus Huygens. Travaux
divers  de  statique  et  de  dynamique  de 1659 <* 7 ^66 . Percussion .
Uhorloge  a  pendule . Sur la cause de la pesanteur . Force centrifuge .
Question  de  I  'existence  et de la perceptibilite du mouvement absolu
Berkeley.  De  Motu  Kant.  Metaphysical  Foundations of Natural Science
Goethe. Beitrdge zur Optil^ . Theory of Colours Hegel. Science of Logic,
vol  ii,  sect  ii, ch i Faraday. The Various Forces of Matter and Their
Relations to Each Other II. Epicurus. Letter to Pythocles R. Bacon. Opus
Majus, part v Nicolas of Cusa. The Idiot, bk iv Stevin. Lart ponderaire,
ou  la  statique  Boyle. New Experiments Physico- Mechanical . A Defence
ofthe  Doctrine  Touching  the Spring and Weight ofthe Air . . . Against
the  Objections  of  Franciscus  Linus  Wallis. Mechanica: sive, De Motu
Guericke.  Experimenta Nova Leibnitz. Discourse on Metaphysics, xv-xxn .
Philosophical Wor\s, ch 20 {On Nature in Itself) . New Essays Concerning
Human  Understanding, appendix, ch 4-5 Voltaire. Letters on the English,
xiv-xvii  Euler.  Mechanic  D'Alembert.  Traite  de  dynamique Franklin.
Experiments  J.  Priestley.  Experiments  and  Observations on Different
Kinds of Air . Experiments and Observations Relating to Various Branches
of Natural Philosophy

[145b]
Chapter  54: MECHANICS 111 Carnot. Principes fondamentaux de V equilibre
et  du  mouvement  Lagrange.  Mecanique  analytique  Galvani. De Viribus
Electricitatis  in  Motu Musculari Commentarius Rumford. An Experimental
Inquiry  Concerning  the  Source  of  Heat  Laplace.  Mecanique  celeste
{Celestial   Mechanics)   Poinsot.   Elemens   de   statique  T.  Young.
Miscellaneous  Worlds,  vol  i,  number  hi, vii, ix-x, xvn-xvm Fresnel.
Theorie  de la lumiere Poncelet. Cours de mecanique Airy. Gravitation W.
R.  Hamilton.  Dynamics  \Yn  ewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the Inductive
Sciences,  VOL  I,  BK  III, CH 5-IO Joule. Scientific Papers Helmholtz.
Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific  Subjects,  VII  W.  Thomson and Tait.
Treatise  on Natural PhilosoTyndall. Light and Electricity R e l l e aux
.  The  Kinematics of Machinery Maxwell. Theory of Heat. . A Treatise on
Electricity  and  Magnetism  . Matter and Motion Rayleigh. The Theory of
Sound  Stallo.  Concepts  and  Theories  of Modern Physics, ch 2-6, 9-12
Clifford.  The  Common Sense ofthe Exact Sciences, ch v Ball. A Treatise
on  the Theory of Screws Gibbs. Collected Worlds C. S. Peirce. Collected
Papers, vol vi, par 35-87 Kelvin. Lectures on Molecular Dynamics and the
Wave  Theory  of  Light  .  Popular  Lectures and Addresses Pearson. The
Grammar  of  Science  Appell. Traite de mecanique rationnelle Hertz. The
Principles  of  Mechanics  Mach. History and Root ofthe Principle of the
Conservation of Energy . The Science of Mechanics . "On the Principle of
the  Conservation  of Energy," in Popular Scientific Lectures Boltzmann.
Principe der Mechanic B. Russell. Principles of Mathematics, ch 54, 5659
Painleve. Les axiomes de la mecanique

[146a]
112 THE GREAT IDEAS Santayana. Reason in Science, ch 3 Duhem. devolution
de  la  mecanique  . Les origines de la statique . Etudes sur Leonard de
Vinci  Enriques.  Problems of Science, ch 5-6 Heaviside. Electromagnetic
Theory  Meyerson. Identity and Reality, ch 2-3, 10 Poincare. Science and
Hypothesis,  part  hi;  part  iv,  ch  12-13 . Science and Method, bk hi
Cassirer. Substance and Function, part i, ch 4; SUP VII Curie. Traite de
radioactivite  E. T. Whittaker. A Treatise on the Analytical Dynamics of
Particles  and  Rigid  Bodies  . A History of the Theories of Aether and
Electricity  Rutherford.  Radio-active  Substances  and Their Radiations
Eddington.  Space,  Time,  and  Gravitation  Einstein.  Relativity:  The
Special  and the General Theory . Sidelights on Relativity . The Meaning
of Relativity

[146b]
Levi-Civita.   Fragen  der  tyassischen  und  relativistischen  Mechanic
Planck.   Das   Prinzip   der   Erhaltung  der  Energie  .  Treatise  on
Thermodynamics  . "The Place of Modern Physics in the Mechanical View of
Nature," in A Survey of Physics Whitehead. Science and the Modern World,
ch  i-iv  Bridgman.  The  Logic  of  Modern  Physics,  ch 3 Schrodinger.
Collected  Papers  on  Wave  Mechanics . Four Lectures on Wave Mechanics
Bohr.   Atomic   Theory  and  the  Description  of  Nature  Broglie.  An
Introduction  to  the  Study  of Wave Mechanics Dirac. The Principles of
Quantum  Mechanics  Heisenberg.  The  Physical  Principles ofthe Quantum
Theory  Nagel.  On  the  Logic  of  Measurement  M. R. Cohen. Reason and
Nature,  bk  ii,  ch  2-3  C.  G.  Darwin. The New Conceptions of Matter
Lenzen. The Nature of Physical Theory, part i, hi Bergson, Time and Free
Will  .  Creative  Evolution,  ch  1  ,  4 . Two Sources of Morality and
Religion, ch 4 Wiener. Cybernetics

[147a]
Chapters^.  MEDICINE  INTRODUCTION  MEDICINE is the name of an art, of a
science  or group of sciences, and of a learned profession whose members
are  proficient in these sciences and experienced in the practice of the
art.  By  derivation it is also the name for curative drugs, physics, or
other  remedies  prescribed  by  the physician. The archaic usage of the
English  word "physic" as the name for the art, practice, and profession
of  what  is  now  generally  called "medicine" suggests what the word's
Greek  root  signifies,  namely,  that  the  physician, no less than the
physicist,  is  a  student of nature. There is one other historic use of
"medicine"  which  indicates  its  scope  and connections in the western
tradition.  When mediaeval institutions first shaped the university, the
basic  divisions  of  learning  then embodied in its structure reflected
different uses of learning as well as differences in subject matter. The
three  faculties  of  medicine,  law,  and theology not only disciplined
their students in different branches of knowledge, but also trained them
for  distinct  applications  of  knowledge  to  practice. The faculty of
medicine  represented  all  the natural sciences, especially those which
have come to be called "biological sciences," just as the faculty of law
or  jurisprudence  represented  all  the  moral sciences and their later
offshoots,  now  called  "social  sciences."  The doctor of medicine was
concerned  with  knowledge  bearing on the relation of man to nature, as
the  doctor of laws was concerned with knowledge bearing on the relation
of  man to man, and the doctor of theology with knowledge bearing on the
relation of man to God. It is a curious accident that the word "doctor,"
which  in  origin  signified  the  competence  to teach others who might
practice  in each of these great fields of learning, has come in popular
usage to designate, not the teacher, but the 113

[147b]
practitioner,  and  chiefly  the practitioner in only one of the learned
professions.  Medicine  may  not  deserve  the implied emphasis upon the
learning of its practitioners, but there would be some truth in granting
it  the  distinction of being the oldest of the professions in the sense
that it comprises a group of men who not only share a common training in
the  relevant  sciences  and  arts,  but who also have adopted a code of
practice  and  obligated themselves to perform a service to their fellow
men. The Hippocratic Oath, sworn to in the name of "Apollo the physician
and  Aesculapius,  and  Health . . . and all the gods and goddesses," is
the   first  explicit  formulation  of  a  professional  ideal.  In  the
collection  of  writings  attributed  to Hippocrates, The Law explicitly
indicates  as  The  Oath  implies that there are intellectual as well as
moral  conditions to be fulfilled by those who would dedicate themselves
to  the  service of health. Only those who have satisfied all requisites
for  the  study  of medicine and by diligent application have acquired a
true  knowledge of it shall be "esteemed physicians not only in name but
in  reality." The same high conception of medicine appears in the Bible.
We  read  in Ecclesiasticus: "Honor the physician for the need thou hast
of him: for the most High hath created him. For all healing is from God,
and he shall receive gifts of the king. The skill of the physician shall
lift up his head, and in the sight of great men he shall be praised. The
most  High  hath created medicines out of the earth, and a wise man will
not  abhor  them.  .  .  .  The  virtue  of  these things is come to the
knowledge of men, and the most High hath given knowledge to men, that he
may  be  honored  in his wonders. By these he shall cure and shall allay
their  pains,  and of these the apothecary shall make sweet confections,
and shall make up ointments of health,

[148a]
114  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  and  of his works there shall be no end. For the
peace  of God is over all the face of the earth." Five of the authors of
the  great books— Hippocrates, Galen, Gilbert, Harvey, and Freudbelonged
to  the  profession of medicine. They were major figures in its history.
Practitioners  of  its arts, they were also contributors to the sciences
concerned  with  health and disease. Three others combined medicine with
other  pursuits.  Copernicus  studied  medicine  at  Padua  and  devoted
considerable time to its practice; Locke was Lord Shaftesbury's personal
physician;  James  took a medical degree at Harvard after years spent in
the  biological  sciences. Still another, Rabelais, not only studied and
practiced  medicine,  but  also  edited the Aphorisms of Hippocrates and
Galen's  little  treatise  on the medical art. His knowledge of medicine
and  his  observation  of  its  contemporary  practices  can  be readily
discerned  in  his  comic  exaggerations of anatomical and physiological
detail,  and of regimens of diet or exercise. The discussion of medicine
in  the  great  books is not limited to its professors or practitioners.
Montaigne has many doubts about medical diagnosis and the possibility of
charting the causes of disease or the remedies which cure. The patient's
ignorance permits the physician to claim credit for his successes and to
blame  fortune for his failures. Montaigne, characteristically, delights
in  observing  that  the doctors disagree. He offers, as "one example of
the  ancient  controversy in physics," the following: "Herophilus lodges
the  original  cause of all disease in the humours; Erasistratus, in the
blood of the arteries; Asclepiades, in the invisible atoms of the pores;
Alcmaeon, in the exuberance or defect of our bodily strength; Diodes, in
the inequality of the elements of which the body is composed, and in the
quality  of  the air we breathe ; Strato, in the abundance, crudity, and
corruption  of the nourishment we take; and Hippocrates lodges it in the
spirits."  There  is  no  great  danger,  he adds, "in our mistaking the
height of the sun, or the fraction of some astronomical computation; but
here  where  our  whole  being  is concerned, 'tis not wisdom to abandon
ourselves to the mercy of the agitation of so many contrary winds."

[148b]
Such  commentary  as  this bears more on the history of medicine than on
the  abiding  problems of its science or art, which, from Hippocrates to
Freud,  have  been more generally agreed upon than the theories proposed
for  their solution. Of similar historical significance are the passages
in the great works of history which describe the phenomena of disease as
they  appeared  to  contemporary  observers,  the  plagues which ravaged
Athens,  Rome,  and  London,  or  the  maladies  which afflicted eminent
individuals.  Poetry,  as  well as history and biography, contributes to
this   record.  The  novels  of  Tolstoy  and  Fielding,  the  plays  of
Shakespeare,  the  tales  of Cervantes and Chaucer, the Greek tragedies,
and  the  Homeric  epics  furnish  evidence of both the constant and the
changing  elements  in  the  conception  of  disease,  the  vocation  of
medicine,  and  the  social  acceptance of the physician. The history of
medicine  is  an  epitome  of  the  history of the natural sciences. The
researches  of  the  Hippocratic  school  inititate  specific methods of
empirical   investigation,   such   as  the  systematic  collection  and
comparison of observations and the painstaking record of individual case
histories.  The  fundamental  concepts  of  medical  theory  reflect the
philosophy  of  nature  and of man. Conflicting notions of the causes of
disease  focus major issues in biology, such as the controversy in which
Galen  engages  with Asclepiades and Erasistratus in the defense of what
he  supposes  to  be Hippocrates' and Aristotle's organic view of nature
against  mechanism and atomism. Medicine, moreover, provides some of the
clearest examples of the interdependence of theory and practice, for the
rules  of  the  healing art put theories to work and to the test; and as
the  rules  are  refined  or  altered  by  the accumulated experience of
particular   cases,   inductive   insight   leads   to  new  theoretical
generalizations.  As  the  work  of  Dr.  Harvey illustrates, biological
science  is  both  the  source  and the reflection of medical knowledge.
Medicine  also affords Bacon and Descartes the prime example of a useful
application  of  the  knowledge  gained by the new methods they propose.
More than engineering or the invention of mechanical utilities, medicine
represents for them knowledge in the service of mankind.

[149a]
Chapter  55:  That science shall bear fruit in technology "is not merely
to  be  desired,"  writes Descartes, "with a view to the invention of an
infinity of arts and crafts . . . but principally beeauseit brings about
the  preservation  of  health, which is without doubt the chief blessing
and  the foundation of all other blessings in this life . . . It is true
that  the  medicine  which  is now in vogue contains little of which the
utility  is  remarkable; but, without any intention of decrying it, I am
sure  that  there  is  no  one,  even  among  those who make its studv a
profession,  who  does  not  confess  that  all  that men know is almost
nothing  in  comparison  with  what remains to be known." The subsequent
history  of  medicine, some of the great documents of which are cited in
the  list  of  Additional  Readings  under  the names of Jenner, Bichat,
Yirchow,  Claude  Bernard,  and  Koch,  seems to substantiate Descartes'
prophecy.  But  it  also  seems  to  be  true that the major problems of
medical practice are not greatly altered or diminished by the tremendous
increase  in  our  knowledge  of the causes of specific diseases and our
vast  store  of  well  tested remedies. What sort of art medicine is; to
what  extent  the  physician should let nature run its course; with what
restraint  or  prudence  the  physician  should  apply  general rules to
particular  cases;  whether  health  is  better  served  by  the general
practitioner  treating  the  whole  man  or  by  a specialist treating a
special  organ;  how  the  relation  of  the physician to his patient is
itself a therapeutic factor and underlies the effectiveness of his skill
in all other respects; to what extent mind and body interact both in the
origin  and  in  the cure of disease— these are the problems of medicine
concerning which Hippocrates and Galen can converse with Osier and Freud
almost  as  contemporaries.  The  distinction made in the chapter on Art
between  the  simply  productive  and  the  cooperative  arts associates
medicine  with agriculture and teaching, and separates these arts, which
merely  help a natural result to come about, from the arts which produce
an  effect that would never occur without the work of the artist. Plants
grow  and  reproduce  without the help of farmers. The mind can discover
some

[149b]
MEDICINE  115  truth  without  the  aid of teachers. Animals and men can
preserve  and  regain  their  health without the care of physicians. But
without  shoemakers  or  house  builders,  shoes and houses would not be
produced.  The  art  of medicine does not produce health in the sense in
which  the  shoemaker  produces  a shoe, or the sculptor a statue. These
other  arts  imitate  nature  by embodying natural forms or functions in
materials  wherein  they  do  not  naturally arise. An art like medicine
seems  to  imitate  nature  by  cooperating  with  natural processes. It
follows the course of nature itself and, bv working with it, enables the
natural  result  to  eventuate  more surely than it might if art made no
attempt  to  overcome  the  factors  of  chance. Socrates expresses this
understanding  of  the  physician's  art  when  he  uses the metaphor of
midwifery  to  characterize  his  own  method  of teaching. As it is the
mother who labors and gives birth, so it is the student who is primarily
active in the process of learning. The teacher, like the midwife, merely
assists  in  a  natural  process  which might be more painful, and might
possibly  fail,  without such help. "The teacher," writes Aquinas, "only
brings  exterior  help  as  does  the  physician  who heals; just as the
interior  nature  is the principal cause of the healing, so the interior
light of the intellect is the principal cause of knowledge. "Health," he
continues, "is caused in a sick man, sometimes by an exterior principle,
namely,  by the medical art; sometimes by an interior principle, as when
a man is healed by the force of nature. . . . Just as nature heals a man
by  alteration,  digestion,  rejection  of  the  matter  that caused the
sickness,  so does art. . . . The exterior principle, art, acts not as a
primary  agent,  but as helping the primary agent, which is the interior
principle,  and  by  furnishing  it  with instruments and assistance, of
which the interior principle makes use in producing the effect. Thus the
physician  strengthens  nature,  and employs food and medicine, of which
nature makes use for the intended end." The subordination of the medical
art  to  nature  seems  to  be  the  keystone  of the whole structure of
Hippocratic  medicine.  It  is implied in the emphasis which Hippocrates
places on the control of the patient's regimen, espe-

[150a]
116 THE GREAT IDEAS cially the elements of his diet, the exercise of his
body,  and  the general circumstances of his life. Even in the treatment
of  acute  diseases, Hippocrates looks to the regimen first, prescribing
changes  or  special  articles  of  diet.  Medicines or drugs perform an
auxiliary  function.  Surgery  is  always  a  last  resort,  to  be used
primarily  in  the  treatment  of  injuries,  and  not to be employed in
diseases  which  will yield to a course of regimen and medication. There
is  an element of violence in surgery which puts it last among the means
of  an  art  which should work by cooperating with nature rather than by
operating  on  it. And among medicines, those are preferable which, like
ptisan,  a  special  preparation  of barley water, derive their efficacy
from  properties  similar  to  those  of  normal nutriment. According to
Hippocrates,  the  control  of regimen is not only the primary factor in
therapy, but also the original principle of medicine. In the treatise On
Ancient Medicine, he points out that "the art of medicine would not have
been  invented  at  first,  nor  would  it have been made the subject of
investigation  (for  there  would have been no need for it), if when men
are  indisposed,  the same food and other articles of regimen which they
eat  and drink when in good health were proper for them, and if no other
were preferable to these. . . . The diet and food which people in health
now  use  would  not have been discovered, provided it suited man to eat
and  drink in like manner as the ox, the horse, and all other animals. .
.  .  What other object, then, has he in view who is called a physician,
and  is  admitted  to  be  a  practitioner of the art, who found out the
regimen  and  diet  befitting the sick, than he who originally found out
and  prepared for all mankind that kind of food which we all now use, in
place  of  the  former  savage  and  brutish  mode  of living?" The same
conception  of  medicine's relation to nature seems to be fundamental in
Galen's  thought.  He attributes to Hippocrates his own reformulation of
the  insight  that  the art of healing consists in imitating the health-
giving  and healing powers of nature itself. The medical doctrines which
he  criticizes  were based on the atomism of Epicurus. They regarded the
body as a complex piece of machinery. When it

[150b]
gets  out  of  order, it needs a mechanic and mechanical remedies to fix
it.  On  the  contrary, it j seems to him, the living body is an organic
unity,  not  an aggregation of atoms, or a system of interlocking parts.
"Nature  is  not  posterior to the corpuscles, J but a long way prior to
them,"  Galen  writes. "Therefore it is nature which puts together the j
bodies  both  of  plants  and  animals; and this she I does by virtue of
certain  faculties  which she I possesses— these being, on the one hand,
attracI  tive  and  assimilative  of  what is appropriate, I and, on the
other,  expulsive  of  what is foreign. I Further, she skillfully moulds
everything  durI  ing  the stage of genesis; and she also provides I for
the  creatures  after  birth,  employing  here I other faculties again."
Nature,  according  to Galen, works not by I the external impact of part
upon  part,  but  by  I its faculties or powers for the performance of \
natural  functions  and  the  production  of  natural 1 effects. Galen's
polemic  against  the  mechanists  I thus leads him to reverse the usual
statement. ] Where Hippocrates looks upon nature as the model for art to
follow, Galen calls Nature the artist, in order to set his view in sharp
contrast  to  all  mechanical conceptions. "Instead of admiring Nature's
artistic  skill,"  he  declares,  "they  even  go so far as to scoff and
maintain  that  .  .  . things have been made by Nature for no purpose!"
Nature,  Galen  holds,  produces  effects according to its powers and in
conformity  to  its needs. It seems to work with intelligence and for an
end,  not  blindly  and  by chance. The true art of medicine, therefore,
borrows  its  method from "Nature's art." The conception of nature as an
artist  may  be  taken  metaphorically  or  literally,  but  the insight
controlling  the practice of medicine remains the same. The physician is
a  servant,  not  a  master,  of  nature.  Aristotle's doctrine of final
causes, summarized in the maxim Galen so often repeats— that "nothing is
done  by  Nature  in  vain"—  furnishes  a  principle  for physiological
research, as well as the rules of medical art. Whether because of faulty
observation  on  his  part,  or  because  of  a failure to apply his own
principle, Galen leaves to Harvey one of the great discoveries which can
be  credited to close attention to final causes. Always observant of the
relation between structure and function,

[151a]
always  questioning  the  purpose  which  bodily  organs  serve,  Harvey
establishes  the  fact  that the blood circulates, and finds therein the
reason  for  the structure of the heart, its motionsTand its relation to
the  lungs.  It  may  also  be possible for a principle to be carried to
excess. Montaigne, for example, expresses his distrust of medical theory
and  the  physician's  remedies  by an unqualified trust in nature's own
resourcefulness.  Drugs,  especially  purgatives, do violence to nature.
"Men  disturb  and irritate the disease by contrary oppositions; it must
be  the way of living that must gently dissolve, and bring it to an end.
The  violent  gripings  and contest betwixt the drug and the disease are
ever  to our loss, since the combat is fought within ourselves, and that
the  drug  is an assistant not to be trusted, being in its own nature an
enemy  to  our  health,  and  by  trouble  having  only  access into our
condition. Let it alone a little; the general order of things that takes
care  of  fleas and moles, also takes care of men, if they will have the
same  patience that fleas and moles have, to leave it to itself." Nor is
there  any  need  for  an  art  of medicine when nature can do better by
herself.  "We  ought to grant free passage to diseases; I find thev stay
less with me, who let them alone; and I have lost some, reputed the most
tenacious  and  obstinate,  by their own decay, without help and without
art,  and  contrary  to its rules. Let us a little permit Nature to take
her  own  way;  she  better  understands  her  own affairs than we." The
Hippocratic  doctrine  seems to occupy a middle ground between this view
of  nature  as an unerring artist and the opposite extreme which permits
all sorts of tampering and tinkering with the machinery of the body. The
art  of  medicine  "consists  in three things," writes Hippocrates: "the
disease, the patient, and the physician. The physician is the servant of
the  art,  and  the  patient  must  combat  the  disease  along with the
physician."  With  regard  to  diseases,  the  physician  must "have two
special  objects  in  view  ...  to  do  good,  and to do no harm." This
celebrated  summary  indicates  the  two  kinds  of  knowledge which the
physician  should  possess.  He should know about disease in general, so
that he can classify diseases according to

[151b]
Chapter  55:  MEDICINE 117 their special causes, their symptoms, and the
typical course each seems to take. Such knowledge underlies the doctor's
diagnosis of the patient's malady. That in turn determines his prognosis
of the stages through which the illness will run, from its onset through
various  crises  or turning points to its sequelae or consequences. Upon
the  accuracy  of  his  diagnosis and the certainty of his prognosis may
depend  the  effectiveness of any remedy the physician prescribes in the
individual  case.  But individual cases are seldom completely alike. The
physician  must therefore know the patient as an individual, and all the
relevant   circumstances   of   his  life  as  well  as  the  particular
characteristics of this instance of the disease; even though its general
characteristics  are  familiar  to  him  from  much  experience  in  the
treatment  of similar cases. The Boo\ of Prognostics and the treatise Of
the  Epidemics  in the Hippocratic collection seem to combine both these
kinds of knowledge. They enumerate the svmptoms by which diseases can be
recognized  and  their  future  foretold. They also set forth individual
case  histories  from  which  such  generalizations  can  be  drawn. The
practice  of  medicine  thus  appears  to  require  more than scientific
knowledge  of health and disease in general, and more than general rules
of art. It requires the sort of experience which can be gained only from
actual  practice. Without prudence born of experience, general rules can
be  misapplied,  for  no  general  rule, in medicine as in law, fits all
cases alike. The most famous of Hippocratic aphorisms conveys a sense of
the  hazards  of  medical  practice:  "Life  is short, and Art long; the
crisis  fleeting;  experiment  perilous,  and  decision  difficult.  The
physician  must  not  only  be prepared to do what is right himself, but
also  to make the patient, the attendants, and the externals cooperate."
To  persuade  the  patient to cooperate is the first maxim governing the
physician's relation to his patient. Plato contrasts the right and wrong
relation  between  doctor  and  patient by comparing the practice of the
physicians  who  treated  slaves  and  those  who treated free men. "The
slave-doctor," he says, "prescribes what mere experience suggests, as if
he had exact knowledge, and when he has given his orders, like a tyrant,
he rushes off with equal assurance

[152a]
118  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  to  some  other servant who is ill But the other
doctor,  who  is  a  freeman, attends and practices upon freemen; and he
carries  his  enquiries  far  back,  and  goes  into  the  nature of the
disorder;  he  enters  into  discourse  with  the  patient  and with his
friends,  and is at once getting information from the sick man, and also
instructing  him as far as he is able, and he will not prescribe for him
until  he  has  first  convinced  him;  at last, when he has brought the
patient more and more under his persuasive influences and set him on the
road  to  health,  he  attempts  to  effect a cure." In the treatment of
mental  diseases,  as  Freud  points  out,  the  proper  development and
management of the relationship between patient and physician is itself a
major  factor  in psychotherapy. "It presupposes a profound interest for
psychological  incidents,  as  well  as  a  personal  sympathy  for  the
patient,"  he writes. "It requires the full consent and the attention of
the  patients,  but  above  all,  their  confidence,  for  the  analysis
regularly  leads  to  the  inmost  and  most  secretly  guarded  psychic
processes."  Since fears, anxieties, or other temperamental dispositions
on  the part of the patient may affect the course of an organic ailment,
the  patient's confidence in the physician and, even more generally, his
emotional  response  to the physician's character play an important role
in  the  successful  treatment  of  bodily  ills as well as of mental or
functional   disorders.   Hippocrates   recommends  that  the  physician
cultivate  prognosis,  not only for the guidance of his own actions, but
also for the sake of the patient. "By foreseeing and foretelling, in the
presence  of  the  sick,  the  present,  the  past,  and the future, and
explaining  the omissions which patients have been guilty of, he will be
the more readily believed to be acquainted with the circumstances of the
sick;  so  that men will have confidence to entrust themselves to such a
physician."  The  relation  of  physician  and patient raises a question
about  the  organization  of the practice of medicine, to which opposite
answers  have  been  given  in  both ancient and modern times. Herodotus
reports  a  high degree of medical specialization in Egypt. "Medicine is
practised among them on a plan of separation," he writes;

[152b]
"each  physician treats a single disorder, and no more: thus the country
swarms  with medical practitioners, some undertaking to cure diseases of
the  eye,  others  of the hand, others again of the teeth, others of the
intestines,  and some those which are not local." The fact that the next
paragraph  begins  a  discussion  of  funerals  can  hardly  be taken as
revealing  the  attitude  of Herodotus toward specialization, though his
comment  on  the  Egyptian  practice  does  imply  a  contrast  to Greek
medicine.  One sentence in the Hippocratic Oath— "I will not cut persons
laboring  under the stone, but will leave this to be done by men who are
practitioners  of  this  work"—  indicates some division of labor in the
organization  of  Greek  medicine.  But apart from the special tasks and
skills  of  surgery,  the Hippocratic conception of the physician's work
favors  the practice of general medicine rather than specialization. The
man,  not  the  disease,  is  to  be  treated, and to treat him well the
physician  must  examine  the  man  as  a whole, not merely the organ or
bodily  part  in which the disorder seems to be located. The Hippocratic
formula  for  getting  a  case  history  calls  for  an inquiry into the
background  of  the  individual's life, his antecedents, his occupation,
his  temperament,  "the  patient's  habits,  regimen,  and pursuits; his
conversation,  manners,  taciturnity,  thoughts,  sleep,  or  absence of
sleep,  and sometimes his dreams, what they are and when they occur; his
picking  and  scratching;  his  tears."  From  these as well as from the
symptoms,  says Hippocrates, "we must form our judgment." The defense of
general practice against specialization is part of Galen's argument with
his  adversaries.  Treatment  of  the  disordered part as if it could be
isolated from the living unity of the whole man is, to Galen, one of the
deplorable  consequences  in medical practice of atomism or mechanism in
medical  theory.  This issue is argued again and again in the history of
medicine,   with  each  side  pressing  the  advantages  in  its  favor.
Montaigne,  for  example,  states the case for the specialist by analogy
with the advantages of specialization in other arts. "As we have doublet
and  breeches makers, distinct trades, to clothe us, and are so much the
better  fitted,  seeing  that  each  of  them  meddles only with his own
business, and has less to

[153a]
trouble his head with than the tailor who undertakes them all; and as in
matter  of diet, great persons, for their better convenience, have cooks
for  the  different offices ... so also as to the cure of our maladies."
With   Freud   and  the  development  of  a  greater  awareness  of  the
psychological  origin of many bodily disorders, a new factor enters into
the  argument.  It tends to favor the general practitioner who, from his
acquaintance  with  the patient as a person, may be better able than the
specialist  to  detect  hidden  psychological  causes. The conception of
disease   is  usually  determined  by  the  conception  of  health.  The
abnormality  is  judged  and  measured  as  a  deviation  from the norm.
Hippocrates uses the outward appearance of man in a healthy condition as
the standard for discerning the visible signs of illness. The physician,
he  says, "should observe . . . first the countenance of the patient, if
it  be like those of persons in health, and more so, if like itself, for
this  is the best of all; whereas the most opposite to it is the worst."
He  should  also  take  note  when  he  finds the patient reclining in a
posture  which resembles the normal disposition of the healthy body. "To
find  the  whole body lying in a relaxed state" is a more favorable sign
than  to  find  him  "upon  his back, with the hands, neck, and the legs
extended."  The  history  of  medicine,  especially  on  the side of its
science  and theory, if not so much with regard to its art and practice,
can  be  told  in terms of refinements in the classification of diseases
and  progressive  discovery  of their specific causes, both internal and
external,  predisposing  and  exciting.  But  the  analysis  of diseases
according  to their aetiology and by reference to the typical picture of
the  disease  process  leaves  unanswered the general question about the
nature  of  disease  as  a loss of health. Apart from its causes and its
symptoms,  its  modes  and  its  patterns, what is disease ? This is the
question  of  major  speculative  interest in the tradition of the great
books.  The  answers  given  have  a  certain uniformity in spite of the
varying  terms  in  which they are expressed. The humoural hypothesis of
ancient  medical theory, for example, conceives health as that condition
of the body in which the physiologi-

[153b]
Chapter  55:  MEDICINE  119  cal  elements are in a proper proportion or
balance,  and in which the various parts or powers function harmoniously
with  one  another.  As  health is harmony or good order in the body, so
disease  consists  in  imbalance and disharmony an excess or defect with
consequent disproportion of the elements, or the disorder of conflicting
bodily  processes.  In  the  Timaeus,  Plato first states this theory in
terms  of  the  four  physical  elements. "There are four natures out of
which  the  body is compacted, earth and fire and water and air, and the
unnatural  excess  or defect of these, or the change of any of them from
its  own  natural  place  into  another  .  .  .  produces disorders and
diseases."  He  then  considers the diseases which result from excess or
defect  of  one or another of the four humours— blood, phlegm, black and
yellow  bile. The humoural hypothesis, which Hippocrates and Galen share
with  Plato and Aristotle, undergoes many transformations in the history
of  medicine.  The  four  elements  or  humours  are  replaced  by other
physiological  factors,  such as the hormones or internal secretions, or
the  elements  of  modern  biochemistry.  But  constant throughout these
changing formulations is the conception of health as an equilibrium, and
of  disease  as  its loss through disorder and disproportion. This broad
conception  of  health  and  disease seems to apply to mental as well as
bodily  ills.  There  is not only a basic continuity between Plato's and
Freud's  discussion  of  the  bodily  origin of mental disorders and the
psychic  origin  of  physical  ailments;  but the Freudian emphasis upon
conflict  and  disintegration  in the neurotic character—milder forms of
the  schizophrenia  or "split personality" which characterizes insanity—
also  appeals  to  harmony  as  the principle of health. The language of
modern  psychiatry  which refers to "the integrated personality" or "the
well-balanced  and adjusted individual" defines the norm or the ideal of
mental  health.  The  various  kinds  and  degrees  of  mental disorder,
especially  those  which  seem  to  be  entirely  functional rather than
organic,  represent  abnormalities  which,  though they differ in cause,
symptom,  and  tendency,  have  in  common  some excess or defect in the
psychic struc-

[154a]
120 THE GREAT IDEAS in the main tradition of medical practice; for in is
health.  ib.  The  relation  of  art to nature in healing: imitation and
cooperation  3. The practice of medicine 3#. The application of rules of
art  to  particular  cases  in  medical  practice  3d.  The  factors  in
prevention  and  therapy  (3) Surgery 5. The theory of disease 5<ar. The
nature  of disease 5c. The disease process: onset, crisis, after-effects
$d.  The  causes  of  disease:  internal  and  external  factors (2) The
psychogenesis  of bodily disorders 5^. The moral and political analogues
of  disease  nature of madness 6b. The classification of mental diseases
6c.  The process and causes of mental disorder (2) Functional origins of
mental disease

[154b]
ture  or  some  unresolved  conflict in the nature addition to insisting
that the patient shall help of man. Freud's psychoanalytic method in the
to  cure himself, it is directed toward the resotreatment of mental ills
places  psychotherapy  lution  of  conflict, restoring the harmony which
OUTLINE  OF TOPICS PAGE tient; the place of the physician in society 121
2.  The  art  of medicine 122 2.c. The comparison of medicine with other
arts  and professions 123 3#. General and specialized practice: treating
the  whole man or the isolated part 124 (1) Control of regimen: climate,
diet,  exercise,  occupation,  daily  routine  m  (2) Medication: drugs,
specifics  125  4.  The concept of health: normal balance or harmony 126
5#.  The  classification  of  diseases  127 (1) The humoural hypothesis:
temperamental dispositions 128 6. Mental disease or disorder: its causes
and  cure  129  6a.  The  distinction  between  sanity and insanity: the
concept  of  mental health and the (1) Somatic origins of mental disease
130  7.  The  historical record on disease and its treatment: epidemics,
plagues, pestilences 131

[155a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James: Psychology, Il6all9b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the page,
the  letters  c  and  d  to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand
sideof  the  page.  For  example,  in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously in the works or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  1.  The  profession  of  medicine,  its aims and
obligations:  the  relation  of  physician  to patient; the place of the
physician   in  society  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  38:1-15—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 38:1-15 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[442-506]
44c-45a  esp  [478-483]  44d  5  Aristophanes:  Plutus  [400-414] 633d 6
Herodotus: History, bk ii, 65c; bk hi, 117a-118a 7 Plato: Charmides, 7d;
10d-lla  /  Lysis,  21d;  22d-23a  / Laches, 27c / Protagoras, 55d-56a /
Symposium,   155d-156b  /  Gorgias,  261a-d;  268d-270b;  287c-  288a  /
Republic, bk i, 298a-b; 303a-304a; bk hi, 335b-338a / Statesman, 599a-b;
600b-d;  601d-602c  /  Laws,  bk  iv, 684c-685a; bk ix, 745a-b / Seventh
Letter, 803c-804b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 10
[104*33-37]
147d;  bk 11, ch 2 [110*14-22] 154d; ch 3 [nob 16-19] 155c ; BK v > CH 7
i  1  3^33-^37^7]  189a  9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [639b
16-21] 161d-162a / Politics, bk i, ch 9 [i257b 25-30] 451d; [1258*10-14]
452b; ch 10 [1258* 23-33] 452b-c; bk hi, ch 6
[i278b36-i279a
2] 476b; ch 11
[i28ib40-i282a6] 479d; ch 16

[155b]
Chapter 55: MEDICINE 121 3] 485d-486a; bk vii, ch 2
[i324b
[i287a32-b
27-31] 528d 10 Hippocrates: The Oath xiiia-b / Ancient Medicine, par 1-5
la-2d;  par 7 3a / Prognostics, par 1 19a-b / Regimen in Acute Diseases,
par 2-3 26d-27c / Epidemics, bk i, sect ii, par 5 46c-d / Fractures, par
36, 89a / Articulations, par 44, 105a; par 78, 119d / Aphorisms, sect 1,
par  1  131a  / The Law 144a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 14,
178d179a;  bk  hi, ch 10 207b-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xii [391-397] 364b
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk vi, 98d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr hi, ch 5,
96a-b  18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  14 627d-628b 22
Chaucer: Prologue
[411-444]
166b-167a  /  Tale  of Melibeus, par 10, 403a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  29b-c; bk 11, 76b; 124d-125b; bk hi, 186a-b; bk iv,
232a-233b;   234a-c   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  365b-379a,c  esp  375b-d;
401b-402c;  523c-524a; 532a-b 27 Shakespeare: All's Well That Ends Well,
act 1, sc 1
[14-36]
142a-c; sc 111
[227-262]
147d-148b; act ii, sc 1
[71-189] 149b-150c;
sc in
[46-57] 151d-152a / Macbeth, act iv,
sc in [140-159] 304d-305a

[156a]
(1.  The  profession of medicine, its aims and obligations: the relation
of  physician  to  patient;  the  place of the physician in society.} 28
Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 267b,d-268d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part
ii,  345a-346b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 50c-53d esp 52d-53a 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part vi, 61b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 3a-b;
part iv, 155b157a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 412a-414b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 33c-34c; 70c-71b; 86a-c; 161d-162b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  xxix,  266a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 44c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  13b-c;  261a-b  47  Goethe: Faust, part i [997-1010] 25b; [201
12036]  47b-48a;  part  ii  [7345-7348]  180a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
323c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk i, 38b-d; 43d44a; 45b-c; bk v,
215c-d;  225c-227a;  bk  viii,  307a-c;  bk ix, 372a-373b; 374c-d; bk x,
448d;  449b-c;  464a-d;  bk  xi, 524c-525a; bk xii, 533d-534a; 535b-c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk xii, 356d-359c 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis, 19d / Hysteria, 64b-c; 71d-72b; 78b-81c
passim;  107a-c  /  Psycho-  Analytic  Therapy, 125b-127a,c esp 127a,c /
"Wild"  PsychoAnalysis  128a-130d  esp  130b-c  /  General Introduction,
449a-b; 451 b-c; 623d-625b esp 624d-625a / Ego and Id, 713b
[fn
1] / New Introductory Lectures, 866b-c; 870d-871a 2. The art of medicine
2a.  The  scientific  foundations  of  the art of medicine: the contrast
between   the   empiric   and   the   artist   in   medicine  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  38:1-15—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  38:1-15  7  Plato:
Charmides,  6d-7b  /  Lysis,  17c-18a  /  Phaedrus,  136b-c  /  Gorgias,
261a-262a;  280d281c;  287d-288b  /  Republic,  bk  i, 303a-304a; bk in,
337b-c  /  Theaetetus,  516a / Statesman, 601d-602c / Philebus, 633b-c /
Laws,  bk iv, 684c-685a; bk ix, 745a-b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk  i, ch 13 aio-i6] 108c; bk ii, ch 19 [iooa3-9] 136c / Meteorology, bk
iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Meta-
[79
physics, bk 1, ch 1
[981*5-24] 499b-c / Sense
and  the  Sensible, ch i [436*1 6-b2] 673b / Youth, Life, and Breathing,
ch 27 [48ob2i~3i] 726d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*29-33]
341c; ch 13
[1102*15-26] 347c; bk
ii, ch 2
[1104*1-9] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 3 [ui2*30-b2o]
358b-c; bk vi, ch i
[ii38b25-34] 387b; ch 7
[1141*20-34] 390a-b; ch
10
[ii42b34-i 143*4]
392b; bk x, ch 9
[n8ob i3-28]
435b-c / Politics, bk in, ch ii
[i28i b40-i282*6] 479d;

[156b]
ch 15
[1286*10-15] 4g4b; ch 16 [i287*32-b
3] 485d-486a; bk vii, ch 13
[i33i b30-38] 536c
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i355b26~32]
595b;
[i356b28-32] 596b-c
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 1-8 la3b; par 12-15 4b-5d; par
20-24  7b-9a,c / Airs, Waters, Places, par 1-2 9a-c / Prognostics, par 1
19a-b;  par  25  26a,c / Regimen in Acute Diseases, par 2-3 26d-27c; par
11,  31d-32a  /  Epidemics,  bk  i, sect ii, par 5 46c-d; sect hi, par 1
49c-d; bk hi, sect hi, par 16 59bc / Surgery, par 1 70b / Fractures, par
31,  87a-b / Articulations, par 10, 94d; par 58, 11 2d / Aphorisms, sect
i, par 1 131a / The Law 144a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13,
175c177a;  bk  ii,  ch  8-9 191b-199a,c esp ch 9, 195c-196a 17 Plotinus:
Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 14 74b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xxii, ch
24, 610c-611a; ch 30, 618a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 57, a
3,  ans 297b-298a; q 117, a i, ans and rep 1 595d-597c; part i-ii, q 14,
a  4,  ans  679b-d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 371c-372b; 377a-d; 450d-451a;
523c-524a  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 27b-c 28 Harvey: Motion of the
Heart,  289d-292a esp 289d, 291d-292a / Circulation of the Blood, 305a-d
/  On  Animal  Generation,  376d-377a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
5b-c;  48d49b; 50c-51d; 52b-d; 53a-b; 56c-57b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph
1-9 107a-d; aph 64 114b; aph 66, 114d-115a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
vi,  61b-c;  66d67a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 36, 465a-d
[fn  1]  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 412a-414b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones.
157a-158a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 372a-373b 54 Freud: Psycho-
Analytic  Therapy,  123b-125a  esp 123b," 125a / "Wild" Psycho-Ana lysis
128a-130d esp 130b-d / General Introduction, 451 be; 549d-550c; 606c-d /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  871d  2b. The relation of art to nature in
healing: imitation and cooperation 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 117a-c 7
Plato:  Symposium,  155d-156c  /  Gorgias,  260a-262a / Republic, bk hi,
335c-337a / Timaeus, 475c-d / Statesman, 599a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
ii, ch i
[i92b8~3i]
268b,d-269a;
[i93b i2-i7]
269d-270a; ch 2
[194*22-27]
270c; ch 8
[i99b26-3i]
277a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii, ch 7 [1032^-29] 555c-d; ch 9 [1034*8-29]
557b-c  10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 3 ld-2b; par 20 7b-d /
Prognostics,  par  1  19a-b  /  Injuries  of  the Head, par 17 68d-69a /
Surgery, par 15 73b-c / Fractures, par 1-3 74b,d-76a /

[157a]
Articulations, par 2-3 92a-c; par 14 96d-97d; par 42 104b-c / Aphorisms,
sect I, par 1 131a; sect 11, par 4 132b; par 51 133d 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr iv, cH3J^175a 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 30
651c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 117, a 1, ans and rep 1
595d  597c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 51, a i, ans
12b-13c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  207c-d  25
Montaigne: Essays, 52c-d; 368d-369a: 369c370a; 528c 529b 27 Shakespeare:
King  Lear,  act  iv,  sc iv [1-15] 272b-c 28 Harvey: Circulation of the
Blood,  305a-d  /  On  Animal  Generation, 438c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  53b  d  /  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 1-9 107a-d 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  vi,  61b c; 66d67a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 195b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  34b; 86b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336b-337a 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk ix. 372a-373b; bk x, 449b-c 54 Freud: Origin
and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  2a  /  Inhibitions, Symptoms, and
Anxiety,  746b-c  2c.  The  comparison  of  medicine with other arts and
professions  7  Plato:  Charmides,  6d-7b  /  Lysis, 17c-18a / Phaedrus,
136b-137c / Gorgias, 260a-262a; 268d-270b; 282c-d; 289c-d / Republic, bk
i,  298a 299a; bk hi, 337b 338a; bk v, 361d362a / Theaetetus, 515d-517b;
525d  /  Sophist,  556d-558d / Statesman, 599a-602c / Philebus, 633b-c /
Laws,  bk iv, 684c-685a / Seventh Letter, 803c-804b 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk  i,  ch  3  144a-b;  bk  v,  ch  7  [i36b33-i37a 7] 189a; bk vi, ch 5
[i42b30143*9]  196b-c / Physics, bk i, ch 8 [i9i*33-b 9] 267b; bk 11, ch
1
[i92b23~32]
268d-269a;
[i93b i3-i9] 269d-270a; ch 8 [i99b26-3i] 277a
/ Metaphysics, bk vn, ch 7
[io32*25~b29]
555b-d  9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [639b 15-24] 161d-162a
/ Ethics, bk i, ch i [1094*69] 339a; ch 6 [1096*29-33] 341c; ch 7 [1097*
15-23]  342c; ch 13 [1102*15-26] 347c; bk ii, ch 2 [no4a i-9] 349b-c; bk
hi, ch 3 [1112*30b i9] 358b-c; bk v, ch ii
[ii38a29-b
4] 386d387a; bk vi, ch i
[1 138^5-34] 387b; ch
7
[1141*20-34] 390a-b; ch
12
[ii43b2i-i 144*5]
393b-c passim; ch 13 [1145*6-12] 394d; bk x, ch 9
[u8ob7-u8i b
7] 435b-436a / Politics, bk 1, ch 9
[i257b25~3o] 451d;
[1258*10-14]
452b; ch 10 [1258*23-33] 452b-c; bk ii, ch 8
[i268b33~37]
464d; bk hi, ch 6
[i278b361279*2] 476b; ch
11
[i28ib4o-i282*6] 479d;

[157b]
ch 15
[1286*10-15] 484b; ch
16 [i287*32-b 3] 485d-486a; bk vii, ch 2
[1 324^7-31] 528d;
ch 13
[i33i b3o-38]
536c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1
[i355b9-i4] 594d-595a; ch 2 [1355^636] 595b; [i356b28-35] 596b-c
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 1 lab; par 9 3b-d / Regimen in
Acute Diseases, par 3 27a-c / The Law, par 1-3 144a-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk xii
[391 -397I 364b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  34b  / Pericles, 129b-d / Demetrius, 726a-d 17
Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead,  tr ix, ch ii 250c251a 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 30 651c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
117,  a  1, ans and rep i 595d-597c; part i-ii, q 14, a 4, ans 679b-d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  76b-c; bk in, 186a-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  450d-451a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 5b-6a;
50c51d; 52d-53b; 77d-78d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 33 176b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  hi,  112b-113a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 86a c; 90b 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  i, 44c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 448d 54 Freud:
Hysteria,  108a-b  3.  The  practice  of medicine da. The application of
rules of art to particular cases in medical practice 7 Plato: Statesman,
599a-b;  600b-d / Laws, bk iv, 684c-685a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i,
ch i [981*5-24] 499bc 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639b i6-2i] 161d-162a
/ Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1104*1-9] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 3 [ni2*3o-b2o]
358b-c; bk vi, ch i
[ii38b25-34] 387b; ch 7
Iii4i  b  i4-2i] 390c-d; bk x, ch 9 [n8ob7-23] 435b-c / Politics, bk hi,
ch 15
[1286*10-15]
484b; bk vn, ch 13
[i33i b3o-38]
536c  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [i356b28-32] 596b-c 10 Hippocrates: Ancient
Medicine,  par  12  4b-c;  par 20-21 7b-8a / Airs, Waters, Places, par 2
9b-c  / Regimen in Acute Diseases, par 18 34d35b / Epidemics, bk i, sect
hi,  par  1  49c-d; bk in, sect hi, par 16 59b-c / Articulations, par 10
94d-95a;  par  71,  117c  /  Aphorisms, sect 1, par 9 131c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  17,  159a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
52a-53c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  112b-113a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  372b-373a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 70c-71b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
60b-c  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk ix, 372a-373b 54 Freud: Hysteria,
32a-c / General Introduction. 607a-b / New Introductory Lectures, 871d

[158a]
124 (3. The practice of medicine.) 3b. General and specialized practice:
treating the whole man or the isolated part 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
65c  7  Plato:  Charmides,  2d-3b  / Phaedrus, 136bc / Gorgias, 282c-d /
Timaeus,  474d-475d / Laws, bk x, 767d 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine,
par  20  7b-d  / Epidemics, bk i, sect hi, par 1 49c-d / Injuries of the
Head,  par  20  69d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 373c-d 44 Bos well: Johnson,
350c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 250c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk ix, 372a-373b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi, 340c-d
54  Freud:  Hysteria.  62b-c / General Introduction, 451b-452a; 620b-c /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  871d-872a 3c. Diagnosis and prognosis: the
interpretation  of  symptoms;  case  histories Old Testament: Leviticus,
13-14  6  Herodotus:  History, bk i, 44d-45a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk ii, 399c400c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 59b-c / Laws, bk iv, 684c685a
8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 27
[70*3-39]
92a-c  passim  /  Prophesying,  ch  i  a3-b  io] 707b- 708a 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[463
b i4-2o] 64b; bk vii, ch 12
[588*10-12]
[537
114c; bk vni, ch 18 [6oi b6-8] 127c; ch 21 [6o3b 20-24] 129c; ch 23
[6o4a i2]-CH
24
[6o4b2o]
130ac  /  Rhetoric,  bki,  ch2 [i357b i4-2i]597b-c 10 Hippocrates: Airs,
Waters,  Places,  par  10-11  13b-14b  / Prognostics 19a-26a,c esp par 1
19a-b,  par  15  22d-23a,  par  25  26a,c  /  Regimen in Acute Diseases,
appendix, par 9-14 38b-40d / Epidemics, bk i, sect ii, par 5 46c-d; sect
hi,  par  i-case  xiv  49c-53d;  bk  hi, sect i-ii 53d-56d; sect hi, par
i6-case  xvi  59b-63d  / Injuries of the Head, par 5 65a; par 8 65c; par
10-12  65d-67a; par 19 69b-c / Fractures, par 5 76d-77a / Articulations,
par  10  94d-95a;  par  26 99a-b; par 30 99c-100b; par 51 109a-b; par 54
Ilia;  par  57  110d-112b;  par  58,  112d; par 59 113b / Instruments of
Reduction,  par  4-24  122d-126c passim / Aphorisms, sect i, par 2 131a;
par  12  131d;  sect ii 132b-134a passim; sect iv, par 17-SECT v, par 15
135d138b;  sect  v,  par  30-SECT  vii,  par  86  138d144a,c  passim  12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk vi
[11381214] 95b-96b
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 5, ans 66b-67d; a 6, ans
67d-68c;  q  57,  a  3,  ans  297b-298a; a 4, ans 298a-299a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 197a

[158b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3bto3d(l)  25  Montaigne: Essays, 531d-532b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  49b-50b; 52a: 52c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
hi, 112b-113a; 114b; part iv, 156b-157a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 33c-34a;
70c-71b;  145b-146a;  157a-158a; 373c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
38c-d; bk viii, 307ac; bk ix, 372a-373b; bk xi, 524c-525a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xi,  340c  54 Freud: Origin and Development of
Psycho370c-d;  372b373b;  Analysis,  lb-2b  /  Hysteria, 31b-d; 38d-40a;
50b-c; 54b-56c; 60b 62c esp 60b-d; 87a-90d esp 87a-d / Psycho-Analytical
Therapy,  124b  /  "Wild"  Psycho-  Analysis',  \2%SL-\29d  esp 129c-d /
Interpretation  of  Dreams, 151a-c / General Introduction, 550d-557a esp
556a-b;  593b-c;  605b-607b  passim,  esp  606c-607b  / New Introductory
Lectures,  872d-873a  3d.  The  factors  in prevention and therapy 3d(l)
Control  of  regimen: climate, diet, exercise, occupation, daily routine
Old  Testament: Proverbs, 16:24; 17:22 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 30:25;
31:19-22; 37:29-31 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30:27; 31:22-27; 37:32-34 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk ii, 64c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 50d / Symposium,
155c-d  /  Gorgias,  261a-d; 289c-d / Republic, bk hi, 334b-337a; bk iv,
345b-c  /  Timaeus,  474d475d  /  Laws,  bk ii, 656b-c / Seventh Letter,
803c-804b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 12
[292*14b i8] 383d-384b
9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk vii, ch 12 114c; bk viii, ch 21
[6o3b25-34] 129d / Ethics, bk ii, ch 2 [1104*10-26] 349c-d; bk vi, ch 7
[ii4i b i4-2i] 390c-d
/ Politics, bk vii, ch ii
[1330*34-41] 535a; ch
16
[i335b i2-i9] 540c;
ch  17  [1336*4-39]  541a-c; bk viii, ch 4 [1338 15 39-1339*10] 544b-c /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 6
[1362*29-33] 603a; ch 7 [1364*3-5] 605b
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient Medicine, par 3-1 1 ld4b; par 13-16 4c-6b; par
20  7b-d  /  Airs,  Waters, Places, par 1 9a-b; par 3-7 9c-12a; par 9-10
12d-14a;  par  12  14b-d;  par  15 15b-c; par 19-21 16c-17b / Regimen in
Acute  Diseases  26a-44a,c  esp  par 9 29d-30c, appendix, par 18 41a-d /
Epidemics,  bk  i,  sect  i,  par 1 44a-b; sect ii, par 1 45a-c; par 7-8
47a-c; bk in, sect hi, par 1-2 56d-57a; par 15 59b / Surgery, par 20 73d
/  Fractures, par 7 77c78a; par 9 78c-d; par 36 88d-89a / Articulations,
par 9 94b-c; par 50, 108b-d; par 55 lilac; par 58 112b-113a; par 81 120d
/ Aphorisms, sect i, par 3-1 1 131a-c; par 13-19 131d-132a; sect ii, par
4 132b; par 16-17,22 132d; par 36 133b; par 38,45 133c; par 49-50

[159a]
b  133d;  sect  in, par 1-19 134a-d; sect v. par 16-29 138b-d; sect vii,
par  56 143a; par 66 143c / Ulcers, par 1, 145a / Sacred Disease, 160b-d
^^  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  ii,  ch 8 191b195c 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  34b-d;  40c-42a / Caesar, 583d-584b 22 Chaucer: Nuns Priest's
Tale
[14,827-852]
450a24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 26d-29d; 48d-49a; bk
ii,  68a-69a,c;  bk  hi,  134d-135a;  152a-153b; 188d 191c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  66c-67a;  374a-375a;  524b;  527a-528a  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation, 433c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 345a-346b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  26c-d;  47a-b; 53d-54a / New Atlantis, 201b;
211b212c  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk xi [524-534] 310b311a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv,  163a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  525a 526b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 70c 71b; 145b 146a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 335a-
b;  336d-337a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 293d 294b 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  171c-d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 353b 354a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man, 356d 357b 50 Marx: Capital, 324a 325c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  52d;  bk  v,  215c-d;  bk  ix, 372a-373b 54 Freud: Hysteria, 64d-65a
3</(2) Medication: drugs, specifics Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 16:12—
(D)  OT,  Boof^  of  Wisdom,  16:12  /  Ecclesiasticus,  38:4-8— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 38:4-8 4 Homer: Iliad, bk iv [188-219] 25d-26b; bk v
[899-906] 39c; bk xi [842-848] 81c
6  Herodotus: History, bk iv, 143a; 157a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  ii,  400b-c  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  474d-475d / Statesman, 601d-602a 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch 21
[522b9-i3] 47d; bk
iv, ch 5 [530^-10] 57b; bk viii, ch 21
[6o3b9-i6]
129c; ch 24 [604 15 26-29] 130c; ch 26 131a; ch 29
[607*21-34]
132c-d; bk ix. ch 6 [6i2b i5-i8] 138b / Ethics, bk vi, ch 1 [ii38b25-34]
387b  10  Hippocrates:  Ancient Medicine, par 13 4c-5a; par 24 8d-9a,c /
Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  par  1  26a-d; par 4-7 27c-29c; par 14-17
32c34c;  appendix,  par  11  39c-40b;  par 16 40d; par 26-39 43a-44a,c /
Fractures,  par  27, 85b-c; par 29 85d-86a / Articulations, par 36 lOld;
par  63  114d-115b  /  Aphorisms,  sect  ii, par 22 132d / Ulcers, par 1
145ac;  par 4-13 146b-149b / Fistulae, par 2-12 150b-152d / Hemorrhoids,
par 2-3 152b,d-153b; par 6-7 153d-154a,c

[159b]
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 13, 176a177a; ch 14, 179a-b; bk
ii, ch 9, 195d-196a; bk in, ch 13, 209c 22 Chaucer: Prologue
[411-444]
166b-167a  /  Tale  of Melibeus, par 10, 403a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  26d;  bk  11, 92b-c; 96a-d; 124d-125d; bk hi, 140b;
173d-174a;  189a-c;  196d;  225a;  226d;  bk iv, 246d-247a; 310d-311c 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   90d  91b;  365b-379c  passim,  esp  369c-370a  27
Shakespeare: AW s Well That Ends Well, act 1, sc in [227-262] 147d 148b;
act ii, sc i
[71-189] 149b-150c; sc
111
[46-57] 151d-152a
/  King  Lear,  act iv, sc iv [1-19] 272b-c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i,
19c-21c;  bk  ii,  35bc  28  Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 297d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 26c-d; 47a-b; 51d-53d esp 53ac / New Atlantis,
201b;  212c  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 108b-109a; 112b 113a; part iv,
156b-157a;  161b-162a;  169a  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 372b-373a 37
Fielding:  Tom Jones, 63a-c; 76b; 83b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336d-337a
44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 257c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 323c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  i, 38b-d; bk v. 215c-d; bk viii, 337d-338a; bk ix,
372a373b;  374a-d; bk x, 449b-c; bk xii, 533d 534a; 535b c; bk xiv, 595a
b;  bk xv, 630b 54 Freud: Hysteria, 40a-b 3</(3) Surgery 4 Homer: Iliad,
bk  xi  [842-848] 81c 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 336a-b / Statesman, 599a
b;  601d-602a  9  Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch 4 5l 38c ' BK
VI11 ' CH 2I
[6o3b 5-i6]
_b a34
[5 I 4
129b-c; bk ix, ch 50
[63i b i9-632a32] 157a-c
10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics, par 23 25a-b / Regimen in Acute Diseases,
par  7  28d-29c;  appendix, par 2-6 35d-37a; par 11 39c-40b; par 24 42d;
par  29 43a-b / Injuries of the Head, par 9 65c-d; par 13-21 67b-70a,c /
Surgery  70b,d-74d esp par 2 70b, par 4 71a-b, par 6 71b, par 10 72a-b /
Fractures   74b,d91d   esp   par   1  74b,d-75a,  par  47-48  90d-91d  /
Articulations  91b,d-121d esp par 61 113d114a, par 79 120b / Instruments
of  Reduction  121b,d-130d esp par 40 129d-130c / Aphorisms, sect v, par
68  140a;  sect vi, par 22 140d; par 31 141a; par 47 141c; sect vii, par
46,48  142d;  par 53 143a; par 87 144c / Ulcers, par 14-17 149b-150a,c /
Fistulae, par 5 151a-b / Hemorrhoids, par .2-6 152b,d-154a 18 Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 14, 627d-628a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  119bc;  bk  in, 196c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 330b-d;
373a-b

[160a]
126  THE  GREAT IDEAS and therapy. (3d. The factors in prevention 3</(3)
Surgery.)  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  289d-290a  /  On Animal
Generation,  376d-377a; 438b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 52b-c /
New  Atlantis, 21 Id 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 113b; part iv, 148b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 70c-71b; 162ac 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336d-337a
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 464a-465c 53 James: Psychology, 844a 54
Freud:  Hysteria,  81b-c  4.  The  concept  of health: normal balance or
harmony  7  Plato: Charmides, 2d-3b / Symposium, 155d157a / Meno, 175b /
Gorgias,  282c-283a  / Republic, bk hi, 334b-337a; bk iv, 355b-d; bk ix,
422c-d; 427a / Timaeus, 472ac; 474d475d / Philebus, 616d-617a / Laws, bk
v, 690ac 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[8b25-9*28] 13d14b /
Topics, bk in, ch i [u6b i7-22] 163a-b / Physics, bk vn, ch 3 [246a io-b
i9]  329c-330a  / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 20 [io22b io-i^l 544a / Soul, bk
1,  ch 4 [4oyb3 1-408*2] 637c; bk ii, ch 2 [414*4-14] 644a-b / Sense and
the  Sensible,  ch 5 [445*16-31] 683a-b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk hi, ch 19
[520b i9-52i a i4] 45c-46a; bk
vii, ch i
[581^
25-582*4]  107b-c  / Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 1 [640*4-7] 162d; bk 11,
ch  5  [65i*37-  b  i8]  176c;  ch  7  177c-179a;  bk iv, ch 2 [677*5^1]
206d-207b  /  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  2  [1104*10-26]  349c-d;  bk v, ch i
[1129*12-25] 376bc; ch ii
[1138*28-32]
386d; bk vi, ch 12
[ii43b2i1144*5] 393b-c passim
/ Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 5
[i36i b3-26]
602a-b; ch 7
[i363b34~i 364*5]
605b  10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 13-19 4c-7b / Regimen in
Acute  Diseases,  par  9, 29d / Sacred Disease, 156b-c 10 Galen: Natural
Pacuities,  bk ii, ch 8, 194c-d; ch 9, 195c-196a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[558565] 37b
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk v, sect 8 269d270b 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xix,  ch  13  519a520a;  bk xxii, ch 24, 610c-611a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 16 628c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
49,  a 2 2b-4a; a 3, rep 3 4b-5a; a 4, ans 5a-6a; q 50, a 1, ans and rep
2-3  6a-7b; a 3, rep 2 8b-9a; q 51, a i, ans 12b-13c; q 52, a i, ans and
rep  3 15d-18a; a 2, ans 18a 19a; q 54, a 1, ans 22d-23d; q 73, a 2, ans
120d121c; a 3, ans 121c-122b; q 82, a i, ans and rep i 168a d

[160b]
4  to 5a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 137d-139b; bk iv,
234a-235a;  239d-240a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 233c-236a; 368d; 369d370a 28
Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 296d-297a / On Animal Generation, 493a-b 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 50c-51d; 72b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk xi
[524-543]
310b-311a  /  Areopagitica, 407b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 155b-156a;
170b171b  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 412a-417a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
336b-d  /  Political  Economy, 368d-369a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
iv, 293d-294b 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 368d-369a /
Judgement,  509c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk x, 449b-c 53 James:
Psychology,  799a-b 54 Freud: General Introduction, 635b-c 5. The theory
of disease 5a. The nature of disease 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii,  400b-c  7  Plato:  Lysis, 21d / Republic, bk iv, 354d355c; bk viii,
409a; bk x, 435a-d / Timaeus, 472a-474d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch
3
[246*10b i9] 329c-330a
9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk v, ch 4
[784*3 i-b34]
326b-d / Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1104*10-19]
349c; bk v, ch i
[1129*12-25]
376bc  10  Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 14 5a-c; par 16 5d-6b; par
19  6d-7b/  Fractures,  par  31,  87a  /  Sacred Disease, 159b 10 Galen:
Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 8, 193d; 194c-d; ch 9, 195c-196a; bk hi, ch
12  208b209b  esp 208d 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 14 74b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 71, a 1, rep 3 105d-106c; q 72,
a 5, ans 115a116b; q 73, a 2, ans 120d-121c; a 3, ans 121c-122b; q 77, a
3,  ans 147c-148b; q 82, a 1, ans and rep 1 168a-d; a 4, rep 2 170b171a;
q  88,  a i, ans 193a-194b; part hi suppl, q 81, a 4, rep 4 966d-967d 25
Montaigne: Essays, 528c-529b 28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 305a-d
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi
[477-543]
309b-311a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 155b-157a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  iv,  293d 294b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 372a-b 53
James:  Psychology,  799a-807b  esp  799a-800a,  806a-b;  815a 54 Freud:
Narcissism, 403a-b

[161a]
5b.  The  classification  of  diseases  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  472a-474d 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 3
[i23b34-37]
172c  ^^  9  Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch 18-27 127b 131b/
Ethics,  bk vii, ch 8 [ii50b 29 35] 401c-d 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters,
Places,  par  3-6  9c- 11a / Regimen in Acute Diseases, par 1-2, 26c-d /
Epidemics,  bk  i, sect hi, par 2 49d50a / Injuries of the Head, par 4-8
64d-65c  / Fractures, par 31, 87a / Articulations, par 51 109a-b; par 61
113d-114a / Aphorisms, sect hi 134a 135b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
ii,  ch  8, 193c194c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 73, a 3,
ans  121c  122b;  a  7, ans 124d-125c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
51d-52a  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 112b 113a; part iv, 155b 157a 54
Freud:  Hysteria,  87a d; 114d / General Introduction, 605b-606d passim,
esp  606c  d  5c.  The  disease process: onset, crisis, aftereffects Old
Testament:  Leviticus,  1  3-14  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
399c  400c 10 Hippocrates: Prognostics 19a-26a,c esp par 15-20 22d-24c /
Regimen  in Acute Diseases, appendix, par 1 35c-d; par 9-15 38b 40d; par
22  42b-c  /  Epidemics  44a-63d  esp  bk  i, sect hi, par 2-3 49d 50b /
Injuries  of  the  Head,  par  19  69b-c  /  Fractures,  par 31 86d87d /
Articulations,  par 69 11 6b- 117a / Aphorisms, sect 1, par 7-12 131b-d;
sect  ii, par 13 132c; par 23-32 132d 133b; sect hi, par 28 135a-b; sect
iv,  par  22-82 136a-137d esp par 30 136b, par 36 136b-c, par 64 137b 10
Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch 14, 177c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[487505] 36b-c; bk vi [1138-1214] 95b-96b
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 51d-52a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 86a-c
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  350b-354a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 256c 54
Freud:  Narcissism,  402  d-403a  /  General  Introduction, 618c 5d. The
causes   of  disease:  internal  and  external  factors  Old  Testament:
Leviticus,   26:16   /   Numbers,   12:10-15;  16:46-50  /  Deuteronomy,
28:2122,27-28,35,58-62  /  //  Kings,  5  :27-(D)  IV  Kings,  5:27  / /
Chronicles,  21:14-15—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 21:14-15 / // Chronicles,
26:18-21  —  (D)  //  Paralipomenon,  26:18-21  /  Job,  2:7  /  Psalms,
107:17-20— (D) Psalms, 106:17-20

[161b]
Apocrypha:  //  Maccabees,  3:27-29; 9— (D) OT, // Machabees, 3:27-29; 9
New  Testament:  Matthew, 9:32-33; 17:14-18 / / Corinthians, 1 1 ^5-30 4
Homer: Iliad, bk i [33-100] 3b-4b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1-215]
99a101a  6  Herodotus: History, bk i, 32c-d; 38a-b; bk 11, 64c-d; bk iv,
135c-d; 157a 7 Plato: Symposium, 155d-157a / Republic, bk 11, 318c-319a;
bk  hi,  334b-335d;  bk  iv,  345b-c;  bk  viii, 412d; bk x, 434d-435c /
Timaeus, 472a-474d; 476b-d 8 Aristotle: Meteorology, bk iv, ch 7
[384
s 25-34] 488c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch 15 I5i9b i5~i9]
44c; ch 19
[521*10-32]
46a-b; bk vii, ch 1
[58i b22-582a
5]  107b-c; ch 12 114c; bk viii, ch 18-27 127b-131b passim; ch 29 132c-d
/  Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch 5 [65i a37-b i8] 176c; ch 7 [653^-7]
178d179a; bk hi, ch 7
[670b5-u]
199a; bk iv, ch 2
[677
a5-b  i] 206d-207b / Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 7 317d-318b; bk v,
ch 4
[784
a3i-b34] 326b-d / Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1104*10-19] 349c
10  Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 1 la-b; par 3 Id 2b; par 6 2d-3a;
par 9-1 1 3b-4b; par 13-22 4c-8d / Airs, Waters, Places, par 1-10 9a-14a
esp  par 10 13b-14a; par 22 17b18a / Regimen in Acute Diseases, par 9-10
29d-30d;  appendix,  par  1  35c-d;  par  6  36c37a;  par  17  40d-41a /
Epidemics,  bk  i,  sect  i, par 1 44a-b; sect ii, par 7-8 47a-c; bk in,
sect  in,  par  1-2  56d-57a;  par  15  59b  /  Surgery,  par  20  73d /
Articulations,  par  12 96a-b; par 58, 113a / Aphorisms, sect ii, par 51
133d; sect in, par 1-19 134a-d; sect v, par 16-24 138b-c / Fistulae, par
1  150a  /  Hemorrhoids,  par  1  152b  /  Sacred  Disease 154a-160d esp
155d-156a  10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch ii, 172b-c; bk 11, ch
8-9  191b-199a,c  esp ch 8, 194c-d, ch 9, 195c-196a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk vi
[769829] 90c-91b; [1090-1137] 94d-95b
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  14  74b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  81,  a  1,  ans  163a-164d;  q 82, a 2, ans
168d169c;  a  4, rep 2 170b-171a; q 83, a 4, ans 173c-174b; q 85, aa 5-6
181d-184a   22   Chaucer:  Prologue  [411-444]  166b-  167a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  148d;  151b-c;  152b  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  53a-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 367b-368a; 371c-d 28
Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 296a-d / Circulation of the Blood, 305a-d;
316c-d;  321d322a / On Animal Generation, 386d-387a; 407a; 423b; 433a-c;
455d-456a; 493a-b

[162a]
128  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5.  The  theory  of  disease. 5d. The causes of
disease:  internal  and  external  factors.)  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,  49d-50b;  52b-d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi, 61c 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [477-548] 309b311a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
hi,  112b-113a;  part iv, 155b-157a; 161b-162a; 163a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  413b-414b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336a-337a esp 336b-c; 364b-c
39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 34d-35b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
70d-71a  44  Bos\v  ell:  Johnson,  306d-307a  48  Melville:  Moby Dic{,
350b-351b  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 9d-10a / Descent of Man, 256a;
325c-327a   passim;   351a-355a;   356d-357b  50  Marx:  Capital,  115c;
118b-124a; 142b,d
[fn
4]; 178b
[fn
1]; 194b-195b; 204a-c; 229c; 236c-237d; 324a-330d passim 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk i, 52d 53 James: Psychology, 69a-b; 535a; 895a 54 Freud:
General   Introduction,   604c-605c   5d(l)   The  humoural  hypothesis:
temperamental  dispositions  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  472a-474d 9 Aristotle:
Parts  of Animals, bk iv, ch 2 a5-b i] 206d-207b 10 Hippocrates: Ancient
Medicine, par 13-20
[677
4c-7d;  par  22  8a-d;  par  24  8d-9a,c  / Airs, Waters, Places, par 10
13b-14a  /  Regimen  in  Acute  Diseases,  appendix, par 1 35c- d; par 3
35d-36a;  par  5-6  36b-37a  /  Epidemics,  bk hi, sect in, par 14 59b /
Aphorisms,  sect  hi,  par  2  134a;  par  11 134b: par 14 134c / Sacred
Disease, 155d-160d esp 159a b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 8-9
191b-199a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[487505I 36b-c
14  Plutarch:  Alexander, 542a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
119, a 1, rep 3 604c-607b; part i-ii, q 46, a 5, ans and rep i 815d-816d
20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 73, a 2, ans 120d-121c; a 3,
ans  121c-122b;  q 77, a 3. ans 147c-148b; q 82, a i, rep i 168a-d; a 4,
rep  2 170b-171a; part hi suppl, q 80, a 3 958b-959c; q 82, a i, ans and
rep  4  968a-970c  22 Chaucer: Prologue [411-444] 166b-167a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 138a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 371c-d 28
Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 435b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
26c-d; 52b-c; 77a-c 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes [599-605] 352b

[162b]
5^(1)  to  5e  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 112b-113a; part iv, 163a 36
Sterne:  Tristram Shandv, 380a; 412a-417a esp 412a-414b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  283a  b  5d(2)  The psychogenesis of bodily disorders Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  30:21-24—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  30:22-26 7 Plato:
Charmides,  2d-3b  / Timaeus, 474d475c 10 Hippocrates: Epidemics, bk hi,
sect  hi,  case  xi  62b-c;  case  xv  63b-c  /  Sacred Disease, 158a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[147160] 32a
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 117, a 3, rep 3 598c-599b; part
i-ii,  q  28,  a  5,  ans  743c-  744b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 36c-42a;
234c-235a;  332d-333c;  532a-b  28  Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 296d /
Circulation  of  the Blood, 321d-322a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
49d-50b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 163a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 253d
44  Bos well: Johnson, 350c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 142d; bk
v,  220b-c: bk vi, 247d-248a; bk vii, 301b302d passim; bk ix, 373a-b; bk
xiii,   567d568c  esp  568b;  bk  xv,  617a-b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk xi, 331d-332a 53 James: Psychology, 132a-135b esp 132a-b;
847b-848a" 54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, lb-6b esp
4c-5a  /  Hysteria, 25a-59d esp 25a-27a, 30a-d, 35b-c, 37d-38d, 56b-58c;
82d-83c:  88c-89c;  90b-d  /  Narcissism,  403a-c / Repression, 426b-c /
General Introduction, 572a-b / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 718a-
719d;  728c-  729a / New Introductory Lectures, 852a-b 5e. The moral and
political analogues of disease Old Testament: Psalms, 147:3— (D) Psalms,
146:3  / Isaiah, 1:4-6— (D) Isaias, 1:4-6 / Jeremiah, 8:21-22; 30:12-17;
33:6;  46:11—  (D) Jeremias, 8:21-22; 30:12-17; 33:6; 46:11 5 Sophocles:
Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[1297-1415] 110b-112b
7  Plato:  Gorgias, 268b-c / Republic, bk iv 345a-d; 354d-355c; bk viii,
409a;  412d;  bk x, 435a-d / Timaeus, 474b-d / Sophist, 556d558d / Laws,
bk iv, 684c-685a; bk v, 690d691b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4
[ioo8b
25-32] 528b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1104*10-26]
349c-d; bk v, ch ii
[1 138^9^4] 386d-387a;
bk vii, ch 8 [ii5ob29-ii5i a4] 401c-d

[163a]
6  to 6c Chapter 55: MEDICINE 129 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8
269d270b 14 Plutarch: Agesilaus, 495c-d / Phocion, 605a-b / Aratus, 834d
^^~~^  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57d-58b  18  Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  14  627d-628b;  ch  16  628c-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71,  a  1,  rep 3 105d-106c; q 72, a 5, ans
115a116b;  q  73,  a  2,  ans  120d-121c;  a 3, ans 121c-122b; q 77, a 3
147c-148b;  q 82, a i, ans and rep 1 168a-d; a 4, rep 2 170b-171a; q 88,
a 1, ans 193a-194b 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 10, 403a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  68d-69a;  part 11. 148c-153a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
330b-d;  462c-465c  passim; 504c-505d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc
iv
[144152] 56a-b / Othello, act hi, sc hi [321-333]
225c-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  112b  113a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  2  15b- 2 16a; 380a 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 368d-369b /
Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  419c-d  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv,
293d-294b  43  Federalist:  number  38,  122b-123c  6. Mental disease or
disorder:  its  causes  and  cure 6a. The distinction between sanity and
insanity:  the  concept  of  mental  health  and the nature of madness 7
Plato: Timaeus, 474b-d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247b i248^] 330b-d
/  Dreams,  ch  2  [460^2^18]  704b-c  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 5
399a-d  passim  10  Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease,  159a-b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk ii, ch 15 155c156b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  84, a 7, ans 449b-450b; q 115, a 5, rep i 590d591c; part 1-11, q 6, a
7,  rep  3  650a-d;  q  io, a 3, ans and rep 2 664d-665c; q 24, a 2, ans
727d-728c;  q 28, a 3, ans and rep i 742a-d; q 37, a 4, rep 3 785d-786d;
q  48, aa 3-4 824c-826a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 74,
a  5,  rep i 131d-132b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 66d-67b; 68b-69c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 201b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
166a-167a;  235b-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 72b 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies, 155d156a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 44,
schol  437d-438a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, sect 13
146b-c; ch xxxiii, sect 3-4 248c-d

[163b]
d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ii, div ii, 455b-c 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  68c-d  43  Mill: Liberty, 299d-300b [fn 1] 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
13c-14a;  Hid;  354c-355a  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 388b-389b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk xi, 525c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii,
356d-359b  53  James:  Psychology,  137a;  241b-258b esp 242a244a; 749a-
750b;  799a-807a  esp 799a-800a, 806a-b 54 Freud: Origin and Development
of  PsychoAnalysis, 18c-19a / Hysteria, 86a-d; 102a106c / Interpretation
of Dreams, 174d-176d; 289a-b; 364c-d / Narcissism, 399b-d / Unconscious,
433c;  440a-442b  / General Introduction, 593c; 624c-625d; 633d-635c esp
635b-c  /  War  and  Death,  760b  /  New  Introductory  lectures, 812a;
830d-832a  6b.  The  classification of mental diseases 7 Plato: Timaeus,
474b9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch 5 399a-d passim 10 Hippocrates:
Sacred  Disease,  159b-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 67b; 68c-d 53
James: Psychology, 241b 54 Freud: Hysteria, 60b-61c; 87a-d / Narcissism,
403b-d  / General Introduction, 451d; 568c; 605b-606d esp 606c-d; 620c-d
6c.  The  process  and  causes  of  mental disorder New Testament: Mar\,
9:17-29—  (D)  Mar\, 9:16-28 5 Aeschylus: Choephoroe [1021-1076] 80a-d 5
Sophocles:  Ajax  [1-332]  143a-146a 5 Euripides: Bacchantes 340a-352a,c
esp   [8471326]  347b-351b  /  Heracles  Mad  [815-1145]  371d-374d  esp
[822-873] 372a-c / Orestes
[1426] 394a-398b
6  Herodotus:  History, bk ii, 86b; bk hi, 95d-98a; bk vi, 199c-201c esp
201b-c 7 Plato: Timaeus, 474b-d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[9
b34~ioa6]  15a  / Dreams, ch 2 [46oa32-b i8] 704b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk  vii, ch 5 399a-d passim 10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease 154a-160d esp
155d-156a, 159a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[487505] 36b-c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 115, a 5, rep 1 590d-591c; part
i-ii, q 6, a 7, rep 3 650a-d; q 10, a 3, ans and rep 2 664d665c; q 24, a
2,  ans  727d-728c;  q  28,  a 3, ans and rep i 742a-d; q 37, a 4, rep 3
785d786d;  q  48,  aa 3-4 824c-826a,c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 67b;
68b-71b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 235b-c 26 Shakespeare: Midsummer-Night' s
Dream,  act  v, sc 1 [1-27] 370d-371a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc
ii
[171—
221] 42b-d; act hi, sc iv [102-144] 55d-56a;

[164a]
b  (6.  Mental disease or disorder: its causes and cure. 6c. The process
and  causes  of mental disorder.) act iv, sc v [1-75] 59c-60b; [154-200]
61b-d; act v, sc 11 [237-254] 70b-c / King Lear, act 11, sc iv
[274-289]
261c-d; act hi, sc iv 264a-266b; act iv, sc iv
[1-19] 272b-c;
sc vi
[80-294] 274b-276c;
sc vn
[14-82] 276d277c
/  Macbeth,  act  v,  sc i 306b-307a; sc in [37-54] 308a-b 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  347c  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote esp part i, la-3b,
32c-33a,   83a-c,  88b-89a,  part  ii,  205a-209d,  252c-257a,  258d  31
Descartes:  Meditations,  1,  75d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 44,
schol  437d-438a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, sect 13
146b-c;  ch  xxxiii,  sect  3-4  248c-d 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 68c-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  598a44  Boswell:  Johnson, 127a-b; 214b-c;
356b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 122b-124b; 135a138a; 232b-235a; 306a-307a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xv, 616a-617a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk i, 4c5a; bk 11, 21d-22b; bk hi, 62d-63b; bk xi, 337a-348d
passim;  bk  xii,  364d-365d;  376a377b  53 James: Psychology, 132a-138b
passim,  esp  137a;  244b-252a passim, esp 251b-252a; 258a-b; 533a-538b;
753b-754b;  800a-806b passim; 828b-829a 54 Freud: Origin and Development
of  PsychoAnalysis,  lb-19a esp 4a-5a, 6a-b, 8a, 14b, 18b19a / Hysteria,
25a-106c  passim,  esp 25a-27a, 35b-c, 37d-38a, 53b-c, 81c-87a, 93d-96a,
97b106c;  110d-118a,c  /  Narcissism, 402d-404d / Unconscious, 440a-443d
esp  440a-b  /  General Introduction, 451d-452a; 546b-623b esp 567d569c,
585b-591a,  593b-596b,  599d-600d, 602d-607b, 611a-615a, 616b-c / Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle, 641a-c; 648d-650a esp 649c / Group Psychology,
690d-691c;   695b696a,c   /   Ego   and  Id,  712c-715c;  716d-717a,c  /
Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 720a752c esp 720a- 723d, 744b-747b /
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 774c-d; 798c-799a / New Introductory
Lectures,  830d-832a; 866b867a 6c(l) Somatic origins of mental disease 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  96c 7 Plato: Timaeus, 474b-d 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247b i3~
248*6] 330c-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 7
[653b i-7J
178d-179a / Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[ii47ai4-i 7]397b
10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease, 155d-160d esp 159a-b

[164b]
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[4594751 36a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, a 7, ans 449b-450b; 115, a
5, rep i 590d591c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 68c 27 Shakespeare: King
Lear,  act 11. sc iv [106113] 259c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 347c
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning. 49d-50b 31 Descartes: Meditations, 1,
75d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 39, schoi 436c-437a; prop 44,
schol  437d-438a  32  Milton:  Samson Agonistes [59Q-605] 352b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv, 163a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 291a; 299c; 318b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xi, 524c-527a 53 James: Psychology, 2b-3a;
23b-26b  esp 25b: 32a-34a; 35b-37b; 40b-41a 54 Freud: Hysteria, 60d-61a;
90d-97b  esp  94b  95d;  110b-115a  esp 114a-115a / Narcissism, 403a-d /
General  Introduction,  604c-606a  esp  605c-606a  / Beyond the Pleasure
Principle, 641a; 649c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 744b- 745d /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  773a-b 6c(2) Functional origins of
mental disease 54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis la-20d
esp  4a-5c,  7a-9a,  18b  19a  / Hysteria, 25a-106c passim, esp 25a-27a,
35bc,'37d-38d,  52c-53c,  81c-87a,  97b-106c / Interpretation of Dreams,
364d-365c;  370b-c;  380d-382a  esp 381d-382a / Narcissism, 406d410b esp
409c-d  /  Repression,  425c-427a,c  /  Unconscious, 434c-436b / General
Introduction,  546b-623b  esp 550d-569c, 577a-591a, 599d600d, 604c-605b,
611a-615a, 620b-623b / Group Psychology. 690c-691c / Ego and Id. 699a-c;
704d;  712c-714a  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and Anxiety, 720a-752c esp
720a-723d.   728b-731d,   746c-747b  6d.  The  treatment  of  functional
disorders: psychotherapy as a branch of medicine 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[31-93]
30b-31b esp
[87-93]
3lD ^
[5 IO-5 22 ]
36c-d;  bk vi [1-42] 80a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 38
786d-789d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 188d-191c 25
Montaigne: Essays, 37c-39a; 401b-406a 27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act iv,
sc iv
[1-19] 272b-c
/  Macbeth, act v, sc i 306b307a esp [79-83] 307a; sc 111 [37-54] 308a-b
30  Bacon: Advancement of learning, 77d-78d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 127a-b;
284c-d;  297d298a;  354c-355a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  357b  358b 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xv, 614a-d; 616a-618b esp 616b, 617a b, 618b

[165a]
52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 2 Id 23c 53 James: Psychology,
132b;  135a-b  54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis la-20d
esp 2a-3a, 6c-7a, 8d^aHoc11a, 13c-14a, 19a-20c / Hysteria, 26c-d; 30d81c
esp  30d-31a,  59d-81c;  106c-110b  esp  107a-108b  /  Psycho -Ana lytic
Therapy  123a127a,c  /  "Wild"  Psycho-  Analysis  128a-130d  /  General
Introduction,   449a-452a;   545a550c;   560c-561b;  563a-566a;  606a-c;
623c638a,c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 643d644a / Group Psychology,
695c  /  Ego  and Id, 712c-713a esp 713b [fn i] / Inhibitions, Symptoms,
and  Anxiety,  748b-d  /  New Introductory Lectures, 840a; 864a-873d esp
871a-873d  ,  The  historical  record  on  disease  and  its  treatment:
epidemics, plagues, pestilences Old Testament: Leviticus, 13-14 4 Homer:
Iliad, bk iv
[188-219]
25d-26b;  bk  v [899-906] 39c; bk xi [842-848] 81c 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  i, 44d-45a; bk ii, 64c-d; 65c; bk hi, 117a 118a: bk iv, 135c-d; 157a
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 399b-401b; bk hi, 438d 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk hi, 335c 336a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch
19
[6o2b i2-i9] 128c
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 15
[i286aio-i5]484b
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  1-3  la2b  / Regimen in Acute
Diseases, par 1 26a d CROSS-REFERENCES

[165b]
-  Chapter  55:  MEDICINE  131  /  Epidemics  44a-63d  / Sacred Disease,
154a155d; 160b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[459525] 36a-d; bk vi
[769-829] 90c-91b;
[11381286] 95b-97a,c
14  Plutarch:  Romulus, 26d-27a / Camillus, 113d / Pericles, 138b-140c /
Coriolanus,  179c180a / Timoleon, 212c-d / Pyrrhus, 315c / Caius Marius,
334c  / Sulla, 386c-d / Agesilaus, 492d / Alexander, 549a-c; 575d-576d /
Caesar,  583d-584a;  593c-594a / Marcus Brutus, 812c 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk  xvi,  178d-179a  /  Histories,  bk  ii,  239c-d; bk iv, 292c-293a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  69c-  7  la;  part  iv, 260d 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 124a b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 343c-344a;
365b-368c;  371c-372b; 508a-509a; 529b-537d passim 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  50c-53d  esp 52d-53d / New Atlantis, 200d-201d 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  412a-414b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xiv,
106b-107a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336c-d; 364b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 114a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 70a-71a,c; 298a300a; 355a-c 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  7a;  13a-14a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 222b;
225c227a  54  Freud:  Origin  and Development of Psycho Analysis, 6a-b /
Hysteria, 107a / General Introduction, 550d-551a

[166a]
132 THE GREAT IDEAS I. Plutarch. "Rules for the Preservation of Health,"
in Moralia Galen. On Medical Experience . Opera Omnia F. Bacon. "Regimen
of  Health,"  in Essays Dostoevsky. The Idiot Freud. The Dynamics of the
Transference . The Employment of Dream-Interpretation in Psycho-Analysis
.   Recommendationsfor   Physicians  on  the  PsychoAnalytic  Method  of
Treatment  .  An  Outline  of Psychoanalysis II. Celsus. De Medicina {On
Medicine)  Avicenna.  The  Canon  of  Medicine, bk i Maimonides. Regimen
Sanitatis Bartholomaeus Anglicus. On Medicine R. Bacon. On the Errors of
Physicians  Boccaccio.  Decameron,  proem  Paracelsus. The Diseases That
Deprive  Man  of  His Reason . On the Miners' Sickness and Other Miners'
Diseases  .  Seven Defensiones Vesalius. The Epitome Burton. The Anatomy
of  Melancholy  Moliere.  he  medecin  malgre lui {The Moch^Doctor) . Le
malade  imaginaire  {The  Hypochondriac)  Ramazzini. De Morbis Artificum
{The Diseases of Workers)

[166b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The Great Ideas. Voltaire. "Physicians," in A Philosophical
Dictionary Jenner. An Inquiry into the Causes and Effects ofthe Variolae
Vaccinae  Bichat.  General  Anatomy\  Applied to Physiology and Medicine
Hahnemann.  Organon  of  the  Rational  Art  of Healing Laennec. Mediate
Auscultation  Virchow.  Cellular  Pathology  O.  W. Holmes. Currents and
Counter-Currents   in   Medical   Science   Bernard.   Introduction   to
Experimental   Medicine  Koch.  The  Aetiology  of  Tuberculosis  S.  W.
Mitchell.  Doctor and Patient Chekhov. Ward No. 6 Osler. Aequanimitas P.
M. Janet. The Major Symptoms of Hysteria Romains. Doctor Knoc\ Mann. The
Magic  Mountain  S.  Lewis.  Arrowsmith Crookshank. Individual Diagnosis
Shaw. Doctors' 1 Delusions E. Allen. Sex and Internal Secretions Cannon.
The  Wisdom of the Body Gibson. The Physician's Art B. Russell. Religion
and  Science,  ch  4  Zilboorg. The Medical Man and the Witch During the
Renaissance Best and Taylor. The Physiological Basis of Medical Practice
Buchanan. The Doctrine of Signatures , ch 3-6 Fearing. The Hospital

[167a]
CONCERNING  memory  and  imagination,  the  tradition of western thought
seems  to  be  involved  in  less dispute than it is on other aspects of
human  and animal life. There are, as we shall see, points of difficulty
and  debatable  theories.  But  these arise only within the framework of
certain  fundamental  insights  which  are  widely,  if not universally,
shared.  Here  at  least we can begin without having to deal with verbal
ambiguities.  Unlike many of the words which are the traditional bearers
of  the  great ideas, "memory" and "imagination" have a constant core of
meaning in almost everyone's discourse. It is understood that memory and
imagination  depend  upon  sense-perception or upon previous experience.
Except for illusions of memory, we do not remember objects we have never
perceived  or  events in our own life, such as emotions or desires, that
we  have not experienced. The imagination is not limited in the same way
by  prior  experience, for we can imagine things we have never perceived
and  may never be able to. Yet even when imagination outruns perception,
it draws upon experience for the materials it uses in its constructions.
It  is  possible to imagine a golden mountain or a purple cow, though no
such  object  has  ever  presented  itself  to  perception. But, as Hume
suggests,  the  possibility of combining a familiar color and a familiar
shape  depends  upon  the  availability  of  the  separate  images to be
combined.  "When  we  think of a golden mountain," Hume writes, "we only
join  two  consistent  ideas,  gold  and  mountain,  with  which we were
formerly acquainted . . . All this creative power of the mind amounts to
no  more  than  the  faculty of compounding, transposing, augmenting, or
diminishing  the  materials afforded us by the senses and experience." A
congenitally color-

[167b]
blind  man  who  lived entirely in a world of grays would not be able to
imagine  a  golden  mountain or a purple cow, though he might be able to
imagine things as unreal as these. Because of their dependence on sense-
perception,  memory and imagination are usually regarded as belonging to
the  same  general  faculty  as  the  external  senses. Not all writers,
however,  conceive  of  a generic power of sense, which they then divide
into  the  exterior  senses  such  as sight, hearing, and touch, and the
interior senses such as memory and imagination. Some, like Hobbes, treat
imagination  as  "nothing but decaying sense," and use the word "memory"
to  "express  the  decay, and signify that the sense is fading, old, and
past."  The  image,  whether  it  is  a  memory-image or fancy-free, re-
produces  or  re-presents  sensory  material. It may be less vivid, less
sharp  in  outline,  and  less  definite in detail than the sensation or
perception  from  which  it is derived. But in one important respect the
image  does  not  differ from the original sense-impression. That is the
respect  in  which ideas or concepts do differ from sense-impressions—at
least  according to those who hold that ideas or concepts have a certain
universality  and  abstractness  which  is  not  found in sensations and
sensory  images.  Those  who, like Berkeley and Hume, call sensations or
images "ideas" deny the existence of abstract ideas or universal notions
precisely  because  they,  too,  agree  that senseimpressions or sensory
images   are  always  particular  in  their  content  and  meaning.  The
fundamental  controversy  about what an idea is and the verbal confusion
occasioned by the ambiguity of the word (which appears in the chapter on
Idea) do not seem to affect the understanding of the nature of images or
their role in the activities of memory and imagina-

[168a]
134 THE GREAT IDEAS tion. As William James points out, in discussing the
"blended"  or  "generic" image which is somehow associated with abstract
or  universal meaning, "a blurred thing is just as particular as a sharp
thing,  and the generic character of either sharp image or blurred image
depends on its being felt with its representativefunction." He speaks of
this  function  as "the mysterious plus, the understood meaning," but he
denies  the possibility of universal or abstract images, whatever may be
the  truth  about ideas which are not images at all. Certainly those who
deny the presence of anything abstract or universal in the understanding
do  so  on the ground that the content of the mind is basically sensory,
whether  the  mind  is perceiving or remembering, imagining or thinking.
The controversy about the nature of the mind does not seem to affect the
conception  of memory or imagination. As neither is confused with sense-
perception,  so  neither is confused with rational thought. This remains
the  case  whether  the  theory  of  mind  looks upon the intellect as a
faculty  separate  from  the  sensitive  faculty  (including  memory and
imagination),  or  conceives the understanding as a single faculty which
is   active  in  judgment  and  reasoning  as  well  as  in  perceiving,
remembering,  and  imagining.  This and related issues are considered in
the  chapter  on Mind. Except for one point, perhaps, such issues can be
ignored  here.  Sensation  is attributed to both animals and men— to all
organisms  which  give  evidence  of  having senseorgans or some sort of
sensitive apparatus. Whether all animals, even those which have the most
rudimentary sensorium, also have memory and imagination may be disputed;
but  no one doubts that the higher animals, with central nervous systems
and  brain  structures resembling those of men, can remember and imagine
as well as perceive. All agree, furthermore, that memory and imagination
require  bodily  organs, though the assignment of these two functions to
the brain as their organic seat is more uniformly a tenet of modern than
of  ancient  physiology, and can be more clearly expounded as the result
of  modern  researches in neurology. But the question whether the memory
or imagination of men and other animals differs more than their bodies

[168b]
do,  elicits  opposite  answers from those who affirm that man alone has
reason and those who deny that man has powers of knowing or thinking not
possessed by other animals to some degree. Nevertheless, if man alone is
considered,  the  nature  of memory and imagination is clear. The object
remembered or imagined need not be physically present to the senses like
the  object  perceived.  The  object imagined need not be located in the
past  like the object remembered; nor, for that matter, need it have any
definite  location  in time and space. It need have no actual existence.
It  may  be  a mere possibility, unlike the object which cannot be known
without  being known to exist. As the object of memory is an event which
no  longer  exists,  so the object of imagination may be something which
has  never  existed  and never will. Thus memory and imagination greatly
enlarge the world of human experience. Without them, man would live in a
confined and narrow present, lacking past and future, restricted to what
happens  to be actual out of the almost infinite possibilities of being.
Without  memory  and  imagination,  man  could  be neither a poet nor an
historian;  and  unless  he had an angelic sort of intellect which in no
way depended on sense-experience, he would be impeded in all the work of
science,  if  memory  and  imagination  did  not extend the reach of his
senses.  The  psychological  analysis ofmemory usually divides it into a
number   of  separate  acts  or  phases.  Recollection  presupposes  the
retention  of  the material to be recalled. The ingenious experiments of
Ebbinghaus  that  James  reports  —  using  the memorization of nonsense
syllables  to  isolate  the factors influencing memory seem to show that
retention  is affected by the strength of the original associations. But
retention  is also affected by the interval between the time of learning
and the time of revival. The amount of forgetting seems to be a function
of  two  separate  factors:  the  force  with  which  the material to be
recalled  is originally committed to memory, and the lapse of time. That
retention  is  not  the  same  as  recall  may  be seen from Ebbinghaus'
experimental discovery of the fact that forgetting is never com-

[169a]
plete. Material which lies below the threshold of recall is nevertheless
retained,  and  manifests  its  presence  by  its  effect on attempts to
relearn  the  material which appears to have beerTiorgotten. Nothing can
be  utterly  forgotten  if,  as  Augustine  suggests,  what  seems to be
forgotten  remains  in  the  memory. He considers the effort men make to
remember  a  forgotten  name.  "Where does that name come back from," he
asks,  "except  from  the  memory?  For  even  when  it is through being
reminded of something else that we recognize someone's name, it is still
by  memory  that  we  do  it,  for  we  do not hold it as some new thing
learned,  but by memory we are sure that this is what the name was. But,
were the name utterly blotted out of mind," Augustine argues, "we should
not  remember  it  even  if  we  were  reminded.  For  if we had utterly
forgotten  it,  we  should not even be able to think of looking for it."
Freud  considers forgetting from another point of view. He describes the
psychoanalytic  method  at  its  inception as a "talking cure" involving
efforts  in  reminiscence.  The things which we have put out of mind, he
claims,  are  "hindered from becoming conscious, and forced to remain in
the  unconscious  by  some  sort  of force." He calls this "repression."
Freud observed that it occurred when" a wish had been aroused, which was
in  sharp opposition to the other desires of the individual, and was not
capable  of  being  reconciled with the ethical, aesthetic, and personal
pretensions  of  the  patient's personality. . . . The end of this inner
struggle  was  the  repression  of  the  idea  which presented itself to
consciousness  as  the  bearer  of  this  irreconcilable  wish. This was
repressed  from  consciousness and forgotten." On this view things which
have   been  put  out  of  mind  because  we  find  them  unpleasant  to
contemplate,  things which are repressed in order to avoid conflict, are
not  forgotten  when they cannot be consciously remembered. Nor are they
below  the  threshold  of recall in the sense that our retention of them
has  been  so weakened by time that no effort at recollection can revive
them.  On  the contrary, they may be capable of quite vivid revival when
the  emotional  obstacles to recollection are removed. Freud applies his
theory of the "obliviscence of

[169b]
Chapter  56:  MEMORY  AND  IMAGINATION  135  the  disagreeable"  to such
everyday  occurrences  as the forgetting of familiar names as well as to
the repression of memories connected with the emotional traumas of early
life.  Recollection  is  distinct not only from retention, but also from
recognition. The illusion known as defi vu consists in the experience of
intense  familiarity  with  a  place  or  scene  that, so far as one can
recall, has never been witnessed before. In contrast, normal recognition
depends upon previous acquaintance with the object being cognized again,
i.e.,  re-cognized.  The fact, noted by many observers, that recognition
may   or  may  not  be  accompanied  by  recollection  of  the  previous
circumstances,  indicates  the  separation  of recall and recognition as
acts  of  memory. Whereas recollection is remembering through the recall
of  images,  recognition  consists  in remembering at the very moment of
perceiving.  Both,  however,  depend  upon  what  seems  to  be memory's
fundamental  act  —  retention.  With regard to retention, there are two
problems  which  have  been  the subject of inquiry throughout the whole
tradition. The first concerns what is usually called "the association of
ideas." From Aristotle through Hobbes and Hume to James and Freud, there
have  been  various  formulations of the laws of association and various
interpretations  of  what  such laws signify about the mind. Ebbinghaus,
for example, used nonsense syllables in order to measure the effect upon
retention  of  the  associations  formed  by  repetition  of a series of
sounds.  All  meaning  had  been removed in order to avoid the influence
upon  recollection of associations resulting from meaningful connections
of  the  sort  which  exists  among  ordinary  words.  The repetition of
nonsense  syllables  in  pairs  or  series  illustrates  association  by
contiguity  or  succession.  According  to most writers, the elements of
experience  become associated through other modes of relation also, such
as  their  similarity  or  contrast  with one another in any significant
respect. It is not the association itself which is remembered. Rather it
is  through  the association of one part of experience with another that
memory seems to work, one particular tending to recall others with which
it has been asso-

[170a]
136  THE  GREAT  IDEAS ciated in one or more ways. Recollection seems to
occur   through  activating  connections  which  have  been  formed  and
retained.  The modern differentiation of controlled and free association
indicates  two  ways  in  which  this  can happen either by a purposeful
pursuit  of  the past or by the apparently chance recall of one thing by
another.  The  ancients make a parallel distinction between reminiscence
and  reverie.  The  former  is a process in which recollection resembles
reasoning  in proceeding step by step through a series of related terms;
the  latter  is more like daydreaming or spontaneous fantasy. The second
problem  can  be stated, perhaps, as the mystery of retention itself. In
describing  the  capacity  of  the memory to hold the innumerable things
which  are  not  now  in mind but can be recalled, the ancients speak of
memory  as  "the storehouse of images." Every variety of thing which can
be  perceived  can  be  "stored  up  in the memory," says Augustine, and
"called  up at my pleasure. . . . When I speak of this or that," he goes
on,  "the  images  of all the things I mention are at hand from the same
storehouse  of  memory,  and if the images were not there I could not so
much  as speak of the things . . . The things themselves are not brought
into  the  memory;  it  is  only their images which are seized with such
marvellous speed, and stored away marvellously as if in cabinets, and as
marvellously brought forth again when we remember." The marvel of memory
deepens  into  a mystery when we ask what the metaphor of the storehouse
literally  means.  Where  actually  are  the  images  when  they are not
actually in mind ? If an image is by its nature an act of consciousness,
whereby  we apprehend objects not immediately present to our senses, how
do  images  exist outside of consciousness during intervals when they do
not  function in remembering, imagining, or other acts of knowing? Their
return to consciousness seems to imply that they have been retained, but
where and how is the problem not solved by the metaphor of things stored
away  in  a capacious barn. The physical storehouse does not require any
fundamental  transformation  in the being of the things it holds between
periods  when they are actually in use. The memory does. This problem of
the nature and causes of retention Wil-

[170b]
liam  James  seems to think can be solved only in terms of the retentive
power  of  nervous  tissue—what  he calls "physiological retentiveness"—
though in the view of others the problem becomes no easier (and may even
be  more  complicated)  when  it  is transferred from mind to matter. On
either view, there seems to be no question that changes in the brain are
somehow  causally connected with the activity of memory and imagination,
especially retention and recall. Aquinas, for example, observes that the
imagination  and  memory  may  be "hindered by a lesion of the corporeal
organ  ...  or  by lethargy," an observation many times extended by more
recent  investigations  of  the  brain  pathology underlying amnesia and
aphasia.  James'  treatment  of  retention  as somehow based on pathways
traced  in  the  brain,  with  recall the result of a retracing of these
paths,  tends  to  emphasize  the affinity between memory and habit. His
theory,  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Habit,  that the plasticity of
matter,  certainly living matter, underlies learning or habit formation,
while  the  inertia  or  retentiveness  of matter, especially the neural
matter of the brain, explains memory or the persistence of habits during
periods  of  disuse,  seems  almost  to  identify  habit and memory. Ice
skating  after  many  years  of  absence  from  the  sport  is  as  much
remembering  how  to ice skate as reciting a poem committed to memory in
youth  is the exercise of an old habit. Not all conceptions of habit and
memory  permit  this fusion of the two—or even their affinity as related
aspects  of  the same phenomenon. Aquinas, for example, restricts memory
to  an act of knowledge. The performance popularly called "reciting from
memory"  would  not be for him an act of memory, though it might involve
memory  if  the  recitation were accompanied by knowledge of the time or
place and occasion when the poem was first learned. Such knowledge would
be  a  memory, but the recitation itself would not be, any more than ice
skating is. These performances represent the exercise of habits of skill
or  art. In view of this, Aquinas raises the question whether the act of
knowledge, of the sort involved in reconsidering a geometric proof

[171a]
learned  at  some  earlier moment and now recalled to mind, is an act of
memory.  The  knowledge  of  the proof which is retained bythe intellect
during  periods  when  it  is  not  actually exercised, he would call an
intellectual habit or habit of knowledge. But should the recollection of
this  retained  knowledge, or the activation of this intellectual habit,
also be called an act of memory ? Aquinas answers No, on the ground that
no  reference  to  the  past need be involved in reworking a geometrical
problem  solved at some earlier time. But if the individual also happens
to recall when he first solved the problem, that is another matter. Even
so,  Aquinas  claims  that  "if  in  the notion of memory we include its
object  as  something  past, then the memory is not in the intellectual,
but  only in the sensitive part." The intellect is said to remember only
in  the  sense  of  recalling a truth retained by habit, and "not in the
sense that it understands the past as something here and now." Memory is
considered  in still another way in relation to speculative truths about
scientific  or  philosophical matters. The question is one of the origin
of  such  knowledge.  In  the usual conception of memory as knowledge of
past  particulars,  one traditional view, found in Aristotle, holds that
"out  of  sense-perception  comes  to be what we call memory, and out of
frequently repeated memories of the same thing develops experience"— the
generalized   experience   which   gives   rise  to  induction  and  the
apprehension  of  the universal. But in the tradition of the great books
we  also  find  a more radical and, perhaps, less familiar conception of
memory  as  the  chief  source of knowledge. This is Plato's doctrine of
reminiscence,  in  which  all  learning  is  a  kind  of  remembering of
knowledge  already  present  in the soul. All teaching takes the form of
helping the learner to recollect things he may not be aware he knows, by
reminding  him  through  a  process  of  questioning  which  awakens the
knowledge  already latent in him. In the Meno, Meno asks Socrates, "What
do  you  mean  by  saying  that  we  do not learn, and that what we call
learning is only a process of recollection?" Socrates undertakes to show
Meno  what  he  means  by taking a slave boy who appears not to know the
solution of a certain

[171b]
Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 137 geometrical problem and merely by
questioning  him,  without  ever giving him a single answer, getting the
slave  boy to find the right solution for himself. Meno assures Socrates
that the slave boy had never been taught geometry. Since the boy was not
told  the  answer,  he  must  have always known it, and needed only some
reminding  to  remember  what he knew. Socrates suggests the explanation
that  the  boy's  soul always possessed this knowledge, bringing it from
another  life. Before he undertook the demonstration with the slave boy,
Socrates  had  proposed  this hypothesis. "The soul, being immortal, and
having been born again many times, and having seen all things that exist
.  .  . has knowledge of them all; and it is no wonder that it should be
able  to  call  to  remembrance  all that it ever knew about virtue, and
about  everything;  for  as all nature is akin, and the soul has learned
all  things,  there  is  no  difficulty  in her eliciting, or as men say
learning,  out  of  a  single  recollection  all  the  rest, if a man is
strenuous  and  does  not faint; for all enquiry and all learning is but
recollection."  Though  he  differs  from Plato in his conception of the
soul  and  the  origin  of  the  knowledge  which it innately possesses,
Augustine  seems  to hold a similar view. As he examines his own memory,
it  appears  to contain much that has not been implanted there by sense-
experience.  Certain  things,  referred  to  by words he understands, he
says,  "I  never  reached  with any sense of my body, nor ever discerned
them  otherwise  than  in  my  mind; yet in my memory have I laid up not
their  images, but themselves. How they entered into me, let them say if
they  can;  for I have gone over all the avenues of my flesh, but cannot
find by which they entered." If the seeds of learning are in the soul at
its  creation,  memory  can  draw  from these "seminal reasons" the full
fruit  of knowledge. The doctrine of reminiscence changes the meaning of
both  learning  and  memory  at the same time. When learning consists in
remembering  knowledge  not  acquired in this life, then the activity of
memory  cannot  be,  as  it  is  usually  conceived,  a  recollection of
knowledge  previously  acquired  in  this  life by learning. In order to
understand a doctrine in which famil-

[172a]
138  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  iar  meanings  are  so profoundly altered, it is
perhaps  necessary  to  understand  the  problem it tries to solve. That
problem  exists  only for those who make an absolute distinction between
particular  sensory  images  and  universal  ideas or abstract concepts.
Those   who,   like  Hobbes,  Berkeley,  or  Hume,  deny  universals  or
abstractions  as  any part of the mind's content, see no special problem
in  the  origin of that part of the mind's content which is not received
as  sense-impressions.  The  original impressions are somehow externally
caused,  and all the rest of the mind's content— its images and memories
and  all  constructions  of  the  sort Locke calls "complex ideas"— then
arise  by  natural  derivation  from the original sense-impressions. But
those  who,  on  the  contrary,  maintain that ideas or concepts are not
images  of  any  sort, cannot avoid the problem of how the mind comes by
its ideas. One solution of this problem attributes existence to ideas as
intelligible  objects, and attributes to the mind the power to apprehend
them by direct intuition, just as the senses directly apprehend sensible
objects.  But  if  ideas,  whether  or  not they exist outside the mind,
cannot  be apprehended intuitively, then what is the origin of the ideas
whereby the mind understands intelligible objects? To this question, the
doctrine  of  reminiscence is one answer. Another answer is the doctrine
of  abstraction, as formulated by Aristotle and Aquinas. Locke and James
also  seem  to  recognize a distinction in kind between abstractions and
other  mental  content,  but  they  do not appear to find any need for a
special  power  to  perform  the  act  of  abstracting  general ideas or
universal  concepts  from  the  sensory  particulars  of  perception and
imagination. Aquinas, however, thinks that a special faculty called "the
active   intellect"  must  be  postulated  to  account  for  the  mind's
possession of the ideas or concepts whereby it actually understands what
it  cannot  perceive  or  imagine.  These theories are considered in the
chapters  on  Idea and Mind. But just as the doctrine of reminiscence is
relevant  here  for  its  bearing  on  the  discussion of memory, so the
doctrine  of abstraction which posits an active intellect is relevant to
the discussion of imagination.

[172b]
"Imagination," writes Aristotle, "is different from either perceiving or
discursive  thinking,  though  it  is  not found apart from sensation or
judgment without it. That this activity is not the same kind of thinking
as judgment is obvious. For imagining lies within our own power whenever
we wish (e.g., we can call up a picture, as in the practice of mnemonics
by  the  use of mental images), but in forming opinions we are not free;
we  cannot  escape the alternatives of falsehood or truth." The point is
not  that  images cannot be false. They frequently are, as (according to
Aristotle)  sensations  neverare.  But  the  falsity of our imaginations
involves  a judgment that things really are as we imagine them to be. If
imagination  is  not  accompanied  by judgment, the question of truth or
falsity  does  not  arise,  for in pure imagination we are not concerned
with  the  way  things  actually exist, but with the possible, i.e., the
imaginary  rather  than  the real. "Everyone knows the difference," says
James,  "between  imagining  a  thing  and  believing  in its existence.
Conceiving  imagination as an activity depending upon the prior activity
of  the  senses,  Aristotle  holds  that  imagination  is  "incapable of
existing  apart  from  sensation." In this he does not differ from other
psychologists. But he also holds that rational thought, which for him is
quite  distinct  from  imagination, cannot exist apart from imagination.
"To  the  thinking  soul  images  serve  as if they were the contents of
perception.  .  .  .  That  is  the why the soul never thinks without an
image."  Aristotle  is  here  saying more than that a special faculty of
mind  or  intellect  abstracts  the universal form—or what Aquinas calls
"the intelligible species"—from the sensory matter of the image, or what
Aquinas  calls "the phantasm." Aristotle is, in addition, insisting that
the  act of understanding is always accompanied by imaginative activity.
The  kind  of  thinking which depends upon the abstraction of ideas from
imagery also depends upon the presence of images when the thinking takes
place.  "The  faculty of thinking," says Aristotle, "thinks the forms in
the  images";  or,  as  Aquinas  expresses  it,  "for  the  intellect to
understand  actually,  not only when it acquires new knowledge, but also
when  it  uses  knowledge already acquired, there is need for the act of
imagination. . . It must of

[173a]
necessity  turn  to  the  phantasms  in  order to perceive the universal
nature  existing  in the individual." The cooperation of the imagination
with the intellect is shown, furthermore, by the fact that "when the act
of imagination is hindered by a lesion of the corporeal organ ... we see
that  a man is hindered from understanding actually even those things of
which  he  had a previous knowledge." Augustine, on the contrary, refers
to  things  "which  we  know  within  ourselves without images." When we
consider  numbers,  for  example,  "it  is not their images which are in
[our]  memory,  but  themselves."  The question of imageless thought— of
thinking  abstractly  without  the use of images— seems to be peculiarly
insistent  in  sciences  like mathematics, metaphysics, and theology, in
which  the  conceivable  may  not be imaginable. The objects peculiar to
these  sciences seem to require the scientist to do without imagery, or,
as  Aquinas says, "to rise above his imagination." This may be true even
in physics. Atoms, according to Lucretius, are conceivable, but they are
no more imaginable than they are perceptible. If we need images to think
of  them,  we must use imagery in a metaphorical way, picturing the atom
as  the smallest particle imaginable—only more so! To the objection that
there  must  be imageless thought if we can think of incorporeal beings,
of which there can be no images or phantasms, Aquinas replies that we do
so  "by  comparison  with sensible bodies of which there are phantasms."
Aristotle's  theory that the operations of thinking are always dependent
on  (though  not  reducible to) acts of imagination, does not imply that
imagination  is  always  accompanied  by  abstract  or rational thought.
Normally, human thinking and knowing is a work which combines both sense
and  intellect,  both  reason and imagination, but sometimes even in man
imagination  may be active without judgment or reasoning. Brute animals,
according  to  Aristotle,  are  largely  guided  by  their  imaginations
"because  of  the  non-existence  in them of mind." But when imagination
takes  the  place  of  thought  in  men, it is "because of the temporary
eclipse of their minds by passion or disease or sleep."

[173b]
Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 139 Dreaming seems to be the striking
case  of  imagination divorced from reason's judgment or control. It has
long  been  suspected  that animals also dream, but the question whether
they  can  distinguish  their  dreams  from their waking perceptions may
prove   forever   unanswerable.  Philosophers  and  psychologists  have,
however,  asked  themselves whether there is any way of being certain of
the  difference between waking thought and the phantasmagoria of dreams.
Descartes,  for  example,  asks,  "How do we know that the thoughts that
come in dreams are more false than those that we have when we are awake,
seeing  that  often enough the former are not less lively and vivid than
the  latter?"  It seems to him that "there are no certain indications by
which  we  may  clearly  distinguish wakefulness from sleep." Even as he
writes  these words, he can almost persuade himself that he is dreaming.
Yet he does find one probable sign whereby to tell dreaming from waking.
"Our  memory,"  he  observes,  "can  never  connect  our dreams with one
another,  or  with  the  whole  course of our lives, as it unites events
which happen to us while we are awake." Aquinas finds other evidences of
the  difference.  When  a man is fully asleep, he does not dream at all,
for  his imagination is inactive as well as his senses and his mind. But
as sleep passes gradually into waking, his faculties begin to act again,
not  merely  the  imagination,  but  the reason also, so that "a man may
judge  that  what  he  sees  is a dream, discerning, as it were, between
things  and  their images. Nevertheless, the common sense remains partly
suspended,  and  therefore,  although  it discriminates some images from
reality,  yet it is always deceived in some particular. Even while a man
is  asleep,  his  sense  and imagination may be to some extent free, and
similarly  the  judgment  of his intellect may be unfettered, though not
entirely.  Consequently, if a man syllogizes while asleep, when he wakes
up  he  invariably  recognizes  a  flaw  in  some  respect."  Apart from
questions  of truth and falsity, or reality and illusion, the nature and
causes  of  dreaming  are  perennial  themes in the tradition of western
thought.  As  different  suppositions  are  made concerning the cause of
dreams, so different interpretations are given of their content.

[174a]
140  THE  GREAT  IDEAS When it is supposed that the dream is inspired by
the gods or is a divine visitation, it becomes a medium of divination or
prophecy  a  way  of foretelling the future, or of knowing what the gods
intend  in  general,  or for the guidance of some particular man. In the
great  books  of ancient poetry and history, and in the Old Testament as
well,  dreams,  like  oracles, are interpreted as supernatural portents,
and  figure as one of the major sources of prophecy. Aristotle discounts
both   the   fulfillment  of  dreams  and  their  non-fulfillment,  "for
coincidences  do  not  occur according to any universal or general law."
Regarding  prophetic  dreams  as  mere coincidences, he does not find it
surprising  that  "many  dreams have no fulfillment." From the fact that
"certain  of  the  lower  animals  also  dream,"  he  thinks  "it may be
concluded that dreams are not sent by God, nor are they designed for the
purpose  of  revealing  the future." Instead, Aristotle proposes natural
causes for the origin of dreams. Slight stimulations of the sense-organs
awaken the dream process and determine its content. "Dreamers fancy that
they  are affected by thunder and lightning, when in fact there are only
faint  ringings  in their ears ... or that they are walking through fire
and  feeling  intense heat, when there is only a slight warmth affecting
certain  parts  of  the  body."  Lucretius  similarly explains dreams by
natural  causes,  but  attributes  their  content  to  events which have
dominated the thought of waking life. "On whatever things we have before
spent  much time," he writes, "so that the mind was more strained in the
task  than  is  its  wont, in our sleep we seem mostly to traffic in the
same  things; lawyers think that they plead their cases and confront law
with  law,  generals that they fight and engage in battles, sailors that
they  pass  a  life  of conflict waged with winds." This is true even of
animals.  "Strong  horses, when their limbs are lain to rest," Lucretius
continues, "yet sweat in their sleep, and pant forever, and strain every
nerve as though for victory. . . . And hunters' dogs often in their soft
sleep  yet  suddenly  toss  their legs, and all at once give tongue, and
again  and again sniff the air with their nostrils, as if they had found
and were following the tracks of wild beasts."

[174b]
In  the  tradition of the great books, modern writers like their ancient
forebears  appeal  thus to sensation and memory as the natural causes of
the  origin  and  content of dreams. But, except for daydreams or waking
fantasy, they do not observe that dreaming may be even more profoundly a
product  of  desire.  If  Freud's extraordinary insight on this point is
supported  by  all  the  evidences  he  assembles in his great work, the
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  then  the lateness of this discovery may be
thought  even  more  extraordinary than the theory itself. The theory is
not  simply  that  the  content of dreams is determined by desires. When
Oedipus  tells  Jocasta  of  his  fear that in taking her to wife he has
unwittingly married his mother, she tells him to fear not, for "many men
ere  now  have so fared in dreams also." If that is so, then such dreams
do  not  call for the interpretation which Freud gives. If there are men
who  suffer  from  what  Freud  calls  "the  Oedipus complex," involving
repressed  incestuous  desires,  then the expression of those desires in
dreaming  will  not  take  the  form  of  imagining  them to be actually
fulfilled. On the contrary, Freud's theory of dream symbolism holds that
"the  dream  as remembered is not the real thing at all, but a distorted
substitute."  Beneath  what  he  calls "the manifest dream-content"— the
actual  moving  images  which  occupy the dreaming consciousnesslie "the
latent  dream-thoughts"  which  are  distorted in the actual dream. This
distortion "is due to the activities of censorship, directed against the
unacceptable   unconscious   wishimpulses   .   .  .  invariably  of  an
objectionable  nature,  offensive from the ethical, aesthetic, or social
point  of  view,  things  about which we do not dare to think at all, or
think  of  only  with  abhorrence." The repressed desires or wishes, the
loves  or  fears,  which  the dreamer refuses to acknowledge consciously
must,  therefore,  appear  in dreams in a disguised form. The imagery of
dreams  seems  to  Freud to be a kind of language in which the repressed
materials  of  thought and feeling employ a special symbolism to express
what  the  moral  censor  will  not permit us to express in the ordinary
language  of  our  conscious thought or social conversation. As ordinary
language  contains  symbols  conventionally  agreed upon, so Freud finds
that

[175a]
the  recurrence  again  and  again  of  certain  images in the dreams of
neurotic  patients,  and  of  normal  persons  as  well,  gives them the
character  of  conventional  symbols.  "The  number  oftrnngs  which are
represented symbolically in dreams is," according to Freud, "not great."
They  are,  he  says,  "the  human  body  as a whole, parents, children,
brothers  and  sisters,  birth, death, nakedness—and one thing more. The
only typical, that is to say, regularly occurring, representation of the
human form as a whole is that of a house. . . . When the walls are quite
smooth, the house means a man; when there are ledges and balconies which
can  be caught hold of, a woman. Parents appear in dreams as emperor and
empress,  king and queen, or other exalted personages . . . Children and
brothers  are  less tenderly treated, being symbolized by little animals
or  vermin.  Birth is almost invariably represented by some reference to
water.  . . . For dying we have setting out upon a journey or travelling
by  train.  Clothes  and  uniforms  stand  for nakedness." The one thing
OUTLINE  OF TOPICS 1 a. The relation of memory and imagination to sense:
the  a  priori grounds of possible \c. The distinction and connection of
memory  and  imagination:  their  interdependence  id.  The influence of
memory  and imagination on the emotions and will: voluntary movement ia.
Retention:  factors  influencing  its strength 2b. Recollection: factors
influencing  ease  and  adequacy of recall 2C. The association of ideas:
controlled  and free association; reminiscence and reverie 2e. The scope
and  range  of normal memory: failure or defect of memory and its causes
(1) Forgetting as a function of the time elapsed (2) The obliviscence of
the  disagreeable:  conflict and repression (3) Organic lesions: amnesia
and the aphasias

[175b]
Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 141 more, which Freud mentions in his
enumeration,  comprises  the  sexual organs and acts. In contrast to all
the  others,  these,  he  says,  "are  represented  by a remarkably rich
symbolism.  ... An overwhelming majority of symbols in dreams are sexual
symbols."  Freud  points  out  why  it would be a mistake to treat dream
symbols  like the words of an ordinary language. "Their object is not to
tell  anyone  anything;  they  are  not a means of communication; on the
contrary,  it is important to them not to be understood." Wresting their
secret  from  such  symbols  is  a  remarkable  achievement. Aristotle's
remark, which Freud quotes, that "the most skilful interpreter of dreams
is  he who has the faculty of observing resemblances," seems to be borne
out  in  the  Freudian  method  of discovering the latent content of the
dream  symbolism.  But  Freud's  therapeutic  use  of  what  can thus be
discovered makes the psychoanalytic method a thing totally unanticipated
by  any  of  his  predecessors.  PAGE  (4)  False memories: illusions of
memory; deja vu 147

[176a]
142  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  memory of men 4. The contribution of memory: the
binding  of  time 5. The activity of imagination, fancy, or fantasy: the
nature and variety of images tive image and the imaginative construct as
contrasted  with  the  abstract  and  universal  5c.  The  pathology  of
imagination:  hallucinations,  persistent  imagery 6c. The dependence of
rational  thought  and  knowledge  on imagination 7. Imagination and the
fine  arts  8.  The  nature and causes of dreaming 8c. The expression of
desire  in daydreaming or fantasy (1) The manifest and latent content of
dreams:  the  dream-work  8e. Dream-analysis as uncovering the repressed
unconscious

[176b]
PAGE  3. Remembering as an act of knowledge and as a source of knowledge
147 3b. Sensitive and intellectual memory: knowledge of the past and the
habit of knowledge 3<r. The scientist's use of memory: collated memories
as  the  source  of generalized experience ia$ 3^. Memory as the muse of
poetry  and  history:  the  dependence  of  history  on  the  49 5#. The
distinction   between   reproductive   and   creative  imagination:  the
representa5b.  The  image  distinguished  from  the idea or concept: the
concrete  and  particular 150 6. The role of imagination in thinking and
knowing  151  6b.  The  effect  of  intellect  on human imagination: the
imaginative  thinking  of  animals  (1)  The  abstraction  of ideas from
images:  the  image  as  a  condition  of  thought (2) The schema of the
imagination  as  mediating between concepts of the understanding and the
sensory  manifold of intuition: the transcendental unity of apperception
152  6d.  The limits of imagination: imageless thought; the necessity of
going  beyond  imagination in the speculative sciences jb. The fantastic
and the realistic in poetry: the probable and the possible in poetry and
history  153  8a.  Dreams as divinely inspired: their prophetic portent;
divination  through  the  medium of dreams 8b. The role of sensation and
memory in the dreams of sleep 154 8d. The symbolism of dreams 155

[177a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface. The faculties of memory and imagination in brutes
and  men  7 Plato: Theaetetus, 538d-541a / Philebus, 621a b 8 Aristotle:
Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  i  690a-692b;  ch  2  [453*5-14]  695b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[ii47b3-6]
397d  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i, ch 12, 173a-b 17 Plotinus:
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  25-31  154d-158c; tr iv, ch 1-17 159a-166d
passim; tr vi, ch 3 190b-191c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 12-36
74b-80d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4 411d-413d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 51, a 3 14b-15a 23 Hobbes :
Leviathan,  part  i,  49a-54c  esp  50a-d;  part  iv,  258b-c;  267b  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  229d-230b  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d;
55a-d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  19d-20d  / Discourse, part 1, 41d /
Meditations,  vi,  96b-97a;  98d99a  /  Objections  and  Replies, def ii
130a-b;  208d-209a;  209b-c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 17, schol
381b-d; prop 18, schol 382a-b

[177b]
Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 143 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii, ch x 141b-143d esp sect 10 143c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341d-342a
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  41c-42b; 54b-55a; 58a-b 194d 195a / Judgement,
542b-543c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 291d-292b; 412d 480c-481b 53 James:
Psychology, la-2b; 396a; 413a; 418a-b 421a-433a esp 424b-427a; 484a-501b
54  Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 352a-d / General Introduction, 527a
la. The relation of memory and imagination to sense: the apriori grounds
of  possible experience in the synthesis of intuition, reproduction, and
recognition 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 523d-524a; 538d-541a / Philebus, 621 a-
b  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 b36-iooa6] 136b-c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[99
[98oa28-b24]
499a-b / Soul, bk hi, ch 3
[428^-16] 660b;
[428b io-429a9] 660d-661b /
Memory  and Reminiscence, ch i 690a-692b 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals,
ch 7
[7oib
i3]-ch 8 [702^0] 237a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i370 a28-3i] 613c
17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 29 157b-d; tr iv, ch 8, 161d-162b;
tr vi 189b191c

[178a]
144  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (1.  "The faculties of memory and imagination in
brutes and men. la. The relation of memory and imagination to sense: the
a  priori  grounds of possible experience in the synthesis of intuition,
reproduction,  and  recognition^)  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
12-17  74b-75d; par 25 77c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 78,
a 4, ans and rep 4 411d-413d; q 81, a 3, rep 3 430c-431d; q 84, a 7, rep
2  449b-450b; q hi, a 3, ans and rep 1-2 570b-571b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  49a-50d;  52b-c;  54b-c; part iv, 258b-c; 262a-b 28 Harvey: On
Animal Generation, 332a-335a esp 334c-d 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 19a-20d
/  Meditations,  vi,  97a  /  Objections  and  Replies, def ii 130a-b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 17-18 380d382b; prop 48, schol 391b-c;
part  hi,  postulate  2  396a;  part  v,  prop  21  458a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15 98d-99a; ch hi, sect 21 118b-119a; BK
II,  CH  I,  SECT  17  125c-d;  CH  II,  SECT  2~3 128ac; ch x, sect 1-7
141b-142d  esp  sect  2 141b-c, sect 7 142c-d; ch xii, sect 8 148c-d; ch
xxxiii,  sect 36-37 213c-214b; bk iv, ch xi, sect 4-8 355b-356d; sect ii
357b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  28-33 418b-419a; sect 36
419c-d;  sect  41  420c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ii 455b457b;
sect  vii,  div 49 471c-d; div 61 477c478a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 48d-55a
esp  48d-49a,  54b-55a;  61a-64a;  85d-89c  passim;  115b-c  / Practical
Reason,  319c-320b  / Judgement, 552c553c 53 James: Psychology, 2b; 13a;
324a;   391a;  422a424a;  453a-456a;  480a-b;  483b-484a;  497a501b  esp
499a-501a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  351c-352d  / General
Introduction,  518c-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  700b-701d  esp  700b-d  lb. The
physiology  of  memory and imagination: their bodily organs 8 Aristotle:
Memory and Reminiscence, ch i a26-b i2] 691ac; ch 2
[44^24-29] 690bc; [450
ai5-bu]  695b-d  / Dreams, ch 2-3 703a706d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  1,  q  78, a 4, ans 411d-413d; q 84, a 6, rep 2 447c449b; a 7, ans
449a-450b;  a  8,  rep  2 450b451b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a-51b
passim;  part  in,  172c; part iv, 258b-c; 261a 31 Descartes: Rules, xn,
19d-20a / Meditations,
[453
vi, 96b-97a / Objections and Replies, def ii 130a-b; 208d-209c

[178b]
\b  to  \d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 17-18 380d382b: part hi,
postulate  2  396a  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect 5
142a-b;  sect  10  143c-d;  ch xxvii, sect 27 227d-228a; ch xxix, sect 3
234b-c;  ch  xxxiii, sect 6 249a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 234b-236b
53  James:  Psychology,  2b-3a; 13a-b; 15a-17b; 32a-37b passim, esp 33a,
36b;  70a-71a;  367a373a;  423a-424a;  427b-434b;  497a-501b  54  Freud:
Interpretation   of   Dreams,   352a-d;   375b-376a   passim;  378a-b  /
Unconscious,  431c-d  /  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 646b647c Ic. The
distinction   and   connection   of   memory   and   imagination:  their
interdependence  7  Plato: Theaetetus, 523d-524a 8 Aristotle: Memory and
Reminiscence, ch i 690a-692b 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7
[70i b
i3]-ch 8 [702*21] 237a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37oa28-33] 613c-d
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 28-31 156d-158c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  x,  par  12-18 74b-76a; par 23 77a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4, ans and rep 3 411d-413d; q 93, a 6, rep 4
496b-498a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 3
8b-9a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a-c; part iv, 258b-c 31 Descartes:
Rules,  vn,  10b-c;  xn,  19a-20d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 18,
schol   382a-b;   part  iv,  prop  34,  schol  433a-b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  x,  sect  2  141b-c;  sect 7-8 142c-143a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect i, 413a 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  v,  div  39  466c-467a  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 194d-195a 53 James:
Psychology,  424b-427a  esp 424b-425a, 427a; 430a-431a; 480a-b 54 Freud:
Ego and Id, 700b-701a Id. The influence of memory and imagination on the
emotions and will: voluntary movement 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xxiv
[480-516]
176b-d / Odyssey, bk iv [183-189] 201a; bk xv [389402] 270a 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk hi, ch 3
[427^ 1-24]
660a 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 6
[700**
i5]-ch 8
[702^2] 235d-237c; ch
ii 239a-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37oa28-b29]
613c614b; bk 11, ch 5
[i382a2i-22] 628b; [1383s
13-19] 629b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[877891] 55d

[179a]
2 to 1c Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 145 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  ix,  sect  7 292b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [194-207] 108a-b; [441493]
115a-116b; bk ii
[1-12] 124a
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 28 156d-157b ^^ 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  viii,  par 25-27 60a-c; bk x, par 30 79b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3. rep 2 430c-431d; part i-ii, q i, a
i, rep 3 609b-610b; q 17, a 7 690d-692a; q 32, a 3 760d-761c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  13,  a  3,  rep 3 782b-783b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 61a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 36c-40a; 236b-d; 316b-c
27 Shakespeare: Othello, act hi, sc hi
[321480] 225c-227b / Macbeth, act
i, sc vii
[i28] 289bc; act
ii, sc i
[33-61I 290d-291a;
act in, sc ii
[8-36]
296c-d; sc iv
[38-108]
298a-d  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 57c-58d; part ii, 285a-288c
esp  286c-287b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  55b-d;  67a-b 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19d-20a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 12-57
400b415b  passim; part iv, prop 9-13 426d-428a; PART V, PROP 34, DEMONST
460cd  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxiii 248b-251d passim,
esp  sect  7-15  249b-250c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 194a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  341 d: 345d-346b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 210b-c 53
James:   Psychology,   13a-15a;   704b-705a;   759a760a;  767b-792b  esp
767b-768a, 771a, 773a-b
[fn
1],  792b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  353b;  363b364d  esp
363d-364a;  377c-378d  2.  The  activity  of memory 7 Plato: Theaetetus,
538d-541a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[125^5-19]
174d  / Memory and Reminiscence 690a-695d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
hi,  ch  25-31 154d-158c passim; tr iv, ch 1-17 159a-166d passim; tr vi,
ch  3  190b-191c  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 12-36 74b-80d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 53a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 18,
schol  382a-b;  part v, prop 11-13 456a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch  x  141b-143d;  ch  xix, sect i 175b-c 53 James: Psychology,
lb-2b;  421a-451b  54  Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 352a-c / General
Introduction,  527a-b  2a. Retention: factors influencing its strength 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  138d-139a  / Gorgias, 262a / Republic, bk vii, 399c /
Timaeus, 446b-c / Theaetetus, 540d-541a

[179b]
8  Aristotle:  Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  1 b3~9] 690a; [450*26^12]
691a-c
[449
17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 29 157c-d; tr iv, ch 8, 161d-162b;
tr  vi,  ch  3  190b-191c  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 12-14
74b-75a;  par 16 75b-c; par 20-27 76b- 78c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  50,  a  3,  rep  3  8b-9a;  q 51, a 3 14b-15a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 53a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 236c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  61d-62c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph 26 156a-157a 31
Descartes:  Meditations, 11, 81 d / Objections and Replies, 208d-209a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch x, sect 3-6 141c-142c; ch xxix,
sect 3 234bc 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 234b-236b 53 James: Psychology,
lb-2a;  277a;  421b-424a  passim,  esp  422a,  424a; 427b-441a esp 428b;
448b-450a;  849a-b  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  27a-28c  /  Interpretation of
Dreams,  145b;  155a-157a  esp  155c;  369a-b  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  769a- 7 70c 2b. Recollection: factors influencing ease and
adequacy  of  recall  7  Plato: Symposium, 165c-166b / Timaeus, 446b-c /
Philebus, 621a-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk viii, ch 14
[i63b i7~
34]  222b-c / Memory and Reminiscence, ch i b3-9] 690a; ch 2 692b-695d 9
Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  hi,  ch 9 [1409*35b8] 660d-661a 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk x, par 12-14 74b-
[449
75a;  par 16-18 75b-76a; par 25-36 77c-80d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
53b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 59a-b; 62bc / Novum Organum, bk
ii,  aph  26 156a157a 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 208d-209a 31
Spinoza:   Ethics,   part   v,   prop   11-13  456a-b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  hi,  sect  21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch x, sect 2
141b-c;  sect  7  142c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 422b 53 James:
Psychology,   lb-2b;   163a-b;   362b-364a;   371a-372a;  382a-385b  esp
382b-383a;  423a424a;  427b-431b  esp  428a-b;  433a-434a;  438a-440b 54
Freud:   Hysteria,   32c-33d  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  156b-157a;
353d-354a  /  Unconscious,  438b-d  /  General  Introduction, 485a-486a;
488c-489c;  566c-567b / Ego and Id, 697d698d; 700b-c 2c. The association
of  ideas:  controlled  and free association; reminiscence and reverie 7
Plato: Republic, bk v, 361a 8 Aristotle: Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[45i b io-453a3i] 693a-695d

[180a]
c  (2.  The activity of memory. 2c. The association of ideas: controlled
and  free  association; reminiscence and reverie.) 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  52b-53b;  67d;  69b-c  26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act v, sc v
[1-41]  349d-350a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, la-3b; 18d-19b;
50b-52d;  134b-135d  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  143a, 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  18  381d-382b;  part  in, prop 14-17
400d-402a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxiii 248b-251d 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 30 418c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect hi 457c458a; sect v, div 41-45 467d-469c passim 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  193a-194b;  319a320b;  393a-394a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, Sic-d /
judgement,  493c-d;  528c-529b  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 292d-293a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk ii, 82a-d; bk hi, 125b-c; 146d-148c; bk vi,
254a;  bk  vii,  293c-295a; bk x, 394d; 422b-c; 443c-444a; 464a-465c esp
464d-465a;  bk  xiv,  608c-d;  bk  xv,  615a-616a  53 James: Psychology,
360a-395a esp 370a-385b; 667a-678b passim; 827a-835a 54 Freud: Hysteria,
65a-67b  esp  66c-67b;  74a79d  esp  74a-77b / Interpretation of Dreams,
180b-181b;   253d-254a;  347b-350a"esp  348a349a;  352b-c;  375b-376a  /
Repression,  423c-d  /  General Introduction, 486b-489c esp 486d488a 2d.
Recognition  with  or  without  recall 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 538d-541a 18
Augustine:   Confessions,   bk  x,  par  27-28  78b-d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  hi,  sect  21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch x, sect 2
141b-c;  sect  7  142c-d  53 James: Psychology 163b; 384a; 440b-441a esp
441b-442b [fn 2} 54 Freud: Hysteria, 33c; 79a-d passim 2e. The scope and
range  of  normal  memory:  failure or defect of memory and its causes 4
Homer:  Odyssey,  bk ix [82-104] 230a 2 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 138c-141a,c /
Philebus, 621a-b 8 Aristotle: Memory and Reminiscence, ch i
[450*26-451*19] 691a-692b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[830869] 40c-41a
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  29,  157c-d  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk x, par 12-36 74b-80d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xxxi
[91-111]
101d-102a; xxxiii
[79-102]
105a-b;

[180b]
146 THE GREAT IDEAS Id to 2e{l) paradise, i
[1-12]
106a; xxxiii
[46-75]
156c-157a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 15a-16c; 236c-d; 316a317a; 465c-466c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch x, sect 4-5 141d-142b; ch xxix,
sect  3  234b-c;  bk  in,  ch  in,  sect 2 254d-255a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  234b-236b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 88d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  hi,  129d-130b  53  James: Psychology, 131a; 179a-b; 216a-b;
240a-258b;  443a-450a;  84ib-842a;  844b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of
Dreams,  155a-156a;  341b-345b  passim / General Introduction, 453b-456a
esp  454b-455b;  526d-527c: 561c562b (1) Forgetting as a function of the
time  elapsed  2e  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x, par 18 75d76a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi suppl, q 98, a 7, rep 3 1076d-1077b
23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  i,  50b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 404a-b 26
Shakespeare: Henry V, act iv. sc hi
[4067] 556a-b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect 5 142a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  x,  422b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 438a-b (2) The
obliviscence   of  the  disagreeable:  conflict  and  repression  2e  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  177d-180b  esp 180a-b; 236b-d 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  312b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 200c-d; bk ix, 355d-356a; bk
xiv, 605c-d; bk xv, 616a617a; 630b-c 54 Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis, 6d-8b; 13a-b / Hysteria, 65b-66a; 82b-d / Interpretation
of Dreams, 343c-345a esp 344d-345a; 346d-347a; 378b-380d esp 378b-379a /
Repression,  422d-425b  / General Introduction, 464b-467a; 472c-475a esp
474a;  566a-567a;  579d  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 720a-d;
732b-c / New Introductory Lectures, 811a-b e(3) Organic lesions: amnesia
and  the  aphasias  8  Aristotle: Memory and Reminiscence, ch i b i-i il
695d
[45o a26-b i2] 691a-cf ch 2 [453
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, a 7, ans 449b-450b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch x, sect 5, 142b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  299c 53 James: Psychology, 25b-26b; 32a-34a; 35b37b; 241b-258b esp
251b-252a, 258a-b; 447a; 448a-b; 490a-493a passim 54 Freud: Civilization
and Its Discontents, 770a

[181a]
2*(4) to 3b Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 147 2e(4) False memories:
illusions of memory; deja vu 8 Aristotle: Memory and Reminiscence^ea I
[45i a8-i2] 692a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk vu, 293c-295a; bk x, 393a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  241a-b;  442a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 597b-599b esp
597b-d  3.  Remembering  as  an  act  of  knowledge  and  as a source of
knowledge  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  124c-126c  /  Meno,  179d183a / Phaedo,
228a-230d / Republic, bk vi, 374d-375a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk ii, ch 19 b34-iooa9] 136b-c / Topics, bk ii, ch 4
[in b24-3i] 156d-157a / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch
[99
1
[980*28-981*1] 499a-b
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 1 690a-692b 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
hi,  ch  25-31 154d-158c passim; tr iv, ch 1-17 159a-166d passim; tr vi,
ch  3  190b-191c  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 12-36 74b-80d /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 9 640c-d; ch 14, 643b; bk iv, ch 5, 677b-c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  78,  a  4,  ans and rep 5
411d-413d;  q  79, aa 6-7 419b-421c; q 84, a 3, rep 3 443d-444d; q 89, a
6,  rep 1 478b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi slppl, q 70, a 2,
rep 4 896a-897d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, v
[3442] 112c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 53a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
32d;  61d62c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  111,  4d;  vu,  10b-c; vm, 14b; xi
17b-18b; xn, 18c; 19d-20d / Discourse, part 1, 41d / Meditations, v, 95d
/  Objections and Replies, 125a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 369 236b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch x, sect 2
141b-c;  sect  8  142d-143a;  bk  iv, ch i, sect 8-9 308b-309b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 69, 30b-c 53 James: Psychology, 145a;
396a-397a;  424b427a;  450a-451b ' 54 Freud: Unconscious, 428d / General
Introduction,  484c-486a  esp  485a-b 3*. Reminiscence as the process of
all  learning:  innate  ideas  or  seminal  reasons  7  Plato: Phaedrus,
124c-126c  / Meno, 179d183a; 188d-189a / Phaedo, 228a-230d / Theaetetus,
515d-517b  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 b2o-33] 136a-b
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992b24-993 an]
511a-c / Memory and Rem-
[99
iniscence, ch 2 [451*19-452*13] 692b-693d

[181b]
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a-b  12  Epictetus:
Discourses, bk ii, ch ii, 150a-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 4,
8b-c  /  Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 25-26 154d-156c; tr iv, ch 5 160d-161b
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 10 73d74a; par 16-19 75b-76b; par
26-38 78a-81a / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c / Christian Doctrine,
bk i, ch 9 627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 54, a 4, ans and
rep  i 287b-288a; q 55, a 2 289d290d; q 57, a 1, rep 3 295a-d; q 58, a 1
300c-301a;  q  60,  a  2,  ans  311a-d;  q  84,  a 3 443d-444d; a 4, ans
444d-446b;  a  6, ans 447c-449a; q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; q 117, a 1,
ans  and  rep  4 595d-597c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 264b-265b 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation, 333d-334d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, lb-c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  iv, 5c-d; 6d; vi, 8d-9a; vm, 13c-d / Discourse, part
v, 54c; part vi, 62a / Meditations, 11 77d-81d passim; in, 83b; 88c- d /
Objections  and  Replies,  120c-d; 140c; 215b-c; 224b,d-225a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  v,  prop  23, schol 458c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
90d-91b; bk 1 95b,d-121a,c passim, esp ch 1, sect 15-16 98d-99c, sect 23
101b-102a,  ch hi, sect 21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch i, sect i 121a-b; sect 6
122b-c;  ch  ix,  sect 6 139a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ii, div
17, 457b,d
[fn
1]  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  113b-115a / Practical Reason, 352c-353a 53
James:  Psychology,  851a-862a  esp  851a-852b,  856a  860a;  867a-868a;
879b-880a;   889a-b;  897a-b  3b.  Sensitive  and  intellectual  memory:
knowledge  of  the  past and the habit of knowledge 7 Plato: Theaetetus,
538d-544a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk ii, ch 4
[in b24-3i]
156d-157a; bk iv, ch 4
[i25b4~i4]
174c;  bk vm, ch 2 [i57b n-i6] 214a / Soul, bk hi, ch 5 [430*20-25] 662d
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 1
[449^3-450*26]
690a-691a; ch 2
[451*19^6] 692b-d
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  25-31  154d-158c  passim 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 16-19 75b-76b; par 23-25 77a-d; par 30
79b-c;  par  36  80c-d  /  City of God, bk xxii, ch 30, 618a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 54, a 5 288a-d; q 77, a 8, rep 4 406b-407a;
q  79,  aa  6-7  419b-421c;  q  89,  a 6, rep i 478b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; part hi suppl, q 70, a 2, rep
4 896a-897d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53a-54a; 60a-b; 65c

[182a]
i  (3.  Remembering as an act of knowledge and as a source of knowledge.
36.  Sensitive  and  intellectual  memory: knowledge of the past and the
habit  of  knowledge.}  31  Descartes:  Rules,  in,  4c-d; xi 17b-18b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop i8, schol 382a-b; part v, prop 21 458a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch x,
sect  2  141b-c; sect 7-8 142c-143a; bk iv, ch i, sect 8-9 308b-309b; ch
xi,  sect ii 357b-c; ch xvi, sect 1-2 366d-367a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341d  53  James:  Psychology,  324a;  424b-427a  esp  424b425b  [fn  3];
433a-434a;  450a-451b  3c.  The  scientist's  use  of  memory:  collated
memories  as the source of generalized experience 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 b34-iooa9] 136b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch
[99
b  i 3] 499a-500a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref la-2d 28 Harvey: Motion of
the  Heart,  273d / On Animal Generation, 332a-335c esp 334c-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  59a-b  / Novum Organum, pref 105a-106d; bk i
107a1  [980*28-98  136a,c  esp aph 11-26 107d-108d, aph 97-98 126c-127b,
aph  105  128b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, in, 4c-d; vn 10b-12a passim; viii,
14b;  xvi  33d-35c  /  Discourse,  part  ii,  47c-d  33  Pascal: Vacuum,
355a-358b 53 James: Psychology, 385a-b; 677b-678a 3d. Memory as the muse
of  poetry and history: the dependence of history on the memory of men 4
Homer: Iliad, bk ii
[484-493]
14d-15a / Odyssey, bk i
[i-io]
183a; bk viii
[62-82]
222d-223a;  [469-520] 226d-227b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, la,c; bk hi,
114a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 353d354c; bk v, 489a-b;
500d-501a  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  443d-444c  /  Critias, 479a-b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk  vii  [641-646]  254a  14  Plutarch:  Pericles, 128d-129a 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 48c; bk iv, 66b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
ii
[1-9]
2c;   paradise,  1  [1-12]  106a;  xxxin  [46-75]  156c157a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 71c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 41b-42a; 199c-d; 305b306a
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 13d-14b; 32d; 33b; 34c; 38c-39a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  626 286b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  193a-194b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 88c-d; 296a;
354c-d; 413b-d

[182b]
7  148  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3c  to  4£ 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 337c;
501c-503a  passim,  esp  502a 44 Boswell: Johnson, lb-c; 3d-4a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 153a154c; 181a-182a; part i, 239c-240a;
247d248a  47 Goethe: Faust, dedication lab 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
hi,  134a-c; bk ix, 366d-367b 4. The contribution of memory: the binding
of  time 4a. Memory in the life of the individual: personal identity and
continuity  4  Homer:  Odyssey,  bk  ix [82-104] 230a 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
138c-140a  /  Republic, bk vi, 374d-375a / Philebus, 614a-c 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk hi, ch 5
[430*20-25]
662d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 12
[1389*2024] 636c; ch 13 [1390*6-10] 637b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[670678] 38d; [830-869] 40c-41a
13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk i [441-493] 115a-116b; bk ii [1-12] 124a; bk vi
[703-751]  229b-231a  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  25-31
154d-158c  passim;  tr  iv,  ch  1-17  159a-166d  passim  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk xi, par 17-38 93b-98c esp par 36-38 97d-98c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  q  87,  a  1  997b-998c; q 98, a 7
1076d-1077b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, purgatory, xxxixxxiii 100d-105d
passim 25 Montaigne: Essays, 15a-16c; 236b-237a; 316a-317a; 465c-466c 31
Descartes: Meditations, vi, 103a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  xxvii,  sect  9-26  222a-227d  passim, esp sect 20 225c-d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  544c-545d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [779-784] 20b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  19a-20a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 297a-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk x, 394d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
epilogue,  411b-412c 53 James: Psychology, 145a; 154a-155b; 213a259b esp
214a-216b,   229a-230a,  240a,  258b259a;  396a-397a;  412b-413a;  418a;
421a-422a  54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 12c / War
and  Death, 760a-b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 769a70c esp 770bc
4b.  Memory  in  the  life  of  the group or race: instinct, legend, and
tradition  Old Testament: Exodus, 3:15; 12:14-20; 13:116; 17:14; 20:8-11
/  Leviticus, 23:24-25 / Numbers, 15:38-41 / Deuteronomy, 4:32-40; 5:15;
6; 7:18-19; 8:2-6:9:7; 15:12-15; 16:1-

[183a]
-  5  to  5a  Chapter  56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 149 12; 24:17-22; 32:7
/Joshua,  1:12-13;  3:144:9—  (D)  Josue,  1:12-13;  3:14-4:9  / Esther,
9:25-32/   Psalms,   102:12;  135:13—  (^O)  Psalms,  101:13;  134:13  /
Ecclesiastes,  1:11;  2:16^945-/ Isaiah, 44:21; 46:9— (D) Isaias, 44:21;
46:9/ Malachi, 4:4— (D) Malachias, 4:4 Apocrypha: / Maccabees, 14:16-49—
(D)  OT,  /  Machabees, 14:16-49 New Testament: Matthew, 26:6-13 / Mar\,
14:3-9 / Luke, 22:19-20 / / Corinthians, 11:23-25 7 Plato: Laws, bk vii,
716a-b;  717d-718c  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk i [441-493] 115a-116b; bk hi
[84-191]  149b-152a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 60d-61a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 97, a 2 236d-237b 26 Shakespeare: Henry V, act
iv, sc hi
[4067] 556a-b / Julius Caesar, act hi, sc
ii  [7982]  584c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii, 46b-c 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  626  286b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  88b-d;  97c-98c;  398b; 413b-d; 544c-545c; 627b-d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  527d-528a,c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
424c-425b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 356 113a-b /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153b-c;  181a 182a; 186d-190b; part i,
227b-c;  230c-231b;  239c-241a;  part  ii,  259b-c;  261b;  263d-266a 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  318ac;  570b-571b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  i,  647b-c  53  James:  Psychology,  1\7&-7\93l esp 718b-719a;
722b-725a  esp  724b-725a:  731b;  851b;  853a858a  54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  Psycho  Analysis, 4a-b / Instincts, 413c / Unconscious,
439d  /  General  Introduction, 509a-513d passim, esp 512b-513b; 526c-d;
591d-592b;  599a-b;  608c-d;  613a  /  Group  Psychology,  686c-689b esp
688d-689a, 689b
[fn
1];  692a693a  /  Ego  and Id, 706c-708b esp 707b, 708b / War and Death,
763b-c;  764d-765a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 795b-796c; 800a-b
/  New  Introductory  Lectures,  834b-d  5. The activity of imagination,
fancy,  or  fantasy:  the nature and variety of images 7 Plato: Sophist,
577a-b  /  Philebus, 623d-624c 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 3 659c-661b;
ch  ii  [433  b32-434  a9  ]  666d  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37oa28-b29]  613c-614b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  viii [18-25] 259b 17
Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 31 158b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  x, par 13-14 74c75a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 9,
rep  2  58b-59a;  q  78,  a 4, ans 411d-413d; q 84, a 6, ans and rep 1-2
447c-449a

[183b]
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[1-45] 78c-79a
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49a-52b; 61a-b; part in, 172b-d; part iv,
258b-d; 261a; 262a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 14c-15a 26 Shakespeare: Romeo
and Juliet, act i, sc iv [96-103] 291c / Richard II, act v, sc v
[141]
349d-350a  /  Midsummer-Night's  Dream.  act v, sc 1 [1-22] 370d-371a 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 66c-67b 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 19d-20a
/  Meditations,  11, 79ac; vi, 96b-97a; 98d-99a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  17,  schol  381b-d; prop 40, schol 2 388a-b; part v, PROP 34,
DEMONST  460c-d  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [95-113] 177b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ii, sect 2 128a-b; ch xi, sect 6 145a; ch
xii, sect i-ch xiii, sect i 147b-149a; ch xiii, sect 4-6 149b-d; sect 27
154c-d;  ch xiv, sect 24-31 160b-162a passim; ch xv, sect 2-3 162c-d; ch
xvi,  sect  1-2  165c-d;  sect 5 166b-c; ch xvii, sect 3-7 168b-169c; ch
xxii,  sect  2  201a-b; ch xxiii, sect 33-37 212d-214b passim; bk hi, ch
xi,  sect  15  303bc;  bk  iv,  ch  iv,  sect  5 324d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  10  406d-407b;  sect i, 413a; sect 5 414a-b 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect ii, div ii, 455b-c; div 13 455d-456b;
sect  v,  div  39,  466c-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 173b-174a / Judgement,
493c-d;  528c-529c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-c; 155b;
part  1, 219d-221a; 254b-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 292a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and Peace, bk ii, 105d-106b; bk vii, 294b-295a; 297a-298a; bk viii,
318b-c;  bk  xi, 523d-524c; bk xii, 542d543a; 544a-b; bk xiv, 601c-602d;
605c-d  53  James: Psychology, 480a-501b 54 Freud: General Introduction,
483b;  597b599d  esp  599b-d  /  New Introductory Lectures, 877d 5a. The
distinction   between   reproductive   and   creative  imagination:  the
representative  image  and  the  imaginative construct 7 Plato: Sophist,
577c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[722748] 53d-54a
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x,  par  14  74d-75a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 12, a 9, rep 2 58b-59a; q 78, a 4, ans 411d-413d;
q  84,  a 6, rep 2 447c-449a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50d; part iv,
262a-c  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 60 112c113a 31 Descartes:
Discourse, part iv, 54a-b / Meditations, 1, 76a-b; in, 82d-83b

[184a]
150  The  activity  of imagination, fancy, orfantasy: (5. the nature and
variety of images. 5a. The distinction between reproductive and creative
imagination: the representative image and the imaginative construct.) 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  49, schol, 392c-d; 393c-d 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost, bk v [95-113] 177b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  xxii,  sect  2  201a-b;  ch  xxx 238a-239b passim 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  10,  406d-407a;  sect  i,  413a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect ii, div 13 455d-456b; sect v, div 39-40 466c-467c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 89bc; 173b-174a; 211c212a / Judgement, 493c-495a,c;
528c-529b  53  James:  Psychology,  480a-b  54  Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  270c-271a 5b. The image distinguished from the idea or concept:
the  concrete  and  particular  as  contrasted  with  the  abstract  and
universal 7 Plato: Cratylus, 108c-110c; 113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 126b-c /
Republic,  bk  hi,  333c-d  /  Theaetetus,  534d-536a  / Seventh Letter,
809c810d  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c; ch 31
120a-c; bk ii, ch 19
[100*15b
5] 136d / Metaphysics, BK I, CH I
[980*2815]
508d; 98i b i3] 499a-500a; ch 9
[990^9
bk  in,  ch  4  f999  a24-b  5]  518a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch 5 [4i7b i7-28]
648b-c; bk hi, ch 8 [432*914I 664c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[ii47b3-6]
397d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 16-19 75b-76b; par 23 77a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 55, a 2, rep 2 289d-290d; q 75, a
2, rep 3 379c380c; a 3, rep 2 380c-381b; q 81, a 3, ans 430c-431d; q 84,
a  i,  ans  and  rep  i  440d442a;  a 2, ans and rep i 442b-443c; aa 6-7
447c-450b;  q 85, aa 1-2 451c-455b; q 86, a i, ans 461c-462a; part i-ii,
q  17,  a  7,  ans  690d692a;  q  29,  a 6, ans and rep 1,3 748b-749a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 70, a 2, rep 3 896a-897d 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 262a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 53b
/  Meditations,  11, 79a-c; 80a-81d; in, 82d-83b; vi, 96b-97a; 98d-99a /
Objections  and Replies, def 11 130a-b; 136d-137a; 137d; 138d; 211d212a;
218c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 44 389b-390a; prop 48, schol
391b-c;  prop  49,  schol, 391d-392c; part v, prop 34, demonst 460c-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xi, sect 8-9 145b-c; ch xxxii,
sect  8-9  244d245a;  bk hi, ch vi, sect 32-33 277c-278c; bk iv, ch vii,
sect 9, 339a-b

[184b]
b  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5b to 5c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect
6-19 405d-410c passim, esp sect 12-16 408a409d; sect 25-27 417d-418b esp
sect  27  418a-b;  sect  89  430b-c;  sect 135-142 440a441c esp sect 140
440d-441a,  sect  142 441b-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341c-342a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  15d-16c;  23a-24a;  34a-c;  115b-c /Judgement, 542b-543c;
570c-572b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  155b;  part  1,
219d-220a;   230c-231b;  254b-d  53  James:  Psychology,  305a-311a  esp
307b-308b,  311b-312b [fn 1]; 480b-484a 54 Freud: Unconscious, 442b-443d
5c.  The  pathology of imagination: hallucinations, persistent imagery 7
Plato: Theaetetus, 520c-522b 8 Aristotle: Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453 ai 5-3 r
l  695b-d  / Dreams, ch 2 [460*31b27] 704b-d 14 Plutarch: Marcus Brutus,
816d-817c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 2, rep 2 102a-d;
q  51, a 2, ans 276b-277a; q 54, a 5 288a-d; q 84, a 6, rep i 447c-449a;
a  8,  rep  2  450b-451b; q hi, a 3, ans and rep 4 570b-571b 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 53, a 3, ans 21d-22d 22 Chaucer: Miller's
Tale  [3611-3617]  219b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50d; 51b-52b; 80a;
part  hi,  172c-d;  174b;  part  iv,  258b-d; 261a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
36c-41b; 237a-b; 405d406a 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act ii, sc i
[33-61]
290d-291a;  act  hi,  sc iv [38-121] 298a-299a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote
esp  part  i, ld-2b, 4bc, 18d-22a, 44b-46b, 50b-52d, 134b-136a, part 11,
285a-288c  31  Descartes: Rules, xn, 22c-23a / Meditations, 1, 75c-77c /
Objections  and  Replies,  209c  31  Spinoza: Ethics,, part iv, prop 44,
schol 437d-438a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[95-128] 177b178a / Samson Agonistes [599-605] 352b
35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ii, div ii, 455b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and   Fall,  598a44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson,  13c-d;  114b-115a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  196d197c  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  i
[4405-4612]  110a-114b  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 148b-150a; 232b-235a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  109d-110a; bk vn, 293c-294a; bk xi,
524c-527a;  bk  xv, 616a-617a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi',
337a-348d 53 James: Psychology, 274a; 490a-493a; 506a507a esp 507b-508b
[fn
1]; 515a-520a; 527a538b esp 527a-533a; 662a-663a
[fn
1]; 747b
[fn 3]; 842b-844a

[185a]
b  Chapter  56:  MEMORY  AND IMAGINATION 6 to 6c(l) 54 Freud: Origin and
Development of PsychoAnalysis, 3a-d / Hysteria, 76d; 86a-d; 102b106b esp
106a-b;  115a-117d  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  176b-c;  354c-355b /
GenerahThlroduction,  551b-552a;  597b-600b  esp  599d600b / Ego and Id,
700c  6. The role of imagination in thinking and knowing 6a. Imagination
as  knowledge:  its  relation to possible and actual experience 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  vi,  383d-388a / Sophist, 575d-577b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
hi,  ch  3  659c-661b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 14 74d75a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 46, a 1, rep 8 250a-252d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 50a-54c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 55b-d 31
Descartes:  Rules, xn, 19d-20d; xiv, 28a-d / Discourse, part iv, 54a-b /
Meditations, 11, 79a-81d; vi, 96b-97a; 98d-99a / Objections and Replies,
def  11 130a31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 17, schol 381b-d; prop 26,
corol  and  demonst 384b; prop 40, schol 1-2 387b-388b; prop 44, corol 1
and  schol 389c-390a; part iv, def 6 424b; prop i, schol 424d-425a; part
v,  prop  34, demonst 460c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 72c-88a; 227a 230c 53
James:  Psychology,  285a-287b  esp  285b;  480b;  520a-521a;  617a-625a
passim,  esp  621a 6b. The effect of intellect on human imagination: the
imaginative thinking of animals 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 3 [429*4-8]
661b;  an]  666d-667a  / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2 [453*5-14] 695b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[ii47b3-6]
397d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4, ans and rep 4-5
411d-413d;  q  81,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 2-3 430c-431d; q 84, a 2, rep i
442b-443c;  a  6,  rep  1-2  447c-449a; q 85, a i, rep 4 451c-453c; part
i-ii,  q  17,  a  7 690d692a; q 29, a 6, ans 748b-749a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, b32-434 ch 11
[433
a  3,  rep 3 8b-9a; q 51, a 3 14b-15a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b;
53a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 229d-230b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
55b-d   31   Descartes:   Meditations,   vi,  96d-97a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xi, sect 11 145d-146a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341d-342a  42  Kant:  Judgement,  479a-c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,
292a-294b  esp  292a-293a;  296c-297b  53  James: Psychology, 665a-666b;
678b-686b esp 681b-682a, 686a b

[185b]
151  6c. The dependence of rational thought and knowledge on imagination
7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  126b-c  /  Republic,  bk  hi,  333b-d;  bk vi-vii,
383d-398c  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b; 810d 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch
i
[403*2-15]
632a-b  / Memory and Reminiscence, ch i b30-450a i4] 690c-d 17 Plotinus:
Fourth Ennead, tr m, ch 30-31
[449
157d-158c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  75, a 3, rep 2
380c-381b;  q  84,  aa  6-8  447c451b;  q  85,  a  1 451c-453c; a 7, ans
459c460b;  q 88, a i, ans 469a-471c; q 89, a i, ans and rep 1 473b-475a;
a  5, ans and rep 4 477a-478b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
51,  a 1, ans 12b-13c; q 52, a 1, ans 15d-18a; part in, o 11, a 2 773a-d
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b-54c; 66c-67a 31 Descartes: Rules, vn,
10bc; vm, 13a-b; 14b; xn, 18c; 19a-20d; xiv, 28a-d; 30b-31a / Discourse,
part  i,  4  Id  /  Meditations, 11, 79a-c; vi, 96b-97a / Objections and
Replies, 136d137a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol i 387b388a
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14a-108a,c esp 14a-15c, 23a-33d, 41c-42b, 48d-51d,
53b-55a,  56d59b,  61a-64a, 66d-93c; 194d-195a / Judgement, 542b-543c 53
James:  Psychology,  158a-161a; 301a-302a; 328a-331b esp 328a-b, 331a-b;
549a-550a; 677a-678b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 367b-c; 385bc /
Unconscious,   442b-443a  /  Ego  and  Id,  700b-701a;  701d  6c(l)  The
abstraction  of ideas from images: the image as a condition of thought 8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 31
[87b39-88a i7l
120a-c / Topics, bk vi, ch 4
[i4i b2-i4] 194d-195a; bk viii, ch
i
[156*4-6]
211d-212a / Soul, bk hi, ch 7
[43i a i4-b i9]
663d-664b;  ch  8  [432*2-14]  664c-d  /  Memory  and Reminiscence, ch i
[449^*30-450*25]  690c691a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 55, a
2, rep 2 289d-290d; q 70, a 3, ans 365b367a; q 75, a 2, rep 3 379c-380c;
a  3,  rep 2 380c-381b; a 6, rep 3 383c-384c: a 7, contrary 384d-385c; q
76,  a  i,  ans  385d-388c;  q  79,  a  4, rep 3 417a-418c; q 84, aa 6-8
447c451b;  q  85,  a 1 451c-453c; q 86, a i, ans 461c-462a; part i-ii, q
29,  a  6,  ans and rep 1.3 748b-749a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 50, a 4, rep 1,3 9a-10b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 53b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch xi,
sect 8-9

[186a]
152  The  dependence  of  rational thought and knowledge on imagination.
6c(l)  The  abstraction of ideasfrom images: the image as a condition of
thought.}  (6c.  145b-c;  ch  xii,  sect  i,  147b-c; ch xxxii, sect 8-9
244d-245a;  bk  iv, ch vii, sect 9, 339a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
intro,  sect 6-19 405d-410c passim, esp sect 12-16 408a409d; sect 97-100
431d-432c  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect xii, div 122 505c-d; div
124-125  506a-507a  esp  div  125,  507b [fn 1] 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341d-342a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 254b-d 53 James:
Psychology,  305a-308a; 330a-331b 6c(2) The schema of the imagination as
mediating between concepts of the understanding and the sensory manifold
of  intuition:  the  transcendental  unity of apperception 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  14a-108a,c esp 48d-55a, 61a-64a, 66d-93c; 193a-195a / Practical
Reason, 319c-320b / Judgement, 542b-543c 53 James: Psychology, 232b-235a
passim  6d.  The limits of imagination: imageless thought; the necessity
of  going  beyond  imagination  in  the  speculative  sciences  7 Plato:
Symposium,  167a-d  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  388a-398c  esp  396d-398c  /
Statesman,  595a-c / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi,
ch 7
[43i b i2-i9]
664b / Memory and Reminiscence, ch i b3o-45oa io] 690c-d
[449
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [265-328] 4b-5a;
[599-612] 8b-c; bk
ii
[80-141] 16a-d;
[308-332] 19a-b
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk ii, ch 2 323a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  7 626b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 1, a 9 8d-9c; q
12,  a  3  52c-53b;  q 75, a i, ans and rep 1-2 378b-379c; a 2, contrary
379c380c;  a  3, ans 380c-381b; q 84, a i, ans and rep 2 440d-442a; a 2,
rep i 442b-443c; a 6 447c-449a; a 7, rep 3 449b-450b; q 85, a i, ans and
rep  2  451c-453c;  qq  87-89 464d480c; q 93, a 6, rep 4 496b-498a; part
i-ii,  q  17,  a  7,  rep 3 690d-692a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52c;
54b-c;  78d-79a;  80a-b;  part  11,  162b-d;  part  iv, 262a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 55b-d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48 HOd-110a 31
Descartes: Rules, iv, 6b-7d; xiv, 30b-31a / Discourse, part ii, 46c-47a;
part  iv, 53b / Meditations, 72b-c; 1 75a-77c; 11, 79a-c; iv, 89a-b; vi,
96b-97a  /  Objections and Replies, 128d-129a; 215b-c; 217c-d; 218c-d 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 8, schol 2

[186b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 6c(2) to la 356d-357d passim; prop 15, schol 360b361d;
appendix  369b-372d  passim  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk v [544-576]
187a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1 171a-172a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii, ch i, sect 24 127b-c; ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d; ch xv, sect 12 165b-c;
ch  xvii,  sect  7-21  169b173d  esp sect 15 171b-172a; ch xxix, sect 16
237b-238a;  bk  hi, ch i, sect 5 252b-c; ch vi, sect 9 270d-271a; bk iv,
ch  vii,  sect 9 338d-339b; ch xvi. sect 12 370b-371a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  6-19  405d-410c;  sect  27 418a-b; sect 135142
440a-441c  passim  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341c-342b  42  Kant: Pure
Reason,  la-b; 15c-16c; 17d-19a; 19d-20c; 85d-93c; 211c-212a; 217d-218a;
227a-230c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d / Science of Right,
399a  /  Judgement,  497a-502d;  506a-511a  esp 506d, 509d-510a; 578a-b;
603b-d  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i, 10c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, part i, 257c258a 53 James: Psychology, 158a-161a
esp  158b-159a;  301a-302a';  549a-~550b  54  Freud: Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,  661d662b  /  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 769b770b esp
770a  7. Imagination and the fine arts la. The use of imagination in the
production  and  appreciation  of  works  of  art  9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[639b i2-2o] 161d-162a; [640*29-33] 162d
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xi, par 7 90d-91a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  67b-c;  part iv, 262c 26 Shakespeare: Midsummer-Night's Dream,
act v, sc 1
[1-27] 370d-371a / Henry
V,  prologue 532b, d; act hi, prologue 543c-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  ii,  285a-288c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d; 38c39a 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  1, 76a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 198a-b 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 280a; 296b,d-298a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 173b-174a /
Judgement,  473a-c; 482b-483d; 491a-c; 493c-495a,c; 498b-502d; 506a-511a
esp  506d,  509d-510a;  523c-524a;  525c-532a  esp  528c-530c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-c; part 1, 254b-d; part ii, 263d-265c
47  Goethe:  Faust,  dedication lab 50 Marx: Capital, 85c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x,  284b-d 54 Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  18d  / Interpretation of Dreams, 181a-b; 383d / General
Introduction, 483c; 600d-601b / Group Psychology, 692c-693a

[187a]
lb  to  $a  Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 153 lb. The fantastic and
the  realistic  in  poetry:  the probable and the possible in poetry and
history   -^—   6   Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  73a-b  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian   War,  bk  i,  354b  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  140a-d  /  Ion
142a-148a,c  esp 145d-148a / Republic, bk ii, 320d-324c; bk x, 427c-434c
/ Sophist, 561b-d; 577d-579d 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 8
[i45i a i6]-CH
9
[i45i b39]
685d-686c; ch 15
[i454a23-b
9] 689b-c; ch 17
[1455*21-35]
690c; ch 24
[i46oai2-b2]
696b-c; ch 25
[i46ob6-i46i a8]
696d-697c;   [i46i  a3i-b25]  697d-698c  14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  lab  /
Coriolanus,  189b-c  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, hell, xvi [124-136] 23d;
xxiv
[79]-xxv
[151]
35b-38a; xxvm 41b-43a; xxxn
[1-12]
47c; paradise, x
[28-48] 120c-d; xxxm [49-75] 156d-157a
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza 147-149 40b-41a /
Prologue  to  Melibeus  400b-401a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 67b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  41b-c  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 183d-193a
esp  184a-d, 186b-d; part ii, 208d-209d; 212a-215b esp 213b-c; 237b-c 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38c-39b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i,
43a-b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 19a-20a; 49b-50c; 152a-155b 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 186c-d; 345c; 471c-d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 446c-447a 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[7428-7433]
181b182a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 150a-152a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
hi,  134a-c  8.  The nature and causes of dreaming 7 Plato: Republic, bk
ix,  416a-c  / Timaeusy 454d / Theaetetus, 520c-521b 8 Aristotle: Dreams
702a-706d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[722822] 53d-55a; [962-1036] 56d-57c
14  Plutarch: Marcus Brutus, 817b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
41-42  81c-82a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 2, rep 2
102a-d;  q 84, a 8, rep 2 450b-451b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk
v,  stanza  36-37 125a; stanza 52-55 127a-b; stanza 183 144a; stanza 245
152a   /  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [14,889-15,162]  451a-455b  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 50d-51d; part iv, 258b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 290bc;
533d-534a 26 Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, act i, sc iv
[49-103] 291a-c / Midsummer-Night's Dream,
act 11, sc 11
[145-156J 360b-c; act
iv, sc i
[191-223] 369d-370b

[187b]
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc 11
[260266] 43b
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51c;  53c-54b  /  Meditations, 1,
75d-76a;  vi,  103a-d  / Objections and Replies, 143a,c; 209c 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk v
[95-128] 177b178a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xix, sect 1, 175c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  295b  42 Kant: Judgement, 560b 44 Boswell: Johnson,
443c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 220c221a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  94a-95b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue i, 672b 53 James:
Psychology,  387b-388a;  534a-535a;  643b  [fn  ij  54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  lla-13a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams
135a-387a,c  esp  137a-139b,  168d-174d, 231b232b, 234b-236b, 252c-253a,
262c-278a, 294d-295b, 336d-340a, 346d-347b, 350a-b, 356a-360d, 363b-377c
/  General  Introduction,  476a-544d esp 478b-482c, 495d 497a, 532d535d;
618b-c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  641c-d;  649d-650b  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  807b,d-818b esp 812d-813c, 817a-818b; 820c-822b
8a.  Dreams  as  divinely  inspired: their prophetic portent; divination
through  the  medium of dreams Old Testament: Genesis, 20:3-7; 28:10-22;
31:10-13,24;  37:1-11;  40-41  /  Numbers,  12:6 / Deuteronomy, 13:1-5 /
Judges, 7:13-15 / / Samuel, 28:6,15— (D) l Kmgs > 28:6,15 / / Kings, III
Kings,  3:5-15  /  //  Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II Paralipomenon, : i4-i6
1:7-12   I   Job,   4:13-21;   7:13-15;  33  /  Ecclesiastes,  5:7—  (D)
Ecclesiastes,  5:6 / Jeremiah, 23:25-32; 29:8-9— (D) Jeremias, 23:25-32;
29:8-9  /  Daniel, 2; 4:4-37; 7-8; 10-12— (D) Daniel, 2; 4; 7-8; 10-12 /
Joel,   2:28-29  Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  io-u—  (D)  OT,  Esther,
10:4-11:12  / Wisdom of Solomon, 17; 18:13-19 esp 18:17-19— (D) OT, Boo{
of  Wisdom,  17; 18:13-19 esp 18:17-19 / Ecclesiasticus, 34:1-7— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  34:1-7  / // Maccabees, 15:11-16— (D) OT, // Machabees,
15:11-16  New Testament: Matthew, 1 :2o-2i; 2:12-13, 1923; 27:19 / Acts,
2:17-18; 18:9-10 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [59-67] 3d; bk ii
[1-75]
10a-d / Odyssey, bk xix
[509-581]
294c295a,c  5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [176-230]  17a-d / Prometheus Bound
[442-506] 44c-45a esp [484-486] 45a;
[645-657] 46d-47a
/ Choephoroe
[523552] 75b-c
5 Sophocles : Oedipus the King [976-986] 108b

[188a]
(8.  The nature and causes of dreaming. 8a. Dreams as divinely inspired:
their  prophetic  portent;  divination  through the medium of dreams.) 5
Euripides: Iphigenia Among the Tauri [4266] 411c-d; [1234-1283] 422b-c 6
Herodotus: History, bk i, 8a-10a; 25b-31a; 47a-c; bk ii, 78d-79c; bk hi,
95d;  103b-104b;  116a-b; bk iv, 154c-d; bk v, 170c-d; bk vi, 205d-206a;
208b; 211a: bk vn, 218b-220b 7 Plato: Crito, 213b-d / Timaeus, 466d-467c
8 Aristotle: Prophesying 707a-709a,c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi
[147-179]
151a-152a;  bk viii [26-93] 259b-261b 14 Plutarch : Themistodes, 98d-99a
/  Alcibiades,  174a-d  /  Coriolanus, 185b-186a / Pelopidas, 239d-240c/
Aristides,  268a-d  /  Pyrrhus,  329c-d  /  Cimon, 398d-399b / Lucullus,
411a-b  / Eumenes, 473a-b / Agesilaus, 483a-b / Pompey, 514d-515a; 532b;
534d-535a  /  Alexander,  548d-549a  /  Caesar, 601d-604d / Demosthenes,
702c-703b  /  Cicero,  721c-722a / Demetrius, 727b-d / Marcus Brutus, 81
6d817c  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 26c; bk xi, 101b; bk xii, 112d-113a;
bk  xvi,  176b-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 19-20 18b-19a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 12, a 11, ans 59d-60d; q 86, a 4,
rep  2  463d464d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, a 8, rep 1
750d-751d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxii
[124]-
xxxiii
[90]
49a-50c; purgatory, ix
[1-69]
65d-66c;  xix  [1-69]  81c-82a  22  Chaucer: Troilus and Crcssida, bk v,
stanza  53  127a;  stanza  177-185  143b 144b; stanza 207-217 147a-148b;
stanza  245  152a  /  Nun's  Priest's  Tale [14,976-15,162] 452b-455b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part hi, 165d-166a; 173c; 175c; 176d-177b; 184a-185a
passim;  186c-d  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 150d-156c
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 533d-534a 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act ii,
sc ii
[75-94] 578d-579a
27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv  [30151]  481c-482c;  sc v
[426-465]  488b-d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 54c-55a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk viii
[283-499]
238b-243a  / Areopagitica, 389a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 294d-296b
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 244c245a; part ii, 263d-265c 53
James:  Psychology,  643b  [fn  1]  54  Freud: Origin and Development of
Psycho  - Analysis, lie / Interpretation of Dreams, 137b138d; 145d-146a;
178b-179c esp 179d
[fn 2];

[188b]
154  THE  GREAT IDEAS Sa to 8c 383d-384a; 387a,c / General Introduction,
477b-d  8b.  The  role  of sensation and memory in the dreams of sleep 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  219b  8  Aristotle: Dreams 702a- 706d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [722-822] 53d-55a; [962-1036] 56d-57c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 84, a 8, rep 2 450b-451b 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 70, a 2, rep 3 896a-897d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  50d-51d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 36d-37a;
229d-230b;  333b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  v, sc i 306b307a 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [797-809] 169b170a; bk v [95-121] 177b-178a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch i, sect 17, 125c 42 Kant:
Judgement,  560b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 19a-20a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk ii, 86a; bk hi, 147c-148c; bk xi, 481a-482a; bk xiv, 601a602d
53  James:  Psychology,  535a-536a  54  Freud: Origin and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  12c  /  Interpretation  of Dreams, 139b155a' esp 141a-b,
145d-146c,   149c-153c;   173c174b;  189d-190b;  205c-237b  passim,  esp
205d-206a,  210d-212d,  215b, 228b-232b; 250c-251c; 297c-298a; 351a-356d
esp  353b356b; 362b-363a / General Introduction, 478d483a esp 480b-482a;
497d-499a;  526c-527c;  532  b-c; 538d-539a / New Introductory Lectures,
809d  8c.  The  expression  of desire in daydreaming or fantasy 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk v, 361a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52d-53a; 67d; 69b-c;
part  11,  138d-139a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  14c-  15a;  37b;  177c-d;
405d-406a  26  Shakespeare:  Richard II, act v, sc v [1-41] 349d-350a 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i, lb-2b; 18d19b; 50b-52d; 134b-135d 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 82-88 186b-189b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [10,039-066]
245a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 82a-d; bk hi, 125bc; 146d-148c;
bk  vi,  254b-c;  bk  x,  394d;  bk  xi,  497c-499c  esp 498c-d; bk xii,
542d-543a;  544a-b; bk xiv, 601a-602d; bk xv, 615c-617a 54 Freud: Origin
and  Development of PsychoAnalysis, 18c / Hysteria, 115b-116c esp 115c /
Interpretation of Dreams, 333c- d / General Introduction, 483b-d; 599b-d

[189a]
%d  to  Se  Chapter  56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 155 8d. The symbolism of
dreams  &d(\)  The manifest and latent content of dreams: the dream-work
^-—-=" 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xix
[509-581]
294c295a,c 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[176-230]
17a-d  /  Choephoroe  [523-552]  75b-c  5 Euripides: Iphigenia Among the
Tauri  [4266]  411c-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 25b-c; 28c-29a; 47a-c;
bk  ii,  78d  7  Plato:  Crito,  213b-d / Phaedo, 221d-222a 8 Aristotle:
Prophesying, ch 2
[464b7~i8]
709c 14 Plutarch: Pyrrhus, 329c-d / Cimon, 398d399b / Eumenes, 473a- b /
Alexander,  548d549a  /  Demosthenes,  702c-703b  / Demetrius, 727b-d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, ix
[169] 65d-66c; xix
[1-69] 81c-82a; xxvn
[91108] 95c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk v, stanza 52-55 127a-b; stanza
177-185   143b-144b;  stanza  207-217  147a-148b;  stanza  245  152a  26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc ii
[17-55] 36c-37a
/ Richard III, act i, sc iv 114d-117c / Romeo and Juliet, act i, sc iv
[49-103] 291a-c / Julius Caesar, act
ii, sc ii
[75-90] 578d-579a
27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  v  [426465] 488b-d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk v
[28-128]
176a178a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part ii, 263 d265c CROSS-
REFERENCES  For: The discussion of memory and imagination in relation to
the  faculties  of  sense and understanding, desire and will, see Desire
5a;  Idea  ic,  2e-2f;  Sense  3b(2),  3d(2).  The  controversy over the
distinction  between  image  and idea, see Idea 2f-2g; Mind ia(i); Sense
id,   5a;   Universal  and  Particular  4d.  Other  discussions  of  the
association of ideas, and of reverie or daydreaming, see Desire 5a; Idea
5e;  Relation 41". The consideration of memory as knowledge of the past,
see  Knowledge 6b(2); Time 6e; 5d; Mind 4c. The doctrine of reminiscence
which  identifies  learning  with  remembering,  or  for the doctrine of
innate  ideas,  see  Idea  2b; Knowledge 6c (3); Mind 4d(2). The role of
memory in science, history, and poetry, see Experience 2a-2b; History i;
Induction  2;  Poetry  2. The problem of personal identity, see Same and
Other  ib;  Soul id. The theory of racial memory in relation to instinct
and tradition, see Habit 3c; Language 3c; Poetry 3.

[189b]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ii,  86a;  bk  vi, 249a-250a; bk xi,
481a-482b;  bk xii, 561c-d; bk xiv, 608a-b; epilogue i, 672b; 673d674a,c
54   Freud:   Origin   and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  llc-12c  /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  178a-205c  esp  189b-190a,  194b-d, 204c-d;
252c-340a esp 252c-253a, 332a-333b, 336d340a; 356d-373a passim / General
Introduction,   489c-504d   esp   489c-494d;  513d-526c  esp  513d-519d;
532d-544d  passim, esp 536c-539a, 541b-542b / New Introductory Lectures,
809b810b;  812d-814d;  816b-818b'  Sd{2)  The  recurrent use of specific
symbols  in  dreams: the dream-language 54 Freud: Origin and Development
of  PsychoAnalysis,  12c-d  /  Psycho-  Analytic  Therapy,  123d-124a  /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  173a174d;  178b-179c; 230b-231c; 265a-272c;
277b-298a  esp  278d-285c  / General Introduction, 504d-513d; 516a-518c;
523a-526c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  813d;  815a-817a  8e. Dream-
analysis  as  uncovering  the repressed unconscious 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  lla-13a  /  Interpretation  of Dreams,
178a-205c  esp 178a-179c, 204c-d; 282d-283a; 285c; 294d-295a; 319d-320c;
340a-387a,c  esp  345c-350a,  356d-358c,  365a,  383d-384a,  386b-387a /
General Introduction, 483d-494d esp 486b-c, 488b-c, 489c-490a; 501c-504d
esp  504b-d;  519d-524a  passim;  531d-532c; 538d-539b; 585a; 635a / New
Introductory Lectures, 808d-813b esp 811a-812b, 812d

[190a]
156 THE GREAT IDEAS I. Hobbes. The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic,
part  1,  ch  3 Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part i, sect hi;
part  hi, sect v-vii Freud. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, ch I_7
.  Wit  and  Its  Relation  to  the  Unconscious . Leonardo da Vinci II.
Cicero. Academics, 11 Albertus Magnus. De Memoria et Reminiscentia G. F.
Pico della Mirandola. On the Imagination Malebranche. De la recherche de
la verite, bk ii Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding, BK
11  . Monadology, par 26-28 Hartley. Observations on Man, His Frame, His
Duty  and  His  Expectations,  vol  i,  intro;  proposition  8-14, 79-94
Voltaire.  "Imagination,"  in A Philosophical Dictionary T. Reid. Essays
on  the Intellectual Powers of Man, 111 Blake. Songs of Innocence . Songs
of  Experience Coleridge. Biographia Literaria, en 13 Brown. Lectures on
the  Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  vol  ii,  pp 354-405 De Quincey.
Confessions  ofan  English  Opium-Eater  Lamb.  "Dream-Children," in The
Essays  of Elia  J. Mill. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, ch
7, 10

[190b]
For:  The  function  of  imagination  in  thinking and knowing, see Mind
ia(2);  Reasoning  ic;  and for the doctrine that universal concepts are
abstracted  from  sensory  images,  see Idea 2g; Sense 5a; Universal and
Particular  4c.  The theory of the transcendental unity of apperception,
to which memory or imagination contributes, see Knowledge 6b(4); One and
Many 4b; Sense ic, 30(5). The imagination as a factor in art, see Art 5;
and  for  another discussion of the probable and the possible in poetry,
see  Poetry  8a  (2).  Other  discussions  of  dreams,  their causes and
meaning,  see  Desire  5a, 6c; Language 10; Prophecy 3c; Sign and Symbol
6a;  and for the theory of conflict, censorship, and repression involved
in  the Freudian interpretation of dreams, see Desire 4a~4d, 6b. Matters
relevant  to  the  psychopathology of memory and imagination, see Desire
5a~5b;  Emotion  3a~3b;  Man  5b;  Mind  8b;  Sense  4d(2); Truth 3a(2).
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo\s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning the publication of the works cited, consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas. W. Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, vol 1
(30-33)  Bain.  The  Senses  and  the Intellect {Intellect) Spencer. The
Principles of Psychology, vol i, part ii, ch 5-8; part iv, ch 6; vol ii,
part  ix,  ch  3  Emerson.  Natural  History of Intellect Hering. Memory
Taine.  On Intelligence Tyndall. Scientific Use of the Imagination Lewis
Carroll.  Alice's  Adventures  in Wonderland . Through the Looting-Glass
and  What  Alice  Found  There  S.  Butler.  Unconscious  Memory  Sully.
Illusions,   ch   10  Galton.  Inquiries  into  Human  Faculty  and  Its
Development  (Mental  Imagery,  Associations,  Psychometric Experiments,
Anti-Chamber  of  Consciousness,  Visionaries,  Number  Forms)  Romanes.
Mental  Evolution  in Animals Ebbinghaus. Memory C. S. Peirce. Collected
Papers,  vol vi, par 494-504 Stevenson. "A Chapter on Dreams," in Across
the Plains Hodgson. The Metaphysic of Experience, vol i, ch 2 (3~4> 6), 3
(3-4)»  7  (5)'  8 (4); VOL "i» CH * (2 (c)), 2 > 3 (5)' 4 (3)' 5 Stout.
Analytic  Psychology,  ch i i . Manual of Psychology, bk iv, ch i Ribot.
Diseases  of  Memory  .  Essay  on  the  Creative Imagination Woodworth.
Psychological  Issues,  ch  4, 7 Titchener. Lectures on the Experimental
Psychology ofthe Thought-Processes

[191a]
Bradley. Collected Essays, vol i (13, 18) . Essays on Truth and Reality,
ch  3,  Bergson.  Matter  and  Memory ^~- . Dreams . Mind-Energy, ch 4-5
Jung. Instinct and the Unconscious Proust. Remembrance of Things Past B.
Russell. The Analysis of Mind, lect 8-9 Broad. The Mind and Its Place in
Nature, ch 5

[191b]
Chapter 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 157 Santayana. Soliloquies in England
and  Later  Solil12oquies,  ch  29 . Scepticism and Animal Faith, ch i 7
Jaensch. Eidetic Imagery and Typological Methods of Investigation Lowes.
The  Road to Xanadu Jones. Nightmare, Witches, and Devils Joyce. Ulysses
. Finnegans Wal^e Wertheimer. Productive Thinking

[192a]
this  chapter,  as  in Mathematics, we must IN distinguish controversies
about  the science we are considering from controversies in it. But here
the  situation  is  complicated by many ambiguities. In the tradition of
western   thought,  the  name  of  science  has  never  been  denied  to
mathematics,  no  matter how its subject matter has been defined or what
conception of science has prevailed. But controversies about metaphysics
often  begin,  in modern times at least, by questioning our right to use
the word "science" when we speak of metaphysical inquiry or speculation.
The  challenge  usually implies that metaphysics cannot be regarded as a
body  of  valid  knowledge because the peculiar objects it has chosen to
investigate    are   not   susceptible   to   scientific   inquiry.   If
experimentation  were the sine qua non of scientific knowledge, it would
follow, of course, that a discipline which could not perform experiments
or  even less rigorous types of empirical research could not be called a
science.  But  by  that standard mathematics would also be ruled out. It
does  not seem to be the case, however, that mathematics and metaphysics
stand  or  fall together. Hume, for example, admits the one and excludes
the  other.  If  we  are persuaded of his principles concerning science,
what havoc, he says, must we make when we run over our libraries. "If we
take  in  our  hand  any  volume; of divinity or school metaphysics, for
instance;  let us ask, Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning
quantity  or  number?  No.  Does  it  contain any experimental reasoning
concerning  matter  of  fact  and  existence?  No. Commit it then to the
flames; for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion." Nor does
Kant  make  experimentation or empirical research indispensable to valid
and certain knowledge. On the contrary, pure, as op-

[192b]
Chapter  57: METAPHYSICS INTRODUCTION posed to empirical, physics is for
him  like  mathematics  in  having  the  superior  status  of  a  priori
knowledge.  They  are  both  sciences  in  the highest sense of the term
because  they  consist  of  valid  synthetic  judgments  a priori. Kant,
therefore,  does  not  exclude  metaphysics  from  the  ranks of science
because  he  thinks  that  "metaphysic,  according  to  its  proper aim,
consists  merely  of synthetic propositions a priori." Not the method of
metaphysics,  nor the form of its propositions, but the character of its
objects  seems  to  be the cause of its frustration, reducing it to what
Kant calls an "illusory dialectic" rather than a valid science. It might
be supposed that those who take the opposite view— that metaphysics is a
science,  even,  perhaps,  the  highest  of  the sciences would agree in
defining  its objects or the scope of its inquiry. This does not seem to
be  the  case,  any  more  than  it  seems to be true that all those who
criticize  metaphysics  conceive  its  subject  matter  in the same way.
Following  what he takes to be the traditional conception of metaphysics
in  the  mediaeval  schools, which appears to him to be continued in the
writings  of  Descartes, Leibnitz, and Wolff, Kant says that "metaphysic
has  for the proper object of its inquiries only three grand ideas: God,
Freedom,  and  Immortality." This also seems to be at least part of what
Hume  has  in mind when he refers to "school metaphysics" and associates
it  with  "divinity," by which he means theology, natural or sacred. Yet
we  find  William  James  saying  that  "Hume  is at bottom as much of a
metaphysician  as Thomas Aquinas," because he is engaged in speculations
concerning  the  relation  or  lack of relation, the identity or lack of
identity,  in  the  discrete  elements of immediate experience. Here the
question  seems to be not about God, freedom, and immortality, but about
the existence of enduring 158

[193a]
substances  underlying all perceptible qualities, or about a fixed order
of  reality behind the sequence of phenomena in experience. According to
James,  "the  whole question of interaction and influence between things
is  a metaphysical question, and cannot be discussed at all by those who
are  unwilling  to  go  into  matters thoroughly." In the Preface to his
Principles  of  Psychology,  James  declares  his  plan to limit his own
inquiries  to  what can be known by the empirical methods of the natural
sciences.   Psychology  like  physics  must  assume  certain  data.  The
discussion  of  these  assumptions,  he says, "is called metaphysics and
falls  outside the province of this book The data assumed by psychology,
just  like those assumed by physics and the other natural sciences, must
sometime  be  overhauled.  The  effort  to  overhaul  them  clearly  and
thoroughly  is  metaphysics;  but  metaphysics can only perform her task
well  when  distinctly  conscious  of its great extent." The implication
seems  to  be  not  that  metaphysics  is  impossible  but  rather  that
metaphysics,  as James conceives it, does not yet exist in any mature or
satisfactory development. "Only a metaphysics alive to the weight of her
task,"  he  writes,  can  hope  to  be successful. "That will perhaps be
centuries  hence."  We  cannot  fully  explore  the issue concerning the
objects  of  metaphysics  without observing that other names are used in
the  tradition  of  the  great  books to designate the discipline which,
rightly  or  wrongly, claims to be the highest human science. The Greeks
initiated  the  conception  of  a  discipline which should be preeminent
because  it  deals with first principles and highest causes. It not only
searches  for  wisdom  about  the  ultimate  realities; it also lays the
foundations  for all other sciences. But the Greeks do not have one name
for  this  discipline, nor is "metaphysics" even among the various names
they  use.  Aristotle, whose Metaphysics is the first great book to have
this  word  in  its  title,  never uses the word to refer to the science
which  he is trying to define and establish. In the opening chapters, he
speaks  of  it  under  the  name of wisdom, for "all men suppose what is
called Wisdom to deal with the first causes and the principles of

[193b]
Chapter  57:  METAPHYSICS  159  all things." There are other theoretical
sciences,  such  as physics and mathematics, which investigate causes or
deal  with  principles,  but  they do not reach to the highest causes or
first  principles,  nor  do they take all things in their most universal
aspect as the object of their Though "physics also is a kind of Wisdom,"
says  Aristotle,  "it is not the first kind"; and elsewhere he says that
"both  physics  and  mathematics  must  be  classed as parts of Wisdom."
Physics   deals   only   with   material  things  in  motion;  and  "the
mathematician   investigates   abstractions"—objects  which,  except  as
abstracted,  cannot  exist  apart  from  matter and motion. "If there is
something  which  is  eternal  and  immovable and separated from matter,
clearly  the  knowledge  of  it  belongs to a theoretical science — not,
however, to physics nor to mathematics, but to a science prior to both."
It  is that science which is the highest part of wisdom. Aristotle gives
two  names  to  the  supreme  form of human wisdom or the highest of the
theoretical  sciences.  He  denominates  it  both  from  the position it
occupies  in  relation to all other disciplines and also in terms of the
kind of substance which it alone investigates. If there is "no substance
other  than  those  which  are  formed by nature, natural science {i.e.,
physics)  will  be  the  first  science,  but  if  there is an immovable
substance,  the  science  of  this  must  be  prior  and  must  be first
philosophy."  But  this  highest  science  also  deserves  to  be called
"theology"  as  well  as  "first philosophy." There are, Aristotle says,
"three  theoretical  philosophies, mathematics, physics, and what we may
call  theology,  since  it  is  obvious  that  if  the divine is present
anywhere,  it  is  present  in  things of this sort," i.e., the eternal,
immutable,  immaThere  is still another name for the highest speculative
discipline  in  the  Greek  conception  of  the  order  of the sciences.
"Dialectic"  is  the  name  which  Plato  gives  to the search for first
principles  and for the knowledge of the most intelligible realities. As
appears   in   the   chapter   on  Dialectic,  Aristotle  contrasts  the
dialectician  and the philosopher as respectively concerned with opinion
and knowledge, but Plato regards the dialectician as preeminently the

[194a]
160  THE  GREAT IDEAS philosopher. Not only does dialectic belong to the
realm  of  knowledge rather than opinion, but in the realm of knowledge,
mathematics   occupies   the   lower,  dialectic  the  upper  part.  The
mathematical sciences build upon hypotheses which they do not and cannot
establish.  Dialectic  uses  hypotheses  only  "as  steps  and points of
departure  into a world which is above hypotheses, in order that she may
soar  beyond  them  to  the  first  principle of the whole; and . . . by
successive  steps  she  descends  again  without the aid of any sensible
object  from  ideas,  through ideas, and in ideas she ends." Despite all
the  relevant  differences  between Plato and Aristotle concerning being
and  becoming,  reason  and sense, the intelligible and the sensible, it
seems  possible  to  compare the knowledge which Plato calls "dialectic"
with  what  Aristotle  calls "first philosophy" or "theology." Both, for
example,  proceed from first principles and establish the foundations of
the  inferior  sciences.  On  its downward path, dialectic, according to
Plato,  brings  the  light of reason to bear on the understanding of the
hypotheses  which  are  the  principles  ofmathematics. Though Aristotle
thinks  that mathematics rests on axioms or self-evident truths, he also
says  that  "it  must be the business of first philosophy to examine the
principles of mathematics" because the mathematician only uses them in a
special   application   without   investigating   their  general  truth.
Furthermore,  the  question  concerning  how  the objects of mathematics
exist is a question for the first philosopher, not the mathematician. In
the Sophist, Plato, to illustrate the difference between the sophist and
the  dialectician  or philosopher, develops an analysis of such terms as
being  and non-being, true and false, same and other, one and many, rest
and  motion.  These,  it  seems,  are  the  fundamental  concepts in the
philosopher's  knowledge of the ultimate reality. But these are also the
fundamental concepts in Aristotle's Metaphysics. In the mediaeval period
when  "metaphysics"  generally  replaces "dialectic" as the name for the
first  philosophy,  the  so-called  transcendental  terms such as being,
essence,  other,  one,  true, good—are treated as the basic metaphysical
concepts; and what is characteristic of them as abstractions

[194b]
helps  to  characterize the nature of metaphysics as a science. The word
"metaphysics"  comes  into use as a result of the title supposedly given
by  the Alexandrian librarians to the work in which Aristotle treats the
problems of the first philosophy. The word is short for "the books which
come after the books on physics." Plotinus uses the word and connects it
with  the  Platonic  meaning  of  "dialectic.  "In  the  training of the
metaphysician  he  says,  dialectic  is  the  ultimate study. Dialectic,
according  to  Plotinus, "is the method, or discipline, that brings with
it  the  power  of  pronouncing  with  final  truth  upon the nature and
relation of things—what each is, how it differs from others, what common
quality all have, to what kind each belongs and in what rank each stands
in  its  kind  and  whether its being is real-being, and how many beings
there  are,  and  how many non- beings to be distinguished from beings."
But we must not think of dialectic, Plotinus declares, "as the mere tool
of   the  metaphysician."  It  goes  beyond  metaphysics  as  vision  or
contemplative wisdom goes beyond discursive reasoning and demonstration.
"It  leaves to another science all that coil of premises and conclusions
called the art of reasoning." The question which Plotinus raises—whether
there  is  a  higher  science  or form of knowledge than metaphysics— is
naturally  considered  by the great Christian theologians. In part their
answer  resembles  that  of Plotinus; in part it differs. Where Plotinus
speaks ofdialec tic as "the most precious part of philosophy" because it
transcends  reasoning  and  argument  and  reaches the sort of immediate
apprehension  of reality which cannot be expressed in words, theologians
recognize  the  supremacy of mystical knowledge—a foretaste in this life
of  what the vision of God will be like in the life to come. But, unlike
Plotinus,  they  do  not  think  such  knowledge,  here or hereafter, is
natural  wisdom. Rather it is supernatural knowledge, the divine gift to
man  of  a contemplative wisdom to which his nature cannot attain by its
own  unaided  powers.  The  subordination  of  metaphysical  science  to
knowledge  which  is  both supernatural and nonscientific {i.e., neither
discursive nor analytical nor demonstrative) is considered in the chap-

[195a]
ters  on  Theology  and  Wisdom.  Another  subordination of metaphysics,
considered  there  also,  must  be  mentioned  here as well. That^is^the
subordination  of metaphysics to theology. Both metaphysics and theology
may be conceived as sciences which are engaged in reasoning and argument
and  in  trying  to  demonstrate conclusions from principles. But one is
merely  a  human  science working with the principles of reason, whereas
the  other  is what Aquinas calls "sacred doctrine," in order to signify
that its principles are articles of religious faith. In the hierarchy of
human  sciences,  metaphysics  remains supreme— the first philosophy. It
suffers  only  by  comparison  with theology insofar as the latter rests
upon  divine  revelation  and,  since  it enjoys the certainty of faith,
escapes the insecurity of reason. Though metaphvsics and theology differ
in  their  principles  and somewhat in their methods, they do not differ
entirely  in  their  subject matter. Both, for example, may treat of God
and  of  the  existence  of immaterial and imperishable beings. Aquinas,
therefore,  must  face  the  objection  that  there  is  no need for any
knowledge  in  addition  to  metaphysics because "everything that is, is
treated  of  in  philosophical science—even God Himself, in that part of
philosophy  called  theology,  or  the divine science, by Aristotle." To
this  he  replies  by  giving  two  reasons  for  sacred theology. It is
necessary,  he says, "for the salvation of man that certain truths which
exceed  human  reason  should be made known to him by divine revelation.
Even  as  regards  those  truths about God which human reason could have
discovered,  it  was  necessary  that  man  should be taught by a divine
revelation;  because  the truth about God such as reason could discover,
would  only  be known by a few, and that after a long time, and with the
admixture of many errors." Furthermore, he continues, there is no reason
"why those things which may be learnt from philosophical science, so far
as  they  can  be  known by natural reason, may not also be taught us by
another  science  so  far  as  they  fall  within  revelation. Hence the
theology  included in sacred doctrine differs in kind from that theology
which  is  a  part  of  philosophy."  These  two  kinds  of theology are
traditionally distinguished as natural and sacred. When Fran-

[195b]
Chapter  57:  METAPHYSICS  161  cis  Bacon  divides  the  sciences "into
theology  and philosophy," he adds that "in the former we do not include
natural  theology."  Natural  theology is the divine part of philosophy,
yet  it  is  clearly  distinct  from sacred theology or what Bacon calls
"inspired  divinity." This distinction, in whatever language it is made,
raises  two  problems.  The  first  concerns  the relation of natural to
sacred theology, especially with regard to the scope of natural theology
and  the  precise nature of its independence of sacred doctrine. On this
question  there seems to be considerable difference between such writers
as  Augustine and Aquinas, or Bacon and Descartes. As already noted, the
various  issues  involved  are reserved for discussion in the chapter on
Theology. The second problem is directly pertinent to metaphysics alone.
The  question  is whether metaphysics and natural theology are identical
in  subject  matter or scope, or whether natural theology is only a part
of metaphysics. Aristotle seems to answer this question when he suggests
that  "first philosophy" and "theology" are interchangeable designations
for  the  highest branch of speculative knowledge. To the extent that he
declares  this  science  to  be  an inquiry concerning the existence and
nature  of immaterial and imperishable substances, his definition of the
object  of  metaphysics  would  seem  to  justify the title of theology.
Descartes,  who  also separates metaphysics from physics by reference to
the  immateriality  and  materiality  of  the substances which are their
objects,  even  more explicitly seems to give the whole of metaphysics a
theological  character.  In  the Preface to his Meditations on the First
Philosophy,  he says that he is concerned to treat of "God and the human
soul";  for,  as he explains to the professors of Sacred Theology of the
Sorbonne,  "I  have  always considered that the two questions respecting
God  and  the soul were the chief of those that ought to be demonstrated
by  philosophical  rather than theological argument." Though he adds the
freedom of the human will to the existence of God and the immortality of
the  soul,  Kant's definition of the objects of metaphysical speculation
similarly makes metaphysics an inquiry into things which lie outside the
realm of physics and associates it

[196a]
162  THE GREAT IDEAS with the traditional subject matter of theology, at
least  in  the  sense that here reason tries to prove propositions which
are  the  main  tenets  of  religious faith. In his Preface to the first
edition  of  the  Critique  of PureReason,  Kant remarks that when reason
"finds  itself  compelled to have recourse to principles which transcend
the  region of experience," it "falls into confusion and contradictions.
.  .  .  The  arena  of these endless contests is called Metaphysic." If
nothing  immaterial  exists,  if  there  are  no  beings  apart from the
changing  things  of senseexperience, or if, although such things exist,
they  cannot  be known by reason proceeding in the manner of speculative
science,  does it follow that metaphysics must also be denied existence,
at  least as a speculative science? The answer seems to be clear. If the
declared  objects  of  a  science  do not exist, or if those objects are
unknowable by the methods which that science proposes to follow, then it
seems difficult to defend its claims to be a valid science against those
who  challenge  them.  The  controversy over the validity of metaphysics
would  thus appear to turn on the truth or falsity of the two "ifs" just
mentioned. But the matter cannot be so resolved if natural theology does
not  exhaust the whole of metaphysics; that is, if metaphysics considers
objects  other than the immaterial, and if it inquires into their nature
rather  than  their  existence.  Aristotle's  definition  of the subject
matter   of  the  first  philosophy  seems  to  contain  an  alternative
conception  of  metaphysics,  one which may be quite consistent with the
conception  of  it as theology, but which, however, gives it problems to
solve  in  the realm of physical things. "There is a science," Aristotle
writes,  "which  investigates  being  as  being and the attributes which
belong  to  being  in  virtue of its own nature." This definition of the
first  philosophy seems to differentiate it from mathematics and physics
as   sharply  as  the  other  definition  in  terms  of  immaterial  and
imperishable  substances. The other sciences, according to Aristotle, do
not  treat  of "being qua being universally." The properties of anything
which is "in so far as it has being, and the contraries in it qua being,
it is the business of no other sci-

[196b]
ence to investigate; for to physics one would assign the study of things
not  qua  being, but rather qua sharing in movement"; and mathematics is
concerned   with   the   attributes   of  things  insofar  as  they  are
"quantitative  and continuous." These sciences "mark off some particular
kind  of being, some genus, and inquire into this, but not being simply,
nor qua being. . . . Similarly, these sciences omit the question whether
the  genus  with  which  they  deal exists or does not exist, because it
belongs to the same kind of thinking to show what it is and that it is."
Only the first philosophy "does not inquire about particular subjects in
so  far as each has some attribute or other, but speculates about being,
in  so  far  as  each  particular  thing  is." Its subject matter, then,
includes  all  existing  things  as  existing, and involves not only the
question  how  anything  which  exists  exists  (i.e., the properties of
being),  but  also  the question whether certain things, whose existence
can  be  questioned, do in fact exist. Whatever truths hold good for all
things  qua  being—such as the principle that the same thing cannot both
be and not be in the same respect at the same time — belong to the first
philosophy,  even  though, as in this case Aristotle points out, the law
of   contradiction  may  also  belong  to  logic  as  the  principle  of
demonstration. This broader conception of the first philosophy explains,
as  its  restriction  to  natural  theology  could  not explain, why the
central  books  in  Aristotle's  Metaphysics treat of sensible, physical
substances;   their   nature  as  substances;  the  distinction  between
substance  and accident, form and matter, potentiality and actuality, as
principles  of  the  composite  nature  of  changing substances; and the
properties  of  such  existences  in virtue of their having being, e.g.,
their  unity  and  divisibility, their sameness and otherness. Aristotle
does  not  inquire whether such substances exist. He seems to take their
existence as unquestionable, for he frequently refers to physical things
as  "the readily recognized substances." But in addition to the question
"how  sensible  substances  exist," there are such questions as "whether
there  are  or  are not any besides sensible substances. . . and whether
there

[197a]
is  a  substance  capable  of  separate  existence,  apart from sensible
substances,  and if so why and how." These latter questions leadj£>~-the
concluding  books of the Metaphysics which inquire into the existence of
the non-sensible, the immaterial, the immutable. If Aristotle's theology
begins here, then theology is only a part— the crowning part, perhaps—of
a  larger  science whose object is not a special realm of being, but all
of being. Hobbes and Bacon go further than Aristotle in the direction of
opposing   the   identification  of  metaphysics  with  theology.  Where
Aristotle  seems  to  admit  theological subject matter as a part of the
first philosophy, they exclude it entirely. Hobbes does not use the word
"metaphysics"  in  his own classification of the sciences; he employs it
only  as  a term of derogation to refer to scholastic doctrines which he
repudiates.  His  own classification makes philosophia prima that branch
of  natural philosophy which is prior to the mathematical and mechanical
sciences.  The  latter  deal  with  determinate quantity and motion. The
antecedent science deals with "quantity and motion indeterminate." These
"being  the  principles  or first foundation of philosophy," the science
which  deals with them "is called Philosophia Prima" Bacon distinguishes
between  first  philosophy  and  metaphysics and between metaphysics and
natural  theology.  First  philosophy, he says, is "the common parent of
sciences."  It  is  concerned with "axioms, not peculiar to any science,
but  common  to  a  number  of  them" and also with "the adventitious or
transcendental   condition  of  things,  such  as  little,  much,  like,
different,   possible,  impossible,  entity,  nonentity,  etc."  Natural
theology,  which  is  the  divine part of philosophy because it inquires
about  "God, unity, goodness, angels, and spirits," is separate from the
rest  of  natural  philosophy.  "But  to  assign  the  proper  office of
metaphysics, as contra-distinguished from primary philosophy and natural
theology,"  Bacon  writes,  "we  must  note  that as physics regards the
things  which  are wholly immersed in matter and movable, so metaphysics
regards  what  is  more abstracted and fixed; that physics supposes only
existence,  motion,  and  natural necessity, whilst metaphysics supposes
also mind

[197b]
Chapter  57:  METAPHYSICS  163  and idea. ... As we have divided natural
philosophy  into  the  investigation  of  causes  and  the production of
effects,  and  referred  the investigation of causes to theory, which we
again  divide  into  physical and metaphysical, it is necessary that the
real difference of these two be drawn from the nature of the causes they
inquire  into." Physics, according to Bacon, inquires into efficient and
material  causes;  metaphysics,  into  formal  and  final causes; and as
mechanics is the practical application of physical theory, so what Bacon
calls  "magic"  is  the  practical  doctrine  that  corresponds  to  the
metaphysical  theory  of forms. Agreement or disagreement concerning the
subject matter and problems of that which claims to be the highest human
science,  however  named,  does  not seem to be uniformly accompanied by
agreement  or  disagreement concerning the status and development of the
discipline  in question. There seems to be some similarity, for example,
between Plato's dialectic as an inquiry into forms and Bacon's notion of
metaphysics  as  concerned  with  formal causes—a similarity which Bacon
himself  observes. But where Plato seems to think that dialectic exists,
to  be  taught  and  learned,  Bacon's  judgment  is  that  this part of
metaphysics, if not the part dealing with final causes, has not yet been
developed  because  the  right  method  has  not  been  employed. Again,
Aristotle's  conception  of  metaphysics  as  concerned with the primary
axioms,  the  universal  principles applicable to all existence, and the
transcendental  properties  of  being, seems to bear some resemblance to
Bacon's   primary   philosophy.  But  Bacon  writes  as  if  Aristotle's
Metaphysics  had  not  been  written,  or  at  least  as  if  it had not
succeeded,  as Aristotle might have supposed it had, in establishing the
science  which  Bacon  finds  for  the  most  part  in  a  defective  or
undeveloped  condition. If we turn to natural theology, either as a part
of  metaphysics  (with Aristotle), or as separate from metaphysics (with
Bacon),  or  as identical with metaphysics (with Descartes), we find the
same  situation.  Aside  from  some  verbal  and  some  real differences
concerning  the  objects of the inquiry, Aristotle, Bacon, and Descartes
think that the existence of beings

[198a]
164  THE  GREAT IDEAS apart from the sensible world of matter and change
can   be   demonstrated  and  that  something  can  be  known  of  their
nature—whether  they  are  called  immaterial  substances,  spirits, and
intelligences,  or  God,  angels,  and  souls.  With some alterations in
language and thought, Plato and Plotinus, Augustine and Aquinas, Spinoza
and  Locke  can  be  added to this company. They are theologians in that
sense of "theology" which implies a rational knowledge—without religious
faith,  and  either by intuition or demonstration—of beings which really
exist,  yet  are not sensible or material or mutable or finite. Spinoza,
for example, does not use the word "metaphysics," but he holds that "the
human  mind  possesses an adequate knowledge of the eternal and infinite
essence  of  God."  Although  Locke's  useof  the  word "metaphysics" is
derogatory,  and  though  the  purpose  of  his  Essay  Concerning Human
Understanding  is to prevent human inquiries from extending beyond man's
capacities,  he attributes greater certainty to our knowledge of God and
the  soul  than  to  our  knowledge  of  bodies,  and  finds  no greater
difficulty  in  our  speculations  about spirits than about particles of
matter.  "Experimenting  and discovering in ourselves knowledge, and the
power of voluntary motion, as certainly as we experiment, or discover in
things  without us, the cohesion and separation of solid parts, which is
the  extension  and  motion  of  bodies," Locke writes, "we have as much
reason to be satisfied with our notion of immaterial spirit, as with our
notion of body, and the existence of the one as well as the other. . . .
But  whichever  of  these  complex  ideas  be clearest, that of body, or
immaterial spirit, this is evident, that the simple ideas that make them
up are no other than what we have received from sensation or reflection;
and so is it of all our other ideas of substances, even of God himself."
As we have already seen, Hume and Kant deny metaphysics (so far as it is
identified  with what is traditionally natural theology) the status of a
valid  theoretical science. For them it is incapable of taking its place
beside  physics  and  mathematics. Hume, in addition, denies validity to
metaphysical speculation concerning causes and substances in the natural
order. Unlike Hume, who simply removes metaphysi-

[198b]
cal problems from the realm of questions worth thinking about, Kant does
not reject the problems but rather offers alternative methods of stating
and  solving  them.  He hopes thereby to accomplish a reformation rather
than  an  abolition  of  metaphysical  inquiry.  The  existence  of God,
freedom,  and immortality must be affirmed, Kant thinks, in the order of
practical, not speculative reason. They are indispensable "conditions of
the  necessary object of our will .... that is to say, conditions of the
practical  use  of pure reason." Yet, he adds, "we cannot affirm that we
know  and  understand,  I  will  not  say  the  actuality,  but even the
possibility,  of  them."  Furthermore, by redefining metaphysics to mean
"any  system  of  knowledge a priori that consists of pure conceptions,"
Kant  not  only  gives  his fundamental treatises in morals and ethics a
metaphysical character, but sees the possibility of a genuine metaphysic
emerging  from  the  Critique  of  Pure  Reason.  Once "the dogmatism of
metaphysic"  has  been  removed,  "that  is,  the presumption that it is
possible  to achieve anything in metaphysic without a previous criticism
of  pure  reason.  ... it may not be too difficult to leave a bequest to
posterity  in  the  shape  of  a  systematical  metaphysic,  carried out
according  to  the  critique  of  pure  reason."  Kant's  transcendental
philosophy,  and  especially  what  he  calls "the architectonic of pure
reason," is in a sense that metaphysic already begun. In subject matter,
if  not  in  its  method  or  conclusions,  it resembles the traditional
inquiry   concerning   the   universal   principles  and  transcendental
properties  of  being.  The  objects of natural theology are, of course,
excluded  as  being  beyond the power of reason to know in a speculative
manner. Metaphysics as a possible science is for Kant "nothing more than
the  inventory  of  all  that is given us by pure reason, systematically
arranged.  .  .  . Such a system of pure speculative reason," he says in
his  original  preface  to  the  Critique, "I hope to be able to publish
under  the  title of Metaphysic of Nature." And in the last pages of the
Critique, wherein he criticizes all speculative efforts in the sphere of
natural  theology, Kant reaffirms "the speculative and the practical use
of  pure  reason" to constitute "a Metaphysic of Nature and a Metaphysic
of

[199a]
Ethics."  The  former, he says, is "what is comtheory of the criteria of
valid  knowledge)  monly  called  Metaphysic  in  the more limited could
determine  in advance of any examinasense." Both together "form properly
thaj^detion of metaphysical discussion whether the partment of knowledge
which may be termed, matters to be discussed fall within the range of in
the truest sense of the word, philosophy. questions concerning which the
human  mind  The path which it pursues is that of science, has the power
to  find  and validate answers, which, when it has once been discovered,
is  But  if  this supposition is untenable in itself; or never lost, and
never misleads." if it is untenable because psychology and epistemology,
when  they  are treated as the first Controversies about metaphysics can
be   disphilosophy,   themselves   presuppose   a   metatinguished  from
metaphysical   controversies   physics  or  conceal  their  metaphysical
presuppothat is, disputes within the field of metaphysical sitions; then
no  alternative  remains  but  to  judge  thought.  We have confined our
attention  to  metaphysics directly by its fruits, the former throughout
this  chapter.  But  it  may  In  that case, the issues surveyed in this
chapnot  be  possible  to  judge,  much  less to resolve, ter require an
examination of the metaphysical the issues about the scope, methods, and
validdiscussions  to  be  found  in  such chapters as ity of metaphysics
without  engaging  in,  or at God, Angel, Idea, Soul, Immortality, least
facing,  issues  which  are  themselves  metaWill  (which  are  relevant
particularly  to  the  physical. problems of natural theology) ; and (as
relevant  The  only  way  to  escape  this  would be to toother parts or
problems of metaphysics) such suppose that psychology (as an analysis of
the  chapters  as  Being,  Cause,  Form,  Matter, powers of the mind) or
epistemology  (as  a  One and Many, Relation, Same and Other. OUTLINE OF
TOPICS  i.  Conceptions  of  the highest human science: dialectic, first
philosophy,  metaphysics,  2. The analysis of the highest human science:
the  character of dialectical, metaphysical, ia. The distinctive objects
or  problems  of  the  supreme  science  ib. The nature of the concepts,
abstractions,  or  principles  of  the highest science ic. The method of
metaphysics:   the  distinction  between  empirical  and  transcendental
methods  id.  The  distinction  between  a  metaphysic  of  nature and a
metaphysic  of  morals:  3. Metaphysics in relation to other disciplines
3#.  The  relation  of  metaphysics  to  theology  3#.  The  relation of
metaphysics  to  mathematics, physics or natural philosophy, psychology,
and  the  empirical sciences y. The relation of metaphysics to logic and
dialectic  4.  The  criticism and reformation of metaphysics 169 4#. The
dismissal  or  satirization of metaphysics as dogmatism or sophistry 4#.
Reconstructions of metaphysics: critical philosophy as a propaedeutic to
metaphysics

[199b]
Chapter 57: METAPHYSICS 165 PAGE

[200a]
166  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or   passage  cited.  1.  Conceptions  of  the  highest  human  science:
dialectic,    first    philosophy,    metaphysics,   natural   theology,
transcendental philosophy 7 Plato: Charmides, 7d-13d / Symposium, 167a-d
/  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Timaeus,  476a-b  /  Parmenides
486a-511d esp 491a-d / Sophist, 561d-574c esp 571a-c / Statesman, 585c /
Philebus, 611d-612b; 633a635a esp 634b-635a / Seventh Letter, 809c810d 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92a33~b2]
268c-d; bk 11, ch 2 [i94b9-i5] 271a; ch 7 [198* 22-31] 275b-c / Heavens,
bk hi, ch i
[298b
13-24]  390a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  499a-501c; bk ii, ch i
511b,d-512b;  bk hi, ch 1 [995 a23-b27] 513b,d-514b; ch 2 [996*18997*34]
514d-516a;  bk  iv, ch 1-3 522a-525a; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk xi, ch
1-4 587a-590a; ch 7 592b-593a / Soul, bk i, ch i
[403b io-i7] 632d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 7 390a-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i,
811a-813a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, pref, 5a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
hi 10a-12b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 1-12 264b,d-273a

[200b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  James  : Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (£>),  follows; e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, a i 3b-4a; a 8, ans 7c-8d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57, a 2 36a-37b; part ii-ii, q 45, a i, ans
598d599d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 72a-d; part iv, 269b-272b 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 15d; 40a48d esp 40a-41b, 43a-c, 44c-45a
/  Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv
51b-54b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol 2 388a-b; prop 47,
schol   390c-391a;   part   v,  prop  25-42  458d-463d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect i 451a455b passim 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-13d; 19a;
115d-117d;  120b  [fn  1];  172d-174a;  243c-250a,c esp 246a248d / Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253b-d; 264b-d esp 264d / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics, 365a-366a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-388d
esp  388a- c; 390b,d-391a / Judgement, 551a-552c; 603d607c esp 606d-607c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  165a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  197b 53 James: Psychology, xiiib-xiva; 95a 54 Freud: New
Introductory lectures, 874a

[201a]
2 to 2c Chapter 57: METAPHYSICS 167 2. The analysis of the highest human
science:  the  character of dialectical, metaphysical, or transcendental
knowledge 2a. The distinctive objects or problems of the supreme science
7  Plato:  Charmides,  7d-13d  /  Republic,  bk v, 368c-373c; bk vi-vii,
383d-398c  esp bk vii, 396d-398c / Timaeus, 476a-b / Sophist, 564d574c /
Philebus,   633a-635a  esp  634b-635a  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d  8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92*33~b2]
268c-d; bk ii, ch 2
[i94b9-i5]
271a; ch 7
[198*22-31]
275b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch i
[298b i3-24]
390a-b  / Metaphysics, bk i-iv 499a-532d; bk vi, ch i-bk vii, ch i 547b,
d551a; bk xi, ch 1-8 587a-593d; bk xii, ch 1 598a-c / Soul, bk i, ch i
[403b io-i7]
632d  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 7 390a-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic,
bk  i,  811a-813a  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest, pref, 5a b 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr hi, ch 4-6 11a12b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5,
a  2,  ans  24b-25a; q ii, a 2, rep 4 47d-48d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
iv,  269b-272b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 42c-46a; 60b-c / Novum
Organum,  bk ii, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes: Meditations, 69a-71a,c; 1-11
75a81d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, prop 40, schol 2 388a-b; prop 47
390c-391a;  part  v,  prop  2533 458d-460c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect xii, div 132 509a-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c; 6c-d; 19a; 120b
[fn
1];  249a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 253a-d / Practical
Reason,  351b-352c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals. 388a-c / Judgement,
603d-607c  esp  606d-607c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, injro, 165a-b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, epilogue ii, 694c-d 53 James: Psychology,
xiiib-xiva; 89b-90a; 118b; 141a; 258b-259b esp 259b; 291a 2b. The nature
of  the  concepts,  abstractions, or principles of the highest science 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c / Sophist, 564d-574c / Seventh
Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 6
[127*26-40]
176d-177a / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[1003*
33-b i9] 522b-c; bk v, ch 7 537c-538b; bk ix, ch 6
[i048a3i-b8]
573c-574a; bk xi, ch 3 589a-d; bk xii, ch 4-5 599d-601a / Soul, bk 1, ch
i  [403b io-i7J 632d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 8, ans
7c-8d;  q 11, a 1 46d-47d; q 13, a 5 66b67d; q 16, aa 3-4 96b-97c; q 48,
a  2,  rep  2  260c-261b;  q  85, a i, rep 2 451c-453c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 2 36a-37b

[201b]
23  Hobbes:  leviathan,  part  iv,  269b-272b  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  43a-46a  esp  44c-45a; 60b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv
51b-54b  passim  / Objections and Replies, 128d-129a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part ii, prop 40, schol 2prop 41 388a-c; prop 47 390c-391a; part v, prop
25-26  458d-459a; prop 28 459b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect
6  405d-406a;  sect  17 409d-410a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 342b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  6c-d;  215d-216d;  245c249c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  253b-c;  264d; 270c-d / Practical Reason, 330d331a; 351b-352c /
Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365a  / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals, 388ac / Judgement, 467d-468b 53 James: Psychology, 884b-886a 2c.
The  method  of  metaphysics:  the  distinction  between  empirical  and
transcendental  methods 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 134a-c; 139d-140b / Republic,
bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk vii, 396d398c / Parmenides 486a-511d esp
491a-d  /  Sophist  551a-579d  esp  552bc,  553d-554a, 561b, 570c-571d /
Statesman  580a-608d  esp 580d, 582d-583c, 586c-589c, 591a-d, 594d596a /
Philebus,   610d-613a   /   Seventh   Letter,   809c-810d  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 3 513c-d; bk iv, ch 2 [1004*25-31] 523b-c; ch 4
[ioo5b
35-1006*28]  525a-c;  ch 7 [1012*18-24] 532a-b; ch 8 [ioi2b5-8] 532c; bk
vi,  ch  i  [io25b i-i8] 547b,d; bk ix, ch 6 [i048*25-b 9] 573c-574a; bk
xi, ch 5
[io6i b34-io62*i9] 590a-c; ch 7
[io63b36-io64*9]
592b / Soul, bk i, ch i
[402*10-22] 631b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q i, a 8, ans 7c-8d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part iv, 269b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 44c-45a 31
Descartes:  Rules,  iv  5a-7d  /  Discourse,  part  11, 46c-47b; part iv
51b-54b   passim   /  Meditations,  69a-71a,c  passim;  1-11  75a-81d  /
Objections   and   Replies,   119c;  126a-b;  128a129c;  postulate  i-ii
130d-131a;  postulate vii 131c; 167a-c; 206c-207b; 237b-238b; 239a-240a;
242c-244c;  245b-246a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 40, schol 2
388a-b;  prop  44,  corol 2 and demonst 390a; prop 47 390c-391a; part v,
prop  25-26  458d-459a;  prop  28  459b;  prop 29, schol 459c-d; prop 31
459d-460b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect xii, div 132 509a-d 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 19a; 121a-d; 249c-250a,c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  253a-d;  263d-264d  esp  264d;  277d-279d  /  Practical Reason,
298d-332d;  349b-351a  / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365a-366a
53 James : Psychology, 95a

[202a]
(2.  The  analysis  of  the  highest  human  science:  the  character of
dialectical,   metaphysical,   or  transcendental  knowledge.)  2d.  The
distinction  between  a metaphysic of nature and a metaphysic of morals:
the  difference  between  the  speculative  treatment  and the practical
resolution  of the metaphysical problems of God, freedom, and immortality
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-d; 15c-16c; 33a-d; 120b
[fn i]; 124d-128a; 143a-145c; 152a-153c; 164a171a
esp 169c-170a, 170c-171a; 177b-192d esp 177b-179c; 200c-209d; 218d-223d;
234c240b  esp 239a-c; 241d-242c; 246a-250a,c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 253a-d; 263d-264d; 277d-287d esp 277d-279d, 283d285a / Practical
Reason,   291a-   293c   esp  292a293b;  296a-d;  301d-302d;  307d-314d;
331a337a,c;  340a-342d;  344a-349b  esp  344a-c,  348b-349b;  351b-352c;
353a-354d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-388d esp 386d387a,c,
388a-d;  390b,d-391a  /  Judgement,  568c-570a;  588a-613a,c passim, esp
607c, 609b-610a 3. Metaphysics in relation to other disciplines 3* . The
relation  of metaphysics to theology 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii,
ch  1-12  264b,d-273a  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40 655b-656a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q i 3a-10c esp a i 3b-4a, aa 4-6
5a-7a,  a  8 7c8d; q 2, a 2 esp rep i lld-12c; q 12, aa 12-13 60d-62b; q
32,  a i 175d-178a; q 39, aa 7-8 209a-213a; q 46, a 2 253a-255a; q 84, a
5  446c-447c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii, q 2, aa 3-4
392d-394b; q 45 598c-603c passim 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83b; 84a;
part  11,  163a-b; part hi, 165b; part iv, 247d; 269b-271c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  155a-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 4c; 15d16b; 19d-20a;
39d-40c;  41b-d;  44c-45a; 95d-101d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c  /  Meditations,  69a-71a,c  /
Objections and Replies, 125b126b; 283d-284d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 543 266a
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 335b-337a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  307b-310a  passim,  esp  308b-309a;  670b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
119a-c;  177b-192d  esp  190a-c; 238b-240b / Practical Reason, 346b347a;
351b-352c  /  Judgement,  599d-600a;  600d-601c;  604d-606d  esp 606a-d;
607d609b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 158c160b; part in,
308c-309d

[202b]
168  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2d  to  3c  3b.  The  relation of metaphysics to
mathematics,   physics   or  natural  philosophy,  psychology,  and  the
empirical  sciences  7 Plato: Republic, bk vi-vii, 386d-398c / Philebus,
634b-635b / Seventh Letter, 809c810a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92a33~b2]
268c-d; bk ii, ch 2
[i94b9-i5]
271a; ch 7
[198*22-31]
275b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch 1
[298^3-24] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 8
[989b29-99oa8] 508a; ch 9 [992*24^9] 510c-d;
bk ii, ch 3
[994
b3i]-BK in, ch 2
[997*34]
513c-516a; bk iv, ch 1-3 522a-525a; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk xi, ch t
587a-588a; ch 3
[io6i a29]-cH
4
[io6i b34] 589c-590a; ch 7
592b-593a;  bk  xii,  ch  i [io69a3o-b2] 598b-c; ch 8 [io73b i-7] 603d /
Soul, bk i, ch i
[403b
10-17]  632d  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i, 812b-813d 16 Ptolemy:
Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 8, ans 7c-8d; q 85, a i, rep 2
451c-453c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 2 36a-37b;
part ii-ii, q 45, a i, ans 598d-599d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 72a-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 15d; 42c44c / Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  9  140b-c 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 128d-129a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  335b-337a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, la-13d;
15c-16c;   17d-19a;  211c-218d  esp  215d-216d;  243c-248d  passim,  esp
245c-246b  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-d; 254b-c; 264b-d /
Practical  Reason, 292d-293b; 295b-d; 307d-310c; 311d313d; 330d-332d esp
331a-332d;   351b-352c  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445  b-c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, intro, 182d183c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
197b;  epilogue  ii, 694c-d 53 James: Psychology, xiiib-xiva; 90a; 118b;
884b-886a  esp  886a  3c.  The  relation  of  metaphysics  to  logic and
dialectic 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch ii
[172*12-22] 237a / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch
i b4-io] 513d-514a; ch 2
[996^6-997*14]
515b-d; bk iv, ch 2
[ioo4b i8-27] 523d; ch
[995
3 524b-525a; bk xi, ch i
[1059*23-26] 587a;
ch  3-4  589a-590a esp ch 3 [io6i b9-i2] 589d; ch 8 [io64b23-29] 593a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a 8, ans 7c-8d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  72a-d;  part  iv,  269b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  43d-46a; 57b-58b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342b 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b-337a

[203a]
4  to  \b  Chapter  57:  METAPHYSICS 169 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36d-37d /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals.  253b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of
History,  intro, 165a-b; 182d-183c ^~~^ 53 James: Psychology, 671a-672a;
852a;   873a874a;  881b-886a  esp  881b-882a,  884b-886a;  890a  4.  The
criticism   and   reformation   of  metaphysics  4a.  The  dismissal  or
satirization  of  metaphysics  as  dogmatism  or  sophistry  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 49d; 52a-b; 54bc; 56b-d; 57c-d; 59a-60a; 71a-b; 80b;
84a; part ii, 163a-b; part hi, 183c-d; part iv, 247d; 267a-272b; 274a-b;
276c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 240a-246a; 257d-264a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  40a-c;  57d-58b;  60a-c  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 62-65
113b-114c;  aph  71  117a-c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x,
sect  2 291d-292a; sect 6-14 293a-295a; bk iv, ch viii, sect 9 347d-348a
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  6  405d  406a;  sect  17
409d-410a;   sect   97   431d-432a;  sect  143  441c-d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div  6-7  453b-454a passim; sect viii, div 62,
478c;  sect  xii,  div  132, 509d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 329b-336a;
421b422b  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b-336c CROSS-REFERENCES
For:  Statements in other contexts concerning the highest human science,
see  Dialectic  2a, 4; Philosophy 2b; Science ia(2); Theology 3a; Wisdom
ia.  Considerations  relevant  to the nature of metaphysical concepts or
abstractions,  see  Being  1  statement of the law of contradiction, see
Opposition  2a.  Criticisms  of metaphysics, and for the substitution of
psychology  or epistemology for metaphysics as the first philosophy, see
Dialectic 2c, 3c, 6; Knowledge 5d~5e; Man 2b(4); Philosophy 3d, 6b; Soul
5a;  Theology  5. Considerations relevant to a metaphysic of morals, and
for the solution therein of the prob-

[203b]
;  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 526c-527a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c;
20b-c;  36a-37d;  109bc;  120c-121c;  129c-130a;  133d; 157d; 187c-188b;
192a-b;  218d-222b  esp  221c-222b;  229b-c  /  Practical  Reason, 299d;
304d-305a;  335b-c  /  Judgement, 600d-601c; 607d-608c 47 Goethe: Faust,
part i
[1 948-1 963]
46a-b;
[4343-4367] 107a-b; part
ii  [7843-7846] 191a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 115b-117a; 255a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and Peace, bk vi, 243b 53 James: Psychology, xiva; 90a; 227b; 235b;
702a-b  4b.  Reconstructions  of  metaphysics:  critical philosophy as a
propaedeutic  to  metaphysics  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 269b-c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part ii, 46c-48b; part iv 51b-54b / Meditations,
72b,d;  1 75a77c / Objections and Replies, 237b-238b passim; 267a-277a,c
passim  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro 405a412a, c passim, esp sect
21-25 411b-412a,c; sect 133 439c-440a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
i,  div  7-10  453c-455b;  sect  xii,  div  116, 503d-504a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  la-13d;  15c-16d;  19a22a,c;  101d-102b;  133c-134d; 146a-149d;
157d;  196b-197c;  218d-227a;  248d-250a,c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 270c-d; 273d-274a / Practical Reason, 292d-293b; 296a-d; 307a-d;
331a-332d / Judgement, 567c568a

[204a]
170  THE GREAT IDEAS I. Aquinas. On the Trinity of Boethius, qq 5-6 Hume.
A  Treatise  of Human  Nature,  bk i, part iv, sect iii-iv Kant. De Mundi
Sensibilis  {Inaugural Dissertation), sect v . Prolegomena to Any Future
Metaphysic,  par  1-5,  40-60;  SCHOLIA  .  Metaphysical  Foundations of
Natural  Science  Hegel.  Science  of  Logic, vol i, bk i W. James. Some
Problems  of  Philosophy,  ch  2-3  II.  Maimonides.  The  Guide for the
Perplexed, part i, ch 33-36 Bonaventura. Itinerarium Mentis in Deum {The
Itinerary  ofthe  Mind to God) Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, esp 1
Malebranche.   Dialogues   on   Metaphysics   and   Religion   Leibnitz.
Philosophical  Wor\s,  ch  i  i {On the Reform of Metaphysics and on the
Notion of Substance)

[204b]
; ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Boo^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of The Great Ideas. Voltaire. "Metaphysics," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea, vol 11, sup, ch 17
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy, intro Lotze. Metaphysics, intro C. S.
Peirce.  Collected Papers, vol vi, par 318-394 A. E. Taylor. Elements of
Metaphysics  Bergson.  The  Creative  Mind, ch 6 Santayana. Dialogues in
Limbo,  ch  10  Heidegger.  Was  ist  Metaphysi^? Whitehead. Process and
Reality, part i, ch 3 (2) part 11, ch 9 (4) T. Whittaker. Prolegomena to
a  New  Metaphysic  Maritain.  The Degrees of Knowledge, intro; ch 4 . A
Preface  to  Metaphysics,  lect  ii-iii  Carnap.  The Unity of Science .
Philosophy  and  Logical  Syntax,  1  Gilson. The Unity of Philosophical
Experience,  ch  12  B.  Russell. Mysticism and Logic, ch 5 . An Inquiry
into Meaning and Truth, ch 25

[205a]
Chafnf^%:  MIND  INTRODUCTION the tradition of the great books, the word
"mind"   is   used   less  frequently  than  "reaIN  son,"  "intellect,"
"understanding,"   or   "soul."   There  are  still  other  words,  like
"intelligence,"  "consciousness,"  and  even "spirit" or "psyche," which
often  carry  some  part  of the connotation of the word "mind. "Certain
authors  use  "mind" as a synonym for one or another of these words, and
give  it the meaning which other writers express exclusively in terms of
"reason"  or  "understanding."  Some  discuss  mind without reference to
soul,  some identify mind with soul or spirit, and some conceive mind as
only a part of soul or spirit. For the purpose of assembling in a single
chapter  references  to  all  discussions  which fall within the area of
meaning common to all these terms, it was necessary to adopt some single
covering  word. Our choice of "mind" is partly the result of its present
currency, partly the result of the fact that it is somewhat more neutral
than  the  others  and  therefore  less  prejudicial  to the conflicting
theories  which  are  juxtaposed in this chapter. Words like "reason" or
"intellect" usually imply a sharper distinction between the functions or
faculties   of   sensation  and  thought  than  does  the  word  "mind."
Imagination and memory, for example, are attributed to the understanding
in the writings of Locke and Hume, whereas, in the analytical vocabulary
of Aristotle and Aquinas, imagination and memory belong to sense, not to
reason  or  intellect.  Similarly, words like "soul" or "spirit" usually
connote  a  substantial  as well as an immaterial mode of being, whereas
"mind"  can  have  the  meaning  of  a faculty or a power to be found in
living  organisms. The adoption of the word "mind" is purely a matter of
convenience.  It  begs no questions and decides no issues. The relations
between 171

[205b]
what  is  here  discussed  and the matters considered in the chapters on
Soul, Sense, Memory and Imagination, remain the same as they would be if
"reason"  or  "intellect"  were  used  in  place  of  "mind."  Different
formulations  of these relationships are not affected by the words used,
but  by  different  theories  of  what the mind is, however it is named.
Before  we  consider the diverse conceptions of the human mind which are
enumerated  under  the  seven main divisions of the first section in the
Outline  of  Topics, it may be useful to examine the elements of meaning
more  or  less  common  to the connotation of all the words which "mind"
here  represents.  Even  here we must avoid begging the question whether
mind  is  a  peculiarly  human possession. Other animals may have minds.
Mind  may  be,  as  it is on one theory, a universal property of matter.
According   to   another  theory,  there  may  be  superhuman  minds  or
intelligences,  or  a single absolute mind, a transcendent intelligence.
What, then, does the universe contain because there is mind in it, which
would  be  lacking  if  everything  else could remain the same with mind
removed  ?  The  facts  we  are  compelled  to mention in answering this
question  should  give  us  some  indication  of the elements of meaning
common  to  "mind" and all its synonyms. First is the fact of thought or
thinking.  If there were no evidence of thought in the world, mind would
have  little  or no meaning. The recognition of this fact throughout the
tradition accounts for the development of diverse theories of mind. None
of   the  great  writers  denies  the  phenomenon  of  thought,  however
differently each may describe or explain it; none, therefore, is without
some conception of mind.

[206a]
172  THE  GREAT IDEAS It may be supposed that such words as "thought" or
"thinking" cannot, because of their own ambiguity, help us to define the
sphere  of  mind.  But  whatever  the  relation  of thinking to sensing,
thinking  seems  to  involve more— for almost all observers— than a mere
reception  of  impressions from without. This seems to be the opinion of
those  who  make  thinking a consequence of sensing, as well as of those
who  regard  thought  as  independent  of sense. For both, thinking goes
beyond sensing, either as an elaboration of the materials of sense or as
an  apprehension  of  objects  which are totally beyond the reach of the
senses. To the extent that this insight is true, the elements or aspects
of  thought  discussed  in the chapters on Idea, Judgment, and Reasoning
have  an  obvious relevance to the various theories of mind discussed in
this  chapter.  The  second  fact which seems to be a root common to all
conceptions  of  mind  is  that  of  knowledge  or  knowing. This may be
questioned  on  the ground that if there were sensation without any form
of   thought,  judgment,  or  reasoning,  there  would  be  at  least  a
rudimentary  form of knowledge—some degree of consciousness or awareness
by  one  thing  of  another.  Granting  the  point of this objection, it
nevertheless  seems  to  be  true that the distinction between truth and
falsity,  and the difference between knowledge, error, and ignorance, or
knowledge,  belief, and opinion, do not apply to sensations in the total
absence  of  thought.  The  chapter on Knowledge reports formulations of
these  distinctions or differences. Any understanding of knowledge which
involves  them  seems  to imply mind for the same reason that it implies
thought.  There  is  a  further implication of mind in the fact of self-
knowledge.  Sensing  may be awareness of an object and to this extent it
may be a kind of knowing, but it has never been observed that the senses
can  sense  or be aware of themselves. Take, for example, definitions of
sense,  or  theories  of  sensation  and  the  objects  of  sense.  Such
definitions  and  theories  must  be  regarded  as  works  of reflective
thought;  they  are  not  products of sensation. Thought seems to be not
only reflective, but reflexive, that is, able to consider itself, to de-

[206b]
fine  the  nature of thinking and to develop theories of mind. This fact
about  thought— its reflexivity—also seems to be a common element in all
the  meanings of "mind." It is sometimes referred to as "the reflexivity
of the intellect" or as "the reflexive power of the understanding" or as
"the  ability  of  the understanding to reflect upon its own acts" or as
"self-consciousness."  Whatever  the  phrasing,  a  world  without self-
consciousness   or   self-knowledge  would  be  a  world  in  which  the
traditional conception of mind would probably not have arisen. The third
fact is the fact of purpose or intention, of planning a course of action
with  foreknowledge  of  its  goal, or working in any other way toward a
desired  and  foreseen  objective.  As  in  the case of sensitivity, the
phenomena  of desire do not, without further qualification, indicate the
realm  of  mind. According to the theory of natural desire, for example,
the  natural  tendencies  of  even  inanimate and insensitive things are
expressions  of  desire.  But it is not in that sense of desire that the
fact  of  purpose  or intention is here taken as evidence of mind. It is
rather  on the level of the behavior of living things that purpose seems
to  require  a  factor over and above the senses, limited as they are to
present  appearances.  It cannot be found in the passions which have the
same  limitation  as  the  senses, for unless they are checked they tend
toward  immediate  emotional  discharge.  That factor, called for by the
direction  of conduct to future ends, is either an element common to all
meanings of "mind" or is at least an element associated with mind. It is
sometimes called the faculty of will rational desire or the intellectual
appetite.  Sometimes  it  is  treated as the act of willing which, along
with   thinking,  is  one  of  the  two  major  activities  of  mind  or
understanding;  and  sometimes  purposiveness  is  regarded  as the very
essense of mentality. Considerations relevant to this aspect of mind are
discussed  in  the  chapter on Will. These three or four facts— thought,
knowledge  or  self-knowledge,  and  purpose—seem  to  be  common to all
theories  of  mind.  More than that, they seem to be facts which require
the

[207a]
development  of  the  conception.  They  are,  for  the  most  part, not
questioned  in the tradition of the great books; but they are not^always
seen  in  the same light. They are not always related in the same way to
one  another and to other relevant considerations. From such differences
in interpretation and analysis arise the various conflicting conceptions
of  the  human  mind. The conflict of theories concerning what the human
mind is, what structure it has, what parts belong to it or what whole it
belongs  to,  does  not  comprise the entire range of controversy on the
subject.  Yet enough is common to all theories of mind to permit certain
other  questions  to be formulated. How does the human mind operate? How
does  it do whatever is its work, and with what intrinsic excellences or
defects?  What  is  the relation of mind to matter, to bodily organs, to
material  conditions? Is mind a common possession of men and animals, or
is  whatever  might  be called mind in animals distinctly different from
the  human  mind?.Are  there minds or a mind in existence apart from man
and  the  whole  world of corporeal life ? Such questions constitute the
major  topics  of  this chapter. Other topics which appear here, such as
the  moral and political aspects of mind, are reserved for discussion in
the  many  other  chapters  devoted  to  the  great  ideas  of moral and
political  thought. Still others, like the problem of insanity— the loss
or  derangement of mind—are obviously relevant here even though the more
general consideration of psychopathology belongs elsewhere, e.g., in the
chapter  on  Medicine. The intelligibility of the positions taken in the
dispute  of  the issues which are here our major concern depends to some
degree  on  the  divergent conceptions of the human mind from which they
stem.  It  seems  necessary,  therefore, to examine the seven notions of
mind  which  appear  in  the great books. This will at least provide the
general context for the reader's further explorations, even if it is not
possible  to  trace  the implications each of these notions may have for
the  great  controversial  issues.  Seven  is,  of  course, a fiction of
analysis.  There  are,  from  one point of view, more—perhaps as many as
there are, among the great authors,

[207b]
Chapter  58:  MIND 173 thinkers who have dwelt at length on the subject.
From  another point of view, there may be fewer than seven, for when the
lines are drawn according to certain basic differences, several of these
theories  appear  to be variants of a single doctrine. "That in the soul
which  is  called  mind,"  Aristotle  writes,  is "that whereby the soul
thinks and judges." For him, as for Plato, the human intellect or reason
is  a  part  or  power  of the soul of man, distinct from other parts or
faculties,  such  as  the  senses  and  the  imagination, desire and the
passions. Though the human soul is distinguished from the souls of other
living  things  by  virtue  of  its  having  this  part or power, and is
therefore  called  by  Aristotle a "rational soul," these writers do not
identify  mind  and soul. As soul is the principle of life and all vital
activities,  so  mind  is the subordinate principle of knowledge and the
activities  of  thinking,  deliberating,  deciding.  Within  the general
framework  of  this  theory,  many  differences  exist between Plato and
Aristotle  and  between  them  and  others  who share their views. These
differences  arise  not  only  with  respect  to  the  soul of which the
intellect  is  a part, but also with respect to the power or activity of
the  intellect  itself.  For  example,  the  distinction which Aristotle
initiates,  between  mind  as  an active and as a passive power, is more
explicitly  formulated  by Aquinas in his theory of the active intellect
and the intellect as potential. The human intellect, Aquinas writes, "is
in  potentiality  to  things  intelligible, and is at first like a clean
tablet  on  which  nothing  is written, as the Philosopher says. This is
made  clear  from  the  fact  that  at first we are only in potentiality
towards   understanding,  and  afterwards  we  are  made  to  understand
actually. And so it is evident that with us to understand is in a way to
be  passive."  But  the  forms  of  things,  or what Aquinas calls their
"intelligible  species,"  are not actually intelligible as they exist in
material  things.  He  therefore  argues  that in addition to the "power
receptive  of  such  species,  which is called the possible intellect by
reason of its being in potentiality to such species," there must also be
another  intellectual  power,  which  he  calls  the  active  or "agent"
intellect.

[208a]
174  THE GREAT IDEAS Nothing, he says, can be "reduced from potentiality
to act except by something in act" or already actual. "We must therefore
assign  on  the part of the intellect some power to make things actually
intelligible,   by   the   abstraction  of  the  species  from  material
conditions.  Such is the necessity for positing an agent intellect." The
more explicit formulation which Aquinas gives of the distinction between
the  active  and  the possible intellects as distinct powers has further
consequences for the analysis of three states of the passive or possible
intellect  distinguished  by  Aristotle. The intellectual power which is
receptive  of  the  intelligible  species  may  either  be  in  complete
potentiality  to  them,  as it is when it has not yet come to understand
certain  things. Or it may be described as in habitual possession of the
intelligible  species  when it has previously acquired the understanding
of  certain  things,  but  is  not now actually engaged in understanding
them.  In the third place, the potential intellect may also be actual or
in  act whenever it is actually exercising its habit of understanding or
is  for  the  first  time  actually  understanding  something.  In  this
traditional  theory  of  mind,  many  other distinctions are made in the
sphere  of mental activity, but none is thought to require a division of
the mind into two distinct powers, or even to require the discrimination
of several states of the same power. Just as Plato regards the intuition
or  direct  apprehension  of  intelligible objects as an activity of the
same  intelligence  which is able to reason discursively about the ideas
it  can  contemplate,  so  Aristotle  and Aquinas assign three different
activities  to  the  intellectual  power  which  apprehends intelligible
objects,  not by intuition, but only as the result of the abstraction of
forms  from  matter by the active intellect. Once the possible intellect
is  actualized by the reception of the abstracted species, it can act in
three  ways.  It  can  express  in  concepts the species which have been
impressed  upon it. This— the first act of the intellect— is conception.
Its  second  and  third  acts—of  judgment  and of reasoning— consist in
forming  propositions  out of concepts and in seeing how one proposition
follows  from  others  in  inference  or  proof.  Unlike abstraction and
conception, which

[208b]
Aquinas  assigns  to the active and the possible intellect respectively,
conception,  judgment,  and  reasoning  do  not, in his opinion, require
distinct  powers.  Nor  do  the  two kinds of thought or reasoning which
Aquinas   calls  "speculative"  and  "practical."  The  speculative  and
practical  intellects, he maintains, "are not distinct powers," for they
differ  only  in  their ends. The speculative intellect "directs what it
apprehends,  not  to operation, but to the sole consideration of truth";
the  practical  intellect  "directs  what it apprehends to operation" or
action.  But  to the nature of intellect as a power of apprehension, "it
is  accidental  whether it be directed to operation or not." Not all the
foregoing  distinctions  are  made,  or  made in the same way, by Plato,
Aristotle  and  other  authors like Plotinus, Augustine, or Aquinas, who
stand  together  in  regarding  mind  as  only a part of the human soul.
Lucretius  belongs  with them on this point, though he differs radically
from  them  on the issue of mind and matter. Mind, for him, is only "the
directing  principle"  of  the  soul,  "the head so to speak, and reigns
paramount  in  the whole body." It is only the thinking or deciding part
of   the  soul.  But  Plato,  Aristotle,  and  their  followers  make  a
distinction  in kind between sensations or images and universal ideas or
abstract  concepts.  Sense and intellect are for them distinct faculties
of knowing and have distinct objects of knowledge. For Lucretius, on the
other hand, thinking is merely a reworking of the images received by the
senses.  In  this  one  respect  at  least,  Lucretius  is  more closely
associated  with  the  theory  of mind to be found in Hobbes, Locke, and
Hume.  In  the  consideration  of  mind,  agreement  on  one point seems
everywhere  to be accompanied by disagreement on another. Locke does not
agree with Lucretius or Hobbes about the materiality of mind; and though
he  agrees  with  Berkeley  that mind is a spiritual entity, he does not
agree  with him, any more than he agrees with Hobbes and Hume, about the
abstraction of general concepts from particular sense-impressions. Plato
and  Aristotle  agree  that  the  senses and the intellect or reason are
quite  distinct,  but  they  do  not  agree  about the relation of these
faculties, especially not on the extent

[209a]
to  which  the  mind  can  act  independently  of sense and imagination.
Augustine  seems to share Plato's doctrine of reminiscence as an account
of  how  the  senses recall actively to mind-ideas it has always somehow
possessed.  Aquinas  adopts  Aristotle's  doctrine of abstraction as the
quite  contrary  account  of  the  role the senses play in providing the
materials  on  which  the  mind works to obtain ideas. But Augustine and
Aquinas  come  together on another point in which they depart alike from
Aristotle  and  Plato.  They  distinguish  with  precision  between  the
intellect  and will as separate faculties of the soul, whereas Plato and
Aristotle  treat  thinking and willing (or knowing and loving) as merely
diverse aspects of mental life. The same situation prevails with respect
to  the  other  theories of mind which we must now consider in their own
terms.  Descartes,  for  example,  resembles  Plato and Augustine on the
point on which we have seen that they together differ from Aristotle and
Aquinas,  namely,  the  relation  of  mind  or  reason  to the senses or
imagination.  Yet  he is also closer to Aristotle and Plato in a respect
in  which  they  together  differ from Augustine and Aquinas, namely, in
regarding  thinking  and  willing  as  acts  of  the mind rather than as
belonging   to  completely  separate  faculties.  These  agreements  and
differences occur in the context of a basic opposition between Descartes
and  all  the  other  writers  so  far mentioned. Unlike all of them, he
identifies  the  human  mind  with the rational soul of man. In the dual
nature  of  man,  he  says, "there are certain activities, which we call
corporeal, e.g., magnitude, figure, motion, and all those that cannot be
thought  of  apart  from  extension in space; and the substance in which
they  exist  is  called body. . . . Further, there are other activities,
which   we  call  thinking  activities,  e.g.,  understanding,  willing,
imagining,  feeling,  etc., which agree in falling under the description
of  thought,  perception,  or consciousness. The substance in which they
reside  we call a thinking thing or the mind, or any other name we care,
provided  only  we  do  not  confound it with corporeal substance, since
thinking  activities  have  no  affinity  with corporeal activities, and
thought, which is the common nature in which

[209b]
Chapter  58:  MIND  175  the  former  agree,  is  totally different from
extension,  the common term for describing the latter." Descartes denies
that brutes possess thought, but "even though I were to grant," he says,
"that  thought existed in them, it would in nowise follow that the human
mind was not to be distinguished from the body, but on the contrary that
in  other  animals  also there was a mind distinct from their body." The
two components of human nature are, according to Descartes, each of them
substances — a res cogitans or a thinking substance and a res extensa or
an  extended  substance.  Descartes uses the phrases "rational soul" and
"mind"  interchangeably.  Reason or intellect— the capacity to think— is
not a power of the soul. Nor is thinking an act which the soul sometimes
performs, sometimes does not. It is the very essence of the soul itself,
even  as  extension  is the essence of body. Just as bodies cannot exist
without  actually  having  three  dimensions,  so  the mind cannot exist
without  thinking.  Though it is literally translated into English by "I
think,  therefore  I am," Descartes' cogito, ergo sum can be rendered by
"Thinking  is;  therefore,  the  mind is," or by the strictly equivalent
statement,  "The  mind  exists;  therefore,  there  is  thinking." It is
precisely  this  equation  of  the mind's existence with the activity of
thought  which  Locke challenges. "We know certainly, by experience," he
writes,  "that  we  sometimes  think,  and  thence  draw this infallible
consequence,  that there is something in us that has the power to think;
but  whether  that  substance  perpetually  thinks  or not, we can be no
farther assured than experience informs us. ... I grant that the soul in
a  waking  man  is never without thought, because it is the condition of
being awake: but whether sleeping, without dreaming, be not an affection
of  the  whole  man,  mind  as well as body, may be worth a waking man's
consideration.  .  .  . Methinks every drowsy nod shakes their doctrine,
who teach that the soul is always thinking." What is striking about this
disagreement  is  that  Locke and Descartes agree in their conception of
man  as  a  union  of  two  distinct substances— the union of a material
substance  or body with a spiritual substance, a mind or soul. It is not
surprising, however, that Berkeley

[210a]
176  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  should  hold  the  Cartesian view against Locke.
Considering  the  flow  of  time  in  terms  of the succession of ideas,
Berkeley  affirms  it  to  be  "a plain consequence that the soul always
thinks."  To  try  to  "abstract  the  existence  oi  a  spirit from its
cogitation"  is, he adds modestly, "no easy task." He might have said it
is  impossible, for since he holds that bodies do not exist and that man
consists  of  mind  or spirit alone, he need not hesitate to assert that
the  mind  cannot  cease  to think without ceasing to be. Neither he nor
Descartes  is, in James' opinion, "free to take the appearances for what
they seem to be, and to admit that the mind, as well as the body, may go
to  sleep."  Despite  these  differences, Descartes, Locke, and Berkeley
seem  to agree on the range of activities within the sphere of mind. The
mind  is  a  thinking  substance  for  Descartes, yet it also senses and
imagines,  suffers  passions, and exercises acts of will. What Descartes
says  in  terms  of  acts,  Locke says in terms of powers. Mind has many
distinct  powers, among which Locke includes all the cognitive faculties
(not  only  the powers of abstract thought and reasoning, but also those
of  sense and imagination), and such voluntary faculties as choosing and
willing.  Berkeley  also  includes  the  whole  range  of  psychological
phenomena—  sensation, imagination, memory, the passions, reasoning, and
choice.  Hume  takes  a  similar  view,  though  in  his  case one basic
qualification  must be added. He does not conceive the mind as a soul or
a  spirit  or  any  other sort of substance. He even has some difficulty
with  the  notion of its continuity or identity from moment to moment in
the  flow  of  experience.  Yet, he says, "it cannot be doubted that the
mind is endowed with several powers and faculties, that these powers are
distinct  from  each other. . . . There are many obvious distinctions of
this kind, such as those between will and understanding, the imagination
and  the  passions,  which  fall  within the comprehension ofevery human
creature." What the mind is or how it exists, we may not be able to say;
but  Hume  thinks  that  "if  we  can  go  no  farther  than this mental
geography,  or delineation of the distinct parts and powers of the mind,
it  is  at least a satisfaction to go so far." Descartes' theory of mind
seems to serve as a point of departure in another direction from

[210b]
that  taken  by Locke. Spinoza agrees that the mind is a thinking thing.
He  agrees  that  man  consists  of  an  individual  body united with an
individual  mind.  But  he  differs  from  Descartes  on  the meaning of
substance.  By its very nature, substance is infinite; and because it is
infinite,  there  can  be  only  one  substance,  which  is  God. Finite
individual  things, whether bodies or minds, do not exist as substances,
but  as modes of the divine attributes. "The human mind is a part of the
infinite  intellect  of  God, and therefore," Spinoza declares, "when we
say  that  the  human  mind perceives this or that thing, we say nothing
less  than that God has this or that idea." He includes love and desire,
as well as perception and imagination, among the affections of the mind,
even  calling  them  "modes of thought." He adds, however, that these do
not exist apart from the idea of the thing loved or desired, "though the
idea  may  exist  although  no  other  mode  of  thinking exist." Of the
remaining  three of the seven conceptions of mind here being considered,
two  bear  certain  resemblances  to theories already mentioned. Hegel's
view  of the human mind as a phase or dialectical moment of the Absolute
Mind  or  Spirit  seems  comparable to Spinoza's conception of the human
mind as a part of God's infinite intellect. The Hegelian theory of mind,
developed  in such works as the Phenomenology of Mind and the Philosophy
of Mind, is reflected in his Philosophy of History and in his Philosophy
of  Right. The expression of his view of mind appears, therefore, in the
chapters  on  History  and  State,  as  well  as here. There seems to be
similar  justification  for  associating the views of William James with
those  of  Locke  and  Hume. Willing to posit a soul "influenced in some
mysterious  way  by the brain states and responding to them by conscious
affections  of its own," James goes on to say that "the bare phenomenon,
however,  the  immediately  known  thing  which on the mental side is in
apposition  with  the entire brain-process is the state of consciousness
and  not the soul itself." What the soul is and whether it exists belong
to metaphysics. So far as psychological obser-

[211a]
vation and analysis are concerned, the phenomena of mind are to be found
in  the stream of thought or consciousness. States of mind are states of
consciousness.  James  uses  the^words  "feeling"  or "thought" to cover
every  type  of  mental  operation,  every  state of mind, every form of
consciousness, including sensations and emotions, desires and wishes, as
well  as  conception and reasoning. Locke and Hume distinguish powers of
the  mind  according to different types of mental operation. James tends
rather  to  analyze the mind in terms of its diverse states according to
different  types of mental content. But he also lays great stress on the
dynamic  interconnection of the various elements of consciousness in the
continuous flow of the stream of thought. Freud too presents an analysis
of  different types of mental content, and accompanies it by a theory of
the  different  layers  of  mind—or  psychic  structure.  He  holds, for
example,  that  "we  have two kinds of unconscious— that which is latent
but  capable  of becoming conscious, and that which is repressed and not
capable  of  becoming conscious in the ordinary way. . . . That which is
latent,  and  only unconscious in the descriptive and not in the dynamic
sense,  we  call  preconscious', the term unconscious we reserve for the
dynamically   unconscious  repressed,  so  that  we  have  three  terms,
conscious  (Cs), preconscious (Pes), and unconscious (Ucs)." Like James,
Freud  is  concerned  with  the  dynamic  interaction  of various mental
operations  or  contents.  In  addition,  a  further point of similarity
exists  between  them. James says that "the pursuance of future ends and
the  choice  of  means  for  their  attainment  are  .  . . the mark and
criterion  of the presence of mentality . . . No actions but such as are
done  for  an end, and show a choice of means, can be called indubitable
expressions  of  Mind."  Freud  goes  further  in the same direction. By
identifying  "psychic energy in general" with what he calls "libido," he
implies  that mind in its most primitive form has entirely the aspect of
desire  or  seeking. It expresses itself in "two fundamentally different
kinds of instincts, the sexual instincts in the widest sense of the word
. . . and the aggressive instincts, whose aim is destruction."

[211b]
Chapter  58:  MIND  177  Finally,  there  is the theory in which mind is
neither  one  of  the  faculties  of  the  soul,  nor  itself a thinking
substance;  nor  is it a soul or spirit with a diversity of powers. "All
our  knowledge,"  Kant  writes,  "begins  with sense, proceeds thence to
understanding,  and  ends with reason beyond which nothing higher can be
discovered in the human mind for elaborating the matter of intuition and
subjecting  it  to  the highest unity of thought." These three faculties
have  distinct functions for Kant. The sensitive faculty is a faculty of
intuition.  The  faculty  of  understanding is a faculty of judgment and
scientific  knowledge.  The  faculty  of reason, when properly employed,
performs a critical and regulative function in the realm of thought, but
when  employed beyond the province of its power leads thought into blind
alleys  or dialectical frustrations. Mind is not one of these faculties,
nor  is it the being in which these faculties inhere. The notion of mind
seems  to  have significance, for Kant, primarily in a collective sense.
It  represents  the unity and order of the triad of cognitive faculties.
The  faculties  of  feeling  and  will  which  Kant adds to these in his
enumeration  of  "the  higher  faculties"— belong to the "transcendental
ego,"  but  they  do  not  fall  within  that part of the transcendental
structure  which is mind. Kant's distinction between the speculative and
the  practical  use of reason, and his distinction between the moral and
the  aesthetic judgment, involve different relationships between mind—or
its  triad  of faculties—and these other faculties. The foregoing survey
of  conceptions  of  the  human mind gives some indication of the way in
which  other  questions  about mind are an With regard to the relation of
mind and matter, for example, the theories of Descartes, Spinoza, Locke,
and  James  seem  to  affirm  a  duality  of  substances, or of modes of
substance,  or at least of realms— the physical and the mental. They are
confronted  by the problem of the relation which obtains between the two
—  their  independence  or  interaction.  "Mental  and physical events,"
writes  James,  "are,  on  all  hands, admitted to present the strongest
contrast in the entire field of being.

[212a]
178  THE  GREAT  IDEAS The chasm which yawns between them is less easily
bridged  over by the mind than any interval we know. Why, then, not call
it  an  absolute  chasm," he asks, "and say not only that the two worlds
are difFerent, but that they are independent?" James thinks that to urge
this  theory  of  the  complete  independence  of  mind  and body "is an
unwarrantable  impertinence  in  the  present  state  of  psychology" He
prefers the common-sense theory that each acts on the other somehow. But
earlier  writers who consider body and mind as distinct substances, find
grave  difficulties in the way of conceiving their interaction. "How our
minds  move  or  stop  our bodies by thought, which we every moment find
they do," is, according to Locke, "obscure and inconceivable." According
to  Hume,  there is no "principle in all nature more mysterious than the
union  of soul with body." He interprets one consequence of the union to
be  that "a supposed spiritual substance acquires such an influence over
a  material  one,  that  the most refined thought is able to actuate the
grossest  matter.  Were  we  empowered  by  a  secret  wish,  to  remove
mountains, or control planets in their orbit; this extensive authority,"
Hume  thinks,  "would  not  be  more  extraordinary, nor more beyond our
comprehension."  Denying that bodies exist, Berkeley nevertheless argues
that  even if they did, they could exert no influence upon mind. "Though
we give the materialists their external bodies," he says, "they by their
own  confession are never the nearer knowing how our ideas are produced;
since  they  own themselves unable to comprehend in what manner body can
act  upon  spirit, or how it is possible that it should imprint any idea
in  the  mind.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the production of ideas or
sensations in our minds can be no reason why we should suppose matter or
corporeal  substances,  since  that  is  acknowledged  to remain equally
inexplicable  with  or  without  this  supposition."  Those who deny the
existence  of  matter,  like  Berkeley,  or  the  existence  of anything
immaterial,  like  Lucretius  or  Hobbes,  are confronted by problems of
their  own. Berkeley must explain the mind's perception of bodies or why
the  mind  thinks of matter. Lucretius must explain perception, thought,
and choice

[212b]
as  functions  of material particles in motion. The reduction of mind to
matter  raises a question which leads in the opposite direction. Why may
it  not be supposed that thought and feeling are present in the universe
wherever matter is—an atom of mind inseparably conjoined with every atom
of  matter,  as  in the "mind-stun " or "mind-dust" theory which William
James  considers  and  criticizes?  Still  another  formulation  of  the
relation  of  mind  to  matter  is  found in the theory of Aristotle and
Aquinas, according to whom the rational soul is "the substantial form of
an  organic  body,"  but the intellect—one of its powersis not united to
matter  in  any way. Mind is said to be immaterial in that understanding
or  thought  does  not  require  a  bodily organ. The angelic intellect,
according  to Aquinas, is a "cognitive power which is neither the act of
a  corporeal organ, nor in any way connected with corporeal matter." The
human  mind is not so completely divorced from matter, for, though man's
intellect  "is  not  the act of an organ, yet it is a power of the soul,
which  is  the form of the body." Among all bodily forms, the human soul
alone  has  the  distinction  of possessing "an operation and a power in
which  corporeal  matter  has  no  share  whatever."  But  Aquinas  also
maintains  that  "the body is necessary for the action of the intellect,
not  as  its  organ  of  action,  but  on  the part of the object" — the
phantasm  or  image produced by the sensitive faculty. He conceives this
dependence  in  the  following  manner. "For the intellect to understand
actually  .  . . there is need for the act of the imagination and of the
other  powers"  that  are  acts  of  bodily organs. "When the act of the
imagination  is  hindered  by  a  lesion  of  the  corporeal  organ, for
instance,  in  a  case  of  frenzy,  or  when  the  act of the memory is
hindered, as in the case of lethargy, we see that a man is hindered from
understanding  actually  even  those  things  of which he had a previous
knowledge."  The problem of body and mind is discussed more fully in the
chapter  on  Matter.  Other  problems  involved  in  the  theory of mind
similarly  occur  in  other  chapters  as well as in this one, e.g., the
problem of mind in animals and men (in the chapters on Animal and Man) ;
the  problem  of  the existence of minds superior to that of man (in the
chapters on Angel and

[213a]
God)  ;  the  problem  of  the origin of ideas in the human mind (in the
chapters  on  Idea  and  Memory  and  Imagination).  It  shouldj^ noted,
however,  that agreement or disagreement on the nature of the human mind
does  not  always  determine  agreement  or disagreement with respect to
these  other  questions.  Sharing  the view that the mind is a spiritual
substance,  Locke  and  Descartes  do  not  agree  about innate ideas or
principles.  Locke  tends  to agree with Aristotle when he says that the
mind  is  a tabula rasa, "void of all characters, without any ideas. How
comes  it to be furnished?" he asks. "Whence has it all the materials of
reason  and knowledge? To this I answer in one word, from Experience. In
that  all  our knowledge is founded; and from that it ultimately derives
itself. Our observation employed either about external sensible objects,
or  about  the  internal  operations  of  our  own  minds, is that which
supplies  our  understandings  with  all the materials of thinking." But
Locke   does  not  accept  Aristotle's  sharp  distinction  between  the
faculties  of  sense and OUTLINE OF TOPICS I. Diverse conceptions of the
human  mind la. Mind as intellect or reason, a part or power of the soul
or  human nature, distinct from sense and imagination jects of sense and
reason lb. Mind as identical with thinking substance (1) The relation of
the mind as thinking substance to sense and imagination (2) Thinking and
willing  as  the acts of the thinking substance ic. Mind as a particular
mode  of  that  attribute  of God which is thought (1) The origin of the
human  mind as a mode of thought (2) The properties of the human mind as
a  mode  of  thought  id.  Mind  as  soul or spirit, having the power to
perform  all  cognitive  and  voluntary  functions (1) The origin of the
mind's simple ideas: sensation and reflection plex ideas

[213b]
Chapter  58:  MIND  179  reason,  nor does he find it necessary to adopt
Aristotle's  notion  of  an  active  intellect  to  explain how the mind
abstracts general ideas from the particulars of sense-perception. So far
as  his  theory  attributes  to  mind the power of sense, Locke has more
affinity with Berkeley and Hume than with Aristotle; yet on the question
of  abstract  ideas  or the distinction between men and brutes, he is as
much  opposed  to  them as they are to Aristotle. These few observations
may  be  taken  as  a  sample  of the many intricately crossing lines ot
thought  which make the complex pattern of the traditional discussion of
mind. With few exceptions, almost any other choice of authors and topics
would  provide  similar examples. That fact, combined with the fact that
almost  every  major  topic in this chapter leads into the discussion of
other  great  ideas,  tends  to make the chapter on Mind a kind of focal
point  for  perspective  on  the  whole  world  of  thought.  It  is not
surprising  that  this  should  be  the case, for on any theory, mind is
somehow  the  place of ideas or, as Aristotle says, "the form of forms."
PAGE l82 83 184

[214a]
180  THE  GREAT  IDEAS realm of art; aesthetic finality of intellect and
will purposive behavior riety of mental operations (2) The topography of
mind   or  nature  2.C.  The  interaction  of  mind  and  body  (1)  The
physiological  conditions of mental activity 2d. The parallelism of mind
and  body y. The evolution of mind or intelligence 4. The various states
of  the human mind 4^. The condition of the mind prior to experience (1)
The  mind  as  completely  potential:  the  mind  as a tabula rasa human
intellect of Christ

[214b]
PAGE  ie.  Mind  as  a  triad  of  cognitive  faculties:  understanding,
judgment,  reason  185  (1)  The  relation  of understanding to sense or
intuition: its application in the realm of nature; conformity to law (2)
The relation of judgment to pleasure and displeasure: its application in
the (3) The relation of reason to desire or will: its application in the
realm  of  freedom;  the summum bonum ig. Mind as the totality of mental
processes  and  as  the principle of meaningful or (1) The nature of the
stream of thought, consciousness, or experience: the va2. The human mind
in  relation  to matter or body 186 (2) The influence of mental activity
on  bodily  states  187  of  the  difference  between mind and soul, and
between  mind  and body 3. Mind in animals and in men 188 ijb. Mentality
as  a  common property of men and animals: the differences between human
and  animal  intelligence  in degree or quality 189 4#. The mentality of
children   190  (2)  The  innate  endowment  of  the  mind  with  ideas:
instinctive  determinations (3) The transcendental or a priori forms and
categories  of  the  mind  191  aJ.  Supernatural  states  of  the human
intellect: the state of innocence; beatitude; the

[215a]
5.  The weakness and limits of the human mind 191 5#. The fallibility of
the human mind: the causes of error 5<r. The elevation of the human mind
by  divine grace: faith and the supernatural 6. The reflexivity of mind:
the  mind's knowledge of itself and its acts 7. The nature and phases of
consciousness:  the realm of the unconscious 194 ya. The nature of self-
consciousness  jb.  The  degrees  or  states  of  consciousness: waking,
dreaming,  sleeping  8.  The  pathology of mind: the loss or abeyance of
reason  $a. The distinction between sanity and madness: the criterion of
lucidity  or  insight  Sb.  The  causes of mental pathology: organic and
functional  factors  9.  Mind  in  the moral and political order ga. The
distinction  between  the speculative and practical intellect or reason:
the  spheres of knowledge, belief, and action gb. The relation of reason
to  will,  desire, and emotion gd. Reason as the principle of free will:
rationality as the source of moral and political gf. The life of reason,
or  the  life  of  the  mind,  as  man's highest vocation: reason as the
principle of all human work 10. The existence of mind apart from man 200
10a.  The  indwelling  reason  in  the  order of nature 10b. Nous or the
intellectual  principle:  its  relation to the One and to the world-soul
ioc. The realm of the pure intelligences: the angelic intellect lod. The
unity  and  separate  existence  of the active or the possible intellect
i0£. Mind as an immediate infinite mode of God (1) The unfolding of mind
or  spirit  in world history (2) The concrete objectification of mind in
the  state  log.  The divine intellect: its relation to the divine being
and the divine will

[215b]
Chapter 58: MIND 181 PAGE gifts 193 freedom 1 98

[216a]
182  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited. 1. Diverse conceptions of the human mind la. Mind as
intellect  or  reason,  a  part  or  power  of the soul or human nature,
distinct from sense and imagination 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 350a-353d;
bk  vi, 386d-388a; bk vii, 392c-393c; bk ix, 421a-c / Timaeus, 466a-467a
/ Theaetetus, 534d535c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247b i248*9] 330b-d / Soul, bk
11,  ch  2  [4i3b24-26]  643d-644a;  ch 3 [414^4-20] 644d; [414^3415*13]
645a-b; bk hi, ch 3-8 659c-664d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io97b34~
1098*7] 343b; bk ix, ch 4
[1166*10-28]
419b-c; ch 8
[1 168^8-1169*12] 422b-d; ch 9
[1170*16-18] 423d-424a; bk x, ch 7 [ii77b261178*8]
432c / Politics, bk vii, ch 15 b8-28] 539b-d
[i 334
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk hi [136-160] 31d-32a 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  6, 110a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 7
3d-4a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  in,  ch  2-3  2  16b-  217b  18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  x,  par 11-36 74a80d esp par 21 76c-d; bk xiii, par 12
113b-d  /  City of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c; bk
xi, ch 27, 337d-338a; bk

[216b]
i  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  77  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. xix, ch 18 523a-b /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 8 626c-627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 75, a 3, ans 380c-381b; q 76, a 3, contrary 391a-393a; q 78, a
i, ans 407b-409a; q 79 413d-427a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[61-84] 92a-b
42  Kant: Pure Reason, 113b-115c esp 113c-114b; 248d-250a,c / Judgement,
551a-552c   1*(1)  The  difference  between  the  acts  of  sensing  and
understanding,  and  the  objects  of  sense and reason 7 Plato: Phaedo,
224a-225a;  228a-230c;  231c232a  /  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c /
Timaeus,  447b-d; 457b-458a / Theaetetus, 534d-536b / Sophist, 565a-569a
esp 568a-569a / Philebus, 634b-635b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk
i,  ch 18 lllbc; ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Topics, bk 11,
ch  8 [114*18-26] 159d-160a / Physics, bk 1, ch 5 [i88b26-i89*9] 264b-c;
bk vii, ch 3 [247^-248*9] 330b-d / Metaphysics, 1 3] 499a-500a; ch 5
[986^5-987*1] 504d-505a; ch 6 [987*29-^8]
505b-d; bk hi, ch 4 [999*24^5] 518a-b; bk b bk 1, ch 1
[980*28-98
vii, ch 10
[io35b35-io36*i2]
559b-c; ch 15

[217a]
la(2) to ldr(4) Chapter 563c-564c; bk viii, ch 2 [1043*12-28] 567c-d; ch
3  [io43b28-33]  568b;  bk x, ch 9 586a-c; bk xi, ch 7 [1064*4-9] 592b /
Soul, bk 11, ch 5
[4i7b i7~28] 648b-c; bk hi, ch 8 664b-d^__12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [553-521]
48d-51a   esp   [469-521]   50b-51a;   [722-756]  53d54a  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 6, 110c111c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 7
3d-4a  / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 2, 107b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 23
153d-154b;  tr  vi,  ch  1-2  189b-190b; tr vii, ch 8, 195b-196a / Fifth
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  2  216b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10
15b-d;  bk  iv,  par 15-17 23a-c; bk vii, par 23 50b-c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  6, 269b-c; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  12,  a 3, ans 52c-53b; q 13, a i, rep 3 62c-63c; q 14, a 11
84c-85c;  q 18, a 2, ans 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 55, a 2, rep 2
289d290d; q 57, a 1, rep 2 295a-d; a 2, ans and rep 1 295d-297a; q 75, a
3, rep 2 380c-381b; a 5, ans 382a-383b; q 76, a 2, rep 4 388c391a; q 79,
a  5,  rep  2  418c-419b; a 6, rep 2 419b-420d; q 84, a i, ans and rep 2
440d442a; a 2, ans and rep i 442b-443c; aa 6-8 447c-451b; q 85, a i, rep
3  451c-453c;  a  2 453d-455b; q 86, a 1 461c-462a; part i-ii, q 1, a 2,
rep 3 610b-611b; q 2, a 6, ans 619d620d; q 29, a 6 748b-749a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 3 8b-9a; part hi suppl, q
70,  a 2, rep 3 896a-897d l<z(2) The cooperation of intellect and sense:
the  dependence  of  thought  upon  imagination  and  the  direction  of
imagination  by  reason  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 126b-c / Phaedo, 228a-230c /
Republic,  bk  hi, 333b-d; bk vi-vii, 383d398c / Theaetetus, 535a-536b /
Seventh  Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18
110b-c; bk 11, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246b2o-248 a8]
330a-d  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch 1 [403*2-10] 632a; bk hi, ch 7 [431*14]-^ 8
[432*13]  663d-664d  / Sense and the Sensible, ch 6 [445 b4~i8] 683b-d /
Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  1 [449^0-450*25] 690c-691a 18 Augustine:
City  of God, bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  75,  a  3, rep 2 380c-381b; q 79, a 4, rep 3 417a418c; q 81, a 3, ans
and rep 2-3 430c-431d; q 84, a 2, contrary and rep i 442b-443c; a 3, ans
443d-444d;  a 4, ans 444d-446b; aa 6-8 447c-451b; q 85, a 1 451c-453c; a
5,  rep  2  457d-458d;  a  7,  ans  459c-460b;  q 86, a i, ans and rep 2
461c-462a; a 4, rep 3 463d464d; q 88, aa 1-2 469a-472c; q 89, a 1, ans

[217b]
58:  MIND 183 and rep i 473b-475a; a 5, ans and rep 4 477a-478b; q 91, a
3, rep 1-3 486b-487d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3,
rep 3 8b-9a; a 4, rep 1,3 9a-10b; q 51, a 1, ans 12b-13c; q 52, a 1, ans
15d-18a;  q  56,  a  5, ans 33c-34b; part hi, q ii, a 2 773a-d 1^(3) The
functioning  of  intellect:  the  acts  of  understanding, judgment, and
reasoning  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  228a-230c / Republic, bk vii, 392a-394a /
Theaetetus, 535a-536b; 537d-538a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 4
[2*4-10]
6a / Interpretation, ch i
[16*9-18]
25a-b / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i 39a-d / Metaphysics, bk vi, ch 4
[i027b i8-28]
550a,c; bk ix, ch 10 577c-578a,c / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[407*25-33]
636d-637a;  bk  hi, ch 6 662d-663c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[353-521]  48d-51a  esp  [469-521] 50b-51a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr
vi,  ch  2, 107b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 37 120d121a /
Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 31 651d652b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; q 14, a 7, ans 81d-82b; q 46, a 2, rep 3
253a-255a;  q  58,  a  3  301d302d; a 4, ans 302d-303c; q 59, a i, rep i
306c-307b;  q  79, aa 8-9 421c-423d; a 10, rep 2-3 423d-424d; q 82, a 4,
rep  i  434c435c;  qq  84-89  440b-480c;  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a 4, rep 2
612a-613a;  q 5, a 1, rep i 636d-637c; q 15, a 4, rep 1 683b-684a; q 16,
a  i,  rep  3 684b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 1,
rep  2  205b-206b; part ii-ii, q 1, a 2, rep 2-3 381a-c; q 8, a 1, rep 2
417a-d;  q  180,  a  6  613a-614d;  part hi, q ii, a 3 773d774c; part in
suppl, q 92, a i, ans 1025c1032b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d;
56b;  59b-61d  esp  59c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48 HOd-110a la(4) The
distinction  of  the  active  and  the  possible  intellect in power and
function  8  Aristotle:  Soul, bk hi, ch 4-5 661b-662d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 54, a 1, rep 1 285a-d; a 4 287b-288a; q 55, a 2,
rep  2  289d-290d;  q  79,  aa  2-5  414d-419b; q 84, a 4, ans and rep 3
444d-446b; a 6 447c449a; Q 85, a 1 451c-453c; Q 87, a 1 465a-466c; q 88,
a  1,  ans  and  rep 2 469a-471c; q 117, a 1 595d-597c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 50, a 4 9a-10b; a 5, rep 1-2 10b-d; q 67, a 2,
ans  82c-83b; part hi, q 9, a i, ans 763b764c; aa 3-4 765b-767b; q 12, a
i, ans and rep 3 776c-777b; part hi suppl, q 92, a 3, rep 11 1034b-1037c
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 31, schol 366d367a

[218a]
184 THE GREAT IDEAS (1. Diverse conceptions of the human mind.) lb. Mind
as  identical  with thinking substance 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv,
51d-52a;  part  v,  56a-b  /  Meditations, 71b-d; n 77d81d; iv, 89b; vi,
98c-d  / Objections and Replies, 114d-115a,c; def vi-vii 130c-d; prop iv
133c;  135b-136b;  152b,d-156a;  207a;  208c-d;  209c;  224d-225d; 248b;
249d-250b;  261a-b;  276b-c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i,
sect 9-25 123a-127d; ch xix, sect 4 176a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  2  413b;  sect  26-27  418a-b; sect 98 432a; sect 135142 440a-441c
passim  53  James:  Psychology, 130b-131a; 221a-226a esp 221a-222b lb(l)
The  relation of the mind as thinking substance to sense and imagination
31  Descartes:  Rules,  vin,  13a-b;  14b; xn, 18b-c; 20a-c; xiv 28a-33b
passim  /  Discourse,  part  1,  41d;  part  iv,  53b; part v, 59a-60c /
Meditations,  11  77d-81d; vi 96b-103d esp 96b98c, 99d-101a / Objections
and  Replies,  def  i-ii  130a-b;  postulate  11  131a; 136d-137a; 137d;
207d-208a;  209c; 215b-c; 218c-d; 224d225d; 229d-230c 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  2 413b; sect 138-139 440c-d \b{2) Thinking and willing
as  the acts of the thinking substance 31 Descartes: Rules, in 3b-5a; xi
17b-18b;  xiv  28a-33b passim / Meditations, 111 81d-89a esp 81d-82a; iv
89a-93a passim; vi, 101d-102a / Objections and Replies, def i-ii 130a-b;
137d; 162b; 170d; 218c-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 2 413b; sect
26-28  418a-c; sect 138-139 440c-d lc. Mind as a particular mode of that
attribute  of  God  which is thought 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 14
359d-360aJ  prop  25, corol 365b; prop 29-31 366b-367a; part 11, axiom 2
373d; prop i, schol 374a; prop 5 374c-d; prop io, corol 376d; prop 11-13
377b-378c;  prop  20 382d; part hi, prop 1 396a-c; prop 2, demonst 396c;
part v, prop 40, schol 462d lc(l) The origin of the human mind as a mode
of  thought  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 14, corol 2 360a; prop 25,
corol  365b;  prop  29-31 366b367a; part ii 373a-394d passim, esp prop i
373d-374a, prop 5-6 374c-375a, prop 10, corol 376d, prop 11-13 377b-378c
lc(2)  The properties of the human mind as a mode of thought 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part ii, def 3 373b; axiom 2-3 373d; prop 11-13 377b-378c; prop
17-19

[218b]
\b to \d(l) 380d-382c; prop 40 387a-388b; prop 48-49 391a-394d; part hi,
prop  1-2,  demonst  396a-c; prop 3 398b-c; prop 9-14 399b-401a; PART V,
PROP  23,  SCHOL  458c-d Id. Mind as soul or spirit, having the power to
perform   all   cognitive   and  voluntary  functions  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect 4 121d-122a; sect 10 123b-d; ch vi
131b-c;  ch ix 138b-141a passim, esp sect i 138b-c, sect 15 141a; ch xi,
sect  i-ch  xii,  sect  1  143d-147d; ch xix 175b-176b; ch xxi, sect 5-6
179c-180a;  ch  xxiii, sect 5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; sect 18 209a; sect
22 209d; sect 28-32 211b-212d; bk iv, ch xiv 364b365a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  2  413b;  sect  7  414b-c;  sect 26-28 418a-c; sect 89
430b-c; sect 135-142 440a-441c passim 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 194d-195a 53
James:  Psychology,  la;  118b-119b;  221a-226a  esp 221a-222b ld(l) The
origin  of  the  mind's simple ideas: sensation and reflection 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 1-8 121a-123a; sect 23-25 127b-d;
ch  ii, sect 2 128a-b; ch hi, sect i 128d-129a; ch vii 131c-133b; ch xi,
sect  17-CH  xn,  sect  1 147a-d; ch xii, sect 8 148c-d; ch xiv, sect 31
161d-162a;  ch  xvii,  sect 22 173d174a; ch xviii, sect 6 174c-d; ch xx,
sect 1-2 176b-c; sect 15 177d; ch xxi, sect 4 178d-179c; sect 75 200b-d;
ch  xxiii,  sect  i  204a-b;  sect  5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; sect 29-30
211d-212b;  sect  32-37  212c-214b; ch xxv, sect 9 216d; sect ii 217a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect i, 413a 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  ii, div 12-14 455d-456b ld(2) The activity of the understanding in
relating   ideas:  the  formation  of  complex  ideas  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch ii, sect 2 128a-b; ch vii, sect 10 133a-b; ch
xi,  sect 6-7 145a-b; ch xii, sect i-ch xiii, sect 1 147b-149a; ch xiii,
sect  4-6  149b-d; sect 27 154c-d; ch xiv, sect 27 160d-161a; sect 30-31
161c-162a;  ch  xv,  sect  2-3  162c-d;  ch xvi, sect 1-2 165c-d; sect 5
166b-c;  ch  xvii,  sect 3 168b; sect 5 168d169a; ch xviii, sect i 174a;
sect  6 174c-d; ch xxii, sect 2 201a-b; sect 9 202c-203a; ch xxiii, sect
15  208c-d;  ch  xxx, sect 3 238c-d; ch xxxii, sect 12 245b-c; bk hi, ch
11,  sect  3  253c;  ch  v  263d-268a; ch vi, sect 11 271b-d; sect 26-51
274d-283a; ch xi, sect 15 303b-c; bk iv, ch iv, sect 5 324d

[219a]
'  \e to 1^(3) 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect i, 413a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  ii,  div  13-14 455d-456b; sect hi, div 18 457c-d;
sect  v,  div  39,  466c-d;  div  40,  467t>^-——  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
101b-102a  esp  lOld102a  le.  Mind  as  a triad of cognitive faculties:
understanding,  judgment,  reason 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16a; 34a-41c
esp 38c41c; 51d-52b; 59c-64a esp 60a-c; 89c-94b 108a-113b esp 110d-113b;
115b-c;  119a-b  129c-130c  esp  130b-c;  166c-171a;  173b-174a  187a-c;
193a-200c  esp  193a-195a,  199b-c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
281c-282d  /  Practical  Reason,  329a-d;  343a;  349b-350c / Judgement,
461a-475d   esp   461a-462d,  464c467a,  472c-d,  474b-475d;  542b-543c;
570b572c;  604a-b  l*(l)  The  relation  of  understanding  to  sense or
intuition:  its application in the realm of nature; conformity to law 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 14a-108a,c esp 15b-c, 16a-c, 22a,c, 23a-24a, 30b-c,
31a-d,  34a-c,  37b-39c,  41c-42a,  45d-46a,  47c-48a, 48d-51d, 53b-55a,
58a-64a,  64d-65c, 94d-95d, 98c, 101b-107b; 109d-112d; 115b-c; 164a-171a
/  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  275b;  281c282d  esp  282b-c /
Practical  Reason,  292a-293b;  296a-d;  301d-302d;  319c-320b; 329b-c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383c-d; 385a-c; 386d387a,c / Judgement,
461a-475d   esp  464c-465c,  474b-475d;  482d-483d;  492c-d;  542b-544c;
550a-551a,c;  562d-563b;  570c-572b;  609b610a  le(2)  The  relation  of
judgment  to  pleasure  and displeasure: its application in the realm of
art;  aesthetic finality 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 101b-107b esp 102b-103a /
Judgement,  461a-475d  esp  467d-473a,  474b475d;  480d-482b; 486d-491c;
493c-495a,c;  497a-501b;  542b-544c;  546d-548c;  558a-b;  559a-560c esp
560b-c;  562a-564c  esp  562a-d;  567c-568c; 570b-572c; 577b; 584d-585a;
588c;  597b-599b  le(3)  The  relation  of reason to desire or will: its
application  in  the  realm  of  freedom; the summum bonum 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  164a-171a  esp 164a-165c; 234c-240b esp 236b-240b / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d-265b;  271c-d;  275b;  279b; 281c-283b esp
282d-283b;  284d-285a  /  Practical Reason, 292a-293b; 296a-d; 301d302d;
303b-304b;  307d-314d  esp 314a-d; 315c; 319c-321b; 327d-329c; 337a-355d
esp 337a-338c, 343b-d, 348d-355d / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
367c  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383c-d; 386b-387a,c; 388a-d; 390b /
Judgement, 461a-475d esp 465a-c,

[219b]
Chapter  58:  MIND  185 474b-475d; 483d-484b; 587a-588a; 594b595c; 601d;
604d-606d  esp 606a-d; 607c; 609b-610a If. Mind as intelligence or self-
consciousness,  knowing  itself as universal: the unity of intellect and
will  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro, par 4-9 12d-14d; par 13
15c-d;  par  21  17a-c;  par 27 18d; part 1, par 35 21a-b; par 66 29a-c;
part  hi,  par  353-360 112b-114a,c; additions, 4 116a-d / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  160d161a; 170b-d; part hi, 306b 53 James : Psychology,
235a-238a esp 236a-237b 1^. Mind as the totality of mental processes and
as   the  principle  of  meaningful  or  purposive  behavior  53  James:
Psychology,  la-9a  esp  la,  5a-b,  6b-7a;  51a-b;  121b-122b 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams, 383b / Unconscious, 428a-430c esp 428d-429b /
General  Introduction,  452a-c; 467c-468a 1^(1) The nature of the stream
of   thought,  consciousness,  or  experience:  the  variety  of  mental
operations  53  James:  Psychology,  43a-44a;  51a-52a; 90b-93a esp 92b;
140b-184a  esp  140b-141a, 145a, 146a-b, 157b-161a, 165a-167b; 300a-311a
esp   300a-b,   307b-308a,  311a;  313a-314a;  315a319a  esp  317b-319a;
323a-327a esp 326a-b
[fn 1]; 360a; 381b-385b; 396a-397a; 421a-427a
esp  424b-426a;  452a-457a;  480a-b;  502a505b;  561a;  664a-666b; 767a;
851a-862a  esp  852b853a  54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 180c-181b;
337a-b;  348a-d;  351d-353b esp 352d; 363c364b; 375a-385c esp 375b-376a,
377c-380d,   383b-c,   384a-385c  /  Unconscious,  442b-443d  /  General
Introduction,  452a-c  /  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 646b-648b / Ego
and Id, 700a-701d / New Introductory Lectures, 835d836a; 837d-838c lg(2)
The  topography of mind 53 James: Psychology, 9a-15a esp 13a-14a; 17b49b
esp  43a-44a,  47b-49b  54  Freud:  Interpretation of Dreams, 351b-353b;
382a-c  /  Unconscious,  430d-432c  /  Ego  and  Id,  70  Id- 703a / New
Introductory  Lectures,  836c-d; 839b-d lg(3) The unity of attention and
of  consciousness:  the  selectivity  of mind 53 James: Psychology, 91a;
184a-187b;   260a-286a   esp   260a-262a,  264b-265a,  270b-272b;  388a;
445a-446a; 606b-610b esp 608a-609a; 692a693b; 773a-774a; 830a; 862b-863b
[fn  2] 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 375b-c / Unconscious, 438c-d
/ Ego and Id, 698d-699b
[fhi]

[220a]
2a.  The  immateriality  of  mind:  mind  as  an immaterial principle, a
spiritual  substance,  or  as an incorporeal power functioning without a
bodily  organ 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-126c / Phaedo, 223b225c; 231c-234b
/  Timaeus, 452d-453b; 466a-b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 4 [4o8b i8-29]
638c;  ch 5 [4ii b i3-i8] 641c-d; bk ii, ch 2 [4i3b24~ a io-b23] 661b29]
643d-644a;  bk  hi,  ch 4 [429 662a; ch 5 662c-d 9 Aristotle: Generation
of Animals, bk ii, ch 3
[736^5-30] 277c
17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 2, 107b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr vii,
ch  8,  195b-196a;  197c-198b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 2,
43c-d  /  City  of  God,  bk viii, ch 5, 268c-d; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 3, a 1, rep 2 14b-15b; q 7, a 2,
rep  2  31d-32c;  q  75,  a  2 379c-380c; a 3, rep 2 380c-381b; a 5, ans
382a-383b; a 6 383c-384c; q 79, a 1, rep 4 414a-d; a 2, rep 2 414d-416a;
a  3, rep 3 416a-417a; a 4, rep 4-5 417a-418c; a 5, rep 1-2 418c-419b; a
6,  rep  1-2  419b-420d;  q  83,  a  1,  rep 5 436d-438a; q 84, a i, ans
440d442a;  a  2, ans 442b-443c; a 4, ans 444d446b; a 6, ans 447c-449a; q
85,  a  6,  ans  458d-459c;  q  87, a 3, rep 3 467b-468a; q 89, a 1, ans
473b-475a;  part i-ii, q 2, a 6, ans 619d-620d; q 35, a 5, ans 775d-777a
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 4 9a-10b; q 53, a i,
ans and rep 2-3 19d21a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[61-84] 92a-b
28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 494a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 20a-b /
Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a;  53b;  part v, 59a-60c / Meditations, 11
77d-81d;  vi  96b-103d  esp  98c99a,  99d,  101d-102a  /  Objections and
Replies,  114d-115a,c; 119d-120a; def vi-vii 130c-d; def x 130d; prop iv
133c;  135d-136b;  152b,d156d;  207d-208a;  209c;  224d-225d;  231a232d;
261a-b; 276bc 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, pref 451a-452c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxiii, sect 5 205a-b; sect 15-22 208c-209d;
sect  28-32 211b-212d esp sect 32 212c-d; ch xxvii, sect 12-14 223a-224b
passim;  sect  27  227d-228a; bk iv, ch hi, sect 6 313c315b 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  26  418a;  sect  137 440b-c; sect 141 441a-b 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 186a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i,
par 48 24bc 53 James: Psychology, 130a; 221a-223a

[220b]
186  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2 to 2c{\) 2. The human mind in relation to matter
or  2b.  The potentiality of intellect or reason cornbody pared with the
potentiality of matter or nature 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247b i248*9] 330b-d
/  Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 2 fi046a37-b24] 571c-d; ch 5 573a-c / Soul, bk
a  i6-22]  667a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part 1, q 7, a hi, ch 5
662c-d; ch ii [434 2, ans and rep 2-3 31d-32c; q 14, a 2, rep 3 76d-77d;
a  8,  ans  82c-83b;  q  19,  a  i,  ans  108d-109c;  q 50, a 2, rep 2-4
270a-272a;  q  55,  a  1  289a-d;  a  2,  ans  289d-290d; o 58, a i, ans
300c-301a;  q  75, a 5, rep 1-2 382a-383b; q 79, a 2 414d-416a; a 6, ans
419b-420d; q 84, a 2, ans and rep 2 442b-443c; a 3, rep 1-2 443d-444d; o
85,  a  5,  rep  3 457d-458d; q 87, a 1, ans 465a-466c; q 91, a 3, rep 2
486b487d;  part  1-11, q 2, a 6, ans 619d-620d; q 22, a 1, ans and rep i
720d-721c  20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 4, rep 1-2
9a-10b; q 55, a i, ans and rep 5 26b-27a; part hi, q 9, a 3, ans and rep
3  765b-766b;  part  hi  suppl, q 92, a i, ans and rep 10 1025c-1032b 28
Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 494a-b 53 James: Psychology, 153a 2c. The
interaction  of  mind and body 7 Plato: Timaeus, 452d-453b; 474b-476b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk hi [94-829] 31b-40c 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 5-7 2d-4a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 48d-50b
esp  48d-49c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v, 60b-c; part vi, 61c /
Meditations,  vi,  99d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  207d-208a; 209c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part v, pref 451a-452c 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 28 322a-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 229b-232a 42
Kant:  Judgement,  538d-539a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 281a-282c 53
James:  Psychology,  2b-4a;  8a-52b  esp 8a-9a, 14b-15a, 19a-b, 47b-49b,
51b-52a;   82b;   84a94b   esp  89b-93a;  116all9b;  139a-140b;  208a-b;
222b-223a; 259a; 288a-289b; 311a; 450a-451b; 694a; 742b-755a; 758a-759a;
827b-835a  esp 829b-830a 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 154c-155a /
Narcissism,  402d-404b  passim  /  Instincts,  412b414c  esp 413d-414a /
General   Introduction,  451c-452a;  605b-606a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure
Principle,  639a-640d;  646b-651a  /  Ego  and Id, 700a-703a passim, esp
702d-703a  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 829a-c 2c(l) The physiological
conditions of mental activity 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246b2o248*9] 330a-d / Soul, bk
ii, ch 9 [421*19-26! 652d / Dreams 702a-706d

[221a]
2c(2) to 2e 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch io
[686b22-29] 218b-c
10  Hippocrates:  Sacred Disease, 155d-160d esp 159a-c ^^^ 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things, bk iv [722-776] 53d-54b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
hi,  sect  i 259b,d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84, a 7, ans
449b-450b;  a  8,  rep  2  450b-451b; q 85, a 7, ans 459c-460b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  48d-50b  31  Descartes: Rules, xn, 19a-20d /
Objections  and  Replies, 207d-208a; 208d-209a; 209c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii,  prop  14  380c; prop 16-17 380d-381d; prop 26 384a-b; part v,
pref  451a-452c passim: prop 39 462a-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  i,  sect  23  127b;  ch  xix,  sect  i, 175b; ch xxvii, sect 27
227d-228a;  ch  xxxiii,  sect  6 249a-b; bk iv, ch in, sect 28 322a-c 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 18-20 416b-417a; sect 50 422c 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  288c-d;  299c;  595d-596a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  689c690a  53  James: Psychology, 2b-3a; 9a-73b; 152a-153a
157a-b;  166b-167a;  367a-373a  esp 370a-b 380a-b; 381b-383b; 387b-388a;
413b-420b  427b-430b;  453a;  455b-456a; 497a-501b 506a-507a; 520a-521a;
533a-538b;  690a-691b  758a-759a;  829b;  865a 54 Freud: Hysteria, 87a /
Interpretation  of Dreams, 351b-352c; 378a-b; 382a-c / Unconscious, 431d
/  General Introduction, 586c-d / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 639b-d;
646b648a  2c(2)  The  influence  of  mental  activity on bodily states 7
Plato: Timaeus, 474d-475b 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7
[7oi b
i3]-ch  8  [702*22] 237a-c; ch ii 239a-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk hi [136-176] 31d-32b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, a 3,
ans 106b-107c; q 117, a 3, rep 3 598c599b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 36c-40d;
234c-235a;  332d-333c;  532a-b  28  Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 296d /
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  321d-322a; 322c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  48d-50b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 5,
179c;  bk iv, ch hi, sect 28 322a-c; ch x, sect 19 354a-c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 51-52 472b-473c; div 57-58, 475c-476b 42
Kant: Judgement, 538d-539a; 560b 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 350c-d

[221b]
-  Chapter  58:  MIND  187  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 141d-142a;
142d;  bk  v,  213c-d;  bk  vi,  247d-248a; bk ix, 350d-354a passim, esp
351d-352a, 353b-d; bk xiii, 567d-568c esp 568b; bk xv, 617a-b; 618a-b 53
James:  Psychology,  3a-b;  64a-67a; 132a-134b; 694a-699a; 767a-794a esp
767b-768a,  787a794a;  827b-835a  esp  828a-830a;  841a-848a passim, esp
842a-b,  847b-848a  54 Freud: Origin and Development of Psycho Analysis,
lb-6b  esp 4c-5a / Hysteria, 25a-59d esp 25a-27a, 30a-d, 35b-c, 37d-38a,
56b58c;  82d-83c  /  Narcissism,  403a-c  / Repression, 426b-c / General
Introduction,  572a-b  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 718a719d;
7'28c?'29a  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 852a-b 2d. The parallelism of
mind  and  body 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 2 355a; prop 14, corol 2
360a;  prop  25,  corol  365b;  part  11,  prop  1-2 373d-374a; prop 5-7
374c-375c;  prop  11-13 377b-378c; prop 15-28 380c-384c; part hi, prop 2
396c398b;   prop  10-14  399c-401a;  part  v,  prop  i  452d  53  James:
Psychology,  84a-90b  esp 84b-85b, 88a90a; 96a-b; 116a-119b esp 119b 2e.
The  reduction  of  mind  to  matter:  the  atomic  explanation  of  its
processes, and of the difference between mind and soul, and between mind
and  body  7  Plato:  Phaedo, 241d-242b / Sophist, 567a568a 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk i, ch 2-5 633a-641d passim, esp ch 2
[403b3i~404a3o]
633a-c, a7-i3] 634b
[405
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d;
[865-990]
26a-27c; bk hi
[94-829]
31b-40c;  bk iv [722-817] 53d-54d; [877-961] 55d-56d 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  ix, ch 5, 68b / Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2, 78d; ch 3 79b-c /
Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 8, 195b196c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  84,  a  2,  ans and rep 2 442b-443c; a 6, ans 447c449a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  49a-d; 52c; part ii, 162c 31 Descartes: Objections
and  Replies,  224d226d; 261a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  6  313c-315b; ch x, sect 5 350a-b; sect 10 351b-352a; sect 17
353b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 93 431b; sect 137 440b-c; sect
141  441a-b 42 Kant: Judgement, 599d-600d 53 James: Psychology, 95a-107b
esp 95b-98a; 115a-118besp 117a-118b 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures,
829a-b

[222a]
4  188  3. Mind in animals and in men 3a. Mind, reason, or understanding
as  a  specific property of human nature: comparison ofhuman reason with
animal intelligence and instinct 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[442-444]
44c  5  Sophocles: Antigone [332-375] 134a-b; [683684] 137a 5 Euripides:
Suppliants
[195-213]
260a-  b  /  Trojan  Women  [665-672]  275d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-c /
Timaeus, 452c454a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch 3
[i32a i7~22]
183a / Physics, bk h, ch 8 [199*20-23] 276c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98oa28-b27] 499a-b
b / Soul, bk 11, ch 3
[4 1
1 7-20] 644d; [415^- 12] 645b; bk in, ch 3 [427b7-i4] 659d-660a;
[428*20-24]
660c; ch 10
[433
a8-i3] 665d / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453*5-14]
695b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[488b2o-27]
9d; bk viii, ch i
[588a i8-b
4]  114b,d / Parts of Animals, bk 1, ch 1 [64ib5~ 8] 164b-c / Generation
of Animals, bk 1, ch 23
[73i a24-b8]
271c-d; bk 11, ch 6
[744*27-31]
285c / Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io97b23-io98a
7]  343a-b;  ch  13  [1102*33-1  103^] 347d-348c; bk hi, ch2 [iiu b6-i2]
357b-c; bk vi, ch 2 [1139 17-26] 387d; bk vii, ch 3
[ii47a25~b
5]  397c-d;  bk  ix, ch 9 [1170*16-18] 423d-424a; bk x ; ch 7 [ii77b26-i
178*8] 432c; ch 8 [ii78b 23-32] 433c / Politics, bk 1, ch 5
[i254b2025] 448b; bk vii, ch 13 [i332a39~b io] 537a-b;
ch 15
[i334b i2-28] 539c-d
/  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1 [i355b i-3] 594d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  3 108b-c; ch 6 110c-112b; ch 9 114c-116b; bk ii, ch 8, 146a-147a; bk
hi,  ch  7,  183c-184a; bk iv, ch 7, 233a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
hi,  sect  16  262d263a,c; bk v, sect 16 271c-d; bk vi, sect 23 276b; bk
viii, sect 7 286a; sect 41 288d; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  i, ch 7-13, 4a-6b esp ch 10, 5a / Third Ennead, tr hi, ch 4
94c-95c;  tr  iv,  ch 2 97d-98a / Fifth Ennead, tr 1, ch 10, 213d-214a /
Sixth  Ennead, tr vii, ch 4-6 323c-325a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x,
par  11  74a-b;  bk  xiii,  par  37 120d-121a / City of God, bk v, ch 11
216c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  23,  256bc;  bk  viii,  ch 6, 269a; bk xi, ch 27,
337d-338a;  bk  xxix,  ch  24,  610c-d  / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 8
626c-627a;  ch 22, 629bc 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 1,
rep 2 14b-15b; q 18, a 2, rep i 105c106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 30, a 2,
rep 3 168a-169b; q 59, a 3, ans 308b-309a; q 76, a 5, rep 4 394c-396a; q
78, a 4, ans and

[222b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 3 to 3a rep 4-6 411d-413d; q 79, a 5, rep 3 418c419b; a
6,  rep 1 419b-420d; a 8, rep 3 421c422b; a 10, rep 2 423d-424d; q 83, a
i,  ans  436d-438a;  q  84,  a  2,  rep  i  442b  443c; q 86, a 4, rep 3
463d-464d;  q  91, a 3, rep 1-2 486b-487d; q 96, a i, rep 4 510b-511b; a
2,  ans  511b-d;  q  115,  a 4, ans 589d-590c; q 118, a 2, ans and rep 2
601c-603b;  part i-ii, prologue 609a,c; o 1, a i, ans 609b-610b; q 10, a
3,  ans 664d-665c; q 12, a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2, rep 3 673c-674c; q 17, a
2  687d688b  20  Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 2
8b-9a;  q  1  10,  a  4,  rep 3 350d-351d; part in suppl, q 79, a i, ans
951b-953b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
[40-57]
46c; purgatory, xxv [52-84] 91d-92b; paradise, v [19-24] 112b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  57d;  59b-c; part 11, lOOa-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
119b-d;  184a-c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act iv, sc iv [32-39] 59a 28
Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428a; 454a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  35,  163d-164a  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part i, 41b,d; part iv,
51d-52a;  part  v,  56a-b;  59a-60c  /  Meditations, 71b-d; 11 77d-81d /
Objections  and  Replies, 156a-d; 209b; 226a-d; 276c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part hi, prop 57, schol 415b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[379-411]
240b-241a;  bk  ix [549-566] 259b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 339-348 233a-234a;
365  236a;  397  240b / Vacuum, 357a-358a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vi, sect 56-58 36d-37b; ch xiv, sect 163-164 63ac / Human Understanding,
intro,  sect  i 93a-b; bk 11, ch xi, sect 4-1 1 144d-146a esp sect io-ii
145d-146a; ch xxvii, sect 12 223a-b; bk in, ch vi, sect 26-27 274d-276a;
sect  29  276b-d; ch x, sect 17 295d-296b; ch xi, sect 20 304c-d; bk iv,
ch  xvii, sect i 371c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 151b-152a; 159b160a
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk i, ld-2b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
336bc;  337d-338a;  341d;  349b-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk i, 393b-c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 409d-410a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 199c-200c /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256d-257a; 264d-265a; 281c-282c /
Practical  Reason,  316c-317a  /  Pref  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
372a-b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-d  / Judgement, 479a-c;
584d-585c;  587a-588a;  602b,d  [fn  1]  43  Mill: Liberty, 294d-295b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, intro, par 21 17a-c; part hi, par 262-264
83d-84a; addi-

[223a]
3b to 4tf Chapter 58: MIND 189 tions, 4 116a-d; 121 136c-d; 157 142b-c /
Philosophy  of History, intro, 156c; 168b-d; 178a-b; 186a; 198a; part i,
258a;  part hi, 304d-305b ^^— 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 287a-c; 319b-c;
331b-332a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a 53 James:
Psychology,  85a-b;  678b-686b esp 686a-b; 691a-b 54 Freud: Unconscious,
429c-d  3b.  Mentality  as  a  common  property  of men and animals: the
differences between human and animal intelligence in degree or quality 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch i
[588a i8-b 4] 114b,d; bk
ix, ch 7
[6i2b i8-32]
138b-c / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10
[686b22-68 7
a23] 218b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[10281090] 74c-75b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 52b; 53a-b; 53d; 54a; 63a; 64a-c; 79c;
part  ii,  lOOa-c;  part  iv,  267b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 215a-232c esp
216c-219a,  231d-232c  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35, 163d-164a
31  Descartes:  Objections and Replies, 209b; 226a-d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk viii
[369-397]
240a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvii, sect 8 221a-222a;
bk  hi,  ch vi, sect 12 271d-272b esp 272b; sect 22 273d-274a; bk iv, ch
xvi,  sect  12, 370c-371a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix 487b488c
38  Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42 Kant: Judgement, 602b,d [fn i] 43
Mill  :  Utilitarianism, 448a-449c passim ; 469c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  287a-303d  esp  287ac, 294c; 319b-d; 591d-592a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue  ii,  689c690a  53  James:  Psychology,  5a-6b; 13a-15a
passim;  47b-51a  passim, esp 49b-50a; 85a-b; 676b677a; 678b-686b; 690b;
691a-b;  704a-706b;  873a 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 385b-c 3c.
The   evolution   of  mind  or  intelligence  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
337d-342c;  348d349c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  281a-c; 286c-288d;
299b-c;  320a-330a,c esp 320a-321b, 328b-d; 349b-d; 566b-567b; 591d-592a
53 James: Psychology, 41b; 51a-52b; 95b-98a; 800b; 851a-861a esp 851a-b,
857b-858a, 859a-860a; 878a; 890a-897b esp 897a-b

[223b]
54  Freud:  Instincts, 413a-d / General Introduction, 591d-592b / Beyond
the  Pleasure Principle, 647a-648a / Ego and Id, 707b-708b esp 708a-b 4.
The  various  states  of  the  human  mind 4a. Individual differences in
intelligence: degrees of capacity for understanding 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk
viii  [165-185]  223d-224a 5 Aristophanes: Frogs [1482-1499] 581d-582a 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  358a-360c;  bk vi, 373c-375b; 383c-d; bk vii,
401b-c / Theaetetus, 513a-d; 528a; 540c-541a / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d
esp 810c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 34
[89b io-i5] 122c /
Topics,  bk  viii, ch 14 [i63b 8-16] 222a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals,
bk iv, ch 10
[686b22-29]
218b-c / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch i
[1404*15-19]
654b; ch 2
[i405°7-9] 655b
/  Poetics,  ch 22 [1459^-7] 694d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 6,
182a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 31 26c27a; bk xiii, par 47,
123d-124a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  89,  a  1, ans
473b-475a;  q 117, a i, ans 595d-597c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  io,  a 4, rep 1 771b-772a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 60a-61a;
66c-67a;  67d-68c;  84c-d;  part ii, 154a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 60a-c;
65a; 71d-72b; 150c-151a; 240a-c; 319c-320a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
i,  41b,d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 13, schol 378a-c; part v,
prop 38-39 461d-462c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1-2 171a-172b; 7 173a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x, sect 8 142d-143a; ch xi, sect 2 144a-c
35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix, div 84, 488b,d
[fn
1]  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 235b-236a; 269b270a; 271b-273a 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk i, 7d-8a 42 Kant: Judgement, 525c-532a esp 526a-d,
528c-530c;  586a-587a 43 Federalist: number 79, 234b-d 43 Mill: Liberty,
297c-299a / Representative Government, 385b-d 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 20c;
283c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 166 59d-60a; additions,
107  134a-b  / Philosophy of History, intro, 166b-168a 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  i  [522-613] 15a-17a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 266c; 566a-567b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  263c-d;  bk  xv,  639a-b  53 James:
Psychology,      14b-15a;      274a-275a;     315ab;     345b;     381a;
431b-432aesp432b-433b[fni];  678b; 686b-690a; 691b-693a passim 54 Freud:
Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788b [fn 3]

[224a]
190  THE  GREAT IDEAS (4. The various states of the human mind.) 4b. The
mentality  of  children  7  Plato:  Laches, 35d / Apology, 200c-c 200c-d
320c-321d 35d Gorgias, 261a-c / Republic, bk ii esp 321d; bk iv, 353bc 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i
[i84a2i-b i4J
259b; bk vii, ch 3
[247b i3-248 a6] 330c-d /
Memory and Reminiscence, ch 1
[450
a26-b 9] 691a-b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch i a i8-b i]
114b,d  / Parts of Animals, bk iv, ch 10 [686b22-29] 218b-c / Ethics, bk
i, ch 3
[588
ic>94b29-io95  a i2] 340a-b; bk hi, ch 12 [1119* 19] 34~b i9] 366a,c; bk
vi, ch 8
[ii42a i2391b; bk x, ch 3 [ii74a i-4] 428b
12  Lucretius  :  Nature  of  Things,  bk hi [445-450] 35d 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 7-13 2c-4c / City of God, bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  85, a 3, ans 455b-457a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  72b-73c  27
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc 11 [163-173] 115b 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vi,  sect  54-63  36c-38c passim / Human
Understanding, bk i, ch 1 95b,d-103d esp sect 15-16 98d-99c; ch ii, sect
22  110a-b;  bk ii, ch i, sect 1-8 121a123a esp sect 6-8 122b-123a; sect
21-22  126d-127a;  ch ix, sect 5-7 138d-139b; ch xi, sect 8-9 145b-c; ch
xxxiii,  sect  7-10  249b-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 14
408d-409a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv, div 33, 463c-d 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 559d 53 James: Psychology, 270a; 413b
[fn
2];  456b457a;  684b-685a  54  Freud:  Interpretation of Dreams, 241b-c;
363b-364b;   379d-380b   /  Narcissism,  400a  /  General  Introduction,
526d-527b  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 768b-c 4c. The states of
the possible intellect: its potentiality, habits, and actuality b i248^]
330b-d  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch  1  [412^-12]  642a; [412^2-28] 642b; ch 5
[417^1-418^]  647d-648d;  bk hi, ch 4 [429b5~43oa2] 661d662b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 19, a 1, ans 108d-109c; q 34, a i, rep 2
185b187b;  q  79, a 4, rep 2 417a-418c; aa 6-7 419b8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk vii, ch 3
[247
421c;  a  10,  ans  423d-424d;  a  12,  ans  425c426b;  q 84, a 7, rep 1
449b-450b;  q 86, a 2, ans and rep 2 462a-463a; q 87, aa 1-3 465a468a 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 31, schol 366d-367a

[224b]
4b  to 4d(2) 4d. The condition of the mind prior to experience 4d{\) The
mind  as  completely  potential:  the mind as a tabula rasa 8 Aristotle:
Soul,  bk  hi,  ch 4 [429b23~430a2] 662a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 79, a 2, ans 414d-416a; q 84, a 3 443d-444d; a 6 447c-449a; q
89,  a  i,  rep 3 473b-475a; q 117, a 1, ans 595d-597c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q  9, a 1, ans 763b-764c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 327
231a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, 90d-91b; bk i 95b,d-121a,c esp ch
i,  sect i 95b,d-96a, sect 15 98d-99a, sect 23 101b-102a, ch ii, sect 22
110a-b,  ch  in,  sect  23  119b-120a;  bk 11, ch 1 121a-127d esp sect 2
121b-c,  sect  6  122b-c,  sect  9  123a,  sect  17  125c-d,  sect 20-25
126d-127d;  ch  ix, sect 6 139a; ch xi, sect 16-17 147a-b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect ii 455b457b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 234b-235a 53
James:  Psychology,  49b-50a;  852b-861a  esp  852b, 859b-860b 4d(2) The
innate  endowment  of  the mind with ideas: instinctive determinations 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  124a-126c  esp  126a-c / Meno, 179d-183a; 188d-189a /
Phaedo,  228a230d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i 97a-d; bk
ii, ch 19
[99^0-33]
136a-b  / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9 [992b24~993 a ii] 511a-c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 22, 127c-d; bk ii, ch 11, 150ac 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead, tr ii, ch 4, 8b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 25, 155b; tr iv, ch
5 160d-161b / Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2, 216b 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk x, par 10 73d74a; par 16-19 75b-76b; par 26-38 78a-81a / City of God,
bk  viii, ch 6, 269b-c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 9 627a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 84, a 3 443d-444d; a 4, ans 444d-446b; a 6,
ans  447c-449a; q 89, a i, rep 3 473b-475a; q 117, a 1, ans 595d-597c 28
Harvey: On Animal Generation, 333d-335a esp 334c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  lb-c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  iv, 5c-d; 6d; viii, 13c-d /
Discourse,  part  iv, 53b; part v, 54c / Meditations, ii-iii 77d-89a esp
in,  83b;  vi,  96d97a  /  Objections and Replies, 120c-d; 140c; 215b-c;
224b,d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 23, schol 458c-d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  90d-91b;  bk  i 95b,d-121a,c esp ch i, sect i 95b,d-96a,
sect 15 98d-99a, sect 23 101b-102a, ch hi,

[225a]
4</(3)  to  5a Chapter 58: MIND 191 sect 21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch i, sect
9-25 123a-127d esp sect 9 123a, sect 17 125c-d, sect 20-24 126d-127c; ch
ix,  sect  6  139a;  ch  xi,  sect  16-17  147a-b  ^_^_  35  Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  117x^1^17,  457b,d  [fn  1]  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
58c-59b; 113c-118a / Practical Reason, 352c-353a /Judgement, 551a552c 53
James:   Psychology,  49b-50a;  767b  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,
512b-513b;  526d;  532b; 599a- b / Group Psychology, 688d-689b / Ego and
Id,  707c-708b  esp 708b/ Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 721a 4d($)
The transcendental or a priori forms and categories of the mind 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  14a-108a,c  esp  14a-15c,  22a,c,  23a-24a,  25b-c,  27c,
28d-29d,  32a-c,  34a-c,  37b-39c,  41c-45b,  48d-51d, 52c-55a, 56d-59b,
61a-62c,  65d-66d, 94b-95a, 99a101b; 146a; 186d-187a; 192a-b / Practical
Reason, 307d-308b; 349b-350c 53 James: Psychology, 628b-631a; 851a-852a;
859a-882a  esp  859b-861b, 865b, 867a-868a, 879b; 886b-889a esp 889a 4e.
The  condition of the human mind when the soul is separate from the body
7  Plato:  Phaedrus, 124a-126c / Phaedo, 223a225c; 246d-247b / Republic,
bk x, 440d441a,c 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 5
[430*20-25]
662d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 21 265b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid,
bk  vi  [724-751]  230b-231a  17  Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 18
151b-c; tr in, ch 25-TR iv, ch 5 154d-161b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xxii,  ch  30,  618a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 77, a 8
406b-407a; q 89 473a-480c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[1-108] 91b 92c esp [79-84] 92b
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 21 458a; prop 23 458b-d; prop 40 462c-d
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 233d 44 Boswell -.Johnson, 192d-193c 4/.
Supernatural  states  of  the  human  intellect: the state of innocence;
beatitude;  the  human  intellect  of  Christ  Old  Testament:  Genesis,
2:17-20; 3:4-7,22 / Exodus, 33:11-23 / Eze^iel, 1; 10— (Z>) Ezechiel, 1;
10 New Testament: Matthew, 5:8 I John, 14:19-21 / / Corinthians, 13:12 /
//  Corinthians,  12:1-4 / I John, 3:2 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ix,
par  25  68c / City of God, bk x, ch 2 299d-300a; ch 28 316b-d; bk xxii,
ch 29 614b-616d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 84,

[225b]
a  5  446c-447c;  q  86,  a  2,  rep  i 462a-463a; q 94 501c-506a; q ioi
522c-523d  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 5, a 4 739a-740b; q
6,  a 2 741c-742a; qq 9-12 763b-779d; part hi suppl, q 92 1025b-1037c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, v
[1-12]
112a-b; vn
[64-84]
115d-116a; xm
[31-111]
125d-126c; xiv
[1-66] 126d-127c; xv [37-84]
128d-129b;  xxi  [82-102]  139a-b; xxxn [139]- xxxiii [145] 156a-157d 5.
The  weakness  and  limits  of the human mind 5a. The fallibility of the
human  mind:  the causes of error 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-225a / Republic,
bk  vii, 388a-389d / Theaetetus, 536c-544a / Sophist, 557b-558d esp 558b
8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 21 87d89b / Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch 16-18 109b-110c / Sophistical Refutations, ch i
[165*13-18] 227c
/ Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5
[ioo9a i5-ioioa i4] 528c-529d; ch 6 [ion a3-i3]
530d; ch 7 [ioi2a i8-22] 532a; bk ix, ch 10
[io5i b i8-io52a
4] 577d-578a,c; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b i2-24] 590d-591a
/ Soul, bk ii, ch 6
[4i8a6-i8] 648d-649a; bk hi, ch 3 [427^-15]
659d-660a;
[428^-429^]
660b-661a; ch 6 a26-b 5] 662d-663a;
[430^6-30]
663b-c; ch 10 [433^1-28] 665d-666a / Dreams, ch 2
[460^3^27] 704b-d
9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 7 [1408^0-
[430
25] 659b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[353521] 48d-51a esp [469-521] 50b-51a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk vii, sect 55 283b-c 18 Augustine: City of
God, bk xi, ch 2, 323c; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk 1,
ch 9 627a; ch 12 627c-d; bk hi, ch 28 668a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  17,  a 1, ans and rep 2 lOOd-lOld; a 3 102d-103c; q 84, a 8
450b-451b;  q  85,  a  i,  rep i 451c453c; a 6 458d-459c; q 89, a 5, ans
477a478b; q 94, a 4 505a-506a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
53, a 1, ans 19d-21a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiii
[88142] 126b-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 57d-58a; 58d-60a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
14c-15a; 271a-276a esp 273b-274a; 287b-292d; 497c-d; 500b-d; 517d518b 26
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  v,  sc  11 [106-114] 136a 28
Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 268a-c / On Animal Generation, 333 b-c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 2c-4c; 11a15a passim; 27a-c; 38d-39a;
51c-d;  60a-61c  esp  61b-c;  90b-d  /  Novum  Organum, bk i 107a-136a,c
passim, esp aph 38-68 109c-116a

[226a]
(5.  The  weakness and limits of the human mind. 5 a. The fallibility of
the  human mind: the causes of error.) 31 Descartes: Rules, n, 3a; vita,
13a-b;  xn, 22c-23b / Meditations, i-ii 75a-81d esp n, 80a, 80d-81a; in,
83a;  iv  89a-93a;  vi,  100a103d  / Objections and Replies, 141a; 142c;
215b-216c; 229d-230d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 17, schol 381b-d;
prop 24-31 383c-385c; prop 40, schol 2-prop 41 388a-c; prop 44, corol i,
schol  389c-390a;  prop 47, schol 390c-391a; prop 49, schol 391d-394d 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[179-197]
236a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 82-88 186b-189b; 365-366 236a; 394-395 240b /
Geometrical  Demonstration,  440b-441b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xi, sect 3 144c-d; ch xxi, sect 60-70 194a-197b passim; ch xxx,
sect  2  238b-c;  ch  xxxiii 248b-251d esp sect 18 251a-c; bk hi, ch ix,
sect  21  290c-291a;  ch  x, sect 16 295d; ch xi, sect 4 300c; bk iv, ch
xvii, sect 9-13 377d-378c; ch xx 388d-394c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
intro,  sect  1-4  405a-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 6,
453c;  sect  v,  div  45  469c;  sect  vii,  div 48 470d-471c 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  194a; 234b-236b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i,
Id  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  lab; 108a-d; 109b-c; 129c-173a esp 133c-d;
193a-b; 200c-209d; 229b-c; 233d-234b / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
260d-261b;  283d-284d  43  Federalist: number i, 29d; number 37, 118c 43
Mill:  Liberty, 274b-293b passim; 293d 53 James : Psychology, 122b-125b;
241a-b;  361a-b;  460a-469a esp 462b-464a, 468b-469a; 508a520a esp 508a;
610b-625a passim, esp 618b621a, 625a 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
148d-149a;  210c-d;  337a-c;  379b-d / General Introduction, 453b-476a,c
passim;  602b-c  / War and Death, 760d-761a / New Introductory Lectures,
819b-c 5b. The natural limits of the mind: the unknowable; objects which
transcend  its powers; reason's critical determination of its own limits
or  boundaries  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  33:12-33  / Job, 9:21; 11:7-9;
26:14;  28:12-21;  36:26;  37:14-23;  38:1-42:6  /  Psalms, 139:1-6— (D)
Psalms,  :35 27 :I / Ec~ 138:1-6 / Proverbs, 20:24; 25 clesiastes, 3:11;
6:11-12;  8:7,16-17;  9:1112; 11:2-6— (£>) Ecclesiastes, 3:11; 6:11-7:1;
8:7,16-17; 9:11-12; 11:2-6 / Isaiah, 55:8-9 — (D) Isaias, 55:8-9

[226b]
192  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5b Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:9-18— (D) OT,
Boo{  of  Wisdom,  9:9-19 / Ecclesiasticus, 1:1-3; 18:4-7; 24:27-29— (D)
OT,   Ecclesiasticus,  1:1-2;  18:4-6;  24:37-39  New  Testament:  Mar\,
13:31-37  / John, 1:18 / Acts, 1:6-7 / Romans, 11:33-34 / I Corinthians,
2:16  /  /  Timothy,  6:14-16  /  James,  4:i3-i5 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant
Maidens  [86-95]  2a ' D 5 Sophocles: Ajax [1419-1421] 155c 5 Euripides:
Helen  [1137-1150]  309a  7  Plato:  Parmenides,  489d-491a 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk ii, ch 4 [196*5-7] 272c;
[i96b5~7]
273a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982b28-983 au] 501a-b; bk
ii,  ch  i  [993*30bn]  511b,d;  bk  xii,  ch 7 [io72b i3~29] 602d603a 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk 1, ch 5
[644
b20-645 a4] 168c-d / Ethics, bk x, ch 7
[ii77b29-ii78 a2] 432c
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk iv [469-521] 50b-51a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 1 la-b; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  6, 269bc; bk x, ch 31 319b-d; bk xii, ch 7 346c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a; q 3, a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; q 12,
a  4  53b54c;  aa  11-12  59d-61c;  q 29, a i, rep i 162a163b; q 32, a 1
175d-178a;  q  46  250a-255d;  q  50, a 2, ans 270a-272a; q 79, a 4, ans
417a418c;  Q 84, a 5 446c-447c; aa 7-8 449b-451b; q 85, a 8 460b-461b; q
86  461b-464d;  q  88 468d-473a; q 94, aa 1-2 501d-504a; Q 117, a 2, ans
and  rep  1 597c-598c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 68, a 2
89c-90c; q 91, a 4 210c-211c; q 93, a 2 216c-217b; q 109, a i 338b-339c;
q 112, a 5 359c-360c; part ii-ii, q 2, a 3 392d-393c; q 8, a 1 417a-d; Q
9, a 1 423c-424b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
10b-c; purgatory, in [22-45] 56a-b; x [121129] 68c-d; paradise, 11
[46-148] 108b-109b
passim; iv
[28-48]
Ilia; xix
[40-90]
135c136a;  xxi  [82-102]  139a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49a; 52c;
54a-c;  78d-79a;  part  ii,  163a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82b; 209a-c;
212a215a;  238c-239c;  267c-268a; 271b-273b; 291b294b; 497b-502c passim,
esp  501d-502c  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  273c-d / On Animal
Generation,  389b; 492c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b-c;
41b-d;  54b-c;  96d-97b  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 1-2 107a-b; aph 9-10
107d;  aph  21 108b-c; aph 37 109b-c; aph 48 HOd111a; bk 11, aph 15 149a
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part i, 43c / Meditations, 1 75a-77c passim;
in,  86d-87a;  iv  89a93a;  vi 96b-103d passim / Objections and Replies,
112a-c; 123d-126b; 168d-169a; 215d216c; 259a-b

[227a]
5b  to 6 Chapter 58: MIND 193 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom 5 373d;
prop 24-31 383c-385c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [544-576] 187a-b; bk
vi [296-301] 202b; bk vii [109-130J2ISJJ220a; bk viii
[114-130] 234b-235a /Samson
Agonistes  [293-314]  346a-b  33  Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 184-241
205a217b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 87d; intro 93a-95d; bk ii, ch i,
sect  5  122a-b;  sect  24 127b-c; ch 11, sect 3 128b-c; ch vii, sect 10
133a-b;  ch  x,  sect  9  143a-c; ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d; ch xv, sect ii
165a-b; ch xxii, sect 9 202c-203a; ch xxiii, sect 12-13 207a208b passim;
sect 36 213c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 2 254d-255a; ch vi, sect 9 270d-271a;
ch xi, sect 23 305a-b; bk iv, ch hi 313a323d; ch vi, sect 4-16 331d-336d
passim; ch x, sect 19 354a-c; ch xii, sect 9-13 360d362d passim; ch xiv,
sect  1-2  364b-c;  ch  xvi, sect 12 370b-371a; ch xviii, sect 7 383b 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect !_3 405a-c; sect 81 428c-d; sect
ioi  432c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 2 451b-c; div 6-10
453b-455b  passim; sect ii, div 13-16 455d-457a; sect iv, div 26 460b-c;
div  29 461a-d; sect v, div 36, 464d-465a; sect vii, div 57, 475b-c; div
60  477a-c;  sect  viii, div 62, 478c; div 71-72 482c-483c; div 81 487a;
sect xi, div ho 501a-b; sect xii 503c-509d passim, esp div 130 508c-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  308c-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason la-250a,c esp
la-13d,  15c16c,  19a, 20a, 25b-26b, 27b-28b, 29d-33d, 53b-54b, 93c-99a,
101b-107b, 129c-130a, 133a134d, 146a-149d, 153a-c, 157d, 175b
[fn
1],  196b-197c,  200c-209d,  215d-216c,  217d-218a,  219a-227a,  229b-c,
230c-235a,  247a-b,  248d250a,c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals,
260d-261b;  281c-282d;  283d-287d / Practical Reason, 296a-d; 307d-308b;
309b; 310d-314d; 331a-332d; 335c-337c esp 337a-c; 354d-355d / Judgement,
461a-c;   465a-c;   497a-498b;   547b-d;  551a-552c;  564ac;  570b-572b;
574b577a;   579a;   581a-b;   584c-d;  599d-600d;  603a604b  44  Boswell
-.Johnson, 126b; 129a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [354-376] lla-b; [558565]
15b; [602-655] 16b-17b; [1064-1067] 26b;
[1765-1784]
42b;
[1810-1815]
43a; part ii
[4917-4922] 122a; [ii,433"452 ] 278a-b
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  244b-245b;  272b276b  esp  276a-b; 366a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  50b-c; bk v, 196a-197c; epilogue ii,
693d-694d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 120d-121c 53 James:
Psychology,   223b-224a;   262a-269a;   388a;  400a-b;  822b  54  Freud:
Interpretation of Dreams, 383b-c / Unconscious, 430b-c

[227b]
5c.  The  elevation  of  the  human  mind by divine grace: faith and the
supernatural  gifts  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  15;  17:1-19:23; 22:918;
26:1-6;  46:1-4  /  Exodus,  19;  24  esp  24:1218;  31:1-11; 33:11-23 /
Numbers,  12  /Joshua,  3:7-8;  5 :i 3_6:5-(£>) Josue, 3:7-8; 5:13-6:5 /
Judges,  6:11-24  / / Kings, 3:5-15; 4 :29~34; 9:1-9; i9-(£>) /// Kings,
3:5-15; 4 :29-34; 9:1-9; 19 / / Chronicles, iy—(D) I Paralipomenon, 17 /
Isaiah,  6—(D) Isaias, 6 / Ezekiel, 1; 10— (D) Ezechiel, 1; 10 / Daniel,
1;  7-12  New Testament: Matthew, 17:1-9 / Luke, 2:2535 I John, 1:1-18 /
Acts,   2:1-21;  9:1-8;  10:4447  /  /  Corinthians,  2:6-16;  14  /  //
Corinthians,   12:1-9   /   Revelation—  (D)  Apocalypse  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 1 la-b; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c; bk ix, par 23-25
68a-c;  bk  x,  par 65 87d-88a / City of God, bk x, ch 2-3 299d-301a; bk
xi,  ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b;  bk xxii, ch 29, 614b-d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk hi, ch 37, 674c-d; bk iv, ch 15-16 685c-686c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i, a 1 3b-4a; q 2, a 2, rep i
lld-12c;  q  12  50b-62b;  q 32, a 1 175d-178a; q 79, a 4, ans and rep i
417a-418c;  Q  84, a 5 446c-447c; q 86, a 4, rep 2 463d-464d; q 105, a 3
540c-541b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 68-69 87c-101c; q
109,  a  1  338b-339c;  part  ii-ii, qq 8-9 416d-426c; q 45 598c-603c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [34-45] 108a; xiv [34-66] 127b-c; xix
[40-66]   135c-d   25   Montaigne:  Essays,  209a-c;  212a-d;  238c239c;
267c-268a;  292a-294b  esp  294a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
17b-c;  19b-c;  39d-40a;  41b-d;  54b-c;  55b-c;  95d97b  31  Descartes:
Objections and Replies, 125b126a; 168d-169a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
xii  [552-587] 331a332a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 202 211a; 430-435 245a-251a;
881  345b  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 190d-191a 44 Boswell: Johnson,
394a-b;  395a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50b-c; bk v, 196a-198b;
bk  xi,  525c-d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 13c-d; bk vii,
189a-191a,c  esp 191a,c 6. The reflexivity of mind: the mind's knowledge
of   itself  and  its  acts  7  Plato:  Charmides,  8b-9d  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[i072b i3-29]
602d-603a; ch 9
[io74b35~
1075*4] 605c / Soul, bk in, ch 4
[429b5~9]
661d;
[429b25~43oa9] 662b-c; ch 6
[43ob2i26] 663b
/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[452^3-28] 694d-695a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 9 [ii7oa28-b i] 424a

[228a]
(6.  The  reflexhity  of  mind:  the  mind's knowledge of itself and its
acts.) 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i, 105a-b; ch 17 122d-124a; ch
20,  126c-d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk xi, sect i 302a-b 17 Plotinus:
Third  Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  3,  137c-d  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-6
215d-219b  18  Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 26 336d337b 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 2, rep 1-3 76d-77d; q 16, a 2 95c-96b;
Q  28,  a  4, rep 2 160c-161d; q 56, a i, ans 292a-d; q 85, a 2, ans and
rep  1 453d-455b; q 86, a 1, rep 3 461c-462a; q 87 464d-468d; q 88, a 2,
rep  3  471c-472c; q 89, a 2, ans 475a-d; part 1—11, q 17, a 6 690b-d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[49-60] 80b-c
31  Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 51d-52a / Meditations, 11 77d-81d esp
77d-79a;  vi,  96d97a  I  Objections  and Replies, 162b; 207b; 209d210b;
276b-c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part 11, prop 21, scHOL383a; prop 23 383b-c;
prop  27-29 384b-385a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 87d; intro 93a-95d;
bk  ii, ch i, sect 1-8 121a-123a; sect 10 123 b-d; sect 24 127b-c; ch vi
131b-c;  ch  ix,  sect  1-2 138b-c; ch xi, sect 14, 146d; ch xiv, sect 4
155d-156a;  ch  xix  175b176b;  ch xxi, sect 30 185a-c; ch xxiii, sect 1
204a-b;  sect  5  205a-b;  sect 15 208c-d; sect 32 212c-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect i, div 7-9 453c-455a passim 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
349bc  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15d-16c;
31a-32c;  49c51d;  55a-56c; 99a-101b; 120c-129c esp 121a123b, 126a-128b;
200c-204c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  271a-c; 281c-282d /
Practical  Reason,  292a-c;  307d-310c;  337a-b  /  Judgement, 600c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii,  par 138 48c-d / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  160c161a;  165a-b; part i, 257d-258a; part ii, 259a-b;
part hi, 306a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi, 341c 53 James:
Psychology,  121a-b;  122b-126a; 177a178a; 191a-b; 196a-197a; 222b-224a;
685a686a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  180b-  181b; 383b-c /
Narcissism,  408c-409a / Unconscious, 429c-430c 7. The nature and phases
of  consciousness:  the  realm  of the unconscious 53 James: Psychology,
43a-44a;   90b-93a  esp  92b;  98a-115a  esp  107b-114b;  146a-167a  esp
154a155b,  157b-161a,  165a-167a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams,
197d-198a;  367bc;  382a-385c  esp 384a-385c / Unconscious 428a-443d esp
428b-429b, 430d-431d,

[228b]
194 THE GREAT IDEAS 7 to lb 436b-437a, 438c-d, 439d, 442b-443a / General
Introduction, 452a-c; 531d-532c esp 532b; 566c567b / Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,  646b647c  / Ego and Id, 697b-702c esp 697b-698d, 700a-701d /
War and Death, 760a-b/ Civilization and Its Discontents, 769a-770c / New
Introductory  Lectures,  834d-838c  esp836b-837d la. The nature of self-
consciousness  31  Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 51d-52a / Meditations,
11,  77d-79a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvii, sect 9-26
222a-227d  passim;  bk  iv, ch ix, sect 2-3 349a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
121a-123b / Practical Reason, 292d [fn 1] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  h,  par 137140, 48a-50a / Philosophy of History, intro, 160c-161a;
165a-b  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 297a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  688a689b  53  James: Psychology, 147a-149a; 188a-197a esp
191a-197a';  204b-259b  esp 205a-206a, 213a240a; 471b-472b; 685a-686a 54
Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 767d768d lb. The degrees or
states  of  consciousness: waking, dreaming, sleeping 7 Plato: Republic,
bk v, 370d-371b; bk ix, 416a-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247^3248*6] 330c-d
/ Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[io72b i3-29] 602d-603a /
Soul, bk ii, ch i
[412*22-28]
642b / Sleep, ch i
[454*1-6]
696b-c;
[45^23-27]
697b; ch 2
[455
b3-i3] 698a-b;
[456*26-29]
699a; ch 3
[456b9~i7]
699c / Dreams, ch i 702a-703a; ch 3 [46(^28461*8] 704d-705a;
[46i*3i-b ii] 705c; [462*1531] 706b-d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[749776] 54a-b; [907-1036] 56a-57c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 84, a 8, contrary and rep 2
450b-451b; q 86, a 4, rep 2 463d-464d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi suppl, q 82, a 3, ans 971a-972d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50d-51d
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  176c-180b; 290b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
iv,  51c; 53c-54b / Meditations, 1, 75d-76b; vi, 103b-d / Objections and
Replies,  162b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 49, schol, 393 b-c 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[28-128] 176a178a esp
(1  00-109]  177b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 10-19
123b-126c;  ch  xix  175b-176b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i,
220c221a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 19a-20a; 115b-117a; 149a-150a; 313a-b

[229a]
7c  to  U  Chapter  58:  MIND  195  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk hi,
147c-148c; bk xi, 481a-482b; 524c-527a; bk xiii, 583d; bk xiv, 601c-602d
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bkxj^  33  7a-346a  ^^  53 James:
Psychology, 98a-103b; 107a-114b esp 108b-109b; 130a'-139a esp 130a-132a,
137a139a: 154a-b; 261a-262a; 643b
[fn
i];  836a850a  passim, esp 839b-840b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
137a-176d   passim,  esp  149c-153c,  157a-164d,  169b-174d;  229d-230a;
234b-235c;  314c-320c  esp  315b,  319c-320b;  332a-340a  esp 336d-340a;
352d357c  esp 353d-354a, 357a; 358d-359d; 366d370a esp 367c-d; 373a-377b
/  Narcissism,  408d-409a  / General Introduction, 477d-483d esp 478b-d;
485a-486a; 518c-519c esp 519b; 535a-c; 537a-539b esp 538d-539a; 617b-c /
Ego  and  Id,  703b  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  811d-812c  7c. The
conscious,  pre-conscious,  and unconscious activities of mind 53 James:
Psychology,  8b  9a; 74b-78b; 107a114b; 295b-298a;774a; 849a-b 54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development  of Psycho - Analysis, 5b-c / Hysteria, HOb-c /
Interpretation   of   Dreams,   348a-c;  352d-353b;  367b-d;  369a-370d;
377c-385c  passim,  esp  382a  383c, 384a-385c / Repression, 422a-425b /
Unconscious,  430d-443d  esp  433b-c,  436b-437c,  438b-439b  /  General
Introduction, 452a-c; 453b-476a,c passim, esp 455b, 473b-475a; 484a-491b
esp  485a-486a,  489d;  499b-504d  esp  502d  504d;  512b-c;  531d-532c;
537a-539b  esp  537b-c,  538d-539b;  558d-568a  esp 558d561b, 566a-567d;
586b-d  /  Ego  and  Id,  697d701 d; 703a-c / New Introductory Lectures,
835a-839b  esp  835c-836d 8. The pathology of mind: the loss or abeyance
of  reason  5  Aeschylus: Choephoroe [1021-1064] 80a-c 5 Sophocles: Ajax
143a-155a,c esp
[282-345]
145d-146b  5 Euripides: Bacchantes 340a-352a,c esp [8471297] 347b-351a /
Heracles Mad
[81 5-1 145]
371d-374d  / Orestes [1-423] 394a-398b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 5
399a-d  passim 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vii [323-405] 245a-247b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 84, a 7, ans 449b-450b; q 115, a 5, rep i
590d591c; part 1—11, q 6, a 7, rep 3 650a-d; q 24, a 2, ans 727d-728c; q
28,  a 3, ans and rep i 742a-d; q 37, a 4, rep 3 785d-786d; q 48, aa 3-4
824c-826a,c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 74, a 5, rep 1
131d-132b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxx
[1-33]
44c-d  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc  v  59c-62a; act v, sc 11
[236-255]  70b-c / King Lear, act 11, sc iv [274-289] 261c-d; act hi, sc
iv 264a-

[229b]
s 266b; act iv, sc iv [1-20] 272b-c; sc vi [80294] 274b-276c; sc vii
[14-82] 276d-277c /
Macbeth,  act  v,  sc  i  306b-307a;  sc  111 [37-46] 308a 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  1,  75d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  44, schol
437d-438a  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 148b-150a; 306a-307a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, bk xi, 513d-515a; 524c-527a 53 James: Psychology, 241b-258b;
818b-819a  54  Freud: Hysteria, 86a-d; 90a-b / Interpretation of Dreams,
174d-176d;  364c-d  /  War  and Death, 760b / New Introductory Lecture y
830d-831a  8a. The distinction between sanity and madness: the criterion
of  lucidity  or  insight  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  96b-98a  10
Hippocrates:  Sacred  Disease, 159a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  10, a 3, ans and rep 2 664d-665c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
67b;  67d;  68b-c;  69a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  166a-167a;  235b-c  26
Shakespeare:  Midsummer-Night's  Dream y act v, sc 1 [1-27] 370d-371a 27
Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc  11  [171-221]  42b-d; act hi, sc iv
[137-144] 56a; act iv, sc v
[1-75] 59c-60b; [154-200] 61b-d / King
Lear, act iv, sc vii [14-82] 276d-277c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xi,  sect  13  146bc; ch xxxiii, sect 3-4 248c-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  ii, div ii, 455b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 299d-300b [fn
1]  44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 13c-14a; Hid; 354c-355a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{
esp  122b-123b,  135a138a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xi, 525c 52
Dostoevsky   :   Brothers   Karamazov,  BKxi,337a348d  passim;  bk  xii,
356d-359c;  364d-365d  53  James:  Psychology, 137a; 241b-244a esp 244a;
749a-750b  esp  750b; 799a-806b esp 799a800a, 806a-b 54 Freud: Hysteria,
86c   /   Interpretation  of  Dreams,  364c-d  /  Narcissism,  399b-d  /
Unconscious,  433 b-c; 440a-442b / New Introductory Lectures, 812a-b 8£.
The  causes  of  mental  pathology:  organic  and  functional  factors 6
Herodotus:  History, bk ii, 86b; bk vi, 199c-d; 201b-c 7 Plato: Timaeus,
474b-d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[9
b34~ioa  io] 15a / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [247b i3~248 a6] 330c-d / Soul,
bk  in,  ch  3  [429*4-8]  661b  /  Dreams,  ch 2 [46oa32-b i6] 704b-c 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 7
[653b i-7] 178d-179a
10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease 154a-160d esp 155d-156a, 159a-b

[230a]
(8.  The  pathology  of  mind:  the  loss or abeyance of reason. 8b. The
causes  of  mentalpathology:  organic andfunctionalfactors.} 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 84, a 7, ans 449b-450b; q 115, a 5, rep i
590d591c;  part  i-ii,  q 6, a 7, rep 3 650a-d; q io, a 3, ans and rep 2
664d-665c;  q 28, a 3, ans and rep 1 742a-d; q 37, a 4, rep 3 785d-786d;
q  48,  aa  3-4  824c-826a,c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 68b-71b 27
Shakespeare: King Lear, act ii, sc iv [106113] 259c 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,   347c   30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  49d-50b  31
Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  155d-156a  40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 598a-b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 127a-b; 355a; 356b-c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  135a-136b  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 299c; 318b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  xv,  616a-617a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
4c-d;  bk  11,  21d-22b; bk hi, 62d-63b; bk xi, 337a348d passim; bk xii,
376a-d  53  James:  Psychology,  3a;  25b-26b;  32a-37b passim; 40b-41a;
258a-b; 533a-538b 54 Freud: Hysteria, 81c-87a; 97b-106c / Interpretation
of  Dreams,  176a-d;  380d-382a  esp  381d-382a  / General Introduction,
451d-452a;   547b-549d;  616d-623b  passim;  627a-b/  Group  Psychology,
690c-691c  /  Ego  and Id, 716d-717a / Civilization and Its Discontents,
774c-d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  812a; 866c-867a; 872b-d 8c. The
abnormality  peculiar  to  mind:  systematic  delusion 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote  esp  part i, la-3b, 50b-52d, part 11, 205a-209d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, sect 13 146b-c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 13c-14a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  232b-236a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x,
391d-394d;  bk  xi,  510b-d;  515a-517a;  525c  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  xi,  337a-346a  passim  53 James: Psychology, 242a-244b;
527b-528b
[fn 3]; 818b-819a
54  Freud:  Hysteria,  86a-d;  102a-106c  / Narcissism, 408a-d / General
Introduction,  547b550c;  620c-622a  esp  620c-d  / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  774c-d  9.  Mind  in the moral and political order 9a. The
distinction  between  the speculative and practical intellect oi reason:
the  spheres  of knowledge, belief, and action 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk  ii,  ch  i [993 23] 512a / Soul, bk 1, ch 3 [407*22-30] 636d637a; bk
hi, ch 7 663c-664b; ch 9 [432b26a6] 665c 433

[230b]
196  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Sc  to  9b  9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7
[701*639] 236b-d / Ethics, bk vi 387a-394d passim, esp ch 1
[ii39a3)-cH 2
[ii39b i3] 387b-388b,
ch  5 389a-c, ch 7 390a-d, ch 8 [1142*11-19] 391b / Politics, bk vii, ch
14  [1333*1  6-29]  538a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 79, aa
11-12  424d-426b;  q  86,  a  i,  rep  2  461c462a;  part i-ii, Q 3, a 5
626b-627a;  q  9,  a  1, rep 2 657d-658d; q 38, a 4, rep 2-3 788d789b 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 5, rep 3 39a-40a; q 94, a
4, ans 223d-224d; part ii-ii, q 8, a 3 418c-419a; q 9, a 3 425b-d; q 45,
a 3 600c-601a; part hi, q 13, a 1, rep 3 780a-781b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  16d-17a;  18a-b;  42a-c;  55b-d;  65d-66a;  86b-c / Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph 4 137d-138b 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
126a-b;  243c-d  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 265-290 221b-225a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  intro, sect 5-6 94b-95a; bk iv, ch xi, sect 8 356b-d; ch
xiv  364b-365a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 2 405b 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  34,  464b;  sect  xn,  div 126-128
507a-508a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  190c-191a;  240b-243c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 253a-255d; 260d-261b; 264b-d; 271a-c; 283d-287d /
Practical  Reason,  291a-297c;  300d  [fn  1];  307d314d  esp 310d-311d;
319c-321b;  329a-337a,c  esp  329a-330c;  343a-d  / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  388a-d;  390b,d-391a  /  Judgement,  461a-475d  esp  463a-467a,
474b-475d;   523d524a;  596c-598b;  599d-607c  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  346c-347a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref, 6a-7a;
additions,  1  115a-d;  4  116a-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part iv,
360d-361a; 362d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1224-1237] 30b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  i, 15a-b; 47b-c; bk ix, 361d-365c 53 James: Psychology,
655a-661a  passim,  esp 656b; 729a-730a; 865b 9b. The relation of reason
to will, desire, and emotion 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[658-660]
120c 5 Euripides: Hippolytus [373-430] 228b-d 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 120a-c;
128a-129d   /  Phaedo,  224a-226c;  230d-234c  /  Gorgias,  275b-280d  /
Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-355a;  bk  ix, 425c-427b / Timaeus, 466a-467b 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch i
[129*10-16]
179a / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5 573a-c; ch 7
[1049*5-12] 574c-d / Soul, bk
1,  ch  3 [407*34b4] 637a; bk hi, ch 10 665d-666d 9 Aristotle: Motion of
Animals, ch 7 236b237b / Ethics, bk i, ch 13 [uo2b i3-no3*io]

[231a]
9b  to 9c Chapter 58: MIND 197 348a-d; bk ii, ch 6 [no6b8-uo7a6] 352a-c;
bk  in,  ch 12 [ni9a35-b i9] 366a, c; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b; bk ix, ch 4
[1166*10-28]  419b-c; ch 8 [n68b28-i 169*12] 422b-d / Politics^. vii, ch
14   [i333  a  i7-29]  538a;  ch  15  [1334^828]  539b-d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  4  108d-110a;  bk  11,  ch  18 161a-162b; ch 23
170a-172d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 55 283b-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  15-17  23a-c;  bk viii, par 19-24 58b-60a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 14, a 8, ans 82c-83b; q 16, a i,
ans 94b-95c; a 4 97a-c; q 57, a 4, rep 3 298a-299a; q 59, a 2 307c 308b;
q  79, a i, rep 2 414a-d; a 2, rep 2 414d-416a; a ii, rep i 424d-425b; q
80,  a  2  428a-d;  q 81, a 3 430c-431d; qq 82-83 431d440b; Q 93, aa 6-8
496b-500c;  part  i-ii,  q 6, a 2 646a-c; q 9, a i 657d-658d; q 10, a i,
rep  3  662d-663d;  q  ii,  a  2  667b-d;  q  12,  a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2
673c-674c; q 15, a i, rep 3 681b-d; a 2 682a-c; q 16, a i, rep 3 684b-d;
a  2 684d-685b; q 17 686b,d-693d; q 19, aa 3-6 704c-708a; q 26, a i, ans
734a-d; q 28, a 1, ans 740b-741a; a 2, ans and rep 2 741a742a; q 30, a 1
749a-d;  a  3  750d-751c; q 31, a 3 754a-d; q 46, a 4, rep 1,3 815b-d; q
48,  a  3,  rep 1,3 824c-825b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
50,  a  5, ans and rep 3 10b-d; q 56, a 4 32b 33c; a 5, rep 1 33c-34b; q
60,  a  i, ans 49d-50c; q 72, a 2, rep 1,4 112b-113a; q 74, aa 5-10 131d
137c;  q  77, aa 1-3 145a-148b; q 90, a i, ans and rep 1 205b-206b; part
ii-ii,  q  45, a 2, ans 599d-600c; part hi, q 18, a 2 811d812b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xxxi
[46-57]
46c;  purgatory, xvin [19-75] 80a-c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk
iv,  stanza 82 99a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 64a-c; part ii, 141a-b;
conclusion,  279a-c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 184b-d; 200d-205b; 232b 238d
passim;  273d-276a; 432a-d; 486b495a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice,
act  i,  sc  ii [13-20] 408b-c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act
ii, sc 11
[51-68]
114a-b;
[163-182]
115b-c; act hi, sc ii [74-81] 121a / Othello, act i, sc hi
[322-337] 212b-c / Sonnets, cxlvii 608d
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  27a-c;  55b-d; 66c-67b; 78a-b 31
Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 50b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 48,
schol 391b-c; part iv, prop 18, schol 429a-d; appendix, ii 447b; part v,
pref 451a-452c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[521-594]
243b-245a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  412-413  242a;  423 243b / Geometrical
Demonstration, 440b

[231b]
35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 69 196d-197a; bk iv,
ch  xx,  sect  12  392c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a; 343d-345c /
Social  Contract,  bk  1,  393  b-c;  bk  11, 400ac 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   of   Morals,  256b;  264d-265a;  271c-d;  279b;  282d-283b;
284d-285a  /  Practical  Reason,  303b-304b; 314a-d; 315b-c; 341c-342a /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 385c-386d /Judgement, 483d-484b; 586a-587a
43  Federalist:  number  15, 65b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  24 17d-18a; par 29 19a-b; part i, par 71 31b-c; additions, 4 116a-d
/ Philosophy of History, part iv, 350b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-807]
lla-21a;
[1064-1117] 26b-28a; [3217-3250] 79a-b; part
ii  [11,404-510]  277b-280a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk hi,
50c-62a  53  James:  Psychology,  796a-b;  816a-819a  esp 817b 54 Freud:
Hysteria,   110c   /   Interpretation   of   Dreams,  353a-b  /  General
Introduction,  590a593b  passim,  esp  592d-593a  /  Ego and Id, 702c-d;
704a-c;  706d-707c;  715a-716c  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and Anxiety,
720a-722c  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  773c; 800d801a / New
Introductory  Lectures,  837b-839b  esp  838a-c;  843d-846a esp 845b 9c.
Reason as regulating human conduct: reason as the principle of virtue or
duty  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  59c-64a / Phaedrus, 120b-c; 128a- 129c esp
129b-c  /  Republic,  bk iv, 346a355a / Laws, bk i, 643c-d; 650b; bk hi,
669b670c; bk iv, 681b-682c; bk xii, 792c-d 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 5
[4iob io-i6] 640c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1 097^3I098a i8]
343a-c; ch 13
[uo2b i3-no3 a io]
348a-d; bk ii, ch 6
[uo6ai4-no7a9]
351c352c  esp [uo6b35-i 107*3] 352c; bk hi, ch 12 [ui9a35-b i9] 366a, c;
bk  vi,  ch 2 387d388b; ch 5 389ac; bk ix, ch 4 [n66aio-28] 419b-c; ch 8
[n68b28-i  169*12]  422b-d;  bk  x,  ch  7 [1177*11-18] 431d; [ii77b26-i
178*8] 432c; ch 8
[1178*16-24]
432d-433a / Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[i332*39-b io] 537a-b; ch
14
[1333*17-29] 538a; ch 15 [i334b8-28] 539b-d
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 18 161a162b; bk in, ch 2 177c-178d;
ch  26,  212d213a,c;  bk iv, ch 5, 228a-229a; ch 8 235b237d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations  253a-310d esp bk 11, sect 15-17 259a-d, bk hi, sect 3 260b,
sect  6  261a-c,  sect 8-9 261d, sect 12 262b-c, sect 16 262d-263a,c, bk
iv,  sect 4 264a, sect 12 264c, bk v, sect 9 270bc, sect 26 272c, bk vi,
sect  16  275b-d, sect 32 277a-b, sect 40 277d, bk vii, sect 14-16 280d,
sect 33 282a, sect 55 283b-c, bk viii, sect 7 286a,

[232a]
(9.  Mind  in  the  moral  and political order. 9c. Reason as regulating
human  conduct:  reason  as the principle of virtue or duty.) sect 39-41
288c-d,  sect  48 289c, sect 54 290b, bk ix, sect 9 292b-d, bk x, sect 8
297d-298a,  sect  33  300c-301a,  bk xi, sect i 302a-b, bk xir, sect 2-3
307b-d  14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius, 50b-c / Solon, 66b-d / Pericles,
121a-122a  /  Timoleon,  197c198a  /  Cato  the  Younger 620a-648a,c esp
646b647b  /  Dion, 798b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 4, 512a;
ch  14  520a-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 18, a 3, ans
106b-107c;  q 21, a 2, rep i 125c-d; q 95, a 2 507c-508a; q 98, a 2, ans
and  rep  3-4  517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q 24, a i 727b-d; q 45, a 4, ans
812b-813a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 56, a 3, ans
31a-32b;  a 4 32b-33c; q 63, a 1 63a-64a; q 74, aa 5-10 131d-137c; q 90,
a i, rep 3 205b-206b; part hi, q 5, a 4 739a740b; q 15, a 4 790d-791c; a
6,  rep  2  792c793c  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory 53a-105d esp xv
[4o]-xviii
[75] 75d-80c
22  Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a / Parson s Tale, par 12, 503b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  91b-92d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 21d-22a;
117d-118c;  184b-d;  488b-489c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act hi, sc ii
[68-79]  49c-d  / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii [3350] 113d-114a /
Othello,  act  i,  sc  hi  [322-337]  212b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,  26a-27c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 14-17 428a-d; prop
18,  schol 429a-d; prop 23-24 430c-d; prop 26-28 431a-c; prop 59 442b-d;
prop  61  443a-b;  prop  63 443d-444a; appendix, iv 447b-c; part v, pref
451a-452c;  prop  1-20  452d-458a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 146 200b; 252-253
219b220a;  347  233b-234a  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii-iii 25d-29d
passim;  ch vi, sect 57-63 36d-38c / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  46-54  189d-192c;  sect  69 196d-197a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
159b-160a;  165a-b;  173b  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 190c-d; 236d-237a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals
253a-287d  esp  255a,  256d-257d,  260a-261d,  265c-266d,  269c, 272a-b,
274a-277b,   279c-d,   283d-287b   /  Practical  Reason,  297a-314d  esp
307d-314d;  321b-329a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 373d;
378d-379a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 386b-d; 388bc; 390b,d-391c;
392b393a / Iudgement, 571c-572a; 586a-587a; 596c-597d; 605d-606b [fn 2]

[232b]
198  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9c  to  9d  43  Mill:  Liberty, 276b-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 170c171c; 189a-b; part ii, 280b-281b; part
hi,  312d-313a;  part  iv,  353c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 304a-305a;
310c312c  esp  310d,  311d-312a;  592b-593b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  i,  646b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 13b-15a; 202a-b; 807a808a;
816a-819a  esp  817b,  819a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 625a-d / Ego
and  Id,  702c-d  /  New  Introductory  Lecturesy 840a 9d. Reason as the
principle of free will: rationality as the source of moral and political
freedom  7 Plato: Phaedo, 230d-234c / Republic, bk iv, 347d-348d; bk ix,
425c-427b  /  Theaetetus,  528c-531a  / Laws, bk ix, 754a-b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  hi, ch 1-2 355b, d358a; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch 2 140c-141c; bk in, ch 5 180d-181d; bk iv, ch i
213a223d  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  2  257a; sect 5-10
257b-258a;  sect  16-17  259a-d;  bk  vi,  sect  32  277a-b;  sect 40-46
277d-278d;  bk  vii, sect 68-69 284c-d; bk xii, sect 2 307b 17 Plotinus:
Third  Ennead, tr i, ch 10 82b / Sixth Ennead, tr viii, ch 2-3 343c-344b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59,  a  3,  ans and rep 1
308b-309a;  q 83, a i 436d438a; a 3 438d-439c; part i-ii, q 13, a 2, ans
673c-674c; a 6, ans 676c-677b; q 17, a 1 esp rep 2 686d-687c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3 8b-9a; q 77, a 8, rep 3 151c-152a
21  Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi [5284] 77b-d; xvm [40-75] 80b-c
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  hi,  sc  ii  [61-79] 49c-d 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies,  228c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 65-73
444b447a;  part  v,  prop  42  463b-d  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk ix
[335-375] 254b255b; bk xii
[79-90]
321a  / Areopagitica y 394b-395b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect
57-63  36d-38c / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 7-13 180a-181b
esp  sect  13 181b; sect 46-54 189d-192c; sect 69 196d-197a 38 Rousseau:
Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 237a-b / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  280b-c;  282b-285a  / Practical Reason, 291a-b;
292a-c;  296a-d;  302a-d;  307d-311d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of
Ethics,  378b-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 390b; 393a / Science
of Right,  400b,d402a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 4 12d13a;
par 29 19a-b; part i, par 66 29a-c; par 71

[233a]
9e  to  9/  31b-c;  part  in,  par  187 65a-c; additions, 24 120d-121a /
Philosophy of History, intro, 158c-d; 160c-162a; 168b-d: 170c-171c; part
hi, 311b-d; part iv, 316d-317a; 350r>c; 353c-d; 359b; 360c-361a; 364d 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 688a690a 53 James: Psychology, 706b
9e.  Reason  as  formative of human society: the authority of government
and  law  7  Plato:  Republic  295a-441a,c  esp  bk  iv, 350b354b / Laws
640a-799a,c csp bk i, 650a-b, bk in, 669b-670c, bk iv, 681b-682c, bk ix,
754a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34a35-b i]
382b  /  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i252b27-i253a38] 446a-d; bk vii-viii
527a-548a,c  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk hi, sect 4 260b261a; bk iv,
sect  4 264a; sect 24 265c-d; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d; bk xi, sect i 302a-b
14  Plutarch:  Aemilius  Paulus,  217d-218a  /  Phocion,  604b,d-605d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 21, a 2, rep 1 125c-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 1 205b-206b; q 97, a i, ans and rep
i 236a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i., 54c; 86b-87b; 91b-92b; 96b; part
ii,  lOOa-c; 132a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv, prop 35-37 433b436a; prop 40 437a; prop 73 446c-447a;
appendix,  xii-xvi  448b-449c  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii 25d-28c
passim, esp sect 6, 26b, sect 9-10 27a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  i,  ld-2a; 2d; 3c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c; bk 11,
400a-c  42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 389a-b / Science of Right,
397a-399a;   416b-417a   43   Federalist:   number  49,  161a  43  Mill:
Representative Government, 327b,d332d passim / Utilitarianism, 469c-d 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a; part in, par 187 65a-c; par 212
70d-71a; par 258, 81c-82d
[fn
1]; par 272 89d-90c; additions, 47 124a-b; 157 142b-c; 164 144c145a; 184
149a / Philosophy of History, intro, 170c-178a; part hi, 311b-d; part iv,
316d317a; 350b-c; 353c-d; 364a-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 318c-d; 322a
54  Freud:  New Introductory Lectures, 880a-b 9/. The life of reason, or
the life of the mind, as man's highest vocation: reason as the principle
of  all  human  work  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-126c / Symposium, 167a-d /
Phaedo,  224a-225c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  380d-381a; bk vii 388a-401d /
Timaeus, 475d-476b / Theaetetus, 528c-531a / Philebus

[233b]
Chapter  58:  MIND 199 609a-639a,c esp 633a-639a,c / Laws, bk v, 690ac /
Seventh  Letter,  808c-809a  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i.  ch 1-2
499a501c;  bk  xii, ch 7 [io72b i4~29] 602d-603a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 5
[i095b i6-i8]
340d; ch 7
[io97b23-io98a i8] 343a-c; ch
8
[i098b9-io99a6] 344a-c; bk
vi, ch 12
[1144s
1-6] 393c; bk x, ch 7-8 431d-434a / Politics, bk vii, ch 3
[i325b i4-32] 529d-530a; ch 14
[i333 ai7-29] 538a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi [1-93] 30a-31b; [307-322] 34a-b;
[1053-1075] 43c-d; bk v [1-54] 61a-d; [11131135] 75c-d; bk vi [1-42] 80a-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 2, 106d; bk ii, ch 11 150a-151b; ch
17  158d-161a; bk hi, ch 10 185d-187a; ch 15 190a-191a; ch 19 192c-d; ch
22  195a-201a;  bk  iv,  ch  4-6  225a-232c; ch 8 235b-237d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii, sect 16-17 259a-d; bk hi, sect 4 260b-261a; sect 6
261a-c;  sect  8-12 261d-262c; bk iv, sect 3 263b-264a; sect 16 264d; bk
v,  sect  9  270b-c; sect 16 271c-d; bk vi, sect 12 274c; bk ix, sect 41
295c;  bk  x,  sect  12  298c-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr iv, ch 2-4
12d14c  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch 4, 130d-131a; ch 6 131d-132b 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  19  523b-d  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 12, a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 26, a 2, ans and rep 2
150c-151a;  q  88,  a  i,  ans  469a-471c;  part  i-ii,  q 1, a 1, rep 3
609b-610b;  q  3,  aa  3-8 624b629c; q 21, a 2, rep 2 718a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 66, a 5, rep 1-2 79b-80c ^ 22 Chaucer:
Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  231d-238a; 395d 27
Shakespeare:  Pericles,  act  hi,  sc  ii  [26-42]  434d-435a  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 18a-b; 27b-d; 69d-76a passim, esp 70b-d, 71bc,
72b-c,  73d-74a 31 Descartes: Rules, 1, Id / Discourse, part i, 41d-42a;
part  hi,  49d-50b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 26-28 431a-c;
appendix,  iv 447b-c; ix 448a; xxxn 450c-d; part v, prop 24-40 458d-462d
33 Pascal: Pensees, 346-348 233b-234a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
i,  div  5  452d-453b  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 94b-99b 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  645c-d  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
256d-257d; 268c-270c esp 269c / Practical Reason, 337a-338c / Judgement,
508c-509a;  591b-592a;  596c-597d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 448b-450a;
451c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 350b-c 47 Goethe: Faust,
part i
[354-517]
lla-14b;
[1194-1201] 29b

[234a]
200  Mind  in  the moral and political order. 9/. The life of reason, or
the life of the mind, as man's highest vocation: reason as the principle
of  all  human  work.)  (9.  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  255a  54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  779d780b 10. The existence of mind
apart  from  man  10a.  The  indwelling reason in the order of nature 12
Aurelius:  Meditations  253a-310d esp bk ii, sect 4 257b, bk in, sect 13
262c, bk iv, sect 10 264c, sect 40 267a-b, sect 45-46 267b-c, bk v, sect
8 269d-270b, sect 30 273a, bk vi, sect 1 274a, sect 9-10 274b-c, sect 36
277c,  sect 38 277c-d, sect 40 277d, sect 42-44 278a-c, sect 58 279d, bk
vii,  sect  9-1  1  280b-c,  sect 75 285c, bk viii, sect 7 286a, sect 34
288a-b,  bk x, sect 6-7 297a-c, bk xii, sect 5 307d-308a, sect 30 310a-b
\0b.  Nous or the intellectual principle: its relation to the One and to
the  world-soul  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  93c; 101d-102a / Phaedrus, 136b /
Phaedo,  240d-242b  / Timaeus, 455a456a / Sophist, 567a-569a / Philebus,
618b619d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 4
[188*5-12]
263b; bk in, ch 4
[203*23-33]
281a  b;  bk  viii,  ch  1  [25ob23~26]  334b;  ch  5 [256b2o-27] 341d /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3
[984b8-22]
502d;  ch  7  [988b6-i6]  506c-d;  ch  8  [989*30b2i]  507c-d 13 Virgil:
Georgics,  iv  [219-227] 89b / Aeneid, bk vi [724-734] 230b 17 Plotinus:
Second  Ennead,  tr ix, ch i, 66a-d / Third Ennead, tr viii, ch i-tr ix,
ch  i  129a-136d  / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 16 165d-166b / Fifth Ennead
208a-251d  esp  tr  1,  ch 3-7 209b-212c, tr in, ch 1-12 215d223c, ch 16
225b-226a,  tr  iv,  ch 2-tr v, ch 3 227b-230a, tr v, ch 7 231d-232b, ch
12,  234c,  tr  vii 238a-239b, tr ix, ch 3-9 247b250b / Sixth Ennead, tr
ii,  ch  20-21 278d280a; tr vii, ch 13-24 328b-334a; ch 36-42 339c-342d;
tr  viii,  ch  17-18  351c-352c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
158a-c;  part  iv, 364b-c 53 James: Psychology, 222b-223a 10c. The realm
of   the   pure   intelligences:  the  angelic  intellect  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  xn,  ch  8  603 b605a esp [1073*36-39] 603d 16 Kepler:
Epitome, bk iv, 890a-895b esp 890b-893b; 897a; 914a-b; 930b; 932a-933a /
Harmonies  of the World, 1080b-1085b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr v, ch
6 103b104a

[234b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  10  to  10* 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 12
101d-102a;  par  16  102d-103a;  par  20 103c-d / City of God, bk x, ch 2
299d-300a;  bk  xxii,  ch 1 586b,d-587b; ch 29, 614b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  7,  a 2, ans and rep 2 31d-32c; o 10, a 3, ans
42c43b;  q 12, a 4, rep 2 53b-54c; o 50 269a275a esp a i, ans 269b-270a,
a  2,  ans  270a272a, a 5, ans 274b-275a; q 54 284d-288d; q 55, a 2, ans
289d-290d; o 56, a 2, ans 292d-294a; q 57, a 1, ans 295a-d; a 3, ans and
rep 2 297b-298a; q 58, a 1, ans 300c301a; a 3, ans 301d-302d; q 61, a 2,
rep  3  315c-316a; q 64, a 1, ans 334a-335c; q 65, a 4, ans 342b-343c; q
75, a 7, rep 2-3 384d385c; q 79, a 1, rep 3 414a-d; a 2, ans 414d416a; a
8, ans 421c-422b; a 10, ans 423d424d; q 84, a 2, ans 442b-443c; a 3, rep
i  443d-444d;  a  7,  ans  449b-450b; q 85, a i, ans 451c-453c; a 5, ans
457d-458d;  q  87,  a i, ans and rep 2-3 465a-466c; a 3, ans 467b468a; o
89,  a  3, ans and rep i 475d-476c; a 4, ans 476c-477a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 50, a 6, ans and rep i lla-12a: q 51, a i, rep
2 12b-13c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[67-96]
10b-c; paradise, i
[103-126]
107b-c; 11
[1 12-138]
109a; viii
[97-114] 118a; xm
[5272]
126a; xxvm 148d-150b; xxix
[37-45]
150c;  [67-85]  151a  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk ii, aph 15 149a 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[1 16-142] 96a-b;
bk 11
[142-159]
114b; bk v
[404-413]
184a;
[469-505] 185b-186a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 285 224a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch x,
sect  9  143a-c;  bk  hi,  ch  vi,  sect 12, 272a; bk iv, ch in, sect 6,
315a-b;  sect  23  320a-c;  sect  27 321d-322a; ch xvi, sect 12, 371a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 81 428c-d \0d. The unity and separate
existence  of the active or the possible intellect 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
hi,  ch 5 esp [430*18-22] 662c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
76,  a  2  388c-391a;  q  79, aa 4-5 417a-419b; q 84, a 4, ans and rep 3
444d-446b; q 88, a i, ans and rep i 469a-471c; q 117, a i, ans 595d-597c
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 4, ans 9a-10b 10c. Mind
as  an  immediate  infinite mode of God 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
14,  corol 1-2 360a; prop 21-23 364a-365a; prop 29-31 366b-367a esp prop
31,  demonst  366d; part 11, prop 1, schol 374a; prop 5-7 374c375c; prop
io-ii 376c-377c

[235a]
10/  to  10£ Chapter 58: MIND 201 10/. Absolute mind: the moments of its
manifestations 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 24 17d-18a; par
27  18d;  par  29-30 19a-c; par 33 20b-d; part 1, par 35 21a-b; part hi,
par  156-157  57d;  par  259  82a;  par 262 83d-84a; par 321 106c-d; par
340-360  110b-114a,c;  additions,  100  133a;  153  141d;  194  150c-d /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  156d-157b; 160b 162a; 163a; 169d-170b;
177d-178d;  179b-d; 182d-183a; 186c-188b; 189d-190b 10/(1) The unfolding
of  mind  or spirit in world history 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi, par 340-360 110b-114a,c; additions, 153 141d / Philosophy of History
153a-369a,c  esp  intro,  153a-190b,  203a-206a,c,  part iv, 368d-369a,c
10/(2)  The  concrete  objectification  of  mind  in the state 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 156-157 57d; par 257-259 80b-82a; par
270 84d-89c; par 274 92a; par 289 97b-d; par 360 113d-114a,c; additions,
152  141c-d;  157  142b-c;  164,  144c-d / Philosophy of History, intro,
170c-176b;  part  i, 230a lOg. The divine intellect: its relation to the
divine  being and the divine will 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[io72b 14-29] 602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[ii78b8-23]
433b-c  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk 11, ch 8, 146a 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead, tr ix, ch i 65d66d CROSS-REFERENCES For: Matters relevant to the
conception  of  reason or intellect as a faculty distinct from sense and
Matters  relevant  to  the  conception  of  the human mind as a thinking
substance,  see  Being  7b(4);  Form  2d;  Idea  2b; Man 3a(i); Soul ic.
Matters relevant to the conception of the human mind as a finite mode of
an  attribute  of  God,  see  Being  70(4);  Idea ie; Man 3a; Nature ib.
Matters  relevant  to the conception of the human mind as soul or spirit
performing  all psychological functions, see Idea ic, 2c-2f; Man 3a; One
and  Many  4a;  Sense  id, 5a. Matters relevant to the conception of the
human mind as a triad of cognitive faculties, see

[235b]
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xiii,  par 12 113b-d / City of God, bk
viii, ch 6 268d269c; bk xi, ch 21 333a-d; bk xii, ch 17-18 353a-354d; ch
23  357d-358a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, rep 2-3
14b-15b;  q 14, aa 1-4 75d-79a esp a 4 78b- 79a; a 8, ans 82c-83b; q 16,
a  5, rep 1 97c-98b; o 18, aa 3-4 106b-108c; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; a
3,  rep  6 HOb-110c; a 4, ans 110c-112c; q 26, a 2 150c-151a; q 46, a 2,
rep  3  253a-255a; q 50, a i, ans 269b-270a; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q
55,  a  i,  ans  289a-d;  a  3,  ans  and  rep  i 291a-d; q 59, a 2, ans
307c-308b;  q  79, a i, ans 414a-d; a 2, ans 414d-416a; a 4, ans and rep
1,5  417a418c;  a  5, rep 3 418c-419b; a 10, rep 2 423d-424d; q 84, a 2,
ans  442b-443c;  a  4,  rep  1  444d-446b; a 5 446c-447c; q 85, a 4, ans
457a-d;  a  5,  ans  457d-458d;  q  87,  a  i,  ans  465a-466c; a 3, ans
467b-468a;  q 89, a 1, ans and rep 3 473b-475a; a 4, ans 476c477a; o 93,
aa  6-8  496b-500c;  q  105,  a  3 540c-541b; part i-ii, q 1, a 4, rep i
612a613a;  q  5, a 6, rep 2 641a-642a; q 19, a 4 705bc; q 40, a 3, rep 1
794c-795a;  q  46,  a 4, rep 2 815b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  51,  a  1,  rep 2 12b-13c; part in, q 6, a 2, ans 741c-742a 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xv  [37-84J 128d-129b; xxxm [82-145]
157a-d  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 122a b; 228ac 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part i, prop 17, schol 362c-363c; prop 32-33 367a-369a; part ii,
prop  1  373d-374a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  53a-b  / Practical Reason,
303b-304a; 350c-d / Judgement, 612b-d

[236a]
202 THE GREAT IDEAS 43(3); Idea if; Soul id. 3d; God 5f; Idea ie; Nature
3a; Soul ia; Will 4a; World 6c. !•

[236b]
For:  Matters  relevant  to  the  conception  of the human mind as self-
consciousness,  see  History  Matters  relevant to the conception of the
mind  as consciousness or as a psychic structure including conscious and
unconscious  processes,  see  Desire 2a, 5a~5c; Experience 1, 2a; Man 4;
One  and  Many 4a; Soul 2b; Will 3b. The general problem of the relation
of  body  and  mind, or matter and spirit, see Element 5e; Man 33-33(2),
3c;  Matter  4C~4d;  Soul 3c~3d; and for the condition of the human mind
when  the  soul is separated from the body, see Soul 4d. The distinction
between  real and intentional existence, or being in nature and being in
mind, see Being yd, 7d(2); Form 2a; Idea 6a-6b; Knowledge i; and for the
difference  between  change in matter and change in mind, see Change 6d.
Other  comparisons  of human and animal mentality, see Animal ic, ic(2);
Evolution 7K3); Language i; Man ia-ic; Sense 2c; and for the relation of
reason  and  instinct,  see  Habit 3c. The mind's knowledge of itself in
relation  to the nature and method of psychology, see Idea 2d; Knowledge
5a(6);  Man  2a-2b(4); Soul 5a~5b. Other discussions of the weakness and
limits  of  the human mind, see Knowledge 5a~5e; Truth 3d—3dCi), 7a; and
for  the  consideration  of  the  training  of  mind,  habits  of  mind,
intellectual  virtues,  and supernatural gifts, see Education 5a~5f; God
6c(2);  Habit  5c5d;  Knowledge  6c(5); Prudence i; Religion ia; Science
ia(i);  Virtue  and  Vice 2a(2), 8e; Wisdom ic, 2a. Other discussions of
sleep  and  dreams,  see  Desire  5a;  Life  and  Death  5b;  Memory and
Imagination  8a-8e;  Sign and Symbol 6a; and for matters relevant to the
theory  of  the  repressed  unconscious, see Desire 3H2), 6c; Memory and
Imagination  2e(2); Opposition 4c; Sign and Symbol 6a. Other discussions
of  psychopathology  and  the  causes  and  cure of mental disorder, see
EmoMatters  relevant  to  the  distinction  between  the speculative and
practical  intellect,  or the pure and practical reason, see Judgment 2;
Knowledge  6e(i);  Philosophy  2a; Prudence 2a-2b; Science 3a; Truth 2c;
Wisdom  ib;  and for the bearing of this distinction, and the bearing of
reason's  relation  to  will  and  desire,  on  the  differentiation  of
knowledge,  belief,  and  opinion,  see  Desire  5b; Emotion 3b; God 2d;
Immortality  3a;  Knowledge  4b;  Metaphysics  2d;  Opinion  2a-2b; Will
30-3^1), 3K3), 5^4). The moral and political aspects of mind, see Desire
6a;  Emotion 43-43(2) ; Law ib; Liberty 3b; Slavery 7; State ia; Tyranny
5d;  Virtue  and  Vice  5b.  The consideration of the existence of mind,
reason,  or  intellect  apart from man, see Angel 2, ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed below are works not included in Great Booths ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by authors not represented
in  this collection. For the date, place, and other facts concerning the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great Ideas. Aquinas.
Summa Contra Gentiles, bk ii, ch 73-78 . On Spiritual Creatures, aa 9-10
Plutarch.  "That Brute Beasts Make Use of Rea- . Quaestiones Disputatae,
De Veritate, qq 10, 15;

[237a]
1  Dante.  Convivio  (The  Banquet),  third treatise, CH2, 3 (3), 4 (11)
Descartes.  The  Principles  of  Philosophy,  part i, 7-8, 11-12, 52-53,
62-65; PART IV > I 9^_I 92^^ Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part
hi,  sect  XVI Kant. De Mundi Sensibilis (Inaugural Dissertation) Hegel.
The  Phenomenology of Mind, v . The Philosophy of Mind, sect i II. Peter
Lombard.  The Four Books of Sentences, bk i, dist 3 Maimonides. The Guide
for  the Perplexed, part i, ch 31-32; part 11, ch 37 Albertus Magnus. On
the  Intellect  and  the Intelligible Bonaventura. Itinerarium Mentis in
Deum  (The Itinerary of the Mind to God) Duns Scotus. Opus Oxoniense, bk
i,  dist  2,  Q3  Petrarch.  On His Own Ignorance Ficino. Five Questions
Concerning  the  Mind  Paracelsus.  The Diseases That Deprive Man of His
Reason  Suarez.  Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxx (14-15), XXXV, XLIV (4)
Burton.  The Anatomy of Melancholy, part i, sect I, MEMB II, SUB-SECT 9—
I  I John of Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Philosophia
Naturalis,  part iv, qq 91 Malebranche. De la recherche de la verite, bk
i,  ch  1  (1);  bk in (1), ch 1-4 Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human
Understanding  . Monadology Vauvenargues. Introduction a la connaissance
de  Vesprit humain Voltaire. "Wit," "Spirit," "Intellect," "Mind (Limits
of  Human),"  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary  T.  Reid.  Essays on the
Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,  1,  ch  5-8  D. Stewart. Elements of the
Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind Coleridge. Biographia Literaria, ch 5-8
Schopenhauer.  The  World as Will and Idea, vol i, BK i; VOL II, SUP, CH
15;  VOL  HI,  SUP, CH 22 Brown. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human
Mind

[237b]
6  Chapter  58: MIND 203 J. Mill. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human
Mind,  ch  1  Bain. The Senses and the Intellect E. Hartmann. Philosophy
ofthe  Unconscious  Taine. On Intelligence Clifford. "Body and Mind," in
vol  ii,  Lectures and Essays Lotze. Microcosmos, bk v . Metaphysics, bk
hi,  ch  5  Romanes.  Animal  Intelligence  T.  H. Green. Prolegomena to
Ethics,  bk ii, ch 2 C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 238-286
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  vii  C.  L.  Morgan. Animal Life and
Intelligence   Wundt.   Outlines  of  Psychology  ,  (15-17,  22)  Loeb.
Comparative  Physiology  ofthe  Brain  and  Comparative Psychology P. M.
Janet. The Major Symptoms of Hysteria Holt. The Concept of Consciousness
Bergson.  Matter  and  Memory, ch 3 . Creative Evolution, ch 3-4 . Mind-
Energy,  ch  1,  7  Maritain. Reflexions sur Vintelligence et sur la vie
propre  . Theonas: Conversations of a Sage, 1, in Stout. Mind and Matter
Bosanquet.  Three Chapters on the Nature of Mind Broad. The Mind and Its
Place  in Nature, ch 3, 7-10, 13-14 Pieron. Thought and the Brain Dewey.
Experience  and  Nature,  ch  2, 6-8 G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of Science,
essay  viii  Woodbridge.  Nature  and Mind . The Realm of Mind Jung. Two
Essays  on  Analytical  Psychology . Instinct and the Unconscious . Mind
and  the  Earth Spearman. The Abilities of Man Lashley. Brain Mechanisms
and  Intelligence  C.  I. Lewis. Mind and the World Order Whitehead. The
Function  of  Reason R. M. and A. W. Yerkes. The Great Apes Sherrington.
The Brain and Its Mechanism Blondel. La pensee Thurstone. The Vectors of
Mind  Blanshard.  The  Nature  of  Thought  Santayan a. Reason in Common
Sense,  ch  5-6 . The Realm of Spirit B. Russell. The Analysis of Mind .
Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part 1, ch 6; part 11, ch 7

[238a]
INTRODUCTION  OF  all  the traditionally recognized forms of government,
monarchy  is  the  easiest  to  define  and  to  identify.  As  the word
indicates,  it  is government by one man. It is indifferent whether that
man is called king or prince, Caesar or Czar. Of all such titles, "king"
is  the  most  frequent;  and  in  consequence  monarchy is often called
kingship  or  referred to as the royal form of government. When monarchy
is  thus  defined  in  terms  of  the principle of unity, other forms of
government,  such  as aristocracy or oligarchy and democracy, tend to be
characterized  as  government  by the few or the many. But the numerical
criterion  by  itself  is obviously inadequate. To those who distinguish
between aristocracy and oligarchy, it makes a difference whether the few
who  rule  are selected for their pre-eminence in virtue or in wealth. A
tyranny,  like a monarchy, may be government by one man. Hence those who
wish  to  use  the  word  "monarch"  or  "king" eulogisticaily cannot be
satisfied  with  a definition that fails to distinguish between king and
tyrant.  It  has been said—by Aristotle, for example that the perversion
of,  or  "deviation  from,  monarchy  is  tyranny; for both are forms of
oneman  rule.  But,"  he adds, "there is the greatest difference between
them;  the  tyrant  looks  to his own advantage, the king to that of his
subjects."  Both  Aristotle  and  Plato  also say that as tyranny is the
worst  form  of  government,  so monarchy at the opposite extreme is the
best.  But  though  in their opinion tyranny is always the worst form of
government,  Aristotle  at least does not seem to think that monarchy is
always  under  all  conditions—  best. Further complications appear when
other  views  are  taken  into  consideration.  The chapters on Citizen,
Constitution, and Government discuss the basic opposition between ab-

[238b]
Chapter  59: MONARCHY solute and limited government in the various terms
in which that opposition is traditionally expressed: royal as opposed to
political,   despotic   as  opposed  to  constitutional  government;  or
government by men as opposed to government by law. That opposition seems
to be relevant to the theory of monarchy, certainly to any conception of
monarchy  which  tends  to identify it with absolute rule, or which sees
some affinity between royal and despotic government. The word "despotic"
is,  of  course,  sometimes  used  in a purely descriptive rather than a
disparaging  sense.  Used descriptively, it designates the absolute rule
exercised  by  the head of a household over children and slaves, neither
of  whom  have  any  voice  in their own government. Aristotle sometimes
characterizes  the royal government of a political community as despotic
to signify its resemblance to the absolute rule of the father or master.
He  expresses the same comparison in reverse when he says that "the rule
of  a  father  over  his  children  is  royal."  The derogatory sense of
"despotic"  would  seem  to  apply to those cases in which grown men are
ruled  as if they were children, or free men as if they were slaves. The
great  issue concerning monarchy, therefore, is whether royal government
is despotic in this sense. Always, or only under certain conditions? And
if  despotic, is it also tyrannical? Is monarchy in principle the foe of
human  liberties  ? To all these questions there are opposite answers in
the  great  books  of  political  theory.  Where Hegel says that "public
freedom  in  general  and  an hereditary monarchy guarantee each other,"
others, like Rousseau and Mill, identify the freedom of citizenship with
republican   or   representative   government.  This  central  issue  is
complicated not only by 204

[239a]
the  various  meanings  of  "despotism"  (discussed  in  the  chapter on
Tyranny),  but  also by variations in the meaning of the word "monarchy"
as  it  is  used by different writers. The word is even used by the same
writer  in  a number of senses. Rousseau, for example, says in one place
that  "every  legitimate  government is republican," and in another that
"monarchical  always  ranks  below  republican  government." But he also
treats  monarchy  or royal rule as one form of legitimate government. He
describes  the king, in whose hands all political power is concentrated,
as only having "the right to dispose of it in accordance with the laws."
He distinguishes not only between king and tyrant, but also between king
and  despot.  To  avoid  what may be only verbal difficulties here, Kant
suggests  the  use  of  the  word "autocrat" to signify "one who has all
power"  and  who  in  his  own  person  "is  the  Sovereign." In contra-
distinction  "monarch"  should  signify  the  king  or  chief magistrate
(sometimes  called  "president") who "merely represents the sovereignty"
or  the  people who "are themselves sovereign." Some political theorists
distinguish  between  absolute and limited (or constitutional) monarchy.
This  in  turn  raises  new  problems  of  definition and evaluation. Is
absolute  government  always  monarchical  in  form,  so  that  absolute
government  and  absolute  monarchy can be treated as identical? Hobbes,
who  seems to think that government by its very nature must be absolute,
nevertheless  treats  aristocracy  and  democracy along with monarchy as
forms  of absolute government. Furthermore, as Rousseau points out, "the
Roman  Empire  saw  as  many as eight emperors at once, without it being
possible  to  say  that  the Empire was split up." The absolutism of the
government was not diminished by the fact that two or more Caesars often
held  power  at  the  same  time.  The  triumvirates  were also absolute
dictatorships.  It would seem, therefore, that the principle of absolute
government  can  be  separated  from  the principle of monarchy. But can
monarchy  as  a  form of government be separated from absolute rule? The
question is not whether, in a republic,

[239b]
Chapter  59:  MONARCHY  205  the monarchical principle is present in the
sense  that one man may hold the office of chief executive. On the issue
of  a  single as opposed to a plural executive, Hamilton and Madison—and
with  them  Jefferson—emphatically  favor  the principle of unity in the
executive branch of the government. "Energy in government," according to
The  Federalist, "requires not only a certain duration of power, but the
execution  of  it  by  a single hand." The qualities essential to a good
executive, such as "decision, activity, secrecy, and dispatch," Hamilton
says,  "will generally characterize the proceedings of one man in a much
more  eminent  degree than the proceedings of any greater number; and in
proportion   as  the  number  is  increased,  these  qualities  will  be
diminished."  Yet  the authors of The Federalist, and Jefferson too, are
equally  emphatic  in insisting upon the difference in kind, not degree,
between  the  power  granted the President of the United States and that
enjoyed by the King of Great Britain. For them, monarchies and republics
are fundamentally opposed in the spirit of their institutions. Despotism
is  inherent  in  the  nature  of  monarchy— not only absolute, but even
limited  monarchy. If the Constitution of the United States does not set
up  a  constitutional  monarchy,  even though it provides for one man as
chief  executive,  then  a  constitutional monarchy must have some other
principle  in  it  which  distinguishes  it from a republic. That may be
hereditary  succession  to  the  throne; or it may be a certain symbolic
identification  of the king with the state. But in a monarchy, no matter
how  attenuated,  so  long  as  it  does  not  become  purely and simply
constitutional  government, the king also seems to retain some degree of
despotic  power—  the absolute power exercised by a sovereign person who
is  free  from  the  supervision of law. Aristotle takes a similar view.
Enumerating  five  types of kingly rule, he sets one form apart from all
the rest— the form in which one man "has the disposal of everything. . .
.  This form corresponds to the control of a household. For as household
management  is  the  kingly  rule  of  a  family,  so kingly rule is the
household management of a city or of a nation." The other forms are all,
in one way or another, kingships accord-

[240a]
206  THE  GREAT  IDEAS ing to law. Of these, most clearly exemplified in
the  Spartan  constitution,  Aristotle  says that "the so-called limited
monarchy,  or  kingship  according  to law ... is not a distinct form of
government, for under all governments, as for example, in a democracy or
aristocracy,  there  may  be  a general holding office for life, and one
person  is  often  made  supreme  over  the  administration of a state."
Whether  or  not  there  is  a  supreme commander or a chief magistrate,
elected  or hereditary, the government is not distinctively royal if the
man  called  "king"  is  subject to the laws and if the other men in the
state  are  not  his  subjects  but  his  fellow  citizens. For somewhat
different  reasons,  Hobbes  agrees  with  the  view  that only absolute
monarchy  is  monarchy.  When the king is limited in power, he says, the
sovereignty  is  always  "in  that assembly which had the right to limit
him;  and  by  consequence  the  government  is not monarchy, but either
democracy  or aristocracy; as of old time in Sparta, where the kings had
a  privilege  to  lead  their  armies,  but  the  sovereignty was in the
Ephori."  Hobbes  uses the government of one people over another people—
the  mother  country  over  colonies, or the conqueror over a subjugated
nation—  to illustrate what he means by absolute monarchy. This suggests
a  significant  parallelism  between  the  problems  of monarchy and the
problems  of empire. If there were universal agreement on the point that
only  absolute monarchy is truly monarchy, the issue concerning monarchy
could  be  readily  translated into the basic opposition between rule by
men  and  rule  by  law. But such agreement seems to be wanting, and the
problems  of  monarchy  are, in consequence, further complicated. Plato,
for  example,  distinguishes  in  the  Statesman  between three forms of
government  according  to  established  laws,  ofwhich  one is monarchy.
Monarchy  is  better  than aristocracy and democracy, obviously not with
respect  to  the  principle  of the supremacy of law, but simply because
government by one seems to be more efficient than government by a few or
many;  just  as  tyranny  is  the  worst  form of government because, in
violating or overthrowing the laws, one man can succeed in going further
than a

[240b]
multitude,  which  is  "unable  to do either any great good or any great
evil."  But  all  these  forms  of  government, good and bad, better and
worse,  are  compared  by  Plato with a form of government which he says
"excels  them  all, and is among States what God is among men." It seems
to  be  monarchical in type, but, though not lawless like tyranny, it is
entirely  above the need of written or customary rules of law. "The best
thing  of all," Plato writes, "is not that the law should rule, but that
a  man  should  rule,  supposing  him  to  have wisdom and royal power."
Whether  such  government  can  ever  exist  apart  from divine rule, or
perhaps  the  advent  of  the "philosopher king," the point remains that
Plato  seems to conceive monarchy in two quite distinct ways— both as an
absolute  rule  and  also  as  one  of  the  legally  limited  forms  of
government.  Montesquieu  separates  monarchy  from  absolute government
entirely.  At the same time, he distinguishes it from republics, whether
aristocracies  or  democracies.  According to him, monarchy is as much a
government  by law, as much opposed to despotism or absolute government,
as  are  republics.  Monarchies  and republics are the two main kinds of
constitutional government, just as aristocracies and democracies are the
two  main  kinds  of republic. Where Aristotle holds that constitutional
monarchy  is  not  a distinct type of government, Montesquieu holds that
absolute monarchy does not deserve the name of "monarchy," but should be
called   "despotism"   instead.   He   criticizes  Aristotle's  fivefold
classification   of   kingships,   saying  that  "among  the  number  of
monarchies,  he  [Aristotle] ranks the Persian empire and the kingdom of
Sparta.  But  is  it not evident," he asks, "that the one was a despotic
state  and  the  other  a  republic?"  Since  Montesquieu's  own view of
monarchy  involves,  in  addition  to  a  king, a body of nobles in whom
intermediate and subordinate powers are vested, he thinks no true notion
of  monarchy  can  be  found  in  the  ancient  world. Hegel agrees with
Montesquieu  that  constitutional  monarchy  is  the  very  opposite  of
despotism, but he goes much further than Montesquieu in the direction of
identifying   monarchy   with   constitutional   government.   For   him
constitutional monarchy is the ultimately true

[241a]
form  of  government.  "The  development  of the state to constitutional
monarchy  is the achievement of the modern world." He thinks Montesquieu
was   right   in  recognizing  that  ^he^ancient  world  knew  only  the
patriarchal  type  of  monarchy,  a  kind  of  transference  of familial
government  to  larger  communities  still  organized  on  the  domestic
pattern.  But  according to Hegel, Montesquieu himself, in stressing the
role  of  the  nobility,  shows  that  he  understands,  not the type of
monarchy  which  is  "organized  into  an objective constitution" and in
which  "the  monarch  is  the  absolute apex of an organically developed
state,"  but  only "feudal monarchy, the type in which the relationships
recognized in its constitutional law are crystallized into the rights of
private property and the privileges of individuals and corporations." It
may  be  questioned,  however,  whether Hegel's theory of constitutional
monarchy  avoids the issue raised by republicans who think that monarchy
is  inseparable  from  some  form  of  absolutism,  or that monarchy, if
entirely  devoid  of  absolutism,  has no special character as a form of
government.  In  spite  of his acceptance of the traditional distinction
between  constitutional  government and despotism, Hegel seems to regard
the sovereignty of the state as absolute in relation to its own subjects
at  home—  no  less absolute than is its sovereignty in external affairs
vis-a-vis  foreign  states.  The  crown  is  the  personification of the
absolute  sovereignty  of  the  state at home. The absolute power of the
state  comes  into existence only in the person of a monarch who has the
final  decision  in all matters. "The sovereignty of the people," writes
Hegel,  "is  one  of  the confused notions based on the wild idea of the
'people.'  Taken  without its monarchy and the articulation of the whole
which  is  the  indispensable  and  direct  concomitant of monarchy, the
people  is  a formless mass and no longer a state." Hegel thus dismisses
the  notion  of  popular  sovereignty  (which to Rousseau, Kant, and the
Federalists  is of the essence of republican government) as inconsistent
with  "the  Idea  of  the  state  in  its  full development." A profound
opposition,  therefore,  exists between Hegel's theory of constitutional
monarchy  and  republican  theories  of  constitutional government. Even
though the issue cannot be

[241b]
Chapter  59:  MONARCHY  207  stated  in  terms  of government by men vs.
government  by  laws, a monarchy as opposed to a republic still seems to
represent  the  principle  of  absolutism  in government. There is still
another  conception  of  a  type  of  government which is neither a pure
republic  nor  an  absolute  monarchy. What the mediaeval writers call a
"mixed  regime"  is not a constitutional monarchy in the Hegelian sense,
nor  is  it  what  Aristotle means when he uses that term. The mediaeval
mixed  regime is a combination of two distinct principles of government—
the  royalprinciple,  according to which absolute power is vested in the
sovereign personality of an individual man; and the political principle,
according  to which the supremacy of law reflects the sovereignty of the
people,  who  have  the  power of making laws either directly or through
their  representatives.  This conception of a mixed regime—of government
which  is  both  royal  and  political—appears  at  first  to  be  self-
contradictory. In Aristotle's terms, it would seem impossible to combine
the supremacy of law, which is the essence of constitutional government,
with  the supremacy of a sovereign person, which is the essence of royal
government.  The  mixed regime would also seem to be impossible in terms
of  Hobbes'  theory  of the indivisibility of sovereignty. Impossible in
theory,  the  mixed  regime nevertheless existed as a matter of historic
fact  in the typical mediaeval kingdom, which derived its character from
the feudal conditions under which it developed. Does not the fact of its
historic  existence  refute  the incompatibility of the principles which
the mixed regime combines? The answer may be that, like a mixture of oil
and water, royal and political government can only exist as a mixture in
unstable  equilibrium.  Originating  under  feudal conditions, the mixed
regime  tends  toward dissolution as these conditions disappear with the
rise  of  the  modern nation-state. It first tends to be supplanted by a
movement  toward absolute monarchy. Then, in the course of re action and
revolution,  it  tends  toward  constitutional  monarchies  or republics
through  added  limitations  on  the power of the throne. These historic
developments  seem  to  indicate that the principles of the mixed regime
are ulti-

[242a]
208  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  mately  as irreconcilable in fact as they are in
theory.  Montesquieu's remark that the ancients "had not a clear idea of
monarchy"  can  be  interpreted  to  mean  that  they  did  not have the
conception of a mixed regime. Before the accidents of history brought it
into  existence,  it  is  unlikely that anyone would have conceived of a
government  both  royal  and  political.  Montesquieu does not adopt the
mediaeval description of a mixed regime, which, as stated by Aquinas, is
"partly  kingdom,  since  there  is  one  at  the  head  of  all; partly
aristocracy,  in so far as a number of persons are set in authority; and
partly  democracy,  i.e.,  government  by  the  people, in so far as the
rulers  can  be  chosen  by the people, and the people have the right to
choose  their  rulers." Yet Montesquieu's theory of monarchy seems to be
determined  by  characteristics  peculiar to the mediaeval kingdom. This
seems  to  be  the  point  of  Hegel's observation, already quoted, that
Montesquieu's  theory of monarchy identifies it with the feudal kingdom.
The  point  is  confirmed  in another way by the fact that Montesquieu's
ideal  of  monarchy  is the government of England at the end of the 17th
century,  which,  he  says,  "may be justly called a republic, disguised
under  the  form  of  a  monarchy."  Locke's  conception  of the English
government  in  his  own  day tends to clarify this point. The form of a
government,  says Locke, "depends upon the placing of the supreme power,
which  is  the  legislative." When the power of making laws is placed in
the  hands  of  one man, then it is a monarchy. But, according to Locke,
"the  legislative  and  executive power are in distinct hands ... in all
moderated monarchies and well-framed governments." What Locke here calls
a   "moderated  monarchy"  (intending  to  describe  the  government  of
England),  seems  to  be  the mixed regime, the form of government which
Fortescue  had  earlier  called  a  "political  kingdom,"  and Bracton a
regimen  regale  et  politicum. The legislative power is in the hands of
the  people  or their representatives. If it belonged exclusively to the
king  as  a  right vested in his sovereign person, and not merely as the
people's   representative   —or,  in  the  language  of  Aquinas,  their
vicegerent— the government would be in form an

[242b]
absolute  monarchy.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  king were merely a
representative,  the  government  would  be  a  republic.  The sovereign
character  of  the  king in a mixed regime seems to stem from his unique
relation  to the laws of the land. In one way, he is above the laws, and
has  certain  powers not limited by law; in another way, his whole power
is  limited  by the fact that he does not have the power to make laws in
his  own  right  or  authority.  When a people are free and able to make
their  own  laws,  Aquinas  writes,  "the  consent  of  the whole people
expressed by custom counts far more in favor of a particular observance,
than does the authority of the sovereign, who has not the power to frame
laws, except as representing the people." But Aquinas also says that the
sovereign  is  "exemptfrom  the  law,  as  to its coercive power; since,
properly speaking, no man is coerced by himself, and law has no coercive
power  save  from the authority of the sovereign." The coercive power of
the law belongs to the sovereign as executive, not legislator. Admitting
the  king to a share in legislative power, Locke conceives his essential
function— that which belongs to him alone—as executive. The absoluteness
of this executive power Locke defines in terms of the royal prerogative,
that  "being  nothing  but a power in the hands of the prince to provide
for  the  public good in such cases which, depending upon unforeseen and
uncertain  occurrences,  certain  and  unalterable laws could not safely
direct."  Prerogative,  he  then  goes  on  to say, is the power "to act
according  to discretion for the public good without the prescription of
law,  and  sometimes  even against it." Locke thus gives us a picture of
the  mixed  regime in which the king's sovereign power is limited to the
exercise   of  an  absolute  prerogative  in  performing  the  executive
functions  of  government.  In the executive sphere, the king's power is
absolute,  yet  his  sovereignty is not absolute; for in the legislative
sphere, he either has no voice at all where ancient customs prevail, or,
in  the  making  of  new  laws,  he  can  count  himself  merely  as one
representative of the people among others. The extent of the prerogative
permitted the king depends upon the extent to which mat-

[243a]
ters are explicitly regulated by law. When in the infancy of governments
the   laws   were   few  in  number,  "the  government  was  almost  all
prerogative,"  as  Locke  sees  it. He thinksmat "they have a very wrong
notion  of  government  who say that the people have encroached upon the
prerogative  when they have got any part of it to be defined by positive
laws. For in so doing they have not pulled from the prince anything that
of  right  belonged to him, but only declared that that power which they
indefinitely  left  in  his or his ancestors' hands, to be exercised for
their  good,  was  not  a  thing  they  intended  him,  when  he used it
otherwise."  Here we see the seed of conflict between sovereign king and
sovereign  people  in  the  combination  of incompatible principles that
constitute  a  mixed  regime.  As  the king, jealous of his prerogative,
tries  to  maintain  or  even  extend  his  power,  royal  and political
government  tends  toward  absolute  monarchy. As the people, jealous of
their  sovereignty,  try to safeguard their legislative power from royal
usurpations,  the mixed regime tends to dissolve in the other direction.
This  happens  as  it moves toward republican government through various
stages of limited or constitutional monarchy in which the sovereignty of
the  king  becomes more and more attenuated. When the king's prerogative
includes  the power of calling parliament into session, nothing short of
revolution  may  resolve  the issue; for, as Locke observes, "between an
executive  power  in  being,  with such a prerogative, and a legislative
that depends upon his will for their convening, there can be no judge on
earth." In the discussion of monarchy, as in the discussion of democracy
or  other  forms  of government, the fundamental terms and issues do not
have  the  same  meaning  in  the various epochs of western thought. The
continuity  of  discussion  in  the tradition of the great books must be
qualified,  especially in the field of political theory, by reference to
the  differing  historic  institutions  with  which  their  authors  are
acquainted  and  concerned.  Ancient  and  modern controversies over the
merits  of  monarchy in relation to other forms of government seem to be
comparing institutions of government as dif-

[243b]
Chapter  59:  MONARCHY 209 ferent as the ancient and modern forms of the
democratic constitution. In the ancient world, the choice between purely
royal   and  purely  political  government  underlies  the  meaning  and
evaluation  of monarchy. In the modern world, with its heritage from the
feudal  institutions  of  the  Middle  Ages,  either the mixed regime or
constitutional  monarchy  is  thought  to offer a third alternative. The
praise  of monarchy may therefore be the corollary of a justification of
absolute  government or the absolute state, as with Hobbes and Hegel; it
may  be  accompanied by an attack on absolute or despotic power, as with
Locke  and  Montesquieu;  or in defense of purely republican principles,
monarchy  may  be  attacked, as by Rousseau and the Federalists, without
differentiation between its absolute and limited This does not mean that
there  is  no continuity between ancient and modern discussion. It seems
to  exist  with  respect  to  both elements in the idea of monarchy— the
unification of government through its having one head, and the Tightness
of absolute power. On the point of unity, Plato's argument that monarchy
is  the  most  efficient  of  the  several forms of government which are
otherwise equally just, seems to be paralleled by modern arguments for a
unified  executive  in  the  constitution  of  a  republic.  It  is also
reflected  in  the  reasoning of Montesquieu and Rousseau concerning the
greater competence of monarchies to govern extensive territories. On the
point  of  absolute  power, there is some continuity between ancient and
modern  discussions  of  government by men versus government by law. But
here  there  seems  to  be greater similarity between ancient and modern
arguments  against  giving sovereignty to an individual human being than
there is between the modern defense of monarchy and ancient speculations
concerning royal government. Taking different shape in Hobbes and Hegel,
the  argument  for  the  necessity  of  absolute  government seems to be
peculiarly modern. It is not simply the point made by the ancients, that
under  certain  circumstances  it  may  be right for the man of superior
wisdom  to  govern  his  inferiors  in  an  absolute manner, as a father
governs children, or a god men. The point is rather that the very nature
of government and the

[244a]
210  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  state  requires a unified repository of absolute
power. Hobbes does not ask whether the monarch in whose hands such power
is  placed  deserves  this  by  reason  of  personal  superiority to his
subjects. Hegel explicitly repudiates the relevance of any consideration
of  the  monarch's particular character. Neither Hobbes nor Hegel argues
for the divine right of kings, or their divine appointment; though Hegel
does   insist  that  the  constitution  itself,  which  establishes  the
supremacy  of  the  crown, is not something made by man, but "divine and
constant,  and  exalted  above the sphere of things that are made." That
kings  have  absolute power by divine right is another peculiarly modern
argument  for  absolute monarchy. "Not all the water from the rough rude
sea,"  says  Shakespeare's  Richard  II,  "can wash the balm off from an
anointed  king.  The  breath  of  worldly  men  cannot depose the deputy
elected  by the Lord." According to the theory of divine right, the king
is  God's  vicar,  not, as Aquinas thinks, the vicegerent of the people.
The  theory of the divine right of kings does not seem to be a mediaeval
doctrine.  It  appears  later  in  such  tracts  as those by Barclay and
Filmer,  which  Locke undertakes to answer. The controversy involves its
adversaries  in  dispute  over  the  interpretation  of  Holy  Writ. The
anointing  of  Christian kings is supposed to draw its significance from
the  establishment  of  this practice among the ancient Hebrews. But the
story  of  the  origin  of  the Hebrew kingship can be given an opposite
interpretation.  The people of Israel, after the leadership of Moses and
Aaron,  first  submitted  their affairs to the government of judges, and
"there  was no king in Israel, but every one did that which seemed right
to  himself." Later they went to Samuel, their judge, saying: "Make us a
king  to  judge us like all the nations." This displeased Samuel. Samuel
prayed  unto  the  Lord,  and the Lord said unto Samuel: "Hearken to the
voice  of  the  people in all that they say unto thee; for they have not
rejected  thee,  but they have rejected me, that I should not reign over
them."  The  Lord then describes the tribulations the people will suffer
at  the hands of an earthly ruler with absolute power, a punishment they
deserve for wanting to be ruled by a king, in-

[244b]
stead  of  by  God  and  God's law, administered for them by judges. The
great  poems  and  histories  of  ancient  Greece and Rome would seem to
indicate  that  the  divinity  of  kings  is  not  a  modern notion. The
deification  of  emperors  and  kings  certainly  appears to be a common
practice.  But  the  assumption  of divinity by kings is not supposed to
signify  divine  appointment, or election by the gods; nor do the rulers
of  the ancient world justify their absolute power as a god-given right.
Furthermore, in the political theory of Plato and Aristotle, the analogy
between   royal  rule  and  divine  government  works  in  the  opposite
direction.  According  to  their  view, the right to absolute government
depends upon a radical inequality between ruler and ruled. If a god were
to  rule  men  on  earth, as in the myth retold in Plato's Statesman, he
would  govern  them  absolutely,  deciding  everything by his wisdom and
without recourse to written laws or established customs. If there were a
god-like man, or if a true philosopher were to become king, he too would
deserve  to  be an absolute monarch. It would be unjust, says Aristotle,
to treat the god-like man merely as a citizen, and so to treat him as no
more  than  "the equal of those who are so far inferior to him in virtue
and  in  political  capacity." It would also seem to be unjust for a man
who  does  not  have  great superiority over his fellow men to rule them
like  a  king, instead of being merely a citizen entitled to hold public
office  for  a  time. Aristotle frequently refers to royal government as
the  divine  sort  of  government, but he does not justify its existence
except when one man stands to others as a god to men. Though some of the
historic  kingships  which Aristotle classifies are absolute monarchies,
none  is  royal  government of the divine sort. That seems to remain for
Aristotle,  as  for  Plato,  a  purely hypothetical construction. Actual
royal  government  has  a patriarchal rather than a divine origin. It is
the  kind  of  government  which is appropriate to the village community
rather than to the city-state. The kingly form of government prevails in
the  village because it is an outgrowth of the family. That is why, says
Aristotle,  "the  Hellenic states were originally governed by kings; the
Hellenes

[245a]
were under royal rule before they came together, as the barbarians still
are."  In  thinking  that  absolute  or  despotic  government befits the
servile  Asiatics,  but  not  the  free  men  of  the Greek city-states,
Aristotle  takes a position which has a certain counterpart in the views
of  Montesquieu and Mill. These modern opponents of absolute monarchy do
not assert that constitutional government is unconditionally better than
despotism.   For   certain  peoples,  under  certain  conditions,  self-
government  may  not  be possible or advantageous. "A rude people," Mill
writes,  "though  in  some  degree  alive  to  the benefits of civilized
society,  may  be  unable  to practice the forbearance which it demands:
their passions may be too violent, or their personal pride too exacting,
to  forego private conflict, and leave to the laws the avenging of their
real  or  supposed wrongs. In such a case, a civilized government, to be
really advantageous to them, will require to be in a considerable degree
despotic;  to be one over which they do not themselves exercise control,
and  which  imposes  a  great  amount  of  forcible restraint upon their
actions."  Montesquieu  seems  further  to suppose that different races—
largely  as  a  result  of  the climate in which they live are by nature
inclined  toward freedom or servitude. The Asiatics are for him a people
whose  spirit  perpetually  dooms  them  to  live  under  despotism.  In
contrast,   Mill's  conditional  justification  of  absolute  government
demands  that despotism serve only a temporary purpose. It must seek not
merely  to  keep  order,  but  by gradual steps to prepare the people it
rules for self-governOUTLINE OF TOPICS i. The definition of monarchy and
the  classification of the types of kingship \a. The distinction between
royal  and  political  government  by  law lb. Modifications of absolute
monarchy: other embodiments of the monarchical principle regime

[245b]
Chapter 59: MONARCHY 211 ment. "Leading-strings are only admissible," he
says,  "as a means of gradually training the people to walk alone." When
they  have  reached  that  stage  of  development where they are able to
govern  themselves,  the  despotic  ruler  must  either  abdicate  or be
overthrown. There is a deeper contrast between Mill on the one hand, and
Aristotle  and  Plato  on the other, one which goes to the very heart of
the  issue concerning royal and political government. Both Aristotle and
Plato  seem  to  be saying that if the superior or god-like man existed,
then  royal  government would be better than the best republic, even for
the   civilized   Greeks.   In   calling  royal  rule  the  divine  form
ofgovernment,  they  imply that it is the ideal, even if it can never be
realized. This Mill most emphatically denies. The notion that "if a good
despot  could  be  ensured,  despotic monarchy would be the best form of
government,  I  look upon," he writes, "as a radical and most pernicious
conception  of  what  good  government  is."  The  point at issue is not
whether  the good despot— the god-like ruler or philosopher king— can be
found.  Suppose  him  to  exist.  The  point then to be made is that the
people  ruled  by  "one  man  of  superhuman  mental  activity" would of
necessity  have  to  be entirely passive. "Their passivity is implied in
the  very idea of absolute power. . . . What sort of human beings," Mill
asks,  "can be formed under such a regimen?" Men must actually engage in
self-government  in  order  to  pass from political infancy to maturity.
Whenever  it is possible, representative or constitutional government is
therefore better than absolute monarchy. PAGE 213 21.

[246a]
212 THE GREAT IDEAS \c. The principle of succession in monarchies 2. The
theory  of  royalty  2a.  The  divinity  of  kings  opher  king monarchy
education  of  the  prince 4. Comparison of monarchy with other forms of
government  4#.  The  line  which  divides  monarchy  from despotism and
tyranny  and  extent  of  territory 4^. The defense of monarchy or royal
rule  (1) The necessity for absolute government lute in their sphere 4^.
The attack on monarchy or absolute government capable of self-government
5.  The  absolute  government  of  colonies,  dependencies, or conquered
peoples  civilizing  achievements  of empire 6. The history of monarchy:
its origin and developments

[246b]
PAGE  (2)  Constitutional  or  limited  monarchy 215 (3) The monarchical
principle  in  the  executive  branch  of  republican government 2b. The
analogy  between  divine  government  and  rule  by  the  best  man: the
philos2C.  The  divine  institution  of  kings: the theory of the divine
right  of  kings 216 2d. The myth of the royal personage: the attributes
of  royalty and the burdens of 3. The use and abuse of monarchical power
217  3a. The good king and the benevolent despot in the service of their
subjects:  the  3#.  The  exploitation  of  absolute  power for personal
aggrandizement:  the  strategies  of  princes  and  tyrants  218 4a. The
patriarchical  character  of  kingship:  absolute  rule in the family or
tribe,  and  paternalism  in  the  state 219 4^. The differences between
kingdoms  and  republics  with respect to unity, wealth, (2) Monarchy as
the  best  or most efficient of the several good forms of government 220
(3)  The  preference for the mixed regime: defense of royal prerogatives
as  abso-  (1)  The paternalistic or despotic character of monarchy: the
rejection  of  benevolent  despotism;  the  advantages of constitutional
safeguards   (2)  The  justification  of  absolute  rule  or  benevolent
despotism for peoples in- (3) The illegitimacy of absolute monarchy: the
violation  of the principle of popular sovereignty (4) The illegality of
royal  usurpations  of power in a mixed regime: the limitations of royal
prerogative  in  a  constitutional monarchy 221 5a. The justification of
imperial  rule:  the  rights  of the conqueror; the unifying and 5#. The
injustice of imperialism: exploitation and despotism 222

[247a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douav versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The definition of monarchy and
the  classification  of  the  types  of  kingship  4 Homer: Iliad, bk 11
[198-206] 12a 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c- 108c 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  iv,  356a  / Statesman, 598b-604b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 7
[1279*33-34]  476d;  ch  14  483a-484a; bk iv, ch 10 [1295* 3-18] 495a /
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  8  [1365^81366^] esp [i366a i-3] 608b 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  4, ans 229b-230c; q 105, a i
307d-309d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch i 3a-b; ch iv, 7a-b; ch ix 14c-16a;
ch  xix, 29c-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 104d-105a; 106d-107c; part
hi,   228b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x,  sect  132  55a-b  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a;  7c-d;  bk  xi, 75b-76c 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk hi, 410b; 412c-d; bk iv, 427d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  24b  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 450a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 273, 91c-d; par 281 95b-d / Philosophy
of History, Intro, 174a-d

[247b]
Chapter 59: MONARCHY 213 la. The distinction between royal and political
government   lrf(l)   Absolute   or   personal   rule   contrasted  with
constitutional government or rule by law 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[322-326]
43c 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-456] 261d-262b 6 Herodotus: History, bk
hi,  107c-d; bk vii, 233a-d 7 Plato: Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk hi,
670c-676c;  bk  iv,  680d-682c;  bk  ix, 754a-b / Seventh Letter, 805d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34a3o-b8]
382a-b/ Politics, bk i, ch i [1252*6-16] 445a-b; ch 5
[i254a34-b9]
448a; ch 7
[1255^6-20]
449b;  ch  12  453d-454a;  bk  hi,  ch  15-17  484b-487a;  bk  iv,  ch 4
[1292*4-37] 491b-d; ch 10
[1295^-24]
495a-b; bk v, ch 10
[i3i2b37-i 3 i 3
a  io]  515c  14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  27d-28a / Caesar, 591d / Cato the
Younger,  638b-639a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  1,  la-2b; bk hi, 51b-c;
61c-62a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d

[248a]
214  The  distinction between royal and political (la. government. la(l)
Absolute  or  personal rule contrasted with constitutional government or
rule  by law.) 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 1, rep 3
205b-206b;  q  95,  a  i,  rep 2 226c227c; Q 96, a 5, rep 3 233d-234d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 114b-115a; 131d-132a; 149d-150a 35 Locke:
Civil  Government, ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch xi
55b-58b;  ch xiv 62b-64c; ch xviii, sect 199-202 71a-72a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii, 4a; 8b-d; bk in, 12a-d; bk v, 29a-31b; bk vi,
33a-35a;  36a-37b;  37d-38b;  bk  viii,  54a-b  38 Rousseau: Inequality,
323d-324a;  357b-c;  358b-d  /  Social  Contract, bk hi, 408c; 419a-c 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b passim, esp 25ac; 51b-d; 154ac; 592a
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 73d-75a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 438b;
450b / Judgement, 547b-c 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b passim 43
Mill:   Liberty,   267d-268b  /  Representative  Government,  339d-340c;
341d-350a  passim  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 195c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi, par 286 96c-97a; additions, 171 146b-c / Philosophy of
History,  part i, 208b-c; 213b-214d; part 11, 262a-c; part hi, 301c-302a
la(2)  The  theory of absolute government: the nature of absolute power;
the  rights  and  duties  of the monarch; the radical inequality between
ruJer  and  ruled  in  absolute  government 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi,
195d-196c;  bk  vii,  238c  7 Plato: Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk iv,
679c-680d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 10 [u6ob2-6] 412d; ch 11
[116^11-23]
413b-c  / Politics bk 1, ch 5 447d-448c; ch 12-13 453d-455a,c passim; bk
hi, ch 13 [i284a3]-cH 18 [i288b 7] 482a-487a,c; bk v, ch 10 512d-515d 14
Plutarch:  Romulus-Theseus,  30c-d  / Agesilaus, 480b,d-481a 15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk  ii,  239b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan 47a-283a,c esp part i-ii
49a-164a,c  26  Shakespeare: Richard II, act iv, sc i [115318] 342c-344d
27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth,  act  i,  sc  iv  [15-27]  287c 30 Bacon: New
Atlantis,  208a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  330 231b- 232a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch ii, sect 13 28a-b; ch hi, sect 17 28d-29a; ch iv 29d30b;
ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch xi,

[248b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  .a(2) to \b{\) sect 135-139 55d-58a; ch xiv, sect 163
63a-b;  ch  xv, sect 172-174 65b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i,
3b-c; bk 11, 4a; 8d-9a,c; bk hi, 12a-13c; bk iv, 15ac; bk v, 26c-31b; bk
vi,  33d-34b;  39d40d;  bk  viii, 54a-b; bk xv, 109a; bk xix, 137c-d; bk
xxv,  211c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 359a-c / Social Contract, bk 1,
388b-389d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 26b-28b passim, esp 27b-c; 50a;
51c-d;  153c-155b  passim  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73d-75a esp 74d;
173c-d; 219c-220a,c; 307a-c; 317b-d; 320d321b 42 Kant: Science of Right,
438b  43 Federalist: number 45, 148a 43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-268a; 321a-b
/  Representative  Government,  339c-341a;  341d-344d passim 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  120a-c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 107a-b lb. Modifications of
absolute  monarchy: other embodiments of the monarchical principle lb(l)
The  combination  of  monarchy with other forms of government: the mixed
regime  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [359-422]  5b6b  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 391c-d 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 671c-672c; bk iv,
680d-681a; bk vi, 699d-700b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[i265b261266*30]
461b-d; ch 9
[i27ob7-i27i a26]
466d-467c;  ch  ii  469a-470b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  iv,  72a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3,
rep  2 430c-431d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 4, ans
229b-230c; q 105, a i 307d-309d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xix, 27a-b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  103d-104a;  151c152a; part hi, 228a-b 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  x, sect 132 55a-b; ch xiii, sect 151-152
59d-60b;  ch xiv 62b-64c; ch xix, sect 212-223 ?4a76d esp sect 223 76c-d
38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 7c-8c; bk v, 32a; bk xi, 75b-78a
38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk hi, 410c-d; 414d-415b; bk iv, 427d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  26d-28b  esp  28a-b; 342c; 630d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  71d;  81c-d;  217d219a;  403bc; 428a 43 Federalist:
number  17,  70a-d;  number  70,  213b-c;  number  71,  216a-b  43 Mill:
Representative Government, 351a-c

[249a]
13(2)  to  2b  Chapter  59:  MONARCHY  215 44 Boswell '.Johnson, 178a-c;
390a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 273, 90d-91d; par
286,  96d  /  Philosophy  of  History, part iv, 342b-d; 356d-357a ^___.-
lb(2) Constitutional or limited monarchy 7 Plato: Statesman, 598b-604b /
Laws,  bk  in, 667c-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 14 [1285*3-16] 5]
484b; ch 15 483a-b; ch 15
[i285b34-i286a
[i286b27]-cH
16
[i287a io]
485bc; bk iv, ch 10
[i295 a i5-i7] 495a; bk
v, ch ii
[1313s
18-33] 515d-516a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1366*1-13] 608b-c
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 106d-107c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vii,  sect  94 46a-c; ch xviii, sect 200 71a-c passim 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  622d-623a  42  Kant: Science of Right, 439c-440b; 441 b-c 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  343c-344a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi, par 273 90c 92a; par 281 95b-d; par 283-284 96a-b; par
286  96c-97a;  par  292-293  98a-b;  par  300  100b;  additions, 170-172
145d-146d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 208b-c; part iv, 342b-d;
368c-d  l£(3)  The  monarchical  principle  in  the  executive branch of
republican  government  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk.xi, 72b 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 414d415a 43 Federalist: number 37,
118d-119b;   number  48,  157b-c;  number  67  203b-205b;  number  69-70
207a-214b   passim   43   Mill:  Representative  Government,  350d-351a;
356b-357a;   409d-413d   passim  lc.  The  principle  of  succession  in
monarchies Old Testament: Judges, 8:22; 9 / / Kings, 1 — (D) HI Kings, 1
/  /  Chronicles,  11:1-3;  23:1  —  (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 11:1-3; 23:1
Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees,  9:28-30—  (D)  OT,  /  Machabees,  9:28-30  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  167b-168a; bk vi, 194d-195b; 196d-199a; bk
vii,  214b-d; 252c-253a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 15 [i286b22-28]
485a  14  Plutarch:  Numa Pompilius, 49b-52c / Pyrrhus, 318a / Lysander,
363d-366a  /  Agesilaus,  480b,d-482a / Agesilaus-Pompey, 538b,d-539a 15
Tacitus:   Annals,  bk  vi,  98b-d  /  Histories,  bk  1,  193c-194a  23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xix,  29c-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii,
106b-d; 107b; 108a-109a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc v
[33-129] 13b-14a / 2nd Henry VI, act ii, sc
ii  43c-44c  / 3rd Henry VI, act i, sc i [50-188] 70b-71d / Henry V, act
i, sc ii 534a-537b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 320 229b-230a

[249b]
35  Locke: Civil Government, ch x, sect 132 55a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk v, 28b-d; bk xxvi, 222b-d 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
hi,  413d-414a  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 165c166a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  30b-c;  61b-c;  68b,d-69b;  161c;  430bc 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 194a-b; 204b205a; 212d-213c; 223c-d; 445b; 508c-d 44
Bos well: Johnson, 347d-348c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
280-281  94d-95d;  par  286  96c-97a  /  Philosophy of History, part iv,
325a-b;  344c; 355c-d 2. The theory of royalty 2a. The divinity of kings
Apocrypha:  Judith,  6:2—  (D)  OT,  Judith,  6:2  /  Wisdom of Solomon,
14:16-21  —  (D)  OT,  Boo/{  of  Wisdom,  14:16-21 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[254-287]  5d-6a  5  Aeschylus:  Persians  [623-680]  21c-22a 13 Virgil:
Eclogues, 1 [6-10] 3a; iv [15-17] 14b; v [20-80] 16b-18b; ix [46-49] 30b
/ Georgics, 1
[24-42] 37b-38a
/ Aeneid, bk 1
[286-296]
HOb-110a; bk vi
[791-805]
232a-b; bk viii
[126-142] 262b-263a
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  28a-29c  / Numa Pompilius, 50b-52c / Alexander,
553b-554b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 4c-d; bk iv, 73b-d; 80c-d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  82b-c  26  Shakespeare:  Richard  II, act iv, sc i
[162242] 343b-344a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act iv, sc v
[123125] 60d-61a /
Pericles, act i, sc i [103-104] 422d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 28b-d;
154d esp 712c [n 100] 2b. The analogy between divine government and rule
by  the  best  man:  the  philosopher  king 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii-vii
310c-401d  esp  bk  v-vi,  368c-383a  / Statesman, 586c-590a; 598b604b /
Laws,  bk  iv,  679c-681d  /  Seventh  Letter,  801b; 806bc 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  12  [i259b  io-i7]  454a; bk hi, ch 13 [1284^-18]
482a-b; [i284b 25-34] 482d-483a; ch 15 484a-485b; ch 17
[1288^-34] 486d-487a; bk
vii,  ch  14  [i332b 16-26] 537b-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 47a-48c / Numa
Pompilius,  50b-52c;  59c-60b  / Themistocles, 99b-c / Phocion, 605b-d /
Dion,  784d-785a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 103, a 3 530ac
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 164c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
20d-21a; 74d-75a

[250a]
216  THE  GREAT IDEAS (2. The theory of royalty. 2b. The analogy between
divine  government  and  rule by the best man: the philosopher king.) 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  3,  schol  374b-c  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch  xiv,  sect  165166  63c-64a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
28b-29a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 338d-339a 43 Federalist: number 49,
160a 2c. The divine institution of kings: the theory of the divine right
of  kings  Old  Testament:  Deuteronomy,  17:14-20 esp 17:15 / / Samuel,
2:10;  9:15-10:13; 10:1819,24; 12:12-14,17-19; 15:1,17; 16:1-13; 24:410;
26:7-12—  (D)  I  Kings,  2:10; 9:15-10:13; 10:18-19,24; 12:12-14,17-19;
15:1,17;   16:1-13;   24:5-11;  26:7-12  /  //  Samuel,  1:13-14;  5:12;
7:8,11-16;  12:7;  23:1  — (D) II Kings, 1:13-14; 5:12; 7:8,11-16; 12:7;
23:1  /  / Kings, 16:2— (D) HI Kings, 16:2 / // Kings, 9 :i-7,i2-(Z)) IV
Kings,  9:1-7,12  / / Chronicles, 28:1-10— (D) I Paralipomenon, 28:1-10/
//  Chronicles, 9:8— (D) II Paralipomenon, 9:8 / Nehemiah, 13:26— (D) II
Esdras,   13:26  /  Isaiah,  45:1-6  —  (D)  Isaias,  45:1-6  /  Daniel,
4:17,25,32—  (D)  Daniel,  4:14,22,29 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:7—
(D)  OT,  BooJ{  of Wisdom, 9:7 / Ecclesiasticus, 17:17; 47:11 — (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,   17:14-15;  47:13  New  Testament:  Acts,  13:21-22  14
Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  50b-51c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,
110b-112b; 123a-b; part hi, 225c-d 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act i, sc
ii [37-43] 323a; act hi, sc ii
[54-62] 336a; sc in [72100] 338c-d;
act iv, sc i
[102-242]
342c344a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch i, sect i 25a-c; ch vni, sect
112  51a-b; ch xix, sect 231239 78c-81b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 29a;
part iv, 182b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 268c-269a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
358d-359a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 33b-c; 292d-293b esp 759d [n 22]
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 204d-205a; 209c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  279, 93d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
680b-c  2d.  The  myth of the royal personage: the attributes of royalty
and  the  burdens  of  monarchy  Old  Testament:  Judges,  9:7-20 I Job,
34:18-20  /  Proverbs,  14:28;  20:2;  21:1;  25:3  Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  7:1-6—  (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  7:1-6  /  Ecclesiasticusy
10:10-18; 11:5; 40:1-4 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:12-22; 11:5; 40:1-4

[250b]
2c to 2d 4 Homer: Iliad, bk hi
[161-224] 20c-21b; bk
ix [96-114] 58a-b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[572-602]
104c-d 5 Euripides: Medea
[1 15-130] 213b / Iphigenia
at  Aulis [12-33] 425 b; [442-453] 428d-429a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
7b-8a;  bk  ii, 85d86b; bk in, 93c; bk viii, 281d-282a 7 Plato: Laws, bk
hi, 669b-674d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 7
[ii58b291159*5] 410d-411a; ch
ii
[1161*11-23] 413b-c
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 13
[1284*3-18] 482a-b;
[1284^5-34] 482d-483a; bk v, ch ii [1314*37I3i5b n] 517b-518c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[11361141] 76a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d;  bk  vii, sect 36 282b 14
Plutarch:  Romulus, 27c-28d / Numa Pompilius, 51b-c / Pericles, 121c-d /
Alexander  540b,d-576d  passim  / Cleomenes, 661b-d / Tiberius Gracchus,
678b-d  /  Demosthenes,  697c  /  Demetrius, 727a-b; 732a-c; 742c-743b /
Aratus,  835b-c  /  Artaxerxes,  847b-d  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 52c;
58a-b;  bk  iv, 73b-74a; bk xi, 104a-c / Histories, bk i, 193a-c; bk ii,
224c-d   23   Machiavelli:  Prince,  la-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  35a-36a;  58a-59d; bk hi, 131b,d-133b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  126b-131a:  311c;  327d329d: 436c-439c; 443d-446a; 451d-452a 26
Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act i, sc ii
[29-34]
73b ; ACT «i sc v
[1-54]
81d-82a; act in, sc 1
[61-65] 85b / Richard II 320a351d
esp act in, sc 11
[27-90] 335d-336b,
[144-177] 337a-b,
sc 111
[61-209] 338c-340a,
act iv, sc 1 [162-334] 343b-345a / King John, act iv, sc 11
[208-214] 396d
/ Merchant of Venice, act iv, sc i
[184-197]
427c / 1st Henry IV, act hi, sc ii
[29-91]
453b-d  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  hi, sc i [1-31] 482d-483a; act iv, sc v
[19-47] 494c-d; act v, sc ii [122145] 499b / Henry V, act iv, sc i
[104-301]
552d-554c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc hi
[10-28]
34c; act in, sc in
[1-23] 53b-c / King Lear
244a-283a,c / Macbeth, act i, sc vii [16-25] 289c / Antony and Cleopatra
311a-350d  28  Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 267a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, la-2c; 20d25c / New Atlantis, 205d-207b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk ii
[430-456]
120b-121a  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 139 196b-199a; 308 228b 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  xviii,  sect 202 71d-72a passim; sect 205-206 72a-c; ch
xix,  sect 224 76d-77a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 8d-9a,c; bk
in,  12a-13c;  bk iv, 15a-b; bk v, 26c-29a; bk vi, 39d; 42a-b; 43c-d; bk
xii, 93d-94a: 94d-95b

[251a]
3  to  3a  Chapter 59: MONARCHY 217 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 358d-359c /
Social  Contract,  bk hi, 412d-413a; 414c-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  356b,d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 28b; 154b-155_b^ 156b-157d;
329c;  547a-b;  572a-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 39b-40a; 194a-d;
297c-d;  307b-c;  317b-321b 43 Federalist: number 67, 203b-c; number 69,
207c;  210a;  number  70, 213b 43 Mill: Liberty, 275b-c / Representative
Government,  341d-342b;  363b-d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 125c; 154c; 155a;
155d;  216b; 251b-d; 333b-c; 335c; 344a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi, par 281282 95b-96a; additions, 173 146d 47 Goethe: Faust, part
i
[221 1-2244] 52b-53b;
part 11
[4761-4875]
118b-121a;
[10,242-259]
249b-250a;  [10,455-500] 254b-255b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 81a-82b; 93 b
94a;  107a-109b;  395ab  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, ld-2b; 49b; bk
11,  87b-d;  bk  hi,  135c-137c;  141b-142d; 147c-150a; 157a-161b; bk v,
230b-234a;   bk  vi,  257c-259a  passim;  bk  viii,  308d-309a;  bk  ix,
342a-346a;   348c-349c;   382a-388a,c;   bk   x,  405b-406c;  444a-450a;
456a-459d;  465c468a,c;  bk xi, 497c-499c; 518c-d; bk xii, 536a-537b; bk
xiii,  573b-c;  574b  3.  The use and abuse of monarchical power 3a. The
good  king  and  the benevolent despot in the service of their subjects:
the  education  of  the  prince  Old Testament: Genesis, 41 133, 39-40 /
Exodus,  18:21-26  /  Deuteronomy,  1:13;  17:14-20 / Judges, 9:8-15 / /
Samuel, 15:10-35— (D) I Kings, 15:10-35 / // Samuel, 23:3— (D) // Kings,
23:3  /  /  Kings,  4:29-34;  11:26-40; 14:1-20— (D) /// Kings, 4:29-34;
11:26-40;  14:1-20 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II Paralipomenon, 1:7-12
/  Psalms, 2 esp 2:10-12; 72 — (D) Psalms, 2 esp 2:10-13; 71 / Proverbs,
8:15-16;   14:28,35;   16:10-15;  17:7;  20:26,28;  25:2-5;  28:2,15-16;
29:2,4,12,14;  31:4-5  /  :  4-7,16-17/ Jeremiah , 23 :3-6 (D) Jeremias,
23:3-6  / Ezekjel, 45:9— (D) Ecclesiastes, 1 o Ezechiel, 45:9 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:1;  6; 9— (£)) OT, BooJ^of Wisdom, 1 :i ; 6; 9 /
Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-4,14; 41:17-18— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:1-4,17;
41:21-22  /  / Maccabees, 14— (D) OT, / Machabees, 14 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
ix  [1-172]  57a-58d  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens [359-422] 5b6b /
Persians
[647-680]
21d-22a;
[759-786]
23b-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King [1-77] 99a-d / Antigone
[162-210]
132c-d;
[658-745]
136d137c 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[339-358]
261b-c / Iphigenia at Aulis [334-375] 427d-428b

[251b]
1  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  108b-c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk i,
303a-304c;  bk  ii-iv,  316a-356a;  bk  vi-vii,  383c-401d  / Statesman,
598b-608d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  679c-680d  / Seventh Letter, 801b; 806b-c;
814b-c  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 10 [u6oa36b9]412c-d;cH 11 [n6i
au-23] 413b-c/ Politics, bk 1, ch 13 454a-455a,c passim; bk hi, ch 14
[i285b3-i9] 483d-484a; ch
15  484b-485b  passim, esp [i286b8-i2] 484d-485a; ch 18 487a,c; bk v, ch
10
[1 3iob 33—
3ii a8] 513b; ch ii
[i3i4 a37-i3i5b u] 517b-518c
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk 1 253a-256d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d
esp  47a-48c  /  Solon  64b,d-77a,c  esp  68d-70d / Poplicola, 80d-81c /
Poplicola-Solon,   86d-87a  /  Pericles,  129a-141a,c  esp  129c-130a  /
Agesilaus,  480b,d481a  /  Alexander,  542d-544a  /  Phocion,  605 b-d /
Demetrius,  742c-  743b  /  Dion,  782c788b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiii,
125d-126a  /  Histories,  bk  1, 198b-c; bk 11, 215c-d; bk iv, 290a-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 105, a 1, rep 2 307d-309d 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy, purgatory, vii [61136] 63a-64a; x [70-96] 68a-b;
paradise, xiii
[88-111] 126b-c
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d; part ii, 143d; 153a-159c; 164a,c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 26d-30c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
131b-132a;  314c-316a; 386b-388c; 436c-439c 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV
434a-466d esp act 1, sc 11
[218-240] 437c-d, act in, sc
11
[93-161] 453d-454c / 2nd Henry /F467a-502d
esp act v, sc 11
[122-145] 499b
/ Henry V, act 1, sc 1 533a-d; act iv, sc 1
[104-321]
552d-554d  27  Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  hi,  sc  iv [2736] 264c /
Macbeth,  act  iv, sc m [1-139] 303b304d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part
ii,  340b343a;  345a-348c;  352b-356d;  360d-364a;  366d-369b  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, lb-2c; 20d25c; 74d-75a; 94b-c / New Atlantis,
205d-207b  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch vii, sect 94 46a-c; ch viii,
sect  105-112  48c-51b passim; ch xiv 62b-64c; ch xviii, sect 200 71a-c;
sect 202 71d-72a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 112a-113b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  268c-269a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 14d; bk xii,
93c-95b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357b-c  /  Social  Contract, bk hi,
412d-414d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 31b-32d; 50a-b; 85d-86a; 260a-b;
284a-c;   288b-289a;   338d340c;   341d-342c;   343c-344a,c;  448c-449c;
577a-580d esp 577d-578a; 638a-646d passim

[252a]
(3.  The  use and abuse of monarchical power, "ha. The good king and the
benevolent despot in the service of their subjects: the education of the
prince?)  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 102b-104b; 176c-d; 504c-505c 43
Mill:   Representative   Government,   342a-344d;  351c-354b  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, additions, 171 146b-c / Philosophy of History, part
i,  212d213a; 243bc; part iv, 361d-362a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
9c-10d   3b.   The   exploitation   of   absolute   power  for  personal
aggrandizement:  the  strategies of princes and tyrants Old Testament: /
Samuel,  8:11-18— (D) I Kings, 8:11-18 / // Samuel, 11 .-6-12:13— (D) II
Kings,  11:6-12:13  / / Kings, 12:1-15; 21— (D) III Kings, 12:1-15; 21 /
II  Chronicles,  10—  (D)  II  Paralipomenon, 10 / Isaiah, 1:23; 3:1415;
10:1-3;  14:4-6— (D) Isaias, 1:23; 3:14-15; : 4-6 / Jeremiah, 22:1-23:2—
(D)  10:1-3;  I  4  Jeremias,  22:1-23:2  /  Ezckjel,  22:27; 46:18— (D)
Ezechiel,  22:27;  46:18  / Daniel, 3:1-12; 6:7-8 / Micah, 3:1-3; 7:3-4—
(D)  Micheas,  3:1-3;  7:3-4  /  Zephaniah,  3:3—  (D)  Sophonias,  3 :3
Apocrypha:  Judith,  2:1-12—  (D)  OT,  Judith, 2:1-6/ Ecclesiasticus, 8
:2—(D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 8:2-3 / ^ Maccabees, 1:41-64; 10:22-46— (D)
OT,  I  Machabees,  1:43-67;  10:22-46  5  Euripides: Iphigenia at Aulis
[334-375]  427d428b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 23b-24a; 35b-37a; bk in,
107c-d  7  Plato:  Republic, bk i, 301b-304c; bk ii, 311b313a / Laws, bk
hi,  672d-674d; bk iv, 681b682c / Seventh Letter, 811b-813d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34a3o-b8]
382a-b; bk viii, ch 10 [u6oa36-b u] 412c-d;
[u6ob23-33]
413a / Politics, bk iv, ch 10
[1295^8-23] 495a-b; bk
v,  ch io-ii 512d518c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8 [1366^-6] 608b 14 Plutarch:
Pyrrhus, 319b-d / Agesilaus, 482a484a; 489b-c; 495a-b / Pompey, 521a-b /
Demetrius,  742c- 743b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-5a; bk hi, 58d-59a /
Histories,  bk i, 195a; 197ac 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
105,  a  1,  rep  2,5  307d-309d  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, hell, xxvii
[55-136] 40a 41b; purgatory, vi
[58-151]
61b-62c; xx [34-96] 83c-84a; paradise, xix
[1 15-148]
136b-c  23  Machiavelli: Prince la-37d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 76d
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  51a-55d 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c /
2nd Henry VI 33a-68d / 3rd Henry VI 69a-104d esp act 11, sc vi
[1-30] 83b-c, act hi, sc
ii

[252b]
218 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to 4
[124-195] 87c-88a / Richard III 105a-148a,c /
Richard  II  320a-351d  esp  act  hi, sc iv [2990] 340c-341a / King John
376a-405a,c / 1st Henry IV, act iv, sc hi [52-105] 459d-460b / 2nd Henry
IV,  act  iv, sc v [178-225] 496b-d 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth 284a-310d 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c passim; ch viii,
sect  hi 50d-51a; ch xi, sect 138 57bc; ch xiv, sect 161-166 62d-64a; ch
xviii,  sect 199-202 71a-72a; sect 210 73b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
37a-b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 357a-c; 359b-c/ Social Contract, bk i,
391a;  bk  hi, 412d-413a; 415d416a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 25a-26d;
29b-c; 38a-c; 42b,d-43b; 60a-c; 70c-71b; 142c; 155a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  39b-40b; 113c114a; 173b-174a 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b 43 Federalist: number 4, 35b; number 22, 83c; number 75, 223c-d 43
Mill: Representative Government, 366a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  hi, 300c302a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 9c-10d 4. Comparison
of  monarchy with other forms of government 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
107c-108d  7  Plato: Republic, bk iv, 356a; bk viii 401d416a esp 402a-d;
bk  ix,  416a-421a  /  Statesman,  598b-604b  / Laws, bk hi, 670d-676c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 10 412c-413b passim, esp [n6oa3i-36] 412c
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 7 476c-477a; ch 15
[i286a23~b22]
484c485a; ch 17-18 486c-487a,c; bk iv, ch 2
[i28oa26-b4] 488b-c; ch 4 [1292V37] 491b-d
passim; bk v, ch 10 [i3i2a40-b9] 514d-515a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  4,  ans  229b-230c; q 105, a i, ans 307d-309d 23
Machiavelli:  Prince, ch i, 3a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 104b-108b;
112bc;   154b-c;  part  hi,  228b;  part  iv,  273a-c  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch x, sect 132 55a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii-
iv,  4a16a;  bk  v,  25a-26d;  bk  v-vi, 30a-43d; bk vii, 47d-48a; bk ix
58b,d-61d;  bk  xii,  90b-c;  bk  xiii  96a-102a,c  passim  38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  359a-b / Social Contract, bk in, 409a-410c; 412c-414d; 415d
42 Kant: Science of Right, 450a-d 43 Federalist: number 9, 48b-d; number
17,  70a-d;  number  22,  83b-d;  number  39,  125b-d  passim; number 69
207a-210c  passim;  number  70,  213b-c;  number  84, 252b-253a 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  338d-339a;  341d-355b  passim,  esp 346a-c;
363b-364d; 366a-367c

[253a]
4*  to  4</(l)  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 273 90c-92a;
par  279,  94b-d; additions, 165 145a- b / Philosophy of History, intro,
174a175c ^__^ 4a. The patriarchical character of kingship: absolute rule
in  the  family  or  tribe,  and  paternalism  in the state 6 Herodotus:
History, bk i, 35c-d 7 Plato: Statesman, 581a-c / Laws, bk hi, 664d-666c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34b8-i7]
382b-c; ch ii
[ii38b5-i4]
387a,c; bk viii, ch 10 [n6ob23-32] 413a; ch ii
[1161*11-23]
413b-c;  bk  x,  ch  9 [n8ob3-7J 435b / Politics, bk 1, ch 1 [i252a6-i6]
445a-b; ch 2 [i252b i624] 445d-446a; ch 7 [i255b i6-2o] 449b; ch 12
[i259a37]-cH
13
[1260*14] 453d-454c; bk
hi,  ch 6 [i278b3o-i279a2] 476a-b; ch 14 [i285b29~ 33] 484a; bk v, ch 10
[i3iob33-i3ii a8] 513b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 12, 517c-d;
ch  13-17  519a-523a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  68a;  part  ii,
109b-110d;  121a; 155b 26 Shakespeare: Taming of the Shrew, act v, sc 11
[136-179]  227d-228a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 34a / New
Atlantis,  207b-209d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch i, sect 1-2 25ac; ch
vi 36a-42a; ch vii,.sect 86 43d-44a; ch viii, sect 105-107 48c-49d; sect
110-112 50c-51b; ch xiv, sect 162 63a; ch xv 64c-65d 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  216b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3b; bk xvi, 118a-c;
bk  xix,  140a-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357a-b; 359b-c / Political
Economy, 367a-368c / Social Contract, bk 1, 388a; bk hi, 414c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 412c-413b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
273,  91c-d;  additions,  in  134d-135a  / Philosophy of History, intro,
172b-d;  part  i,  211b-c;  212c-d  53 James: Psychology, 731b 54 Freud:
Group  Psychology,  686c-687d;  689a 4b. The line which divides monarchy
from  despotism  and  tyranny  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi, 107c-d 6
Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian War, bk i, 352c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ix,
418d-419a  /  Statesman,  590c-d;  598b-604b  /  Laws, bk hi, 672d674d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34a3o-b8]
382a-b; bk viii, ch 10 [n6oa36-bn] 412c-d;
[ii6ob23~32] 413a / Politics, bk hi, ch 7 476c477a esp [1279^-10] 476d-477a; ch 8 [1279^617] 477a; ch
14
[i285 ai7~b3] 483b-d; bk
iv,  ch 2 [i289a26-b 4] 488b-c; ch 4 [1292*15-19] 491c; ch 10 495a-b; bk
v, ch 10
[1310*39i3ii a8]
512d-513b;
[1312^0^9]
514d-515a;
[I3i2b37-i3i3ai6]
515c-d; ch ii 515d-518c

[253b]
Chapter 59: MONARCHY 219 passim, esp
[i3i4*37-i3i5b n]
517b-518c  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8 [1366*1-3] 608b 14 Plutarch: Romulus-
Theseus,  30c-d  /  Lycurgus, 34d / Demetrius, 742c-743b / Dion, 783b-d;
784d-785a  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xii, 115d / Histories, bk i, 193c-194a
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 95, a 4, ans 229b-230c; q
105,  a  i,  rep  2,5  307d309d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 105a;
150c-151a;  part  iv,  273a-c; conclusion, 280d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 27a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 15 174a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
ii,  sect 13 28a-b; ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c passim; ch viii, sect 107
49b-d;  ch  xiv  62b-64c  passim; ch xviii, sect 199-202 71a-72a; ch xix
73d-81d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii, 4a; 7c9a,c; bk in,
12a-13c;  bk  v,  25d-29a; 30a-31b; bk vi, 33a-34d; 36a-37b; 37d-38c; bk
vii,  46a;  47d;  bk  viii, 53a-d; bk ix, 60a-61a; bk xi, 75a-b; bk xxv,
211c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357b-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk hi,
412d-413a;  419bc  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b; 32c-33a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  195c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part ii i, par 286
96c-97a;  par  302, 101b / Philosophy of History, part iv, 342b-d Ac. The
differences  between  kingdoms  and  republics  with  respect  to unity,
wealth,   and   extent  of  territory  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  148a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a; bk v, 25c-d; 31b-33a,c; bk vii,
44d-46a;  50a-b;  bk  viii,  56b-57c;  bk  ix,  58b,d-61a passim; bk xi,
75b-76a;  bk xiii, 99d; bk xv, 112d113a; bk xviii, 125a-c; bk xx, 147a-d
38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 400a; bk hi, 412c-414d; 415b-417c
43 Federalist: number 9, 47d-48d; number 14, 60d-61b; number 39, 125b-d;
number 48, 157b-c; number 75, 223c-d 43 Mill: Representative Government,
330a-c;  346a-c;  350b-355b  passim; 363b-364d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 260b
Ad.  The  defense  of  monarchy  or  royal  rule 4d{\) The necessity for
absolute  government  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [198-206] 12a 5 Euripides:
Suppliants  [399-456]  261d-262b  6 Herodotus : History, bk hi, 108b-c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 13
[i283b i7~
23]  481d;  [1284*3-17]  482a-b  15  Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 193c-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i-ii,  97c-107c;  part ii, 112b-d; 113c-115a;
130d-132b; 148c-153b; conclusion, 280c-281a

[254a]
220  THE GREAT IDEAS (4d. The defense of monarchy or royal rule. Ad ( l)
The necessityfor absolute government^) 33 Pascal: Pensees, 330 231b 232a
35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c passim 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  68b,d-69b  42  Kant: Science of Right, 439c-440a 43
Federalist:  number  9, 47b-c; number 55, 174c-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk 130d-131b 4d{2) Monarchy as the best or most efficient of
the several good forms of government 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 108b-c
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ix, 419a / Statesman, 602d-604b / Laws, bk iv,
679c-680d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 13
[1284*3b34J
482a-483a; ch 15 484a-485b; ch 17
[1288*7-34] 486d-487a; bk iv, ch 2 [1289*3033] 488b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 103, a 3 530a-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, a 1, rep 2 307d-309d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  105c-106d; 119a-b; 129b-130a; 158b-c 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  268c-269a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk v, 25c-d 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  409a-410a;  412c-414d  40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 622d-623a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 74d-75a; 81c-d
42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 450b-d 43 Mill: Representative Government,
341d-344d;  352b-353d  passim;  363b-364d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 120a-c;
255a-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 281 95b-d; par 283
96a-b;  par  292-293  98a-b;  par  300  100b; additions, 170 145d-146a /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  174a-175c;  part  iv, 368c-d 4d(3) The
preference  for  the  mixed  regime:  defense  of  royal prerogatives as
absolute  in  their  sphere  7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 671c-672c 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk iv, 72a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 4,
ans  229b-230c;  q 105, a i, ans 307d309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
228a-b  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii, sect 151152 59d-60b; ch xiv
62b-64c;  ch  xvii,  sect  200  71a-c  passim; ch xix, sect 223 76c-d 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  216b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi,
69c75a;  bk  xix,  142a-146a,c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk hi,
414d415b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  353d-354b  44 Boswell:
Johnson, 178a-c

[254b]
4d(2)  to  4^(3) 4e. The attack on monarchy or absolute government 4e(l)
The  paternalistic  or  despotic character of monarchy: the rejection of
benevolent  despotism;  the  advantages  of  constitutional safeguards 5
Euripides:  Suppliants  [399-456] 261d-262b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
107c-d 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 671c-674c; bk iv, 681d682c; bk ix, 754a-b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6 [ii}4*24-b i7] 382a-c / Politics, bk i, ch
7  [i255b  i6-2o]  449b;  bk  in,  ch  15-16  484b-486c  35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  ii,  sect 13 28a-b; ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch xii,
sect  143  58c-d;  ch xiv, sect 162-163 63a- b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xi,  69c84d  esp  70a-71a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 357a-b /
Political  Economy,  367a-368c  passim / Social Contract, bk in, 408b-c;
412c-414d   40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b;  32c-34a;  68b,d-69b;
522a-523a,c;  523d-524a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 450a-d 43 Federalist:
number  47  153c-156d;  number  48,  157c  43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-269a /
Representative   Government,   341d-344d  passim;  348c-349a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 286, 96d-97a; additions, 180 148b /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 173c; 174c-d 4e{2) The justification of
absolute  rule  or  benevolent  despotism for peoples incapable of self-
government  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i, 191d-192a; 193c194a; bk iv,
290a-d  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii, sect 105110 48c-50d 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 110a111c; bk xvii, 122a-123b; 124c-d
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 324a-b / Social Contract, bk 11, 402d-403a 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 513b-c 43 Federalist: number 9, 47b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  272a  /  Representative  Government,  329c;  338d-341d;  344c;
351c-353d;  363b-d; 436b-442d passim, esp 436b-437a 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  History,  intro,  174a-b;  198b-199c;  part  hi, 300c-301c 4e(3) The
illegitimacy  of  absolute  monarchy:  the violation of the principle of
popular  sovereignty  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch vii, sect 90-94
44d-46c  passim,  esp  sect 90-93 44d-46a; ch viii, sect 105-112 48c-51b
passim;  ch  xi 55b58b passim; ch xv, sect 172-174 65b-d; ch xviii, sect
199-202 71a-72a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk viii, 54a

[255a]
4>(4)  to 5a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 356b-359a / Social Contract, bk i,
387b,d-391b;  bk  ii,  395d396a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 436c; 437c-d;
439_a^ 441d; 450d-452a 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b esp
[1-28] la-b, [109-121] 3a-b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 279, 93d-94d 4*(4) The
illegality  of  royal  usurpations  of  power  in  a  mixed  regime: the
limitations   of  royal  prerogative  in  a  constitutional  monarchy  9
Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 10
[i3i2b37~
1313*16] 515c-d 14 Plutarch: Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, a 1, rep 2,5 307d-309d 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  viii, sect iii112 50d-51b passim; ch xi 55b-58b passim;
ch  xiv  62b-64c; ch xvii 70c-71a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii,
7c-9a,c;  bk  v, 29ac 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 395d-396a; bk
hi,  418a-419c;  424a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b esp 27b-d
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 74c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 445a-c 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  43 Federalist: number 48, 157b-c;
number  84,  252b-253a  43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-268b 44 Boswell: Johnson,
120a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 286 96c-97a 5. The
absolute  government of colonies, dependencies, or conquered peoples Old
Testament:  Joshua,  9  esp  9:18-27— (D) Josue, 9 esp 9:18-27 / Judges,
6:1-6  /  I  Kings, 9:20-23— (D) HI Kings, 9:20-23 / // Kings, 23:30-35;
24:12-16;  25:5-30— (D) IV Kings, 23:30-35; 24:12-16; 25:5-30 Apocrypha:
I  Maccabees,  1:41-64; 8:1-13; I0:23~ 46— (D) OT, / Machabees, 1:43-67;
8:1-13;  10:23-46/  II  Maccabees,  5:11-7:42—  (D)  OT,  II  Machabees,
5:11-7:42  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  16b-20b;  30b-31a;  31d-32a;
35c-36a;  37b-40b;  bk  hi,  109d-110b;  bk  vi, 186a-191c 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk i, 353d; bk 11, 403c-404a; bk hi, 425a-428d; bk v,
504c-507c;  bk viii, 579d-580b 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 698c-d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk hi, ch 13 [i284a36-b2] 482c; bk vii, ch 2
[i324a35~i325ai5] 528b529a; ch 14 [i333b io-i334a io] 538c-d
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  47d-48c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv, 76a; bk xi,
104a-c; 106a-d; bk xii, 117c-d; 122ac; bk xiii, 139c-

[255b]
b  Chapter  59:  MONARCHY  221  140d; bk xiv, 149a-b; bk xv, 162c-163a /
Histories,  bk i, 191d-192a; bk iv, 290a-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
iv,  ch  14-15 196b-197a; bk v, ch 12, 216d-218a 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch  iii-viii  3c-14c;  ch  xviii,  25d-26a;  ch  xx  30a-31c  23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  107a; 107c; 108d109a; HOb-110a; 119ac; 126d-127a;
131c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 131b,d-133b 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch  xvi  65d-70c  passim 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
24b-25a;  part  hi, 102b-103a; part iv, 182b-183a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk x 61b,d68d; bk xi, 83c-84c; bk xxi, 170c-171d 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy, 380a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 239a-279b
esp  239a-240b,  267c-272a;  288bc 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14d-15a;
26a-c;  147a-b;  245d-246c;  518b-519a; 632d-633a 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  216c-d  42 Kant: Science of Right, 413d; 454a-455a 43 Declaration
of Independence:
[7-98] la3a
43   Mill:  Representative  Government,  436b-442d  passim  44  Boswell:
Johnson,  511c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 299a-c 5a. The
justification  of  imperial  rule:  the  rights  of  the  conqueror; the
unifying  and  civilizing  achievements  of empire 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[852-908]  24b-d  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  358d360c;
367a-369a; bk ii, 402b-404a; bk v, 504c507c; bk vi, 514b-d; 530d-532b 13
Virgil: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b / Aeneid, bk i
[254-296]
HOa-110a; bk vi
[845-853] 233b234a; bk viii [714-731] 278a-b
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 47d-48c / Flamininus 302b,d-313a,c / Alexander,
566a-b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xi,  106a-d;  bk  xiii,  139c-140d  /
Histories,  bk  i,  191d-192a; bk iv, 286c-287a; 290a-d; bk v, 301c-d 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iv,  ch  14-15  196b-197a;  bk v, ch 12,
216d-218a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, hell, ii [13-27] 2d; paradise, vi
[i-iii]  113c-114d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, HOb-110a; conclusion,
279d-281a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 22-23 30a-b; ch vii,
sect  85  43c-d;  ch  xv,  sect 172 65bc; ch xvi 65d-70c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk x, 61b,d63d; bk xv, HOa-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
355c-d  /  Social Contract, bk 1, 389d-390d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
12a-24a,c  esp  12a-b, 14c-16c, 18a, 21c-22c; 255c-d; 608b,d-609a; 620a;
638a-639a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 285a-

[256a]
(5.  The  absolute  government  of  colonies, dependencies, or conquered
peoples.  5a.  The  justification  of  imperial  rule: the rights of the
conqueror; the unifying and civilizing achievements of empire.) 43 Mill:
Representative   Government,   353c-354b;  436b-442d  passim  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 351 112a-b / Philosophy of History,
part  i,  208b-d;  241d-250a;  part  ii,  281d-282a;  part hi, 302b-d 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 466b-d; bk xi, 498c-499a 5b. The injustice
of  imperialism: exploitation and despotism 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi,
189d  6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 424d-429b; bk v, 504c-507c;
bk  vi,  529b533a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vii,  ch 2 [i324b23~4i]
528d-529a;   ch  14  [1333*16-1334*11]  538a-d  14  Plutarch:  Lucullus,
409b-410d  / Agesilaus 480b,d-499a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 17c-d; bk
ii,  39d-40c;  bk  iv,  76a;  82d-83a; bk xii, 122a-c; bk xiv, 149a-b 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; bk iv, ch 14-15 196b-197a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  440b-443d  35  Locke:  Toleration,  13c-d  /  Civil
Government,  ch  xvi  65d-70c  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 182b-183a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii, 56d57c; bk x, 62b-63a; bk xv,
109b-c;  110a-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 355c-d / Social Contract, bk 1,
389d-390d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk iv, 253a-255a 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 23c-d; 33d-34a,c; 551a-b; 631a-633a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  420c;  505bc  42  Kant: Science of Right, 413d; 454a-455a 43
Declaration  of  Independence: la-3b 43 Mill: Representative Government,
436b-442d  passim  44  Boswell  '.Johnson,  179c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions,  172  146c-d  50  Marx: Capital, 372c-374a; 379a-383d
passim  6.  The  history  of  monarchy:  its origin and developments Old
Testament:  Deuteronomy, 17:14-20/ / Samuel, 8-31 esp 8, 10:17-19— (D) I
Kings, 8-31 esp 8, 10:17-19 / // Samuel— (D) II Kings I I Kings- (D) III
Kings  /  II Kings- (D) IV Kings 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 23b-24b; bk
hi,

[256b]
222  THE GREAT IDEAS 5b to 6 92b c; 93c; 108b-109b; bk iv, 152d-153b; bk
vi,  195d-196c  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 391c-d 7 Plato:
Laws, bk hi, 672c-674d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[i252b i5~27]
445d-446a; bk ii, ch 6
[i265b34-39] 461b;
ch  9 [i270b7]-cH 10 [i27i b26] 466d-468a; ch ii 469a-470b; bk hi, ch 14
483a-484a; ch 15
[i286b8-22]
484d-485a; bk v, ch 10 512d515d / Athenian Constitution, ch 3 553c-554b;
ch  14-16  558d-560a  14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-d / Romulus, 20c-28a /
Lycurgus  32a-48d  /  Poplicola  77a-86a,c  /  Agesilaus 480b,d-499a,c /
Caesar,  600a-603c  /  Cleomenes,  657a-663c  /  Demetrius, 731c-732c 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2b; bk hi, 51b / Histories, bk i, 191d-192a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 105, a 1 307d-309d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, vi [i-iii] 113c-114d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  103d-104a;  148d149a;  150b-151a;  part  iv,  273a-b;  275a-278d 26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c / 2nd Henry VI 33a-68d / 3rd Henry VI
69a-104d  /  Richard  III  105a-148a,c / Richard //320a-351d / King John
376a-405a,c  / 1st Henry /J/ 434a466d / 2nd Henry IV 467a-502d / Henry V
532a-567a,c  27  Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII  549a-585a,c  35 Locke: Civil
Government, ch vi, sect 74-76 41b-42a; ch viii, sect 105-112 48c-51b; ch
xiv, sect 165-166 63c-64a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 69d78a;
bk xxx-xxxi 269a-315d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-c / Social Contract,
bk  in,  410b-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall  passim, esp 24b, d34a,
50a-51b,   110b-113a,   153c-155d,   240b251d,   290c-297a,   523a-524a,
608b,d-624c,  625c-626a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall passim, esp 71d75b,
194a-d,  204b-220a,c,  223c-224b,  288a,c, 495b-506d, 557c-558c 42 Kant:
Science  of Right, 451d-452a 43 Federalist: number 17, 70a-d; number 26,
92c-d; number 84, 252b-253a 43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-269a / Representative
Government,  340d-341c;  346ac;  352a-b;  353c-d;  363b-d;  429d-430a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  286 96c-97a / Philosophy
of History,  intro,  174c-d;  part  ii,  261b-263d;  part  hi, 293b-294c;
301c302a;  part  iv,  324b-327a;  342a-345b;  355c358b;  368c-d 50 Marx:
Capital,  356c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a;
epilogue ii, 675a-683b

[257a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Discussions  relevant to the distinctign-between
royal   and  political  government,  see  Citizen  2b;  Constitution  i;
Government  ib;  Law  7a; Slavery 6b; Tyranny 5. Other considerations of
the  mixed  regime  and its distinction from the mixed constitution, see
Constitution  3a,  5b; Democracy 3b; Government 2b. Monarchy in relation
to  other  forms of government, see Aristocracy 2a; Democracy 3c; son of
monarchy with domestic or despotic government, see Family 2b; Government
ib;  Tyranny  4b.  Another  discussion  of government in relation to the
wealth and territorial extent of the state, see State 4a~4c ; Wealth of.
Matters  relevant to the theory of the royal prerogative, see Government
3e;  Law  7c  The  controversy  concerning  the legitimacy or justice of
absolute  monarchy,  and  for the statement of the issue in terms of the
doctrine  of natural rights and popular sovereignty, 6b, 7b; Liberty id,
ig;  State  2c;  Tyranny  5a~5c Matters relevant to the justification of
absolute  rule  when  it  takes the form of a benevolent 4 b. The issues
concerning  imperialism  as  a form of absolute rule, see Government 5b;
Liberty  6c;  Revolution 7; Slavery 6d; State 10b; Tyranny 6. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included in Great BooJ{s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas. Marsilius of Padua. Defensor Pacts Wycliffe. Tractatus de Officio
Regis Plutarch. "Of the Three Sorts of Government— Fortescue. Governance
of  England  Monarchy,  Democracy  and  Oligarchy,"  in  MoErasmus.  The
Education  of  a  Christian Prince I. ralia Castiglione. The Boo\ of the
Courtier  Aquinas. On the Governance of Riders La Boetie. Anti-Dictator,
the  Discours de la serviDante. On World-Government or De Monarchia tude
volontaire  F.  Bacon. "Of the True Greatness of Kingdoms Bodin. The Six
Bootes of a Commonweale and Estates," in Essays Bellarmine. The Treatise
on  Civil  Government  (De  Milton.  The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates
Laicis)  .  Defence  of the People of England Marlowe. Edward the Second
Hobbes.  Behemoth  Hooker. Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity Spinoza.
Tractatus  Politicus  (Political Treatise), ch Mariana. The King and the
Education  of  the  6-7  King Berkeley. Passive Obedience W. Barclay. De
Regno James i. The Trew Law of Free Monarchies . An Apologiefor the Oath
of  Allegiance  Demosthenes. Philippics . A Premonition to all Christian
Monarches,  Free  . De Corona (On the Crown) Princes and States Bracton.
De Legibus et Consuetudinibus Angliae . A Defence of the Right of Kings,
Against (On the Laws and Customs of England) Cardinall Perron

[257b]
Chapter 59: MONARCHY 223

[258a]
224  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Campanella.  A  Discourse  Touching  the Spanish
Monarchy  Corneille.  Cinna  Prynne. The Soveraigne Power of Parliaments
and Kingdomes Hudson. The Divine Right of Government Filmer. The Anarchy
of  a  Limited or Mixed Monarchy . Patriarcha Sevigne. Letters Barrow. A
Treatise  ofthe  Pope's  Supremacy  Bossuet. Politique tiree des propres
paroles de VEcriture Sainte A. Sidney. Discourses Concerning Government

[258b]
Voltaire.  "King,"  in  A Philosophical Dictionary Burke. Reflections on
the  Revolution in Prance Paine. Common Sense, n . Rights of Man, part i
Maistre.   Du   pape   Pushkin.   Boris  Godunov  Bagehot.  The  English
Constitution  Frazer.  The Golden Bough, part i; part ii, ch i; part in,
ch  2-5 Figgis. Theory of the Divine Right of Kings Maurras. Enquete sur
la  monarchic  Hocart.  Kingship  B. Russell. Power, ch 5 A. J. Carlyle.
Political Liberty

[259a]
Chapter^*?. NATURE INTRODUCTION NATURE is a term which draws its meaning
from  the  other  terms  with  which  it is associated by implication or
contrast. Yet it is not one of a fixed pair of terms, like necessity and
contingency, one and many, universal and particular, war and peace. When
things  are  divided  into  the  natural and the artificial, or into the
natural  and  the  conventional,  the  opposite  of the natural does not
represent  a loss or violation of nature, but rather a transformation of
nature through the addition of a new factor. The unnatural, on the other
hand,  seems to be merely a deviation, a falling away from, or sometimes
a  transgression  of nature. Most of the terms which stand in opposition
to  nature  represent the activity or being of man or God. As appears in
the  chapter  on  Medicine,  Galen thinks of nature as an artist. Harvey
later   develops  this  notion.  But  with  these  two  exceptions,  the
traditional theory of art conceives it not as the work of nature, but of
man.  Despite other differences in the great books on the theory of art,
especially with regard to art's imitation of nature, there seems to be a
common   understanding   that   works  of  art  are  distinguished  from
productions  of  nature  by  the  fact  that  man has added something to
nature.  A  world which man left exactly as he found it would be a world
without  art  or  any trace of the artificial in it. The ancient authors
who contrast the natural and the conventional and the modern authors who
distinguish  man's  life  in  a  state  of nature from his life in civil
society  seem to imply that without something done by man there would be
nothing  conventional  or  political.  Locke  appears to be an exception
here.  He  thinks  that  there  is  a  natural  as  well  as a civil, or
political,  society.  Natural  society  is  the  society  of "men living
together  according  to  reason without a common superior on earth, with
authority to 225

[259b]
judge  between  them."  Unlike  Hobbes  or Kant or Hegel, Locke does not
think  that  the state of nature is necessarily a state of war. But this
difference  between  Locke and others does not affect the point that the
political  institutions  of  civil  society  are  things  of  man's  own
devising.  There may be, among the social insects, natural organizations
such  as  the  bee-hive  and  the  ant-mound.  It  may even be, as Locke
supposes,  that  in a state of nature, "men living together according to
reason" would constitute a society. But in neither case does the society
we  call  "a  state"  result.  States  differ  from  one another in many
features  of  their  political  organization. In this sense the state or
political   community   is   conventional   rather   than  natural;  its
institutions  are  humanly  contrived. The social contract theory of the
origin  of the state is not necessarily involved in the recognition that
the  state  is  partly conventional. Aristotle, for example, who regards
the state as natural— he speaks of it as "a creation of nature"—does not
think of the political community as natural in the sense in which a bee-
hive  is  natural. That men should form political communities is, in his
view,  the result of a natural desire, a tendency inherent in the nature
of man as a political animal. But what form the political community will
take  is  at  least partly determined by the particular arrangements men
voluntarily  institute.  Manmade  laws are conventional, but so also are
other institutions which vary from state to state or change from time to
time. The issues in political theory raised by any consideration of what
is  and is not natural about society or the state are discussed in other
chapters,  e.g.,  Family  and  State. What is true in this connection is
likely to be true of each of the other fundamental oppositions in which

[260a]
226  THE GREAT IDEAS the notion of nature is involved. The issues raised
by  the  relation  of  art to nature are, for example, considered in the
chapter  on  Art;  those  raised  by  the distinction between nature and
nurture  are  considered in the chapter on Habit, and so on. Here we are
concerned not with the theoretical consequences of different conceptions
of  nature,  but  with  the various meanings of the term itself as it is
used  in  different  contexts. Common to all meanings is the notion that
the  natural  is  that  which  man's  doing or making has not altered or
enlarged.  The  distinction  between  nature  and nurture confirms this.
Man's  activities  are  the source of modifications in his own nature as
well as in the nature of other things. The human nature man is born with
undergoes  transformations  in  the  course  of life: the acquirement of
knowledge,  the  formation  of  habits  (which  are often called "second
nature"),  the  modification  of  instincts.  The  sum  of these changes
represents  what  nurture  adds to nature. When changes of this sort are
looked  at  collectively  they  give  rise  to the notions of culture or
civilization—  two  more  terms  which  present a contrast to nature. In
Rousseau  and  others  we  meet  the feeling that man may have lost, not
gained, by exchanging the natural for the civilized life. The ideal of a
return  to  nature involves more than a return to the soil, or an exodus
from the city to the country. In its most radical form, this ideal calls
upon  man to divest himself of all the artifices and conceits with which
he  has  thought  to  improve  on  nature  "by renouncing its advances,"
Rousseau  says,  "in  order  to  renounce its vices." But why, it may be
asked,  is  the  whole  world  which  man  creates not as natural as the
materials which man finds to work with— the resources of physical nature
and the native equipment which is man's nature at birth ? If man himself
is  a natural entity, and if all human activities are somehow determined
by  human  nature,  then  why  are not the works of art and science, the
development  of  political institutions, the cultivation of human beings
by  education and experience, and all other features of civilization—why
are  not all these just as natural as the falling stone, the flourishing
forest, or the bee-hive? Why, in short, should there by any

[260b]
contrast  between  the  works  of  nature  and  the  works of man ? This
question  points  to  one  of  the fundamental issues in the traditional
discussion  of  nature.  Those  who  uphold the validity of the contrast
defend  its significance in terms of something quite special about human
nature.  If  man were entirely a creature of instinct— if everything man
did  were  determined  by his nature so that no choices were open to him
and  no  deviation  from  the  course of nature possible— then the human
world  would  seem  to  fade  into  the  rest  of  nature.  Only  on the
supposition that man is by nature rational and free do those human works
which are the products of reason or the consequences of free choice seem
to stand in sharp contrast to all other natural existences or effects of
natural  causes.  Of  these  two  factors—  rationality and freedom— the
element of freedom is usually the one most emphasized. The line is drawn
between   that  which  natural  causes  determine  and  that  which  man
determines  by  his  own  free  choice.  The  laws  of  nature are often
conceived  as  expressing  an inherent rationality in nature itself, but
they  also  state  the uniformity of nature's operations. Such maxims of
nature  as  'nature  does nothing in vain,' 'nature abhors a vacuum,' or
'nature  does  nothing  by  jumps' are usually interpreted as describing
nature's invariable way of doing things. Aristotle's distinction between
things  which happen naturally and those which happen by chance turns on
the regularity of the events which result from causes in the very nature
of  things.  The  natural is that which happens either always or for the
most  part.  Hence,  even  if  there  is rationality of some sort in the
structure  of  nature,  that  supposition  does  not  seem to affect the
position  of  those who connect human reason with human freedom and who,
in consequence, divide the things which happen as a result of man's free
choice  from everything else which happens in the course of nature. This
may  be exemplified by the Greek understanding of the difference between
nature  and convention. The laws of Persia vary from the laws of Greece,
the  political  institutions  of  the city-states vary from those of the
Homeric age, customs and consti-

[261a]
tutions  differ  from city to city. Unlike such conventions, "that which
is by nature," Aristotle writes, "is unchangeable and has everywhere the
same  force,  as fire burns botij-hereT and in Persia." The conventional
is   the   variable,   the  natural  the  uniform.  The  variability  of
conventions,  moreover,  seems  to  suggest  that  they  are products of
freedom  or  choice.  The  difference between the bee-hive and the human
city is that one is entirely a creation of nature, a social organization
entirely  determined by the instincts of the bees, so that wherever bees
form  a  hive,  it  is  formed  in  the same way; whereas the human city
involves  something  more than a natural desire of men, since when these
political  animals  associate in different places, they set up different
forms  of government and different kinds of law. The same comparison can
be  made  between the spider's web or the beaver's dam and such products
of  human  art  as  cloth  and  houses.  The variability of the works of
reason,  as  opposed to the uniformity of instinctive productions of all
sorts,  implies the factor of choice in reason's work. The conception of
nature  which  tries  to  separate the natural from what man contributes
thus   seems  to  depend  upon  the  conception  of  man.  Controversies
concerning  man's  difference from other animals, especially the dispute
about  human freedom (considered in such chapters as Man and Will), bear
directly on the issue of the naturalness of the things which result from
man's  doing  and  making.  Spinoza,  for example, in holding that human
actions  constitute  no  exception  to the reign of necessity throughout
nature,  removes  any  ground  for  distinguishing  the effects of human
operation  from  other effects. Man exercises no freedom of choice ; nor
does  man  in  any other way introduce a new principle into the order or
process  of  nature. Hobbes and Locke concur in the denial of free will,
but   they   separate  the  inventions  of  man's  mind  or  his  social
institutions from what happens without human contrivance in the realm of
thought  or  action. The difference between simple and complex ideas for
Locke  seems to parallel the ancient distinction between nature and art.
At the other extreme from Spinoza, Kant

[261b]
Chapter  60:  NATURE  227 separates the order of nature and the order of
freedom  into  worlds  as  radically  asunder as the Cartesian realms of
matter  and  mind.  The  world  of  nature is the system or order of the
objects  of  sense— "the sum total of phenomena insofar as they . . .are
connected  with  each  other throughout." For Kant this means two things
which  are  strictly  correlative. Nature is the object of the theoretic
sciences  and  it  is also the realm of time, space, and causality. Like
Spinoza,  Kant  identifies  the order of nature with the order of causal
necessity. But, unlike Spinoza, Kant places the moral and political life
of  man  in  an  order unconditioned by time, space, and causality. This
realm  of  freedom is the sphere of the moral or practical sciences. The
natural  or  theoretic  sciences  do  not  extend to what Kant calls the
"supersensible"  or  the  "noumenal"  order—  the  world of things lying
outside  the  range  of sense-experiThere is an alternative to Spinoza's
location  of  all  events  within  the  order  of  nature  and to Kant's
separation  of  the realm of nature from the domain of freedom. It takes
the  form of Aristotle's or Aquinas' distinction between the natural and
the voluntary. The voluntary is in one sense natural, in another not. It
is  natural  in  the sense that what happens voluntarily in the realm of
animal  and  human  motions  proceeds  from  causes  as natural as those
responsible  for the motions of inert bodies. A voluntary act, according
to  Aquinas, comes from "an intrinsic principle," just as the falling of
a  stone proceeds from "a principle of movement in the stone." But among
the  factors  responsible  for  voluntary acts is "knowledge of the end"
knowledge  of  the  object being sought. The sphere of the voluntary can
therefore  be  equated  with  the sphere of conscious desire, i.e., with
desire aroused by an object known, whether known by sense or reason. The
natural  in the sense in which it is distinguished from the voluntary is
the sphere of motions in line with natural desire, i.e., with tendencies
founded  in  the  very nature of a body or organism and unaccompanied by
any  awareness  of  the  goal  toward which it is thus inclined to move.
Aristotle's  distinction  between  natural  and  violent  motion  (which
Galileo and other physicists adopt) seems to throw light on a double

[262a]
228  THE  GREAT IDEAS use of the term 'natural' here. Galileo treats the
motion of a freely falling body as natural, in contrast to the motion of
a  projectile.  In  the former case, it is the nature of heavy bodies to
gravitate  toward  the earth; whereas in the latter case, in addition to
the  motion  of gravitation, another motion is imparted to the body when
it  is  shot  from a gun—a motion which does not proceed from the body's
own  nature  but  is  caused by the motions of other bodies. In terms of
this  distinction, voluntary motions are natural rather than violent. In
fact,  the  violent  is sometimes thought to be even more opposed to the
voluntary  than  to the natural, in the sense that a man acting contrary
to  his will under external coercion suffers violence. When he does what
he  wishes,  his  conduct  is not only voluntary but natural, i.e., free
from  the  violence  of external forces. It is necessary to consider the
additional  distinction  between  the  voluntary  and  the free. Animals
acting  from  desires  caused  by  the perception of certain objects act
voluntarily,  but,  in  the  theory  of  Aristotle and Aquinas, only men
freely  choose  among alternative objects of desire or between means for
accomplishing  an end. The effects of voluntary action differ from other
natural  events  only because knowledge enters into their determination.
But  that which happens as the result of man's free choice is determined
neither  by  his  nature nor by his knowledge. Hence whatever comes into
existence  through  man's choice stands apart from all that is naturally
determined to exist. One other matter bears on this consideration of the
natural  in relation to the voluntary and the free. Spinoza excludes the
operation  of  final  causes,  as well as free choice, from the order of
nature. Purposes or ends are not principles of nature. Aristotle, on the
other  hand,  thinks  that  final  causes are operative in every part of
nature. He finds them in the sphere of inert bodies which naturally tend
toward  certain results. He finds them in the sphere of animal and human
motions,  where  the  final  cause  or end may be an object of conscious
desire.  So  far  as the search for causes is concerned, nature presents
the  same  kind  of  problems  to  the  physicist as to the biologist or
psychologist. In only one sense are final causes peculiarly pres-

[262b]
ent  in human conduct; that is the sense in which the change effected is
not the ultimate end, but only a means to some further end desired. Here
there  is an extrinsic final cause as well as a final cause intrinsic to
the  change  itself.  It  may  be with regard to this special sense that
Bacon  says  of  final  causes  that  they are "more allied to man's own
nature  than to the system of the universe." Yet Bacon, far from denying
their  presence  in  the  scheme of things, assigns the investigation of
final  causes  to metaphysics (as a branch of natural philosophy) rather
than  to  physics.  For  him  the ascertainment of final causes does not
discover  a  purpose  in  the nature of things. Rather it looks to God's
plan  and  providence.  We  have so far dealt with that consideration of
nature  which opposes the natural to the works of man. The discussion of
nature also moves on a theological plane. Here, on one traditional view,
the  natural  is  not opposed to, but rather identified with the work of
God.  "Things  which  are said to be made by nature," Plato writes, "are
the  work  of  divine  art."  Those  who  conceive the universe as God's
creation,  and  think  of  God alone as uncreated being, tend to use the
word  "nature"  collectively  for  the  whole  world  of  creatures  and
distributive^  for  each type of thing which has its being from God. The
distinction   between   the   supernatural  and  the  natural  has  many
interpretations  in  Christian  theology,  but none more basic than that
which  divides  all  being  into  the uncreated and the created. On this
view,  the  order  of  nature  includes more than the world of physical,
sensible  things. It includes the spiritual creation—angels and souls—as
well. Immaterial beings are no more supernatural than bodies. They, too,
are  created natures. Only God is uncreated being. Those who do not have
or  who  deny a doctrine of creation use the word "nature" in a less and
in a more comprehensive sense. The Greek philosophers, for example, seem
to restrict the natural to the physical, i.e., to the realm of material,
sensible,  changing  things.  Change is an element in the connotation of
the  Greek  word  phiisis,  of  which natura is the Latin equivalent. As
Greek scientists conceive the

[263a]
study  of  nature,  it  is  the  business  of physics to investigate the
principles,  causes, and elements of change. Things which are thought to
be  untouched  by  change,  such  as  the  objects of mathematics, self-
subsistent  ideas,  or separate forms; or things which are thought to be
eternal  and  immutable, such as immaterial substances or intelligences,
do not belong to the realm of physics or natural science. In Aristotle's
classification   of   the  sciences  such  beings  are  the  objects  of
mathematics  and  metaphysics,  or theology. Since, for him, whatever is
both sensible and mutable is also material, the realm of nature includes
no  more  than  the  whole  material  universe,  celestial  as  well  as
terrestrial. The more comprehensive sense of nature appears in Spinoza's
identification of nature with the infinite and eternal substance of God.
"Besides  God," says Spinoza, "no substance can be nor be conceived. . .
.  Whatever  is,  is  in  God, and nothing can either be or be conceived
without  God."  All  finite things are modes of the divine substance or,
more  precisely, of the attributes of God, such as extension and thought.
Nature,  therefore,  is the totality of finite things, both material and
immaterial.  But  nature  exceeds  even  this totality, for the infinite
substance  of  God  is  greater  than the sum of its parts. To make this
clear,  Spinoza  employs  the  distinction  between  natura naturans and
natura  naturata. "By natura naturans we are to understand that which is
in  itself  and  is  conceived  through  itself,  or those attributes of
substance  which  express  eternal and infinite essence; that is to say,
God  in  so  far  as  He  is  considered  as a free cause. But by natura
naturata I understand everything which follows from the necessity of the
nature  of  God, or of any one of God's attributes in so far as they are
considered as things which are in God, and which without God can neither
be  nor  be  conceived."  Viewed  under  the  aspect of time rather than
eternity,  the  order  of  nature  {i.e., natura naturata) is as much an
order of ideas as it is an order of things. "The order and connection of
ideas  is  the  same  as  the  order  and connection of things," Spinoza
writes.  "Whether we think of nature under the attribute of extension or
under the attribute of thought, or under any

[263b]
Chapter  60:  NATURE 229 other attribute whatever, we shall discover one
and  the  same  order, or one and the same connection of causes." Except
perhaps  for  the  Stoics,  like  Marcus Aurelius and Epictetus, Spinoza
seems  to stand alone in this conception of nature as all-embracing. The
Stoics  too regard nature as the system of the universe, with man a part
of  its cosmic structure, and with God or divinity inherent in nature as
the  rational  principle  governing  all  things.  But  with  or without
reference  to God and creation, thinkers like Descartes and Hume tend to
identify  nature  not  with  the totality of finite things, but with the
world  of  bodies  in motion or changing sensible things. For Descartes,
nature  does  not  include  the realm of thought or thinking substances,
though  these,  like  bodies, are finite and dependent creatures of God.
For  Hume,  nature  seems to be that which lies outside experience— in a
way,  the reality which underlies appearances. Where Spinoza thinks that
the  system of ideas is as much a part of nature as the system of bodies
in  motion, Hume speaks of "a kind of preestablished harmony between the
course  of  nature  and the succession of our ideas." Hume's distinction
between knowledge of the relation between our own ideas and knowledge of
matters of fact or real existence seems furthermore to imply that nature
is  the  reality  known  (however  inadequately)  when we assert certain
things  to  be  matters  of  fact.  Here  we perceive another meaning of
nature,  defined by another basic opposition, this time between the real
and  the  ideal  or  the  imaginary.  It is in this sense that mediaeval
writers  oppose  entia  naturae,  i.e., natural or real beings, to entia
rationis, or things which have their being in the This distinction, like
most of the others in which nature is concerned, does not have universal
acceptance.  Kant,  as  we have seen, far from making nature the reality
which exists independently of our experience or knowledge, conceives the
realm  of  nature as identical with all possible experience. "We possess
two  expressions,"  Kant  writes, "world and nature, which are generally
interchanged.  The first denotes the mathematical total of all phenomena
and the totality of their synthesis. . . . And

[264a]
230 THE GREAT IDEAS the world is termed nature, when it is regarded as a
dynamical whole—when our attention is not directed to the aggregation in
space and time . . . but to the unity in the existence of phenomena." On
quite  different principles of analysis, Berkeley also treats as natural
things  the ideas or sensations which "are not produced by, or dependent
on,  the wills of men." Natural beings do not exist apart from the mind,
but  unlike imaginary ones, natural beings are those ideas which are not
subject  to  our  will  or the human mind's own constructive activities.
Such ideas are produced in our minds immediately by God. To the question
whether  "Nature  hath  no  share  in the production of natural things,"
Berkeley  answers:  "If by Nature is meant the visible series of effects
or  sensations  imprinted  on  our minds, according to certain fixed and
general  laws, then it is plain that Nature, taken in this sense, cannot
produce  anything at all. But, if by Nature is meant some being distinct
from  God,  as  well as from the laws of nature, and things perceived by
sense,  I  must  confess  that  word is to me an empty sound without any
intelligible  meaning  annexed  to it. Nature, in this acceptation, is a
vain  chimera,  introduced by those heathens who had not just notions of
the  omnipresence  and  infinite  perfection  of  God."  Berkeley's view
represents  one  extreme  position  on a theological issue of the utmost
difficulty. According to him God is not only the creator or first cause,
but  the sole cause of everything which happens in the course of nature.
There  are no natural causes. Nature has no productive power. Everything
is the work of God or the work of man—nothing the work of nature. Within
the  limits of this issue, the other extreme consists in denying not the
creativity of God, but the role of divine causality in the production of
natural  effects.  It relegates them entirely to the efficacy of natural
causes.  Lucretius, of course, denies both the creation of the world and
the  intervention  of  the  gods in the processes of nature. But others,
like  Descartes,  seem  to  say  that  once God has created the physical
world,  once  He  has  formed  matter  into  bodies and given them their
initial impe-

[264b]
tus,  their  motions henceforward need only the laws of nature which God
laid  down for them to follow. For everything that happens in the course
of nature, natural causes, operating under these laws, suffice. There is
a  third  position  which  distinguishes  between the work of God in the
creation  of nature, and the work of nature in the production of effects
of  all  sorts, such as the natural motions of bodies or the propagation
of  animals. But though it ascribes efficacy to natural agents or second
causes  in  the  production  of natural effects, it also regards natural
causes  as instrumental to the hand of God, the first or principal cause
of  everything  which happens as well as of everything which is. Aquinas
seems  to  hold  that  God  acts  alone only in the original creation of
things;  whereas  in  the  preservation  of created natures and in their
causal  interaction,  God  works  through secondary, or natural, causes.
"Some  have  understood God to work in every agent," Aquinas writes, "in
such  a way that no created power has any effect in things, but that God
alone  is  the immediate cause of everything wrought; for instance, that
it  is  not fire that gives heat, but God in the fire, and so forth. But
this  is  impossible. First, because the order of cause and effect would
be  taken away from created things, and this would imply a lack of power
in  the  Creator. . . . Secondly, because the operative powers which are
seen  to  exist  in things would be bestowed on things to no purpose, if
things produced nothing through them. . . . We must therefore understand
that  God  works  in things in such a manner that things have also their
proper  operation."  In  other  words, according to Aquinas, "God is the
cause of action in every agent." Furthermore, "God not only moves things
to  operate  .  .  .  but  He  also gives created agents their forms and
preserves  them  in  being." With regard to the being of things, Aquinas
holds  that  God "established an order among things, so that some depend
on  others,  by which they are conserved in being, though He remains the
principal  cause  of  their  conservation." With regard to nature itself
this  theological  doctrine  raises  two  sorts  of  problems. The first
concerns the efficacy of natural causes,

[265a]
which  are  sufficient  for  the  scientist  to  appeal to in explaining
natural phenomena, yet are insufficient by themselves for the production
of  natural  effects.  The  second  conce-mfthe  distinction between the
natural  and  the  supernatural, now not in terms of the created and the
uncreated, but in terms of what happens naturally (or even by chance) as
opposed  to what happens as a result of God's intervention in the course
of  nature.  Miracles, for example, are supernatural rather than natural
events.  They  are not produced by natural causes; nor do they happen by
accident. They are attributed by the theologian to divine causality, yet
not  in such a way that violence is done to nature. "The term miracle,'"
Aquinas  explains,  "is  derived  from  admiration, which arises when an
effect  is  manifest,  whereas  its cause is hidden. ... A miracle is so
called  as  being  full  of  wonder;  in  other words, as having a cause
absolutely  hidden  from  all. This cause is God. Therefore those things
which  God  does  outside the causes which we know are called miracles."
The  miraculous  is  that  which  is  beyond  the  power  of  nature  to
accomplish. "A thing is said to be above the ability of nature," Aquinas
writes, "not only by reason of the substance of the thing done, but also
because  of the manner and the order in which it is done"; and "the more
the  power  of  nature  is  surpassed, the greater the miracle." Aquinas
distinguishes  three  grades  of miracles. The first, he says, surpasses
nature  "in  the  substance  of the deed; as, for example, if two bodies
occupy  the same place, or if the sun goes backwards, or if a human body
is  glorified.  Such things nature is absolutely unable to do; and these
hold  the  highest  rank among miracles. Secondly, a thing surpasses the
power of nature, not in the deed, but in that wherein it is done; as the
raising  of  the  dead, and giving sight to the blind, and the like. For
nature  can  give  life, but not to the dead, and it can give sight, but
not  to  the  blind.  Such  hold the second rank in miracles. Thirdly, a
thing  surpasses  nature's power in the measure and order in which it is
done;  as  when  a  man  is  cured  of  a fever suddenly by God, without
treatment  or  the  usual process of nature. . . . These hold the lowest
place in miracles."

[265b]
Chapter  60: NATURE 231 Though "each of these kinds has various degrees,
according  to  the  different  ways  in  which  the  power  of nature is
surpassed,"  no miracle, according to Aquinas, transgresses the order of
nature  in  the  sense  of  accomplishing  the  impossible.  Unlike  the
impossible,  which  would destroy nature, the improbable can be elicited
by  God's  power  within  the general framework Hume, on the other hand,
thinks that "a miracle is a violation of the laws of nature." And since,
in  his  view,  a  firm and unalterable experience has established these
laws,  the  proof  against a miracle, from the nature of the fact, is as
entire  as  any  argument  from  experience can be. "Why is it more than
probable,"  he asks, "that all men must die; that lead cannot, of itself
remain   suspended   in  the  air;  that  fire  consumes  wood,  and  is
extinguished  by  water;  unless  it  be,  that  these  events are found
agreeable  to  the  laws of nature, and there is required a violation of
these  laws,  or  in other words, a miracle to prevent them? "Nothing is
esteemed  a  miracle," Hume continues, "if it ever happens in the common
course  of  nature. . . . There must, therefore, be a uniform experience
against every miraculous event, otherwise the event would not merit that
appellation. And as a uniform experience amounts to proof, there is here
a  direct  and  full  proof,  from  the  nature of the fact, against the
existence  of  any  miracle;  nor  can such a proof be destroyed, or the
miracle  rendered  credible, but by an opposite proof which is Hume does
not  think that miracles can be proved against our uniform experience of
the order of nature. But he also thinks that they are "dangerous friends
or  disguised enemies to the Christian religion' who would try to defend
its  beliefs  "by  the  principles  of human reason. . . . The Christian
religion  not  only  was  at first attended with miracles," he declares,
"but  even  at  this  day  cannot  be  believed by any reasonable person
without one. Mere reason is insufficient to convince us of its veracity:
and  whoever  is  moved  by  Faith  to  assent  to it, is conscious of a
continued   miracle  in  his  own  person  .  .  .  which  gives  him  a
determination   to   believe   what  is  most  contrary  to  custom  and
experience."

[266a]
232 THE GREAT IDEAS One other traditional conception of nature, implicit
in  much  of  the  foregoing, should be noted. The various senses of the
term  so  far explicitly considered are alike in this: that they justify
the  use of the word "Nature" with a capital N and in the singular. This
other  sense of the term appears when we speak of each thing as having a
nature  of  its own, and of the world as containing a vast plurality and
radical  diversity  of natures. In this sense we attribute a nature even
to  things which are contrasted with Nature and the natural. We speak of
the  nature  of  God  and  the nature of freedom, the nature of art, the
nature  of  reason,  the  nature  of ideas, the nature of the state, the
nature of customs and habits. This could, of course, imply a theory that
things  which  are  not  completely natural, nevertheless have a natural
basis,  as  art, the state, or habit. Another meaning, however, seems to
be  involved. The phrase "nature of" appears almost as frequently in the
great  books as the word "is," and frequently it is unaccompanied by any
explicit  theory  of Nature or the natural. The discussion of the nature
of  anything seems, for the most part, to be a discussion of what it is.
To state the nature of anything is to give its definition; or if for any
reason definition in a strict sense cannot be given, then the attempt to
state   the  nature  of  the  thing  consists  in  trying  to  say  what
characterizes   this  thing  or  kind  of  thing,  in  distinction  from
everything  else  or all other kinds. Enumerating the senses of the term
'nature,'  Aristotle  gives  this  as  the fifth meaning. The first four
comprise senses which distinguish the natural from the artificial or the
immutable,  and  which  indicate that the natural or the physical has an
immanent principle of movement in itself and involves matter or potency.
The fifth sense is that in which 'nature' means i. Conceptions of nature
(2) Nature or essence in relation to matter and form

[266b]
"the  essence  of  natural  objects";  and,  as  he goes on to say, this
implies the presence in them of form as well as matter. "By an extension
of meaning from this sense of 'nature' everv essence in general has come
to  be  called  a 'nature,' because the nature of a thing is one kind of
essence."  This  is the sixth and most general sense, according to which
the nature or essence of anything is the object of definition. Does each
individual  thing have a nature peculiarly its own, even if it cannot be
defined  ? Or is a nature or essence always something common to a number
of  individuals,  according  to which they can be classified into kinds,
and  the  kinds  ordered  as  species and genera? Do John and James, for
example,  have individual natures in addition to the common nature which
they  share through belonging to the human species; and does their human
nature entail certain properties which are generic rather than specific,
i.e.,  which  seem  to  be determined by their having the generic nature
common to all animals as well as the specific nature common to all men ?
Such  questions  about  individual,  specific, and generic natures raise
problems  of  definition  and  classification which are discussed in the
chapter  on  Evolution.  They also raise problems about the existence or
reality  of  the  J$inds  which men define and classify. Are they merely
what  Locke calls "nominal essences," or do our definitions signify real
essences,  i.e.,  the  natures of things as they really are? Is the real
world  one  which,  as  William  James  says,  "plays right into logic's
hands"? Does Nature consist of a hierarchy of natures or distinct kinds;
or  is it a continuum of things all having the same nature and differing
from  each other only individually or accidentally, but not essentially?
These  problems  are  discussed  elsewhere,  in such chapters as Animal,
Definition,  Evolution,  Life  and Death, and Same and Other. OUTLINE OF
TOPICS  234 (i) The distinction between essential and individual nature:
generic or specific 235

[267a]
\b. Nature as the universe or the totality of things: the identification
of  God and \c. Nature as the complex of the objectTof sense : the realm
of  things  existing  under  the  determination of universal laws 2. The
antitheses  of  nature  or  the  natural  236  2a.  Nature  and art: the
imitation  of nature; cooperation with nature ib. Nature and convention:
the state of nature and the state of society 237 ic. Nature and nurture:
the  innate  or  native  and  the  acquired;  habit as second nature 2d.
Natural  and  violent  motion  238  2e. The natural and the unnatural or
monstrous:  the  normal and the abnormal 2/! The order of nature and the
order of freedom: the phenomenal and the noumenal 3. The order of nature
30.  The  rationality  of  nature:  the  maxims  and  laws of nature 3b.
Continuity  and  hierarchy  in  the  order  of  nature 240 y. Nature and
causality  241  (1)  The  distinction between the regular and the chance
event:  the  uniformity  of  nature  (2)  The  determinations  of nature
distinguished  from  the voluntary or free 4. Knowledge of nature or the
natural  244 4#. Nature or essence as an object of definition 4^. Nature
in relation to diverse types of science: the theoretic and the practical
4c.  Nature  as  an  object  of  history 5. Nature or the natural as the
standard  of  the right and the good 246 50. Human nature in relation to
the  good  for  man  <yb.  Natural  inclinations  and natural needs with
respect  to  property  and  wealth  5c. The naturalness of the state and
political  obligation 247 $d. The natural as providing a canon of beauty
for  production  or  judgment 6. Nature in religion and theology 248 6a.
The  personification and worship of nature 6b. Nature and grace in human
life

[267b]
Chapter 60: NATURE 233 PAGE

[268a]
234  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited. 1. Conceptions of nature la. Nature as the intrinsic
source  of a thing's properties and behavior 7 Plato: Cratylus, 105a-d 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  i,  ch  i  259a-b;  bk  ii, ch 1 268b,d-270a /
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4 534d-535c; ch ii
[1019*1-14]
540a; bk ix, ch 8
[i049b4-u] 575b /
Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[4 i5b8-4i6a i8] 645d-646c
9  Aristotle: Politics, bk 1, ch 2 [i252b3o~34] 446a-b / Rhetoric, bk 1,
ch 10
[1369*3 i-b
5]  612c-d  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  1,  ch  1 167a-b; ch 12
172d-173c; bk ii, ch 3 185a-186d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a  3  16a-d; q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 29, a i, rep 4 162a-163b; q
39, a 2, ans and rep 3 203b-204c; q 60, a 2, ans 311a-d; q 115, a 2, ans
587c-588c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, a 1 710a-711c; q
17,  a  2,  ans  and  rep 1,4 808d-809d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
384d-390b passim; 428a-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 4 137d138b

[268b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b refer to the upperand lower halvesof the page. For example, in 53
James  :  Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half of
page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upperand  lower  halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult the Preface. 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  v,  60b / Meditations, in, 83c-d; iv, 90a-b; v, 93b-c;
vi, 99clOOd / Objections and Replies, 126b-127c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
iv,  prop  18,  scholprop 19 429a-d; prop 37, schol i 434d435b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxiii, sect 3 204c-d; sect 8 206a-b; ch
xxxi,  sect  6  240d-241d;  sect ii 242d-243a; sect 13 243a-b; ch xxxii,
sect  24  247c-d;  bk  hi,  ch  hi, sect 15-19 258b-260a; ch vi 268b283a
passim, esp sect 2-3 268c-d; ch ix, sect 12 287d-288a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  101-102 432c-433a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 133b [fn 1] 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  165b-c  49  Darwin:  Origin of
Species,  9a-10d  passim  la(l)  The  distinction  between essential and
individual  nature:  generic  or  specific  properties,  and individual,
contingent  accidents 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 4 lOOa-
lOlb; bk ii, ch 3 123c-124c / Topics, bk v, ch 3
[i3ib i9-37] 182b-c /
Physics, bk ii, ch 1
[i92b35-39]
269a; ch 7
[198*22-29]

[269a]
la(2)  to  \c  275b-c;  bk  vii,  ch  3 [246^-9] 329c-d / Generation and
Corruption, bk ii, ch ii
[338** 1219] 440d-441a,c
/ Metaphysics, bk hi, ch i b27-3i] 514b; ch 3 517a-518a; bk v, ch^
[995
536a-537c;  ch  8-9  538b-539a; ch io^Tt5i^Sb8] 539b-c; ch 30 547a-d; bk
vii,  ch  10-15 558a-564c; bk x, ch i [1052^8-37] 578d; ch 3] 581a-d; ch
8-9 585b-586c; bk xi, ch 1 [io59b2i-io6oa i] 587d-588a a3°-I055 a 3
[ I054
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 1
[486ai5-487a i] 7b-d / Generation of Animals,
bk v, ch 1 [778 ai5-b i9] 320a-321a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[449-482] 6c-7a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 12 46c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  1, q 3, a 3 16a-d; a 4, ans 16d-17c; q 9, a 2,
ans  39c40d; q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; q 39, a 2, ans 203b-204c; q 41, a 5
222b-223b; q 119, a i, ans and rep 2 604c-607b; part i-ii, q 2, a 6, ans
619d-620d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2, ans 2b-4a;
q  51,  a  i, ans 12b-13c; q 85, a 6 182d-184a; part hi, q 2, a i, rep 2
710a711c;  a 2, ans 711d-712d; part hi suppl, q 81, a 3, rep 3 966a-c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk hi, ch hi, sect 6-20 255c-260a; ch vi,
sect  32  277c278b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341c-342b passim 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  28b-  29a  la (2) Nature or essence in relation to
matter and form 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch i
[i93 a9~b2i]
269b-270a; ch 2 [i94an-b i5] 270c-271a; ch 8
[i99a30-33] 276c; ch 9 277b-278a,c / Metaphysics, bk
11, ch 3
[995
ai5-i7] 513d; bk v, ch 4
[ioi4b27-ioi5 a i9] 535a-c; bk
vi, ch i
[io25b28-io26a6] 547d-548a; bk vii, ch 7-1 i
555a-561a;  bk  vii,  ch  i6-bk  viii,  ch  6  564c570d;  bk  x, ch 8-10
585b-586d; bk xi, ch 7
[io64ai9~28] 592c; bk
xii, ch 3
[1070^-13]
599b-c / Soul, bk 1, ch 1 [403 a2-b i9] 632a-d; bk 11, ch 4
[4 i5b8-4i6a i8] 645d-646c
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 1
[64i ai4-33] 163d-164b; [642^4-24] 165b
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 5 169b-c; bk 11, ch 3 185a-186d 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  vii, sect 23 281b; bk viii, sect ii 286b 17
Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 9-12 146d-149b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 3, a 3, ans 16a-d; a 4, ans 16d-17c; q 18, a 3,
ans  106b-107c;  a 4, rep 3 107d-108c; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; q 29, a
i, rep 4 162a-163b; a 2, rep 3 163b-164b; q 39, a 2, ans 203b204c; q 45,
a 8 249b-250a; part i-ii, q 1, a 3, ans 611b-612a; a 5, ans 613a-614a

[269b]
Chapter  60: NATURE 235 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 85, a
6  182d-184a;  part  hi,  q  2,  a  i, ans and rep 2 710a-711c; a 2, ans
711d-712d;  part  hi suppl, q 80, a 4, ans and rep 1 959c-963a 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  4  13 7d138b; aph 29 159b-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 186b-d lb. Nature as the universe or the totality of things: the
identification  of  God  and  nature;  the  distinction  between  natura
naturans  and  natura  naturata  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk i
[418-482I 6b-7a;
[951-1051]
12d-14a; bk ii
[294-307]
18d-19a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 14 120d-121c 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii, sect i 256b,d; sect 3 257a-b; bk iv, sect 29 266a;
sect  40 267a-b; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; sect 30 273a; bk vi, sect 36-45
277c-278c;  bk  vii,  sect 9 280b-c; sect 19 281a; sect 25 281c; sect 75
285c;  bk  ix,  sect  8-9  292b-d; bk x, sect 6-7 297a-c; bk xi, sect 18
304b-305b;  bk  xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch
16  90c91c;  tr  viii, ch 1-4 129a-131a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 36-37
178c-179b 31 Descartes: Meditations, vi, 99c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
def  3-6  355b; axiom 1,3-5 355d; prop 5-6 356b-c; prop 8 356d357d; prop
io358a-b;  prop  14-16  359d-362a;  prop 18 363c; prop 24 365a; prop 25,
corol  365b;  prop  28-31 365c-367a; prop 33 367b369a; part ii, prop 1-2
373d-374a;  prop  6-7  374d-375c;  prop  9-10  376a-377a;  part iv, pref
422b,d-424a;  axiom  424c; prop 2 425a; prop 4 425b-d; appendix, i 447a;
vii-viii  447d  42 Kant: Judgement, 564c-565d esp 565c-d; 566c-d; 580c-d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 176b-c; 186d; 190b-c; part i,
220c-221a;  245d-246c;  part  11,  263d-265c  47  Goethe:  Faust, part i
[430-521]  12b-15a  48  Melville:  Moby Dic{, 115b-117a; 140a 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  40d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 216d-218b; bk
xiii, 581c-582a; bk xiv, 608a-b; bk xv, 631a-c 1c. Nature as the complex
of  the  objects  of  sense:  the  realm  of  things  existing under the
determination  of  universal  laws  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 5d-6c; 15b-c;
25b-26b; 29d-33d esp 32c-33a; 49c-51d esp 51c-d; 88b91d; 109d-110d; 133a
esp  133b  [fn  1];  195a-c;  200c-209b  esp  204c-205a  /  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  281c-282d;  283b; 285c-d / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  387a-b  /  Judgement, 550a-551a,c; 562a-b; 562d-563b; 574b577a;
581a-b

[270a]
236  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2.  The  antitheses of nature or the natural 2a.
Nature  and  art:  the  imitation  of  nature; cooperation with nature 5
Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c45a  5  Sophocles: Antigone
[332-375]  134a-b  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [195-218]  260a-b 7 Plato:
Gorgias,  260a-262a  /  Republic, bk iiiii, 320c-334b; bk x, 427c-434c /
Critias,  478a-d  / Sophist, 561b-d; 577d-578d / Laws, bk 11, 660a-662a;
bk x, 760a-b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch ii a3-9] 129d /
Physics, bk ii, ch i 268b,d-
[95
270a; ch 2
[i94a2i-b i3]
270c-271a; ch 8
[i99a8-b33] 276b-277a / Generation and Corb i8-336a i3] 437b-d /
Meteorology,  bk  iv,  ch  12  [39(^2-14] 494c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[988*1-7]  506a;  bk  vi,  ch  1  [io25b  i9~25]  547d;  bk  vii, ch 7-9
555aruption,  bk 11, ch 9 [335 558a; bk viii, ch 3 [i043b i9-23] 568a-b;
bk xi, ch 7
[1064*10-16] 592b-c; bk
xii, ch 3
[1070^-8] 599b / Soul, bk ii, ch
i  [4i2b  io-i8]  642c-d  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals, bk 1, ch i 1
2-640*33] 161d-162d; [64^13-29] 164c-d 13
[639
/ Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 21-22 269c271a; bk ii, ch i
[734
ai7~735  a4]  274c-275c;  ch 6 [743 b2o-25] 285a; bk iv, ch 6 [775^7-23]
317b /Ethics, bk vi, ch 4 [1140*11-17] 388d / Politics, bk vii, ch 14
[i333 ai6-23]
538a; ch 17 [i336b39-i337a2] 542a,c; bk viii, ch 5
[i339b42-i340b i8]
545c-546a / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2 [1404^-26] 654c-655a / Poetics, ch 4
[i448b4-23] 682c-d; [1449^9-27] 683b; ch 24
[i459b i7-i46oa4] 695d-696a
10  Hippocrates: Surgery, par 15 73b-c / Fractures, par 1-3 74b,d-76a 10
Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 7 170c171a; ch 12 172d-173c; bk ii,
ch  3  185a-186d;  ch 6, 189a-190a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[823-857]  55a-b;  bk v [1361-1389] 78d-79a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
hi,  sect  2  259d260a;  bk  vi,  sect 40 277d; bk xi, sect 10 303b-c 13
Virgil:  Georgics  37a-99a  esp  1  [118-159]  40a41b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr viii, ch 2, 129b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 10, 147c-d; tr
iv,  ch  31,  174d-175a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch i 239b-240a 18
Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 30 651c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 45, a 2, ans 242d-244a;
q  91,  a 3, ans 486b-487d; q 93, a 2, rep 4 493a-d; q 103, a i, rep 1,3
528b-529a;  q  104, a 1, ans 534c-536c; q iio, a 2, rep 3 565d566d; part
1-11,  q  1,  a  6,  ans 614a-c; q 2, a 1 615d-616c; q 12, a 3, contrary
670d-671b

[270b]
2 to 2a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 1, ans 12b-13c;
part hi suppl, q 79, a i, rep 4 951b 953b; a 2, rep 2,4 953b-955c; q 80,
a 1, ans 956c-957c; a 2, ans 957c958b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-m]
16a-b; purgatory, x
[22-99]
67c-68b esp
[28-33] 67d; paradise, xxvi [124-1 38] 147a-b;
xxvii [88-96] 148b 22 Chaucer: Physician's Tale [11,941-972] 366b367a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  intro,  47a- b; part iv, 262c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
52c-d;  93b-d;  216c-219a;  368d-369a; 527d-529b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act hi, sc ii
[1-39]
49a-b / King Lear, act iv, sc iv [1-15] 272b-c / Timon of Athens, act i,
sc i
[156-160]
395b-c  /  Winter's  Tale,  act iv, sc iv [79-103] 508c-d 28 Harvey : On
Animal Generation, 385a-c; 400d401a; 428a-c; 443d-444c esp 444b-c; 450c;
492a-b  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 184a-187c; part 11, 251d-252a
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 34b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 3-4
107b;  aph  66  114d-115c; bk ii, aph 4 137d-138b; aph 29 159b-c; aph 41
173d-174b  / New Atlantis, 203a-b 31 Descartes: Meditations, 1, 76a-b 32
Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk v [291-297] 181b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 21 175a;
29  176a; 32 176ab; 120 195a / Geometrical Demonstration, 437a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  hi, ch vi, sect 40 280a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  195b-196a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 243a-b 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  368d-369a / Social Contract, bk hi, 419c-d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  ii,  157a-b 40 Gibbon: Declme and Fall, 663d-664a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  188c-189a  /  Judgement, 495a-496c; 521b-524b esp 523c-d;
525a-528c  esp  527b-528c;  557c-558b  43  Federalist: number 14, 61d 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  327b,d328d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  i, par 56 26b / Philosophy of History, intro, 165b-c; part
1,  244b-c;  part  ii,  263d-265c;  267b268b  47  Goethe: Faust, prelude
[134-157]  4a-b  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 41c-d; 87a-c; 233c-d 50
Marx:  Capital,  16d-17a;  85a-88d  53 James: Psychology, 186b 54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  2a / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 778b-779d / New Introductory Lectures, 877a-b

[271a]
2b  to 2c Chapter 60: NATURE 237 2b. Nature and convention: the state of
nature  and  the  state  of  society 7 Plato: Protagoras, 52b / Cratylus
85a-114a,c  esp  85a-87b,  110c-110c  /  Gorgias, 271fe^72b; 273d-274c /
Republic,  bk  ii, 311b-313a / Theaetetus, 528b-c / Laws, bk x, 760a-c 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 2
[140*6-18]
193a; ch 3
[14^15-22]
194b-c / Sophistical Refutations, ch 12
[i73 a7~ l8 ]
238b-c;
[173*
27-30]  238c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7 382c-383a / Politics, bk 1,
ch 2 [1253^29-37] 446d; ch 6 448c-449b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 15
[1375*25b25] 619d-620b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[14-37]
15a-c; bk iv
[823-857]
55a-b; bk v
[9251027] 73b-74c
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  12,  517d-518c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 2426 648d-650a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  95,  a  2  227c-228c;  a  4,  ans  229b-230c; q 97, a 3, rep 1
237b-238b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxvi
[124-138] 147a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 56d; 84c-96b; part 11, 99a-101a; 131a-c;
136d-137a;  138c; 159d; part iv, 272c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 63d-64b; 93b
94a; 102a-103a; 424d-426b; 430b-d; 509a-b 26 Shakespeare: As You Like It
597a-626a,c esp act 11, sc 1
[1-20]
603c-d,  sc  v  606b607a, act in, sc 11 [u-90] 609d-610c 27 Shakespeare:
All's  Well  That  Ends  Well,  act 11, sc in [112-151] 152c-153a / King
Lear,  act  1, sc 11 [1-22] 247d-248a / Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp act
iv, sc i-act v, sc i 409c419b / Cymbeline, act hi, sc hi
[12-78]
465c-466b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d; 62c-63a; 94d-95b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
89-98 189b-190b 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch ii-ix
25d-54d  passim;  ch  xi, sect 135-137 55d-57b / Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect 2-3 228c-229b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i
la-3d;  bk viii, 52a; bk xvi, 119d-120a; bk xxvi, 215b217b; 219d-221c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-366d  / Political Economy, 369a- b / Social
Contract, bk i 387b,d-394d; bk ii, 399b-c; 405d-406a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations, bk v, 397a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 86d-87a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  222b-c / Science of Right, 402c; 405d-406a; 433c-434d esp 434a;
435c436b esp 435c-d; 437c-d; 450d-451a; 452a-d 43 Federalist: number 51,
164c-d

[271b]
b   43   Mill:   Liberty,  269c-d;  293b-302c  passim  /  Representative
Government,  327b,d-332d  passim  /  Utilitarianism, 459b-461c passim 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  194a; 311b; 363c-364a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  57 26b-27a; par 93 36a-b; part hi, par 187 65a-c; par 194
66c-d;  additions, 36 122b-c; 149 140d-141a; 152 141c-d; 164 144c-145a /
Philosophy  of  History, intro, 171b-172b; 196d-197a; part ii, 260b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xi, 514c-d 54 Freud: Origin and Development
of  Psycho  -  Analysis, 20c-d/ General Introduction, 452c-d; 573c / War
and Death, 757d-759d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 776b-802a,c esp
776b-777a,   780b-781d,   783c-784b,   787a-c,   788d-789b,   791b-792a,
799b-802a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 853a2c. Nature and nurture: the
innate  or  native  and  the  acquired;  habit as second nature 7 Plato:
Republic,   bk  ii-iii,  319c-339a;  bk  vvii,  368c-401d  /  Statesman,
605d-608d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[8b26~9a27] 13d14b
/  Prior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 27 [7ob6~39] 92c 93a, c / Metaphysics, bk
i,  ch  i  [981^1b  7]  499d; bk ix, ch 5 [io47b3i-34] 573a 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk iv, ch 9
[536
b  i4-2o] 63b / Ethics, bk ii, ch i 348b,d349b; bk in, ch 5 [ni4a32-b25]
360c-d; bk vi, ch 11
[ii43b7-i3] 393a; ch
13 394b-d; bk vii, ch 10
[ii52a28-33] 403b
/ Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[i332a39-b io]
537a-b; ch 14
[i333ai6-23] 538a; ch
17 [1336^-22] 541a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[1370^-14] 613b; bk
hi, ch 1
[1404^5-19] 654b; ch 2 [1405^-9]
655b  /  Poetics,  ch  22  [1459^-7]  694d 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters,
Places, par 14 15a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[288322] 33d-34b
14  Plutarch: Coriolanus, 174b,d-175a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 76, a 5, rep 4 394c396a; q 83, a i, rep 5
436d-438a; part i-ii, q 32, a 2, rep 3 759d-760d; a 8, rep 3 764c765b 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 49, aa 2-4 2b-6a; q 51, a 1
12b-13c;  q  63,  a 1 63a-64a; q 82, a 1 168a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, viii [115148] 118b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 54a; 60a-b;
61c-d;  66c-d;  68b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  60a-c;  63d-64b; 216c219a;
489b-490c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  hi,  sc  iv  [157170]  56b  /
Cymbeline, act hi, sc hi [79-107] 466b-c 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart,
285b-c / On Animal Generation, 428a-c

[272a]
(2. The antitheses of nature or the natural. 2c. Nature and nurture: the
innate  or  native  and the acquired; habit as second nature.} 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  79a  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v, 60b /
Meditations,  vi,  99c-100d  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk i 95b,
d121a,  c  passim  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ix, div 83-85
487c-488c  esp  div 85 488c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-366d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  7d-8a 43 Mill: Liberty, 293b-302c passim /
Utilitarianism, 459b-461c passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par 2 187 65a-c / Philosophy of History, part ii, 281d 49 Darwin: Origin
of  Species,  9b-10d; 65a-69c; 98c; 119a-d; 131c-134c esp 134c / Descent
of  Man,  287d-288c;  304b,d  [fn 5] 53 James: Psychology, 49b-50a; 68a;
78b-79a;  691a-b; 704a-737a passim, esp 704a-705a, 707b-712b, 732b-735b,
737a;  890b-897a  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  530d-531c; 573c-d;
588c-589a;   591d-592b;   594d-595b   /   War  and  Death,  757d-759d  /
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 781a-c 2d. Natural and violent motion
7 Plato: Timaeus, 463d-464b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch i
[2o8b9-22]
287b;  ch  8  [215^-13] 294c-d; bk v, ch 6 [230s 18-231^9] 311c-312d; bk
viii,  ch  4  338d340d  /  Heavens,  bk i, ch 2 [268b i2]-cH 3 [270s 13]
359d-361b; ch 7 [27^30-33] 366a; [275b 12-29] 366d-367a; ch 7
[276a8]-cH
8
[2yyh
25]  367b-369a;  ch 9 [278^2-279^] 370a-b; bk 11, ch 13 [294b3i-295 a29]
386b-d;  bk  hi,  ch  2  391c-393b;  ch  5  [304bn-23]  395d-396a;  ch 6
[305*22-28]  396c / Generation and Corrupb22~334a tion, bk 11, ch 6 [333
9] 434c-435a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5
[ioi5b9-i6]
536a; bk ix, ch 1 [i046a34~36] 571b; bk xii, ch 6
[io7i b33-37] 601d / Soul, bk
i, ch 3 [406*2227] 635c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[10521094] 14a-c; bk
11 [184-215] 17b-d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, lla-b; bk hi, 86b; bk ix,
270b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 517b-520b
16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 929b-930b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i,
ch  8,  39d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  26 296a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 18, a 1, rep 2 104c-105c; q 97, a 2, ans 514c515a;
q  105, a 4, rep i 541c-542a; a 6, rep i 543b-544a; part i-ii, q 6, a i,
ans  644d646a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep 2-3 647b-648a; a 5, ans and rep 2-3
648b-649a; q 9, a 4, rep 2 660a-d; q 41, a 3 799c-800b

[272b]
238  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Id  to  2e 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  q  75,  a 3, ans and rep 3-5 938a 939d; q 91, a 2, ans and rep 6
1017c-1020c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, i [94-142] 107b-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 50a; part iv, 271d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk
vi,  109a-b;  HOb-d  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 157d-158a;
third  day, 200a-d; 203d; fourth day, 238a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph  66,  115b-c;  bk  11, aph 36 164a-168d; aph 48 179d-188b ?. The
natural  and the unnatural or monstrous: the normal and the abnormal Old
Testament:  Genesis,  18:16-19:38 esp 19:4-9, 19:30-38 / Exodus, 22:19 /
Leviticus,  18  esp  18:22-23;  20:10-24  / Deuteronomy, 27:21 / Judges,
19:22  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon,  14:22-27—  (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom,
14:22-27  New  Testament:  Romans,  1:24-27  /  /  Corinthians,  5:1-5 5
Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1298-1421]
110b-112b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 102d-103a; 114a-b; 122a; bk viii,
281c  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  90a-91a  /  Laws,  bk  i, 645d646a; bk viii,
735c-738b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 8
[i99a33~b i3]
276c-d  9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch 20 a i3~2i] 47a-b; bk
vi, ch 2
[559
b i6-2o] 86b; ch 22
[576
[522
a i-2] 101c / Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 3-4 308d-315b esp ch 4
[77ob io-24] 312b-c; ch 8 [777^4-22] 319b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [700-710] 23d-24a; bk v
[837-854]
72a-b;
[878-924]
72c-73a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 15 17a-b / City of God, bk
xxii,  ch  22 606d-607a / Christian Doctrine, bk iv, ch 21, 692d-693c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  21, a 1, rep 1-2 717a-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  151d-152a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  5c-6b;  8c-9c; bk hi, 191c-193c; bk iv, 273c274b 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 80b-81b; 343c-344a 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act
ii, sc v
[55-122] 82b-d; act
v, sc vi
[35-83]
103c104a  /  Richard  III,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-31]  105b,d; sc 11 [1-67]
107c-108b / Richard II, act ii, sc iv [7-24] 334c-d / Julius Caesar, act
ii, sc ii 578a-579c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii
[406417] 53b; sc iv [39-101] 55a-c /
Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc hi
[75-137] 108d-109c /
Othello, act 1, sc ii
[59-81]
208b-c; sc in
[58-119] 209c-210b; act hi, sc in [228-238]

[273a]
If  to  3a Chapter 60: NATURE 239 224c-d / King Lear 244a-283a,c esp act
i, sc i [211-226] 246d, sc iv [283-311] 252d-253b, act iv, sc 11
[29-68] 270d-271b / Macbeth,
act 11, sc iv 294a-c / Pericles, act i, prologue
[i]-sc
1
[142] 421b-423b
28  Harvey:  Circulation  of  the Blood, 305a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  33b-d  /  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 29 159b-c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  hi,  sect  17  258d-259b; ch vi, sect 22-27
273d276a;  bk  iv,  ch iv, sect 13-16 326d-328d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
iv,  155b-157a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  87d88a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 363a-366d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93d-94a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  183c-d  49  Darwin:  Origin of
Species,  24a-  c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xi, 525c 53 James:
Psychology,   241b-258b   54   Freud:   Unconscious,   433c   /  General
Introduction, 530d; 570a-572d / New Introductory Lectures, 830d-831a 2/.
The  order  of  nature  and the order of freedom: the phenomenal and the
noumenal  worlds;  the  antithesis  of  nature  and spirit 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop
26-29  365b366c;  prop 32-33 367a-369a; prop 36 369b; appendix 369b-372d
passim;  part  in,  395a-d; part iv, prop 57, schol 441a-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 93c-99a; 101b-107b; 133a-c; 164a-170d esp 164a-165c, 169c-170a /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-c;  271a-c; 275b; 281c-282d;
283d-287d  /  Practical Reason, 292a-293b; 296a-d; 301d-302d; 307d-314d;
327d-329a;   331c-337a,c   /   Intro.   Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383c-d;
386b-387a,c;  388a-d;  390b / Judgement, 463a-467a esp 465a-c; 570b-572b
esp 571c-572a; 587a588a; 603a-b; 607c; 609b-610a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  pref, 6a-7a; part 1, par 39 21d; part hi, par 187 65a-c; par 280
94d-95a;  par  352 112b; additions, 1 115a-d; 152 141c-d; 164 144c-145a;
167  145c  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 164b-c; 170c172b; 178a-179c;
186b-c;  203b-206a,c;  part  1, 207a-209a; 222a-224a; 236a-c; 245d-246c;
247c-d; 252a-255a; 257c-d; part ii, 268b-271c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  689c690a;  693d-694d  3.  The  order  of  nature 3<*. The
rationality of nature: the maxims and laws of nature 7 Plato: Meno, 180a
/ Phaedo, 240d-242b / Timaeus, 447b-455d esp 455a-d / Sophist, 567a-569a
/ Philebus, 618b-619d

[273b]
8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 4
[188^-12]
263b; bk 11, ch 8
[i99a8-b33] 276b-277a
/  Heavens, bk i, ch 4 [271*34] 362c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii,
ch  10  [336  b25~34]  438d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3 [984^-22] 502d; bk
b8-i6] 512d-513a / Prophesying, ch 2 [463b n-i5] 708a 9 Aristotle: Parts
of Animals, bk i, ch i [639 ii, ch 2
[994
15 12-640*12] 161d-162b; bk hi, ch 4
[665b i9~
22] 193c; bk iv, ch 6 [683*20-25] 214b / Gait of Animals, ch 2
[704b i2-i8]
243c; ch 12
[711*15-20]
249b / Generation of Animals, bk 1, ch 1
[7i5*25~b i7] 255b-d; ch
4
[717*
13-18] 257a; bk ii, ch 4
[739
b  i9-2i]  280c;  ch  5  [74^2-4]  282c;  ch  6 [744*36-745^] 285c286d /
Politics, bk i, ch 8
[1 256^-26] 450b-c
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 6, 170b-c; ch 12 172d-173c esp
173c;  ch 13, 175c; bk ii, ch 4, 187c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
i  [146-264]  2d-4b;  bk  ii  [294-307]  18d-19a;  [1077-1089] 28d; bk v
[306-310]  65a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 4 257b; bk iv, sect
40  267a-b;  sect  45-46 267b-c; bk v, sect 30 273a; bk vi, sect i 274a;
sect  36  277c;  sect 40 277d; bk vii, sect 25 281c; sect 75 285c; bk x,
sect  6-7  297a-c 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk
i,  526a-529a 16 Kepler: Harmonies ofthe World, 1023b-1080b 17 Plotinus:
Third Ennead, tr viii 129a-136a esp ch 2-4 129b-131a / Fourth Ennead, tr
iv,  ch  13  164d-165b  18  Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 32
652b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, ans and rep 2
12c-14a; q 19, a 4, ans 111c112c; q 71, a 1, rep 4 367a-368b; q 76, a 5,
ans  394c-396a; part i-ii, q 1, a 2 610b-611b; q 5, a 5, rep 1 640b-641a
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 9, a 4, ans 766b-767b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, viii
[91148] 117d-118c
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk  hi,  192b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 80b-81b; 216c-219a esp 218c-219a;
516b-c  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone, bk i, 12a-b; bk vi, HOd 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences,  first  day,  131d-132a;  135b-136b; third day, 200a-d 28
Harvey:  Motion  of  the Heart, 285c; 302c304a,c / On Animal Generation,
390b-c;  402c;  426b-429b;  447b-d;  453c-454b;  489d  29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  xia 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 92c-d / Novum
Organum,  bk i, aph 10,13 107d; aph 24 108c; bk 11, aph 6 139b-c; aph 43
175a-c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v, 54c; 55a-56a esp 55b; 59a /
Objections and Replies, 214d 215b

[274a]
(3.  The order of nature. ?>a. The rationality of nature: the maxims and
laws of nature.} 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 29, schol 366b-c; prop
33,  schol  1-2 367c-369a; appendix 369b-372d; part hi, 395a-d; part iv,
pref  422b,d-424a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 72, 184b; 75 185b-186a / Vacuum,
359a-365b  /  Great  Experiment  382a389b esp 388b-389a / Weight of Air,
405b415b;  425a-429a  34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule i-hi 270a 271a
esp  rule i 270a / Optics, bk i, 409b; bk hi, 528b-529a; 540a; 542a-543a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk iv, ch hi, sect 28-29 322a-323a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  29-33  418c-419a  passim; sect 62-66
425a-426a; sect 103-109 433a-434b passim; sect 150151 442d-443c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect v, div 44 468d-469c; sect vi, div 47 470b-d;
sect  viii,  div 64-70 478d-482c passim 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
ii,  397a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  127a-128a;  220a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256d-257a;  264d-265a  /  Judgement, 467d-468c;
550b551a,c;   558b-c;   559c-d;  583d-584c  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of
Chemistry, part i, 41b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b; 173b; 175b;
177a;  183a-b;  184a  45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 582b-584a
passim;  839b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a; part in, par
146   55c-d;  additions,  i  115a-d  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
156d-160b;  183c-d;  186d;  part  iv,  361a-c  47  Goethe: Faust, part i
[447-453] 13a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 231a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
71a-c;  91b-92d  esp 92c-d; 97a-98a,c; 243c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  xi, 469a-470c; bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue ii, 687d-688a; 693d-696d 53
James: Psychology, 5a; 503b; 672a; 862a866a; 870b; 873a-b; 882a-886b esp
884b885a;  889a-890a 3£. Continuity and hierarchy in the order of nature
7   Plato:   Timaeus,   447b-458a  /  Philebus,  618b619d  8  Aristotle:
Categories,  ch  13  20b-d  /  Topics,  bk vi, ch 10 [148*23-38] 202b-c;
Physics, bk viii, ch 1
[25ob n-i4] 334a / Heavens, bk
i,  ch  2 359d-360d; bk ii, ch 12 383b-384c / Generation and Corruption,
bk  ii, ch 10 [336b 25-34] 438d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6 505b506b; ch 7
[988a34-b5] 506c; ch 9 508c-511c; bk xiv, ch 3 [io9ob i4~2i] 623b/ Soul,
bk i, ch 5
[411*7-23]
641a-b; bk ii, ch 2
[413

[274b]
240 THE GREAT IDEAS 3b 2o-b 4] 643b-c; bk hi, ch ii
[433
b3  1-434*9]  666d  /  Sleep,  ch  i  696a-697c  9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk viii, ch i 114b,d-115b / Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[644b23-645*26] 168c-169a; bk
iv, ch 5 [681* 12-15] 211d; ch 10
[686^3-35]
218b-c / Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch i [73^24733 b i7] 272a-274a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 6b-c; bk 11 [865-930] 26a-d;
bk  v [783-836] 71b-72a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 8, 146a-b 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  v,  sect 8 269d270b; sect 16 271c-d; bk ix,
sect 9 292b-d; bk xi, sect 18, 304b-c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi,
ch  13  46c47b  /  Third  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  3  93d-94c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c  / City of God, bk xi, ch 22
333d334c;  bk  xii,  ch  2-5  343c-345b;  bk xix, ch 12-17, 518c-523a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, a 3 106b-107c; q 23, a 5, rep 3
135d-137d;  q  47,  a 2 257b-258c; q 48, a 2, ans and rep 3 260c-261b; q
50, a i, ans and rep i 269b270a; a 4 273b-274b; q 57, a i, ans 295a-d; q
71,  a 1, rep 4 367a-368b; q 75, a 7 384d385c; q 76, a 3, ans 391a-393a;
a  5,  rep  3-4  394c-396a;  q  77, a 2 401a-d; a 4, rep i 403a-d; q 108
552c-562a esp a 4 555b-d; q no, a 3, ans 566d-567b; part i-ii, q 1, a 4,
rep 1 612a-613a; q 5, a 1, rep 3 636d-637c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q  7, a 9, ans 751d-752c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i
[94-142]  107b-d; xiii [52-87] 126a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 218c-219a 27
Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida, act i, sc hi [75-139] 108d-109c 28
Harvey:   Motion  of  the  Heart,  277b-278d  esp  278b-c  /  On  Animal
Generation,  336b-d;  400d-401a  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 30
159c-d;  aph 35 162a-164a; aph 37 168d-169c; aph 41 173d-174b 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk v [469-505] 185b186a 33 Pascal: Pensees, n 9-1 21 195a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, SECT 12 140c; BK III, CH
VI, SECT 11-12 271b272b; bk iv, ch xvi, sect 12, 370c-371a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  193a-200c esp 199c-200c /Judgement, 578d-580a esp 579bc; 582b-c
43 Federalist: number 37, 119b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
183c-d  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  55b-62a;  63d64d;  179b-180d;
228c-229a,c; 238b-243d esp 241 b-c, 243b-d / Descent of Man, 340d341d 53
James:  Psychology, 51a-52a; 95b-98a; 686b 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure
Principle, 65 ld654b esp 652b-c, 653b, 654a

[275a]
Ic  to  3r(2)  Chapter  60: NATURE 241 3c. Nature and causality 7 Plato:
Timaeus, 455a-b / Philebus, 615c-619d esp 618b-c / Laws, bk x, 764a-765a
8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk ii 268b,<£r278a,c; bk vin, ch i 334a-336b esp
[252  a5~b  7]  335d  "  336b  /  Generation  and Corruption, bk i, ch 3
413c-416c; bk ii, ch 9-10 436d-439c / Soul, bk 11, ch 4
[4 i 5
b8-4i6a  i8] 645d-646c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 1 [639 15
11-642^]  161d-165d esp [642a i-b 4] 165a-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
vi,  sect  io274b-c; bk vii, sect 19 281a; sect 25 281c; sect 75 285c 17
Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch i 78a-c / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch
32-39  175c-180a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, ans and
rep 2 12c-14a; q 18, a 3, ans 106b107c; part i-ii, q 12, a 5, ans 672a-c
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii
[94148] 118a-c; xiii [52-87] 126a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 113b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 80b-81b 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 43d-46a / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 3-5
13  7c- 139a; aph 17 149b-d; aph 27 157b-158d 31 Descartes: Meditations,
iv,  90a-b  / Objections and Replies, 214d-215b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,  prop 29 366b-c; prop 33 367b-369a; prop 36 369b; appendix 369b-372d;
part ii, prop 7 375a-c; part hi, 395a-d; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a; prop
57, schol 441a-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 119-121 195a 34 Newton: Principles,
bk  hi,  rule  i-ii  270a  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vi, div 47
470b-d;  sect  viii,  div  67  480c-481a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,
502b-503a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, la-b 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  ii,  397a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 140b,d-143a; 187c-189a /
Practical  Reason,  339a  /  Judgement, 467a-470c; 557c-558b; 562d-564c;
568c-d;  581a-582c  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity, 582b-584a
passim  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 284c-285cesp285b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  ix,  344a-b;  bk xi, 469a-470c; bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue i,
646c-647b;  650b-c;  epilogue ii, 678b-c; 679b-c; 687d-688a; 691d; 693b;
694d-696d   53   James:   Psychology,  824a-825a;  856b-858a  3c(l)  The
distinction  between the regular and the chance event: the uniformity of
nature  7  Plato: Timaeus, 455a-b 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch
13
[32b
4-23]  48b-d  /  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 4 b io-i6] lOOc-d; ch 30
119d; bk ii, ch ii
[73
b39~95 9] 129c-d / Physics, bk ii, ch 4-6 272c-275a; ch 8
[i98b i6-i99a8]
275d-276b; a
[94
[i99a33-b26] 276c-277a / Heavens, bk 11, ch 8

[275b]
[289b22-28] 381b / Generation and Corruption,
bk  11, ch 6 [333 a35~b2o] 434b-c / Metaphyics, bk v, ch 30 [1025*13-29]
547a-c; bk vi, ch 2
[io26b27-io27a i8] 549a-b; ch
3  549c-d;  bk xi, ch 8 593a-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640*  18-33]  162c-d; [64^13-31] 164c-d / Generation of Animals, bk iv,
ch  4  [77ob io-24] 312b-c/ Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 10 fi369a3i-b5] 612c-d 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293]  18b-d  12  Aurelius:
Meditations, bk vi, sect 46 278cd; bk vii, sect 1 279b; sect 49 282d; bk
ix, sect 9 292b-d; sect 28 293d-294a; bk x, sect 27 299d; bk xi, sect 27
306b  17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 32-39 175c-180a 19 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, ans 12c-14a; q 22, a 2, rep i
128d-130d; q 57, a 3, ans 297b-298a; q 103, a i, ans 528b-529a; a 5, rep
i  531b-532b;  a 7, rep 2 533b-d; q 116, a 1 592d-593d; a 3 594c-595a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 84, a 1, rep 3 174b-175a 28
Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 412c-413a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  33 161 b-d; aph 36-37 164a 169c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 29
366b-c;  appendix  369b-372d; part hi, 395a-d; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a
34   Newton:   Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  i-ii  270a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 36-37 279a-b; bk iv, ch hi, sect 28-29
322a-323a  passim  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 2933 418c-419a
passim;  sect  57  423d-424a;  sect 60-66 424b-426a passim; sect 103-109
433a-434b passim; sect 146 442a-b; sect 150-151 442d-443c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vi,  div 47 470b-d; sect viii, div 64-70 478d-482c
passim,  esp  div  67  480c-481a;  sect x, div 90, 491a-b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d-265a / Judgement, 558b-c; 566a-b 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 183c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[10,198-233] 248b249b
49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 65a / Descent of Man, 593d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  epilogue  i, 646c647b 53 James : Psychology, 864a 54 Freud:
General   Introduction,   454b-c  3c(2)  The  determinations  of  nature
distinguished  from  the  voluntary or free 7 Plato: Phaedo, 240d-242b 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch i
[25i a28-b i]
334d-335a / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 2 571c572a; ch 5 573a-c; ch 7
[i048b35-i 049^8]
574c-d

[276a]
(3c   Nature   and   causality.   3c(2)  The  determinations  of  nature
distinguishedfrom  the  voluntary or free.) 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i,
ch io
[i368b28iT,6gh2j) 612a-613a
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 2, a 3, rep 2 12c-14a; q 6, a 1, rep 2 28b-d; q
18,  a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 3, rep 3 110b111c; a 4 110c-112c; q 22,
a  2, rep 4 128d130d; q 41, a 2, ans 218c-219d; a 6, ans 223b224a; q 46,
a  i,  rep  9-10  250a-252d;  q 47, a i, rep 1 256a-257b; q 59, a i, ans
306c-307b;  q  70,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 4-5 365b-367a; q 78, a 1, rep 3
407b-409a;  q  83, a i, rep 3 436d438a; q 103, a i, rep 1,3 528b-529a; q
105,  a  1, rep 2 538d-539c; part i-ii, q 1, a 2 610b-611b; a 3, ans and
rep  3  611b-612a; a 5, ans 613a-614a; q 6, a 1 644d-646a; q 8, a 1, ans
655b-656a;  q  9, a 4, rep i 660a-d; q 10, a 1 662d-663d; q ii, a 2, ans
667b-d;  q  12,  a  5,  ans  672a-c;  q  13, a 6 676c-677b; q 17, aa 8-9
692a-693d;  q  21,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1-2  717a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 49, a 4, ans and rep 1-2 5a-6a; q 50, a i, ans
and  rep i 6a-7b; a 2, ans 7c-8a; a 3 8b-9a; a 5, rep 1,3 10b-d; q 51, a
1  12b-13c; q 55, a i, ans and rep 5 26b-27a; q 72, a 3, ans and rep 1-2
113b-114a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[82]-xviii
[75] 79b-80c; paradise,
i  [94-142]  107b-d; xxvi [124-138] 147a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
61a-b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 218c-219a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
456c-458a  passim  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  60b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  appendix 369b372d; part in, 395a-d; part iv, prop 57,
schol  441a-c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div  64-72
478d-483c  passim  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a  42  Kant: Pure
Reason,  140b,d-143a;  164a-171a esp 164a- 165c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of   Morals,  264d-265a;  275b;  276a-277a;  279b,d287d  esp  282b-283d,
285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason, 296a-d; 319c-321b; 331c-337a,c / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 386d-387a,c / Judgement, 463a-467a; 571c-572a 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 194 66c-d; additions, 1 115a-d;
152  141cd  /  Philosophy  of History, intro, 171b-c; 178a-179c; 186b-c;
part  i,  207b-c;  236a-c;  247c-d  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 288b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue ii, 688a-694d 53 James: Psychology,
84a-94b esp 90b-93a;

[276b]
242  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3c(2)  to 3r(3) 291a-295b esp 291a-b; 387b-388a;
704b-706b  esp  706b;  820b-825a  54  Freud:  Origin  and Development of
PsychoAnalysis,  13c  / General Introduction, 453b467b esp 454b-c, 462d;
486c-488c  esp  486d  3c(3)  Teleology in nature: the operation of final
causes 7 Plato: Phaedo, 241b-242b / Timaeus, 447d448a; 455a-b; 465d-466a
8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch ii b26-95 a9] 129c-d /
Physics,  bk  i,  ch  9  i92a  i6-24]  268b-c;  bk  ii,  ch i 19312- 19]
269d-270a;  ch  2 [194^7^13] 270d-271a; ch 8-9 275d-278a,c / Heavens, bk
ii, ch 12 383b384c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6
[94
a35~b2 °] 434b-c / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 2
[982V11] 500d; ch 7 [988b6-i5] 506c-d; ch 9
[992^9-34] 510c; bk
ii, ch 2 [994^-1 6] 512d513a; bk hi, ch 2
[996^2-36]
514d-515a; bk v, ch 4 [ioi4b34-ioi5a io] 535b; bk xii, ch
[333
7 [io72b i-4] 602c; ch 10 [io75 ai2-b i6] 605d606c / Soul, bk 11, ch 4
[4i5b i5~22] 645d646a;
ch 8
[420^6-23]
652a; bk hi, ch 9
[432
b2i-26] 665b-c; ch 12-13 667a-668d passim / Sleep, ch 2
[455
b  i3-28] 698b-c / Prophesying, ch 2 [463b n-i5] 708a 9 Aristotle: Parts
of Animals, bk i, ch i [639 15 i2-640a i2] 161d-162b;
[64i bn-642b4 ]
164c165d;  ch 5 [645^3-26] 169a; bk ii-iv 170a229d passim, esp bk ii, ch
i
[646a25-b27]
170b-d,  bk in, ch 2 [663b22-23] 191b, bk iv, ch 2 [677*15-19] 206d-207a
/  Gait  of Animals, ch 2 [704 b i2-i8] 243c; ch 8 [708*9-21] 246c-d; ch
12 249b-d / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 1
[715*1-18] 255a-b; ch 4-13 257a-260b
passim;  bk  ii,  ch  5  [74^2-4]  282c; ch 6 [742* i6-b b a37~745 i 7 ]
283b-d;
[744
5] 285c-286d; bk in, ch 4 296b-c; bk iv, ch 3
[767
b6-i6] 309a; bk v, ch i [778 ai6-b i9] 320a-321a; ch 8
[788b22-789b i5] 330c-331a,c
/  Politics, bk i, ch 2 [i252b3o-i253a i] 446a-b; ch 8 [i256b826] 450b-c
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties  167a-215d  esp bk i, ch 6, 170b-c, ch 10
171b-172b,  ch  12 172d173c, ch 13, 174d-175c, bk ii, ch 3 185a-186d, ch
4,  187c,  bk  in,  ch  1 199a-c, ch 3 200a-201a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk i
[10221037] 13c-d; bk
11
[1052-1063] 28b-c; bk iv
[823-857]
55a-b; bk v
[76-90]
62a-b;
[156234] 63a-64a
12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 8 269d270b; bk vi, sect 40 277d 16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 511b 16 Kepler:
Epitome,   bk   iv,   846b-847a;  857b860b;  863b-887a  passim;  913a-b;
915b-916a;  925b-928a;  932a-933a  / Harmonies of the World, 1023b-1080b
esp  1049b-1050a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ii, ch i 40a-41a / Fifth
Ennead, tr viii, ch 7 242d-243c

[277a]
3c(3) to 3r(4) 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 22 333d334c; bk xii,
ch 4-5 344b-345b; bk xix, ch 12-13, 518c-520a; bk xxii, ch 24, 610c-611c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3,, ans and rep 2 12c-14a;
q 5, a 4, ans T&dFfoc, q 6, a 1, rep 2 28b-d; q 18, a 3, ans 106b107c; q
19,  a  1,  ans 108d-109c; a 4, ans 111c112c; q 22 127c-132b; q 23, a i,
ans  and  rep  1-2  132c-133b;  q  44, a 4, rep 3 241a-d; q 59, a 1, ans
306c-307b; q 60, a 5 313b-314c; q 65, a 2, ans 340b-341b; q 70, a 3, ans
365b-367a; q 76, a 5, ans 394c-396a; q 78, a i, rep 3 407b-409a; q 82, a
4, ans 434c-435c; q 85, a 3, rep 1 455b-457a; q 91, a 3 486b-487d; q 92,
a  1,  rep  1  488d-489d; q 98, a i, ans 516d517c; q 103 528a-534b; part
i-ii, q 1, a 2 610b-611b; a 3, ans and rep 3 611b-612a; a 6, ans 614a-c;
a  8 615a-c; q 2, a 5, rep 3 618d-619c; q 8, a 1, ans 655b-656a; q 12, a
5,  ans  672a-c;  q  21,  a  i, ans and rep 1-2 717a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 75, a 3, ans and rep 4 938a-939d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-39] 80a-b; paradise,
i  [94-142]  107b-d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a; part iv, 271d 28
Harvey:  Motion of the Heart, 271b-273a; 285c; 302c-304a,c / Circulation
of  the  Blood,  309b-d  / On Animal Generation, 349a-b; 355c-d; 390b-c;
401b; 402c; 418b-c; 426b429b passim; 439c-440a; 442d-443c; 447a-b; 453c;
454b-c;  461a-c; 462c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 43a-d; 45a46a
/  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 48 HOd111a 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv,
90a-b  /  Objections  and Replies, 214d-215b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
appendix  369b372d;  part iv, pref 422b,d-424a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  v  [469-505]  185b186a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72, 184b; 75 185b-186a 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol,  371a  /  Optics,  bk hi,
528b-529a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 15 124d-125b
esp 125b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 60-66 424b-426a passim; sect
107 433d-434a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 44, 469b-c; sect
xi,  div  iii 501b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 229b-230a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 127a-128a; 187a-190a; 205b-209b; 220a-b; 239a-240b / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256d-257a  /  Judgement,  467d-470b; 473a-474b;
523c-d;  550a613a,c  esp  550a-562a,c, 568c-570b, 575b578a, 587a-588a 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 157b-c; 161d-162a 49 Darwin: Origin
of  Species,  40c-42a  esp  41c-d; 60b-61d; 95d-97a; 217d-218a; 243b-d /
Descent of Man, 474a-b; 593d

[277b]
Chapter  60:  NATURE  243  646c51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue 647b;
650b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 4a-6b; 671b [fn 1] 54 Freud: Narcissism,
401b  / Instincts, 415b / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 651d-654c 3c(4)
Divine  causality  in relation to the course of nature: the preservation
of  nature;  providence;  miracles  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1-2; 7-8;
11:1-9;   17:15-21;  18:9-15;  21:1-8  /  Exodus,  3-4;  712;  13:20-22;
14:19-31;  15:22-25;  16:1-17:7  /  Numbers, 12; 16-17; 20:1-13; 21:4-9;
22:21-34 / Joshua, 3; 6:1-20; 10:12-14— (D) Josue, 3; 6:1-20; 10:12-14 /
^  Samuel,  12:1420—  (D)  I  Kings, 12:14-20 / / Kings, 17-19 — (D) III
Kings, 17-19 / Nehemiah, 9~(D) II Esdras, 9 / Job, 12:7-10; 36:24-42:2 /
Psalms, 8; 18:6-17; 19:1-6; 65; 78; 89:812; 104; 106-107; 136; 147:7-20—
(D)  Psalms,  8;  17:7-18;  18:1-7;  64; 77; 88:9-13; 103; 105-106; 135;
146:7-147:20  / Jeremiah, 10:12-13; 31:35— (D) Jeremias, 10:12-13; 31:35
/  Amos,  5:8;  8:8-12  /  Jonah— (D) Jonas Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
11:24-25— (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 1 1 ^5-26 / Ecclesiasticus, 43— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  43  New  Testament:  Matthew, 1:18-25; 6:25-34; 8-9 esp
8:1-3,  9:27-36;  14:14-36;  15:30-39 / Luke, 1:5-66; 5:4-15; 13:11-13 /
John,  2:111;  9:1-34;  11:1-45/  /to,  3:1-16;  17:28/  Romans, 11:36 /
Colossians,  1:16-17  7  Plato: Timaeus, 465d-466a / Sophist, 577d578b /
Laws, bk x 757d-771b passim 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92a i6-24]
268b-c; bk ii, ch 4
[i96b5~7]
273a; ch 7
[198*22-29] 275b-c;
[i98 a35~b
3] 275c / Heavens, BK I, CH 4
[271*34] 362c; BK
II, CH 12 383b-384c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10 [336^5-34]
438d;  [337^5-23]  439a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch 10 [1075*12-24]
605d606a  /  Soul,  bk  11,  ch 4 [4i5*22-b8] 645c-d / Prophesying, ch 2
[463b  n-i5] 708a 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 22 17b-18a /
Sacred  Disease  154a-160d  esp 154a155d, 160b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk i [146-158] 2d-3a;
[1022-1037]
13c-d; bk ii
[167-183]
17a-b; [1090-1104] 29a; bk v [76-90] 62a-b;
[156-234] 63a-64a; [306-310] 65a; [1161-1240]
76b-77b; bk vi
[43-79] 80d-81b;
[379-422]
85b-d  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c-112b; ch 16 121d-122d;
bk hi, ch 17 191d-192a; ch 22 195a-201a; bk iv, ch 3 224b-d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect 4 257b; bk vii, sect 75 285c; bk ix, sect 28
293d294a;  bk  xii,  sect 14 308c 14 Plutarch: Nicias, 435b-d 16 Kepler:
Harmonies of the World, 1049b1050a; 1061a

[278a]
(3c.  Nature  and  causality.  3c(4) Divine causality in relation to the
course  of nature: the preservation of nature; providence; miracles.} 18
Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 22 333d334c; bk xii, ch 4-5 344b-345b;
bk  xix,  ch 12-14, 518c-520c; bk xxi, ch 4-8 562a568d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  2,  a  3, ans and rep 2 12c-14a; q 3, a 1, ans
14b-15b;  a  2, ans 15c-16a; a 8, ans and rep 1-2 19d20c; q 8 34c-38c; q
14, a 8 82c-83b; q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 4 110c-112c; a 5, rep
2-3  112d-113c; q 22 127c-132b; q 23, a i, ans and rep 1-2 132c-133b; qq
44-46  238a-255d  esp  q 45, a 8 249b-250a; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a278c; q
52,  a  2  279b-280a;  q  56,  a  2,  ans  292d-294a; q 60, a i, rep 2-3
310b-311a;  a  5 313b-314c; q 75, a i, rep i 378b-379c; q 76, a 5, rep 1
394c-396a;  q  83,  a i, rep 3 436d438a; q 84, a 4, rep i 444d-446b; a 5
446c447c;  q  89,  a  1, rep 3 473b-475a; a 8, rep 2 479c-480c; qq 90-92
480c-491d; q 94, a 3, ans 504a-505a; qq 103-119 528a-608d esp qq 103-105
528a-545b,  q 116 592d-595c; part 1-11, q 1, a 2 610b-611b; a 4, ans and
rep  1 612a-613a; a 8 615a-c; q 2, a 5, rep 3 618d-619c; q 6, a 1, rep 3
644d-646a;  q  10,  a  4,  ans  and  rep 1-2 665d-666a,c; q 12, a 5, ans
672a-c; q 17, a 8, rep 2 692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  85,  a  6  182d-184a; q 113, a 10 369c-370b; part in suppl, q 83, a 3
978c-980d; q 91 1016a1025b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b; paradise, ii [46-148] 108b-109b; vin
[91-148]
117d-118c; xiii
[52-87]
126a-b; xxvii [97-120] 148b-c 22 Chaucer: Knights Tale
[2987-3040]
209a210a / Tale of Man of Law
[4883-4924]
242 b- 243b / Prioress's Tale
[13,572-599]
394b-395a  / Second Nun's Tale [16,001-021] 471a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  51d-52a;  part  ii, 149c-d; 160b-c; part hi, 183d-187a passim;
188a-191a;  241c-242a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  344a 26 Shakespeare: 1st
Henry  IV,  act  hi,  sc i [i63] 450a-d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
390d-391a;  406b-407b;  416b-c;  426a-429b;  443a-c;  490d493a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 2c-d; 4b-c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 23 108c;
aph  124  133c-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55d-56a / Meditations,
iv,  90a-b  / Objections and Replies, 214d-215b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i, prop 16-18 362a363c; prop 24-29 365a-366c; prop 33 367b369a; appendix
369b-372d; part ij, prop 7 375a-c; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a

[278b]
244 THE GREAT IDEAS 3c(4) to 4a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[667-709]
354a355a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  77  186a;  619-641  284b  290a; 643-644
290b-291b;  803-856  328b-341b passim, esp 804 329a; 876 345a 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi, general schol, 369b-371a / Optics, bk hi, 542a-543a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 28-29 322a-323a; ch
xvi,  sect  13 371a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 25-33 417d-419a
passim,  esp sect 29-33 418c-419a; sect 36 419c-d; sect 51-53 422d-423a;
sect   57  423d-424a;  sect  60-76  424b-428a  passim,  esp  sect  60-66
424b-426a;  sect  84  429b-c;  sect 92-94 431a-c; sect 105-109 433b-434b
passim;  sect  141,  441a;  sect  146153  442a-444a passim, esp sect 150
442d-443b  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 54-57 474b-475d;
sect  x-xi  488d-503c  passim 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 189b-191a esp
190c-191a;  206b-d;  292d-296b  esp 295c-d; 409a-b; 465d-467b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 227d-228a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 143a-145c; 177b-179b;
187a-190a;   239a-240b   /  Practical  Reason,  334b-335c  /  Judgement,
560d-562a,c; 567b; 572b-578a; 581a-582c; 588a-592d 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
126b-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 246b-c; part hi, 307a-b;
part iv, 338b-c; 361b-c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 239c-d; 243 b-d 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v, 219b-d; epilogue 11, 675a-677b; 680b-c;
684o-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 21d-22b; bk vi, 168a-c;
bk  vii,  171a-177b  passim  4.  Knowledge  of nature or the natural 4a.
Nature  or  essence  as  an  object  of  definition  7  Plato: Cratylus,
104d-105b  /  Meno,  174a179b  / Euthyphro, 196a-b / Gorgias, 252d253b /
Theaetetus,  514b-515a  / Sophist, 577c-d / Laws, bk x, 763c-d / Seventh
Letter,  809c810b  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii, ch i-io
122b,d-128d; ch 13 131b-133c / Physics, bk ii, ch i
[i93 a3o-b
7]  269c-d;  ch  2  [194*11-14]  270c;  ch 9 [20oa3o-b io] 277d-278a,c /
Meteorology,  bk  iv, ch 12 493d-494d / Metaphysics, b i6-27] 513a-b; bk
hi, ch 2 bk 11, ch 2 [994 ai8-b26] 514d-515b; bk vi, ch i [io25b28-
[996
i026a6]  547d-548a;  bk vii, ch 4-6 552b-555a; ch 10-12 558a-562a; ch 15
563c-564c;  bk  viii,  ch  2-3  566d-568d;  ch  6 569d-570d; bk xi, ch 7
[1064*19-28]  592c / Soul, bk i, ch 1 631a-632d; bk ii, ch 1-3 642a-645b
passim;  bk  hi,  ch  4  [429^0-23] 661d-662a; ch 6 [430b26-3i] 663b-c 9
Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals, bk i, ch 1 [641* 14-33] 163d-164b; ch 2-3
165d-167d

[279a]
4b  to 4c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 2, rep 2 lld-12c;
q  3, a 3, ans 16a-d; a 5, ans 17c-18b; q 14, a 11, rep 1 84c-85c; q 17,
a 3 102d-103c; q 29, a 1, rep 4 162a-163b; a 2, rep 3 163b-164b; q 44, a
i,  rep  i  238J^239a; q 86, a 1 461c-462a; part i-ii, q 1, a 3, ans and
rep  3  611b-612a; a 5, ans 613a-614a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii,  q  4, a 1, ans 402a-403d; part hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a-711c; a 2,
ans  711d-712d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 59d; part iv, 270d-271a 31
Descartes: Rules, vin, 14b-c / Objections and Replies, 126b- 12 7c; 160d
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 4 355b; prop 8, schol 2 356d-357d; prop
10  358a-b; part ii, def 2 373b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xxiii,  sect  3-10  204c-206d  esp  sect  6  205bc;  ch  xxxi, sect 6-13
240d-243b;  ch  xxxii,  sect 18 246c-247a; sect 24 247c-d; bk hi, ch in,
sect 12-20 257b-260a; ch vi 268b283a; ch ix, sect 11-17 287d-290a; ch x,
sect  17-21  295d-297b; bk iv, ch vi, sect 416 331d-336d passim; ch xii,
sect  9 360d361b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 101-102 432c-433a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 341c-342b 53 James: Psychology, 185a-b; 669a-671a
4b.  Nature  in  relation to diverse types of science: the theoretic and
the  practical sciences; natural philosophy or science, mathematics, and
metaphysics  7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-477a,c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 13
[32b
4-23]  48b-d / Topics, bk i, ch 14 [io5b i9-29] 149c / Physics, bk i, ch
2
[i84b25-i85*i9]
259c-260a; ch 7
[191*8-11] 266d; ch 9
[192*
33-b2] 268c-d; bk ii, ch 2 270a-271a; ch 9
[2ooa3o-b
9] 277d-278a,c; bk hi, ch i
[2oob
11-24]  278a; ch 5 [204a34-b 3] 282b-c; bk iv, ch 1 [208*27-33] 287a; bk
viii,  ch i [25obn251*8] 334a-c; ch 3 [253*32^6] 337c/ Heavens, bk 1, ch
1
[268*1-7] 359a; ch
5
[27ib i-i8]
362c-d; bk hi, ch i [298*24-299*17] 389b,d390c; ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c / Metaphysics,
bk 1, ch 8
[989b2i-99o*8] 507d-508a; ch 9
[992*29^9]
510c-d; bk ii, ch 3
[995*15-20]
513d; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk vii, ch ii
[1037*10-21] 560d; bk xi, ch 3 [io6i*29-b i2]
589c-d;  ch  4  589d-590a; ch 7 592b-593a / Soul, bk i, ch i [403*25^19]
632b-d / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436*1 6-b2]
673b  /  Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 27 [48ob2i~3i] 726d 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i 161a-165d esp
[639^4-640*1 o]
162b; bk i, ch 5
[644b2i]-BK
11, ch 1
[646*13]
168c170a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a

[279b]
Chapter  60:  NATURE  245  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk viii, ch 2
265b266a;  ch  4  266d-267c;  ch  5-6,  268b-269c; bk xi, ch 25 336b-d /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29 650d-651c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  i, a i, rep 2 3b-4a; q 7, a 3, ans 32c-33c; q 14, a 16, ans
90b  91b;  q  84,  a  8,  ans  450b-451b;  q 85, a 1, rep 2 451c-453c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 84, a 1, rep 3 174b-175a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 71c-d; 72a-d; part 11, 163a; part iv, 268c-d
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  331c-332a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 33b-34b; 40a-c; 42ac; 43a-d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 3 107b;
aph  66  114d-115c  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54c; 55b; part vi,
61b-62c;  66d-67a  /  Meditations,  iv,  90a-b / Objections and Replies,
215a-b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d; PART II, PROP 7,
SCHOL  375b-C;  PART  III,  395a-d; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a 34 Newton:
Principles, bk hi, rule i-iii 270a271a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
hi,  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim, esp sect 9 270d-271a; bk iv, ch vi, sect
4-16  331d-336d  passim;  ch xii, sect 7-13 360b-362d; ch xxi 394d395a,c
esp  sect  1-2  394d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 30-32 418c-419a;
sect  58-66  424a-426a  passim,  esp  sect  59  424b, sect 66 426a; sect
101-109  432c-434b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect viii, div 64,
478d-479a;  div 65 479b-480a esp 479c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341c-342b
passim  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 335b-337a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  5a-13d esp 5d-9a; 15c16c; 190c-191a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 253a-d; 271a-c; 283d-284d / Practical Reason, 291a-292c; 297a-c;
300d  [fn  1];  307d314d  esp  310a-b;  329a-337a,c  esp 329b-d / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-  d  / Judgement, 461a-475d esp 463a-467a,
474b-475d;   578a-b;   596c-598b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
327b,d-328b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  i  115a-d /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  263d265c;  part iv, 361a-c 50 Marx:
Capital,  190d  [fn 2] 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 694c-d 53
James:  Psychology,  862a-866a;  882a-886a  4c.  Nature  as an object of
history 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 6
[491*5-26] 12c-13a
18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 29 650d-651c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 71c-d; 72a-d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 338a-c;
383d; 473a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d-34b

[280a]
(4.  Knowledge  of  nature  or  the  natural. Ac. Nature as an object of
history.)  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 333a-334a,c 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  328a-b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 20b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  156b164d;  178a-179b;  190b-201a,c;  part i, 246b-c 48
Melville:  Moby Dic{, ixa-xxa; 221b-224b; 243b-249a; 267a-271a; 335a-341
49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 152a-166a,c esp 165d-166a,c; 241d-243a 50
Marx: Capital, 181d
[fn
3] 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 688a 5. Nature or the natural
as  the  standard of the right and the good 5a. Human nature in relation
to the good for man 5 Sophocles: Philoctetes [895-903] 190a 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  368a-d; bk iv, 461d-462a; bk v, 504c-507c 7
Plato:  Symposium,  155d-157a  /  Gorgias,  282b-284b  / Republic, bk i,
309b-310b;  bk  iv,  350a-355c;  bk viii, 410a-c; bk ix, 421a425b; bk x,
439b-441a,c / Timaeus, 474b476b / Sophist, 557b-d / Philebus, 619d620b 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246a io248 a8] 329c-330d / Metaphysics, bk
i,   ch   1-2   499a-501c  passim  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7
[ic>97b23-i098a 17] 343a-c; ch 9
[i099b i8-24] 345a-b; bk
ii, ch 1 348b,d-349b; bk hi, ch 5 [ni4a32-b25] 360c-d; bk v, ch 7 [ii34b
i8-ii35  a4]  382c-d; bk vi, ch 13 394b-d; bk x, ch 7 431d-432c passim /
Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253^-38]
446b-d;  ch  5-6 447d-449b; bk hi, ch 6 [i278b 15-29] 475d-476a; bk vii,
ch 3
[i325b2-i3]
529c-d; ch 13
[i332a39-b io]
537a-b; ch 14
[i333 ai6-23] 538a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi
[1053-1094]
43c-44a,c; bk v
[1113-1135] 75c-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c-112b; ch 11 116d-118d; ch 15
121c-d;  bk  hi,  ch  1-3  175a-180a;  ch  10  185d-187a;  bk iv, ch 6-7
230b-235a  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; sect 9 257d;
sect  17 259b-d; bk hi, sect 2 259d-260a; sect 9 261d; bk iv, sect 23-24
265c-d;  sect  29 266a; sect 32 266b-c; sect 39 267a; sect 48 267d-268a;
sect 51 268d; bk v, sect 4 269a; sect 8 269d-270b; sect 15-16 271b-d; bk
vi,  sect  9 274b; bk vii, sect 20 281b; sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect 1
285a-b;  sect  46  289b;  bk  ix,  sect i 291a-c; sect 9 292b-d; sect 42
295c-296a,c; bk x, sect 2-3 296b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
15 17a-b / City of God, bk xii, ch 3 343d-344b; bk

[280b]
246  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5  to  5b  xiii,  ch  3 361a-c; bk xiv, ch 11-13
385d388c; bk xix, ch 1-4 507a-513c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q 63, a 9, rep 1-2 333b-d; q 118, a 2, rep 5 601c603b; part i-ii, qq 1-5
609a-643d;  q 10, a 1 662d-663d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  49,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  1  2b-4a; q 51, a i, ans 12b13c; q 54, a 3
24c-25b; Q 63, a 1 63a-64a; q 71, a 2 106d-107c; q 85 178b-184a; q 91, a
2  208d-209d;  q  94 220d-226b; part ii-ii, q 182, a 1, ans 620b-621d; q
183, a i 625a-626a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi 15a-16b; purgatory,
xvn
[82]-xviii
[75]
79b-80c;  paradise,  viii  [115-148]  118b-c  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  65c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 60a-c; 71d-73a; 93b94a;
216c-219a;    424d-426b;   502c-504c;   508a512a;   520b-d;   528c-529b;
538a-543a,c  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii
[173-188]  115b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 70d-71b; 94d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, pref, 423c; prop 18, schol-prop 28 429a-431c;
part v, prop 41-42 462d-463d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 90a-d; bk i,
ch  11,  sect  5  105a-b;  sect  13,  108b-c;  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 52-53
191d-192b;  sect  55-56  192c-193b;  ch  xxviii,  sect  ii  230c-231a 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 38c-39c; 82c-83b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-366d
/  Political Economy 367a-385a,c passim / Social Contract, bk 11, 399b-c
42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 253a-254d esp 253d-254d;
263d-264a;  270c-d;  280d-281a  /  Practical  Reason, 327d-329a / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387d-388a  43 Mill: Liberty, 293b-302c passim /
Utilitarianism,   448a-455a;  459b-464d  passim;  464d465c  44  Boswell:
Johnson,  413a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 196d197a 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310a-319d  esp  316a-318c;  592b-d  50 Marx:
Capital,  301d [fn 3] 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c
passim  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 20c-d /
General Introduction, 623d625b / War and Death, 758a-759d / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents,  785c-789b  esp  786d787a;  800c-801c 5b. Natural
inclinations  and  natural  needs  with respect to property and wealth 5
Euripides: Helen
[903-908]
306d-307a  /  Phoenician  Maidens [528-567] 382c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk
ii, 316c-319a; bk viii, 409d-410c

[281a]
5c to 5d Chapter 60: a6-i6] 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2 164d-165a 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  3-1  i 446d-453d; bk vii, ch 13 [i33i
b39~i332  a27]  536c-537a_  14 Plutarch: Marcus Cato, 285c-d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk ii, 31a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, a 1,
ans and rep 3 615d-616c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a
5, rep 3 224d-225d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-111]
16a-b;  xvn  [34-75]  24b-c  22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus, par 49-51
422a424a  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 217c-d; 489b-490c 27 Shakespeare: King
Lear, act ii, sc iv [263274] 261c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix,
xxviiixxix  450a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch v 30b-36a passim 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk vii, 44a-d; bk xix, 145b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  350c; 352a; 363a-366d / Social Contract, bk i, 393d-394b 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 6d-8b; 27b37b passim; 42a-50d; 63a-b;
70a-71d;  bk  ii,  147c-148b; bk hi, 163c-164c; bk v, 383c-d 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  124d-125c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 128 137b-c
/  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii, 267a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 16d-17a;
71d-72c; 81b-c; 147d-148a; 251a-255a esp 253a-255a; 377b
[fn 3 ]
54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788a 5c. The naturalness
of  the  state  and  political  obligation  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk ii,
316c-319c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7
[1 I34b i8-i 135
s  4]  382c-d  /  Politics, bk i, ch 2 445b-446d; ch 5-6 447d-449b; ch 8
[1256^0-26] 450c; bk in, ch 6
[i278b i5~29] 475d-476a; ch
17
[i287b37~39]
486c; bk v, ch 9
[i309b i4~
1310*2] 511d-512b; bk vii, ch 3
[i325b2-i3]
529c-d; ch 4
[1326^9^2]
530b-c; ch 14
[i332b i3-4i] 537b-d
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b,d; bk iv, sect 4 264a; sect
29  266a;  bk vi, sect 14 274d-275a; bk vii, sect 13 280c; bk viii, sect
34  288a-b;  sect  59  290d; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d; sect 23 293c; sect 42
295c-296a,c;  bk x, sect 6 297a-b; bk xi, sect 8 303a-b; bk xii, sect 30
310a-b  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 91, a 3 209d-210c; q
95,  a 2 227c-228c; a 4 229b230c 23Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b; part
ii, lOOa-c; lOla-b; 113c; 164a,c; part hi, 165a; conclusion, 282a; 283c

[281b]
NATURE 247 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d; 94d-95b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  35-37  433b436a; appendix, ix 448a; xn 448b 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vi
[171-188}
200a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch ii-ix 25d-54d passim, esp ch vii-
viii  42b-53c  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, lc-2d; 3b-c; bk vi,
39b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-366d / Political Economy, 368d-369b /
Social  Contract,  bk  i-ii,  387b,d-400c; bk hi, 419c-d; 423a-c passim;
424d  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 402c; 433c-434c; 435c-436b; 437c-d /
Judgement,  586b-d  43  Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-15]  la-b  43
Federalist:  number  51,  163b-c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
327b,d328d  /  Utilitarianism,  459b-461c passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi, par 280 94d-95a / Philosophy of History, intro, 164b-c
54  Freud:  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 780b-d 5d. The natural as
providing  a  canon  of  beauty  for  production  or  judgment  7 Plato:
Republic, bk x, 427c-431b / Laws, bk 11, 660a-661a 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk  vii, ch 3 [246a io-b i9] 329c-330a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk
i, ch 5 [645 s 4-26] 168d-169a / Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[i28i b io-i5] 479b-c; bk
v, ch 9 [i309b23-3o] 512a; bk viii, ch 5
[134(^23-28]
545d / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2
[i404b2-26] 654c-655a
/  Poetics, ch 4 [1449*19-27] 683b; ch 7 685b-c; ch 24 [i459b3i-i46oa 4]
695d-696a  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 2 259d260a 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 49, a 2, rep 1 2b-4a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, x
[2296]
67c-68b esp
[28-33]
6?d; xn
[ l0~72 ]
70b-71a 22 Chaucer: Physician's Tale [11,941-972] 366b367a 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 93b-d; 151b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii
[1-40]
49a-b  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 184a-187c; 189d-193a; part ii,
212d-215b  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 29 176a; 32 176a-b; 134 196a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 494d-495a,c 42 Kant: Judgement, 476a-479d esp 479a-d;
494c-495a,c; 495c-d; 502d-503b; 521b-524b esp 523c-d; 525a-527b; 546b-c;
557a-558b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  263d265c  48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 277a-b; 335b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 576b-577d
53 James: Psychology, 186b

[282a]
248  6.  Nature  in  religion  and  theology 6a. The personification and
worship  of nature Old Testament: Deuteronomy, 4:16-19; 17:3 / // Kings,
23  :4-5,  1 1 — (D) IV Kings, 23 -.4-5,1 1 / Jeremiah, 8:1-2; 10:2— (D)
Jeremias,  8:1-2;  10:2 / Ezekiel, 8:16— (D) Ezechiel, 8:16 / Zephaniah,
1:4-5—  (D)  Sophonias,  1:4-5  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 13:1-9;
15:1819—  (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  13:1-9; 15:18New Testament: Romans,
1:23-25 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 31a-b; 48c 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 116b-d
8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [io74b  1-14] 604d-605a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[1-43]
la-d; bk 11
[581-660] 22b-23b; bk v
[783836] 71b-72a
18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk iv, ch 8 192c193b 27 Shakespeare: King
Lear, act i, sc ii
[1-22]
247d-248a; sc iv
[297-311] 253a-b; act hi,
sc  11  [1-25]  262d-263a 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 543b-544a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  81d;  93bc  42 Kant: Judgement, 504b-505a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  196d197c;  part  1,  220c-221a; 228ac:
244c-245a;  252a-255a; part ii, 263d-265c; 268b-271c; part hi, 291d-292a
47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[430-521]
12b-15a;
[1064-1121] 26b-28a; [3217-3239] 79a-b; part
ii  [4679-4727]  116b-117b  48  Melville:  Moby Dic{, 367a-372a 50 Marx:
Capital,  35b c 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 876d877b 6b. Nature
and  grace  in  human  life  New  Testament: John, 1:12-13; 3; 6:22-27 /
Romans  esp  8:1-17 / I Corinthians, 2-3; 12; 15:42-50 / // Corinthians,
4:15-16;  5:14-17;  7:1;  10:2-4;  12:7-9  /  Galatians,  5:3-4,19-26  /
Ephesians passim, esp 2:1-6, 4:17-24 / CROSS-REFERENCES

[282b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 6 to 6b Colossians passim, esp 3:9-10 / James, 4:1-10 /
//  Peter,  1:3-4 / I John passim, esp 2:15-16, 3:1, 5:4-5 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk v, par 16 31c-d; bk vn, par 27 51d-52c / City of God, bk
xv,  ch  1-3  397b,d-399c;  ch 22 416a-c; bk xvi, ch 26 438c-439a; ch 37
444b-445a;  bk  xviii, ch 11 477c-d; bk xxi, ch 15 572c-573b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a  8,  rep 2 7c-8d; q 2, a 2, rep 1
lld-12c;  q  8,  a  3,  ans  and rep 4 36b-37c; q 12, a 2, ans and rep 1
51c-52c;  aa  12-13  60d-62b;  Q  62 317c325b; qq 94-101 501c-523d; part
i-ii, q 4, a 5, rep 1 632c-634b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 51, a 4 15a-d; q 63, a 4 65d-66c; q 68 87c-96c; q 79, a 3, ans and rep
i 158a-d; qq 109-114 338a-378a,c; part ii-ii, q 2, aa 3-4 392d394b; part
in, q 2, a 10 720c-721b; qq 7-8 745c-763b; q 10, a 4, rep 2 771b-772a; q
62 858b-864c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xi
[130]
68d-69a; xxx 99b-100d; paradise, vii
[16-120] 115b-116b; xxxn [40-87] 155a-c
22  Chaucer:  Parson  s  Tale, par 13 504b-505a; par 19, 508a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,   part  hi,  192c-193c;  part  iv,  250c-251b;  253b-254a  25
Montaigne: Essays, 212a-215a; 267c-268a; 294a-b 31 Descartes: Objections
and Replies, 125c-126a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[1024-1033]
133b; bk in
[56-415]
136b-144b esp
[130134] 138a, [227-238] 140b; bk xi [1-21] 299ab;
[251-262]
304b-305a / Samson Agonistes
[356-372] 347b
33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 29b; 147b; 155b / Pensees, 434 248a-250a;
520-525  263b-264a;  643-646  290b-291b;  670  295a-b;  675  296b297a 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 38d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 238b 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  History,  part  iv,  354a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c passim For: Terms or discussions relevant to the conception of
the  nature  of  a thing as its essence, see Being 8c-8e; Definition ia;
Form  2c(2),  3c;  Idea  40(3);  One  and  Many 30-30(1); Same and Other
3a~3a(i).  Terms  or discussions relevant to the conception of nature as
the  totality  of  things  or  as  the  whole  of  sensible reality, see
Experience i; God ii; One and Many ib; World 3-3 b. Other considerations
of  the  distinction  between nature and art, see Art 2a-2c, 9a; and for
the  distinction  between  the natural and the conventional in language,
law, and justice, see Custom and Convention 1; Justice 6b, 10a; Language
2a-2b; Law 2, 4/; Sign and Symbol ia-if; Slavery 2, 3.

[283a]
For:  The distinction between the state of nature and the state of civil
society,  and  for  the problem of the naturalness of the family and the
state,  see  Family  i;  Law  4b;  Liberty ib; Necessity and Contingency
5b~5d;  State i-ia, 3D-3C; War and Peace i. Another consideration of the
distinction   between  nature  and  nurture,  see  Habit  1,  3d.  Other
treatments  of  natural  and  violent  motion,  see Change 7b; Mechanics
^(2)-^{.  The  distinction  between  the natural, the voluntary, and the
free,  see  Cause  3;  Liberty 4b; Will 3a(i)-3a(2), 6c. The distinction
between  the  natural  and the supernatural, see God 6b-6c(4), 10; Habit
Discussions bearing on the rationality or order of nature, see Mind 10a;
Relation  5b;  World  6c;  and  for the special problem of continuity or
hierarchy  in  the  order of nature, see Animal ib-ic; Evolution 4a, 4c;
Life  and  Death 2, 3a; Man ia, ic; World 6b. The reign of causality and
the  uniformity  of  nature,  see  Chance  2a;  Fate  5;  Necessity  and
Contingency  3c; Will 5c; and for the problem of final causes in nature,
see Cause 6. Other considerations of divine causality in relation to the
order  of  nature,  see  Cause  7b~7d; God 7e. Nature in relation to the
various  sciences,  see  Metaphysics  2a,  3b; Philosophy 2a-2b; Physics
i-ib;  Science  3a; Truth 2c. The nature of man as a standard in ethics,
economics,  and  politics,  see Citizen 8; Democracy 4b; Desire 3a; Good
and  Evil 3a; Necessity and Contingency 5e; Slavery 2d, 3d; State 3b(i);
Wealth  10b.  The  theological  discussion  of nature and grace in human
life,  see  God 7d; Habit 5e(i); Happiness 7a; Man ob(i)-Qb(2) ; Sin 3a,
3c,  7;  Virtue  and Vice 8b. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works
not  included  in  Great  Books ofthe Western World, but relevant to the
idea  and  topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided
into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas. Maimonides. The Guide for the Perplexed,
part  ii,  ch  17,  19-20  Epictetus.  The  Manital  Bruno, De la causa,
principio,  e  uno  Augustine. On Nature and Grace Suarez. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xxxiv,  xliii  Aquinas.  Summa Contra Gentiles, bk hi, ch
99-103  (4),  xlvii  (2) Rousseau. Eloisa (La nouvelle Heloise) Boyle. A
Free  Inquiry into the Vulgarly Received Kant. Prolegomena to Any Future
Metaphysic,  par  Notion of Nature 14-39 Leibnitz. Philosophical Worlds,
ch  4 (Extractfrom a Goethe. Zur Natur- und Wissenschaftslehre Letter to
Bayle) Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind, v, a (a) J. Butler. The Analogy
of  Religion  J.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of  Logic, bk hi, ch 12-14, 22 >
Voltaire.  "Nature,"  in  A  Philosophical  Diction24 ary . "Nature," in
Three  Essays on Religion . The Ignorant Philosopher, ch 36 Tolstoy. The
Cossacks  .  The Study of Nature Engels. Dialectics of Nature Schelling.
Ideen zu einer Philosophie der Natur II. Chateaubriand. Rene Wordsworth.
Tintern  Abbey  Epicurus.  Letter  to  Herodotus  .  Michael Erigena. De
Divisione Naturae . The Prelude

[283b]
Chapter 60: NATURE 249

[284a]
250  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea, vol hi,
sup,  ch  23  Emerson.  Nature  Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive
Sciences, vol 1, bk x, ch 3 Thoreau. A Wee\ on the Concord and Merrimac\
Rivers  .  Walden Tyndall. The Belfast Address Lotze. Microcosmos, bk i,
ch  1-2; bk iv, ch 1-3 . Logic, bk 11, ch 8 . Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 7-8
C.  S.  Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 88-101, 395-427 Nietzsche.
The  Will  to Power, bk hi (2) Frazer. The Golden Bough, part i, ch 3-6;
part  vii, ch 13 Bradley. Appearance and Reality, bk i, ch 11-12; bk 11,
ch  13-15,  22 Ward. Naturalism and Agnosticism Royce. The World and the
Individual,  series  ii  (5) C. Read. The Metaphysics of Nature Berg son.
Creative  Evolution,  ch  3  B.  Russell.  Philosophical  Essays,  ch  2
Henderson. The Order of Nature

[284b]
Dewey'.  "Nature  and  Its  Good,  A  Conversation," in The Influence of
Darwin  on  Philosophy  . Experience and Nature, ch 3-7, 9 Bridgman. The
Logic  of  Modern  Physics,  ch  4  Eddington. The Nature ofthe Physical
World,  ch 13 Lenzen. The Nature of Physical Theory, part ii Levy-Bruhl.
Primitives  and  the Supernatural Santayan a. Reason in Common Sense, ch
3-5 . Scepticism and Animal Faith, ch 22 . The Genteel Tradition at Bay,
ch 2-3 Maritain. The Degrees of Knowledge, ch 3 Lovejoy. The Great Chain
of  Being,  ch  10 Collingwood. The Idea of Nature Planck. "The Unity of
the  Physical  Universe,"  in  A  Survey  of Physics . The Philosophy of
Physics,  ch  2  Whitehead.  The Concept of Nature, ch 1-2 . Process and
Reality,  part  ii,  ch  3-4  .  Adventures  of Ideas, ch 7-8 . Modes of
Thought,  lect  vii-viii  Sherrington.  Man  on  His Nature, 1-11, xii W
toodbridge.  An  Essay  on  Nature  Kelsen. Society and Nature Cassirer.
Substance and Function, part ii, ch 6 The Myth of the State, part ii (9)
Von Weizsacker. The History of Nature

[285a]
Chapter  61: NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY INTRODUCTION THE basic meaning of
the words necessity and contingency is made known to us by the fact that
we  can  substitute  for them the familiar words must and may. "Is there
any  being  which must exist?" asks the same question as, "Does anything
exist  of  necessity?"  "Are all things of the sort which may or may not
exist,  or  are they divided into those which must exist and those which
may  or  may not exist?" means the same as, "Is everything contingent in
being  or  do  some things exist necessarily and some contingently}" The
great   issues  which  involve  the  opposition  between  necessity  and
contingency  are  concerned  with  more  than  questions  about being or
existence. They also deal with cause and effect, judgment and reasoning,
happenings  or  events,  the actions and decisions of men, human history
and social institutions. In each case, the problem is formulated by such
questions  as: Does everything which happens in nature or history happen
necessarily  ?  Is  everything contingent ? Or are some events necessary
and  others  contingent  ?  Is  the  relation between cause and effect a
necessary   connection,   or   do  some  causes  produce  their  effects
contingently  ?  Are  there some propositions which the mind must affirm
because their truth is necessary? Or are all propositions such that they
may  or  may  not  be  true,  our  affirmation  or  denial of them being
contingent  upon  factors which lie outside the propositions themselves?
In  reasoning,  does  the conclusion always follow by necessity from the
premises  if  it  follows  at all ? And are all conclusions which follow
necessarily  from  their  premises  necessarily  true,  or  may  some be
necessary truths and some contingent ? Are men necessitated in all their
acts,  or are certain actions contingent upon the exercise of their will
and in this sense free? Does human liberty consist merely in the freedom
of a 251

[285b]
man's  action  from the external necessity of coercion or constraint; or
does  it  consist  in  a man's being able to choose whatever he chooses,
freely  rather  than  necessarily?  Is every act of the will necessarily
determined,  or  are  some  acts  of  the  will acts of free choice? Are
certain  human institutions, such as the family and the state, necessary
?  Are  men  compelled  to live socially or can they choose the solitary
life?  If  domestic and political society are necessary, are the ways in
which  they are organized also necessary, or are such things as monogamy
in  the  family and monarchy in the state contingent? Are such things as
war, slavery, poverty, and crime necessary features of human society, or
are  they the result of circumstances which are contingent and which can
therefore  be  remedied?  These  questions indicate the range of subject
matters  in  which  issues  are  raised concerning the necessary and the
contingent.  They  also indicate that the other ideas to which necessity
and contingency have relevance are too manifold to permit an enumeration
of  all  the  other  chapters  in  which  some  aspect  of necessity and
contingency is discussed. This chapter stands to the others as a kind of
summary  of  the theme of necessity and contingency. It assembles in one
place   the   various   topics,   problems,  or  subject  matters  which
traditionally  engage the human mind with that theme. Two chapters alone
demand  specific mention as, in a sense, being concerned with ideas that
seem  to  be  inseparable from the notions of necessity and contingency.
They  are  Fate  and Chance. Though they stand opposed to one another as
the  necessary to the contingent, they do not cover every application of
this   opposition.   They  are  largely  concerned  with  necessity  and
contingency  in  the  realm of change, in the causation of the events of
na-

[286a]
252 THE GREAT IDEAS ture or the happenings of history. They do not deal,
at  least  not  directly,  with  necessity  and  contingency in being or
existence,   in   thought   or  knowledge,  in  human  acts  and  social
institutions. The necessary and the contingent do not seem to be opposed
in exactly the same way in each of the four areas—namely, being, change,
thought,  and  action—in which they raise basic issues. In the sphere of
human  action,  for  example,  writers  like  Hobbes,  Locke,  and  Hume
substitute  the  notion  of  liberty  for contingency as the opposite of
necessity.  The  meaning  of  necessity  alters in consequence. Liberty,
according  to  these  authors, implies the absence not of all necessity,
but  only  of  external necessity in the form of compulsion. An internal
necessity,  they  think, is quite compatible with complete freedom. Hume
therefore  dismisses the supposed conflict between liberty and necessity
as  groundless.  "By  liberty,"  he writes, "we can only mean a power of
acting or not acting, according to the determinations of the will', that
is,  if  we  choose  to remain at rest, we may; if we choose to move, we
also may. Now this hypothetical liberty is universally allowed to belong
to everyone who is not a prisoner and in chains Liberty, when opposed to
necessity,  not  to  constraint, is the same thing with chance; which is
universally  allowed  to  have  no  existence." Similarly, Locke defines
liberty  as a man's power "to do or forbear doing any particular action,
according  as  its doing or forbearance has the actual preference in the
mind,  which  is the same thing as to say, according as he himself wills
it."  Liberty  in this sense, he adds, belongs not to the will, the acts
of  which  are necessitated by their causes, but to the man who is under
no external necessity, in the form of compulsion, to do what is contrary
to  his  will or to refrain from doing what he wills. Hobbes seems to go
even  further  along  the  same line of thought. Holding that liberty is
destroyed only by external impediments to action, he uses "necessity" in
a  sense which makes it consistent with liberty, or inseparable from it.
"The  actions  which men voluntarily do," he says, "because they proceed
from their

[286b]
will,  proceed  from  liberty; and yet, because every act of man's will,
and  every  desire,  and inclination, proceeds from some cause, and that
from  another  cause,  in  a continual chain (whose first link is in the
hand of God, the first of all causes), they proceed from necessity." Yet
if  what  Hobbes  means  by  "external  impediments" represents the same
nullification  of liberty which others call "compulsion" or "restraint,"
then  there  is at least one meaning of "necessity" which stands opposed
to  liberty. Enumerating the meanings of "necessary," Aristotle lists as
one  sense  "the  compulsory  or compulsion, i.e., that which impedes or
tends  to hinder, that which is contrary to impulse or purpose ... or to
the  movement which accords with purpose and with reasoning." It is in a
related  sense  that  Plato opposes necessity to intelligence. Necessity
represents  for  him those resistant factors in nature which the mind of
man  or God must overcome, or persuade to give way, if reason or purpose
is  to prevail in the coming to be of anything. In this sense, necessity
like chance is opposed to purpose. Blind necessity and blind chance both
exclude the operation of final causes; both exclude the possibility that
the  events  of nature are directed toward an end. We seem to have found
almost universal agreement on the point that there is one sense in which
necessity conflicts with liberty. But this agreement does not affect the
issue whether liberty is more than freedom from external coercion. There
are  those,  like Aquinas, who think that man's will is free in its acts
of  choice  with regard to "particular contingent means." Aquinas agrees
that  what is called "necessity of coercion" is "altogether repugnant to
the  will." The same act cannot be absolutely coerced and voluntary. But
the  question  is  whether the will's acts are necessarily determined by
causes operating within the sphere of the will itself. Aquinas names two
modes  of  necessity  which  operate  within  the sphere of the will and
restrict  its freedom. One is the natural necessity that the will should
desire an ultimate end, such as the complete good or happiness. If a man
wills any object at all as the ultimate goal of his life, he cannot will
anything  other  or  less  than  that  which can satisfy all his natural
desires. The

[287a]
other  necessity is that which concerns the use of those means which are
absolutely  indispensable  conditions for reaching the end being sought.
This  may  be  an  absolute  or a condttional necessity. When the end is
itself necessary (e.g., happiness), whatever means are necessary thereto
necessitate  the  will  absolutely. When a certain end is not necessary,
but has been freely adopted (e.g., a certain destination), and when only
one  means  is  available  (e.g.,  one  mode of transportation), then it
becomes   necessary   to  choose  that  means.  But  this  necessity  is
conditional  since  it  remains  in  force only on the condition that we
continue  to  have a certain end in view—an end we can relinquish at any
time  as  freely  as  we adopted it. According to Aquinas, this leaves a
great  many  acts of the will which are in no way necessitated: those in
which  there  is  no  necessary connection between the means and a given
end, and those in which a given means is necessary only on the condition
that  a  certain  end is sought. If the end need not be sought, then the
will  is  free not to choose the means of achieving it; and if, when the
end  is  necessarily  sought,  alternative means are available, then the
will  is  free  to  choose  one  rather  than another. According to this
theory,  liberty consists in the absence of internal as well as external
necessity.  Furthermore,  liberty  seems  to  be  related  positively to
contingency,  insofar  as  freedom  of  choice  depends  on a contingent
connection  between  means  and  ends, or upon the contingent, i.e., the
conditional,  character  of  the  end. On the other hand, those who hold
that  the will is never free from internal necessity insist that the act
of  choice,  even with respect to contingent means, is always caused. If
being  caused  is  equivalent  to being determined—which seems to be the
view of Hobbes, Locke, and Hume— then whether or not we know what causes
a  particular choice, our wills are so determined that we could not have
chosen  otherwise. The problem of the freedom of the will in relation to
the  causes  which  determine  its  acts is considered in the chapter on
Will. The foregoing discussion suffices here for the purpose of throwing
light on the meaning of necessity.

[287b]
Chapter  61:  NECESSITY  AND  CONTINGENCY 253 If now we shift from human
action to the realm of becoming, change, or motion, we face the question
of  the  relation  between  necessity  and causation in its most general
form.  In the realm of nature the alternatives to necessity are referred
to   as  "chance"  and  as  "contingency."  The  significance  of  these
alternatives  depends  on  the  theory  of  causation.  According to one
opinion, every effect is necessarily determined by its causes, and every
cause  necessarily  produces  certain effects. Given the causal chain of
past events leading up to the present, every future event is necessarily
determined.  Nothing  that  ever happens could happen otherwise. Nothing
happens   contingently  or  by  chance.  This  theory  of  causation  is
accordingly a doctrine of universal necessity or absolute determinism in
the  realm  of  change.  "In  nature," writes Spinoza, "there is nothing
contingent,  but  all  things  are  determined from the necessity of the
divine  nature  to  exist  and  act in a certain manner." Though nothing
which  exists  or  happens  is  contingent,  "God  alone exists from the
necessity of His own nature and acts alone from the necessity of His own
nature."  The divine necessity is therefore different from the necessity
of  everything  else  which  follows  from the divine nature. One is the
necessity  of  freedom or self-determination, the other the necessity of
compulsion,  or  determination  by another. "That thing is called free,"
says  Spinoza, "which exists from the necessity of its own nature alone,
and  is  determined  to action by itself alone. That thing, on the other
hand,  is  called  necessary,  or  rather compelled, which by another is
determined  to  existence  and action in a fixed and prescribed manner."
Hume's  statement  that there is "no such thing as Chance in the world,"
would  appear  to  agree  with Spinoza's denial of contingency. But Hume
also  seems  to  deny the perception of any necessary connection between
cause  and  effect. This is not to say that events happen without cause,
but only that "our ignorance of the real cause of any event has the same
influence   on   the  understanding"  as  if  nothing  were  necessarily
determined by its causes. "We are never able," Hume thinks, "to discover
any power or necessary connexion, any quality, which binds the effect to
the cause,

[288a]
254 THE GREAT IDEAS and renders the one an infallible consequence of the
other. . . . One event follows another; but we never can observe any tie
between  them. They seem conjoined, but never connected. . . . Our idea,
therefore,   of   necessity  and  causation  arises  entirely  from  the
uniformity observable in the operations of nature, where similar objects
are  constantly conjoined together, and the mind is determined by custom
to   infer  the  one  from  the  appearance  of  the  other.  These  two
circumstances  form  the  whole  of  that necessity, which we ascribe to
matter.  Beyond  the  constant  conjunction  of similar objects, and the
consequent  inference  from  one  to the other, we have no notion of any
necessity  or  connexion." But the question remains whether in the order
of  nature itself particular events are necessarily determined or happen
contingently.  The fact that we may be ignorant of real necessities does
not, as Hume seems to admit, imply their non-existence. Our saying it is
only probable that the sun will rise tomorrow may reflect our inadequate
knowledge  of  causes  rather  than a real indeterminacy in the order of
nature.  On the other hand, to say as Hume does that chance has no place
in  nature,  may  mean  only that "nothing exists without a cause of its
existence,"  rather than that whatever happens is necessarily determined
by its causes. As indicated in the chapter on Chance, two things must be
distinguished   here:   the  absolutely  uncaused—  the  spontaneous  or
fortuitous  and  the contingently caused, or that which depends upon the
coincidence  of a number of independent causes. A given condition may be
necessary  to  produce  a certain result, as, for example, oxygen may be
necessary for combustion. But by itself it may not be sufficient for the
production of that effect. If the maxim, "nothing exists without a cause
of  its  existence,"  requires a cause or causes adequate to produce the
effect,  then  the  maxim  is  equivalent to the principle of sufficient
reason. Whenever two or more causes, each of which may be necessary, are
not  sufficient  in separation, the existence of the effect depends upon
their  combination;  and  the  effect  is  contingent  if  the  required
combination of causes is itself not necessarily caused.

[288b]
The issue concerning contingency in nature thus seems to be more sharply
stated  when  there  is  no  reference  to our knowledge or ignorance of
causes.  On  this issue, Aristotle and Spinoza appear to be more clearly
opposed  to  one  another  than Hume is to either. If things do not take
place  of  necessity, "an event," according to Aristotle, "might just as
easily  not  happen  as happen; for the meaning of the word 'fortuitous'
with  regard  to  present  or  future  events  is  that  reality  is  so
constituted that it may issue in either of two opposite directions." For
example,  "a sea-fight must either take place tomorrow or not, but it is
not  necessary  that  it  should  take  place  tomorrow,  neither  is it
necessary  that  it  should  not take place, yet it is necessary that it
either should or should not take place tomorrow." Though Aristotle holds
that "one of the two propositions in such instances must be true and the
other  false,"  he  also  insists that "we cannot say determinately that
this  or  that  is  false,  but  must  leave the alternative undecided."
Aristotle's  view  with  regard  to propositions about future particular
events is that our judgments cannot be either true or false, not because
of  insufficient  knowledge  on our part, but because future particulars
are  in themselves always contingent. Nothing in the nature of things or
causes—existent  in the past or present — necessarily determines them to
happen.  They  will occur only if independent causes happen to coincide.
Since  these  causes  are  independent  not determined to combination by
their  natures—  the  coincidence  will  be  a  matter of chance, not of
necessity.  This  theory of contingency in the realm of change—involving
an  affirmation  of  the  real  existence  of  contingent events— raises
problems  for  the  theologian concerning God's knowledge and will. Does
the fact that nothing happens contrary to God's will imply that whatever
happens  happens  necessarily  ?  Aquinas  answers  that "God wills some
things  to  be  done necessarily, some contingently. . . . Therefore, to
some  effects, He has attached necessary causes that cannot fail; but to
others  defectible  and  contingent  causes, from which arise contingent
effects  ...  it  being  His will that they should happen contingently."
Similarly, the fact that God knows all things

[289a]
infallibly  does  not  seem  to Aquinas to be inconsistent with the real
contingency of some things. He explains that "whoever knows a contingent
effect  in  its causes only, has -merely a conjectural knowledge of it."
But  "God  knows  all  contingent  things  not only as they are in their
causes,  but also as each one of them is actually in itself. . . . Hence
it  is  manifest  that  contingent  things  are infallibly known by God,
inasmuch as they are subject to the divine sight in their presentiality;
yet  they are future contingent things in relation to their own causes."
This   has  a  bearing  on  the  difference  between  human  and  divine
apprehension  of  future contingent things. "Things reduced to actuality
in  time,"  Aquinas declares, "are known by us successively in time, but
by  God  they  are  known in eternity, which is above time. Whence to us
they  cannot  be certain, since we know future contingent things only as
contingent   futures;   but   they  are  certain  to  God  alone,  Whose
understanding  is  in eternity above time. Just as he who goes along the
road  does  not  see  those  who come after him; whereas he who sees the
whole  road  from  a  height  sees  at  once all those travelling on it.
Hence,"  Aquinas continues, "what is known by us must be necessary, even
as  it is in itself; for what is in itself a future contingent cannot be
known by us. But what is known by God must be necessary according to the
mode  in  which  it  is  subject  to  the divine knowledge . . . but not
absolutely  as  considered  in  its  proper causes." It does not follow,
therefore,  that  everything  known by God must necessarily be; for that
statement,  according  to  Aquinas,  "may  refer  to the thing or to the
saying.  If  it  refers  to  the thing, it is divided and false; for the
sense  is, Everything which God knows is necessary. If understood of the
saying,  it  is  composite and true, for the sense is, This proposition,
'that  which  is  known  by God is,' is necessary." With regard to human
knowledge,  Aquinas  makes another distinction in answering the question
whether  man  can  have  scientific  or  certain knowledge of contingent
things.  If,  as  Aristotle  seems to hold, the objects of knowledge are
necessary,  not contingent things, then the realm of contingency belongs
to opinion, conjecture, or probability. Insofar as the particular events
of nature are contingent, they

[289b]
Chapter   61:  NECESSITY  AND  CONTINGENCY  255  cannot  be  objects  of
scientific  knowledge. But, according to Aquinas, "contingent things can
be  considered  in  two ways: either as contingent or as containing some
element  of  necessity, since every contingent thing has in it something
necessary;  for example, that Socrates runs is in itself contingent; but
the relation of running to motion is necessary, for it is necessary that
Socrates moves if he runs." The contingency that Socrates may or may not
run  does  not alter the hypothetical necessity that if he runs, he must
move.  In  its  concern  with  contingent  things,  natural  science  is
concerned only with such hypothetical necessities. Unlike physics, other
sciences  may deal with absolutely necessary things. That the objects of
mathematics  are of this sort seems to be an opinion shared by James and
Kant,  Hume and Descartes, Plato and Aristotle. But they do not agree on
whether  the  necessities  of mathematics belong to reality or have only
ideal  existence,  i.e.,  whether  they  exist apart from or only in the
human  mind. This issue is connected with another major issue concerning
necessity  and  contingency,  namely,  whether any reality has necessary
existence.  As we have seen, those who discuss necessity and contingency
in  the  domain  of human acts and natural events seem to construe these
alternatives  differently, according as they conceive liberty and chance
in  terms  of  different  theories of causation. With regard to being or
real existence, however, there seems to be a common understanding of the
alternatives,  even  among  those  who  do not agree that God alone is a
necessary being because they think that this world is also determined to
exist  as  a  necessary consequence of God's existence. In the preceding
discussions,  one  meaning  of  contingency has repeatedly appeared. The
contingent  is  that  which  can  be  otherwise.  "That  which cannot be
otherwise  is  necessarily  as  it is," writes Aristotle, "and from this
sense  of  'necessary' all its other meanings are somehow derived." This
insight is sometimes expressed by the statement that the opposite of the
necessary  is  the  impossible,  whereas the contingent—which is neither
necessary  nor  impossible  —includes contrary possibilities. In logical
analysis what is called the "modal-

[290a]
256  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ity of necessity" is attributed to judgments the
contradictories   of   which   are   self-contradictory;  e.g.,  if  the
proposition  'the whole is not greater than any of its parts' represents
an impossible judgment, then the contradictory proposition 'the whole is
greater  than  any  of  its  parts'  represents a necessary judgment. In
contrast, as Hume points out, "that the sun will not rise tomorrow is no
less  intelligible a proposition, and implies no more contradiction than
the  affirmation  that  it  will rise." These two propositions represent
contrary  possibilities. Xo matter which turns out to be true, the event
could  have  been otherwise. In logical analysis some complication seems
to  arise  from  the  fact  that  the  necessary  has two opposites: the
impossible on the one hand, and the possible or contingent on the other.
This  is  usually  clarified by the recognition that the possible is the
opposite of the impossible as well as of the necessary. In that sense of
"possible"  which  excludes  only  the  impossible, the necessary is, of
course,  possible,  for  what  is necessary cannot be impossible. But in
that  sense  of  "possible"  which  implies  contrary possibilities, the
possible  excludes  the  necessary  as well as the impossible. "From the
proposition 'it may be' it follows," according to Aristotle, "that it is
not  impossible,  and  from that it follows that it is not necessary; it
comes  about therefore that the thing which must necessarily be need not
be; which is absurd. But again, the proposition 'it is necessary that it
should  be'  does  not follow from the proposition 'it may be,' nor does
the  proposition  'it  is  necessary  that  it  should  not be.' For the
proposition 'it may be' implies a two-fold possibility, while, if either
of  the  two  former  propositions  is  true,  the  twofold  possibility
vanishes.  For  if  a  thing  may  be,  it may also not be, but if it is
necessary  that  it  should  be or that it should not be, one of the two
alternatives   will   be  excluded.  It  remains,  therefore,  that  the
proposition 'it is not necessary that it should not be' follows from the
proposition  'it  may  be.'  For  this  is  true also of that which must
necessarily be." Of the same thing we can say that it may be and that it
may  not be; but we cannot say of the same thing both that it may be and
that it mast be, or that it mav not be and that it cannot be.

[290b]
As  Aristotle  traces the implications of these modes of 'to be,' we see
that may-be implies may-not-be, which contradicts must-be; and similarly
that  may-not-be  implies  may-be,  which contradicts cannot-be. When we
pass from the analysis of propositions or judgments to the consideration
of being or existence, the situation is simpler. Since the impossible is
that which cannot exist, whatever does exist must either be necessary or
possible.  Here  the necessary and the possible are generally understood
to  exclude  one another. The necessary is that which cannot not be, the
possible that which can not be. In spite of this common understanding of
the  alternatives,  there are basic differences among the authors of the
great  books  in  regard  to  the analysis or demonstration of necessary
being.  Aristotle,  for example, tends to identify the possible with the
perishable—with  that which both comes into being and passes away. Those
substances  are  necessarv,  in  contrast,  which  are  not  subject  to
generation  and  corruption.  Holding  that  the matter of the celestial
bodies  differs  from  that  of  terrestrial  bodies with respect to the
potentiality  for  substantial  change,  Aristotle  seems  to regard the
heavenly  bodies  as  necessary  beings,  eternal in the sense of always
existing,  even  though  changeable in regard to place, i.e., subject to
local  motion.  The  changing things of this earth are all contingent in
being,  for  the mutability to which their matter inclines them includes
coming   to  be  and  passing  away.  This  analysis  of  necessity  and
contingency  in  terms  of  matter's  potentialities  leads  to  another
conception  of  necessary being— that of a totally immutable being which
has  necessary  existence because it lacks matter entirely and, since it
consists  of  form alone, is purely actual. Whether or not there are for
Aristotle  substances  other  than  the  prime mover which are necessary
because they are immaterial beings, he attributes pure actuality only to
that  one  necessary  being  which is an unmoved mover. Aquinas seems to
adopt  both  of  Aristotle's  senses of "necessary being." He treats the
celestial  bodies  and the angels as having necessity to the extent that
they  are immutable. But their immutability is limited in his opinion to
the

[291a]
fact  that they are by nature imperishable— the celestial bodies because
of  their  matter;  the  angels because they are simple substances, not^
composed  of  matter  and  form. Since they are creatures they cannot be
altogether  immutable.  "All  creatures,"  Aquinas  writes, "before they
existed,  were  possible"—and  in this sense contingent as regards their
being,  not necessary. "As it was in the Creator's power to produce them
before  they existed in themselves," he continues, "so likewise is it in
the  Creator's  power  when  they  exist  in themselves to bring them to
nothing."  Furthermore,  at  every  moment  of  their  existence,  their
contingent  being depends upon God's power. God preserves them in being,
Aquinas  says, "by ever giving them existence," for "if He took away His
action from them, all things would be reduced to nothing." In the strict
sense  then  of  "necessary  being,"  no  creature,  but  only  God, the
uncreated  being,  is  truly  a  necessary  being—  because in God alone
existence  is identical with essence. Only a being whose very essence it
is to exist is incapable of not existing; only such a being is necessary
in  the  sense  of  being  purely  actual.  All  created  things must be
contingent,  for  if  in  their  case  to  exist  belonged to their very
natures,  God  could  not  have created them by causing their natures to
exist,  nor  when they did exist would His power be necessary to sustain
them  in  being.  Where  Aquinas defines God's necessity in terms of the
identity  of  essence  and  existence,  Descartes  and  Spinoza  tend to
conceive God as necessary because his essence is such that his existence
follows  from it. The difference may affect the meaning with which it is
said  that God is uncaused or that God is self-caused. "If its existence
is  caused," Aquinas writes, "nothing can be the sufficient cause of its
own existence." According to Descartes, to say that God is "cause of His
own  existence . . . merely means that the inexhaustible power of God is
the cause or reason why he needs no cause." Descartes' position seems to
be  that  that which is self-caused in the sense of having its existence
determined  by  its own nature or essence, is also uncaused in the sense
that   its   existence   is  not  caused  by  anything  outside  itself.
"Existence," he writes, "is involved in the

[291b]
Chapter  61: NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 257 essence of an infinite being,
no  less than the equality of its angles to two right angles is involved
in  that  of  a  triangle." But though this suggests the notion of God's
existence  following  from His essence, Descartes also says that "in God
existence  is  not  distinguished  from For Descartes as for Aquinas the
basic  point  remains that that which does not depend for its being upon
any   external   cause,   exists  necessarily.  Descartes,  furthermore,
associates  the  necessary  existence  of an independent being with that
being's  infinity  or  perfection  of nature. That which is conceived as
infinite  or  perfect  cannot  be  conceived  as lacking existence. "The
notion  of  possible or contingent existence," he says, "belongs only to
the  concept  of a limited thing." Like Descartes, Spinoza conceives God
as the only infinite and immutable being which exists necessarily in the
sense  of  being "that whose essence involves existence." But unlike him
Spinoza  also  attributes necessity in another sense to every finite and
mutable  thing  which God causes to exist; for in his view, God not only
exists necessarily but, acting from the necessity of His own nature, God
also  necessitates  whatever  follows as a consequence of His action. No
other  world  than  this is possible. "Things could be produced by God,"
Spinoza  writes,  "in no other manner and in no other order than that in
which  they have been produced." Furthermore, since whatever is in God's
power   "necessarily   follows   from   it,   and   consequently  exists
necessarily,"  it  is impossible for this world not to have existed. The
existence  of  this  particular  world  is  as  inseparable  from  God's
existence  as  God's  own  existence  is inseparable from His essence or
nature.  In  the  tradition  of  western  thought, there is, perhaps, no
deeper  theological  issue  than that which opposes the freedom of God's
will  to  the  necessity  of  God's  acting according to His nature; and
which,  in consequence, sets the possibility of other worlds (or even of
no  world  at  all)  against  the  necessity  that,  if God exists, this
particular  world  inevitably  follows.  Taking  the  other side on both
points,  Aquinas, for example, argues that "since the goodness of God is
perfect,  and  can  exist without other things inasmuch as no perfection
can

[292a]
258 THE GREAT IDEAS accrue to Him from them, it follows that His willing
things  apart  from  Himself  is  not  absolutely necessary." As for the
particular features of this world, Aquinas says that "since God does not
act  from  natural necessity" nor from a will that is "naturally or from
necessity  determined" to the things which exist, it follows that "in no
way  at  all  is  the  present course of events produced by God from any
necessity,  so  that  other things could not happen. . . . Wherefore, we
must  simply  say  that God can do other things than those He has done."
Other,  and  even  better, worlds than this are possible, for "God could
make  other  things,  or add something to the present creation; and then
there  would  be  another and a better universe." Nor does the Christian
theologian admit that the divine nature is subject to any necessity. "We
do not put the life of God or the foreknowledge of God under necessity,"
writes Augustine, "if we should say that it is necessary that God should
live  forever,  and  foreknow  all  things;  as  neither  is  His  power
diminished  when  we say that He cannot die or fall into error— for this
is in such a way impossible to Him, that if it were possible for Him, He
would  be  of less power. But assuredly He is rightly called omnipotent,
though  He  can  neither  die  nor  fall  into  error.  For He is called
omnipotent  on account of His doing what He wills, not on account of His
suffering  what He wills not; for if that should befall him, He would by
no means be omnipotent. Wherefore, He cannot do some things for the very
reason  that He is omnipotent." One other traditional issue is raised by
the  conception  of  God as a necessary being; or, more strictly, as the
only  necessary  being  in  the  sense of having a nature which involves
existence.  It  is  formed  by opposite views of the validity of the so-
called  "ontological"  or  a  priori  argument for God's existence. Both
Descartes  and  Spinoza  argue, like Anselm and others before them, that
since  God cannot be conceived as not existing, it is impossible in fact
for  God  not to exist. Those who reject such reasoning do not deny that
it  is  unintelligible  or  self-contradictory to think of God as merely
possible rather than necessary,

[292b]
i.e.,  as requiring a cause outside Himself in order to exist. Kant, for
example, admits that existence must be included in the conception of God
as  ens realissimum— the most real and perfect being. But he denies that
the  real existence of the object so conceived is implied by the logical
necessity  of  the  conception itself. This amounts to saying that it is
possible  for  a  being  we  cannot  conceive except as existing, not to
exist.  Aquinas  seems to make the same critical point when he says that
even  if  everyone  understood  by  the  word "God" something than which
nothing  greater  can  be  conceived,  and therefore a being necessarily
existing,  still  it would not follow that "he understands that what the
word  signifies  actually exists, but only mentally." Stated in its most
general  form, the problem is whether that which is inconceivable by the
human  mind is impossible in reality; or whether that which is logically
necessary,  or  necessary  in  thought,  is  also  necessary  in fact or
existence.  However  that issue is resolved, it must be noted that among
the  so-called  a  posteriori  demonstrations  of  God's  existence,  or
arguments  from  the  existence  of  certain effects to the existence of
their  cause,  one  mode of reasoning turns upon the distinction between
contingent  and  necessary  being.  (/"contingent beings exist (as it is
evident  they  do,  from  the  mutability  and perishability of physical
things),  and  if  each  contingent  being is by definition incapable of
causing  its own existence, and if one contingent being cannot cause the
existence  of  another, and if everything which exists must have a cause
for  its  existence, either in itself or in another; then from all these
premises it would seem to follow that a necessary being exists. Here the
conclusion  may  follow  with  logical  necessity from the premises, but
whether  it  is necessarily true depends upon the truth of the premises.
That in turn seems to depend upon the understanding of what it means for
anything  to  be contingent or necessary in being. It may also depend on
whether  or  not  the  reasoning  escapes  Kant's  criticism  of  all  a
posteriori  arguments  for  the  existence of a necessary being, namely,
that such reasoning always implicitly contains the ontological argument,
and is thereby invalidated.

[293a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  i.  The  meaning  of necessity and contingency: the
possible  and  the  impossible  260 2. Necessary and contingent being or
existence  261  2a.  The independent or unconditioned as the necessarily
existent:  the  uncaused  or  self-caused;  the  identity of essence and
existence  lb.  The argument for the existence of a necessary being: the
problem  of logical and ontological necessity ic. Mutability in relation
to  necessity  in being id. The necessary and contingent with respect to
properties, accidents, and modes 262 3. Necessity and contingency in the
realm  of change: chance and determinism 3a. The distinction between the
essential  and the accidental cause: the contingent 3b. The necessity of
contingent  events:  absolute and hypothetical or conditional necessity;
necessitation  by  efficient  or material and final or formal causes 3c.
The  grounds  of contingency in the phenomenal order: real indeterminacy
or  ignorance  of  causes  4.  Necessity and contingency in the realm of
thought 264 4#. The necessary as the domain of knowledge, the contingent
as  the  object of opinion: certainty, doubt, and probability; necessary
truths  /\b.  Practical necessity as a cause of belief 4<r. The truth of
judgments  concerning  future  contingents  4^.  Mathematical necessity:
necessity  in  the  objects of mathematics and in mathematical reasoning
4^.  Necessity  and  contingency in logical analysis (1) The modality of
propositions  or  judgments: modal opposition (2) Modality in reasoning:
the  logical  necessity of inference; the necessity and 5. Necessity and
contingency in human life and society 50. Liberty and necessity in human
conduct:   the   voluntary   and  the  compulsory  (2)  Categorical  and
hypothetical   imperatives   as   expressing  necessary  and  contingent
obligations  (3)  Human  freedom as knowledge or acceptance of necessity
5#.  The  necessity  of family and state: the contingency of their forms
and  institutions  5<r.  Necessity  and  contingency  in relation to the
natural  and conventional in law 267 <}d. The necessity or inevitability
of  slavery, poverty, war, or crime 5^. Economic necessities or luxuries
5/ Necessity and contingency in history 268

[293b]
Chapter  61:  NECESSITY  AND  CONTINGENCY  259  ^~"^ PAGE contingency of
premises and conclusions 265

[294a]
260  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or passage cited. The meaning of necessity and contingency: the possible
and  the  impossible  7  Plato: Cratylus, 103d-104a / Timaeus, 455c456a;
459d; 465d-466a 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d; ch 13 33d-35c
/  Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch 13 48a49a / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch
ii [94^69] 129c-d / Topics, bk ii, ch 6
[ii2b i-2i]
157d-158a  /  Physics,  bk  ii, ch 4-6 272c-275a; bk in, ch 4 [203^5-29]
281d / Heavens, bk i, ch 11
[28i a2]-CH
12 [283^2] 372c-375d; bk a 95 ii, ch 5 [287^2-26] 379b; ch 8
[289^2-28]
381b / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5 535c-536a; ch 12
[1019^3-33] 541a; bk ix, ch 3 [1047
24-29] 572c; ch 4 572d-573a; ch 8 [1049^318] 575b; bk xi, ch 8
[io65 a6-b4]
593b-d;  bk xii, ch 7 [io72b4-i4] 602c-d 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals,
ch 4
[699b
i2-700a5] 234d-235a / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 19
[i392a8-i393 a
9] 639c-640c 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr viii, ch 4-5, 203a-c / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  viit, ch 9, 347a-b 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch  35  653b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 2, a 3, ans
12c-14a;  q  14,  a  8,  rep  2  82c-83b; a 9, ans and rep 3 83b-d; a 13
86d-88c; q 19, a 3 esp rep 4 HOb-110c; a 8 116a-d; q 22, a 2

[294b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. esp rep 4-5
128d-130d;  a 4 131c-132b; q 23, a 6 137d-138c; q 25, a 3, ans and rep 4
145b147a;  q  41, a 2, rep 5 218c-219d; a 4, rep 2 221c-222b; q 46, a i,
rep 1-2 250a-252d; q 79, a 9, rep 3 422b-423d; q 82, a i, ans 431d-432c;
q  86,  a  3, ans 463b-d; part i-ii, q 4, a 1, ans 629d-630b; q 10, a 4,
rep  3 665d-666a,c; q 13, a 6, ans 676c-677b; q 40, a 3, rep 2 794c-795a
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 112, a 3, ans and rep i
358a-d;  part  hi,  q  65,  a  4,  ans  and rep 1 883d-884a,c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  113b-c  31  Descartes:  Meditations, v, 93b-94c /
Objections  and  Replies, 112d-114c; 126b-127c; axiom x 132b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part i, def 7 355b; prop 33, s schol 1 367c-d; part iv, def 3-4
424a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 469 256a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vi-
vii  469d-478a;  sect  viii,  div  62-75  478b-485a  passim,  esp div 64
478d-479b,  div  72  483a-c,  div  75  484c-485a  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
85d-88a;  90c-91a;  95a-d;  107b-c; 129c-145c esp 130b-133c, 140b,d143a;
175c-d;  176d-177a; 179c-180c; 186a-b / Judgement, 550a-578a esp 550c-d,
552c-d, 555a-b, 564a-565b, 568a-c, 569a, 570c-575b; 603b-c

[295a]
Chapter  61:  NECESSITY  AND CONTINGENCY 2 to 2c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions, 162 143 b- 144c 53 James: Psychology, 301b-302a; 851a
2.  Necessary  and  contingent being or existence 2a. The independent or
unconditioned  as  the necessarily existent: the uncaused or selfcaused;
the  identity  of essence and existence Old Testament: Exodus, 3:13-14 7
Plato: Laws, bk x, 762b-765d 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[23*18-26]
35b-c / Physics, bk hi, ch 4 [203^5-29] 281d; bk vni, ch 5-6 340d-346b /
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5
[ioi5b9-i6] 536a; bk ix, ch 8 575b577a;
bk xii, ch 6-7 601b-603b esp ch 7
[io72b4-i3] 602c-d
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [483-634] 7a-8d 17 Plotinus: Sixth
Ennead,  tr viii, ch 7-21 345d-353d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
10  3b-c;  bk  vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  6  268d-269c;  ch  ii,  272c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 8
626c627a;  ch  32 633c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3,
ans  12c-14a;  q 3, a 4 16d-17c; a 6 18c19a; a 7, ans and rep i 19a-c; q
4, a 1, rep 3 20d-21b; a 2, ans and rep 3 21b-22b; a 3, rep 3 22b-23b; q
6,  a 3 29c-30b; q 8, a 1, ans 34d-35c; q 10, a 2, ans and rep 3 41d42c;
q  11,  a  4,  ans  49d-50b;  q 13, a ii, ans 73c-74b; q 14, a 13, rep i
86d-88c;  q  19,  a  3  110b-110c; q 28, a 2 158d-160a; q 50, a 2, rep 3
270a-272a; q 54, a i, ans 285a-d; a 3, rep 2 286c-287b; q 75, a 5, rep 4
382a383b;  part 1-11, q 3, a 7, ans 628a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  93,  a  4  218b-d;  part  hi,  q 3, a 2, rep 3 724a-c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv, 52d-53a / Meditations, 71d-72a; 73d; m
81d-89a;  v  93a96a esp 93b-95b / Objections and Replies, 108a115a,c esp
110c-112a,  112d-114c;  126b-127c;  def  viii  130d; postulate v 131b-c;
axiom  i  131d;  axiom  x  132b;  prop  i 132b-c; 158b162a; 217d-218a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, def i 355a; def 3 355b; def 6-8 355b-c; prop
5-1  i  356b-359b;  prop  14  359d-360a;  prop  17 362b-363c; prop 19-20
363c-364a;  prop  24  365a; prop 34 369a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 469 256a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  97b-c;  140b,d-145c;  153a;  164a-167a; 170d-171a;
177b-182b  esp  179c-182b;  186a-b; 205a / Practical Reason, 291a-292a /
Judgement,  587a-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a; part 1,
par 66, 29a / Philosophy of History, Intro, 156d-157b; 160c-d; 161c-162a

[295b]
261 2b. The argument for the existence of a necessary being: the problem
of  logical and ontological necessity 7 Plato: Laws, bk x, 758b-765d esp
762b-765d  8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch 1-6 334a346b / Metaphysics,
bk  ix,  ch  8  575b-577a;  bk  xii,  ch  6-7  601b-603b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  10  3b-c;  bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-23
48c-50c  / City of God, bk viii, ch 6 268d-269c / Christian Doctrine, bk
i, ch 8 626c-627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2 10c14a; q 8,
a  1  34d-35c;  q  19,  a  5,  rep 3 112d113c; q 44, a 1 238b-239a; q 65
339a-343c; q 104, aa 1-2 534c-537b 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale [3001-3016]
209a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 51d-53a / Meditations, 71d-72a;
73d;  in  81d-89a  esp  84a87a;  v  93a-96a esp 93b-95b / Objections and
Replies,  108a-114c; 126b-127c; def viii 130d; postulate v 131b-c; axiom
i  131d;  axiom  x 132b; prop i-ii 132b-c; 158b-162a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  def  i 355a; def 3 355b; def 7-8 355b-c; prop 5-1 1 356b-359b;
prop  19-20  363c-364a;  prop  34  369a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 469 256a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xvii, sect 17 172b-c; sect 20,
173a;  bk iv, ch x, sect 1-12 349c-352b esp sect 7 350d351a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  25-33  417d-419a esp sect 28-33 418b-419a; sect
146-149  442a-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi 497b503c passim,
esp div 115 503b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 85d-93c esp 87d-88c; 143a-145c;
152a-153c esp 153a; 177b-192d esp 177b-179c, 182c-185c, 190a-c; 205a-b /
Practical   Reason,   310d-311d;  334b-337a,c  /  Judgement,  568c-570a;
570c-571c;   600d-603d   esp  601d-602a;  606d-609b  esp  608a-609b  2c.
Mutability   in   relation   to   necessity   in   being   8  Aristotle:
Interpretation, ch 13
[23^8-26]
35b-c  /  Physics,  bk  viii,  ch  1-6  334a-346b  / Heavens, bk i, ch 3
360d-362a; bk ii, ch i 375b,d-376a; ch 5
[287b22-26] 379b / Generation and
Corruption, bk ii, ch ii 439c441a,c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5
[ioi5b9-i6]
536a; bk ix, ch 8 [i049b n-i8] 575b;
[io5ob
6-34] 576b-d; bk x, ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch 6
[io63 a i3-i6]
591b; bk xii, ch 6-7 601b603b; ch 8 [1073*24-39] 603c 17 Plotinus: Sixth
Ennead, tr viii, ch 9-10 347a-348a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
15-19 23a-24b; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c; bk xii, par 9
lOlb-c;  par 18-20 103a-d / City of God, bk viii, ch 6 268d269c; bk xii,
ch 15 351b-352d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 32 633c-d

[296a]
262 THE GREAT IDEAS (2. Necessary and contingent being or existence. 2c.
Mutability  in  relation  to  necessity  in  being.)  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3 12c-14a; q io, a 5 44b-45c; q 14, a 13, ans
and  rep 1 86d-88c; q 19, a 3, rep 4-5 110b-110c; a 8 116a-d; q 44, a i,
rep  2  238b239a;  q  50,  a  5  esp  rep  3 274b-275a; q 63, a 1, rep 2
325c-326c;  q  66,  a  2  345d-347b;  q 86, a 3 463b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  q  91, a 2 1017c-1020c 3 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, xiii
[5287] 126a-b
31  Descartes  :  Discourse,  part  iv,  52a-d  /  Meditations, in, 86b;
87b-88c; iv, 89b / Objections and Replies, 113c-114a; axiom x 132b; prop
hi,  133a;  158b-162a  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 1-2 355a; def 6-8
355b-c;  prop  6-8  356b-357d;  prop 11-13 358b-359d; prop 17 362b-363c;
prop 20, corol 2 364a; prop 24-29 365a-366c; prop 33 367b-369a; part ii,
axiom  i  373c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 74b-76c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  156d157c 2d. The necessary and contingent with respect
to  properties,  accidents,  and  modes  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  244b-246c 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[32b
4-14]  48b-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 4 lOOa-lOlb / Topics, bk v,
ch i 178b,d-179b; ch 3
[i3i b i9-37] 182b-c; bk
vi, ch 14
[151 s
32-b2] 206b-c / Physics, bk i, ch 3
[i86b i930]
261d; ch 4
[188*5-13]
263b; bk ii, ch 1
[i92b35-39]
269a; bk vii, ch 3
[246^-9]
329c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v, ch 30 547ad; bk vi, ch 2-3 548c-549d; bk
vii,  ch 12 561b-562a; bk x, ch 9 586a-c; bk xi, ch 8 593a-d; bk xiv, ch
6 625d-626d esp
[i093b
7-22]  626c-d  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i [449-482] 6c-7a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, ans 16d-17c; a 6 18c-19a; q
9,  a  2,  ans  39c40d;  q  54,  a  3, rep 2 286c-287b; q 77, a i, rep 5
399c-401b;  a  6,  ans  404c-405c;  q  86, a 3 463b-d; q ioi, a i, rep i
522c-523a;  part  1—11,  q 2, a 6, ans 619d-620d; q 7 651d655a passim; q
10,  a  i, rep 2 662d-663d; q 18, a 3, rep 2 695d-696b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 72, a 5, ans 115a-116b; part hi, q 2, a 2, ans
711d-712d  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 33 161b-d; aph 36-37
164a-169c 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 152d; 231a-b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  def 4-5 355b; prop 10, schol 358a-b; prop 15, demonst
360a;

[296b]
2d  to  3  prop  16,  demonst  362a; prop 19, DEMONST 363c-d; prop 20-29
363d-366c; prop 33 367b-369a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi
268b-283a  passim, esp sect 5 269b-d; bk iv, ch hi, sect 9-16 315c-317c;
ch vi, sect 5-16 332b-336d passim; ch xii, sect 9 360d361b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 75d-76a; 131c-d /Judgement, 566a-d; 580c-d 53 James: Psychology,
668a-671a  Necessity  and contingency in the realm of change: chance and
determinism 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[507-520]
45a-b 7 Plato: Republic, bk x, 438c-439a / Timaeus, 455c-456a; 465d-466a
/   Statesman,   587a-589c   /   Laws,  bk  x,  759d-765d  8  Aristotle:
Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch ii
[94
b26-95a  9] 129c-d / Topics, bk ii, ch 6 [ii2b i-2i] 157d158a / Physics,
bk ii, ch 6 [198^-13] 275a; ch 8
[i99a34-b i2] 276c-d; ch 9 277b-278a,c
/ Heavens, bk ii, ch 5
[287b22-26]
379b;  ch 8 [289^2-28] 381b; bk iv, ch 3 [310^332] 401d / Generation and
Corruption, bk ii, ch 6
[333*35-334*9]
434b-435a; ch ii 439c-441a,c / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 7
[io32ai5-22]
555a-b;  bk  ix, ch 5 573a-c; bk xi, ch 8 593a-d; bk xii, ch 3 [1070^-9]
599b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640aio-b
5] 162b-163a / Ethics, bk hi, ch 3
[ui2ai8-32]
358a-b; bk x. ch 3
[1 173^-7]
427d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[i369a3i-b
4] 612c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[10221034] 13c-d; bk
ii
[184-307] 17b-19a; [10521063]
28b-c; bk v
[55-58]
61d;
[306-310]
65a;  [416-431] 66c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 28 293d294a;
sect 39 295a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i 78a-82b; tr ii, ch i, 82c /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  16 150c-d; tr iv, ch 33 176b-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 14, a 13 86d-88c; q 19, a 3 110b-110c; a 8
116a-d; q 22, a 2 128d-130d; a 4 131c-132b; q 23, a 6 137d-138c; q 25, a
3,  rep  4  145b-147a;  a  4 147a-d; q 86, a 3 463b-d; q 103, a i, rep 3
528b-529a;  aa  7-8  533b-534b;  q  115,  a  6,  ans 591d-592d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 45b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55a-56a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, def 7 355b; axiom 3 355d; prop 17, corol 2
362b; prop 26-29 365b-366c; prop 32-33 367a-369a; prop 3536 369a-b; part
ii,  prop  13  377d-378c; lemma 3, corol 378d-379a; prop 48 391a-c; part
in, 395a-d; part iv, prop 2-4 425a-d; appendix, i-ii 447a-b

[297a]
3a  to  3c  Chapter 61: NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 263 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  93 431b; sect 106 433c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect vi 469d470d; sect viii 478b-487a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
i,  IsTb  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  45b-c;  72c-85d esp 74b76c, 82a-83b;
140b,d-143a; 144a-145c; 153a; 171b- 172c / Practical Reason, 331c-333a /
Judgement,  566a-  b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 160c190b 51
Tolstoy:   War   and  Peace,  epilogue  ii  675a696d  passim  53  James:
Psychology,  823a-825a  passim  54  Freud: General Introduction, 454b-c;
592a-b  "ha.  The  distinction  between the essential and the accidental
cause:  the  contingent effect; contingency and chance 7 Plato: Timaeus,
455a-456a; 465d-466a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 5
[i88 a32-b26]
263d-264a; bk ii, ch 3-6 271a-275a; ch 8
[i99a34-b i2] 276c-d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 2
[101^34-101^7] 534a; ch 5 535c-536a; ch 30
547a-d;  bk  xi,  ch  8  593a-d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 3
257a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q ii, a 3, ans 49a-c; q 14,
a 13 86d-88c; q 19, a 3 HOb-110c; a 8 116a-d; q 22, a 2, rep i 128d130d;
a  4  131c-132b; q 57, a 3, ans 297b298a; q 103, a 5, rep i 531b-532b; a
7,  rep  2  533b-d;  q  115,  a  6  591d-592d; q 116, a i 592d-593d; a 3
594c-595a;  part  i-ii, q 10, a 4 665d-666a,c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
iv,  272b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, prop 16, corol 2 362a; prop 33,
schol  i  367c-d; part iv, def 3 424a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
viii,  div  67 480c-481a; div 74 484a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 144a-145c;
153a  /  Practical Reason, 311d-314d / Judgement, 550a551a,c; 553c-555a;
584c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, intro, par 3, 10a-llb 3£. The
necessity of contingent events: absolute and hypothetical or conditional
necessity;  necessitation  by  efficient or material and final or formal
causes  8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk ii, ch 9 277b-278a,c / Generation and
Corruption,  bk  ii, ch ii 439c-441a,c / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5 [ioioa
6-25] 529c-d; bk v, ch 5 [ioi5 a20-26] 535c;
[ioi5b3-6] 535d; bk
vii, ch 8
[io33a24-b i9]
556b-d; ch 9 [i034b8-i9J 557d-558a; bk ix, ch 8
[ic>49b35-io5oa
3] 575c-d; bk x, ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch 6
[1063^7-28]
591b-c / Soul, bk 11, ch 8
[42ob i6-23J 652a; bk
hi, ch 12-13 667a-668d / Sleep, ch 2
[455
b i3~ 28] 698b-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i

[297b]
d
[639b8-642b4] 161d-165d esp
[639b24-64oa io]
162a-b, [642^-15] 165a-b, [642a30-b 4] 165c-d; bk 11, ch 1
[646b28-647b io]
170d-171d;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [663b2i-664a  i2]  191b-d;  ch  9  [672ai24]
200d-201a; bk iv, ch 5
[68ob3-68i a
4J 210d-211c / Generation of Animals, bk iv, ch 3 [767b5-i5] 309a; bk v,
ch i [778 a i5~b2o] 320a-321a; ch 8
[789b i-2i] 331a,c /
Politics,  bk  1,  ch 2 [1252^0-36] 446a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xxii,  ch 24, 610c-611b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, a 3,
ans and rep i HOb-110c; a 7, rep 4 114d-115d; a 8, rep 1-2 116a-d; q 23,
a  6,  rep  3  137d-138c;  q  86,  a  3  463b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, xvii
[1345] 132b-c
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 45a-46a esp 45c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part i, prop 16-17 362a363c; prop 21-23 364a-365a; prop 26-29 365b-366c;
prop  33-36  367b-369b;  part  ii,  def 5 373b-c; part iv, def 3 424a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  140b,d-143a;  164a-171a;  179c-180c  / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  262a-279d  esp 263a-264d, 265c-267a; 285c286a /
Judgement,   491c-492b;   550a-551a,c;   553c-555a;  557c-558b;  564a-c;
581a-582c;  584c46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158a-c  51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue 1, 650b-c; epilogue
ii,  679b-c 3c. The grounds of contingency in the phenomenal order: real
indeterminacy  or  ignorance of causes 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9
28a-29d / Physics, bk 11, ch 4-6 272c-275a / Memory and a3o-b i] 694b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 13 86d-88c; q 19, a 8 116a-d;
q  22,  a  4  131c-132b; q 86, a 3 463b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv,
272b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 33, schol i 367c-d; part ii, prop
27-31  384b-385c  esp  prop  31, corol 385c; prop 44 389b-390a; part in,
395a-d; def 1-2 395d; prop 1-3 396a-398c; part iv, def 3-4 424a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  vi  469dReminiscence,  ch 2 [452 470d; sect
viii,  div 67 480c-481a; div 74 484a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 164a-172c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387a-d  /  Judgement, 555a-d; 564a-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part ii, par 118, 43a; part hi, par 324,
107b  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 37c-d; 65a / Descent of Man, 593d 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 646c647b 53 James: Psychology, 377b;
851b esp [fn 1] 54 Freud: General Introduction, 454b-c

[298a]
264 4 Necessity and contingency in the realm of thought 4a The necessary
as  the  domain  of  knowledge, the contingent as the object of opinion:
certainty,  doubt,  and probability; necessary truths 7 Plato: Republic,
bk vi, 384b-388a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4
aio-b  i9]  8b-9a  /  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch 13 [32b4~23] 48b-d /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[yi b8-i6]
97d-98a;
[72*25^4]
98d-99a;  ch  4-8 100a104b; ch 30 119d; ch 33 121b-122a,c / Metaphysics,
bk  vi, ch 2 548c-549c; bk vii, ch 15 [i039b3i-i040a8] 563d-564a; bk ix,
ch  10  577c-578a,c;  bk xi, ch 8 [io64b i5-io65 a6] 593a-b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b23~27]
339d-340a;  bk  hi, ch 3 [ni2ai9-b i2] bk vi, ch 3 [ii39b i8-24] 388b-c;
ch 3o-b i] 389a-b;
[ii40b24~28] 389c /
Rhetoric,   bk  1,  ch  2  [i357ai4-b2i]  596d-597c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part 1, q 14, a 13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; q 19, a 3, rep 6
HOb-110c;  q 47, a 1, rep 3 256a-257b; q 79, a 9, rep 3 422b-423d; q 82,
a  2,  ans 432d433c; q 86, a 3 463b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 84, a 1, rep 3 174b-175a; q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d 31 Descartes:
Rules,  11  2a-3b; xn, 21d-22b / Discourse, part ii, 47a; part iv, 52a /
Meditations,  1  75a-77c; v, 95b-96a / Objections and Replies, 124d-125a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  44  389b-390a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 9-16 315c-317c esp sect 14 316b-d;
sect  28-29  322a-323a;  ch vi, sect 5-16 332b336d passim; ch ix, sect i
349a;  ch xii, sect 9 360d-361b; ch xv, sect 1-3 365a-d; ch xvii, sect 2
371d-372b;  sect  15-17  378d379c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv,
div  20-21 458a-c; div 30, 462a; sectxii, div 131132 508d-509d passim 42
Kant:   Pure   Reason,  la-4a,c;  194b-c;  228c-d;  240b-243c  /  Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387ad  /  Judgement, 601d; 603a-b; 603d-604b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  365a-b;  bk  x, 441b-442a 53 James:
Psychology,  851a-890a esp 851a, 867a868b, 879b, 889a-890a 4b. Practical
necessity as a cause of belief 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 48b-50b
/  Objections  and Replies, 126a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b
35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect xii, div 126-128 507a-508a 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 124d-128a; 236b-243c esp 239a-240b, 241d-242c / Fund. Prin.
Meta-

[298b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4 to 4<?(1) physic of Morals, 279b,d-287d / Practical
Reason,  291a-292a;  314d-321b; 344a-349b; 351b-352c / Intro. Metaphysic
of  Morals, 390b,d-391a / judgement, 588a-607c esp 593d-596c, 599d-600d,
601d-602a,  603a-b, 604d-606d; 608c-611d 53 James: Psychology, 223a-225a
esp  224a-225a; 653a; 820b-823b esp 822b-823b 4c. The truth of judgments
concerning  future contingents 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v,  ch 10 215c216c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 14, a 13 86d-88c; q 57, a 3 297b-298a; q 86, a 4
463d-464d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xvii
[1345] 132b-c
22  Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 145-146 107b 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix,
365a-b;  bk  x,  441b-442a;  bk  xiii,  584c-585c; epilogue ii, 685a 4d.
Mathematical  necessity:  necessity in the objects of mathematics and in
mathematical  reasoning  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk v, 361b-c 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk  ii, ch 9 [200^5-29] 277c-d 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 3a-b /
Discourse,  part  ii,  47b-c; part iv, 52d-53a / Meditations, v, 93b-c /
Objections  and Replies, 113c-114a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  hi,  sect  18-20  317d-319c; sect 29, 322c; ch iv, sect 6 325a-b; ch
vii,  sect  6 338b-c; ch xiii, sect 3 364a 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  iv,  div  20  458a-b;  sect  xii,  div 131 508d-509a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  15c-16c;  17d-18d;  68a69c; 211c-218d esp 211c-212a, 215d-217a;
228c-d  /  Practical  Reason,  295b-d;  330d-331a  /  Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of Ethics,  376c-d  / Science of Right, 398c-399c esp 399a- b /
judgement,  551a-553c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 2 9b-10a
53  James : Psychology, 874a-878a 4e. Necessity and analysis contingency
in  logical  4e{\)  The  modality  of  propositions  or judgments: modal
opposition  8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  12-13  32d-35c  /  Prior
Analytics,  bk i, ch 3 40a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14,
a 13, rep 2 86d-88c

[299a]
b  Chapter  61:  NECESSITY  AND  CONTINGENCY  4<?(2) to 5a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,   14c-15c;  39c-41c  esp  40d-41c  /  Judgement,  603a53  James:
Psychology,  851a 4e(2) Modality in reasoning: the logieafne^ cessity of
inference;  the  necessity and contingency of premises and conclusions 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i [24b i826] 39c; ch 8-22 45b-57b /
Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 6 [75^1-28] 103b / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5
[ioi5b6-9]  535d-536a  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [i357a i4-3o]
596d-597a  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 7, 112d-113d; ch 26, 131b
18  Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3134 651d-653b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  19, a 8, rep 3 116a-d; q 44, a i, rep 2
238b-239a;  q  82,  a  2,  ans  432d-433c;  part  i-ii,  q  13, a 5, ans
675c-676b;  a  6, rep 1-2 676c-677b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65c-d;
71c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 14d; 17d-18a; l10d111a; 194b-d 5. Necessity
and  contingency  in human life and society 5a. Liberty and necessity in
human  conduct:  the voluntary and the compulsory 4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d
esp bk xxiv [513-551] 176d-177a 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [160-226] 53d-54c
5  Euripides:  Hecuba  [864-867] 360b 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
iv,  461d-462a;  bk  v,  506b-c  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  56b;  59c-64a /
Cratylus,  95b-c / Republic, bk v, 361b-c; bk x, 439b441a,c 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5 573a-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 1-3 355b,
d359a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i357ai4~b2i]
596d-597c; ch 10 [i368b i-i369b27] 611c-613a; ch 11 [1370^-17] 613b-c 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [251-293]  18b-d  12  Aurelius:
Meditations  253a-310d  esp  bk v, sect 8 269d-270b, sect 19-20 272a, bk
vi,  sect  8  274b,  sect ii 274c, sect 39 277d, sect 50 279a-b, sect 58
279d,  bk  vii,  sect  54 283b, sect 58 283c-d, sect 68 284c-d, bk viii,
sect 17 286d, sect 32 287d-288a, sect 35 288b, sect 45-47 289a-c, bk ix,
sect  41  295c,  bk x, sect 3 296d, sect 6 297a-b, sect 25 299c, sect 33
300c-301a,  sect  35  301b,  bk xii, sect 3 307b-d, sect 11-13 308b-c 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk iv, 68d-69b; bk vi, 91b-d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead,
tr i, ch 8-10 81 d82b

[299b]
265 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 10-11 55c-56b; bk x, par 65,
88a  / City of God, bk v, ch 1-10 207d-216c; bk xix, ch 5-6 513d515a; ch
15  521a-c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 25-26 649b-650a; ch 39-40
654c-656a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 23 132b-141b; q 83, a
1  436d-438a;  part  i-ii,  qq 6-10 644a-666a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xvi
[52-114] 77b-78a; paradise,
i  [94-142]  107bd;  viii  [91-148]  117d-118c  22  Chaucer: Troilus and
Cressida, bk iv, stanza 137-154 106b-108b / Knight's Tale
[13121324]
181b;
[2987-3046]
209a-210a  /  Nun's  Priest's  Tale  [15,236-256]  456b-457a  23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 59b; 86c; part ii, 112d-113c; 163d-164a 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 52c-53c; 216c-219a; 528c-529b 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act
i, sc ii
[135-141] 570d
27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act i, sc ii
[128164] 249a-b; act iv, sc hi [34-37] 272a
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, 395a-d; part iv, prop 2-4 425a-d; appendix,
i-ii 447a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  821  331b-332a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  7-27  180a-184c; sect 57 193b-c; sect 73 198c-199c; ch xxiii, sect
18  209a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 144 441 d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect viii 478b-487a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 133a; 190c-d; 234c-235a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,   279b,d287d  esp  279b,d,  282c,  286a-c  /  Practical  Reason,
292a-293b;  307d-314d  /  Science  oj  Right,  400b,d-402a  / Judgement,
571c-572a;  587a-588a  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  392d-393a; 549c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par 15 16a-b; part i, par 91-92 35d-36a;
part  ii, par 118 42d-43b; additions, 12 118a-c; 75 128a / Philosophy of
History, intro, 158c159b; 160c-190b passim, esp 162a-165b, 168a-d, 186bc
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\  esp  121a, 159a, 395a397a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  221b-d;  bk  vii,  275a-276b; bk viii, 303d-304b; bk ix,
343b-d;  epilogue  ii,  688a-694d  53  James:  Psychology,  84a-94b  esp
89b-93a; 291a-295b; 387b-388a; 796a-798b passim; 820b-827a esp 821b-823b
54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 13a-c / General
Introduction,  453b476a,c  passim,  esp  454b-c,  462  d;  486b-488c esp
486d-487a

[300a]
266  Liberty  and necessity in human conduct: the (5a. voluntary and the
compulsory^)  5<z(l)  The  necessitation  of  the will: the range of its
freedom  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch 4-5 359a-361a 12 Epictetus:
Discourses  105a-245a,c esp bk i, ch 1 105a-106c, ch 18 124a-125a, ch 29
134d138a,  bk  11,  ch 5 142c-144a, ch 10 148c-150a, ch 23 170a-172d, bk
hi,  ch  2 177c-178d, ch 10 185d-187a, ch 14 189c-190a, ch 18 192a-c, bk
iv, ch 1 213a-223d 12 Aurelius: Meditations 253a-310d esp bk ii, sect 16
259a,  bk  v, sect 19 272a, bk vi, sect 16 275b-d, sect 22 276a, bk vii,
sect  16  280d, bk viii, sect 16-17 286d, sect 28 287c, sect 48 289c, bk
x,  sect  34-35 301a-b, bk xii, sect 3 307b-d 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  v,  ch  i-io  207d-216c  esp  ch 10 215c-216c; bk xii, ch 6, 346a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 3,
ans  HOb-110c;  a 10, ans and rep 2 117d-118b; q 60, aa 2-3 311a-312b; q
62, a 8 323c-324a; q 82, aa 1-2 431d-433c; q 83, a 1 436d-438a; a 2, ans
438a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  5  613a-614a;  q  5,  a 4, ans and rep 2
639a-640b;  a  8,  rep  2  642d-643d;  q  10  662d-666a,c;  q 13, aa 3-6
674c-677b;  q 17, a 5, rep 3 689c-690b; a 6, ans 690b-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[1-75] 79d-80c; xxi [40-72] 85b-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part hi, 165c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi,
50b  /  Objections  and Replies, axiom vii 132a; 141d; 215d216a; 228c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, prop 17 362b-363c esp schol, 363a-c; prop 32
367a-b;  part ii, prop 48-49 391a-394d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi, sect 12 180d-181a; sect 59 193d-194a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
164a-165c  esp  164b-c;  234c-236a  esp  235c-d; 236d-237a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   of  Morals,  256a-b;  259c260c;  264d-265b;  265c-267d  esp
266c-267d;  268b;  286a-287d  /  Practical  Reason,  296a-d; 325d-326b /
Judgement,  595a-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par 8-21
14c-17c;  part  11,  par  118  42d-43b;  additions,  90 130b-d 53 James:
Psychology,   291a-295a   esp   291a-b,   293a;  388a;  821b-822b  5a(2)
Categorical  and  hypothetical  imperatives  as expressing necessary and
contingent  obligations  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 190c-d; 236d-237a / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals 253a-287d esp 253d-254d, 260a-261d, 263a-c,
264d268d,  272a-b,  276b-277a,  277d-279d,  281c282d / Practical Reason,
297a-314d esp 297a-

[300b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 5«(1) to 5b 298a, 307d-314d / Pref Metaphysical Elements
of  Ethics,  373d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-387a,c; 388b-c;
390b,d-391c;  392b-393a  /  Science  of  Right,  397c-398a;  416b-417b /
Judgement,  571c-572a;  595a-d; 605d-606b [fn 2] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  ii,  par  132135  46b-47d; additions, 84 129b 5<z(3) Human
freedom   as   knowledge   or  acceptance  of  necessity  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 12 118d120b; bk iv, ch 1 213a-223d; ch 4 225a-228a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v, prop 6 453d-454a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  intro, par 8-21 14c-17c esp par 15 16a-b, par 21 17a-c; part hi,
par  144-145  55b-c;  additions,  12  118a-c;  93-94  132a-b; 159 142d /
Philosophy  of History, intro, 170c-171c 5b. The necessity of family and
state:  the  contingency  of  their  forms  and  institutions  7  Plato:
Republic,  bk  ii,  311b-312b;  316c-319a;  bk  v,  361b-c  9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i, ch 2 445b-446d; bk in, ch 6 [i278b i5-29] 475d-476a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
18  Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 14-17 520a-523a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 92, a 1 488d-489d; q 96, a 4 512d-513c; q 98, a 1
516d-517c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 95, a 4, ans
229b-230c;  q  105,  a  4,  ans  318b321a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
84c-86b;  86d87a;  91a-b;  96a-b;  part ii, 99a-101a; part iv, 273a-b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 462d-463a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 18, schol
429a-d;  prop 35, corol 1-2 433c-d; prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a; appendix
447a-450d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[364-436]
240a-241b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  304  227b-228a;  306  228a  35  Locke:
Toleration,  16a-c  /  Civil  Government, ch ii, sect 13-15 28a-c; ch vi
36a-42a  passim;  ch  vii,  sect  77-83  42b-43c; ch ix 53c54d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i, 29b-30a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 216b; 261b-262a;
410a-411a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2a-3b; bk xxiii,
187d-188a  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 367b / Social Contract, bk i,
387b,d-392a  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 309a-c 42 Kant: Science
of Right, 418d; 433c-434a 43 Declaration of Independence: [1-23] la-b 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  327b,d332d  passim / Utilitarianism,
460a-461c

[301a]
5c  to 5e Chapter 61: NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 267 44 Boswell: Johnson,
102a-b;  120a-c;  125c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 182
64a;  par  264-267  84a-b;  par  270 84d-89c; additions, 116 135c-d; 162
143b-144c__^ Philosophy of History, intro, 170c-171<ffl73a175c; part 11,
262a-c  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 579b-581c 50 Marx: Capital, 241c-d 50
Marx-Engels:   Communist   Manifesto,   421c-d;   427b-428a   54  Freud:
Civilization   and   Its   Discontents,  781  d782d  5c.  Necessity  and
contingency  in  relation  to  the  natural  and  conventional  in law 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7 [ii34b i 8-1 135 s 4] 382c-d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  15  17a-b;  par 17 17d-18a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 94, aa 5-6 224d-226b; q 95, a 2, ans and rep 3
227c-228c; a 4 229b-230c; q 96, a 1 230c231c; q 97, a 1, rep 1 236a-d; a
4, rep 3 238b-239b; q 99, aa 3-4 247a-248d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
95d-96a;  part  ii,  115b-c;  131a-c;  134c;  136d-137a; 138a-b; 142a-c;
163d-164a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect 10-12 27b-28a; ch xi, sect 135
55d-56b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, lc-d; bk xv, 109b-110a; bk
xxvi,  219d-221c  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 399b-c 42 Kant:
Science  of Right, 426b-429a esp 426b-c 43 Federalist: number 25, 91b-d;
number  41, 133a-b; number 43, 143b-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 470d-471b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 145 55b-c; par 214 71a-c;
additions,  94  132b;  134  138b-c 5d. The necessity or inevitability of
slavery, poverty, war, or crime 5 Aristophanes: Peace
[1061-1114] 538a-539a
/  Plutus  [415-619]  633d-636d  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
427d-428a;  436d-437d  7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a / Laws, bk 1,
640d-641a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk i, ch 5-6 447d449b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 19, 125c-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk hi, ch 10
172d173c;  bk  xix,  ch 5, 514a-b; ch 7 515a-c; ch 15 521a-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  92,  a  1,  rep  2 488d-489d; q 96, a 4
512d-513c  20  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3
224d-225d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch hi, 5c; ch xiv, 21b; ch xxi, 32a-d

[301b]
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76d;  94b-c; part ii, 141a-b; 157a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 30d-41a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xi  [384-897]  307b318b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch ii
25d-28c; ch hi, sect 17 28d-29a; ch iv 29d-30b; ch xv, sect 172 65b-c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 154b-155b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
x,  61b,  d62b;  bk  xv,  109b-110a;  HOd-110c  38 Rousseau: Inequality,
356c-357a;  357c-358b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i, 388b-c; 389a-390d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  309a-c  42 Kant: Science of Right,
457a-458a,c  /  Judgement,  586a-587a  43 Federalist: number 3-7 33b-44c
passim,  esp number 6, 39a; number 23-24 85a-89c; number 28, 96c; number
34, HOa-d; number 41, 132c-135a; number 43, 141d 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  339c-340c  /  Utilitarianism,  452a-b  44 Boswell: Johnson,
301d;  304c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 333-334 109b-c /
Philosophy of History, part ii, 273c 50 Marx: Capital, 283b-c; 303b-307c
esp 303d305a, 307a-c; 315c-321b esp 319a-321b 50 Marx-Engels : Communist
Manifesto,  419b,d-420c; 425a; 428a-b 54 Freud: War and Death, 755b-757a
passim,  esp  755b-c;  766c-d  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 787a-
788d  5e.  Economic  necessities  or luxuries Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
29:21— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 29:27 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[550-554]
382d  7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a; bk viii, 409d-410c / Critias,
479d  8  Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2 [n8a6-i6] 164d-165a 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 8
[i256b27-39]
450c-d; ch 9
[i257b30-i258ai8] 451d-452b;
bk vii, ch 5
[1326^6-38] 530d-531a; ch
13
[i33i b39-i332a2] 536c
14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / Marcus Cato, 285c-d / Aristides-Marcus
Cato,  291b-292b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii, 31a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 2, a 1, ans and rep 3 615d-616c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica, part ii-ii, q 32, a 6 545b-546b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
HOb-c;  131b-132a; 216c218a passim; 489b-490c 27 Shakespeare: King Lear,
act  ii,  sc  iv  [263274]  261c; act in, sc iv [27-36] 264c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part iv, appendix, xxvihxxix 450a 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
91a 94a

[302a]
(5.  Necessity  and  contingency in human life and society. 5e. Economic
necessities  or  luxuries.)  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch v 30b-36a
passim  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk vii, 44a; bk xin, 96a 38
Rousseau:   Inequality,  327c-328a;  337b;  350a-c;  352a-353c;  364a-b;
365c-366b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393d-394b  39  Smith: Wealth of
Nations, bk i, 27b-37b passim; 63a-b; 70a-71d; 74d-75b; bk hi, 163c164c;
bk  v,  383c-d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 22c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  451d-452a  42  Kant:  Judgement,  586b  43 Federalist: number 30,
102a-b   43   Mill:   Utilitarianism,  470d-471b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,
124d-125a;  389d-390a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 190191
66a-b;  par  195  66d-67a;  par  203  68a-c;  additions,  120  136b-c  /
Philosophy  of History,  Intro, 193b-c; part 11, 267a-b 50 Marx: Capital,
16c-17a;  81a-d; 88c; 112a-b; 218d-219a; 253b-254b; 261c-262a; 280d-283c
esp  282d-283b; 292c-296a esp 293c-294a 5/. Necessity and contingency in
history  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21d-22a; bk ix, 291b-c 6 Thucydides
:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  iv,  462a-b  7  Plato: Laws, bk iv, 679a-c 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  xii,  ch  8  [107^ n-13] 605a 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,  18d;  20b-c  / Timoleon 195a-213d esp 201a-203b / Philopoemen,
CROSS-REFERENCES  Immortality  3a;  Metaphysics  2d;  Will 5b(4). 3b(2).
3b(3)"3c > 7a -

[302b]
268  THE GREAT IDEAS 5/ 300b-c / Demosthenes, 698a-699a / Marcus Brutus,
814d-815c  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49c; bk vi, 91b-d / Histories, bk
11,  23  2d-  233a  18  Augustine: City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; ch 36
149c-d;  bk  11,  ch  2-3  150c-151c;  bk  iv,  ch 33 206c-d; bk v, ch i
207d-208c;  ch  ii26  216c-230a,c;  bk  xv,  ch  i 397b,d-398c; ch 21-22
415b-416c;  bk  xviii, ch 1-2 472b, d473d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
vii
[61-96]
10b-c;  purgatory,  xvi  [52-129] 77b-78a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi,
9a-b; ch xxv 35a-36b 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act iv, sc hi
[215-224] 590d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 609b-c; 630b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
590a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 340-360 110b-114a,c /
Philosophy  of History, Intro, 156c-190besp 156d-170b; 190b-201a,c; part
1,  241d-242b;  part  ii,  274a-275a;  281d  282d; 283d-284a,c; part hi,
285a-b; 300c 301c; part iv, 368d-369a,c 50 Marx: Capital, 6d; 7b-c; 10b-
lld; 174a-c 378b-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 421d422c passim;
425a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 143a-c; bk ix, 342a-344b; bk x,
389a-391c;  bk  xi,  469a472b;  bk  xin  563a-587d;  bk  xiv, 588a-590c;
609a-613d;  bk xv, 618b-621b; 626d-630a; epilogue i, 645a-650c; epilogue
ii  675a696d  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 801d802a / New
Introductory   Lectures,  882b-884c  passim,  esp  882c-d  For:  Matters
relevant  to the distinction between necessary and contingent being, see
Being  7a,  7b(3);  Change  15c; Eternity 3, 4b; God 2b, 4a; and for the
application of this distinction to properties, accidents, and modes, see
Being   7b(5)~7b(6),  8c-8e;  Nature  ia(i).  Matters  relevant  to  the
distinction  between  necessity  and contingency in the realm of change,
see  Cause  i-ia; Chance ia, 2a; Fate 3; Nature 30(1). Other discussions
of  the distinction between knowledge and opinion, and of the difference
between  certainty  and  probability,  see  Chance  4;  Judgment  3,  9;
Knowledge  4b,  6d(i)-  6d(2);  Opinion i, 3b; Truth 2e; Will 3b(i). The
moral  certainty  of  the things in which it is practically necessary to
believe,  see  God  2d;  Other  discussions of the truth of propositions
about  future contingents, see Time 6f ; Truth Necessity and contingency
in  logical  analysis  and  in  mathematical reasoning, see Judgment 6c;
Mathematics  ic;  Opposition  id  (2); Principle 2b(2), 5; Reasoning 3d;
Truth

[303a]
For: The opposition between necessity and liberty in the sphere of human
life and history, see Cause 3; Fate 2-3, 5-6; History 4a(i); Liberty ic,
4a;  Nature 2f, 30(2); Prudence idence in relation to human freedom, see
Fate  4;  God  7b; History 5a; Liberty 5a~5b; Will 7c. The necessary and
contingent,  or  the  natural  and the conventional, with respect to the
family  The  consideration  of the inevitability or necessity of certain
social  institutions or phenomena, Another discussion of the distinction
of  the  necessary, the possible, and the probable in poetry, see Poetry
8a (2). ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great
BooJ^s  ofthe  Western  World,  but relevant to the idea and topics with
which  this  chapter  deals. These works are divided into two groups: I.
Works  by  authors  represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Aquinas.  Summa  Contra Gentiles, bk ii, ch 29-31; bk in, ch
64-83  Hume.  A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part hi, SECT XIV; BK II,
PART  III,  SECT  I  Kant.  Introduction  to Logic, ix Hegel. Science of
Logic, vol i, bk ii, sect hi, ch 2 J. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk hi,
ch  17;  bk vi, ch 2 W. James. "The Dilemma of Determinism," in The Will
to  Believe  II. Epicurus. Letter to Menoeceus Cicero. De Fato (On Fate)
Anselm  of  Canterbury.  De  Potestate  et  Impotentia; Possibilitate et
Impossibilitate;  Necessitate et Libertate Maimonides. The Guide for the
Perplexed,  part  ii,  ch  21  Suarez.  Disputationes Metaphysicae, xix,
xxvinxxix,  xxxi  (14)  Leibnitz. Philosophical Worlds, ch 28 (Letter on
Necessity and Contingency), 34 (The Principles of Nature and of Grace) .
Monadology, par 33-37 J. Butler. The Analogy of Religion, part 1, ch 6

[303b]
Chapter 61: NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 269 J. Priestley and Price. A Free
Discussion  of  the  Doctrine  of  Materialism and Philosophical NecesT.
Reid.  Essays  on  the  Intellectual  Powers of Man, vi, ch 5-6 Voltaire.
"Necessary-Necessity,"    "Power-Omnipotence,"    in   A   Philosophical
Dictionary . Candide Godwin. An Enquiry Concerning Political justice, bk
iv,  ch  5-6  Schopenhauer.  On  the  Fourfold  Root of the Principle of
Sufficient  Reason  Laplace.  A  Philosophical  Essay  on  Probabilities
Whewell. On the Philosophy of Discovery, ch 29 Boutroux. The Contingency
of  the  Laws  of Nature Bradley. Ethical Studies, 1 . The Principles of
Logic,  bk  i,  ch  7  C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 35-65
Bergson.  Time and Free Will Bridgman. The Logic of Modern Physics, ch 4
Dewey. The Quest for Certainty Heisenberg. The Physical Principles ofthe
Quantum  Theory  Koninck.  Le probleme de Vindeterminisme Blanshard. The
Nature  of  Thought, ch 28-32 Maritain. Scholasticism and Politics, ch v
Weiss. Nature and Man, ch i Hartshorne. The Divine Relativity

[304a]
the  great  books of political theory the word IN "oligarchy" is usually
listed along with "monarchy" and "democracy" among the traditional names
for  the  forms  of  government. According to the meaning of their Greek
roots, "oligarchy" signifies the rule of the few as "monarchy" signifies
the  rule  of  one  and  "democracy" the rule of the people—or the many.
These  verbal  meanings  are somewhat altered, however, when we consider
the  actual  conflict between oligarchy and democracy in Greek political
life.  It  involved  an  opposition,  not simply between the few and the
many,  but  between  the  wealthy  and  the working classes. The contest
between these factions for political power dominated more than a century
of  Greek  history  around  the  Periclean  age; and that fact justifies
Aristotle's  remark  that  oligarchy and democracy are the two principal
conflicting  forms of government. We would not so describe the political
struggle  of  our  time.  We  would not speak of oligarchy as one of the
principal  forms  of  government  in the world today. Instead we tend to
think  in  terms  of  the conflict between democracy and dictatorship or
despotism.  Even when we look to the background of present issues, it is
the  age-old  struggle between absolute and constitutional government—or
between  monarchies  and  republics—which  seems  to  supply the obvious
historical   parallels   for   the  contemporary  conflict  between  the
principles  of  arbitrary and legal government. The traditional terms of
political theory, with the exception of oligarchy, thus appear to have a
certain  liveliness in the consideration of current problems. But though
it  does  not  have  such  frequency in our speech or familiarity in our
thought,  oligarchy  may be much more relevant to the real issues of our
day  than  appears  on  the  surface.  Certainly within the framework of
constitu-

[304b]
Chapter  6z:  OLIGARCHY  INTRODUCTION tional government oligarchical and
democratic principles are the opposed sources of policy and legislation.
In  modern  as  in  ancient republics the division of men into political
parties  tends  to follow the lines of the division of men into economic
factions.  The  ancient  meanings of oligarchy and democracy, especially
for  those  observers like Thucydides and Aristotle who see the rich and
the  poor  as  the  major  rivals for constitutional power, indicate the
fusion   of  political  and  economic  issues.  The  difference  between
oligarchy   and  democracy,  says  Aristotle,  is  not  well-defined  by
reference  to the few and the many, unless it is understood that the few
are  also  the  rich and the many the poor. The issue is not whether the
few are wiser than the many, or whether it is more efficient to have the
government  in  the  hands  of the few rather than the many. Such issues
have been debated in the history of political thought, but they are more
appropriate to the alternatives of aristocracy and democracy than to the
conflict  between oligarchy and democracy. The historic struggle between
oligarchs and democrats—whether described as a struggle between rich and
poor, nobility and bourgeoisie, landed gentry and agrarian peons, owners
and  workers,  classes  and  masses—  is  a  struggle over the political
privileges  of wealth, the rights of property, the protection of special
interests.  In  the tradition of the great books, Marx and Engels may be
the  first  to call this struggle "the class war," but they are only the
most  recent  in  a  long  line  of  political  and  economic writers to
recognize  that  the  economic antagonism of rich and poor generates the
basic  political  conflict in any state. "Any city, however small," says
Socrates,  "is  in  fact divided into two, one the city of the poor, the
other of the rich: these are at war with one another." 270

[305a]
Oligarchy  is  not  always defined as the rule of the wealthy, nor is it
always   conceived  as  the  opponent  of  democracy  on  constitutional
questions.  In the Statesman, for example, Plato^fixst divides the forms
of  government  into "monarchy, the rule of the few, and the rule of the
many,"  and thendivides "the rule of the few into aristocracy, which has
an  auspicious name, and oligarchy." Here aristocracy and oligarchy seem
to  be regarded as opposites, the one a government in which the few rule
according to the laws, the other lawless government by the few. In both,
the  few  are  the  wealthy;  hence  wealth is no more characteristic of
oligarchy   than  of  aristocracy.  Some  political  theorists  make  no
reference  to  wealth  at  all  in  the  discussion of oligarchy. Hobbes
divides the forms of government according to whether the sovereign power
is  in  the  hands of one or more; and if in the hands of more than one,
then  whether  it  is held by some or all. He calls the several forms of
government  monarchy  (one),  aristocracy  (some),  and democracy (all).
There  are  "other  names  of  government  in the histories and books of
policy,"  he  adds, such as "tyranny and oligarchy. But they are not the
names  of other forms of government, but of the same forms misliked. For
they that are discontented under monarchy call it tyranny, and they that
are  displeased  with  aristocracy  call it oligarchy" Like Hobbes, both
Locke  and  Rousseau  use no criterion except numbers to distinguish the
forms of government, Locke calling government by the few "oligarchy" and
Rousseau  calling  it  "aristocracy."  Barely  outlined in this way, the
alternatives  of  monarchy, aristocracy or oligarchy, and democracy seem
to raise issues only of expediency or efficiency rather than of justice.
Whether  oligarchy  is  intrinsically  a  good or bad form of government
tends to become a question only when other factors are considered; when,
for  example,  the distinction between aristocracy and oligarchy is made
to  turn  on  whether  the  few are men of virtue or men of property, or
when, in the comparison of oligarchy with democracy, the emphasis is not
upon  numbers but on the principles of wealth and liberty. Nevertheless,
the  numerical  criterion  does not seem to be totally irrelevant to the
com-

[305b]
Chapter  62: OLIGARCHY 271 parison. "Oligarchy and democracy," Aristotle
writes,   "are  not  sufficiently  distinguished  merely  by  these  two
characteristics  of  wealth  and  freedom."  Though the "real difference
between  democracy  and  oligarchy  is  poverty  and wealth," and though
"wherever  men  rule  by  reason of their wealth, whether they be few or
many,  that  is  an  oligarchy," Aristotle does not seem to think we can
neglect the political significance of what he calls the "accidental fact
that the rich everywhere are few, and the poor numerous." With regard to
aristocracy and oligarchy, the chief question does not seem to be one of
principle,  but  of  fact.  Plato  in  the Republic and Aristotle in the
Politics  define  aristocracy  as government by the few best men, or the
most  virtuous.  They  also  place it next to what is for them the ideal
government  by the supremely wise man— the rule of the philosopher king,
or  what  Aristotle  calls  "the  divine  sort  of  government." In this
context,  oligarchy  represents  a perversion of aristocracy, as tyranny
represents  a  corruption  of  monarchy.  Plato  describes  oligarchy as
arising when "riches and rich men are honored in the State" and when the
law  "fixes  a  sum  of  money as the qualification for citizenship" and
allows  "no  one whose property falls below the amount fixed to have any
share  in  the  government."  But according to Socrates, wealth does not
qualify  men  to  rule,  as virtue and wisdom do. "Just think what would
happen,"  he  says,  "if  pilots  were  to  be chosen according to their
property,  and  a poor man were refused permission to steer, even though
he  were a better pilot." To which Adeimantus agrees that in government,
as  in  navigation,  the  probable result would be shipwreck. But though
there  may  be  no  question  of  the  superiority  of  aristocracy over
oligarchy  in principle, the critics of aristocracy question whether any
historic  state  in which the few hold political power is not in fact an
oligarchy. It may not always be the case that the power of the few rests
directly  on wealth. The privileged class may be a military clique or an
hereditary  nobility. Yet these distinctions are seldom unaccompanied by
the  control  of  land  or  other forms of wealth, so that indirectly at
least the oligarchical factor is thought to be operative.

[306a]
272 THE GREAT IDEAS The criticism of aristocracies as masked oligarchies
is  discussed in the chapter on Aristocracy. The critical point seems to
be  that  nothing except superior virtue or talent justifies a political
inequality  between  the  few  and the many. The meaning of oligarchy is
generalized  in  consequence  to  include  any  government  in which the
special  privileges  or  powers  held  by  the  few cannot be justified,
whether  it  is  wealth  or  some  other  title  to pre-eminence that is
substituted  for  superiority  in  virtue  or  talent.  When  it  is  so
understood, the word "oligarchical" tends to become like "tyrannical," a
term  of reproach. In describing different forms of democracy, Aristotle
observes  that  their  common  principle  is  to  give  a  share  in the
government to all who meet whatever minimum qualification is set by law.
"The absolute exclusion of any class," he says, "would be a step towards
oligarchy."  To the same effect is Mill's comment on the steps away from
oligarchy  accomplished  by  English  constitutional reforms in the 19th
century.  "In  times  not  long  gone  by," Mill writes, "the higher and
richer classes were in complete possession of the government. ... A vote
given  in  opposition  to those influences . . . was almost sure to be a
good  vote,  for it was a vote against the monster evil, the over-ruling
influence  of  oligarchy." But now that the higher classes are no longer
masters  of the country, now that the franchise has been extended to the
middle  classes,  a  diminished  form  of  oligarchy still remains. "The
electors  themselves  are  becoming the oligarchy"—in a population where
many  are  still  disfranchised. "The present electors," Mill continues,
"and  the  bulk  of those whom any probable Reform Bill would add to the
number,  are  the  middle  class;  and  have  as  much a class interest,
distinct  from the working classes, as landlords or great manufacturers.
Were the suffrage extended to all skilled laborers, even those would, or
might,  still  have  a  class  interest  distinct  from  the unskilled."
Oligarchy  remains,  according  to  Mill,  so  long  as  the  re  is any
unjustifiable  discrimination among classes in the population. It is not
in  his  view  limited to discrimination based on the extremes of wealth
and  poverty,  as  he  plainly  indicates  by his remarks on the special
interests of different parts of the working class, or their relation

[306b]
as  a  whole  to the lower middle classes. He makes this even plainer by
what  he  has  to  say on political discrimination as between the sexes.
Suppose the suffrage to be extended to all men, he writes, "suppose that
what  was  formerly called by the misapplied name of universal suffrage,
and  now  by  the  silly  title of manhood suffrage, became the law; the
voters  would  still have a class interest, as distinguished from women.
The  oligarchical defect in representative government which Mill is here
criticizing  seems  to  have  little  or  no  basis  in  economic  class
divisions.  The exclusion of any class in the population from a voice in
government  renders  that  government oligarchical with respect to them.
The  excluded  class  may even be a minority. So conceived, oligarchy no
longer means the rule of either the rich or the few. When the meaning of
oligarchy  is generalized in this way, the discussion of oligarchy seems
to presuppose the typically modern conception of democracy. As indicated
in  the  chapter  on Democracy, the distinguishing feature of the modern
democratic  constitution  is  universal suffrage. By this criterion, the
conflict  between  the  democrats and the oligarchs of the ancient world
appears  to  be  a  conflict  between  two  forms  of  the  oligarchical
constitution—one  in which the wealthier few and one in which the poorer
many  have  political  rights, but in neither of which membership in the
political  community  includes  all  normal  adult  human  beings in the
population.  Where  ancient  political  theory could conceive of a mixed
constitution—somehow  combining  oligarchical  and democratic principles
the  modern  conception  of  democracy seems to make any compromise with
oligarchy  impossible.  Certain  modern writers, notably Mosca, Michels,
and  Pareto,  seem to insist, on the contrary, that oligarchy is present
in   all   forms   of   government,   and  is  especially  prevalent  in
representative  democracies  where the actual conduct of government— the
effective  power—  is in the hands of a bureaucracy or an elite, whether
popularly  chosen  or  self-appointed. But the contradiction may be more
verbal  than  real if on one side the word "oligarchy" means some degree
of  restriction  in  the franchise or citizenship, and, on the other, it
applies to any situa-

[307a]
tion  in  which  the  whole  people  are  not directly active in all the
affairs   of  government  and,  consequently,  a  small  number  of  men
administers  the  state. Understood in the latter sense^jiieoligarchical
principle   does   not  seem  to  be  incompatible  with  representative
democracy. Those who use the word in this sense merely call attention to
an   inevitable   characteristic   of   representative   government.   A
representative  democracy  may  also have an aristocratic aspect when it
follows  the  principle  that the men best qualified by virtue or talent
for  public office should be chosen by the suffrage of all their fellow-
citizens.  Fuller  discussion  of these aspects of oligarchy is found in
the  chapters  on  Aristocracy  and  Democracy.  Here  we  are primarily
concerned   with  political  issues  which  have  their  source  in  the
opposition  of  economic  classes  in  the state, primarily that extreme
division of men into those who live by their labor and those who live on
their  property  and the labor of others. It is in terms of this extreme
division  between  men  of  leisure  and  working  men that the conflict
between  oligarchy  and democracy takes place in the ancient world. At a
time   when   citizenship   meant   a  much  more  active  and  frequent
participation  in  government than it does under the modern institutions
of the ballot box and the representative assembly, the ancient defenders
of  oligarchy  could  argue  that  only  men  of  wealth had the leisure
requisite  for  citizenship.  Oligarchy could be further defended on the
ground  that,  in  many  of the Greek city-states, public officials were
either not compensated at all or at least not substantially. Only men of
sizeable  property  could afford to hold public office. Aristotle weighs
the  arguments  for  and against oligarchy. On the point of leisure, for
example,  he  holds  that  "nothing is more absolutely necessary than to
provide that the highest class, not only when in office, but when out of
office,  should  have  leisure."  Yet  "even  if you must have regard to
wealth  in  order  to  secure  leisure,"  it is "surely a bad thing," he
thinks, "that the greatest offices, such as those of kings and generals,
should  be  bought. The law which allows this abuse makes wealth of more
account than virtue."

[307b]
Chapter  62:  OLIGARCHY  273  Aristotle  seems  to regard democratic and
oligarchical  claims  as complementary half-truths. "Both parties to the
argument,"  he says, "are speaking of a limited and partial justice, but
imagine  themselves to be speaking of absolute justice." According to an
adequate  conception  of  political  justice,  it  is as unjust to treat
equals  unequally  as  it  is  to  treat  unequals equally. The oligarch
violates  the  first  of  these  principles,  the  democrat  the second.
"Democracy  arises  out  of  the  notion that those who are equal in any
respect  are  equal  in all respects; because men are equally free, they
claim  to  be  absolutely  equal.  Oligarchy is based on the notion that
those  who are unequal in one respect are in all respects unequal; being
unequal,  that  is,  in  property, they suppose themselves to be unequal
absoBoth  forms  of government have "a kind of justice, but, tried by an
absolute  standard,  they  are  faulty;  and,  therefore,  both parties,
whenever  their  share  in  the  government  does  not accord with their
preconceived  ideas,  stir  up revolution In oligarchies the masses make
revolution  under the idea that they are unjustly treated, because . . .
they  are  equals  and  have not an equal share; and in democracies, the
notables  revolt, because they are not equal, and yet have only an equal
share." What can cure this situation in which perpetual revolution seems
to   be  inevitable,  as  democracy  succeeds  oligarchy,  or  oligarchy
democracy,  in  the  government of the Greek cities? Aristotle describes
many  forms  of  oligarchy  and  democracy, but none seems to remove the
cause of revolution. When, in an attempt to preserve their position, the
wealthier  families  turn  to  the  more  extreme  forms of oligarchical
constitution,  that  tendency  eventually  leads  to  a kind of despotic
government  which  Aristotle  calls  "dynasty,"  or  the lawless rule of
powerful famTo establish a stable government which shall be less subject
to  revolution in favor of a contrary principle of government, and which
shall  resist  the tendency toward lawless rule, by either the masses or
the powerful few, Aristotle proposes the mixed constitution, which shall
combine  the  elements  of both democratic and oligarchical justice. But
this  will  not  work  in  actual practice, he thinks, unless the middle
class

[308a]
274  THE  GREAT  IDEAS "is large, and stronger if possible than both the
other  classes  Great  then  is the good fortune of a state in which the
citizens have a moderate and sufficient property; for where some possess
much, and the others nothing, there may arise an extreme democracy, or a
pure  oligarchy;  or  a  tyranny  may  grow  out of either extreme These
considerations  will  help  us  to  understand  why most governments are
either democratical or oligarchical. The reason is that the middle class
is seldom numerous in them, and whichever party, whether the rich or the
common  people,  transgresses  the  mean  and  predominates,  draws  the
constitution   its   own  way,  and  thus  arises  either  oligarchy  or
democracy." From the point of view which sees no justice in granting any
special  privileges to property, Aristotle's position on oligarchy seems
open  to  question. For one thing, in admitting a partial justice in the
principle  that  those  who  are  unequal  in  wealth  should be treated
unequally  in  the distribution of political power, Aristotle appears to
affirm that the possessors of wealth deserve a special political status.
For  another thing, in his own formulation of an ideal polity, Aristotle
advocates  the  exclusion  of the working classes from citizenship. "The
citizens  must  not  lead the life of mechanics or tradesmen, for such a
life is ignoble and inimical to virtue. Neither must they be husbandmen,
since  leisure  is  necessary both for the development of virtue and the
performance of political duties." All these classes of men are necessary
for  the existence of the state, but they are to be no part of it in the
sense  of  political  membership. "The best form of state will not admit
them  to  citizenship,"  though it will include as necessary "the slaves
who  minister to the wants of individuals, or mechanics and laborers who
are  the  servants  of  the  community."  Some  of the great speeches in
Thucydides'  History,  which  deal  with  domestic issues as well as the
issues of war and peace, eloquently argue the opposite side of the case.
Debating  with  Hermocrates  before  the Syracusan assembly, Athenagoras
answers those who say that "democracy is neither wise nor equitable, but
that  the holders of property are the best fitted to rule. I say, on the
contrary,  first,  that  the  word  demos, or people, includes the whole
state, oli-

[308b]
garchy only a part; next, that if the best guardians of property are the
rich,  and  the  best  counsellors the wise, none can hear and decide so
well   as   the   many,  and  that  all  these  talents,  severally  and
collectively,  have  their  just  place in a democracy. But an oligarchy
gives  the  many  their  share  of  the danger, and not content with the
largest  part,  takes  and  keeps  the  whole  of the profit." In modern
political  thought,  the  discussion  of oligarchy seems to occur on two
levels. There is a controversy on the level of constitutional principles
with  regard  to  suffrage and representation and the qualifications for
public  office.  Here  the issues concern the justice of the fundamental
laws  of republican or popular government. There is also a consideration
of  the  way  in  which  men  of property or corporate concentrations of
wealth are able to exert influence upon the actual course of government.
Here the problem becomes, not so much the justice of the constitution or
of  the  laws,  but the weight which wealth seems able to throw onto the
scales  of  justice.  The  great  modern  defense  of  the  oligarchical
constitution does not seem to be as plainly or forcefully made in any of
the  great books as in the speeches of Edmund Burke, especially those in
opposition  to  the  suffrage  reform measures proposed by Charles James
Fox,  wherein  Burke argues for the principle of virtual representation.
It  is  unnecessary,  he claims, for the franchise to be extended to the
working  classes  if  their economic betters—who also happen to be their
superiors  in talent and education— deliberate on what is for the common
good  of  all. The Federalists seem to take an opposite view. Reflecting
on the system of British representation in their day, they observe that,
for  the  eight  millions  of  people  in  the  kingdoms  of England and
Scotland,  "the  representatives  ...  in the House of Commons amount to
five  hundred  and  fifty-eight."  But,  they go on, "of this number one
ninth  are  elected by three hundred and sixty-four persons and one half
by  five  thousand  seven hundred and twenty-three persons. It cannot be
supposed,"  they  argue, "that the half thus elected and who do not even
reside  among  the  people  at  large,  can  add  anything either to the
security of the people

[309a]
against  the  government, or to the knowledge of their circumstances and
interests  in the legislative councils. On the contrary, it is notorious
that they are more frequently the representatives and instruments of the
executive  magistrate  than  the  guardians and advocates of the popular
rights."  Nevertheless,  they do not condemn such an oligarchical system
of  representation  as entirely inimical to the virtues of parliamentary
government.  "It  is  very  certain,"  they  declare,  "not  only that a
valuable   portion  of  freedom  has  been  preserved  under  all  these
circumstances,  but that the defects in the British code are chargeable,
in  a  very  small  proportion,  on  the  ignorance  of  the legislature
concerning  the  circumstances  of  the  people."  Some  of the American
constitutionalists  may  be influenced by Burke's defense ofoligarchy in
terms  of  the  virtues  of  an  aristocracy,  but  they state their own
position  in  terms  which are more plainly oligarchical. They argue for
poll  tax  clauses  and property qualifications for public office on the
ground  that  the  country  should  be  run  by  the  people who own it.
Furthermore,  those  who  are  not economically independent are not in a
position   to   exercise   political   liberty.   "Power  over  a  man's
subsistence,"  Hamilton  declares,  "amounts  to  power  over his will."
Facing   the   issue   which  had  been  raised  on  the  floor  of  the
constitutional  convention,  Madison  remarks  that "the most common and
durable source of factions has been the various and unequal distribution
of property. Those who hold and those who are without property have ever
formed  distinct  interests in society." He proposes a representative—or
what he calls a "republican"—system of government to avoid the excessive
factionalism  of  the  pure  or direct democracies of Greek city-states.
"Theoretic politicians, who have patronized this species of government,"
Madison  writes,  "have erroneously supposed that by reducing mankind to
perfect  equality  in  their  political  rights, they would, at the same
time, be perfectly equalized and assimilated in their possessions, their
opinions,  and  their passions." By a weighted system of representation,
the power of sheer numbers may be counter-balanced by the power given to
other  factors, thus preventing the "accomplishment of the secret wishes
of an unjust and interested majority.

[309b]
Chapter  62: OLIGARCHY 275 .... A rage for paper money, for an abolition
of  debts,  for an equal division of property, or for any other improper
or  wicked  project,  will  be less apt to pervade the whole body of the
Union than a particular member of it." In another paper, the Federalists
answer  the  charge  that the constitution is oligarchical, because "the
House of Representatives will be taken from that class of citizens which
will  have least sympathy with the mass of the people and be most likely
to  aim  at  an ambitious sacrifice of the many to the aggrandizement of
the  few."  This objection, they say, while "leveled against a pretended
oligarchy,"  in  principle  "strikes  at  the  very  root  of republican
government."  The  method  of  election provided for by the Constitution
aims  "to  obtain for rulers men who possess most wisdom to discern, and
most  virtue to pursue, the common good of the society Who are to be the
electors  of  the  federal  representatives? Not the rich, more than the
poor;  not the learned, more than the ignorant; not the haughty heirs of
distinguished  names,  more  than  the  humble  sons  of  obscurity  and
unpropitious  fortune Who are to be the objects of popular choice? Every
citizen  whose  merit  may recommend him to the esteem and confidence of
the  country.  No qualification of wealth, of birth, of religious faith,
or  of  civil  profession,  is  permitted  to  fetter  the  judgment  or
disappoint  the  inclination of the Whether the American Constitution in
its  original  formulation  is  an oligarchical document has long been a
matter  of dispute. Whether the Federalists favor devices for protecting
the  rights  of property or repudiate oligarchical restrictions in favor
of the rights of man has also been the subject of controversy. That this
is  so  may indicate at least a certain ambiguity in their position. But
on  the  question  of  the  oligarchical  influences  on government— the
political pressures exerted by propertied classes to serve their special
interests—  the  opinion  of the modern authors of the great books seems
much  The  most  extreme  statement of this opinion is, of course, to be
found  in  the  Communist Manifesto. There government, in fact the state
it-

[310a]
276  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  self,  is  regarded  as  an instrument which the
economic  oppressors  wield against the oppressed. The final step in the
bourgeois  revolution,  according  to Marx and Engels, occurred when the
bourgeoisie  "conquered  for itself, in the modern representative State,
exclusive  political  sway."  In  the  bourgeois  state,  legislation is
nothing  but the will of this one class made into a law for all. One aim
of  the  communist  revolution, beyond the temporary dictatorship of the
proletariat,  is  the  withering  away of that historic formation of the
state in which "political power ... is merely the organized power of one
class  for  oppressing  another."  Though much less radical in intention
than  Marx,  Smith  and  Mill  make  statements which seem to be no less
radical  in  their  criticism  of  the oligarchical influences on modern
parliamentary  government.  It  has  been said, Smith observes, that "we
rarely hear . . . of combinations of masters, though frequently of those
of workmen. But whoever imagines, upon this account, that masters rarely
combine,  is  as  ignorant  of  the world as of the subject. Masters are
always  and  everywhere  in  a  sort  of tacit, but constant and uniform
combination,   not  to  raise  i.  The  oligarchical  constitution:  the
principles  and  types  of  oligarchy  2.  The  relation of oligarchy to
monarchy,  aristocracy, and democracy 3. The instability of oligarchical
government  or  democracy  3#.  The  preservation of oligarchies against
revolution  4.  The  defense  of  oligarchy:  the  political  rights and
privileges  of  property 5. The attack on oligarchy and on the political
power of wealth public office 5#. The character of the oligarch: the man
of property; the capitalist the class war

[310b]
the  wages  of  labor above their actual rate .... Masters too sometimes
enter into particular combinations to sink the wages of labor even below
this  rate."  Furthermore, the parties to the conflict do not have equal
access  to legislative protection. "Whenever the legislature attempts to
regulate   the  differences  between  masters  and  their  workmen,  its
counsellors are always the masters." Almost a century later, Mill writes
in  a  similar vein concerning "the persevering attempts so long made to
keep  down  wages  by  law  .... Does Parliament," he asks, "ever for an
instant look at any question with the eyes of a working man ? . . . . On
the  question  of  strikes,  for instance, it is doubtful if there is so
much  as one among the leading members of either House who is not firmly
convinced  that the reason of the matter is unqualifiedly on the side of
the masters, and that the men's view of it is simply absurd." The remedy
for   this   inequity,   according   to  Mill,  is  not  communism,  but
constitutional reforms in the direction of universal suffrage which will
no   longer   leave  the  working  classes  "excluded  from  all  direct
participation in the government." OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 277 278 30. The
revolutionary  changes  to  which  oligarchy  is  subject: the change to
despotism  279  5  a. The objection to property as a basis for privilege
with  regard  to  citizenship  or  5c.  Economic  status  and power as a
political   instrument:   oligarchy   in   relation   to  6.  Historical
observations of oligarchy: the rise and fall of oligarchies 280

[311a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The oligarchical constitution:
the  principles  and  types  of  oligarchy  6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
107d-108b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 353d; bk v, 502d;
503d-504b;  bk  viii,  579d-581c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 405c-408a /
Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk iv, 680a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii,
ch 10 [u6obn16] 412d / Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1266^-24]
461c-d; ch 10 [i272a27~b io] 468c-469a; ch ii
[i273a2-b
7]  469c-470a;  bk hi, ch 6 [i278b9~ 14] 475d; ch 7-13 476c-483a; bk iv,
ch 2-9 488b-494d passim, esp ch 3
[i2ooai3]-cH 4
[i2QOb2o] 489b-d, ch
5
[i2Q2a3o-b io] 491d492a, ch
6
[1293*11-34]
492d-493a; ch 12
[i296bi7-34]
496d-497a;  ch 14-16 498b502a,c passim; bk v, ch i [1301*30-35] 502b; ch
12  [i3i6a39-b i5] 519c; bk vi, ch 6-8 524b526d / Athenian Constitution,
ch 2-6 553a555c; ch 29 566b-d; ch 33-34 568b-569a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[i365b32-i366a  5]  608a-b  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 97b-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 95, a 4, ans 229b-230c 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  v,  8a-b;  ch  ix,  14c15a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
104d-105a; part iv, 273a-b

[311b]
Chapter  62:  OLIGARCHY  277  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch x, sect 132
55a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk viii, 52c-d 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  hi, 419b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 165c-166c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73b  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 450c 43
Federalist: number 57 176d-179b; number 77, 228d 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  363b-364d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 277c-d;
part   in,   293c-294a   2.  The  relation  of  oligarchy  to  monarchy,
aristocracy,  and  democracy  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 107c-108c 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi,  520a-d;  bk  viii, 575d-576b;
577b-c; 579d580c; 587a-b 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 402b-d; 405c-406a /
Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk iv, 680a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch
3
[ii3i a24-29]
378d; bk viii, ch 10 [u6obn-i6] 412d; [n6ob 32-116^3] 413a-b / Politics,
bk ii, ch 6 [i265b 27"39l 46 lb ; CH i° [i272a27-b io] 468c-469a; ch 11
[i273 a2-b7]
469c-470a; bk hi, ch 5
[i278ai5-3 4 ] 475b-c; ch 6 [1278V14] 475d;
ch  7-13  476c-483a; ch 15 [i286b9-2i] 484d485a; bk iv, ch 2-9 488b-494d
passim, esp

[312a]
(2.  The relation of oligarchy to monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy?)
ch 3
[i29oai3]-CH 4 [i290b2o] 489b-d, ch 5
491d-492a, ch 6 [1293*11-34] 492d-493a; ch 11
[i295b35]-cH
12
[1297*12] 496a-497b; ch
14-16 498b-502a,c; bk v, ch 7
[i3o6b22-26]
508c-d;  ch  8-9  509d-512d; ch 12 [i3i6ai-b28] 518d-519d; bk vi, ch 6-8
524b-526d  / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 8 608a-c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b;
47a-48a  15 Tacitus : Annals, bk vi, 97b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  4,  ans 229b-230c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
104d-105a;  part  iv,  273a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch x, sect 132
55a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk viii, 52c-d; bk xx, 151c-152a 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk hi, 419b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
hi,  165c-166c;  bk  v,  309c-310d  42 Kant: Science of Right, 450a-c 43
Federalist: number 57 176d-179b; number 58, 181b-c; number 60, 185a-187a
passim;   number   6^,   194b-195b;   number   77,   228d229a  43  Mill:
Representative  Government, 363b-364d; 393c-395a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  ii,  277c-d;  part  in,  292d-293b 3. The instability of
oligarchical   government   "ha.  The  revolutionary  changes  to  which
oligarchy  is subject: the change to despotism or democracy 6 Herodotus:
History, bk hi, 108b-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 436d-438b;
bk  viii,  568d-569a; 569c-585a esp 582a-c; 587a-590c 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  viii,  408b-409a  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  680a-b / Seventh Letter, 801c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12
[i273b361274*22]
470c-d; bk hi, ch 15
[1286^9-21]
484d-485a; bk iv, ch 5
[1292^ 1-22]
492a; ch 11
[i295b35~i296a2i] 496a-b; bk
v, ch i 502a-503b passim, esp [1302^-16] 503b; ch 3
[i302b25-28]
504a;
[1 303^-7] 505a; ch
6 507b-508c; ch 12
[i3i6ai-b28] 518d-519d
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  2-6  553a-555c;  ch  32-41  568a-572a 14
Plutarch:  Solon,  68d-71c;  75c-76d  /  Themistocles, 96b-c / Camillus,
117c-121a,c  /  Coriolanus,  176b-184c  /  Crassus,  444d-445d / Pompey,
521c-d  /  Caesar,  581d-582a / Phocion 604b,d-619d / Agis 648b,d-656d /
Cleomenes,   657a-663c   /   Tiberius   Gracchus,  674c-681a,c  /  Caius
Gra<r<r/!#.!f  681b,d-689a,c / Cicero, 708a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi,
97b-c / Histories, bk 11, 224d-225a

[312b]
278  THE  GREAT IDEAS 3 to 4 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, p\rt ii, 149a-b; 152c
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xviii,  sect 201 71c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  51d52a;  52c-53a  43  Mill: Representative
Government,  394a-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 275b276a;
278d-279b;  part  hi,  300a-301c  50  Marx:  Capital, 377c-378d 50 Marx-
Engels: Communist Manifesto, 421c425b esp 423d-424b, 425b; 429bc 3£. The
preservation  of oligarchies against revolution 6 Herodotus: History, bk
vi,  202c-203b  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk iv, 463a-465c; bk v,
482d-483a;  502d-504b;  bk  viii,  580bc;  582a;  582d-583d; 587b-589d 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii, ch ii [i273b i7-26] 470b; bk iv, ch 12-13
496d-498b; bk v, ch 6
[1306^-12] 507d-508a; ch 8-9 509d-512d; bk
vi, ch 6-7 524b-525b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 35c-d / Camillus, 117c121a,c
/   Coriolanus,   176b-184c  /  Agis  648b,d656d  /  Tiberius  Gracchus,
674c-681a,c  esp  680b-d / Caius Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  hi, 165b-166c; bk iv, 239c-240b 50 Marx: Capital, 305a
[fn  2]  50  Marx-Engels : Communist Manifesto, 432b-d 4. The defense of
oligarchy:  the political rights and privileges of property 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  hi,  107d-108a  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk viii,
575d-576b; 590a-b 7 Plato: Laws, bk v, 695a-c; bk vi, 699d700b / Seventh
Letter, 807a-b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[126^261266^0] 461b-d; ch
ii
[1273^2-24] 469d;
bk  in,  ch  5  [i277b33-i278a25]  475a-c;  ch  10  478d-479a;  ch 12-13
480c-483a;  bk  iv,  ch  8-9  493c-494d;  ch 11-12 495b-497b; bk v, ch 1
502a-503b; bk vi, ch 3 521c-522a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35d / Solon,
70d71c  /  Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Dion, 800c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
32b-d; 35d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch v, 8a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii, 140d 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch vii, sect 87
44a-b;  sect  94  46a-c;  ch  ix 53c-54d; ch xi, sect 137-140 56d-58a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk ii, 5b-c; 7b-c; bk v, 25a-c; 32b-c; bk
vii,  45c-46a;  bk xi, 71d-72b; bk xxvi, 221c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
354b-355b  /  Political Economy, 377c-d / Social Contract, bk hi, 412b-c
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 309a-311c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 81c-82a; 94d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 436d-437c

[313a]
5  to  5c  Chapter  62:  OLIGARCHY  279 43 Articles of Confederation: iv
[17-36]  5b-c  43  Federalist:  number  10, 50b-d; number 35, 113b-114c;
number  54  170a-172b  passim;  number  57  176d-179b passim; number 60,
186a-c;  number  63, 194d-195b; NUMB-ER-79, 233c 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  366c-d;  383b-387d;  418d-419a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 251a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 45 23c-d; part in, par 208 69c;
par 305-307 102 b-c; additions, 181 148b-c / Philosophy of History, part
ii,  275b-276a;  277c-d  5. The attack on oligarchy and on the political
power  of  wealth  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk hi, 108b-c 6 Thucydides :
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi,  519c-520d;  bk  viii,  575d-576b  7 Plato:
Republic, bk iv, 342d-344a; bk viii, 405c-408a / Laws, bk iv, 680a-b; bk
v,  695a-c;  bk  viii,  733b-734a  / Seventh Letter, 800b-d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 10
[1272*27b io] 468c-469a; bk hi, ch 7 476c-477a passim;
ch  13  [1283^7-33] 481d; bk iv, ch 11 [i295b 2-i296b2] 495c-496c; ch 12
[i296b35-i297a i3] 497a-b; bk v, ch i
[1301*25-39]
502b-c;
[i30i b26-i302a8] 503a-b; ch
6
[i305a36-b2i]
507b-c; ch 9
[i309b i4-i3ioai3] 511d-512b /
Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 16 638b :c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34b-37c; 47a-48a /
Coriolanus,  180b-d  /  Lysander, 361a-d / Agis 648b,d-656d / Cleomenes,
657a-663c   23   Hobbes:   Leviathan,  part  ii,  140d  27  Shakespeare:
Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-89]
351a-352b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 7c; bk v, 23a-25a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  353a-358c  passim  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
501c-d  42 Kant: Science of Right, 441d-443b; 450c 43 Federalist: number
57 176d-179b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 293c294a 50 Marx-
Engels: Communist Manifesto 415a434d esp 420c-422b, 424d-425a, 425d-428a
5a.  The  objection  to property as a basis for privilege with regard to
citizenship  or  public  office  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk vi,
520b-c;  bk  viii, 576d 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 405c-407a / Laws, bk
iv,  682c  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch ii [1273*22^7] 469d-470a; bk
hi,  ch  9-12  477c-481b  passim 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract, bk hi, 412b-c; 421c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b
42 Kant: Science of Right, 445a-c

[313b]
43  Federalist:  number  39,  125c-126b;  number  52,  165b-c; number 57
176d-179b;   number   60,   186c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
345c-346c:  369b-370a;  384a-387d;  394a-395a; 398a- d: 419a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 310 103b-c / Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  263b-d; part iv, 356d; 364a-c 50 Marx: Capital, 137b-141b esp
138b,  140a-b;  364a-368b  esp  367c-368b  50  Marx-Engels  :  Communist
Manifesto,  416c-d; 425b-d; 428d-429c 5b. The character of the oligarch:
the man of property; the capitalist 5 Euripides : Suppliants
[229-245]
260b-c / Hecuba
[1 206-1 232] 363b
5 Aristophanes: Wasps
[653-724]
515c-516d  /  Plutus  [144-197]  630d-631b 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii,
221c-222a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi, 512c-d; bk viii,
587a-b  7  Plato: Republic, bk iv, 343a-b; bk viii, 407a-408a / Laws, bk
viii,  733b-734a;  bk  ix,  751c-d  9  Aristotle:  Politics, bk ii, ch 7
[1267*36^9] 463b; bk iv, ch 6
[1293*12-34] 492d-493a;
bk vi, ch 7
[i32i a35~b2] 525a / Rhetoric, bk
ii, ch 16 638b-c 14 Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus, 218a-d; 223c224a / Marcus
Cato,  287c-d  /  Aristides-Marcus  Cato,  292b  /  Lysander,  361a-d  /
Lucullus,  419a-420b  /  Crassus,  439a-c  / Agis 648b,d656d 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk hi, 57b-58d; bk vi, 97b-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[1-96]
9c-10c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv,  158a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
377d-378a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 10a; bk vii, 45a-b; bk
xx,  146b-c  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 109d-110d; bk hi, 177c-d
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 497c-501b passim 43 Mill: Representative
Government,   345c-346a   44   Boswell:  Johnson,  194c-195a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, part hi, 292d293b 50 Marx: Capital, 72a-c; 112c;
292d-295d  esp 292d-293c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 420c-d 5c.
Economic  status  and  power  as  a  political  instrument: oligarchy in
relation  to  the  class war Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 13:18-24— (D) OT
Ecclesiasticus,  13:24-30  5  Aristophanes: Plutus [122-226] 630c-631c 6
Herodotus: History, bk vi, 202c-203b

[314a]
(5.  The  attack on oligarchy and on the political power of wealth. 5 c.
Economic  status  and  power  as  a  political  instrument: oligarchy in
relation  to  the  class  war.)  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
428c-d; 434c-438c; bk iv, 463a-465c; 467a-b; bk v, 482d-483a; 502d-504b;
bk  viii,  575c576c;  577b-d; 579c-583c; 587a-590c 7 Plato: Republic, bk
iv,  342d;  bk viii, 405c406b / Laws, bk iv, 682b-c; bk viii, 733b734a 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 7
[i266b24~
1267*17] 462b-d; bk hi, ch 10
[1281*11-29]
478d-479a; ch 15 [i286b8-22] 484d-485a; bk iv, ch 3
[i289b26-i29oa i3] 488d-489a; ch 4
[i290a3o-b2o] 489b-d;
[i29i b5-i3] 490d; ch
6
[1293*12-34]
492d-493a; ch 11-12 495b497b passim; bk v, ch 5-6 506b-508c; ch 7
[1307*5-39]
509a-c; ch 9
[1310*22-25]
512c;  bk  vi, ch 3 521c-522a / Athenian Constitution, ch 2-6 553a-555c;
ch  32-41 568a-572a 14 Plutarch: Solon, 68d-71c / Poplicola-Solon, 87a /
Agis  648b,d-656d  /  Tiberius  Gracchus,  674c-681a,c  / Caius Gracchus
681b,d-689a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b  /  Histories, bk 11,
224d-225a  26  Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv 56a-64d 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus,  act  i,  sc  i  [1-167] 351a-353a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xi, 77b83c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a-358c passim / Social
Contract,  bk  iv,  429c-430a  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 28a-d;
53b56a;  61c-d; 109d-110d; bk iv, 239c-240a; 287d-288c; bk v, 309a-311c;
346c-347d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 127a-c; 144a-c 43 Federalist:
number  10,  49c-51b;  number  54,  171b-172a  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  345b-346c  passim;  366d-367a;  368b-370a passim; 393c395a;
398a-d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 251a; 255d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  263b-d;  275b-276a; part hi, 287d-288b; 295b-297a; 300a-301c;
part  iv,  364a-c 50 Marx: Capital, 63b-c; 137b-143a passim, esp 138b-c,
140a-b;  241a-244b  esp  243d-244a;  283d-285c;  317b-c;  364a-368b  esp
367c-368b;  372c-383d  esp  382c-383d  CROSS-REFERENCES Constitution 5b;
Democracy 3a; Government 2b.

[314b]
280 THE GREAT IDEAS 5c to 6 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto 415a434d
esp   415b-417a,c,  420b-c,  421c-422a,  425b-c,  428d-429c,  434a-d  6.
Historical observations of oligarchy: the rise and fall of oligarchies 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  202c-203b;  bk  vii, 243b-c 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  353d;  bk  in, 434c-438b; bk iv, 458d-459c;
463a465c;  bk v, 502d; 503d-504b; bk vi, 520a-d; bk viii 564a-593a,c esp
568d-569a, 575c-576c, 577b-d, 579c-583c, 584b-585a, 585d-586b, 587a-590c
7 Plato: Seventh Letter, 800b-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 10
[1272*27b io]
468c-469a; ch ii
[1273*3-30]
469c-d;
[i273b i7~26] 470b; bk hi, ch 15
[i286b9-2i]
484d-485a; bk v, ch 4
[1304*18-39]
505d506a; ch 5-6 506b-508c; ch 12
[i3i6*i-b28]
518d-519d  / Athenian Constitution, ch 2-6 553a-555c; ch 32-41 568a-572a
passim 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34b-37c; 47a-48a / Solon, 68d-71c; 75c-76d
/ Camillas 102b,d121a, c passim, esp 117c-121a,c / Alcibiades, 166a-174d
/ Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Lysander 354b,d-368a,c / Phocion 604b,d-619d /
Agis 648b,d-656d / Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c
/  Caius  Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk vi, 97b-c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  viii,  51d52a;  bk  xi,  77b-83c 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 429c-431a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk hi, 165b-181a,c passim; bk iv, 239c-240b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
501c-d  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b; 81c-82a; 570d-572d; 574b-582b
esp  576a-577b,  579c581a  43  Mill:  Representative Government, 346a-c;
353b; 363d-364d; 367a; 393c-395a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  244 77c / Philosophy of History, part ii, 275b276a; 278d-279b; part
hi,  293c-294a;  295d297a;  300a-301c  50  Marx:  Capital, 354a-377a esp
355d-359c,  368c-369a,  371c-372c  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
415b416b;  419b,d-422c  esp  420b-c;  429c-433d  passim For: The general
discussion  of constitutional government, see Constitution 1-30; Law 7a;
Monarchy  ia-ia(i). Other considerations of the relation of oligarchy to
aristocracy  and  democracy,  see  Aristocracy  2d; Democracy 2b, 33-30;
Government  2a,  2c;  and  for the theory of the mixed constitution as a
compromise between democracy and oligarchy, see Aristocracy 2b;

[315a]
For: The tyrannical and despotic extremes to which oligarchy can go, see
Tyranny  2b.  Opposition  5b;  Revolution  4a,  5a~5c; War and Peace 2c;
Wealth  6a, 9J1. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included
in  Great Boohs ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  '  Mosca.  The  Ruling  Class  Plutarch.  "Of the Three Sorts of
Government   Michels.   Political   Parties   Monarchy,   Democracy  and
Oligarchy,"  in  MoB  .  Adams.  The Theory of Social Revolutions ra"a .
Beard.  An  Economic  Interpretation of the ConstituDante. Convivio {The
Banquet),  fourth treatise, tion of the United States ch 10-14 J. Adams.
A  Defense  of  the  Constitutions  of  GovernT.  Veblen.  The Theory of
Business  Enterprise  ment  of the United States of America . The Vested
Interests  and  the  State  of the InBurke. Thoughts on the Cause of the
Present Disdustrial Arts contents Bryce. Modern Democracies, part hi, ch
74-75  .  On  the  Reform  of the Representation in the Tawney. Equality
House  of  Commons  Brinton.  The Anatomy of Revolution, ch ii, vii . An
Appealfrom the New to the Old Whigs Burnham. The Machiavellians

[315b]
Chapter  62  :  OLIGARCHY  281 Burke. Letter to Sir Hercules Langrishe §
Economic  Origins  of Jeffersonian  Democracy  II.  Pareto.  The Mind and
Society, vol hi, ch ii

[316a]
Pragmatism  and in his unfinished last work, Some Problems of Philosophy,
William  James IN uses the problem of the one and the many as one of the
crucial  tests  of  the  philosophical  mind.  In  his  famous  table of
doctrines  or  "isms"  he aligns monism with rationalism and idealism in
the  column  headed  "tender-minded,"  and  in  the other column, headed
"tough-minded,"  he  places  their  opposites—pluralism, empiricism, and
materialism.  But  as  his  own  theories  show,  "isms" like monism and
pluralism  tend  to  oversimplify  the  issues.  Whoever  emphasizes the
oneness of the world, for example, may also acknowledge its manyness and
recognize  that  it is somehow a pluriverse as well as a universe. Some,
like  Bradley,  may qualify this view by regarding the unity as ultimate
reality,  the  plurality  as  appearance  or illusion. Whoever finds the
multiplicity  of  things  the  primary fact may, nevertheless, find some
unity  in  the order and connection of things. Some, like James himself,
may  insist  that  the connection is a loose concatenation of relatively
independent  parts  of  reality, rather than an interpenetration of each
part  with  every  other in the solid whole which James calls the "block
universe."   There   may   be   another   oversimplification  in  James'
consideration  of  the  problem  of the one and the many. He seems to be
concerned  largely,  if  not  exclusively,  with the alternatives of the
block  and  the concatenated universe as conceptions of the structure of
reality. But, as some of the great books of antiquity make evident, that
is  only  one of the problems of the one and the many. Perhaps it should
be  said,  not that there are many problems of the one and the many, but
that  there  is  one problem having many aspects or applications, for in
every  statement  of  the  problem  there is at least this singleness of
theme; that the one and the many are

[316b]
Chapter  6y.  ONE  AND  MANY INTRODUCTION opposed, that the one is not a
many  and  the  many  not a one. Yet even that does not seem to be quite
accurate  for, as Socrates tells Protarchus in the Philebus, it may also
be  said that the one is a many and the many a one. These are "wonderful
propositions,"  he  says,  wonderful  because "whoever affirms either is
very  open to attack." At this early moment in the recorded tradition of
western   thought,   the  dialogues  of  Plato,  so  thorough  in  their
exploration of the problems of the one and many, make no claim to having
discovered  or  invented them. They were ancient even then. They seem to
hang  in the very atmosphere of thought, usually befogging those who try
to  see  the truth about anything else without first clearing away their
obscurities.  Socrates  refers to "the common and acknowledged paradoxes
of  the one and the many . . . that everybody has by this time agreed to
dismiss  as  childish  and obvious and detrimental to the true course of
thought." These aside, some genuine perplexities remain. Protarchus asks
Socrates  to instruct him about "those other marvels connected with this
subject  which," as Socrates seems to have implied, "have not yet become
common  and acknowledged." Socrates begins by calling his attention, not
to  the  unity  of  this man or this ox, but to the sense in which it is
said that "man is one, or ox is one, or beauty one, or the good one." It
is  necessary  to ask, he says, first, whether such unities exist; then,
such unities being always the same, and admitting neither generation nor
destruction,  how  each  is  itself alone, is not only one but this one;
finally,  how these unities can be conceived as dispersed and multiplied
in  the  world  of  things  which  come  to  be and pass away. This last
question  seems to be the most difficult because it asks about the being
of the same and one as it becomes in the one and manv. 282

[317a]
Protarchus  is impatient to begin clearing up these problems. Willing to
undertake  what  he  calls "this great and multifarious battle, in which
such  various  points  are  at  issue^-Socrates  is  also anxious to let
Protarchus  and  the other youths know the intellectual perils which lie
ahead  for  novices  who enter upon this inquiry. "The one and many," he
tells them, "become identified by thought . . . They run about together,
in  and out of every word which is uttered . . . This union of them will
never cease, and is not now beginning, but is ... an everlasting quality
of  thought  itself,  which  never grows old." That is why, he explains,
"any young man, when he first tastes these subtleties, is delighted, and
fancies  that he has found a treasure of wisdom; in the first enthusiasm
of  his  joy,  he  leaves  no stone, or rather no thought, unturned, now
rolling  up  the  many  into  the  one,  and kneading them together, now
unfolding and dividing them; he puzzles himself first and above all, and
then  he  proceeds  to  puzzle  his neighbors, whether they are older or
younger  or of his own age— that makes no difference; neither father nor
mother  does  he  spare;  no  human being who has ears is safe from him,
hardly  even  his  dog; and a barbarian would have no chance of escaping
him,  if  an  interpreter  could  only  be found." Whether it is full of
exasperating  subtleties or is a treasure of true wisdom, the discussion
of the one and the many—in itself and in relation to being and becoming,
the  intelligible  and  the sensible, the definite and the infinite, the
same and other, universals and particulars, wholes and parts, the simple
and  the  complex,  the  indivisible and the continuous— is a discussion
which  seems  unavoidable to the ancients. In the dialogues of Plato and
in  Aristotle's  treatises,  especially his Metaphysics, the one and the
many  are  connected  with the basic terms of philosophical thought. For
Plato,  the  distinction  between  the  one and the many enters into the
analysis  of  almost any object—such as pleasure or virtue or knowledge.
Anything,  viewed  under  the  aspect of its being or- its becoming, its
definite  sameness  or  its  indefinite  otherness  and variety, must be
discussed both as a one and as a many. The

[317b]
;  Chapter  63: ONE AND MANY 283 motion of Plato's dialectic may be from
the  one  to  the  many  or from the many to the one or it may be on the
level  of  the many as an intermediate stage through which analysis must
go  in  proceeding  from the infinite to the one. Those who pass at once
from  unity to infinity, says Socrates, do not recognize "the difference
between  the mere art of disputation and true dialectic." For Aristotle,
first  philosophy  or  metaphysics,  concerned  as it is with "being qua
being  and  the  attributes  which  belong  to anything qua being," also
investigates  unity.  Unity is the first property of being. The meanings
of one or unity are as various as the meanings of 'to be.' If there is a
difference  between  essential and accidental being, there is a parallel
difference  between  essential  and  accidental  unity.  If  natural and
artificial  things differ in substance or being, so too must they differ
in  unity.  "Being and unity are the same," Aristotle says, "and are one
thing in the sense that they are implied in one another as are principle
and  cause.  "  Unity  is  nothing  apart from being, and nothing can be
without  being one in some sense of unity which is determined by the way
in  which  the thing exists. Aristotle's analysis of any subject matter,
proceeding  as it does by reference to contraries, always appeals to the
one and the many. "All contraries," he says, "are reducible to being and
non-being  and  to unity and plurality, as for instance, rest belongs to
unity  and  movement to plurality . . . And everything else is evidently
reducible  to  unity  and  plurality.  .  .  . For all things are either
contraries  or  composed  of contraries, and unity and plurality are the
principles  of  all contrariety." The problems in whose analysis one and
many  seem  to be involved recur in every period of western thought. The
question,  for  example,  whether there is an irreducible duality in the
relation  of  knower  and  known,  or  whether, in the act of knowledge,
knower  and  known  are one, is discussed by Hobbes and William James as
well  as Plotinus and Aristotle. The question whether the state—which is
a  multitude  somehow  united for a common life—has, or should have, the
same  degree  of unity as the family, is discussed by Locke and Hegel as
well as Plato and Aristotle.

[318a]
284  THE  GREAT IDEAS The earlier controversy over the indivisibility of
sovereignty becomes at a later stage the central issue of federal union,
to  which  e  pluribus  unum is the solution offered by the Federalists.
Questions concerning the simple and the complex, or wholes and parts, as
objects of knowledge, or questions concerning the unity and divisibility
of  time,  space,  or  matter,  engage  the  attention  of inquirers and
analysts  no less in modern than in ancient times. But there are certain
problems  which  are  treated  with  unusual  speculative  vigor  by the
ancients  alone.  Unlike  the  problems  just mentioned, which deal with
applications  of  the contrast between unity and multiplicity, these are
questions about the One itself—what it is, whether it exists, whether it
is  identical  with  Being,  whether  it  is  itself  a substance or the
substance  of  all  things.  The  sustained inquiry into such matters in
antiquity  seems  to  testify  to  the  extraordinary power exerted upon
ancient  thought  by  Parmenides of Elea. The person called "the Eleatic
Stranger"  represents  his  theories  in  such dialogues of Plato as the
Sophist and the Statesman. Parmenides, or his disciple Zeno, is probably
the  source  of many of the paradoxes and riddles which Socrates, in the
Philebus,  dismisses as no longer worthy of serious attention. One whole
dialogue,  named  Parmenides  because  of  his  part  in the discussion,
exhibits  the Eleatic demonstration that 'all is one.' It abounds in the
subtleties  of  the various arguments which try to defend the reality of
the  many  or  try  to  reduce that position to absurdity. Questioned by
Socrates  concerning  his  paradoxes,  Zeno says that his writings "were
meant  to protect the arguments of Parmenides against those who make fun
of  him  and  seek to show the many ridiculous and contradictory results
which  they  suppose to follow from the affirmation of the one." When he
addresses  himself  to  the  partisans  of  the  many, Zeno says that he
returns  "their  attack  with interest by retorting upon them that their
hypothesis of the being ofmany, if carried out, appears to be still more
ridiculous  than  the  hypothesis  of  the being of one." Aristotle also
deals  with  the  Eleatic  arguments. In the Physics, he says first that
inquiring  about whether being is one, cannot contribute to the study of
nature. He then adds that

[318b]
a  such inquiry anyway would be "like arguing against any other position
maintained  for  the  sake  of  argument  ...  or like refuting a merely
contentious  argument."  This  description,  he  says,  "applies  to the
arguments  both of Melissus and Parmenides: their premises are false and
their  conclusions do not follow . . . Accept one ridiculous proposition
and  the  rest follows— simple enough proceeding." Aristotle's treatment
of  Parmenides  and  Zeno  in  the  Metaphysics  seems  to  be  no  more
sympathetic,  though  it  tacitly  admits  the  relevance of the Eleatic
speculations  to  the  study of being, if not to the study of change and
the principles of nature. Nevertheless, many of the questions concerning
the  one  and  the  many  which  both Plato and Aristotle deem worthy of
discussion   appear  to  have  some  connection  with  the  perplexities
propounded  by  Parmenides  and his school. Those who do not deny either
the  unity  of  being  or its multiplicity tend to make the primary fact
about reality either its oneness or its manyness. This may seem at first
to  be  of  slight significance, but if the two views of the world which
result  from  this  difference  are  examined,  it may be found that the
disagreement  on this single point changes the perspective on everything
else.  The  philosophers  who  magnify either the one or the many behold
universes  more radically dissimilar than the same object looked at from
opposite  ends  of  a telescope. But that is not all. Almost every other
fundamental  conception—of  God  and  man, of the mind and knowledge, of
matter  and  motion,  of  cause  and necessity—seems also to be altered.
Spinoza,  for  example, criticizes those who attribute to finite things,
of  which there are necessarily many, the properties which belong to the
infinite being, of which there can be only one. This man, this stone, or
any comparable individual thing, is not a substance, having the power to
exist  in and of itself; it consists merely "of certain modifications of
the  attributes  of God," the one infinite substance in which everything
else "both is and is conceived." According to Spinoza, those who suppose
that the finite many are substances "have not observed a proper order of
philosophic  study." They begin with the objects of sense which have the
least reality and come last to the di-

[319a]
vine  nature, the infinite one, which "ought to be studied first because
it  is  first in the order of knowledge and in the order of things . . .
Hence >iTrTat it has come to pass," Spinoza continuesr there was nothing
of  which  men  thought less than the divine nature while they have been
studving natural objects, and when they afterwards applied themselves to
think  about  God, there was nothing of which they could think less than
those  prior  fictions  upon  which  they  had  built their knowledge of
natural  things, for these fictions could in noway help to the knowledge
of the divine nature." Starting with the definition of substance as that
which  exists  in  itself  and is conceived through itself, and with the
definition  of  God  as  absolutely  infinite  being,  "that  is to say,
substance  consisting  of  infinite  attributes,"  Spinoza undertakes to
prove that there cannot be two or more substances having the same nature
or attributes, that substance is necessarily infinite, and hence that it
is  impossible for more than one substance to exist. Since he regards it
as  axiomatic  that  "everything  which  is,  is  either in itself or in
another," it follows for Spinoza that if anything at all exists, God (or
substance)  must  necessarily exist—as that which alone exists in itself
and  as  that in which everything else has its finite being as a mode or
affection  of  the attributes of God. Certain other consequences seem to
follow.  The  one  infinite  substance is indivisible: it is not a whole
made up of parts which can have independent existence, as the parts of a
quantitative  whole  seem  able  to  exist when the quantity is divided.
Furthermore,  God,  according  to Spinoza, "is the immanent, and not the
transitive,  cause  of  all  things."  God  causes them not as one thing
acting  on another when both are independent in existence, but rather as
the  being  in which all things are. God is not present in the world, as
other  theologians  seem to think, in the manner in which a cause exists
in  an  effect that depends upon it. Rather the whole world is in God as
an  effect  which  can  in no way be separated from the existence of the
cause, any more than an aspect can be separated from that of which it is
an  aspect.  For  Spinoza, the unity and totality of being can be called
"nature,"  as  well  as  "infinite  substance" or "God." His distinction
between

[319b]
Chapter  63:  ONE  AND  MANY  285  natura  naturans and natura naturata,
discussed  in  the chapter on Nature, seems to permit him to distinguish
between  the infinite or eternal and the finite or temporal— the one and
the  many—without  implying a real separation between God and the world.
Since  God  is  immanent  in  the  world,  and since God not only exists
necessarily  but  also  acts  from  the  necessity of His own nature, it
follows  (as  is  indicated in the chapter on Necessity and Contingency)
that   every  finite  and  temporal  aspect  of  nature  is  necessarily
determined.  Nothing  is  contingent. Nothing could be otherwise than it
is.  This  examination  of  a  doctrine  in which the primacy of the one
absorbs  as well as subordinates the many, serves to exemplify the point
that  making  the one primary is more than a matter of emphasis. It also
shows  that almost every fundamental question is affected. It presents a
picture  of  what  William  James  appears to mean when he speaks of the
block  universe, though he himself usually seems to have in mind Hegel's
Absolute  rather  than  Spinoza's  God.  Aristotle  advances  a contrary
doctrine.  Like  Spinoza  he  uses the term 'substance.' Like Spinoza he
defines  substance as that which exists in itself, not as an accident (a
quality,  for example) which exists in another, e.g., the redness in the
rose.  But  for  him  substance  is  not necessarily infinite, nor is it
indivisible.  A rose or a man is a substance. Every physical thing which
has  a  natural  unity is a substance. Each is a finite whole, or rather
each  is  a  whole  in  a  number of different senses. Insofar as it has
essential  unity,  it  is  a  whole  composed  of matter and form which,
according  to  Aristotle,  are  represented  in  the  formulation  of  a
definition  by  the genus and the differentia. Insofar as it is composed
of  matter,  it  also has the unity of a quantitative whole in virtue of
which  it  moves  as  one  thing  or  uniquely  occupies  a place. Since
quantitative   unity   involves   continuity,   and  continuity  entails
divisibility,  a substance remains one only so long as it is not divided
into  its quantitative parts, just as it remains one essentially only so
long as its matter and form are not separated. A substance is individual
not because it is absolutely indivisible—as for Lucretius the atom

[320a]
286  THE  GREAT IDEAS is because it is simple rather than composite. Its
individuality  rather  consists,  first, in its being divided from other
substances  in  such  a  way  that  it  can  perish  without necessarily
destroying  them, or they can perish without destroying it; and, second,
in  the  fact  that,  though  divisible into parts, it is one whole when
these  parts  remain  undivided.  Yet as one substance it has more unity
than  a  mere  collection  of things. The difference between a man and a
machine,  according  to Aristotle's differentiation between the unity of
natural  substances  and  of  artificial  things,  is  that a man is not
composed  of  substances (though the parts of a living organism may come
to  exist as substances when it is decomposed or they are separated from
it),  whereas a machine, made up of separate pieces of metal, is nothing
but  a  number  of  individual substances arranged in a certain way. The
unity  of  man  does not appear to be the same, therefore, when soul and
body  are  conceived by Descartes as two substances and by Aristotle not
as  distinct substances but as form and matter which through their union
constitute  a  single substance. Unity, in short, belongs essentially to
the  individual  natural substance. Because each individual substance is
necessarily a one among a many, Aristotle, unlike Spinoza, cannot affirm
the unity of substance without also affirming a plurality of substances.
Not itself a substance, but only an aggregation of substances, the world
is  primarily  a  many rather than a one. The unity it possesses derives
from  the order and connection of the substances which are its component
parts;  and  that in turn largely derives from the way in which distinct
substances  causally  interact. Since, according to Aristotle, causality
includes   contingency   and   chance,  the  causal  interdependence  of
substances, with respect to their generation and their motions, does not
lock  them  together  into a solid block. To use James' imagery again, a
vast  plurality of individual substances, causally yet also contingently
related,  constitutes a loosely-knit world, a concatenated universe. The
relation  of  the world as a whole to God does give it greater unity, if
the supposition of a plurality of finite individual substances re-

[320b]
mains  the  fundamental  feature of the world God creates. The Christian
doctrine  of  creation  may  attribute to the world a greater unity than
that possessed by any work of human art, in proportion as the infinitely
greater  wisdom  of the divine plan orders the separate things of nature
with  an  infinitely  greater perfection than man can achieve in putting
things together or in ordering them to his purpose. But if, according to
the theologian, God in creating the world creates not one substance, but
many  substances,  forming  a  single whole through the pattern of their
connection  with  one  another, then in a sense the world has less unity
than  each  of  its  component  substances.  For  Aquinas,  one  kind of
substance  may  have greater unity than another. The immaterial has more
than the material; and God more than any finite substance, since each of
these  is  composed  of matter and form, or essence and accidents, or at
least  of  essence  and  existence, whereas the infinite being of God is
absolutely   simple.  The  divine  nature  is  without  matter,  without
accidents;  its  attributes  are  identical  with  its  essence, and its
essence  with its existence. This cardinal point about the divine nature
is crucial to the conception of God, and of the world's relation to God.
In  the formation of Christian theology, God's absolute simplicity seems
to  exclude  all but one resolution of the issue concerning the Trinity.
According  to  the  position  Augustine  takes  in criticizing the Arian
heresy,  the position which is expressed in the Nicene Creed, God is not
a  trinity  of  substances,  but  a  trinity  of  persons—aspects of, or
relations   within,   one  substance.  The  plurality  of  things  which
constitutes  the  world  puts  the  world  entirely  outside  the divine
substance.  Immanent only as a cause, the simple being of God transcends
the  complex  whole  of  the  created  world.  This transcendence seems,
furthermore,  to  imply  for  theologians  like  Augustine and Aquinas a
fundamental  duality  in  the  realm of existence. God and the world are
two,  not  one. Infinite being is absolutely prior to and independent of
finite  beings.  The one can exist without the many. Though the many are
said to participate in being, when they do exist, they do not enter into
the being of the one, or share it in any way.

[321a]
The being they have is not only separate from the being of God, but even
their mode of being is only analogical to the divine being. The doctrine
that  each thing has its-own being, and that, as Aquinas says, "being is
common  to  all  things  only  in  an  analogical  sense,"  seems to put
diversity  above  unity  in  the  structure of reality, and to leave the
ultimate  plurality  of this world unaffected either by the fact that it
was created as one or by the fact of its relation to a transcendent One.
In the tradition of the great books, the problem of the one and the many
is  often  stated  without  using the notion of substance as the pivotal
term.  It  appears in Plato's consideration of being and becoming. It is
sometimes  present in his treatment of the relation between intelligible
forms   and  sensible  things—  between  the  universal  ideas  and  the
particulars  which  resemble  them  through  some manner of imitation or
participation. It even runs through the discussion of the realm of ideas
itself;  for the idea of the one is one idea among many, and yet each of
the  many  ideas is in some way one. The problem of the one and the many
appears  in  Hume's  consideration  of the absolute distinctness of each
unit  of  experience  from  every  other,  accompanied  as  it is by his
skepticism  concerning  our  ability  to  discover any connections which
might  tie  these units together into a real unity. It appears in Kant's
theory  of  the  transcendental unity of apperception, which reduces the
sensory  manifold  to a unity of order; and in Hegel's theory of the one
Absolute  Idea which contains within itself all the variety that becomes
manifest  as the Idea unfolds in the processes of nature or history. The
substitution  of one set of terms for another does not seem to alter the
fundamental  issue.  Nor  does it enable the mind to escape taking sides
with those who give primacy to the one or to the many, except perhaps by
trying  to balance them as correlatives. Among the great books, however,
the  Enneads  of Plotinus develops a theory of the One which, putting it
above being and beyond knowing, seems to transfigure all the traditional
terms  of analysis. The One of Parmenides is, after all, Being; and this
identification of Being with One raises

[321b]
Chapter 63: ONE AND MANY 287 a question of the reality of the many. But,
according to Plotinus, "there exists a Principle which transcends Being;
this is The One, whose nature we have sought to establish so far as such
matters  lend  themselves to proof. Upon The One follows immediately the
Principle,  which is at once Being and the Intellectual-Principle. Third
comes  the  Principle,  Soul."  These  are what Plotinus calls the three
hypotases.  He  finds  some  analogy  for  his  trinity in a doctrine he
ascribes   to   Plato's  Parmenides,  in  which  he  finds  a  threefold
distinction  "between  the  Primal  One,  a  strictly  pure Unity, and a
secondary One which is a One-Many, and a third which is a One-and-Many."
The  One,  according  to  Plotinus,  not  only transcends being; it also
transcends  intelligence.  Knowing  or  thinking requires an object. The
relation  of knower and known entails a duality which would fracture the
utter  simplicity  of  The One. Even the complete reflexivity of The One
knowing only itself is excluded. The superessential is for Plotinus also
the   supra-cogitative.   "What   stands   above   Being   stands  above
intellection,"  he  says;  "it  is no weakness in it not to know itself,
since  as  pure  unity  it  contains nothing which it needs to explore."
Multiplicity  begins  with  the  effort of the Intellectual-Principle to
know  the  Transcendent.  "It knows the Transcendent in its very essence
but,  with  all  its  efforts to grasp that prior as pure unity, it goes
forth  amassing  successive  impressions,  so  that,  to  it, the object
becomes  multiple  .  .  .  The Intellectual-Principle is established in
multiWhat   is  the  All  of  which  The  One  is  not  all,  since  the
Intellectual-Principle  and the Soul also belong to it? Plotinus answers
that "The One is all things and no one of them. The source of all things
is  not  all  things ... It is precisely because there is nothing within
the One that all things are from it." Everything else in the totality of
which the Transcendent is the source emanates from it. "Seeking nothing,
possessing  nothing,  lacking  nothing,"  Plotinus declares, "The One is
perfect  and,  in  our  metaphor, has overflowed, and its exuberance has
produced  the new: this product has turned again to its begetter and has
filled  and has become its contemplator and so an Intellectual-Principle
... It is simulta-

[322a]
288  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  neously  Intellectual-Principle  and Being; and,
attaining  resemblance  in  virtue of this vision, it repeats the act of
the  One in pouring forth a vast power. This second outflow is a Form or
Idea   representing   the  Divine  Intellect  as  the  Divine  Intellect
represented  its  own  prior,  The  One.  This  active power sprung from
essences  (from the Intellectual-Principle considered as Being) is Soul.
Soul  arises  as  the  idea  and  act  of  the  motionless Intellectual-
Principle.  ...  It  takes fullness by looking toward its source; but it
generates  its  image  by  adopting  another, a downward, movement. This
image  of  Soul  is  Sense  and Nature, the vegetal principle." Nothing,
writes  Plotinus,  "is completely severed from its prior. Thus the human
Soul  appears  to  reach  as far down as to the vegetal order." In these
successive emanations "all that is not One is conserved by virtue of the
One,  and  from  the  One  derives  its  characteristic  nature."  Every
thingexcept the One is a one-many. "If it had not attained such unity as
is  consistent  with  being made up of multiplicity, we could not affirm
its existence." The Transcendent alone is "a really existent One, wholly
and  truly One, while its sequent, poured down in some way from the One,
is  all, a total which has participation in unity and whose every member
is similarly all and one." If reason cannot fully grasp the Transcendent
One,  that  may  be  because  discursive  reason is God and the concrete
universal 2. The modes of unity: comparison of numerical, essential, and
divine  unity  ia. Numerical unity or identity: the number one atom, the
quality indivisible and the undivided

[322b]
itself a thing of multiplicity. The unity of an all-embracing vision may
be  required  to  apprehend the ineffable unity of the Transcendent. But
the  mysteriousness of unity is not confined to the Transcendent One. It
confronts  the  mathematician  as well as the philosopher. It challenges
Nicomachus  and  Euclid as well as Plotinus. "Unity," writes Nicomachus,
"occupying  the place and character of a point, will be the beginning of
intervals and numbers, but is not itself an interval or a number." What,
then, is unity or a unit in itself? Euclid answers with this definition:
"A  unit  is  that  by  virtue of which each of the things that exist is
called  one."  Unity  is  not only the measure of existence, but also of
numbers;  for, according to Euclid, "a number is a multitude composed of
units."  In  mathematics  no less than in metaphysics or in theology the
relation  of unity to number seems to be the heart of the problem of the
one  and the many. "Number," according to Locke, "applies itself to men,
angels,  actions, thoughts; everything that either does exist, or can be
imagined."  Unity  or  one is, in his view, not only the simplest of all
our  ideas,  but  the  most  omnipresent.  "Every  object our senses are
employed  about; every idea in our understandings ; every thought of our
minds,  brings  this  idea along with it. And therefore it is ... in its
agreement to all other things, the most universal idea we have." OUTLINE
OF  TOPICS  PAGE  290 291 lb. The unity or duality of God and the world:
the  immanence and transcendence of \c. The one and the many in relation
to  the  universal and the particular: the abstract 292 2b. The unity of
the  indivisible or the simple: the individual thing, the point, the 293
ic.  The  complex  unity  of  a whole composed of parts: the distinction
between the

[323a]
3.  Kinds  of  wholes  or  complex  unities 293 3#. Quantitative wholes:
oneness  in  matter  or  motion 294 (1) The continuity of a quantitative
whole  (2)  The  unity  and  divisibility  of a motion (3) The unity and
divisibility of matter 3^. Natural or essential wholes: the oneness of a
being  or  a nature (1) The distinction between essential and accidental
unity  (2)  The  comparison of the unity of natural things with man-made
compositions  or  aggregations:  artificial  wholes  (3)  The unity of a
substance  and  of substantial form (4) The unity of man as composite of
body  and  soul,  matter  and  spirit, exten- (5) The unity of the human
person  or the self: the order of man's powers; the split personality 4.
Unity  in  the  realm of mind: unity in thought or knowledge 297 4#. The
unity  of  mind  or intellect, the cognitive faculties, or consciousness
4#.   The  unity  of  sense-experience:  the  unity  of  attention;  the
transcendental   unity   of   apperception  4c.  Unity  in  thinking  or
understanding:  the unity of complex ideas and definitions; the unity of
the  term, the judgment, and the syllogism 4^. The unity of science: the
unity of particular sciences 298 4^. The one and the many, or the simple
and  the  complex,  as  objects of knowledge: the order of learning with
respect  to  wholes  and  parts ^f. The unity of knower and known, or of
subject  and  object 299 5. Unity in moral and political matters 50. The
unity of virtue and the many virtues 5#. The unity of the last end : the
plurality of intermediate ends or means 5c. The unity of subjective will
and  objective morality in the ethical realm 5^. The unity of the family
and  the  unity  of  the  state:  the  limits  of  political  or  social
unification   5^.  The  unity  of  sovereignty  :  its  divisibility  or
indivisibility;  the  problem  of  federal  6. Unity in the supernatural
order  6a.  The unity and simplicity of God 6b. The unity of the Trinity
301 6c. The unity of the Incarnation

[323b]
Chapter 63: ONE AND MANY 289 PAGE sion and thought 296

[324a]
290  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage cited. 1. The transcendental one: the Absolute; the unity of
being,  of  nature,  of  the  universe  7 Plato: Parmenides, 491d-511d /
Theaetetus,  532c-533a  / Sophist, 566a-567a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv,
ch i
[121*14-19]
169a;
[i2i b4-8] 169c; ch 6 [127*26-40] 176d177a / Sophistical Refutations, ch 7 [169*21-24]
232d;
[169*33-36]
233a; ch 10
[170^8-25]
235a / Physics, bk i, ch 2-3 259b-262a; ch 8
[i9i*23-b i3] 267a-c; bk
hi, ch 6
[207*7-31]
285b-d / Heavens, bk i, ch 8-9 367b-370d / Generation and Corruption, bk
i, ch i 409a410c; ch 8
[325*4-b5]
423c-424a / Metab7-984b8] 501d-502c; ch 5
[986^-987*2]
504c-505a; ch 6 505bphysics, bk 1, ch 3
[983
506b; ch 7
[988*34-b
5] 506c; ch 8 [988^3989*18] 506d-507b; bk hi, ch i
[996*4-9]
514c;  ch 3 [998b i4-28] 517b-c; ch 4 [1001*4b25] 519d-520c; bk iv, ch 2
[ioo3b23-ioo5*i] 522d-524a; ch 4
[1007^9-1008*3]
527a-b; bk v, ch 4 [ioi4b27-35] 535a-b; bk vii, ch 4
[io30b7-i4] 553b; ch
ii [1036*26^20] 559d560b; ch 16 [1040^6-27] 564d; bk viii, ch 6
[1045*36^7] 570b-c; bk x, ch 2 580b-d; bk
xi, ch 2 [1060*36^19] 588c-d; bk xii, ch i
[1069*18-22]
598a; ch 4
[1 070*3 i-b8] 599d600a; ch 8 [1074*31-39] 604d; ch 10 [1075*12-

[324b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  ]a\ies:  Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand  side  of  page  164. Author's Divisions : One or more of the
main  divisions  of  a  work  (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes
included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in brackets, are given in
cerBible  References:  The  references  are to book, chapter, and verse.
When  the  King  James and Douay versions differ in title of books or in
the  numbering  of  chapters  or verses, the King James version is cited
first  and  the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 24] 605d-606a; bk
xiv, ch i [io87b34-io88a 4] 620a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch i [4i2b6-9] 642c 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[10231104] 28a-29a
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,   bk  i,  ch  14  120d-121c  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk ii, sect 3 257a-b; bk iv, sect 29 266a; sect 40 267a-b;
bk  v,  sect  8 269d-270b; sect 30 273a; bk vi, sect 36-45 277c-278c; bk
vii, sect 9 280b-c; sect 19 281a; bk ix, sect 8-9 292b-d; bk x, sect 6-7
297a-c;  bk  xii, sect 30 310a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [724-729] 230b
17  Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 13 46c47b; tr ix, ch 1, 65d-66a /
Third  Ennead, tr viii 129a-136a; tr ix, ch 3, 138a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr
i,  ch  6-7 211a-212c; tr ii, ch i 214c-215a; tr hi, ch 11-17 222b-226c;
tr  v, ch 4-13 230b-235b; tr vi, ch 2-6 235d-237d / Sixth Ennead, tr ii,
ch  8-12  272d-276a;  tr  iv,  ch  7-8  300b-301c;  ch  ii  302c-d; tr v
305c-310d;  tr ix 353d-360d passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q 6, a 3, rep 1 29c-30b; q ii 46d-50b passim, esp a i 46d-47d; q 30, a 3
169b-170c;  q  39,  a  8  210a213a;  q 44, a i, ans 238b-239a; q 47, a 3
258c-259a;  q 93, a 9, ans 500c-501c; q 103, a 3, ans 530a-c; part i-ii,
q 10, a i, rep 3 662d-663d; q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c

[325a]
la to \b Chapter 63: ONE AND MANY 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi,
q  4,  a  1,  rep 4 730d-731d; q 17, a 2, ans 808d809d; Q 19, a 1, rep 4
816a-818b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  172b; part iv, 269d ^— 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part i 355a-372d esp prop 2-8 355d-357d, prop 10, schol
358a-b,  prop 12 359b-c, prop 13, corol and schol 359d, prop 14, corol 1
360a, prop 15 360a-361d, prop 16, corol 1-3 362a, prop 18 363c, prop 25,
schol  and  corol  365b,  prop  28  365c366a,  prop  33, schol i-prop 34
367c-369a; part in, 395a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk 11, ch vii,
sect  7  132d; ch xm, sect 26 154b-c; ch xvi, sect 1 165c-d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect 13 415c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 43d-44a; 44c-45b /
Judgement, 550a-551a,c; 564c-565d esp 565c-d; 580c-d la. The relation of
the  one  and  the  many:  emanation  of  the many from the one 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  v,  370d-373c; bk vii, 392b-394b / Parmenides 486a-511d /
Sophist,  561d-574c  esp  564d-574c  /  Statesman,  594d595a / Philebus,
610d-613a l2 4 -b I2] 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 8
[191'
267a-c  / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6 505b-506b; ch 7 [988 a34-b 5] 506c; bk
v,  ch  6  [ioi6b i825] 537b; [1017^-7] 537c; bk x, ch i [io52b ii053b8]
578d-580a; ch 6 583d-584c; bk xiv, ch 1-2 619b,d-622c 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 2 26c-d / Second Ennead, tr hi, ch ii 46b-c; ch 18
49c-50a;  tr ix, ch 8 70a-d / Third Ennead, tr 11, ch 16 90c-91c; tr in,
ch 1 93b-c; tr vii, ch 11 126a-d; tr viii 129a-136a passim; tr ix, ch 3,
137b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr ii 139c-141c; tr in, ch 2-5 142a-144c; tr iv,
ch  1,  159b-d; ch 10-12 163a-164d; ch 30-45 174b-183a; tr viii, ch 3-TR
ix,  ch  5 202a207a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-9 209d213c; tr 11, ch 1
214c-215a;  tr hi, ch 10-12 221b-223c; tr iv 226d-228b; tr vii 238a239b;
tr  viii,  ch  7  242d-243c  / Sixth Ennead, tr 11, ch 1-8 268d-273c; ch
20-22  278d-280d;  tr  iv,  ch  4  299a-d;  tr  v 305c-310d; tr vi, ch 7
313d-314a;  tr vii, ch 4-17 323c-331a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  qq  311  14a-50b passim; q 14, a 6, ans 80a-81c; q 16, a 6 98b-d; qq
30-31  167a-175c;  qq  44-45 238a-250a; q 47 256a-259a; q 77, a 6, rep i
404c-405c;  q  85, a 8, ans 460b-461b; qq 103105 528a-545b esp q 103, aa
3-4  530a-531b;  part i-ii, q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i 355a-372d esp def 3,5 355b, axiom 1-2 355c-d, prop 1-8 355d357d,
prop 11-16 358b-362a, prop 18 363c, prop 21-25 364a-365b, prop 29 366b-c
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  43d-44a;  49c-51d  esp 51c-d; 74b-76c; 107b-c;
173b-177b; 197b-

[325b]
291  198a / Judgement, 564c-565d esp 565c-d; 580c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of History, intro, 165a-b: part in, 306a lb. The unity or duality of God
and  the  world:  the  immanence  and  transcendence of God 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk xn, ch 10
[i075ai2-i6] 605d
9  Aristotle:  Motion of Animals, ch 3 [699 an]- ch 4 [700^] 234a-235a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk 1, ch 14 120d-121c 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  ii,  sect i 256b,d; bk vii, sect 9 280b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  i,  par  2-3  lb-2a;  bk in, par 10 15b-d; par 18 18b; bk iv, par 26
25c-d;  par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, par 4 36a-b; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par
16-23  48c-50c esp par 21 49d-50a; bk x, par 8-10 73b-74a; bk xii, par 7
lOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a / City of God, bk iv, ch 12-13 195d-196b; bk
vii,  ch  6,  248a;  ch  30  261b-d; bk x, ch 14 307c308a; bk xii, ch 17
353a-354a;  ch  25  358b359a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 12 627c-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 1, rep 1 14b-15b; a 8 19d-20c;
q  4, a 3 22b-23b; Q 6, a 4 30b-d; q 8 34c-38c; q 16, a 6 98b-d; q 18, a
4 107d-108c; q 44, aa 1-2 238b-240a; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a-278c; q 52, a
2  279b-280a;  q  61, a 3, rep 2 316a-d; q 90, a 1 480d-481d; qq 103-105
528a-545b;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 26, a 2, rep 3 511a-d; part hi suppl, q 84, a
2, rep 1 984c-985d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [94-123] 107b-c;
11
[1 12-148]
109a-b; xm
[52-66]
126a;  xix [40-66] 135c-d; xxvm 148d-150b; xxix [127-145] 151c-d; xxxiii
[76-145]  157a-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  162b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part v, 54d-56a / Objections and Replies, 110b-112a; 123c-d;
158b-159a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i 355a-372d esp def 3-5 355b, axiom
1-2  355c-d,  prop  2-8 355d357d, prop 10, schol 358a-b, prop 13, corol-
prop  18  359d-363c, prop 22-23 364d365a, prop 25, corol and schol 365b,
prop 28-31 365c-367a, prop 33-34 367b-369a; part 11, prop i-ii 373d-377c
32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [469-505] 185b186a; bk xi [334-346] 306b
34  Newton:  Principles, bk hi, general schol, 370a-371a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c; ch xv, sect 2-4 162c163b;
bk  in,  ch  vi, sect 11-12 271b-272b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
149150  442d-443b;  sect  155  444b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
vii, di* 56 475a-b

[326a]
7  (1.  The  transcendental  one:  the  Absolute; the unity of being, of
nature,  of the universe, lb. The unity or duality of God and the world:
the  immanence and transcendence of God.) 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 192c-d /
Practical  Reason,  342c;  351b-352c / Judgement, 550a-551a,c; 564c-565d
esp  565c-d;  566c-d;  580c-d;  592ac  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,   156d157b;   176b-c;   part  i,  220c-221a;  224a-b;  227d-228c;
237d-238a;  245d-246c  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 115b-117a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, bk v, 216d-218b; bk xiv, 608a-b; bk xv, 631ac 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk vi, 153b-d lc. The one and the many in relation
to  the  universal  and  the  particular:  the abstract and the concrete
universal 7 Plato: Laches, 32a-33a / Meno, 174d-175d / Euthyphro, 193a-c
/  Republic, bk vi, 383d388a; bk vii, 392a-394a / Parmenides, 486d489a /
Theaetetus,   514b-515d  /  Sophist,  559a-c  /  Philebus,  610d-613a  8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[i a20-b9] 5b-c /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch ii [77*5-9] 105d106a; ch 24
[85
a3i-b3] 116c;
[85b i5~2i] 117a
b26-278b9] 369a-d / Heavens, bk 1, ch 9
[27
/ Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 6 505b-506b; ch 7
[988a34-b
5] 506c; bk hi, ch 4
[iooi ai8-b6]
520a-b; bk v, ch 3
[ioi4b3-i3] 534d; ch 6
[ioi6b i7-ioi7a
3] 537b-c; ch 25
[io23b i7-i9]
545b-c; ch 25
[i023b22]-cH
26
[1023^2]
545c;  bk  vii, ch 10 [io34b35~i036a25] 558b559d; ch 15 563c-564c; bk x,
ch  1  578b,d580a  esp  [1052^8-37]  578d;  ch  2  580b-d;  bk xii, ch 8
[1074*32-39]  604d;  bk  xiii,  ch  10  618c-619a,c  17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  ix, ch 5 206d207a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a  2,  rep 3 15c-16a; q ii, a 3, ans 49a-c; q 13, a 9, ans and rep 2
71b-72c; q 14, a 6, ans 80a-81c; q 30, a 3, ans and rep i 169b-170c; a 4
170c-171b; q 47, a 2, ans 257b-258c; q 77, a 1, rep 1 399c-401b; q 79, a
5,  rep 2 418c-419b; q 93, a 9, ans 500c-501c; part i-ii, q 10, a 1, rep
3 662d-663d; q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  2,  a  1,  ans  710a-711c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b-c 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-333b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop  40, schol i 387b-388a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi,
sect  9  145b-c; ch xxxii, sect 6 244b-c; bk hi, ch 1, sect 3 251d-252a;
ch  hi,  sect  1-9  254d-256c  passim;  ch vi, sect i 268b-c; sect 32-33
277c-278c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect

[326b]
292  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  \c  to  2a 7-19 406a-410c passim, esp sect 12-16
408a409d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 125, 507b [fn 1] 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 197b-198a; 211c-213a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
intro,  par  5-7  13a-14c; par 24 17d-18a; part hi, par 156-157 57d; par
165  59d;  par  185-186  64b-d;  par 353-360 112b-114a,c / Philosophy of
History, intro, 158a-159a; 176b-177b; part i, 237d238a; part hi, 306a 53
James: Psychology, 308a-311a passim 2. The modes of unity: comparison of
numerical,  essential, and divine unity 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i85b5~i86a  4]  260b-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [986b8-987a  i]
504c-505a;  bk  v, ch 6 536a-537c; bk x, ch 1 578b,d-580a / Soul, bk ii,
ch i
[4i2b8-9]
642c;  ch  4  [4i5a22-b8] 645c-d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr ix, ch 2
205c206a;  ch  5  206d-207a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q ii
46d-50b  esp  a  4  49d-50b;  q  30,  a i, rep 2,4 167a-168a; a 2, rep 5
168a-169b;  q  93, a i, rep 3 492a-d; part i-ii, q 17, a 4, ans 688d689c
20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2 709d-723a esp a 9 719d-720c;
q  17  806d-809d  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies, 224d-225d 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, def 7 373c 53 James: Psychology, 215b-216a 2a.
Numerical  unity  or identity: the number one 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii,
392b-394b / Theaetetus, 535b-c; 537a-c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4
aio-b i9] 8b-9a / Topics, bk 1, ch 18
[io8b23~32] 153a,c; bk
vi, ch 4 [i4ib6-8] 194d / Physics, bk iv, ch 14
[223b i2-224ai4]
303c-304a,c; bk vii, ch i
[242*3 i-b4] 326c-d / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 4
[iooi a25-b25]
520a-c; bk v, ch 6
[ioi6b i8ioi7a i] 537b-c; ch 9 [1018^-9] 538d; ch 13
[1020*8-9] 541b; bk x, ch
i 578b,d-580a; ch 3 [1054^0-35] 581a; ch 6 [io56b33-io57a i6] 584b-c; bk
xii, ch 7 [1072*33-34] 602b; ch 8
[io74a3i~39]
604d;  bk xiii, ch 6-9 611d618c; bk xiv, ch 1 [io87b34-io88 a i4] 620a-b
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  vii,  definitions,  i  127a  11  Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  bk  i,  814c;  821  d;  bk  11,  832b; 838c-d; 839d-840a 17
Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr ix, ch 2 205c206a; ch 5 206d-207a,c / Fifth
Ennead,  tr v, ch 4 230b-d / Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch 9-1 i 273c-275d; tr
vi  310d-321b  esp  ch  5  312c313b,  ch  11-16 315d-319d; tr ix, ch 1-2
353d-355a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 5, ans and rep 2
17c-18b;  q  7,  a  4, ans 33d34c; q 10, a 6 45c-46d; q ii, a i, rep 1-2
46d47d; a 2, ans 47d-48d; a 3, rep 2 49a-c; a

[327a]
2b  to 3 Chapter 63: ONE AND MANY 293 4, rep 2 49d-50b; q 30, a i, rep 4
167a-168a;  a  2,  rep  5  168a-169b;  a  3  169b-170c; q 85, a 8, rep 2
460b-461b;  part  i-ii,  q  10,  a  i, rep 3 662d-663d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part jitrrT2, a 3, rep 1 713a-714c; a 9, rep i 719d-720c; q
17 806d-809d; part hi suppl, q 79 951b956b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day, 146c-147a 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv, 31b-c; 32a-b / Geometry,
bki,  296a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 12-15 359b361 d 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  512  262a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 4-5
113bc;  bk 11, ch xxvii 218d-228c passim; bk iv, ch i, sect 4 307b-c; ch
hi,  sect  8  315b-c  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 12-13 415b-c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  99a-101b  2b.  The unity of the indivisible or the
simple:  the individual thing, the point, the atom, the quality 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  vii,  392b  394b  /  Parmenides,  506d-507b / Theaetetus,
545b-547b  / Sophist, 566a-d / Philebus, 611b-c 8 Aristotle: Categories,
ch 2
[i b3-9]
5c / Topics, bk 1, ch 18
[io8b23-32]
153a,c / Physics, bk 1, ch 2
[i85b i7-i9] 260c; bk
hi, ch 7
[207a3i-b io] 285d-286a; bk
iv, ch 10
[218*3-30] 297d-298b
/  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  1, ch 2 [316*15-317*17] 411d-413a /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9 [992*18-24] 510b-c; bk in, ch 4
[iooi b7-i9] 520bc; bk
v, ch 3
[ioi4b3-i3]
534d; ch 5
[ioi5b9-i6]
536a;  ch 6 [ioi6b24-3i] 537b; bk xi, ch 12 [1069*1316] 598c; bk xii, ch
7
[1072*33-34] 602b
/ Soul, bk hi, ch 2
[427*10-14] 659b-c;
ch 6
[430b6-22] 663a-b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[ii74b9~i4]
428d-429a  11  Euclid:  Elements, bk i, definitions, i la 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  bk  ii, 832b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [483-634]
7a-8d  17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2, 142b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 6, a 3, rep i 29c-30b; q 8, a 2, rep 2 35c-36b; q
10,  a  1, ans and rep 1,3,5 40d-41d; q ii, a 1, ans 46d-47d; a 2, rep 4
47d-48d;  aa 3-4 49a-50b; q 29, a 4, ans and rep 3 165c-167a; q 30, a 1,
rep 3 167a-168a; q 40, a 2, rep i 214b-215b; q 42, a 2, rep 4 225d-227a;
q  50, a 2 270a-272a; q 52, a 2 279b-280a; q 53, a i, rep i 280d-282a; a
2,  ans  282a-283b;  q  76,  a  8  397d-399b;  q  85, a 8, ans and rep 2
460b-461b;  part  i-ii,  q  13,  a  4,  rep  2  675a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q

[327b]
b  54,  a 4 25b-d; part hi suppl, q 83, a 2, rep 5 976c-978c; a 3, rep 4
978c-980d  31  Descartes: Rules, xn, 20d-21b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop 12-15 359b 361d; part 11, def 7 373c 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 541b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch ii, sect 1 127d-128a; ch xv,
sect 9 164b-d; ch xvi, sect 1 165c-d; bk hi, ch iv, sect 15-16 263a-c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 7 406a-b; sect 99 432b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  120c-129c  esp  121a-124d, 126a-128b; 130b-133c esp 131c;
137a-140c esp 137d-138d
[antithesis];
152a-d; 158a159d; 161d-163a; 211c-213a 2 c. The complex unity of a whole
composed  of  parts:  the  distinction  between  the indivisible and the
undivided  7  Plato:  Parmenides,  495c-497c;  505c-506b  /  Theaetetus,
545b-547b / Sophist, 566a-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 13 [i50*i]-ch
14
[151*32] 204c-206a
/ Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i85b n-i7]
260b-c; bk hi, ch 6
[206^3207*31]
285b-d; bk iv, ch 3
[2io*25-b8]
289b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v, ch 6 536a-537c; ch 26 545c-d; bk x, ch i
578b,d-580a; ch 3
[1054*20-23] 581a / Soul, bk hi, ch 6 [43ob622] 663a9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[ii74*i3-b i4]
428b-429a / Politics, bk 1, ch i
[1252*18-24]
445b;  ch  2  [1253*19-25]  446c  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i
[599-634]  8b-d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2 142a143b; tr ix,
ch  5  206d-207a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 6, a 3, rep 1
29c-30b;  q  ii, a i, ans and rep 2 46d-47d; a 2, rep 2 47d-48d; q 30, a
i,  rep  4  167a-168a;  q  39,  a  3,  ans  204c-205c;  q 85, a 3, rep 2
455b-457a;  a  8,  ans 460b-461b; part i-ii, q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 79, a 2, rep 2 953b-955c 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, first day, 145b-146c; 150d-151c 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule hi 270b271a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxii,  sect  4  201c-d; ch xxiv 214b-d; bk hi, ch v, sect 10-11
266b-d  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  12-13  415b-c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  168  145c-d  53  James : Psychology,
104a-106b   3.   Kinds   of  wholes  or  complex  unities  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6 536a537c; ch 25-26 545b-d; bk x, ch i 578b,d580a

[328a]
(3.  Kinds of wholes or complex unities?) 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
hi,  142a-143d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3 14a-20c; q 8, a
2,  rep 3 35c-36b; q ii, a i, rep 2 46d-47d; a 2, rep 2 47d-48d; q 76, a
8,  ans  397d-399b;  q  77,  a i, rep i 399c-401b; part 1— 11, q 17, a 4
688d-689c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  a  1, ans
710a-711c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  79,  a  3,  ans  and rep i 955c-956b 31
Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  224d225d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason,
161d-163a  3<z.  Quantitative  wholes: oneness in matter or motion b20-5
a37J 9a-d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[4
/ Physics, bk iv, ch 5
[2i2b29-33] 292b; bk
vii,  ch  1 [242^3-243*3] 327a-b / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 6
420b-421d; ch 10 426c-428d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6
[ioi5b
37-1016*16] 536b-c;
[ioi6b7-i8]
537a-b; ch 13 541b-c; ch 25
[i023b i3~i8] 545b; ch 26
[io23b32-io24a io]
545c-d; bk x, ch i
[1052*
18-28] 578b,d; bk xi, ch 9
[io66a2
594d;  ch 12 [1069^-12] 598a,c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 4 ii74ai3-b
i  4  ]  r  428b-429a  17  Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 139d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 8, a 2, rep 3 35c-36b; q ii, a 2,
rep  2  47d-48d;  q 119, a 1, ans 604c-607b 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  114d-115a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15, schol 360b361d;
part  11, def 7 373c; lemma 5-7 379d380b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 129c-159d
esp  130b-133c,  137a-140c, 152a-d; 161d-163a 3tf(l) The continuity of a
quantitative whole 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5^-14] 9b-c /
Physics,  bk  1, ch 2 [i85b5-iy] 260b-c; bk hi, ch 6-7 284b-286c; bk iv,
ch 4
[2ii a29-b
4]  290c;  ch  5  [2i2b3-6]  291d;  bk  v,  ch 3 307b308b; bk vi, ch 1-2
312b,d-315d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4
[ioi4b2o-27] 535a; ch 6
[ioi5b36-ioi6a i7] 536b-c; ch
13
[io2oa8-i4]
541b; ch 26 [i023b32-36] 545c-d; bk x, ch i
[1052^8-25] 578b; bk xi, ch 12 [1069^-11]
598a,c  / Soul, bk hi, ch 2 [427^0-14] 659b-c; ch 6 662d-663c 11 Euclid:
Elements,  bk  x,  prop  1  191b-192a  11  Archimedes:  Spirals,  484b /
Quadrature  of  the  Parabola,  527a-b  11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i,
811d-812a  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 139d 19 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a 1, ans 14b-15b; q 7, a 3, rep 3-4
32c-33c;  a  4,  ans  33d-34c;  q ii, a 2, rep 2 47d-48d; q 30, a 3, ans
169b-170c; q 58, a 2, ans

[328b]
5  294  THE  GREAT IDEAS 3a to 3a(3) 301b-d; q 67, a 2, ans 350b-351a; q
76,  a  8,  ans  397d-399b;  q  85, a 8, ans 460b-461b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi, q 2, a 3, rep 3 713a-714c; part hi suppl, q 79, a
3,  ans  and  rep  i  955c-956b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
139c153a  passim  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15, schol 360b361d 34
Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma i 25a; lemma 11, schol, 31a-32a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  69c-72c;  161d-163a 3*(2) The unity and divisibility of a
motion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch ii
[2i9a io-i3]
298d-299a;  bk  v,  ch  4  308b-310a;  bk  vi  312b,d-325d; bk vii, ch 1
[242a3i-b 4] 326c-d; BK VIII, CH 7
[26l a28]-CH
8
[265 a I2] 347c352a
/ Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6
[1016^-7]
536c; ch 13
[1020^5-33]
541c; bk x, ch i
[i052 ai8-2i] 578b; bk
xii, ch 6
[io7i b8-n]
601b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[ii74ai3-b i4]
428b-429a  17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  8-9 123b-125d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 7, a 3, rep 4 32c-33c 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences, third day, 201a-202a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  6  139b-c;  aph  41 173d-174b 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration,
434a439b  passim  34  Newton:  Principles, bk i, lemma ii, schol, 31b 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  26b-27a;  74b-  76c;  130b133c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  xi,  469a-d  3<z(3)  The  unity and divisibility of matter 7
Plato:  Timaeus, 456a-457b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 6-7 284b286c;
bk  vi,  ch  4  316d-318a  /  Heavens,  bk  iv, ch 6 [3i3b6-22] 405a,c /
Generation and Corb2 5-317^7] 411b413a; ch 8 [325 ruption, bk 1, ch 2
[3 1
a23-326b28] 423d-425d; ch 9 ai]-CH 10
[328^5]
426a-428d / Meta-
[327
physics, bk vii, ch 13 [1039^-11] 562d; ch 16
[i040b5-i6]
564c; bk x, ch i
[io53a2i-24]
b4~ 683b-684c; ch 7
[449^1-30] 688d579d
/ 446 Sense and the Sensible, ch 6
[445
a2o] 689a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c 12 Lucretius
:  Nature of Things, bk i [483-634] 7a-8d 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
iv,  ch  7,  52c  /  Fourth  Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 139d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 3, a 1, ans 14b-15b; q 7, a 3, rep 3-4 32c-33c; a
4, ans 33d-34c; q 16, a 7, rep 2 99a-d; q

[329a]
3*(4)  to  3b(3>) Chapter 63: ONE AND MANY 47, a 3, rep 2-3 258c-259a; q
50,  a  2,  ans  270a-272a;  q 119, a i, ans 604c-607b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q 2, a 1, ans 710a-711c; part hi suppl, q -]^kj^
rep  3  951b-953b  28  Galileo:  7Vo  iW«/ Sciences, first day, 139c153a
passim,  esp  147d-148b  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 8 140b 31
Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 112b 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 541b
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvii, sect 12 170d; ch xxiii,
sect  31  212b-c;  ch  xxix,  sect  16,  237b-d;  bk  iv, ch x, sect 10,
351d-352a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 47 421c-422a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, lOOc-d; 131c; 137a-140c; 152a-d; 161d-163a 43 Federalist: number
31,  103d 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 850b, d855a,c 3a(4) The
unity  and  divisibility  of time and space 7 Plato: Timaeus, 450c-451a;
456a-457b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5*6-29] 9b-c /
Physics, bk iv, ch ii
[219*10-13] 298d-299a;
bk  vi  312b,d-325d  passim  /  Generation  and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10
[337*22-34]  439b-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 13 [1020*25-34] 541c / Soul,
bk in, ch 6 [430b6-i9] 663a-b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 8-13
123b-129a  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par  17-41  93b-99b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 7, a 3, rep 4 32c-33c; a 4, rep i
33d-34c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 201a-202a 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part iv, 52d-53a / Objections and Replies, 213b-c 33 Pascal:
Geometrical    Demonstration,    434a439b   passim   35   Locke:   Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiii, sect 13-14 151b-d; ch xv, sect 9 164b-d
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  98  432a  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
24a-26b;   130b-133c;   160b-163a;   186d-187a   53  James:  Psychology,
398a-399b;  420a-b;  547a548b; 631a 3£. Natural or essential wholes: the
oneness  of  a  being  or  a nature 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6
536a537c;  bk x, ch 1 578b,d-580a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch
6,  189a190b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1, q 8, a 2, rep 3
35c-36b;  qii.ai,  rep  2  46d-47d;  a  4, rep 3 49d-50b; q 13, a 9, ans
71b-72c; q 85, a 8, ans 460b-461b; part i-ii, q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c

[329b]
295  152d31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 155d; 224d-225d 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 1-10 268b-271b passim, esp sect
4  268d269b;  bk  iv,  ch  vi,  sect  ii  334b-335b  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  i  413a-b;  sect  12  415bc;  sect  99  432b 3^(1) The
distinction   between   essential  and  accidental  unity  8  Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 10 b36-38] 128b-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch
6  536a-537c; ch 27 545d-546a; bk vii, ch 4-6 552b-555a; ch 12 561b-562a
9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 8 [1328*21-24]
[93
532c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 6, ans 45c-46d; q ii,
a i, rep 2 46d-47d; q 76, a 8, ans 397d-399b; q 118, a 3, ans 603b-604b;
part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  4,  ans 688d689c; q 28, a 1, rep 2 740b- 741a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  a  1, ans 710a-711c; a 6
716b-718b; q 3, a 1, rep 2 723b-724a; q 17, a 2, ans 808d-809d; PART III
SUPPL,  Q  79, A I, ANS and REP 4 951b-953b; a 2, rep 1-2,4 953b-955c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk hi, ch vi, sect 1-10 268b-271b passim,
esp sect 4 268d-269b 3^(2) The comparison of the unity of natural things
with   man-made   compositions  or  aggregations:  artificial  wholes  8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6 [1015^51016*9] 536b-c; ch 26
[io23b32-36] 545c-d;
bk viii, ch 3 [i043b i9-24] 568a-b; bk x, ch i
[1052*18-25] 578b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 17, a 4, ans 688d-689c 20
Aouinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi, q 2, a 1, ans 710a-711c; part hi
suppl,  q  79,  a 2, rep 4 953b-955c 42 Kant: Judgement, 557a-558b 3&(3)
The  unity  of a substance and of substantial form 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk i, ch 3
[i86b i4~i9]
261c-d; bk iv, ch 2 [209b i-2io*io] 288b-d / Heavens, bk 1, ch 9
[277b26-278b
9] 369a-d; bk iv, ch 4
[312*12-17] 403d / Metaphysics,
bk  v,  ch  6  [ioi6bi-n] 537a; ch 25 [io23b i923] 545b-c; bk vii, ch 17
565a-566a,c;  bk viii, ch 6 569d-570d; bk ix, ch i [1046*28-29] 571b; bk
x, ch 1 [1052*28-34] 578d; bk xii, ch 10
[1075^4-37]
606d; bk xiii, ch 2
[1077*20-23] 608C / Soul, BK
I, CH I
[402b I403*2] 631c-632a; ch 5
[4iob io-i6] 640c; bk
1,  ch  5  [4ii*23]-bk  11,  ch  2  [414*28] 641b-644c 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12  172d173c; bk 11, ch 6, 189a-190b 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, aa 2-3 15c-16d; q 7, a 1, ans 31a-d; a 2,
ans

[330a]
296  Natural  or  essential  wholes:  the  oneness  of a (3b. being or a
nature. 3£(3) The unity of a substance and of substantialform.} 31d-32c;
q  ii,  a  i,  rep  1-2  46d-47d; a 4, rep 2-3 49d-50b; q 16, a 7, rep 2
99a-d;  q  29,  a 2, rep 5 163b-164b; q 50, a 2, ans 270a272a; q 70, a 3
365b-367a;  q  76,  aa 3-4 391a-394c; a 8, ans 397d-399b; q 85, a 4, ans
and  rep  2  457a-d; q 119, a i, ans 604c607b; part i-ii, q 17, a 4, ans
688d-689c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 2, a 1, ans and rep 2
710a-711c;  q  3, a 7, rep i 728a-729a; q 17 806d-809d; part hi suppl, q
79, a 1, ans and rep 4 951b-953b; a 2, rep 1-2,4 953b-955c 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies,  152d-155d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 3
355b;  prop  5-10  356b-358b;  prop  12-15  359b-361d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii, sect 1-6 204a-205c; sect 37 213d214b; ch
xxvii, sect 2-7 219b-221a; bk hi, ch vi, sect i-io 268b-271b passim, esp
sect  4 268d-269b, sect 10 271b; sect 21 273c-d; sect 42 280b-c; sect 49
282c;  bk iv, ch vi, sect 11 334b-335b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15b-c; 63a;
63d-64a;  74b-76c; 81b-83b; 91d-93b; 95a-d; 131c-d; 137a-140c; 162b-163a
/Judgement,  556d-558a; 559b-d; 565b-d; 575c-576a 3b(4) The unity of man
as  composite of body and soul, matter and spirit, extension and thought
7  Plato:  Cratylus,  93b-d  /  Phaedrus,  124b-d  / Phaedo, 231b-234c /
Republic,  bk  hi,  338a339a  / Timaeus, 453b-c / Laws, bk v, 686d687c 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 10
[io35b i3~32] 559a-b; bk
viii,  ch 3 [1043*29b4] 567d; ch 6 569d-570d; bk xii, ch 10 b34~37] 606d
/  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  i  [403*2b  i9]  632a-d;  ch  5 [4iob io-i6] 640c;
[4iib5-i8]
[ I075
641c-d; bk ii, ch 1-2 642a-644c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 5
[i254a33-b
7]  448a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  hi  [94-176] 31b-32b;
[370-395]  34d-35a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108bc; bk iv, ch
11,  240d-242d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 21 265b-c; bk vii,
sect  55 283b-c; bk ix, sect 8 292b; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr  i  la-6b  /  Second Ennead, tr i, ch 5, 37c / Fourth
Ennead,  tr hi, ch 19-23 151d-154b; tr vii, ch i 191c-d; ch 8, 197c-198b
/  Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 4-8, 323c-325c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
v,  ch ii, 216c; bk ix, ch 8-17 289d-295c passim; bk x, ch 29 316d-318b;
bk  xiii,  ch 16 367a-d; ch 19 369c-370c; bk xiv, ch 2-3 377a-378d; ch 5
379c-380b

[330b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 3£(4) to 3£(5) 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
8,  a  i,  rep  2  34d-35c;  a  2,  rep  1-2 35c-36b; q 75, a 2, rep 1-2
379c-380c;  a  4  381b-382a;  q 76 385c399b; q 118-Q 119, a 1 600a-607b;
part i-ii, q 4, a 5, rep 2 632c-634b; q 17, a 4, ans and rep 3 688d-689c
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  a  1,  ans and rep 2
710a-711c;  a 5 715a-716b; a 6, ans and rep 2 716b-718b; q 3, a 7, rep 1
728a-729a;  q  17,  a 2, ans and rep 4 808d809d; part in suppl, q 79, aa
1-2  951b-955c;  q  80,  aa  1-2 956c-958b; qq 82-85 968a-992a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv
[34-78] 91d-92a
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 294c-295a; 311a-b; 432b-d; 540a-543a,c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning,  48d-49c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,
51d-52a:  part v, 60b-c / Meditations, 11 77d-81d; vi, 98c-99a; 99d-100a
/  Objections and Replies, 119d-120a; def vi-vn 130c-d; def x 130d; prop
iv  133c;  135d-136b;  152d-155d;  170b-c;  207d-208a;  209c; 224d-225d;
231a-232d;  248b;  276b-c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  11-13
377b378c;  part  in, prop 2 396c-398b; part v, pref 451a-452c 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  512  262a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 4-5
113b-c;  bk  11, ch xxvn, sect 6-8 220c-222a esp sect 8, 221d-222a; sect
15  224b-c;  sect 21 225d-226a; sect 27-29 227d228c; bk iv, ch m, sect 6
313c-315b  passim  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  52
472c-473c  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  229b-230a;  270b;  277a-b  37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  198ac  42  Kant -.Judgement, 557c-558b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  47-48 24a-c; additions, 2 115d 53
James:  Psychology,  la-4a  esp 2b-3a, 4a; 84a93b esp 88a-90b; 116a-119b
esp   118b-119b;   130a;   139a-140a;   208a-b;   222b-223a   54  Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams,  154c-155a 3^(5) The unity of the human person
or  the  self:  the  order  of  man's  powers; the split personality New
Testament: Romans, 6:12-14; 7-8; 13:1314 7 Plato: Symposium, 165d-166b /
Gorgias,  270d271b  / Republic, bk iv, 346a-355a esp 350b355a / Timaeus,
453b-454a;  474b-d;  476a-b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 6-1 i 662d-667a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3-4 108b110a; ch 12 118d-120b; bk hi,
ch  24  203c210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect i 253a; bk v, sect
36  273d;  bk vii, sect 13 280c; sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect i 285a-b;
bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 18 166d-167b

[331a]
4  to  4<r  Chapter  63:  ONE AND MANY 297 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
viii,  par  io-ii  55c-56b;  par  19-24  58b-60a;  bk x, par 39 81b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part L^Q—77 399b-407a; q 81, a 3 430c-431d;
qq 93-101 492a-523d; part i-ii, q 13, a i 672d-673c; q 16, a 1 684b-d; q
17,  a  4  688d-689c;  q 36, a 3 782b-783a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  77,  a 2 145d-147c; qq 81-83 162d-174b; part ii-ii, q 29
530b-533a;  part  hi,  q  2,  a i, rep 2 710a-711c; a 2, ans and rep 2-3
711d-712d; q 6 740b-745b; q 17, a 2, ans and rep 4 808d-809d; q 19, a i,
rep 4 816a-818b; part hi suppl, q 70, a 1 893d-895d; q 79, a 2 953b-955c
21  Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv [1-18] 57c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
105c-107a;  159a-162c; 273b-276a; 300d-301c; 326b-327b; 381bc; 388c-389c
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 72b 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv
89a-93a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  1,  sect  11-12
123d-124c;  sect  19  126a-c;  ch  xxvii 218d-228c passim, esp sect 9-26
222a227d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 49c-51d
esp   51c-d;   120c129c  esp  121a-124d,  126a-128b;  200c-204c  /  Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368d369a  / Judgement, 584d-585c 47
Goethe: Faust, part i [1064-1117] 26b-28a;
[3217-3250] 79a-b
51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 554b555c 53 James: Psychology, la-b;
130a-139a  passim,  esp  134b-137b;  147a-149a;  154a-155b; 188a259b esp
192a-b,  205a-206a,  213a-219a,  222a-b,  225a-258a 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  6a-9b / Hysteria, 28d-29b; 81d-83c esp
82a  / Unconscious, 430a-b / General Introduction, 589c-593b esp 590a-c;
615b-616c;  633d- 63 5c esp 634b / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 640c-d
/  Group  Psychology,  689d690c  /  Ego  and  Id,  699a-c; 701d-707c esp
701d-703a, 704d; 711b; 712b-716b esp 712b-c, 71 5c- 71 6a / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 721d-722d esp 722c; 747a / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  767d-768d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  830a-840a  esp
830d-832a,  836d-839b; 843d-845b esp 845b 4. Unity in the realm of mind:
unity  in  thought  or knowledge 4a, The unity of mind or intellect, the
cognitive faculties, or consciousness 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 3
[407*3-22]
636b-d; bk hi, ch 1-5 656b,d-662d; ch 7
[43i a20-b i] 663d-664a; ch 8 [432*2-14] 664c-d
17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 3 143b-c

[331b]
i  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 76, a 2 388c-391a; q 79, aa
4-5  417a-419b;  q  88, a 1, ans 469a-471c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  50,  a  4,  ans 9a-10b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 49c-51d esp
51c-d;  55a56c;  99a-101b;  110d-112a;  119a-b; 120c-129c esp 121a-124d,
126a-128b; 185b-c; 193a-200c esp 193d-194b, 194d-195a, 199a-c; 200c-204c
/  Practical  Reason,  329a-d / Judgement, 463a475d; 570b-572b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 321-322 106c-107a; par 343 HOd-110a /
Philosophy  of History,  intro,  175c-177b  53  James:  Psychology,  lab;
154a-157b  esp  156a;  159b-161a  esp  160a-161a 4b. The unity of sense-
experience:   the  unity  of  attention;  the  transcendental  unity  of
apperception  7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  534d-535b  8  Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 b36-i 00*14] 136b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch
[99
ai] 499b / Soul, bk 11, ch ii 654b-656a; bk hi, ch i
[425
1
[980^5-98
a  i4-b  io]  657b-d;  ch  2 [426b7-427a i5] 658d-659c; ch 7 [431*20b i]
663d-664a / Sense and the Sensible, ch 7 685c-689a,c 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr hi, ch 3 143b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a
3,  rep  2  4c-5a;  q 78, aa 3-4 410a-413d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  77,  a  1,  ans  145a-d; part hi suppl, q 82, a 3, rep 4
971a-972d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv [1-18] 57c 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, sect 99 432b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 48d-59b esp 49c-51d
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 244b-245a 53 James: Psychology, 232b-238b esp
232b-234b,   237a-238a;   261a-269a;   315b-318b   passim,  esp  318a-b;
469a-471a;  502b-503b;  570a-572b  esp  572a  4c.  Unity  in thinking or
understanding:  the unity of complex ideas and definitions; the unity of
the  term,  the  judgment,  and the syllogism 7 Plato: Laches, 32a-33a /
Meno,  174a-179b / Theaetetus, 514b-515d; 534d-536a; 545b547b / Sophist,
559a-c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[2*19-33] 6b-c;
[3*6-b9]
7b-d  /  Interpretation,  ch  5  26b-c;  ch  8  27d-28a; ch ii 31c-32c /
Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 23 [84b3i-85*i] 115d-116a; bk ii, ch 6
[92*28-33]
126b; ch 10 [93^6-38] 128b-c; ch 13
[97
b6-25] 133a-b / Topics, bk 1, ch 18 [108*17-37] 152b-d; bk iv, ch 3
[123*27-29] 171d; ch 6 [i27b5~6] 177a; bk vi,
ch 2
[139^9-32]
192c-d; ch 4
[i4i*26-b2]
194c-d; ch 5
[i42b30-i43*i2] 196b-c; ch
10
[i48*23]-ch
11
[149*38]
202b-203d; ch 13
[i50*i]-ch 14 [151*31] 204c-206a; bk vii, ch 3

[332a]
(4. Unity in the realm of mind: unity in thought or knowledge. Ac. Unity
in   thinking   or   understanding:  the  unity  of  complex  ideas  and
definitions; the unity of the term, the judgment, and the syllogism.)
[i53a6-22]
208a-b;
[154*3-11]
209b; ch 4
[154*15-18] 209c / Sophistical Refutations, ch
7 [i69b3-6] 233b / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 7
[1012*22-24] 532b; bk
v, ch 3
[ioi4a35-b
3]   534c;  bk  vii,  ch  4-6  552b-555a;  ch  10-12  558a-562a;  ch  17
565a-566a,c; bk viii, ch 2
[1043*12-28] 567c-d; ch 3 [i043b28~33] 568b;
ch 6 569d-570d; bk x, ch i
[1052*28-37]
578d  /  Soul,  bk  i,  ch  i  [402^-9]  631c-d;  bk 11, ch 3 [414^0-32]
644d-645a;  bk  hi,  ch  6  662d-663c; ch 8 [432*9-10] 664c 9 Aristotle:
Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 3 166a167d esp [643b io-35] 167a-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  58,  a  2 301b-d; Q 85, a 4 457a-d; a 8
460b-461b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  59c-d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xii, sect i 147b-d; sect 5-8 148a-d passim; ch
xvi,  sect 1 165c-d; ch xxii, sect 4 201c-d; ch xxiv 214b-d; bk hi, ch v
263d268a  passim,  esp sect 4 264b, sect io-ii 266b-d; ch vi, sect 28-33
276a-278c  passim,  esp  sect  32,  278a-b;  ch  xi,  sect  18 304a-b 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect i 413a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 43d-44a;
44c-45b;  45d46a;  49c-51d  esp 51c-d; 107bc; 110d-112a; 133c; 193a-200c
esp  195b-d,  197b-198a;  234c  /  Practical Reason, 329a-d / Judgement,
550a-551a,c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 220c 53 James:
Psychology,  178a-184a esp 178b-179a, 180a; 213b-214a; 820b-821a Ad. The
unity  of  science: the unity of particular sciences 7 Plato: Charmides,
10b-lla / Symposium, 167a-d / Republic, bk hi, 333b-d; bk vii, 397c-398a
8  Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 7 103c-d; ch 9 104b-d; ch ii
[77*26-35]  106b; ch 28 119c; ch 32 120c-121b / Topics, bk ii, ch 3 [nob
i6-28]  155c  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  9  [i7o*20-b 3] 234b-c /
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 1
[995
b4-26] 513d-514b; ch 2
[996*18997*34] 514d-516a; bk iv, ch 1-3 522a-525a;
bk  vi,  ch  1  547b,d-548c; bk xi, ch 1-4 587a590a; ch 7-8 592b-593d 17
Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr ix, ch 2, 137a / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2,
143a; tr ix, ch 5 206d-207a,c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 1,
a  3  4c-5a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 6, rep 3
40a-41a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 71c-d; 72a-d

[332b]
298  THE  GREAT IDEAS Ad to Ae 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 13a-c;
15d16b;  44c-45a;  48d-49b  31  Descartes:  Rules, 1 la-2a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  193a-200c  esp  197b198a  /  Judgement,  560d-561a;  578a-b  51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  197b;  bk  vi,  248d-249a  53 James:
Psychology,  la-4a  passim 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 874a Ae.
The  one  and  the  many,  or  the simple and the complex, as objects of
knowledge:  the  order  of  learning  with respect to wholes and parts 7
Plato:  Phaedrus, 126a-c; 134b-c / Symposium, 167a-d / Meno, 174a-183a /
Phaedo,  231b232b  /  Republic,  bk  hi, 333b-d; bk v, 368c373c; bk vii,
392b-394b / Timaeus, 465d / Parmentdes 486a-511d / Theaetetus, 534d536a;
537a-c;   545b-547b  /  Sophist,  569d-570a  /  Statesman,  594d-595a  /
Philebus,  609b-613c  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk ii, ch 19
136a-137a,c  / Topics, bk v, ch 5 [i35*2o-b6] 186d-187a / Physics, bk i,
ch  1  259a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk in, ch 4 [999*24-29] 518a; bk v, ch 6
[ioi6b i8-25] 537b; bk vii, ch 17 [1041* 6-b n] 565a-d; bk x, ch i
[io52b i-io53b8]
578d-580a; ch 3
[1054*20-29]
581a;  bk  xi,  ch  10  594d-596a  /  Soul,  bk i, ch i [402b i5~ 403*2]
631d-632a; bk hi, ch i
[425*i4-b io]
657b-d;  ch  6  662d-663c  /  Sense and the Sensible, ch 7 685c-689a,c 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639*12^9]
161b-d / Politics, bk i, ch i
[1252*18-24] 445b
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  i  159a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 3, a 3, rep 1 16a-d; q 10, a i, rep i 40d-41d; q
ii,  a  2, rep 4 47d-48d; a 3, rep 2 49a-c; q 12, aa 8-10 57b-59d; q 14,
aa  5-6  79a-81c;  a 10, rep 1 83d-84c; q 30, a i, rep 4 167a-168a; a 3,
rep  3  169b-170c;  q  39, a 8 210a-213a; q 58, a 2 301b-d; q 85, aa 3-4
455b-457d; a 8 460b-461b; part i-ii, q 10, a i, rep 3 662d663d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 44c-45a / Novum Organum, pref 105a-106d; bk i,
aph  19-36  108b-109b;  bk  ii, aph 3-5 137c-139a; aph 17 149b-d; aph 27
157b-158d;  aph  30  159c-d;  aph  35  162a-164a;  aph  37  168d-169c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  viii,  14bc;  ix  14d-15d; xii 18b-25a esp 20d-24c /
Discourse, part ii, 46c-48b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch hi,
sect  7  255c-256a;  ch  vi,  sect  32  277c-278b; bk iv, ch vi, sect ii
334b-335b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 99 432b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect i, div 9 454c-455a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 49c-51d esp
51c-d; HOd111c; 193d-200c / Practical Reason, 294a-b / Judgement, 572a-b

[333a]
Chapter  63: ONE AND MANY 4//o 5d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk 197b; bk
vi,  248d-249a;  bk  xii,  555b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 315a-319a esp
317b-318b; 327a-331b; 360a; 397a; 406b; 452b-453b
[fn
i];  456b-457a;  503b-504a; 547«T548b; 551b-552a 4/. The unity of knower
and  known,  or of subject and object 7 Plato: Seventh Letter, 809c-810d
esp  810c 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16*4-9] 25a / Topics, bk 1,
ch  18  [108*17-37]  152b-d  /  Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [ic>72b i8-24]
602d-603a; ch 9 [io74b35-io75an] 605c-d / Soul, bk i, ch 5
[409b i8-4ii a
7] 639c-641a; bk ii, ch 5
[4 i6b32-4i7a2] 647b; [417*17-21] 647d; [418*26] 648c-d; bk hi, ch 2 [425b i7-426b8] 657d658d; ch
3
[427*1 6-b6] 659c-d; ch
4 661b662c; ch 5
[430*14-16]
662c;
[430*20-22]
662d; ch 7 [431*1-8] 663c; ch 7 [43i b i3]-cH 8
[432*2] 664b-c
/ Sense and the Sensible, ch 6 b i3-27] 685a-b / Memory and Reminis-
[446
cence,  ch 1 [450*25-451*19] 691a-692b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ix,
ch  i  136a-d / Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 10 221b-222a; tr vi, ch 1 235b-d
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 17 75c-d; par 19 76a-b; par 22-24
76d-77c;  par 27-28 78b-d / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 14, a 2 76d-77d; a 6, rep 1,3 80a-81c; a 9,
rep  2  83b-d; q 27, a i, rep 2 153b-154b; q 85, a 8, rep 3 460b-461b; q
117,  a 1 595d-597c; part i-ii, q 28, a 1, rep 3 740b-741a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  23a-24a;  52c-53a; 88b91d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  31 19c-20a; part hi, par 146-147 55c-56a; par 343 HOd-110a; par 360
113d-114a,c  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 160c-161a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  231a 53 James: Psychology, 142a-143b; 147a-b; 176a178a; 232b-238b
esp  232b-233a,  234a-235a, 236a-237b; 307a; 309a-311a passim, esp 311a;
852a 5. Unity in moral and political matters 5a. The unity of virtue and
the many virtues 7 Plato: Laches, 32a-37b / Protagoras, 48a-50d; 58a-64d
/  Meno 174a-190a,c esp 174a-175d / Statesman, 605d-607a / Laws, bk xii,
795c797b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch i
[i28b34~39]
178d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 1 [ii29b i2]-cH 2
[1130^9] 377a-378b; bk vi, ch 13 394b-d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk viii, sect 39 288c; BK xi, sect 10 303b-c
17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr h, ch 7 9c-10a; tr in, ch 6 lld-12b 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60,

[333b]
b  299  a  1  49d-50c;  q  61,  aa  3-4 56b-58b; q 65 70a-75a; q 68, a 5
92c-93c; q 73, a i 119c-120c; part ii-ii, q 23, aa 4-8 485d-489c; q 184,
a  1  629a-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  80a-81a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  20  175a  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics,  377d  43  Mill: Utilitarianism,
469a5b. The unity of the last end: the plurality of intermediate ends or
means b5~i3] 666b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; ch 4
[1095*13-29] 340b-c; ch 6 [1096*1 i-b8] 341b-d
8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10 [433 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch
14,  189d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 16 271c-d; bk vi, sect 42
278a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr iv, ch 4-16 14a19b / Sixth Ennead, tr
ix,  ch  6-1  i  357a-360d  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk viii, ch 4
266d267c;  ch  8-9 270a-271a / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 35 634c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q i, aa 5-8 613a-615c; q 12, a 3,
rep i 670d-671b; q 13, a 3, rep 2 674c-675a; q 16, a 3, contrary and rep
3  685b-686a  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 2-4 390d-409d
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 234c-240b esp 235a-b, 236d-237a, 238c-239a / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 257c-d; 266c-267d; 271d279d esp 273d-277b;
286c-287d  /  Practical  Reason,  307a-d;  317a-b; 327d-329a; 337a355d /
Judgement,  588b  [fn  2];  591b-592c  esp  592a-c:  594c-597d  43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  448a;  461c-463d  5c.  The unity of subjective will and
objective  morality  in the ethical realm 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
intro, par 8 14c; par 33 20b-d; part ii, par 141 54b-d; part in, par 155
57c;  par  183  64a;  par  185  64b-d; par 229 75b; par 258 80b-81c; par
260261  82a-83d;  par  270  84d-89c; par 353-360 112b-114a,c esp par 360
113d-114a,c;  additions, ioo-ioi 133a-b; 118 136a-b 5d. The unity of the
family  and  the  unity  of the state: the limits of political or social
unification  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  343c-344a; bk v, 356b-365d /
Statesman,  605d-608d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk viii, ch i [1155*22-28]
406d;  bk  ix, ch 6 420c-421a / Politics, bk i, ch 1-2 445a-446d; bk ii,
ch  1-6  455b,d-461d  esp  ch  2  455d-456c;  bk  vii, ch 4 530a-d; ch 8
532c-533a  18 Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21, 161 be; bk xii, ch 21
357a-b; bk xvii, ch 14, 464d; bk xix, ch 14-17 520a-523a

[334a]
300  Unity in moral andpolitical matters. 5d. The unity of thefamily and
the   unity  of  the  state:  (5  the  limits  of  political  or  social
unification^)  20  Aquinas:  Summa Thcologica, part i-ii, q 8i, a i, ans
163a-164d 23 Hobbes : Leviathan, partii, 99a-101a; 109c-d; 110a-b; 121a;
152c-d; 155b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 871 344b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vii,  sect  78-80 42b-43a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3b-c; bk
x,  64a;  64d-65b;  bk  xix,  140a-c  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,
367a-369a  passim  / Social Contract, bk i, 392b-393b; bk hi, 419c-d; bk
iv,  425a-427a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 18a 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  455c-456a  43 Federalist: number 1-2, 30d-32a; number 14 60a-62d
passim,   esp  61b-c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  352b-353a;
417c-433b  passim / Utilitarianism, 460a-461c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 56a-b
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 158-159 58a; par 173 61a-b;
par  181  63c-d; par 270 84d-89c; par 276 92b; additions, 117 135d-136a;
161  143a-b;  168  145c-d;  178 147d148a / Philosophy of History, intro,
170c178a; part i, 211a-212c; 222ac; 236a-c; part hi, 302d-303a; part iv,
363c-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 421a-d esp 421c-d; 427c-428b
54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  677b-678b;  684d  / Civilization and Its
Discontents,   785c-   788d;   791  b-c;  799a-800a  5e.  The  unity  of
sovereignty:  its divisibility or indivisibility; the problem of federal
union 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 97c-98a,c; part 11, 100c-105c; 150b;
151a-152a;  part  hi, 198a199a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3b;
bk  ix,  58b,d-60a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 392b-393b; bk 11,
395a-396a; bk hi, 406b,d-410a; 420d; 422a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
577b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 437c-d; 439a-441d; 452c-d; 455c-456a /
Judgement,  586a-587a  43  Constitution of the U.S.: lla-20d passim, esp
ARTICLE VI
[583-590]
16d, AMENDMENTS, x 18a 43 Federalist: number 1-14 29a-62d passim; number
15,  63d-64a;  65c-d;  number 18-20 71a-78b passim; number 32, 105d-107b
number  39,  126b-128b; number 42, 138c; number 44, 146d-147c; number 82
242b244a  43 Mill: Representative Government, 428b-433b passim 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 276-

[334b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5e  to 6a 278 92b-93a; par 281 95b-d; par 106c-107a /
Philosophy of History, 278c; part iv, 342b-d; 355c-d 321-322 PART II, 6.
Unity  in the supernatural order 6a. The unity and simplicity of God Old
Testament:  Exodus,  20:1-6  / Deuteronomy, 4:39; 5:6-10; 6:4; 32:29 / /
Kings, 8:23,60— (D) /// Kings, 8:23,60 / Psalms, 18:31—(D) Psalms, 17:32
/  Isaiah,  37:16,20;  43:10-15;  44:6,8;  45:5-6,18,21-22;  48:12—  (D)
Isaias,  37:16,20;  43:10-15; 44:6,8; 45:5-6,18,21-22; 48:12 / Jeremiah,
10:6  (D) Jeremias, 10:6 / Hosea, 13:4— (D) Osee, 13:4 / Zechariah, 14:9
—  (D)  Zacharias,  14:9 / Malachi, 2:10— (D) Malachias, 2:10 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon, 12:13— (D) OT, Boo{ of Wisdom, 12:13 / H Maccabees,
1:24-25—  (D) OT, II Machabees, 1:24-25 New Testament: Matthew, 23:9; 28
/  Mar\,  12:29-34  /  John,  17:3  /  /  Corinthians,  8:1-6; 12:1-13 /
Ephesians,  4:1-6 / / Timothy, 2:1-6 / James, 2:19 8 Aristotle: Physics,
bk viii, ch 10 353b-355d / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [1073*4-11] 603a-b;
ch 8
[1074*32-39]
604d; ch 9
[1075*5-1 1]
605c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 14 [ii54b20-3i] 406c 17 Plotinus:
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  ix 353d-360d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 10
3b-c; par 12 4a; bk iv, par 24 25b-c; par 29 26b; bk vii, par 2 43c-44a;
par 16-23 48c-50c esp par 21 49d-50a; bk xiii, par 4 111c / City of God,
bk viii, ch 6 268d-269c; ch ii, 272c; bk xi, ch 10 327d-328d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  1,  ch  5  625d-626a;  ch  32  633c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 3 14a20c; q 4, a 2, rep 1-2 21b-22b; a 3 22b-23b;
q  6,  a  3  29c-30b;  q  7, a 2 31d-32c; q 8, a 2, rep 2-3 35c-36b; a 4
37c-38c;  q  ii  46d-50b;  q 13, a i, rep 2-3 62c-63c; a 4 65c-66b; a ii
73c-74b;  q 14, a i, rep 2 75d-76c; a 4 78b79a; q 26, a i, rep i 150b-c;
q 27, a i, rep 2 153b-154b; q 30, a i, rep 3-4 167a-168a; a 3 169b-170c;
q  40,  a  i,  rep  i  213b-214b;  q  44,  a 1, ans 238b-239a; q 47, a i
256a-257b;  q 50, a 2, rep 3 270a-272a; a 3, rep 2 272a-273b; q 54, a 1,
ans  285a-d; a 3, rep 2 286c-287b; q 55, a 1, ans and rep 3 289a-d; a 3,
ans 291a-d; q 57, a i, ans 295a-d; q 84, a 2, ans and rep 3 442b-443c; q
88,  a  2,  rep 4 471c472c; part 1—11, q 18, a 1, ans 694a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49,  a  4, ans 5a-6a; q 50, a 6, ans
lla-12a;  q  73,  a 1, rep 3 119c-120c; part hi, q 2, a 2, ans and rep 1
711d-712d; q 3, a 2, rep 3 724a-c; a 3 724c-725b; q 6, a 5, rep 2 744a-d
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiii
[5266]
126a; xxiv
[115-154]
143d-144b; xxix
[127-145] 151c-d; xxxiii [76-145] 157a-d

[335a]
6b to 6c Chapter 63: ONE AND MANY 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 151d 31
Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 52a-d / Meditations, in 81d-89a esp 88a-b
/  Objections  and  Replies,  122b-c;  232b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i
355a-372d  esfTTJEF  i  355a,  def  3,6  355b,  axiom 2 355c-d, prop 1-8
355d-357d, prop 13-15 359c-361d, prop 16, corol 1,3 362a, prop 17, corol
2 362b, prop 18 363c, prop 20 363d-364a, prop 29, schol 366b-c; part ii,
prop 4 374c; prop 7, schol, 375b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
hi,  sect 15 116c-d; bk 11, ch xxiii, sect 35 213b-c; bk in, ch vi, sect
ii  271b-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 307b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  229c-230b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 176bc; 192c-d; 205a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History,  part i, 224a-b; 227d-228a; part hi, 306a-c; part
iv,  322ac  6b.  The unity of the Trinity New Testament: John, 1:1-5 / I
John,  5:7  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xiii, par 12 113b-d; par 32
119a-b / City of God, bk x, ch 23-24, 312c-313a; bk xi, ch 10 327d-328d;
ch  24-28  335c-338d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 5 625d-626a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q ii, a 4, contrary 49d-50b; qq 27-31
153a-175c;  q  39,  a  8  210a-213a;  q  42  224a-230a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q 2, a 3, rep 1 713a-714c; q 3, a 3 724c-725b; q
17, a 1, rep 5 807a-808d; a 2, rep 3 808d809d; part in suppl, q 95, a 3,
ans 1045b1046d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiv
[28CROSS-REFERENCES
For:  Other  discussions  of  the  problem  of  the  one and the many in
relation to the order of being, 3; World 3a~3b. Problems closely related
to that of the one and the many, see Relation id; Same and Other 2b, 2e;
Universal  and Particular i. The dialectical significance of the problem
of  the  one  and  the  many, see Dialectic 3a, 3d; Opposition 2b. Other
discussions  of  numerical  unity  or  identity,  or  the  unity  of the
individual  or  the in Discussions relevant to the unity and divisibility
of  matter, motion, time, and space, see Change 5b; Element 5b; Infinity
4b;  Quantity  2;  Space  3a;  Time  1.  The  problem  of  essential and
accidental  unity,  see  Same  and Other 3a. The problem of the unity of
substantial form, see Form 2c(3). The problem of the unity of man, or of
unity  in  the  human personality, see Man 3a, 5~5aJ Opposition 4-4K 4d;
Soul  4a.  Considerations  of  unity  in  the faculties or operations of
thought or knowledge, see Defini3C (5)-

[335b]
301 :54] 143d-144b; xxxm 33] 127b; xxiv [115-
[76-145] 157a-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 267 155a / Second Nun's
Tale
[15,798-809]
467a-b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 207b; 207d208c; part iv, 259d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  lOOc-d  31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  232b  32 Milton: Christs Nativity [1-14] la-b / Paradise Lost,
bk v [600-615] 188b; bk xii
[469-551]
329b-331a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307a-313d esp 307bc, 310b-312a;
605a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part hi, 303d304a; 306a-c 6c.
The  unity  of  the  Incarnation  New Testament: John, 1:9-14; 10:30,38;
14:1011  /  Philippians,  2:5-7  / Colossians, 2:9 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  ix,  ch  14-17  293a-295c;  bk  x, ch 29 316d-318b / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 13 62 7d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, qq
i26 701b,d-846d esp q 2 709d-723a, q 17 806d809d; part in suppl, q 95, a
3, ans 1045b1046d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxxi
[76-126] 101c-102a; paradise, 11 [31-45] 108a;
vii  [25-33]  115c;  xxxm [76-145] 157a-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 512. 262a;
765  322a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 308a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  134a-138a esp 136b-d, 137c-d; 140a-b; 145b-d; 150c-151c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part hi, 306b307b

[336a]
302  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  and the Incarnation, see God 4b, 9a-ob; Man iic;
Relation  2. . Some Problems of Philosophy, ch 7-8 div ii Albo. The Boo{
of  Principles  (Sefer ha-IJ^arim) G. Pico della Mirandola. Of Being and
Unity  Meyerson.  Identity  and Reality Bruno. De la causa, principio, e
uno Blood. Pluriverse

[336b]
,  For:  The one and the many, or the simple and the complex, as objects
of  knowledge  and  in  relation  to the order of learning, see Idea 3d;
Knowledge 5b. The unity and diversity of knower and known, see Knowledge
i  ; Same and Other 4a. The controversy over the unity of virtue and the
plurality  of virtues, see Courage 4; Prudence 3b; Temperance ia; Virtue
and  Vice  ib, 3b. Other discussions of the order of means and ends, see
Good and Evil 5c; Principle 4a; Relation 5a(2). Unity as an aesthetic or
an  artistic  principle,  see  Art  7b; Beauty ic; Poetry 8a(i). Matters
bearing  on  the  unity of the family and the state, and relevant to the
process  and  limits  of  social  unification, see Citizen 8; Family 2a;
Government  ib; State ib, ioa-iof; War and Peace 11a, nd. Considerations
germane  to  the  divisibility  or  indivisibility  of  sovereignty, see
Government  ig,  5d;  State  yd. Other discussions of the uniqueness and
simplicity  of  God,  and  of  the  mysteries  of the Trinity ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included in Great BooJ^s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning the publication of the works cited, consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas. Suarez. On the Various Kinds of Distinctions (Dis- *•
putatwnes Metaphysicae, vn) Aquinas. On the Trinity of Boethius, q 4 John
of  Saint  Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus Tho~ Dante. On World- Government
or  De Monarchia, misticus, Ars Logica, part ii, q 27; Philosophia bk 1,
ch   14-15  Naturalis,  part  hi,  q  9  Descartes.  The  Principles  of
Philosophy,   part   i,  Leibnitz.  Monadology,  par  1-9,  56-90  60-65
Schelling.   Von   der   Weltseele  Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind
Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea, vol i, . Science of Logic, vol
i,  bk  i,  sect i, ch 3(b); bk iv (56} bk 11, sect 11, ch 3(a) Fechner.
Uber  die  physikalische  und  philosophische  W.  James.  Memories  and
Studies,  ch  8 Atomenlehre —— . Pragmatism, lect iv Lotze. Metaphysics,
bk i, ch 6 . A Pluralistic Universe . Outlines of Metaphysic, div i, esp
ch 3, 5; C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 373-383 "• Bradley.
The  Principles  of Logic, Terminal Essays, Sextus Empiricus. Against the
Physicists,  bk  i  iv-v  (Concerning  Whole  and Part) . Appearance and
Reality  Proclus.  The Elements of Theology, (a, h) Royce. The World and
the  Individual,  series  1(4,  Erigena.  De  Divisione  Naturae 9-10) ;
Supplementary  Essay  B.  Russell.  Principles  of Mathematics, ch 16-17
(10),  xxx  (10),  xxxiv,  xliv  (11), xlvi (i), Broad. The Mind and Its
Place  in  Nature, ch i xlvii (11, 14-15, 17) Whitehead. Science and the
Modern World, ch 10

[337a]
Chapter^  OPINION  INTRODUCTION  THE  noble  Houyhnhnms  are paragons of
reason.  They have no conceptions or ideas of what is evil in a rational
nature.  "Their  grand maxim," according to Swift, their creator, "is to
cultivate  reason  and  to  be  wholly governed by it. Neither is reason
among  them  a  point problematical as with us, where men can argue with
plausibility  on  both  sides  of  the  question;  but  strikes you with
immediate  conviction,  as  it  needs  must  do where it is not mingled,
obscured,  or discolored by passion and interest." What Captain Gulliver
finds  most  striking in the contrast between men and this noble race of
horses  is  that  the  perfect  rationality of the Houyhnhnms lifts them
entirely  above the vagaries and vicissitudes of opinion. "I remember it
was  with extreme difficulty," he says, "that I could bring my master to
understand  the  meaning  of  the  word opinion, or how a point could be
disputable; because reason taught us to affirm or deny only where we are
certain,  and  beyond  our  knowledge  we  cannot  do  either.  So  that
controversies,  wranglings,  disputes,  and  positiveness  in  false and
dubious propositions, are evils unknown among the Houyhnhnms." Among men
it  is  not  the  meaning  of  "opinion" but of "knowledge" which causes
trouble. If men had no conception of knowledge at all, as the Houyhnhnms
seem  to  have  no  conception  of  opinion,  they would find themselves
disagreeing  about  many  matters of opinion, but probably not about the
nature  of opinion itself. The great controversies concerning opinion in
the  tradition  of  western  thought  all relate to its distinction from
knowledge,  both  with  regard  to  the  difference  in their respective
objects and with regard to the way in which the mind works when it knows
and when it opines. 303

[337b]
Only when something better than opinion is proposed as attainable do the
characteristics  of  opinion  come  to be questioned. That something may
stand  in  relation  to  opinion as certainty to probability, as fact to
conjecture,  as  adequate  to  inadequate knowledge, as demonstration to
persuasion. The chief source of disagreement about the nature of opinion
seems  to  be the meaning of the other term in the comparison. Yet a few
commonly  recognized  features  of  knowledge—  if  that is taken as the
contrasting  term—  throw  some light on the characteristics of opinion.
Certain things which are never said about knowledge seem to be generally
said  of  opinion.  An opinion, it is said, may be either true or false.
But  knowledge  is  never  said  to  be false. For a great many writers,
though  not  for  all,  doubt  and  belief  are  attitudes of mind which
accompany  the holding of opinions, but not the possession of knowledge.
It  is possible to opine and doubt at the same time, but not to know and
doubt.  Belief  overcomes  doubt  with  respect to opinion, but in those
matters in which the mind is convinced of the truth of its judgments, an
act of belief does not seem to be In the sense in which belief implies a
willingness  to assent where assent might reasonably be withheld, belief
seems  to be appropriate to opinion but incompatible with knowledge. The
opposite  of  an  opinion  may  be  reasonably  maintained,  whereas the
opposite  of  that  which  is  known  must  be  error  or falsehood, and
therefore  untenable.  The  traditional  distinction  between axioms and
postulates   (or   assumptions)   exemplifies  this  difference  between
knowledge  and opinion. If a proposition is axiomatic, its contrary must
be  false. But if something is proposed as an assumption to be taken for
granted,

[338a]
304  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  then  its  opposite  can also be postulated, and
probably will be postulated by those who are unwilling to grant what has
been  proposed.  This  last  point  in  the  comparison of knowledge and
opinion  appears  to  have political significance. It is not merely that
men are accustomed to expect more disagreement in the sphere of politics
than  in  science;  they take a different attitude toward scientific and
political  controversy,  largely because one is supposed to occur in the
domain  of knowledge and the other in the realm of opinion. Men speak of
having  a right to their own opinions, which includes a right to persist
in  them  despite  the  conflicting  opinions of others. The notion of a
right to a certain obstinacy in differing from one's fellow men seems to
follow  from  the  nature  of opinion and to accord with its distinction
from  knowledge.  With regard to matters concerning which it is supposed
that  knowledge  rather  than  opinion  is possible, disagreement may of
course  occur,  but  never  without  the expectation that reasonable men
should  be able to reach agreement on the disputed point by re-examining
the facts. The differences between men which we appeal to a consensus to
resolve  are  differences of opinion, not knowledge. Sometimes conflicts
of  opinion  cannot  be  settled  in any other manner, and for practical
purposes  it may be necessary to accept the opinion of the majority. The
theory  of  majority rule raises many questions on which the great books
take opposite views, but for the most part they restrict the application
of  the  theory to matters of opinion. Disputed issues in mathematics or
other theoretic sciences are seldom, if ever, settled by counting heads.
The  weight  of numbers seems to be peculiarly relevant to measuring the
worth  of conflicting opinions. The traditional consideration of opinion
naturally  divides,  therefore,  into two major lines of discussion. The
first  deals  with  the  theoretical  problem  of the difference between
knowledge and opinion, and involves such related terms as doubt, belief,
faith,  certitude,  and probability. The second assumes that distinction
for  the  most  part,  and  deals  with  the  problems  of  decision and
responsibility  in  the  sphere  of  opinion—  the problem of liberty of
conscience, of freedom of thought and expression,

[338b]
of  majorities  and  minorities, and of individual judgment in difficult
cases  of  conscience.  The distinction between knowledge and opinion is
sometimes  made in terms of a difference in their objects, and sometimes
in  terms  of  a  difference in the way the mind works when it knows and
when  it  opines.  These  two  modes  of differentiation may, of course,
supplement  one  another— the object of opinion being such that the mind
must  operate  in  a  certain  way  with respect to it. The same authors
usually treat the matter both ways. But not all the great books in which
these  things  are  discussed use the words "knowledge" and "opinion" to
signify  the  basic  opposition. Locke, for example, says that "the mind
has  two  faculties  conversant  about  truth  and  falsehood  :  first,
knowledge,  whereby  it certainly perceives and is undoubtedly satisfied
of the agreement or disagreement of any ideas; secondly, judgment, which
is  the  putting  ideas together, or separating them from one another in
the mind, when their certain agreement or disagreement is not perceived,
but  presumed  to  be  so."  To the faculty of judgment belongs "belief,
assent,  or  opinion,  which  is  the  admitting  or  receiving  of  any
proposition  for  true,  upon  arguments  or  proofs  that  are found to
persuade  us to receive it as true, without certain knowledge that it is
so."  As demonstration is to persuasion, as certainty is to probability,
so  for  Locke  knowing  or  perceiving  stands to judging or presuming.
Others, like Hume, tend to use the term 'belief in the place of 'opinion
'  as  the opposi te of 'knowledge'; or, like Spinoza, to assign opinion
along  with  imagination  to  the  domain  of  inadequate  as opposed to
adequate  knowledge.  But  such differences in vocabulary do not seem to
obscure  the  fact  that these authors are making distinctions which, if
not  identical, are at least analogous. A certain parallelism or analogy
exists  between  different  statements  of  the objects of knowledge and
opinion.  The  knowable  seems  to  have the properties of necessity and
immutability,  of universality, clarity, and distinctness. That which is
contingent and variable, or confused and obscure, is usually regarded as
the object of opinion.

[339a]
Plato,  for example, says that that which is apprehended by intelligence
and  reason  "always  is,  and  has no becoming," whereas "that which is
conceived  by  opinion with the help of sensation and without reason, is
always  in  a process of becoming and perishing and never really is." As
understanding  and reason divide the realm of knowledge, whose object is
the  immutable  being of the intelligible forms, so fancy and perception
divide the realm of opinion, whose objects are the sensible things which
come  to be and perish. According to Aristotle, the object of science is
the  essential  and  the necessary, the object of opinion the accidental
and  the  contingent.  To  whatever  extent sensible particulars involve
contingent  accidents  of  all  sorts, they belong to opinion, while the
intelligible  essences of things, universal in the sense of being common
to  many individuals, belong to science. The parallel which so far seems
to  be present between Plato's and Aristotle's statements of the objects
of  knowledge  and  opinion  does  not  continue  when  we  consider the
consequences  of  their  analyses. For Aristotle, it is possible to have
scientific  knowledge  as  well  as  probable opinion about the changing
things  of  the physical world, to the extent that these things are both
intelligible  and  sensible,  and  have  aspects  both  of necessity and
contingency.  But for Plato the realm of becoming belongs exclusively to
opinion,  as  the  quite  separate realm of being belongs exclusively to
knowledge.  In  consequence,  Aristotle's  enumeration  of  the sciences
includes  physics along with mathematics and theology, whereas the study
of  the physical world does not yield a science, according to Plato, but
only,   as  he  says  in  the  Timaeus,  "a  likely  story"—a  plausible
composition of probable opinions. At first glance, Hume seems to provide
a  closer parallel to Plato. "All the objects of human reason or enquiry
may  naturally  be  divided  into  two  kinds," he writes, "relations of
ideas,  and  matters  offact."  Objects of the first sort are capable of
demonstratively  certain  knowledge,  e.g.,  the  mathematical sciences.
Matters  of  fact, which include questions concerning the real existence
of  anything  or the causal connection of one thing with another, do not
permit demonstration. They are objects of belief or opinion.

[339b]
Chapter 64: OPINION 305 It would seem, therefore, that Hume, like Plato,
regards  the objects of knowledge and opinion, or science and belief, as
belonging  to  altogether  distinct realms. They even seem to agree that
physics  cannot  be classified as a science, though the probabilities it
establishes  may be quite sufficient for action. But this agreement must
be  qualified  by  the  fact  that  the  realm of ideas is for Plato the
reality  which  changing  things  image,  while  for  Hume ideas have no
reality at all. They exist only in the mind, which obtains them from the
impressions  of  sense-experience. A parallel between Hume and Aristotle
might  also  be drawn, at least insofar as both connect opinion with the
contingent—   that  which  can  be  otherwise.  If  the  opposite  of  a
proposition  is  not  impossible or does not lead to self-contradiction,
then  the  proposition  and  its  contrary  are matters of opinion. This
criterion,   in   Aristotle's   terms,  excludes  all  self-evident  and
demonstrable   propositions.   Such  propositions,  for  both  Hume  and
Aristotle,  express  knowledge, not opinion. Yet Aristotle, unlike Hume,
does not seem to think that the real existence even of immaterial beings
is  indemonstrable,  or  that no necessary connections can be discovered
between  cause  and  effect. These examples might be extended to include
similar  observations  concerning  Locke, Spinoza, Kant, James— in fact,
almost  every  writer who distinguishes between knowledge and opinion by
reference  to  characteristically different objects. In the tradition of
western  thought  the  major  controversies  concerning  the  objects of
knowledge  and opinion occur with regard to the kind of being or reality
assigned  to  each  type  of object; and, in consequence, with regard to
applications  of  the  distinction.  One writer treats as knowledge what
another,  by  apparently  the  same  criterion,  calls opinion. The term
'opinion'  gets its skeptical impact from this circumstance. The skeptic
never denies that men can form opinions about a given subject; he denies
that  the  topic can be a matter of certain or unquestionable knowledge.
Skepticism approaches its limit when it is maintained that everything is
a  matter of opinion. At the furthest extreme, it is sometimes said that
nothing is either true or false, though

[340a]
306  THE  GREAT IDEAS Aristotle and others argue that such skepticism is
self-destructive  since  the  proposition  'nothing is true or false' is
inconsequential  if  it  is false, and self-contradictory if it is true.
But the proposition 'everything is a matter of opinion' can itself be an
opinion,  and its opposite an opinion also. The position which Montaigne
takes  in  the  Apologyfor  Raimond  de  Sebonde  is not the provisional
skepticism  of  universal  doubt in order to discover the foundations of
certain  knowledge. It is rather a resolute skepticism which reduces all
human  judgments to the status of equally tenable opinions and gives man
no  hope  that  he will ever be able to do better than adopt opinions on
insufficient  grounds  or  else  suspend  judgment  entirely. No axioms,
according  to Montaigne, have ever won the universal consent of mankind;
no  demonstrations  have  ever  escaped the need to assume their initial
premises.  Unless men beg the question in this way, they cannot avoid an
infinite  regress  in reasoning. There is no proposition about which men
have  not disagreed or changed their minds. Illusions and hallucinations
suggest the pervasive unreliability of the senses, as errors of judgment
and  reasoning suggest the radical infirmity of the mind. "How variously
do  we  judge  of  things?"  Montaigne  asks. "How often do we alter our
opinions?  What  I  hold  and  believe today," he continues, "I hold and
believe  with my whole belief. . . .1 could not embrace nor preserve any
truth with greater assurance than I do this; but has it not befallen me,
not only once but a thousand times, and every day, to have embraced some
other  thing with the same instruments, and in the same condition, which
I  have  since judged to be false ? A man must, at least, become wise at
his own expense; if I have often found myself betrayed under this color,
if  my  touch  prove ordinarily false and my balance unequal and unjust,
what  assurance can I now have more than at other times ? . . . We ought
to  remember  that  whateverwe  receive into the understanding, we often
receive  things  that  are false; and that it is by the same instruments
that  so  often  give  themselves  the  lie, and are so often deceived."
Montaigne exempts religious faith from the uncertainty of all beliefs or
opinions which man

[340b]
arrives  at  through  the  unaided efforts of his senses and his reason.
Though  we  must  "accompany  our faith with all the reason we have," we
must  do  so "always with this reservation, not to fancy that it is upon
us  that  it depends, nor that our arguments and endeavors can arrive at
so  supernatural  and  divine  a knowledge." Faith is distinguished from
ordinary belief, according to Montaigne, only "if it enter into us by an
extraordinary  infusion."  What  is  an article of faith to one man may,
however,  be  merely  a  matter  of opinion to another. This seems to be
generally  recognized  by  all  who  differentiate  religious faith from
secular belief. The difference lies not in the object, but in the causes
of  belief.  Those  who  distinguish  between knowledge and opinion also
admit  that  a difference in the way the mind judges, is able to produce
either   knowledge   or  opinion  concerning  the  same  object.  It  is
impossible, according to Aristotle, for the same mind with regard to the
same  object to know and opine at the same time. A given individual, for
example,  cannot  hold  a  proposition  of geometry to be true both as a
matter  of  knowledge  and  of  opinion.  But  this does not prevent the
individual  who  once  held  the  proposition  to  be true merely on the
authority   of  his  teacher—and  thus  as  a  matter  of  opinion  from
subsequently  learning the reasons for its truth and thus coming to know
what  formerly he merely opined. Two individuals may likewise assert the
same  truth  in  different  ways,  the  one  as  knowledge, the other as
opinion.  The  traditional  account of the difference in the activity of
the mind when it knows and when it opines appears to involve two related
points.  The  point which both Plato and Aristotle emphasize is that the
man  who  knows  does  not  merely  assert something to be true, but has
adequate  reasons  for  doing  so. The truth of right opinion is no less
true  than  the  truth  of  knowledge.  It differs, as the discussion in
Plato's  Meno  and  Theaetetus  seems  to show, in that the man of right
opinion  cannot  explain why what he asserts is true. He cannot give the
causes  of  its  truth, or trace its connections with other truths which
help  to  demonstrate  it.  The  fact  that  an opinion is true does not
prevent its being overturned or given up, since without adequate reasons
it is insecure against attack. Un-

[341a]
supported  by  reasons,  opinion  is  not only unstable as compared with
knowledge,  but  it  is also unteachable in the sense in which knowledge
can  be  learned and taught. The mafrof right opinion, unable to explain
satisfactorily  why  he thinks as he does, cannot help others understand
the  Tightness of his opinions. The other characterization of the mind's
activity  in  forming  opinions  seems  to  follow  from  the  preceding
observation.  If  reasons do not determine the mind to think this rather
than  that,  what  is  the  cause  of  its  judgment? If the mind is not
compelled  by the object under consideration to think of it in a certain
way,  what  does  move  the mind in its act of assent or dissent to that
which  is  proposed ? To such questions, the traditional answer seems to
be wish or desire, whether an act of free choice on the part of the will
or  an  inclination  determined  by  the  driving power of the emotions.
Pascal  makes  this  point  when  he observes that there are two ways in
which men come to think as they do. The more natural way "is that of the
understanding, for one should only agree to demonstrated truths; but the
more usual. . .is that of the will; for all men are nearly always led to
believe,   not   by   proof,   but  by  inclination."  Hobbes  similarly
differentiates    knowledge,    which   rests   upon   definitions   and
demonstrations,  from the opinions or beliefs which the mind adopts, not
as  the result of reasoning, but by an act of will. The assent of reason
is  not, according to Aquinas, subject to command by the will in respect
to  all matters on which the reason can judge. If "that which the reason
apprehends  is  such  that  it  naturally  assents  thereto, e.g., first
principles, it is not in our power to assent to it or to dissent. For in
such  cases,"  he  holds,  "assent  follows naturally, and consequently,
properly  speaking, is not subject to our command. But some things which
are  apprehended  do not convince the intellect to such an extent as not
to leave it free to assent or dissent, or at least suspend its assent or
dissent  for  some cause or other; and in such things, assent or dissent
is  in  our  power,  and is subject to our command." Knowledge, it would
seem,  consists  in  those judgments wherein the mind is moved to assent
solely  by  the matter being considered, whereas all matters about which
we are free to make up

[341b]
Chapter  64:  OPINION  307 our minds one way or the other are matters of
Though  they  vary in the terms of their analyses, Descartes, Locke, and
Hume  seem  also  to  agree that when the mind is moved to assent by the
relations  it  perceives  between ideas, especially when these are clear
and  distinct,  it  knows  beyond doubt or the possibility of error. But
when  the mind, lacking such intuitive or rational grounds, nevertheless
forms  a  judgment  concerning  what  is not evident, then the result is
opinion  entertained  as  merely  probable,  accompanied  by  doubt, and
subject  to For Descartes, the will, freely exercised, moves the mind to
such fallible judgments. Except when it is so moved the mind, responding
to its object alone, is naturally infallible. For Hume, the mind is free
to  imagine  whatever  it  pleases,  but its beliefs are determined by a
sentiment  or  feeling  of instinctive origin, "which depends not on the
will,  nor  can  be  commanded at pleasure." The issue between those who
connect  opinion  with  free  will  and  those who deny that beliefs are
voluntarily formed is discussed in the chapter on Will. It does not seem
to  affect  the fairly general agreement on the point that opinion is an
act  of  the mind caused by something other than the object itself which
the  mind  is  considering.  Does this distinction between knowledge and
opinion  exhaustively divide all the acts of the mind ? As we have seen,
Montaigne  appears  to  reject both alternatives and substitutes instead
supernatural  faith  and  ordinary  belief.  Aquinas, on the other hand,
accepts  knowledge  and opinion as exhaustive on the plane of the mind's
natural  operations and makes religious faith a supernatural alternative
to  both.  He  calls  faith  a  mean or intermediate between science and
opinion because he conceives it as having some of the characteristics of
each.  "To  believe,"  he says, "is an act of the intellect assenting to
the  truth at the command of the will." In this faith resembles opinion.
The act of faith is due to the will rather than to the rational evidence
of  the object. Faith is "the evidence of things unseen." But faith also
resembles  science  because the affirmations of faith have the certitude
or freedom from doubt

[342a]
308 THE GREAT IDEAS which characterizes knowledge. According to Aquinas,
faith   has   greater   certitude  than  natural  knowledge,  since,  as
intellectual  virtues,  "science,  wisdom,  and  understanding . . . are
based  upon  the  natural  light  of  reason,  which  falls short of the
certitude  of God's word, on which faith is founded." Faith differs from
knowledge   in   that  the  object  of  faith  exceeds  the  intellect's
comprehension. That is why faith requires an act of the will to move the
intellect  to  assent;  but  whereas  ordinary opinions are adopted by a
man's own volition, Aquinas attributes faith to God. "Faith," he writes,
"as  regards  the  assent  which  is the chief act of faith, is from God
moving  man  inwardly  by  grace."  Just  as  skepticism with respect to
science  takes  the  form of reducing all human judgments to opinion, so
skepticism  with  respect  to religion takes the form of attributing all
belief  to  purely  natural causes. If Freud is correct that all beliefs
are  the  product  of wishful thinking, then it is difficult to separate
religion  from  superstition  or prejudice—or even, perhaps, to separate
science  from  religion.  James  finds the will to believe in science as
well as religion. Like Freud, he explains belief in terms of emotion and
desire. "Will and Belief, meaning a certain relation between objects and
the  Self," he writes, "are two names for one and the same psychological
phenomenon."  Except for those necessary truths which concern only ideal
relationships,  the  mind  in  thinking  about reality is free to choose
between  alternative  theories,  in  the sphere of science as well as in
religion.  To  believe  is  to attribute reality to a theory. Though the
operation  of  the will to believe is not for James entirely independent
of  objective  criteria,  neither is it mainly determined thereby. "That
theory  will  be  most  generally  believed,"  he  says, "which, besides
offering  us  objects  able to account for our sensible experience, also
offers  those  which  are  most  interesting,  those  which  appeal most
urgently  to  our  aesthetic, emotional, and active needs. . . .Socalled
'scientific'  conceptions  of  the  universe  have  so far gratified the
purely intellectual interests more than the mere sentimental conceptions
have.  But.  .  .they leave the emotional and active interests cold. The
perfect object of belief would be a God or 'Soul of the World,' repre-

[342b]
sented  both  optimistically  and  moralistically (if such a combination
could  be),  and  withal  so  definitely conceived as to show us why our
phenomenal  experiences  should be sent to us by Him injust the very way
in  which  they  come."  Opinion  raises  moral and political as well as
psychological  issues  of liberty. One of them is the problem of freedom
of   discussion.   This  problem  has  aspects  which  belong  to  other
chapters—freedom  in  scientific inquiry to Science, freedom in artistic
or  poetic  expression  to  Art  and  Poetry,  freedom of conscience and
worship  to  Religion, freedom in teaching to Education, and the general
issue  of  freedom  of thought and speech to the chapter on Liberty. Yet
what  is common to all these related questions seems to be determined by
the  nature  of opinion, particularly in its distinction from knowledge.
None  of  the  books  which  argue  for  freedom  of expression—Milton's
Areopagitica,  Locke's  Letter Concerning Toleration, or Mill's essay On
Liberty—defends  the  right to disseminate error or falsehood knowingly.
All  of  them argue that the individual who claims the right to be heard
is  morally  bound  by the duty to speak the truth as it appears to him.
Nor  do those, like Plato and Hobbes, who recommend political censorship
seek  thereby  to fortify the state by suppressing truth. In saying that
the  sovereign  should "judge of what opinions and doctrines are averse,
and what conducing to peace," Hobbes observes that "though in matters of
doctrine,  nothing  ought  to be regarded but the truth, yet this is not
repugnant  to  regulating  the  same by peace. For doctrine repugnant to
peace can no more be true, than peace and concord can be against the law
of  nature."  Since knowledge as distinct from opinion has the character
of  incontrovertible truth, the issue of freedom or censorship cannot be
stated  in  terms  of  knowledge. But what some men hold to be knowledge
others regard as opinion. The issue of free expression applies therefore
to  the  entire  range  of  human  thought  on  the  supposition that no
proposition  or  doctrine  is  exempt  from  controversy,  and  no human
judgment  secure  from  contradiction. This supposition does not abolish
the distinction between knowledge and opinion; nor does it flout the law
of

[343a]
contradiction  by  treating  opposite answers to the same question as in
fact  equally  true.  "If all mankind minus one were of one opinion, and
only  one  person  were  of the contrary opinion, mankind," according to
Mill, "would be no more justified in silencing that one person, than he,
if  he had the power, would be justified in silencing mankind. . . . The
peculiar  evil  of silencing the expression of an opinion is, that it is
robbing  the  human  race; posterity as well as the existing generation;
those  who  dissent from the opinion, still more than those who hold it.
If  the  opinion  is  right,  they  are  deprived  of the opportunity of
exchanging error for truth; if wrong, they lose, what is almost as great
a  benefit,  the  clearer  perception  and  livelier impression of truth
produced  by  its  collision  with  error."  Mill advances four distinct
reasons  for  recognizing  "the  necessity  to  the mental well-being of
mankind  (on  which  all  their  other well-being depends) of freedom of
opinion,  and  freedom of the expression of opinion. . . . First, if any
opinion  is  compelled  to  silence,  that opinion may, for aught we can
certainly   know,   be   true.  To  deny  this  is  to  assume  our  own
infallibility.  Secondly,  though  the  silenced opinion be an error, it
may,  and  very commonly does, contain a portion of truth; and ... it is
only  by  the  collision  of  adverse opinions that the remainder of the
truth  has  any  chance of being supplied. Thirdly, even if the received
opinion  be not only true, but the whole truth; unless it is suffered to
be, and actually is vigorously and earnestly contested, it will, by most
of  those  who  receive  it,  be held in the manner of a prejudice, with
little  comprehension  or  feeling of its rational grounds. And not only
this,  but,  fourthly,  the  meaning  of  the doctrine itself will be in
danger  of  being  lost,  or  enfeebled."  The  aim is not to perpetuate
controversy; nor is it to keep all doctrines perpetually on the level of
debatable  opinion.  "As  mankind  improve," Mill writes, "the number of
doctrines  which are no longer disputed or doubted will be constantly on
the increase; and the wellbeing of mankind may almost be measured by the
number  and  gravity of the truths which have reached the point of being
uncontested. The cessation, on one question after another, of

[343b]
Chapter  64:  OPINION  309  serious controversy, is one of the necessary
incidents  of  the consolidation of opinion; a consolidation as salutary
in  the  case  of true opinions, as it is dangerous and noxious when the
opinions  are erroneous." As Mill argues the case for freedom of thought
and discussion, it appears to be based on the hypothesis that the public
debate  of  all matters, carried on without any restriction except those
minimum  restraints  needed  to  prevent  violence,  serves  the  end of
separating  true from false opinion and, by the clarification of opinion
as  well  as the correction of error, discovering the reasons which turn
opinion  into  knowledge.  It is not to multiply opinions but to advance
knowledge,  not to encourage skepticism but to invigorate the search for
truth, that Mill advocates the submission of all matters to open dispute
so  long  as  any  disagreement remains. His fundamental principle, like
that  of  Locke,  consists in divorcing political from logical criteria.
Logically,  the  disputants  may  stand opposed to each other as one who
knows  and  one  who merely opines, or as one who holds a true and one a
false  opinion,  or  even  as  one who enjoys God's gift of supernatural
faith  and  one  who  lacks  such light; but considered politically, the
opponents  represent  a  conflict  of  opinion,  with each party equally
deserving  the  benefit  of  the doubt that it may have the truth on its
side.  If  the  state were to intervene, it would be deciding a disputed
question,  not  by  reason,  but  by force, in an area to which force is
inap-  "The  business of laws," Locke writes, "is not to provide for the
truth  of opinions, but for the safety and security of the commonwealth,
and  for every particular man's goods and person. And so it ought to be.
For  the  truth  certainly would do well enough if she were once left to
shift  for herself. . . .She is not taught by laws, nor has she any need
of  force  to  procure her entrance into the minds of men. Errors indeed
prevail by the assistance of foreign and borrowed succours. But if Truth
makes  not  her way into the understanding by her own light, she will be
but  the  weaker  for any borrowed force violence can add to her." Those
who  argue that state censorship is justified, whether the matters whose
debate is prohibited are speculative or practical, moral,

[344a]
310  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  political,  or theological, appear to extend the
safeguarding  of the common good beyond security from immediate peril of
violence;  or to proceed upon the hypothesis of sufficient wisdom in the
rulers to discriminate unerringly between truth and falsehood. Those who
distinguish  between  church and state with regard to censorship tend to
limit  the application of ecclesiastical authority to questions of faith
and  morals,  on  which  the  church  is  supposed  to have supernatural
guidance  in  deciding  what is true or sound. The principle of majority
rule  in  matters  of opinion seems to be opposite to the principle that
the  voice  of  a  minority  should  be heard. To settle a difference of
opinion  by  taking  a vote gives a decisive weight to numbers which, it
may  be  thought, is as illegitimate as resolving a debate by force. But
when  it  is necessary to legislate or to act, debate must be terminated
and  issues  resolved. On speculative questions, which may be answerable
by knowledge rather than by opinion, and with respect to which agreement
may  be  possible,  the  end  of  truth seems to be served by permitting
discussion  to  go  on  as  long  as  reason  opposes reason. But if the
discussion  is  for  the sake of determining action and if, in addition,
the  subject under discussion is strictly a matter of opinion concerning
which it is possible for reasonable men perpetually to disagree, then it
may  be  necessary  to  appeal  to  some  principle  other  than reason.
Traditional  political  theory  appears to offer only two solutions. One
principle  of  decision  is  to  follow  the  opinion of a single man—an
absolute  monarch or an elected chief magistrate whether or not that one
man also has the wisdom commensurate with such responsibility. The other
principle  is  to  accept  the  opinion  of  the  majority. According to
Aristotle,   this  second  principle  is  operative  in  every  form  of
government  except  absolute  monarchy.  It is not only in democracy, he
says,  that  "the  greater  number  are sovereign, for in oligarchy, and
indeed in every government, the majority rules." It is characteristic of
every  form  of  constitutional  state  that "whatever seems good to the
majority of those who share in the government should have authority."

[344b]
Considered  in  this way, the principle of majority rule leaves open the
question  whether  the majority should be a preponderance of the many or
the  few.  Should  it  be  a  democratic  majority or, according to some
aristocratic  standard,  the  majority  of  the  few who are wiser, more
expert,  or more virtuous than the many ? With regard to some questions,
Aristotle  suggests,  the  multitude  may  be  a  better  judge than any
individual,  even  the  most  expert.  "If  the  people  are not utterly
degraded,  although individually they may be worse judges than those who
have  special  knowledge,  as  a  body  they are as good or better." The
opposing claims of the greater number and the more competent, as well as
the  possibility  of  combining the merits of both, are discussed in the
chapters on Democracy and Aristocracy. The problem of majority rule also
appears  in  those chapters as a factor in the theory of representation,
especially  the  question  considered by Mill—whether the representative
shall exercise his own judgment or act on the opinion of the majority of
his  constituents.  Mill  tries to separate those problems of government
which  should  be submitted to representative assemblies and decision by
majorities  from  those  which  should be solved by experts. But even on
matters  subject  to deliberation by representatives of the people, Mill
advocates  such measures as plural voting and minority representation to
offset  the  sheer  weight of numbers and prevent its being the decisive
force  in  settling  political  differences and determining action. Such
qualifications  of  the principle of majority rule do not seem necessary
to  those  who,  like Rousseau, think that "the general will is found by
counting votes." What Rousseau says of any individual opinion applies to
minority  opinions  as  well,  namely,  that  when  a  contrary  opinion
prevails,  it  proves  that what the minority "thought to be the general
will  was  not  so."  On  the question of how large a majority should be
decisive,  he  thinks  that  "the more grave and important the questions
discussed,  the  nearer  should  the opinion that is to prevail approach
unanimity. . . .The more the matter in hand calls for speed, the smaller
the  prescribed  difference  in  the  number  of votes may be allowed to
become."

[345a]
There  is,  according  to  Rousseau, only one poqualities of the general
will  still reside in the litical decision which requires unanimity, and
majority."  When  the principle of majority rule that is the decision to
enter  upon the social conis unanimously adopted, each individual agrees
tract,  to  set up popular government^trficter to substitute the general
will  for his own particwhich individual liberty endures as long as "the
ular  opinion.  OUTLINE  OF TOPICS 1. The different objects of knowledge
and opinion: being and becoming; universal and 2. The difference between
the acts and sources of knowing and opining 313 ia. The influence of the
emotions on the formation of opinion: wishful thinking, rationalization,
prejudice  ic.  Reasoning  and  argument  concerning matters of opinion:
comparison  of  demonid. Reason, experience, and authority as sources of
opinion  3. Opinion, knowledge, and truth 315 3a. The truth of knowledge
and  of  right  opinion:  their  difference  with  respect  to manner of
acquisition,  stability,  and  teachability  ijb.  Certain and probable,
adequate and inadequate knowledge: degrees of certitude; modes of assent
4.  Opinion,  belief,  and  faith  /\b.  Criticism  of  superstitious or
dogmatic  belief  as opinion without foundation or warrant 5. Freedom in
the  sphere  of  opinion  318  50. Rights and duties with respect to the
expression  of  opinion  $b.  Advantages and disadvantages of freedom of
discussion  6.  Opinion  in  the  realm  of  morals 6a. Good and evil as
matters of opinion: moral standards as customs or conventions reflecting
prevalent  opinion  7.  The  social and political significance of public
opinion  7a.  The value of the majority opinion: the distinction between
matters to be determined by the expert or by a consensus

[345b]
1 Chapter 64 : OPINION 3 1 PAGE

[346a]
312  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  I.  The different objects of knowledge and opinion:
being  and  becoming;  universal  and  particular; the necessary and the
contingent  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  125a126c  /
Republic,  bk v, 368c-373c esp 371a373b; bk vi-vii, 383d-398c / Timaeus,
447bd;  450b-c;  457c-d  /  Theaetetus, 532a-536b / Sophist, 559c-561d /
Philebus,  632d-635a 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 13 [32^- 23]
48b-d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[7ib8-i6] 97d-98a; ch 33 121b-122a,c / Topics,
bk iv, ch 1
[121*20-26]
169a-b;
[i2i b i-4]
169c / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 6
[ion b3-7]
531b; bk vii, ch 15
[io39b3i-i040a8]
563d564a; bk ix, ch 10 [i05i b i3-i8] 577d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch
3
[i094b u-28]
339d-340a;  ch  7  [i098a25-b8] 343d-344a; bk in, ch 2 [iuib30-iii2a i3]
357d-358a;  bk  vi,  ch  5  389a-c;  ch 10 392b-c; bk vii, ch 3 396c398a
passim  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  25  [i402b  i3~ 1403*17] 652b-653a 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk 1, 811a-d 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr ix,
ch  7  249b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 57, a 3, ans
297b-298a; q 79, a 9, rep 3 422b-

[346b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53 James: Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage begins in the upper half of
page  116  and  ends  in  the  lower  half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand  side  of  page  164. Author's Divisions : One or more of the
main  divisions  of  a  work  (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes
included  in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in brackets, are given in
cerBible  References:  The  references  are to book, chapter, and verse.
When  the  King  James and Douay versions differ in title of books or in
the  numbering  of  chapters  or verses, the King James version is cited
first  and  the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of  The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 423d; q 86, a 3
463b-d; a 4, ans 463d-464d; part i-ii, q 17, a 6, ans 690b-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, a 3, ans 83b-84d; part hi, q 9, a 3,
rep  2 765b-766b 31 Descartes: Rules, 1—in la-5a; vi 8a-10a / Discourse,
part  iv, 53c-d / Meditations, 72b,d; 74a,c; 1-11, 75a-78b; in, 81d-82b;
v,  93a-d;  95b-96a;  vi 96b-103d passim / Objections and Replies, 123b;
124d-125a;  126a-b;  229d-230d; 237b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part 11, prop
10  376c-377a;  prop  27-31  384b-385c; prop 40, schol 2 388a-b; prop 44
389b-390a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 234 216b 35 Locke : Human Understanding,
bk  iv,  ch xv, sect 1-3 365a-d; ch xvii, sect 2 371d372b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  iv,  div  20-21 458a-c; div 30, 462a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 228c-d; 240b-243c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 285c-286a /
judgement,  601d;  603d-604b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref la-7d;
intro,  par 1 9a; par 31 19c-20a; part ii, par 132 46b-47a; part hi, par
316 104c; additions, 1 115a-d 53 James : Psychology, 660b-661a

[347a]
b 2 to 2a Chapter 64: OPINION 313 2. The difference between the acts and
sources  of  knowing  and  opining  7  Plato:  Symposium,  163b  / Meno,
182c-183a;  188b-189a  /  Republic,  bk  v, 370d-373cT^K vi, 383d-388a /
Timaeus,  447a-b;  450b-c;  457c-d  /  Theaetetus,  536b-549d / Sophist,
575d-577b  8  Aristotle: Soul, bk iii,ch ii [433 b32-434 au] 666d-667a 9
Aristotle:   Ethics,   bk  vii,  ch  2-3  395c-398a  passim  /  Rhetoric
593a-675a,c  17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch 7 249b-c 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  7  326a-c;  ch  29 339a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 79, a 9, rep 4 422b-423d; o 83, a i, ans 436d438a;
q  108,  a  7,  rep  2  560b-561a; part i-ii, q 13, a 4, rep 2 675a-c 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; q 67, a 3, ans
83b-84d;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  aa  4-5  382c-384b; q 2, a 1 391a-392a 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65b-66c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 41b;
part ii, 45a; 46b-c; part hi 48b-51b passim / Meditations, 1 75a- 7 7c /
Objections  and  Replies,  119c-d;  123b;  124d-125a;  167a-b;  226d  31
Spinoza:   Ethics,   part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2  388a-b  32  Milton:
Areopagitica,  406a-b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect
23-25  119b-120d; bk iv, ch i, sect 2 307a; ch xiv, sect i-ch xv, sect 3
364b365d;  ch  xvn, sect 2 371d-372b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 165a-b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  2b-4a,c; 194b-c; 202b203c; 228c-d; 240b-243c /
Judgement,  601d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 316 104c 54
Freud:  New Introductory Lectures, 882a2a. The influence of the emotions
on   the   formation  of  opinion:  wishful  thinking,  rationalization,
prejudice  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 402a404d; bk in,
427d-428a; bk iv, 474a-c; bk v, 506b-c; 507a-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi,
339c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 [1095^-9] 340a; bk vi, ch 5
[ii40b i3-i9J 389b-c; bk
vii,  ch  2-3  395c-398a  passim;  ch 8 [1151^1-19] 401d402a; ch 9 [ii5i
a28-b i6] 402b-c / Politics, bk hi, ch 16
[i287a2o-b
5] 485c-486a / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 1
[i354ai3~i355a
3] 593b-594a; ch 2
[1356*1-18]
595b-c;  bk  ii,  ch  i-ii  622b,d636a;  bk  hi,  ch  7 659a-660a; ch 14
[1415^5]-  ch 15 [i4i6b i4J 668c-670c; ch 16 [i4i7a37~b 7] 671c-d; ch 19
[i4i9b io-27] 674c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[11411191] 59a-d
18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  36  653d; bk iv, ch 2
675d-676a; ch 4 676d-677a

[347b]
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  9,  a 2, ans and rep 2
658d-659c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  77,  aa 1-3
145a-148b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, xiii [112142] 126c-d 22
Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza  29  92b  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a;  58c-d; 65b-c; 68d; 78a-c; part ii, 128c;
129bc; 154a; partiii, 166a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi,
148d-150d;  154a-156c;  159d-163c;  166a-168a;  215c-218a  25 Montaigne:
Essays,   210b-212a;   272d-276a;   288a-290c;   404c-406a;   446d-450c;
488b-489b; 490d-491d 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act iv, sc 1
[35-62] 425d-426a / Julius Caesar, act hi,
sc  ii 583c-586c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk hi, 60c-61a 28 Harvey: Motion
of  the  Heart,  268a-c;  274a;  283b;  285b-c/ Circulation ofthe Blood,
306ac;  309d  / On Animal Generation, 364a-365a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 16a-b; 27a-c; 61b-c; 65b-c; 79c-80a; 90b-d / Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph  41  109c-d;  aph  49 Ilia 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
215d-216a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d passim; part
hi,  prop  39,  schol  408b-d;  prop  51, demonst and schol 411c-412a 32
Milton:  Samson  Agonistes  [599-605]  352b  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 82-87
186b-189a; 100 191a192b; 105 193a; 296 226b / Geometrical Demonstration,
439b-442a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii, sect 13 28a-b / Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 65-67 195b-196c; ch xxxiii 248b-251d
passim, esp sect 7-18 249b-251c; bk iv, ch xix 384c-388d; ch xx, sect 12
392c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  75  427d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect i, div 6, 453c; sect x, div 93 491d-492d 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 310a-311b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 296b-c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  221c-222b  /  Judgement,  586a-b 43 Federalist: number i,
29b-30c;  number  10,  50a-d;  number  31, 103c-104a; number 37, 118a-c;
number  49,  159d-160a;  number 50, 162a-b 43 Mill: Liberty, 269c-270c /
Utilitarianism,  455a  44  Bosw^ell:  Johnson,  103b-c;  106d  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 317 104d-105a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
317a-321a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man,  265d  50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  427a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk i, 15b-16a; bk ii,
82d-83a;  bk hi, 134ac; 159b-160c; bk iv, 170d-171c; bk v, 233b-234a; bk
vi, 238a-c; 247a-248a; bk ix, 358b-365c; 366d-367b; bk

[348a]
(2.  The difference between the acts and sources of knowing and opining.
2a.  The  influence  of the emotions on theformation of opinion: wishful
thinking,  rationalization,  prejudiced) x, 403a-405a; bk xi, 505a-511b;
bk  xii,  534d536a;  bk  xiii, 585b; epilogue i, 645a-646c; epilogue ii,
686c-687a 53 James: Psychology, 652a-659a esp 652a-654a 54 Freud: Origin
and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis, 13d-14a / Psycho-Analytic Therapy,
125a-126d  /  General  Introduction,  452c-453a  /  Beyond  the Pleasure
Principle,  661d-662a  /  Group  Psychology,  682b-d  /  War  and Death,
760d-761a  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 81 9b-c; 864a-865c; 874b-875a;
877b-c  2b.  The will as cause of assent in acts of opinion 8 Aristotle:
Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch i [24*21b2] 39a-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi,
ch 2 [im b301112*13] 357d-358a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-h, q
17,  a  6  690b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q i, aa 4-5
382c-384b; q 2, a 1, rep 3 391a-392a; a 9, rep 2 398c-399b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part hi 48b-51b passim / Meditations, iv 89a-93a esp 90b-91b
/  Objections  and Replies, 126a-b; 167a-b; 215d216a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
bk  h,  prop  49,  demonstschol, 391c-394a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 99 191a /
Geometrical  Demonstration,  439b-442a  53  James:  Psychology,  636a-b;
660b-661a  2c.  Reasoning  and  argument  concerning matters of opinion:
comparison  of demonstration and persuasion, principles and assumptions,
axioms  and  postulates  7  Plato:  Meno,  187c-189d / Gorgias, 256b-c /
Republic,  bk vi-vii, 383d-398c / Timaeus, 457c-d 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch i
[71*1-10] 97a; ch 19
[8i b io-3o] 110c-d; ch 30
119d / Topics 143a-223a,c / Sophistical Refutations 227a-253d / Physics,
bk viii, ch 1
[252*23-32] 336a / Metaphysics, bk
iv, ch 5
[1009*16-22]
528c; bk xi, ch 6
[io63b7-i4]
591d-592a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b u-28]
339d-340a; ch 7
[i098a25-b8]
343d-344a;  bk  vi,  ch  5  389a-c  esp  [11 40^5-30] 389c; bk vii, ch 3
396c-398a; ch 8
[1151*11-19] 401d402a; ch
9
[ii5i*28-b i6] 402b-c
/  Rhetoric  593a-675a,c  esp  bk  i,  ch 1-2 593a-598b, bk 11, ch 18-26
639a-653a,c,  bk hi, ch 17 672a673c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 5
HOb-c; bk 11, ch 11 150a-151b

[348b]
314 THE GREAT IDEAS 2b to 2d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12,
a  7,  ans and rep 2 56a-57b; q 46, a 2, ans 253a-255a; q 47, a i, rep 3
256a-257b;  q 67, a 2, rep 2 350b-351a; q 82, a 2, ans 432d433c; q 83, a
1,  ans  436d-438a;  q  108,  a  7,  rep  2  560b-561a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; q 67, a 3, ans 83b-84d; part
hi,  q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b-766b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 60d; 65b-d;
part  11,  127d; 128d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 56c-59b; 61b-d;
65ac  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part hi 48b-51b passim / Objections and
Replies, 126a-b 34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke: Toleration,
3c-4a  /  Human Understanding, BK I, CH I, SECT 27, 103b-C; BK IV, ch xv
365a-366c;  ch  xvii,  sect 2 371d372b; sect 15-17 378d-379c; sect 19-22
379d-380b  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv 458a463d esp div 20-21
458a-c  div  30  461d-462b; sect vi 469d-470d esp 469d [fn 1]; sect xii,
div 131-132 508d-509d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 227a-228a 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  261c-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 215a-218d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  376c-d / Judgement, 600d-603d esp 603a-b 43 Mill:
Liberty,   274b-293b  passim  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  299b-d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 317 104d-105a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
272b-276b  esp 276a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 365a-c; epilogue
1, 661c-662a; 668a-669c; 672a-b 2d. Reason, experience, and authority as
sources  of  opinion  7  Plato:  Meno,  174a-d  /  Theaetetus, 517b518a;
522b-523a;  525a-527b  8  Aristotle:  Topics, bk i, ch i [ioob2i-ioi*i5]
143b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i,ch 3 [io94b29-i095*3] 340a; bk x, ch 8
[1179*16-23] 433d-434a /
Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 7 [i364b i2-i8] 606b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i, ch 14, 178d179a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a;
a  8,  rep  2  7c-8d; q 12, a 7, ans 56a57b; q 83, a 1, ans 436d-438a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; part ii-ii, q
2,  a 3, ans 392d393c; q 4, a 8, rep 2 409a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,   56b-   d;  58d-59a;  60c-61a;  66a-c;  78ac;  part  ii,  128d-129b;
conclusion,  282c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 65a-66a; 259d-261a; 270c-271b;
524d-525a   28   Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  279d-280a;  285b-c  /
Circulation of the Blood, 306a-c;

[349a]
/  3  to  lb Chapter 64: OPINION On Animal Generation, 333c- d; 319c-d /
335a-b;364a-365a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 12c-13c; 14c- 15a;
47d-48d  /  Novum Organum, bki^ aph 77, 119a ^^ 31 Descartes: Rules, in,
3b-4a / Objections and Replies, 168b-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 260 220b-221a
/  Vacuum,  355a-358b; 368a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 85a-c; 87b-c;
bk  1, ch in, sect 23-25 119b-120d; bk hi, ch x, sect 16 295d; bk iv, ch
xv,  sect i 365a-c; sect 4-5 365d-366b; ch xvi 366d371c passim, esp sect
6-14  368b-371c;  ch  xvii, sect 2 371d-372b; sect 19 379d-380a; sect 24
380c-d;  ch  xviii-xix 380d-388d passim, esp ch xix, sect 2-4 384d-385b,
sect  14  387d-388a; ch xx, sect 17 394a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
intro,  sect  20  410d-411a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect iv-vi
458a-470d  passim,  esp  sect  v, div 34-38, 464a-466c; sect x 488d-497b
passim, esp div 86-91 488d-491c; sect xi, div 104, 498c; div 107, 499c-d
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  434b-435a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v, 346c-347a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308c-309d passim
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c;  146a-149d;  176d177a  /  Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals,  260d261b  43  Federalist: number 49, 159d-160a 43
Mill:  Liberty,  269c-270c;  275a-277b;  283c288c;294d-295a 44 Boswell \
Johnson,  129b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, additions, 91, 131b-c /
Philosophy of History, part iv, 351d352a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 243a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  iv,  170d-171c;  bk  vi,  260bc;  bk ix,
358b-365c;  epilogue  i,  661c-662a  54  Freud: Psycho-Analytic Therapy,
125a-b  3.  Opinion, knowledge, and truth 3a. The truth of knowledge and
of   right   opinion:   their  difference  with  respect  to  manner  of
acquisition,  stability,  and  teachability  7  Plato: Protagoras, 62c /
Cratylus, 103d / Symposium, 163b / Meno, 182c-183a; 188b-189a / Gorgias,
256b-c  /  Theaetetus,  527b-d;  536b549d  esp  539a-540c,  544c-549d  /
Sophist,  564a-b  /  Statesman, 591a-c / Philebus, 622d626a; 633a-635b 8
Aristotle:  Categories,  ch 5 [4 aio-b i3] 8b-9a Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch 2
[7i b8-i6] 97d98a; ch 6 102b-103c; ch 8 104a-b; ch 33 121b122a,c / Topics, bk iv, ch 2 [123*16-19] 171c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982*28-30] 500c; bk iv, ch 4 [ioo8b27-32] 528b;
ch 5-6 528c-531c;

[349b]
315  bk vii, ch 15 [io39b3i-io4oa8] 563d-564a; bk ix, ch 10 577c-578a,c;
bk  xi,  ch  6  590d-592b  /  Soul,  bk  in,  ch  3 [428a2o-b9] 660c-d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 [i094b i2]-cH 4
[1095*28] 339d-340b; ch 7 [io98 a25-b8] 343d344a; bk
ii, ch 2 [1103^7-1104*5] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 2
[iiii b30-ni2a i3] 357d-358a; bk vi,
ch  3  [ii39b  i4-i8]  388b;  ch  5  389a-c; ch 8-1 i 390d-393b esp ch 9
[ii42b7-i3] 391d; bk vii, ch 2-3 395c-398a passim; ch 8
[1151*11-19]
401d-402a;  ch 9 [ii5i*28-b i6] 402bc; bk x, ch 8 [1179*16-23] 433d-434a
/  Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 1 [i355 a4-b 7] 594b-d 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead,
tr  viii,  ch  3,  344a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 16, a 8
99d-100d;  q 79, a 9, rep 3 422b-423d; q 83, a 1, ans 436d-438a; q 85, a
6,  rep  2  458d-459c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 53, a 1
19d-21a;  q 57, a 2, rep 3 36a-37b; q 77, a 2, rep 3 145d-147c; part ii-
ii,  q  1,  a  5, rep 4 383b-384b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53c-54a;
60c-61a;  65b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43d; part ii, 45a; part
hi,  49a-b;  part  iv,  53c-d;  part vi, 63c-64d / Meditations, 1, 75ac;
77a-c;  v,  95b96a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, prop 43 388c-389b 32
Milton:   Areopagitica,   406a-b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  240b-243c  /
judgement,  603a-b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  276b-277a;  283c-288c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  i  115a-d  3b. Certain and probable,
adequate and inadequate knowledge: degrees of certitude; modes of assent
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v,  370d-373c;  bk vivii, 383d-398c / Timaeus,
447a-d  / Philebus, 633a-635b 8 Aristotle : Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d
/  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch 13 [32^-23] 48b-d; bk ii, ch 25 91a-b /
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2 97d-99a; ch 19 [8i b io-3o] 110c-d/
Topics, bk 1, ch 1 [100*25-31] 143a; bk v, ch 3
[i3ib i9~
30]  182b-c  /  Meteorology, bk i, ch 7 [344*5-7] 450b / Metaphysics, bk
iv, ch 3 [1005^-34] 524c-525a; bk vii, ch 15
[io39b3i-i040*8]
563d-564a; bk xii, ch 8 [1074*14-16] 604c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch
3
[ii39b i4-34]
388b-c / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch i
[1355*14-17]
594b; ch 2
[i357*23-b24] 596d-597c; bk
ii, ch 25 [1402^3-1403*17] 652b-653a 10 Hippocrates: The Law, par 4 144d
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 12 264c 16 Copernicus: Revolutions
of  the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par
19  32b-c  / City of God, bk viii, ch 3, 266a-b; bk xi, ch 26 336d-337b;
bk xix, ch 18 523a-b

[350a]
(3.  Opinion,  knowledge, and truth. 3 b. Certain and probable, adequate
and  inadequate  knowledge:  degrees  of certitude; modes of assent.) 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 12, a 7, ans and rep 2 56a-57b; q
14,  a  13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; q 47, a i, rep 3 256a257b; q 57, a 3,
ans  297b-298a;  q 58, a 7, rep 3 305c-306b; q 82, a 2, ans 432d-433c; q
86,  a  4,  ans  463d-464d; part i-ii, q 17, a 6, ans 690b-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; q 67, a 3, ans 83b-84d;
part ii-ii, q 1, aa 4-5 382c-384b; q 4, a 8, ans 409a-d; part hi, q 9, a
3,  rep  2  765b-766b  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 333c-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 27a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b; m, 3d-4a;
xn,  22a-b / Discourse, part hi, 49a-b; 49d-51a; part iv, 51b-52a; 53c-d
/  Meditations,  72b,d;  74a,c;  i-m,  75a-82d;  v, 95b-96a; vi 96b-103d
passim  /  Objections  and  Replies,  123b-125b; 126a-b; postulate i-iii
130d-131a;  postulate  vi-mi  131c;  152d-153c; 226d; 237b-c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part ii, def 4 373b; prop 27-31 384b-385c; prop 37-44 386b-390a;
prop  49, schol, 391d-392a; part hi, prop 17, schol 401d-402a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  233-241 213b-217b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro 93a-95d
passim;  bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect 2 307a; ch ii, sect 14, 312b; ch hi, sect
25-29  321a-323a  passim;  ch  iv,  sect 3-12 324b-326d; ch vi 331b-336d
passim,  esp  sect  13 335c-d; ch xi, sect 9-1 i 356d-357c; ch xii, sect
6-14  360a-363a passim; ch xiv-xvi 364b-371c; ch xvii, sect 2 371d-372b;
sect   14-17   378c-379c;   ch   xix,  sect  1  384c-d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect iv, div 20-21 458a-c; div 30, 462a; sect vi, 469d
[fn
1];  sect  x, div 86-91 488d-491c passim, esp div 87 489b-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  348a,c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335d-336a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c;  14c-15c; 39c-41c esp 40d-41c; 194b-c; 211c-218d
esp 217c-d; 228c-d; 230c-233d; 240b-243c / Practical Reason, 330d-331a /
Judgement,  600d-603d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  274b-293b  passim  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  intro,  par  31  19c-20a; part hi, par 318 105b;
additions,  91  131a-d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 463d / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  661c-662a  3c.  The  skeptical  reduction of human
judgments  to  opinion  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  86a-d; 107d-109a / Phaedo,
236c-238a  /  Republic,  bk  vii, 400a-d / Timaeus, 457c-d / Theaetetus,
517b-532a passim, esp 517b-c, 522b, 525a-526c, 531b-532a

[350b]
316 THE GREAT IDEAS Ic to 4 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72b5-i8] 99b
/  Metaphysics,  bk iv, ch 5-6 528c-531c; bk x, ch i [i053a3i-b 3] 580a;
ch 6
[i057a7-u] 584b; bk xi, ch 6 [io62b i2-io63b
14]  590d-592a  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk iv [469-477] 50b 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 20 164c166c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk v, par 19 32b-c / City of God, bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  84,  a  1, ans 440d-442a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
80b-82b;  208a-294b  esp  212c-215a,  238c-246a,  258c-261c,  267c-268a,
271b-273b, 276b-278a, 285c-294b; 308c-d; 318a-319b; 439c-440a; 497d-502c
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 57d-58b; 95d-96a / Novum Organum, bk
i, aph 67 115d-116a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 46b-c / Objections
and  Replies,  lll^nZo,  33  Pascal: Pensees, 385 238b-239a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  intro, sect 1-3 405a-c; sect 86-88 429c-430b 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect iv, div 26 460b-c; sect iv, div 28-sect v, div
38  460d-466c; sect vii, div 60 477a-c; sect xii 503c-509d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  224a-227a  /  Practical  Reason,  294c-295d; 311d-313a 43 Mill:
Liberty,   274b-293b  passim  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  121c-d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, pref, 2c-6a; 7a; part in, par 270, 86b-c 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace , bk v,
194a-195a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 168b-c 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures, 881d-882b 4. Opinion, belief, and faith 7 Plato:
Gorgias,  256b-c  /  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d-388a  /  Timaeus, 447b-d 8
Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 3
[428 a20-b
9J  660c-  d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 6-8 36c37c / City of
God,  bk  xxii,  ch  4-5  588b590a  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40
655b656a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 8, rep 2 7c-8d 20
Aquinas  : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, a 3, ans 83b-84d; part ii-
ii,  q  1,  a  3,  ans and rep 3 381d-382c; a 4 382c-383b; q 2, a 1, ans
391a-392a;  q 4, a 1, ans 402a-403d; q 10, a 1 426d-427c; q 18, a 4, ans
464c-465a; part hi, q 7, a 3, rep 3 747b-748a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 65b-66c; 78a-b; part in, 165b-166a; 238c; 241a-242a; part iv, 248c 25
Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82a; 98b-99a; 150d-

[351a]
4a  to 4b Chapter 64: OPINION 317 151a; 208a-294b esp 209a-c, 238c-239c,
250a-b,   259d-261a,  267c-268a,  271b-273b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  27a-c;  95d96a  31 Descartes: Meditations, 69b-d / Objections
and  Replies, 125c-126a; 168b-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
xviii  380d-384b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  v,  div  38-40
466b-467c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 240b-243c / Practical Reason, 292a-c;
353a-354d  /  Judgement,  599d600a;  601d-607c  esp  601d-602a,  603a-b,
604d-606d;  607d-609b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 147
55d-56a  /  Philosophy  of History, part iv, 349b-350b 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,   360b-361a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196a-198b  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  lla-b  53  James: Psychology,
652a-654a 4a. Comparison of supernatural or religious faith with science
and  opinion New Testament: Hebrews, 11 :i 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
i,  par  1  lab;  bk  vi,  par  6-8 36c-37c / City of God, bk xix, ch 18
523a-b;  bk  xxii, ch 5, 589b-590a; ch 7 591c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk
ii,  ch  7  638d639c;  ch  40  655b-656a; ch 42 656c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q i, aa 1-2 3b-4c; a 5, rep 1-2 5c-6a; a 6 6b-7a; a
8  7c-8d; q 12, a 13, rep 3 61c-62b; q 32, a 1, rep 2 175d-178a; q 84, a
5  446c-447c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, a 3, ans
83b-84d;  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a  i 380b381a; aa 4-5 382c-384b; q 2, a 1
391a-392a;  a 3, rep 3 392d-393c; a 4 393c-394b; a 9 398c-399b; Q 4, a 1
402a-403d;  a  8  409a-d;  q  8,  a 8 422c-423b; q 9, a 1, ans and rep 2
423c-424b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii [25-148] 108a-109b
passim;  xx [88-93] 137c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65b-66c; part ii,
163a-b;  part  hi,  165bc;  part  iv,  267ac  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,   2c-4c;   41b-d;   55b-d;   95d-96a;  96c-97c  31  Descartes:
Meditations,  69b-d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  125c-126a  32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk xii
[552-587]
331a-332a  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 147b-148b / Pensees, 265-290
221b-225a;   434   248a-250a;   862  342b-343a  /  Vacuum,  365b-366a  /
Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke : Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  vii,  sect  11,  340b-c;  ch  xi, sect 12 357c-d; ch xvi, sect 13-14
371a-c;  ch  xvii,  sect  23-CH  xviii, sect ii 380b-384b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect xii, div 132, 509c

[351b]
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  200d;  308b-309a  42  Kant: Judgement,
604d-606d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 158c160b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  196a-198b  4b.  Criticism  of superstitious or
dogmatic  belief  as  opinion without foundation or warrant 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i, 12d-13b; bk hi, 95c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
i,  353d354b  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk i, sect 6 253b 14 Plutarch:
Camillus, 114d-115a / Alexander, 575d-576a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv,
274b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 4-6 20a-d; bk vii, par 8-10
45d-47a  /  City  of  God,  bk  i-x 129a-322a,c passim, esp bk v, ch 1-7
207d-212c  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 2124 647a-649a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 84, a 5 446c-447c; q 115, a 4 589d-590c; q
116, a i, ans 592d-593d; part i-ii, q 9, a 5, rep 3 660d-662a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 51d-52b; 56b-d; 68d-69b; 79a-b; 79b-84c passim; part
ii,  149d;  151ac;  163a-b;  part  hi,  165d-166a; 172a-177c esp 172b-d;
192c-195d;  part  iv,  247a-267a;  269b-271c;  272b-c;  274a-c;  276c 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   37b-c;  80b-82b;  500a-d  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  331b-332a; 333c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 13a-c;
16c;  57d-58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114bc; aph 67 115d-116a; aph
74  118b;  aph 89 124a-d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 125d-126a
31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 50 411b-c 35 Locke: Toleration, 4d-5b;
8d-9a / Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 23-25 119b120d; bk iv, ch
xix  384c-388d;  ch  xx,  sect  7-17 390d-394b passim 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  54-55  423b-c; sect 74-75 427c-d; sect 124 437d438a 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  6,  453c;  sect xi, div 107
499c-500b;  sect  xii, div 132, 509d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 27b-28a
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 189d-191a; 200d201b; 308c-309d; 465d-467a
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 333b-334c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 129c-130a;
187c-188b;  218d-222b  esp  221c-222b  /  Judgement,  607d608c  43 Mill:
Liberty,  278a-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270, 85bc;
86ac;  additions,  162  143b-144c  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 228b-229b 50
Marx: Capital, 36c-d [fn 2]

[352a]
318  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (4. Opinion, belief, and faith. 4 b. Criticism of
superstitious   or  dogmatic  belief  as  opinion  withoutfoundation  or
warrant.')  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 433c-d 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures, 874a-875a; 877b-880b; 881c; 883d-884a 5. Freedom
in  the  sphere  of  opinion  5a.  Rights and duties with respect to the
expression of opinion 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[365-401]
5c-6a   5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [497-511]  135b-c;  [683745]  137a-c  6
Herodotus:   History,   bk   i,  44d-45a;  bk  vii,  239ac  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 402b-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-c / Apology
200a212a,c / Statesman, 601c-602c / Laws, bk xii, 789b-790a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk i, sect 6 253b; sect 14 254bc 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv
[173-197]
171b-172b  14  Plutarch:  Cato  the  Younger, 632d; 636b637c 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  i, 21b-d; bk iv, 72b73a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch
23,  312d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, paradise, xiii [112142] 126c-d 22
Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk hi, stanza 41-48 59b-60b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  7a-d;  80b-82b;  208bc; 240c-242a; 270a-271a; 381a-388c passim;
446d-450c;  497d-502c; 521d-522a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, induction
467b,d-468a  32  Milton:  Areopagitica  381a-412b esp 384b390a 35 Locke:
Toleration la-22d / Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, sect 4 367c-368b
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  75b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 223b-d 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 89c90c; bk xix, 143a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  326b  / Social Contract, bk iv, 425d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  231ac;  309c-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 220b-221b 43 Declaration of
Independence: [i-6] la 43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, i 17a 43
Federalist:  number  i  29a-31a  43 Mill: Liberty, 272d-273a; 274b-293d;
302d312a  passim / Representative Government, 370a389b passim; 392b-399d
passim;  401a-406a  passim 44 Boswell: Johnson, 221d-224a; 300c-301a esp
301a-d [fn i]; 402ac; 512c-d

[352b]
c  c 5 to 6a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270, 89a-b; par
316-317 104c-105a; par 319 105b106c; par 324 107a-d; additions, 185 149a
51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 233b-234a; bk viii, 307d-309c passim,
esp  308b;  bk  ix,  384c-388a,c  54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  757b 5b.
Advantages  and  disadvantages  of  freedom  of  discussion 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk vii, 216d-218a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 397b;
bk in, 425a-d; 427ac 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-c / Statesman, 601c602c 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 57a; bk iv, 72b-73a; bk xiv, 153bc 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii, 102d-103a; 114d115a; 129b-130a; 149b-d; 150c-151a;
155d156b;  part  iv,  274c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  65a-66a;  208b-c;
270a271a; 324c-326b esp 326a-b; 446d-450c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i,
aph 77 118d119b / New Atlantis, 214a-b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi,
60d-61a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  283c-284a 32 Milton: Areopagitica
381a-412b  esp 384b389a, 398a-b 35 Locke: Toleration, 4a; 15b-c; 18c-21c
/  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch hi, sect 20 319b-c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 89c90c; bk xix, 143a-b; 146a, 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  309c-d;  669a-670d  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 161c-162b;
334d335a,  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 220b-221b; 223a-c 43 Federalist: number
i  29a-31a;  number  10  49c-53a  passim 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b esp
274c-275a;  293b-294a; 318a-319b / Representative Government, 361b-362c;
410d-412a  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 221d-224a; 300c-301a; 512c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  270  84d-89c passim; par 314-315
104b-c; par 317 104d-105a / Philosophy of History, part ii, 279d-280b 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 384c-388a,c 54 Freud: War and Death, 757b
6.  Opinion  in  the  realm  of  morals  6a. Good and evil as matters of
opinion:  moral standards as customs or conventions reflecting prevalent
opinion 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[499-525]
382b-c  5  Aristophanes:  Clouds  [882-1  114]  499b-502b  6  Herodotus:
History,  bk hi, 97d-98a 7 Plato: Euthyphro, 193d-194b / Crito, 215a-d /
Gorgias, 271b-274c / Republic, bk ii, 311a-

[353a]
6a  to la Chapter 64: OPINION 319 312b; bk vi, 377a-379c; bk vii, 400a-d
/  Theaetetus,  525c-526a; 527b-528c esp 528b-c; 531a-532a / Laws, bk x,
759d-760c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b i4~i6]
339d; ch 8
[io98b9-29] 344a-b; bk v^c-H-7
[ii34b i8-ii35 a
4]382c-d  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 11 150a151b; bk in, ch 3,
179d-180a  14  Plutarch:  Marcus Cato, 285c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
24a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 13 16c-d / Christian Doctrine,
bk hi, ch 10, 661d-662a; ch 14 663c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  65, a 1, rep 2-3 339b-340b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a;
61d62a;  78b-c;  96a; part ii, 140b; 149b-d; part iv, 272c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  46b-47c;  93b; 102a103a; 115b-119d; 122a; 124c-125a; 143c-144a;
146b-c; 278a-284c; 307b; 424d-426b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii
[254257] 43b / Troilus and Cressida, act
ii, sc ii
[53-96] 114a-c; act in, sc m [125-130] 123d
/  King  Lear, activ, sc vi [151-176] 274d-275a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  94d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 46b-c; part hi 48b-51b
passim  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 371b372c; part hi, prop 9,
schol  399c;  prop  39,  schol  408b-d;  prop  51,  schol 411d-412b; the
affects,  def  27  419a-b; part iv, pref, 423c-d; prop 8 426b-c; prop 19
429d;  prop  27-28  431b-c; prop 63-64 443d-444b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 309
228b;  312  229a; 916918 349b-350a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 90a-d;
bk  i,  ch  11, sect 8 105d-106a; sect 9-10, 106d; sect 21-23 110a-c; bk
ii, ch xxviii, sect 10-13 230b-231c; bk hi, ch xi, sect 15-18 303b-304b;
bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 18-20 317d319c; ch iv, sect 7-9 325b-326b 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding, sect xii, div 132, 509c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
362b-d  / Social Contract, bk iv, 434b-435a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk v, 346c-347d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 236d-237a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  263a;  270d-271c;  278a-b  /  Practical  Reason, 320c-321b;
330d331a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  377c-d  / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 387b; 387d-388a / Science of Right, 397b-398a 43
Mill:  Liberty,  269c-270c;  296a-b; 300a-c; 307b-312a / Utilitarianism,
457c-461c  passim;  471b-476a,c  passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
pref,  2b-c;  Intro,  par  18  16c-d;  part  ii, par 132 46b47a; par 140
49b-54a;  additions, i 115a-d; 91 131 a- d / Philosophy of History, part
ii, 272a-d; 279c-280b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 305a; 317a-d

[353b]
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 428b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  i,  15d-16a;  bk  v,  194b-195a;  214c-215b;  bk  vi, 260b; bk viii,
304c-305a;  bk  x,  403a-405a;  bk  xii,  542d;  epilogue  i, 645a-646c;
647b-649d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 33c34b; bk xi,
314b-c  53  James: Psychology, 190b-191a; 886b-887a 6b. The inexactitude
of  moral principles as applied to particular cases 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk i, ch 3
[i094b i2-28]
339d-340a; ch 7
[1098^5^8]
343d-344a; bk 11, ch 2
[uo3b27-ii04 a9] 349b-c; ch
7
[1107^7-34] 352d-353a; ch
9 354d-355a,c; bk hi, ch 1
[iiiob27-uu a2i] 356c-357a; bk
vi,  ch  5  389ac;  bk  vii,  ch  2-3 395c-398a passim 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 7 651d-655a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  91,  a  3, rep 3 209d-210c; q 94, a 4, ans 223d224d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc iv
[1-74] llb-12a
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
hi,  48b-49d;  part  iv, 51c / Objections and Replies, 126a-b; 237b-c 33
Pascal: Provincial Letters, 27a-44a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii,
396b;  bk  iv, 434c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 60a-c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals, 278d-279d / Practical Reason, 357c-360d / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  372b-d  /  Science  of  Right, 398c-399c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  454d-455a;  456d-457b;  471b-473c  44 Boswell: Johnson,
219a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 227 74b-d; par 234
75d-76a;  additions,  144  140a  53  James: Psychology, 887a-888a 7. The
social and political significance of public opinion la. The value of the
majority  opinion:  the  distinction between matters to be determined by
the  expert  or  by a consensus 5 Sophocles: Antigone [683-745] 137a-c 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107d-108a;  bk  v,  180c-d  6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk ii, 402a404d; bk in, 425a-d; bk v, 504c-505a; bk
vi,  520bc  7  Plato:  Laches,  29a-d / Protagoras, 43b-45b / Symposium,
159b-d  /  Meno,  188b-190a,c  / Apology, 202b-c / Crito 213a-219a,c esp
213a215d  / Gorgias, 258b-c; 266b-c; 273d-274c; 286b-287c / Republic, bk
vi, 377a-379c / Theaetetus, 527b-528c / Statesman, 598b-599c;

[354a]
(7.  The  social  and  political significance of public opinion, la. The
value  of  the  majority  opinion: the distinction between matters to be
determined  by  the  expert or by a consensus.} 601d-603a / Laws, bk ii,
653c-662a esp 655b656a, 660a-662a; bk hi, 675c-676b; bk xii, 788d-789a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk ix, ch 6 420c-421a / Politics, bk in, ch ii [i28i
a39-i282a4i] 479b480b; ch 15
[i286a22-b8]
484c-d; ch 16
[i287b8-36]
486a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 7
[i364
b  i2-i8J606b  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 4, 260d261a; bk ix,
sect 23 293c; bk xi, sect 23 306a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35c / Agis,
648b, d649b / Dion, 792d-802a,c esp 800c 15 Tacitus : Annals, bk iv, 74a
/ Histories, bk ii, 238d 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza
29-31 92b / Clerks Tale
[8871-8884] 313b314a / Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a esp par 29,
413a  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi, 9b-c; ch xviii, 25d-26a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  58c-d;  78b-d; part 11, 112d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
147b-148a;  303c-304a;  491c-d;498b-d  26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act
iv, sc viii
[52-67]
63a-b / Julius Caesar, act i, sc i
[31-80] 568d-569b
27  Shakespeare:  Antony  and  Cleopatra,  act  i,  sc iv [33-47] 316b /
Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-167] 351a-353a / Henry
VIII, act i, sc ii
[68-91] 553c-d
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 77, 119a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 324
230b;  328  231b;  335 232b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xix, sect 223
76c-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i, 28b-29a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  ii,  4c-5a;  bk v, 18d; bk vi, 35c-36a; bk xi, 71a-c; bk xii,
84b,d-85a; 94c; bk xix, 135b-d; 145c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 362b-d /
Political  Economy,  371c-372a  /  Social Contract, bk ii, 396bd; bk in,
411b;  bk  iv, 425a-428a; 434b-435a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94c-95b
43  Federalist:  number 3, 33b; number 10 49c53a; number 28, 98a; number
49,  159d-160a;  number  63,  192c-193a;  number  68, 205b-d; number 71,
214d-215a;  number  84,  253a  43  Mill:  Liberty, 274b-293b passim, esp
274c275a;  293b-302c  esp 298b-299b; 307b-d / Representative Government,
330a-b;  332a-d;  343c-344a; 350b-351c; 355b-409c passim, esp 355b-362c,
401a-409c; 410a-412a; 422c-423b; 425b-c; 437c-442d passim, esp 439b-c

[354b]
320  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  la  to lb 44 Boswell: Johnson, 86a-b; 172d-173a;
220a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 301 lOOb-lOla; par
303  101c-102a;  par  308  102c103a; par 316-318 104c-105b; par 348 Hid;
additions,  135 138c; 184 149a; 186 149b / Philosophy of History, intro,
172d-173a;  part ii, 272c-273a; part iv, 365a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  ix,  384c-388a,c;  bk  x,  410c-411a;  bk  xi,  482b-484c; 485d486a;
503a-511b lb. Majority rule, its merits and dangers: protections against
the  false weight of numbers 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-456] 261d-262b
5 Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a,c esp
[1111-1150]
483d-484b / Wasps
[463-507]
512d-513c  /  Plutus  [567-571]  636a 6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 180c-d
6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 425a-d; bk vi, 515d-516a; 520bc 7
Plato:  Republic, bk viii, 409b-413a / Statesman, 603d-604b 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[i266a i3]
461b-c; ch 12
[1273^5-1274^2] 470c-d;
bk in, ch 7
[i279b4]-cH
8
[i28oa6]
476d477c; ch 11
[i28i a39-i282 a4i]
479b-480b; ch 13 481b-483a passim, esp
[i283b281284*2]
481d-482a; ch 15
[i 286a22-b22]
484c-485a; bk iv, ch 4
[129^30-1292^8]
491a-d; ch ii
[i296a22-b2]
496b-c; ch 14 498b-499c; bk v, ch 5
[1305^-34]
506d507a; ch 9
[i309b i4-i3ioa i2]
511d-512b; ch 10
[i3ioa39-b i8]
512d-513a;  bk  vi,  ch  2-3  520d-522a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 34d-35c /
Agis,  648b, d649b / Dion, 800c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 152b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  147b-148a  27  Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-225] 351a-353d; act ii, sc i
[1-106]
361a-362a; act in, sc 1
[140-161]
370d-371a;  act iv, sc vi [74-156] 383a-384a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 301-303
227b; 878 345a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch viii, sect 95-99 46c-47c
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4d-6b;  bk hi, 10a; bk vi,
35c-36a;  bk  viii,  51a-52b; bk xi, 71a-d; 73b-d 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  369c-d  / Social Contract, bk i, 391a-b; bk hi, 411a-b; bk iv,
425d-427a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 91b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
73b  43  Articles of Confederation: v [49-73] 5d6a 43 Federalist: number
i,  30b;  number 9, 47a-c; number 10 49c-53a; number 22, 82a-83a; number
37,  120b-c; number 43, 141d-142a; number 58, 181b-c; number 62, 189b-d;
number 63, 192c-193a; number 78, 232a-c

[355a]
lb  Chapter  64:  OPINION  321  43  Mill: Liberty, 268d-271c; 298b-302c;
307b46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 312a / Representative
Government,  330a;  350b302  lOla-c;  par  311-313  103d-104b  / Phi355b
passim;  355b-392b passim, esp 370alosophy of History, intro, 172d-173a;
389b;  401a-409c;  410b-c;  431b  175b-c;  part  ii, 273d-274a; part iv,
365c44  Boswell:  Johnson, 261c-d; 422c ^^—~^ 366b CROSS-REFERENCES For:
Other  discussions  of  the distinction between knowledge and opinion in
terms of their objects, causes, see Custom and Convention 9a; Desire 5b;
Emotion  3b;  Will  3b(i).  The  logic of argumentation in the sphere of
opinion, see Dialectic 2b-2b(2); Reasoning 5c~5d; Rhetoric 4c~4c(3). The
consideration  of opinion in relation to truth and falsity, to certainty
and probability, Other statements of the extreme skeptical position that
everything  is a matter of opinion, 7b; Universal and Particular 7a. The
more  limited  skepticism which treats philosophy as opinion in contrast
to science, see Metaphysics 4a; Philosophy 6b; Science 7a; and for still
another  variety  of  skepticism  which  treats  all  moral or aesthetic
judgments as matters of opinion, see Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 5a;
Good  and Evil 6d; Relation 6c; Universal and Particular 7b. The special
problem of applying moral principles or legal rules to particular cases,
see  Justice  iod;  Law 5g; Reasoning 5e~5e(3); Universal and Particular
6c.  The  conception  of  supernatural  faith as distinguished from both
science  and  opinion,  see  God  see  God  13; Religion 6f; Science 7a;
Theology  5;  Will  3b(i),  3K3). Other considerations of the problem of
freedom in the sphere of opinion, see Knowledge 9b; Liberty 2a; Progress
6e; Truth 8d. Other considerations of the value of the majority opinion,
the  principle of majority rule, and 2a, 3b, 5b(i); Government ih; State
8d(3);  Tyranny  2c.  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below  are works not
included  in  Great Booths ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea
and  topics  with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into
two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great Ideas. Kant. Introduction to Logic, ix l ' J. S.
Mill.  A  System  of  Logic,  bk  hi,  ch 25 Augustine. On the Profit of
Believing  W.  James. The Will to Believe . On Faith in Things Unseen F.
Bacon.  Of  the  Colours  of  Good  and  Evil  "  Locke.  Conduct of the
Understanding  Sextus  Empiricus.  Outlines  of  Pyrrhonism,  bk Hume. A
Treatise  of Human Nature, bk i, part iv, i-ii sect i-iv Nicolas of Cusa.
De Docta Ignorantia

[355b]

[356a]
322  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Scientific  and Religious Gill. The Necessity of
Belief

[356b]
Browne.  Pseudodoxia  Epidemica  {Vulgar  Errors)  Morley. On Compromise
Sanderson.  De Obligatione Conscientiae (On the Clifford. "The Ethics of
Belief,"  in  vol  ii, LecObligations of Conscience) tures and Essays J.
Taylor.  Ductor  Dubitantium  C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol v, par
358-410 Glanvill. The Vanity of Dogmatizing A. Sidgwick. Distinction and
the Criticism of Beliefs Voltaire. "Opinion," "Sect," in A Philosophical
Balfour.  The  Foundations  of  Belief Dictionary Bosanquet. Science and
Philosophy,  3  Beattie. An Essay on the Nature and Immutability Hodder.
The  Adversaries of the Sceptic of Truth Dicey. The Relation Between Law
and  Public OpinT. Reid. Essays on the Active Powers of the Human ion in
England  During  the Nineteenth Century Mind, in, part 11, ch 8 Bradley.
Essays on Truth and Reality, ch 2 Hazlitt. Table Tal\, vn T. Veblen. The
Vested  Interests  and the State of the De Morgan. A Budget of Paradoxes
Industrial Arts, ch i

[357a]
Chapter  65:  OPPOSITION INTRODUCTION CERTAIN words in the vocabulary of
common speech, used at almost every turn of discourse, indicate ideas so
indispensable  to  human  thought  that  they are often employed without
analysis. The word "is" is one of these, signifying the idea of being or
existence.  The word "not" and the pair of words "either. . . . or" have
the  same character. Taken together, "not" and "either. . . .or" signify
the  idea  of  opposition. The quality of redness is not the same as the
quality  of  hotness, yet this negative relation by itself does not make
them opposite, for something can be red-hot. It is only when a thing can
have either one quality or another, but not both, that the qualities are
said  to  be  opposed.  Opposites  are  more  than merely distinct; they
exclude one another. Opposition seems to be as pervasive as the familiar
words  which  signify  it.  Even  if it were not itself one of the great
ideas, it would be manifest in all the other basic notions which come in
antithetical  pairs, e.g., good and evil, life and death, war and peace,
universal  and particular, pleasure and pain, necessity and contingency,
same  and  other,  one  and many, virtue and vice. Each of these notions
seems to imply its opposite and to draw its meaning from the opposition.
There  are  other  terms  in  the  list of great ideas which, though not
paired in the same chapter, stand opposed to one another: art to nature,
chance  to  fate,  liberty  to  slavery,  time to eternity, knowledge to
opinion,  matter  to  form,  democracy  to oligarchy and similarly other
forms  of  government.  Still  other  terms  cannot be discussed without
reference  to their opposites, even though we have not explicitly listed
them,  such  as  being  and non-being, truth and falsity, love and hate,
justice  and injustice, wealth and poverty. The enumeration might extend
to include every fundamental notion, except for the in323

[357b]
convenience  in  certain  cases  of not having readily familiar names to
designate  the  opposites.  In  some instances, moreover, the opposition
seems to involve more than a pair of terms, as, for example, is the case
with   poetry,  history,  and  science;  or  physics,  mathematics,  and
metaphysics.  In  the  tradition of the great books we not only find the
opposition  of  one idea to another, but we also find opposite points of
view,  conflicting  theories  or  doctrines, in the discussion of almost
every  basic  topic  under  the heading of these ideas. We find the same
word  used  with  contrary  meanings,  the same proposition affirmed and
denied.  We  find reasoning opposed to reasoning. The same conclusion is
reached from apparently opposite principles, or opposite conclusions are
drawn  from premises apparently the same. But though opposition seems to
be  inherent  in the realm of ideas and in the life of thought, the idea
of  opposition  is  not  itself  explicitly thought about in many of the
great  books.  This  does  not  mean  that in the consideration of other
matters  the  significance and consequences of opposition go unnoted. On
the  contrary,  all  the chapters dealing with the nature and conduct of
man,  or  with the institutions and history of society, give evidence of
the  general  recognition—  by  poets  and historians, by scientists and
philosophers—   that   opposition   in   the  form  of  active  conflict
characterizes  the  phenomena.  The  fact  of warring opposites not only
enters  into descriptions of the way things are, but also poses problems
for  psychologists,  moralists,  economists, and statesmen to solve. The
study  of nature, as well as of man and society, discovers opposition at
the  root  of change. The physics of antiquity, for example, defines the
elements or the bodily humours in terms of contrary qualities; according
to Aristotle, contraries are among the ultimate prin-

[358a]
324 THE GREAT IDEAS ciples of nature— the terms of change. The cosmology
of Lucretius makes the conflict of opposites the principle of growth and
decay  in  the  universe. Destruction struggles against creativity; life
against  death.  "The  death-dealing  motions," the poet writes, "cannot
keep  the  mastery  always nor entomb existence for evermore, nor on the
other  hand can the birth and increase-giving motions of things preserve
them  always after they are born. Thus the war of first-beginnings waged
from eternity is carried on with dubious issue: now here, now there, the
life-bringing elements of things get the mastery and are overmastered in
turn."  Modern mechanics deals with action and reaction in the impact of
bodies and the resolution of forces tending to produce opposite results.
The  theory  of  evolution  pictures  the  world  of living organisms as
engaged  in  the struggle for survival, organism competing with organism
or  against  an  adverse  environment  for  the  means of subsistence or
reproduction.  These  indications  of  the prevalence of conflict in the
realm  of  thought  itself,  or  as  a  fundamental  conception in man's
thinking  about  nature and society, do not alter the point that only in
logic  or  metaphysics  is  opposition  abstracted  from special subject
matters, to become itself the object of thought. Even so, not all of the
great  speculative  works  develop  an  explicit  theory  of opposition—
classifying  its  types,  analyzing  its  structure, formulating it as a
universal  principle  of being, mind, or spirit. Four authors especially
treat  opposition  as  a primary theme, though not out of the context of
such  other notions as being, relation, one and many, same and other, or
identity  and difference. They are Plato, Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel. It
should not be surprising that the same authors are the principal figures
in  the  chapter  on  Dialectic.  Their disagreement about the nature or
meaning  of  dialectic has a parallel here in their conflicting theories
of  opposition.  Socrates  argues,  in  the Protagoras, for the unity of
virtue  by using the principle that "everything has one opposite and not
more  than  one."  If  wisdom  is  the opposite of folly, and if it also
appears  that  folly  is  opposed  by temperance, then either wisdom and
temperance are the same, or a thing may have more

[358b]
than one opposite. Protagoras reluctantly accepts the first alternative;
he  is  apparently  unwilling  to  re-open  the  question concerning the
pairing  of opposites. But the question is reopened by others. It is one
of  the  great  problems  in  the  theory of opposition, relevant to the
distinction  of  different  kinds  of  opposites.  The  problem can most
readily  be  stated  in  terms  of the logical processes of division and
definition. On the hypothesis that opposites always come in pairs, every
class  can  be  divided into two sub-classes which not only exclude each
other,  but  also  exhaust  the  membership  of  the divided class. Such
division  is  called  dichotomy. Many of the Platonic dialogues— notably
the  Sophist  and  the  Statesman—exemplify  the  method  of dichotomous
division,  used  as a device for constructing definitions. The object to
be  defined,  the  character of the statesman or the sophist, is finally
caught in the net of classification when, division after division having
been   made,   two   sub-classes   are  reached  which  leave  no  other
possibilities open. The thing is either one or the other. In the Sophist
a  preliminary  exercise  is  undertaken  in  the  method of division as
preparation  for  the  use of this method to define the sophist. It will
serve us here as an example of dichotomy. All the arts are first divided
into two kinds, the productive and the acquisitive; then the acquisitive
arts  are  divided into those making voluntary exchanges and those which
obtain goods by coercion; the coercive divides into fighting and hunting
according to the alternatives of open or secret attack; hunting into the
hunting  of  the  lifeless  and  the  living; hunting of the living into
hunting  of swimming or walking animals; the hunting of swimming animals
into the hunting of winged animals and the hunting of water animals; the
hunting  of  water  animals into opposite methods of catching fish, with
further sub-divisions made until the art of angling can be defined as an
acquisitive   art   which,   being  coercive,  is  a  form  of  hunting,
distinguished  from  other  forms  of  hunting  by  the character of its
object—animals  which  swim  in  water rather than air—and by the method
used to catch them—hooks or barbs rather than nets or baskets. Aristotle
objects  to  this process of division as a way of defining things. "Some
writers," he

[359a]
says,  "propose to reach the definitions of the ultimate forms of animal
life  by  bipartite  division.  But  this method is often difficult, and
often  impracticable." For one thing, it tends toassociate or dissociate
natural groups arbitrarily, e.g., the classification of birds with water
animals,  or  of  some birds with fish and some birds with land animals.
"If such natural groups are not to be broken up, the method of dichotomy
cannot  be  employed,  for  it necessarily involves such breaking up and
dislocation." Aristotle also calls attention to the fact that the method
of  dichotomy  often  uses negative terms in order to make an exhaustive
division  into  two  and  only  two  sub-classes. But the class which is
formed  by  a  negative  characterization cannot be further sub-divided.
"There  can  be  no  specific  forms  of  a negation, of featherless for
instance or of footless, as there are of feathered and of footed." It is
impossible,  Aristotle  says,  to "get at the ultimate specific forms of
animal  life  by  bifurcate division." He therefore proposes a method of
defining  by  genus and difference, according to which it is possible in
biological  classification  to  sub-divide  a  genus  into more than two
species.  To  avoid  sub-division  into  two  and  only  two, that which
differentiates  each  species from the others within the same genus must
be  some  positive characteristic. As alternative methods of definition,
dichotomous  division  and the differentiation of species within a genus
are  discussed  in the chapter on Definition. Here we are concerned with
the  problem  of  the  number  of  opposites  produced by the exhaustive
division  of a class or kind. For example, how many species of color are
there  ?  If  the primary colors are more than two, it would appear that
each  primary color has more than one opposite, since the same object at
the same time and in the same respect cannot be both red and yellow, red
and  green, green and yellow. But Aristotle seems to restrict the notion
of  contrariety  to  pairs of opposite qualities. "Red, yellow, and such
colors,  though  qualities, have no contraries," he says. Whether or not
he would have regarded them as contraries if he had been acquainted with
the  chromatic  series  of the spectrum, remains a conjecture. To find a
single opposite for red, it is neces-

[359b]
Chapter  65:  OPPOSITION 325 sary to employ the negative term 'not-red.'
But  then  another  difficulty arises which Aristotle recognizes when he
calls  the  negative  term "indefinite" and which Kant discusses when he
treats  the  infinity  of  the  negative. The not-red includes more than
other  colors  which  are not red, such as green and yellow. It includes
everything  in  the  universe,  colored  or colorless, which is not red,
e.g., happiness or atoms or poPerfect dichotomy can be achieved by using
positive  and  negative  terms as opposites, or what Aristotle sometimes
calls  "contradictory  terms"—such  as  man and not-man or just and not-
just.  But  the class which is thus divided is absolutely indeterminate.
It   is  the  universe,  everything,  the  infinite.  It  is  necessary,
furthermore,  to  distinguish between the opposition of 'just' and 'not-
just'  and  the  opposition of 'just' and 'unjust.' The term 'unjust' is
the  contrary  rather  than  the  contradictory  of  'just,'  for  these
opposites  apply  only  to  men, or laws, or acts; only certain kinds of
things  are  either  just  or  unjust,  and  that is why it is said that
contraries  are  always  opposites within a genus or a definite kind. In
contrast,  'not-just'  is  the contradictory rather than the contrary of
'just,'  for  these  opposites  apply  to  everything  in  the universe;
everything is either the kind of thing to which just and unjust apply or
it is the kind of thing to which neither of these terms apply, and so it
is the not-just. In addition to separating contraries (both of which are
positive  terms)  from  contradictory  opposites  (one  of  which  is  a
positive,  the other a negative term), Aristotle distinguishes two sorts
of  contraries.  On  the  one  hand,  such  contraries  as  odd and even
exhaustively  divide  a  limited  class (e.g., integral numbers): on the
other hand, such contraries as white and black represent the extremes of
a  continuous  series  of shades, in which any degree of grayness can be
considered as the opposite of either extreme or of a darker or a lighter
gray.  There  are  still  other  kinds  of  opposite pairs, according to
Aristotle,  such  as  the  terms  'double'  and  'half,'  which have the
peculiarity  of  implying  each  other;  or  the  terms  'blindness' and
'sight,' which are opposite conditions of the same subject. In this last
case, one of the opposites naturally belongs to a certain kind of

[360a]
326  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  thing,  and  the other represents a loss of that
natural  property  or  trait.  It  is  therefore  called  a "privation."
Considering  these  various  modes  of  opposition, Aristotle proposes a
fourfold  classification  of opposite terms: correlative opposites, like
double and half; contrary opposites, like odd and even, white and black,
just  and  unjust;  the  opposites  of possession and privation, such as
sight  and blindness; the opposites of affirmation and negation, such as
man  and  not-man,  or  just  and  not-just.  He  discusses  the special
characteristics  of  each type of opposition, but it is only contrariety
which  he  thinks  requires  further  subdivision.  Even though both are
always  positive  terms,  some  contraries, like odd and even, exhaust a
definite  class,  just  as  positive  and negative opposites exhaust the
infinite. They admit of no intermediate terms and hence they differ from
contraries like white and black. White and black are extreme limits of a
continuous  series and thus permit an indefinite number of intermediates
which fall between them. Things which differ only in degree are like the
sort of contraries which find their place in a continuous series. Things
which  differ  in  kind are like the sort of contraries between which no
intermediates are possible. One of the great problems of classification,
especially  with  respect  to  living  organisms, is whether the diverse
species  which  fall  within  a  single  genus differ in kind or only in
degree.  The  answer would seem to depend on whether the several species
are  related  by one or the other sort of contrariety. As the chapter on
Evolution  indicates,  the  basic  meaning of the word "species" changes
when  the  possibility  of "intermediate forms" is rejected or admitted.
When  a  class is divided by contraries without intermediates, the genus
can  have only two species, as for example, the division of animals into
brutes  and men. When a genus is divided into more than two sub-classes,
(e.g.,  the  division  of  vertebrates  into fish, amphibians, reptiles,
birds,  and  mammals), it would seem to follow that the species are like
points  in a continuous series and admit the possibility of intermediate
types.  According  to  Darwin's conception of species, their contrariety
always tends to take the latter

[360b]
form.  Aristotle,  on the other hand, seems to use the word "species" in
two  distinct  senses  which correspond to the two kinds of contrariety—
with  and  without  intermediates.  "A thing's difference from that from
which  it  differs  in species," he writes, "must be a contrariety." But
though  contrariety  is  always  a  "complete difference," the fact that
"contraries  are  socalled  in several senses" leads him to observe that
"their  modes  of  completeness  will  answer  to  the  various modes of
contrariety  which  attach to the contraries." The logical opposition of
propositions  or judgments depends in part on the opposition of terms or
concepts.  If  contrary  things  are  said  about  the  same  subject of
discourse  (i.e., if the same number is called odd and even, or the same
act  is  called  cowardly and courageous, or the same animal is called a
bird and a mammal), pairs of contrary statements are made, of which both
cannot  be  true.  But  it  does  not seem to follow that one of the two
statements  must  be true. Both can be false. In the examples given, the
number  may  be  a  fraction  and  neither  odd nor even; the act may be
foolhardy  and  neither  courageous  nor  cowardly;  the animal may be a
reptile  and  neither  bird  nor mammal. This characteristic of contrary
statements  the impossibility of their both being true combined with the
possibility  of  their  both being false—can also be found, according to
Aristotle,  in  propositions  which  have  the  same  subject and do not
contain  contrary  terms  as  predicates.  The propositions 'All men are
white'  and 'No men are white' cannot both be true, but they can both be
false.  The  contrariety  of these two statements, which can be taken as
typifying  the  opposition  of all universal affirmations and negations,
does  not  depend on contrary predicates, but on the opposed meanings of
'all are' and 'none is.' Keeping the terms constant and varying only the
quality and quantity of the propositions, Aristotle formulates two other
typical  modes  of  opposition  between  pairs  of statements. When both
statements  are  particular  or  limited, but one is affirmative and the
other  negative,  both  cannot  be  false though both can be true, e.g.,
'Some  men  are  white'  and  'Some  men  are  not  white.' This pair of
opposites Aris-

[361a]
totle  calls  "sub-contraries."  When  one  statement  is  universal and
affirmative  and  the  other  is  particular and negative—or when one is
universal  and  negative,  the other particular and affirmative— the two
propositions  are, accord ing to Aristotle, contradictory. Contradiction
is  the  most  complete type of opposition, for contradictory statements
are opposite in both quality and quantity. Of a pair of contradictories,
both  cannot  be true and both cannot be false. One must be true and the
other false, e.g., it must be true either that all men are white or that
some  men  are  not  white.  The  formal  scheme of opposite statements,
traditionally  known  as  "the square of opposition," appears to exhaust
all possibilities. It indicates, moreover, that every statement may have
two  opposites, a contradictory and either a contrary or a sub-contrary;
for  example,  'All  men are white' is contradicted by 'Some men are not
white'  and  opposed in a merely contrary fashion by 'No men are white.'
The  latter  is a weaker form of opposition since it permits the dilemma
to be avoided by the truth of a third statement, that some men are white
and  some  are  not.  The  dilemma  set  up by a contradiction cannot be
avoided  in  this  way.  The propositions 'God exists' and 'God does not
exist,'  or  'The  world  had a beginning' and 'The world did not have a
beginning,'  constitute  contradictions  from which there seems to be no
escape.  It  would  seem  to make a difference, therefore, in facing the
great controversies in the tradition of western thought, to know whether
the  opposite  views  which  men  have  taken  on fundamental issues are
genuine  contradictions,  requiring  everyone  to take sides, or whether
they  are  merely  contrary  positions.  In  the latter alternative, the
inconsistency  of  the  theories  prevents  us  from  agreeing with both
parties to the dispute, but it does not require us to agree with either,
for  contrary  doctrines  never  exhaust the possibilities. Between such
extreme  positions,  for  example,  as  that  everything  is in flux and
nothing  changes, both of which cannot be true, the truth may lie in the
doctrine that some elements of permanence are involved in all change; or
it may be in the theory of a realm of becoming that lacks permanence and
a realm of being that is free from change.

[361b]
Chapter  65:  OPPOSITION  327  One  of  the  basic  controversies in the
tradition  of  the  great  books  concerns  opposition  itself.  Is  the
principle  of  contradiction the ultimate test of the truth of judgments
and  reasoning?  Is  the  truth of indemonstrable propositions or axioms
certified  by  the  self-contradiction  of  their  contradictories?  For
example,  is the truth of the proposition 'The whole is greater than the
part' made necessary by the impossibility of the contradictory statement
'The whole is not greater than the part,' on the theory that this latter
statement  is  impossible  because  it is self-contradictory? And when a
conclusion  is demonstrated by propositions which seem to be necessarily
true, must not the contradictory of this conclusion be false—or at least
be incapable of demonstration by propositions which are also necessarily
true?  On  both  these  questions Kant and Aristotle seem to be opposed.
According  to  Aristotle,  no  truths  are necessary or axiomatic unless
their   contradictories   are   self-contradictory.  But  Kant  makes  a
distinction  between  analytical and synthetical propositions (discussed
in  the  chapter  on  Judgment)  and  in  terms  of  it he restricts the
principle  of  contradiction  to  serving  as  a  criterion of truth for
analytical  judgments  alone.  "In  an analytical judgement," he writes,
"whether  negative or affirmative, its truth can always be tested by the
principle  of  contradiction." But though we must admit, Kant continues,
that  "the  principle  of  contradiction  is  the general and altogether
sufficient  principle  of  all  analytical  knowledge,  beyond  this its
authority  and  utility, as a sufficient criterion of truth, must not be
allowed  to  extend." In "the synthetical part of our knowledge, we must
no  doubt  take  great  care  never  to  offend  against that inviolable
principle,  but we ought never to expect from it any help with regard to
the truth of this kind of knowledge." The reason, Kant explains, is that
"in  forming  an  analytical  judgement I remain within a given concept,
while predicating something of it. If what I predicate is affirmative, I
only predicate of that concept what is already contained in it; if it is
negative,  I  only  exclude from it the opposite of it." For example, if
the meaning of the concept 'whole' involves 'being greater than a part,'
self-contradiction results from denying that the whole is greater than a
part.

[362a]
328 THE GREAT IDEAS "In forming synthetical judgements, on the contrary,
I  have  to  go  beyond  a  given  concept,  in order to bring something
together  with  it, which is totally different from what is contained in
it.  Here," Kant declares, "we have neither the relation of identity nor
of  contradiction,  and  nothing in the judgement itself by which we can
discover  its  truth  or  its falsehood"; for example, the judgment that
everything  which  happens  has  a  cause. The truth of such synthetical
judgments,  according  to  Kant,  is as necessary and as a priori as the
truth  of  analytical judgments, but the principle of contradiction does
not  provide  their  ground  or  validation. For Aristotle, in contrast,
those  propositions  which do not derive necessity from the principle of
contradiction  belong to the sphere of opinion rather than to the domain
of  knowledge.  They  can  be  asserted as probable only, not as true or
false.  In  the domain of knowledge, it is impossible to construct valid
arguments for contradictory conclusions, for if one must be true and the
other  false,  one  can  be validly demonstrated and the other cannot be
demonstrated   at  all.  But  in  the  sphere  of  opinion,  dialectical
opposition   is  possible.  Because  the  contradictory  of  a  probable
statement is itself also probable, probable arguments can be constructed
on  the  opposite sides of every dialectical issue. For Kant dialectical
issues  do  not consist in a conflict of opposed probabilities. Far from
setting  probable  reasoning  against  probable  reasoning,  dialectical
opposition consists in what appear to be demonstrations of contradictory
propositions.  For  example, in that part of the Critique of Pure Reason
devoted to the Transcendental Dialectic, Kant presents opposed arguments
which look like demonstrations of contradictory propositions—such as the
thesis  that "the world has a beginning in time" and its antithesis that
"the  world  has  no  beginning";  or  the  thesis that "there exists an
absolutely  necessary  being"  and  its  antithesis  that "there nowhere
exists  an absolutely necessary being." These are two of the four issues
which  Kant  calls  the "antinomies of a transcendental dialectic." Such
issues,  Aristotle would agree with Kant, do not belong to the sphere of
opinion or prob-

[362b]
ability. But Kant would not agree with Aristotle that such issues belong
to  the  domain  of  science  or  certain  knowledge. The problem of the
world's  beginning  or  eternity,  for  example,  is one which Aristotle
treats   in   his  Physics  and  appears  to  think  is  solved  by  the
demonstration  that  motion  can  have  neither  beginning  nor end. The
problem  of  the  existence  of a necessary being is one which Aristotle
treats  in his Metaphysics and which he also appears to think is capable
of  a  demonstrative  solution. For him, therefore, both are problems to
which scientific answers can be given. But for Kant the demonstration of
the  antitheses,  or  contradictory  propositions,  in  both cases is as
cogent as the demonstrations of the theses; and therefore, since we know
that  both  of  a  pair  of contradictory propositions cannot be validly
demonstrated,  we  must  conclude  that  the arguments advanced are only
counterfeit  demonstrations, or as Kant says, "illusory." He calls these
demonstrations  "dialectical,"  and  the  issues they attempt to resolve
"antinomies,"  precisely because he thinks the reasoning goes beyond the
limits  of  scientific  thought  and  because  he  thinks the issues are
problems reason cannot ever solve. With respect to conclusions affirming
or  denying matters beyond experience, the antinomies can be interpreted
either  as  showing that contradictory arguments are equally sound or as
showing that they are equally faulty. On either interpretation, Kant and
Aristotle  seem  to  be opposed on the applicability of the principle of
contradiction  to  conflicting  arguments  and  conclusions  (except, of
course,  those  which are merely probable). This difference between them
accords  with  the  difference  in  their  conceptions  of  science  and
dialectic,  and  in  their theories of the scope and conditions of valid
knowledge. The opposition between Kant and Aristotle may not present the
only  alternatives.  Hegel's  theory of the dialectical process seems to
offer  a third. Where Aristotle appears to think that all contradictions
must  be  resolved  in  favor  of  one  of the opposites, and where Kant
appears  to  think  that  some contradictions cannot be resolved at all,
Hegel  proposes  the  resolution  of all contradictions, not by a choice
between

[363a]
them,  but  by  a  synthesis uniting the opposites and reconciling their
differences.  According  to  Aristotle, opposites exclude one another in
existence  as  well as in though^—Athing cannot both exist and not exist
at  the  same  time; nor in any particular respect can it simultaneously
both  be and not be of a certain sort. Only with the passage of time and
in  the  course of change can opposites be realized, when a thing passes
from  being  to  non-being, or gives up one attribute in order to assume
its  contrary.  The  difference for Aristotle between becoming and being
(or  between  change  and  complete  actuality) seems to be that the one
includes and the other excludes opposites. Change cannot occur except as
one  opposite  comes  into  existence  while  the other passes away. But
opposites  cannot  co-exist  with  complete actuality. So far as reality
consists  of  co-existent actualities, it is limited by the principle of
contradiction—as   a   principle  of  being—  to  those  which  are  not
contradictory.  All  possibilities  cannot, therefore, be simultaneously
realized,  for,  as Leibnitz states the principle, all possibilities are
not   "compossible."   According   to   Hegel,  every  finite  phase  of
reality—everything    except    the   Absolute   Idea   itself—has   its
contradictory,   as   real   as   itself,   and   co-existent  with  it.
Contradictories  imply  one  another  and  require each other, almost as
correlative opposites do. Whatever is partial and incomplete presupposes
something  which  is  partial and incomplete in an opposite respect. The
opposition  between  them can therefore be overcome by a synthesis which
includes  them  both,  and which complements each by uniting it with the
other. For example, the category of being is opposed by non-being. These
opposites  both  exclude and imply one another. They are in a sense even
identical  with one another, insofar as the notion of being contains the
notion  of  non-being,  and,  conversely,  the  notion of non-being, the
notion  of  being.  Except for the Absolute, everything which is also is
not,  and  everything  which  is not also is. The apparent contradiction
involved  in this simultaneous application of opposite categories to the
same  thing  is  overcome  by  a  third category, becoming, which is the
synthesis  of  being  and  non-being.  Being and non-being are united in
becoming.

[363b]
Chapter 65: OPPOSITION 329 This reconciling of opposites, by their union
in  a  more  inclusive  whole  embracing  both,  typifies  the  Hegelian
dialectic  of  thesis,  antithesis,  and  synthesis.  The motion repeats
itself  as the synthesis of one contradiction faces its own opposite and
requires  a  higher  synthesis  to  overcome  the  contradiction  it has
generated. Thus every opposition in reality or thought is a phase in the
progressive  realization of the Absolute, wherein all contradictions are
resolved.  In  Hegel's  Philosophy  of  History and in his theory of the
development  of  the  state  in  the Philosophy of Right, the dialectical
process  is  exemplified  at  every  stage  of progress. The conflict of
interdependent  opposites—of  opposite  classes or forces in society, of
opposite  political  institutions  or principles— calls for a resolution
which  shall unite rather than exclude the opConsidering the division of
labor, for example, Hegel writes: "When men are dependent on one another
and  reciprocally  related  in  their work and the satisfaction of their
needs,   subjective  self-seeking  turns  into  a  contribution  to  the
satisfaction  of  the  needs  of  everyone  else.  That  is to say, by a
dialectical advance, subjective self-seeking turns into the mediation of
the  particular  through the universal, with the result that each man in
earning, producing, and enjoying on his own account is eo ipso producing
and  earning for the enjoyment of everyone else." The opposition between
the  particular good of each individual and the universal good of all is
thus  overcome  by  that  advance  in  social  organization which is the
division  of labor. Each of the stages of world history is, according to
Hegel,  "the  presence  of  a  necessary moment in the Idea of the world
mind."  But  the  world  mind itself is a synthesis, a resolution of the
conflicting  opposites—of  the  various national minds "which are wholly
restricted  on account of their particularity. Their deeds and destinies
in  their  reciprocal  relations to one another are the dialectic of the
finitude  of  these  minds, and out of it arises the universal mind, the
mind  of the world, free from all restrictions, producing itself as that
which  exercises  its  right  —and  its  right  is  the highest right of
all—over  these  finite  minds in the 'history of the world which is the
world's court of judgment.' "

[364a]
330  THE GREAT IDEAS with and without intermediates between extremes (1)
Dichotomous  division: positive and negative terms id. The opposition of
propositions  or  judgments  (2) Modal opposition: the necessary and the
contingent  lectical  triad  of  thesis,  antithesis,  and synthesis ic.
Nonbeing as the opposite of being id. The opposition of good and evil in
the  world  and in relation to God traries in the Absolute 3. Opposition
in  the  realm  of  physical  nature 3#. The contraries as principles of
change  3d.  The opposition of physical forces and its resolution y. The
struggle  for  existence:  the  competition  of species 4. Opposition or
conflict in the psychological and moral order 40. The conflict of reason
and  the  passions  4^. The conflict of loves and loyalties, desires and
duties  5#.  Competition  in  commerce  and  the  rivalry of factions in
politics  ertyless,  capital  and  labor,  producers  and  consumers $d.
Opposition or strife as a productive principle or source of progress

[364b]
OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1, Opposition in logic «j \a. Kinds of opposition
among  terms:  correlation,  contrariety,  privation,  negation  ib. The
analysis  of  contrariety:  the  kinds  of  terms which can be contrary;
contrariety ic. The exclusiveness of opposites as a principle of logical
division  332  ie.  Opposition  in  reasoning and proof: the conflict of
dialectical  arguments;  the antinomies of a transcendental dialectic 2.
The  metaphysical  significance  of  opposition  333  ia.  Opposition as
limiting  coexistence:  noncontradiction  as  a  principle  of being lb.
Opposites  in the realm of being, mind, or spirit: the one and the many;
the  diaie.  The  reconciliation  of opposites in the divine nature: the
synthesis of all con334 ijb. Contrariety of quality in the theory of the
elements  or  humours  335  y. The opposition of motion and rest, and of
contrary motions 4^. Conflicting emotions, humours, instincts, or habits
336 4<r. Conflict as the cause of repression and as a factor in neurotic
disorders 337 \e. Conflict in human life: opposed types of men and modes
of  life  338  5. Conflict in society and history 339 $b. The class war:
the  opposition  of  the rich and the poor, the propertied and the prop-
<yC. The inevitability of civil strife and war between states 340

[365a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in53 James -.Psycho logy, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the left-hand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283) 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
ot  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  1.  Opposition  in logic la. Kinds of opposition
among  terms:  correlation,  contrariety,  privation,  negation 7 Plato:
Protagoras,  49a-50b  /  Phaedo, 226d-227a; 242d-245c / Republic, bk iv,
351b-c  8  Aristotle: Categories, ch 10 16d-19c / Prior Analytics, bk i,
ch  46 70b-71d / Topics, bk ii, ch 8 159b-160a; bk iv, ch 4 [i24a35-b34J
173a-d;  bk  v,  ch 6 187a-188c; bk vi, ch 9 201a-202a / Metaphysics, bk
iv, ch 2 [1004^- 17] 523a-b;
[ioo4b27-ioo5a2] 523d-524a; bk
v, ch 10 539a-c; bk ix, ch i
[1046^9-36]
571b; ch 2
[i046b7-i5J 571c-d; bk
x, ch 4
[io55 a34-b28] 582b-d; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i ai828] 589b-c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 4 103c-104b; part i-ii, q
18,  a  8,  rep  1  699d-700b; q 36, a i, ans 780c781b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  64,  a  3,  rep 3 68b-69b; q 71, a 6, rep i
110b111b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 57b-c

[365b]
Chapter 65: OPPOSITION 331 lb. The analysis of contrariety: the kinds of
terms  which can be contrary; contrariety with and without intermediates
between  extremes  7  Plato:  Lysis,  21b-22b  /  Euthydemus,  83d84a  /
Symposium,  163b  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350c-351d;  bk  v,  372b-373c 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[3
b24~3i] 8a; b u-6a i8] 10a-c; ch 7 aio-b 4] 8b-d; ch 6
[5
[4
[6b i5-i9]
lib; ch 8
[iob n-25]
15d; ch 10
[n b33-i2a25l 17a-c; ch
ii  19c-d  / Topics, bk ii, ch 7 158b-159a; bk iv, ch 3 [i23b i-i24a io]
171d-172c; bk v, ch 6 [i35b7-i6] 187a-b; bk vi, ch 9
[i47a32-b25] 201b-d / Metaphysics,
bk  iv,  ch 7 531c-532b; bk v, ch 10 [ioi8a25~ b7] 539a-b; bk x, ch 3-10
581a-586d; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i ai8-28] 589b-c; ch 6 [1063^9-24]
592a; ch 12
[io68b26-3i]
597d;
[1069^-5]
597d-598a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch i
[ii55b8-i5]
407a  17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 20 292b293a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 48, a 1, rep 1 259b-260c; part i-ii, q 18, a 8,
rep 1 699d-700b; q 22, a 2, rep i 721c-722c

[366a]
(  1  . Opposition in logic. 1 b. The analysis of contrariety: the kinds
of   terms   which   can  be  contrary;  contrariety  with  and  without
intermediates  between  extremes.}  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 64, a 3, rep 3 68b-69b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
i,  12d-13b  53  James  :  Psychology,  387b  Ic.  The  exclusiveness of
opposites as a principle of logical division lc(l) Dichotomous division:
positive  and  negative  terms  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  134bc  /  Sophist,
552b-561d:  577c-579d  /  Statesman  580a-608d  esp  595a-d  / Philebus,
610d-613a  8  Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 31 64b65a / Posterior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 5 125b-d; ch 13
[96b25~97b
5]  132a-133a  /  Topics,  bk  vt,  ch  6  [i43b  i  1-144*4]  197b-c  /
Metaphysics,  bk  vii,  ch  12  [1038*8-14]  561d  9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals,  bk  i, ch 2-3 165d-167d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4
lla-c  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 8-10 285a-286d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
43d-44a  lc(2)  Division  of  a genus by differentia: the contrariety of
species 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 548c-549d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 3
[i b i6-24]
5d; ch 5
[3
a22-b23]  7b-8a  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  11,  ch  13  [96b25~97b6]
132a-133a / Topics, bk 9] 152d; [io8b i9-32] 153a,c; bk iv, ch 3
[i23 a2o-i24a9]
171c-172c; ch 6 1, ch 18 [io8 a38-b
[i27b7-i7]
177a;
[128*20-30]
177d-178a; bk vi, ch 5-6 196b-199c / Physics, bk i, ch 3
[i86b
i 4-3 4 ] 261c-262a; ch 5 [188*18-25] 263c; ch 6
[189*11-14]
264c;
[i89b23-27] 265b
/ Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 3
[998^1-27]
517c;  bk  v, ch 10 [ioi8 a38-b 7] 539b; ch 28 [1024s 37-b 9J 546b-c; bk
vii, ch 12 [io37b28-io38 a34] 561c-562a; bk viii, ch 3
[i043b24-i044 a i4]
568b-d; ch 6 569d-570d; bk x, ch 8-9 585b586c / Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[402b
i  5-403*2]  631  d632a  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals, bk i, ch 2-4
165d-168c  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch i, 281a-b; ch 8-10
285a-286d;  ch 18 291a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4,
rep 1 16d-17c; a 5, ans 17c-18b; q 4, a 2, rep 2 21b-22b; q 29, a i, rep
3  162a-163b; q 47, a 2 257b-258c; q 48, a 3, rep 3 261b262a; q 75, a 3,
rep i 380c-381b; a 4, ans 381b-382a; q 76, a 3, rep 4 391a-393a; q 77, a
1,  rep  7  399c-401b; part i-ii, q 1, a 3, ans 611b-612a; q 3, a 5, ans
626b-627a; q 18, aa 5-10 697a-702a; q 29, a 2, rep i 745c-

[366b]
746b;  q  35,  a  4  774d-775d; a 8, ans and rep 3 779c-780c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, a 2, rep 3 2b-4a; q 52, a i, ans
15d-18a; a 2, ans 18a-19a; q 55, a 4, ans and rep 1-2 28c29d; q 61, a 1,
rep  1 54d-55c; q 72, a 5, ans 115a-116b; a 7, ans 117a-118a; q 95, a 4,
ans 229b-230c; part ii-ii, q 21, a 3, rep 2-3 479c-480b; part hi, q 2, a
i,  ans  710a711c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 193a-200c esp 197b198a 53 James:
Psychology,  344b-345b  Id.  The opposition of propositions or judgments
ld{l)   The   square   of   opposition:   contradictories,   contraries,
subcontraries 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 10
[i3b i-35]
19ac  /  Interpretation, ch 6 26c-d; ch 10 29d31c / Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch 2
[72
a  i3]  98c  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, a 3, rep 3
68b-69b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 64d-65c; 156d-157b; 174b-d \d{2) Modal
opposition:    the   necessary   and   the   contingent   8   Aristotle:
Interpretation, ch 12-13 32d-35c 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 22a-b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  39c-41c  esp  40d-41c;  193a-200c  esp  194b-d  53 James:
Psychology,  851a;  861b  le.  Opposition  in  reasoning  and proof: the
conflict  of  dialectical  arguments; the antinomies of a transcendental
dialectic  7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c / Phaedrus, 134b-c / Phaedo,
226d-227a  / Republic, bk iv, 350c-351d; bk vii, 392b-393d / Parmenides,
491a-511d  /  Theaetetus,  525d-526b  /  Sophist,  558b-d;  571d-574c  /
Statesman,  594d-595d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30 [46*310]
63d;  bk  11,  ch  15 84b-85b / Topics, bk i, ch 11 148a-c / Sophistical
Refutations, ch 9 234b-d / Heavens, bk i, ch 10
[279^-12]
370d / Metaphysics, bk xiii, ch 4 [1078^828] 610b 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk v, ch 8 [i307b26-29] 509d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1
[1355*28-39]
594c-d; bk ii, ch 23
[1397*6-18]
645a-b;
[1399*18-28] 647d-648a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  89, a 5, ans 477a-478b 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  9,  a  3, rep 2 765b-766b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 446d-449d 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, sect 9 369b-c

[367a]
2 to 2d Chapter 65: OPPOSITION 333 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect x,
div  86-91  488d-491c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, lab; 7a-8b; 120c-173a esp
133c;  174b-177b;  187a-192d;  200c-209d; 219a-220b; 229b-c; 231c-232a /
Fund^Brin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261b;  283d-284d  /  Practical
Reason,  291a-292a;  296a-d;  302a-d; 307d-308b; 331c-337a,c; 340a-342d;
348d349a / Science of Right, 407a-408b / Judgement, 540a-542a; 562a-578a
esp  562d-564c, 570b-572b, 575b-578a; 584c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b
passim   54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  545d  2.  The  metaphysical
significance  of  opposition  2a.  Opposition  as  limiting coexistence:
noncontradiction  as  a  principle of being 7 Plato: Phaedo, 244b-246c /
Republic,  bk  iv, 350d-351b / Parmenides, 504c-d / Sophist, 573a-574c 8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[22b28-23*
b 26] 34d-35c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch i
[995
6-10] 514a; ch 2
[996^6-997^ 5]
515b-d;  bk  iv, ch 3-6 524b-531c; ch 8 532b-d; bk v, ch 10 [1018*22-26]
539a; bk ix, ch 9 [1051*422] 577a-b; bk xi, ch i
[1059*23-26] 587a;
ch  5-6 590a-592b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q i, a 5, rep
2-3  613a-614a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 2, ans
221d-223a;  q 113, a 7, rep 5 366a367c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop
4-5  398d;  prop  10  399c-d;  part  v,  axiom  i  452c  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 15 316d-317a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
99a-101b;  107b-c;  179c182  b  /  Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
367d-368a  53  Iames:  Psychology, 302a esp 302b [fn 1] 2b. Opposites in
the  realm  of  being,  mind,  or  spirit:  the  one  and  the many; the
dialectical   triad  of  thesis,  antithesis,  and  synthesis  7  Plato:
Phaedrus,  134b-c  / Phaedo, 2<+4b-246c / Republic, bk hi, 333b-d; bk v,
368c-373c;  bk  vii,  392b-394b  /  Parmenides  486a-511d  / Theaetetus,
534d-536a  /  Sophist,  561d-577b  esp  574d-575a / Philebus, 610d-613a;
615c61  7d;  634b-635a  8  Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13 [22b32-23a8]
34d-35a / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2 522b-524b; bk v, ch 6
[1017*3-7] 537c; bk x, ch 3-10
581a-586d; bk xi, ch 3 589a-d; bk xii, ch 10
[1075*25-33]
606a;  bk  xiv,  ch  i  619b,d620d  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,
813d-814b;  bk 11, 839d-840b 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 16-17,
91b-92c; tr hi, ch i 93b-c; tr vii 119b-129a;

[367b]
tr  ix  136a-138a,c / Fifth Ennead 208a-251d esp tr 1 208a-214c, tr iv-v
226d-235b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch  1-3  310d-312b; tr ix, ch 1-2
353d-355a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q ii, a 2 47d-48d; q 17,
a 4 103c-104b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv 51b-54b / Meditations, 11
77d-81d;  vi,  98c-d / Objections and Replies, 115a,c; def v-vii 130b-c;
prop  iv  133c;  152b,d-155b;  231a-232d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 7a-8b;
43d-44a;   99a101b;   107b-c;   133c;  173b-177b;  197b-198a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, intro, par 26 18b-c; par 31 19c-20a; part i, par 39
21d;  par  97 37a; part ii, par 106 40a-b; par 109in 41a-c; part in, par
256  79d-80a;  par  353-360  112b-114a,c  esp  par  353  112b-c, par 360
113d-114a,c;  additions,  61 125d-126a; 70 127b / Philosophy of History,
intro,  156d157b;  160c-161a;  165a-b;  205d-206a,c;  part 1, 235d-236a;
237d-238c;  245b-d;  part  ii,  260b-c;  279c-280b;  part hi, 286c-287a;
305c-306c;  part  iv,  316a-b;  333d-334d  53 James: Psychology, 107a-b;
117b; 238b
[fn 2]
2c. Nonbeing as the opposite of being 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 371c-373c
/  Parmenides,  507c-511d  /  Theaetetus,  518a  /  Sophist,  561d577b 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 5
[188*18-25]
263c; ch 9 [192*2-16] 268a; bk v, ch i
[225*
20-29] 305b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 4 [985b 3-10] 503c; ch 5
[986^5-987*1] 504d-505a;
bk iv, ch 2
[ioo3*33-b u]
522b;
[ioo4b27~
29] 523d; bk vii, ch 4 [1030*25-26] 553a; bk xii, ch 2 [io69b27~34] 599a
17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  viii  27b-34a  / Second Ennead, tr iv
50a-57c  /  Third  Ennead, tr vi, ch 6-7 109d-110c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xii, ch 2 343c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a
7,  ans  68d-70d;  q  14,  a 9 83b-d; q 16, a 3, rep 2 96b-d; a 5, rep 3
97c-98b;  q  17,  a  4,  rep  2  103c-104b;  q 104, a 3, rep i 537b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  71, a 6, rep 1 HOb-110b 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  iv,  89c-d / Objections and Replies, 214d-215a
2d.  The opposition of good and evil in the world and in relation to God
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  322a-b  / Theaetetus, 518a-b; 530b-531a /
Statesman, 587a-589c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch ii
[i3b36-i4*6]
19c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  4  [984b33-985*9]  503a-b; bk ix, ch 9
[1051*17-22] 577a-b; bk xii, ch 10
[io75*34-b
7]  606a-b;  bk  xiv,  ch  4  [1091*29-1092*8]  624a-d  12  Epictetus  :
Discourses, bk i, ch 12 118d-120b; ch 20, 126c-d; ch 25 129d-131b; ch 29
134d138a

[368a]
334  (2. The metaphysical significance of opposition. 2d. The opposition
of  good  and  evil  in  the world and in relation to God.) 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead, tr viii 27b-34a esp ch 6-7 29d-30d / Third Ennead, tr ii,
ch  5-7  85b-86c; ch 10-14 88a-89d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
11  15d16a;  bk  iv,  par 24 25b-c; bk v, par 20 32d33a; bk vii, par 3-7
44a-45d;  par  11-23 47a50d; bk viii, par 22-24 59a-60a; bk xiii, par 45
123a  /  City  of God, bk viii, ch 24, 283a-b; bk x, ch 21 311c-312a; bk
xi,  ch  9  326d327d;  ch  18  331d-332a;  bk xii, ch 3 343d344b; ch 6-9
345b-348b; bk xiv, ch 1-5 376b,d-380b; ch io-ii 385b-387a; bk xxii, ch 1
586b,d-587b  /  Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 33, 633d-634a; bk ii, ch 23
648a-c;  bk hi, ch 37, 673d-674a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
8,  a  i, rep 4 34d-35c; a 3, ans 36b-37c; qq 48-49 259b-268a,c; q 65, a
1, ans and rep 2-3 339b-340b; q 66, a 3, ans 347b-348d; q 72, a 1, rep 6
368b-369d;  part  i-ii,  q  18,  a  8,  rep  1 699d-700b; q 36, a i, ans
780c-781b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 75, a 1 137d-138c;
part hi suppl, q 74, a i, rep 1 925c-926c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
viii
[65]-
ix
[103]
llc-13b; xxvii
[55-136]
40a-41b; purgatory, v [85-129] 59d-60c; viii
[1-108]
64a-65b; xi
[1-30]
68d-69a; paradise, i
[103-142]
107b-d; xiii
[52-87]
126a-b; xix
[40-66] 135c-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  160d-161a  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  17d-18a  32  Milton:  Comus  33a-56b  esp  [414-475] 42b44a /
Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [496-505]  122a; bk iv [32-104] 153a-154b; bk v
[600-904] 188b195a; bk vii
[519-549]
228b-229a; bk viii
[319-337]
239a-b; bk ix
[679-779]
262a264a; bk xi [84-98] 301a / Areopagitica, 395a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 81b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 230b; 330a-b 42 Kant: Practical
Reason,  316a-317d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 160a; part 1,
237d-238c; part iv, 346b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue 7a-9b; part ii
[11,676-843] 284a-288a
48 Melville: Moby Dic\ esp 4b-5a, 135a-145a, 171b, 370b-372a, 409b-410b,
414b-419b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 120d-126d; bk xi,
308c-309a;  341a-345c  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 790d;
791b  [fn  1]  2e. The reconciliation of opposites in the divine nature:
the  synthesis  of  all  contraries  in  the  Absolute 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 3 14a-20c; q 4, a 2, rep 1-2 21b-22b; q 65, a 1
339b-340b; q 91, a 1, ans 484a-485b

[368b]
i 2e to la 21 Dante Divine Comedy, paradise, xxxiii
[76-145] 157a-d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  15  360a-361d;  part 11, prop 1-2
373d-374a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 156d160a; 165a-b;
205d-206a,c;  part i, 237d238c; 245b-d; part hi, 306a-c 3. Opposition in
ture  the realm of physical na5a. The contraries as principles of change
7 Plato: Symposium, 165c-166b / Phaedo, 226c-228a; 243c-246c / Republic,
bk  iv, 350d351b / Theaetetus, 519d-520b / Sophist, 565a-c / Laws, bk x,
760a; 762b-764c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4
aio-b i9] 8b-9a; ch 10
[13*17-37]
18d-19a; ch 14
[i5b i-i6]
21b-c  / Physics, bk i, ch 5-9 263c-268d; bk ii, ch 1 [i93b i9-22] 270a;
bk hi, ch i [201*48] 278c; bk iv, ch 9
[2i7a2o-b26]
297a-c; bk v, ch 1
[224b27-225ai2] 304d-305a; [225s
34-b 9] 305d; ch 2 [226*23^9] 306d-307a; ch 3
[226^4-34]
307c; ch 5 310a-311a; ch 6 a2] 312b-c; bk 21] 312a;
[230*27-23
l 10-
[230
4 [234b io-2i] 316d-317a; bk viii, ch 2 VI, CH
[2 52b9
11]  336b-c; ch 7 [26oa29-b i] 346b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [27oa i3~23]
361b-c;  ch 4 362a-c; ch 6 [273^-21] 364b; ch 8 [277^3- - 34] 368b-c; ch
12  [283b  i7-23] 375c-d; bk iv 399a-405a,c / Generation and Corruption,
bk 1, ch 3-5 413c-420b; ch 7 421d-423b; bk 11, ch 1-5 428b,d-433d esp ch
4-5 431b-433d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 8 [989^8-29] 507b-c; bk 11, ch 2
[994
a i9-b6] 512c-d; bk iv, ch 7
[iou b29-38] 531d; bk
viii,  ch  5  569b-d;  bk ix, ch 9 [i05i a5-i3] 577a; bk x, ch 7 [1057 s
16-34]  584c-d;  bk xi, ch 9 [io65b5~i4] 593d594a; ch ii 596a-d; bk xii,
ch 2-3 598c599d; ch 10 [1075^5-34] 606a / Soul, bk ii, ch 4
[4i6ai8-b8] 646c-d /
Longevity, ch 2-3 710b-711b 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk i, ch
a20-b i3] 264b-d; bk iv, ch 3 [768^-7] 309c / Ethics, bk viii, ch i
[ii55b2-8] 407a;
ch  8 [ii59b i9-23] 411d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 167b-d
18  [724 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 813d-814b; bk ii, 839d-840b 14
Plutarch:  Agesilaus, 482c 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8 110c-d
/  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch 22 293d-294c; ch 27 296b-297a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 23, a 1, rep 3 132c-133b; q 58, a 7, rep 3
305c306b;  q  62,  a  7,  rep  1  322d-323b; part i-ii, q 18, a 8, rep 1
699d-700b; q 23, a 2 724c725c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 408c-d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  prop  4-6  398d399a;  part  iv, prop 29-35
431d-434a; part v, axiom 1 452c

[369a]
3£  to 4<z Chapter 65: OPPOSITION 335 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 27a; 76c-83b
esp  76c-d;  91d-93c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 160c-d;
165a-b;  178a-d;  179b-d 5b. Contrariety of quality in the theory-of~the
elements or humours 7 Plato: Symposium, 155d-157a / Timaeus, 462b-464b 8
Aristotle:  Physics, bk iv, ch 9 [217*20-26] 297a / Heavens, bk ii, ch 3
[286*22-28] 377d / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 1-3 428b,d-431a;
ch 7
[33^8-30] 435d-436b
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 8
[989*18-29] 507 b-c
/  Sense  and the Sensible, ch 2-7 674a-689a,c passim 9 Aristotle: Parts
of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch 7 177c-179a; bk hi, ch 7 [67ob i8-25] 199b; bk
a5-b i] 206d-207b / Generation iv, ch 2
[677
b8~766b25]  306d308a  10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 13-20 of
Animals,  bk  iv, ch i [765 4c-7d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch
8-9 191b-199a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[380415] 66a-c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 66, a 2, ans 345d-347b; q 91, a
i,  ans  and  rep 3 484a-485b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 435b-c 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph 66, 114d-115a 3c. The opposition of
motion  and  rest,  and  of  contrary  motions  7 Plato: Cratylus, 112b/
Republic, bk iv, 350d351b / Timaeus, 453b-c; 460c-d / Sophist, 567a-574c
/ Statesman, 587a-589c esp 587a-b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 14
[i5b i-i6] 21 b-c
/  Physics,  bk  v,  ch  5-6  310a-312d  /  Heavens, bk 1, ch 4 362a-c /
Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[ioo4b28-3o] 523d; bk xi, ch 12 [io68b i9-25]
597c-d  / Soul, bk 1, ch 3 [406*22-27] 635c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties,
bk i, ch 2, 167b-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832c 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i, 517b-518a; 519b-520b 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 931b 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 24,
295b;  ch  27 296b-297a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 4,
rep  3  43b-44b;  q 18, a i, rep 2 104c105c; q 53, a 3, ans 283b-284d; q
73,  a 2, ans 371b-d; part i-ii, q 6, a i 644d-646a; a 4 647b-648a; q 9,
a  4,  rep  2  660a-d; q 41, a 3 799c-800b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl,  q 75, a 3, ans and rep 3-5 938a-939d; q 84, a 3, rep 2
985d-989b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 50a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk
ii, 26a-b; bk vi, 110b

[369b]
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 35, 163a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  axiom i 378c; lemma 1-3 378c-379a 34 Newton: Principles, def hi 5b;
law  i  14a  3d. The opposition of physical forces and its resolution 11
Archimedes:  Equilibrium of Planes, bk i, postulates-prop 7 502a-504b 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk v, 969a-972a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  q  84,  a  3,  rep  2-3  985d-989b  28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i,
llb-12d;  bk ii, 38a-39b; 52d-54d; 59a-d; bk hi, 65a-67a 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences,  third  day,  209a-210a;  224d-225c;  fourth day, 240a-d;
243d-249b  passim  34 Newton: Principles, corol i-ii 15a-16b; bk 1, prop
57-69  110b-130b  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 9a-12d 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  691b-692a;  788c-793c; 817a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xiii, 570d; epilogue 11, 678a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  105a  3e.  The  struggle  for existence: the competition of
species  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi, 112d-113b 7 Plato: Protagoras,
44c-45a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk ix, ch i
[6o8b i9]-CH 2 [6iob2o] 134a-136b
36   Swift:   Gulliver,   part  ii,  79a-80a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
334b,d-337d;  348d349d  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 34a 42 Kant:
Judgement,  584d-585c  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 7b; 32a-39a,c esp
32d-33b,  36a-38a;  49d-51d passim; 52d53b; 182d; 233d-234a / Descent of
Man,   328b-c;  596c  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  573c;  592b  /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 791c-d 4. Opposition or conflict in
the  psychological  and  moral  order 4a. The conflict of reason and the
passions  5  Euripides:  Hippolytus  [373-430] 228b-d 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
120b-c;  128a-129c  /  Phaedo,  224a-226c;  230d-234c / Republic, bk iv,
346a-355a esp 350c-353d; bk ix, 416a-c; 425c-427b / Laws, bk viii, 735b-
738b 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433
b5~i2] 666b; ch 11 [434*10-15] 666d-667a / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453*25-31]  695c-d  9  Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch ii 239a-d /
Ethics, bk 1, ch 13 [uo2b i3-28] 348a-c; bk hi, ch 1 [iiu*35-b4]357b; bk
vn 395a-406a,c / Politics, bk in, ch 15
[1286*17-20] 484b-c;
[1286*33-37] 4g4d

[370a]
336 (4. Opposition or conflict in the psychological and moral order. 4a.
The  conflict  of  reason  and  the  passions.)  12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[307322] 34a-b
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  18  161a-162b  12  Aurelius:
Meditations, bk ii, sect 5 257b-c; sect 10 257d-258a; sect 16-17 259a-d;
bk  hi,  sect  4 260b-261a; sect 12 262b-c; bk v, sect 8-9 269d-270c; bk
vii, sect 55 283b-c; sect 68-69 284c-d; bk viii, sect 39 288c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk  iv  167a-186b  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 18-26
40d43a; bk viii, par 10-24 55c-60a / City of God, bk iv, ch 3 190a-c; bk
xiv,  ch  1-5  376b,  d380b; ch io-ii 385b-387a; bk xix, ch 15 521a-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3 430c-431d; q 95, a 2, ans
and  rep  i 507c-508a; q iii, a 2, ans 569c-570b; part i-ii, q 6, aa 6-7
649a-650d;  q 9, a 2 esp rep 3 658d-659c; q 10, a 3 664d-665c; q 17, a 7
690d-692a;  q  28,  a  3, ans 742a-d; q 33, a 3 767a-d; q 34, a i, rep i
768c-769d;  q 48, a 3 824c-825b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  61,  a 3, ans 56b-57a; q 72, a 2, rep 1,4 112b113a; q 77 144d-152a; q
80,  a 2 160d-161c; q 91, a 6 212c-213c; q 93, a 6 219d-220d; q 94, a 6,
ans  225d-226b;  part  ii-ii, q 183, a 4, ans 627d-628d; q 186, a 4, ans
655c-656b  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii 2c-4a; v 7a-8b 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 82 99a / Parson's Tale, par 12,
503b504a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a;  58c-d;  part  ii,
105d-106a;  141a-b; 151b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 5a-6c; 20d-22a; 36c-41a
esp   39b-40a;   165c-167a;   200d-205b;   273b276a;  344a-347c  passim;
350d-354b;  486b495d  26  Shakespeare:  Merchant of Venice, act i, sc ii
[11-29]  408b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet, act hi, sc ii [61-79] 49c-d /
Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii 113c-115d esp
[17-50]
113d-114a,
[168-182]
115b-c; act in, sc 11
[74-81] 121a /
Othello, act 1, sc 111
[330-337]
212c; act 11, sc III
[204-207]
219a  /  King  Lear,  act  hi,  sc iv 264a-266b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  55b-d;  66c-d; 67a-b; 78a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
1-18  424c429d;  prop 59-APPENDix, in 442b-447b; appendix, xxxii 450c-d;
part v, prop 1-20 452d-458a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[521-643]
243b-246a;  bk xii [80-110] 321a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 104 193a; 412-413
242a; 423 243b

[370b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4a  to  4b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 13
28a-b  /  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 54 192b-c; bk iv, ch
xx,  sect  12  392c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 3 451d 36
Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 239b-243a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 109c 42 Kant:
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  282b-283d;  284d-285a / Practical
Reason,  303b-304b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385c-386b / Judgement,
483d-484b;  586a587a  43  Federalist:  number  15,  65b-c  44  Bosw ell:
Johnson,  116b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 312d313a; part
iv, 321b-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3217-3373] 79a-82a
esp  [3217-3250]  79a-b; [3835-4205] 93b-103a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
318d-319a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 50c-62a 53 James:
Psychology,  706b;  799a-808a;  816a819a 54 Freud: Unconscious, 433b-c /
Ego  and  Id,  702c-d;  715c-716a  / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
721d-722c / War and Death, 760d-761a / Civilization and Its Discontents,
800d-801a  / New Introductory Lectures, 819b-c; 838a-839b; 843d-845b esp
845b   4b.   Conflicting  emotions,  humours,  instincts,  or  habits  8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5
[1048°
21-24]  573c  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 5-9 351b-355a,c / Rhetoric,
bk  ii,  ch 2-1 i 623b-636a passim 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10731120]  58a-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 6-8 54c-55a /
City of God, bk xiv, ch 5-10 379c385d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 23, a 2 724c-725c; q 31, a 8 758b-759a; q 35, aa 3-5 774a-777a;
q  46,  a  i, rep 2 813b-814a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
53,  a  1  19d-21a;  q  71,  aa  1-2  105d-107c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, iv [1-27] HOd-110a 22 Chaucer: Wife of Bath's Prologue
[62706292] 267b
24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 8c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
105c-107a;  350d-354b;  381b-c 26 Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, act hi,
sc  ii  [71-127]  304a-c 27 Shakespeare: Sonnets, cxxix 606a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  hi,  prop 17 401d-402a; prop 51 411c-412a; part iv, def 5
424b;  axiom  424c;  prop i, schol-prop 7 424d426b; prop 9-18 426d-429d;
prop 60 442d443a; appendix, xxi-xxv 449a-c

[371a]
4r  to  Ad  Chapter  65:  OPPOSITION 337 33 Pascal: Pensees, 411 242a 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 258b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, intro, par 17 16c; additions, 13 118c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-429] -HaT^b;
[1064-1117]
26b-28a;
[1322-1706]
32b-41a;
[3217-3250] 79a-b; [3469-3501] 84b-85a
49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  311a-314b passim, esp 311a-b, 312d-313a;
318c-319a  50 Marx: Capital, 293c-294a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi,
120a;  bk  vi,  235a-238c;  247d-249a;  265d-266b; bk vii, 292b-296a; bk
viii,  338a-339c; bk xii, 560a562d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
iv,  95b-100c;  bk  viii,  200c-201c  53  James:  Psychology, 704b-706b;
717a-718a;   720b;  729b;  734b-735b  54  Freud:  Narcissism,  401b-c  /
Instincts,  414d421a,c  /  General  Introduction, 590a-593b; 615b-616c /
Beyond  the Pleasure Principle, 640c; 651d-654c esp 653c-d; 659b-d; 663c
/  Group  Psychology,  677c-678c / Ego and Id, 708d-712a esp 709c-710c /
War  and  Death,  758b; 766a-b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 789c-
791  d  / New Introductory Lectures, 846b-851d 4c. Conflict as the cause
of repression and as a factor in neurotic disorders 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis, 6a-9a esp 7a-c, 8a-b / Hysteria, 65c-d;
81d-84a  esp  82c;  117a / Interpretation of Dreams, 370b; 377b-382a esp
380a-b,  381d-382a  /  Narcissism,  406d-407c  /  Repression 422a-427a,c
passim,  esp  424b-d  /  General  Introduction, 566a-569c esp 568d-569b;
589c591d;  593d-594c;  611a-623b  esp  614c-615a,  616b-c; 623d-624d esp
624c-d;  626d-627b;  633d-635a / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 640c-d /
Group  Psychology,  690a-691c  esp  691a  /  Ego and Id, 704d: 712b-715a
passim  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety 718a-754a,c passim, esp
719b-c,  720a-722d, 724b-725a, 726b-c, 731c-d, 746c-747b, 750a-d 4d. The
conflict  of  loves  and  loyalties,  desires  and duties Old Testament:
Genesis, 4:1-16; 22:1-12 / Judges, 11:30-40 / Ruth, 1 / // Samuel, 11-13
—  (D)  II  Kings,  1 1 -1 3 / / Kings, 11:1-13 (D) /// Kings, 11 :i-i 3
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon,  9:15—  (D)  OT,  BooJ^of  Wisdom, 9:15 /
Susanna,  19-24—  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  13:19-24  New  Testament:  Matthew,
8:21-22; 10:34-37; 12:46-50; 26:41 / Mar\, 14:38 / Romans, 6:12-14; 7-8;
13:13-14 / Galatians, 5:16-26 / Philippians, 1:21-26 / James, 1:12-17; 4
:i ~ 2 / / Peter, 2:11 4 Homer: Iliad, bk vi [369-502] 43d-45a

[371b]
s  5  Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes [1011-1084] 38b-39d / Agamemnon
[184-247]  54a-c  /  Choephoroe  [885-930] 78d-79b 5 Sophocles: Antigone
131a-142d esp
[1-99]
131a-132a,
[162-210] 132c-d,
[441-470] 134d135a
/   Philoctetes   182a-195a,c  esp  [895-1292]  190a-193c  5  Euripides:
Hippolytus
[373-430]
228b-d / Phoenician Maidens
[1 625-1 746] 392b-393c
5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata 583a-599a,c esp
[706-780] 592b-593b, [1072-1188] 596d-597d
6  Herodotus:  History, bk vi, 197a-b; 201d202c; bk vii, 223c-d 7 Plato:
Symposium,  153b-157a  /  Laws,  bk viii, 737a-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk iv
[11211140] 58d-59a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv, ch 2 223d-224b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv
[333-361]  176a-177a  14 Plutarch: Poplicola, 77d-79c / Fabius, 152b-d /
Coriolanus,  189d-191c  /  Timoleon,  196b-  198b  /  Agis, 654c-655a 17
Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  v,  ch  i  IOOc-IOIc  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 24, a 12 499c-500d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, x
[70-93] 68a-b
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv  88b120a  esp stanza 76-92
98b-100b,  stanza  223-229  117b-118b  /  Franklins  Tale  351b366a  esp
[11,767-854] 363b-365a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 240a-c; 245c246a,c
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  200d-205b;  381a-388c;  467b-470a; 486b-488b 26
Shakespeare: Two Gentlemen of Verona, act 11, sc iv
[192-214] 238b; sc
vi 239a-c; act in, sc 1
[4-21]
240c  / Love's Labour's Lost, act iv, sc in 268b-272c / Romeo and Juliet
285a-319a,c  esp prologue 285a-b, act hi, sc 11 [64-131] 303d-304c, sc v
307a-309d / Richard II, act v, sc 11 [85-117] 347b-c; sc in
[23-146] 348a-349c
/  Midsummer-Night'  Dream,  act  i,  sc 1 [22-127] 352d-353d / Much Ado
About Nothing, act ii, sc i
[182-189]
509a-b / Julius Caesar, act hi, sc ii
[11-44]
583d-584a 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida 103a141a,c esp act iv, sc
ii-iv  126d-129d  / Othello, act 1, sc in [175-189] 210d-211a / Macbeth,
act 1, sc vii
[1-28]
289b-c  /  Antony  and  Cleopatra  311a-350d  esp  act i, sc 11 [92-204]
313b-314c  /  Coriolanus,  act iv, sc ii-iii 377d-379a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i,  120b-137d  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 24b 32
Milton: Samson Agonistes [843-870] 358a-b;
[1003-1007] 361b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 104 193a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 77c-78b; 79d-80b;
126c-127c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 259a

[372a]
(4. Opposition or conflict in the psychological and moral order. 4d. The
conflict  of loves and loyalties, desires and duties.) 48 Melville: Moby
Dick,  394a-397a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310d-314c; 318d319a 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 273c-274a,c; bk vn, 291a-292b; 301b-302d;
bk  viii,  327a329c;  bk  ix,  365d-366a;  bk  xi, 490a-493d; 520a-521b;
epilogue i, 669b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 58d-59a; bk
iv, 95b-100a; bk x, 282b-283c; epilogue, 402a-404c 53 James: Psychology,
199b-201b; 293b; 791a798b passim; 824a-b 54 Freud: General Introduction,
452c-d;  467b476a, c passim, esp 472d-475a / Group Psychology, 694c-695b
/   War   and   Death,  757c-759d;  764d-766d  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  780d-781d;  783c-789b esp 783c-784d, 788d789a; 792a-802a,c
passim  / New Introductory Lectures, 853a -b 4e. Conflict in human life:
opposed  types  of  men and modes of life Old Testament: Genesis, 4:1-8;
25-27  /  /  Kings,  8:53—  (D)  III  Kings, 8:53 /Jeremiah, 12:1-3— (D)
Jeremias,  12:1-3  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-15 esp 33:14 (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  33:10-15  esp  33 115 New Testament: Matthew, 5-7; 25 /
Mark,  4:1-20  /  Luke,  8:4-15 / Acts, 16:19-23 / Romans, 6:12-14; 7:8;
13:13-14  / Ephesians I I Thessalonians, 3:11-4:12— (D) / Thessalonians,
3:11-4:11  /  I  Timothy,  5:5-6 / II Timothy, 3 / Hebrews, 11:24-26 / /
Peter,  2:1-5:11  esp  3:12  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk hi [191-224] 20d-21b 5
Euripides:   Ion   [585-647]   287d-288b   /   Hippolytus   225a-236d  5
Aristophanes: Clouds [882-1 114] 499b-502b 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii,
232d-233d;  253b-254a;  bk  viii,  264c;  bk ix, 305d-306a 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  366b367a; bk ii, 396d-397a 7 Plato: Phaedo,
223d-225a  /  Republic,  bk  i,  308b-309b; bk hi, 340b-341a; bk viii-ix
401d-427b  /  Theaetetus,  528c-531a  /  Statesman, 605d-608d / Philebus
609a-639a,c  /  Laws,  bk  v,  690a-c  /  Seventh  Letter,  806a; 806d 9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk i, ch 5 340d-341b; bk 11, ch 3 350a-c; bk vii, ch
14 [ii54b20~3o] 406c; bk x, ch 7-8 431d-434a / Rhetoric, bk 11, ch 12-17
636a-639a  10  Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 12-24 14b-19a,c 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk hi
[59-86]
30d-31b;
[830-1094]
40c-44a,c; bk v
[1105-1135]
75c-d; bk vi
[1-41] 80a-d
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 3 108b-c; ch 29 134d-138a; bk ii, ch
ii 150a-151b; bk

[372b]
in,  ch  10  185d-187a;  ch  15  190a-191a; ch 22 195a-201a; bk iv, ch 6
230b-232c;  ch  8 235b-237d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ix [590-620] 295a-b 14
Plutarch: Themistocles, 99b-c / Marcellus, 254c-256b / Demetrius, 726a-d
17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3 10a11a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv,
ch  18  166d  167b / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch 1-2 246c-247b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  x,  par  39  81b-c  / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 14
663c-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92 488d-491d; q 93, a 4,
rep  i  494c-495b; q 96, aa 3-4 512a-513c; q 99, a 2 520a-d; q 112, a 1,
rep  3  571d-573a;  q  113,  a  2,  rep  3  576d577d;  q 115, a 3, rep 4
588c-589c;  part  i-ii, q 8, a 1, rep 1-2 655b-656a; q 19, a 10, ans and
rep  to  contrary  3  710b-711d;  q  46, a 5, ans and rep 1 815d-816d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 25, a 7 506a-d; q 29, a 3, rep
2 531d-532c; qq 37-42 570c-584d; q 179 606a-607c; part hi suppl, q 81, a
3 966a-c; q 82, a 3, rep 4 971a-972d; q 96, a ii 1063d-1064d 22 Chaucer:
Prologue   159a-174a  /  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par  30-31,  413b-414a  23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xviii,  25a-b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
66d-67a;  84c-d;  part  11,  154a; 155d; conclusion, 279a-c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, 62b-63c; bk hi, 189c-191a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  43d-47a;  91d-98b esp 93b-94a; 103c-104a; 150c-151a; 159a-162c;
167a-169a;   200d-205b;   235a-236a;   278a279c;  281a-284c;  318a-319b;
326b-327d;  406a-408b;  445a-c;  446a-450a;  458b-c;  492b4°3a;  524b-d;
528c-529b 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act i, sc 1
[1-162]
254a-256a  /  Midsummer-Night's  Dream,  act  i,  sc  i [67-78] 353a-b /
Merchant of Venice 406a-433d esp act i, sc i
[41-94]
406d-407b,  sc  in  409c-411b,  act  hi,  sc i [2576] 419a-b / 1st Henry
7F434a-466d  esp act i, sc in 437d-440d / 2nd Henry IV 467a-502d esp act
iv,  sc  iv-v  492d-496d  /  Much Ado About Nothing, act 1, sc hi [1-41]
506d-507a; act 11, sc 1
[345-363] 510d
/ Julius Caesar, act 1, sc 11 569b-572c / As You Like It, act ii, sc 1
[1-20] 603c-d; act iv, sc
1  [1-41] 617a-c 27 Shakespeare: Twelfth Night, act ii, sc hi— iv 8c-lld
/ Hamlet 29a-72a,c esp act ii, sc ii
[575-616] 46b-c, act in, sc
1
[56-90] 47c-d,
sc ii
[58-79] 49c-d,
[360-389] 52d-53a, act
iv, sc iv [32-66] 59a-c / Troilus and Cressida 103a-141a,c esp act i, sc
hi
[17-54] 108b-c,
act 11, sc i-ii 112b-115d / Othello, act i, sc in 208d-213a / Antony and
Cleopatra  311a-350d esp act i, sc iv 315d-316d / Coriolanus, act iv, sc
vii
[27-57] 384c-d
/  Timon  of  Athens,  act  i,  sc  i  [175-293] 395c396d; act iv, sc in
[197-398]  413a-415a  29  Cervantes  :  Don  Quixote esp part i, 49c50b,
113b-115d, 145b-147d, part ii, 228a-d

[373a]
5  to  5b  Chapter 65: OPPOSITION 339 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
18a-b;  20c-d;  69d-76a  passim;  76d-77c  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 42
109d;  aph  53-58  110c-112b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iii-iv 395a-450d
passing.  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [496-505^1223 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  125-183  195b-204b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i, 21b-23a 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 416c-417a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
89d;  191c-194a;  398d 399a; 409d-410a; 593b,d-599a passim; 632b 633d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  290a-291d;  293b-302c; 303d306c passim / Representative
Government, 346c-348c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 39 21d;
part  11,  par 139 48d-49b; part hi, par 256 79d-80a; additions, 128-129
137b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 192a-194a; part 1, 232d-233a;
part  ii,  276d-277a;  280b281b;  part  in,  289d; part iv, 318c-319b 47
Goethe: Faust, prelude
[33]-part
i
[429]
2a-12b;  part  i  [522-601]  15a-16b;  [1064-1117]  26b-28a; [3217-3250]
79a-b;  [3469-3501]  84b85a;  part ii [5199-5290] 128b-130b 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic{csp  39b-40a,  79a  82a,  83a-91a, 122b-125a, 285d-288a, 303a,
317a321a,  370b-371b,  394a-397a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 318d-319a 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto  415a434d  passim 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  15a-b; bk hi, 131c-135c; bk vi, 238c-243d; 244b-c; 249a;
260a-262a;  bk  vii,  284c-285a;  bk  viii,  303d304b; 336b-337d; bk ix,
358b-365c  passim,  esp  362d-363a;  bk  x, 403a-406c; 426a-430b; bk xi,
480a-482b;  515c-521c;  bk  xiii,  577a578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d;  bk  xv,
630c-631a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov esp bk iiv, la-88a, bk vi
146b,d-170d,  bk xi, 337a346a 53 James: Psychology, 199b-204b; 800a-807b
54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams, 246c-247c / General Introduction,
501d-504b;  616b-c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  640b-d / Group
Psychology,  689d-690c  / Ego and Id 697a717a,c / Inhibitions, Symptoms,
and Anxiety, 746c- 74 7a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 771c-802a,c
esp   772a-c,  776b-777a,  780d781d,  783c-784c,  787a-789a,  790a-791d,
796a-c,   799a-802a,c   /   New  Introductory  Lectures,  830a-853b  esp
830b-832c,  837b839b,  849d-853b  5. Conflict in society and history 5a.
Competition  in  commerce  and  the  rivalry  of  factions  in  politics
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk hi, 434c-438b; bk iv, 458d-459c; bk
v,  502d504b;  bk  viii  564a-593a,c  passim,  esp  568d569a, 575c-576c,
577b-d, 579c-583c, 584b585a, 585d-586b, 587a-590c

[373b]
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 6 420c-421a / Politics, bk v, ch 9
[i309b i4-i3ioai2] 511d512b
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 5 554d555a; ch 8, par 5 556c 14 Plutarch:
Solon,  68d;  75c-d  /  Pericles,  126c-d  / Agesilaus, 482a-c / Pompey,
521c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi, 97b-c / Histories, bk 11, 224d-225a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix,  14c-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii,
103d-104a;  121b-d;  148d-149b;  150b-151a; 152b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
42a-b 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c / 2nd Henry VI 33a-68d / 3rd
Henry VI 69a-104d / Richard III 105a-148a,c esp act v, sc v
[15-41]
148a,c  /  Richard  II 320a-351d / 1st Henry IV 434a-466d / 2nd Henry IV
467a502d  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and Cressida, act i, sc in [75-137]
108d-109c  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 9d; bk xix, 142b-143a;
bk xx, 148d-149a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 23c-27b esp 25c-26c;
42a,c;  51a-62a;  bk ii, 142c-d; bk iv, 192c-201d esp 193a-194b, 201b-d;
225d-228a;  269d-271a;  bk  v,  420c-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
652b-655c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 572c-d 43 Federalist: number 7,
42d-43c;   number  10,  49c-51b;  number  43,  141d-142d;  number  50-51
161d-165a  passim;  number  60,  185b187a;  number  70,  212b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  289c-d;  312b-313a  /  Representative  Government,  361b-362b;
366a-370a;  371c-372a; 376a-c; 412b-413a 44 Boswell : ]ohnson, 124d-125d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 289 97b-d; par 304 102a /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  11, 275b-d; 279b; 283b-c; part hi, 285d;
298c-d;  part  iv,  336a-c; 356c-357a; 366d-367a 50 Marx: Capital, 130c;
171d-176a  esp  174b-c;  270c-271c passim; 308d-311a esp 310b; 316d317c;
371c-377a   passim,   esp   372c;  379a383d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  425b  5b.  The class war: the opposition of the rich and the
poor,  the propertied and the propertyless, capital and labor, producers
and  consumers  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [229-245] 260b-c 6 Herodotus:
History, bk vi, 203a-b; bk vii, 243b-c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War,
bk hi, 423a-c; 434c-438c; bk iv, 458d-459c; 463a465c; 467a-b; 480a-c; bk
v,  482d-483a;  502d504b;  bk  vi,  520a-d;  524d-525d;  533a-c; bk viii
564a-593a,c   passim,   esp   568d-569a,  575c576c,  577b-d,  579c-583c,
584b-585a,  585d586b,  587a-590c  7  Plato:  Republic, bk iv, 343c-d; bk
viii, 405c-416a

[374a]
340  THE  GREAT IDEAS (5. Conflict in society and history. 5b. The class
war:  the  opposition  of  the rich and the poor, the propertied and the
propertyless,  capital and labor, producers and consumers.} 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[i265b6-i2]
461a; ch 7 461d-463c; ch 9
[i269*33-b i2]
465c-d;  bk  hi,  ch  10  [1281*11-29]  478d-479a; bk iv, ch 4 489b-491d
passim,  esp  [1290*30b2o] 489b-d, [i29i b5-i3] 490d; ch 11-12 495b497b;
bk v, ch 3 [i303b5~8] 505a; ch 4 [i304b 1-6] 506a; ch 5
[i304b i8]-cH
6
[i305b
22] 506b-507c; ch 7 [1306^2-1307*2] 508c-d; ch 9
[1310*19-25]
512c; ch 10
[i3iob9-i5]
512d-513a; ch 12
[i3i6*39-b22]
519c-d  / Athenian Constitution, ch 2-6 553a-555c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36a-37c  / Solon, 68d71c / Camillus, 117c-121a,c / Coriolanus, 176b-184c
/  Agis  648b,d-656d  /  Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c / Caius Gracchus
681b,d-689a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  97b  /  Histories, bk 11,
224d-225a   23   Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix,  14c-d  27  Shakespeare:
Coriolanus,  act  i, sc i [1-167] 351a-353a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
154b-155b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xi, 77b83c 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy, 381c-382b / Social Contract, bk iv, 429c-d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  28a-d;  55d56a; 61c-62d; bk iv, 239c-240a;
243b,d244a;  279b-288c  esp 287d-288c; bk v, 309a311c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  126d-127c;  144a-d;  501b-502c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
574b-582b   passim   43  Federalist:  number  10,  50b-51b;  number  35,
113b-114a;   number   36,  114c-115a;  number  60,  185b-186a  43  Mill:
Representative    Government,    345c346a;    366d-367b;   369b-370a   /
Utilitarianism,  473b-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 244
77c;  additions,  149  140d-141a / Philosophy of History, intro, 193b-c;
part i, 250ac; part 11, 263b-d; 275b-276a; part hi, 287d288b; 295d-297a;
part  iv,  335a-336c;  356c357a 50 Marx: Capital, 6c-lld passim, esp 7b,
8a-9c;  63b-c;  110c-146c  esp  113c,  115c,  130a-131a, 134c-d, 141b-c,
143a-c,   145a-146c;   209c-215a;  262a;  282d-286a  passim;  294b-295a;
354a368b  esp 354c-355b, 356c-358a, 366a-b, 367c368b; 377c-378d 50 Marx-
Engels:   Communist   Manifesto  415a434d  esp  415b-416d,  419b,d-420a,
422b425c,  428d-429c,  434c-d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
165b-166a 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 882c-d; 884a

[374b]
5b  to 5d 5c. The inevitability of civil between states strife and war 5
Aristophanes:  Peace  526a-541d esp 222] 528b-c, [1061-1126] 538a-539a 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  384c386c; bk in, 436c-438b esp
436d-437d; bk 195vi, 518a-520d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 318d / Laws, bk
i,  640d-641a;  bk  viii,  732b  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch 6
[1265*20-27] 460c; ch 7
[1267*21-36] 463a; bk
vii, ch 6 531b-d; ch ii
[i33ob i-i33i*i8] 535a-d; ch
I4[i333a4i-i334a"]538b-d  14  Plutarch:  Demetrius, 727d 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  hi,  5c;  ch  xiv,  21b;  ch xviii, 25a-b; ch xxi, 32a-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76c-d;  84c-86b; part 11, 114b-c; 116c-d;
157a; 159c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[496-505]
122a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii, 76b-78b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws, bk i, 2d-3a; bk x, 61b,d-62b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324c; 355b-c
/   Socia  Contract,  bk  ii,  403c-404a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,
452a-458a,c   esp   457a   458a,c  /  Judgement,  504a-b;  586a-587a  43
Federalist:  number 3-10 33b-53a passim; NUMBER l6, 68d; NUMBER 23, 85b;
NUMBER  24, 88d-89c passim; number 28, 96c; number 34, HOa-d; number 41,
132c-135a  passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right,  part hi, par 333334
109b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii, 278c-279b 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist Manifesto, 428a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 12d-13a; bk
ix,  342a-344b  53  James:  Psychology,  717a-b 54 Freud: War and Death,
755c-757a  esp 755c; 766c-d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 787a788c
5d. Opposition or strife as a productive principle or source of progress
18 Augustine: City of God 129a-618d esp bk i, pref 129a-d, ch 36 149c-d,
bk ii, ch 2-3 150c-151c, bk iv, ch 33 206c-d, bk v, ch ii26 216c-230a,c,
bk  xi, ch i 322b,d-323a, ch 18 331d-332a, bk xii, ch 21 357a-b, bk xiv,
ch 28-BK xv, ch 1 397a-398c, bk xv, ch 21-22 415b-416c, bk xviii, ch 1-2
472b,  d473d,  bk  xix,  ch 5-7 513d-515c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
lOOa-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 338c-339b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  hi,  170c173b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 633a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 327d-328a,c 43 Mill: Representative Government, 376a-c; 387c-d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 324 107a-d / Philosophy of
History, intro, 178a179c; 187d-188b; 205d-206a,c; fart i, 235d-

[375a]
5d Chapter 65: OPPOSITION 341 CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other considerations
of  the  opposition  of  terms  and  propositions,  or  of opposition in
reasonof   definition,   see  Definition  2a-2b.  6d(3);  Quality  43-4^
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  *"  Proudhon.  The Philosophy of Misery Kant. Prolegomena to Any
Future  Metaphysic,  par  2  Lotze.  Logic,  bk  i, ch 2 (c) (b, c) C S.
Peirce.  Collected  Papers, vol i, par 322-336, Hegel. Science of Logic,
vol  i,  bk  ii,  sect  i,  ch  2  457-461  .  Logic, ch 8, par 1 15-122
Bosanquet.  Logic, vol i, ch 7 Marx. The Poverty of Philosophy . Science
and Philosophy, 5 Croce. Logic as the Science of Pure Concept, part i, "•
sect  i (6) Erigena. De Divisione Naturae, bk i Royce. The Principles of
Logic  Nicolas  of  Cusa.  De  Docta  Ignorantia Bradley. Appearance and
Reality  Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, iv (6), vi .Essays on Truth
and  Reality,  ch 7-9 (9-10), xxvi (6), xlii (6), xlv Sheldon. Strife of
Systems   and   Productive   Duality   John   of  Saint  Thomas.  Cursus
Philosophicus  ThoM.  R.  Cohen.  Reason  and  Nature,  bk  i,  ch 4 (5)
misticus,  Ars  Logica,  part 1, q 7 Ogden. Opposition J. G. Fichte. The
Science  of  Knowledge, part hi, Dewey. Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, ch
10  a-d  B.  Russell.  Introduction  to  Mathematical PhilosW. Hamilton.
Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, ophy, ch 14 vol ii (14)

[375b]
Emerson.  "Compensation,"  in  Essays,  1  . An Inquiry into Meaning and
Truth, ch 20

[376a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  difficulties  which  attend  the consideration of any
great  idea—by  philosophers or others—appear with peculiar force in the
traditional  discussion  of philosophy itself. The word "philosophy" not
only varies in its descriptive significance, now designating one part of
learning,  now  another, and sometimes even an attitude of mind or a way
of  life;  but it also varies as a term of evaluation. It is seldom used
without  expressing  either  praise  or  dispraise  of  the  methods and
accomplishments  of  philosophy,  or of the calling and character of the
philosopher. On the descriptive side the meaning of the word ranges from
a  conception  of  philosophy  which  covers  all  branches ofscientific
knowledge  and  which  contrasts  philosophy  with  poetry, history, and
religion,  to  a  conception of philosophy in which the primary point is
its  contrast to science and its association with poetry and religion as
works of vision, speculation, or belief rather than of knowledge. On its
evaluative  side, the word "philosophy" sometimes eulogizes the love and
search  for truth, the pursuit and even the attainment of wisdom. At the
other  extreme,  it  derogates  vain learning, idle disputation, and the
dogmatism  of  unsupported  opinion.  At  one time, the good name of the
philosopher  stands  in  contrast  to the questionable reputation of the
sophist.  At  another,  "philosopher"  carries almost the same invidious
connotation  as "sophist." The dismissal of philosophy as useless, or at
best  ornamental, in the practical affairs of society is sharply opposed
to  the  vision  of  an  ideal  state  which  can  come  to pass only if
philosophers  are  kings,  or  kings  philosophers.  These shifts in the
meaning of the words "philosophy" and "philosopher" record crises in the
history of western thought. They reflect

[376b]
Chapter  66:  PHILOSOPHY the characteristic formations of our culture in
its  major  epochs.  The  great books of antiquity, for example, seem to
give  no  intimation  of  a  division  between  science  and philosophy.
Particular  bodies  of  knowledge,  such  as physics or mathematics, are
indifferently  regarded as sciences or branches of philosophy. The crown
of  knowledge  is  wisdom,  approached  as one rises in the hierarchy of
knowledge  to the highest science or the first philosophy. Aristotle and
Plato  may  disagree  in  naming or defining the type of knowledge which
deserves to be called wisdom, yet for both it is the ultimate attainment
of  philosophical  inquiry  or  scientific work. The differences between
Plato   and  Aristotle  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Dialectic  and
Metaphysics—  the one using "dialectic" as the name for the supreme form
of  knowledge,  the  other  using  "theology"  to name the summit of the
sciences—do  not affect their agreement that the philosopher is a man of
knowledge,  not  opinion, and that his ultimate goal is wisdom. If there
is any distinction in antiquity between science and philosophy, it seems
to  find  expression in the sense in which Socrates speaks of philosophy
as  the  love  of  wisdom,  implying thereby its pursuit rather than its
attainment. A man would not be called a scientist in a particular field—
mathematics,  let  us  say—  unless  he  actually  had some mathematical
knowledge;  but  a  man  who  is  not  actually  wise  can  be  called a
philosopher  by  virtue  of  his  effort to become wise. Apart from this
point  of  distinction,  the Greeks tend to identify philosophy with the
fundamental  sciences,  which  somehow  yield  speculative  or practical
wisdom.  Considering  the  whole  of  human  learning,  all its arts and
disciplines,  we  see  that  the  things  the  ancients distinguish from
philosophy are poetry, history, and the particular productive 342

[377a]
arts  or  crafts.  Here  again  Plato  and  Aristotle  do  not  make the
distinction  in the same terms. Plato compares the poet unfavorably with
the philosopher in the Republic. The poet is^n4mftator of imitations and
moves  on the level of images and beliefs, whereas the philosopher rises
above  the  imagination  to  the  level of ideas which are the only true
objects  of knowledge. Aristotle, on the other hand, seems to pay poetry
a  compliment  when in the Poetics he says that it is more philosophical
than  history  because  it  deals  with  the  universal  rather than the
particular.  These attitudes toward poetry in relation to philosophy are
somewhat  reversed  by  the  fact that for Plato myth and poetry provide
materials  from which philosophical insights can sometimes be distilled,
whereas  for  Aristotle  sense-experience  is  the source from which, by
induction,  the  principles  or  axioms  of  philosophical knowledge are
obtained. Despite these differences their accord on the supremacy of the
philosopher remains unaffected. More than poetry and history—and all the
knowledge  that  can  be applied productively —philosophy represents the
highest  use  of man's faculties. On this Aristotle and Plato seem to be
agreed,  even  though Aristotle distinguishes the philosophical from the
political   life   and   assigns  the  most  perfect  happiness  to  the
contemplative  activity  of  the  philosopher,  whereas  Plato  — in the
Republic  at  least—  brings  the philosopher back to the shadows of the
cave after he has seen the light of truth itself, so that he can put his
wisdom  to  practice in the government of his less fortunate fellow man.
The  practice of philosophy seems to become, for the Roman writers, more
important than the content of philosophy as a body of doctrine. "What is
that  which is able to conduct a man ?" asks Marcus Aurelius. "One thing
and  only  one,  philosophy." It keeps the inner man "free from violence
and  unharmed,  superior to pains and pleasures, doing nothing without a
purpose."  It  enables  him  to "accept all that happens and all that is
allotted  .  .  . and finally to wait for death with a cheerful mind, as
being  nothing  else  than  a dissolution of the elements of which every
living  being  is  compounded." To Aurelius his imperial court is like a
stepmother to whom one must be dutiful, philos-

[377b]
Chapter 66: PHILOSOPHY 343 ophy like a mother from whom one gains solace
and  help. "Return to philosophy frequently and repose in her," he tells
himself,  so  that  "what thou meetest with in the court appears to thee
tolerable,  and thou tolerable in the The Stoic conception of philosophy
as  a  moral  discipline  and as a consolation creates that sense of the
word  in  which  the  familiar  injunction  to a person in distress— "Be
philosophical"  carries  the  same  meaning  as "Be stoical." Philosophy
provides  only  peace  of  mind,  not  worldly riches or external power.
"Philosophy does not promise to secure to man anything outside himself,"
says  Epictetus.  Nor  does  it  fulfill  its  promise of inner strength
without  stern  resolution to withdraw desire from the goods of fortune.
"Do  you suppose that you can be a philosopher if you do as you do now?"
Epictetus  asks.  "Do  you  suppose that you can eat and drink as you do
now,  and  indulge  your  anger and displeasure just as before ? No, you
must  sit up late, you must work hard, conquer some of your desires. . .
When  you have carefully considered these drawbacks, then come to us . .
.  if  you  are  willing  to  pay this price for peace of mind, freedom,
tranquility."  Do  not  try  to  be  "first  a  philosopher, then a tax-
collector,  then  an  orator,  then  one  of Caesar's procurators. These
callings do not agree . . . You must be busy either with your inner man,
or with things outside, that is, you must choose between the position of
a  philosopher  and  that  of  an  ordinary  man."  There seems to be no
difference  between  the  Stoic  and Epicurean conception of philosophy.
Lucretius praises Epicurus, "thanks to whom sweet solaces of life soothe
the  mind,"  for as soon as his philosophy "begins to proclaim aloud the
nature  of  things, the terrors of the mind fly away." But for Lucretius
philosophy  achieves  this  boon  not merely by curbing the passions and
quieting desires, but also, and primarily, by the truth of its teachings
about  the constitution of the world and the causes of things. Nor is it
merely  that  the  philosophical mind is able "to dwell in the calm high
places,  firmly  embattled  on  the heights by the teaching of the wise,
whence you can look down on others, and see

[378a]
344  THE  GREAT IDEAS them wandering hither and thither, going astray as
they  seek  the way of life." Philosophy provides a more specific remedy
for  the  deepest  of  human  ills  by  "freeing the mind from the close
bondage  of  religion."  Men  fear  the  thunderbolts of the gods, their
intervention  in  the  course  of  nature  and  human  affairs,  and the
punishments of the after-life. Before Epicurus taught them the mortality
of the soul and the atomic determination of all things, "the life of man
lay  foul to see and grovelling upon the earth, crushed by the weight of
religion." His teaching concerning "what can come to be and what cannot,
and  in what way each thing has its power limited," rids the mind of the
terrors  fostered  by  religion.  This  "darkness  of mind must needs be
scattered ... by the outer view and the inner law of nature." Except for
Lucretius,  the  triumph of philosophy over religion does not seem to be
central  to ancient conceptions of philosophy's contribution to the mind
and life of man. In the pagan world, religious belief is either combined
with philosophy to constitute the worship of the gods, which seems to be
Plato's  view  in  the  Laws;  or it represents the superstitions of the
ignorant  as  opposed  to  the  sophistication  of  the educated. Gibbon
describes  the  rift  between religion and philosophy not as a matter of
intellectual  controversy,  but  as  a  division of society into classes
lacking or having the benefits of education— or, what is the same in the
ancient  world,  instruction  in philosophy. But in the mediaeval world,
the distinction between philosophy and religion seems to be essential to
the  consideration of the nature and value of philosophy. The importance
of  the  distinction  appears  alike in the great books of the Christian
tradition  and  in  the  great  writings  of  the  Mohammedan and Jewish
cultures—  in Augustine and Aquinas, Avicenna, Averroes, and Maimonides—
though the problem of philosophy's relation to religion and theology may
be  quite differently solved by each. In all three religious communities
secular  learning and sacred doctrine are set apart by their origin— the
one  from the efforts of human reason, the other from the word of God as
revealed  to the faithful. Even when it is held in highest esteem as the
best achievement of secular learning, phi-

[378b]
losophy  is  for  the most part regarded as inferior to the teachings of
religion.  There  are  those—  the  simply  religious,  the  devout, the
mystical—who  abominate  the  pretensions  of  reason  and the vanity of
philosophers who claim either merit or need for any knowledge beyond the
truths  which  God  himself  has revealed. This position is expressed by
such   Christian   writers  as  Tertullian,  Peter  Damian,  Bernard  of
Clairvaux; or, in the Arabic tradition, by Al-Ghazzali's The Destruction
of  Philosophy.  Al-Ghazzali  is answered by Averroes in his Destruction
ofthe  "Destruction" which asserts the supremacy of philosophy. Averroes
reserves  philosophy  for  men  of  requisite  intellectual strength and
relegates theology and religion to those who must substitute opinion and
imagination  for  reason.  Neither  Augustine  nor Aquinas goes to these
extremes.  They  do  not  dismiss  philosophy  as useless learning or as
dangerous  folly, subversive of the wisdom of faith; but neither do they
admit  the sufficiency of philosophy for knowledge of God— the mysteries
of  the  divine  nature,  God's  providence  and  His  gracious  gift of
salvation  to  man.  Quoting  St. Paul's warning to "beware lest any man
spoil  you through philosophy and vain deceit according to the tradition
of  men  and  the  rudiments of the world, and not according to Christ,"
Augustine  defends  his  praise  of the Platonic philosophy which in his
judgment  comes  nearest  to the Christian faith, on the ground that the
Apostle  also  said  to the gentiles that "that which is known of God is
manifest  among  them,  for  God has manifested it to them." Yet he adds
that  "the  Christian  man who is ignorant of their writings ... is not,
therefore,  ignorant that it is from the one true and supremely good God
that  we  have that nature in which we are made in the image of God, and
that  doctrine  by  which we know Him and ourselves, and that grace with
which,  by  cleaving  to  Him, we are blessed." Philosophy, according to
Augustine,  can  thus  be  dispensed  with  in all the major concerns of
knowledge,  love, or action. But Augustine does not argue that it should
therefore be discarded. "If those who are called philosophers," he says,
"and  especially  the  Platonists,  have  said aught that is true and in
harmony with our faith, we

[379a]
are not only not to shrink from it, but to claim it for our own use from
those  who  have  unlawful  possession of it," even as the spoils of the
Egyptians  belong to the Jews. Though Augustine and Aquinas conceive the
relation  of  faith  and  reason  differently,  they  seem  to  share  a
conception  of philosophy as the handmaiden of theology when faith seeks
understanding. For Aquinas this does not appear to imply lack of dignity
or even the loss of a certain autonomy on the part of philosophy. On the
contrary, so highly does he regard the demonstrations of Aristotle, whom
he  calls "the philosopher," that he opens the Summa Theologica with the
question  "Whether,  besides  the  philosophical  sciences,  any further
doctrine  is  required."  He  answers  that  "it  was  necessary for the
salvation of man that certain truths which exceed human reason should be
made  known  to  him  by divine revelation. Even as regards those truths
about  God which human reason can investigate, it was necessary that man
be  taught  by  a  divine  revelation.  For the truth about God, such as
reason  can know it, would only be known bv a few, and that after a long
time,  and  with  the  admixture  of  many  errors;  whereas man's whole
salvation,  which  is  in God, depends upon the knowledge of this truth.
... It was, therefore, necessary that besides the philosophical sciences
investigated  by  reason,  there  should  be  a sacred science by way of
revelation."  That sacred science is theology— not the theology which is
a  part of philosophy, but the theology whose principles come from faith
rather  than  from  reason.  "There  is no reason," Aquinas writes, "why
those  things which are treated by the philosophical sciences, so far as
they  can  be  known  by  the  light  of natural reason, may not also be
treated  by another science so far as they are known by the light of the
divine  revelation."  On this view, sacred theology may treat of certain
things, such as the mystery of the Trinity, which do not belong properly
to   the  philosopher  because  they  exceed  the  power  of  reason  to
demonstrate;  but  other  matters  concerning  nature,  man, and God may
belong  both to the philosopher and to the theologian, who consider them
according  to their different lights. Since a truth cannot conflict with
a truth,

[379b]
Chapter  66:  PHILOSOPHY  345  though  reason sponsors one and faith the
other,  there  can  be no conflict between philosophy and theology. Some
modern  philosophers, like Bacon and Locke, seem to agree with mediaeval
theologians  about  the subordination of philosophy to theology. But for
the  most part the modern tendency, increasingly evident in the writings
of  Descartes,  Spinoza, Kant, and Hegel, is to insist upon the complete
autonomy  of  philosophy. Hegel, for example, challenges "the imputation
against  Philosophy  of  being  shy  of noticing religious truths, or of
having  occasion  to  be  so," and the insinuated "suspicion that it has
anything  but a clear conscience in the presence of these truths. So far
from  this  being  the case," Hegel remarks, "the fact is that in recent
times  Philosophy  has  been  obliged  to  defend the domain of religion
against the attacks of several theological systems." The diverse aspects
of  the  problem  of  the  relation  of  philosophy  to theology, and of
theology  to  faith,  are  discussed  in  the  chapters  on Metaphysics,
Theology,  and Religion. The problem which is more characteristic of the
modern  consideration of philosophy concerns its relation to science. To
state  the  problem  some  distinction between the two is necessary, and
making  this  distinction  represents a novel departure, both in thought
and  language.  As  we  have  seen,  philosophy  and  science are almost
identified  throughout  the  ancient and mediaeval tradition. Insofar as
the  word  "science"  means knowledge rather than opinion, the result of
philosophical  inquiry  is science, and philosophy as a whole is divided
into  a  number  of  sciences. There may be, as ancient writings seem to
suggest,  sciences  which  aim  at  useful  productions  rather  than at
speculative or practical wisdom, and fall below the level of philosophy;
or  there  may  be, as some Christian theologians hold, a sacred science
superior  in  its  wisdom  to  all the philosophical sciences. But these
exceptions  to the identity of philosophy and science merely confirm the
point that in the ancient or mediaeval view philosophy is scientific and
consists  of  sciences,  even though there may be sciences which are not
philosophical. This use of the words "science" and "philos-

[380a]
346  THE  GREAT IDEAS ophy" persists well into modern times. Hobbes, for
example, presents his classification of the types of knowledge under the
heading  "science,  that  is,  Knowledge  of Consequences, which is also
called Philosophy." Bacon proposes to "divide sciences into theology and
philosophy."   Descartes  uses  the  words  "science"  and  "philosophy"
interchangeably.  "Among the different branches of Philosophy," he says,
"I  had  in  my  younger  days to a certain extent studied Logic; and in
those  of  Mathematics,  Geometrical Analysis and Algebra— three arts or
sciences which seemed as though they ought to contribute to the design I
had  in  view." In the Prefatory Letter to his Principles of Philosophy,
he   likens  "philosophy  as  a  whole"  to  "a  tree  whose  roots  are
metaphysics,  whose  trunk  is  physics, and whose branches, which issue
from  this trunk, are all the other sciences. These reduce themselves to
three  principal  ones,  viz., medicine, mechanics, and morals." Even as
near  the  end  of the eighteenth century as Hume, the word "philosophy"
continues  to be the general name for the particular sciences. It covers
the experimental study of natural phenomena as well as what are for Hume
the  non-experimental  sciences  of  mathematics  and psychology. But it
excludes  divinity  or  theology,  insofar  as  "its best and most solid
foundation   isfaith  and  divine  revelation";  metaphysics,  which  is
"nothing  but sophistry and illusion"; and all inquiries into particular
as  opposed  to  general facts, such as "history, chronology, geography,
and  astronomy." Nor is this use of terms confined to what readers today
would call books of philosophy. The authors of the books which are today
regarded  as  among  the foundations of modern science— Galileo, Newton,
Huygens  and,  in the eighteenth century, Lavoisier and Fourier refer to
themselves as philosophers and to the science in which they are engaged,
e.g., mathematics, mechanics, physics, chemistry, as parts or aspects of
natural  philosophy. They do, however, indicate an awareness of how they
differ from ancient and mediaeval scientists (who also called themselves
philosophers)  by  calling  their own work "experimental philosophy." In
this  phrase  lies  the  root  of the distinction between philosophy and
science as that distinction is generally understood by writers since the

[380b]
.  eighteenth  century.  The  word  "experimental" applied to philosophy
signifies  a radical difference in the method of inquiry and even in the
objects  to  be  investigated,  for certain objects can be known only by
experimental or empirical research. Kant appears to be the first (in the
great   books   at  least)  to  make  a  sharp  separation  between  the
investigation  of  either nature or mind by what he calls "empirical" as
opposed to "rational" methods. He still uses the name "science" for both
sorts  of  investigation, but he appears to restrict "philosophy" to the
latter—  the  pure,  the  a  priori,  the  rational  sciences. Two other
innovations  must  be  noted.  Though  Kant  regards  it  as  a rational
discipline,   he  excludes  mathematics  entirely  from  philosophy  and
criticizes  its  misleading  influence  upon those philosophers who have
tried  to  imitate  mathematical  thought.  And though he sometimes uses
"metaphysic"  narrowly  to  designate  the  critical examination of pure
reason  itself,  he also says that "this name of metaphysic may be given
to  the  whole  of pure philosophy . . excluding all that belongs to the
empirical  and  the mathematical employment of reason." Considering that
it  has  only  two  objects,  nature and freedom— that which is and that
which  ought  to be—Kant divides philosophy into the speculative and the
practical use of pure reason, which gives rise to a metaphysic of nature
and  a  metaphysic  of morals. "Metaphysic, therefore, that of nature as
well   as  that  of  morals,  and  particularly  the  criticism  of  our
adventurous  reason  which forms the introduction to and preparation for
it, constitute together," Kant writes, "what may be termed philosophy in
the true sense of the word. Its only goal is wisdom, and the path to it,
science."   Kant's   innovations  in  vocabulary  plainly  announce  the
separation  of  philosophy  from  mathematics  and experimental science,
which  is  only intimated by earlier modern writers. But Kant still uses
the  word  "science"  for  both  the  philosophical  and  the  empirical
sciences.  The  final  step  is taken in the nineteenth century when the
word  "science"  is  restricted  to mathematics and to such knowledge of
nature,  man,  and  society  as  can  be  obtained  by  the  methods  of
experimental or empirical research. William James, for example, stresses
the fact that he is trying to expound psychology as one of the natural

[381a]
sciences,  and  to  that end he tries to separate the problems which are
capable   of   empirical   investigation  from  those  which  belong  to
philosophical  speculation. For Freud that separation is an accomplished
fact,  and  one which leaves to philosophy no problem that can be solved
by  science.  According  to  Freud,  "it is inadmissible to declare that
science  is  one field of human intellectual activity, and that religion
and philosophy are others, at least as valuable, and that science has no
business to interfere with the other two." On the contrary, Freud thinks
it is right for scientific research to look "on the whole field of human
activity  as its own," and to criticize the unscientific formulations of
philosophy. The trouble with philosophy is that "it behaves itself as if
it  were  a  science . . . but it parts company with science, in that it
clings  to  the  illusion  that  it  can produce a complete and coherent
picture  of the universe." It is this illusion which science continually
punctures,  since,  in Freud's opinion, "that picture must needs fall to
pieces  with  every  new  advance  in  our  knowledge." When science and
philosophy  are  set  apart at last, it is possible to make sense of the
typically  modern  questions concerning philosophy. How does it stand in
relation  to science? Does it consist of verifiable knowledge comparable
to  that  which  can  be obtained in the natural and social sciences? If
not,  what  is  the  standard of truth in philosophy? Does it consist of
definitions   and   postulates   leading   to   rigorously  demonstrated
conclusions  in  a  manner  comparable to mathematics, especially in its
modern  construction?  If  not,  must  it  not be regarded as opinion or
speculation  rather  than  as  knowledge  in  any  strict  sense ? Or if
philosophical  thought  can  be  compared with mathematics, does not the
diversity   of   definitions   and   postulates  employed  by  different
philosophers  reduce  philosophy  to a collection of competing "systems"
rather than a single discipline in which philosophers work cooperatively
as  do  scientists  and mathematicians ? However the foregoing questions
are  answered,  there  are  still  others. Does philosophy have distinct
branches,  divided  according to their objects of study like the natural
sciences,

[381b]
Chapter  66:  PHILOSOPHY  347  or  is  philosophy  to be identified with
metaphysics?  If,  in  addition to metaphysics, there is a philosophy of
nature,  how  are its principles and conclusions related to the findings
of  the  natural  sciences  which  appear  to  study  the  same object ?
Similarly, if psychology is a branch of philosophy, how is it related to
experimental  or clinical psychology ? What is the relation of moral and
political  philosophy  to  the  empirical social sciences concerned with
describing,   not  judging  or  regulating,  human  conduct  and  social
institutions?  Is  economics  a  science  or  is  it  a  branch of moral
philosophy; or, if it is both, how are the two related ? What is the use
of philosophy, especially in its theoretic branches, if, unlike science,
it  cannot  be  applied  to  the  mastery  of  physical  nature  and the
production of utilities, whether bridges or bombs? What, finally, at the
end  of  its  long  history,  does philosophy come to if, in such marked
contrast  to  the  continuously accelerated progress of the sciences, it
cannot  claim  any  signal advance on which all philosophers are agreed,
but  instead must admit that most of its problems seem to be perennially
debated, now as in every preceding century ? Some of these questions, as
well  as  certain answers to them, are considered in other chapters: the
comparison   of   empirical   research   and  philosophical  thought  as
constituting  different types of science, in the chapter on Science; the
distinction and relation between natural philosophy and natural science,
in  the  chapter  on  Physics;  the difference between philosophical and
scientific   psychology,   in  the  chapter  on  Man;  the  function  of
definitions,  hypotheses,  postulates,  or  axioms in the foundation and
method  of  philosophy  and  science,  in  the chapter on Principle; the
difference  between  the  practical  use  of philosophy in the sphere of
morals  and  the use of science in the sphere of the productive arts, in
the  chapter  on  Knowledge;  the  accumulation  of  truth  as measuring
advances  in  science and philosophy, in the chapter on ProgHere we must
observe  that  such  answers  to  these questions as tend to subordinate
philosophy  to  science  originate  exclusively with modern views of the
nature  of knowledge, of the criteria of truth, and of the capacities of
the

[382a]
348  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  human mind, especially the power of reason. Even
those  modern  authors  who write at a time when the words "science" and
"philosophy"  are,  for  the  most  part,  interchangeable  tend in this
direction.  The  points  they  make about the nature, aim, and method of
what  they  call  either science or philosophy have the effect of giving
the  status of knowledge only to mathematics and the empirical sciences,
and  of  reducing  philosophical  speculation  to the status of opinion.
Bacon's  insistence,  for example, that genuine knowledge gives us power
over  nature  and  generates  productions,  seems  to  have this effect,
certainly upon any part of traditional philosophy which cannot meet this
test.  Hume's insistence upon experimental reasoning with respect to all
matters of fact seems to eliminate not only metaphysics, but any science
or  philosophy  of  nature  which is not experimental.The methodological
reforms  in philosophy which these philosophers and others, like Hobbes,
Descartes,  and  Spinoza,  propose  seem  to  be reforms which eliminate
whatever  in  philosophy  cannot become either experimental science or a
quasi-mathematical  system  of  thought.  Among  the modern reformers of
philosophy,  Kant  represents  the  exception. By his critical method he
hopes to establish philosophy above and independent of all the empirical
sciences;  and  to  institute  metaphysics  as  a  science which neither
imitates mathematics nor accepts it as an equal in the scale of reason's
accomplishments.  Yet  even  Kant  seems  to betray the typically modern
attitude   toward  philosophy.  The  intellectual  revolution  which  he
projects  as  the philosophical parallel to the Copernican revolution in
astronomy  is  motivated  by  his  desire  to  secure  for  philosophy a
stability  and development comparable to that enjoyed by mathematics and
the empirical sciences. "In the progress of society," writes Adam Smith,
"philosophy  or  speculation  becomes,  like every other employment, the
principal  or  sole  trade  and  occupation  of  a  particular  class of
citizens. Like every other employment too, it is subdivided into a great
number  of  different  branches,  each  of which affords occupation to a
peculiar  tribe  or  class  of  philosophers;  and  this  subdivision of
employment in philosophy, as

[382b]
well as in every other business, improves dexterity and saves time. Each
individual  becomes more expert in his own peculiar branch, more work is
done  upon  the  whole,  and  the  quantity  of  science is considerably
increased  by  it."  Despite  his use of the word "philosophy," it seems
likely that Adam Smith is describing the division of labor in scientific
research  and  the  specialization  of scientists. Though philosophy has
divisions,  and  though  the  distinction  and  order  of  its parts are
discussed  by  the  great philosophers, their own work exhibits a spirit
opposed  to  specialization.  In fact, one measure of the greatness of a
philosopher  is  the  comprehensiveness  of  his  thought,  the range of
subject matters and the scope of the problems with which he deals. Those
philosophers,  like  Aristotle,  Bacon,  Hobbes, or Kant, who show great
interest  in  the  divisions  of philosophy seem to be largely concerned
with  distinguishing  the different objects of philosophical thought and
differentiating  the concepts or principles peculiarly relevant to each.
Other  chapters deal with subject matters, sciences, or disciplines that
have been regarded, by one philosopher or another, as major divisions of
philosophy,  e.g., Logic, Metaphysics, Theology, Dialectic, Mathematics,
Physics,  and  psychology  (in  the  chapter  on  Man). But one group of
sciences  or  disciplines is not discussed elsewhere and must be briefly
noted  here.  Traditionally within the province of the philosopher, they
are sometimes expanded to his whole domain. They come nearer to what the
ordinary man means by "philosophy" when he speaks of having a philosophy
of   life  an  over-all  yet  personal  view  of  the  human  situation,
illuminated  by  a  sense of the values which should direct conduct. The
disciplines in question are traditionally called ethics and politics, or
moral  philosophy.  Socrates  is  credited  with having accomplished the
first  great  reform  in  philosophy when he turned to such subjects and
away  from  the  inquiries  of his predecessors. "I do not mean to speak
disparagingly  of  the  students  of natural philosophy," he says at his
trial,  "but the simple truth is, O Athenians, that I have nothing to do
with  physical  speculations."  Subsequently he tells his judges that he
"will never cease from the practice and teaching of philosophy"— re-

[383a]
proaching  those  whom  he questions with "under-valuing the greater and
over-valuing  the  less,"  enjoining  them  not to take thought of their
persons  or  their  properties, "but frcst-and chiefly to care about the
greatest improvement of the soul." He will not foreswear philosophy even
to  save  his life. "I cannot hold my tongue," he says. "Daily discourse
about  virtue ... is the greatest good of man," for "the unexamined life
is not worth living." The conception of ethics and politics and of their
relation  to  other  branches  of  philosophy  seems  to depend upon the
acceptance  or  rejection  of a fundamental principle in the division of
philosophy.  Aristotle  and  Kant, for example, divide the philosophical
sciences  into  the theoretic or speculative and the practical or moral,
according  as they consider what is (the nature and causes of things) or
what  ought  to  be  (the  objects of choice, the ends and means, in the
conduct  of  life  and  the  institutions of society). According to this
conception  of  the  practical,  the  practical  sciences are ethics and
politics,  and  with  them  economics  and  jurisprudence; or in another
statement  of  the same divisions, the parts of practical philosophy are
moral  philosophy,  the philosophy of right, the philosophy of law. They
are all conceived as normative, prescriptive, or regulative disciplines,
determining  what  is  good  and  evil or right and wrong, and directing
action  in  the  sphere of human freedom. Hobbes proceeds on a different
principle. He separates natural philosophy (including philosophia prima)
from  civil  philosophy,  or  the  theory  of  the  body politic. But he
includes  ethics  and  poetics  under  natural philosophy as part of the
theoretic  study  of human nature. The distinction between the theoretic
and  the  practical  seems to be here ignored, or even implicitly denied
insofar  as  Hobbes  would  reject  the  basis  of  the distinction— the
difference  between  natural  necessity  and  human  freedom.  Necessity
governs the motions of the human body and of the body politic as much as
it  does  the  bodies studied by the physicist, and so ethics, politics,
and physics are alike sciences of determined consequences. Still another
view  seems  to  be  taken by Bacon who separates natural from human and
civil philosophy and divides natural philosophy into

[383b]
Chapter  66:  PHILOSOPHY  349 two main speculative branches (physics and
metaphysics)  and  two  main  practical  branches (mechanics and magic).
Psychology,  logic,  and ethics belong to human philosophy; politics and
jurisprudence  to  civil  philosophy.  But  with respect to all of these
Bacon  does  not  apply  the distinction between the speculative and the
practical  which  seems  to  him  of  the  utmost  importance in natural
philosophy.  The reason seems to be that Bacon uses the word "practical"
to  mean  the  production  of  effects  resulting  from the knowledge of
causes,  rather  than  actions  to  be performed by men as the result of
choicer  His practical sciences correspond, therefore, to what Aristotle
conceives  as  arts,  or  productive  sciences—  the sphere of making or
poetics  in  general—  not to what Aristotle means by the practical, the
sphere  of  doing rather than of making, of prudence rather than of art.
These  matters  are  discussed  in  the  chapters on Art and Poetry. The
problem  of  the  relation  of  science  to  art becomes, if restated in
Bacon's  terms,  the  problem  of  the  relation of the theoretic to the
practical  (i.e.,  productive)  sciences.  But  in  terms  of Aristotle,
Aquinas,  or  Kant,  the problem of the relation between the speculative
and practical branches of philosophy becomes the quite different problem
of  how knowledge of being or nature relates to knowledge of what should
be  sought  or  ought to be done. In Hobbes' terms the problem shifts in
still  another  direction to the consideration of the bearing of physics
upon  psychology,  ethics,  and  politics.  How, on any of the foregoing
views, do speculations concerning the nature of things affect the theory
of  human  life  and  society,  or the practical principles by which man
tries to lead a good life and organize a good society ? What relation do
the truths of physics and metaphysics, or the major philosophical issues
in  these  fields,  bear to the truths and issues in psychology, ethics,
and  politics?  Or, as William James puts the question, must not any man
who  has  a  philosophy  of  life  also  have,  implicitly  at  least, a
metaphysics?  Upon  the  answers  to  such questions depends the varying
esteem  in  which  philosophy  is  held  in the great periods of western
culture.   Unlike  supernatural  religion  and  empirical  science,  and
especially when separated from them, philoso-

[384a]
350  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  la.  The  relation  of philosophy to theology or
religion  \c.  The  relation  of philosophy to experimental or empirical
science  2. The divisions of philosophy 3. The method of philosophy 3<z.
The  foundations  of philosophy in experience and common sense stration,
reasoning,  analysis,  and  synthesis 4. The uses of philosophy: diverse
conceptions of its aim, function, and value 4*7. The philosophic mode of
life:  contemplation and happiness 4^. Philosophy as a moral discipline:
the  consolation  of  philosophy tion, perpetual controversy drawal from
the affairs of men and the marketplace

[384b]
phy  does  not  promise eternal salvation or earthly ning of philosophy,
are  of  its  essence—  the  love prosperity. The uses of philosophy, as
comof  wisdom,  and  through it the search for a pared with religion and
science,  must  somehow  human  wisdom  which shall be at once speculabe
assessed  in  the terms which, from the begintive and practical. OUTLINE
OF  TOPICS  PAGE  i.  The definition and scope of philosophy 351 lb. The
relation of philosophy to mathematics 352 id. The relation of philosophy
to  myth,  poetry, and history 353 ia. The distinction between theoretic
or  speculative and practical or moral philosic. The nature and branches
of   practical   or   moral  philosophy:  economics,  ethics,  politics,
jurisprudence;  poetics  or  the theory of art 354 3#. The philosopher's
appeal  to  first principles and to definitions 355 3c. The processes of
philosophical  thought:  induction,  intuition, definition, demon3^. The
methodological  reformation  of  philosophy  356  4c  The social role of
philosophy : the philosopher and the statesman; the philosopher king 357
6.  Praise  and  dispraise  of  the philosopher and his work 358 6a. The
philosopher as a man of science or wisdom: the love and search for truth
6b.  The  philosopher  and  the man of opinion: sophistry and dogmatism,
idle  disputa6c.  The  philosopher  as  a  man  of reason: the limits of
reason;   its  supplementation  by  experience  or  faith  359  6d.  The
philosopher  as  a  man  of  theory or vision: neglect of the practical;
withtheir thought 360

[385a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a- 119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand side of thepage. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b 164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1. The definition and scope of
philosophy 7 Plato: Lysis, 20a / Euthydemus, 74b- 76b / Republic, bk 11,
320b;  bk  v,  368c-373c;  bk  vivii, 383d-398c / Sophist, 570a-574c esp
571a-c / Philebus, 633a-635a esp 634b-635a / Seventh Letter, 809a-811a 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i
[184*10-16]
259a; ch 9
[i92a33-b2] 268c-d; bk
ii,  ch  2  270a-271a  esp  [i94b9-i5]  271a;  ch  7 [198*2231] 275b-c /
Metaphysics,  bk  i-vi 499a-550a,c esp bk 1, ch 3 501c-502d, bk ii, ch i
511b,  d512b,  bk in, ch 1-2 513b,d-516d, bk iv, ch 1-3 522a-525a, bk vi
547b,d-550a,c; bk xi, ch 1 587a-588a; ch 3-4 589a-590a; ch 7-8 592b-593d
/ Soul, bk i, ch i
[403b io-i7]
632d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6 389d 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  ii  150a151b;  ch  17  158d-161a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  8  14d15a / City of God, bk viii, ch i 264b,
d265b  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 60a-b; 65c-d; 71c-d; 72a-d; part iv, 267a-272b

[385b]
Chapter  66:  PHILOSOPHY 351 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 39d-41b;
42a-46a; 48d-49b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 54 110c-d; aph 66 114d-115c;
aph  80  120a-b;  aph  95  126b-c;  aph 107 128c; bk ii, aph 9 140b-c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  i-m  la-5a  /  Discourse, part 11, 47a-48b; part iv,
51b-52a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i 451a455b passim; sect viii,
div  81  487a;  sect  xii,  div  130-132  508c-509d  39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations, bk i, 5d-6a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-13d; 211c-218d; 243c250a,c
esp  245a-246a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253ac; 254bc; 264b-d;
270c-d  /  Practical  Reason,  337a-338c / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  365a-366a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 388a-c / Judgement,
463a-467a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, lb-7d; additions, 3 116a
/   Philosophy   of  History,  Intro,  156c-158a;  184d-185d  53  James:
Psychology,  641a-b;  758a 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 874a la.
The relation of philosophy to theology or religion 7 Plato: Republic, bk
iv, 345d-346a / Theaetetus, 528c-531a / Laws, bk xii, 797c-798b

[386a]
(1.  The  definition  and  scope  of  philosophy,  la.  The  relation of
philosophy to theology or religion.) 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch i
[284b i~5]
376a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch 2 [982b28-983 au] 501a-b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk i
[62-79]
ld-2a;  bk  hi  [1-93]  30a-31b; bk v [1-90] 61a62b 14 Plutarch: Nicias,
435b-d  16  Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
viii,  ch  1-12  264b,d-273a;  bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c;  bk  xviii, ch 37
493c-494a; ch 41 495b-496c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40 655b-656a;
ch  42  656c-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a-10c esp a i
3b-4a,  aa 4-6 5a-7a, a 8 7c-8d; q 2, a 2, rep 1 lld-12c; q 12, aa 12-13
60d62b;  q 14, a 6, rep 2 80a-81c; q 19, a 5, rep 2 112d-113c; q 32, a 1
175d-178a;  q  39,  aa  7-8  209a-213a;  q  46, a 2 253a-255a; q 84, a 5
446c-447c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 71, A 6, REP 5 HOb-
110b;  PART II-II, Q 2, AA 3-4 392d-394b; q 19, a 7, ans 469d-470c; q 45
598c-603c  esp  aa  3-4 600c-601c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65b-66c;
70c;  83b;  part  11, 137bc; 160b; 163a-b; part hi, 165b; part iv, 247d;
260bc;  267a-c;  269b271c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 89c-d; 155a-c; 208d209c;
212a-d;   238c-239c;   267c-268a;  271b273b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  4c;  12c13c; 16a-b; 19d-20a; 33c-d; 39d-48d esp 41b-d; 55b-d;
95d-101d esp 96c-97c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c; aph 89 124a-d
31  Descartes:  Rules, in, 4d-5a / Discourse, part 1, 43c / Meditations,
69a-71a,c   /   Objections   and  Replies,  125b-126a;  127d;  162c165d;
168b-169a;  283d-284d  esp  284d  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 77 186a; 185-195
205a210b; 219 212a; 226 212b-213a; 243-253 218a-220a; 265-290 221b-225a;
543  266a;  557-567  272b-273b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect xi
497b503c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b-337a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 12d-13b; 159a-d; 186a-d; 200d-201a; 204c-206d passim; 307b309d
esp 308b-309b; 670b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 119a-c; 176a-c; 177b192d esp
190a-192d; 236b-240b esp 239a-b / Practical Reason, 346b-347a; 349b-353a
/  Judgement,  578a-b; 588a-613a,c esp 593d599d, 604d-606d, 607d-609b 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism,  455a-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
158c160b; 177c-d; part hi, 308c-309d; part iv, 368d-369a,c 54 Freud: New
Introductory Lectures, 875b

[386b]
352  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  la  to  \c  lb.  The  relation  of philosophy to
mathematics  7  Plato:  Euthydemus, 75b / Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; bk
vii,  391b-398c  /  Philebus,  633a-635a  /  Laws,  bk  vii, 728b-730d 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 2 270a-271a esp
[i94b9-i5J 271a / Heavens, bk
i, ch 10 [279b 32-28oau] 371b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992
a  i5~2o] 513d; bk iv, ch i 522a; bk vi, ch 1 547b, da24-b 9J 510c-d; bk
ii, ch 3
[995
548c; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i &29]-ch
4
[io6i b34J
589c-590a; ch 7 592b-593a; bk xii, ch 8
[io73b3-7] 603d / Soul, bk
i, ch i
[403b io19] 632d
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  8  [1142^2-19]  391b 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-813d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 58a-b;
59bc;  part  iv,  267a-b;  268c-269b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
16a-b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph 80 120a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, 11
2a-3b;  iv  5a-7d; xiv, 29a-b / Discourse, part ii, 46c-47d / Objections
and  Replies,  169c-170a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 370b-c 34
Newton: Principles, la-2a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 48
470d-471c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c;  17d-19a;  211c218d / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 376c-d / Judgement, 551a-552c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 445b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 695b-c 53
James:   Psychology,   882a-883a  Ic.  The  relation  of  philosophy  to
experimental or empirical science 7 Plato: Phaedo, 240d-242c / Republic,
bk  vii, 391b-398c 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 13 [293^ 5-31] 384d /
Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316^-14] 411c-d
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par 20 7b-d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
pref,  lab;  bk  ii,  27bc  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, third day,
202d-203a;  214d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a-b; 42a43d;
46c-47c  / Novum Organum, pref 105a106d; bk 1, aph 15 108a; aph 51 111c;
aph  54 110c-d; aph 62-64 113b-114b; aph 66 114d115c; aph 80 120a-b; aph
95  126bc;  aph  107  128c; bk 11, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  i,  43d;  part  vi, 61bc; 66d 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk hi,
269a;  rule  iii-iv 270b-271b; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk hi,
542a-543b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  5a-13d  esp  5c-6c  /  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-d  / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-d /
Judgement,  561c-562a,c;  578a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
182d183c

[387a]
id  to lb Chapter 66: PHILOSOPHY 353 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
ii,  694c-d 53 James: Psychology, xiiib-xiva; 882a-886a passim 54 Freud:
Narcissism,  400d-401a  /  Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 722a-b /
Neu^Fntroductory  Lectures,  873d-875a esp 874d-875a Id. The relation of
philosophy  to  myth,  poetry,  and history 7 Plato: Protagoras, 57a-c /
Phaedrus,  122d123a;  138c-140d / Ion 142a-148a,c / Republic, bk ii-iii,
319c-334b;  bk x, 427c-434c esp 434a-c / Timaeus, 443b-447d / Statesman,
586c-589d  9  Aristotle:  Poetics,  ch  9 [i45i a36-b u] 686a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 67b-c; 71c-d; 72a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 41b-42a 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 32d; 38d39b; 44c 31 Descartes: Rules,
in,  3c-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 5, 452d-453a; sect
viii,  div  65,  479bc  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  333d-334a; 348a,c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  345b-346b; 544c545c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  40b-41a 42 Kant: judgement, 575b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
intro,  par  3  10a-  12c  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 156c190b esp
177c-d,  184d-185d;  part  iv,  368d369a,c  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  690a-b  54  Freud:  Interpretation of Dreams, 239c- 240a;
246b-  248c  passim  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 796c 2. The
divisions  of  philosophy  2a.  The  distinction  between  theoretic  or
speculative  and  practical or moral philosophy: the distinction between
natural and civil philosophy 7 Plato: Charmides, 7d-8a / Statesman, 581a
8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 14
[i05b i9-29]
149c;  bk  vi,  ch  6 [145*12-18] 198d /Heavens, bk in, ch 7 [306*14-18]
397b-c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  1,  ch  1-2 499a-501c esp ch 2 [982a3o-b27]
500c-501a;  bk  ii,  ch  i [993 b i9~3i] 512a-b; bk iv, ch 4 [ioo8b2~32]
527d-528b; bk vi, ch i
[i025b i8-28] 547d; bk xi, ch 7 [1064*10-19]
592b-c;  bk  xii,  ch  9  [io74b35~io75a2]  605c  9  Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[639b32-640aio] 162a-b
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; ch 7 [io98a20-b8] 343c-344a; bk 11, ch 2
[uo3b26-ii04a  9]  349b-c;  ch  4  350d351b;  bk  in, ch 3 [ui2a3o-b i2]
358b-c; bk vi, ch 1-2 387a-388b; ch 5 389a-c; ch 7-8 390a-391c; ch 12-13
393b-394d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 26 131b132b; bk in, ch 6
181d-182b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a

[387b]
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk viii, ch 4 266d267c; bk xi, ch 25 336b-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 4 5a-b; a 5, ans 5c-6a; q
14,  a  16  90b-91b; q 79, a 11 424d-425b; q 84, a 8, ans 450b451b; part
1—11,  q  1,  a  6,  rep  2 614a-c; q 3, a 5 626b-627a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, a 3, ans 31a-32b; q 57, a 5, rep 3 39a-40a;
q  84,  a 1, rep 3 174b-175a; q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d; part hi, q ii, a
i, rep 3 772b773a; q 13, a i, rep 3 780a-781b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  72a-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 16d-17a; 40a-c; 42a-c;
55b-d;  65d-66a;  86b-c  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 3 107b; bk ii, aph 9
140b-c  31 Descartes: Rules, 1 la-2a / Discourse, part hi, 48b-49b; part
vi,  61b-c  /  Objections  and Replies, 126a-b; 162d; 206c-207a; 215a-b;
237b-c;  243c-d  35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect 5-6 94b-95a;
bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  i  103d-104a;  sect  3-4 104b-105a; bk iv, ch xxi
394d395a,c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i 451a455b; sect viii, div
65,  479b-c;  sect  xi,  div  104  498b-c  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d;
190c-191a;   234c235a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-d;
260d-261d;  266c-d;  271a-c;  283d284d  /  Practical  Reason, 291a-297c;
307d-314d  esp  310a-b;  319c-321b;  329a-337a,c  esp  329b-d  /  Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388a-d  /  Judgement,  461a-475d esp 463a-467a,
474b475d; 578a-b; 596c-598b 43 Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445a-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, pref, 5c-6a;
additions,  i 115a-d 53 James: Psychology, 865b-866a 2b. The branches of
speculative  philosophy:  the  divisions  of natural philosophy 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  vii,  388a-398c  esp  396d-398c  /  Philebus, 634b-635b 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 14
[io5b i9-29]
149c / Physics, bk i, ch 9 [i92a33~b2] 268c-d; bk 11, ch 2 270a-271a esp
[i94b9-i5] 271a; ch 7 [198^2-31] 275b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch i
[298b i3-24] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 9
[992
a29-b9] 510c-d; bk iv, ch 2
[1004*2-9]
523a; bk vi, ch i 547b,d-548c; bk vii, ch ii
[i037ai3-2i] 560d; bk xi, ch 3 [106^29]-
ch 4
[io6i b34] 589c-590a; ch 7 592b-593a;
bk xii, ch i [io69a30-b2] 598b-c; ch 8 [io73b 1-7] 603d / Soul, bk 1, ch
1 [403b io-i7] 632d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[641 s
33-b  io]  164b-c 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812b-813d 16 Ptolemy:
Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4-6 lla-12b

[388a]
354  The  divisions  of  philosophy. 2b. The branches (2. of speculative
philosophy: the divisions of natural philosophy. ) 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d267c;  bk xr, ch 25 336b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q i, a i, rep 2 3b-4a; q 85, a i, rep 2 451c-453c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  71c-d;  72a-d;  part  iv, 269bc 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 15d; 39d48d esp 40a-41b, 42ac, 43a-45a; 55b-61d
esp  56c-58c, 59c-60c / Novum Organum, bk 11, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes:
Rules,  1-11  la-3b; iv 5a-7d / Discourse, part ii, 46c-48b / Objections
and  Replies,  169c-170a  34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv, ch xxi 394d-395a,c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  ioi,  432c  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b-337a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  la-13d;  15c-16c; 34a37d esp 34c-35b; 59c; 210b-c / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-d; 264d; 266c-d / Practical Reason,
300d
[fa ifc 351b-352c
/  Judgement, 463a-467a esp 463b-464a; 476a479d; 485b-486d; 488a-495a,c;
515b-c; 578a-b 53 James: Psychology, 867a 2c. The nature and branches of
practical    or   moral   philosophy:   economics,   ethics,   politics,
jurisprudence;  poetics  or  the  theory of art 7 Plato: Republic, bk x,
427c-434c / Statesman, 604c-608d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 14
[i05b i9~29]
149c / Metaphysics, bk ii, ch i
[993
b2o-23] 512a; bk vi, ch i
[i025b i9-28] 547d; bk xi,
ch 7 [1064*10-19] 592b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-4 339a-340d; ch
7
[i098 a20-b8]
343c-344a; bk ii, ch 2
[no3b26-i 104*9] 349b-c; ch 4 350d-351b passim; bk in, ch 3 [ni2a30-b i2] 358b-c; bk vi,
ch 8 390d-391c; bk x, ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics, bk iv, ch 1 487a-488b
/  Poetics  681a699a,c  passim,  esp  ch  1-5  681a-684a  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk hi, par 14 16d17a / City of God, bk viii, ch 8 270a-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  aa  4-5 5a-6b; q 14, a 16
90b-91b;  q 86, a 3, contrary 463b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xviii
[40-72] 80b-c
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 58a-b; 72a-d 78bc; 80d-81a; 95d-96b; part
ii,  112c-d  128d-129b; 158c-d; 164a,c; part iv, 268d conclusion, 282c-d
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 81d-95b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 3
107b

[388b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2c  to 3a 66d31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61b-c;
67a,c 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 543b-544a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  hi,  ch  xi,  sect 15-18 303b-304b esp sect 16 303c-d; bk iv, ch in,
sect  18-20  317d-319c; ch iv, sect 7-10 325b-326b; ch xii, sect 8 360c;
ch  xxi,  sect  1-3 394d-395a; sect 5 395c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  i,  div  1-5  451a-453b  passim;  sect  xii, div 131-132 508d-509d
passim,  esp  div  132,  509c-d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-334a,c 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 75d-80b passim 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of Morals,  253a254b;  264b-d;  266c-d;  271a-c;  283d-287d  /  Practical
Reason, 291a-296d; 300d
[fn
1];   304a-d;   307d-321b;   327c-d;   329a-337a,c  esp  329b-d  /  Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 366d-368a; 370d-372a; 373b-c; 374a-c;
378a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a-d;  388a-d; 390b,d-391a /
Science  of  Right, 398a-399c / Judgement, 463a-467a; 515b-c; 523d-524a;
596c-598b 43 Federalist: number 9, 47a-d; number 31, 103c-104a passim 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b  passim;  453c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, pref, ld-7c; Intro, par 1 9a 50 Marx: Capital, 6a-lld passim, esp
6a-d,  8a9b;  178d-179c;  265a-266a;  267c-d  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue   ii,   680d684a;   689b-c   54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents, 800c801b 3. The method of philosophy 3a. The foundations of
philosophy  in experience and common sense 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 30
[46
s 18-28] 64a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c; ch 31 120a-c; bk
ii,  ch  2  [90^4-30]  123b-c;  ch  19 136a-137a,c / Physics, bk i, ch i
259a-b / Heavens, bk hi, ch i
[298bi3~24]
390a-b; ch 7
[3o6a i-i8] 397b-c / Generation
and Corruption, bk 1, ch 2 [316*5-14] 411c-d; ch 3
[3i8b i9~3i] 415c-d / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 1 499a-500b / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436b i3-437ai6] 673c-674a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk 1 [418-448] 6bc;
[693-700] 9c; bk iv [353-521] 48d-51a
esp  [469-521]  50b-51a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 267a-b 28 Harvey:
Motion  of the Heart, 268a-c / On Animal Generation, 331b-335c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  16a; 57d58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 19-22
108bc 31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 53b / Meditations, 1 75a- 77c

[389a]
3b  to  3c  Chapter 66: PHILOSOPHY 355 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop
io,  schol  376d-377a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i, div 4,
451d-452a;  sect  xii,  div  130  508c-d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 14a-b;
15c-16c^r9a;  236d-237a;  247a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals,
253a-c; 254b-c; 263b-d; 271a-c; 281c-282d / Practical Reason, 320c-321b;
329d-330c; 358a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365a-d / Intro.
Metaphysic   of  Morals,  387a-388a  /  Science  of  Right,  397b398a  /
Judgement, 551a-552c; 562d-563b; 603a-b; 604a-b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
445b-446b  53 James: Psychology, 655a-659a }>b. The philosopher's appeal
to  first  principles  and  to  definitions  7  Plato:  Republic, bk vi,
383d-388a;  bk  vii,  388a-398c  esp  396d-398c  8  Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics  97a-137a,c  esp  bk  1,  ch  1-3 97a-100a, ch 9 104b-d, ch ii
105d-106b,  ch  19-22  110c-115b,  ch  31-32  120a-121b,  bk ii, ch i-io
122b,d-128d, ch 13 13 lb- 133c / Topics, bk i, ch i
[iooa25-b2i]
143a-b  / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982*25-28] b i6~3o] 513a-b; bk hi, ch
1
[995
500c; bk 11, ch 2 [994 b6-io] 514a; ch 2
[996b26-997*i5]
515b-d; bk vi, ch i
[io25b i-io26a6] 547b,d548a; bk
xi, ch i
[1059*23-26] 587a; ch
4
[io6i b i7]-CH 7 [1064*28] 589d-592c; bk
xiii, ch 4
[io78b i3-3o] 610a-b / Soul, bk
i, ch i 631a-632d; bk ii, ch 2
[413*11-19] 643a b;
ch  3  [4i4b20-4i5*i4]  644d-645b  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  4
[1095*30-^2]   340c-d;   ch   7  [1098*20^8]  343c-344a;  bk  vi,  ch  6
[ii40b3i]-CH  7  [1141*19]  389d-390a;  ch  ii [ii43*32-bio]392d-393a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part 1, q 1, a 2, ans and rep 1 4a-c; q 2, a
2  lld-12c  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-d; 58d-60a; 65d; part iv,
269b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  iv,  5c-d;  6d;  xii,  21b-c / Discourse
41a-67a,c  esp  part  iv  51b-54b  /  Meditations,  69a-72d; 1 75a-77c /
Objections  and Replies, postulate i-iii 130d-131a; 206a207a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  10,  schol  376d-377a  33  Pascal: Geometrical
Demonstration, 430b434a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect
24-25 120a-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 2 451b-c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  179d-182b;  215d-217a  /  Practical  Reason, 293c-294c 43
Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-447b
passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, lb-c; Intro, par 2 9b-10a;
additions, 3 116a / Philosophy of History, intro, 156c-158a

[389b]
3c.  The  processes  of  philosophical  thought:  induction,  intuition,
definition,  demonstration,  reasoning, analysis, and synthesis 7 Plato:
Protagoras,  50d-52d;  57a-c  / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Phaedrus, 134a-d;
139d140b / Meno, 179d-183c / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d-398c / Parmenides
486a-511d  esp  491a-d  /  Theaetetus,  514b-515d;  525d-526b / Sophist,
570a-574c  esp  571a-c  /  Statesman  580a-608d  esp  595a-d / Philebus,
609a-613c  /  Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics
97a-137a,c  esp  bk  1,  ch  1-3  97a-100a, bk ii, ch i-io 122b, d128d /
Topics, bk viii, ch i [i55b i-i6] 211a-b; ch 14
[i63b8-i6] 222a
/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 16
[175*1-12] 241a
/  Physics, bk i, ch 1 259a-b; ch 2 [i84b25-i85*i9] 259c-260a; bk 11, ch
7-9  275b-278a,c  /  Heavens,  bk ii, ch 13 [294b6-i4] 386a; bk hi, ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[316*5-14] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[997*25-34]
515d-516a; bk iv, ch 2 522b524b esp
[1004*25-31]
523b-c,
[ioo4b i8-27]
523d; ch 4
[ioo5b35-ioo6*28]
525a-c; ch 7
[1012*18-24]
532a-b; ch 8
[ioi2b5-8]
532c; bk vi, ch 1
[io25b i-i6] 547b; bk
xi, ch i
[1059*29-34] 587b; ch 3 589a-d esp [1061*1018]
589b; ch 5
[io6i b34-io62*i9]
590a-c;  ch  7  [1064*4-9]  592b;  bk xiii, ch 4 [io78b i3~ 30] 610a-c /
Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[402*1 ]-ch 2
[403^3] 631a-633a; bk
ii, ch 4
[415*14-22]
645b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; ch 4
[io95*30-b i2]
340c-d; ch 7
[io98*20-b8]
343c-344a;  bk  vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6 389d; ch 11 [ii43*32-bn] 392d-393a
17  Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr hi, ch 4-6 11a12b / Sixth Ennead, tr ii,
ch  4  270c-271a  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk viii, ch 2-8 265b-270d
passim  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2, a 2 lld-12c; q 32, a
1,  rep  2  175d-178a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 58a-60b; 65c-d; part
iv,  267a-c;  269b-c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk ii,
101b-106a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c; 56c59c / Novum
Organum  105a-195d  31 Descartes: Rules, i-xiii la-27d / Discourse, part
ii,   46c-47d  /  Meditations,  1  75a-77c  /  Objections  and  Replies,
119c-120c;  128a-129a  33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 442a443b 34
Newton: Principles, bk hi, rules 270a-271b / Optics, bk in, 543a-544a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, intro, sect 3-5 93d-94d; bk i, ch hi, sect
24-25 120a-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 2 451b-c; div 7-9
453c-455a; sect ii, div 17 457a-b; sect xii, div 116, 503d-504a

[390a]
(  3  .  The  method  ofphilosophy.  3 c. The processes of philosophical
thought:  induction,  intuition,  definition,  demonstration, reasoning,
analysis,  and  synthesis.)  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 339d; 341b-342b 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, la-13d; 16a-c; 109d112d; 115d-116a; 119a-b; 184b-c;
185bc;   193a-200c  esp  193d-194b,  199a-c;  211c-218d  /  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d  /  Practical  Reason,  294a-b: 330d-331a:
336d337a,c / Pre/. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365a-366a; 376c-d 43
Mill:  Liberty, 274b-293b passim 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
690a   b  53  James:  Psychology,  674a-675b  esp  675b:  687a  3d.  The
methodological  reformation  of  philosophy  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  11a- 17b esp 12a-13c, 15a-b, 16a; 30b-c; 40a-c; 47d48d; 65a-c
/  Novum  Organum 105a-195d 31 Descartes: Rules, i-xm la-27d / Discourse
41a-67a,c  esp part iii-iv 48b-54b / Meditations, 69a-71a,c; i 75a-77c /
Objections  and  Replies, 119c-d: 126a-b; 128a-129a; postulate i-prop iv
130d-133a,c;  134b-c; 167a-c; 206a207a; 237b-238b; 267a-277a,c 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii 358c-363b esp sect 14-15 362d-363b 35
Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro 405a412a, c passim, esp sect 21-25 411b
412a,  c;  sect  133-134 439c-440a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i,
div  7-10  453c-455b;  sect  vii,  div  49  471c-d;  sect  xii, div 116,
503d-504a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, la-13d; 19a-22a,c; 36d37b; 101d-102a;
133c-134d;   146a-149d;   157d;   196b-197c;  218d-227a  esp  224a-227a;
248d250a,c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253c-d; 260d-261c;
273d-274a;  277d-279d  /  Practical  Reason,  292a-296d  esp  292 d293b,
294a-b;  299d;  311d-313d;  320c-321b;  331a-332d; 335b-c; 336d-337a,c /
Judgement,  492c-d;  567c-568a 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 875a
4. The uses of philosophy: diverse conceptions of its aim, function, and
value  4a.  The  philosophic mode of life: contemplation and happiness 7
Plato:  Euthydemus,  69a-71a  / Phaedrus, 122b128a / Symposium, 167b-d /
Meno,  183c-184c  / Apology 200a-212a,c / Phaedo, 223a-226c; 231c-234c /
Republic,  bk v-vii, 368c-401d / Timaeus, 476a-b / Theaetetus, 528b-531a
/  Philebus  609a-639a,c  esp 633a-639a,c / Laws, bk 1, 643c-d / Seventh
Letter, 808c-809a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2
[n8 a6-i6]
164d-165a / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [io72b 14-29] 602d-603a

[390b]
356  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3d  to 4£ 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8 [io98b
i9-i099a 6] 344a-c; bk vi, ch 12 [1144*2-6] 393c; bk x, ch 7-8 431d-434a
/  Politics,  bk ii, ch 7 [1267* 8-14] 462d; bk vii, ch 1-3 527a-530a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk v [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi [1-79] 80a-81b 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  i, ch 4 108d-110a; ch 15 121c-d; ch 27 132b-133b; ch 29 134d138a; bk
ii,  ch i 138b,d-140c; ch 12 151b152c; ch 14 153d-155b; ch 17 158d-161a;
bk  hi,  ch  5  180d-181d;  ch  10  185d-187a; ch 15 190a-191a; ch 21-22
193d-201a; bk iv, ch 6 230b-232c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 6
261a-c; sect 9 261d; sect 12 262b-c; bk iv, sect 16 264d; bk v, sect 8-9
269d-270c;  bk  vi,  sect  12  274c;  bk  x,  sect  12 298c-d 13 Virgil:
Georgics,  11  [490-493]  65b  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 5-6
11c12b;  tr iv, ch 4-16 14a-19b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 5
267d268d;  ch  8  270a-d:  bk  x,  ch  2  299d-300a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 12, a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 26, a 2, ans and rep 2
150c-151a;   part  i-ii,  q  3,  aa  4-5  625a-627a  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 66, a 5, rep 1-2 79b-80c 22 Chaucer: Prologue
[285-308]  164a-b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 70d-72a; 107a-112d; 231d-246a;
395d;   503b-504c;  508a-512a;  538a-543a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  69d-76a  esp  70b-72c,  73c-74a  31 Descartes: Rules, 1, Id /
Discourse,  part i, 41d-42a; part hi, 49d-50b / Meditations, in, 88d-89a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part iv, appendix, iv 447b-c; xxxn 450c-d; part v
451a-463d  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  6  453b-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  345a  /  Political  Economy,  373d-374a 42 Kant:
Judgement,  591b-592a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 451c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of History, part iv, 368d369a,c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[614-685]
17a-18a;
[1194-1201] 29b
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  255a;  308a-b  4b.  Philosophy  as  a  moral
discipline: the consolation of philosophy 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 69a-71a /
Meno,  183c184c  /  Phaedo,  222a-226c;  231c-234c  /  Timaeus, 476a-b /
Theaetetus, 528c-531a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-145]
ld-2d; bk 11
[1-61] 15a-d; bk hi
[1-93] 30a31b;
[307-322] 34a-b;
[830-1094] 40c-44a,c;
bk  v  [1-54]  61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-41]  80a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses
105a-245a,c  esp  bk i, ch 4 108d-110a, ch 9 114c-116b, ch 15 121c-d, ch
17 122d-124a, ch 24 129a-d, ch 27 132b-

[391a]
4c  to  5  133b,  ch  29  134d-138a,  bk  it,  ch i 138b,d140c, ch 14-17
153d-161a,  bk  hi,  ch  5  180d181d,  ch  21-23  193d-203b, bk iv, ch i
213a223d,  ch 10 238d-240d 12 Aurelius: Meditations 253a-310d esp-BlTTi,
sect  11-12  258ac, sect 14 258d, sect 17 259b-d, bk in, sect 3 260b, bk
iv, sect 3 263b 264a, sect 5 264b, sect 46 267c, sect 48 267d-268a, sect
50 268c, bk v, sect 9 270b-c, sect 14 271b, bk vi, sect 12 274c, sect 24
276b,  sect 47 278d, sect 49 279a, bk vn, sect 32,35 282a, bk viii, sect
i  285a-b,  sect  25  287b-c,  sect 31 287d, sect 58 290d, bk ix, sect 3
291d-292a,  sect  21  293b-c, sect 41 295c, bk xii, sect 35-36 310c-d 13
Virgil: Georgics, 11 [490-493] 65b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch
3  266a-d;  ch  8 270a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 21d-22a; 28a-36b; 55d62a;
69d-75a;  231d-237d;  240c-242d; 283b284c; 401c-d; 503b-504c; 508a-512a;
529c530c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 26a-c; 73d74a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 67-73 444d447a; part v, prop 25-42 458d-463d 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  67 180b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 1-4
451a-452c;  sect  v,  div  34  463d-464b  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,
388a-417b  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 35a-d; 182ac 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy, 373d-374a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 644d-646a 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  261c-d  /  Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  368c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part  hi, 303b-c 47
Goethe: Faust, part i
[614-685]
17a-18a;  part  11  [11,398-407] 277b 4c. The social role of philosophy:
the  philosopher  and  the  statesman;  the  philosopher  king  7 Plato:
Euthydemus,  83c-d / Apology, 207a208a / Gorgias, 272b-273b; 291c-292b /
Republic,  bk v-vi, 368c-383c; bk vii, 390b391b; 398c-401d / Theaetetus,
525c-526a;  528c-531a  /  Statesman,  598b-608d  /  Laws, bk 1, 643c-d /
Seventh  Letter,  801b-802c;  806bc 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982*5-19] 500b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 7-8 390a-391c; bk x, ch
9  434a-436a,c / Politics, bk vii, ch 2-3 528a-530a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d;  bk  v [1113-1135] 75c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 14
274d275a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d esp 47a-48c / Numa Pompilius,
59c-60b / Solon 64b,d-

[391b]
Chapter  66:  PHILOSOPHY  357  77a,c / Pericles, 122d-123c / Alcibiades,
156c158b  /  Marcus  Cato,  287d-288c / Alexander, 543b-544a; 566a-567d;
571b-572a / Cicero, 717a-b / Dion, 782c-788b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiv,
153d-155a;  bk  xv,  172c-173d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 164a,c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 127b,d-131a,c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  55d-62a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 5a-b; 20b26a; 27c;
30ac 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 383a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi,
ch x, sect 8-9 293c-294a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, 452a; div
5 452d-453b; sect xi, div i 502d-503b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xxiv,  202d-203a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345a  / Political Economy,
373d-374a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 32a-b; 205d-206a; DIV 4, 284ac;
338d-339c;  390d;  669b-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 40b-41a; 72c;
76d-77b  42  Kant: Practical Reason, 360d-361d 43 Federalist: number 49,
159d-160a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, pref, 4b- 7c / Philosophy of
History,  part ii, 279d-281a; part in, 303b-c; part iv, 360b-c; 363d364c
48   Melville:   Moby  Dic{,  107a-b  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  780a-b  The character and training of the philosopher: the
difficulty of being a philosopher 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 84a,c / Phaedrus,
125b126c  /  Symposium,  163a-168a;  169c-172d  /  Apology 200a-212a,c /
Phaedo,  223a-226c;  231c-234c  /  Gorgias,  271a-b;  273b-d; 291c292b /
Republic,  bk  ii,  320b-c;  bk  v-vii,  368c-401d  /  Timaeus, 476a-b /
Parmenides,  491a-c / Theaetetus, 525c-526b; 528c-531a / Seventh Letter,
808c-809a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 9
[76^6-30] 104d / Topics, bk viii, ch 14 [i63b
8-16] 222a / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [29i b24-29J 383b-c / Metaphysics, bk
i,  ch  2  500b-501c  /  Soul, BK I, CH I [402aI-22] 631a-b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[i096an-i7]
341b; bk x, ch 7 [ii77ai9-b 3] 431d-432a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i,  ch  14, 178d179a; bk hi, ch 10, 207d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  8  113d-114c;  ch  26  131b-132b;  ch  29  134d-138a;  bk  ii,  ch 1
138b,d-140c;  ch 3 141d-142a; ch 8-9 146a148c; ch 11-12 150a-152c; ch 17
158d-161a;  ch  19  162c-164b;  bk  hi, ch 2 177c-178d; ch 19 192c-d; ch
21-22 193d-201a; bk iv, ch 6 230b-232c; ch 8 235b-237d

[392a]
358 The character and training of the philosopher: (5. the difficulty of
being  a philosopher.} 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 9 270b-c; bk
vii,  sect  3 279d-280a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b; tr iv,
ch  4-16  14a-19b  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr ix, ch 1-2, 246c-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  55d-62a  esp  60a-c;  70d72a;  150c-151a;  451ac;  539d-540a 28
Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268a-c / On Animal Generation, 331c-332a 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 16a-b; 26a27a 31 Descartes: Discourse
41a-67a,c  esp part iiiii 44c-51b, part vi 60d-67a,c 33 Pascal: Pensees,
4  172b  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 6 453bc 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  81c-82a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 31d-32b; 644b646a 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 526c-527a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 337a-338b
46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, ld-2a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[614-685]
17a-18a;
[1868-2050] 44b-48b
6.  Praise  and  dispraise  of  the  philosopher  and  his  work 6a. The
philosopher as a man of science or wisdom: the love and search for truth
7 Plato: Phaedrus, 125b-126c / Symposium, 163a-168a; 169c-172d / Apology
200a-212a,c / Phaedo, 222a-224a / Gorgias, 271a; 280d294d / Republic, bk
ii,  319c-320c;  bk  v-vii,  368c-401d  /  Timaeus, 476a-b / Theaetetus,
528c-531a  / Sophist, 551a-552c; 569a-571c / Seventh Letter, 808c-809a 8
Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk ii, ch 12 [2(H b24-29] 383b-c / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 1-2 499a-501c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*11-17]
341b;  bk  vi,  ch 7 [1141*9-19] 390a; bk ix, ch a ii 77 3] 2 [1324*24BK
VII,  CH  431d-432a / Politics, 34] 528b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
hi, ch 10, 207d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-79]
ld-2a;  bk  hi  [1-30]  30a-b;  bk v [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi [1-41] 80a-d 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 22 167d170a; ch 24 172d-174b; bk hi, ch
9  184c185d;  ch  21-22  193d-201a;  bk  iv,  ch 5 228a230b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  v,  sect 9 270b-c 14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-255a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi 10a-12b / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch 1-2,
246c-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 8 14d15a / City of God, bk
viii, ch 3 266a-d; ch 10 271a-d

[392b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6  to  Gb  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a; 70d-72a;
150c151a;  446d-450a  28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268a-c / On Animal
Generation,  331c-332a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, la-28d esp
17b-27c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  41d-42a; 43d44a; part hi,
50b-51a;  part  vi 60d-67a,c esp 66d-67a,c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 261 221a;
327   231a-b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  87a-b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i  451a455b  passim,  esp  div  2 451b-c, div 5-10
452d455b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  526c-527a 42 Kant: Practical
Reason, 337c-338b / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365b [fn 1] 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, pref, ld-2a 6b. The philosopher and the man
of   opinion:  sophistry  and  dogmatism,  idle  disputation,  perpetual
controversy 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[93267] 489a-491a, [412-476] 493c-494b
7  Plato:  Laches,  36a  /  Protagoras, 42a-43b / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c /
Gorgias,  271b-273b  /  Republic,  bk  i,  300b-301c;  bk  vi,  379c-d /
Theaetetus,  518d-519a;  525d-526b  /  Sophist  551a-579d  9  Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  i [u64a22-b6] 417a-b; bk x, ch 9 [u8ob29-n8i b i2]
435d436a,c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13, 174c175a; ch 14-15,
177a-179d  esp  ch  14,  178d179a;  bk  ii,  ch  9, 199a,c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  8  113d-114c;  ch 25-26 129d-132b; bk ii, ch 17
158d-161a;  ch  19-20 162c-166c; bk hi, ch 2 177c-178d; ch 21 193d-195a;
bk  iv,  ch 8 235b-237d 14 Plutarch: Marcus Cato, 287d-288c / Alexander,
566a-567d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49d; 54b-c; 56d; 57c-d; 59a-60a;
71a-b;  84a;  part  ii,  163a-b;  part  iv,  267a-274d  passim;  276c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  18b-24a; bk ii, 78b-80d;
101b-106a;  124d125b;  bk  in,  197b-200d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 55d-62a;
74d-77d;  89cd;  239d-294b  passim,  esp 240c-246a, 257d264a, 276b-278a;
448d-449a;  517b-519a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, la-28d esp
2c-17b;  57d-58b;  66c-67c  /  Novum Organum, bk 1, aph 44 HOa-b; aph 54
110c-d;  aph  56  112a; aph 62-65 113b-114c; aph 71 117a-c 31 Descartes:
Rules,  11 2a-3b; x, 16d-17a / Discourse, part i, 43d-44b; part ii, 46b;
part   vi,  64a-c  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  327  231a-b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  89a-c; bk hi, ch iv, sect 7-1 1 260d-262b passim; ch vi,
sect  24  274c;  ch viii, sect 2 284c-285a; ch x, sect 2 291d-292a; sect
6-14 293a-295a;

[393a]
6c  to  6d  Chapter  66: PHILOSOPHY 359 bk iv, ch in, sect 30 323a-c; ch
vii,  sect  ii,  341a-d;  ch  viii,  sect 9 347d-348a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect 17 409d-410a; sect 20, 411a; sect 85 429c; sect
88   430a-b;   sect   97   431d-432a;  s&erTj}  441c-d  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i, div 6-7 453b-454a passim; sect viii, div 62-63,
478c-d;  sect  xii, div 132, 509d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 227a-228a;
234b236b;  318b-321a;  329b-336a; 421b 422b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  336b 337a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 159a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  299a-b; 526d 527a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36a-37d esp 36d 37b;
120c-121c;  187c-188b;  221c  222b  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
260d-261d  /  Practical  Reason,  299d  /  Judgement, 607d608c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  pref, 2d-4a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1908-1963]
45b 46b;
[4343-4366] 107a-b; part ii [7843-7846] 191a
51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 243b 53 James: Psychology, 227b; 235b
54  Freud:  New Introductory Lectures, 874c875b esp 875a; 877b-c 6c. The
philosopher   as   a   man   of   reason:  the  limits  of  reason;  its
supplementation by experience or faith 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a 6a
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  8  14d-15a; bk iv, par 30-31
26b-27a;  bk v, par 3-5 27c28c; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c / City of God, bk
xi,  ch 2 323a-c; bk xviii, ch 41 495b-496c; bk xix, ch 1-4 507a-513c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a; q 2, a 2, rep i lid
12c;  q  12,  a  12  60d-61c; q 32, a 1 175d-178a; q 46, a 2 253a255a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[1645]
56a-b; paradise, xxiv
[52-81]
143b-c;  xxix  [70-126]  151a-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  208a-294b  esp
208d209c, 212a-215a, 238c-239c, 257d-264a, 267c268a, 271b-273b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  96d97b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65
114b-c;  aph  95  126b-c  31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b; viii, 13a-14a /
Discourse 41a-67a,c esp part i, 43c, part hi 48b-51b 33 Pascal: Pensees,
77-79  186a;  184-241  205a217b  passim;  245  218b;  248  219a;  265290
221b-225a;  425-428  243b-244b;  434435  248a-251a;  561-567  272b-273b;
585-588  277a-b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  440a-b  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  intro  93a95d  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect
1-4 405a-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i 451a-

[393b]
455b  passim,  esp  div  2  451b-c,  div  7-10 453c455b; sect iv, div 26
460b-c;  sect v, div 34 463d-464b; sect viii, div 81 487a; sect xii, div
116,  503d-504a; div 129-130 508a-d 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 379c-380a 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186a-d esp 186c; 200c 201b; 308b 309b; 390d 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 129c-173a esp 133c-d; 217d-218a; 219a-220b; 227a-235a
esp  231c232a  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 285a-287d / Practical
Reason,  291a-292a; 296a-d; 320c-321b; 337a-355d / Judgement, 497a-498b;
551a-552c; 570b-572b; 575b-c; 588a-607c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-514]
lla-14b;
[614-807] 17a-21a; part
ii  [10,113-121]  246b247a  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 307a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi, 242c-243b; bk ix, 361d-365c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  xi, 337a-346a Gel. The philosopher as a man of theory or
vision: neglect of the practical; withdrawal from the affairs of men and
the  marketplace  7  Plato: Protagoras, 54c-55a / Symposium, 149d-150a /
Apology  200a-212a,c  / Gorgias, 272b 273b; 291c-292b / Republic, bk vi,
375b-376c;  bk  vii,  390b-391b  /  Theaetetus,  528c-531a  9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk ii, ch 4
[no5b5-i9]
351a-b; bk vi, ch 7
[ii4i a34-b8] 390b-c
/  Politics,  bk 1, ch 11 [1259^-21] 453b-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
i,  ch  22  127c-128c;  ch  26  131b-132b;  bk hi, ch 6 181d-182b; ch 22
195a-201a;  bk  iv, ch i 213a-223d; ch 8 235b237d 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
130c-d  /  Marcellus,  252a255a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 55d-57b; 63d- 75a;
327b-d;   478c-482b;   514a-c;  538a-543a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,   la-28d   esp  2c-17b;  30b-c;  73d-74c  35  Berkeley:  Human
Knowledge,   sect   97   431d-432a;   sect   119  436c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i, div 2-4 451b-452c; sect v, div 34, 463d-464a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  ii,  78b  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 421b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  345a  /  Political  Economy, 373d-374a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 335d-337a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187c-188b /
Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 263b-264a; 266a-b / Practical Reason,
304d-305a;  320c-321b;  358a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
365b-c  /  Judgement,  607d-608c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
346c-347a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, pref, 5c-6a / Philosophy of
History, part hi, 303 b-c

[394a]
360  THE GREAT IDEAS (6. Praise and dispraise of the philosopher and his
work.  6d.  The philosopher as a man of theory or vision: neglect of the
practical;  withdrawal  from the affairs of men and the marketplace^) 48
Melville:   Moby   Dic\,   116a-117a;  255a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  430d432a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk ix, 361d-365c 53
James:  Psychology, 271a-b 54 Freud: Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
722a-b  7.  Observations  on the history of philosophy: the lives of the
philosophers in relation to their thought 7 Plato: Protagoras, 54c-55a /
Apology  200a212a,c  /  Phaedo,  240d-242b / Sophist, 564c568a / Seventh
Letter 800a-814d 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i6-i84b8] 253a-d / Physics, bk
i,  ch 2-9 259b-268d / Heavens, bk i, ch 10 [27(^4-12] 370d; bk in, ch 7
[3o6a6-i8] 397b-c / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 3 [983 a24]-BK 11, ch 1 [993 b
i9] 501c-512a; bk xi, ch 6 590d-592b; bk xn, ch 8
[ic-74b i-i4] 604d-605a; ch 10 [1075*251076*4] 606a-d / Soul, bk
i,  ch  2-5  633a-641d  9  Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [642*
25-30]  165b-c  /  Ethics,  bk i, ch 6 341b-342c / Politics, bk 1, ch 11
[1259*5-21]  453b-c  10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk hi, ch 10 207b-d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-79]
ld-2a;  bk  hi  [1-30]  30a-b;  bk v [1-54I 61a-d; bk vi [1-34] 80a-c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 12 151b152c; bk hi, ch 2 177c-178d; ch
6,  182a;  ch  21-22 193d-201a 14 Plutarch: Solon, 65c-d / Themistocles,
88d  /  Pericles,  122d-123c  /  Marcellus,  252a-255a  /  Marcus  Cato,
287d-288c / Sulla, 381c / Lucullus, 420b-d / Nicias, 435b-d / Alexander,
543b-544a   /  Cicero,  705b-c;  720a-b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv,
153d-155a;  bk xv, 172c-173d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 1-12
264b,d-273a;  bk xviii, ch 37 493c-494a; ch 41 495b-496c; bk xix, ch 1-3
507a-511a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  22,  a  2, ans
128d-130d; q 44, a 2, ans 239b-240a; q 65, a 4, ans 342b-343c; q 66, a 1
343d345c;  a  2,  ans 345d-347b; q 75, a i, ans and rep 1-2 378b-379c; q
76,  a i, ans 385d388c; a 3, ans 391a-393a; a 4, rep 4 393a394c; q 79, a
4, ans 417a-418c; q 84, a i, ans 440d-442a; a 2, ans 442b-443c; a 4, ans
444d-446b;  a 6, ans 447c-449a; q 85, a 2, ans 453d-455b; q 88, a i, ans
469a-471c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 3 228c-229b;
q  97,  a  1, ans 236a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 164a,c; part iv,
267c-269b; 274c-d; 276c; conclusion, 282c-d

[394b]
25   Montaigne:   Essays,  65b-66b  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,
267b,d-268d;  279d-280c  /  On  Animal  Generation, 336d337a,c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning la-lOld esp 2c-5a, 7b-c, 9a-b, 14a-15a, 15c-d,
16c,  22ab,  23a-b,  24c,  29b-c,  30d-31a,  39d-48d,  54b61d,  69d-76a,
81d-85a,  97b-c  /  Novum Organum, bk 1, aph 38-105 109c-128c esp aph 56
112a,  aph 78 119b-c, aph 95-96 126b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse 41a-67a,c
/  Meditations,  70a  /  Objections  and  Replies, 278a293a,c 33 Pascal:
Vacuum, 355a-358b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch iv, sect 7-10
260d-261d;  ch  viii, sect 2 284c285a; ch x, sect 2 291d-292a; sect 6-14
293a-295a;  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 30 323a-c; ch vii, sect 11, 341a-d; ch
xvii,  sect  4,  373a-b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 17
409d-410a;  sect 85 429c; sect 88 430a-b; sect 119 436c; sect 143 441c-d
35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect i, div 4, 451d-452a; div 5, 453a-b;
div  8-9, 454b-455a; sect v, div 34 463d-464b; sect vii, div 48, 471b-c;
sect  xi, div 102 497b-d; sect xii, div 122, 505d [fn 1] 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxi,  169a-b;  bk  xxiv,  202d-203a  38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  329a-334a,c / Political Economy, 373d-374a 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk i, 5d-6a; bk v, 335b-337b; 338d-339a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and   Fall,   12d-13b;  23d-24a;  31d-32b;  159a-d;  186a-c;  204d-206d;
307b308c;  364a-d;  644b-646a;  668d-671b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
40b-d; 299a-b; 326b-327a; 522b-528a,c passim, esp 526c527a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  la-8b esp 5b, 5d-6d; lOOa-d; 101d-102a; 177b-179b; 218d-222b; 2
24a- 2 2 7a; 248d-250a,c / Fund. Prin. Metaphvsic of Morals, 273d-274a /
Practical  Reason,  299d;  307a-d; 311d-313d; 317b-318b; 327c-d; 332c-d;
335b-c;  339b-d  /Judgement,  485b-486d;  513d-514b;  551a-552c; 580c-d;
600d-601c  43  Federalist:  number  9, 47a-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b
passim  /  Utilitarianism,  445a-b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref,
2d-5c / Philosophy of History, intro, 158a-159a; part 1, 218c-d; 229b-d;
part  ii,  279d-281a;  part  in,  303a-c;  308c-309d; part iv, 341c342a;
363d-364c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 243a 50 Marx: Capital, 25c-d; 190d
[fn 2]; 301c esp
301d  [fn  3];  305a-306b  [fn  2]  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
428b-d 53 James: Psychology, 221a-239a; 305a-312a; 627a-635a; 879b-882a

[395a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  For: Another discussion of the nature of philosophical
science,  see  Science  ia, ic; and for various 2b; Progress 6b; Science
ic.  The  comparison  of philosophy, poetry, and history, see History i;
Poetry  5b;  Science  2b.  6e(2), 8a-8c; Logic 4c; Poetry 8; Science 3a;
State  8d; Wealth 9. 3-4; Reasoning 6a, 6c-6d. The uses of philosophy in
the  conduct  of  life  and  the  organization of society, see Happiness
2b(7);  Wisdom  2c. The conception of the philosopher as a man of wisdom
or as seeking wisdom, see Truth 8e; matist, see Dialectic 6; Metaphysics
4a;  Opinion  4b;  Rhetoric  ia; Wisdom 3. The comparison of progress in
philosophy   and   science,  and  for  the  conditions  of  progress  in
philosophy,  see  Progress  6b-6c.  ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are
works  not  included in Great Booty ofthe Western World, but relevant to
the  idea  and  topics  with  which  this chapter deals. These works are
divided  into  two  groups:  I.  Works  by  authors  represented in this
collection. II. Works by authors not represented in this collection. For
the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works
cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the
last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. Hobbes. Concerning Body, part i, ch i
Gibbon. An Essay on the Study of Literature, xlivAugustine. Soliloquies,
bk  i,  ch  7  lv  .  Divine  Providence  and the Problem of Evil, Kant.
Introduction   to   Logic,   iii-iv,  x  bk  11,  ch  xviii  Hegel.  The
Phenomenology  of  Mind,  pref Aquinas. On the Trinity of Boethius, qq 2,
5-6 . The Philosophy of Mind, sect hi, subDante. Convivio (The Banquet),
second  treatise,  sect  c  ch 12-16; third treatise, ch 11-15; fourth .
Lectures  on the History of Philosophy treatise, ch i Engels. Herr Eugen
Duhring's   Revolution   in   Science,   Descartes.  The  Principles  of
Philosophy, pref part i

[395b]
Chapter 66 : PHILOSOPHY 361

[396a]
362  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  W.  James. Pragmatism, lect i-ii . A Pluralistic
Universe,  lect i . Some Problems of Philosophy, ch i II. Tertullian. On
Idolatry  .  Apology  Cicero.  De  Oratore  {On Oratory'), in, ch xv-xvi
Diogenes.  Lives  of  Eminent  Philosophers  Philostratus.  Lives of the
Sophists  Boethius.  De  Fide  Catholica  (On  the  Catholic  Faith) Al-
Ghazzali. The Destruction of Philosophy Abailard. Ethics (Scito Teipsum)
Judah   ha-Levi.  Kitab  al  Khazari  John*  of  Salisbury.  Metalogicon
Averroes.  The  Destruction of the '''Destruction" R. Bacon. Opus Majus,
part ii Duns Scotus. Oxford Commentary, bk i, dist 3,04 Thomas a Kempis.
The  Imitation  of  Christ,  bk  i, ch 1-5; bk in, ch 43-45 Erasmus. The
Praise   of   Folly   Glanyill.  The  Vanity  of  Dogmatizing  Voltaire.
"Philosopher,"  "Sophist,"  "Philosophy,"  in A Philosophical Dictionary
Coleridge.  Biographia Literaria, ch 9 Heine. Religion and Philosophy in
Germany  Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy,  intro,  ch  i  W. Hamilton.
Discussions  on  Philosophy  and  Literature,  Education  and University
Reform  .  Lectures  on  Metaphysics and Logic, yol i (1-7) Whewell. The
Philosophy  of the Inductive Sciences, YOL I, BK I, CH 2 Lotze. Outlines
of Encyclopedia of Philosophy, sect 1— 11 C S. Peirce. Collected Papers,
yol i

[396b]
Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good and Evil, ch i . The Will to Power, bk ii (2-3)
H.  Sidgwick. Philosophy, Its Scope and Relations Bosanquet. Science and
Philosophy, 1 T. Veblen. The Place of Science in Modern Civilization, pp
56-179  Bergson.  An  Introduction  to Metaphysics, pp 7592 Dewey et al.
"The  Need  for  a  RecoYery  of  Philosophy,"  in Creative Intelligence
Santayana.  Soliloquies  in  England  and  Later  Soliloquies,  ch 48 B.
Russell.  The Problems of Philosophy, ch 14-15 . Mysticism and Logic, ch
6  Beard.  The  Economic  Basis  of  Politics Croce. Politics and Morals
Dewey.  Reconstruction in Philosophy, ch i . The Quest for Certainty, ch
i  i  J. S. Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lect x-xi M. R. Cohen.
Reason  and  Nature,  bk  hi,  ch  5 Tennant. Philosophy of the Sciences
Whitehead.  Science  and  the  Modern World, ch 9 . Process and Reality,
part  i  .  Adventures  of Ideas, ch 9-10 Carnap. Philosophy and Logical
Syntax  Maritain.  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge, ch i . De la philosophic
chretienne  .  Science  and  Wisdom,  pp  137-220  .  Scholasticism  and
Politics,  ch  2  Gilson.  Christianisme  et  philosophie . The Unity of
Philosophical  Experience  .  History  of  Philosophy  and Philosophical
Education Jaspers. The Perennial Scope of Philosophy

[397a]
Chapterj^ PHYSICS INTRODUCTION CONCERNING the subject matter of physics,
one thing seems to be traditionally taken for granted. The object of its
study is the sensible world of changing things or matter in motion. When
Plato,  for  example, conceives astronomy as dealing not with the actual
and  observable  motions  of  the heavenly bodies, but with the possible
forms  of  the  motions  of  solids,  he  gives  it  the  character of a
mathematical  rather  than  a  physical  science.  He associates it with
geometry,  as  for  a  similar  reason he associates music—divorced from
concern  with audible harmonies— with arithmetic. In anyone's view, if a
science  does  not  investigate  sensible  realities,  if  it  does  not
undertake  to  account for the motions of actual bodies, or, stated most
generally,  if  it  has no concern with the phenomena of change, then it
does  not  have  the character of physical or natural science. The early
Greek  physicists, the pre-Socratics, to whom Plato and Aristotle refer,
inaugurate the study of change with speculations about ultimate origins,
the underlying principles or causes of natural phenomena. Sometimes they
are   called  philosophers  and  sometimes  scientists  —or,  at  least,
precursors  of empirical science. But there seems to be no difference of
opinion  about their title as physicists. Their undisputed claim to this
title derives, not from the method they employ, but from the object they
study  change.  In that primary meaning of the word "nature" which comes
from  the  Latin natura— the equivalent of phiisis in Greek— they can be
called  "naturalists" or "physicists" indifferently. The realm of nature
is  the  realm  of  change.  It  is  for  this  reason  that  Aristotle,
considering  the theories of his predecessors in the opening chapters of
his  Physics,  sets  Parmenides  apart  from  all  the rest. Parmenides'
affirmation of the unity of being, which leads to his denial 363

[397b]
of  the  reality  of  change  or motion, cannot be treated as a physical
theory.  On  the  contrary,  it  is,  according to Aristotle, a complete
negation  of  the subject matter of physics. No matter what other points
physicists may dispute among themselves, they must all at least agree in
taking a stand against Parmenides. Aristotle does not even seem to think
that  a book on physics is the proper place to argue against Parmenides.
That  argument  belongs  to  another  part of philosophy. The reality of
change seems to him sufficiently evident to assure the physicist that he
has  a  subject matter to invesThe question whether the early physicists
were  scientists or philosophers calls attention to different methods of
investigating  natural  phenomena.  Agreement  on  the subject matter of
physics  may  prevail, therefore, only in very general terms. When, in a
manner  to  accord  with  the  method  employed,  the object of physical
inquiry  is more specifically defined, there seem to be two physics, not
one—a philosophical and a scientific physics, a philosophy of nature and
a  natural  science,  or,  to  use  Kant's  phrasing, a rational or pure
physics and an empirical or experimental physics. Though Newton may call
his work a philosophy of nature, he also refers to it as an experimental
philosophy,  in order to distinguish it from the work of earlier natural
philosophers who did not perform experiments. The difference between the
physics  of Newton and that of Aristotle seems, however, to involve more
than a divergence in method. The problems which Newton and Aristotle try
to  solve indicate a difference in subject matter as well. Nevertheless,
this  difference  falls  within what, in the most general terms, must be
conceived as the domain of physics. For all their differ-

[398a]
364  ences,  both  are  physicists,  though both are not philosophers or
scientists  in  the  same sense. There are other sources of variation in
the  definition  of  physics.  The problem of the relation of physics to
other  disciplines—whether  these  are  other  branches of philosophy or
other  fields  of empirical research— raises issues about the object and
scope of physics. Aristotle, Bacon, Descartes, and Kant, for example, do
not  seem  to  have a common understanding of the relation of physics to
mathematics and metaphysics. In consequence they conceive physics itself
differently.  On  the  level of empirical research, physics is sometimes
regarded  as just one of the natural sciences and sometimes as the whole
group of natural sciences. In the latter case it includes such fields as
astronomy,  mechanics, optics, acoustics, thermodynamics, magnetism, and
electricity;  and  sometimes chemistry, biology, and even psychology are
included  under  the head of physical or natural sciences, contrasted in
the  broadest  terms  to  the social sciences. The conception of physics
obviously  changes when its scope is determined by a boundary line which
separates it from chemistry, or from biology and psychology, or from the
study  of  society.  The separation of these other sciences from physics
does  not  necessarily  imply  a  discontinuity in nature or the natural
sciences.  The biologist and the psychologist, for example, consider the
physical  bases  of  life  and  the physical conditions or correlates of
mental phenomena. Hybrid sciences like biophysics and psychophysics have
developed.  Even  the  study of society draws upon physics to the extent
that  the  laws of matter in motion and considerations of space and time
must  be appealed to for an understanding of the physical foundations of
economic  and political life. Other chapters deal with specific physical
sciences,  e.g.,  Astronomy and Mechanics. The latter tries to cover the
various  branches  of  mechanics  and  related  fields of study, such as
dynamics,  optics,  the  theory  of  heat,  magnetism,  and electricity;
particularly  so  far  as  these are represented in the work of Galileo,
Newton,  Huygens,  Gilbert,  Fourier, and Faraday. The basic concepts of
mechanics and its

[398b]
THE GREAT IDEAS branches or affiliates are also treated in that chapter.
Still  other  chapters deal with fundamental terms representing concepts
or   problems   in  the  larger  domain  of  physics,  philosophical  or
scientific,  e.g.,  Cause, Change, Element, Infinity, Matter, Principle,
Quantity,  Space,  and Time—not to mention Nature and World, terms which
represent  in  the  most  comprehensive  way  the reality studied by the
physicist.  Our  discussion  here  can  therefore  be  restricted to the
problems raised in the great books concerning the conception of phvsics,
its  subject  matter and method, its relation to other sciences or other
parts  of  philosophv. It will lead to such questions as whether physics
is  supreme  among the sciences studying reality or the nature of things
and,  at  the  other  extreme,  whether  physics is at all possible as a
science,  whether  there can be scientific knowledge of bodies in motion
or  of  the  whole  realm  of  change  and  becoming. The problem of the
distinction between philosophical and scientific physics would appear to
be only a special case of the distinction between philosophy and science
in  general.  But  it  is more than that. It is the case which tests the
main distinction itself, since here both philosopher and scientist claim
to  be expounding the same subject matter or at least to be dealing with
the same general field of phenomena. Mathematics and metaphysics bear on
the  distinction  between philosophy and science in a different way. If,
for  example,  we  take  experimentation  or  empirical  research  to be
characteristic   of   science   in  distinction  from  philosophy,  then
mathematics would seem to resemble philosophy rather than science. On no
understanding  of  the  nature  of mathematical knowledge is mathematics
ever  divided  into  two  kinds  which are capable of being described as
empirical and rational. The possibility of metaphysical knowledge may be
challenged,  but no one has ever proposed an experimental metaphysics to
challenge  the  metaphysics  of  the  philosophers. But physics seems to
permit  both an experimental and a philosophical treatment. Whether they
are  to  be  regarded as in conflict with one another depends on whether
they are attacking

[399a]
the  same  problems  by  different  methods  or  whether  they represent
something like a division of labor. In the latter view, each would deal,
according  to its method, with diffejent problems and tend to supplement
rather  than  to exclude the other. Psychology is another subject matter
which seems to receive a dual treatment— philosophical and experimental—
in  the  tradition of the great books. It raises issues similar to those
just  mentioned.  They  are  considered  in  the  chapter on Man. As the
chapters  on Philosophy and on Science indicate, the discussion of their
difference from and relation to one another is complicated by the double
use of both terms. The word "science," for example, is used for both the
philosophical  and the experimental sciences throughout the greater part
of   the  tradition.  Similarly,  until  quite  recently,  the  name  of
philosopher  is taken by those who experiment as well as by those who do
not.  It  is  impossible,  therefore,  to  speak  without confusion of a
scientific and a philosophical physics unless the verbal ambiguities are
resolved  by  some  convention,  such as the understanding that when the
context  indicates  that  the words "science" and "philosophy" are being
used  as opposites rather than as synonyms, then "science" shall signify
the   experimental   and   "philosophy"  the  non-experimental  mode  of
treatment. Beyond this, it is necessary to proceed as if the chapters on
Philosophy and Science formed a background for some of the matters to be
discussed  here.  Otherwise  the consideration of natural philosophy and
natural  science would tend to become a general discussion of philosophy
and  science. The great books of experimental physics seem to have three
characteristics  in  common. First, and most naturally, they insist upon
experimentation  as either the indispensable source or the ultimate test
of  scientific  formulations. Second, they tend to rely upon mathematics
as  much  as  upon experiment, both for the formulation of nature's laws
and  for  the  demonstration  of  the consequences or corollaries of the
primary  laws.  Third,  though  experiments and observations multiply as
science  develops,  they seek to bring all the phenomena of nature under
the smallest number of generalizations,

[399b]
Chapter 67: PHYSICS 365 which have the utmost simplicity in mathematical
statement. On the second and third points, Newton's declarations seem to
be  most  explicit.  "Nature,"  he says, "is pleased with simplicity and
affects  not the pomp of superflous causes." Accordingly, Newton directs
his  efforts  toward  the  simplest statement of the laws of motion, and
these  he  seeks  to  give the universality requisite for covering every
type  of  natural  phenomenon.  At  the opening of the third book of the
Mathematical  Principles  of Natural Philosophy, he explains that in the
preceding  books,  he  has  "laid  down  the  principles  of philosophy,
principles  not  philosophical but mathematical; such, namely, as we may
build  our  reasonings upon in philosophical inquiries. These principles
are  the  laws and conditions of certain motions, and powers or forces."
From  these  same  principles, he will now undertake to "demonstrate the
frame  of  the System of the World." In the Preface to the first edition
of this work, Newton describes the third book as one in which he derives
"from  the  celestial  phenomena the forces of gravity with which bodies
tend  to  the  sun  and  the several planets. Then from these forces, by
other  propositions  which are also mathematical," he goes on, "I deduce
the  motions of the planets, the comets, the moon, the sea." But he does
not  consider  his  work  to  have  attained  the  goal  of physics— the
comprehension  of  all  natural  phenomena  by a few simple mathematical
formulae.   His   confession   of   failure   may  also  be  read  as  a
prognostication  of  what  an experimental physics based on mathematical
principles  might  some  day be able to achieve. "I wish we could derive
the  rest  of the phenomena of nature by the same kind of reasoning," he
writes,  "for  I am induced by many reasons to suspect that they may all
depend  upon  certain  forces  by which the particles of bodies, by some
causes  hitherto  unknown,  are  either  mutually  impelled  towards one
another,  and cohere in regular figures, or are repelled and recede from
one   another."   Einstein's  unified  field  equations,  covering  both
gravitational  phenomena  on  the  astronomical scale and the electrical
attractions  and repulsions of sub-atomic particles, seem to realize, or
at least closely to approximate, the ideal Newton has in mind.

[400a]
366  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Midway between Newton and Einstein, Fourier also
bears  testimony  to the ideal of physics as a science at once simple in
its  principles  and  universal  in  the scope of their application. The
successors  of  Newton  and  Galileo,  he  writes,  "have extended their
theories  and  given  them  an admirable perfection; they have taught us
that  the  most  diverse  phenomena  are  subject  to  a small number of
universal  laws  which  are  reproduced in all the acts of nature. It is
recognized  that  the  same principles regulate all the movements of the
stars,  their  form,  the inequalities of their courses, the equilibrium
and  the  oscillations  of  the seas, the harmonic vibrations of air and
sonorous  bodies,  the  transmission  of  light,  capillary actions, the
undulations  of  fluids, in fine the most complex effects of all natural
forces.  Thus  has  the thought of Newton been confirmed," he concludes,
referring to Newton's praise of geometry, whose glory it is that the few
mathematical  principles it provided for use in physics should have been
"able  to  produce  so many things." On the experimental side, the great
works  of  physical  science  seem  to  contain  diverse  notions of the
purposes  served  by  experimentation,  accompanied  by a fairly uniform
recognition of the dependence of natural science upon experiment. In the
field  of magnetism, for example, Gilbert sets aside as unscientific all
those  authors who "have written about amber and jet as attracting chaff
.  . . but with never a proof from experiments. . . . These writers deal
only  in  words. . . . Such philosophy bears no fruit." The fruitfulness
of  experiments on the vacuum, the equilibrium of fluids, and the weight
of air leads Pascal to conclude that the secrets of nature remain hidden
until  "the  experiments which supply us with knowledge about it" can be
performed and multiplied. "We ought never to search for truth but by the
natural  road  of  experiment  and  observation,"  writes Lavoisier; and
Faraday  describes  himself  as "an experimentalist" who feels "bound to
let experiment guide me into any train of thought which it may justify."
The  science  of electricity, he finds, "is in that state in which every
part  of  it  requires  experimental  investigation,  not merely for the
discovery of new effects," but ultimately for "the more ac-

[400b]
curate  determination  of  the  first  principles  of action of the most
extraordinary and universal power in nature." Methods of experimentation
necessarily  differ  in  different fields of physical research. Newton's
optical  experiments  with  mirrors  and  prisms  were  adapted  to  the
phenomena  of  light,  as  Galileo's experiment with the inclined plane,
Pascal's   experiment   on  the  equilibrium  of  fluids,  or  Faraday's
experiments  with  induction  coils  were  adapted  to  the phenomena of
dynamics,  hydrostatics,  and  electricity.  The materials employed, the
apparatus  or  instruments  devised,  the factors controlled or isolated
from irrelevant circumstances, and the units of measurement in which the
results   are   recorded,   naturally  vary  with  the  phenomena  under
observation.  Yet  one  thing  is  common  to the variety of experiments
described  in  the great books of physical science. They all involve the
construction  of  an  artificial  physical  system  which  permits  more
accurate  and  refined  observation  than  does  nature  uncontrolled or
untampered  with.  The  student  of  nature must observe in any case, no
matter  whether  he  is  a  philosopher  or  a  scientist.  To  say that
philosophical  physics  is  non-experimental does not mean for Aristotle
that  knowledge  of  nature is possible without observation or induction
from  experience.  But  the experimentalists insist upon the distinction
between  the  kind of observations which men normally make in the course
of everyday experience and the kind which involve the special experience
enjoyed  only by those who observe and, in addition, measure the results
of  specially  contrived experiments. This point of distinction seems to
be  strikingly  illustrated  by a passage in Galileo's Two New Sciences.
One  of  the  persons  in  the  dialogue,  Simplicio, declares "everyday
experience  to  show  the  propagation of light to be instantaneous." He
explains  that  "when  we  see  a  piece  of  artillery fired at a great
distance,  the  flash  reaches  our  eyes without lapse of time; but the
sound reaches the ear only after a noticeable interval." Sagredo replies
that  this  familiar  bit  of  experience permits him to infer only that
"sound,  in  reaching  our ear, travels more slowly than light." It does
not inform us, he says, "whether the coming of light is instanta-

[401a]
neous or whether, although extremely rapid, it still occupies time." The
choice  between  these  alternatives could not be determined by ordinary
experience.  An experiment had to_be constructed in order to measure the
velocity  of  light.  Recourse to experimentation to find by observation
and  measurement  the  answers  which ordinary experience fails to yield
does  not  exhaust  the  uses  of  experiment.  The  great  experimental
physicists  indicate  at  least three distinct uses to which experiments
can be put in addition to a merely exploratory use for "the discovery of
new  effects."  In  natural philosophy as in mathematics, writes Newton,
"the method of analysis ought ever to precede the method of composition"
or  synthesis.  In  physics,  the method of analysis "consists in making
experiments  and  observations,  and in drawing conclusions from them by
induction." In contrast, the synthetic method begins with the principles
assumed,  therefrom  "explaining  the  phenomena  .  . . and proving the
explanations."  Here  experiments  perform  a  probative  rather than an
inductive  function. As Huygens observes, proof in physics does not have
the  certitude  of  mathematical  demonstration,  but  it  can  have  an
extremely  high  degree  of  probability —"very often scarcely less than
complete  proof"—as  a  result  of  the  experimental  confirmation of a
conclusion deduced from the assumed principles. This occurs "when things
which  have  been demonstrated by the principles that have been assumed,
correspond perfectly to the phenomena which experiment has brought under
observation, especially when there are a great number of them." A single
crucial experiment, so perfect in construction that all relevant factors
have   been   controlled,   makes   unnecessary  the  multiplication  of
experiments  to  establish  the conclusion. A third use of experiment is
illustrated  by  Galileo when he measures the velocity of a ball rolling
down   an   inclined  plane,  in  order  to  decide  whether  a  certain
mathematical  definition  of  uniformly accelerated motion describes the
acceleration  "which one meets in nature in the case of falling bodies."
The  persons in the dialogue seem to be satisfied with some mathematical
reasoning which shows that the velocity

[401b]
Chapter  67: PHYSICS 367 increases with the units of time elapsed rather
than  with the intervals of space traversed. But when Simplicio asks for
an  experiment  to  show  that  the mathematical conclusion has physical
reality,  in  the  sense  of  describing  observable phenomena, Salviati
replies  that  this  request  "is a very reasonable one, for this is the
custom   —and   properly   so—in   those   sciences  where  mathematical
demonstrations   are  applied  to  natural  phenomena"  and  "where  the
principles  once  established  by  well-chosen  experiments  become  the
foundations  of  the  entire  superstructure."  Here experiment does not
confirm   conclusions.  It  establishes  principles,  not  by  inductive
generalization  but  by  comparing actual measurements with mathematical
exWithout experiment but not without inductions from experience, without
measurements  but  not  without  recourse  to  observation,  Aristotle's
Physics—and  with it such physical treatises as his works On the Heavens
and  On Generation and Corruption— represents a philosophy of nature. In
Aristotle's  meaning  of  the  term  'science,'  these treatises expound
sciences,  but  they  also  constitute  one  part  of  philosophy, to be
distinguished  from  mathematics  and from what Aristotle regards as the
first   or   highest   part   of   philosophy,   i.e.,  the  science  of
metaAristotle's   tripartite  division  of  the  theoretic  sciences  or
speculative philosophy into physics, mathematics, and metaphysics raises
a  question  concerning  his numerous biological works, and perhaps also
his  treatise  On  the  Soul.  Are  these  to  be classified as physical
sciences  or  parts  of  natural  philosophy?  The  fact  that Aristotle
distinguishes  between the forms and properties of living and non-living
matter  does  not seem to affect the answer. By his criteria of physical
inquiry—namely,  that  it  investigates  what  neither exists nor can be
conceived  apart  from  matter and motion, and that it is concerned with
every  type  of  change—all these works belong to the domain of physics.
Accordingly  even such apparently psychological studies as those dealing
with  sensation, memory, dreams, justify the title under which they have
been   traditionally  grouped  Parva  Naturalia,  i.e.,  short  physical
treatises.

[402a]
368  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  For all these more specialized considerations of
natural  phenomena the Physics seems to serve as a general introduction,
as  well as being in its own right an exposition of the most fundamental
science  in  the sphere of natural philosophy. It tries to define change
and to state the principles underlying every type of change. It tries to
classify  the  types of change, separating coming to be and passing away
simply  (or  generation  and corruption), from coming to be in a special
respect  (or  change  in  quality,  quantity, and place) which Aristotle
usually  calls  "motion" in distinction from "becoming" or "generation."
It  undertakes  to analyze the conditions or causes of change or motion,
to distinguish what happens by chance from what happens of necessity, to
discriminate  between natural and unnatural or violent motions, to treat
the  relation  of  mover  and  moved,  to  deal  with the continuity and
divisibility  of  motions,  to  consider place and time as conditions or
aspects  of motion, and to ask about the infinity of body and of change,
and  about  the  eternity  of motion or the whole order of becoming, the
natural  world  of  things  in motion. Aristotle's physics thus seems to
stand  in  sharp  contrast  to  the physics of the experimentalists, not
merely  in  method,  but  in the questions it tries to answer and in the
principles  to  which it appeals. The effort to define change in general
and to state the principles and causes operative in every type of change
might  appear  to  correspond  to  the  search  for  formulae of maximum
generality  to cover all natural phenomena. But where Newton and Fourier
hope thereby to reduce nature's variety to the simplest terms—a few laws
of  motion comprehending the whole framework of natureAristotle tends on
the  contrary  to insist upon an irreducible variety of types of motion,
kinds  of  matter,  and causes of change. Furthermore, the principles to
which   Aristotle  appeals  are  not  mathematical.  He  criticizes  the
discussion  of  becoming  which  takes  place in Plato's Timaeus, on the
ground  that  it  tries to substitute mathematical for physical terms in
the  analysis  of change. "Physical bodies contain surfaces and volumes,
lines  and  points,"  he  writes,  "and  these are the subject matter of
mathematics";  but  the mathematician is not concerned with these things
as the attributes of

[402b]
physical bodies, but only as separated, in thought at least, from matter
and  motion.  There are sciences which represent mixtures of mathematics
and  physics,  such  as optics and harmonics, but the existence of these
mixed  sciences—  the  equivalent  of what is later called "mathematical
physics"—seems  to Aristotle to imply rather than deny the separation of
purely  physical science from pure mathematics. Where Newton (who can be
taken as the exemplary author of a physics which is at once mathematical
and  experimental)  goes  to  mathematics  for the principles of natural
philosophy,  Aristotle  seems  to  think that physics has its own proper
principles.  If  any deeper understanding of these principles is sought,
it  is  not  to  be  found  in  mathematics, but in metaphysics, or what
Aristotle  calls  "the  first philosophy." For example, matter, form and
privation,  are  proposed by Aristotle as the basic physical principles.
In such terms he is able to state his insight that all change involves a
substratum (or that which changes) and contraries (or thatfrom which and
that to which the change occurs). But the analysis of matter and form in
terms  of  potentiality  and  actuality  as  modes  of  being,  and  the
consideration  of  form  and  privation in terms of being and non-being,
belong  to  metaphysics rather than physics. Furthermore, Aristotle as a
physicist  deals  with  bodies in motion and with the difference between
the generation of bodies and their alteration, increase and decrease, or
change  of  place. But he leaves to metaphysics— to the books which come
after  the  books  on  physics  the  discussion  of  physical  bodies as
substances  composite  of  matter  and  form,  and  the  distinction  of
substance and accident which bears on the difference between substantial
and accidental change (i.e., generation and corruption as opposed to the
change  in quality, quantity, or place). Though for Aristotle physics is
as  separate  from  metaphysics  as  it  is  from mathematics in subject
matter,   physics   depends  upon  metaphysics,  as  it  does  not  upon
mathematics,  for  the  establishment  as well as the elucidation of its
principles.  It  is in this sense that metaphysics is logically prior to
physics. But there may also be a sense in which philosophical physics is

[403a]
logically  prior to experimental natural science. To the extent that the
experimentalist  employs physical as opposed to mathematical principles,
he  may  have to derive these from a philosophy^ of nature. Galileo, for
example, investigatesme properties of natural and violent motions in the
Third  and  Fourth  Day  of  his  Two New Sciences {i.e., the motions of
freely  falling  bodies and of projectiles). The problem of establishing
the reality of this distinction and of defining the natural and the non-
natural  types  of motion seems to be a matter of philosophical analysis
rather  than  of  experimental  investigation.  Bacon and Kant appear to
agree  with  Aristotle about the separation of physics from mathematics.
Rational  (or  pure,  as  opposed to empirical) physics is, according to
Kant,  "entirely  separate  from  mathematics." It is not to be confused
with  "what  is  commonly called physica generalis, which is mathematics
rather  than a philosophy of nature." Criticizing the natural philosophy
of  the  ancients  because  it  is  corrupted  by logic in the school of
Aristotle  and  by  mathematics  in the school of Plato, Bacon says that
mathematics should "terminate natural philosophy rather than generate or
create  it.  We  may  hope  for better results," he adds, "from pure and
unmixed   natural   philosophy."  Bacon  elsewhere  observes  that  "the
investigation  of  nature is best conducted when mathematics are applied
to physics." He does not deny "the great use of mathematics in physics,"
but  rather  insists  that  mathematics  be regarded as "an appendage or
auxiliary"  of natural philosophy, not its master. He is writing against
the  mathematicians "who would have their science preside over physics."
But  to  whatever  extent  Aristotle,  Bacon,  and Kant are in agreement
concerning  the  relation  of physics and mathematics, their theories of
the  scope  and  subject  matter  of physics seem to be at variance. For
Bacon, physics is only one of the theoretic parts of natural philosophy;
the  other  is  metaphysics. Both are sciences of nature or the physical
world,  though one investigates material and efficient, the other formal
and   final   causes.   Both   studies,   moreover,   can  be  conducted
experimentally and can yield practical fruits (in mechanics and

[403b]
Chapter 67: PHYSICS 369 what Bacon calls "magic") through the production
of  effects  by  the application of a knowledge of causes. For Kant, the
whole  body of theoretical knowledge which is rational and a priori, not
empirical  and  a  posteriori, is the metaphysic of nature, of which one
part  is  rational  physics,  and  the  other  rational psychology. "The
metaphysic  of  corporeal  nature,"  he  writes,  "is called physic, or,
because  it  must  contain  the  principles  of an a priori knowledge of
nature  only, rational physic." Here physics and metaphysics do not have
distinct objects as they do for Aristotle; nor does Kant's conception of
physics  as  purely  a  priori  knowledge  of  nature seem to agree with
Aristotle's  conception  of  physics  as inductive and empirical, if not
experThese  issues concerning the relation of physics to mathematics and
metaphysics  have  significance  for  the  experimental  as  well as the
philosophical  study  of nature. If, for example, following the position
taken  by  Hume,  metaphysical  inquiry  is  dismissed  as  incapable of
yielding  knowledge,  and  mathematical  knowledge  is restricted to the
realm  of  ideal entities, then natural science, which for Hume consists
in  experimental  reasoning  about  matters  of  fact,  becomes the only
knowledge  of  reality.  Even  though Hume looks upon the conclusions of
experimental  reasoning  as  at  best probable, it remains the case that
questions  about  nature  which  cannot be answered by physics cannot be
answered  scientifically.  The  effect  is  the same as that achieved by
Hobbes,  who  makes physics the primary science of reality on the ground
that  nothing  exists  except  bodies  in  motion.  The assertion of the
primacy  of  physics,  in  short,  may  be due either to the denial that
immaterial  objects  can  be  known  by  us,  or to the denial that such
objects  have  any  real  existence. Of quite opposite tenor is the view
that only immaterial and eternal things can be scientifically known, and
that  the  sensible world of things which come to be, pass away, and are
forever  undergoing  change,  belongs  to  the  realm of probability and
opinion,  not  knowledge.  For  Plato, mathematics and dialectic can be,
respectively,  science  and  wisdom  because they study the intelligible
reality of being in its im-

[404a]
370  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  preciating physics by contrasting its probabilof
physics.  and  philosophical  physics  of nature: the metaphysics of the
scientist  relation  to  mathematical  formulations  creating  ideal  or
isolated  physical  systems theory or hypothesis in experimentation 4<r.
Experimental testing and verification: the crucial experiment mastery of
nature

[404b]
mutable  forms.  But the physicists who try to ity with the certitude of
mathematics.  It praises give an account of becoming in all its changing
mathematics  and dialectic, as Hume's theory sensible appearances can do
no  better  than  does not, for something more than their certi- "adduce
probabilities  as likely as any others." tude— for their being knowledge
of  reality  On  such matters, Timaeus says, "we ought to rather than of
appearances, accept a tale which is probable and inquire no Furthermore,
Hume,  unlike  Plato,  does not further." After discoursing at length of
physithink the probability of physics detracts from cal matters, Timaeus
apologizes  for  the merely its utility, the sort of utility which Bacon
magconjectural   character   of  his  account  of  natural  nifies  more
eloquently  than  Hume—  the  invenphenomena,  saying  that  "a  man may
sometion  of  machines  and  the  technical applications times set aside
meditations  about  eternal  things,  of physics whereby man extends his
dominion  and for recreation turn to consider the truths over nature. In
the  traditional  discussion of the of becoming which are probable only;
he  will  dignity  and  value  of  physics,  Plato and Bacon thus gain a
pleasure  not  to be repented of, and seem to represent attitudes as far
apart  as  are  secure  for  himself  a  wise and moderate pastime." the
theories  of  Aristotle  and  Newton  in the This view goes further than
Hume's  in  dediscussion  of  the  subject  matter and method OUTLINE OF
TOPICS PAGE sophical physics, the philosophy of nature, pure or rational
physics 371 ib. The relation of the philosophy of nature to mathematics:
mathematical  method  and  mathematical principles in natural philosophy
372 ia. The derivation of definitions, distinctions, and principles from
the  philosophy  ib.  The  treatment  of  causes  in  philosophical  and
empirical  physics:  description  and explanation, theory and prediction
373  4.  The  experimental  method  in  the  study of nature 374 40. The
distinction  between  simple observation and experimentation: the art of
/\b.  Experimental  discovery: inductive generalization from experiment;
the   role   of   4^.   Experimental  measurement:  the  application  of
mathematical formulae 375

[405a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283) 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halvesof  the  page.For example, in 53 James: Psychology, 116a-119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than continuously in the works or passage cited.
For  additional information, concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. Physics as the general theory
of  becoming  and  the order of nature or change: philosophical physics,
the philosophy of nature, pure or rational physics 7 Plato: Republic, bk
vii,  391b-398c/  Timaeus,  447a-477a,c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i
259a-b; ch 2 b25-i85ai9l 259c-260a; ch 9
[i92a33-b2]
268c-d; bk ii, ch 2 270a-271a; ch 7-9 275b-
[i8 4
278a,c; bk hi, ch i
[200^2-24] 278a; ch
5
[204a34-b3] 282b-c; bk
iv, ch i
[208*27-33]
287a; bk viii, ch 3 [253 a32-b6] 337c / Heavens, bk 1, ch i
[268*1-7] 359a; ch
5
[27ibi-i8]
362c-d; bk hi, ch i [298b i3~3o] 390a-b; ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992
a29~b9] 510c-d; bk ii, ch 3
[995*15-20]
513d; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk vii, ch ii
[1037*10-18] 560d; bk xi, ch 3 [io6i*29-b i2]
589c-d;  ch 4 589d-590a; ch 7 592b-593a / Soul, bk i, ch i [403*25-b i9]
632b-d / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436*1 6-b2]
673b  /  Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 27 [48ob2i-3i] 726d 9 Aristotle:
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch i 161a-165d esp [639^2-640*10] 162a-b 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk viii, ch 2
265b-

[405b]
Chapter  67: PHYSICS 371 266a; ch 4 266d-267c; ch 5-6, 268b-269c; bk xi,
ch 25 336b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q i, a i, rep 2 3b-4a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  71c-d; 72a-d; part iv, 271d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  33b-34b; 40a-c; 42c-43d 31 Descartes: Rules,
xiv,  31c-d  /  Discourse,  part  vi,  61b-62c  /  Meditations, 1, 76c /
Objections and Replies, 215a-b; 285b-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
iv,  ch  xxi,  sect  1-2 394d; sect 5 395c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  101-117 432c-436b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d esp 5d-6c; 18d19a /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-d; 271a-c /Judgement, 578a-b 53
James:   Psychology,  882a-886a;  889a-890a  la.  The  relation  of  the
philosophy  of  nature  to  metaphysics  and  dialectic 7 Plato: Phaedo,
240d-242b  /  Republic, bk vi, 385c-388a; bk vii, 391b-398c 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i84b25-i85*
19]  259c-260a; ch 9 [i92*33-b2] 268c-d; bk ii, ch 2 [i94b8-i5] 271a; ch
7 [198*22-31] 275b-c; bk in, ch 5 [204*34^3] 282b-c; bk viii, ch i

[406a]
(1. Physics as the general theory of becoming and the order of nature or
change:  philosophical  physics,  the  philosophy  of  nature,  pure  or
rational  physics,  la.  The  relation  of  the  philosophy of nature to
metaphysics and dialectic.)
[250b u-25i a8] 334a-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch
i
[298b i3-3o] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 8
[989b2i-990a8] 507d-508a; bk
ii, ch 3
[995
15-20] 513d; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk vii, ch 11
[io37aio-i8]
560d; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i a29-b i2] 589c-d; ch 4 589d-590a; ch 7
592b-593a; bk xii, ch i
[io69a3o-b2] 598b-c
/  Soul,  bk 1, ch 1 [403^5^19] 632b-d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 85, a 1, rep 2 451c-453c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  72a-d  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
33b-34b;  42c-43d  /  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph i 137a; aph 9 140b-c 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 17d-19a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-d /
Practical Reason, 351b-352c / Judgement, 561c-562a,c; 578a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  epilogue ii, 693d694d 53 James: Psychology, 862a-866a;
884b-886a  esp  886a  lb.  The  relation  of the philosophy of nature to
mathematics:  mathematical method and mathematical principles in natural
philosophy  7  Plato:  Republic, bk vii, 391b-398c / Timaeus, 449b-450b;
453b-454a; 458a-460b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 2 270a-271a; ch 9
[2ooai5~29] 277c-d
/  Heavens,  bk hi, ch 1 [299 ai-3ooa i9] 390b-391c / Metaphysics, bk 1,
ch 9
[992
a29-b  9] 510c-d; bk ii, ch 3 513c-d; bk vi, ch 1 547b,d-548c; bk xi, ch
3
[io6i a29]-CH
4
[io6i b33]
589c-590a; ch 7 592b-593a; bk xii, ch 8
[io73b i-i7] 603d604a; bk
xiii,  ch  3 609a-610a / Soul, bk i, ch 1 [403b io-i9] 632d 9 Aristotle:
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  1,  ch  1  [639b  6-12]  161c-d  11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic, bk i, 812b-d; 813d814a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1,
q  i, a i, rep 2 3b-4a; q 7, a 3, ans 32c-33c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 72a-d; part iv, 268c-d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 133b;
third  day, 236d-237a; fourth day, 252a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a-c;
xiv,  31c-d  /  Objections and Replies, 169c-170a 34 Newton: Principles,
la-2a; bk hi, 269a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d; 17d-19a; 211c218d

[406b]
372  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  \b to 2a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
695b-c  53  James: Psychology, 882a-883a 2. Experimental physics and the
empirical   natural   sciences:   the   relation   of  experimental  and
philosophical  physics 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 391b-398c 8 Aristotle:
Heavens,  bk  ii,  ch 13 [293^5-31] 384d; bk in, ch 7 [306^-18] 397b-c /
Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i, ch 2 [3i6a5-i4] 411c-d 9 Aristotle:
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  i, ch i 161a165d esp [639b32-640a io] 162a-b 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  la-b;  bk  ii,  27b-c  28  Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  third  day, 202d-203a; 214d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
16a-b;  30d11  31a;  33b-34b;  42a-43d;  46c-47c  /  Novum Organum, pref
105a-106d;  bk  i,  aph  15  108a; aph 51 111c; aph 54 110c-d; aph 63-64
113d-114b; aph 66 114d-115c; aph 80 120a-b; aph 95 126b-c; aph 107 128c;
aph  109 128d129c; bk 11, aph 1-10 137a-140d esp aph i 137a, aph 9 140bc
31  Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a;
bk  hi,  269a; rule iii-iv 270b-271b; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics,
bk hi, 542a-543b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 24-29
320c-323a  esp  sect 26 321b-c; ch vi, sect 13 335c-d; ch xii, sect 9-13
360d-362d  passim,  esp sect 10 361bc 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
59  424b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 23-27 459a-460d esp
div  26  460bc;  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d-509d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  336b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  5a-13d  esp  5c-6c;  17d19a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
253a-d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-b /judgement, 561c-562a,c;
578a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, lc-2d 49 Darwin: Origin
of  Species, 239c 50 Marx: Capital, 6c 53 James: Psychology, xiiib-xiva;
883b  54  Freud:  Narcissism, 400d-401a / General Introduction, 545c-d /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms, and Anxiety, 722a-b / New Introductory Lectures,
873d-875a esp 874d-875a 2a. The derivation of definitions, distinctions,
and  principles  from  the  philosophy of nature: the metaphysics of the
scientist 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk hi, ch 7 [306^-18] 397b-c / Sense and
the Sensible, ch i
[436*
i6-b  i7] 673b-c / Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 27 [48ob2i-3o] 726d 10
Hippocrates:  Ancient Medicine, par 1-2 lad 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v,
104b-105d; bk vi, 109a b

[407a]
2b to 3 Chapter 67: PHYSICS 373 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
135b-136b;  third  day,  197a-b;  200a-c 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 366a-368b 34
Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule i-iii 270a271a; general schol, 369b-372a
/ Optks, bk i, 409b; bk in, 540a; 541b-542a ^"^ 34 Huygens: Light, ch i,
553b-554a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 102 432d-433a 42 Kant:
Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
part  i,  36b;  41b  c  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat, 172a 45 Faraday:
Researches  in Electricity, 582b-584a; 595a; 670a; 673d; 824a-b; 837b-c;
839b-c  53 James: Psychology, viib-viiia; 69b- 70a; 84a119b esp 89b-90a,
95a;  882a-886a; 889a 890a 54 Freud: Narcissism, 400c -40Id / Instincts,
412a-b  2b.  The  treatment  of  causes  in  philosophical and empirical
physics:  description  and  explanation,  theory and prediction 7 Plato:
Phaedo,  240d-246c  / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d-398c / Timaeus, 455a-b 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics  97a-137a,c  passim,  esp  bk  i, ch 13
107c-108c,  bk  ii,  ch 1-2 122b,d-123c, ch 9 128a-b, ch ii 128d129d, ch
16-18  134b-136a  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch 3 [i94b i6-23] 271a-b; ch 7-9
275b-278a,c; bk iv, ch 4 [2ii a6-u] 290a / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 1
[98i a24-982a i] 499c-500b; ch 2 [982*
ai8-b26] 514d515b; bk vi, ch 1 [i025b i-i8] 547b,d; bk vii, ch 17
[i04i aio-bu]
565b-d; bk viii, ch 4
[i044a33-b2o] 569a-b; bk xi, ch 7 [io63b3628-30] 500c; bk in, ch 2
[996
1064*9] 592b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639b io-642b4]
161d-165d esp
[642a i-3o]
165a-c / Gait of Animals, ch i 243a-b / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[715*1-18] 255aa35-b 5] 306c; bk v, ch i
[778^-10] 320d
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i, ch 4 169a b; bk iv, ch 1 [765 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk v [509-533] 67d-68a; bk vi [703-711]
89c-d  16  Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 16
Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 959a-960a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  32,  a  1,  rep  2 175d-178a; q 57, a 3, ans 297b298a; q 86, a 4, ans
463d-464d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60a-b;  part iv, 267a-b 28
Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  i,  6a-7a;  bk  ii,  27b-c 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,   third   day,   202d-203a;  fourth  day,  252a-b  28  Harvey:
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  319c  /  On  Animal Generation, 335c-336c;
393b-c;  425a  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 42a-c; 43a-d; 45a-46a;
46c-47c / Novum Organum,

[407b]
bk  1,  aph  48  HOd-110a;  aph  99  127b-c;  bk  ii, aph 2 137b-c / New
Atlantis,  210d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  ix, 15b-d / Discourse, part vi,
61b-62c;  66a-b / Meditations, iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies, axiom
1 131d; 215a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d 34 Newton:
Principles, la-2a; def viii 7b-8a; bk in, rule i-ii 270a; general schol,
371b372a  /  Optics,  bk  hi,  542a;  543a-b  34  Huygens:  Light, ch i,
553b-554a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch hi, sect 28-29
322a-323a  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 32 418d-419a; sect 50-53
422c-423a  passim;  sect  60-66 424b-426a passim; sect 101-109 432c-434b
passim  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9 454c-455a; sect iv,
div  26  460b-c;  sect vii, div 57, 475d-476b [fn 2]; div 60, 477a; sect
viii, div 67 480c-481a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 46d-47c / Practical Reason,
311d-314d   /  Judgement,  557c-558b;  564ac;  581a-582c  45  Lavoisier:
Elements  of Chemistry, part i, 9d-10b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a;
183a-b  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239c-240d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  ix,  344a-b;  bk  xi,  470a-c;  bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue i,
650b-c;  epilogue  11, 694d-696d 53 James: Psychology, 69b-70a; 89b-90a;
742a-b; 745b; 882a-884b passim, esp 882b-883a, 884b; 885a 886a 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  454b-c;  484a  3. The role of mathematics in the
natural   sciences:   observation   and   measurement   in  relation  to
mathematical formulations 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 9
[76*3-25] 104b-d; ch 13 [78b3i-79ai6] 108b-c
/  Physics,  bk  11,  ch  2  [194^-11]  270b-c;  bk  vii,  ch 5 333a-d /
Metaphysics, bk xiii, ch 3
[1078*5-17] 609b-c
9  Aristotle: Gait of Animals, ch 9 247a-248a 11 Archimedes: Equilibrium
of  Planes  502a519b  /  Floating Bodies 538a-560b / Method 569a-592a 14
Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252a-255a  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 964b-965a 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  v, par 3-6 27c28c / Christian Doctrine, bk
ii,  ch 29, 651 b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 32, a 1, rep
2  175d-178a;  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a 8, ans 779c-780c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 9, a 2, rep 3 424b-425a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i, 72a-d; 73b; part iv, 268c-d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first
day, 131b-132a; 133b; fourth day, 245b-d; 252a-b

[408a]
(3.  The  role  of  mathematics in the natural sciences: observation and
measurement   in  relation  to  mathematical  formulations.}  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 46b-c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 109, 129b; bk
ii, aph 8 140b: aph 39, 170b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, iv, 7a-c; xiv, 31c-d
/  Discourse,  part  i,  43b-c;  part  hi, 50d / Objections and Replies,
169c-170a  34  Newton: Principles, la-2a; def viii 7b-8a; bk 1, prop 69,
schol,  131a:  bk  in,  269a 34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Hume:
Human Understanding, sect iv, div 27 460c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
94b-103a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b-c  42  Kant: Judgement,
551a-552a  45  Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 14a-c; 33b-36a;
41a-44d; part hi, 96b-103b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b; 172a-173b;
175b;  177a;  182b-184a;  249a-b  45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
831be  50 Marx: Capital, 170a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d
53  James:  Psychology,  126a-b;  348a-359a esp 351a-354a; 675b; 876a-b;
882a-884b  4.  The  experimental  method  in the study of nature 4a. The
distinction  between  simple observation and experimentation: the art of
creating  ideal  or  isolated  physical  systems  28  Galileo:  Two  New
Sciences,  first day, 148d-149c; 166d-167b 28 Harvey: Circulation of the
Blood,  320b  50  Marx:  Capital,  6c 53 James: Psychology, 126a-127b 54
Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  815a-c 4b. Experimental discovery:
inductive   generalization  from  experiment;  the  role  of  theory  or
hypothesis in experimentation 10 Hippocrates : Ancient Medicine, par 1-8
la-3b  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone, pref, lab; bk i, 6a7a; bk 11, 27c-28a 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 131a-138b; 157b-171b passim; third
day, 203d-205b; 207d-208a 28 Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart, 273c-d; 280c-d;
285c-d / On Animal Generation, 331b-333d; 336b-d; 383d; 451b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  16a;  30d31a;  34b;  42a-c;  56c-59c / Novum
Organum,  pref-bk 1 105a-136a,c esp bk i, aph 64 114b, aph 70 116b-117a,
aph  82 120d-121b, aph 99-100 127b-c; bk ii, aph 11-14 140d-148d; aph 36
164a-168d  31  Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
359a-365b / Equilibrium of Liquids 390a-403a passim

[408b]
374  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4 to Ac 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule iii-iv
270b271b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics, bk i, 379a; 386b-404b;
424a-440a;  450a-453a;  bk  11,  457a-478b; bk ii-iii, 496a-516a; bk hi,
543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  in,  ch vi, sect 46-47 281d-282b; bk iv, ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d
passim  42  Kant:  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387a-b 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  2a-b; part 1, 10d-12d; 17a-20d esp i7a;
22d-24a;  29d-33b  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  172a:  175b; 184a 45
Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 265a-273a esp 272c-273a; 277a-300a;
319b.d-330d;  347a-351c;  362d-366c;  371d-377d;  440b,d;  607a,c; 659a;
774d-775a;  851ac  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 136b-139a passim 53
James:  Psychology,  126a-127a;  265a-268a; 341a-344b; 348a-357b passim;
385a-b 4c. Experimental testing and verification: the crucial experiment
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  13  173d177a;  bk  hi, ch 2
199d-200a;  ch  4  201b-202c;  ch  8  205a-207b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  ii  [46-105]  108b-d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
148c-149c; 166d-168a; third day, 200a-b; 202d-203a: 203d-205b; 207d-208c
28  Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 268d-273c esp 268d, 273c; 286b-304a,c
esp  286b-c,  295d296a  / Circulation of the Blood, 311c-312c; 324c-d 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 36 164a-168d 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  vi, 61c-62c; 66a-b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 368b-370a / Great Experiment
382a-389b  /  Weight of Air, 404a-405b; 425a-429a 34 Newton: Principles,
laws of motion, schol, 19b-22a; bk ii, general schol 211b-219a; prop 40,
schol  239a-246b  /  Optics,  bk  i,  392a-396b;  408a-410b;  412a-416b;
453a455a;  bk  hi,  543a-b  34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii,  sect  13  362c-d 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref, 2a-b; part 1, 17a-b; 32a-33a 45 Fourier:
Theory  of  Heat,  181b;  184a  45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity,
300b-316a;  334b-335c;  377d-383a;  385b-c;  388c-389d;  440b,d; 467a-b:
830b-832c  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  12b-c; 149d-150a 53 James:
Psychology,   865a;   882a-884b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
291d-292a  /  Narcissism,  401a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures, 815a-b;
818c-819b

[409a]
4dto5   Chapter  67:  PHYSICS  375  4d.  Experimental  measurement:  the
application   of   mathematical   formulae  92a-93b  ^_—--  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  iv,  85c-89c;  bk v, 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first
day,  136d-137c  esp  137b-c;  148d-149c; 164a-166c esp 165c-166c; third
day,  207d-208c  28  Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 286c-288c 34 Newton:
Principles,  laws  of  motion, schol, 20a-22a; bk ii, general schol 211b
219a; prop 40, schol 239a-246b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part
i, 14a-c; 17a-20b; 22d-24a; 30a-32d; 33b-36a; part hi, 87d-90a; 91a-95a;
96b-103b  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  175b;  184b-185b  45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity, 277d-279a; 316b-318c; 366d-371d; 444a-451a;
465d467a,c;  768d-773d;  778b,d-793c  53  James: Psychology, 56a-66a esp
61b-64a;  126a;  265a-268b;  341a-344b;  348a-359a  5.  The  utility  of
physics:  the  invention of machines; the techniques of engineering; the
mastery   of  nature  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,  252a-255a  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  hi,  75a-b;  bk  iv,  85c-89c;  bk  v,  lOOc-lOld CROSS-
REFERENCES  For:  The  general  discussion  of  the  distinction between
philosophy  and science, relevant to the 5f(2), 6a-6e, 7a, 7D-7C, 7d, 7c
2e;  and  for  the  treatment  of one aspect of psychophysics, see Sense
3c(2).

[409b]
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  160d-161a;  second  day,
191b-193b  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 34b / Novum Organum, bk i,
aph 81 120b-c; aph 124 133c-d; aph 129 134d-135d; bk ii, aph 39, 170b-c;
aph  44-51  175d-194c / New Atlantis, 210d-214d 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  vi 60d-67a,c esp 61bc 33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 392b-393a
34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 412a-423b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  xii,  sect  11-12 361c-362c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 99b-112a 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  5d-6a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
661c-663c   41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  291d-292c;  509d510a,c  45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part i, 26c-27a; 41a-44d; 45c-d 45
Fourier: Theory of Heat, 170a-172a; 184a; 213b 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  390b;  433a440a,c  50  Marx:  Capital,  170a-c; 180d-188c;
239c-d  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 421d 54 Freud: Civilization
and Its Discontents, 777a; 778b-779a

[410a]
376  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I.  Aquinas.  On the Trinity of Boethius, qq 5-6
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body,  part  iv,  ch  27 Newton. Letters on Various
Subjects   in   Natural  Philosophy  Kant.  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future
Metaphysic,  par  x  4_39  . Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science
Hegel. Science of Logic, vol ii, sect ii, ch 2 II. Suarez. Disputationes
Metaphysicae, 1 (4), xv (n) Boyle. New Experiments Physico -Mechanical .
The  Sceptical Chymist . The Origin of Forms and Qualities, According to
the   Corpuscular  Philosophy  .  Experiments,  Notes,  etc.  About  the
Mechanical Origine or Production of Divers Particular Qualities Voltaire.
Letters  on the English, xiv-xvii Black. Experiments upon Magnesia Alba,
Quicklime,  and Some Other Alcaline Substances J. Priestley. Experiments
and  Observations  on  Different  Kinds of Air Cavendish. Experiments of
Factitious  Air  . Electrical Researches . Experiments on Air Schelling.
Ideen  zu  einer  Philosophic  der  Natur  T. Young. Lectures on Natural
Philosophy and the Mechanical Arts Davy. Elements of Chemical Philosophy
Dalton.  A  New  System  of  Chemical  Philosophy  Comte.  The  Positive
Philosophy, bk iii-iv Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,
VOL  I,  BK  V-VI  Tyndall.  On  the Study of Physics Helmholtz. Popular
Lectures  on Scientific Subjects, 1 Herschel. A Preliminary Discourse on
the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophy  .  Familiar  Lectures on Scientific
Subjects, vi-vm, XIII Mendeleyev. The Principles of Chemistry W. Thomson
and   Tait.  Treatise  on  Natural  Philosophy  .  Elements  of  Natural
Philosophy  Lotze.  Grundzuge  der  Naturphilosophie Maxwell. Matter and
Motion Clifford. The Common Sense ofthe Exact Sciences, ch 2, 5 Ostwald.
Natural Philosophy

[410b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this collection. For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning the publication of the works cited, consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas.  Poincare.  The  Value  of Science, part ii Duhem. La
theorie  physique, son objet—sa structure Meyerson. Identity and Reality
Cassirer.  Substance  and  Function,  part  i,  ch  4;  SUP  VII  Broad.
Perception,  Physics,  and Reality N. R. Campbell. Physics; the Elements
Pauli.  Relativitdtstheorie  Lorentz.  Lectures on Theoretical Physics .
Problems  of Modern Physics Whitehead. The Concept of Nature, ch 9 . The
Principle  of Relativity with Applications to Physical Science . Science
and the Modern World, ch 7-8 Bridgman. The Logic of Modern Physics Weyl.
Space—Time—Matter  .  Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science Bohr.
Atomic  Theory  and  the  Description of Nature Heisenberg. The Physical
Principles  ofthe Quantum Theory Santayana. The Realm of Matter, ch i M.
R.  Cohen. Reason and Nature, bk ii, ch 2 Lenzen. The Nature of Physical
Theory  Einstein.  Relativity:  The  Special  and  the  General Theory .
Sidelights  on Relativity . The Meaning of Relativity . On the Method of
Theoretical  Physics  Carnap.  The  Unity  of  Science  . Philosophy and
Logical  Syntax,  in (5-9) Maritain. An Introduction to Philosophy, part
ii  (3)  . The Degrees of Knowledge, ch 3 . Science and Wisdom, pp 34-69
Gilson.  The Unity of Philosophical Experience, ch 9 Einstein and Infeld.
The  Evolution  of  Physics  Watson.  On  Understanding  Physics D'Abro.
Decline  of  Mechanism  in  Modern  Physics  Eddington. The Mathematical
Theory  of  Relativity  .  The  Philosophy  of Physical Science Riezler.
Physics and Reality P. Frank. Between Physics and Philosophy B. Russell.
Our Knowledge of the External World, iii-iv . The Analysis of Matter, ch
1-26, 37 . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part I, CH 3; PART II,
CH  4  Planck.  A  Survey of Physics . The Philosophy of Physics, ch 1 .
Scientific Autobiography Schlick. Philosophy of Nature

[411a]
Chapter  68:  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN INTRODUCTION PLEASURE and pain, writes
Locke,  "like  other  simple ideas, cannot be described, nor their names
defined;  the  way  of  knowing  them is . . . only by experience." That
pleasure  and  pain are elementary experiences, attributed to animals as
well   as  enjoyed  or  suffered  by  men,  is  attested  by  poets  and
physiologists  alike,  by  economists and theologians, by historians and
moralists.  Yet  in  the  tradition of western thought, few of the great
writers  are content to leave the nature or meaning of pleasure and pain
to  the  intuitions  of  experience  alone.  Conflicting definitions are
proposed.  Psychologists  disagree  about the conditions under which the
feelings  of  pleasure  and  pain  occur, their causes and consequences,
their  relation  to  sensation,  to  desire  and  emotion,  to  thought,
volition,  and  action.  Moralists  dispute whether pleasure is the only
good  and  pain  the  only evil, whether pleasure is only one good among
others  to  be  assessed  according  to its worth in the scale of goods,
whether   pleasure  and  pain  are  morally  indifferent,  whether  some
pleasures  are good, others bad, or all are intrinsically evil. Not only
in  the  theory of good and evil, but also in the theories of beauty and
truth, pleasure and pain are fundamental terms. They are affected by all
the  difficulties  which belong to these great themes; and also with the
difficulties  attendant  on the ideas of virtue, sin, and punishment, of
duty  and  happiness,  into the consideration of which pleasure and pain
traditionally  enter.  The  traditional  use of the words "pleasure" and
"pain" is complicated by more than the variety of definitions which have
been  given.  Other words are frequently substituted for them, sometimes
as  synonyms  and  sometimes to express only one part or aspect of their
meaning. Locke, for example, uses "pleasure" 377

[411b]
or  "delight,"  "pain" or "uneasiness," and he observes that "whether we
call  it  satisfaction,  delight,  pleasure, happiness, etc., on the one
side,  or  uneasiness, trouble, pain, torment, anguish, misery, etc., on
the  other,  they  are  still  but different degrees of the same thing."
Other  writers  use  "joy"  and  "sorrow"  or  "grief"  as  synonyms for
"pleasure"  and  "pain."  The  words  "pleasure"  and "pain" are closely
associated  in  meaning  with  "pleasant" and "unpleasant," though Freud
sometimes  uses "unpleasure" (unlust) to signify an opposite of pleasure
which  is not the same as ordinary pain (schmerz). The pleasant is often
called  "agreeable,"  "enjoyable,"  or  "satisfying." In the language of
Shakespeare,  the  words  "like"  and  "dislike"  have  currency  as the
equivalents  of  "please" and "displease." A person who is displeased by
something  says  of  it  that  "it  likes  me  not." The problem of what
pleasure   and   pain   are  seems  logically  to  precede  the  ethical
consideration  of their relation to good and evil, happiness and misery,
virtue  and  duty.  But  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  the
psychological  questions  about  pleasure and pain are usually raised in
moral   or   political  treatises,  and  sometimes  in  connection  with
discussions  of  rhetoric.  What  pleasure is, how it is caused, and the
effects  it  produces are seldom considered apart from whether pleasures
should  be sought or avoided, whether some pleasures should be preferred
to  others,  and  whether  pleasure  is  the sole criterion of the good.
Sometimes,  as  with  Marcus  Aurelius and Epictetus, the ethical point—
that  pleasure  and  pain  are in one sense morally indifferent— is made
without  any  psychological  account  of  the nature and origin of these
experiences.  More  frequently,  as  in Plato's Philebus and Aristotle's
Ethics, or in the

[412a]
378  THE  GREAT  IDEAS writings of Hobbes, Spinoza, Locke, and Mill, the
psychological discussion is imbedded in an ethical or political context.
Even  Lucretius and William James do not seem to be complete exceptions.
James' theory that the feeling of pleasure accompanies activity which is
unimpeded,  whereas pain attends arrested activity, seems to be a purely
psychological  observation,  and  one which can be readily divorced from
moral  considerations  on  the ground that it makes no difference to the
occurrence  of  pleasure  and  pain  whether the activity in question is
ethically  good  or  bad. Yet James makes this observation the basis for
arguing  against  those whom he calls "the pleasure-philosophers"— those
who  make  pleasure the only motive or goal of conduct. They confuse, he
thinks,   the  pursuit  of  pleasure  itself  with  the  pleasure  which
accompanies  the successful achievement of other things which may be the
goals  of  activity.  "A pleasant act" he writes, "and an act pursuing a
pleasure  are  in  themselves two perfectly distinct conceptions, though
they  coalesce  in  one  concrete  phenomenon  whenever  a  pleasure  is
deliberately  pursued . . . Because a pleasure of achievement can become
a pursued pleasure upon occasion, it does not follow that everywhere and
always  that  pleasure  must be pursued." One might as well suppose that
"because  no  steamer can go to sea without incidentally consuming coal,
and  because some steamers may occasionally go to sea to try their coal,
that  therefore  no steamer can go to sea for any other motive than that
of  coal-consumption."  Psychological  observations of this sort have an
obvious  relevance  to  Aristotle's theory of good and bad pleasures, as
well as to Locke's and Mill's position that pleasure is the only good or
the  only  object  of  desire. They reveal an ethical strain even in the
psychologist's  view  of  pleasure  and pain. The same point can be made
with   regard  to  James'  observation  that  "pleasures  are  generally
associated   with  beneficial,  pains  with  detrimental,  experiences."
Lucretius appears to give a purely physiological account of pleasure and
pain  in  terms  of  the  effect upon the sense-organs of various atomic
configurations.  "Those things which can touch the senses pleasantly are
made of smooth and round bodies, but those which

[412b]
seem  to  be  bitter and harsh are made up of particles more hooked, and
for  this  reason are wont to tear a way into our senses . . . Hot fires
and  cold  frost  have  particles  fanged in different ways to prick the
senses."  But  Lucretius is concerned to point out not only the basis of
pain  in  the  atomic nature of things, but also the natural tendency of
all  sensible  things  to  avoid pain as the one besetting evil. "Nature
cries aloud for nothing else but that pain may be kept far sundered from
the  body, and that, withdrawn from care and fear, she may enjoy in mind
the  sense of pleasure." Without giving any psychological explanation of
the  pleasures  of  the mind, Lucretius sets them above the pleasures of
the   body  because  the  latter—as  his  diatribe  against  love  makes
clear—seem  to  be  inevitably followed by bodily torments or even to be
admixed  with  them.  The  first  maxim  of nature, then, is not to seek
pleasure,  but  to  avoid  pain;  and  among  pleasures to seek only the
unmixed  or  pure, the pleasures of knowledge and truth. The distinction
between  different  qualities  of pleasure (pleasures of the body and of
the  mind, mixed and pure pleasures), which is made by Plato and Mill as
well  as  by  Lucretius, inevitably tends to have at once both moral and
psychological  significance. If, in the great books, there is any purely
psychological   theory   of  pleasure  and  pain,  divorced  from  moral
considerations,  it  is  probably  to  be  found in Freud. The pleasure-
principle,  according  to  him, automatically regulates the operation of
the  mental  apparatus.  "Our entire psychical activity," he writes, "is
bent  upon  procuring  pleasure  and avoiding pain." Though pleasure and
pain  are  for  him  primary  elements  of mental life, Freud admits the
difficulty  they  present for psychological analysis. "We should like to
know,"  he  writes, "what are the conditions giving rise to pleasure and
pain,  but  that is just where we fall short. We may only venture to say
that  pleasure  is  in  some  way connected with lessening, lowering, or
extinguishing  the  amount  of  stimulation in the mental apparatus; and
that  pain  involves  a  heightening of the latter. Consideration of the
most  intense  pleasure  of  which  man  is capable, the pleasure in the
performance of the sexual act, leaves little doubt upon this point."

[413a]
Yet for Freud the pleasure-principle is not the only regulator of mental
life.  In  addition  to the sexual instincts, which aim at gratification
and pleasure, there are the ego-instincts which, "under the influence of
necessity,  thctfrnistress, soon learn to replace the pleasure-principle
by  a  modification  of  it.  The task of avoiding pain becomes for them
almost  equal  in importance to that of gaining pleasure; the ego learns
that  it  must  inevitably  go  without immediate satisfaction, postpone
gratification, learn to endure a degree of pain, and altogether renounce
certain sources of pleasure. Thus trained, the ego becomes 'reasonable,'
is  no  longer  controlled  by  the  pleasure-principle, but follows the
reality-principle,  which  at  bottom  also  seeks  pleasure—although  a
delayed and diminished pleasure, one which is assured by its realization
of  fact,  its  relation  to  reality."  This  recognition of a conflict
between   pleasure   and  reality,  with  a  consequent  attenuation  or
redirection  of the pleasure-principle, is not amplified by Freud into a
moral  doctrine.  It  does,  however, bear a striking resemblance to the
theories of moralists like Kant who oppose duty to pleasure; and also to
the  teachings of those who, like Aristotle and Aquinas, conceive virtue
as  the  foregoing  of  certain pleasand the endurance of certain pains,
ures  through a reasonable and habitual moderation of these passions. If
pleasure  and  pain  were simply sensations, like sensations of color or
sound,  they  would pose a problem for the physiological psychologist no
different  from  the  problems  which  arise in the fields of vision and
audition.  Modern  physiological  research  claims  to  have  discovered
differentiated  nerve-endings for pain which, together with the specific
sense-organs for pressure, heat, and cold, make up the cutaneous senses.
But whether there are special cells for the reception of pain stimuli or
whether  cutaneous  pain results from the too intense stimulation of the
pressure  and  thermal  nerve-endings,  there seems to be no evidence of
organs  sensitized  to  pleasure as, for example, the nerve cells of the
retina  are  sensitized to light. The feeling of pleasure, it would seem
to  follow,  is  not  a  sensation.  This  seems  to be confirmed by the
traditional observation that every type of sen-

[413b]
Chapter  68:  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN 379 sation, including the sensation of
pain,  can  be  Even if pain, unlike pleasure, is found to be a specific
mode  of sensation with a special senseorgan of its own, all other types
of   sensation   visual,  auditory,  olfactory,  etc.—might  still  have
painfulness or a feeling of unpleasantness as an attribute. That such is
the  case  seems  to  be a matter of traditional observation. Locke, for
example,  says  that  "delight  or uneasiness, one or the other of them,
join  themselves  to  almost  all our ideas of sensation and reflection:
there  is scarce any affection of our senses from without . . . which is
not able to produce in us pleasure or pain." So understood, pleasure and
pain —or the pleasant and the unpleasant—are not opposite sensations, as
are  hot  and  cold,  but  contrary  attributes with which every sort of
sensation  can  be  affected.  All  need  not be. Some sensations may be
neutral  with  respect  to  what  psvchologists call "affective tone" or
"affective  quality."  The  kind  of  pleasure  and pain which is called
"bodily" or "sensuous" would thus be sensuous because it is an attribute
of  sensations, and bodily because sensations involve bodily organs. But
in  almost  every great discussion of pleasure and pain, other types are
recognized:  intellectual delights, the pleasures and pains of learning,
aesthetic pleasure in contemplating beauty with the mind as well as with
the  senses,  and  the pain of loss, the grief accompanying deprivation,
which  is  so  different from the torment of a painful affliction of the
senses. The human suffering with which the great poems deal is much more
often  a  torment  of the spirit than of the flesh. To cover these other
types  of  pleasure  and  pain, we must go beyond sensation to two other
terms   traditionally  connected  with  the  psychological  analysis  of
pleasure  and  pain.  One is emotion, the other desire, the latter to be
understood  broadly  as  including  both  the sensitive and the rational
appetites—  both the passions and the will. Aquinas, for example, treats
joy  and  sorrow  as specific emotions which represent the appetite in a
state  of  satisfaction or frustration. So, too, the will as an appetite
can  come to rest in the attainment of its object and, with fruition, be
in a state of joy. As conditions of the appetite, pleasure and

[414a]
380 THE GREAT IDEAS pain (or joy and sorrow) can be either passions and,
like  all other emotions, bodily states; or they can be acts of the will
and,  according  to  Aquinas  at least, spiritual states. But either way
pleasure  and  pain seem to represent the satisfaction or frustration of
desire  rather  than  objects  desired  or averted. To be pleased by the
attainment of an object desired, such as food and drink or knowledge, is
not the same as to desire pleasure itself, as, for example, the pleasant
sensations  which  may  be involved in eating or drinking. Aquinas talks
about  the  desire for pleasure and the aversion to pain, as well as the
pleasure  and  pain of satisfied and unsatisfied desires. Since the same
words are almost always used to express both meanings, the two senses of
pleasure  and  displeasure  may  go  unnoticed  unless  by context or by
explicit mention the author refers to pleasure as an object of desire or
identifies  it with the satisfaction of any desire, whether for pleasure
or  for  some  other  object.  As  a  passage  already quoted from James
indicates,  and  as  we  shall presently see more fully, the distinction
between  these  two  senses  of  pleasure  has a critical bearing on the
dispute  between  those  who  think  that pleasure is the only good, and
those  who  think  that pleasure is one good among others. The generally
recognized  difference  between two kinds of pain— the pain of sense and
the  pain  of  loss  or deprivation—parallels the distinction which most
writers  acknowledge  between  sensuous  pleasure  and  the  pleasure of
possession  or satisfaction. Plato's example of the pleasure involved in
the  relief  of itching by scratching seems to catch both meanings, and,
in addition, to show that bodily pleasures may be either sensual objects
or  sensual  satisfactions.  In  contrast, the pleasures of the mind are
satisfactions  of intellectual desire, as in the contemplation of beauty
or  the  knowledge  of  truth. Aristotle deals with pleasure and pain as
objects  when  he  defines  temperance  as  a moderate pursuit of bodily
pleasures,  and  courage  as  controlling  the  fear  of  pain  and  its
avoidance.  But  he  also conceives pleasure as that which completes any
activity, whether of the senses and the body or of thought and the mind.
"Without  activity,"  he  writes,  "pleasure  does  not arise, and every
activity is completed by

[414b]
the  attendant pleasure." This meaning of pleasure seems to be analogous
to, if not identical with, pleasure as satisfaction, at least insofar as
the  satisfaction  of  a  desire  is  that  which completes the activity
springing therefrom. There can be as many different kinds of pleasure as
there  are  kinds of activity; the quality of the pleasure is determined
by  the  character of the activity it accompanies. Though Mill refers to
pleasure  and  freedom from pain as "the only things desirable as ends,"
he  admits  many other objects of desire, in the attainment of which men
find pleasure or satisfaction. It is wrong to suppose that human beings,
he  writes, are "capable of no pleasures except those of which swine are
capable."  Precisely  because "human beings have faculties more elevated
than   the   animal   appetites,"  they  have  sources  of  pleasure  or
gratification not open to swine. Here as before two meanings of pleasure
seem  to  be  involved.  In  pointing out that "money, in many cases, is
desired  in  and  for itself," Mill is naming an object of desire which,
like  health,  knowledge,  power,  or  fame, is not pleasure, yet which,
through being desired, is a source of pleasure (i.e., satisfaction) when
achieved.  Like other objects of desire, sensual or bodily pleasures may
also be sources of satisfaction. These two meanings of pleasure are most
in  need of clear distinction when the relation of pleasure to happiness
is  being  discussed.  If  happiness, as Aristotle and Mill seem to say,
consists  in having all desires satisfied, then the content of the happy
life  can  be described either in terms of the goods which the happy man
possesses—the  objects of desires fulfilled—or in terms of the pleasures
which  accompany  the  goods possessed, that is, the pleasures which are
satisfactions  of  desire.  If pleasure in the other meaning, especially
sensual  or  bodily  pleasure, is only one object of normal desire, then
lack  or  deficiency  of  pleasure  may, like loss of health or fortune,
impair  a  man's  happiness.  But  the pursuit of pleasure in this sense
cannot  be  identified  with  the pursuit of happiness. A life including
every  sort  of bodily pleasure and free from every sort of bodily pain,
if  it  lacked other things men normally desire, would be marred by many
dissatisfactions inconsistent with happiness.

[415a]
Talking  to  Don  Quixote  of the island he would like to govern, Sancho
Panza  says:  "The first thing I would do in my government, I would have
nobody  to control me, I would be absolute . . . Now he that's absolute,
can  do  what  he  likes;  he  that  can  do what he likes, can take his
pleasure; he that can take his pleasure, can be content, and he that can
be  content,  has  no  more  to  desire."  Here,  it  would seem, Sancho
conceives   happiness   as   the  sum  of  pleasures  in  the  sense  of
satisfactions—  all desires come to rest through the possession of their
objects. Dr. Johnson seems to make the opposite point about pleasure and
happiness.  Boswell  asks  him  whether abstention from wine would be "a
great deduction from life." "It is a diminution of pleasure to be sure,"
Johnson  replies,  "but  I  do  not say a diminution of happiness." But,
Boswell  asks,  "if  we  could  have  pleasure  always, should we not be
happy?"  Johnson  explains  his  negative answer by saying that "when we
talk  of  pleasure,  we  mean  sensual pleasure. When a man says, he had
pleasure with a woman, he does not mean conversation, but something of a
different  nature.  Philosophers  tell  you that pleasure is contrary to
happiness." This last observation does not seem to describe the position
taken  by  those  philosophers  who  make happiness the greatest good or
ultimate  end of human striving. Both Aristotle and Mill distinguish the
life  of  pleasure,  the bestial or swinish life, from one which employs
the  higher  faculties peculiar to man. In this sense, perhaps, the life
of  pleasure  can  be  regarded  as contrary or opposed to what Johnson,
along  with  Aristotle and Mill, calls "the rational life." But pleasure
itself,  far  from  being  inimical  to happiness, either represents the
state  of  satisfaction which is identical with happiness, or one of the
things  a  man desires and hence a constituent of the happy life. Hobbes
and  Locke  seem  to go further in the direction of identifying pleasure
with   happiness  or  the  good.  "Pleasure,"  writes  Hobbes,  "is  the
appearance  or  sense  of  Good . . . and Displeasure, the appearance or
sense of Evil." Similarly, Locke says that "things are good or evil only
in  reference  to  pleasure  or  pain. That we call good which is apt to
cause  or  increase pleasure or to diminish pain in us . . . And, on the
contrary, we name that evil which is apt to pro-

[415b]
Chapter 68: PLEASURE AND PAIN 381 duce or increase any pain, or diminish
any  pleasure  in us." As for happiness, it is, according to Locke, "the
utmost  pleasure  we are capable of, and misery the utmost pain; and the
lowest  degree  of what can be called happiness is so much ease from all
pain,  and  so  much present pleasure, as without which anyone cannot be
content."  In which sense of the term is Locke identifying pleasure with
happiness?  Not  sensual  pleasure,  nor  even  pleasure as an object of
desire,  it would seem, for he says: "Let one man place his satisfaction
in sensual pleasure, another in the delight of knowledge; though each of
them  cannot  but  confess  there  is  great  pleasure in what the other
pursues,  yet  neither  of them making the other's delight a part of his
happiness,  their  desires  are not moved, but each is satisfied without
what the other enjoys." Yet his understanding of happiness as consisting
in  the pleasures or satisfactions accompanying the possession of things
desired  leads  him  to  criticize "the philosophers of old" who "did in
vain  inquire  whether  the  summum bonum consisted in riches, or bodily
delights,  or  virtue,  or  contemplation; they might have as reasonably
disputed  whether  the best relish were to be found in apples, plums, or
nuts,  and  have  divided themselves into sects upon it. For as pleasant
tastes  depend  not on the things themselves, but on their agreeableness
to  this  or  that particular palate, wherein there is great variety; so
the greatest happiness consists in the having those things which produce
the  greatest pleasure . . . These, to different men, are very different
things." The difference between Locke's position and that of Mill seems,
therefore,  not  to  lie  in  a  different conception of the relation of
pleasure  —  as  object  or as satisfaction of desire— to happiness, but
rather in Locke's conception of degrees of happiness as being determined
only  by larger and smaller quantities of pleasure, whereas Mill insists
upon diverse qualities of pleasure, and upon the possibility of ordering
pleasures  as  higher and lower. In consequence, Mill can say what Locke
would  seem  unable to approve, namely, that "it is better to be a human
being   dissatisfied  than  a  pig  satisfied;  better  to  be  Socrates
dissatisfied  than  a  fool satisfied." Locke's denial that happiness is
the same

[416a]
382  THE GREAT IDEAS for all men explicitly takes issue with Aristotle's
contrary  view.  It also involves an issue about pleasure. For Locke, as
apparently   for  Hobbes  and  Mill,  the  good  and  the  pleasant  are
inseparable.  Nothing  which satisfies a desire can be evil. Whether, as
in  Locke's  view,  one satisfaction is as good as another, and the only
thing  which  matters  is  the  amount  or  number  of satisfactions; or
whether,  as  in Mill's view one pleasure may be better than another, in
no case is a pleasure bad so long as some one desires it, or desires the
thing  which  produces  satisfaction when possessed. But, for Aristotle,
desires  themselves  can  be  good or bad, and consequently there can be
good  and  bad pleasures, as well as pleasures which vary in quality and
in  degree  of goodness. "Since activities differ in respect of goodness
and badness, and some are worthy to be chosen, others to be avoided, and
others  neutral,  so, too," Aristotle writes, "are the pleasures; for to
each  activity  there  is  a  proper  pleasure. The pleasure proper to a
worthy  activity  is  good, and that proper to an unworthy activity bad;
just  as  the  appetites  for noble objects are laudable, those for base
objects  culpable."  Pleasure  and  pain,  in  Aristotle's judgment, are
measured  by  virtue,  not  what  is good and evil by pleasure and pain.
Pleasure  and pain are elements common to the good life and the bad, but
only the pleasures which the good man enjoys, and the pains he willingly
suffers,  can  be  called  good.  That is why "in educating the young we
steer  them  by  the  rudders  of pleasure and pain ... for to enjoy the
things we ought and to hate the things we ought has the greatest bearing
on  virtue  or  character."  Virtue  is  possessed  only  by  those  who
habitually  take  pleasure  in  the  right  things.  As indicated in the
chapters  on Happiness and Duty, the moralists who make duty rather than
virtue  the  spring  of  right  conduct,  and  who  make the goodness of
anything  depend  upon  its  Tightness  according  to the moral law, see
little  difference  among the various theories of pleasure and happiness
as  the  ultimate  good  and  the standard of conduct. The most eloquent
tribute  which  Kant  can  pay  to the idea of duty is that it "embraces
nothing charming or insinuating." Reason, he

[416b]
says,  "will never let itself be brought around" to the view that "there
is  any  intrinsic worth in the real existence of a man who merely lives
for  enjoyment  . . . even when in so doing he serves others." Admitting
that  "the  greatest aggregate of the pleasures of life, taking duration
as  well  as  number into account," would appear to merit "the name of a
true,  nay,  even  of the highest good," Kant adds that "reason sets its
face  against  this,  too."  The  line of duty is always set against the
seductions  of pleasure or any calculations of utility, whether in terms
of  the  means  to  achieving happiness or the ways of augmenting life's
satisfactions.  According  to  Stoics like Marcus Aurelius, "pleasure is
neither  good  nor useful," nor is pain an evil, for when we are "pained
by  any  external  thing," we should remember that "it is not this thing
which disturbs us, but our own judgment about it." Pleasure and pain are
morally  indifferent,  for like death and life, honor and dishonor, pain
and  pleasure  are things which "happen equally to good men and bad" and
therefore  "make  us neither better nor worse . . . and are neither good
nor  evil."  From the same observation, that pleasure is enjoyed by good
and  bad  men, Aristotle and Plato seem to draw the conclusion, not that
it is morally indifferent, but, as we have seen, that there are good and
bad  pleasures.  Plato  uses pleasure and wisdom to typify fundamentally
different  kinds  of  good.  Wisdom  is  always  true and good, but like
opinion,  which  can  be  either true or false, there are true and false
pleasures,  good  and  evil  pleasures. Furthermore, wisdom or knowledge
represents the kind of good which is definite or intrinsically measured,
whereas   pleasure,  like  wealth,  is  an  indefinite  good,  requiring
something  external  to itself, something like wisdom, to measure it and
limit  its  quantity.  If  wisdom  be allowed to choose among pleasures,
Socrates  suggests in the Philebus, it will choose those associated with
itself in the activities of the mind, not the bodily pleasures which are
always  mixed  with  pain.  So  far  as pleasure belongs to the realm of
change or becoming, it is, again like opinion, inferior to knowledge and
wisdom, which draw their goodness from the realm of immutable being. Yet
Plato does not seem to think that knowledge

[417a]
and  wisdom  are the only goods. The argument against those who think so
seems  to  be  as conclusive as against those who think that pleasure is
the  only  good.  Each  of the simple lives— the life of pleasure or the
life  of  wisdom—  is  deficient.  Only  the  mixed life, the life which
combines  both pleasure and wisdom, is the complete life. Like the happy
life  in  Aristotle's  view,  it  includes  every  kind of good; and the
difficult  problem,  for Plato as for Aristotle, seems to be finding the
principle  which  determines  the  goodness  of the mixture or the right
order  and  proportion in which the variety of goods should be combined.
The  moral  issues  which have been raised here with respect to pleasure
and  pain  are  more broadly considered in the chapters on Good and Evil
and  on  Virtue,  Temperance,  and  Sin,  as  well as in the chapters on
Happiness  and  Duty.  Other issues are reserved entirely for discussion
elsewhere,  such as the role of pleasure in the perception of beauty and
in  judgments  of  taste (the chapter on Beauty), or the role of pain in
relation  to  the  government  of  men  (the chapter on Punishment). Two
special  problems  which  involve pleasure and pain remain to be briefly
mentioned.  The first concerns the contrast between asceticism and self-
indulgence  or  even profligacy. In the tradition of western thought and
culture,  and  in  the ancient as well as in the modern world, those who
worship  pleasure, though perhaps only as a minor deity to be celebrated
in  bacchic  revels, stand opposed to those who turn away from pleasure,
as  from  the world, the flesh, and the devil, even mortifying the flesh
and  sanctifying themselves with pain. In their less extreme forms these
contrasting  attitudes  generate  the  traditional  issue concerning the
place  of  worldly  recreations  in  man's life and in the state. Is the
pleasure of play a necessary and proper relief from the pain of work, or
is  it  always  an  indulgence which provides occasions for sin? Are the
enjoyment  of  the  theatre,  of  music and poetry, the gaiety of public
festivals,  and  the diversions of games or sports things to be promoted
or prohibited by the state ? Man's avidity for amusements and diversions
of all sorts leads Pascal to say, "How hollow and

[417b]
Chapter 68: PLEASURE AND PAIN 383 full of ribaldry is the heart of man!"
The  fact  that "men spend their time in following a ball or a hare" and
that  "it  is  the pleasure even of kings," indicates to him how deep is
the  misery  from which men try to escape through play and pleasure. "If
man  were happy," Pascal suggests, "he would be the more so, the less he
was diverted." But "so wretched is man that he would weary, even without
any  cause of weariness, from the peculiar state of his disposition; and
so  frivolous  is  he,  that,  though  full  of  a  thousand reasons for
weariness, the least thing, such as playing billiards or hitting a ball,
is  sufficient  to  amuse  him."  Men  need  such diversions in order to
"prevent  them from thinking of themselves." Men indulge in pastimes for
another  reason,  according  to Aristotle. They "need relaxation because
they  cannot work continuously" and "amusement is a sort of relaxation."
But "happiness does not lie in amusement. It would, indeed, be strange,"
he  says,  "if  the end were amusement, and one were to take trouble and
suffer hardship all one's life in order to amuse one's self." It is true
that "pleasant amusements" resemble happiness in having the nature of an
end,  because  we  engage in playful activity "not for the sake of other
things,"  whereas  we do serious work for some end beyond itself. But in
Aristotle's  opinion  "a virtuous life requires exertion" and since "the
happy  life  is thought to be virtuous," it follows that "serious things
are  better  than  laughable things and those connected with amusement."
These  reflections  on  work  and play, and the pains and pleasures they
involve, lead us to the second of the two problems mentioned above. That
concerns  pleasure and pain in the life of learning. Here there seems to
be  no  fundamental  issue,  for  the  tradition  speaks  with an almost
unanimous  voice  of  the  pleasure all men find in knowing and the pain
none  can  avoid  in  the  process  of seeking the truth. The problem is
rather  a  practical and personal one which the great books put to their
readers,  to  solve  in  their  individual  lives.  Their  invitation to
learning  should  not  be accepted, nor their promise of pleasure relied
upon,  by  those  unwilling  to  take  the  pains  which,  however great
initially,  gradually  diminish  as  the  mind,  in  the very process of
learning, learns how to learn.

[418a]
384  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2. The causes of pleasure and pain 4. The kinds of
pleasure   and  pain:  different  qualities  of  pleasure  4b.  Sensuous
pleasure: the affective quality of sensations 4*/. The pleasures of play
and  diversion  6.  Pleasure and the good 6b. Pleasure as one good among
many:  pleasure  as  one  object of desire 6e. Pleasure as intrinsically
evil  or  morally  indifferent ja. Pleasure and pain in relation to love
and  friendship  ochism  10.  The  social  utility  of pleasure and pain
training

[418b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  PAGE  i. The nature of pleasure and pain 385 3. The
effects  or  concomitants  of pleasure and pain 386 40. The pleasant and
unpleasant  in  the sphere of emotion: joy and sorrow, delight and grief
387   4<r.  Intellectual  pleasure:  the  pleasures  of  reflection  and
contemplation  388  (2)  The pleasure and pain of learning and knowledge
389  \e.  The  kinds  of pain: the pain of sense and the pain of loss or
deprivation  390 5. The quantity of pleasure: the weighing of pleasures;
the  limits of pleasure 391 6c. Good and bad pleasures: higher and lower
pleasures  392 7. Pleasure and happiness: their distinction and relation
393  yb.  The  life of pleasure contrasted with other modes of life: the
ascetic life 394 8. The discipline of pleasure 395 $a. Pleasure and pain
in relation to virtue: the restraints of temperance and the endurance of
courage  Sb.  The conflict between pleasure and duty, or the obligations
of  justice:  the  pleasure  principle and the reality principle 396 $c.
Perversions  or  degradations in the sphere of pleasure and pain: sadism
and mas9. The regulation of pleasures by law 397 1 00. The employment of
pleasure  and pain by parent or teacher in moral and mental 10b. The use
of pleasure and pain by orator or statesman in persuasion and government

[419a]
REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the ntrfrlbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. For example, in 53 James: Psychology, 116a-119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. The nature of pleasure and pain 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  221c / Republic, bk ix, 421a424a / Timaeus, 463d-464b /
Philebus 609a639a,c esp 619d-633a / Laws, bk ix, 748a 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics,  bk  1,01136  [48b2832] 67b / Topics, bk iv, ch i [121*27-39]
169b;  bk  vi,  ch  6  [i45a32-b  i6]  199a-b;  ch  8 [i46b i319] 200c /
Metaphysics,  bk xii, ch 7 [i072b i3~ 29] 602d-603a 9 Aristotle: History
of Animals, bk viii, ch i
[589*4-9] 115b / Ethics, bk
1,  ch  8  [1099*7-30]  344c-d; bk vii, ch 5 [ii48b i5-i8] 399a; ch ii14
403c-406a,c; bk x, ch 1-5 426a-430d esp ch 4 428b-429c / Rhetoric, bk i,
ch 6 [i362b5~ 9] 603b; ch ii [i369b33-i37oa3] 613a-b; [1370* 27-28] 613c
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 33 282a; sect 64 284a-b; bk viii,
sect  28  287c; sect 40-42 288c-289a; sect 47 289b-c 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr iv, ch 18-19, 167a-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par
7-8  54c55a; bk x, par 21 76c-d / City of God, bk xiv, ch 15, 389c-390a;
bk  xix,  ch  i 507a-509a passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
48,  aa  5-6 263a-264d; part i-ii, q 2, a 6 619d-620d; Q 31 752b-759a; q
35 772b-780c

[419b]
Chapter 68: PLEASURE AND PAIN 385 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 62b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  531a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi, prop 11-12
399d400c;  the affects, def 2-3 416d-417a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch vii, sect 1-6 131c-132d esp sect 2 131c-d; ch viii, sect 13,
135b;  sect  16  135c-d; sect 18 136a-b; ch xx, sect 1-2 176b-c; ch xxi,
sect 55-56 192c-193b 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 293c-d
[fn 3] / Intro.
Metaphysic  of Morals,  385a-386b  esp  385c-d  / Judgement, 470c-471b 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism,  463c-d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 39b-40a 53 James:
Psychology,   829b-830a;   860a-b  54  Freud:  Narcissism,  403d-404a  /
Instincts,  413d  /  General  Introduction,  592d  / Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,   639b-640a;   648d-649c;  663ac  /  Ego  and  Id,  701a-b  /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents, 772d-773a 2. The causes of pleasure
and  pain  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ix, 422c-425b/ Timaeus, 463d-464b /
Philebus,  619d-633a  8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk vi, ch 6 [i45 a36-b i6]
199a-b  / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246b20-247ai9] 330a-b / Metaphysics, bk
v, ch 5 [1015*27-31] 535d; bk xii, ch 7 [i072b3~29] 602c-603a / Soul, bk
in, ch 2 [426a27-b8] 658c-d / Sense

[420a]
b  (2.  The  causes  of  pleasure and pain.) a i2-i7] 679d; ch 5 and the
Sensible,  ch  4 [442 b a 3 ] 681c-682d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk viii, ch i '• i 7-445
[443
[589*4-9] 115b
/ Ethics, bk 1, ch 8
[ic>99a730]
344c-d;  bk  hi, ch ii 365a-d passim; bk vii, ch 4 398a-399a passim, esp
[ii47b23~ 30] 398a-b; ch 5
[ii48b i5-i8] 399a; ch
12
[ii52b34-ii53a i8] 404a-b; bk ix, ch 7 [u68 a
9-18]  421c; bk x, CH4 [ii74b i5-i 175*2] 429a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[i309b i5]-cH 11
[1372*
3] 612d-615c; bk ii, ch i
[i378 a2o]-CH
11
[i^88b3o] 623b-636a passim
/ Poetics, ch 24
[i46oa i2-i9] 696b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [398-477] 20a-21a; bk hi [231-257]
33a-b;  bk  iv  [324331]  48c;  [615-672] 52b-53a; [1037-1072] 57d58a 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk vii, sect 16 280d; bk viii, sect 47 289b-c 17
Plotinus:   Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  18-19,  167a-d  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 2-4 13c14b; bk iv, par 10 21c-d; bk viii, par
7-8  54c55a;  bk x, par 21-22 76c-77a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  18, a 2, rep 2 105c-106b; part i-ii, q 2, a 6 619d620d; q 3, a 4,
ans  and  rep  3,5  625a-626b;  q  4,  a  2  630b-631a; q 31, a i, rep i
752c-753c; q 32 759a-765b; q 34, a 3, ans and rep i 770c-771c; q 35, a i
772c-773b;  a 3, rep 1,3 774a-c; q 36 780c-783c; q 38 786d-789d; q 48, a
1  822d-823b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 70, a 3
897d-900d;  Q 98, a 7 1076d-1077b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 62b-c 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  97b-98a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop
11-57 399d415b passim 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk iv [877-945] 171b173a
esp  [912-916]  172a-b 33 Pascal: Equilibrium of Liquids, 401 a35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch vii, sect 4 132a-c; ch viii, sect 13,
135b;  sect  16  135c-d; sect 18 136a-b; ch xx, sect 1-3 176b-d; ch xxi,
sect  43  188d; sect 55-56 192c-193b; sect 71 197b-198a 38 Montesquieu :
Spirit of Laws, bk xi v, 102b, d103c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 234c 42
Kant: Practical Reason, 293c-d
[613]; 314d318b / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
375a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a386b / Judgement, 470c-471b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  39b-40a  50  Marx:  Capital,  166c  4> 53 James:
Psychology,   324a;   409b-410a;   812a-b;   829b-830a;860b   54  Freud:
Narcissism,  403d-404b  / Instincts, 413d / Repression, 422a-b / General
Introduction, 592d / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 639a-

[420b]
386  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2/o  4  640d;  648d-649c / Ego and Id, 701 b-c /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety, 753b- 754a / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  772d-773b The effects or concomitants of pleasure and pain
7   Plato:   Phaedo,  220d-221a;233d-234c/  Timaeus,  466a-b;  474b-d  /
Philebus,  628c-d;  637b-c  /  Laws,  bk  1, 645b-c; bk vii, 715b-716a 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5 [125^9 -34] 175a; ch 6 [i27b26-32] 177b /
Soul, bk ii, ch 2
[4i3b i7-2 4 ] 643d; ch
3
[4i 4
a28-b  5]  644c;  bk in, ch 7 [43i a8-i4] 663c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
ii, ch 9
[nc>9b i-i3]
355a,   c;   bk   hi,   ch   12  [ni9a22-3i]  365d-366a;  bk  vn,  ch  6
[ii49b20-ii5oa8] 400b-c; bk ix, ch 7 [n68a9-i8]421c 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk hi
[31-40]
30b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  4, rep 1
625a-626b;  q  32, a 4, rep 2 761c762a; q 33 765b-768c; q 35, a 3, rep 3
774a-c;  QQ 37-38 783c-789d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl,
q 86, a 3, rep 3-4 994d-996a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[16-39] 80a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77a;  part ii, 163d-164a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 8c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop
11-57   399d415b   passim;  the  affects  416b-422a,c  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  vii,  sect  3-5  131d-132c; ch xxi, sect 34
186a-b; sect 54 192b :c; sect 59 193d-194a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  i,  413b  42 Kant: Practical Reason, 314d-318b / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics, 375a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a-386b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part i, 220b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
308a-309d  53  James:  Psychology,  94a-b;  526b-527a;  647a; 650b-651b;
654a-655a;  725b-726a;  808b814b;  829b-830a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  377c-380d  esp  378b-d;  384c-385c  /  Narcissism,  402d404b  /
Instincts,  419a-421a  /  Repression  422a427a,c  esp  422a-d,  425b-c /
General   Introduction,   592c-593a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle
639a-663d  esp  639a-640c,  648b-650a, 651a-d, 652b-d, 654a, 662c-663c /
Ego  and  Id,  701b;  711c-  71 2a / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
737b-741c  esp  737d,  741a-b;  742b-  744a;  753c-d  / New Introductory
Lectures,  843d-846a The kinds of pleasure and pain: different qualities
of pleasure 7 Plato: Phaedo, 220d-221a / Gorgias, 277'd280d esp 280b-d /
Republic,  bk  viii,  409d410c;  bk ix, 421a-425b / Philebus, 609a-610c;
619d-633a

[421a]
Chapter 68: PLEASURE AND PAIN 4# to 4b 36-b i] 5
[io6a
CH  8  Aristotle: Topics, bk i 150b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch io-ii
364b365d; bk vn, ch 5 [ii48b i5-i8] 399a; ch 1314 404d-406a,c; bk ix, ch
7  [u68  a9-i8[421c;  bk  x,  ch  3 [ii73b8-i9] 427d-428a; cH^429d430d /
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch ii 613a-615c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[94-116]  31b-c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 64, a 3 337a-c;
part  i-ii, q 2, a 6, ans and rep 2-3 619d-620d; q 31, aa 3-7 754a-758b;
q  35  772b-780c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 72, a 2, ans
112b-113a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  81,  a  4,  rep  4 966d-967d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  62a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 432b-d; 537d-543a,c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  27c-d;  73c-d  32  Milton: V Allegro
17b-21a / // Penseroso 21a25a / Paradise Lost, bk vi
[327-343]
203b;
[386-405] 204b-205a; [430-468] 205b 206b /
Samson    Agonistes   [606-632]   352b-353a   33   Pascal:   Geometrical
Demonstration,  441b442a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xx
176b-178a;  ch xxi, sect 55-56 192c-193b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  xiv, 103a104a 42 Kant: Judgement, 477b-478a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
447b-450b  50 Marx: Capital, 292d-295a esp 293c-294a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b; bk xiv, 605b-d; bk xv, 630b-631c 53 James:
Psychology,  754b-758a; 812a-813b 4a. The pleasant and unpleasant in the
sphere  of emotion: joy and sorrow, delight and grief 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
120b-c / Phaedo, 220b-221a / Republic, bk iv, 352d / Philebus, 628d-630c
/ Laws, bk 1, 649d-650a; bk ix, 748a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk iv, ch 5
[i25b28-34]
175a; ch 6 [127^6-32] 177b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 5 [no5b i9-28]
351b;  ch  9  354d-355a,c;  bk  hi,  ch  8  [ni6b2311 17*9] 363a-c; ch 9
363d-364b; ch 12 [1119s 23-31] 365d-366a; bk vii, ch 5
[1149^-21]
399c-d; ch 6 [ii49b2o-ii5oa8] 400b-c; bk ix, ch 4 [n66b3-29] 419d-420a /
Politics, bk v, ch 10 [i3i2b24-33] 515b / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch ii
[i37oa25-b32]
613c-614b;
[137^17-22]
614c; bk 11, ch 1
[i378a2o]-cH
11
[i388b3o] 623b636a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[10731085] 58a-b
12   Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect  10  257d258a  14  Plutarch:
Coriolanus, 184a-c 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 28 172a173b

[421b]
387  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi, par 2-4 13c14b; bk iv, par 10
21c-d;  bk  viii,  par  7-8 54c55a; bk x, par 39 81b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 22, a 1, ans 720d-721c; qq 31-39 752b- 792d; q
48,  a  1  822d-823b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62b-c; 63b-d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  la,c  29  Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  217d-218a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 11-57
399d415b  passim; the affects 416b-422a,c 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch vii, sect 2 131c-d; sect 5 132c; ch xx 176b-178a passim, esp
sect  3 176d; ch xxi, sect 40 187d-188b; sect 42 188c 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge, sect i 413a-b 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a c 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  103b-c  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 308a-309c passim,
esp  308d  53  James:  Psychology,  197b;  324a;  391b  392a; 702a-703a;
718b-719a;  730a-b;  739b-740a;  754b-758a  passim;  808b-809a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams, 378c-d / Instincts, 418d-421a,c esp 419c-420a
/ Repression 422a-425b esp 422a-d, 424a-b / General Introduction, 608d /
Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  640c-  d;  641d-643c  /  Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  720a-721c;  736d-740c  esp 737a-b, 739b, 740c;
752c-754a,c  /  New  Introductory  Lectures, 843d-846a esp 845c-846a 4b.
Sensuous   pleasure:  the  affective  quality  of  sensations  7  Plato:
Republic,  bk 421a-425b / Timaeus 1, 295d-296c; bk ix, 463d-464b; 474b-d
/ 627c-628d / Laws, Philebus, 619d-620b; bk vii, 714c-715a 8 Aristotle :
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [980^2-28] 499a / Soul, bk ii, ch 2 [4i3b i7~24]
643d; ch 3
[4i4a28-b
5] 644c; ch 9 [42^6-16] 652c; bk hi, ch 2
[426a27-b8] 658c-d
/  Sense  and  the  b26~44oa  i]  677a; ch 4 [442 Sensible, ch 3 [439 11
bi7-445a 12-29] 679d-680a; ch 5 [443 4] 681c682d 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk vii, ch i
[58^11-22]
107b  /  Parts  of Animals, bk ii, ch 17 [66i a6-8] 188a / Generation of
Animals, bk 1, ch 17 [72i b i2-i8] 261c; ch 18 [723*^33724^] 264a; ch 19
[j2-jh6-i2] 267c-d; ch 20
[727b34-728a i4]
268a-b;
[728^1-34]
268c  / Ethics, bk 1, ch 5 340d-341b; bk hi, ch io-ii 364b-365d; bk vii,
ch ii
[ii52b i7-i8] 403d;
ch 12
[ii53 a26~36]
404c-d; ch 14 405b406a,c; bk x, ch 3
[1 173^-19] 427d-428a; ch
4
[ii74b i5-ii75a
3] 429a-b; ch 5
[1176^-14]
430c;  ch  6 [ii76b8-i 177^1] 431a-c / Rhetoric, BK I, CH II [1370^8-30]
613C  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk ii [398-477] 20a-21a; bk hi
[94-1  16]  31b-c;  bk  iv [324-331] 48c; [615-721] 52b-53d; [1037-1072]
57d-58a

[422a]
388  The kinds of pleasure and pain: different qualities ofpleasure. 4b.
Sensuous   pleasure:  the  affective  quality  of  sensations.)  (4.  17
Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tk\v,chk) 167b-d; ch 28 172a-173b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk vi, par 26 42d43a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  91,  a  3,  rep 3 486b-487d; q 98, a 2, ans and rep 3 517d-519a; part
i-ii,  q  2,  a 6, ans and rep 2 619d-620d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl,  q  81, a 4, rep 4 966d-967d 22 Chaucer: Wife of Bath's
Prologue
[55835774] 256a-259a
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 62c 27 Shakespeare: Antony and Cleopatra,
act  ii,  sc  11  [175-245]  320c-321b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
27c-d;  73c-d  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  vi, 97b-98a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xx, sect 1-2 176b-c; sect 15 177d; ch xxi, sect
42-44  188c-189b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 345d-346b 42 Kant: Judgement,
477b-478a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 447b-450b passim 44 Boswell: Johnson,
409c  47 Goethe: Faust, parti [3835-4205] 93b-103a; part ii [10,160-175]
247b-248a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  307b-308b  49  Darwin:  Origin of
Species,  95d  /  Descent  of  Man,  301d-302a;  569a-b;  577b 53 James:
Psychology,  157a; 650b-651b; 755b756a; 809b-810b [fa 1]; 829b 54 Freud:
Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 15d-16c / Sexual Enlightenment
of  Children,  119d-120b / Interpretation of Dreams, 367b-c / Narcissism,
403a-c  /  General  Introduction,  574a-576a;  578c-579b  /  Beyond  the
Pleasure  Principle,  648b-c;  663a  / Ego and Id, 701a-c / Inhibitions,
Symptoms, and Anxiety, 737a-b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 773a-b
/  New  Introductory  Lectures,  847b-849a  esp  847c  4c.  Intellectual
pleasure:  the  pleasures  of  reflection  and  contemplation  7  Plato:
Symposium,   149d-150a;   167a-d   /   Phaedo,   220d-221a  /  Republic,
BKi,295d-296c; bk ix, 420d-425b / Philebus, 620b-621c; 631b 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [980*2228] 499a; bk xii, ch 7
[io72b i3-29] 602d603a
9  Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals,  bk i, ch 5 [644 22-645*26] 168c-169a /
Ethics, bk vii, ch 12
[1 1 52b3 3-1153*1] 404a; bk x, ch 4
[ii74b i5~
1175*2]  429a-b; ch 5-8 429d-434a / Politics, bk viii, ch 3 [i338 a2-b3]
543b-d;  ch  5  544c546a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch ii [i37i b4-io] 615a /
Poetics, ch 4 [i448b4-i9] 682c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]

[422b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 4r to 4<r(l)
[i-54]
15a-d;  bk  hi  [1053-1075]  43c-d;  bk  v  61a-d; bk vi [1-41] 80a-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch 10 185d187a; ch 15 190a-191a; ch 22
195a-201a; bk iv, ch 4 225a-228a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 6
261a-c;  sect  9 261d; sect 12 262b-c; bk iv, sect 16 264d; bk v, sect 9
270b-c;  bk  vi,  sect  12 274c; bk x, sect 12 298c-d 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  12  17d  /  Sixth  Ennead, tr vii, ch 30 336b-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk vi, par 26 42d43a; bk ix, par 23-25 68a-c 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 4, rep 1 25d-26c; part i-ii, q
3,  a 4, ans 625a626b; q 4, aa 1-2 629d-631a; q 27, a i, rep 3 737b-d; q
34,  a  3 770c-771c; q 35, a 5 775d777a; q 38, a 4 788d-789b 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 180, a 7 614d-616a; part hi suppl, q 90,
a  3  1014d-1016a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxxxxxi 99b-102b:
paradise, x
[7-27] 120b-c;
xxxiii  [40-66]  156c-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62c;  63a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  69d-72a  30  Bacon : Advancement of Learning, 27c-d;
73c-d  31 Descartes: Rules, 1, Id / Meditations, in, 88d-89a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part hi, prop 53 413a; prop 58-59 415c-416b; part v, prop 32-36
460b461c; prop 42 463b-d 32 Milton: II Penseroso 21a-25a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xx 176b-178a passim, esp sect 1-2 176b-c, sect
15  177d;  ch  xxi,  sect  42-44  188c-189b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
645c-d  42  Kant:  Judgement,  534c-539d;  551a-552a; 586d-587a 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 447b-450b passim 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[1178-1201]
29b;
[3217-3239] 79a-b
48  Melville:  Moby Dic\, 255a 53 James: Psychology, 755a-758a 54 Freud:
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 773d774c 4c{\) Pleasure in the beauty
of  nature  or  art:  disinterested  pleasure  4 Homer: Odyssey, bk viii
222a-228a,c  passim  7  Plato: Gorgias, 266d-267a / Philebus, 630d631b /
Laws, bk ii, 653a-656c; bk vii, 720c-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk
i, ch 5 [645 s 4-26] 168d-169a / Ethics, bk hi, ch 10 [ni8 ai9] 364c; bk
vii, ch 12
[1153*24-26] 404c
/  Politics,  bk  viii,  ch 3 [i337b27-i338 a29] 543ac; ch 5 544c-546a /
Poetics, ch 4
[1 448^-23]
682c-d; ch 14 [i453b i2-i4] 688b-c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect
2  259d260a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 5, a 4, rep 1
25d-26c; q 91, a 3, rep 3 486b-487d;

[423a]
4r(2)  to  4d  Chapter 68: PLEASURE AND PAIN i, rep 3 737b-d; q 32, a 8,
PART  HI,  Q  27  ans  764c-765b  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, ii
106133]  55c-d;  x  [22-105] 67c-68c 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice,
actv^sc 1 [66-110] 431b-d ^ 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 184b-d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  v,  prop  32  460b 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes,
337a-338a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, la-2a; 49a-50c 42 Kant: Judgement,
470c-471b; 471d-473a; 476a-483d esp 479a-d; 485b-486d; 495a496c; 509c-d;
516d-518d;  525a-527b;  532ad;  534c-539d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 254c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 185c-d; part 1, 220b-c; part ii,
267b-268b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [9218-9245] 224a-b;
[9863-9869] 239b; [11,288-303] 274b-275a
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  95a-d  /  Descent  of Man, 301c-302a;
568d-571b  passim;  577b-d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 235a-238a
passim,  esp 237c-238a; 257c-259a; bk vii, 278a-c; 288c-290b; 295c-296a;
bk  x,  450a451c;  bk  xi,  497d-498b;  bk  xiii,  575d-576a  53  James:
Psychology,  157a;  886b  54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 600d-601b /
Beyond   the  Pleasure  Principle,  643c  /  War  and  Death,  756a-c  /
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 774a-c; 775b-c 4c(2) The pleasure and
pain of learning and knowledge 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[160-183] 53d-54a
7  Plato:  Apology,  208a / Republic, bk 1, 296a-c; bk vi, 374d-375a; bk
ix, 421a-425b / Theaetetus, 515d-517b 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch
i
[980*2228] 499a
9  Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals,  bk i, ch 5 [64^ 22-645*37] 168c-169b /
Ethics, bk hi, ch 10
[ui7b28-32] 364b; bk vii, ch 12 [1153*21-23]
404c; bk x, ch 3 [ii73b i5-i8] 427d-428a; ch 4
[1 175*10-17] 429c /
Politics, bk viii, ch 3
[i337b27-i338 a29] 543a-c; ch
5
[1339*27-29]
544d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii [1371*30-33] 614d;
[i37i b4-io] 615a
/ Poetics, ch 4
[i448b4~i9]
682c-d  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk i [921-950] 12b-c; bk iv
[1-25]  44a-b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 14 153d155b; bk in, ch
23  201a-203b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 14-16 4c5b; par 19-27
5d-7d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  4,  a  1, rep 3
629d-630b; q 32, a i, rep i 759b-d; a 2, ans 759d-760d; a 3 760d-761c; a
8  764c765b;  q  33,  a  3  767a-d; a 4, rep i 767d-768c; q 34, a 3, ans
770c-771c;  q  37, a 1 783d- 784c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xx
[124]- xxi
[75] 84c-85d; paradise,
iv
[ii5]-v
[12]
110d-112b

[423b]
389  22 Chaucer: Prologue [285-308] 164a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
62c;  63a;  78d;  79b-80a  24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
26d-27d;  29d-30c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  70d-74a; 110b-d; 244d246a 26
Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act i, sc 1 [70-93] 255a-b 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  331c-332a  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i,
146a-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  3c-4a;  6d7a;  27c-d  31
Descartes:  Geometry,  bk 1, 297a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 53
413a;  prop 58 415c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 87a-b; bk ii, ch xxi,
sect 44 188d-189b; ch xxxiii, sect 15 250c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  i,  div 6, 453b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 523c-527a passim, esp
524a-b  42 Kant: Judgement, 532a-d; 551d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 451c-d
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  14b; 15a-c; 130b; 135b136a; 309c-d 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  ld2a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [354-736]
lla-19b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk i, 47b-48d; bk viii, 306b 53
James:  Psychology, 524b-525a; 715b; 729b730a 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  779d  780b  4d. The pleasures of play and diversion 4
Homer:   Iliad,   bk  xxiii  [262-897]  164a-170d  /  Odyssey,  bk  viii
222a-228a,c esp [104-255] 223b-224d 5 Euripides: Bacchantes
[1-209]
340a-341c;
[37 -43 J ] 343a-b / Cyclops [139-174] 441c-d;
[495-589] 444d-445d
5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [241-279] 458a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
86b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 396d; bk in, 442c-443a 7
Plato:  Symposium  149a-173a,c  /  Gorgias,  281c-d  /  Laws,  bk  i-ii,
644d-663d  esp  bk  i,  647c-648c,  650c-652d,  bk ii, 653b-c, 655b656c,
658c-660a,  662a-663d; bk vii, 717d718c; bk viii, 731d-735b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk ii, ch 7 [1108*23-26] 353d; bk iv, ch 8 375a-d; bk vii, ch 14
[u54*22-b i9] 405c-406a,c; bk x, ch 6 [ii76b
8-1177*11] 431a-c / Politics, bk vii, ch 17
[1336*23^24] 541b-d; bk viii, ch 3 [i337b271338*29] 543a-c; ch 5
[1339*1 i]-ch 6
[i340b
33] 544c-546b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii [1370*1417] 613b-c;
[i370b34-i37i*7]
614b-c;
[1371
15 33-1372*1] 615b-c

[424a]
(4. The kinds of pleasure and pain: different qualities of pleasure. 4d.
The pleasures of play and diversion.) 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
hi
[10531094] 43c-44a,c
14  Plutarch:  Agesilaus,  489d-490b  /  Alexander,  572b-d  15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  xiv, 145a-d; 146b-147a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
15-16  4d5b;  bk  in, par 2-4 13c-14b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-h,  q  i,  a  6,  rep  1  614a-c;  q 32, a i, rep 3 759b-d 22 Chaucer:
Prologue  [747-821]  172a-173a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 82b-d 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  la-3a,c; 7a-8c; 14c-15c;
25a-26d; bk ii, 97b99b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 538d-540b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i, 186d-187c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 54a-b 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 125-183 195b-204b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 265c-266d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 346c-347d esp 347d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  90a-b; 502c-503a; 583d-584b 42 Kant: Judgement, 537b-539d 43
Mill: Liberty, 308d-309a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 88a; 287b-c esp 287d
[fn
1];  309a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 267b268b; part in,
291d-292c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk 1, 10d-llb; 16a-18b; 37a-d; bk
vi,  254c-260a;  bk  vii,  278a-287a;  296a-298d; bk viii, 303a-305b esp
305a-b;  bk  xi,  486c-d;  bk  xii,  538a-539d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  viii,  220c-235d;  bk  x,  284b-d  53 James: Psychology,
716b-717a; 727b-729a; 732b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 250d-251a
/  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 641d-643c; 651 b-d / Group Psychology,
690b-c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 773a-b 4e. The kinds of pain:
the pain of sense and the pain of loss or deprivation 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
xviii
[1-126]
130a-131c; bk xix [276-368] 139d-140c; bk xxii [21-98] 155b-156a;
[405-515]
159c-160d;  bk  xxiv  171a-179d  esp  [480-805]  176b-179d  5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon  [399-455]  56b-57a  5 Sophocles: Electra [86-309] 157a-158b 5
Euripides: Medea
[1090-1115] 221b-c / Alcestis [861-1005] 244d-245d /
Trojan Women
[572-705] 274d-276a;
[1 156-1333] 279d-281a,c
/ Electra
[1 12-214] 328a-d
7  Plato:  Phaedo, 250b-251d / Gorgias, 277 d280d esp 280b-d / Philebus,
619d-633a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch ii
[iu8b2S1119*5] 365b-c; bk vii, ch 13-14 404d-406a,c

[424b]
390  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  le passim; bk x, ch 3 [n73b7-i9] 427d-428a; ch 5
[ii75b i6-23] 430a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[459525] 36a-d; [634-669] 38b-c; [830-1023] 40c43b; bk iv [324-331] 48c; [1058-1191] 57d-59d
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [194-209] 108a-b; bk ii
[735-794] 145a-146b; bk ix
[473-502] 291b292b; bk x [833-856] 325a-b; bk xi [29-58]
328b-329b;  [139-181] 331b-333a; bk xii [593613] 370a 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk xiv, ch 15 388d390a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
64,  a 3 337a-c; part i-ii, q 35 772b-780c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part hi, q 15, a 6 792c-793c; q 18, a 6, rep 3 814d-815d; part in suppl,
q 97, a 2 1066d-1067b; a 5 1068c-1070a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi
[1-18] 4a-b; iv [13-45] 5c-d; v 7a-8b esp [121-123] 8b; vi
[94-111] 9b-c; xiv [4-72] 19c-20b; purgatory,
vii [1-36] 62c-d; xxiii [1-75] 88b-89a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida,
bk  v  120b155a  esp stanza 29-106 124a-134a, stanza 174-182 143a-144a /
Tale  of Melibeus,  par  4-7 401b-402b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 62c;
79b-d;  part hi, 195b-d; part iv, 271a 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act
ii, sc vi
[61-84] 83d-84a / Two Gentlemen of Verona,
act  in,  sc 1 [170-187] 242b / Romeo and Juliet 285a-319a,c esp act hi,
sc hi
[1-70] 304d305c, act v, sc in 315d-319a,c / Richard II,
act 1, sc 11
[58-74] 323b-c; sc
111 [139-309] 325a-326d; act ii, sc ii
[1-72] 331a-d; act
iv, sc 1
[162-318] 343b-344d
/ Much Ado About Nothing, act v, sc i
[1-38] 524c-525a
/ Julius Caesar, act hi, sc i [148-275] 582a583b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet,
act i, sc ii
[68-117]
32b-d / Othello, act i, sc hi [199-220] 211a-b / King Lear, act v, sc hi
[257-273]  282b / Antony and Cleopatra, act iv, sc xv [59-91] 344c-345a;
act  v,  sc i [13-48] 345b-c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 333b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 55 413b-414a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
i [44-74] 94b-95a; bk 11 [81-92] 113a; [521-628] 122b-125a; bk vi
[327-343] 203b;
[386-405] 204b-205a;
[430468]
205b-206b / Samson Agonistes
[606632] 352b-353b
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xx 176b-178a passim 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, part i, 245b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii,
109d-110a,c; bk xii, 551d-554a; bk xv, 614a-618b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  160b-163c;  169c-170b;  bk  xii,  398a-d  53 James:
Psychology,   554a-b  54  Freud:  Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,
736c-740c esp 736c-737b, 739b-c; 743b-744a; 752c-754a

[425a]
Chapter  68:  PLEASURE AND PAIN 5 to 6b 5. The quantity of pleasure: the
weighing  of  pleasures;  the  limits  of  pleasure 7 Plato: Protagoras,
57d-62d  /  Phaedo,  225d226b  /  Gorgias,  275d-277b  / Republic,^B^mc,
421a-425b  /  Timaeus,  474b-d / Philebus, 618a; 625c-631d / Laws, bk v,
689d-690c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5 [644b 32-645*1] 168d
/ Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 17 [72i b i2-i8] 261c / Ethics, bk hi,
ch  1011  364b-365d  passim;  bk  vii,  ch 4 398a399a passim; bk x, ch 3
[1173*13-28]  427b-c;  i  5-1  175*9]  429a-c  /  Politics,  bk  i, ch 9
[1258*2-14] 452a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ch 4
[ii74b
7 [i364b23-26] 606c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-36]
15a-c; bk in
[931-962]
42a-c;
[1076-1084]
44a;  bk iv [1058-1120] 57d-58d; bk v [14121435] 79b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 98, a 2, ans and rep 3 517d-519a; part i-ii, q 2,
a 6, rep 2 619d-620d; o 30, a 4, rep 3 751c752b; q 31, aa 5-6 755c-757c;
q  32,  a  i,  rep  3  759b-d;  a 2, ans and rep i 759d-760d; a 7, rep 3
763c-764b; q 33, a 2, ans 766a-767a; q 36, a 3, rep 1 782b 783a; q 37, a
4,  ans  785d-786d;  q 38 786d-789d passim 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  q  28,  a  3  528d-529c;  part  hi suppl, q 71, a 8, rep 3
909d-910d;  q  93,  a  i,  ans  and  rep 4 1037d-1039a 21 Dante : Divine
Comedy,  hell,  vi  [94-1  11] 9b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 76d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  128c  129d;  326b-327b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 125-172
195b-203b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxi, sect 42-43
188c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 363a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 234c
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  298d-300a / Judgement, 584d-585c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  448a-450b; 463a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  20  17a;  additions,  15  118d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1765-1775]
42a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xiii, 577c-578a; bk xiv, 605b-d;
epilogue i, 660d-661b 54 Freud: General Introduction, 592d-593a / Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle  639a-663d esp 639a-640a, 643c, 645d-646a, 648b
650a,  662c-663a  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  771c-776b esp
772a-b,  773c  6. Pleasure and the good 6a. Pleasure as the only good or
as  the  measure  of  goodness  in all other things 7 Plato: Protagoras,
57d-62d / Gorgias, 275b280b / Republic, bk vi, 384b-d; 386b-c / Philebus
609a-639a,c  8  Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 40 68b / Topics, bk
viii, ch 9 [i6ob i6-23] 218a-b

[425b]
391  -21]  5  (io95b i3BK I, CH 340d; bk vii, ch 13 bk x, ch 2 426c-427b
428a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-21]
15a-b  9 Aristotle: Ethics b7-36 ] 404d-405b; ch 3 [ii73b3i-ii 74*i2] IJ
53 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15 74d75b 18 Augustine: City of
God, bk v, ch 20 225b226a; bk x, ch 18, 310c-d; bk xix, ch i 507a509a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q i, a 7, ans 614c-6l5a; q 2, a 6
619d-620d;  q 34, a 3 770c-771c; q 39, a 4 792a-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  284c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 28a-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  71d-72a  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 8
426b-c;  appendix,  xxx-xxxi  450b-c  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk iv
[885-899]  171b172a; bk xi [594-602] 312a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch xx, sect 1-2 176b-c; ch xxi, sect 31-48 185c190d esp sect 43
188d;  sect  55-56 192c193b; sect 63 194d-195a; ch xxviii, sect 5 229c-d
42  Kant: Practical Reason, 298c-300d esp 298c-d; 314d-318b / Judgement,
478a-479a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c passim, esp 447b-457b,
461c-464d  53  James:  Psychology,  808b-814a  esp  811b-813b  54 Freud:
Instincts,   418d-420c   esp  420b-c  /  General  Introduction,  574b-d;
592c-593a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 772a-c 6b. Pleasure as one
good  among  many:  pleasure  as  one object of desire 7 Plato: Gorgias,
275b-280d  / Republic, bk ii, 310c-d / Philebus 609a-639a,c 8 Aristotle:
Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 40 68b / Topics, bk in, ch 2 [117*23-25] 163d;
ch 3
[n8b27-36] 165d-166a; ch 6 [ii9*37-b i] 166d;
bk  iv,  ch  4  [124*15-20]  172d;  [i24b7~i4]  173b 9 Aristotle: Motion
of Animals,  ch 6 [7oob23~ 30] 236a / Ethics, bk hi, ch 4 359a-c; bk vii,
ch 11-14 403c-406a,c; bk x, ch 2
[1 172^334] 426d-427a; ch 3 [1174*8-12] 428b / Rhetoric, bk
1, ch 6 [1362^-9] 603b;
[i362b i4-i8]
603b-c;  ch  7  [i365b7-i3] 607c-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch
1-4 507a-513c passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 6, ans
and  rep  2  27c-28b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  6,  rep 1 614a-c; a 7, ans
614c-615a;  q  2,  a  6,  ans  and  rep  2  619d-620d;  q 34, a 2, rep i
769d-770c; a 3, ans 770c-771c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxx
[ioo]-xxxi [63] lOOb-lOlc
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  90d-91a;  109d-112a;  424d-426b;  527b-528a  40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 192b

[426a]
(6. Pleasure and the good. 6b. Pleasure as one good among many: pleasure
as one object of desire!) 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 461c-464d 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  404b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 316a-317a esp 316b,d [fn 42]
53  James:  Psychology,  808b-814b esp 810b-811a, 812b-814b 6c. Good and
bad pleasures: higher and lower pleasures 7 Plato: Protagoras, 57d-62d /
Gorgias,  277d280d  esp  280b-d  /  Republic,  bk viii, 409d410c; bk ix,
421a-427b  /  Philebus,  635c-639a,c  /  Laws, bk v, 689c-690c; bk viii,
736bc; 738a-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[i099a7-3o]
344c-d; bk hi, ch 10-12 364b-366a,c; bk vii, ch 4-5 398a-399d; ch ii
[ii52b i9-23] 403d;
ch 12 [11 53*26-36] 404c-d; ch 14 405b-406a,c; bk x, ch 3
[ii73b2o-ii74ai2] 428a-b; ch
5 b24-i 176*29] 430b-d; ch 6 [ii76b8-ii77a
[1 1 75
11] 431a-c / Politics, bk viii, ch 3
[1338*1-9]
543b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [10731078] 58a-b 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr  iv, ch 12 17d / Third Ennead, tr v, ch i lOOc-lOlb /
Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 26 334c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par
26  42d43a;  bk viii, par 7-8 54c-55a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  34,  aa  1-3  768c-771c  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 63a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d; 424d-426b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
6d-7a;  27c-d; 73c-74a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 56-57 414a415b;
part  iv,  prop  43  437b-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 38b 42 Kant:
Practical   Reason,   298c-300d  esp  298c-d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,
447b-450b  passim;  461c464d  6d. Pleasure as the accompaniment of goods
possessed:  the  satisfaction  of  desire  7 Plato: Gorgias, 275b-278d /
Republic,  bk  ix,  423c-424c / Philebus, 620a-b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk
hi, ch 2
[117*23-25]
163d; ch 3
[118^7-36]
165d-166a / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[io72b i3~29]
602d603a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[1099*7-30]
344c-d; bk hi, ch io-ii 364b-365d passim; bk vii, ch 12-13 403d-405b; bk
x, ch 3
[ii73b7]-CH
5
[1176*29] 427d-430d esp ch 4
[1175*10-22] 429c, ch
5  [1176*3-29]  430c-d  /  Politics,  bk  11, ch 7 [1267*5-12] 462c-d 17
Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 27, 335b

[426b]
392  THE GREAT IDEAS 6c to 6e 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 9-10
37c-38b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 3-4 625b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 5, a 6, ans 27c-28b: part i-ii, q 2, a 6 619d-620d
q  3,  a 4 625a-626b; q 4, aa 1-2 629d-631a q 11 666b,d-669b; q 30, a 4,
rep  3 751c-752b q 32, a 1, ans 759b-d; q 34 768c-772b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq 28-29 527b-533a; part hi suppl, q 69, a 4,
ans 889c-890c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[19-39]
80a-b; paradise, hi
[58-90]
109d110b;  xxxiii  [46-48]  156c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 76c-d 42
Kant:  Practical  Reason, 298a-300a; 341c-342a / Judgement, 470c-471b 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism,  448d-449c  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 308a-b 53
James:  Psychology,  725b-726a;  812a-813b  54  Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  377c-d  / Instincts, 412d-413d esp 413d / General Introduction,
574a-d / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 663a / Ego and Id, 711d-712a 6e.
Pleasure   as   intrinsically  evil  or  morally  indifferent  7  Plato:
Protagoras, 60d-61c / Phaedo, 224a226c; 233d-234c / Gorgias, 263c-270c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 12
[1153*1823] 404b-c; ch 13 [ii53b i-2o] 404d-405a; bk
x, ch 1
[1172*28-33] 426b; ch 2
[1173*5-13]
427b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[14-21]
15a-b  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch ii, 151a-b; ch 19, 163c-164a;
bk  hi,  ch  24  203c-210a  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 10-12
257d-258c;  sect  16  259a;  bk hi, sect 6 261ac; bk vi, sect 16 275b-d;
sect  51  279bc;  bk vii, sect 27 281d; sect 64 284a-b; bk viii, sect 10
286b;  sect 19 286d-287a; sect 28 287c; sect 39 288c; sect 47 289b-c; bk
ix,  sect  1  291a-c;  bk x, sect 34-35 301a-b; bk xii, sect 3 307b-d 14
Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  277c  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk ix, ch 4
287a288b;  bk  xiv,  ch  8  381c-383a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,   q   34,   a   1   768c-769d;   q  39  790a-  792d  25  Montaigne
:Essays,90d-91b', 118a-122a; 124c125a; 165c-169a; 202a-b; 234bc; 432b-d;
537d-543a,c  esp  541d-542c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 41-43
437a-c;  appendix,  xxxi  450c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 160 202a-b 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 192c-193c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 238c-d / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 256a-257d; 258d-259a; 262a-263c; 265b / Practical
Reason,   297a318b   esp  298a-300a,  304d-307d;  325a-327d;  329a-331a;
338c-355d / Pref Metaphysical

[427a]
7  tola  Chapter  68:  PLEASURE AND PAIN Elements of Ethics, 365b-366d /
Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 387b-388a / Judgement, 478a-479d passim 44
Boswell:7oA^o«,  393a-b 7. Pleasure and happiness: their distinction and
relation  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [1155-1171]  140d-141a  5  Euripides:
Alcestis
[773-802]
243d-244a  /  Cyclops  [163-174]  441d  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 57d-62d /
Gorgias, 275b284d / Republic, bk ix, 421a-425b / Philebus, 635b-639a,c /
Laws,  bk i, 646a; bk ii, 657b658b; bk v, 689c-690c; bk vii, 715c-716a /
Seventh  Letter,  801  b-c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7 [i072b
13-29] 602d-603a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[i095b i3-22]
340d; ch 8 344a-345a esp [1099*7-30] 344c-d; bk vii, ch 11
[ii52b i-8] 403c; ch 13 [n53b7ii54a7] 404d-405b; bk
ix, ch 9 423a-424b; bk x, ch 6 430d-431c; ch 7
[1177*23-28]
431d-432a / Politics, bk viii, ch 3 [1338*1-9] 5
[i339b32-
[1360^
543b;  ch  -40]  545b-c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  5  4-18] 600d-601a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk 11
[1-36]
v
[141215a-c;
bk in
[1003-1010] 43a;
bk  1435]  79b-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 164b 19 162c14
Plutarch: Demetrius, 747b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr iv, ch 1-2 12bV,
CH  4  13c;  ch  6-7 15a-16a; ch 12 17d; tr CH 15 19c; ch 8 20c / Second
Ennead,  tr  ix 74d-75b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 26, a 4,
ans  and  rep 2 151c-152a,c; part i-ii, q 1, a 6, rep 1 614a-c; a 7, ans
614c-615a; Q2, a 6 619d-620d; q 3, a 4 625a-626b; q 4, aa 1-2 629d-631a;
q  5,  a  8,  ans 642d-643d; q 34, a 3 770c-771c; q 35, a 5 775d-777a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 84, a 4, ans 176d-178a; part ii-
ii, q 28 527b530a; q 180, a 7 614d-616a; part hi suppl, q 81, a 4, rep 4
966d-967d;  q 90, a 3 1014d1016a; q 95, a 5 1048a-1049d; q 96 1049d1066a
21   Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  v-vi  7a-9c;  xi  [67-90]  15d-16a;
purgatory, xvi [82-105] 77d; xvii
[125-139]
79d; xix-xxvi 81c-94c esp xix
[1-69] 81c-82a; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b
esp xxxi
[22-63]
101a-c; paradise, i
[103142] 107b-d; xi [1-12] 122a
22 Chaucer: Prologue
[331-360]
165a  / Pardoner's Tale 374a-382b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk  i, 60c-66b esp 65c-66b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 28a-d; 71a-73c; 90d91a;
109d-112a;   128c-129d;   200d-205b;   235c237d;  326b-327b;  394a-395b;
406a-408b; 424d-426b; 431c-432d; 527b-529b; 537d543a,c

[427b]
393  Love's Labour's Lost, act i, 26 Shakespeare: sc 1 [1-162] 254a-256a
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  193b  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  71d-72b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 125-183 195b-204b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch vii, sect 2 131c-d; sect 5 132c; ch xxi, sect
4247  188c-190b  passim,  esp sect 42-43 188c-d; sect 55-56 192c 193b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 192b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 234c-d 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256c257c; 258d-259a / Practical
Reason,  298c-300d esp 298c-d; 314d-318b / judgement, 478a-479d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  447b-457b  esp  448a;  461c-464d  44  Boswell: Johnson,
378a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 15 118d 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part  i  [1741-1775]  41b-42b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi,
259d-260a;  bk  viii,  334d-335a;  bk  xiii, 577a-578b esp 577d; bk xiv,
605b-d; bk xv, 615a-d; 630c631a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
la7a;  bk in, 54b-58a; bk iv, 88d; bk xi, 343d; bk xii, 370b-d 54 Freud:
General   Introduction,  599b-d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,
771a-776b  esp  772a-c  la.  Pleasure  and  pain in relation to love and
friendship 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xviii [1-126] 130a-131c; bk xix
[276-368]
139d-140c; bk xxii
[21-98]
155b-156a;
[405-515]
159c-160d;  bk xxiv 171a-179d esp [480-805] 176b-179d / Odyssey, bk xvii
[290-327]  280a-c  5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [399-455] 56b-57a 5 Euripides:
Medea
[1090-1115] 221b-c
/ Alcestis [861-1005] 244d-245d / Trojan Women
[572-705] 274d-276a; [1156-1333] 279d-281a,c
/ Electra
[1 12-214] 328a-d
7 Plato: Phaedrus, 120b-122a; 126c-127c / Symposium, 160c / Republic, bk
hi, 333b334b / Laws, bk viii, 735b-738c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk
i,  ch 5 [644b 32-645*1] 168d / Ethics, bk ii, ch 7 [1108*2629] 353d; bk
iv, ch 6 373d-374b passim; ch 8 375a-d; bk viii, ch 2-6 407a-410c; ch 12
[1162*15-28] 414c-d; bk
ix,  ch  4  419a-420a  passim; ch 7 421a-d passim; ch 9 423a-424b; ch 11
425a-d; bk x, ch 3
[ii73b32-i 174*1]
428a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i370bi9-24]
614a; [1371*17-24] 614c-d; [i37i b2i-24] 615b; bk 11, ch 4 [i38ob33-i38i
b i4] 626c-627c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [10371208] 57d-60a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 22 167d170a; bk iv, ch 2 223d-224b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk iv [279-705] 174b-186b; bk vii
[341-405]
245b-247b; bk xii
[54-80]
355b-356a; [593-613] 370a

[428a]
(7. Pleasure and happiness: their distinction and relation, la. Pleasure
andpain  in  relation to love andfriendship^) 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  ii,  par 16-17 12c-13a; bk vi, par 26 42d-43a / City of God, bk xix,
ch 5 513d-514b; ch 7-8 515a-516a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
21, a 3, ans 126a-c; q 98, a 2, ans and rep 3 517d-519a; part i-ii, q 4,
a  8,  ans and rep 2 636ac; q 31, a 6, rep 3 756d-757c; q 32, a i, rep 1
759b-d;  a  3,  rep  3  760d-761c;  aa  5-7  762a-764b; q 34, a 4, rep i
771c-772b;  q  36, a 1, ans and rep 3 780c-781b; a 2, ans 781c782b; a 3,
ans  782b-783a; q 38, a i, rep 3 786d-787c; a 3 788b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii—  ii, q 28 527b-530a; q 30, a 2 534b-535a; part hi
suppl,  q 94, aa 2-3 1041b-1042c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v 7a-8b;
purgatory, xvii [9i]-xvm
[75] 79b-80c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida  la-155a  esp  bk 1, stanza 108-117
15a-16a,  bk  ii,  stanza  111-125 36a-38a, bk hi, stanza 174-178 77a-b,
stanza 219 83a, bk v, stanza 29110 124a-134b, stanza 174-182 143a-144a /
Knight's Tale 174a-211a esp
[1092-1186]
178a-179b,  [1574-1627]  186a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 85b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  398c-399d; 426c-427d; 431c-433c 26 Shakespeare: Two
Gentlemen  of  Verona,  act  hi,  sc 1 [170-187] 242b / Romeo and Juliet
285a-319a,c esp act v, sc hi 315d-319a,c / Midsummer-Night 's Dream, act
i, sc i
[128251] 353d-355a / Much Ado About Nothing,
act v, sc 1
[1-38] 524c-525a / Julius Caesar,
act in, sc 1 [148-275] 582a-583b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii
[68-117]
32b-d; act hi, sc ii [206-225] 51b / Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc ii
[8-30]  120b-c;  act  iv,  sc 11 [1-19] 126d; sc iv [11-108] 128b-129b /
Othello,  act  1,  sc  in  [199-220]  211a-b  / King Lear, act hi, sc vi
[109-122] 267d; act v, sc in
[257-273] 282b
/ Antony and Cleopatra, act 1, sc in 314c-315d; act v, sc i
[13-48]
345b-c  /  Timon  of  Athens  393a-420d  /  Sonnets  586a-609d passim 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i, 73d-89c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi,
prop  12-13  400b-d; prop 19-26 402c-404b; prop 33-46 406c-410c; prop 49
411a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-617]
243a-245b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xx,  sect 4-5
176d-177a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  126c-12/b; 235b-238d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  345d-346b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 451b-c 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  i [3620-3645] 88b-89a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 308a-313a passim,
esp 308d-309a

[428b]
394  THE  GREAT IDEAS la to lb 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 30a-31a;
56b;  bk  11,  69a-c;  bk hi, 135c-137c; 140c-142d; bk iv, 167c-d; bk v,
203a-d;  bk vi, 259d260a; bk vii, 276b-277a; bk viii, 319c-d; 323b-324b;
340d-341a,c; bk xv, 615a-d; 639a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
i,  4a5b;  bk  11, 32d-36c; bk hi, 58d-59b; 69d-70c; bk iv, 95b-100c; bk
viii,  200c-201b;  bk x, 282b-283c; bk xi, 324a-b; epilogue, 402a408a 53
James: Psychology, 391b-392a 54 Freud: Instincts, 418c-421a,c esp 420b-c
/ Civilization and Its Discontents, 774d-775a; 782d-783b lb. The life of
pleasure  contrasted  with  other  modes  of  life: the ascetic life Old
Testament:  Numbers,  6:1-5  /  Ecclesiastes,  2:1-11; 3:12-22; 5:18-20;
8:14-15—  (D)  Ecclesiastes, 2:1-11; 3:12-22; 5:17-19; 8:14-15 / Isaiah,
5:11-12;  22:12-13;  28:1,7-8—  (D)  Isaias, 5:11-12; 22:12-13; 28:1,7-8
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 2 esp 2:1-9— (D) OT, Boof{ of Wisdom, 2
esp   2:1-9   /   Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-32;  19:1-2;  23:5-6—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-32;  19:1-3;  23:6  New Testament: Luke, 1:13-17;
8:5-15;  16:1925  /  Romans,  1:18-32; 8:1-13; I3« I3H4 / / Corinthians,
5:9-13;  6:13-7:9;  7:36-38; 9:24-27 / Galatians, 5:16-25 / Philippians,
3:18-19  /  Colossians,  3:5-8  /  /  Thessalonians,  4:3-7 / / Timothy,
4:1-10; 5:6 / // Timothy, 3 / Titus, 2:11-15; 3 :3 / Hebrews, 11:24-26 /
James,  4:1-6; 5:5 / / Peter, 4:1-5 5 Euripides: Alcestis [782-802] 244a
/ Cyclops
[139-174] 441c-d; [495-589] 444d-445d
5  Aristophanes: Birds [685-800] 551b-553a / Plutus [415-618] 633d-636d;
[802-822]  638c 7 Plato: Phaedo, 223d-225a / Republic, bk x, 439b-440c /
Timaeus,  474b-d / Philebus, 635a-639a,c / Laws, bk ii, 656c-658b; bk v,
689d-690c;  bk  vii,  715d-716a; bk viii, 737c738c / Seventh Letter, 801
be;  806a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk i, ch 5 340d-341b; bk hi, ch 10-12
364b-366a,c;  bk  x, ch 9 [ii79b 20-1180*13] 434c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk ii
[1-54]
15a-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 10 185d187a; ch 15 190a-191a;
ch  22 195a-201a; ch 24 203c-210a; bk iv, ch 4 225a-228a; ch 6 230b-232c
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 6 261a-c; sect 12 262bc; sect 16
262d-263a,c;  bk  v,  sect  8-9  269d-270c;  bk  viii,  sect  10 286b 14
Plutarch:  Alcibiades,  161d-162b / Demetrius, 732d-733a; 747b / Antony,
751b-c;  755d756c;  757c-758c  /  Antony-Demetrius,  780c-d 17 Plotinus:
First Ennead, tr iv, ch 4-16 14a19b

[429a]
8  to %a Chapter 68: PLEASURE AND PAIN 395 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
ii, par 2-8 9b10d; bk vin, par 26-27 60b-c / City of God, bk 1, ch 16-18
139c-140d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18, a 2, rep 2
105c-106b;  q 26, a 4, ans^SIc152a,c; part i-ii, q 1, a 6, rep i 614a-c;
a 7, ans 614c-615a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 179, a 2,
rep  1,3 607a-c; q 186, aa 3-5 652d657d; part in suppl, q 81, a 4, rep 4
966d967d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[127-139] 79d; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b esp xxxi
[22-63] lOla-c; paradise, xi [1-12] 122a
22  Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b  /  Wife  of  Bath's  Prologue
[5583-5774]  256a-259a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  155d-156a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk 1, 46a-49c; 60c-66b esp 65c-66b;
bk   ii,  126a-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d;  109d-112a;  128c129d;
162c-167a esp 165c-167a; 406a-408b 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost,
act  i,  sc  1  [1-162]  254a-256a  / 1st Henry IV, act i, sc 11 [1-116]
435c-436c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 7d-8b; 54a-b; 69d-74b esp
71d-72a, 73c-74a 32 Milton: // Penseroso 21a-25a esp
[156-176]
24b-25a   40   Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  38a-b;  60a-c;  192a-193c;
593b,d-599a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 174c-175c 43 Mill: Liberty,
296b-c  /  Utilitarianism, 448a449c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1765-1775]
42a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 273c-274a,c; bk vm, 321d-322d;
329c-333a; 334d-335a; 336b-337d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov esp bk
i,  la-7a,  bk  11  15a-45d,  bk  hi, 50c-62a, 64c73b, bk iv, 88d, bk vi
146b,d-170d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 624a-625b / Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  772c-774d  esp 772d 8. The discipline of pleasure 8a.
Pleasure  and  pain  in relation to virtue: the restraints of temperance
and  the endurance of courage Old Testament: Proverbs, 7:6-27 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  19:5 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 19:5 New Testament: James,
1:12-16 4 Homer: Odyssey 183a-322d esp bk iv [265295] 201d-202a, bk v
[192-224] 209d-210b,
[282-493] 210d-213a,c, bk ix
[82-104] 230a >
bk xii
[153-200]
251d-252b, bk xx
[1-55]
296a-c 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [160-183] 53d-54a 5 Sophocles: Philoctetes
182a-195a,c esp [13161347] 193d-194a, [1408-1444] 194d-195a,c

[429b]
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii, 397b-c 7 Plato: Laches, 32c /
Phaedrus, 120a-122a / Gorgias, 275d-285a / Republic, bk iv, 347a348d; bk
vi,  374a-c;  bk  vii,  389d-390b;  bk ix, 421a-425b / Timaeus, 474b-d /
Laws, bk 1, 644b-645c; bk ii, 653a-c; 657b-658b; bk in, 669b-670c; bk v,
689c-690c;  bk  vii,  713d-716a;  bk  viii,  737c-738c;  bk ix, 748a-c /
Seventh Letter, 807a; 814b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 8
[1 46^4-27]
200d  /  Physics,  bk  vii,  ch  3  [246b20-247a i9] 330a-b 9 Aristotle:
History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[58i b n-22] 107b
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 5 340d341b; ch 8
[1099*7-30] 344c-d; bk
ii, ch 2
[no4ai9]-cH
3
[uo5 a i6]
349c-350c; ch 7
[no7b3-8]
353a;
[1108*23-29]
353d;  ch 9 354d-355a,c; bk hi, ch 4 359a-c; ch 6-12 361a-366a,c; bk iv,
ch 6 373d-374b; ch 8 375a-d; bk vi, ch 5 [ii40b u-i9] 389b-c; bk vii, ch
4-10 398a-403c; ch 12
[1153*27-36]
404c-d;  bk ix, ch 4 419a-420a passim; ch 9 423a-424b passim; bk x, ch i
426a-c; ch 3
[ii73b32-ii74an]
428a-b; ch 5
[1176*3-29]
430c-d; ch6 [ii76b8-ii77a ii]431a-c/Po//'//a, bk vm, ch 5
[1340*1-28] 545c-d /
Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 9 [i366b i4-i6] 609a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi,
ch 21, 194a-b; ch 24 203c-210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect io-
ii  257d-258b;  bk hi, sect 6 261a-c; sect 16 262d-263a,c; bk v, sect 26
272c; bk vii, sect 16 280d; bk viii, sect 10 286b; sect 28 287c; sect 39
288c;  sect  47  289b-c;  bk  ix,  sect  1 291a-c 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
139a-140d  / Coriolanus, 184a-c / Agesilaus, 489d-490b / Demetrius, 747b
/ Antony-Demetrius, 780c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 98, a
2, ans and rep 3 517d-519a; part i-ii, q 31, a 8, rep 1 758b-759a; q 32,
a  6  762d-763c;  q  34,  a  1 768c-769d; a 4 771c772b; q 35, a 6, rep 3
777b-778c;  q  39,  aa  1-2  790a-791b;  a  3, ans and rep 2 791b792a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 59, a 3 47c-48c; q 60, a 4, ans
52b-53a; a 5, ans 53a-54d; q 61, a 2, ans 55c-56b; a 3, ans 56b-57a; a 4
57a-58b;  q 74, a 6 132b-133a; a 8 134b-136a; q 107, a 4, ans 329d-330d;
part  ii-ii,  q  15,  a  3  453c-454c;  qq  35-36  562d-570c;  q 46, a 3
604d-605a,c;  part hi, q 15, aa 5-6 791 d- 793c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, v
[i]-viii
[64]
7a-llc; xi
[67-90] 15d-16a; purgatory, xvi
[82-105] 77d ; xvn
[9i]-xvin
[75]
79b-80c; xix-xxvi 81c-94c esp xix
[1-69]
81c-82a;   xxx-xxxi  99b-102b  esp  xxxi  [22-63]  101a-c;  paradise,  1
[103-142] 107b-d 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 4-7 401b402b

[430a]
(8.  The  discipline  of  pleasure. 8a. Pleasure and pain in relation to
virtue:  the  restraints of temperance and the endurance of courage.) 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 138d-139a; 163d164a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 65c-66b; bk iv, 234a-240a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
28a-d;  71a-72a;  89b91b; 109c-112a; 118a-119d; 162c-167a esp 165c-167a;
200d-205b;  234b-c;  350d-351b; 353c-354b; 365b-367b; 392a-b; 394a-395b;
406a-408b;  424d-426b; 431c-432d; 474b-d; 537d-543a,c esp 540c 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 71d-72a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 41-73
437a447a  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  390b-391a  33  Pascal:  Provincial
Letters, 64b-67b / Pensees, 160 202a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  35  186b-d; sect 59 193d-194a; sect 71 197b-198a 37
Fielding:  Tom Jones, 9a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 330d-331b; 343d-345c
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 192b-193c; 596c597a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
173c-d  /  Pre/.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 368d-369a 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  461c-464d  44 Boswell: Johnson, 116b 49 Darwin: Descent
of  Man, 315c-317a esp 316c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15b-16a; bk
hi,  122b-c;  bk  v,  201a-c; 203a-d; bk vi, 245b-c; 248b-250a; bk viii,
321d-322d; 336b337d; bk ix, 369c-d; bk x, 426b; bk xi, 481a482a; bk xii,
551d-554a;  bk  xiii,  577a-578b;  bk  xiv,  605b-d; epilogue i, 652a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk xi, 343d 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  793a794b  /  New  Introductory Lectures, 831b 8b. The
conflict  between  pleasure and duty, or the obligations of justice: the
pleasure  principle  and  the reality principle Old Testament: Proverbs,
5:1-13;  6:23-35;  7:627; 21:17; 23:20-21,29-35 / Ecclesiastes, 10:16-17
Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 18:30-32; 19:1-5; 31:12-31; 37:29-31— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  18:30-32;  19:1-5;  31:12-42;  37  :32-34  5 Euripides:
Hippolytus [373-430] 228b-d 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk v, 506b-c
7  Plato: Republic, bk ii, 311a-315d / Laws, bk ix, 748a-c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i, ch 3 108b-c; bk ii, ch n 150a-151b; ch 19 162c-164b;
bk  hi,  ch  2  177c-178d; ch 10 185d-187a; ch 24 203c-210a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk hi, sect 6 261a-c;

[430b]
396 THE GREAT IDEAS Sb to Sc bk vi, sect 2 274a; bk vii, sect 44 282b-c;
sect  55  283b-c;  bk  viii,  sect  10  286b; sect 19 286d-287a; sect 32
287d-288a; bk ix, sect i 291a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[500-617]
243a-245b  33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 64b-67b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
234c-240b  esp  235a-b,  238c-239a  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals
253a-287d   esp   256c-257d,   258d-259a,   261c-d,  262a-263c,  267b-d,
282b-283d,  286ac  / Practical Reason 291a-361d esp 298a-300a, 304d307d,
325a-327d,  329a-331a,  338c-355d / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics
365a379d  esp365b-366d,  369c  -3  73  b  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
387b-388c /Judgement, 478a479d; 584d-587a esp 586a-587a; 588b
[fn 2];
591b-592a; 594c-596c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 452b-456a passim; 457c461c
passim; 464d-476a,c passim 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3025-3072] 73b-74b;
[32 i7-3373] 79a-82a
49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 309c-314c passim, esp 310d 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  452c-d;  575a;  592c-593b; 599b-d; 624a-625b / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  640b-d / Ego and Id, 702c-d / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  768b-c;  772b-d;  784a-d;  799c-800a  /  New  Introductory
Lectures,  837d-839b  esp  838a-b 8c. Perversions or degradations in the
sphere  of  pleasure  and  pain:  sadism  and  masochism  Old Testament:
Genesis,  19:4-11  /  Exodus,  22:19  /  Leviticus, 18:22-23; 20:13-16 /
Deuteronomy,   27:21   New   Testament:  Romans,  1:26-32  5  Euripides:
Bacchantes 340a-352a,c 7 Plato: Laws, bk i, 645d-646c; bk viii, 735d738b
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk vii, ch i
[58i b u-22] 107b / Ethics, bk vii, ch 5 399a-d;
ch 6
[ii49b24-i 150*8]
400b-c; bk x, ch 5
[1 176^5-25] 430c-d
12  Epictetus  :  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  3  108b-c  14 Plutarch: Dion,
783c-784a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  86a-b;  bk xi, 103bc; 107b-c;
108b-c;  bk  xiv,  145a-d;  146b-147a; bk xv, 166b-c / Histories, bk hi,
265a-b  18  Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 18-21 664d-666b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 31, a 7 757c-758b 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part hi, q 65, a 1, rep 5 879c-881d; part hi suppl, q
81,  a  4,  rep  4  966d-967d  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi [22-90]
15b16a; xv-xvi 21a-23d; xvm
[1-99] 25b-26b;
purgatory,  xix [1-69] 81c-82a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 89d-90c; 118a-122a;
166b-167a; 427b-d

[431a]
9  to  103  Chapter  68:  PLEASURE AND PAIN 397 27 Shakespeare: Sonnets,
cxxix  606a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  the affects, def 48, expl
421b-d;  part  iv,  appendix,  xix  449a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix
[990-1133^26^3272a  36  Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 67b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  38a-b; 60a-c; 138d139a; 389b-c; 484c-d; 649c-650b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 93d-94a; 169a-b; 174c-175c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 355a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part hi, 292b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  iv,  174b;  188a190c;  bk  vi,  267c-d;  271c-273c; bk viii,
305b307d; bk xi, 505a-511b; 520b-c; epilogue i, 660d-661b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  4a-d;  bk 11, 39a-40a; bk v, 121d-127b esp
122d123a;  bk  xi,  307c-310c  53 James: Psychology, 718a-720b 54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  16d  /  Interpretation of
Dreams, 204b-c / Instincts, 415d-418c / General Introduction, 570a-572d;
577a-579d  passim  / Civilization and Its Discontents, 790a- 79 lb / New
Introductory  Lectures,  847c-849b  passim;  850a-b 9. The regulation of
pleasures by law Old Testament: Exodus, 20:14,17 / Deuteronomy, 5:18,21;
21:18-21   New   Testament:   Matthew,   5:27  5  Euripides:  Bacchantes
340a-352a,c  esp  [215369]  341d-343a  7  Plato:  Gorgias,  283a-285a  /
Republic,  bk  hi,  326c-328a; bk iv, 348a-d; bk x, 432a-434c / Laws, bk
1—11,  643b-663d  esp bk ii, 663b-d; bk in, 675c-676b; bk vi, 708c-709a;
712b; bk vii, 713c-716b esp 713c, 716a-b; 718c720d; bk viii, 731d-738c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[ii29b i9-24]
377a; bk x, ch 9 [ii79b3i-u8oa i3] 434c-d / Politics, bk 11, ch 9 [i269b
i3-i27oa  i4]  465d466b; bk vii, ch 17 [i336a23-b24] 541b-d 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  36b-37b  / Lycurgus-Numa, 61b,d-62c 15 Tacitus :
Annals,  bk ii, 31a-b; bk hi, 57b-58d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  100,  a  4,  ans  and rep 3 253d-255a; a 5, rep 5 255a-257c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi  [85114]  77d-78a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  131b-132a  27 Shakespeare: Measure for Measure 174a204d passim,
esp  act  ii,  sc  i  [225-270] 181a-c, act in, sc 11 [91-128] 190c-d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 54a-b 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 390a-b;
393a-395b 35 Locke : Toleration, 8c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
v, 19a-d;

[431b]
bk  vii,  44d-47a;  47c-48a;  49a-50c;  bk  xii,  86b;  87c-88a; bk xiv,
105c-106b; bk xvi, 119d; bk xxv, 210a-b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
iv,  434b-435a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk ii, 149d-150a; bk iv,
211a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, lOOc-lOlb; 484c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  93d-94a  43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, xviii 19c;
xxi  20b  43  Federalist:  number 12, 58b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-312a;
314b-316b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 301c-d 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 690b-c
10.  The  social  utility  of  pleasure  and pain 10a. The employment of
pleasure  and pain by parent or teacher in moral and mental training Old
Testament:  Proverbs,  13:24;  19:18;  22:15;  23:13-14:29:15 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus, 30:1-12 passim— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30:1-12 passim 5
Aristophanes: Clouds
[1303-1464]
504b506c  7  Plato: Protagoras, 46b / Republic, bk hi, 339b-340b / Laws,
bk  ii 653a-663d esp 653a656c, 662c-663d; bk vii, 713d-716a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
[ii04b8-i8]
350a; bk x, ch i
[1172*18-23] 426a; ch 9
[ii79b20-u8oa
4]  434c-d  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 14-23 4c-7a / City of
God, bk xix, ch 16 521d-522a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 48,
a 6, contrary 264a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 1,
ans  226c-227c;  q  99,  a  6,  ans  250a251a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  26d-30c  esp  30b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 16c-d;
70d-74a;  90d91a;  185c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part hi, prop 55, schol
413b-d;  the  affects,  def 27, expl 419a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
40d-41a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264b
[fn
1]   /   Practical   Reason,   357c-360d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  287b-c  /
Utilitarianism,  463c464d  44 Boswell: Johnson, 191b-c;199c-200d;309c-d;
448a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 47b-48d; bk viii, 306b 53 James:
Psychology,  290a-291a  54 Freud: War and Death, 759b / New Introductory
Lectures,  876c 10£. The use of pleasure and pain by orator or statesman
in  persuasion  and  government  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 45b-d / Apology,
208c209b; 210b-d / Gorgias, 260a-262a / Sophist,

[432a]
(10. The social utility ofpleasure andpain. 10b. The use of pleasure and
pain  by  orator  or  statesman  in persuasion and government.} 554c-d /
Laws,  bk  i  640a-652d  esp  650c652d  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
350a-c;  bk  vii,  ch  11 [ii52b i-3] 403c; bk x, ch 9 [n8oai-i3] 434d /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1356*14-18] 595c; bk 11, ch 1
[i378a2o]-cH
11   [1388^0]  623b636a  14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  125b-130d  /  Caesar,
578b-579a;  598d-599b  / Marcus Brutus, 810d-811a 15 Tacitus: Histories,
bk  iv,  269d-270b  CROSS-REFERENCES of duty and an ethics of happiness,
see Duty 2; Happiness 3. I. Descartes. The Passions of the Soul Hume. An
Inquiry Concerning the Principles of Morals J. S. Mill. An Examination of
Sir  William Hamilton's Philosophy, ch 25 Freud. Wit and Its Relation to
the Unconscious, ch 1-5 . Mourning and Melancholia

[432b]
398 THE GREAT IDEAS 10* 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 99, a
6  250a-251a  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  viii, 14a-c; ch xxi, 33a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  82b-d;  part  ii, 109b; 128a-b; 145a-147b
passim  25  Montaigne: Essays, 176ac; 181d-183a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  23a-26a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration, 440b442a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  320c-321b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 79a- b;
139b-  140c;  502c-503a  42  Kant: Judgement, 535b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vi,  245a-c  For:  The  relation  of  pleasure  and  pain to
sensations  and emotions, see Emotion ia; Sense 30(2). The discussion of
intellectual  pleasure  with  respect to beauty and truth, see Beauty 4;
Education  5e; Knowledge 80(4). Another discussion of the kinds of pain,
see  Punishment  ia.  The aspect of infinity in the desire for pleasure,
see  Desire  7a(i). The problem of pleasure and pain in relation to good
and  evil,  see  Good  and  Evil  3d,  4a, 4c; and for the conception of
pleasure  as  an object of desire and as the satisfaction of desire, see
Desire  2b,  2d.  The  problem of pleasure in relation to happiness, see
Happiness  2b(2).  Other discussions of pleasure and pain in relation to
moral virtue, see Courage 1,3; Punishment 3a; Temperance 1,2; Virtue and
Vice  5a;  and for the consideration of asceticism and pleasure-seeking,
see  Temperance  6a-6b. The conflict between duty and pleasure, see Duty
8;  and  for  the  basic  issue  between  an ethics Pleasure and pain in
relation  to  friendship  and  love,  see Love ib. Another discussion of
pleasure in relation to law, see Temperance 5c. The role of pleasure and
pain  in  moral  training,  see  Punishment  3a;  Virtue and Vice 4d(2).
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool^s
ofthe  Western World, but relevant to the For the date, place, and other
facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult the
Bibliography  of  Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of
The  Great  Ideas.  II. Epicurus. Letter to Menoeceus Cicero. De Finibus
{On  the  Supreme Good), 1-11 . Tusculan Disputations, 11 Tertullian. De
Spectaculis  T.  More.  Utopia, bk ii Malebranche. De la recherche de la
verite, bk iv, ch 5-13

[433a]
Leibnitz.  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  BK  II, CH 20
Franklin.  Dissertation  on  Liberty  and  Necessity,  Pleasure and Pain
Hutcheson.  An  Essay  on  the  Nature  and  Conductjyf the Passions and
Affections  Bentham.  An  Introduction  to  the  Principles of Morals and
Legislation,  ch  1-5 Lamb. Hospita on the Immoderate Indulgences of the
Pleasures of the Palate De Quincey. Confessions of an English OpiumEater
Alibert.  Physiologie  des  passions  Leopardi.  Essays,  Dialogues, and
Thoughts  Coleridge.  The  Pains  of  Sleep  J.  Mill.  Analysis  of the
Phenomena  of  the  Human  Mind,  ch  17-23  W.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on
Metaphysics and Logic, vol 1 (41-46) Emerson. "Compensation," in Essays,
1  Whewell. The Elements of Morality, bk ii, ch 25 Schopenhauer. "On the
Sufferings  of  the  World," "On the Vanity of Existence," in Studies in
Pessimism Bain. The Emotions and the Will

[433b]
Chapter  68:  PLEASURE  AND  PAIN  399  Hinton.  The  Mystery of Pain E.
Hartmann.  Philosophy of the Unconscious, in H. Sidgwick. The Methods of
Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  4; BK II, CH 1-6; BK III, CH 14; BK IV Spencer. The
Principles  of  Ethics, part i, ch 7 T. H. Green. Prolegomena to Ethics,
bk  hi, ch 4(a) Avebury. The Pleasures of Life Frazer. The Golden Bough,
part  vi,  ch 8 Ribot. The Psychology of the Emotions Wundt. Outlines of
Psychology  ,  (7)  Bradley. Ethical Studies, in . Collected Essays, vol
1(14)  Titchener.  Lectures  on the Elementary Psychology of Feeling and
Attention,  ii-iv,  vin Moore. Principia Ethica, ch 2-3 . Ethics, ch 1-2
Ellis.  Studies  in  the  Psychology  of  Sex, vol i, part 11, pp 66-188
Proust.  Remembrance  of  Things Past A. H. Allen. Pleasure and Instinct
Powys.   In  Defence  of  Sensuality  Beebe-Center.  The  Psychology  of
Pleasantness  and  Unpleasantness  Bertrand.  The Art of Suffering C. S.
Lewis. The Problem of Pain

[434a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  spirit  in  which  the  great  poets  have read their
predecessors  differs remarkably from the attitude toward the past which
prevails  in  other  fields.  The philosophers and scientists frequently
feel  assured  that they can improve upon their predecessors. The poets,
for  the  most  part,  wish  only to do as well. Virgil's admiration for
Homer;  Dante's  accolade  to  Virgil;  Milton's  praise  of  Aeschylus,
Sophocles,  and  Euripides  as "the three tragic poets unequall'd yet by
any";  the  tributes  which  Cervantes  and Fielding pay to the poets of
antiquity—  these testify that there is no battle between the modern and
the  ancient  books  of  poetry.  Contemporary novelists and dramatists—
especially  those  who  are  proud  of their innovations in the forms or
materials of poetry—may constitute an exception. But they would still be
the  exception  to a rule which can be verified for almost all the great
books of poetry. Part of the reason for such unusual accord may be that,
in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  one  book  enjoys the unique
distinction  of having founded the science of poetry. More than that, it
seems  to  have  gained  from the poets a large measure of approval, and
even  adherence  to  its  principles,  during a period of more than 2000
years.  Not  that  Aristotle's Poetics is without sources. They exist in
Plato's  comments  on  the  kinds  of  poetry; in Aristophanes' critical
weighing  of  Aeschylus  and  Euripides; and, of course, in the original
inventions of Homer and the great dramatic poets, both tragic and comic.
Not that the acceptance of Aristotle's theory of poetry is unaccompanied
by  some  dissent, as, for example, in Fielding's quarrel with the rules
about the unities of time and place. But Fielding, like Cervantes who is
another  close  student  of  the  Poetics,  more  frequently adopts than
rejects  Aristotle's  basic  insights. His most rebellious protest— that
the originality of creative genius

[434b]
Chapter  69:  POETRY  cannot  be  bound  by  the  laws  of  art  or held
accountable  to  any  established  critical  standards  —would certainly
receive  sympathetic consideration from the man who formulated the rules
of poetry and its measures of excellence by the study of the productions
of  Greek  genius.  One  way  in  which later poets have expressed their
disagreement  with  the  Poetics  confirms Fielding's insight. Those who
have  violated  its  rules and yet produced great poems have been men of
exceptional  genius.  Where  the  genius  has been lacking to create new
forms,  the violation of the rules has usually resulted in formlessness.
But  it  is  not only in the creative work of the poets that Aristotle's
principles  have  been put to use and tested. His influence also appears
in  the  comments  which  the  poets  make  on the nature and purpose of
poetry.  The  terms and distinctions of the Poetics are reflected in the
writings  of  Dante, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Goethe, and Melville,
as  well  as  in  many  essays in criticism from Horace and Demetrius to
Boccaccio,  Boileau,  Dryden,  and Pope. Socrates once complained of the
wisdom of the poets. Those whom he asked about their poetry were tongue-
tied.  They  finally  resorted  to  the  mystery  of  inspiration or the
inscrutability  of  genius. "There is hardly a person present," he tells
his judges in the Apology, "who would not have talked better about their
poetry than they did themselves." The poets of a later age were, through
benefit  of  Aristotle,  better  able to discourse analytically of their
art.  If  we turn from the poets themselves, or rather from their poems,
to  the analysis of poetry— by poets or others—we find a number of major
issues.  On  what poetry is and on the end it serves, the tradition does
not  seem  to be either unified or harmonious. Basic disagreements begin
with the ancients. 400

[435a]
On the question, for example, whether the poets have the same obligation
to  speak  the  truth—and  the  same kind of truth—as do philosophers or
scientists,  Plato  and  Aristotle  seem  to be opposed. On the question
whether  the  art  of poetry lies in its use of language or is primarily
the  craft  of  fiction,  Aristotle's Poetics and Horace's Art of Poetry
represent  the  opposite answers which have been points of departure for
divergent  discussions  of  poetry  throughout  the  whole  tradition of
western  thought.  With  regard to the second of these two questions, it
may  be  wondered  whether  we  are  in  the  presence  of  the  sort of
disagreement  which  requires us to take one side rather than the other.
The  fact that Aristotle, in his Rhetoric, writes about poetry in a vein
contrary  to  the  theory  he advances in his Poetics, would suggest the
possibility  of  different  but  not  inconsistent  points of view about
poetry. Unless Aristotle unwittingly contradicts himself, the rhetorical
consideration  of poetry is simply a different way of conceiving what is
poetic. In the Advancement of Learning, Bacon records this difference in
the  meaning  of  poetry,  which  had become traditional by his time. He
treats  it,  moreover,  as the sort of difference which does not require
the rejection of either alternative as incorrect. Poetry, he writes, can
be  "taken  in  two  senses: in respect of words or matter. In the first
sense  it  is  but  a  character  of style, and belongeth to the arts of
speech,  and  is  not pertinent for the present. In the latter it is (as
hath  been  said)  one  of  the  principal  portions of learning, and is
nothing  else  but feigned history, which may be styled as well in prose
as  in  verse."  When  Bacon  says  that  the  conception of poetry as a
literary  style—as an art of writing in verse rather than prose— "is not
pertinent  for  the  present,"  he  does  not  reject  that  alternative
entirely.  He  merely  postpones it for the later section of his work in
which  he  treats of grammar and rhetoric. The other alternative —poetry
as  "feigned  history"—  is  germane to his present consideration of the
kinds  of  learning. Just as Aristotle does not set his Rhetoric against
his  Poetics  on  the nature of poetry, so Bacon does not exclude one of
these conceptions in favor of the other when he observes

[435b]
Chapter   69:   POETRY   401   how  different  are  the  principles  and
considerations  appropriate  to each. These two points of view about the
nature  of  poetry  are not always treated in this way. Sometimes one or
the  other  is  taken as the primary or even the only way of approaching
the  subject, and then a genuine issue ensues either with those who take
the excluded point of view or with those who find it possible to embrace
both.  The Alexandrian and Roman critics seem to create such an issue by
considering   poetry  largely  in  terms  of  style.  Modern  criticism,
especially since the beginning of the 19th century, goes even further in
the   direction  of  identifying  poetry  with  verse.  When  Wordsworth
discusses  the  art  of  poetry in his preface to Lyrical Ballads, he is
concerned  largely  with  its  language.  His  definition  of  poetry as
"emotion  recollected  in  tranquility"  indicates his emphasis upon the
lyrical aspect of even narrative poetry. When Edgar Allen Poe writes his
Poetic  Principle  and  Matthew  Arnold his Essays in Criticism, each is
concerned almost exclusively with lyric poetry, with that kind of poetry
which  is  written  in verse rather than prose. The poet tends to become
more  and  more  a  composer  of  verses— so much so that the free-verse
movement  can appear to be a great revolution in poetry. In the Brothers
Karamazov, Smerdyakov says, "Poetry is rubbish." At Maria's protest that
she  is  very  fond  of  poetry,  he  adds: "So far as it's poetry, it's
essentially rubbish. Consider yourself, whoever talks in rhyme?" Just as
the  word  "art"  has  come  in  popular usage to mean only painting and
sculpture,   so   its   sister-word   "poetry"   has  also  narrowed  in
significance.  Contemporary readers who are accustomed to think of poems
as  lyrics  and  of  poetry  as  verse  may  be  surprised to learn that
according  to  the significance of its Greek root, the word "poetry" can
cover  all  the  forms  of  art  or human productivity; they are just as
likely  to be surprised by the reference to novels and plays, written in
prose,  as  poems.  Yet,  in the tradition of the great books, novelists
like  Cervantes, Fielding, and Melville call themselves poets. The great
books  consider  poetry  primarily  as narrative rather than lyrical, as
story rather than song. This does not mean that they exclude the

[436a]
402  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  other  consideration  of  poetry.  Fielding, for
example,  says  in  one  place  that  "poetry  .  . . demands numbers or
something  like numbers" (i.e., metre), but for the most part he insists
that the art of the novelist or romancer lies mainly in the invention of
good stories, not in the mastery of rules of prosody which apply only to
poems  of  the  lyric  sort,  written  in  verse. Speaking of "the sweet
influence  which  melody  and  rhythm by nature have," Plato may observe
"what a poor appearance the tales of the poets make when stripped of the
colors  which music puts upon them and recited in simple prose"; but for
Plato as for Aristotle the poet is a teller of tales, either in prose or
in  verse.  Aristotle  does  not  ignore the devices of language. In the
third  book of the Rhetoric, where he considers problems of style in all
sorts of compositions, he distinguishes "poetic" from "prosaic" writing;
and  in  the Poetics aho he devotes a few chapters to style. But when in
the  latter  case  he  deals  with  the  language  of  poetry, he is not
concerned  with  the  style  of  any  sort  of  composition, but only of
dramatic  and epic narratives. Except for a brief mention of the form of
verse  known as the "dithyramb," Aristotle does not discuss the isolated
lyric  as  a  kind  of  poetry.  He  treats song and spectacle merely as
embellishments of the drama. In the Poetics his emphasis is not upon the
devices  of  language  or  the  sentiments  of  the  poet,  but upon the
construction  of  plot,  the  development  of character, the diction and
thought of the characters— in short, upon the subject matter of the poem
rather  than  upon the feelings of the poet and the eloquence with which
he expresses them. Because he regards plot as the "soul of tragedy"—and,
by  extension,  the primary principle of all narrative poetry— Aristotle
insists  that  "the  poet or 'maker' should be the maker of plots rather
than    of   verses."   He   is   therefore   led   to   criticize   the
confusion—apparently  prevalent  in  his  day as in ours—which he thinks
results  from identifying the art of poetry with skill in writing verse.
"Even  when  a treatise on medicine or natural science is brought out in
verse,"  he  writes, "the name of poet is given by custom to the author;
and yet Homer and Empedocles have nothing in common except the metre, so
that it would be better to call the one poet, the other physicist rather
than poet."

[436b]
Just  as  Bacon later remarks that "a true narrative may be delivered in
verse  and a feigned one in prose," so Aristotle says that "the poet and
the  historian  differ  not by writing in verse or in prose. The work of
Herodotus  might  be  put into verse, and it would still be a species of
history,  with  metre  no  less  than  without  it." That the difference
between  prose  and  verse  may  affect the style of writing but not the
essence  of  storytelling  is  a  point  which has wide acceptance among
writers  who  call  themselves  poets.  In  the  Prologue  to  Melibeus,
Chaucer's  host  commands  him  to leave off rhyming and "tell a tale in
prose—you  might  do  worse  wherein  there's mirth or doctrine good and
plain."  Thinking  of  his  History  of Don  Quixote as a species of epic
poetry,  Cervantes  declares that "epics may be as well written in orose
as  in verse." The use, by Cervantes and Fielding, of the word "history"
in the title of their novels indicates the acceptance of the other point
in  the  conception  of poetry by reference to its subject matter rather
than  to  its  linguistic  style.  The  great  poets  recognize that, as
narratives,  their works resemble histories, but they also know that the
stories poets tell are, in the words of Bacon, "imaginary history." Just
as  Fielding  writes  at  length  in mock justification of himself as an
historian,  so  Melville  touches  upon "the plain facts, historical and
otherwise,"  of  whale  fishery,  lest  someone "scout at Moby Dick as a
monstrous  fable,  or  still  worse  and  more detestable, a hideous and
intolerable  allegory." In his chapter on the Leviathan's tail, he says,
"Other  poets  have  warbled the praise of the soft eye of the antelope,
and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less celestial, I
celebrate  a  tail."  The  conception  of poetry as feigned or imaginary
history  seems  to  have  a direct bearing on the question of the poet's
obligation  to  speak  the  truth. We shall return subsequently to other
aspects of the comparison of poetry with history and philosophy. For the
present  we  are  concerned with the issue in the theory of poetry which
arises from applying the standards of knowledge to the inventions of the
poet.  Bacon, like Aristotle, denies that such standards are applicable.
Though he treats poetry as

[437a]
"a part of learning," he holds that it is only restrained "in measure of
words"; "in all other points," it is "extremely licensed, and doth truly
refer  to  the imagination; which, being not tied to the laws of matter,
may  at  pleasure  join  that  which nature hath severed, and sever that
which  nature  hath joined." Kant, on the other hand, like Plato, judges
poetry  in  terms  of  its  contribution  to  knowledge.  A thing of the
imagination,  poetry,  he  maintains,  serves  the understanding, for it
conducts  "a  free  play  of  the  imagination  as  if it were a serious
business  of  the  understanding."  Though  "the poet promises merely an
entertaining   play   with   ideas,"   Kant   continues,  "yet  for  the
understanding  there  enures as much as if the promotion of its business
had  been  his  one  intention."  He achieves a certain "combination and
harmony   of   the   two   faculties   of   cognition,  sensibility  and
understanding,  which, though doubtless indispensable to one another, do
not  readily  permit  of  being united without compulsion and reciprocal
abatement."  In  so  doing,  the  poet, in Kant's opinion, "accomplishes
something  worthy of being made a serious business, namely, the using of
play  to  provide  food for the understanding, and the giving of life to
its  concepts  by  means  of the imagination." Yet Kant and Plato do not
agree  in  their judgment of the poet. Regarding "the poet's promise" as
"a  modest one"— "a mere play with ideas is all he holds out to us"—Kant
praises  him  for achieving more in actual performance than he promises.
Plato,  on  the  contrary,  seems  to  think  the poet promises more and
achieves  less.  He  seems  to  regard the poet not as assisting, but as
competing  with  the  philosopher.  The reason why the poet must fail in
this attempt is that he tries to do on the level of the imagination what
the  philosopher  is  better able to do on the level of reason. Both are
engaged  in  a  process of imitation for all knowledge is imitation— but
whereas the notions of the philosopher imitate the reality of the Ideas,
the   images  of  the  poet  imitate  sensible  appearances,  which  are
themselves  imitations  of  the  Ideas or eternal Forms. Even when it is
accurate  or  truthful,  poetry  must, therefore, be an inferior form of
knowledge.  In  Plato's terms, it is on the level of opinion, along with
fancy and belief. In any case, it must sub-

[437b]
Chapter  69:  POETRY  403  mit  to being judged by the same standards of
accuracy as anything else which claims to be knowledge or right opinion.
"Imitations,"  he writes, "are not to be judged of by pleasure and false
opinion. . . . They are to be judged of by the standard of truth, and by
no  other  whatever."  The  competent  judge  of poetry must, therefore,
"possess  three  things:  he  must know, in the first place, of what the
imitation  is; secondly, he must know that it is true; and thirdly, that
it  has been well executed in words and melodies and rhythms." The issue
concerning  poetry and truth can be most sharply drawn between Plato and
Aristotle,  precisely  because Aristotle thinks that poetry is a form of
imitation,  but  that knowledge does not have the character of imitation
at  all.  Since poetry is not a kind of knowledge, the same standards do
not  apply  to  both.  "There  is  not the same kind of correctness," he
insists, "in poetry as in politics"—or "in medicine or any other special
science."  The poet's art is at fault if he "meant to describe the thing
correctly  but  failed  through  lack  of power of expression." But if a
technical  error  in  physiology  enters into his description because he
meant  to  describe  the thing "in some incorrect way (e.g., to make the
horse in movement have both right legs thrown forward)," then, according
to  Aristotle,  "his  error in that case is not in the essentials of the
poetic  art."  The  poet's  obligation  is  not  to  be truthful in such
particulars  but  to  make  his  whole  story  seem plausible. Aristotle
summarizes  his  position in the statement of his famous rule concerning
the probable and the possible. "For the purposes of poetry," he says, "a
convincing  impossibility is preferable to an unconvincing possibility."
Connected  with  this  issue concerning the kind of truth to be expected
from  the poet is the controversy over the purpose of poetry to instruct
or  to delight, or to do both. This in turn relates to the moral problem
of  the  influence  poetry can have on human character or virtue; and to
the  political  problem  of the regulation of poetry by the state or the
right  of  poetry  to be free from such censorship. It is not surprising
that  Plato,  conceiving poetry as he does, should banish poets from the
ideal state described in the Republic; or that he should lay

[438a]
404  THE GREAT IDEAS down specific regulations for the content of poetry
in  the  Laws.  At  the  opposite extreme are those who, like Milton and
Mill,  attack the principle of censorship itself—as applied to poetry as
well  as  toother  forms ofcommunication. But the traditional defense of
poetry,  in essays bearing that title from the pen of Sidney and Shelley
or  in  the writings of Chaucer, Montaigne, and Cervantes, usually tries
to answer Plato by praising poetry as an instrument of moral instruction
as  well  as of delight. Waiving the question of its effect upon morals,
some,  like  Adam  Smith,  answer the sort of criticism Augustine levels
against pagan poetry and theatrical presentations by holding the theatre
to be a legitimate, a lawful, even a necessary means of recreation. Some
of  these  issues  touch on considerations dealt with in other chapters.
The  problem  of  censorship  is  discussed  in  the chapters on Art and
Liberty;  and the theory of imitation as applied to the arts in general,
useful  as well as fine, is discussed in the chapter on Art. Here we are
concerned with the bearing of that theory upon the nature of poetry. The
difference  we  have  observed  between  Plato  and Aristotle concerning
imitation  itself  does  not  seem to affect their use of this notion in
treating  works  of  fine art, and more particularly poetry. What Hamlet
tells the players is the purpose of their play— "to hold, as 'twere, the
mirror  up to nature"— Aristotle says is the aim of such arts as poetry,
sculpture,  painting,  music, and the dance, which give both instruction
and  delight  through imitation. Within the sphere of the fine arts, the
distinction  of  poetry  from the others is usually made in terms of the
medium  of  imitation.  Poetry, according to Aristotle, imitates through
the  medium  of  language; painting and sculpture through lines, planes,
colors,   and   shapes;   music  through  rhythm  and  harmony.  Whether
Aristotle's  statement that "the objects of imitation are men in action"
applies  to  poetry  alone  or  to  all  the fine arts, is a question of
interpretation   to   which  opposite  answers  have  been  given.  Some
commentators  seem to think that human action as the object of imitation
specifically  defines  poetry, whereas music and sculpture have distinct
objects as well as dis-

[438b]
tinct  mediums of imitation. Others hold that human action is the object
of imitation common to all the arts. However this issue is resolved, the
differentiation  of  the kinds of poetry can be made neither in terms of
the object nor the medium of imitation, but only in terms of the manner.
"The  medium  being the same and the object the same," Aristotle writes,
"the  poet  may  imitate  by narration— in which case he can either take
another  personality  as  Homer  does,  or  speak  in  his  own  person,
unchanged—or  he  may  present  all  his characters as living and moving
before  us."  Plato  makes  the  same distinction, pointing out that the
Homeric  type  of poetry combines both the discourse of the poet and the
discourse  of  his  characters  in  dialogue.  He calls stage plays pure
imitations in the sense that the author never speaks directly, but tells
his  story  entirely through the actions and speeches of the characters;
whereas  the  type  of  poetry  which  he  calls narrative as opposed to
imitative  may  combine  both  methods  of  storytelling or may, in some
extreme   instances,   never  resort  to  dialogue  at  all.  Since  all
storytelling  is  narration, and since all poetry is imitation, it seems
slightly confusing to call the two major types of poetry "narration" and
"imitation,"  as Plato sometimes does, or "narrative" and "dramatic," as
Aristotle   sometimes   does.  Bacon  also  speaks  of  "narrative"  and
"dramatic"  or  "representative"  poetry. He defines narrative poetry as
"such  an  exact  imitation  of  history as to deceive, did it not often
carry  things  beyond  probability,"  and  dramatic poetry as "a kind of
visible  history,  giving  the images of things as if they were present,
whilst  history  represents  them as past." The difficulties of language
seem  to be removed by other terms which both Plato and Aristotle use to
express the main distinction. The manner of storytelling, exemplified by
Homer,  which  either  employs  direct  narration  without  dialogue  or
combines  both,  is  epic  poetry.  That  which  uses dialogue alone, is
dramatic.   These   words—   "epic"   and   "dramatic"—may   have  their
difficulties,  too,  especially  for  the  contemporary reader, unless a
number of things are remembered. First, epics and dramas may

[439a]
be  written  either  in  prose  or verse. Second, the arts of theatrical
representation  are  auxiliary  to  the  art  of  the dramatic poet. The
writing  of  a  play  is  completely  independent  of  its  acting, "the
production  of  spectacular effects depending," as Aristotle says, "more
on the art of the stage machinist than on that of the poet." Third, epic
poetry  differs  from  dramatic poetry in other respects than the use of
indirect  discourse  as  well as dialogue. On this last point, Aristotle
observes  that  all  the  elements  of  epic  poetry are found in drama,
whereas  the  dramatic  form  may include the embellishments of song and
spectacle  in  addition  to  plot, character, thought, and diction. Even
more  important is his distinction of the two in terms of the unities of
time,  place,  and action. Because it need not be limited at all in time
and  place,  epic  narration  may  have  a  much  more  complicated plot
structure  or  even,  as Aristotle says, "a multiplicity of plots." With
this  understanding  of  the  distinction between the two major types of
storytelling,  we  can  see why the great novels of Cervantes, Melville,
Tolstoy,  and  Dostoevsky  should  be classified as epic poems, and were
apparently  so  conceived  by  their  authors,  at least in the cases of
Cervantes  and  Melville.  As measured by the magnitude of its plot— its
reach  in  time,  and its scene the whole universe "from Heaven, through
the  world,  to  Hell"—  Goethe's Faust, even though dramatic in manner,
seems to be no less epic in its structure and proportions than the poems
of  Homer,  Virgil, Dante, and Milton. The story of a single white whale
can be epic in its immensity if the storyteller, like Melville, makes it
"include  the  whole  circle of the sciences, and all the generations of
whales, and men, and mastodons, past, present, and to come, with all the
revolving  panoramas  of  empire  on  earth,  and  throughout  the whole
universe,  not  excluding  its suburbs." Another traditional division in
the  kinds  of  poetry  is  that  between the tragic and the comic. This
distinction  is  variously  expressed.  Fielding  sees the difference in
terms  of the misery or happiness to which the poet brings his principal
characters  in  the  end. Speaking of tragedy alone, Milton says that it
has ever been held "the gravest, moralest, and most profitable of

[439b]
Chapter  69:  POETRY  405  all  other  poems."  In  similar vein, Marcus
Aurelius  praises  tragedy "for reminding men of the things which happen
to  them and that it is according to nature for things to happen so." He
does  not  admit  comedy  to be of equal worth, though he does look with
some  favor  upon  the  older  forms  of  comedy  which  were "useful in
reminding  men  to beware of insolence." According to Aristotle, "comedy
represents  men  as  worse,  tragedy  as better than in actual life." He
describes  the  action  which  tragic poetry imitates as serious, adding
that  tragedies  "through  pity  and fear effect the proper purgation of
these emotions." Whether comedies also arouse and purge certain emotions
Aristotle  does  not  say,  for his promise to speak more fully of comic
poetry  is  not  fulfilled in the Poetics. Concerning the meaning of the
tragic catharsis, there are questions enough. Augustine asks: "How is it
that  a  man wants to be made sad by the sight of tragic sufferings that
he  could  not  bear  in his own person? . . . The more a man feels such
sufferings  in himself, the more he is moved by the sight of them on the
stage.  Now  when  a  man  suffers himself, it is called misery; when he
suffers  in the suffering of another, it is called pity. But how can the
unreal sufferings of the stage possibly move Boswell begs Dr. Johnson to
explain  Aristotle's  doctrine  of  the  purging  of the passions as the
purpose  of  tragedy.  "Why, Sir," Johnson replies, "you are to consider
what  is  the  meaning  of purging in the original sense. It is to expel
impurities from the body. The mind is subject to the same imperfections.
The  passions  are the great movers of human actions; but they are mixed
with  such  impurities,  that  it  is necessary they should be purged or
refined  by  means of terror and pity. For instance, ambition is a noble
passion;  but by seeing upon the stage, that a man who is so excessively
ambitious as to raise himself by injustice is punished, we are terrified
by  the  fatal  consequences  of  such  a  passion. In the same manner a
certain  degree  of  resentment  is  necessary; but if we see that a man
carries it too far, we pity the object of it, and are taught to moderate
that  passion."  Johnson's interpretation seems to be more specific than
Milton's  notion that to purge the passions by tragedy is "to temper and
reduce

[440a]
406 THE GREAT IDEAS them to just measure with a kind of delight, stirr'd
up  by  reading  or  seeing  those  passions  well  imitated." It may be
arguable  whether  the  difference  between  tragedy  and comedy is well
defined  by  reference  to  the  nobility  or  vulgarity  of the leading
characters;  by the contrast between the pride of the tragic and the wit
of  the  comic  hero;  by the seriousness or lightness of the tragic and
comic  themes  and  by  the passions appropriate to each. In any case it
seems clear that this division of poetry crosses the other division into
epic  and  dramatic  writing.  The  plays  of Sophocles and the Iliad of
Homer,  Aristotle  observes,  are  tragic  poetry, yet dramatic and epic
respectively  in manner; but from another point of view, Sophocles is to
be  compared  with Aristophanes, for though the one writes tragedies and
the  other  comedies, both are dramatists. In the tradition of the great
books,  there  are  comic  as well as tragic epics Chaucer's Troilus and
Cressida,  Rabelais'  Gargantua  andPantagruel,  Cervantes' Don Quixote,
Sterne's  Tristram  Shandy,  and Fielding's Tom Jones— just as there are
tragic  and  comic  plays.  The  examination of these suggests that talk
rather  than  action  is  the  essence  of comedy. The chief thing which
Aristodemus  remembers  of  Socrates'  discourse  the  morning after the
banquet,  in  Plato's  Symposium,  is  Socrates'  success  in compelling
Aristophanes  and  Agathon "to acknowledge that the genius of comedy was
the  same as that of tragedy, and that the true artist in tragedy was an
artist  in  comedy  also. To this they were constrained to assent, being
drowsy,  and  not  quite  following  the  argument." Precisely what they
assented  to  has  never  been  entirely clear. On one interpretation of
Socrates'  remark,  examples  of  his point are difficult to find in the
great  books—except, perhaps, for the plays of Shakespeare which, in the
sphere  of dramatic poetry, seem to represent an equal genius for tragic
and  comic  writing.  In  the  sphere  of  epic  poetry,  we  have  only
Aristotle's  reference to a lost poem of Homer's — the Margites—which he
says "bears the same relation to comedy that the Iliad and Odyssey do to
tragedy." According to another interpretation the insight of Socrates is
that  the  totality  of the great tragic vision tends to approximate the
totality

[440b]
of  the  great  comic vision. The same poem may be both tragic and comic
because  the  poet  has  been  able to see far enough into the nature of
things  to  reveal  a world which is at once dreadful and ridiculous. In
this sense Moby Dic\ may be both a tragedy and a comedy. "Though in many
of  its  aspects,"  Melville writes, "this visible world seems formed in
love,  the invisible spheres were formed in fright"; but he also remarks
that "there are certain queer times and occasions . . . when a man takes
this  whole  universe  for  a  vast  practical  joke." In the science of
poetics,  certain  principles  or  rules  seem to apply to all the major
forms  of  poetry,  where others relate specifically to epic or dramatic
writing,  or  to  tragedy  or  comedy.  Aristotle  implies that his most
general  formulations  hold not only for long poems, but for dithyrambic
poetry  as  well.  If that is so, they should be capable of extension to
other  forms  of  lyric  poetry,  such  as,  for example, the sonnets of
Shakespeare  and  Milton,  and  Milton's  odes  and elegies. Yet the two
principal elements in Aristotle's analysis of poetry— plot and character
seem,  superficially  at least, to belong peculiarly to narrative poems,
long  or short. Whether they are present in any comparable manner in the
structure  of  a  lyric, or whether the form and content of lyric poetry
requires  an  analysis  peculiar to itself, are among the most difficult
questions  in the theory of poetry. In the tradition of the great books,
there  seems  to  be,  as  already observed, general agreement about the
basic  rules  for  writing  narrative  poetry.  Since these rules aim to
direct  the  artist  toward the achievement of excellence, they are also
the  basic principles of criticism. The science of poetics is at once an
organon of production and a canon of criticism. The simple rules such as
those  of  plot  construction afford an example. A well constructed plot
must  have a beginning, middle, and end. It must observe certain unities
(at  least  of action, if not of time and place). Certain effects, it is
held,  can  best  be  produced  by  the  use  of  recognition scenes and
reversals  of  fortune.  Whether  the  events  narrated  are possible or
impossible,  the  poet  must  at  least invest them with plausibility or
verisimilitude.  Such  rules,  formulated  by Aristotle and discussed by
Cer-

[441a]
vantes,  Fielding,  and  others, provide standards for judging whether a
poem  is  skillfully made, as well as give directions for the attainment
of  skill  by  the  poet. ^^—^ It may be held, of course, that the great
poet  works  by  inspiration,  by  a divine madness rather than by rule;
that,  as  Theseus says in A Midsummer-Night' s Dream, "the lunatic, the
lover, and the poet are of imagination all compact . . . The poet's eye,
in  a  fine frenzy rolling, doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth
to  heaven; and as imagination bodies forth the forms of things unknown,
the  poet's  pen turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing a local
habitation  and a name." But if there is an art of poetry, then like any
other  art  it  is  a  thing of rules, whether or not genius needs their
guidance  or  can  be  regulated  by them. The pivotal question here is,
Which  takes  precedence,  the  creative  or  the critical faculty? Does
Aristotle's rule concerning the primacy of plot derive from the greatest
poems  of  antiquity in which he found this principle observed ? Does it
set up an infallible measure of excellence in narration or, on the other
hand,  do  certain  modern  novels  have an impeccable greatness despite
their  violation  of  this  rule  by  the  emphasis  they  place  on the
development  of  character  rather  than  on  the  action  in  which the
characters  are  involved? The rule of probability and necessity may, on
the  other hand, be inviolable. Not even the most original genius may be
able  to  tell a good story without giving it poetic truth, according to
the  necessities  of the characters he has created and the probabilities
of  the  situations  in  which  he places them. On the side of language,
poetic  theory seems to draw much from the art of rhetoric. The relation
of  rhetoric  to  poetics,  the  nature  of  rhetorical  devices such as
metaphor and simile, the choice among existing words or the invention of
new  ones,  are matters dealt with in the chapter on Rhetoric as well as
here.  Aristotle's  treatment of these problems both in his Rhetoric and
his Poetics lays the foundation for the traditional association of these
two disciplines. In both, for example, he discusses the various modes of
metaphor and their utility in achieving an expansion of meaning combined
with a contraction of speech.

[441b]
Chapter  69:  POETRY  407 This, in turn, relates to his general maxim of
style  which directs the writer "to be clear without being ordinary. The
clearest  style,"  he  says,  "is that which uses only current or proper
words,"  but in order to avoid being commonplace or ordinary, it must be
admixed   with  lofty  diction—"raised  above  the  commonplace  by  the
employment of unusual words. . . . Nothing contributes more to produce a
clearness   of   diction   that  is  remote  from  commonness  than  the
lengthening,  contraction,  and alteration of words. . . . Phrases which
are  not  part of current idiom give distinction to style. . . . But the
greatest  thing  by  far  is  to  have a command of metaphor. This alone
cannot be imparted by another; it is the mark of genius for to make good
metaphors  implies  an  eye  for  resemblances." One part of Aristotle's
theory  of  style  seems  to be amplified by Pascal's observation that a
certain  perfection  is  achieved  by  the  use of those words which, if
altered,  would  spoil the discourse. In these terms, prosaic as opposed
to  poetic  writing  does  not result from the lack of a fixed metre but
rather  from  commonplaceness  or  lack of distinction in language. This
standard  of  style  does not apply to poetry alone; for just as history
and  philosophy  may  be  written in prose or verse, so also may they be
written  poetically  or  prosaically.  Dr.  Johnson's  point that poetry
cannot  be  translated, that "the beauties of poetry cannot be preserved
in  any language except that in which it was originally written," may be
capable  of  the  widest generalization. It may be extended to mean that
writing  which  is  poetic  cannot  be translated into any other form of
words,  even  in  the  same  language.  A  poetic sentence in English is
untranslatable  in  this  absolute  sense  when  no  alternative English
phrasing  is  truly  its equivalent. For example, it seems impossible to
re-state, without loss or ruin, Shakespeare's "Life is a tale told by an
idiot, full of sound and fury, signifying nothing" or Hobbes' "Life in a
state of nature is solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short." The other
part of Aristotle's theory of style, that concerning metaphors, seems to
be  converted by William James into a general distinction between poetic
and  philosophic  thought,  or  what  he  calls  "the  splendid  and the
analytic"

[442a]
408  THE GREAT IDEAS types of intellect. Poetic thought tends to develop
the  implications  of  an  analogy  without giving an explication of its
grounds.  This,  in  fames'  view,  explains  "the abrupt transitions in
Shakespeare's   thought,"   which   "astonish   the   reader   by  their
unexpectedness,  no  less  than delight him by their fitness." Quoting a
passage  from  Homer, unfathomably rich in metaphor, he says that "a man
in  whom all the accidents of an analogy rise up as vividly as this, may
be  excused  for  not  attending  to the ground of the analogy." The two
types  of intellect are rarely found in conjunction— Plato, according to
James,  being  one  of  the few exceptions "whose strangeness proves the
rule."  On  the  level  of  thought and knowledge, as opposed to that of
language,  poetry is traditionally contrasted to philosophy and history.
As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  History, historians like Herodotus,
Thucydides,  and  Plutarch  emphasize  the  difference  rather  than the
similarity;  the  historian is a reporter of fact, the poet a creator of
fables  or  fictions.  The one gains credence by his display of evidence
and reasons; the other, by the intrinsic plausibility of his tale. "In a
good  poem,"  writes  Hobbes, "whether it be epic or dramatic . . . both
judgment  and fancy are required, but the fancy must be more eminent ...
In  a  good  history, the judgment must be eminent, because the goodness
consists  in  the method, in the truth . . . Fancy has no place but only
in  adorning  the  style."  Bacon associates poetry most intimately with
history,  both  being concerned with "individuals, circumscribed by time
and place," and differing only as one employs the imagination, the other
the  memory.  Aristotle,  on the other hand, finds poetry and philosophy
more  alike,  at least to the extent that poetry, unlike history, "tends
to  express the universal," by which he means "how a person of a certain
type  will on occasion speak or act, according to the law of probability
or  necessity." Even if the poet "chances to take an historical subject,
he  is none the less a poet; for there is no reason why some events that
have actually happened should not conform to the law of the probable and
possible,  and  in  virtue  of  that quality in them he is their poet or
maker." In this sense

[442b]
the  historian  also  may  turn  poet.  Referring to the speeches in his
history, Thucydides tells us that it was his habit "to make the speakers
say what was in my opinion demanded of them by the various occasions, of
course adhering as closely as possible to the general sense of what they
really  said."  Some  of  the  great  poems,  notably the Divine Comedy,
Paradise  Lest,  and Faust, are frequently called philosophical for what
appear  to  be  other  reasons:  either  because  the discourse of their
characters  is  weighted  with  doctrine, or because the poet himself is
expressing  a doctrine, not in particular speeches, nor by argument, but
in  the  symbolism of the poem as a whole. By these criteria, Lucretius'
On the Nature of Things is a philosophical work, but not a philosophical
poem.  It  is argumentative throughout, not narrative at all; it aims to
be  a literal rather than an allegorical statement of the truth. Bacon's
definition of allegorical poetry— as that "which represents intellectual
things  to  the  senses"—seems to characterize both the poetic aspect of
philosophy  and  a  distinctively  philosophical  type  of  poetry.  Yet
Aristotle's  point,  that  poetry  and  philosophy are alike, may remain
valid.  All  poetry,  certainly all the great narrative poems, the great
epics  and  dramas,  novels and plays, deal with the abiding problems of
human  action  and the perennial themes of human thought. It is not this
moral   or  metaphysical  content,  however,  which  makes  poetry  more
philosophical  than history. It is the poet's treatment of such matters.
In  the  persons  and  events  of  his  story  he succeeds in giving the
universal  a  concrete  embodiment.  Precisely  because  these  are only
imaginary,  not  real particulars, they permit the abstract universal to
be readily disengaged. Poets like Chaucer and Cervantes, who insist that
their  function  is to instruct as well as to delight, do not assume the
role  of  pedagogues  or preachers. They teach, not dogmatically, but as
experience  does,  by  affording the mind the materials or occasions for
insight  and  inference.  As an artistic imitation, poetry may be better
than  the  experience it represents. It may improve upon experience as a
teacher,  because,  born  of  the poet's mind, it is already impregnated
with ideas.

[443a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1. The nature of poetry: its distinction from other
arts  410  \a.  The  theory  of  poetry  as  imitation: the enjoyment of
imitation 2. The origin and development of poetry: the materials of myth
and  legend  3.  The inspiration or genius of the poet: the influence of
the  poetic  tradition  4.  The major kinds of poetry: their comparative
excellence  412  4#.  Epic and dramatic poetry 4#. Tragedy and comedy 5.
Poetry  in  relation  to knowledge 5 a. The aim of poetry to instruct as
well  as to delight: the pretensions or deceptions 5b. Poetry contrasted
with  history  and  philosophy: the dispraise and defense of the poet 6.
Poetry  and  emotion 414 6a. The expression of emotion in poetry 6b. The
arousal  and  purgation of the emotions by poetry: the catharsis of pity
and  fear 7. The elements of poetic narrative ja. Plot: its primacy; its
construction  jb.  The  role  of  character:  its  relation  to plot jd.
Spectacle  and song in drama 8. The science of poetics: rules of art and
principles  of  criticism Sa. Critical standards and artistic rules with
respect  to  narrative  structure ( 1) The poetic unities: comparison of
epic   and   dramatic   unity   (2)   Poetic  truth:  verisimilitude  or
plausibility; the possible, the probable, and the necessary $b. Critical
standards and artistic rules with respect to the language of poetry: the
distinction  between prose and verse; the measure of excellence in style
Sc. The interpretation of poetry 9. The moral and political significance
of  poetry  417  ga.  The influence of poetry on mind and character: its
role in education gb. The issue concerning the censorship of poetry

[443b]
Chapter 69: POETRY 409 ^-s=—"~" PAGE of the poet as teacher 413

[444a]
410 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The nature of
poetry:  its  distinction  from  other  arts  7 Plato: Ion 142a-148a,c /
Symposium,  164d;  166b-167b / Gorgias, 280d-282b / Republic, bk ii-iii,
320d-334b; bk x, 427c-434c / Laws, bk 11, 660a-662a 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk ix, ch 7
[ii6yb34n68 a9] 421b-c / Politics, bk viii, ch 5 [1339
40-i340b i9] 545c-546a / Poetics 681a-699a,c esp ch 1-6 681a-685a, ch 9
[i45i a36-b32]
686a-c,  ch  25 696d-698c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [127-145]
2c-d;  bk  iv [1-25] 44a-b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4, 109d 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3 10a11a / Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch
ii,  250c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 14 16d-17a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  1,  a  9, rep 1 8d-9c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  101,  a 2, rep 2 267a-268a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xxiv
[49-63] 90a-b; paradise, xxx [16-36] 152a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67b-c;  72a-d  25  Montaigne: Essays,
104d-105b; 166d-167a; 482d 26 Shakespeare: Midsummer-Night''s Dream, act
v. sc 1 [1-27] 370d-371a

[444b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 27
Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  lv  594c-d  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii,
251b-252b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d; 38c39d; 55c-d 31
Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes, 337a-338a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  33  176b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a-b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 19a-20a; 49b-50c; 189c 42 Kant -.Judgement, 524b;
532a-536d  esp  532b-d  44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson,  254c-d; 308b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, intro, 153b; part 1, 254b-d; part ii, 263d-265c;
279b 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude
[134-157]
4a-b;  part  11 [9695-9904] 235a-240b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 292a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v  t  115ac  54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  643c  la.  The  theory of poetry as imitation: the
enjoyment of imitation 5 Aristophanes: Thesmophoriazusae
[95-172]
601c-602b 7 Plato: Cratylus, 105a-c / Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-334b; bk
x,  427c-434c  / Timaeus, 443c / Sophist, 561 b-d / Laws, bk 11, 654a-c;
660a662a; bk vii, 726d-728b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk viii, ch 5
[i339b40-

[445a]
d  Uto3  Chapter 69: POETRY 411 I340b i9] 545c-546a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch
ii
[i37i b4-io] 615a; bk
hi, ch i
[1404*20-23]
654b / Poetics 681a-699a,c esp ch 1-4 681a683c, ch 6 [i450b i6-2o] 685a,
ch  9  [1451*36b32]  686a-c, ch 25 696d-698c ^^^ 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[13791411] 79a-b
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4, 109d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
hi, sect 2 259d260a; bk xi, sect 10 303b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
hi,  par 2-4 13c-14b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 9, rep
1  8d-9c;  part 1-11, q 32, a 8, ans 764c765b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  i,  xiiib-c; part 11, 251d-252a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
38c-39d 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes, 337a 338a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 32-33
176a-b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 5, 452d-453a 36 Swift:
Gulliver, part iv, 169a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 121b,d-123a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 94a-b 42 Kaxt: Judgement, 527b-528c 54 Freud: Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle,  643c  lb.  The  object, medium, and manner of
imitation  in  poetry  and  other  arts  7  Plato:  Republic, bk ii-iii,
320c-334b  /  Timaeus,  443c  /  Laws,  bk ii, 654a-662a passim; bk vii,
726d-728b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk viii, ch 5
[i^39b40I340b i9] 545c-546a /
Poetics  681a  699a,c  esp ch 1-3 681a-682c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
xi,   sect   10  303b-c  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  43b-d  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk i, par 25-27 7a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 262c 26
Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  prologue 532b, 27 Shakespeare: Timon of Athens,
act i, sc i
[15-50] 393b-394a / Sonnets, lxxxiv 599a
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38c-39d 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes,
337a-338a  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv, 169a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
49a-50c; 121b,d-123a; 189a-191c 42 Kant: Judgement, 527b-528c; 557a-558b
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  196d-197a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  335a-b 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk x, 284b-d 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  265c  2. The origin and development of poetry: the materials of
myth and legend 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[1-7] 3a; bk
ii [484-493] 14d-15a / Odyssey, bk i [i-io] 183a 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus
Bound
[442-461]
44c-d

[445b]
5 Aristophanes: Knights
[503-546] 476b-d
/  Peace  [734-818]  534c-535c  /  Frogs  [871-894]  574b-c 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  5b  7  Plato:  Ion, 143a / Republic, bk hi, 324c328b 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2 [982^119] 500d-501a 9 Aristotle:
Poetics, ch 3-5 682a-684a; ch 6
[1450^-8]
684d-685a; ch 13
[1 452^301453*22]
687c-688a; ch 18
[1456*16-32]
691c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[13791411] 79a-b
12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk xi, sect 6 302c303a 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv
[1-3]
14a; vi 19a-21a / Aeneid, bk i
[i-ii]
103a;
[740-747]
123b;  bk  vii  [37-44]  237a;  [641-646] 254a 14 Plutarch: Solon, 76a /
Pericles,  128d-129a  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk xviii, ch 13-14
478d-479d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxxiii
[46-75] 156c-157a
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  262c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  190d-191a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 362a-363b; 482d 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d; 38d39a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
ix
[1-47]
247a248a   /   Samson  Agonistes,  337a-338a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,
152a-155b:  357a-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  23d-24a,c;  94a-b;
158d-159a;  476d-477a;  502d;  544c-545c;  627b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 40b-41a; 225ac; 293c; 325d-328a,c esp 327c-d; 522b528a,c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153b;  part  1,  229b-230a; 239c-240a;
254b-d;  part  ii,  263d-265c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, xib-xxa 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  569c-571b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-128a   54   Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  246b-c  /  General
Introduction,  483b-c;  509a-513d passim / Group Psychology, 692a-693a /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  816a-b 3. The inspiration or genius of the
poet: the influence of the poetic tradition 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[1-7] 3a; bk
ii  [484-493]  14d-15a  /  Odyssey,  bk  i  [i-io]  183a 5 Aristophanes:
Acharnians
[665-675] 462d463a / Knights [581-594] 477b / Clouds [314340]
491c-492a;
[562-574]
495c;
[595-605]
496a / Peace
[734-818]
534c-535c / Birds
[1372-1409] 559b-c / Thesmophoriazusae [3957] 600d-601a;
[95-172] 601c-602b
/ Plutus
[144-197] 630d-631b

[446a]
(3  . The inspiration or genius of the poet: the influence of the poetic
tradition.)  7  Plato:  Phaedrus, 124a / Ion 142a-148a,c esp 144b-145c /
Symposium,  160c-161a; 166b167b / Apology, 202c-d / Laws, bk iv, 684bc 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch y
[n6yh^^-
1168*9] 421b-c / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch i
[i403b
15-1404*39] 653b,d-654c; ch 2
[1405*7-8]
655b / Poetics, ch 4
[i448b24-i449a
7] 682d683a; ch 13
[1453*30-35] 688a; ch 17 [1455
21-39] 690c ; CH 22 [i459a5-7] 694d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[127-145]  2c-d;  [921-950]  12b-c;  bk iv [1-25] 44a-b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, ii
[7-10]
2c; iv
[67-102]
6a-b; xxvi
[19-24]
38a; xxxn
[1-12]
47c; purgatory, i
[1-12]
53a; xxi
[76]-xxn
[129] 85d-87d; xxiv [49-63] 90a-b;
xxvi
[88-148]
93d-94c; xxix
[37-42]
98a; paradise, 1
[1-37] 106a-b;
11
[1-17] 107d; x
[28-48]
120c-d; xviii
[82-87]
134c ' xxn
[106-123] 140d; xxiii [55-69] 141d-142a
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii, stanza 1-3 21b-22a; bk v,
stanza  256-257  153b-154a  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
2d-3a,c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 52d-53a; 104d-105b; 166d-167a; 195d-197a;
309c;  362a-363b; 455c-d; 482d; 512b-d 26 Shakespeare: Midsummer-Night's
Dream, act v, sc 1
[1-27]
370d-371a  /  Henry  V, prologue 532b,d 27 Shakespeare; Timon of Athens,
act i, sc i
[19-25] 393d / Sonnets, c-cviii 601c-602d
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, xia-xiiid; part 11, 251d-252a; 340b
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 55c-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
i, 43b 32 Milton: Lycidas 27b-32a esp [1-22] 27b-28a,
[64-69] 29a, [186-193] 31b-32a / Paradise Lost,
bk 1 [1-26] 93b-94a; bk hi [1-55] 135b-136b; bk vii
[1-39] 217a-218a; bk ix
[1-47] 247a248a
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  302a-b  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 49a-50c;
152a-155b;  189a-191c; 246a-247a; 273a-274c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
24a;  185b;  345bc;  476d-477a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 527d-528a,c;
573a574a   42  Kant:  Judgement,  525c-532a  esp  526a-527b,  528c-530c;
542b-543c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 455a 47 Goethe: Faust, dedication-prelude
la-6a esp DEDICATION la-b, PRELUDE
[134-I57]
4a-b;  part  ii [5573-5605] 137b-138a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 292a 53
James:  Psychology,  686b-688a; 863a 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
181a-b;   239c-240a;  246b-248c;  383d  /  General  Introduction,  483c;
600d-601b  /  Group Psychology, 670a-b; 692c-693a / Civilization and Its
Discontents, 796c

[446b]
412  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3  to  5  4.  The  major  kinds of poetry: their
comparative  excellence  4a. Epic and dramatic poetry 7 Plato: Republic,
bk ii, 322a; bk hi, 328b 331c 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 1-3 681a-682c; ch
4
[i448b24-i 449
a  7]  682d-683a;  ch  5  [1449V19I 683d-684a; ch 23-24 695a-696d; ch 26
698c699a,c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i. 185b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  39a-d  43  Federalist:  number  47,  154a  52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk v, 127b-128a 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 692c-d
4b.  Tragedy  and  comedy  5 Aristophanes: Frogs [1482-1499] 581d-582a 7
Plato:  Symposium,  173c / Gorgias, 281d282a / Republic, bk hi, 329b; bk
x,  431b  / Philebus, 629a-630c / Laws, bk ii, 655d; bk vii, 727d-728b 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk iv, ch 8 375a-d passim / Poetics 681a-699a,c esp
ch  5-6  683c-685a,  ch  12  687bc 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4,
109d;  ch  24, 129c-d; ch 28, 133d-134d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk xi,
sect  6 302c303a 14 Plutarch: Solon, 76a / Pericles, 128d-129a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xvi
[124-136]
23d;  paradise, xxx [19-36] 152a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v,
stanza   256-257   153b-154a   /   Mon1(s   Prologue  [13,979988]  433b;
[13,997-14,004] 434a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 69c 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  237b-c  32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes, 337a-338a /
Areopagitica,  385a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 73a-75a; 154d-155a; 273d;
357a-d  42  Kant:  Judgement,  537a-539d  44 Boswell: Johnson, 308b-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part  ii, 263a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
54b-55a;   84b-85a;  107a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  373a-b  54  Freud:
Interpretation of Dreams, 246c-248c / General Introduction, 581d-582b 5.
Poetry  in  relation to knowledge 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
354b c 7 Plato: Lysis, 19d-20a / Phaedrus, 138c-140d / Ion 142a-148a,c /
Republic,  bk  hi,  333b-d;  bk  x,  427c-434c  /  Laws, bk iv, 684b-c 9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37i b4-io]
615a / Poetics, ch 4 [i448b4-23] 682c-d; ch 9
[i45i a36-b32]
686a-c; ch 24
[1460*19-25]
696bc;  ch  25 [1460^-32] 696d-697b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
20-22 6a-c; par 25-27 7a-d; bk hi, par 11, 16a

[447a]
5a  to 5b Chapter 69: POETRY 413 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i, a 9, rep 1 8d-9c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 101, a 2,
rep  2  267a-268a  n^—-^  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i [6i-r^5]ld2c;
purgatory, xxn
[64-93]
87a-c;  paradise,  1  [1-37]  106a-b;  xvn  [100-142]  133a-c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  67b-c;  72a-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  258c-259a;
362a-363b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  32d;  38d39b;  55d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  33 176b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  296b,d-298a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 345c 41
Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  300a-b  42  Kant:  Judgement,  526a-527b;
528c-530c;  532b-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk x, 431a 53 James:
Psychology,  687a; 863a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 796c
5a. The aim of poetry to instruct as well as to delight: the pretensions
or deceptions of the poet as teacher 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[497-508]
460d461a;
[628-675]
462b-463a / Knights
[503511] 476b / Clouds [575-594] 495c-d / Frogs
564a-582a,c  esp  [1008-1098] 576b-577c, [14171533] 581a-582a,c 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  140c-d  / Apology, 202c-d / Gorgias, 281d-282a / Republic, bk
ii-iii,  320c-339a;  bk  x,  427c-434c  / Timaeus, 455b-c / Laws, bk 11,
653a-663b;  bk  vii,  726d-728b  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk viii, ch 5
544c546a;  ch  7 [i34i b33-i342b i8] 547c-548a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i [127-145] 2c-d; [921-950] 12b-c; bk iv [1-25] 44a-b; bk v
[110-113] 62c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 7 253b-d; bk xi, sect
6  302c-303a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  33d-34a;  43b-d  /  Solon, 76a /
Pericles, 121d-122b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 27 202d203c; bk
xviii,  ch 14 479c-d 22 Chaucer: Prologue to Melibeus 400b-401a / UEnvoi
550a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 168a-169d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  62bc;  245d  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, parti, xia-
xvid;  13b-16c;  184a-187c;  189d-191d;  part  ii,  322b-c; 427a-429d 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix
[1-47]
247a248a  /  Samson  Agonistes,  337a-338a / Areopagitica, 385a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  i, div 5, 452d-453a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
la-2a; 35a-d; 49a-50c; 73a-75a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 347c-d
40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 346a; 494b-495a

[447b]
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  40d-41a  42  Kant:  Judgement, 532a-d;
534c-539d    44    BoswELL:/oteo/z,116b;158a-b;284b;308b-d   46   Hegel:
Philosophy  of History, part ii, 265c 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude 2a-6a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk v, 127b-128a 5b. Poetry contrasted
with  history  and  philosophy:  the dispraise and defense of the poet 5
Aristophanes:  Frogs  [1482-1499] 581d-582a 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
72a-73b;  bk  iv, 127b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 353d354c 7
Plato:  Lysis, 19d-20a / Protagoras, 57a-c / Phaedrus, 122d-123a; 140a-d
/  Gorgias,  280d282b / Republic, bk ii-iii, 320c-333b; bk viii, 415b-c;
bk  x,  427c-434c / Laws, bk iv, 684b-c 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 9 [i45i
a36-b32] 686a-c; ch 23 695ac; ch 25 696d-698c 14 Plutarch: Theseus, la-b
/  Solon,  76a / Pericles, 140d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3
10a-lla  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk ii, ch 14 156c157c; bk iv, ch
26-27  202a-203c;  bk  viii,  ch 13 273b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q i, a 9, rep 1 8d-9c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
101,  a  2,  rep  2  267a-268a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 67bc 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  62b-c;  194c-201b passim; 258d-259a 26 Shakespeare:
Midsummer-Night'  s  Dream, act v, sc 1 [212-221] 373a-b / 1st Henry IV,
act  in,  sc 1 [120-135] 451b-c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 473b 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  xia-xiiid;  part  11, 212a-215b esp
213b-c; 251a-252b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 32d; 38d39b; 55d 32
Milton:  Samson  Agonistes,  337a-338a  /  Areopagitica, 385a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,   11   173b-174a;   34-35  177a;  38-39  177b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect i, div 5, 452d-453a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 19a-20a;
49b-50c  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 390c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  88a-d; 186c-d; 345b-346b; 398b; 471c-d; 545c; 627b-d 44 Bosvjell:
Johnson, 120c; 307c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-b; part
1, 229b-230a; part ii, 259b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[7426-7433]
181b182a;  [10,189-191]  248b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 431a 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 115a-c; bk xi, 312d-313b 53 James:
Psychology, 686b-689a

[448a]
414  6.  Poetry  and emotion 6a. The expression of emotion in poetry Old
Testament: Exodus, 15:1-21 / // Samuel, 1:17-27— (D) II Kings, 1:17-27 /
Psalms  passim / Lamentations Apocrypha: Judith, 16— (£>) OT, Judith, 16
/  Song of Three Children, 28-68— (D) OT, Daniel, 3:51-90 New Testament:
Luke,   1:42-55,67-79  7  Plato:  Ion,  146d-147a  /  Republic,  bk  hi,
325b-326b; bk x, 432a-434c / Philebus, 628d-630c / Laws, bk ii, 654b-d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk viii, ch 5 544c-546a; ch 7
[i34ib33-i342b i8]
547c-548a,c / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 11
[i37i b4-n]
615a; bk hi, ch 7 659a-660a; ch 16 [i4i7a37-b 7] 671c-d / Poetics, ch 15
[i454b7-i4]  689c;  ch  17  [1455  29-39]  690c  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[440-493] 115a-116b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxiv
[1-36]
51b-c;  purgatory,  xxiv  [49-63] 90a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 104d-105b;
399d-401a;  410a-c  27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets, lxxvi 597d-598a; lxxviii-
lxxix  598b;  lxxxii-lxxxv  598d599b  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i,
184a185b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 38c-39d; 78a-d 32 Milton:
UAllegro 17b-21a / // Penseroso 21a-25a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 11 173b-174a
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  53c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro,
153a-c;  part  iv, 323b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 570c-571a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  246d-248c  /  General  Introduction, 483bc;
600d-601b  /  Group  Psychology, 692c-693a passim / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  773d-774c 6b. The arousal and purgation of the emotions by
poetry: the catharsis of pity and fear 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk i
[325-359] 186b-c; bk
viii
[71-103]
222d-223a;
[482-547]
227a-d;  bk  xii  [1-3]  255a 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi, 189c 7 Plato:
Ion,  145a-b  /  Republic,  bk hi, 325b326b; bk x, 431b-434c / Philebus,
628d-630c  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  viii,  ch  5  544c-546a;  ch  7
[i34ib33-i342b i8] 547c-548a,c / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 11
[1371^-11] 615a; bk
hi, ch 7 659a-660a / Poetics, ch 6
[1 449^3-28] 684a;
ch 9
[1452*1-10] 686c-d; ch
ii
[i452*37-b
4] 687a; ch 13-14 687c-689a; ch 16
[1455*17]
690b;  ch  17  [1455*29-39]  690c;  ch  18  [1456*  19-23] 691c-d; ch 19
[1456*33^8]  691d-692a;  ch 25 [i46ob24-26] 697a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[13791414] 79a-c

[448b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6  to 7b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 33d-34a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  20-22  6ac;  par  25-27  7a-d; bk hi, par 2-4
13c-14b;  bk  x,  par  49-50  83c-84b  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v
[73-142]  7d8b;  purgatory, ii [76-133] 55b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  69c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 104d-105c; 410a-c; 507b-c 26 Shakespeare:
Two  Gentlemen  of  Verona, act in, sc 11 [66-95] 245a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet, act ii, sc ii
[575633] 46b-d / Cymbeline, act
ii, sc hi
[1-35]
459bc  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, xiiic 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 38c-39d; 78a-d; 87c-d 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes, 337a-338a /
Areopagitica,  385a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  n  173b-174a;  135 196a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 94a-b 42 Kant: Judgement, 509b-d 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 308b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 570b-571b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk xv, 638c-639c 53 James: Psychology, 288a; 747b-748a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams, 239c-240a; 246c-247d / General Introduction,
581d-582b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle, 643c / Group Psychology,
692c-693a  /  War  and Death, 762c 7. The elements of poetic narrative 5
Aristophanes: Peace [734-818] 534c-535c / Frogs [758-1533] 573a-582a,c 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk hi, 331c 9 Aristotle: Poetics 681a-699a,c esp ch 6
684a-685a,  ch  12  687b-c  32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes, 337a-338a 36
Sterne:   Tristram   Shandy,   335b-336a  la.  Plot:  its  primacy;  its
construction  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  221d-222a  9  Aristotle: Poetics, ch 6
[i45o*3-b5] 684b-d; ch 7-1 1 685b-687b; ch 13-14 687c-689a; ch 15
[1454*39^8]
689c; ch 16-18 689d-691d; ch 23-24 695a-696d; ch 26
[1 462^-1 1]
699a,c  32  Milton:  Samson  Agonistes, 338a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
228b-231a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 2d-3a; 204b,d-205c lb. The role of
character: its relation to plot 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 2 681d-682a; ch
6
[i449b36-i45ob io]
684b-685a; ch 13
[i452b
30-1453*30]  687c-688a;  ch 15 689a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch
24,  129c-d;  ch  28  133b-134d  17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii, ch 17
91c-92c  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  49a-50c;  152a-155b; 204b,d-205c 44
Boswell: Johnson, 157d-158b

[449a]
1c to 8* (2) 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 54b-55a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  247d-248b  7 Plato: Protagoras, 5 2d- 5 7a ^—-- 7c. Thought and
diction as elements of poetry 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 4 [17*5-7]
26b  9  Aristotle:  Poetics, ch i [i447a i4~b3o] 681ad; cH6 684a-685a;cH
19-22 691d-695a; CH24
[i459b i2-i7] 695c;
ch 25
[i46i a9~b
9] 697c698a; [i46i b i5-i8] 698b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i,  a 9, rep 1 8d-9c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 2-4
21b-22a;  stanza  37-38  26b; stanza 147149 40b-41a / Prologue [725-746]
171b-172a / Millers Prologue
[3167-3186]
212a-b  / Prologue to Melibeus 400b-401a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii,
sc  ii  [454-471] 45a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, xiiic 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 63b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b 32
Milton: Vacation Exercise
[1-58] 59a-60b /
Paradise  Lost,  bk i [12-16] 93b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a-b 42
Kant: Judgement, 524b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 335b 53 James: Psychology,
687b-688a  54  Freud:  General Introduction, 458a-459a Id. Spectacle and
song in drama 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 331c-333a 9 Aristotle : Poetics,
ch  i  [1447*1  4^30]  681a-d;  ch  4  [i448b24-i449a27] 682d-683b; ch 6
684a685a esp [i449b2o-i45oa i4] 684a-c, [i45ob i720] 685a; ch 12 687b-c;
ch 14
[i453b i-i2]
688b; ch 18
[1456*1-3] 691b-c;
[1456*25-32]
691d;  ch  26  [1462*13-17]  698d  32  Milton: Samson Agonistes, 338a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  263d265c  8. The science of
poetics:  rules of art and principles of criticism 5 Aristophanes: Frogs
[758-1533]  573a-582a,c 7 Plato: Ion 142a-148a,c / Laws, bk ii, 654a662a
9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[i28i b3-io]
479b  /  Poetics  681a-699a,c  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 287b-289b;
335b336a;  344b-345a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  la-2a;  19a-20a; 35ad;
49b-50c;   73a-75a;   121b,d-123a;   152a155b;  189a-191c;  204b,d-205c;
223a-225a;  246a-247a; 273a-274c; 296b,d-298a; 338a-d; 357a-d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 494d-495a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 300b; 526b-d
passim; 573a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23d
[fn
1]  /  Judgement,  513d-514b; 524a-527b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro, 185c-d

[449b]
Chapter  69:  POETRY  415 8a. Critical standards and artistic rules with
respect to narrative structure 5 Aristophanes: Peace [734-818] 534c-535c
9  Aristotle:  Poetics, ch 7-1 i 685b-687b; ch 13-14 687c-689a; ch 16-18
689d-691d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 32-33 176a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  viii,  div  70,  481d-482a  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 193a-194b;
195a-b;  209a-210b;  228b-231a;  335b-336a;  344b-345a  37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  189a-191c;  204b,d205c;  223a-225a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
300b  44  Bosw ell: Johnson, 513a-b &a(\) The poetic unities: comparison
of  epic  and  dramatic  unity  7  Plato:  Phaedrus, 133c-d 9 Aristotle:
Poetics, ch 7-9 685b-686d; ch 17
[i455*38-b23]
690d-691a; ch 18
[1456*1020]
691c; ch 23 695a-c; ch 26
[i462b3-i5]
699a,c  27 Shakespeare: Winter's Tale, act iv, sc i 505c-d 29 Cervantes:
Don Quixote, part i, 186b-c 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes, 338a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  245b-246a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 19a-20a; 73b-75a
Sa{2)  Poetic  truth:  verisimilitude or plausibility; the possible, the
probable,  and  the  necessary  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii, 72a-b 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 354b 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 140c-d /
Ion 142a-148a,c / Republic, bk ii, 320d-324c; bk x, 427c-434c / Sophist,
561 b-d 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 9
[1451*36]-^
11
[1452*30]
686a-687a; ch 15
[i454a23-b
9] 689b-c; ch 24
[i46o*i2-b2]
696b-c; ch 25 696d-698c 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 189b-c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xvi
[124-136]
23d;  xxv  [46-151]  36d-38a;  xxvm  [112-142] 42c-43a; xxxn [1-12] 47c;
purgatory, xxxi
[124-145]
102a-b; paradise, i
[38-81]
106c107a; x
[28-48]
120c-d; xxx
[19-36]
152a;  xxxiii [46-75] 156d-157a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii,
stanza  149  41a  / Prologue to Melibeus 400b-401a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  67b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 41bc 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi,
sc ii
[1-50]
49a-b  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 184c-186d; 189d-191d; part ii,
208d-209d;  215a-b; 386a-388a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 38c-39b
31  Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 49b-50c;
152a-155b; 379b-c

[450a]
(8a.  Critical  standards  and  artistic rules with respect to narrative
structure.  8^(2)  Poetic  truth:  verisimilitude  or  plausibility; the
possible, the probable, and the necessary^) 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
345c;  471c-d;  494d-495a  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 693d [n 83] 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  282c-d;  446c-447a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right,
additions,  12 118a-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 153a-c 47 Goethe :
Faust,  part  ii [7426-7433] 181b-182a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 151b-152a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  hi, 134a-c 8a(5) The significance of
recognitions  and  reversals  in  the  development  of plot 9 Aristotle:
Poetics,   ch   6   [1450*33-35]   684d;   ch  io-ii  686d-687b;  ch  14
[i453b22-i454a8]  688c-689a; ch 16 689d-690b 22 Chaucer: Monies Prologue
[13,979-988]   433b   37   Fielding:   Tom   Jones,   379b-c  54  Freud:
interpretation  of  Dreams,  246b-c  /  General  introduction, 581 d 8b.
Critical  standards  and  artistic rules with respect to the language of
poetry:  the  distinction  between  prose  and  verse;  the  measure  of
excellence in style 5 Aristophanes: Knights
[1373-1383]
486d487a / Clouds
[331-340]
492a;
[1351-1379]
504d-505b / Peace
[734-818]
534c-535c / Birds
[1 372-1 409] 559b-c
/ Frogs [758-1533] 573a-582a,c / Thesmophoriazusae
[95-175]
601c-602b  7 Plato: Protagoras, 52d-57a / Republic, bk hi, 328b-333b; bk
x, 430c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 8
[1128*18-33]
375b-c  /  Politics,  bk viii, ch 7 [i342a32-b i8] 548a,c / Rhetoric, bk
hi, ch 1-12 653b, d667b passim / Poetics, ch i
[i447ai4-b23]
681a-c;  ch  6  [i45ob  i3-i5]  685a;  ch  19 [i456b 8-19] 692a-b; ch 22
694a-695a;  ch  24 [1460s 32-b 4] 696c-d; ch 25 [i46i a9-bl8 ] 697c-698b
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  14  16d17a; bk xi, par 35-37
97c-98b  /  City of God, bk xi, ch 18 331d-332a / Christian Doctrine, bk
11,  ch  6  638a-d;  bk  iv,  ch 17-26 686c-696a passim 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xxviii
[1-42]
41b-c; xxxii
[1-12]
47c; purgatory, xxiv
[49-63] 90a-b; xxvi
[88-148] 93d-94c; xxxi
[133-145] 102b; paradise,
i [1-37] 106a-b; x
[28-48]
120c-d; xxx
[19-36]
152a; xxxm 156b-157d 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 1-4
21b-22a;  stanza  37-38 26b; stanza 147149 40b-41a; bk v, stanza 256-257
153b154a  / Prologue [725-746] 171b-172a / Miller's Prologue [3167-3186]
212a-b / Clerks Prologue [7888-7932] 295a-296a / Squire's Tale
[10,715-722] 345b / Franklin's Prologue 351a

[450b]
416  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  8«(3)  to  8c / Prologue to Melibeus 400b-401a /
Manciple's Tale
[17,154-186] 491a-b / Parson's Prologue
U7>34i-375]  494a-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 67b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,   62b-c;  76b-c;  104d-105c;  195d-197a;  309a-310c;  422c-423c;
453d-454a; 455a-d; 482b-483b 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act hi, sc i
[121-135] 451b-c
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [85-125] 41c-d;
[454-466] 45a
/  Sonnets,  xxi  589bc;  lxxvi  597d-598a;  lxxxii 598d; cxxx 606a-b 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, xia-xiiid; lb-c; 13b-16c; 185a-b; part
ii,   251a-252a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  38c;  63b-c  31
Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b 32 Milton: Vacation Exercise 59a-61b /
Sonnets,  xiii 65b-66a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 14-16 174a-b; 22-35 175b177a;
48  178b  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 287b-289b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
la-2a;  49a-50c;  189c-d;  223a-225a;  246a-247a  40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  494d-495a,c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 300b; 327a-c; 573a 42
Kant. Judgement, 513d-514b; 524b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 59d-61d; 167d-170d
passim;  180c;.  202b;  284b;  307c;  381d-382c; 454a-b; 455b 47 Goethe:
Faust,  prelude  [146-149]  4b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
115a-c;  127b  53  James:  Psychology,  381a;  400b; 687a-688a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  277d  8c.  The interpretation of poetry New
Testament:  Matthew,  13:3-50; 18:23-35; 21:28-44 / Mar\, 4:3-20 / Lu{e,
8:5-15;  15:410;  16:1-13;  18:2-8  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 52d-57c / Ion
142a-148a,c  /  Apology,  202c-d  / Republic, bk ii, 321b-d 9 Aristotle:
Poetics, ch 25
[i46i a9-b25] 697c698c
14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 189b-c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch 6 638a-d; ch 9-10 640c-641a; ch 12 641c-642b; ch 16 644b-645d; bk hi,
ch 5 659d-660a; ch 24-37 666d-674d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  i,  aa 9-10 8d-10c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 101, a
2,  rep  2  267a-268a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, hell, ix [61-63] 13a;
purgatory, viii
[19-21] 64c; xxxm
[64-78]
104d-105a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, lb,d-3a,c;
66b-67d;  bk  hi,  146a-150d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 104d-105b; 285a-b;
362a-363b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 346a-b

[451a]
9 to 9b Chapter 69: part ii, 263d46 Hegel: Philosophy of History 265c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  151b-152a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk viii,
324b-d;  bk xn, 533b-c; 534c-d ^^__^ 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
246b:248c  /  General  Introduction, 509a-513d passim / New Introductory
Lectures,  816a-b  9. The moral and political significance of poetry 9a.
The  influence  of poetry on mind and character: its role in education 5
Aristophanes: Acharnians
[497-508]
460d461a;
[628-675]
462b-463a / Clouds 488a506d esp [575 594] 495c-d,
[882-1104] 499b502a / Wasps [1010-1070] 519d-520c
/  Frogs  564a-582a,c esp [1008-1098] 576b-577c, [141715^] 581a-582a,c /
Thesmophoriazusae  [330567]  604b-606c  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  46b-c  /
Phaedrus,  140a-d  /  Ion,  144b-145c  /  Symposium,  156b-c  / Gorgias,
280d-282b  /  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,  320c  339a; bk iv, 344b-d; bk vii,
391c-d;  bk  x,  427c-434c / Timaeus, 455b-c / Laws, bk 11 653a-663d esp
654b-d;  bk  hi,  675c676b;  bk  vn,  724c-725b;  727c-728b 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk vii, ch 17 [1336*3033] 541b;
[1 336b i2-35] 541c-d; bk
viii, ch 3 542d-543d; ch 5-7 544c-548a,c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i,
sect  7  253b-d  14  Plutarch: Lvcurgus, 33d-34a; 43b-d / Solon, 76a-b /
Pericles,  121a-122b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk xiv, 146b-c 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 1-2 10a-d / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 40 180b-c
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 20-22 6a-c; par 25-27 7a-d; bk hi,
par  2-4  13c-14b; bk x, par 49-50 83c-84b / City of God, bk i, ch 31-33
147d-149a;  bk  ii,  ch  8-14  153d157c;  bk  iv,  ch  26-27 202a-203c /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 6 638a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i
[61-135] *d2c; purgatory, xxn [55-93] 87a-c; paradise,
1 [1-37] 106a-b; n
[1-18] 107d; xyn [100-142]
133a-c 22 Chaucer: Intro, to Man of Law's Prologue
[4465-4510] 234b-235b / Prologue to Melibeus
400b-401a  /  Nuns  Priest's Tale [15,444-452] 460a-b / UEnvoi 550a-b 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 69c; part hi, 183b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  146a-150d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 71c; 79a-80b 26
Shakespeare:  Two  Gentlemen  of Verona, act hi, sc ii [66-95] 245a-b 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc 11 [616-633] 46c-d

[451b]
POETRY 417 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote esp part i.xiiic-d, la-3b, 13b-16c,
184a-187c,  189d-193c,  part  ii,  252a-b,  322a-c,  427c-429a 30 Bacon:
Advancement   of   Learning,   38d-39a;  78a-d;  79c-80a  31  Descartes:
Discourse,  part  i,  43b  32 Milton: Areopagitica, 385a-386b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  n 173b-174a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div i 451a-b
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 347d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
3a-b;  94a-b;  629a-b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  225c;  300a- b;
573a-574b  passim  42  Kant:  Judgement,  504a-b; 521b-523c; 586d587a 44
Boswell: Johnson, 116b; 158a-b; 259b-c esp 259b [fn 2]; 308b-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History,  part  11,  259b-c; 263d-265c; 267a-268b; 276a-d;
part  iv, 347b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 311a-313a; 324b325d
54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  582a b / War and Death, 762c 9b. The
issue  concerning  the  censorship  of poetry 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[366-384] 459c-d;
[497-508] 460d-461a
6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 172d-173b; bk vi, 189c 7 Plato: Republic, bk
ii-iii,  320c-334b; bk iv, 344b-d; bk x, 427c-434c esp 432d-434c / Laws,
bk  11  653a-663d passim; bk hi, 675c676b; bk vii, 719d-721a; 724c-725b;
727c728b; bk viii, 732c; bk xi, 782d-783b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii,
ch  17  [1336*30b35] 541b-d; bk viii, ch 3 542d-543d; ch 5-7 544c-548a,c
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  43b-d  /  Solon, 76a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
21b-22b;  bk  hi,  56d57b;  bk  iv,  67bc;  72b-73a; bk xiv, 152d153c 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  9  154a-c;  ch 12 155c-d; ch 14
156c-157c;  bk  viii,  ch  13  273b-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii,
102d-103a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  79d-80b; 191d-192b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i, 13b-16c; 117d-119d; 185b-188c 32 Milton: Areopagitica
381a-412b   esp   384b389a,  393a-394b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  xviib  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 90b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  347c-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 300a-b 43 Mill: Liberty,
274b-293b passim 44 Boswell: Johnson, 259b-c

[452a]
418  THE GREAT IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES expression, see Art 10b; Education
8c;  Emotion  5c;  Liberty 2a. . Of Tragedy . Of Heroic Plays Gibbon. An
Essay on the Study of Literature, i-xliii . A Discourse Concerning . . .
Satire

[452b]
For: The comparison of poetry with history, philosophy, and science, see
History  i  ;  Knowledge  4c;  Philosophy  id; Science 2b; Truth 4b. The
consideration of the fine arts in general, see Art 7a; and for standards
of  critical  judgment with respect to the beauty or excellence of works
of  fine  art, see Art 7b; Beauty 2, 5, Another discussion of the theory
of  art  as imitation, and for related doctrines, see Art 3; Form id(i).
The  elements of inspiration, emotion, and tradition in the formation of
poetry, see Art 8; Matters related to the theory of emotional purgation,
see  Art  8;  Desire  4d.  The  place of poetics among the sciences, see
Philosophy  2c.  The  discussion  of  poetic  truth and probability, see
Memory and Imagination 7b; Truth 4b. Other considerations of the problem
of  style,  see  Language  9;  Rhetoric  2-2b.  Matters  bearing  on the
interpretation  of poetry, see Rhetoric 2d. The role of poetry and other
fine  arts  in  education,  see  Art  10a; Education 4d; Virtue and Vice
4d(4).  Other  discussions  of  the  problem  of  censorship,  or of the
political  regulation  of  artistic ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are
works  not included in Great Booths ofthe Western World, but relevant to
the  For  the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of
the  works  cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional Readings which
follows  the  last chapter of The Great Ideas. Boccaccio. On Poetry ' P.
Sidney.  An  Apology for Poetry Plutarch. "How a Young Man Ought to Hear
Corneille.  Examens  Poems,"  in  Moralia  .  Trois  discours  sur  Vart
dramatique Augustine. On Music Moliere. La critique de Vecole des femmes
(The  Dante. De Vulgari Eloquentia Schoolfor Wives Criticised) A. Smith.
"Of  the  Affinity  Between  Music, Dancing Pope. Essay on Criticism and
Poetry,"  in Essays Philosophical and Literary Vico. The New Science, bk
ii-iii  Goethe.  Poetry  and Truth J. Harris. Three Treatises. The First
Concerning  Art.  .  Conversations  with Eckermann The Second Concerning
Music,  Painting, and in vol 1, Dissertations and Discussions . Upon the
Rise  and Progress of Criticism Tolstoy. What Is Art? Burke. Hintsfor an
Essay  on the Drama Freud. Wit and Its Relation to the Unconscious, ch .
A  Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our 5-7 Ideas of the Sublime
and  Beautiful, part v Gray. The Progress of Poesy "• Kames. Elements of
Criticism  Horace.  The  Art of Poetry Voltaire. Letters on the English,
xviii-xx  Longinus.  On  the  Sublime  .  "Art of Poetry," "Poets," in A
Philosophical Demetrius. On Style Dictionary

[453a]
Lessing. Laocoon Beattie. An Essay on Poetry and Music S. Johnson. Lives
of  the  English  Poets  Blair,  lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres
Schiller.  The  Stage  as  a  Moral  Institution^^-—""  .  On Simple and
Sentimental  Poetry  Wordsworth.  Preface  to  the Lyrical Ballads A. W.
Schlegel.  Lectures on Dramatic Art and Literature Coleridge. Biographia
Literaria, ch 4, 14-20 Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea, vol hi,
sup,  ch  37  T.  L.  Peacock. Four Ages of Poetry Shelley. A Defense of
Poetry  Hazlitt.  Lectures  on the English Poets . My First Acquaintance
with Poets Stendhal. Racine et Shakespeare Hugo. Preface de 'Cromwell De
Quincey.  The  Literature  of  Knowledge  and the Literature of Power T.
Carlyle.  On  Heroes,  Hero-  Worship and the Heroic in History, lect hi
Emerson.  "The  Poet,"  in  Essays,  11  Hunt. An Essay in Answer to the
Question  "  What Is Poetry?" Kierkegaard. Either/Or . The Point of View
Poe.  The  Poetic  Principle  Taine.  Essais  de  critique et d'histoire
Nietzsche. The Birth of Tragedy Arnold. Essays in Criticism Meredith. An
Essay  on  Comedy  and  the  Uses  ofthe Comic Spirit Frazer. The Golden
Bough,  part hi, ch 3 Chekhov. Letters on the Short Story, the Drama and
Other Literary Topics Bergson. Laughter Claudel. Poetic Art Dilthey. Das
Erlebnis und die Dichtung

[453b]
Chapter  69: POETRY 419 Shaw. Dramatic Opinions and Essays H. James. The
Art  of  the  Novel  Babbitt.  The New Laocoon Kallen. The Book of Job as
Greek  Tragedy  Maritain.  Art  and  Scholasticism (Frontiers of Poetry)
Jung.   On   the  Relations  of  Analytical  Psychology  to  Poetic  Art
Abercrombie.  The  Theory  of  Poetry  Richards.  Principles of Literary
Criticism  . Science and Poetry Forster. Aspects of the Novel Lowes. The
Road  to  Xanadu Routh. God, Man, and Epic Poetry Muir. The Structure of
the  Novel  Buchanan.  Poetry and Mathematics H. E. Read. Form in Modern
Poetry Croce. Aesthetic as Science of Expression . The Defense of Poetry
T.  S.  Eliot.  The Sacred Wood . "The Function of Criticism," "Rhetoric
and Poetic Drama," "A Dialogue on Dramatic Poetry," in Selected Essays .
The  Use of Poetry and the Use of Criticism Housman. The Name and Nature
of Poetry Tate. Reactionary Essays on Poetry and Ideas Yeats. Letters on
Poetry  Santayana. Interpretations of Poetry and Religion, ch 2, 7, 10 .
Reason  in  Art, ch 6 . Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies, ch
32-33,  37  .  The Realm of Truth, ch 7 Ransom. The World's Body Valery.
Variety  .  Introduction  a la poetique Cassirer. The Myth of the State,
part i Van Doren. The Noble Voice Sartre. What Is Literature?

[454a]
INTRODUCTION OF the three ways in which principles are considered in the
tradition of the great books, the most familiar sense of the word is the
one  in  which  we  speak  of moral principles, principles of action, or
political principles. The connotation of the word in this usage seems to
be  twofold.  We think of principles as rules of conduct and we think of
them  as standards by which to measure and judge human acts or political
events. Either conception attributes a certain generality to principles.
Just  as rules apply to an indefinite number of particular cases, so any
principle  we  appeal  to  in  order to decide a practical problem or to
weigh the merits of an action undertaken, can be applied again and again
in   other   circumstances.   In  addition  to  this  characteristic  of
generality,  principles  seem to have the quality of underlying or being
the  source  of other things. In jurisprudence the search for principles
consists  in the attempt to discover those few most fundamental precepts
from  which  the  more  detailed  rules  of  law  can  be  derived.  The
constitution  of  a  state  provides  the  principles which underlie its
particular  laws and sets the standards by which their legality is to be
measured. Governments are judged by the principles they attempt to apply
as  well  as by their success in putting these principles into practice.
To  say of a government that its acts are unprincipled is not to condemn
the  particular acts as wrong, but to accuse the government of having no
uniform policy to serve as a foundation for its acts. This aspect of the
meaning  of  principle—as  the  source  from which a set of consequences
follows—seems  to  be  more characteristic of the idea of principle than
the  aspect  of  generality.  According  to its Latin derivation and the
equivalent root in Greek, "principle" means a beginning or a foundation.
Sometimes it means that which comes first absolutely, in the

[454b]
Chapter  70:  PRINCIPLE sense of being before everything else; sometimes
it  means that which comes first only relatively, taking precedence over
some  things,  but  having others prior to itself. Since priority may be
either absolute or relative—first without qualification or first only in
a  certain  respect  — the traditional phrase "first principle" does not
have  the redundancy of "first first" or "beginning beginning." If there
are  absolutely  first  beginnings,  to which nothing else can be prior,
they  can  legitimately be called "first principles" to distinguish them
from  principles  which  come  first  only in a certain respect. Only if
there  are first principles can regression to infinity be avoided in the
search  for  origins.  The propositions which lie at the foundation of a
science  may,  for example, constitute its principles, but they may also
be  derived  in  turn  from some prior science. Only the principles of a
science  which  is  prior  to  or independent of all others can be truly
first  principles.  The foregoing example brings us to the other meaning
of  principle that is popularly recognized. It is the sense in which men
speak  of principles in relation to conclusions, or of principles as the
foundations  of  a  science. The priority which belongs to principles in
the domain of thought need not be temporal. Principles may or may not be
first  in  the  order  of  learning.  But  if  they are not first in the
temporal  order, they must be first logically, as premises are logically
prior  to  a conclusion, or, as in Euclid's Elements, his principles—his
definitions,  postulates,  and  axioms—are  logically  prior  to all the
theorems  he  demonstrates  by  means  of them. It may be asked whether,
among  propositions  related  as  premises  and conclusions, the logical
priority of one proposition to another 420

[455a]
is  sufficient  to  make  the  prior  proposition  a  principle.  Can  a
proposition  be  a  principle if, even though it is used as a premise in
reasoning,  it  lacks  generality  ?  For  example,  is thej>axtic^ ular
proposition— that this bottle contains poison—a principle underlying the
practical  conclusion  that  its  contents  should  not  be  swallowed ?
Aristotle  answers affirmatively. In the order of practical thinking, he
holds,  we  deliberate  neither about the end to be sought nor about the
particular facts on which a choice of the means depends. "The end cannot
be  a  subject  of  deliberation,"  he  writes, "but only the means; nor
indeed  can  the particular facts be a subject of it, as whether this is
bread  or  has  been  baked  as  it  should;  for  these  are matters of
perception." The perceived particulars thus function as principles along
with  the  most  general of all practical propositions, namely, what the
end  should  be.  Calling  the faculty which apprehends first principles
"intuitive  reason,"  Aristotle says that "the intuitive reason involved
in  practical  reasonings  grasps  the last and variable fact, i.e., the
minor  premise. For these variable facts are the starting-points for the
apprehension  of  the  end,  since  the  universals are reached from the
particulars;  of  these  therefore  we  must  have  perception, and this
perception  is  intuitive  reason."  Perception, at least in the form of
senseperception,  seems  to  be  only  one  of  the two ways in which we
apprehend  the  particular  facts  which  are  principles  in  practical
reasoning. Like Aristotle, Aquinas uses the judgment, that this is bread
or  iron, as an example of "facts received through the senses" which are
"principles  .  .  .  accepted in the inquiry of counsel." But the moral
quality  inherent  in particular acts does not seem to be perceptible by
the  senses alone; and such particular moral judgments are also involved
in  moral  reasoning.  Aristotle  suggests  that  habit {i.e., the moral
habits or virtues) are the immediate source of such judgments, which can
be  called  "perceptions  of  the  particular"  even though they are not
simply sense-perceptions. "Of first principles," Aristotle explains, "we
see   some   by  induction,  some  by  perception,  some  by  a  certain
habituation."  By  induction  we  see  the  general  truths;  by  sense-
perception,

[455b]
Chapter  70: PRINCIPLE 421 the sensible particulars; and by habituation,
the  moral  particulars.  Hence Aristotle insists that "anyone who is to
listen  intelligently  to  lectures  about  what  is noble and just and,
generally,  about  the  subjects  of  political  science  must have been
brought  up  in  good habits. For the fact is the starting-point, and if
this  is  sufficiently  plain  to him, he will not at the start need the
reason  as  well;  for  the  man who has been well brought up has or can
easily get the starting-points." The word "principle" is used by Kant in
a much more restricted sense. He reserves the status of principle to the
general  propositions which serve as the major premises in reasoning. In
both  the  theoretic  and  the  practical  sciences,  principles express
reason's  understanding  of  universal and necessary relationships. Kant
differs  from  Aristotle  in  other  respects. He differentiates between
ordinary  general  propositions  which merely serve as major premises in
reasoning  and the propositions he classifies as "synthetic judgements a
priori."  He  regards  the former as principles only in a relative sense
and   treats   the  latter  alone  as  principles  absolutely.  He  also
distinguishes  between  those  principles  of the understanding which he
thinks  are  "constitutive  of  experience," and those principles of the
reason  which  should  be  used  in  what he calls a "regulative," not a
constitutive  manner.  They determine the direction and goals of thought
beyond  experience. But such differences concerning the nature and kinds
of  principles  do not affect the commonly accepted meaning of principle
as  that  from  which,  in  the  temporal  order  of learning, knowledge
develops  or that upon which, in the logical order, knowledge rests. The
third  and relatively unfamiliar sense in which principles are discussed
in  the  great  books  does  not  refer  to  the  sources of man's moral
decisions,  political acts, or scientific conclusions. The discussion in
question  refers  to reality apart from man. Just as men try to discover
the elements of matter, or the causes of motion, so they try to discover
the  principles  of existence and of change. The issues which arise from
this  concern  with  the  principles  of  reality  are discussed in such
chapters as Being, Cause, Change, Form, Nature, and Matter.

[456a]
422 THE GREAT IDEAS If the word "principle" always connotes a beginning,
every  special  sense of principle should involve some kind of priority.
As  we  have already observed, principles may be either prior in time or
prior logically. But the principles of the universe or the principles of
change  are not usually thought to be prior in either of these ways. For
them  Aristotle  specifies another kind of priority— priority in nature—
to  explain  the primacy of those principles which constitute the nature
of a thing. In his view, for example, matter and form are the principles
of  a physical substance. Since a substance composite of matter and form
cannot  exist until its matter and its form coexist, matter and form are
not  prior  to  the  substance they compose. Their priority to substance
consists  only in the fact that that which has the nature of a composite
substance  results  from  the  union  of  matter and form as its natural
components.  Because  the substance is the natural resultant, matter and
form  can  properly  be  called  its  natural  principles.  This  way of
considering  principles  at  once  suggests  a  close relationship among
principles,  elements,  and  causes;  and  also indicates the connection
between  the  present chapter and the chapters on Cause and Element. The
ultimate  parts  into which a whole can be divided may be its principles
as  well  as  its elements. The form or matter of a substance may be, in
Aristotle's  theory,  not only one of its principles, but also a cause—a
formal  or  a  material  cause.  Among  the  great authors Aristotle and
Aquinas  alone seem to dwell upon the relationship of these three terms.
They  give  instances in which the same thing is principle, element, and
cause,  as well as instances in which a principle is neither a cause nor
an  element,  e.g., privation. In the sphere of human conduct, an end is
both  a principle and a final cause, but not an element. The last end is
the  highest  final  cause  and  the first principle— first in intention
though  last  in attainment. The traditional issues concerning this idea
differ  according  to  the  general  context  in  which  the question of
principles  is raised. The main controversy, for example, with regard to
principles  in  the  order  of  reality  is over their number and order.
Aristotle argues against an infinite number

[456b]
of  principles as incompatible with the very notion of principle itself.
In his analysis of change or motion, he tries to prove that no more than
three  principles  are necessary, and no less will do. These are, as the
chapter on Change explains, matter, form, and privation. Considering the
principles  of  the  universe as a whole, Plotinus also enumerates three
and  tries  to  prove  that none can be added or subtracted. But whereas
Aristotle  treats the three principles of change as coordinate, Plotinus
places the cosmic principles in the absolute order of first, second, and
third.  "We  need not go seeking anv other Principles," writes Plotinus.
"This—  the  One  and  the  Good—  is  our First, next to it follows the
Intellectual  Principle, the Primal Thinker, and upon this follows Soul.
Such  is the order in nature. The intellectual realm allows no more than
these  and  no  fewer.  Those who hold to fewer Principles must hold the
identity  of  either Intellectual Principle and Soul, or of Intellectual
Principle  and  The  First  ...  To  increase  the Primals by making the
Supreme  Mind  engender the Reason-Principle, and this again engender in
the  Soul  a  distinct  power  to  act  as mediator between Soul and the
Supreme  Mind,  this is to deny intellection to the Soul, which would no
longer  derive  its  Reason from the Intellectual Principle, but from an
intermediate.  .  . . Therefore, we must affirm no more than these three
Primals."  In  the  sense in which Plotinus conceives the three primals,
they are not only principles in the order of reality, but are themselves
the ultimate grades or modes of reality. Similarly for Plato soul is not
only  the principle of life and thought in the universe, but it also has
its own existence in the realm of being. For Aristotle, in contrast, the
principles of change do not have existence in and of themselves. Matter,
form,  and  privation are not substances, but aspects of substance. They
are  present  in  every changing substance and in every change, but they
are only the principles of mutable being; they are not mutable beings in
themselves. Lucretius states two principles as the basic laws of nature.
The  first  is that nothing comes into being out of nothing; the second,
that nothing is ever completely reduced to nothing-

[457a]
ness. The word "principle" is obviously not being used in the same sense
here  as when it designates The One for Plotinus, soul for Plato, matter
for  Aristotle,  or  the  atoms  whicii-ttr^  cretius  calls  the "first
beginnings."  Here  it does not refer to an entity, or even to an aspect
of  some  real  being, but rather to a law— the statement of a universal
and  necessary  condition which governs all that is or happens. It is in
this  sense  that  the  proposition  traditionally  called  "the  law of
contradiction"—  that  the  same  thing cannot both be and not be in the
same  respect  at  the  same  time— is said by Aristotle to be the first
principle  of  being as well as of thought. The conception of the law of
contradiction  and  the  related laws of identity and excluded middle as
principles  of  thought  raises  problems  about  logical  principles in
general—whether  they  are axioms or postulates, whether they are merely
rules  of  reasoning  and  demonstration or are themselves premises from
which   conclusions  can  be  deduced.  If,  for  example,  the  law  of
contradiction  is  only  a  rule  of  thought, which forbids the mind to
affirm  and  deny  the  same  proposition, then it is not a principle of
knowledge  in  the sense in which the definitions and axioms of geometry
function as premises in the demonstration of theorems. No conclusion can
be drawn from it concerning the nature of things. But if, in addition to
being  a  rule  of thought, it is a metaphysical axiom, which states the
most  fundamental fact about existence, then like the axioms in geometry
it may be the source of conclusions in metaphysics. On this second point
Locke seems to differ sharply from Aristotle and Aquinas. He denies that
the  laws  of  identity  and  contradiction  are  fruitful principles of
knowledge.  "These magnified maxims," he writes, "are not the principles
and  foundations  of  all  our  other knowledge." Nor have they been, he
adds,  "the foundations whereon any science hath been built. There is, I
know,  a great deal of talk, propagated from scholastic men, of sciences
and  the  maxims  on  which they are built; but it has been my ill luck,
never to meet with any such sciences, much less any one built upon these
two maxims, 'what is, is' and 'it is impossible for the same thing to be
and not to be.'"

[457b]
Chapter  70:  PRINCIPLE  423  We  shall  presently  consider  the  issue
concerning  axioms  or postulates—whether the principles of the sciences
are  self-evident  truths or are only provisional assumptions. Those who
are  willing to admit the existence of axioms do not all agree, however,
that such truths refer to reality. Hume, for example, limits the content
of  axioms to knowledge of the relations between our own ideas. They are
not  truths  about  real existence or matters of fact. Locke also grants
self-evidence  only  to  perceptions  of  the  agreement or disagreement
between  ideas.  "Concerning  the  real  existence  of all other beings"
except   ourselves  and  God,  we  have,  he  writes,  "not  so  much  a
demonstrative,  much  less  a  self-evident,  knowledge;  and  therefore
concerning  these  there  are  no maxims." But Locke does think that our
demonstrative  knowledge  of  God's  existence depends upon an intuitive
knowledge  of  our  own  existence;  and  in addition to knowing our own
existence  directly or without proof, he also thinks we have through our
senses  an  equally  direct  knowledge of the existence of other things.
Such intuitive and sensitive knowledge of particular existences is, like
the  truth  of  axioms,  immediate— that is, something known directly or
without  proof, without any appeal to prior propositions. Hence Locke is
not  denying  that we know some immediate truths about reality, but only
that  such  truths  consist exclusively of propositions about particular
existences.  Since  axioms,  or  what  Locke  calls "maxims," are always
general  propositions, the self-evident truths which they express do not
apply  to  William  James uses the word "intuitive" in a different sense
from  Locke—  to characterize propositions that state "the necessary and
eternal  relations"  which  the mind "finds between certain of its ideal
conceptions." Intuitive propositions are for him, therefore, what maxims
are  for  Locke;  and  like Locke, James also denies that such axioms of
reason  hold  for reality. "Only hypothetically" he says, "can we affirm
intuitive  truths of real things— by supposing, namely, that real things
exist  which  correspond exactly with the ideal subject of the intuitive
propositions  .  .  .  The  intuitive  propositions of Locke leave us as
regards outer reality none the better for their possession. We

[458a]
424  THE  GREAT  IDEAS still have to 'go to our senses' to find what the
reality  is.  "The  vindication  of  the  intuitionist  position," James
continues,  "is  thus  a  barren victory. The eternal verities which the
very  structure  of  our mind lays hold of do not necessarily themselves
lay hold on extramental being, nor have they, as Kant pretended later, a
legislating  character  for  all possible experience. They are primarily
interesting  only  as  subjective facts. They stand waiting in the mind,
forming  a  beautiful  ideal network; and the most we can say is that we
hope  to discover outer realities over which the network may be flung so
that  ideal  and real may coincide." The opposite view seems to be taken
by  Plato,  Aristotle,  Aquinas,  Bacon,  Descartes,  Spinoza, and Kant.
Though  they  are  far  from  being in complete agreement concerning the
principles  of  knowledge,  the  propositions which they call axiomatic,
self-evident,  intuitive,  or  a  priori  synthetic  judgments,  are not
restricted by them to the mind's perception of the relations between its
own  ideas.  There  are  selfevident  or immediate truths in physics and
metaphysics,  as  well  as  in  mathematics and logic. Whether these are
inductions  from  experience  or innate possessions of the mind, whether
they  are  intuitive  apprehensions  of  intelligible  being or a priori
judgments having a transcendental origin, these propositions are held to
describe  the world of experience, or the nature and existence of things
outside  the human mind. There seem to be two degrees of skepticism with
regard  to  principles  in  the  order of knowledge. Complete skepticism
would  consist  in  denying principles in every sense. That would be the
same  as  denying any beginning or basis for even the opinions which men
hold.  No  one  seems  to  go  that  far.  The issue with respect to the
foundations  of  knowledge or opinion is therefore not between those who
affirm  and  those  who  deny principles, but between different views of
what  the  starting  points are. It is sometimes said, for example, that
sensations  are the principles or beginnings of all human learning. This
view  is  shared  both by those who think that all our ideas or concepts
are abstracted from the mate-

[458b]
rials  provided by the senses and by those who account for all the other
contents  of  the  mind  —  its  memories  and imaginations, its complex
formations—  in  terms  of the simple impressions originally received by
the  senses.  Concepts,  as  distinct  from  sense-perceptions, are also
sometimes  regarded  as  principles of knowledge by those who think that
concepts  originate by abstraction from sensory materials, as well as by
those  who  think  that  ideas  are  primary principles, i.e., having no
origin  in  any  prior  apprehensions. On either view, ideas or concepts
function  as  principles  insofar as they are the simples from which the
more  complex acts of the mind develop, such as the acts of judgment and
reasoning. Just as on the level of language, words are the principles of
all  significant  speech,  out  of  which  sentences  and paragraphs are
formed;  just  as,  in  the  logical  order,  terms  are  said to be the
principles   of   propositions  and  syllogisms;  so  concepts  are  the
principles  of  judgments and reasonings. The definitions of Euclid, for
example, state the notions of point, line, triangle, etc. which underlie
his  theorems  and  demonstrations.  One common characteristic of either
sensations   or   concepts  as  principles  of  knowledge  seems  to  be
simplicity. Nothing more elementary, out of which they can be formed, is
prior  to  them.  Another  characteristic is that they are principles of
knowledge  or  opinion  without  being  themselves  acts of knowledge or
opinion.   This   point   is   made   by   all   who   hold   that  only
propositions—whether  statements  of opinion or of knowledge—can be true
or  false. The terms which express the simple apprehensions of the mind—
its  sensations  or  concepts—cannot  be  true or false, because, unlike
propositions,  which are composed of terms, they do not assert anything.
If sensations and concepts cannot be true or false in the sense in which
propositions  or  judgments are, then they lack the distinctive property
of  knowledge  or opinion. In contrast, propositions or judgments —which
are  supposed  to  be  principles,  whether axioms or assumptions—can be
treated as themselves expressions of knowledge or opinion, not merely as
its starting points or sources. The two degrees of skepticism previously
mentioned apply only to those principles of

[459a]
knowledge which are themselves capable of being regarded as knowledge or
opinion  and  hence  as either true or false. We have already considered
the   skepticism  of  those  who,  admitting  that  the  truth  of  some
propositions  can  be  immediately  recognized by the mind, nevertheless
deny  that such selfevident truths describe reality. This may or may not
be  accompanied  by  a further depreciation of axioms on the ground that
they   are   merely   analytical   propositions   and   hence  trifling,
uninstructive,  or.  tautological. The chapter on Judgment considers the
issue  which  revolves  around  the  derogatory  use  of  such  words as
"tautology"  or  "truism"  to  designate self-evident truths. Though the
invidious  connotation  of  the word "truism" does not make the truth to
which this epithet is applied any less true, the dignity of a truth does
seem  to  be  affected  by  the  refusal  to regard it as a statement of
reality.  Furthermore,  a certain degree of skepticism results from such
refusal.  Hume  exemplifies  this.  He holds that selfevident truths are
possible  only in mathematics, which deals not with matters of fact, but
with  the  relations between our own ideas. In consequence, he denies to
the  study  of  nature the certitude or demonstrative character which he
finds  in  mathematical  science.  Since  physics is concerned with real
existences,  no  axioms  or self-evident principles are available to it;
and  so,  according  to Hume, it cannot demonstrate its conclusions, but
must  advance  them  as  probabilities. A more thorough-going skepticism
seems  to consist in holding that there are absolutely no matters at all
about  which  men  have  axiomatic  knowledge.  This  appears  to be the
position  of  Montaigne.  No  truths are self-evident. None commands the
universal  assent  of mankind; none belongs to the nature of the mind so
that all men must agree to it. Montaigne almost holds it to be axiomatic
that  there  are  no axioms, for if there were, he says, "there would be
some  one thing to be found in the world . . . that would be believed by
men  with  an  universal  consent;  but  this,  that  there  is  no  one
proposition that is not debated and controverted amongst us, or that may
not  be,  makes it very manifest that our natural judgment does not very
clearly comprehend what it embraces."

[459b]
Chapter 70: PRINCIPLE 425 If it is objected that, in the absence of such
principles,  there  is  no  starting  point  or  foundation for science,
Montaigne  seems  willing  to accept the consequence. He does not flinch
from  an infinite regression of reasons. "No reason," he writes, "can be
established  but  upon the foundation of another reason; and so run back
to  all  infinity."  To  those  who  say that there is no disputing with
persons   who  deny  principles,  he  replies  that  "men  can  have  no
principles,  if  not  revealed to them by the Divinity; of all the rest,
the beginning, the middle, and the end are nothing but dream and vapor."
If, however, for practical purposes, a beginning must be made somewhere,
Montaigne  suggests that it can be done by taking things for granted and
then  getting others to grant our presuppositions. "It is very easy," he
writes,  "upon  granted  foundations  to build whatever we please ... By
this  way,  we find our reason well-grounded and discourse at a venture;
for  our  masters  prepossess  and  gain  beforehand as much room in our
belief  as is necessary for them towards concluding afterwards what they
please, as geometers do by their postulates; the consent and approbation
we allow them giving them power to draw us to the right and left, and to
whirl us about at their own pleasure." If the only principles upon which
reasoning  can  be  based  or  from  which  conclusions can be drawn are
assumptions,   postulates,   or  hypotheses  rather  than  axioms,  then
everything  is a matter of opinion and probability; nothing can have the
certitude  of  knowledge.  As indicated in the chapters on Knowledge and
Opinion,  one  theory  of that distinction makes knowledge an act of the
mind  independent of our wishes or will and treats opinion as a judgment
voluntarily accepted or rejected. Accordingly, assumptions or postulates
are  perfectly  representative  of  opinion, and axioms express the very
essence  of knowledge. To assume or postulate anything is to take it for
granted  voluntarily!  A  postulate  neither compels assent, nor does it
ever  exclude  the possibility of taking the opposite for granted. Where
men  make postulates, there dispute is possible. But to assert something
as an axiom is to command assent on the ground that its opposite can be

[460a]
426 THE GREAT IDEAS immediately recognized as impossible. No proposition
can be regarded as an axiom if its acceptance or rejection is in any way
a matter of choice. For Aristotle the area in which men can dispute with
some  reason on both sides belongs to what he calls "dialectic," whereas
what  he  calls  "science" is the area from which dispute is excluded by
demonstrations  which  rest  on  selfevident  truths. One is the area of
probability and opinion; the other, of certainty and knowledge. Contrary
assumptions  are  the  starting  point  of dialectical argument, whereas
science  begins  with  axioms.  These  may be the first principles which
Aristotle  and  Bacon  call  "common notions" because they are common to
diverse sciences; or they may be the axioms peculiar to a single subject
matter.  The  word  "dialectic"  is  used  by Plato in a quite different
sense.  It  names the highest science. Whereas the mathematical sciences
start  from  hypotheses which require further support, dialectic— in the
conception of Plato — rises to the first principles of all knowledge. In
the   hierarchical   ordering   of   the  sciences,  Plato's  dialectic,
Aristotle's  metaphysics,  and  Bacon's philosophia prima seem to occupy
respectively  the same primary position and to perform the same function
in  virtue  of  being the discipline which contemplates or considers the
absolutely  first  or  most  universal  principles.  For  Bacon,  as for
Aquinas,  the  only  higher science is sacred theology, whose principles
are  articles of supernatural faith, not axioms of reason. These matters
are  more fully discussed in the chapters on Dialectic, Metaphysics, and
Theology;  questions  concerning  different  kinds  of principles or the
principles of different sciences are considered in Hypothesis and Logic.
The chapter on Induction, furthermore, discusses the inductive origin of
axioms,  as  well as the disagreement between Bacon and Aristotle on the
point  of whether the highest axioms or first principles are immediately
intuited from the particulars of experience, or are reached only through
intermediate  stages of generalization. Since axioms are indemonstrable,
they cannot be derived by reasoning as conclusions from any truths prior
to themselves. Their indemon-

[460b]
strability is regarded by Aristotle and Pascal as a virtue rather than a
defect,  for if they were demonstrable, they could not be the principles
or  starting  points  of  demonstration.  If  there were no axioms, then
nothing  could be demonstrated, because everything in turn would require
proof  in  an  endless  regression.  To  the ancient counterparts of the
skeptical   Montaigne,   Aristotle   replies  that  unless  the  law  of
contradiction  is  an  indisputable  axiom,  any form of reasoning, even
probable  reasoning from assumptions, is impossible. The principle which
underlies  all disputation cannot itself be disputed. To those who, with
skeptical intent, insist upon having everything demonstrated before they
will  accept  it,  Aristotle  offers  an  indirect defense of the law of
contradiction  by  asking the questioner to try denying that selfevident
principle  without  reducing himself to absurdity. Those who acknowledge
the  existence  of  axioms  generally agree that they are indemonstrable
truths,  but  some,  like Descartes and Kant, do not agree that they are
inductions  from experience. The alternatives seem to be that axioms are
innate  possessions  of  the intellect or that they are transcendental a
priori  principles of pure reason, independent of experience. Yet Locke,
who denies innate ideas and principles, or anything prior to experience,
does  not  treat  what  he  calls self-evident maxims as inductions from
experience.   They   are  rather  direct  perceptions  of  agreement  or
disagreement  among  the  ideas  we  have  acquired  through experience.
Aquinas,  who,  no less than Locke, denies innate ideas and insists upon
sense-experience  as  the  source  of all human knowledge, refers to the
assent  we  give  first  principles  as a natural habit of the mind— the
intellectual   virtue  he  calls  "understanding,"  equivalent  to  what
Aristotle  calls  "intuitive reason." As the chapter on Habit indicates,
axioms  are  called  "natural" truths, not in the sense of being innate,
instinctive,  or  congenital,  but  only  in the sense that if the human
reason  functions  naturally or normally it will come to recognize these
truths.  Again, like Locke, Aquinas seems to be saying that the truth of
axioms  is  perceived  by the human understanding as soon as their terms
are known, but he does not concur

[461a]
with  Locke  in  thinking  that  therefore  such  truths  hold  only for
relations  between  our  own  ideas.  The  theory  of  the possession of
principles  by  natural  habit  has,  for  Aquinas,  more  than a verbal
connection  with  the  theory of natural law. Of the various meanings of
the  phrase "natural law" which are distinguished in the chapter on Law,
we  are  here  concerned with what both Kant and Aquinas conceive as the
moral  law  whose  precepts  are  the  fundamental  principles  of human
conduct. Both also speak of the precepts of the natural law or the moral
law  as  the  first  principles  of man's practical reason. For Aquinas,
these  principles  are  primary  in the order of practical truth and the
moral  sciences,  as  metaphysical  first  principles are primary in the
order  of speculative truth and the theoretic sciences. "The precepts of
the natural law," he writes, "are to the practical reason what the first
principles  of demonstration are to the speculative reason, because both
are  self-evident  principles.".As  the proposition that "the same thing
cannot  be affirmed and denied at the same time'" is the first principle
of the speculative reason, so "the first precept of law, that good is to
be  done,  and  evil  is  to  be avoided," is the first principle of the
practical reason. For Kant, the principles of the pure practical reason,
which  legislate  a  priori  for the realm of freedom, play an analogous
role to the principles of the pure speculative reason, which legislate a
priori  for  the  realm  of nature or experience. It is this parallelism
between the two sets of principles which Kant seems to have in mind when
he  conceives  a metaphysic of nature and a metaphysic of morals as twin
disciplines  founded  on the speculative and the practical employment of
the  transcendental  principles  of  pure  reason.  The same fundamental
issues  which  we  have  considered  in  connection  with  the axioms of
theoretic  knowledge  occur here in connection with the first principles
of  moral  knowledge.  Aquinas and Kant disagree, for example, about the
way  in which we come into possession of these principles. For Kant, the
principles of mortality, like the principles of nature, belong

[461b]
Chapter 70: PRINCIPLE 427 to the transcendental structure of pure reason
itself.  For  Aquinas, as already suggested, the precepts of the natural
law  are  known in the same way as the axioms of the speculative reason.
As  the  truth  of  the  principle  of  contradiction  is  known when we
understand  the  meaning  of  'is'  and 'not,' so the truth of the first
command of natural law— 'Seek the good'— is known when we understand the
meaning  of  'seek' and 'good.' We hold such truths by the natural habit
of  our minds, which in the case of the natural law is given the special
name  of synderesis. Just as we find a certain skepticism with regard to
the principle of contradiction and other axioms, so we find doubts about
the  existence  of  natural  law,  or about indisputable and universally
acceptable  principles  of  morality.  Referring to those who think that
there  are  some  laws "first, perpetual, and immutable, which they call
natural  that  are  imprinted  in  mankind by the condition of their own
proper  being," Montaigne declares that "the only sign by which they can
argue  or  infer  some  laws  to  be  natural  is  the  universality  of
approbation";  and  he  adds:  "Let  them  produce  me  but  one of this
condition."  The consequences of skepticism are here the same as before.
Without  first  principles,  moral  science  either fails entirely or is
reduced  to  systems  of  belief  based  upon  one set of assumptions or
another.  In  either  case,  moral judgments express, not knowledge, but
opinion.  As  John  Stuart Mill observes, the utilitarians must, despite
all  other differences, agree with Kant that if there is to be a science
of  ethics,  "mortality must be deduced from principles," and ultimately
from  one  first  principle, for "if there be several, there should be a
determinate  order  of precedence among them." What Mill says concerning
the self-evidence of the first principle of morality—which he formulates
as  a  statement of the ultimate end of human conduct— closely resembles
what Aristotle says about the self-evidence of the law of contradiction.
"Questions  of  ultimate  ends  are  not amenable to direct proof," Mill
writes.  "To  be  incapable of proof by reasoning is common to all first
principles:  to the first premises of our knowledge, as well as to those
of our conduct."

[462a]
428  THE  GREAT IDEAS \a. The differentiation of principle, element, and
cause  ib.  The  being,  number, and kinds of principles in the order of
reality  2.  The  kinds  of principles in the order of knowledge 2a. The
origin  of  knowledge in simple apprehensions (1) Sensations or ideas as
principles  (2)  Definitions as principles lb. Propositions or judgments
as  principles  evident  particular  facts  judgments  as principles (3)
Constitutive  and  regulative  principles:  the  maxims  of  reason  30.
Principles  and  demonstration  (1)  The  indemonstrability  of  axioms:
natural  habits  of  the  mind  (2)  The  indirect defense of axioms the
principles of identity and contradiction of inductive generalization $c.
Axioms  in  relation  to  postulates,  hypotheses,  or assumptions their
principles  ciples of the practical reason \b. The natural moral law and
the categorical imperative

[462b]
OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE i. Principles in the order of reality 429 ic. The
metaphysical   significance   of  the  principles  of  thought  430  (3)
Indefinables  as  principles  of  definition 431 (1) Immediate truths of
perception:  direct  sensitive  knowledge  of appearances; (2) Immediate
truths  of  understanding:  axioms  or  self-evident truths; a priori 3.
First principles or axioms in philosophy, science, dialectic 432 (3) The
dependence  of demonstration on axioms: the critical application of xjb.
Principles   and   induction:   axioms   as  intuitive  inductions  from
experience;  stages  (1)  The  distinction  between  first principles in
general,  or  common  notions, and (2) The difference between axioms and
assumptions,  hypotheses  and principles, as a basis for the distinction
between  knowledge  and  opinion,  or  science and dialectic 433 (3) The
distinction  and order of the sciences according to the character of 40.
Ends as principles, and last ends as first principles: right appetite as
a  principle  in the practical order 434 the universal assent of mankind
435

[463a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, I16a-1 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  1.  Principles  in  the order of reality la. The
differentiation  of principle, element, and cause 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455d
8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch i
[184*10-16]
259a  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  i  a24-b2]  429a-b /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[32Q
[a87b io-23] 505d; bk
hi, ch 3
[998*20-^3]
517a-b; bk v, ch 1-3 533a-534d; ch 24 545a-b; bk vii, ch 16
[i040b i8-23]
564d; ch 17 565a-566a,c esp
[104^26-33]
566a,c; bk viii, ch 3 [i043b5-i4] 567d-568a; bk xii, ch 1 598a-c; ch 4-5
599d-601a esp ch 4
[1070
15  22-35]  600b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 33, a 1, rep 1
180d-181c; q 42, a 3, ans and rep 2 227a-d; q 105, a 6, ans 543b-544a 31
Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  159a  45  Lavoisier:  Elements of
Chemistry,  pref, 3d4a lb. The being, number, and kinds of principles in
the  order  of  reality  7  Plato:  Phaedo, 240b-246c / Republic, bk hi,
333c-d;  bk  vi,  383d-388a  /  Timaeus, 455c458b / Sophist, 564d-574c /
Philebus, 610d613a; 615c-617d

[463b]
Chapter  70:  PRINCIPLE 429 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i 259a-268d; bk hi,
ch 4
[203b2-i4] 281b-c; bk
iv, ch i
[2o8b8209*1] 287bc; bk
vi,  ch  5  318a-319c  /  Heavens,  bk  1, ch 2 359d-360d; bk hi, ch 3-5
393c-396a  / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3-10 501c511d; bk 11, ch 2 512b-513b;
bk hi, ch i b i3-996a i7] 514a-c; ch 2 [997*34]-^ 6
[995
[1003*17]
516a-522a,c;  bk v, ch 3-4 534c535c; bk vn-xiv 550b,d-626d / Soul, bk i,
ch  2  [404b3o-405b3i] 634a-635a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 3
168c169a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [146-264] 2d-4b; [418-448]
6b-c  17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch i 65d66d / Fourth Ennead, tr
vii,  ch  9  198b-d  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr i, ch 4 209d-210c; tr ii, ch i
214c-215a;  tr iv 226d-228b / Sixth Ennead, tr i-iii 252a-297b; tr viii,
ch  7-8  345d347a;  tr ix 353d-360d passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  1,  q  2,  a  3 12c-14a; q 3, a 5, ans 17c-18b; a 6, ans and rep 2
18c-19a; q 14, a ii, rep i 84c-85c; q 25, a 1 143d-144c; q 27 153a-157c;
q  33,  a  i 180d181c; a 3, rep 1 182c-183c; q 42, aa 2-3 225d227d; q 44
238a-241d;  q  49  264d-268a,c  esp  a  3  266d-268a,c;  q  75, a i, ans
378b-379c; q 77, a 5, rep 1-2 403d-404c; a 6 404c-405c; o

[464a]
(1. Principles in the order of reality. lb. The being, number, and kinds
of  principles  in  the  order  of  reality.)  84,  a  2,  ans and rep 3
442b-443c;  a  4,  rep  i  444d-446b; q 115, a 2 587c-588c 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part vi, 61d-62c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 10, schol
376d-377a  34 Newton: Principles, lb-2a; law i-iii 14a-b; bk in, general
schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics,  bk  in,  541b-542a  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
66d-93c   esp  68a-74b,  85d-88a;  108a-112d  esp  110a-d  /  Judgement,
467d-470b;   565b-d;   566d-567a;   575b-578a   45  Lavoisier:  Elements
of Chemistry,  pref,  3b-4a  45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b 53 James:
Psychology,   882a-884b   lc.   The  metaphysical  significance  of  the
principles  of  thought  7 Plato: Euthydemus, 72d-73b / Republic, bk iv,
350d-351b  8  Aristotle:  Interpretation, ch 13 [22b28-23 a26] 34d-35c /
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch i [995 514a; ch 2 [996b26-99ya i5] 515b-d; bk iv,
ch  3  524b-525a;  bk  xi,  ch  i  [1059^3-26]  587a  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 2, ans 221d-223a 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part iv, 52a / Objections and Replies, def hi 130b; axiom v 13 ld132a 31
Spinoza:   Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  10,  schol  376d-377a;  prop  37-40
386b-388b;  prop  44, corol 2 390a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  vii.  sect io-ii 339b-342d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 59c-107b /
Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 367d-368a / Judgement, 543d-544a;
560c;  562a-d;  600d601d; 603b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6c
53  James:  Psychology,  302a-b;  671a-672a; 852a; 862a-866a; 873a-874a;
881b-886a  esp  881b882a,  884b-886a;  890a  54  Freud: New Introductory
Lectures,  877b-c  2.  The kinds of principles in the order of knowledge
2a.  The origin of knowledge in simple apprehensions 2a(l) Sensations or
ideas  as  principles  7  Plato:  Symposium, 167a-b / Phaedo, 228a230c /
Republic,  bk  vii,  392b-393b / Theaetetus, 517b-536b / Seventh Letter,
810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c / Metaphysics,
bk  i,  ch  i  [980*28^24]  499a  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i
[422-425] 6b; [693-700] 9c; bk ii [434-436] 20c; bk iv
[353-521] 48d-51a esp [469-521] 50b-51a

[464b]
430  THE  GREAT  IDEAS \cto2a{2) 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
12,  a  12,  ans  60d-61c;  q  17,  a  i,  ans lOOd-lOld; q 18, a 2, ans
105c-106b; q 84, a 6 447c-449a; a 8, ans and rep i 450b-451b; part i-ii,
q  14,  a 6, ans 680c-681a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49a 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  v,  105c  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-335c esp
334c-d  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15 98d-99a; bk
ii,  ch  i.  sect 1-8 121a-123a esp sect 2 121b-c; sect 23-25 127b-d esp
sect  24  127b-c; ch ii, sect 2 128a-b; ch vii, sect 10 133a-b; ch xiii,
sect  1-6  148d-149d  esp  sect  2  149a; ch xiv, sect 2 155b-c; sect 27
160d-161a;  sect  30-31 161c-162a; ch xv, sect 2-3 162c-d; ch xyti, sect
22ch  xvm,  sect  1  173d-174a; ch xviii, sect 6 174c-d; ch xxii, sect 9
202c-203a;  bk  hi,  ch  1, sect 5 252b-c; ch iv, sect 12-14 262b263a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro 405a412a,c passim, esp sect 4 405c-d,
sect  17  409d-410a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ii 455b457b; sect
vii, div 49 471c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14a-22a,c; 66d-72c esp 69c-72c;
101b-107b  53  James:  Psychology,  452a-459b  esp 453b-454a, 455a-457a;
480a*  54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  701d 2*(2) Definitions as principles 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  134b-d;  140a-b  /  Meno,  174a-  179b  / Theaetetus,
544c-549d  /  Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics
97 a-137a,c passim, esp bk 1, ch 3
[72b i8-24] 99b-c, ch
10  6b35-77  a6-b2 ] 114d115b, ch 23 [84b i9-85 a3] 115c-116a, bk ii, ch
3-10 123c-128d / Topics, bk vii, ch 3 [153*64] 105c-d, ch 22
[8 4
a
[?
11] 208a-b; bk viii, ch 3
[i58 a3i-i59a2]
214d-215c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996
15 18-21] 515b; bk iv, ch 7
[ioi2ai8-24] 532ab;
ch 8
[ioi2b5-8]
532c; bk vii, ch 10
[i036a i-8] 559b-c; bk xiii, ch 4 [1078^7-30]
610b-c / Soul, bk i, ch i
[402b i 5-403^]
631d-632a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a, 2 rep 2 lld-12c;
q  17, a 3, rep 1-2 102d103c; q 58, a 5 303c-304c; q 85, a 6 458d459c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94,  a 2, ans 221d-223a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  56b-d;  58d-59c;  65d; part iv, 269b-c 31
Descartes:   Objections   and   Replies,  128c  33  Pascal:  Geometrical
Demonstration,  430b431b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch ix, 16
288d-289c;  ch  xi,  sect  15-17  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 20, 319b sect 15
303b-304a

[465a]
2a(3)  to  2b(3) 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 215b-217a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,   intro,   par  2  9b-10a  54  Freud:  Instincts,  412a-b  2<z(3)
Indefinables  as principles of definition 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 544c-547c
8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch 9 [992^4a i] 511a-b; bk ii, ch 2
[^^16-2-]} 513a-b; bk v, ch 3
[ioi4b3-i3] 534d; bk
viii, ch 3
[1043^8-33] 568b
33  Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 431b993 434a; 442a-443b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ii,  sect  2 128a-b; ch vii, sect 10
133a-b;  ch  xii 147b-148d; ch xviii, sect i 174a; sect 6 174c-d; bk hi,
ch  iv,  sect 12-14 262b263a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 215d-216c 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 82b 2b. Propositions or judgments as principles 2b{\) Immediate
truths of perception: direct sensitive knowledge of appearances; evident
particular  facts  8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c;
ch 23
[84b i9-85 a i] 115c-116a; bk
ii, ch 2 [90*24-30] 123b-c; ch 19 136a-137a,c / Heavens, bk hi, ch 7
[306*1-18]
397b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch r
[98i b io-i3]
499d500a;  ch  9  [992b24-993  a  i]  511a-b; bk iv, ch 5 [ioiob i4-2(5]
530b-c; bk vii, ch 10
[1036s
1-8] 559b-c; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b33~io63a
9] 591a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[io95a30-b i2]
340c-d; ch 7 [1098*35^3] 343d; bk ii, ch 9
[no9b20-23]
355c; bk hi, ch 3
[ni2b341113*2] 358d-359a; bk
vi, ch ii
[ii43a25-b6]
392d-393a; bk vii, ch 3 [ii47a25~b6] 397c-d; bk x, ch 1
[ii72a34~b
7] 426b-c; ch 8
[1179*
16-23]  433d-434a 12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk i [693-700] 9c; bk
iv [469-521] 50b-51a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 14, a 6,
ans  680c-681a  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-335c 31 Descartes:
Objections and Replies, 229d230d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
i,  sect 15-19 98d-100c esp sect 19 lOOb-c; sect 23 101b-102a; bk iv, ch
i,  sect  4  307b-c;  ch 11, sect i 309b-d; ch hi, sect 21 319c; ch vii,
sect  4 337b-338b; sect 9-10 338d-340a; sect ii, 342c-d; ch xi 354c358c;
ch  xii,  sect  3 358d-359c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 37
465c-466a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 66d-72c esp 67d-68a / Practical Reason,
351c  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445d-446a; 461c 53 James : Psychology,
867a-868b

[465b]
Chapter  70:  PRINCIPLE  431  2b{2)  Immediate  truths of understanding:
axioms  or  self-evident  truths;  a  priori  judgments  as principles 8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[72^-9] 98c; [72^5-19] 98c-d; ch 3 99b-100a;
ch 15 109a-b; bk ii, ch 9 128a-b / Metaphysics, bk in, ch 2 [996b26-997a
i4]  515b-d;  bk  iv, ch 3 [1005^3-34] 524d-525a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
vi, ch 6 389d; ch 8
[1 142^5-29]
391b-c; ch 11
[ii43 a25-b i3]
392d-393a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1 356^6-28]
596b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i, ans 10d-lld; q 17,
a  3,  rep  2  102d-103c;  q  84,  a  3, rep 3 443d-444d; q 85, a 6, ans
458d459c;  q  87,  a  1,  rep  1  465a-466c; q 117, a i, ans and rep 1,3
595d-597c;  part  i-ii, q i, a 4, rep 2 612a-613a; a 5, ans 613a-614a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 2 36a-37b; q 90, a 2, rep
3 206b-207a; q 91, a 3, ans 209d-210c; q 94, a 2, ans 221d223a; a 4, ans
223d-224d;  part  ii-ii,  q  8,  a 1, rep 2 417a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
260c-261a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 61d 31 Descartes: Rules,
111,  4a-d;  iv, 5c-d; 6d; vi, 8d-9a; viii, 13c-d; xii, 23c / Discourse,
part  iv,  51b-52a  /  Meditations, v, 95a-96a / Objections and Replies,
123a-b;  125a-b;  224b,d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 1 171a-172a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk 1 95b, d121a,c esp ch i, sect 15-19 98d-100c, sect 23
101b-102a, ch 11, sect 21-27 110a-112c, ch hi, sect 23 119b-120a; bk iv,
ch  i,  sect  4  307b-c; ch 11, sect i 309b-d; sect 7-8 310d311a; ch vii
337a-344d esp sect i 337a, sect io-ii 339b-342d; ch ix, sect 2-3 349a-c;
ch  xii,  sect  1-6 358c-360a; sect 12, 362b-c; sect 15 363a-b; ch xvii,
sect  14-17  378c-379c; ch xx, sect 7-10 390d-392a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
31a-d;  64d-93c  esp  64d66d,  68a-74b,  85d-88a; 211c-218d; 225a-227a /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 268b- d; 279c-d / Practical Reason,
295b-d; 329d-330c / Judgement, 542d-543a 43 Declaration of Independence:
[7-15]  la-b  43  Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a; number 83, 244b-c 43
Mill:   Utilitarianism,   445d-447a;  458d-459c  53  James:  Psychology,
319b-320a;  869a-879b passim, esp 869a-870a, 872b 2^(3) Constitutive and
regulative  principles:  the  maxims  of  reason  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
72c-74b   esp  73c-74a;  109d-112d;  194b-c;  199c-209d  esp  199c-200c,
201d-202a,  206a-207b  /  Practical  Reason,  343a;  349b-355d  / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  390b;  392b-d / Judgement, 550a-551a,c; 562a-d;
570b-572c; 577b; 578a-d

[466a]
432  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3.  First  principles  or  axioms in philosophy,
science,   dialectic   3<z.   Principles  and  demonstration  3*(1)  The
indemonstrability  of  axioms:  natural  habits of the mind 8 Aristotle:
Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch i6
[64b28-}8] 85c / Posterior Analytics, bk
i,  ch 3 99b-100a / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2 [996 26-997a i4] 515b-d; bk
iv, ch 4
[ioo5b35~
ioo6a  i2] 525a-b; bk xi, ch 5 [io6ib34-io62a 5] 590a-b / Soul, bk i, ch
3  [407*22-30]  636d637a  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6
389d;  ch 11 [ii43a25-b i3] 392d-393a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  14,  a 1, rep 2 75d-76c; q 16, a 6, rep i 98b-d; q 17, a 3, rep 2
102d-103c;  q 79, a 12 425c426b; part 1—11, q 1, a 4, rep 2 612a-613a; a
5, ans 613a-614a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 53, a 1, ans
19d-21a;  q  57,  a 2, ans and rep 2 36a-37b; q 94, a 1 221a-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 56c-59c 33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration,
440b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect io-ii 97c-98a; ch
hi, sect 23 119b120a; bk iv, ch xi, sect i-io 354c-357b passim, esp sect
10  357a-b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  66d-72c  esp  67c-69c; 211c-218d /
Judgement,  542d-543a  43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a  43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445d-447a; 461c; 465a-b 53 James: Psychology, 851a-890a
esp 851a-852a, 879b-882a, 889a-b 3<*(2) The indirect defense of axioms 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4-8 525a532d; bk xi, ch 5-6 590a-592b
3<*(3)   The   dependence  of  demonstration  on  axioms:  the  critical
application  of  the  principles  of identity and contradiction 7 Plato:
Euthydemus,  72d-73b  /  Cratylus,  112a  / Republic, bk iv, 350d-351b 8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 1-3 97a-100a; ch 7
[75
a38-b7] 103c; ch ii 105d106b; ch 19-23 110c-116a; ch 32
[88 a36-b
4]  120d  /  Topics, bk vni, ch 3 [i58a3i-b4] 214d215a / Metaphysics, bk
hi,  ch  2  [996b26-997a  14] 515b-d; bk iv, ch 3 [1005^8-27] 524b; ch 4
jioo5b35-ioo6a i2] 525a-b; ch 6
[101 1*3-14]
530d; bk v, ch 5
[ioi5b6~9] 535d-536a; bk
xi,  ch 6 [io63b7-i2] 591d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6
389d; ch ii
[1 143^5^13] 392d 393a / Rhetoric, bk
1,  ch  2 [i356b26-28] 596b 11 Euclid: Elements, bk i, common notions 2a
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 7 81d-82b; q 17, a 3, rep
1-2 102d-103c; q

[466b]
d 3 to 3r(l) 36, a 3, rep 4 194c-195d; q 84, a 3, rep 3 443d-444d; q 85,
a  6  458d-459c; part i-ii, q 1, a 4, rep 2 612a-613a 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  90,  a  2,  rep 3 206b-207a; q 94, a 2, ans
221d223a  28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 333d-334d esp 334a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  56c-59d  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part ii,
46c-47a  /  Meditations, in, 82b-d; v, 95b-96a / Objections and Replies,
123a-b;  125a-b;  224b, 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 37-47 386b391a
esp  prop  40, schol 1-2 387b-388b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch ii, sect 1, 309d; sect 7-8 310d-311a; ch vii 337a-344d esp sect io-ii
339b-342d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  17d-18d;  64d-65c;  68a69c; 174b-d;
211c-218d  43  Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 82b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions, 3 116a 3£. Principles and
induction:  axioms  as  intuitive  inductions from experience; stages of
inductive  generalization  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 23
90a-c  / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c; bk ii, ch 2 [9oa24~3o]
123b-c;  ch  7 [92 a34~b i] 126b; ch 19 136a-137a,c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk  vi,  ch  3  388b-c;  ch  6  a25-b i3] 392d-393a 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 333d-334d 389d; ch 11 [n 43 esp 334c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  56c-59c;  96d-97a  /  Novum  Organum  105a-195d  esp pref
105a-106d,  bk  1,  aph  11-26  107d-108d,  aph  36-38  109b-c,  aph  63
113d-114a,  aph  66  114d-115c,  aph 69-70 116a-117a, aph 94 126a-b, aph
103-106  127d-128c,  bk  ii,  aph  i-io 137a-140d, aph 15-16 149a-b, aph
20-22  150d-153c, aph 52 194c-195d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
123a-b; 167c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 25, 120d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect i, div 2 451b-c; div 9, 454d; sect
iv,  div  26  460b-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  66d-72c; 217a-c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 446a; 475b,d [fn 1] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
iv,  361a-b  3c.  Axioms  in  relation  to  postulates,  hypotheses,  or
assumptions  3c(l)  The distinction between first principles in general,
or  common notions, and the principles of a particular subject matter or
science 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 383d-388a esp 386d388a

[467a]
3c(2)  to  4 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch io 104d-105d; ch
ii
[77*26-35]
106b; ch 32 120c-121b / Topics, bk i, ch 2
[ioi a37-b
4]  144a / Heavens, bk hi, ch 7 [3o6a i-i8] 397b-c / Metaphysics, bk iv,
ch 3
[ioo<yb i<^-}^$24d
I Soul, bk 1, ch 1 [402*17-23] 631b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1358*3-33]
597d-598b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 40a-48d esp 40a-41b, 43a-c,
44c-45a   35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  118  436b-c  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,   445b-c   3c(2)   The  difference  between  axioms  and
assumptions,  hypotheses  and principles, as a basis for the distinction
between  knowledge  and  opinion,  or  science  and  dialectic  7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk  vii,  396d-398c 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2 97d-99a; ch ii
[77*22-35] 106b /
Topics,  bk  viii, ch 3 [i58 a3i-b4] 214d-215a / Physics, bk a23-b viii,
ch 1
[252
7]  336a-b  /  Metaphysics,  bk iv, ch 2 [ioo4b i8-27] 523d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^1-28]
339d-340a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1358*3-33] 597d-598b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  12,  a  7,  ans and rep 2 56a-57b; a 13, rep 3
61c62b: q 47, a 1, rep 3 256a-257b; q 82, a 2, ans 432d-433c; q 83, a 1,
ans  436d-438a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 51, a 3
14b-15a;  q  67,  a 3, ans 83b-84df part ii—ii, q 1, a 4, ans 382c-383b;
part  hi,  q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b-766b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65b-d
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  260c-261a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
56c-59b 31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b 34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch xvii, sect 2 371d-372b; sect
15-17  378d379c  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 217a-218c; 240b-243c / Judgement,
600d-604b  3c(3)  The distinction and order of the sciences according to
the  character  of their principles 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a;
bk  vii,  391b~398c  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics, bk vi, ch i [i025b i18]
547b,d; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i a29-b4]
589c;  ch 4 [io6i b i7-28] 589d-590a; ch 7 [io63b361064^] 592b; bk xiii,
ch 2
[i077bn]-cH 3
[1078*31] 609a-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io98 a2o-b8]
343c-344a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1358*3-33] 597d-598b

[467b]
Chapter  70:  PRINCIPLE 433 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a
2,  ans  and  rep  i  4a-c;  a  5  5c-6a;  a 6, rep 1-2 6b-7a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 71c-d; 72a-d; part 11. 163a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 39d-41b 31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a 3b / Discourse, part 1,
43d-44a  /  Meditations,  1,  76c  / Objections and Replies, 128d 129a /
Geometry, bk ii, 304a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20-21
458a-c;  div  30,  462a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 17d-19a; 64d65c;
68a-69c;  215d-217c  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-d  /
Practical  Reason,  351b-352c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 388a-c /
Judgement,   578a-b   43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445b-c  53  James: Psychology, xiiib-xiva; 884b-886a 54
Freud:  Narcissism, 400d-401a / Instinctsy 412a-b 4. First principles in
the   practical  order:  the  principles  of  action  or  morality;  the
principles of the practical reason 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-263c; 280c-d 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  3  339d-340b  passim; ch 7 [io98*25-b8]
343d-344a; bk vi, ch 5 389ac passim; ch ii
[ii43*25-b i3]
392d-393a; bk vii, ch 8
[1151*11-19] 401d402a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 22 127c128c; bk hi, ch 2 177c-178d;
ch  10  185d187a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk viii, sect i 285a b 18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk viii, ch 8 270a-d; bk xix 507a-530a,c passim
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 91, a 3, ans 209d-210c 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86c-96b; part ii, 140b; 153c-154a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part iv, prop 18, schol 429a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
i,  ch  ii-iii 103d-121a,c esp ch ii, sect 3 104b-d, sect 21-27 Hla-112c
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  330d-331b;  343d345c  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
190c-d;  234c-240b  esp  235a-b,  238c-239a  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals   253a-287d   esp   253d-254d,  256c257d,  258d-259a,  260a-261d,
262a-265a, 266b-268a, 268d
[fn 2],
269c,  270d-271a,  273d-280b, 280d-281a, 282b-283d, 286a287d / Practical
Reason 291a-361d esp 291b293b, 293c-d
[fn 3],
298a-300a,   304d-307d,   310b-311d,  318c-321b,  325a-328a,  329a-331a,
338c-355d  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  oj Ethics, 365b-366d; 367c;
369c-373b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals 383a-394a,c esp 386d

[468a]
(4. First principles in the practical order: the principles of action or
morality;  the principles of the practical reason.) 388a, 392b / Science
of  Right,  397a-402a / Judgement, 463a-467a; 478a-479d; 584d-587a; 588b
[fn   2];  594c-596c  43  Federalist:  number  31,  103c-104a  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism  445a-476a,c  passim, esp 445a-447b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  316a-317a;  592d 53 James: Psychology, 886b-888a 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  592d-593a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure Principle, 639a-640c;
662c-663b  esp  663a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 772a-b 4a. Ends
as  principles,  and  last ends as first principles: right appetite as a
principle  in  the practical order 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-263c; 280c-d /
Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk  vii,  397a-398c 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982b4~7] 500d; bk 11, ch 2 [99^8-10] 512b; [994
b9-i6]  512d-513a;  a2i-b i3] 514dch i fioi3a2o-24J 533b; bk vii, bk in,
ch 2
[996
515a;  bk  v ch 7 [io32 a28-b29] 555b-d; bk ix, ch 8 [r 3-b6] 575d-576b;
bk  xii, ch 10 [1075^2 605d-606a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch
i [639 io-640a i2] 161d-162b / Motion of Animals, ch 6 [7oob4l-CH 7 L70i
a39]  235d-236d  /  Ethics, bk 1, ch 1-4 339a-340d esp ch 4 [1095^0b i2]
340c-d; ch 7
[io98 a35~b8]
343d-344a; ch 12
[noi b34-uo2 a
4] 347b; bk 11, ch 9
[nc>9b20-23]
355c; bk hi, ch 3
[ui2b i2ni3 a
2l 358c 359a; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b; ch 5 389a-c passim; ch 8
[1142*12-31]
391b-c; ch 9
[ii42b i7-35] 391d-392b; ch
ii
[ii43 a25-b i3] 392d-393a; ch
12
[1144^31-37]
394a; ch 13 [ii44b30-H45 a6] 394c-d; bk vii, ch 3
[ii47 a25-b6] 397c-d; ch 8
[ii5i a i5-i9]
402a; bk x, ch 6-8 430d-434a / Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[i33i b24-37] 536b-c / Rhetoric,
bk  1,  ch  6-7  602d-607d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk hi, ch 13-14
188b190a  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk x, ch i, 298b, d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  3-4  625b-c;  ch  35  634c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part i, q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 2, rep 2 109c110b;
a  5,  ans  112d-113c:  q  22,  a  i,  rep  3  127d-128d; o 25, a 5, ans
147d-149a;  q  60,  a 2, ans 311a-d; q 82, aa 1-2 431d-433c; q 113, a 1,
rep  2  576a-d; part i-ii, q i 609a615c; q 8, a 2, ans 656a-d; q 9, a 3,
ans 659c660a; q ii, a 3 667d-668d; q 12, aa 2-4 670b672a; q 13, a 3, ans
674c-675a;  a  6, rep i 676c-677b; q 14, a 2 678bc; a 6, ans 680c681a; q
15, a 3 682c-683b; q 16, a 3 685b686a; q 34, aa 3-4 770c-772b

[468b]
434  THE GREAT IDEAS 4# to 4b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
56, a 2, rep 3 30c-31a; a 3, ans 31a-32b; a 4, rep 4 32b-33c; q 57, a 4,
ans  38a-39a;  a 5, ans and rep 3 39a-40a; q 58, a 3, rep 2 43b44a; a 4,
ans  and rep i 44a-d; a 5 44d-45c; q 65, a 1, ans and rep 3-4 70b-72a; a
2,  ans  and  rep  3  72a-d; a 3, ans and rep i 72d73d; q 90, a 2, rep 3
206b-207a;  q 91, a 3, ans 209d-210c; part ii-ii, q 26, a i, ans and rep
1  510c-511a;  q 27, a 6, ans 524c-525c; q 181, a 2 617d-618c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  76c-d;  part  iv,  272c  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  69d-70a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b372d; part
iv,  pref  422b,d-424a;  424b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 98 190b / Geometrical
DemDEF  7 onstration, 440b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect 52-53 191d-192b; sect 62 194c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 234c-240b esp
235a-b,  236d-237a,  238c-239a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
253d-254d;  256a-b;  257c-d;  260a-c; 266a-267d; 271d-279d esp 274d275b;
282b-283d;  286c-287d  /  Practical  Reason,  318c-321b  esp  320c-321b;
327d-329a;  338c-355d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 367c /
Judgement,   477b-c;  478a-479d;  584d-587a;  588b  [fn  2];  591b-592a;
594b-595c  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b;  456a-457b; 461c-464d;
475b,d  [fn  1]  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 586d-587a 53 James:
Psychology,  796a-b  4b.  The  natural  moral  law  and  the categorical
imperative 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262ab; bk iv, sect 4
264a; bk vii, sect 55 283b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 79,
a  12  425c-426b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 91, a 2
208d-209d;  a 3, ans 209d-210c; q 94 220d-226b; q 95, a 2 227c-228c; a 4
229b-230c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86b-87a; 91a; 95c-96b; part ii,
134c;  part  hi,  165a;  conclusion, 282a; 283c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  96a-c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 330d-331b; 343d-345c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  190c-d;  235a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
253d-254d;   260a261d;  265c-266d;  268c-270c  esp  269c;  273d287d  esp
277d-279d,  282a-287b  /  Practical  Reason,  297a-314d  esp  307d-314d;
321b-329a  esp  327a-329a / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 373d /
Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-387a,c; 388b-c; 390b,d-391c; 392b-393a
/  Science  of  Right,  400b,d-402a;  416b-417b  / Judgement, 571c-572a;
594b-595c; 604d-606d esp 605d-606b [fn 2], 606a-d

[469a]
5 Chapter 70: PRINCIPLE 435 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3
460b-c; sect xn 503c-509d
[72
528c-531c; bk x, ch i
[i 053*3 lJ,3l 580a 5 CH 6
Reason,  294c-295d CROSS-REFERENCES For: Another discussion of principle
in  relation  to  element  and  cause,  see  Element 2. of contraries as
principles,  see Change 2b; Dialectic 3d; Opposition 2b, 3a. axioms, see
Reasoning 4d. Opinion 3c; Truth 7a.

[469b]

[470a]
436  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I.  Augustine. Answer to Skeptics Aquinas. Super
Boethium  de  Hebdomadibus Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy, pref
Hegel. Science of Logic, vol i, bk ii, sect i, ch 2 J. S. Mill. A System
of  Logic, bk ii, ch 6 II. Sextus Empiricus. Outlines of Pyrrhonism Duns
Scotus.  Tractatus  de  Primo  Principio  (A  Tract Concerning the First
Principle)  Bruno.  De  la causa, principio, e uno Suarez. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xn  (1),  xxn w Arnauld. Logic or the Art of Thinking, ch
6-7  Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics, xxvi . New Essays Concerning
Human  Understanding,  BK  IV,  CH  7-8 . Monadology, par 31-37 T. Reid.
Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, 1, ch 2; vi, ch 4-7

[470b]
1 ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Boo^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great Ideas. Schopenhauer. On the Fourfold Root of the
Principle  of Sufficient Reason W. Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and
Logic,  vol  11 (5-6) Whewell. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,
VOL  I, BK I, CH 4, 6 . On the Philosophy of Discovery, ch 28 Helmholtz.
Popular  Lectures  on  Scientific Subjects, 11 J. H. Newman. An Essay in
Aid of a Grammar of Assent, ch 4 LOTZE. Logic, BK III, CH 5 Bradley. The
Principles  of  Logic,  bk  i,  ch  5  BOSANQUET. Logic, VOL II, CH 7 E.
Hartmann.  Kategorienlehre  W.  E.  Johnson. Logic, part i, ch 14 Rueff.
From  the Physical to the Social Sciences Santayana. The Realm of Truth,
ch i Dewey. Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, ch 17 B. Russell. The Problems
of Philosophy, ch 7-8, 1 . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, PART VI

[471a]
Chapterji^PKOGRESS  INTRODUCTION  TIF  IKE  the  idea of evolution, with
which  it  has  1  j  some  affinity,  the  idea of progress seems to be
typically  modern.  Anticipations  of  it  may  be  found in ancient and
mediaeval  thought,  sometimes  in  the  form of implicit denials of the
idea. But in explicit formulation, in emphasis and importance, progress,
like  evolution,  is almost a new idea in modern times. It is not merely
more prominent in modern discussion; it affects the significance of many
other  ideas,  and so gives a characteristic color or tendency to modern
thought.  The  idea  of  evolution affects our conceptions of nature and
man.  But  the  theory  of  evolution  is itself affected by the idea of
progress.  Since  it  was  a  major  theme at least two centuries before
Darwin, progress does not depend for its significance upon the theory of
biological evolution. The reverse relationship seems to obtain. The idea
of  evolution  gets  some of its moral, social, even cosmic significance
from  its  implication  that  the  general motion in the world of living
things,  perhaps  in  the  universe,  is a progress from lower to higher
forms.  Darwin  thinks  "Von Baer has defined advancement or progress in
the  organic  scale better than anyone else, as resting on the amount of
differentiation  and specialization of the several parts of a being"— to
which  Darwin  adds  the qualification that the organisms must be judged
when  they  have  arrived  at maturity. "As organisms have become slowly
adapted  to diversified lines of life, their parts will have become more
and  more  differentiated and specialized for various functions from the
advantage  gained  by the division of physiological labor. The same part
appears often to have been modified first for one purpose, and then long
afterwards  for  some other and quite distinct purpose; and thus all the
parts are rendered more and more complex. ... In accord437

[471b]
ance with this view," Darwin writes, "it seems, if we turn to geological
evidence,  that  organization  on  the whole has advanced throughout the
world by slow and interrupted steps. In the kingdom of the Vertebrata it
has  culminated  in  man."  Whether  strictly biological evolution has a
single or uniform direction may be disputed in the light of evidences of
regression  and the multiplication of lower as well as higher forms. But
Darwin  seems to think that since "natural selection works solely by and
for  the  good  of  each being, all corporeal and mental endowments will
tend  to  progress toward perfection." Whatever the evidence may be, the
popular  notion  of  evolution,  especially when applied by writers like
Herbert Spencer to human society or civilization, connotes progress— the
gradual  yet steady march toward perfection. Apart from this application
of  the  idea  of  evolution  to  man's  world, progress seems to be the
central  thesis  in  the  modern  philosophy of history. In the minds of
some, the philosophy of history is so intimately connected with a theory
of  progress  that  the  philosophy  of  history is itself regarded as a
modern  development.  There seems to be some justification for this view
in  modern  works  on  the  tendency  of  history  which have no ancient
counterparts,  such  as the writings of Vico, Condorcet, Kant, Proudhon,
Comte,  J.  S. Mill, Hegel, and Marx. These writers do not all define or
explain  progress  in  the  same  way.  Nor  do they all subscribe to an
inviolable and irresistible law of progress which has the character of a
divine  ordinance,  replacing  or  transforming less optimistic views of
providence. But for the most part the moderns are optimists. They either
believe  in  man's  perfectibility  and  in  his  approach to perfection
through his own efforts freely

[472a]
438 THE GREAT IDEAS turned toward the realization of ideals; or they see
in the forces of history—whether the manifestations of a world spirit or
the  pressure  of  material  (i.e.,  economic)  conditions—an inevitable
development from less to more advanced stages of civilization, according
to  a  dialectical  pattern  of conflict and resolution, each resolution
necessarily  rising  to  a  higher  level. As opposed to the optimism of
expecting  a  continual  improvement  in  all  things or an irreversible
ascent  to  new  heights,  the  pessimistic view denies that progress is
either  the  law  or  the  hope  of  history.  It  believes  rather that
everything  which goes up must come down. As indicated in the chapter on
History, the theory of cycle after cycle of rise and decline or even the
notion that the golden age is past, that it is never to be regained, and
that things are steadily getting worse—prevails more in the ancient than
in the modern world. The modern exceptions to optimism in the philosophy
of history are notably Spengler and, to a much less extent, Toynbee. But
modern  pessimism  never  seems to reach the intensity of the Preacher's
reiteration  in  Ecclesiastes that "there is no new thing under the sun"
and  that  "all  is  vanity and vexation of spirit." Nor does the modern
theory of cycles of civilization, even in Vico, seem to be as radical as
that  of the ancients. In his vision of cosmic cycles Lucretius sees the
whole  world  crumbling  into  atomic dust to be reborn again. Herodotus
does  not  relieve  the  gloom  of  his observation that, in the life of
cities,  prosperity  "never continues long in one stay." The eternity of
the  world  means for Aristotle that "probably each art and each science
has  often  been  developed  as far as possible and has again perished."
Leaving  to  the chapter on History the discussion of progress so far as
it  concerns  an explicit philosophy of history, we shall here deal with
considerations  of  progress  as  they  occur in economics, in political
theory,  in  the  history  of  philosophy  and  the  whole  intellectual
tradition  of  the arts and sciences. In this last connection, the great
books  play  a  dual  role.  They  provide  the major evidence which, on
different   interpretations,  points  toward  opposite  answers  to  the
question whether or not there has been progress in the

[472b]
tradition  of  western thought. Whatever their readers may think on this
subject, the great authors, having read the works of their predecessors,
offer  their  own interpretations of the intellectual tradition. In many
cases,   especially   among   the   modern   writers,   their  point  of
departure—even  the  conception  they  entertain  of the originality and
worth  of  their  own  contribution—stems  from  their  concern  with  a
deplorable  lack  of  progress,  for  which  they  offer  new methods as
remedies. Before we enter upon the discussion of economic, political, or
intellectual  progress,  it  seems useful to distinguish between thefact
and  the  idea  of progress. When men examine the fact of progress, they
look  to  the  past and find there evidence for or against the assertion
that  a  change  for the better has taken place in this or that respect.
Two  things are involved: a study of the changes which have occurred and
the judgment— based on some standard of appraisal— that the changes have
been  for  the better. But when men entertain the idea of progress, they
turn  from  the past and present and look to the future. They regard the
past  merely as a basis for prophecy, and the present as an occasion for
making  plans to fulfill their prophecies or hopes. The fact of progress
belongs  to  the record of achievement; the idea of progress sets a goal
to  be  achieved.  This  distinction  seems  to  be  exemplified  by the
difference  between  ancient  and modern considerations of progress. The
ancients  observe  the fact of progress in some particulars almost never
universally.  Thucydides,  for  example,  in the opening chapters of his
History,  contrasts  the  power  and wealth of the modern city-states of
Greece  with "the weakness of ancient times." "Without commerce, without
freedom  of  communication either by land or sea, cultivating no more of
their  territory  than  the  exigencies  of  life required, destitute of
capital,  never  planting  their  land  (for they could not tell when an
invader  might  not come and take it all away, and when he did come they
had  no  walls  to  stop  him),  thinking  that the necessities of daily
sustenance could be supplied at one place as well as another, they cared
little  for  shifting  their  habitation, and consequently neither built
large cities nor attained to any other form of greatness."

[473a]
But Thucydides does not seem to draw from these observations any general
idea  of progress. He does not concretely imagine a future excelling the
Periclean  age  in the magnitude"of its wars and the magnificence of its
wealth, as that period dwarfs antiquity. He does not infer that whatever
factors worked to cause the advance from past to present may continue to
operate  with  similar results. It might almost be said that he does not
think  about  the  future;  certainly he does not think of it as rich in
promise.  "Knowledge  of  the  past."  he  writes,  is  "an  aid  to the
interpretation  of  the future, which in the course of human things must
resemble  if  it  does  not  reflect  it."  Adam  Smith's thinking about
economic  progress  represents  the contrasting modern emphasis upon the
future.  In  one  sense,  both  Thucydides  and  Smith  measure economic
progress in the same way, though one writes of the wealth of cities, the
other of the wealth of nations. Both Smith and Thucydides judge economic
improvement  in  terms  of  increasing  opulence,  the growth of capital
reserves,  the  expansion  of commerce, and the enlarged power in war or
peace  which greater wealth bestows. But Smith, in the spirit of Francis
Bacon,  seeks  to analyze the causes of prosperity in order to make them
work  for  further  progress. He is the promoter of progress, not merely
the  historian who witnesses the beneficial effect on productivity of an
increasingly  refined  division  of  labor  and of the multiplication of
machinery.  To  know  how  these things have operated to bring about the
opulence  of  modern  nations  as compared with the miserable poverty of
primitive  tribes  or  even the limited property of ancient cities is to
know  how  to  formulate  policies  which shall still further expand the
wealth of nations. For Smith the study of the means and methods by which
economic  progress has been made serves to determine the policy which is
most likely to ensure even greater increments of progress in the future.
Marx  appears  to measure economic progress by a different standard. The
transition  from the slave economies of antiquity through feudal serfdom
to what he calls the "wage-slavery" of the industrial proletariat may be
accompanied by greater productivity and vaster accumula-

[473b]
Chapter  71  :  PROGRESS  439  tions of capital stock. But the essential
point  for  him  about  these  successive systems of production is their
effect  upon the status and conditions of labor. The Communist Manifesto
notes  respects  in  which,  under the capitalist system, the supposedly
free  workingman  is  worse  off than were his servile ancestors. But if
economic  progress  is conceived as the historically determined approach
to  the  final  liberation of labor from its oppressors, then capitalism
represents  both  an  advance over feudalism and a stage in the march to
communism.  Each successive economic revolution brings mankind nearer to
the  goal  of  the  ideal  or  classless economy. Capitalism creates the
proletariat—  the  revolutionary  class which is to be that system's own
undoing. The overthrow of the landed aristocracy by the bourgeoisie thus
prepares  the  way  for  the dictatorship of the proletariat, as that in
turn  liquidates  the  obstacles  to  the  realization  of  the  perfect
communist  democracy. We are not here concerned with the details of this
history  and  prophecy  but  only  with  the theory of progress which it
involves.  In  the  first  place,  it  seems  to set an ultimate goal to
progress,  while  at the same time it makes progress a necessary feature
of  what  is  for  Marx, as it is for Hegel, the "dialectic of history."
Those  who  think  that  the  inevitability  of progress ought to render
progress  as  interminable as history itself, find some inconsistency in
this  tenet  of dialectical materialism, as well as in Hegel's notion of
the  necessary  dialectical  stages  by  which the Absolute Idea reaches
perfect  realization  in the German state. Can progress be the inner law
of  history  and yet reach its goal before the end of time? There may be
some  answer  to  this  question  in  a  second  aspect of the theory of
progress  which goes with a dialectic of history. The progress which the
successive  stages  of history represent resides in the quality of human
institutions  rather than in the nature of man. If more economic justice
or  greater  political  liberty is achieved, it is not because the later
generations  of  men are born with a nature more disposed to goodness or
virtue,  but  because better institutions have evolved from the conflict
of  historical  forces.  Furthermore, according to Marx, man's nature is
only partly de-

[474a]
440  THE GREAT IDEAS termined at birth. Part remains to be determined by
the  social  and  economic  circumstances  of his life— by the system of
production under which he lives. Hence though institutional progress may
arrive  at  its  historical  goal  with  the  establishment of the ideal
economy,  it  may be possible for further progress to be made throughout
the  rest  of  time  by  the improvement of men themselves, when at last
their  natures  can develop under ideal circumstances. We have noted two
great issues in the characteristically modern discussion of progress. Is
the  goal  of  progress  definitely  attainable, or is its goal an ideal
progressively approximated but never realized ? Is progress accomplished
by the betterment of human institutions or by improvements in the nature
of  man  ?  The  second  question  has  a critical bearing on the first,
especially for those who conceive man as infinitely perfectible. It also
relates  to  the  problem  of the evolutionist: whether a higher form of
life  on earth will evolve from man or whether the future belongs to the
progressive  development  of  human  nature— biologically or culturally.
Darwin  is  unwilling to admit that "man alone is capable of progressive
improvement,"  but  he  does affirm that man "is capable of incomparably
greater  and more rapid improvement than is any other animal." Rousseau,
on  the other hand, claims that "the faculty of self-improvement" is one
distinction  between man and brute "which will admit of no dispute." But
he  also  thinks that this faculty is the cause of human decline as well
as  progress.  "A brute, at the end of a few months," he writes, "is all
he  will ever be during his whole life, and his species, at the end of a
thousand  years, exactly what it was the first year of that thousand . .
. .While the brute, which has acquired nothing and has therefore nothing
to  lose, still retains the force of instinct, man, who loses, by age or
accident,  all that his perfectibility had enabled him to gain, falls by
this means lower than the brutes themselves." One other issue concerning
progress  remains  to  be  stated.  It raises the question of freedom or
necessity  in  history. Is progress inevitable in the very nature of the
case,  or  does  it  occur  only when men plan wisely and choose well in
their

[474b]
efforts  to  better themselves or the conditions of their lives ? In his
Idea ofa Universal History and his Principle of Progress, Kant finds the
possibility  of  progress  in  man's  potentialities for improvement. He
regards  the realization of this possibility as a work of freedom rather
than  a  manifestation  of  historical necessity. Political progress may
have  an  ultimate goal— the world republic or federation of states. But
this,  according  to  Kant's  conclusion  in the Science of Right, is an
impracticable idea, and serves only the regulative purpose of "promoting
a  continuous  approximation  to Perpetual Peace." Hegel's theory of the
progressive  realization  of  the  idea of the state in history seems to
represent   the  contrary  position  on  both  points.  Progress  is  an
historical  necessity,  and  it  reaches  an  historic consummation. The
contrast between ancients and moderns with respect to political progress
seems  to  be  the same as that which we observed between Thucydides and
Adam Smith with regard to wealth. The ancients assert the superiority of
the  present  over the past, and even trace the stages by which advances
have  been  made from primitive to civilized conditions. But they do not
extend  the motion they observe into the future. The moderns look to the
future  as  to  a  fulfillment  without which present political activity
would  be  undirected. According to Aristotle, for example, the state is
the  last  stage in the development of social life which begins with the
family.  "When  several families are united, and the association aims at
something  more  than the supply of daily needs, the first society to be
formed  is  the  village."  The  village  or  tribal community, in turn,
becomes  the  unit  out  of  which  a  larger  and  more truly political
community  is  formed.  "When  several  villages  are united in a single
complete  community,  large enough to be nearly or quite self-sufficing,
the  state  comes  into  existence." Aristotle sees this development not
merely  as  a  progress  from smaller and weaker societies to larger and
more  powerful  ones,  but  also as an advance toward the realization of
man's  political  nature. Absolute or despotic government by the eldest,
natural  to the family, still persists in the tribe. "This is the reason
why the Hellenic

[475a]
states  were  originally  governed  by  kings; because the Hellenes were
under  royal  rule  before  they  came together, as the barbarians still
are."  Not until the domestic or tribal form ofgdvernment is replaced by
political  or constitutional government—not until kings and subjects are
replaced  by statesmen and citizens— is the state or political community
fully  realized.  But  Aristotle  does  not  conceive the development he
describes  as  one  continuing  into  the  future. He does not imagine a
larger  political unity than the city-state, as Kant is able to envisage
a  world  state  as  the ultimate formation toward which the progressive
political   unification   of   mankind  should  tend.  Though  Aristotle
recognizes  that  new  institutions  have  been  invented  and  old ones
perfected, his political theory, unlike Mill's, does not seem to measure
the  goodness  of  the  best  existing institutions by their devotion to
further   progress.   Considering  the  criterion  of  a  good  form  of
government, Mill criticizes those who separate the maintenance of order,
or  the  preservation  of existing institutions, from the cultivation of
progress.  "Progress  includes  Order,"  he  writes, "but Order does not
include Progress." Order "is not an additional end to be reconciled with
Progress,  but  a  part  and  means of Progress itself. If a gain in one
respect  is  purchased  by a more than equivalent loss in the same or in
any  other,  there  is  not  Progress.  Conduciveness  to Progress, thus
understood, includes the whole excellence of government." Progress fails
to  define  good government, Mill adds, unless we understand by the term
not  merely  "the  idea  of  moving  onward,"  but  "quite  as  much the
prevention  of  falling  back.  The very same social causes . . . are as
much  required  to  prevent  society  from retrograding, as to produce a
further  advance.  Were there no improvement to be hoped for, life would
not  be  the less an unceasing struggle against causes of deterioration;
as  it  even  now  is. Politics, as conceived by the ancients, consisted
wholly  in this . . . Though we no longer hold this opinion; though most
men  in  the  present  age  profess a contrary creed, believing that the
tendency of things, on the whole, is toward improvement; we ought not to
forget  that  there  is  an  incessant  and everflowing current of human
affairs toward the worse."

[475b]
Chapter  71:  PROGRESS 441 According to Mill, the ideally best polity is
representative   government   on   democratic   principles.  By  a  just
distribution  of political rights and by the fullest grant of liberties,
it  serves  better  than  any  other  form of government "to promote the
virtue  and intelligence of the people themselves." This is the ultimate
end  of  political  progress.  Inferior  forms  of  government,  such as
despotic  monarchy,  may  be justified for people as yet unfit for self-
government,  but  only  if  they  also work for progress, i.e., "if they
carry  those communities through the intermediate stages which they must
traverse  before  they  can become fit for the best form of government."
The  whole  theory  of  good  government  is  thus  for Mill a theory of
progress  in  which  we must take "into account, not only the next step,
but all the steps which society has yet to make; both those which can be
foreseen  and  the far wider indefinite range which is at present out of
sight."  We must judge the merits of diverse forms of government by that
ideal form "which, if the necessary conditions existed for giving effect
to  its  beneficial  tendencies, would, more than all others, favour and
promote  not  some one improvement, but all forms and degrees of it." In
the  field  of  the  arts  and sciences or culture generally, the modern
emphasis  upon  progress  seems  to  be even more pronounced than in the
spheres  of  economics  and  politics.  Lack of progress in a science is
taken  to  indicate  that  it  has not yet been established on the right
foundations  or  that the right method for discovering the truth has not
yet  been  found.  Lack  of agreement in a particular field is the chief
symptom  of these defects. The fact that philosophy "has been cultivated
for  many  centuries  by  the  best minds that have ever lived, and that
nevertheless no single thing is to be found in it which is not a subject
of dispute, and in consequence which is not dubious," leads Descartes to
propose his new method. He hopes this may ensure progress in philosophy,
of  the same sort which the new method has, in his view, accomplished in
mathematics.  The  Novum  Organum  of Bacon seems to be dedicated to the
same end of progressively augmenting knowledge in all those

[476a]
442  THE GREAT IDEAS fields in which, according to the inventory made in
the  Advancement of Learning of the present state of the sciences, no or
little  progress  has been made since antiquity. Similarly, Locke, Hume,
and  Kant insist that a study of the human mind should precede all other
studies  in order to save men from fruitless disputes concerning matters
beyond  their  capacities  for knowledge; they hope thereby to encourage
research  in  areas  where  progress  can  be  made.  The  comparison of
different  disciplines or subject matters with respect to their progress
leads  to  the  condemnation  of  those  which  lag  behind.  The  great
scientific  advances of the 17th century tend to intensify the complaint
about  philosophy,  especially  metaphysics. The progress which has been
made  from  the  beginning  in  mathematics and more recently in physics
means to Kant that each of these disciplines has found the "safe way" or
the  "secure  path" of a science. By comparison, metaphysics has not yet
even  made a beginning. A hundred years later, William James is still to
say  that,  by  comparison with the progress of knowledge in the natural
sciences,  metaphysics  belongs to the future. The notion that any field
of  learning  has  attained  its  full maturity seems to Bacon to be the
presumption   of   those  philosophers  who,  seeking  "to  acquire  the
reputation  of perfection for their own art," try to instill the "belief
that  whatever  has not yet been invented and understood can never be so
hereafter."  Whenever such belief prevails, learning languishes. "By far
the  greatest  obstacle  to  the  advancement  of  the sciences, and the
undertaking  of  any  new  attempt or departure, is to be found in men's
despair  and  the  idea  of  impossibility."  Though the ancients do not
evidence  this  presumption  of  perfection  in their arts and sciences,
neither  do  they fret about lack of progress. Nor does the disagreement
of  minds  seem to them to signify an unhealthy condition which requires
new  and  special methods to cure. "The investigation of the truth is in
one way hard, in another easy," writes Aristotle. "An indication of this
is found in the fact that no one is able to attain the truth adequately,

[476b]
while, on the other hand, we do not collectively fail, but everyone says
something  true  about  the  nature of things, and while individually we
contribute  little  or  nothing  to  the  truth,  by  the union of all a
considerable   amount  is  amassed."  Aristotle  puts  the  intellectual
tradition  to  use  by  adopting the policy of calling "into council the
views  of  those  of  our predecessors who have declared any opinion" on
whatever  subject  is  being considered, "in order that we may profit by
whatever  is sound in their suggestions and avoid their errors." But, in
the  opinion  of the moderns, the intellectual tradition can also be the
greatest  impediment  to  the  advancement of learning if it is received
uncritically and with undue reverence for the authority of the ancients.
"The  respect  in  which  antiquity  is  held  today," Pascal says, "has
reached such extremes in those matters in which it should have the least
preponderance,  that  one  can  no  longer  present  innovations without
danger."  This  is the common complaint of Hobbes, Bacon, Descartes, and
Harvey.  "The  reverence for antiquity and the authority of men who have
been  esteemed  great in philosophy have," according to Bacon, "retarded
men from advancing in science, and almost enchanted them." Harvey agrees
with Bacon that philosophers or scientists should not "swear such fealty
to their mistress Antiquity, that they openly, and even in sight of all,
deny  and  desert  their friend Truth." Harvey has a much higher opinion
than Bacon of the achievements of antiquity. "The ancient philosophers,"
he writes, "whose industry even we admire, went a different way to work,
and  by their unwearied labor and variety of experiments, searching into
the  nature of things, have left us no doubtful light to guide us in our
studies. In this way it is that almost everything we yet possess of note
or credit in philosophy, has been transmitted to us through the industry
of  ancient  Greece." His admiration for the ancients does not, however,
lead  Harvey  to  rest  on their achievements. "When we acquiesce in the
discoveries of the ancients, and believe (which we are apt to do through
indolence)  that  nothing  farther  remains  to  be known," then, in his
opinion,  "we  suffer the edge of our ingenuity to be taken off, and the
lamp which they delivered us to be

[477a]
extinguished.  No  one  of a surety," he continues, "will allow that all
truth  was engrossed by the ancients, unless he be utterly ignorarxt (to
pass  by  other arts for the present)"of the many remarkable discoveries
that   have  lately  been  made  in  anatomy."  In  his  own  anatomical
researches,   Harvey   adopts   an  attitude  toward  the  work  of  his
predecessors,  both  ancient  and recent, which remarkably resembles the
attitude  expressed by Aristotle toward his scientific forebears. "As we
are  about  to  discuss  the  motion,  action,  and use of the heart and
arteries, it is imperative on us," Harvey declares, "first to state what
has  been  thought of these things by others in their writings, and what
has been held by the vulgar and by tradition, in order that what is true
may  be confirmed, and what is false set right by dissection, multiplied
experience,  and  accurate  observation."  It is precisely this attitude
which Bacon expressly condemns. Bacon sees no genuine method of science,
but merely a cultivation of opinion, in those who prepare themselves for
discovery  by  first obtaining "a full account of all that has been said
on  the  subject  by  others."  Those  who  begin in this way, it is the
judgment  of Descartes, seldom go further. Particularly the followers of
Aristotle  "would think themselves happy," he says, "if they had as much
knowledge  of  nature as he had, even if this were on the condition that
they  should  never attain to any more. They are like the ivy that never
tries  to  mount  above the trees which give it support, and which often
even  descends  again after it has reached the summit; for it appears to
me  that  such  men  also  sink  again—  that  is to say, somehow render
themselves  more  ingnorant than they would have been had they abstained
from  study  altogether.  For,  not  content  with  knowing  all that is
intelligibly explained in their author, they wish in addition to find in
him  the  solution of many difficulties of which he says nothing, and in
regard  to which he possibly had no thought at all." Pascal takes a more
moderate  view. We can profit, he thinks, from a limited respect for the
ancients.  "Just  as  they made use of those discoveries which have been
handed  down  to them only as a means for making new ones and this happy
audacity opened the road to great

[477b]
Chapter  71:  PROGRESS 443 things, so," Pascal suggests, "must we accept
those  which  they  found for us and follow their example by making them
the  means and not the end of our study, and thus try to surpass them by
imitating  them. For what would be more wrong than to treat the ancients
with more caution than they did those who preceded them, and to have for
them  this  inviolable  respect  which they only deserve from us because
they did not feel a similar respect for those who had the same advantage
over  them  ?"  Modern  writers seem to conceive the law of intellectual
progress  by  an analogy between the mind of the race and the individual
mind.  Where  Aquinas says merely that "it seems natural to human reason
to  advance gradually from the imperfect to the perfect," adding, in the
past tense, that hence the imperfect teaching of early philosophers "was
afterwards  perfected  by  those who succeeded them," Pascal generalizes
the  insight  and  gives it future significance. "Not only does each man
progress  from  day  to  day  in the sciences, but all men combined make
constant  progress  as the universe ages, because the same thing happens
in  the  succeeding  generations of men as in the different ages of each
particular man. So that the whole succession of men, in the course of so
many centuries, should be regarded as the same man who exists always and
learns continually." At this point Pascal applies his metaphor to effect
a  reversal of the relation between the moderns and the ancients. "Since
old  age  is  the time of life most distant from childhood, who does not
realize  that  old age in this universal man should not be sought in the
times  closest  to  his birth, but in those which are farthest away from
it?  Those  whom we call ancients were really novices in all things, and
actually belonged to the childhood of man; and as we have added to their
knowledge  the experience of the centuries which followed them, it is in
ourselves  that  may be found this antiquity which we revere in others."
Whether by accident or borrowing, this characteristically modern view of
the  advantage  progress  confers upon modernity is expressed in similar
language  by  Hobbes and Bacon. "Though I reverence those men of ancient
times," writes Hobbes, "who either have

[478a]
444  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  all  things of the mind, Bacon recommends the of
truth."  of  Spirit  or  matter;  conflict  as  a source of progress lb.
Optimism  or meliorism: the doctrine of human perfectibility 2. The idea
of  progress  in the theory of biological evolution 3. Economic progress
$a.  The  increase  of  opulence:  the  division of labor as a factor in
progress  and reform 4. Progress in politics political order in relation
to progress political conservatism 6a. Progress in the arts the reaction
against the authority of the past

[478b]
written  truth  perspicuously  or  have  set  us  in  a avoidance of two
extremes,  the  affectations of better way to find it out for ourselves;
yet to antiquity and novelty, for "antiquity envies the antiquity itself
I think nothing due; for if new improvements, and novelty is not content
we  will  reverence  age,  the  present  is  the oldest." to add without
defacing."  Since  "antiquity  de-  "Antiquity,  as  we call it," writes
Bacon,  "is  the  serves  that men should stand awhile upon it, to young
state  of  the  world; for those times are view around which is the best
way,"  the great ancient when the world is ancient; and not books of the
past  can  lay  the foundations for those we vulgarly account ancient by
computprogress,  but  only  if they are properly read, ing backwards; so
that  the  present time is the "Let great authors, therefore, have their
due,"  real  antiquity." Bacon declares, "but so as not to defraud time,
To  secure  a  sound,  not  specious, progress in which is the author of
authors,  and  the parent OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE 1. The idea of progress
in  the  philosophy  of  history 445 \a. Providence and necessity in the
theory  of  progress:  the  dialectical  development  \c.  Skeptical  or
pessimistic  denials  of  progress: the golden age as past; the cyclical
motion  of history 446 ijb. The improvement of the status and conditions
of  labor:  the goals of revolution y. Man's progressive conquest of the
forces of nature through science and invention 447 40. The invention and
improvement  of  political  institutions:  the  maintenance  of  4^. The
progressive  realization of the idea of the state 448 j\c. The growth of
political  freedom:  the  achievement of citizenship and civil rights 6.
Intellectual  or  cultural progress: its sources and impediments 449 6b.
Progress in philosophy and in the sciences 450 6c. The use and criticism
of  the  intellectual  tradition:  the  sifting of truth from error; 6d.
Plans  for  the advancement of learning and the improvement of method in
the  arts  and  sciences 451 6e. Freedom of expression and discussion as
indispensable to the progressive discovery of the truth 452

[479a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283I 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves of the page. For example, in 53 James: Psychology, 116a-119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283I  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  1.  The  idea  of  progress in the philosophy of
history  la.  Providence  and  necessity  in the theory of progress: the
dialectical  development  of  Spirit  or matter; conflict as a source of
progress  5  Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [436-525]  44c45b  7  Plato:
Protagoras, 44a-45a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 49-51 124a-d
/  City  of  God, bk x, ch 14 307c-308a; bk xv-xvin 397b,d-507a,c esp bk
xv,  ch  1-4 397b,d-400a, bk xvi, ch 3 423d-425b, ch 12 431b-c, bk xvii,
ch  1-2  449a-450c, bk xviii, ch 1 472b, d, ch 54, 506d-507a,c; bk xxii,
ch 30, 618c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 338c-339b 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  376a-c;  387c-d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par
32-33  20a-d;  part  hi,  par  340-360  110b-114a,c  esp par 342 110c-d;
additions,  36  122b-c  /  Philosophy  of History 153a-369a,c esp intro,
156d-190b, 203a-206a,c, part iv, 368d-369a,c

[479b]
Chapter  71:  PROGRESS  445  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  320d; 321c;
322d323a;  328b-c;  596c  50  Marx: Capital, 6c-7d; 10a-lld esp llb-d 50
Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 419b, d425b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue   i,  645a650c  esp  646b-c;  epilogue  ii.  675b-d;  676d677b;
679b-680b 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 654a-c / Civilization
and  Its Discontents, 801d-802a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 882b-883c
lb.  Optimism  or  meliorism:  the  doctrine  of human perfectibility 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 338b-c; 347d-348a / Social Contract, bk hi, 420a-b
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 633c-634a,c 42 Kant: judgement, 586a-587a
43 Federalist: number 6, 41a; number 55, 174c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 287d /
Representative Government, 335d-336a / Utilitarianism, 452a-b; 460a-461b
46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 343 HOd-110a / Philosophy of
History, intro, 178a-179c

[480a]
(  1 . The idea ofprogress in the philosophy of history, lb. Optimism or
meliorism: the doctrine of human perfectibility^) 47 Goethe: Faust, part
i [570-573] 16a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 294d-295a; 317c319a esp 318d;
328d-330a,c  esp  329d-330a,c;  596b-597a,c  esp  596d-597a,c  54 Freud:
Beyond   the  Pleasure  Principle,  654a-c  /  War  and  Death,  759d  /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  781a; 801c-802a,c \c. Skeptical or
pessimistic  denials  of  progress: the golden age as past; the cyclical
motion of history Old Testament: Ecclesiastes, 1:1-15; 2:12 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  2b  7  Plato: Timaeus, 443d-446b / Critias, 479a485d /
Statesman, 586c-589c / Laws, bk i, 640d-641a; bk iv, 681b-d 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 8 [i074b 1-14I 604d-605a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,   bk   v   [999-1010]  74a-b;  [1405-1435]  79b-d  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii, sect 14 258d; bk vn, sect 1 279b; sect 49 282d; bk
ix,  sect  14  293a;  sect  28  293d-294a; bk x, sect 27 299d 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk vtii
[306-336]
267a268a  14  Plutarch:  Sulla, 372a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b-c;
57c-58d;  bk  xiv,  146b-147a; 151d / Histories, bk ii, 232d233a; bk hi,
255b-c  18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch 13 350a-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xiv
[94-120]
20c-d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 103c-104d; 276b-279c; 439c-440b; 443a-b 27
Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  lix  595b  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i,
27b-28a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 15a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  ii,  79a-80a; part hi, 118a-121b esp 121a-b; 126a; part iv, 168a-b
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 329a-334a,c;
342c345c;  347a-348a;  362a-366d  / Social Contract, bk in, 419c-420a 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 23b; 32b-33a 42 Kant: Judgement, 586a-587a 43
Federalist:  number 6, 41a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 335d-336a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 179d180c; 183d-184d 47 Goethe:
Faust,  prologue  [281-292] 8a; part 1 [4072-4095] 99b-100a 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic\,  316b  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 323a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue i, 645a646c 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
776c777d

[480b]
446  THE  GREAT  IDEAS \c to 3b 2. The idea of progress in the theory of
biological  evolution  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 334b,d 47 Goethe: Faust,
part ii
[8260-8264]
201a;
[8321-8326I 202b-203a
49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, lc-3b passim; 41c-42a; 60b-62a; 63b-64d;
96b-103c  esp 96b-98a, 102d-103c; 176b-178a; 180c-d; 243b-d / Descent of
Man,  294d-295c;  340d341d  53 James: Psychology, 90b-91a; 95b 54 Freud:
Beyond  the  Pleasure Principle, 651 d654c esp 653b, 654a / Civilization
and  Its Discontents, 768d-769a 3. Economic progress 3a. The increase of
opulence:  the division of labor as a factor in progress 5 Aristophanes:
Plutus 629a-642d esp
[489534] 634c-635b
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnestan War, bk i, 350d; 352c-d 7 Plato: Republic,
bk ii, 316c-317a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v, sect 42-50 34a-35d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 154b-155b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xxiii,  191ac  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  352a-353a; 365b366b 39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations,  bk  i,  3a-6d; 30b-c; 31b; 38a; 40b-c; 55b-c; 71a-d;
75c-76a,c;  105a;  bk  11,  142d-151c;  bk hi, 163a-c: bk iv, 190b-191a;
291a-295c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 21c-23b; 498d; 642a-c; 655d-658b
esp  655d-656a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 451d-452a 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 253c / Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Federalist:
number 12, 56b-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 452a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  i  ii,  par 198199 67b-c / Philosophy of History, part ii,
263b-d;  part  iv,  323c-d;  335a-336c;  368c  50  Marx: Capital, 16c-d;
31a-37c  passim,  esp  32a-c,  34c-35a;  157a-180d passim, esp 160c164a,
178c-179a;  218c-219a;  308d-311b;  377c378a  50  Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  421b-c  5b.  The improvement of the status and conditions of
labor:  the  goals of revolution and reform 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i,
ch 4
[i253b3i-39]
447b-c; bk ii, ch 9 [i269a33-b7] 465c: ch 12
[i273b36-i274a22] 470c-d
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  2  553ac;  ch 5-6 554d-555c 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus, 36a-37c / Solon, 68d70c / Agis 648b,d-656d / Tiberius Gracchus
671b,d-681a,c / Caius Gracchus 681b,d689a,c

[481a]
3c  to  4a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiii,  132a-c  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep 1-4 318b-321a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xv, lilac 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  i,  6a^T27b37b  esp  33c;  51a-62a  passim;  bk hi, 165b175b; bk iv,
182a-b;  200a-201a; 251c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 16c-17b; 144a-c;
628c-629a  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 452d-453a,c 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: article iv, SECT 2
[529-535]
16b;  AMENDMENTS,  XIII  18c  43  Mill: Representative Government, 332c;
339d340c;  393c-394d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 172b-d 50 Marx: Capital, 7b;
8c-9c  esp  9c; 110c-146c esp 113c, 115c, 131a-146c; 209c-215a; 231b248d
esp  235a,  236c-238c,  241a-c,  248c-d; 295a-d; 367b-368b; 377c-378d 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 415c416d; 419b,d; 423b-425b; 426b-d;
429b-c;  432b-434d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; bk vi,
235a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  165b-c  54  Freud:
Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788a esp 787d-788b
[fn 3] / New Introductory
Lectures,  883  d  -884c 3c. Man's progressive conquest of the forces of
nature  through  science  and  invention  5  Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[442-506]  44c45a  5  Sophocles:  Antigone [332-375] 134a-b 5 Euripides:
Suppliants [195-218] 260a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[12411296] 77b-78a passim; [1361-1378] 78d-79a
13  Virgil:  Georgics,  1  [121-146]  40b-41a  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,
252a-255a  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk v, lOOc-lOld 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  second  day,  191b-193b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
14b15a;  56b  /  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 1-5 107a-b; aph 81 120b-c; aph
124  133c-d;  aph  129  134d-135d;  bk  ii,  aph 39 169d-170c; aph 49-51
188b-194c  /  New  Atlantis,  210d214d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi
60d-67a,c esp 61b-d, 66d-67a,c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 106a-107a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xviii,  126c-d; bk xxiii, 191a-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  339b-c;  348d-353c;  363b;  365b-366b  39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 5b-6d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 633d-634a,c
43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 452a-b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 170a-172a;
183b184a

[481b]
c  Chapter 71: PROGRESS 447 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 195b-
d;  part  1,  243d-244c;  part ii, 267a-b; part iv, 347d-348a 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[6835-6860]
167b168a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 204a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 86a-c; 170a-c;
180d-188c  esp  181c-184b,  187d-188a;  239c-d; 253a-255a esp 253d-254b;
299b  d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 420d421a: 421d 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  777a-c;  778b-779a;  802a, c / New
Introductory  Lectures,  882d-883a  4.  Progress  in  politics  4a.  The
invention  and improvement of political institutions: the maintenance of
political  order in relation to progress 5 Sophocles: Antigone [332-375]
134a-b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  366d367a  7  Plato:
Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-318a;  bk iv, 344b-d / Laws, bk hi, 663d-666d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 445b-446d esp
[i252b27-i253 a i]
446a-b; bk ii, ch 8
[i268b23-i269a28] 464d-465b; bk
vii, ch 10
[i329a40-b35]
533d-534b / Athenian Constitution 553a-584a,c passim, esp ch 41 571c572a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c; [1105-1160] 75c-76b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [254-296] HOa-110a; bk vi [845-853] 233b-234a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  / Solon 64b, d77a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi, 51b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, a 1, ans 236a-d
23  Machiavelli:  Prince, ch xxvi 36b-37d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
153c-154a;  164a,  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xiii, sect 157158
61c-62b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5,  453a-b  38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 9c-d bk iv, 16a-17a; bk x, 62b-c; bk
xi, 75b-d; bk xiv, 107d; bk xix, 140d-141a; bk xxi, 170a bk xxiv, 201b-c
38   Rousseau:  Inequality,  323a-325b  esp  324d  354d-355b;  356a-b  /
Political  Economy 367a385a,c / Social Contract, bk i, 391b-392a; bk ii,
400c-406a; bk hi, 420a-c; 423a-424a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 617a 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 71d-80b; 202a-d; 218c-219a; 403b-404d 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right, 438d-439a; 450d452a; 456b-458a,c / Judgement, 586b-c
43  Federalist:  number 9 47a-49c: number 14, 60c-d; 62a-d; number 37-38
117d-125a;

[482a]
448  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (4.  Progress in politics. 4a. The invention and
improvement  of  political  institutions:  the  maintenance of political
order  in  relation  to progress.) number 47-51 153c-165a passim; number
52,  165d-167b;  number  63,  193c-194a;  number  65, 200b-c; number 78,
230a-b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  272a;  289c-d;  300d-302c  / Representative
Government,  327a-336c;  350b355b  passim; 370a-380b passim, esp 376a-c;
387c-d / Utilitarianism, 460a-461a; 475c-d 44 Boswell:/o/!/25ow, 172b-d;
204c-205b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  298  99c;
additions,  176 147c-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 203b-206a,c; part
i, 208b-d; 258b-d; part ii, 263b-d; part iv, 318b; 335a-336c; 342a-343a;
346a-c   51   Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  vi,  238c-243d  54  Freud:
Civilization   and   Its   Discontents,  780b781a  4b.  The  progressive
realization of the idea of the state 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  256  79d-80a; par 259-260 82a-83a; par 270 84d89c; par 340-360
110b-114a,c  esp  par  349  110d-112a;  additions,  19-20 119c-120b; 152
141c-d;  164  144c-145a  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  170c-178a;
180c-183c;  203b-206a,c;  part  1,  230a-231b;  part  iv,  315a; 333b-c;
342d-343a  4c.  The  growth  of  political  freedom:  the achievement of
citizenship  and  civil  rights  6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 171c-175b 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  396b397d;  bk  vm,  590a-c  9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12 470b-471d; bk in, ch 15
[i286b8-2i] 484d-485a; bk
iv, ch 13
[i297b i6-28] 498a; bk
v, ch 4
[1304
18-38]  505d-506a / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-41 553a-572a passim, esp
ch 41 571c-572a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[756-853] 231a-234a;
bk  vm  [626-731]  275b-278b 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 9c-d / Romulus, 22c /
Poplicola,  79d-80a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b-52a; bk xi, 106a-d 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect 94 46b-c; ch vm, sect ioo-iii
47c-51a;  ch xiv, sect 162-166 63a-64a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xi,  75b-78a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk hi, 170c-173b; bk iv,
269d-271d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14a-d; 15c; 521a523a,c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 403b-404d 43 Federalist: number 9, 47a-c; number 14,
62b-d; number 26, 92a-94b passim; number 84, 252b-c

[482b]
^bto  5  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267  b,d-268c / Representative Government,
328d-332d  esp  331a;  352a-b;  367b-c;  381b-382c;  394a-396d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part ii, 275b276a; part hi, 288c; 295d-296c; part
iv,  342a-346c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 423d425b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  i, 10a-b Forces operating against social progress:
emotional  opposition  to  change  or  novelty; political conservatism 5
Aristophanes: Birds 542a-563d esp
[9041057]
554a-555d / Ecclesiazusae
[730-876]
623c-625b  7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 344b-d / Laws, bk ii, 654c-655b; bk
iv,  678c-679a;  bk  vii,  717d718d  14  Plutarch:  Agis  648b,d-656d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiv, 151d-152b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ti, q 97, a 2 236d-237b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xiv
[91-126]
74c-75a;  paradise,  xv-xvi 128b132a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vi, 9b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 154b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 47a-51a;
131b-132a; 208b-c; 281a-282a; 318c-319b; 458b-c; 462c-465c; 504c-506a 27
Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act ii, sc hi
[1 19-128] 367b
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 15a-b; 61b; 90b-d / Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph  39-43  109c-110a; aph 90 124d-125a / New Atlantis, 205d-207b 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part ii, 45c-d; part vi, 61a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
294  225b-226b;  325  230b231a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii, sect
157158  61c-62b;  ch  xix, sect 223-224 76c-77a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
hi, 105a-106b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 22a-b; bk xiv, 104c;
bk  xix,  137c-140c  passim  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a-b / Social
Contract,  bk  11,  401c-403a;  404c-405a;  bk  hi,  419c-420a;  bk  iv,
437d-438b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i, 27b-37b esp 27b-28d,
33c-34b;  40b-c; 55b-d; 80c; 96d97b; 109d-110d; bk iv, 201b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 459a-c 43 Declaration of Independence: [15-25] lb 43
Federalist:  number 14, 62a-d; number 37-38 117d-125a passim; number 70,
211d212a 43 Mill: Liberty, 293b-302c passim / Representative Government,
327b,d-332d;  335d-336c;  344a-b;  346c-348c  passim;  350b-355b passim;
357c; 376a-c; 377b-378a; 387c-d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 189d-190b

[483a]
7  6  to 6a Chapter 71: PROGRESS 449 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  274 92a; par 355 112d-113a; additions, 166 145b-c / Philosophy
of  History, intro, 187d-188b; part 1, 209b; 235d-236a; 257a-c; part il,
280b-281b;  part  hi, 302a-d; part iv7^51b353a; 367a-b 47 Goethe: Faust,
part  1  [1972-1979] 46b-47a; part 11 [7963-7964] 194a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{, 228b 229b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 323a 50 Marx: Capital, 6d-7a;
174b-c; 234a-236c; 239b-240b 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 424bc;
426b-428d  passim;  429c-433d  passim,  esp  433c-d  51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vi, 239a-240a; 240b-d; bk viii, 303a-305b; bk ix, 354b-c; bk
x,   403a-c;   epilogue   i,  645a-646c;  647b-c;  666c-669d  53  James:
Psychology,  79b  54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  759c-761c  esp  759c-d /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  7  76c-  7 7c; 780d-781d esp 781c;
783c-791d esp 785c, 791b-d; 799a 802a,c esp 800c-801c / New Introductory
Lectures, 834c; 853a-b 6. Intellectual or cultural progress: its sources
and  impediments  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk hi, ch 10 207b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, a 1, ans 236a-d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part iv, 274c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii,
81d-82b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 271b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third
day,  166c-d;  203c-d  28  Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart, 268a-c: 285b-c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning la- 1 Old esp la-15a, 20b-25c, 29a-32c,
33d-34a,  35b  36c,  38d-39a,  51d-54b  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 38-46
109c-110c;  aph 85 121d-122d; aph 129 134d-135d / New Atlantis, 203d207b
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  45b-46a  32 Milton: Areopagitica,
384a-b  33  Pascal:  Vacuum, 355a-358b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
hi, ch x, sect 6-13 293a-294d passim 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 336a-337a;
337d-348a;  348d-353c;  362a-363a,c  /  Social Contract, bk 1, 393b-c 40
Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  21c-24a,c;  88d-90d;  158d-159c;  601b-d;
627d-630a  passim,  esp  627d-628b;  633c-634a,c  41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  161c-162b;  225a-b;  298a-300c  esp  300a-b; 326b-328a,c; 347a,c;
451c-453a,c;  522b-528a.c  esp  523a-b, 527d528a,c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
222a-c  /  Judgement,  504a-b;  586a-587a  43  Mill: Liberty, 274b-302c;
311d-312a / Repre-

[483b]
sentative  Government,  336c-341d  passim;  346c348c  passim;  387c-d  /
Utilitarianism,  452a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  211b-c;  297b;  307c-d;
380d-381a; 512d-513a 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 33a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 247 78a-b / Philosophy of
History  153a-369a,c  esp  intro,  182b-c, 185a-186a, part 1, 217c-219c,
235d-236a,   248a-c,  251a-b,  253b-c,  part  ii,  277d-278a,  part  hi,
300d-301a,  part  iv,  318a,  346c-348a, 351b-353a, 361a-362b 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part  i [570-573] 16a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 320a-330a,c esp
323a-324b,  327b-330a,c;  596c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196b; bk
xi,  498b-d;  epilogue ii, 695d-696d 54 Freud: Psycho- Analytic Therapy,
125d-126a   /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents.  776d-780b;  781a-d;
801c-802a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 849d 6a. Progress in the arts 5
Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506] 44c45a 6 Herodotus: History, bk
ii,  49d-50a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350b351a 7 Plato:
Critias,  479c-d  /  Statesman,  601b603a  /  Laws,  bk  ii, 654c-655b 8
Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i6-i84b8]
253a-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  1  [98^13-241  500a;  bk  xii, ch 8
[i074b813] 605a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[1098*21-25]
343c-d / Politics, bk ii, ch 8
[i268b35-38]
464d / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch i [i403b i 5-1 404*39] 653b,d-654c / Poetics,
ch  4-5 682c-684a 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 1-4 la2c; par 12
4b-c  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk v [330-337] 65b-c; [925-1160]
73b-76b;  [1241-1457]  77b80a,c 13 Virgil: Georgics, 1 [121-146] 40b-41a
14 Plutarch: Marcellus, 252a-255a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xxii, ch
24,  610a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 46, a 2, rep 4
253a-255a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 85c; part ii, 153d; part iv,
267c-269b  passim  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 81d-82b
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 85 121d122d; aph 129 134d-135d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi,  61a-c  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi,
103b-115b  esp  106a-107a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  224b-225a  38
Rousseau:   Inequality,   336a-337a;  338d-339a;  339d-342c;  346d-347a;
348d-353c;  365b-366b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 190d-191a; bk
v, 308c-309a,c

[484a]
(6.  Intellectual or cultural progress: its sources and impediments. 6a.
Progress in the arts.) 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 18b-24a,c; 158d159a;
171c;  237d-238b;  633c-634a,c  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 291d-292c;
327a328a,c;  451d-452a;  509d-510a,c  42  Kant:  Judgement, 586a-587a 43
Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [214-217] 13b 43 Federalist:
number 43, 139d-140a 44 Boswell -.Johnson, 70d-71b; 195d; 406c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part i, par 69, 30b / Philosophy of History, intro,
182bc;  185a-186a;  part  i, 229b-d; 247c-248d; 251a-b; 253b-c; part ii,
261b;  267b-268b;  276a-d;  part hi, 312c-d; part iv, 323c-d; 335a-336c;
346c-348a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 13c / Descent of Man, 278a-279a;
320a-321a  passim;  329a330a;  349b-d  50  Marx: Capital, 86b-c 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 420d421a; 421d 53 James: Psychology, 727b
54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  777a-c;  778b-779b 6b.
Progress in philosophy and in the sciences 7 Plato: Statesman, 601b-603a
8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i6-i8 4
b8] 253a-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [642s 25-30] 165b-c
/ Generation of Animals, bk v, ch 1
[778^-10] 320d
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io98 a22-25] 343c-d
10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk 11, ch 8, 193bc; bk in, ch 10 207b-d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk 1
[62-79]
ld-2a; [1114-1117] 14d; bk hi
[1-30]
30a-b; bk v
[1-54]
61a-d;
[1448-1457]
79d-80a,c;  bk  vi [1-4 1 ] 80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 6,
181d182a  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xxii, ch 24, 610ac 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, a 1, ans 236a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  11,  153d; 164a,c; part iv, 258c; 267c-269b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and Pantagruel, bk ii, 81d-82b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 271bc; 276b-279c 28
Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 285b-c / On Animal Generation, 336d-337a,c;
433c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2b-c;  14c15a; 18b; 29b-c;
30d-31a;  32a-c;  33b-d;  34b;  51d-53d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 30-31
109a;  aph  70-115  116b-130d  31 Descartes: Rules, iv 5a-7d / Discourse
41a67a, c esp part iv-vi 51b-67a,c 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 355a-358b

[484b]
450  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6b to 6c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 88d-89c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  17  409d-410a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect i, div 5, 453a-b; div 8-9, 454b-455a; sect vii, div
48,  471bc;  sect  x,  div  94,  492d-493a  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
118a-119a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 224b-225a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-342c;  346d347a  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b 337b esp
337a-b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 148a-b; 158d-159d; 601bc: 658b-c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 298a-300a; 326b327d; 452a-b; 509d-510a,c 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, ld-2b [fn 2]; 5a-8b; 248d250a,c / Practical Reason,
299d;  317b-318b;  335b-c;  336d-337a,c;  339b-c / Judgement, 513d-514b;
586a-587a  43  Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [214-217] 13b
43  Federalist:  number 9, 47c-d; number 43, 139d-140a 43 Mill: Liberty,
287c-288a  /  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b  passim;  452a-b  45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry, pref, 7c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 173a; 175b
45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 391 b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions,  136 138c-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 185a186a;
part  i,  217c-219c;  229b-d;  251a-b; 253b-c; part hi, 312c-d; part iv,
323c-d;  335a-b; 343d-344a; 346c-348a; 361a-362b 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
105b;  204a  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 590a 50 Marx: Capital, 170b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xi, 469a-d; bk xiii. 563a-b; epilogue ii,
694d-696d  53 James: Psychology, 37b; 125b-127b passim 54 Freud: Psycho-
Analytic   Therapy   123a-127a,c  passim  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
137b-139a esp 138d-139a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 110a-c I New
Introductory  Lectures,  880d-881c  6c.  The  use  and  criticism of the
intellectual  tradition:  the  sifting of truth from error; the reaction
against the authority of the past 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
353d354b  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  240d-242b / Sophist, 564d569a 8 Aristotle:
Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i6-i8 4
b  8]  253a-d  /  Physics, bk i, ch 2-9 259b-268d / Heavens, bk i, ch 10
[279b4-i2]  370d; bk in, ch 7 [306*6-18] 397b-c; bk iv, ch 1 [307b28-3o8
a8] 399a-b / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 3-10 501c-511d; bk ii, ch i
[993*30b i9] 511b,d-512a;
bk hi 513b,d-522a,c; bk iv, ch 4-8 525a-532d; bk v 533a-547d; bk xi,

[485a]
6c to 6d Chapter 71: PROGRESS 451 ch 1-2 587a-589a; ch 5-6 590a-592b; bk
xii, ch 8
[i074b i-i4]
604d-605a; ch 10
[1075*
25-1076*4]  606a-d; bk xiii-xiv 607a-626d / Soul, bk i, ch 2-5 633a-641d
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk JttrTcH^^
[513*7-11] 36c-d / Parts of Animals, bk
i, ch i
[642*25-301 165bc / Ethics, bk
i, ch 6 341b342c esp [1096*11-16] 341b 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine,
par  12  4b-c / Regimen in Acute Diseases, par 1 26a-d 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk i, ch 14, 178d179a; ch 16 180c-182b esp 181d-182b; bk ii,
ch  8,  192a-b;  ch  9,  198d-199a,c;  bk  hi,  ch 10 207b-d 16 Ptolemy:
Almagest,  bk  i, 6b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres,
508a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 846a-850a / Harmonies of the World,
1009b-1010a  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 13-15 47c-48c / City
of  God,  bk  viii-x  264b,  d322a.c  passim; bk xix, ch 1-5 507a-514b /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40 655 b656a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 22, a 2, ans 128d-130d; q 44, a 2, ans 239b-240a; q 65, a 4,
ans  342b-343c;  q  66, a 1 343d345c; a 2, ans 345d-347b; q 75, a i, ans
and  rep  1-2 378b-379c; q 76, a i, ans 385d-388c; a 3, ans 391a-393a; a
4,  rep 4 393a-394c; q 79, a 4, ans 417a-418c; q 84, a 1, ans 440d-442a;
a  2,  ans  442b-443c;  a 4, ans 444d-446b; a 5, ans 446c-447c; a 6, ans
447c-449a; q 85, a 2, ans 453d455b; q 88, a i, ans 469a-471c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 3 228c-229b; q 97, a i, ans 236a-d;
part ii-ii, q 1, a 7, rep 2 385c-387a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i
[61-87]
lc*- 2a; iv 5c-7a; purgatory, xxi [76]-xxii [129] 85d-87d; xxvi [88-148]
93d-94c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49d; 56b-d; 58d61a passim; 71a-b;
part  ii,  114d-115a;  150c151a;  part  iv.  247a-248a; 267a-274d; 276c;
conclusion,  282b-283a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 65b-66b; 208bc; 259d261c;
271bc;  276b-278a;  524d-525a  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, 2b-d; bk i,
3a7b;  bk  11,  34c-36c;  bk  hi, 60c-61a; bk iv, 77d-78a; 84a-d; bk vi,
107c-110d; 113c115a 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 157b160a 28
Harvey:  Motion  of  the Heart, 267b,d-269a; 274a-b; 279d-280c; 285b-c /
Circulation  of  the  Blood,  306a-c;  319c-d  /  On  Animal Generation,
331a-332a;  336d-337a,c;  364a-365a;  377a-c;  457b;  458a-b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  14b-15d esp 15a-d; 16c; 27d-28c; 29b-c; 32a;
47d-48d;  64a-b  /  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 56 112a; aph 84 121b-d; aph
94-97 126a-d

[485b]
31 Descartes: Discourse 41a-67a,c esp part i, 42b-44c, part 11, 46c-48a,
part   hi,   49d-50b,  part  vi  60d-67a,c  /  Objections  and  Replies,
278a-293a,c  passim  32  Milton:  Areopagilica  381a-412b  esp 384b389a,
398a-b  33 Pascal: Vacuum, 355a-358b 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 526b-529a
35  Locke: Human Understanding, 85ac; bk i, ch in. sect 23-24 119b-120c;
bk  iv,  ch  xvii,  sect  4,  373a-b  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, pref
404a-b;  Intro,  sect 24 411d-412a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 346d-347a 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 335b-337a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
23d-24a,c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 198c-d; 298a-300a; 522d-528a,c
esp  523bc,  526c-527a,  527d528a,c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 220b-221b /
judgement,  513d-514b  43  Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b 44 Boswell: Johnson,
129a  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  3b-d  45 Faraday:
Researches  in Electricity, 332a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
ii,  265c266a;  part  iv,  346c-348a; 361a-362b 48 Melville: Moby Dic/{,
243a   49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  590a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  428b-d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, epilogue ii 675a696d 53
James: Psychology, 125b-126a; 221a-239a; 305a-312a; 627a-635a; 879b-882a
54  Freud:  General Introduction, 550d-551a / New Introductory Lectures,
879c-880b  6d. Plans for the advancement of learning and the improvement
of  method in the arts and sciences 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i,
ch  i 161a-165d esp [642ai4-b4] 165b-d 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine,
par 1-8 la3b / The Law 144a-d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk hi, ch 10,
207d  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 331c-337a,c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning  la-lOld / Novum Organum 105a-195d / New Atlantis 199a-214d
31  Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c  passim,  esp  i-iii,  la-4a, iv 5a-7d /
Discourse  41a-67a,c  esp part 1, 41d-42a, part 11, 45b-47b, 48a-b, part
in,  50b-51a,  part  iv,  52a,  part  v,  54bc, part vi, 61a-d, 62c-63c,
66d-67a,c  / Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 298b, bk ii, 322a, bk hi, 353a
33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430a434a;  442a-443b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch hi, sect 22 319c-320a; ch iv, sect 17
328d; en xii 358c-363b esp sect 14-15 362d-363b

[486a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  4c-4d  Opinion  5b; Science 6a-6b; Sign and Symbol 4c;
Truth 6, 8d.

[486b]
452  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6d to 6e (6. Intellectual or culturalprogress: its
sources and 6e. Freedom of expression and discussion as impediments. 6d.
Plans  for  the  advanceindispensable  to  the  progressive  disment  of
learning  and  the improvement of covery of the truth method in the arts
and  sciences.)  7  pLATO  :  Statesman,  601c-602c  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c
21-25  411b-412a,c;  sect 133-134 439c-440a 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies, 283c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, DIV49 32 Milton:
Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp 384b471c-d 390a, 398a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part hi, 106a-115b 35 Locke: Toleration, 15c / Human Understand39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 331b, ding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 20 319b-c 356d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xi,  div  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
la-4a,c;  5a-13d; 15c-16c; 102 497b-d 19a-22a,c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of Morals, 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 66Sd-671b esp 669b, 253c-d 670bc
45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref, 6d41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 523a For: The general discussion of the philosophy of history, see
Dialectic  2d;  History  4a(2)~4a(3),  4b;  and for the consideration of
fate,  fortune, and freedom in relation to progress, see Chance 2b; Fate
3; History 4a(i); Liberty 4a; Necessity and Contingency 3. The religious
aspects  of  optimism  and  pessimism,  see  God 7h, 8e, of; History 5a;
Prophecy  Discussions  relevant  to  the theme of economic progress, see
Labor  4a,  5a~5d, 7c(2), ^i\ Liberty 6b; Revolution 4a, 5c; Slavery 3c,
5b;  Wealth  9b,  12.  Discussions  relevant  to  the theme of political
progress,  see  Constitution  10; Democracy 4d, 7; Government 6; Liberty
6a-6c;  Monarchy  4e(2); Slavery 5b; State 2a(3); Tyranny 8; and for the
distinction  between  Utopian and practical ideals as goals of Attitudes
toward  change  which have a bearing on progress, see Change 12b; Custom
and  Convention  8;  Time  7.  Evidences  of  progress  in  the arts and
sciences,  and  for  the  comparative  progress  of  different fields of
learning,  see  Art  12;  Knowledge  10; Philosophy 7. The conditions on
which  intellectual  progress  depends,  see  Knowledge  9b; Language 6;
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boo{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter of The Great Ideas. Rousseau. Discourse on the Arts and Sciences
!•  Kant.  The  Idea  of a Universal History on a CosmoSwift. The Battle
ofthe  Books  Political  Plan Hume. Of the Rise and Progress of the Arts
and  .  The  Principle  of Progress Sciences Hegel. The Phenomenology of
Mind, vi, b (ii)

[487a]
J.  S. Mill. "Civilization," in vol i, Dissertations and Discussions II.
Vico.  The  New  Science  ^~^  Voltaire.  Candide  .  "Optimism,"  in  A
Philosophical  Dictionary  Ferguson.  An  Essay  on the History of Civil
Society,  PART III Lessing. Nathan the Wise . The Education of the Human
Race  Herder.  Outlines of a Philosophy of the History of Man Condorcet.
Outlines  of  an  Historical  View  of  the  Progress  of the Human Mind
Malthus.  An  Essay  on  Population,  bk  hi Proudhon. The Philosophy of
Misery  Ren  an.  The  Future  of  Science  Tennyson. Loc\sley Hall . In
Memoriam   Schopenhauer.   Studies  in  Pessimism  Comte.  The  Positive
Philosophy,  bk  vi . System of Positive Polity, vol hi, Social Dynamics
Lotze. Microcosmos, bk viii J. H. Newman. An Essay on the Development of
Christian Doctrine . Callista

[487b]
Chapter  71:  PROGRESS 453 Spencer. Progress: Its Law and Cause Bagehot.
Physics  and Politics S. Butler. Erewhon George. Progress and Poverty T.
H.  Huxley.  Methods  and  Results,  i-ii  Maine.  Ancient Law . Popular
Government,  in Bellamy. Looking Backward Frazer. The Golden Bough, part
i,  ch  3,  5; part 11, ch 7; PART VII Sumner. The Absurd Effort to Make
the  World Over Jensen. The Long journey Sorel. Les illusions du progres
B.  Russell.  Proposed Roads to Freedom, ch 4-8 Spengler. The Decline of
the  West  Bury.  The Idea of Progress Whitehead. Science and the Modern
World,  ch  13 Wells. The World of William Clissold Dawson. Progress and
Religion  MacIver.  Society;  Its  Structure  and  Changes Shaw. Bacf^to
Methuselah  .  Doctors'  Delusions  A.  J.  Toyn bee. A Study of History
Maritain.  Theonas, Conversations of a Sage, vnVIII, x . True Humanism .
Scholasticism and Politics, ch 9 Simon. Community of the Free, ch 3

[488a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  name of prophet signifies, throughout a great part of
the  western  tradition,  an  eminence  and  dignity  not  shared by the
scientist,  the  philosopher,  the  statesman,  or  even  the  sage. The
soothsayer  and  the seer in pagan antiquity and the prophet of the Lord
in Israel do not claim to speak from a merely human wisdom or to declare
truths  they  have  learned  by  inquiry  or  reflection.  Nor are their
utterances  concerned  with  the nature of things. The prophet claims to
know  what  men  cannot  know by any exercise of human powers. He enjoys
special  gifts.  He is divinely inspired. He is instructed by God or has
in  some  way been admitted to the secrets of the gods. His knowledge is
not  only  of  supernatural  origin; it deals with supernatural matters.
Prophecy  is  more than a prediction of the future. It unveils what Fate
holds  in  store for men; it foretells the course of providence. In most
cases,  the future predicted has deep moral significance, expressing the
pleasure  or  displeasure  of  the  gods with individuals or nations, or
manifesting  God's  justice  in  the rewards promised those who keep His
commandments,  and  the  punishments  awaiting those who break them. The
prophet's foresight discerns more than the future; it discovers what men
can  hope for or must fear according to their merits, not in the eyes of
men  but in the sight of God. This understanding of prophecy seems to be
involved in the major issues which the great books raise about prophets.
For  example,  the  problem  of  distinguishing  between  true and false
prophets goes beyond the mere truth or falsity of a prophet's utterances
to  the  validity  of  his  claim  to  special sources of knowledge or a
supernaturally  inspired  understanding of dreams and visions, omens and
portents.  The  false  prophet  is  not  like  the mistaken scientist or
philosopher— just a person in error. He is either a

[488b]
Chapter  77.:  PROPHECY  deceiving impostor or a self-deceived victim of
his  own  pathology.  Similarly, the Christian theologians who criticize
the  pagan cult of oracles and all forms of divination which seek to pry
into  divine  mysteries, seem to imply that the seers and soothsayers of
Greece  and  Rome,  unlike the Hebrew prophets, did not have the gift of
prophecy.  The  acceptance  or  rejection  of  prophets  and  of ways of
foreseeing  what  has  been  planned  in  Heaven  cannot,  it  seems, be
separated  from  a  whole  system of religious beliefs. In this respect,
prophets  are  like miracles. Without faith, both are incredible. "There
be  two  marks,"  writes Hobbes, "by which together, not asunder, a true
Prophet  is  to be known. One is the doing of miracles; the other is the
not teaching any other religion than that which is already established."
In  Hobbes'  view,  that there be a religion already established among a
people  is  the  one  indispensable  condition  for  their  reception of
prophets  or  their  experience  of miracles. Issues concerning prophecy
may,  therefore,  occur  within  a  single  religious  community,  or be
relative  to differences between religious communities, as, for example,
the  opposition  between  the Jewish and Christian interpretation of the
messianic  prophecies  in the Old Testament. Necessarily, then, there is
an  issue  between the unbelievers and the religious of any faith. Those
who  deny  the  existence  of  God  or the gods, or divine agency in the
temporal affairs of men, and certainly those who deny the credentials of
revelation,  cannot  but  regard  prophets  as misled and misleading and
those  who  accept  prophecy  as gullible or superstitious. In the pagan
tradition,  a  philosopher  like  Aristotle may, however, be critical of
divination,  and an historian like Thucydides may cast doubt on oracles,
without discredit454

[489a]
ing  all  other religious beliefs or being themselves atheists. Some who
reject  religious  prophecy  do not concede that man's natural desire to
peeTTnto   the  future  need  be  completely  balked.  But  the  secular
substitutes  for  religious  prophecy  appear  to  alter  the meaning of
prophecy.  Scientific  predictions of the future of the world or of life
on  this  planet  (as, for example, those which occur in the writings of
Lucretius  or  Darwin)  may  be  accompanied  by  attributions  of moral
qualities   to   Nature,  but  usually  they  connote  Nature's  sublime
indifference  to  man's  welfare.  They  are  seldom,  if  ever, read as
promises  or threats of what man deserves to have befall him. Similarly,
historians  turned  prophets,  or  philosophers  of  history  who,  like
Spengler,  prophesy  decline  and  doom,  do  not  exhort  men  to avert
disaster,  as  do  the  prophets of the Old Testament. Nor do those who,
like  Hegel  and  Marx,  foresee  the  ultimate goal toward which events
inevitably  march,  urge  men  to  prepare  themselves  for it as do the
prophecies  of  the  New  Testament, which speak of the second coming of
Christ.  Secular  prophecies  which  bespeak the inevitable operation of
necessary causes are, in this respect, like pagan previsions of Fate. At
most,  they  leave  man  only  the  illusion  of free choice. Jewish and
Christian  prophecy,  in contrast, addresses man as a responsible agent,
who,  even  when  he knows something of God's will, remains free to will
good  or  evil  for  himself.  If,  according to the theologians, divine
providence  or  predestination  does  not abolish human freedom, neither
does prophetic knowledge of the divine plan. These matters are discussed
elsewhere—secular  prophecy in the chapters on History and Progress, and
the  problem  of  foreknowledge  and freedom in the chapters on Fate and
Necessity and Contingency. In pagan antiquity, prophecy does not seem to
be confined to men especially appointed by the gods. The gods themselves
foretell the future to men. When people wish to know the future, they go
or  send  emissaries  to  the temple at Delphi over which a goddess, the
Pythoness,  presides. The institution of the oracles, of which Delphi is
perhaps the most illustrious

[489b]
Chapter  72:  PROPHECY 455 example, leaves foresight in the hands of the
gods;  for,  as  most of the anecdotes in Herodotus and Thucydides show,
only  the  Pythoness  herself  knows  unequivocally  the  meaning of her
oracular  utterances.  To  men is left the task of interpreting what the
oracle  means.  The pagan unlike the Hebrew prophet seems to be a man of
skill in penetrating the secrets of the gods—a skill which may itself be
divinely  bestowed—  but  he  is  not a man to whom the gods have spoken
plainly,  so that he may in turn unerringly advise others. "No man, when
in   his  wits,"  according  to  Plato,  "attains  prophetic  truth  and
inspiration." There are passages in the Greek poets and historians which
seem  to  suggest  that  the gods begrudge men too clear a vision of the
future, and may even on occasion mislead them or at least permit them to
be misled. In Aeschvlus' play, Prometheus declares that "because he gave
to  men  gifts  claimed  by the gods," he is "bound in durance here." He
gave  them  radiant  fire,  the  mechanical  arts; he "took from men the
expectancy  of Death"; he gave them medicines and healing drugs. Last in
his own enumeration and in a sense most significant, he endowed men with
the  divine  gift  of  foresight.  "I  drew clear lines for divination,"
Prometheus  says, "and discerned (before all others) what from dreams is
sure   to  come  to  pass  in  waking.  I  disclosed  the  mysteries  of
omenbringing  words,  and  pathway  tokens, and made plain the flight of
taloned birds, both of good augury and adverse ... I cleared the way for
mortals  to  an art hard of discernment, and made bright and clear fire-
auguries,  heretofore  obscure  and blind." The chorus questions whether
"the  power  of creatures creeping for an hour" shall by wisdom overpass
the  bounds  set  for their little lives by "the mind of Zeus." Does the
wisdom of foreknowledge, gained through the arts of divination, give men
strength  to  resist  the  will of the gods or to struggle against them?
Prometheus  himself  is  the answer to the question. The power he wields
over  Zeus, which Zeus tries to wrest from him by bribes and threats and
by the infliction of titanic pain, is the foreknowledge which Prometheus
possesses  of  the  doom  to befall the son of Kronos. No threat of Zeus
will get him to divulge it,

[490a]
456 THE GREAT IDEAS Prometheus says, because "nought can surprise me who
foreknow  .  .  .  Nought in his power shall bend me to reveal whom Fate
prepares  to  work  his overthrow." A myth which Socrates relates in the
Gorgias  appears to contain a sequel to the legend as told by Aeschylus.
It  also seems to confirm the point that foresight is a divine privilege
in  which men should not share, lest they become too god-like. According
to  the  myth,  Zeus,  in  order  to prevent men from evading the divine
judgment,  says:  "In  the  first  place,  I  will  deprive  men  of the
foreknowledge  of  death;  this  power  which  they have, Prometheus has
already  received  my  orders to take from them." The oracles never make
the  future so plain that men can act with a foreknowledge equal to that
possessed  by  the  gods,  but  sometimes oracular utterances seem to be
contrived  not  merely  to  veil  the  future,  but  to lead men astray.
Herodotus  tells  the  story  of Miltiades who, on the advice of Timo, a
priestess  of  the  goddesses  of  the  underworld, acted in a way which
brought  him  to  grief.  When the Parians sent to Delphi to ask whether
Timo  should  be  punished for this, the Pythoness forbade them, saying,
"Timo  was  not at fault; 'twas decreed that Miltiades should come to an
unhappy  end; and she was sent to lure him to his destruction." There is
also  the story, told by Thucydides, of Cyclon who, inquiring at Delphi,
was told to seize the Acropolis of Athens on the grand festival of Zeus.
This, too, turned into a disastrous misadventure, apparently because, as
Thucydides  observes,  "whether the grand festival that was meant was in
Attica  or  elsewhere  was a question he never thought of, and which the
oracle  did  not  offer  to  solve."  For  the  most  part, however, the
calamities which befall men who seek guidance from the oracle seem to be
due  to  their  own misinterpretation of the Delphic deliverance, itself
always  admittedly  difficult  to  understand.  Herodotus and Thucydides
abound  with  such  stories,  and  also with instances in which the same
oracular  statement  is  given conflicting interpretations, one of which
must  be  wrong.  Nevertheless, Herodotus declares himself unwilling "to
say  that  there  is  no  truth  in prophecies," and he is certainly not
willing to question "those which speak with clearness." Giv-

[490b]
ing an example of a clear prediction, he adds, "When I look to this, and
perceive  how  clearly  Bacis  spoke,  I  neither  venture myself to say
anything against prophecies, nor do I approve of others impugning them."
Thucydides  appears  to take a contrary view. He singles out one example
as  "an  instance  of  faith  in oracles being for once justified by the
event."  He  puts  into  the  speech  of  the  Athenians  at  the Melian
Conference  the warning not to "be like the vulgar, who, abandoning such
security  as  human means may still afford, when visible hopes fail them
in  extremity,  turn  to invisible, to prophecies and oracles, and other
such  inventions  that  delude men with hopes to their destruction." The
problem  of the reliability of prophecies, and of the faith or credulity
of  those  who  rely upon them, applies not only to oracles, but also to
dreams  or  visions, and to omens and portents of all sorts. Two stories
about  Croesus,  told  by Herodotus, show that oracles and dreams can be
equally  ambiguous  and are equally liable to misinterpretation. Croesus
dreamed  that  his  son  Atys  would  die by the blow of an iron weapon.
Subsequently  when  Atys  wished  to  go  boar hunting with Adrastus, he
persuaded  Croesus  that the dream could not have been a warning against
this  undertaking because a boar does not have hands to strike with, nor
does  it  wield iron weapons. But during the hunt Atys was killed by the
spear which Adrastus intended for the boar. On another occasion, Croesus
inquired  of  Delphi  how  long  his  kingdom  would last. The Pythoness
answered,  in  effect, until "a mule is monarch in Media." This not only
pleased him because "it seemed incredible to him that a mule should ever
become  king of the Medes," but also gave him confidence when he engaged
in  war  with the Medes and Persians, led by Cyrus. The war ended in his
defeat  and  capture  but,  according  to  Herodotus, he had no right to
complain  of  the  oracle because "he had misunderstood the answer which
had  been given him about the mule. Cyrus was that mule; for the parents
of  Cyrus  were of different races and of different kinds"— his mother a
Median  princess,  his  father  a  Persian  subject. The attitude of the
ancients toward these

[491a]
various  instruments  of  prophecy  or  divination  does  not seem to be
consistent  or  constant.  Herodotus  reports  at  one place how Xerxes,
"despising the omens," carried out Ijis-plans against their forebodings;
and  at another how an eclipse of the moon, being interpreted as of good
omen,  rejoiced  Xerxes who, "thus instructed, proceeded on his way with
great  gladness  of  heart." And again, when Xerxes reports to Artabanus
the  advice—concerning his war against the Greeks—which he received from
a dream apparition, Artabanus scoffs, saying, "Such things, my son, have
of  truth  nothing divine in them . . . Whatever a man has been thinking
of  during  the  day,  is  wont to hover round him in the visions of his
dreams  at  night."  But  when  Artabanus  himself  experiences the same
apparition which had occurred to Xerxes in his dream and, in addition to
giving  the same advice, the vision threatens him, Artabanus changes his
mind  about dreams and reverses his policy with regard to the expedition
against Greece. "As to the divination which takes place in sleep, and is
said to be based on dreams," Aristotle writes, "we cannot lightly either
dismiss  it with contempt or give it implicit confidence." Nevertheless,
he  himself  seems  to conclude that most so-called prophetic dreams are
"to  be  classed as mere coincidences"; and that "dreams are not sent by
God,  nor  are  they  designed  for this purpose," i.e., foretelling the
future.  One proof that they are not sent by God is, in his opinion, the
fact  that  the  persons  having  them  "are not the best and wisest but
merely  commonplace persons." The fact that "the power of foreseeing the
future  and  of having vivid dreams is found in persons of inferior type
implies  that  God  does  not  send  them."  The  Christian theologians,
distinguishing  between prophecy and divination, condemn the latter as a
kind  of  presumption  or  impiety.  Though  their criticism seems to be
directed  especially against astrology, it applies to the interpretation
of  terrestrial  as  well  as  celestial signs. Augustine refers to "the
lying  divinations  and impious dotages of the astrologers," and Aquinas
explains  how  the  astrologers are able to foretell things in a general
way without

[491b]
Chapter  72: PROPHECY 457 attributing to them any genuinely prophetic In
his  consideration  of  the  difference between true and false religion,
Hobbes  goes further than the theologians in condemning "the innumerable
other  superstitious  ways  of  divination,"  such  as "the ambiguous or
senseless  answers  of  the  priests  at Delphi, Delos, Ammon, and other
famous oracles," or "the prediction of witches that pretended conference
with  the  dead,  which is called necromancy, conjuring, and witchcraft,
and  is  but  juggling  and  confederate  knavery,"  or, in general, the
recourse to omens, portents, and dreams for purposes of prognostication.
That  the  things  Hobbes  calls superstitious are not confined to pagan
antiquity  is  manifest  in  Shakespeare's  Macbeth. The witches and the
omens  there are like the soothsayers and the portents in Julius Caesar;
and   Macbeth's  misunderstanding  of  "  'til  Birnam  Forest  come  to
Dunsinane"  is as fatal as Croesus' reliance on "until a mule is monarch
in  Media."  In  one other respect, pagan and Christian cultures seem to
exhibit  a certain parallelism with regard to the belief in supernatural
foreknowledge.  The  spirits  of  the  departed,  in the Odyssey and the
Aeneid,  are  able  to  inform  the  visitor to the underworld of coming
events  on  earth.  They  speak plainly and with perfect prescience. The
veil  which  hides the future from mortal eyes has been lifted. So, too,
the  damned  souls  and  the blessed foretell future things to Dante, no
less  accurately  though  less  extensively  than, in Paradise Lost, the
archangel  Michael  unfolds to Adam the whole future history of mankind.
But  so  far as the foreknowledge of mortal men is concerned, the Hebrew
prophets  seem  to be unique. Unlike pagan diviners or soothsayers, they
do  not  probe  the  future in order to help men anticipate the turns of
fortune or the lines of fate. They do not have to employ arts or devices
for penetrating divine secrets. God speaks to them directly and, through
them,  to the Chosen People. For the most part their prophetic speeches,
unlike  those  of  the  oracles,  seem  to  be unambiguous. At least the
intention  seems  to  be  to  reveal, not to conceal, God's plan on such
matters as He Himself wishes men to foresee the course of providence.

[492a]
458 THE GREAT IDEAS Where pagan prognosticators may claim to be divinely
inspired  in  the  sense of having special powers of interpretation, the
Hebrew prophets speak from a different kind of supernatural inspiration.
They  are  the  vessels  through which the Lord Himself speaks. They are
interpreters  only  in  that they make known to others what God has made
known  to  them.  The  content  of  the  divine  communication is seldom
exclusively  a  foretelling  of  the  future. It is often accompanied by
instruction  concerning  the  actions  to  be  performed  by  the Jewish
people—the  direction  of  their conduct toward the Promised Land or the
rebuilding  of  the  Temple.  Sometimes when the prophecy is one of doom
rather than of hope, as in the case of the destruction of Jerusalem, the
Babylonian captivity, or the dispersion of Israel, the prediction of the
future  is accompanied by moral instruction of another sort— the lessons
of   the  Law  which  the  Jews  have  forsaken,  meriting  thereby  the
punishments  the prophets foresee. Mere prognostication does not seem to
be  the chief purpose of Hebrew prophecy- Just as the Covenant which God
makes  with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob consecrates the Jewish people to a
special mission; just as the Law which God hands down through Moses sets
them  apart  from  the  Gentiles  and  prescribes  for  them  the way of
righteousness  and  sanctity;  so  the  revelations  of God's providence
through  the prophets tend to remind the Chosen People of the meaning of
the  Covenant  and  the  Law  as  well as to disclose their destiny as a
nation.  The  prophets  speak not only of the future, but of the present
and  the  past.  They  are divinely appointed teachers, no less than the
patriarchs  and  Moses.  Yet they may rank below Moses (who is sometimes
also  regarded  as  a prophet) by reason of the manner in which they are
addressed  by  God.  As Hobbes points out, "God himself in express words
declareth  that to other prophets he spake in dreams and visions, but to
his  servant Moses, in such manner as a man speaketh to his friend"—face
to  face.  The  content  of  Hebrew  prophecy,  in  short,  seems  to be
continuous  with  the  rest of God's revelation of Himself to His Chosen
People.  The difference between the prophets as the instruments of God's
teaching and the pagan philosophers as merely human teachers seems to

[492b]
Augustine  plainly  shown  by  the  agreement  of  the prophets with one
another  and  by their continuity with Moses and the patriarchs; whereas
Augustine  can  find  nothing but disagreement and dissension among even
the  best teachers of the pagans. Among them, false teachers or prophets
seem  to  be  accorded  the  same  recognition  and  to attract the same
following  as  true.  "But that nation," Augustine writes, "that people,
that  city,  that republic, these Israelites, to whom the oracles of God
were  entrusted,  by  no  means  confounded  with  similar license false
prophets  with  the true prophets; but, agreeing together, and differing
in  nothing,  acknowledged  and  upheld  the  authentic authors of their
sacred  books.  These  were  their philosophers, these were their sages,
divines,  prophets,  and teachers of probity and piety. Whoever was wise
and  lived  according  to them was wise and lived, not according to men,
but according to God who hath spoken to them." Hobbes also conceives the
prophets  of  the  Old Testament as more than foretellers of the future.
"The  name  of  prophet,"  he  writes, "signifies in Scripture sometimes
prolocutor;  that  is,  he that speaketh from God to man, or from man to
God  ;  and  sometimes predictor, or a foreteller of things to come." In
addition  to  their  being  divinely  appointed  teachers, the prophets,
according  to  Hobbes,  seem to perform a political function. They check
the  power  of  the  kings,  or  seek to awaken their consciences to the
dictates  of justice and mercy. "Through the whole history of the kings,
as  well  of  Judah  as  of  Israel,  there  were  prophets  that always
controlled  the kings for transgressing the religion; and sometimes also
for  errors  of  state."  A secular view of the Hebrew prophets seems to
give  prominence  to their political role in the theocratic community of
the  Jews.  Comparing  the Jewish state with other sacerdotal societies,
Mill observes that "neither their kings nor their priests ever obtained,
as  in those other countries, the exclusive moulding of their character.
Their  religion  .  .  .  gave  existence  to  an  inestimably  precious
unorganized  institution—  the  Order  (if  it  may be so termed) of the
Prophets.  Under  the protection, generally though not always effectual,
of  their  sacred  character,  the  Prophets were a power in the nation,
often

[493a]
more  than  a  match  for kings and priests, and kept up, in that little
corner of the earth, the security for continued progress." ^^ antagonism
of  influences  which  is  the only real As there is a body of prophetic
doctrine in the Old Testament, so the religion of the Gospels contains a
number  of  prophetic  beliefs peculiar to Christian doctrine. Such, for
example, is the prophecy of the second coming of Christ, the prophecy of
the  Last  Judgment  on  that  occasion,  and  the  prophecy  of a final
conflagration  to cleanse the world, which will precede the resurrection
of  the  body  as  that  in turn precedes the general judgment of souls.
Aquinas discusses the various signs which will foretell the imminence of
these events. He also raises the question whether the time of the end of
the  world  and  of  the  resurrection  can be known exactly. On this he
agrees  with Augustine that "that time is hidden from men." It cannot be
calculated  by  natural  reason,  nor  is  it revealed. "Of that day and
hour,"  it is written in Matthew, "no one knoweth, no, not the angels of
heaven."  When  the  apostles  asked  Christ about His second coming, He
answered,  according to Saint Paul, "It is not for you to know the times
or  moments  which  the  Father  hath put in His own power." What Christ
refused  to  tell  the  apostles,  Aquinas  adds, "He will not reveal to
others. Wherefore all those who have been misled to reckon the aforesaid
time  have  so far proved to be untruthful; for some, as Augustine says,
stated  from  our  Lord's  ascension  to His last coming 400 years would
elapse, others 500, others 1 ,000. The falseness of these calculators is
evident,  as  will likewise be the falseness of those who even now cease
not  to  calculate." The single greatest prophecy in the JudaeoChristian
tradition  is,  perhaps,  the  messianic  prophecy— the foretelling of a
Messiah  or  of a messianic age. The prediction of a Messiah or Saviour,
who  shall  be born of the house of David and shall be king of the Jews,
runs  throughout  the  prophetic books of the Old Testament, though with
different  degrees  of  explicitness  and  varying imagery in Daniel and
Jeremiah,  in  Isaiah  and  Ezekiel.  "The Lord himself shall give you a
sign," says Isaiah. "Behold a virgin shall conceive and

[493b]
Chapter  72:  PROPHECY  459 bear a son, and shall call his name Immanuel
For  unto  us  a child is born, unto us a son is given," Isaiah goes on,
"and  the  government  shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be
called  Wonderful,  Counsellor,  The mighty God, The Everlasting Father,
The  Prince of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace, there
shall be no end, upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to order
it  and to establish it with justice from henceforth even for ever." And
Jeremiah tells his people, "Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I
will  raise  unto  David  a  righteous Branch and a King shall reign and
prosper  and  shall  execute  judgment  and justice in the earth. In his
days,  Judah  shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely." Two of the
great  issues  between  the  Jewish  and  Christian faiths concern these
messianic  prophecies  in  the  Old  Testament. One arises from opposite
interpretations  of  the  event  predicted—a  messianic age in which the
kingdom   of  the  Jews  will  be  established  on  earth  in  perpetual
righteousness  and  glory, or the coming to earth of God's only begotten
son,  incarnate  in  human  form,  for the salvation of all mankind. The
other   arises  from  opposite  answers  to  the  question  whether  the
prediction—on  either  interpretation—  has  been  fulfilled.  It is, of
course,  the  Christian  view  that  the prophets foretold the coming of
Christ  and  that their prophecy has been fulfilled. But more than that,
Christian  apologists  and  theologians  seem to make the fulfillment of
Hebrew  prophecies,  interpreted  as  foreshadowing  the  truths  of the
Christian  religion,  a  source  of  verification  for these truths. The
difference  between  Jesus  Christ  and Mahomet, according to Pascal, is
that  "Mahomet  was  not foretold; Jesus Christ was foretold. I see many
contradictory  religions,  and  consequently  all  false  save  one," he
writes.  "Each  wants to be believed on its own authority, and threatens
unbelievers.  I  do  not  therefore believe them. Everyone can say this;
everyone  can  call  himself a prophet. But I see the Christian religion
wherein  prophecies are fulfilled; and that is what everyone cannot do."
And  in  another  place  Pascal  declares  that  "the prophecies are the
strongest proof of Jesus Christ. ... If one man alone had made a book of
predictions about Jesus Christ, as to the time

[494a]
460  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  future  political  reformers  2. The vocation of
prophecy:   the   possession  of  foreknowledge  2a.  The  foreknowledge
possessed  by  the  spirits  in the afterworld Christ as prophet 4#. The
Covenant and the Promised Land Israel and the rebuilding of the Temple

[494b]
and manner, and Jesus Christ had come in conwho understood not, all that
has  transpired  formity  to these prophecies, this fact would since the
advent  of  Christ until now, and all have infinite weight. But there is
much  more  that  will transpire." Not only the explicit here. Here is a
succession of men during four "prophecies which are contained in words,"
thousand  years,  who,  consequently  and  withbut  all  the rituals and
ceremonies,  the  offices  out  variation,  come,  one after another, to
foreand  institutions,  of  the  Jewish  religion  prefigtell  this same
event."  ure  Christianity, signifying and fore-announcCenturies earlier
Augustine  writes in a similar ing "those things which we who believe in
vein.  The Hebrew people as a whole are chosen Jesus Christ unto eternal
life  believe  to  have  to perform this prophetic function— to forebeen
fulfilled,  or  behold in process of fulfilltell, "sometimes through men
who  understood  ment,  or confidently believe shall yet be fulwhat they
spake,  and sometimes through men filled." OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE i. The
nature  and  power of prophecy 461 1 a. Prophecy as the reading of fate,
the  foretelling  of  fortune,  the  beholding  of  the 1 £. Prophecy as
supernaturally  inspired foresight into the course of providence 462 \c.
Prophecy as the instrument of providence: prophets as moral teachers and
id.  The  religious  significance of the fulfillment of prophecy 463 ib.
The  political  office of prophecy: priests, soothsayers, oracles 464 3.
The  varieties  of  prophecy  and  the instruments of divination 465 3^.
Omens   and   portents:   celestial  and  terrestrial  signs;  signs  as
confirmations  of  prophecy  y.  Dreams,  visions,  visitations  466 3d.
Prophecy  by the direct word of God 467 4. Particular prophecies of hope
and  doom  468  4b.  The  destruction of Jerusalem and the dispersion of
Israel:  the  restoration of and the millenium 469 ecy; the condemnation
of astrology and divination as impiety or superstition

[495a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page.For example, in 53 James: Psychology, 116a-119b, the
passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower half
of  page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a and
b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-hand side
of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage
begins  in  the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and ends in
the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions:
One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect)
are  sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in brackets, are
given  in  certain  cases;  e.g.,  Iliad,  bk  ii  [265-283]  12d. Bible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult the Preface. 1. The nature and power of prophecy la. Prophecy as
the  reading  of  fate, the foretelling of fortune, the beholding of the
future 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xvi
[843-861]
121c; bk xviii [94—137] 131a-c; bk xxii [355-366] 159a / Odyssey, bk x
[487-540]
241a-c; bk xi
[90-137]
244a-c; bk xiv
[321-336]
263b-c; bk xix [291-307] 292b 5 Aeschylus : Persians
[739-842]
23a-24b / Seven Against Thebes
[1-38]
27a-c / Prometheus Bound
[88-114]
41a-b;
[907-940] 49d50a / Agamemnon [104-159] 53a-d; [248-254]
54d;  [1072-1342]  63c-66b  5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [300-512]
102a103d  / Oedipus at Colonus [1348-1555] 126c128b / Antigone [988-1 11
4] 139c-140c / Ajax
[745-783] 149c-d / Trachiniae [155-177] 171c;
[821-830] 177b
/ Philoctetes
[604-619]
187c;
[1326-1347] 194a; [1408-1444] 194d-195a,c
5 Euripides: Trojan Women
[308-461]
272d274a / Electra
[1233-1359]
338b-339a,c / Phoenician Maidens
[834-1018] 385c-387b
/  Iphigenia Among the Tauri [1234-1283] 422b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i,  12b-d;  bk  ii,  77a-b; bk vi, 189a-b; 190c-d; 199d-201a; 201d-202c;
204b-c; bk vii, 223b-c; 227a;

[495b]
Chapter  72:  PROPHECY  461  239c-240d; 248b-c; 255c-d; bk viii, 263b-c;
268b-d;  270c-271a;  273b c; 276d-277a; bk ix, 308a-c 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
123b-d  /  Symposium,  153a-b; 156d-157a / Apology, 210d-211a / Gorgias,
292 b-d / Timaeus, 466d-467c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 15
[i375b35~
i376a2]  620c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 17, 123b124a 13 Virgil:
Eclogues, iv 14a-15b / Aeneid, bk i
[223-304] 109a-110a; bk viii [608-731] 275a278b
14 Plutarch: Romulus, 20b-c / Numa Pompilius, 52b-c / Poplicola, 82a-b /
Pericles,  123c124a  /  Fabius, 141d-142a / Marcellus, 259c260c / Sulla,
371d-372c / Lucullus, 404d-405a / Caesar, 601c-602a / Tiberius Gracchus,
679a-680b / Demosthenes, 698b-699a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch
22 525b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 183b-d 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth,
act i, sc hi 285b287b; act iv, sc 1 300b-302b; act v, sc viii
[9-22] 310a-b / Cymbeline, act v, sc v [426475] 488b-d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 56b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
i, 217b-c

[496a]
(1.  The nature andpower ofprophecy, la. Prophecy as the reading offate,
the  foretelling  of  fortune,  the beholding of the future.} 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[8094-8133]
197a198a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  364b-365a;  415a418a 54 Freud: New
Introductory Lectures, 822b-825c lb. Prophecy as supernaturally inspired
foresight into the course of providence Old Testament: Exodus, 4:10-17 /
Numbers, 11:16-17,24-30; 12:1-9; 22:35-23:26 passim / Deuteronomy, 18:18
/  /  Samuel,  10:1-13;  28:15-20—  (D)  I Kings, 10:1-13; 28:15-20 / //
Samuel,  7:4-16—  (D)  II  Kings,  7:4-16 / / Kings, 13:1-2,32; 14:1-16;
16:1-4; 17:13-16; 19:15-18; 20:13-14,22,28,35-42; 21:17-24,2829— (D) III
Kings,     13:1-2,32;     14:1-16;     16:14;     17:13-16;    19:15-18;
20:13-14,22,28,35-42;  21:17-24,28-29  /  II  Kings,  1-2;  7:1-2,17-20;
8:1,7-15; 9:30-10:17; 19:1-7,20-21,28-33,37; 20:1-6,14-19; 22:14-20— (D)
IV  Kings,  12; 7:1-2,17-20; 8:1,7-15; 9:30-10:17; 19:17,20-21,28-33,37;
20:1-6,14-19;  22:14-20  /  /  Chronicles, 17:7-15— (D) I Paralipomenon,
17:7-15  /  // Chronicles, 15:1-8; 18:4-16,31-34; 20:14-16,37; 21:12-20;
34:22-28;   36:15-23—   (D)  //  Paralipomenon,  15:1-8;  18:4-16,31-34;
20:14-16,37;  21:12-20; 34:22-28; 36:15-23 / Isaiah passim, esp 46:9-10—
(D)  Isaias  passim,  esp  46:9-10 /Jeremiah passim, esp 1, 7:25-26— (D)
Jeremias  passim,  esp  1, 7:25-26 / Ezekjel, 1-39 passim— (D) Ezechiel,
1-39 passim / Daniel, 2 esp 2:36-45; 4:4-8,24-37; 5:25-31; 7-8; 9:20-27;
11-12—  (D)  Daniel,  2  esp 2:3645; 4:1-4,21-34; 5:25-31; 7-8; 9:20-27;
11-12  /  Rosea  passim—  (D)  Osee passim /Joel, 2-3 esp 2 ^8-29 / Amos
passim,  esp  3 7-8 / Jonah, 3— (D) Jonas, 3 / Micah passim— (D) Micheas
passim / Nahum passim / Habahfoi\ passim— (D) Habacuc passim / Zephaniah
passim—  (D)  Sophonias  passim  /  Haggai, 2— (D) Aggeus, 2 / Zechariah
passim,  esp  8:9—  (D)  Zacharias  passim, esp 8:9/ Malachi passim— (D)
Malachias  passim  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  42:19; 48:22-25— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 42:18-19; 48:25-28 New Testament: Matthew, 2:3-6; 3:1-3;
10:1820 / Mar\, 1:7-8; 6:1-4 / Luke, 1:67-79; 2:25-26; 4:22-24; 16:14-16
I   John,  1:6-8,1527;  8:51-53  /  Acts,  2:17-18;  3:20-24;  19:1-7  /
Ephesians, 2:19-22; 3:3-6 / II Peter, 1:19-21 7 Plato: Timaeus, 467b-c 8
Aristotle: Prophesying, ch i
[462b20-26]
707a-b;   ch   2  [463^1-23]  708a-b;  [464*19-23]  708d  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk xi, par 25 95a / City of God, bk vii, ch 30, 261b; bk x,
ch 25 313c-314c; bk xi, ch 4 324a-d; bk xix, ch 22 525b-c

[496b]
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 11, ans 59d-60d; a 13, ans
61c-62b;  q  57, a 3, rep 1 297b-298a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  7,  a  8, ans and rep 2 750d-751d; q 26, a i, rep 1 845b-846a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xv [1-99] 21a22a; purgatory, xxii
[55-93]
87a-c; xxiv
[76-93] 90c; xxxin
[22-90] 104b-105a; paradise,
ix 118c-120a esp
[61-63] H9b; xvn
132a-133c; xxvn
[10-66]
147b-148a;
[121148] 148c-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  53d;  part ii, 149c-d; part in, 173c;
176d-177b; 183d-186b passim 32 Milton: Christs Nativity
[1-7]
la / Paradise Lost, bk in [183-193] 139b; bk xi-xii 299a333a esp bk xi
[656-775] 313b-316a,
[802834]
316b-317b, bk xii
[235-248]
324b,
[315-330] 326a-b
35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect x, div 101 497a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall, 189b-c Ic. Prophecy as the instrument of providence: prophets
as moral teachers and political reformers Old Testament: Exodus, 3:6-15;
4:10-17;  6:13,28-30; 7-12 passim; 24; 31:18; 34:1-4 / Numbers, 11:11-17
/  Deuteronomy,  4:14-29;  7-1 1 passim; 18:15-19; 28-30 /Joshua, 3:7-8;
4:14;  23-2 4-(D) Josue, 3:7-8; 4:14; 23-24 / Judges, 6:7-10 / / Samuel,
2:27-36;  8:1018,22;  10:1-8;  12:6-25;  13:11-14;  15:1  — (D) I Kings,
2:27-36;  8:10-18,22;  10:1-8;  12:6-25;  13:11-14;  15:1  /  // Samuel,
7:4-17;  12:1-14;  24:10-14— (D) // Kings, 7:4-17; 12:1-14; 24:10-14 / /
Kings,  14:5-16;  17-19;  20:1314,22,35-42;  21:17-24;  22:1-23— (D) III
Kings,  14:5-16; 17-19; 20:13-14,22,35-43; 21:17-24; 22:1-23 / // Kings,
1-2;  3:14-20;  5:1-19;  9:1-10; 17:9-14,23; 19:1-7,20-37; 20; 21:10-15;
22:14-20;   24:1-4—   (D)   IV  Kings,  1-2;  3:14-20;  5:1-19;  9:1-10;
17:9-14,23; 19:1-7,20-37; 20; 21:10-15; 22:14-20; 24:1-4 / / Chronicles,
17:3-15;  21 :9~i3, 18-19— (D) / Paralipomenon, 17:3-15; 21:9-13,18-19 /
//  Chronicles,  11:2-4;  15:1-8;  16:7-10;  18:422;  19:2-3;  20:14-16;
21:12-15;   25:5-10,1416;   28:8-15;   34   :22-33;   36:14-16—  (D)  II
Paralipomenon,  11:2-4;  15:1-8;  16:7-10;  18:4-22;  19:2-3;  20:14-16;
21:12-15;  25:5-10,14-16;  28:8-15;  34:22-33; 36:14-16 / Ezra, 9:10II —
(D)  I  Esdras,  9:10-11 / Nehemiah, 9:30 — (D) II Esdras, 9:30 / Isaiah
passim,  esp 1:10-23, 2:10-22, 5:8-13, 5:20-25, 6:1-13, 10:1-2, 28:1-29,
30:1, 30:8-14, 32:1-33:24, 37:1-7, 37:21-38, 38:4-8, 49:1-12, 56:159:21,
61:1-3,  65:1-25—  (D)  Isaias  passim,  esp  1:10-23,  2:10-22, 5:8-13,
5:20-25, 6:1-13, 10:1-2, 28:1-29, 30:1, 30:8-14, 32:1-33:24, ;2i-3 8 > 3
8:4~8 > 49 :I -I2 > 5 6:I_ 37 :i -7> 37

[497a]
Id  to 2a Chapter 72: PROPHECY 463 59:21, 61:1-3, 65:1-25 / Jeremiah esp
i\ 5:14, 7:25-26, 11:1-10, 16:1-13, 17:19-20, 19:1-15, 25:4-6, 25:15-30,
26:1-24,  28:1-17,  29:15-19,  35:15,  44:4—  (D)  Jeremias esp 1, 5:14,
7:25-26, 11:1-10, 16:1-13, 17^10^20, 19:1-15, 25:4-6, 25:15-30, 26:1-24,
28:1-17,  29:15-19,  35:15,  44:4  / Ezekiel, 1-39 passim, esp 2:1-3:27,
11:1-5,  12:8-20,  21:1-17,  33:3334:6,  35:1-36:7—  (D)  Ezechiel, 1-39
passim,  esp  2:1-3:27, 11:1-5, 12:8-20, 21:1-17, 33:3334:6, 35:1-36:7 /
Hosea  passim,  esp  6:4-6,  12:9-10 (D) Osee passim, esp 6:4-6, 12:9-10
/Joel,  1:1;  2:12-14 / Amos passim, esp 3:7-8, 5:1-27, 7:14-17 / Jonah,
3—  (D)  Jonas, 3 / Micah passim, esp 3:8— (D) Micheas passim, esp 3:8 /
Nahum  passim / Habahfcu\ passim— (D) Habacuc passim / Zephaniah passim—
(D)  Sophonias  passim  /  Haggai-(D) Aggeus / Zechariah, 1:1-6; 7:8-14;
8:16-17—  (D)  Zacharias,  1:1-6;  7:8-14; 8:16-17 / Malachi passim, esp
4:5-6—  (£>)  Malachias  passim,  esp  4:5-6  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
36:15-16—  (Z)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 36:17-18 / Baruch, 2:20-21 — (D) OT,
Baruch,  2:20-21  New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:36-40 / LuJ^e, 11:48-50;
16:14-16 / Acts, 9:3-16; 26:13-18 / / Corinthians, 14 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk  xvii  449a472a,c esp ch i 449a-450a, ch 3 450c-451c, ch 24
471d-472a,c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi, q 26, a 1, rep 1
845b-846a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxxiii
[22-90]
104b-105a;  paradise, ix 118c-120a esp [61-63] 119b; xvii 132a-133c; xxi
[103]- xxii
[18]
139b-d; xxvn
[10-66]
147b-148a;
[121-148] 148c-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 160b-c; part hi, 182d-183a; 188d-189c;
204a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[167-193]
139a-b; bk xi [656-749] 313b-315b; [802-834] 316b-317b; bk xii [235-248]
324b;  [315-330]  326a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  732-733 317a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 194d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 229c-233c esp 230c,
231b;  306a-c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  341a-c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part iv, 322b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 35a-36b 54
Freud:   Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  793c  \d.  The  religious
significance  of  the  fulfillment  of  prophecy  New Testament: Matthew
passim, esp 1:18-23, : i-3> 4:12-17, 5 ; i7-i 8 > 8:14-17, 11 :i2:3-6, 3
15,  12:14-17,  21:1-6,  27:3-10,  27:35 / Mar{, 1:1-8 / Luke, 4:16-21 /
John,  1:19-27,45;  5:39;  7:25-52;  12:37-41  /  Acts,  2:1-36; 3:1226;
8:26-40;  13:16-52;  15:13-21;  24:14-15;  28:16-29  /  Romans,  9-1 1 /
Hebrews passim,

[497b]
esp  1:1-14,  2:6-13, 3-7-™» 4:3-7» 5:5-6, 8:8-12 / II Peter, 1:19-21 18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk vii, ch 32 262a-b; bk x, ch 32 319d-322a,c;
bk  xv,  ch 26 419b-420a; bk xvi, ch 2 422b-423d; ch 37-42 444b-448a; bk
xvii  449a-472a,c  esp  ch  3  450c-451c;  bk xviii, ch ii 477c-d; ch 23
483d-485a;  ch  26-36  485d-493b;  ch  44-54  498a-507a,c; bk xix, ch 22
525b-c;  bk  xx, ch 4 532b-c; ch 21, 549d; ch 28-30 556c560a,c; bk xxii,
ch  3  588a-b  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 5, a 2, ans
411b-412a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 83c; part ii, 160b; part in,
165a-167b  passim;  187b-c;  242b;  244bc; part iv, 248a-b; 251c-252d 32
Milton: Christs Nativity
[1-7]
la / Paradise Lost, bk in [167-193] 139a-b; bk xi [656-749] 313b-315b;
[802-834]
316b-317b; bk xii
[235-248] 324b; [315-330] 326a-b
33 Pascal: Pensees, 570-578 273b-276a; 598-600 278b-279a; 613 282b-283a;
616-618 283b284a; 637-644 289b-291b; 659 293a; 662 293b; 670 295a-b; 678
297a-b;  684-686  298b299b;  692-741  300b-319a; 744-745 319a-b; 751-758
320a-321a;  761  321b-322a;  768  322b; 770 323a; 829-830 333b-334a; 838
335a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect x, div 101 497a-b 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 181b; 187c-188c; 206a-b; 297a; 307d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  230c-231a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c
passim  2. The vocation of prophecy: the possession of foreknowledge 2a.
The  foreknowledge  possessed  by  the  spirits  in  the  afterworld Old
Testament:  /  Samuel,  28:6-20— (D) I Kings, 28:6-20 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
xxiii
[54-81] 161d-162a /
Odyssey, bk x
[487-540]
241a-c; bk xi
[90137] 244a-c
5 Aeschylus: Persians [739-842] 23a-24b 5 Sophocles: Philoctetes
[1408-1444]
194d195a,c  6  Herodotus: History, bk v, 178a-180a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk
vi [756-892] 231a- 235a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 89, a 3,
rep 3 475d-476c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi [37-93] 8d9b; x
[1-114]
13d-14d; xv
[1-99]
21a-22a;  xxiv  [121-151]  35d-36a;  purgatory, xi [109142] 69d-70b; xiv
[27-72] 73d-74c; xx
[3496] 83c-84a; xxiv [37-93] 90a-c; xxxiii [2290]
104b-105a; paradise, ix 118c-120a esp
[61-63]
119b; xvii
[1-99]
132a-133a; xix
[97-148] 136a-c; xxi [i03]-xxn
[18] 139b-d;
xxvii
[10-66]
147b-148a;
[121-148]
148c-d; xxx [127-148] 153a-b

[498a]
(2. The vocation of prophecy: the possession of foreknowledge. ) 2b. The
political  office  of  prophecy:  priests, soothsayers, oracles 4 Homer:
Iliad,  bk  i  [59-100]  3d-4b  /  Odyssey,  bk 11 [146-207] 189c-190b 5
Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes [1-38] 27a-c / Agamemnon [104-159] 53a-d
5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the King [300-512] 102a103d / Oedipus at Colonus
[1348-1555] 126c128b / Antigone [988-1 114] 139c-140c / Ajax
[745-783] 149c-d / Philoctetes [604-619] 187c;
[1326-1347] 194a
5 Euripides: Helen
[744-760] 305b
/  Phoenician  Maidens  [834-1018]  385c-387b  5  Aristophanes:  Knights
[108-233] 471b-472d;
[941-1099]
481d-483d / Peace
[1039-1126]
537d-539a / Birds
[959-991]
554c-555a  /  Lysistrata  [762-780]  593a-b  6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
13c-d;  19d-20a; bk 11, 83b-c; bk iv, 135b-136a; 150b-d; 151b153a; bk v,
160a-b;  167d-168b;  171d-172a;  177b-d;  bk  vi,  191d-192b; 194d-195b;
197d198a;  bk  vii,  241c-242a; 246b-c; bk viii, 281a; 284d-285b; bk ix,
295d-297a; 302b-c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i, 355b-c; 378a-b
7 Plato: Meno, 189d / Republic, bk iv, 345d346a / Statesman, 597d-598a 9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 15
[i375b35~
1376^]  620c  13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi [356-462] 157a-160a 14 Plutarch:
Numa  Pompilius,  52b-c  /  Poplicola,  82a-b  /  Camillus,  103b-104a /
Pericles,  123c-124a  /  Timoleon,  207c-d  /  Aemilius Paulus, 214b-d /
Marcellus, 259c-260c / Aristides, 268a-d; 271a-c / Caius Marius, 339b-c;
351d-352a  /  Cimon,  398d-399b  /  Nicias, 424d / Alexander, 541a-542a;
552b-c / Caesar, 594b-c / Dion, 789b-790a; 791a-792a 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk  ii,  30d-31a;  37b;  bk  vi,  91b;  bk xi, 103d-104a; bk xii, 121d /
Histories,  bk  1,  195b-c;  bk 11, 214d-215c; 235a-c; bk iv, 285d-286a;
287b  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv, stanza 196-202 114a-115a;
bk  v,  stanza  208-218 147b-148b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83d-84a;
part hi, 183b-d; 185a-188a; 199b-204a 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act
i, sc ii
[12-24] 569c; act
ii, sc iv [21-38] 580a-b 27 Shakespeare: Antony and Cleopatra, act i, sc
ii  [1-82]  312b-313a  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 401c-402a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 121a; 194d; 390d; 457d-458a; 734c [n 137] 43
Mill: Representative Government, 341a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part i, 217b-c; 235b; part 11, 273b-c; part hi, 292b-d 54 Freud: General
Introduction, 477c

[498b]
2c.  The  Hebraic  conception of the prophetic vocation: the law and the
prophets; Christ as prophet Old Testament: Exodus, 3:1-4:17; 6:13,28-30;
7:1-2;   19:9,19-24;   20:18-21;   24:1-2,9-18;   33:9-11,17-23;  34:1-4
/Numbers,   11:11-17,2429;   12:1-9  /  Deuteronomy,  13:1-11;  34:10-12
/Joshua,  3:7-8;  4 :i 4 -(D) Josue, 3:7-8; 4:14 / Judges, 4 / / Samuel,
8:10-18,22;  10:1-13,24  —  (D)  I  Kings,  8:10-18,22;  10:1-13,24 / //
Samuel,  12:1-14—  (D)  II  Kings,  12:1-14  /  / Kings, 14:5-16; 17-18;
19:16-21;  20:1314,22,37-42; 21:17-24; 22:14-22— (D) /// Kings, 14:5-16;
17-18;  19:16-21;  20:1314,22,37-42;  21:17-24; 22:14-22 / // Kings, 1-2
esp  2:9-15;  3:9-20:  4-6;  8:1-15; 9:1-10; 13:14-21; 19:1-7,20-34; 20;
22:8-20—  (D)  IV  Kings,  1-2  esp 2:9-15; 3:9-20; 4-6; 8:1-15; 9:1-10;
13:14-21;  19:1-7,20-34;  20; 22:8-20 / // Chronicles, 18:4-26; 34:1428;
36:15-16—  (D)  //  Paralipomenon,  18:426; 34:14-28; 36:15-16 / Isaiah,
6:8-12;  8:11-18;  20; 37:6-7,21-35; 38:4-8; 49:112; 61:1-3— (D) Isaias,
6:8-12;  8:11-18;  20; 37:6-7,21-35; 38:4-8; 49:1-12; 61:1-3 / Jeremiah,
1; 5:14; 6:27; 7:25-26; 9:12; 18:18-23; 20; 25:4-7,15-30; 26; 28; 35:15;
36-38;  42:1-43:3;  44:4—  (D)  Jeremias,  1; 5:14; 6:27; 7:25-26; 9:12;
18:18-23;  20;  2  5  :4-7>i5-3°; 26; 28; 35:15; 36-38; 42:1- :35 44:4 /
Ezefyel,  2:1-5:4;  12; 33:30-33 — (D) Ezechiel, 2:1-5:4; 12; 33:30-33 /
Daniel,  2;  4-6—  (D) Daniel, 2; 3:98-6:28 / Amos, 7:14-17 / Jonah— (D)
Jonas   Apocrypha:   Ecclesiasticus,   39:1-11;  45-46;  4849—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  39:1-15;  45-46; 43 48-4 9 / Bel and Dragon, 33-39— (D)
OT,  Daniel, 14:32-38 / // Maccabees, 2:1-7— (D) OT, // Machabees, 2:1-7
New   Testament:   Matthew,  3:1-3;  5:17-18;  10;  11:20-24;  12:36-45;
13:53-57;  19:27-30;  2325  esp  23:29-39  /  Mar\,  1:4-9; 6:1-4 / Lufa
4:22-24; 16:14-16 / John, 1:15-27; 4 :43-44 ; 8:52-53 / Acts, 3:22-26 18
Augustine: City of God, bk vii, ch 32 262a-b; bk xvii, ch 1-3 449a-451c;
bk  xviii,  ch  27, 486c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, a 8
750d-751d  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 69d-70c; part ii, 160b-c; part
in, 169d-170a; 182d-188a; 201b-c; 204a; 205a-d; part iv, 269a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk xii
[101-269]
321b-325a  esp  [173-269]  323a-325a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 732-733 317a 38
Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 401d402a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
181b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 230c-231a 43 Mill: Representative
Government, 341a-c 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 793c

[499a]
3.  The  varieties of prophecy and the instruments of divination 3a. The
institution  of  oracles:  the  interpretation  of oracular or prophetic
utterances 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xiv
[^ii-^&fTJo^b-c,
bk  xix [291-307] 292b 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes [jj2-jjj] 35b-c
/ Prometheus Bound
[484-499]
45a;
[640-682]
46d-47b / Choephoroe
[269-305]
72d-73a;
[1021-1076] 80a-d
/ Eumenides
[133] 81a-b
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1-1185]
99a110b / Oedipus at Colonus
[386-419]
117d118a / Trachiniae
[155-177]
171c;
[821-830]
177b  5  Euripides:  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [12341283]  422b-c  /
Iphigenia at Aulis
[872-883]
433a 5 Aristophanes: Knights [108-233] 471b-472d;
[941-1099]
481d-483d / Peace
[1039-1126]
537d-539a / Birds
[959-991]
554c-555a / Lysistrata
[762-780]
593a-b / Plutus
[1-78]
629a-630a  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 4d; 10a-c; llb-d; 14a-15b; 20a-d;
21b-22a;  37c-d;  38a-b; 39c-d; bk 11, 60d-61b; 70d-71a; 77a-b; 80c; 81d
82b;   83b-c;  bk  in,  101d-102b;  103b-d;  bk  iv,  126d127a;  150b-d;
151b-153d;  bk v, 160a-b; 178a180a; 183d-184a; bk vi, 189a-b; 191d-192b;
194d-195b;  197d-198a; 199d-201a; 201d202c; 211b-d; 212d-213a,c; bk vii,
215a-c;  234d;  239a-240d;  241c-242a;  246b-c; 248b-c; 250b; 255c-d; bk
viii,  263b-c;  268b-d; 269c270a; 273b-c; 276d-277a; 281a; 284d-285b; bk
ix,  295d-298c;  302b-c;  308a-c  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
355bc;   378a-b;  380a-d;  bk  ii,  392a-b;  401a-b;  415d416c;  bk  in,
442c-443a;  bk v, 489a-b 7 Plato: Apology, 201d-203a / Timaeus, 467b-c 9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 15
[i375b35~
i376a2]  620c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 17 122d-124a; bk in, ch
1, 175d-176a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii [108-136] 127a-b; bk hi
[84-120]
149b-150a;
[132-191]
150b-152b;
[356-462]
157a-160a; bk vi
[42-101]
212a213b;  bk  vii [81-106] 238a-239a 14 Plutarch: Camillus, 103b-104a /
Aristides, 268a-d / Lysander, 363d-367d / Alexander, 546c-d; 553d-554a /
Demosthenes,  698b-699a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 37a-b / Histories, bk
1,  196b-c;  bk  11, 214d-215c; 235a-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi,
par 6 36c-d / City of God, bk hi, ch 17, 180b; bk viii, ch 16 275c-276a;
bk  xvii, ch 3 450c-451c; bk xviii, ch 23 483d-485a; bk xx, ch 21, 549d;
ch  28  556c-557a  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk hi, ch 33 670b-c 23Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 81d-82a; part in, 183c-d

[499b]
24  Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 66b-67d; bk hi, 158b-171a;
173d-175c;  215c219b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  18d-20d  27  Shakespeare:
Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  v [426475I 488b-d / Winter's Tale, act ii, sc i
495b497c  esp  [172-198]  497b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 607 280a; 659 293a;
672 296a; 678 297a-b; 683-692 298b-301a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
ii,  401d-402a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 121a; 170c; 225c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 252d253a; part ii, 264d-265c; 273b-c;
part hi, 311a-b 3b. Omens and portents: celestial and terrestrial signs;
signs  as  confirmations  of  prophecy  Old  Testament: Genesis, 9:8-17;
25:22-23  /  Exodus,  4:1-9,29-31;  7:8-13;  17:2-7;  33:910;  34:29-30;
40:32-38  /  Numbers,  9:15-23; 11:24-25; 12 / Judges, 6:17-22,36-40 / /
Samuel,  10:2-16—  (D)  /  Kings,  10:2-16  / // Samuel, 5:23-25— (D) II
Kings,  5:23-25  / / Kings, 13:1-6; 17:12-24; 18:16-39 esp 18:30-39— (D)
///  Kings,  13:1-6; 17:12-24; 18:16-39 esp 18:30-39 / // Kings, 1:8-17;
2:9-15,19-22;   5:1-19;   19:29;   20:4-11   —  (D)  IV  Kings,  1:8-17;
2:9-15,19-22;  5:1-19;  19:29;  20:4-11  /  / Chronicles, 14:14-15 (D) I
Paralipomenon,  14:14-15 / Isaiah, 38:18— (D) Isaias, 38:1-8 / Jeremiah,
1:1116;  10:2;  13:1-11;  18:1-10;  24—  (D)  Jeremias,  1:11-16;  10:2;
13:1-11; 18:1-10; 24 / Ezefyel, 37:1-19— (D) Ezechiel, 37:1-19 / Daniel,
5  /  Amos,  7:1-9; 8:1-2 New Testament: Matthew, 12:38-40; 16:1-4; 24 /
Mar\,  8:11-12;  13:4-30  /  Luke,  1:3944; 2:11-12; 11:16,29; 21:7-13 /
John, 2:1822; 6:30-31 / Acts, 2:16-22 / / Corinthians, 1 =22-24 4 Homer:
Iliad, bk ii [301-332] 13a-b; bk viii
[130-183]
52c-53a;
[245-252]
53c-d; bk xii
[195-250] 84a-d
/ Odyssey, bk ii
[146-207]
189c-190b;  bk  xv  [160-181]  267c-d; [525-538] 271c; bk xvii [541-550]
282d; bk xx [91-121] 297a-b; [240-246] 298c; [345-357] 299d 5 Aeschylus:
Persians
[176-230] 17a-d
/ Prometheus Bound [484-499] 45a / Agamemnon
[104-159] 53a-d
5  Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus [1447-1555] 127b-128b / Antigone [988-1
114]  139c-140c / Trachiniae [663-718] 175d-176b 5 Euripides: Phoenician
Maidens
[834-840]
385c  5 Aristophanes: Birds [708-726] 551d-552a 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i,  12b-d;  17a-b;  18b; 39c-40a; bk ii, 65b; 86c-87a; bk hi, 106c-d; bk
iv,  124d-125a;  135b-136a;  138a-c;  bk  v,  183d-184a;  bk vi, 190c-d;
199d-200a; 200d-201a; 204b-c; 212d-213a,c; bk vii,

[500a]
(3.  The  varieties  of prophecy and the instruments of divination. 5 b.
Omens   and   portents:   celestial  and  terrestrial  signs;  signs  as
confirmations of prophecy.) 223b-c; 227a; 248c-d; bk viii, 266b-d; 267a;
270c-271a;   278c;   285c-286a;  bk  ix,  289d290a;  296c-297a;  298b-c;
301d-302a;  307d308c;  313d-314a  6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
389a-b; bk vii, 552c; 560d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch ii
[518*32-36] 43a; ch 20 [522a i3-2o] 47a-b; bk
b i6-2o] 86b; ch 22 [576*1-4] 101c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk vi
[43-55]
80d-81a;  [379-422]  85b-d \t, ch 2 [559 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  17,  122d123c  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk i [387-401] 113b-114a; bk ii
[162-233] 128b-130b; [679-704] 143b-144a; bk in
[388-393] 157b-158a;
[523-547] 161b162a; bk vi [185-21 1] 216a-b; bk vii [59-80]
237b-238a; bk viii [520-540] 273a-b; bk xii
[245-265] 360b-361a
14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  19b-20c  /  Numa  Pompilius, 52b-c / Poplicola,
80b-d;  82a-b  /  Themistocles,  94d  /  Camillus, 103b-104a / Pericles,
123c-124a;  138d  /  Fabius,  141d-142a  /  Timoleon,  198c-d;  207c-d /
Aemilius  Paulus,  214b-d  /  Marcellus,  248c-d; 259c-260c / Aristides,
271a-c  /  Caius Marius, 339c-d / Sulla, 371d372c / Lucullus, 403d-404a;
404d-405a;  411d412a  /  Nicias,  429d-430b;  435b-d / Crassus, 447c-d /
Agesilaus,  483a-b  /  Alexander,  568a-b; 575a-576a / Phocion, 615b-d /
Caius  Gracchus, 685c-d / Dion, 789b- 790a / Marcus Brutus, 818a-b; 822b
/  Galba,  866d-867d / Otho, 871 b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 9a-b; 9d;
bk ii, 27b; bk iv, 79b; bk vi, 95d-96a; bk xi, 103b; bk xii, 119b; 124b;
bk  xiii, 141a-b; bk xiv, 144c; 147a; 149b-c; bk xv, 159b-c; 168d-169a /
Histories,  bk  i, 189d-190a; 206a; 212d-213a; bk 11, 228a-b; 235a-c; bk
hi,  256d; bk v, 298b-c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 7 44c45a /
Third Ennead, tr i, ch 5-6 80a-81b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par
4-6  20a-d;  bk  vii,  par  8-10  45d-47a  /  City  of God, bk v, ch 1-7
207d-212c; ch 9, 213b-c; bk vii, ch 35 263c-264a,c / Christian Doctrine,
bk  ii,  ch 2124 647a-649a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 70, a
2,  rep  i  364b-365a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 80c-d; 81d-82b; part
hi,  188a;  188d-189c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk hi,
146a-150d;  175c-178a; bk iv, 268b-269c; 277d-279b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
18d-20d; 223d-224a 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act v, sc vi
[34-93] 103c-104a / Richard
II, act ii, sc iv

[500b]
[7-17] 334c-d
/  Julius  Caesar,  act  i, sc hi 572c-574b; act v, sc i [71-88] 592d 27
Shakespeare: King Lear, act i, sc ii
[112166] 249a-c / Macbeth, act
ii, sc iv
[1-18]
294a-b  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 381a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  14b-c:  54c55a  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [594-599]
106b; bk viii [511-514] 243b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 173 203b-204a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk iv, ch xix, sect 15 388a-c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  332a-334b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 3c; 457d; 547a-b; 571a;
614b-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  232a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part ii, 263d265c; part in, 292b-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4947-4976]
122b123a  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 121a; 175b-176a; 409b-410b; 413b-414a
51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 259c-d; bk vii, 292d-293b; 298d-300a;
bk viii, 340d341a,c; bk ix, 377b-379a; bk x, 428a-429a 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  467a-b  3c.  Dreams,  visions, visitations Old Testament:
Genesis, 16:7-13; 18:1-15; 19:12-22; 20:3-7; 21:17-19; 22:11-19; 26:1-6;
28:10-22;  31:11-13,24;  32:24-32;  35:9-13;  37:1-11;  40-41 / Numbers,
12:5-8; 22:15-35 / Deuteronomy, 13:1-5 /Judges, 2:1-4; 6:11-23; 7:13-15;
13 / / Samuel, 28:6-20— (D) / Kings, 28:6-20 / // Samuel, 7:4-17— (D) II
Kings,  7:4-17 / I Kings, 3:5-15; 9:1-9; 19:2-8; 22:1723— (D) /// Kings,
3:5-15;  9:1-9;  19:2-8;  22:17-23  /  // Kings, 1:3-4,15— (D) IV Kings,
1:3-4,15   /   /   Chronicles,   21:15-20,28-30—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon,
21:15-20,28-30  / // Chronicles, 18:11-22— (D) II Paralipomenon, 18:1122
/  Esther,  10—  (D) Esther, 10:1-3 I Job, 4:1321; 33:14-16 / Isaiah, 6—
(D)  Isaias,  6  /  Jeremiah,  1;  14:14;  23:16,25-32;  24; 29:8-9— (D)
Jeremias,  1;  14:14;  23:16,25-32;  24;  29:8-9 / Ezefyel, 1-3; 8-1 1 ;
37:1-11; 40-48— (D) Ezechiel, 1-3; 8-1 1; 37:1-11; 40-48 / Daniel, 2; 4;
7-12  passim  /  Joel,  2:28-29  /  Zechariah,  1:7-6:15— (D) Zacharias,
1:7-6:15   Apocrypha:   Rest   of Esther,  10:4-11:12—  (D)  OT,  Esther,
10:4-11:12 / Wisdom of Solomon, 17; i8:i4-i9-(D) OT, Boo{ of Wisdom, 17;
18:14-19  / Ecclesiasticus, 34:1-7— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 34:1-7 / Bel
and  Dragon,  33-39 — (D) OT, Daniel, 14:32-38 / // Maccabees, 15:11-16—
(D)   OT,  //  Machabees,  15:11-16  New  Testament:  Matthew,  1:20-25;
2:12-13,1923;  17:1-8;  28:1-7  /  Mar\, 9:1-10 / Luke, 1:11-38; 2:8-15;
9:28-43;  24:1-10  /  Acts, 2:1718; 9:3-8; 10; 18:9-10 / // Corinthians,
12:1-4 / Revelation— (D) Apocalypse

[501a]
4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[59-67] 3d; bk
ii
[1-83]
10a-d / Odyssey, bk iv [787-841] 207a-d; bk xix
[509-581]
294c-295a,c 5 Aeschylus: Persians [176-230] 17a-d / Seven Against Thebes
[24-29]
27b / Prometheus Bound
[484-499]
45a;
[640-682] 46d-47b
/ Agamemnon [1072-1342] 63c-66b/ Choephoroe
[514-552] 75a-c
5 Sophocles: Electra
[405-515]
159b-160a;
[634-659] 161a-b
5 Euripides: Trojan Women
[308-461]
272d274a / Hecuba
[59-97]
353d  /  Iphigenia  Among  the Tauri [42-66] 411c-d; [1234-1283] 422bc 5
Aristophanes:  Knights  [1090-1095]  483c-d  6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
8a-10a;  25b-31a;  47a-c; bk ii, 78d-79c; bk hi, 95d; 103b-104b; 116a-b;
bk  iv,  126d-127a;  154c-d;  155b-c;  bk  v,  170c-d; bk vi, 196d-197a;
205d-206a;  208b;  211a;  bk  vii,  218b-220b; bk viii, 274b-c; 276b-c 7
Plato:  Euthydemus,  66a-b  /  Apology, 207b-c; 211a-b / Crito, 213b-d /
Timaeus,  466d-467c  8  Aristotle: Prophesying 707a-709a,c 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk i [102-126] 2b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi
[132-191]
150b-152b; bk iv [450-473] 179b-180a;
[554-570]
182b183a;  bk  vi  [76-97]  213a-b;  bk vii [323-474] 245a-249a; bk viii
[18-89]  259b-261b  14  Plutarch:  Themistocles,  98d-99a  / Alcibiades,
174a-d  /  Coriolanus,  185b-  186a  / Pelopidas, 239d-240c / Aristides,
268a-d  /  Pyrrhus,  329c-d / Cimon, 392b-c; 398d-399b / Lucullus, 405c;
411a-b  / Eumenes, 473a-b / Agesilaus, 483a-b / Pompey, 514d-515a; 532b;
534d-535a  /  Alexander,  548d-549a  /  Caesar, 601d-604d / Demosthenes,
702c-703b / Cicero, 721c-722a / Demetrius, 727b-d / Dion, 781d782a; 801b
/  Marcus  Brutus,  816d-817c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk ii, 26c; bk xi,
lOlb-c;  105c;  bk  xii,  112d-113a;  bk xvi, 176b-c / Histories, bk iv,
293a-294a  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 19-20 18b-19a / City of
God,  bk  viii,  ch  16  275c276a;  bk  xi, ch 2 323ac 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 12, aii, ans 59d-60d; q 86, a 4, rep 2 463d-464d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi, q 7, a 8, rep 1 750d-751d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxiii [13-75] 49c-50b; purgatory, ix
[13-69]
66a-c; xix
[1-63] 81c-82a; xxvn [91-117] 95c-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 46-56 126a-127b; stanza
177-186  143b-144b;  stanza  207-219  147a-149a; stanza 245 152a / Nun's
Priest's  Tale  [14,976-15,162]  452b-455b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
51d-52a;  69d-70c;  part  in,  173c;  176d-177b;  184a-187a; conclusion,
281d-282a  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 150d-156c; bk
iv, 278d

[501b]
b 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc ii
[17-55] 36c-37a; sc
iv 40a-41a / Romeo and Juliet, act 1, sc iv
[44-114]
291a-d  /  Midsummer-Night's  Dream,  act  ii,  sc ii [145-156] 360b-c /
Julius Caesar, act ii, sc ii
[75-90]
578d-579a; act iv, sc hi
[275-289]
591c;  act  v,  sc  v  [16-19]  595b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc i
29a-31c  / Macbeth, act i, sc hi 285b-287b; act hi, sc v 299b-d; act iv,
sc i 300b-302b; act v, sc viii
[16-22] 310b /
Cymbeline, act v, sc iv
[30-122] 481c-482b; sc v [426-465] 488b-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 8c; 54d55a; 55c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk v
[28-128]
176a178a; [469-505] 185b-186a; bk viii [283-336] 238b-239b; bk xi
[i93]-bk
xii
[649] 303b333a / Areopagitica, 389a37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 162b-163a
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 189b-c; 294d-296b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  i,  244d;  part  11, 264d-265b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[11,384-401]  277a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vii, 300c-301b; bk
xii,   546a-d;  561b-562a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,
127b-137c passim 54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, lie
/  Interpretation of Dreams, 137c; 138a-b; 178b-c; 179d [fn 2]; 387a,c /
General Introduction, 477b-d "bd. Prophecy by the direct word of God Old
Testament:  Genesis,  2:16-17;  3  ;6- :^_I 9» 4 15; 6:3,7,13-21; 7:1-4;
8:21-22;  9:1-17;  11:67;  12:1-8;  13:14-18; 15; 17; 18:17-21; 21:1213;
26:1-5,24;   35:9-13/   Exodus,   3:4-22;   6:18,28-30;   7-12   passim;
16:4-5,11-12;  17:56,14; 19:3-20:22; 32:9-14,30-34; 33:1-34:27/ Numbers,
12:5-8,14;  14:11-12,20-35  /  Deuteronomy,  4:10-15,36;  5;  31:14-21 /
Joshua,  :7~8  ; 4 :i ~3; 6:1-5; 8:1-2; 10:8— (D) 1:1-9; 3 Josue, 1:1-9;
3:7-8; 4:1-3; 6:1-5; 8:1-2; 10:8 / / Samuel, 3; 16:1-13— (D) / Kings, 3;
16:113  /  / Kings, 19:9-18— (D) III Kings, 19:9-18 / Isaiah, 6; 48:2-5—
(D)  Isaias,  6;  48:2-5  / Jeremiah, i— (D) Jeremias, 1 / Ezetyel, 1-39
passim,  esp  1-2—  (D) Ezechiel, 1-39 passim, esp 1-2 / Hosea, 1-3— (D)
Osee, 1-3 / Amos, 7-9 New Testament: Matthew, 17:1-9 / Acts, 26:13-18 18
Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 3 323d; bk xvi, ch 16-29 433c-441a; ch
36 443d444b; ch 38 445a-446a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12,
aii,  ans  and  rep  i 59d-60d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 165d-166a;
183d-184a; conclusion, 281d-282a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[106-151]
321b-322b;  [173-269] 323a-325a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c

[502a]
4.  Particular  prophecies  of  hope  and  doom 4a. The Covenant and the
Promised  Land  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 9:8-17; 12:1-7; 13:14— 18; 15;
17-18;  22:1-19;  26:1-6,24-25;  28:1122;  35:9-13  / Exodus, 2:23-3:22;
6:2-8;  19:46; 20:1-17; 32:11-14; 33:1-3; 34:10-11 / Leviticus, 26:40-45
/  Numbers,  14:6-9;  32;  34:1-12  / Deuteronomy, 1:7-8,19-31; 3:16-23;
4:1213,23-40;  5;  0:1-3,10-11,18-19; 7:12-13; 8:710,18-20; 9:1-6,23-29;
10:11; 11; 26:1-11; 27-32 esp 27:1-3, 28:1-14, 29:1-29, 31:16-20; 34:1-4
/ Joshua esp 1, 23:1-24:13— (D) Josue esp 1, 23:1-24:13 /Judges, 2:1-6 /
I  Kings,  8:56  —  (D) /// Kings, 8:56 / / Chronicles, 16:13-22 — (D) I
Paralipomenon,  16:13-22  /  Nehemiah,  9—  (D)  //  Esdras, 9 / Psalms,
74:19-20;   78:17,52-55;   105:6-44;  in;  132—  (D)  Psalms,  73:19-20;
77:1-7,52-55;  104:6-44;  no;  131  / Isaiah, 54:1-10; 56:4-6; 59:20-21;
61:7-9  —  (D)  Isaias,  54:1-10;  56:4-6;  59:20-21;  61:79 / Jeremiah,
11:1-10; 31:31-34; 34:12-18— (D) Jeremias, 11:1-10; 31:31-34; 34:12-18 /
Ezekiel,  16:60-63;  37:26-28— (D) Ezechiel, 16:60-63; 37:26-28 / Hosea,
2:16-18:  6:4-7  —  (D)  Cte,  2:16-18; 6:4-7 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
44:19-23— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 44 :2o-26 New Testament: Luke, 1:71-75
/  Acts,  3:25;  7:1-8  /  Romans, 9:1-9; 11:25-27 / Galatians, 3:13-18;
4:22-31 / Ephesians, 2:11-13 / Hebrews, 8:6-9:28; 10:14-17 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  xvi,  ch  16-29  433c-441a;  ch  32 441c-442c; ch 36
443d444b; ch 38, 445a-d; bk xvii, ch 7 458c459d; bk xxii, ch 3 588a-b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi, 177c-180a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi
[880-897] 318b; bk xii [101-126] 321b-322a;
[151-172] 322b323a; [259-269] 324b-325a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  637-640  289b-290a; 675 296b-297a; 713 304b-308a;
717-719  308b309a 4b. The destruction of Jerusalem and the dispersion of
Israel:  the  restoration of Israel and the rebuilding of the Temple Old
Testament:  Leviticus,  26:27-39  /  Deuteronomy,  4:25-31; 28:15-30:10;
31:16-18  /  Joshua,  23:12-16—  (D)  Josue,  23:12-16  /  // Kings, 17;
20:12-21;  21:10-15; 22:12-20; 23:26-27; 24:1-4,10-20; 25— (D) IV Kings,
17;  20:12-21;  21:10-15;  22:12-20;  23:26-27;  24:1-4,10-20;  25  / //
Chronicles,  7:19-22;  34:21-33;  36:15-23—  (D) // Paralipomenon, 7 : 1
9-22;  34:21-33;  36:15-23  /  Psalms, 14:7; 53:6; 78:58-72; 79; 85:1-3;
126;  i37-(D)  Psalms,  13:7;  52:7;  77:58-72;  78;  84:2-4; 125; 136 /
Isaiah,  1-10;  14:1-3;  22; 28; 32; 36-37; 39; 42-43; 49; 51-52; 60-63;
65:8-10,17-25;  66—  (D)  Isaias,  1-10;  14:1-3;  22; 28; 32; 3637; 39;
42-43; 49; 51-52; 60-63; 65:8-10,17-

[502b]
1  25;  66  /  Jeremiah,  1-45 passim; 49-52 passim — (D) Jeremias, 1-45
passim;  49-52  passim / Lamentations / Ezekiel, 4-7; 9; 11-24; 28:2026;
33-48  passim,  esp  33:23-29, 36:1-37:28, 39:22-40:2, 43:1-10, 47:1-23—
(D)  Ezechiel,  4-7;  9;  1  1-24; 28:20-26; 33-48 passim, esp 33:23-29,
36:1-37:28,  39:22-40:2,  43:1-10,  47:1-23 / Hosea, 2; 3:4-5; 5-1 — (D)
Osee,  2;  3:4-5;  5-1 1 I Joel, 2-3 / Amos passim / Obadiah passim— (D)
Abdias  passim  /  Micah—(D)  Micheas  /  Nahum  passim / Habakk.uk— (D)
Habacuc  /  Zephaniah—(D)  Sophonias  /  Zechariah passim— (D) Zacharias
passim   Apocrypha:   Tobit,   14:4-5—   (D)   OT,   Tobias,   14:6-7  /
Ecclesiasticus,  49:4-50:2—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 49:5-50:2 / Baruch,
5—  (D)  OT,  Baruch,  5 New Testament: Matthew, 24:1-2 / Mark, 13:1-2 /
Luke,  21:5-6;  19:41-44  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xvii, ch 7
458c-459d;  bk  xviii, ch 46 500a-d; ch 48, 501b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  hi,  179a-b; 244b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 638-641 289b-290a; 713-719
304b-309a;  722  309a-312a;  726  313a-315b 4c. The coming of a Messiah:
Hebraic  and  Christian  readings  of  messianic prophecy Old Testament:
Genesis,  3:15; 12:3; 18:18; 21:12; 22:18; 26:4; 28:14; 49:10-12,22-26 /
Numbers,  24:15-25 / Deuteronomy, 18:15-19 / I Chronicles, 17:11-14— (D)
I  Paralipomenon,  17:11-14  I Job, 19:25-27 / Psalms, 2:7; 8:5-6; 14:7;
16:10;  19:4-5;  21-22;  40:1-8;  45:7;  50:1-3;  68;  72; 80:16-18; 85;
89:19-29,3637; no; 118:22,26— (D) Psalms, 2:7; 8:5-6; 13:7; 15:10; 18:6;
20-21;  39:1-8;  44:7; 49:13; 67; 71; 79:16-18; 84; 88:19-29,36-37; 109;
117:22,26  /  Isaiah,  7:10-16;  8:3-4;  9:6-7;  11:1-5; 16:1; 22:20-25;
28:16-29;  32;  35:4;  40:1-11;  41:2-3,8-14,25;  42:1-7;  45; 46:11-12;
49:1-13,22-23;  52-55;  59-66 passim, esp 59:16-21, 61:1-3, 62:11-63:14,
64:1-5  —(D)  Isaias,  7:10-16;  8:3-4;  9:6-7;  11:1-5; 16:1; 22:20-25;
28:16-29;  32;  35:4;  40:111;  41:2-3,8-14,25;  42:1-7;  45;  46:11-12;
49:1-13,22-23;  52-55;  59-66 passim, esp 59:16-21, 61:1-3, 62:11-63:14,
64:1-5  / Jeremiah, 23:5-6; 30:7-9; 31:31-33; 33 :i °" 18— (D) Jeremias,
23:5-6;  30:7-9;  31:31-33; 33:10-18 / Ezekiel, 17 ^2-24; 34; 37:21-26 —
(D)  Ezechiel, 17:22-24; 34; 37:21-26 / Daniel, 2:44; 7:13-14; 9:24-27 /
Hosea,  1:11;  3:5; 13:14; i 4 :5-7-(D) Osee, 1:11; 3:5; 13:14; 14:6-8 /
Micah,  5:2-5;  7—  (D)  Micheas,  5:2-5;  7  /  Zechariah, 2:10; 3:8-9;
6:12-14; 9:9-11; 11:16; 13— (D) Zacharias, 2:10; 3:8-9; 6:12-14; 9:9-11;
11:16; 13 / Malachi, 3:1-3; 4:5-6— (D) Malachias, 3:1-3; 4:5-6

[503a]
Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, i :i2-22— (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 2:12-22
/  Baruch,  3:36-38  -(D)  OT,  Baruch,  3:36-38 New Testament: Matthew,
3:1-12 / M^, 1 :4-8 / Luke, 2:25-34; 3:1-6 //oAw, 1:19-25^40-45; 7:26-31
/  /4<rtt, 2:29-36; 3:18-26 '/Romans, 11:25-27 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  vii, CH32 262a-b; bk x, ch 32 319d-322a,c; bk xv, ch 26 419b420a; bk
xvi,  ch  2  422b-423d;  ch  37 444b445a; bk xvii 449a-472a,c passim; bk
xviii,  ch 11 477c-d; ch 23 483d-485a; ch 28 486c487a; ch 30, 487c-d; ch
33-34  490c-491c;  ch  44  498a-d; ch 46 500a-d; bk xix, ch 22 525b-c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, a 12, ans 264d-265d; q 103,
a 2, ans and rep 1-2 299b-300d; q 107, a 2 327b329a; part hi, q 26, a i,
rep i 845b-846a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxii [5593] 87a-c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part hi, 179d; 187b-c; 204a-207b passim; 229c; 242b;
243a-b 32 Milton: Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, bk xi
[22-44] 299b-300a; bk
xii
[227-244]
324a-b;
[284-330] 325b-326b
esp  [307-314]  326a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 607-609 280a-b; 613 282b283a;
616-619  283b-285a;  662-664  293b294a; 673 296a; 675 296b-297a; 692-741
300b-319a;  747-749  319b-320a;  751-761 320a322a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 181b; 206a-b; 207d; 308a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134b 4d. The
second  coming  of  the Lord: the Day of Judgment, the end of the world,
and  the  millenium  Old  Testament:  Job,  19:25-29;  21 esp 21:30-32 /
Psalms,  50;  72; 96:10-13; 97-98— (D) Psalms, 49; 71; 95:10-13; 96-97 /
Ecclesiastes, 3:16-17; 11:9-10; 12:14 / Isaiah, 2-4; 11; 24; 26:1-28:15;
30;  34-35; 65:17-25; 66— (D) Isaias, 2-4; 11; 24; 26:1-28:15; 30; 3435;
65:17-25;  66  /  Daniel,  7:21-27;  11-12 / Joel, 1:14-2:11; 2:27-3253/
Micah,  4— (D) Micheas, 4 / Zephaniah—{D) Sophonias / Zechariah, 14— (D)
Zacharias,  14  /  Malachi,  3-4—  (D)  Malachias, 3-4 Apocrypha: Tobit,
13:9-14:15—  (D) OT, Tobias, 13:11-14:17 /Judith, 16:17— (D) OT, Judith,
16:20-21 New Testament: Matthew, 10:14-15; 11:20-24; 12:34-36; 13:24-50;
24-25  /  Mark,  13:4-37  /  Luke, 17:20-37; 19:11-28; 21 I John, 12:48;
14:3-4/  Acts,  1:9-11; 2:17-21; 17:31 / Romans, 2:5-11 / / Corinthians,
15:23-28  /  Philippians,  3:20-21  /  /  Thessalonians,  1:9-10;  2:19;
4:125:11  /  //  Thessalonians,  1-2  /  // Timothy, 3; 4:1,8 / Hebrews,
9:26-28  /  James,  5:7-9  / / Peter, 4:5-7 / // Peter, 2:9; 3 / 1 John,
2:18-

[503b]
29; 4:17 I Jude, 14-25 / Revelation esp 1:4-20, 14:15-16:21, 20:1-22:21—
(D)  Apocalypse  esp 1:4-20, 14:15-16:21, 20:1-22:21 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  iv, 848b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xviii, ch 53 504d-505c; bk xx
530a-560a,c  /  Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 15 628b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 73 922b-925b; q 74, a 1 925c-926c; q 77, a
2  945a-946b;  q  88,  a  1  lOOOd-lOOld;  a  3  1002d-1004b;  q 91, a i
1016b-1017c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi
[94-115]
9b-c;  paradise, xix [100-148] 136a-c 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 10,
498b-499b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, partiii, 179d; 197c; 230a; 244b-c; part
iv,  248a-b;  251c-252b;  254b-c  32  Milton: Christs Nativity [125-172]
4b-5b / At a Solemn Music\ 13a-b / Paradise Lost, bk hi
[274-343]
141b-143a; bk vii
[139-173]
220a-221a; bk xi
[45-83] 300a-301a; bk
xii
[451-465] 329a; [537-557] 331a / Areopagitica,
404a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  757  321a  35 Locke: Toleration, 17a-b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  187c-188c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
233c-234d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  i,  13c-d;  bk  v,
127b-137c  5.  The  criticism and rejection of prophecy: the distinction
between  true  and  false  prophecy;  the  condemnation of astrology and
divination  as impiety or superstition Old Testament: Exodus, 7:10-13,22
/  Deuteronomy,  13:1-5;  18:15-22  /  /  Samuel, 28:1-10 — (D) / Kings,
28:1-10 / / Kings, 13:11-34; 18:17-40; 22:5-25— (D) /// Kings, 13:11-34;
18:17-40;  22:5-25  /  //  Kings,  17:17—  (D)  IV  Kings,  17  '.17 I I
Chronicles, 10:13-14— (D) / Paralipomenon, 10:13-14 / // Chronicles, 18—
(D)  // Paralipomenon, 18 / Isaiah, 8:1822; 30:9-11; 41:21-29; 47:12-13—
(D)  Isaias,  8:18-22;  30:9-11;  41:21-29;  47:12-13  /  Jeremiah, 2:8;
5:12-14,31;  14:13-16;  23:9-40;  27:9-18;  28;  29:8-9,29-32; 36-38 esp
37:1820—  (D) Jeremias, 2:8; 5:12-14,31; 14:13-16; 23:9-40; 27:9-18; 28;
29:8-9,29-32;   36-38  esp  37:17-19  /  Ezekjel,  13;  14:9;  21:21-23;
22:23-31—  (D) Ezechiel, 13; 14:9; 21:21-23; 22:23-31 / Daniel, 1:19-20;
2:1-23;  4  :i~2  7;  5:5-17  /  Micah,  3:5-12—  (D)  Micheas, 3:5-12 /
Zechariah,  10:2;  13:2-6— (D) Zacharias, 10:2; 13:2-6 Apocrypha: Wisdom
of Solomon,  14:27-29— (D) OT, Book °f Wisdom, 14:27-29 / Ecclesiasticus,
34:1-7—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 34:1-7 New Testament: Matthew, 7:15-23;
12:38-40;  i3  :54-57;  16:1-4;  23:29-39;  24:11,23-28  /  Mark, 6:1-5;
8:11-12; 13:21-22 / Luke, 6:26; 11 :i6,2o / John, 4:44 / // Peter, 2:1-3
/ i John, 4:1-6

[504a]
470  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5. The criticism and rejection of prophecy: the
distinction between true andfalseprophecy; the condemnation of astrology
and divination as impiety or superstition.} 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xii
[195-250]
84a-d / Odyssey, bk ii, [146-207] 189c-190b 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[248-254]
54d;
[1178-1213] 64c-65a
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King [300-512] 102a103d;
[702-725] 105d-106a / Antigone [11551171] 140d-141a
5  Euripides: Helen [744-760] 305b / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [570-575]
416a  /  Iphigenia  at Aulis [948-960] 433d-434a 5 Aristophanes: Knights
[108-233] 471b-472d;
[941-1099]
481d-483d / Peace
[1 039-1 126]
537d-539a / Birds [959-991] 554c-555a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 10a-c;
bk  ii, 86c; bk in, 116a-b; bk viii, 273b-c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian
War,  bk  ii,  389a-b;  bk v, 489a-b; 506b 7 Plato: Timaeus, 466d-467b 8
Aristotle: Prophesying 707a-709a,c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[80-135]
2a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  7 145b-146a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk i, sect 6 253b 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 123c-124a; 138d /
Alexander,  575a-576a  /  Marcus Brutus, 816d817c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
iv,  79b;  bk  vi,  91a-d; bk xii, 121d / Histories, bk i, 191d; 194a-b;
195b-c; bk iv, 274b; 283b; bk v, 298bc 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv,
par  4-6  20a-d;  bk  vii,  par 8-10 45d-47a / City of God, bk v, ch 1-7
207d-212c;  ch  9,  213b-c;  bk vii, ch 35 263c-264a,c; bk xviii, ch 41,
496b-c;  bk  xix,  ch 23 525c-528a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 21-24
647a-649a CROSS-REFERENCES 7h, 8b, 8e, of; World 8.

[504b]
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 115, a 3, rep 4 588c-589c; aa
4-6  589d-592d;  part  1—11, q 9, a 5 660d-662a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell,  xx  28b-29d  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 52-55
127a-b;  stanza  183-185 144a-b; stanza 218 148b / Parson's Tale, par 38
522b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 80d; 81d-82b; part in, 165d-167b;
183b-d;  186c-188a;  190a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i,
66b-67d;  bk  ii,  82c-d;  bk  hi,  158b-171a;  173d-175c;  215c-219b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  18d-20d; 94d-95a; 98b99a; 284d-285b 26 Shakespeare:
Romeo and Juliet, act i, sc iv
[35-114] 290d-291d
27  Shakespeare:  King Lear, act i, sc ii [112166] 249a-c / Macbeth, act
v,  sc  viii [9-22] 310a-b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 381a-b 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 54c-55a 31 Descartes: Rules, v 7d-8a 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  173  203b-204a; 597-598 278b-279a; 817-818 330b-331b;
835  334b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect x, div 94 492d-493c 36
Sterne:   Tristram  Shandy,  217b-221a;  332b334b  38  Rousseau:  Social
Contract,  bk  ii,  401d402a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 3c; 52b; 93b;
121a-b; 170b-c; 225c-d; 460b; 463b; 877c
[n 51]
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 217b-c; part 11, 263d-265c;
273b-c;  part  hi,  311a-b  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 232a-235a 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams, 387a, c / General Introduction, 467a-b / New
Introductory  Lectures,  822b-825c  Fate 5-6; Knowledge 5a(5); Necessity
and  Contingency  4c; Time 6f; Truth 30(2). Another consideration of the
religious  significance  of  prophecy  and its fulfillment, see Religion
10(3).  Other  discussions  of  the  interpretation  of  oracles, omens,
portents,  and  visions,  /^Language 10; Memory and Imagination 8a; Sign
and Symbol 5b; and for other treatments of dreams and their meaning, see
Language  10;  Memory  and Imagination 8d-8d(2); Sign and Symbol 6a. The
religious  dogmas  related  to  particular  prophecies  in  Judaism  and
Christianity, see God

[505a]
idea  and  topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided
into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II.
Works  bv  authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. I. Plutarch.
"Wherefore  the  Pythian  Priestess Now Ceases to Deliver Her Oracles in
Verse,"  "Why  the Oracles Cease to Give Answers," in Moralia Augustine.
De  Genesi  ad  Litteram,  bk  xii,  ch 9 . On the Spirit and the Letter
Aquinas.  Quaestiones  Disputatae, De Veritate, q 12 . Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  qq  1 71-175 F. Bacon. "Of Prophecies," in Essays Spinoza.
Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (Theological-Political Treatise), ch 1-3,
11  Newton.  Daniel  and  the  Apocalypse II. Cicero. De Divinatione (On
Divination)  Tertullian.  The Prescription Against Heretics Saadia Gaon.
The Boo/^ of Beliefs and Opinions, TREATISE III, VIII

[505b]
Chapter  72:  PROPHECY  471 Maimonides. Eight Chapters on Ethics, ch 7 .
The  Guidefor the Perplexed, part ii, ch 32-47 Calderon. Life Is a Dream
J. Taylor. A Discourse ofthe Liberty of Prophesying Fontenelle. Histoire
des  oracles Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  19 Voltaire. "Prophecies," "Prophets," in A Philosophical Dictionary
Paine.  The  Age  of  Reason,  part  i  J.  H.  Newman.  Lectures on the
Prophetical  Office of the Church Kierkegaard. Of the Difference Between
a Genius and an Apostle Comte. System of Positive Polity, vol iv, Theory
of the Future of Man W. R. Smith. The Prophets of Israel and Their Place
in  History  Frazer.  Psyche's  Tas\  Lods.  The  Prophets  and the Rise
of Judaism

[506a]
INTRODUCTION  OF  the  qualities or virtues attributed to the intellect,
prudence  seems  to be least concerned with knowledge and most concerned
with  action. When we call a man a scientist or an artist, or praise the
clarity  of  his understanding, we imply only that he has a certain kind
of  knowledge.  We admire his mind, but we do not necessarily admire him
as  a  man.  We may not even know what kind of man he is or what kind of
life  he  leads.  It is significant that our language does not contain a
noun  like  "scientist"  or  "artist"  to describe the man who possesses
prudence.  We  must  use the adjective and speak of a prudent man, which
seems  to  suggest  that  prudence belongs to the whole man, rather than
just  to  his  mind.  Prudence  seems to be almost as much a moral as an
intellectual quality. We would hardly call a man prudent without knowing
his  manner  of  life.  Whether he behaved temperately would probably be
much more relevant to our judgment of his prudence than whether he had a
cultivated  mind.  The  extent  of  his  education  or  the depth of his
learning  might  not  affect  our judgment at all, but we probably would
consider  whether  he  was  old  enough  to  have  learned anything from
experience  and  whether  he  had  actually  profited from experience to
become  wise.  These observations not only express the ordinary sense of
the  word "prudence," but also give a summary indication of the idea for
which that word stands in the great books. Like other fundamental traits
of mind or character, prudence is considered by the poets and historians
in  terms  of precept and example. For the definition of the term or for
an  analysis  of its relation to other fundamental ideas, such as virtue
and  happiness, desire and duty, one must go to the great works of moral
and political theory or of theology.

[506b]
Even  there, however, the conception of prudence is used more frequently
than  it  is expounded. Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Hobbes, and Kant seem
to  be  the exceptions, and of these only Aristotle and Aquinas offer an
extended  analysis—Aristotle  in  his book on intellectual virtue in the
Ethics,  Aquinas  in  certain questions of his Treatise on Habits in the
Summa  Theologica, but more extensively in his Treatise on Prudence (see
the  questions from the Summa Theologica cited in the list of Additional
Readings).  That  prudence is not knowledge in the ordinary sense of the
term—  that  it  is  a  product of experience and a possession of reason
which,  unlike science or art, cannot be expressed in propositions—seems
to be clearly implied by Hobbes. "When the thoughts of a man, that has a
design  in  hand,  running over a multitude of things, observes how they
conduce  to  that  design,  or  what  design they may conduce to; if his
observations  are  such  as  are  not  easy or usual; this wit of his is
called  Prudence,  and depends on much experience and memory of the like
things,  and their consequences heretofore." Whereas science can achieve
some  certainty, the judgments of prudence are, according to Hobbes, all
uncertain,   "because   to   observe  by  experience  and  remember  all
circumstances  that  may  alter  the  success, is impossible." It is the
opposition  between experience and science which seems to lead Hobbes to
distinguish prudence from wisdom. "As much experience is prudence, so is
much science sapience. For though we usually have one name of wisdom for
them  both,  yet the Latins did always distinguish between prudentia and
sapientia,  ascribing  the former to experience, the latter to science."
The Greeks also had two words—phronesis

[507a]
and  sophia—  both  of  which  are  sometimes  translated  in English by
"wisdom."  But  Aristotle,  like  Hobbes,  insists  upon the distinction
between  the  wisdom  which  is  the  ultimatrtruit  of  the speculative
sciences  or  philosophy  and  the wisdom which belongs to the sphere of
moral  and  political action. Wishing to preserve Aristotle's sense that
phronesis  and  sophia  have  something  in  common  which  deserves the
eulogistic connotation of "wisdom," his translators usually render these
words in English by the phrases "practical wisdom" or "political wisdom"
(for phronesis), and "speculative wisdom" or "philosophical wisdom" (for
sophia).  The  English  rendering of Aquinas, on the other hand, usually
translates  his  prudentia by "prudence," and his sapientia by "wisdom."
Whether  it  is  permissible to use "prudence" and "practical wisdom" as
synonyms may be more than a question of verbal equivalence; for there is
a  fundamental  issue in theory concerning the unity of wisdom, on which
Plato  differs  from  both Aristotle and Aquinas. The question about the
relation  of  knowledge and virtue may be differently answered according
to  the  view  of  wisdom which denies its division into speculative and
practical,  and  according  to  the view which conceives the possibility
that  a  man  may be wise in one way without being wise in the other. In
the  language of Aquinas, a man may have acquired wisdom through science
and  understanding  without having the moral character of a prudent man.
"That   practical  wisdom  is  not  scientific  knowledge  is  evident,"
Aristotle  declares. This is confirmed, he adds, "by the fact that while
young  men  become  geometricians and mathematicians and wise in matters
like these, it is thought that a young man of practical wisdom cannot be
found.  The  reason  is  that  such  wisdom  is  concerned not only with
universals  but with particulars, which become familiar from experience,
but  a  young man has no experience, for it is length of time that gives
experience."  Hobbes  and  Aristotle  seem  to  agree that experience is
important  for the development of prudence or practical wisdom precisely
because  "it  is  practical and practice is concerned with particulars."
But  though  both  also agree that this explains the distinction between
prudence and scientific knowledge—which is con-

[507b]
Chapter  73:  PRUDENCE 473 cerned not with action but with the nature of
things—  Aristotle alone raises a further question about the distinction
between  practical  wisdom and art. In making something, the artist also
deals  with  particulars.  In  this  sense,  art is also practical. But,
according  to  Aristotle,  the  word  "productive"  should  be  used  in
distinction  from  "practical"  to signify the difference between making
and  doing—  two kinds of human activity which, though alike as compared
with  scientific  knowing,  represent knowledge differently applied. The
knowledge  which the artist possesses can, furthermore, be formulated in
a  set  of  rules.  An  individual  can  acquire  the skill of an art by
practicing  according  to its rules. What a man knows when he is prudent
seems  to be much less capable of being communicated by precept or rule.
What  he knows is how to deliberate or calculate well about things to be
This,  in  Aristotle's  view, marks prudence off from all other virtues.
That prudence is a quality of mind seems to follow from the fact that it
involves  deliberation, a kind of thinking about variable and contingent
particulars  of the same sort which belong to the realm of opinion. That
prudence  is  also  a  moral  quality,  an aspect of character, seems to
follow   no  less  from  Aristotle's  statement  that  prudence  is  not
deliberation  about  the  means to any sort of end, but only about those
"which  conduce  to  the  good  life in general." Prudence is not always
described  as skill of mind in deliberating about alternative courses of
action,   nor   is  it  always  regarded  as  entirely  praiseworthy  or
admirable—inseparable from virtue and the good life. It is, for example,
sometimes  identified  with  foresight  or  even  conjecturing about the
future.  So  conceived, prudence does not seem to require rational power
so  much  as memory and imagination, in order to project past experience
into  the  future.  In  this sense, Aristotle admits it may be said that
"even some of the lower animals have practical wisdom, viz., those which
are  found  to have a power of foresight with regard to their own life."
Identifying  prudence  with foresight, Hobbes conceives perfect prudence
as belonging only

[508a]
474  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  to God. When the event answers expectations, the
prediction   is  attributed  to  prudence,  yet  human  foresight  being
fallible,  "it  is but presumption. For the foresight of things to come,
which  is  Providence,  belongs  only  to  him by whose will they are to
come."  Aquinas gives a quite different reason for saying that "prudence
or  providence  may  suitably  be  attributed  to  God."  It is that the
ordering  of  things  toward  their  ultimate  end is "the chief part of
prudence,  to which two other parts are directed —namely, remembrance of
the   past,   and  understanding  of  the  present;  inasmuch  from  the
remembrance of what is past and the understanding of what is present, we
gather  how to provide for the future." Prudence is sometimes described,
not as a virtue of the mind, or even as the power of foresight, but as a
temperamental  trait,  an  emotional  disposition. It is associated with
timidity  or  caution  in those who are fearful of risks or unwilling to
take chances. It is in this sense that Bacon seems to oppose hopefulness
to prudence, "which is diffident upon principle and in all human matters
augurs  the  worst."  The  cautiousness  of  the over-deliberate man may
involve  thought as well as fear. Hamlet thinks too much and on too many
sides  of every action. His action being "sicklied o'er by the pale cast
of thought," he is irresolute. He laments his misuse of reason. "Whether
it be bestial oblivion, or some craven scruple of thinking too precisely
on  the  event—a  thought, which quartered, hath but one part wisdom and
ever  three  parts  coward—  I  do  not know why yet I live to say 'this
thing's to do,' since I have cause, and will, and strength, and means to
do it." When prudence is conceived as excessive caution, its opposite is
usually   described   as   rashness,  precipitateness,  or  impetuosity.
Thucydides  portrays  these  opposites  in  the  persons  of  Nicias and
Alcibiades.  Their  speeches to the Athenian assembly on the question of
the  Sicilian  expedition do not merely present an opposition of reasons
for  and  against  the  undertaking, but also represent an opposition of
types  of  human character. Both come to grief: Nicias, the overcautious
leader of the expedition, who earns a not inevitable defeat by his ever-
delaying tactics, and Alcibiades, who does

[508b]
not  stop  at treachery or treason when the moment seems ripe for action
which,  if  quickly  taken, may succeed. Aristotle and Aquinas would use
such facts to argue against what, in their view, is the misconception of
the  prudent  man  as the opposite of the impetuous. The prudent man, in
their  opinion, does not stand at the other extreme of undue caution. In
their  theory  of  the  virtues  as means between extremes of excess and
defect,   prudence,  like  courage  or  temperance,  represents  a  mean
consisting  in  neither  too  much  nor  too  little.  As  cowardice and
foolhardiness are the opposite vices of too much and too little fear—and
as  both  are opposed to the mean of courage which involves a moderation
of  fear—so  excessive  caution and impetuosity are the vices opposed to
prudence  as  well  as  to  each  other. Nor are prudence and imprudence
simply  matters  of  temperament.  Men may differ in their temperamental
dispositions;  but, according to Aristotle and Aquinas, these are not to
be  confused  with  virtues  and  vices.  One  man may be by nature more
fearful or fearless than another, but regardless of these differences in
emotional  endowment, either may become courageous, by forming the habit
of  controlling  fear  for  the  right  reasons. So, too, one man may be
naturally  more  impulsive  or more circumspect than another, but either
can  acquire prudence through learning to take sufficient counsel and to
deliberate  enough  before  action,  while  also  forming  the  habit of
resolving thought into action by reaching decisions and commanding their
execution.  Failing  to satisfy these conditions of prudence, either may
develop  the  vices  of  imprudence,  becoming,  like  Hamlet or Nicias,
irresolute;  or,  like  Alcibiades, impatient of counsel or ill advised,
lacking  care  in deliberation and soundness in judgment. The conception
of  prudence  as itself the extreme of caution, whether temperamental or
habitual,  is  not  the  only  challenge  to  the Aristotelian theory of
prudence  as  a  virtue.  Other  moralists,  especially those who take a
different view of virtue generally, do not seem to look upon prudence as
wholly  admirable.  Even  when  they  do  not  condemn  prudence  as  an
indisposition to act promptly or decisively

[509a]
enough, they seem to give prudent deliberation the invidious connotation
of  cold and selfish calculation. A suggestion of this appears in Mill's
contrast  between  duties  to ourselves and duties to others, wherein he
remarks that "the term duty to oneself, when it means anything more than
prudence,  means self-respect and self-development." It would seem to be
implied  that prudence means something less—something more selfish— than
a  proper and justifiable self-interest, the violation of which involves
"a  breach  of duty to others, for whose sake the individual is bound to
have  care  for  himself."  Kant,  more explicitly than Mill, associates
prudence  with expediency and self-seeking, and separates it from action
in  accordance  with  duty under the categorical imperative of the moral
law.  Prudence has meaning only in relation to a hypothetical imperative
"which  expresses the practical necessity of an action as a means to the
advancement  of  happiness."  Granted  that  a  man seeks his individual
happiness,  then "skill in the choice of means to his own greatest well-
being may be called prudence" Consequently, "the imperative which refers
to  the  choice  of  means  to  one's  happiness,  i.e.,  the precept of
prudence,  is  still  always  hypothetical;  the action is not commanded
absolutely,  but  only  as a means to another purpose," or, as Kant says
elsewhere,  "the  maxim of self-love (prudence) only advises; the law of
morality  commands."  Furthermore, he holds that "what duty is, is plain
of  itself  to everyone; but what it is to bring true durable advantage,
such as will extend to the whole of one's existence, is always veiled in
impenetrable  obscurity,  and  much  prudence  is  required to adapt the
practical  rule  founded  on  it to the ends of life, even tolerably, by
making  exceptions."  In  terms of Kant's division of the imperatives of
conduct  into  the  pragmatic  and the moral, according as they refer to
welfare  and happiness or duty and law, prudence is merely pragmatic. It
does  not  belong  to  morality. The pragmatic imperative of prudence is
more like the technical imperative of art, which is also conditional and
concerned with determining means to an end—in this case, the thing to be
produced by skill. "If it were only equally easy

[509b]
Chapter 73: PRUDENCE 475 to give a definite conception of happiness, the
imperatives  of  prudence would correspond exactly with those of skill."
As Kant sees it, "the sole business of reason in the moral philosophy of
prudence  is  to bring about a union of all the ends, which are aimed at
by our inclinations, into one ultimate endthat of happiness, and to show
the  agreement which should exist among the means of attaining that end.
In  this  sphere, accordingly, reason cannot present to us any more than
pragmatical  laws  of free action, for our guidance towards the aims set
up  by the senses, and is incompetent to give us the laws which are pure
and determined completely a priori." Hence the precepts of prudence "are
used  by  reason  only  as  counsels, and by way of counterpoise against
seductions  to an opposite course." The issue between Kant and Aristotle
(or  Aquinas)  with  respect  to prudence thus appears to be part of the
larger  issue  between  them  on the fundamental principles of morality,
discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Duty  and  Happiness.  In Kant's view,
Aristotle  and  Aquinas,  no less than Mill, are pragmatists rather than
moralists.  They  are  all  utilitarians  in  the sense that they regard
happiness as the first principle of human conduct and concern themselves
with the ordering of means to this end. Since the consideration of means
necessarily  involves  the  weighing  of  alternatives  as  more or less
expedient,  prudence  becomes indispensable to the pursuit of happiness.
The  choice  of  the  best  means  is  second  in importance only to the
election of the right end. Kant admits that those who live for happiness
require  a  great deal of prudence, in order to adapt practical rules to
variable  circumstances  and  to  make the proper exceptions in applying
them.  None  is  required  by those who live according to the moral law.
"The  moral  law  commands the most punctual obedience from everyone; it
must,  therefore,  not  be  so difficult to judge what it requires to be
done, that the commonest unpracticed understanding, even without worldly
prudence,  should  fail  to  apply  it  rightly." That "the principle of
private happiness" is "the direct opposite of the principle of morality"
Kant  seems to think is evident from the questionable worth of prudence;
"for a man must have a different crite-

[510a]
476  THE GREAT IDEAS rion when he is compelled to say to himself: I am a
worthless  fellow,  though  I have filled my purse; and when he approves
himself, and says: I am a prudent man, for I have enriched my treasure."
Kant  does not limit his criticism of prudence as pragmatic—or practical
rather  than  moral  to  the  fact that it serves what he calls "private
happiness."  It  may  serve  the  public welfare. "A history is composed
pragmatically,"  he  writes,  "when it teaches prudence, i.e., instructs
the  world  how  it  can  provide for its interests better." But he also
distinguishes  between  worldly  and  private prudence. "The former is a
man's  ability  to  influence  others  so  as  to  use  them for his own
purposes.  The  latter is the sagacity to combine all these purposes for
his  own  lasting  benefit."  Nevertheless,  the  prudence which aims at
individual  happiness  is  primary,  for  "when  a man is prudent in the
former  sense, but not in the latter, we might better say of him that he
is clever and cunning, but, on the whole, imprudent." Those who take the
view that happiness is the first principle of morality would still agree
with  Kant  that the man who is skillful in exercising an influence over
other  men  so as to use them for his own purposes, is clever or cunning
rather  than  prudent.  Hobbes,  for example, says that if you permit to
prudence  "the  use  of  unjust  or  dishonest means . . . you have that
Crooked  Wisdom,  which is called Craft." Aristotle goes even further in
his  insistence  that  "it  is impossible to be practically wise without
being  good,"  or, as the same point is made in the language of Aquinas,
"one  cannot  have  prudence  unless  one  has  the moral virtues; since
prudence  is  right  reason about things to be done, to which end man is
rightly  disposed  by  moral  virtue." "To be able to do the things that
tend  towards  the  mark  we have set before ourselves" is, according to
Aristotle,  to  be  clever.  "If  the  mark  be noble, the cleverness is
laudable,  but  if  the  mark be bad, the cleverness is mere smartness."
Hence  the  man of prudence has a certain cleverness, but the clever man
who is merely smart cannot be called practically wise. By this criterion
the clever thief who plans and executes a successful robbery, the shrewd
busi-

[510b]
nessman  who, without regard to justice, calculates well how to maximize
his  profits,  or  Machiavelli's  prince who exercises cunning to get or
keep  his  power,  exhibits, not prudence, but its counterfeits. In some
cases,  the  cleverness  or  shrewdness  may  simulate  prudence without
involving  the  knavery  of craft or cunning. Some men have what Aquinas
conceives  as  artistic (or technical) rather than moral prudence. Those
who  are  "good counsellors in matters of warfare or seamanship are said
to be prudent officers or pilots, but not simply prudent. Only those are
simply  prudent  who  give good counsel about all the concerns of life."
Aristotle  and  Aquinas  make  the  relation  between prudence and moral
virtue  reciprocal.  The  moral  virtues depend, for their formation and
endurance,  as much upon prudence as prudence depends upon them. "Virtue
makes  us aim at the right end," Aristotle writes, "and practical wisdom
makes  us take the right means." The Tightness of the means requires not
merely that they be adapted to an end, but that the end itself be right.
The  right  end  cannot  be  achieved  unless the means to it be rightly
chosen.  Hence no skill of mind in deliberating about and choosing means
is  truly  the  intellectual  virtue  of  prudence  unless  the  man who
habitually  calculates  well  is  also  habitually inclined by the moral
virtues to choose things for the right end, whether that be happiness or
the  common  good  of society. Conversely, the moral virtues depend upon
prudence  because, in Aristotle's view, they are formed by the making of
right  choices.  His  definition  of  moral  virtue names prudence as an
indispensable  cause.  Since  the  mean  between  extremes, in which the
virtues  consist,  is  in  most  cases  subjective  or  relative  to the
individual,  it  cannot  be determined by objective measurements. Reason
must   determine   it   by  a  prudent  consideration  of  the  relevant
circumstances.  The  interdependence  of  prudence and the moral virtues
seems  to  be  the basis, for both Aristotle and Aquinas, of the insight
that  it  is  impossible to have one moral virtue without having all. On
this  basis, Aristotle says, we can "refute the dialectical argument . .
. that the virtues exist in separation from one another."

[511a]
As  no  moral  virtue can exist apart from practical wisdom, so with it,
all  must  be  present.  Aquinas mentions another intellectual virtue as
indispensable to the moral virtues, naniely, the virtue of understanding
which  consists  in knowing the first principles in practical as well as
speculative matters. The first principles of the practical reason (i.e.,
the  precepts of the natural law) underlie prudence as well as the moral
virtues.  Just  as sound reasoning in speculative matters "proceeds from
naturally  known  principles  ...  so  also does prudence which is right
reason  about  things to be done." Nevertheless, though prudence and the
moral  virtues depend upon it, Aquinas does not include understanding—as
he  does not include art, science, and wisdom— in his enumeration of the
four  cardinal  virtues,  cardinal  in  the  sense  of being the virtues
indispensable  to  a  good  human  life.  These  matters, especially the
interconnection  of  the virtues and the theory of the cardinal virtues,
are  discussed  in  the  chapter  on Virtue. The problem of the relative
worth of the moral and the intellectual virtues is also considered there
and  in  the  chapter on Wisdom, where the contributions to happiness of
prudence   and   wisdom—or   of  practical  and  speculative  wisdom—are
specifically  compared. Here there remains to be considered the Socratic
conception of the relation between knowledge and virtue, for there seems
to  be an issue between his theory of this matter and the foregoing view
of  the  relation  between  prudence and the moral virtues. In the Meno,
Socrates  argues  that whatever a man desires or chooses he either knows
or deems to be good. The man who chooses something evil for himself does
not  do so knowingly, but only through the mistake of deeming that which
is  in  fact  evil to be advantageous or good. Except for such mistakes,
"no  man,"  says  Socrates, "wills or chooses anything evil." Apart from
error  or  ignorance, evil is never voluntarily chosen. Hence, if virtue
consists  "in  willing  or desiring things which are good, and in having
the  power  to gain them," it would seem to follow that knowledge of the
good is closely related to its practice. Subsequently, Socrates suggests
that "if

[511b]
Chapter  73:  PRUDENCE  477  there be any sort of good which is distinct
from  knowledge,  virtue may be that good; but if knowledge embraces all
good,  then  we shall be right in thinking that virtue is knowledge." To
test  these  hypotheses,  he  proceeds  to  consider  the various things
which—whether  or  not  they  are  the same as virtue—are like virtue in
being  advantageous  to  men.  None  of these things, such as courage or
temperance,  seems  to profit men unless accompanied by what, in English
translations,  is  sometimes  called  "wisdom" and sometimes "prudence."
Socrates  points  out that "everything the soul attempts, when under the
guidance of wisdom"—or prudence— "ends in happiness; but in the opposite
when  under  the  guidance  of folly"—or imprudence. "If then," he says,
"virtue  is  a  quality  of  the  soul, and if it be of necessity always
advantageous,  then virtue must be wisdom or prudence, since none of the
things of the soul are either advantageous or hurtful in themselves, but
they  are  all  made  advantageous or hurtful by the addition to them of
prudence  or  imprudence"—wisdom  or folly. From this, says Socrates, we
can  conclude  that  "prudence  is virtue, either the whole of virtue or
some  part of it at least"— or, as this is sometimes translated, "virtue
is  either  wholly  or partly wisdom." In the light of his own view that
all  the  moral virtues depend on practical wisdom, Aristotle criticizes
the  Socratic  position. "Socrates in one respect was on the right track
while  in  another he went astray. In thinking that all the virtues were
forms  of practical wisdom he was wrong, but in saying that they implied
practical  wisdom  he  was right . . . Socrates thought the virtues were
rules  or  rational  principles  .  .  .  while  we think they involve a
rational  principle."  Similarly,  in  considering  the question whether
there   can  be  moral  without  intellectual  virtue,  Aquinas  writes:
"Although  virtue be not right reason, as Socrates held, yet not only is
it  according  to  right reason, insofar as it inclines a man to do that
which  is  in accord with right reason as the Platonists maintained; but
it  also  needs  to be joined with right reason, as Aristotle declares."
Aquinas  furthermore interprets the opinion that "every virtue is a kind
of prudence," which he attributes to Socrates, as meaning

[512a]
478  THE  GREAT IDEAS that when "a man is in possession of knowledge, he
cannot sin, and that everyone who sins does so through ignorance." This,
he  says,  "is  based  on  a  false  supposition, because the appetitive
faculty  obeys  the  reason,  not  blindly,  but with a certain power of
opposition."  Nevertheless,  "there  is  some  truth  in  the  saying of
Socrates that so long as a man is in possession of knowledge he does not
sin;  provided  that  this  knowledge  involves the use of reason in the
individual  act  of choice." Whether those who criticize the position of
Socrates  accurately  perceive  his intention and state the issue fairly
are  problems of interpretation as difficult as the question of where in
this  matter  the  truth  lies. If Socrates is saying that a man will do
good  if  he knows the good, what sort of knowledge is implied—knowledge
of  the  good  in  general  or knowledge of what is good in a particular
case?  Do  both types of knowledge of the good lead as readily or surely
to  good or virtuous action? Whether or not, in addition to knowledge, a
good  will or right desire is essential, it may be held that prudence is
required  to  apply  moral  principles—aiming at the good in general— to
particular  cases.  "There  exists no moral system," writes Mill, "under
which  there  do  not arise unequivocal cases of conflicting obligation.
These  are  the real difficulties, the knotty points, both in the theory
of  ethics  and  in the conscientious guidance of personal conduct. They
are  overcome  practically, with great or less success, according to the
intellect  and  virtue of the individual." Mill seems to imply that both
prudence  and  virtue  are  essential  to  good  action  on the level of
particulars,  and  that  without  them  the  kind  of knowledge which is
expressed  in  moral  principles  does not necessarily lead a man to act
well.  One  other problem of interpretation must be mentioned. It occurs
with  respect  to  Aristotle's  statement  concerning  diverse  modes of
prudence.  "Political  wisdom and practical wisdom are the same state of
mind,"  he  writes,  "but  their  essence is not the same. Of the wisdom
concerned  with the city, the practical wisdom which plays a controlling
part is legislative wisdom, while that which is related to this as par-

[512b]
ticulars  to  their universal is known by the general name of 'political
wisdom'  .  . . Practical wisdom also is identified especially with that
form of it which is concerned with the individual man, and this is known
by  the  general  name  'practical  wisdom.'  Of the other kinds, one is
called  domestic,  another  legislative,  a third political; and of this
last, one part is called deliberative and the other judicial." Does this
mean  that  skill  of  mind  in  determining the best means to an end is
different  according  to differences in the end—whether the happiness of
an  individual  or  the  common  good  of  a  society  ?  Does  it mean,
furthermore,  that  the  prudence  involved  in  managing a household is
different  from the prudence concerned with political affairs; and that,
in  the  state,  the  prudence  of  the  ruler  (prince or statesman) is
different  from  the prudence of the ruled (subject or citizen), because
the  one  moves  on the level of general laws, the other on the level of
particular   acts   in   compliance  with  law?  Within  the  sphere  of
jurisprudence,  or  the  prudence  of  laws,  is  the  prudence  of  the
legislator  or  lawmaker  different  from  the prudence of the judge who
applies  the  law?  In  his  Treatise on Prudence, Aquinas answers these
questions affirmatively. He distinguishes between private, domestic, and
political  prudence,  and  within  the  political  sphere places special
emphasis  upon what he calls "reignative prudence," the sort of prudence
Dante  calls  "a  kingly  prudence,"  which  sets  the prince apart from
ordinary  men. Hobbes, on the other hand, asserts that "to govern well a
family  and  a  kingdom,  are  not  different  degrees  of prudence, but
different  sorts  of business; no more than to draw a picture in little,
or  as  great, or greater than life, are different degrees of art." This
issue  is  intimately  connected  with  the  problem  of  the  forms  of
government.  If  only  a  few  men  are  fitted by nature to acquire the
special  mode  of prudence which is reignative or legislative, would not
government  by  the  few  or  by  the one seem to be naturally best? If,
however,  in  a  republic,  those who are citizens rule and are ruled in
turn,  should  not  each  citizen  have  the prudence requisite for both
tasks,  whether  it be the same or different? Finally, if the democratic
theory is that all men

[513a]
are  capable  of  being  citizens—  though  not  all,  special  mode  of
reignative  prudence;  or  merely  perhaps, are equally eligible for the
highest   a   higher  degree  of  the  same  prudence  by  which  public
offices—must  not  political prudence be they govern their private lives
and   their   doconceived  as  attainable  by  all  men?  ^___^-  mestic
establishments;  or,  as  Hobbes  suggests,  The  question  remains open
whether  those  have  other  abilities  whereby  they  can apply the who
deserve  the  highest  magistracies  have a same prudence to a different
kind  of  business.  OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  i.  The nature of prudence: as
practical  wisdom,  as  a  virtue  or quality of the deliberative 2. The
place  of  prudence  among  the virtues of the mind 481 2a. Practical or
political  wisdom distinguished from speculative or philosophical wisdom
lb.  Prudence  distinguished  from  art: action or doing contrasted with
production or making ic. The relation of prudence to intuitive reason or
to  the  understanding  of  the  natural  law:  the  moral perception of
particulars  3.  The  interdependence of prudence and the moral virtues:
the parts played by deliberation, will, and emotion in human conduct 30.
Moral  virtue  as  determining  the end for which prudence makes a right
choice  of ijb. Prudence as a factor in the formation and maintenance of
moral  virtue:  the  determination of the relative or subjective mean 3c
Shrewdness  or  cleverness as the counterfeit of prudence: the abuses of
casuistry  3^.  Prudence,  continence,  and  temperance 4. The sphere of
prudence 40. The confinement of prudence to the things within our power:
the  relation  of prudence to free will, choice, and deliberation 5. The
nature  of  a  prudent  judgment  50.  The conditions of prudent choice:
counsel,  deliberation, judgment 5b. The acts of the practical reason in
matters open to choice: decision and command, 5c. The maxims of prudence
6.  Prudence  in  relation  to  the  common  good  of  the community 6a.
Political  prudence:  the  prudence  of  the prince or statesman, of the
subject  or  citizen 6b. Jurisprudence: prudence in the determination of
laws and the adjudication of

[513b]
Chapter  73  :  PRUDENCE 479 PAGE means: right desire as the standard of
practical truth 482 leading to execution or use 485 cases 486

[514a]
480 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in  the work or passage cited. The nature of
prudence;   as   practical  wisdom,  as  a  virtue  or  quality  of  the
deliberative  mind  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 1:4; 19:22; 34:9-10 — (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 1:4; 19:19; 34:910 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  i,  383d384a  7  Plato:  Charmides, 7b-c / Protagoras, 43a-b / Meno,
183d-184c;  188b-189d  BK  IV,  CH  2  '248  Aristotle:  Topics,  I22a2]
169d-170a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[no3 a4-io]
348c-d; bk vi, ch 5 389a-c; ch 7 390a-d esp
[ii4i b8-23]
390c-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[1 366*20-23] 609a-b
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch i 105a-106c; bk 11, ch 5 142c-144a;
ch  23  170a-172d;  bk  hi, ch 2 177c-178d; ch 10 185d-187a; bk iv, ch 5
228a-230b  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii 258a-b; bk v, sect 9
270b-c;  sect  34  273c;  bk vi, sect 12 274c; bk viii, sect 16-17 286d;
sect 48 289c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 4, 512a

[514b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in S3 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b 164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance  in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch 10, 662a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 56, a 3, ans 31a-32b; q 57, aa 4-5 38a-40a; q 58, a 2, rep
1 42a-43a; a 3, rep i 43b-44a; q 65, a 1 70b-72a; part ii-ii, q 181, a 2
617d618c  22  Chaucer:  Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  53c-54a;  60c;  67d-68a;  84c-d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  201b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  520b-c  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c;  81  d95b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,
395a-396a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 349b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of Morals, 261c-d; 266b-c esp 266b,d
[fn
1];  267b-d / Practical Reason, 305d; 339b-d; 361c-d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 376c377d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
191  66b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 315b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
x, 424a-c 53 James: Psychology, 13a-15a passim

[515a]
2  to  3  Chapter  73:  PRUDENCE  481 2. The place of prudence among the
virtues of the mind 2a. Practical or political wisdom distinguished from
speculative  or  philosophiadjwisdom  7  Plato:  Statesman,  581c-582a /
Philebus, 633a-635b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[i098b24-26]
344b: bk vi, ch i
[ii38b i7]-cH
3
[ii39b i8]
387a-388b;cH7-8 390a-391c; cm 11 [ii43b i4]- ch 12
[ii44a36] 393b-394a; ch
13
[1145*612] 394d / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch ii
[i37i b26-28]
615b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q i, a 6, ans 6b-7a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 66, a 5, rep 1-2 79b-80c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiii
[88104] 126b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60c-61a;  84c-d;  part  iv, 267a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  327b-d;  520b-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
4c-6c;  16d17a;  42a-c;  55b-d;  65d-66a; 86b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  i,  44a-b;  part hi, 48b-c 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 543b- 544a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect  5-6  94b-95a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect i, div 1-5 451a-453b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
373c-374a   42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  60b-c;  190c-191a  /  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261d;  266c-d;  271a-c / Practical Reason,
291a-296d;  319c-321b;  329a-330c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 388a-d;
390b,d-391a  /  Judgement,  461a-475d  esp 463a-464c, 474b-475d 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  346c-347a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right,
pref,  4b-7a  2b.  Prudence  distinguished  from  art:  action  or doing
contrasted  with  production  or  making  7  Plato:  Charmides,  5c-6d /
Philebus, 633a635b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 2
[ii39a32-b
5]  388a;  ch 4 [ii40si]-ch6 [1141*1] 388d-389d; ch 12 [ii43b i7-ii44a6|
393b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  34, a 1, rep 3
768c-769d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 56, a 3, ans
31a-32b;  q  57,  a  4  38a-39a;  a 5, rep 1,3 39a-40a; q 58, a 2, rep i
42a-43a;  a  5,  rep  2  44d-45c;  q  65,  a  i,  rep 4 70b72a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 266c-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 388a-d /Judgement, 515b-c;
523d-524a

[515b]
2c. The relation of prudence to intuitive reason or to the understanding
of  the  natural  law:  the moral perception of particulars 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[i095a3o-b i2]
340c-d; ch 7
[io98 a35-b8] 343d-344a; bk
ii,  ch 9 [no9b20-23] 355c; bk hi, ch 3 [ni2b341113*2] 358d-359a; bk vi,
ch 5-6 389a-d; ch 8 [1142^2-31] 391b-c; ch ii
[ii43 a25-b
5]  392d-393a;  bk  vii,  ch  3  [ii47a25-b6]  397c-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 56, a 3, ans 31a-32b; q 57, a 4, ans and rep 2
38a39a;  a  5, rep 3 39a-40a; a 6, ans and rep 3 40a-41a; q 58, a 4, ans
44a-d; a 5, ans and rep 1 44d-45c 3. The interdependence of prudence and
the  moral  virtues: the parts played by deliberation, will, and emotion
in human conduct 4 Homer: Odyssey 183a-322d esp bk iv
[265295] 201d-202a, bk v [282-493] 210d-213a,c,
bk xii 250a-254d, bk xiii
[185-440]
257a259d, bk xvi 272a-276d 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp
[259-398] 42d-44a, [930-1093] 50a-51d
5 Sophocles: Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[50134] 182d-183c
5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[373-387]
228b-c  /  Phoenician  Maidens [697-747] 384a-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk
viii,  269c-270a  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370a-c; bk ii,
389d-390b;  bk  iv, 474a-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 48a-50d; 58a-64d / Meno,
174d-176a; 183d-184d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[no3b271104^] 349b-c; ch 6 351c-352d passim; bk vi,
ch  12-13 393b-394d; bk vii, ch 9 [115^29]- ch 10 [1152^4] 402b-403b; bk
x,  ch  8  [1178*  16-19]  ^32d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 5
257b-c  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  viii  [18-25]  259b  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  113,  a  1,  rep  2  576a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 57, a 4, ans 38a-39a; a 5, ans 39a-40a; q 58,
aa  4-5 44a-45c; q 61 54d-59d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 64a-c; 65b-c
25  Montaigne: Essays, 20d-22a; 159a-162c 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar,
act ii, sc i
[60-69] 575a
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act iv, sc iv [32-66] 59a-c 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  256c-d;  291d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
86c-95b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi  48b-51b  35  Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 46-54 189d-192c; sect 69 196d-197a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  45b-c; 395a-396a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of Morals, 260ac; 261c-d; 266a-267d/ Practical Reason, 305d-

[516a]
(3.  The  interdependence  of  prudence and the moral virtues: the parts
played  by  deliberation,  will,  and  emotion  in human conduct.} 307d;
318c-d;  339b-d; 341c-342a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  ii, par 114 42a-b / Philosophy of History,
intro,  165a166b  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 310c-313a esp 311b-d 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  211a-213a;  bk  vi,  235a  53 James:
Psychology,  13a-15a  passim,  esp  14b15a;  794a-808a  passim 5a. Moral
virtue as determining the end for which prudence makes a right choice of
means:  right  desire  as  the  standard of practical truth 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk hi, ch i [n6b22-26] 163b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1 103^7110^9] 349b-c; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b; ch 5
[ii40b4-i9] 389b-c; ch 9
[ii42b i7-34] 391d392b; ch
12
[1144*6-37]
393d-394a; ch 13
[ii44b30-ii45 a6] 394c-d / Politics, bk vii, ch
13 [133^24-381 536b-c 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  113,  a  1,  rep  2  576a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 56, a 2, rep 3 30c-31a; a 3, ans 31a-32b; a 4,
rep 4 32b-33c; q 57, a 4, ans 38a-39a; a 5, ans and rep 3 39a-40a; q 58,
a  3,  rep  2 43b-44a; a 4, ans and rep i 44a-d; a 5 44d-45c; q 65, a 1,
ans  and  rep  3-4 70b-72a; a 2, ans and rep 3 72a-d; a 3, ans and rep i
72d-73d;  part 11—11, q 181, a 2 617d-618c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 52c-53c
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 235a-b / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b;
259c-260c;   266b-267d;  268b;  271d-279d  esp  271d-272b,  274d-275b  /
Practical  Reason,  305d-307d;  318c-d;  357c-360d  /  Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics, 376c-377d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387d-388a
43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 456d-457b passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  ii,  par  122 44a; par 140 49b-54a 5b. Prudence as a factor in the
formation  and  maintenance  of  moral  virtue: the determination of the
relative  or  subjective  mean  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  61c-62a  / Meno,
183d-184c / Phaedo, 226a-b / Republic, bk x, 439b-d / Laws, bk 1, 643c-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1 103^71104*9] 349b-c; ch 6 351c-352d
passim, esp
[iio6b36-no7 a2]
352c; ch 9 354d-355a,c;

[516b]
482  THE GREAT IDEAS 3a to 3d bk v, ch 9 [1137*5-26] 385b-c; bk vi, ch 5
389a-c; ch 9
[1142^7-34]
391d-392b; ch 12-13 393b-394d; bk x, ch 8
[1178*16-19]
432d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  12 187b188b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk vi, sect 16 275b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ix, ch
4  287a288b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 113, a 1, rep 2
576a-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  56, a 2, rep 2
30c-31a;  q  57,  a  5  39a-40a; q 58, a 2 42a-43a; a 4 44a-d; q 65, a 1
70b-72a  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii, 256c-d; 291d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning,  79b-c; 86b95b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi
48b-51b  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 359 235a; 378-381 238a-b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  45b-c  42 Kant: Practical Reason, 305d-307d / Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  365 b-d; 376c-377d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
387d-388a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 140 49b-54a 3c.
Shrewdness  or  cleverness as the counterfeit of prudence: the abuses of
casuistry  5 Aristophanes: Frogs [534-541] 570b 6 Herodotus: History, bk
hi, 95d-96b; bk viii, 279d-280b 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk viii,
575b-d;  584b-585a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk vi, ch 12 [ii44*i2]-ch 13
[ii44b  i6]  393d-394b;  bk  vii,  ch  10 [1152* 8-15] 403a 14 Plutarch:
Aratus, 829b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 58, a 4, rep 2
44a-d;  q  93, a 6, rep 2 219d-220d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvii
[55-136]  40a-41b  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch xviii, 25a-b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 68a 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act i, sc hi [302-410]
212b-213a  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 27a-127a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  ii,  75b-76a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 142c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  532d-533a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v, 204c-206a;
228b-230c;  bk  x, 424ac; bk xi, 476c-480a 5d. Prudence, continence, and
temperance  7  Plato:  Charmides,  7a-c  /  Protagoras,  59b-62b / Meno,
183d-184c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1103*3-10]
348c-d; bk hi, ch 12
[ni9*35-b i9]
366a,  c;  bk vi, ch 5 [ii40bn-i9] 389b-c; ch 9 [ii42b 17-34] 391d-392b;
bk vii, ch i
[ii45b i7-i9]
395c; ch 2-3 395c-398a esp ch 2
[ii45b2i-

[517a]
; 3e to 4j Chapter 73: PRUDENCE 483 1146*8] 395c 396a; ch 4
[1148*4-22] 398b-c;
ch 6 399d-400c; ch 8-10 401c-403c esp ch 10
[1152*7-24] 403a-b; ch
ii
[ii52b i5-i8] 403d;
ch  12  [1153*21-23] 404c; [n53a27-35] 404c-d 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  xix, ch 4 !J512a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 58, a 2,
ans 42a-43a; a 3, rep 2 43b-44a; q 65, a 1 70b-72a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
312c-314b  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [334-369] 306b307a; [527-551]
310b-311a / Samson Agonistes
[38-59] 340b
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxviii,  259b  3*. The vices of
imprudence:  precipitance  and  undue  caution  Old  Testament: Genesis,
25:29-34 / Proverbs, 7:6-27; 14:16,29; 18:13; 19:2; 20:21; 25:8; 29:11 /
Ecclesiastes,  5:2-3;  7:9— (D) Ecclesiastes, 5:1-2; 7:10 Apoc ry ph a :
Ecclesiasticus,  2  :2  ;  4 :29 ; 6 7-8 ; 8 : 1 9 9:18; 19:4,8-9; 20:8;
21:25-26;  28:11; 30:24— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:2; 4:34; 6:7-8; 8:22;
9:25;  19:4,8-9;  20:8;  21:28-29;  28:13; 30:26 New Testament: Matthew,
13:19-23  / Mar\, 4:3-20 / Luke, 8:5-15 / Acts, 19:36 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
i
[1-492] 3a-8a; bk ix
[i172]
57a-58d / Odyssey, bk ix
[461-542]
234a-d; bk xii [260-419] 252d-254c 5 Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d esp
[739-786]
23a-c / Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp
[631-719] 34a-35a
/  Prometheus  Bound  40a51d esp [259-398] 42d-44a, [930 1093] 50a-51d 5
Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[633-767] 136c-137d
/ Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [654-683I 148d-149a,
[748-783]
149c-d / Electra 156a-169a,c esp
[121-403] 157b-159b, [938-1057] 163c-164d
/ Philoctetes 182a-195a,c 5 Euripides: Rhesus 203a-211d esp
[1-148]
203a-204c / Suppliants
[465-510]
262b-d / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c esp
[215-433]
341 d343b / Phoenician Maidens
[443-593] 381 d383a
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi, 94c-d; 97b-c; bk vii, 216d-218b; 225c-d
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 370a-c; bk ii, 393a-c; 402a-404d
esp  402c-d,  403b-c;  bk  iv,  449b-c; 462d-463a; bk v, 507a-c; bk vii,
545b-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 62b-64a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1104*10-26]
349c-d; bk vi, ch 5 [ii40b i3-i9] 389b-c; ch 9
[ii42b i7-34] 391d-392b; bk
vii, ch 6 399d400c; ch 9
[1151*28^16] 402b-c
/ Rhetoric, bk 11, ch 12
[i389*2]-ch
14
[i39ob u] 636b638a
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vii [572-600] 252a-b; bk xi [376-444] 338b-340a 14
Plutarch:  Fabius-Perides,  154d  /  Pelopidas,  232a-233a;  244c-245a /
Marcellus-Pelopidas,

[517b]
262c  /  Nicias  423a-438d  /  Alexander,  547b548a / Caius and Tiberius
Gracchus- Agis and Cleomenes, 690c-691a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 61b
/  Histories, bk 1, 205d-206a; bk hi, 252c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  108, a 3, rep 5 334a-336b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xxvi  [49-142]  38c  39c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk hi, stanza
42-47 60a-b; stanza 129 71a-b / Nuns Priest's Tale 450a-460b esp
[15,273-452]
457b-460b / Manciple's Tale
[17,206-311]
491b-493b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxv, 36b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  77d;  79c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  22d-23b;  53c-55d;  174a-d  26
Shakespeare:  Romeo  and Juliet, act hi, sc hi 304d-306d / 1st Henry IV,
act  i, sc hi 437d-440d; act ii, sc hi 443b-444b; act hi, sc 1 [147-190]
451c-452a;  act iv, sc hi [1-29] 459b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet 29a-72a,c
esp act iv, sc iv
[33-66]
59a-c / Troilus and Cressida, act in, sc in
[184-241] 124b-125a
/  Othello  205a-243a,c  esp act v, sc ii [338-356] 242d243a / King Lear
244a  283a,c  /  Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp act hi, sc ii hi 373c-377a /
Timon  of  Athens 393a-420d esp act n, sc 11 400c-403b / Henry VIII, act
i,  sc  i  [122-149]  551b-c;  sc  ii  [68-88]  553c-d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i, 8c-10a; 116a-117b; part ii, 252c-257a; 291d 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  92  125b-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 172 203b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  203a-207b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  149b-c 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{  esp  148b-150a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
15d-18b;  bk  hi, 139a-c; bk v, 211a-213a; bk viii, 321d322d; 328c-333a;
334d-335a;  336b-337d; bk ix, 344b-346a; 366d-367b; bk x, 426b; bk xiii,
569d-570b;   bk   xiv,  596c-d;  603a-604b;  epilogue  1,  655c-656b  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  x,  273a-d  53 James: Psychology,
799b-807a passim, esp 800a-801a, 806b-807a 4. The sphere of prudence 4a.
The confinement of prudence to the things within our power: the relation
of  prudence to free will, choice, and deliberation 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk  hi,  ch  2-3 357b-359a; bk vi, ch 2 [ii39a32-bn] 388a-b; ch 5 [1140*
3i-b  5]  389a-b; ch 7 [ii4i b8-i4] 390c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch i 105a-106c; ch 18 124a-125a; ch 29 134d-138a; bk ii, ch

[518a]
(4.  The  sphere  of  prudence.  4a.  The confinement of prudence to the
things  within  our  power: the relation ofprudence tofree will, choice,
and deliberation. ) 5 142c-144a; ch io 148c-150a; ch 23 170a172d; bk in,
ch  2  177c-178d;  ch 10 185d187a; ch 18 192ac; bk iv, ch i 213a-223d 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk ii, sect 6 257c; sect 9 257d; sect ii 258a-b;
sect  16  259a; bk v, sect 19 272a; sect 34 273c; bk vi, sect 16 275b-d;
sect  22  276a;  bk  vii,  sect 16 280d; bk vm, sect 16-17 286d; sect 28
287c; sect 48 289c; bk ix, sect 7 292b; bk x, sect 34-35 301a-b; bk xii,
sect  3  307b-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 13, aa 4-6
675a-677b;  q  14,  aa  3-6 678c-681a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  57,  aa  4-6  38a-41a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxv, 35a-b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 53c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 52c-53c; lOOa-
lOlc;  136b-139b;  393b-394a; 451d-452d; 514d-515a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning, 76d-78a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi 48b-51b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 48-54 190c-192c passim; sect 57
193b-c  42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 266c-267d / Practical
Reason,   318c-321b  esp  320c-321b;  357c-360d  53  James:  Psychology,
199b-201b  4b. The restriction of prudence to the consideration of means
rather than ends 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 9
[1137*5-26]
385b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  5  389a-c;  ch 9 [ii42b i7-34] 391d-392b; ch 12 [1
144^-37] 393d-394a; ch 13
[ii44b30-ii45 a6] 394c-d / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch 9
[i366b2o-22] 609a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 14, a 2 678b-c; q 15, a 3
682c-683b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 57, a 5, ans
39a-40a;  q  58, a 4, ans 44a-d; a 5, rep 1 44d-45c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  266b267d  53  James:  Psychology, 796a-b 5. The
nature  of  a  prudent  judgment  5a.  The conditions of prudent choice:
counsel,  deliberation, judgment Old Testament: Proverbs, 11 :i4; 12:15;
13:10,16; 14:18; 15:22; 19:20; 20:5,18; 24:6 Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:18— (D)
OT,  Tobias, 4:19 / Ecclesiasticus passim, esp 6:6, 8:17, 25:4-5, 32:18,
34:9-11,  37:7-16— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus passim, esp 6:6, 8:20, 25:6-7,
32:22-23,  34:9-12,37:7-20 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [333-523] 5a7c
/ Persians [739-786] 23ac 5 Sophocles: Antigone [633-767] 136c-137d

[518b]
484  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4b to 5a 5 Euripides: Rhesus [1-148] 203a-204c /
Suppliants [465-510] 262 b-d / Phoenician Maidens [443-593] 381d-383a;
[697-747] 384a-d /
Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [378-414]  428b-c  5 Aristophanes: Birds [366-382]
546d-547a  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 31c-d; 46c-d; bk vii, 217a; 218c;
219a-c;  258d;  bk viii, 269c270a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
383d384a;  bk  ii,  397bc;  bk  hi,  427a-c  7  Plato:  Meno, 183d-184c;
188b-189a  /  Republic, bk in, 337b-338a; bk x, 439b-441a,c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^91095*12] 340a-b; ch
4
[i095 a3o-b i2] 340c-d;
bk  in,  ch  2-3  357b-359a;  bk  v, ch 9 [1137*526] 385b-c; bk vi, ch 5
389a-c;  ch  7  [ii4i  b823]  390c-d;  ch  8 [ii42a i3-22] 391b; ch 9-11
391c-393b  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 6 181d-182b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  12 264c 14 Plutarch: Timoleon, 197c-198a 15
Tacitus:  Histories, bk ii, 234b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
22,  a  1  127d-128d;  q  83,  a  i, ans 436d-438a; a 3, ans and rep 2-3
438d-439c;  part  i-ii,  q  13,  a 1 672d-673c; a 3, ans 674c-675a; q 14
677b-681a;  q  44,  a  2  808b-d;  a  4, ans 809c-810a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57,  a 4, rep 3 38a-39a; a 5, ans and rep 2
39a40a; a 6 40a-41a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 90-93
12b-13a  / Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a esp par 7-13 402b-405a, par 17-31,
407b414a, par 59-78 427a-432a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53a; 53c- d;
60c-d;  64a-c;  65a-c;  66c-68a;  77d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 393b-394a;
450d-451a; 520b-522d 26 Shakespeare: Comedy of Errors, act hi, sc i
[85-106] 157b
27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  11 113c-115d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  235d237a  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  86c-95b  33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 39a / Pensees, 381383
238b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 48 190c-d; sect
53  191d-192b;  sect 57 193b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div
36,  465a-d  [fn  1] 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 266b-c /
Practical  Reason,  318c-321b;  357c360d 43 Federalist: number 2, 32b-d;
number   8,   46d-47a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  276b-277a;  287b-c;  295a  /
Representative   Government,   410c-d  /  Utilitarianism,  456a-457b  44
Bosvvell: Johnson, 149b-c

[519a]
b  5b to 6a Chapter 73: PRUDENCE 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par 227 74b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; bk vi, 235a 53
James:  Psychology,  13a-15a; 794a-798tj_esp 796a-b, 797b-798a 54 Freud:
General  Introduction, 624d-625b 5b. The acts of the practical reason in
matters  open  to  choice: decision and command, leading to execution or
use 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433*13-31]
665d-666a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[no3b27no4a
9] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 2-3 357b-359a; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b; ch 7
[ii4i b8-23]
390c-d; ch 10
[1143*4-10] 392b-c; ch
12-13  393b 394d; bk vii, ch 2 395c-396c esp [ii45b 20-1146^] 395c-396a;
ch 10
[1152*8-24]
403a19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part 1, q 22, a 1, ans and rep 1-2
127d-128d;  part  i—ii,  q  17 686b,d-693d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i—ii,  q 57, a 6, ans and rep 2 40a-41a; q 61, a 3, ans 56b-57a 27
Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  iv,  sc iv [33-66] 59a-c 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  hi, 409d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 260ac;
265c-267d  csp  266c-267d  /  Practical  Reason, 305d-307d; 314d-321b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 38 21d; part in, par 214 71a-c
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk vi, 235a; bk x, 411c-412d; 421c-426a;
440c-442c;   459d-461d;  bk  xi,  488c-489c;  bk  xii,  536b;  bk  xiii,
584c-585c;  586d-587d; epilogue i, 654a655c; epilogue ii, 685a 53 James:
Psychology,  794a-798b  esp  797b-798a  5c.  The  maxims of prudence Old
Testament:    Proverbs   passim   /   Ecclesiastes   passim   Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  1-43  passim—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1-43 passim New
Testament:  Matthew,  6:19-34  /  Luke,  12:13-32  /  Acts,  19:36  /  /
Corinthians,  7:2935  / Ephesians, 5:15-16 / Philippians, 4:6 / I Peter,
5:7 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[631719]
34a-35a / Prometheus Bound
[259-398]
42d-44a;
[887-906]
49c-d;
[930-1093]
50a51d 5 Sophocles: Antigone
[1-99]
131a-132a   /   Electra   [121-403]  157b-159b;  [938-1057]  163c164d  6
Herodotus: History, bk vii, 225b-226a; bk viii, 269c-270a 6 Thucydides :
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a-c; bk v, 507a-c 14 Plutarch: Pericles,
131b-c

[519b]
485  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida, bk i, stanza 101-118 14a-16b;
stanza   136-139  18b-19a;  bk  hi,  stanza  233-236  85a-b  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  53a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  51a-55d esp 52c-53c;
136b-139b;  174a-d  26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc n [183-220]
535d-536b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc m
[59-80]
35a  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 331d-333b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  81d-95b  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi  48b-51b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  45,  schol  438b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect v, div 36, 465d
[fn
1]  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  345b;  410c-d 6. Prudence in
relation to the common good of the community 6a. Political prudence: the
prudence  of  the  prince  or  statesman,  of the subject or citizen Old
Testament:  Genesis, 41:33-41 / / Kings, 3:16-28— (D) /// Kings, 3:16-28
/  Proverbs,  11:14;  20:18,28;  23:1-3;  24:6;  25:6-7; 29:12; 31:4-5 /
Ecclesiastes,  8:2-4  Apocrypha:  Tobit,  12:7—  (£)) OT, Tobias, 12:7 /
Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-3—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:1-3 4 Homer: Iliad,
bk i
[1-492] 3a-8a; bk ix
[i172] 57a-58d
5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [333-523] 5a7c / Persians 15a-26d esp
[739-786] 23a-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1-512]
99a103d / Antigone
[1-99]
131a-132a;
[633-767]
136c-137d / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[50134] 182d-183c
5 Euripides: Rhesus 203a-211d esp
[1-148]
203a-204c / Suppliants
[103-597]
259a-263c / Bacchantes
[266-271] 342a-b
/ Phoenician Maidens
[443-593]
381d-383a;
[697-747]
384a-d / Orestes
[682-716]
400d-401a / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d esp
[1-542]
425a-429d 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[480-571]
460d461c;  [971-999]  466c-d  /  Knights  470a-487a,c esp [13 1 6-1 408]
486a-487a,c / Frogs [686-737] 572a-d;
[14 17-15 14]
581a-582a,c / Lysistrata
[541-602] 590a-591a
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6a-b;  41c-d;  bk  hi,  97b-c;  bk vii,
216d-218a; 225a-226b; 242a-b; 245d-246b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  i, 365c367a; 370a-c; 383d-384a; bk ii, 389d-391b; 393a-c; 397b-c; bk
hi,   427a-c;  436d-438b;  bk  iv,  451a-c;  462d-463a;  474a-c;  bk  v,
483c-485b;  507a-c;  bk  vi, 511c-516a; bk vii, 545b-c; bk viii, 564a-c;
569c-570a; 574d575d

[520a]
(6.  Prudence  in  relation  to  the  common  good of the community. 6a.
Political  prudence;  the  prudence  of  the prince or statesman, of the
subject  or  citizen.}  7  Plato:  Protagoras, 43a-b / Meno, 174d-176a /
Statesman,  604c-608d  /  Laws,  bk hi, 669b670c; bk ix, 754a-b; bk xii,
785d-786b / Seventh Letter, 806d-807b; 813d-814d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
vi, ch 5
[ii40b4-n]
389b; ch 8
[ii4i b23-ii42ai2] 390d-391a; bk
x,  ch 9 434a-436a,c / Politics, bk hi, ch 4 473c-475a; ch ii 479b-480c;
bk  iv,  ch  14  498b-499c;  bk  v,  ch  8-1 i 509d-518c; bk vii, ch 2-3
528a-530a  12 Epictetus : Discourses, bk hi, ch 7 182b-184a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  5  261a;  bk iv, sect 4 264a; bk v, sect 16
271c-d; bk vii, sect 5 280a-b; bk ix, sect 23 293c; bk x, sect 6 297a-b;
bk  xi,  sect  8  303a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xi [296-444] 336a-340a 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  129a-141a,c  /  Alcibiades,  167c-168a / Alexander
540b,d-576d passim / Phocion, 604b,d-605d / Cuius und Tiberius Grucchus-
Agis and Cleomenes 689b,d-691a,c / Demetrius, 736c-737b / Dion, 781b,d /
BrutusDion  824b,d-826a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk iv, 72b-73a; bk xvi,
176b-d / Histories, bk i, 193d; 211c-212b; bk hi, 247a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologicu,  part  i,  q 22, a 1, ans 127d-128d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell,  xxvii  [55-136]  40a-41b;  paradise,  xiii  [88-1  ii]  126b-c 23
Machiavelli:  Prince  la-37d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 60d-61a;
67d-68a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 51a-55d; 381a-388c; 451d-452d; 488b-489b;
490d-491d 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act hi, sc ii
[29-84] 453b-d / 2nd Henry IV, act
i,  sc  hi  472d-474a / Julius Cuesur, act ii, sc i [154191] 576a-c; act
iv, sc i 587a-c 27 Shakespeare: Antony und Cleoputru, act ii, sc 11
[1-27] 318c-d
/  Coriolunus  351a-392a,c esp act 11, sc in [53-160] 366c-367c, act hi,
sc  11  [28-92]  373d-374c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 331a333b;
340d-343a;  353b-356d;  361a-d 30 Bacon: Advuncement of Leurning, 4c-6c;
20d26a;  74b-c;  81d-82a;  94b-95b  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii,
sect 156158 61a-62b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 7b-8a; 28b-29b; part in,
112a-115b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Luws,  bk  vi,  39b  38 Rousseau:
Politicul  Economy,  368b-c;  373c374a / Sociul Contruct, bk hi, 409d 39
Smith:  Weulth  of  Nutions,  bk  i,  109d-110d;  bk 11, 126a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  und  Full,  lb-2a  passim;  50a;  331b-332d; 609d-610a; 645a 41
Gibbon: Decline und Full, 168c

[520b]
486  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 6a to 6b 43 Federalist: number 5, 37d; number 27,
96b;  number  31,  105b-c;  number  40,  130c132a; number 62, 190d-191a;
number 74, 222b-d 43 Mill: Representutive Government, 334b-c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  255a-256a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 274 92a;
additions,  166  145b-c / Philosophy of History, part 11, 271d-272a; part
iv,  361d-362a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Mun,  315b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  9c-10d;  bk  ii,  65d-66d;  bk  x, 421c-426a; 440c-442c;
459d461d;  bk xiii, 570a-b; 584c-585c 6b. Jurisprudence: prudence in the
determination  of  laws  and  the  adjudication  of  cases  5 Aeschylus:
Eumenides [397-777] 85c-89a 5 Aristophanes: Wusps 507a-525d 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  32b-c;  bk  hi, 95d-96b 7 Plato: Apology 200a-212a,c /
Republic, bk hi, 337b-338a / Theuetetus, 544a-c / Stutesmun, 599c-603a /
Luws,  bk ix, 744b-c; bk xi, 782a-b; 784a-b; bk xii, 792a-c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  10 385c-386b; bk vi, ch 8 [ii4i b23-33] 390d-391a /
Politics, bk 11, ch 8
[i268b5~23] 464c; bk
hi, ch ii
[i282b i-i4]
480b-c; ch 15
[1286*10-30]
484b-c;  ch 16 [1287*24-28] 485d; [i287b i5-25] 486a-b / Rhetoric, bk i,
ch i
[i354a32-bi5]
593c-d 14 Plutarch: Solon, 70d-71b 15 Tacitus: Annuls, bk hi, 61c-62a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  6  514b515a  20 Aquinas: Summu
Theologicu,  part  i-ii,  q  91,  a  3,  rep 3 209d-210c; q 94, a 4, ans
223d224d;  a  5,  224d-225d;  q  95,  a  i,  rep  2-3  226c-227c; aa 2-3
227c-229b;  q  96,  a  i,  rep  2  230d-231c;  a  6 235a-d; q 97, aa 1-2
236a237b;  a  4  238b-239b;  q  105,  a  2, ans and rep 7-8 309d-316a 22
Chaucer:  TuleofMelibeus, par 11 403b-404a 23 Hobbes: Leviuthun, part i,
58b; 78b-c; part ii, 123b-d; 134a-136b; 136d; part hi, 234d 24 Rabelais:
Gurguntuu  und  Puntugruel,  bk  ii, 85c-92c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 283a;
516c-517a  26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act iv, sc 1 425c-430b 27
Shakespeare:   Meusure  for  Meusure,  act  ii,  sc  1-11  178d-184a  29
Cervantes:   Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  332d333b;  340d-343a;  353b-356d;
360d-361d   30  Bacon:  Advuncement  of  Leurning,  94d-95b  33  Pascal:
Provinciul Letters, 27a-62a; 90a-99a; 102a-117b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
iv, 152b-154a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Luws, bk vi, 33a35c; 39b; 42c-d;
bk  xxvi,  214b,d-215a; bk xxix, 262a-b 38 Rousseau: Sociul Contruct, bk
iv, 433a-b

[521a]
6b  Chapter  73:  PRUDENCE  487  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 244d-245b;
343b-c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 75d-78b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 60a-c
/   Science  of  Right,  397a-b;  399c-400d  43  Federalist:  number  65
198a-200c^passirn;   number  78,  231c-232a  CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  The
distinction  between  prudence  and  wisdom,  or  between  practical and
speculative  wisdom,  see Citizen 5; Government 3d; Law 5d, 5g; Monarchy
3a; State 8d. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in
Great  BooJ^s  ofthe  Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Augustine.  On the Morals of the Catholic Church, ch 1, XXIV
Aquinas.  Summa  Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 47-56, 155-156 F. Bacon. "Of
Counsel,"  in  Essays A. Smith. The Theory of Moral Sentiments, part vi,
sect 1 Kant. Lectures on Ethics J. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk vi, ch
12  II.  Horace.  Epistles  Perkins.  The Whole Treatise of the Cases of
Conscience  Gracian  y  Morales. The Art of Worldly Wisdom Sanderson. De
Obligatione  Conscientiae  {On the Obligations of Conscience) J. Taylor.
Ductor Dubitantium

[521b]
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 214 71a-c; par 222-223
73b-d; par 225-229 73d75b; additions, 134 138b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
292a-295a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii 348b,d-401d passim
Moliere   Vecole   des   femmes  {The  School  for  Wives)  Shaftesbury.
Characteristics of Men, Manners, Opinions, Times, treatise iv J. Butler.
Fifteen  Sermons  upon  Human Nature Chesterfield. Letters to His Son S.
Johnson.  History  of Rasselas Bentham. An Introduction to the Principles
of Morals  and  Legislation  Emerson.  The  Conduct  of Life Maurice. The
Conscience  Hodgson.  The Theory of Practice H. Sidgwick. The Methods of
Ethics,  bk  ii  Spencer.  The Principles of Ethics, part i, ch i, 13 L.
Stephen.  The Science of Ethics, ch 6 (4), 9 (5) Bonar. The Intellectual
Virtues Dewey. The Study of Ethics, ch 5-6 Lecky. The Map of Life, ch 6,
8-9, 11 Santayana. Reason in Common Sense, ch 9 Adler. Art and Prudence,
part hi, ch 12

[522a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  problem  of  punishment  divides  into  a  number  of
questions.  In  what  does  punishment  consist  ?  What  purpose should
punishment serve, or what should be its principle or reason? Who has the
authority  to  punish  and under what conditions shall this authority be
exercised  ?  Who  shall  be  punished  and  who  shall  be  exempt from
punishment? What are the forms or kinds of punishment ? Are any of these
reprehensible  either  in  principle  or  for their consequences? Should
there be a proportion between the severity of punishment and the gravity
of  the  offense?  Can  a  person  punish  himself?  Do men desire to be
punished?  These questions apply, though not with equal emphasis, to the
three  major  types  of  wrongdoing in relation to which men discuss the
nature  and  the  need  of  punishment,  its  justice or its expediency.
Punishment  is  traditionally  considered in relation to vice, to crime,
and  to  sin.  According to the type of wrongdoing being considered, the
punitive agent may be the wrongful individual himself or his family, his
state,  his  church  or God. The lines which separate these areas of the
problem  of  punishment  cannot  be  sharply  drawn in all cases, for as
certain acts simultaneously violate the moral, the civil, and the divine
law,  they  may  also  cause  a  person  to be simultaneously subject to
punishment from diverse sources. The wrong or injury which punishment is
supposed to redress may in some cases fall under none of these headings,
as,  for  example,  acts of war or rebellion. It is sometimes questioned
whether  the  theory  of punishment remains the same when punitive steps
are  taken  by  one  state against some or all the people of another; or
again, when a government applies penalties for a rebellion engaged in by
members  of  its  own community. In this chapter, we shall deal with the
prob-

[522b]
Chapter  74: PUNISHMENT lem of punishment in its most general terms, for
the  most part considering the foregoing questions without regard to the
distinction  of  sin,  crime,  and  vice;  or to the differences between
divine  and  human punishment, or between punishment by the state and in
the  family  (i.e., punishment as involved in the enforcement of law and
punishment  as  an  instrument  of  education  or  training). These more
specialized  topics  belong  to  other  chapters:  e.g.,  punishment  as
affecting  the  formation  of character to the chapters on Education and
Virtue and Vice; punishment as administered by parents to the chapter on
Family;  divine  rewards  and punishments to the chapters on Immortality
and  Sin. The basic ideas in terms of which any discussion of punishment
proceeds  are,  of  course,  the subjects of the chapters on Justice and
Law.  One  other chapter Pleasure and Pain — is of peculiar relevance to
the  question  about  the nature of punishment. Concerning the nature of
punishment  there  seems  to  be  no  great difference of opinion in the
tradition  of  western thought. Punishment is generally conceived as the
infliction  of  pain,  though some writers distinguish between corporeal
and  spiritual punishment according as the pain inflicted is the pain of
sense  or  the  pain of deprivation and loss. Imprisonment, for example,
always  entails  the  pain of loss— the loss of freedom— but it may also
carry  with it the suffering of physical hardships or even tortures. The
torment  of the damned is, according to some theologians, both corporeal
and  spiritual—  the  agony  of  hell-fire  and  the anguish of the soul
deprived  of  God's  love and presence. If there is little dispute about
the nature of punishment, the opposite situation prevails concerning its
purpose. Why men should be 488

[523a]
punished  is  one  of  the  most controversial questions in the field of
moral and political thought, and in psychology and theology as well. The
major  opposition  in the traditioruefrrlef great books is between those
who  think  that  punishment need only be inherently just, and those who
think  it  cannot  be  justified  without  reference  to  its utility or
expediency.  While  this debate goes on, for more than twenty centuries,
punishments  in  actual  practice— whether in accordance with the law or
uncontrolled  by  it—  tend generally to be severe and often fiendish or
ferocious.  Not  until  Beccaria  in  the  18th, and Bentham in the 19th
century,  does the discussion of punishment lead to major reforms in the
spirit  and provisions of the penal codes. But the opposite positions in
the debate across the centuries are never without practical significance
for  penal  institutions  and punitive measures, even when theory is not
immediately  reflected  in practice. The speculative significance of the
issue is, however, always immediately apparent. Although justice and law
are  more  fundamental and comprehensive ideas than punishment, this one
problem  of  punishment— the question of its purposecritically tests the
meaning  of anyone's theory of law and justice. It may be that the issue
cannot  be  fairly  stated in terms of purpose. To use that word may beg
the  question,  since  one  of  the  basic  positions in the controversy
appears  to  be  that  punishment has no purpose in the sense of serving
some  end  beyond  itself,  or producing some desired consequence in the
future.  This  is  the  theory—shared by Kant and Hegel— that punishment
should  be  purely retributive. According to this view the effect of the
punishment  upon  the  wrongdoer,  or  upon  others whose conduct may be
affected  by punishments meted out or threatened, must not be taken into
account  at all. Nothing should be sought except the preservation of the
balance sheet of justice, by seeing that every wrong is duly requited by
a  proportionate  measure  of  punishment.  Nor  is  the requital purely
retributive  if  it  considers  any person except the wrongdoer himself.
That punishment of the transgressor may assuage the feelings of those he
has  injured,  or  even  satisfy  a  desire  for revenge, should have no
motivating force. The only pleasure the spectacle ofpunish-

[523b]
Chapter  74: PUNISHMENT 489 ment should yield, the only desire it should
satisfy,  is  that of seeing the moral law upheld. We should punish only
because  we  have, under the moral law, a duty to do so. Kant castigates
as  utilitarian  every  theory  of  punishment  which  directs it to the
service  of  anything  besides strict justice—such as the reformation of
the  criminal,  the deterrence of others, the welfare of society, or the
slaking  of  the  thirst for vengeance. "Juridical punishment," he says,
"can never be administered merely as a means for promoting another good,
either  with  regard  to  the Criminal himself, or to Civil Society, but
must  in  all cases be imposed only because the individual on whom it is
inflicted  has  committed  a Crime. . . . The Penal Law is a Categorical
Imperative;  and  woe  to him who creeps through the serpent-windings of
Utilitarianism  to  discover  some advantage that may discharge him from
the  Justice  of  Punishment, or even from the due measure of What shall
determine  the mode and measure of punishment? Kant answers: "It is just
the  Principle  of Equality by which the pointer of the Scale of Justice
is  made  to  incline  no  more  to  one  side than the other. It may be
rendered  by  saying  that  the  undeserved evil which anyone commits on
another,  is to be regarded as perpetrated on himself. . . . This is the
Right  of Retaliation (ius taltonis) ; and properly understood it is the
only  Principle  which  . . . can definitely assign both the quality and
the  quantity  of  a  just penalty. All other standards are wavering and
uncertain; and on account of other considerations involved in them, they
contain  no  principle  conformable  to  the sentence of pure and strict
Justice."  Retributive  punishment  or  retaliation seems to express the
principle of justice or fairness in exchange. The Mosaic injunction that
"thou  shalt  give  life for life, eye for eye, tooth for tooth, burning
for  burning, wound for wound, stripe for stripe," occurs in the context
of  other  passages  which  declare  the  compensation in goods which an
injured  party  shall  receive for the loss of or damage to his chattel.
But  it is also accompanied by ordinances which impose the death penalty
for wrongs other than the taking of a life.

[524a]
490  THE  GREAT IDEAS "You have heard," Christ declares in the Sermon on
the Mount, "that it hath been said, An eye for an eye, and a tooth for a
tooth.  But I say unto you, That ye shall resist not evil; but whosoever
shall  smite thee on thy right cheek, turn to him the other also. And if
any  man  will sue thee at the law, and take away thy coat, let him have
thy  cloak also." This passage has sometimes been taken to mean that all
punishment is simply vengeance; and that instead of returning injury for
injury,  the Christian should love his enemies and forgive them. "If you
think  someone  has wronged you," Princess Mary says to Prince Andrew in
War  and Peace, "forget it and forgive! We have no right to punish." But
the Christian view of punishment may not be the same when the punishment
of  the  evildoer  is  a  question  for  the  state  rather than for the
individual.  "Avenge  not  yourselves,"  St.  Paul  commands; "for it is
written,  Vengeance  is  mine,  I  will  repay,  saith  the  Lord."  The
individual  need  not  avenge  himself, for God punishes the wicked; not
only God, but the ruler of the earthly state who, St. Paul says, "is the
minister  of God to thee for good. But if thou do that which is evil, be
afraid;  for he beareth not the sword in vain; for he is the minister of
God, a revenger to execute wrath upon him that doeth evil." A life for a
life  appears  to  be  the symbolic statement of the lex talionis in the
Greek  as well as the Hebrew tradition. "Justice claims aloud her debt,"
the  Chorus  explains in the Choephoroe of Aeschylus. "Who in blood hath
dipped  the  steel,  deep in blood her meed shall feel. . . . W Thoso'er
shall  take  the  sword,  shall  perish  by the sword." But as Aristotle
points  out—and  similarly Aquinas in his comment on the lex talionis o£
the  Old  Testament—simple  reciprocity  does  not determine the mode of
retribution. "People want even the justice of Rhadamanthus to mean this:
Should  a  man  suffer  what  he did, right justice would be done." Yet,
Aristotle  points  out,  "in  many  cases, reciprocity and rectificatory
justice  are  not in accord, e.g., if an official has inflicted a wound,
he  should  not  be  wounded  in  return,  and  ifsomeone has wounded an
official,  he  ought  not  to be wounded only but punished in addition."
Retaliation consists in reciprocity only if it is "in accordance with a

[524b]
proportion,  and  not  on  the  basis  of  a  precisely  equal  return."
Punishment  as retaliation may seem to be inseparable from revenge. Yet,
according  to  Lucretius,  the  surrender  of  primitive freedom for the
restrictions  of civilized life is motivated by the desire to substitute
equitable  retribution for unlimited vengeance. "Mankind, tired out with
a  life  of brute force, lay exhausted from its feuds; and therefore the
more  readily  it  submitted  of its own free will to laws and stringent
codes.  As  each man moved by anger took measures to avenge himself with
more  severity  than is now permitted by equitable laws, for this reason
men  grew  sick of the life of brute force." Hegel tries to clarify what
he  regards as a popular confusion of retribution with revenge. "In that
condition  of  society,"  he writes, "when there are neither magistrates
nor  laws,  punishment always takes the form of revenge; revenge remains
defective  inasmuch  as  it  is  the  act  of  a subjective will." It is
understandable that retribution should be objected to on the ground that
"it  looks  like something immoral, i.e., like revenge, and that thus it
may  pass  for  something personal. Yet it is not something personal but
the  concept  itself  which carries out retribution. 'Vengeance is mine,
saith the Lord,' as the Bible says. . . . The Eumenides sleep, but crime
awakens  them,  and  hence  it  is  the  very  act of crime itself which
vindicates  itself."  The  apparent  contradiction  in  the identity and
difference  of  retribution  and  revenge  can,  in  Hegel's opinion, be
resolved.  On  the one hand, it can be said that "the annulment of crime
is retribution insofar as retribution in conception is an 'injury of the
injury.' " On the other hand, it can be said that "the annuling of crime
in this sphere where right is immediate is principally revenge, which is
just  in its content insofar as it is retributive." The demand that this
contradiction  be resolved "is the demand for justice not as revenge but
as punishment." Hegel's resolution seems to be in terms of a distinction
between  the particular and the universal. "When the right against crime
has  the  form  of  revenge, it is only right implicit, not right in the
form  of  right,  i.e.,  no  act of revenge is justified. Instead of the
injured party, the injured universal now comes on the scene, and this

[525a]
has  its proper actuality in the court of law. It takes over the pursuit
and  the  avenging  of crime, and this pursuit consequently ceases to be
the subjective and contingent retributiorrof revenge, and is transformed
into  the  genuine  reconciliation  of  right  with  itself,  i.e., into
punishment."  On  this conception of punishment, Hegel like Kant decries
every   utilitarian  purpose  for  punishment.  Such  misconceptions  of
punishment  arise, he says, from the supposition that both crime and its
annulment   are   "unqualified   evils,"  which  makes  it  seem  "quite
unreasonable  to  will  an  evil  merely  because 'another evil is there
already.'  To  give punishment this superficial character of an evil is,
amongst   the   various   theories   of   punishment,   the  fundamental
presupposition  of those which regard it as a preventive, a deterrent, a
threat,  as reformative, etc., and what on these theories is supposed to
result from punishment is characterized equally superficially as a good.
But . . . the precise point at issue is wrong and the righting of it. If
you  adopt  that superficial attitude toward punishment, you brush aside
the  objective treatment of the righting of wrong." The issue would seem
to  be  a conflict between justice and expediency, with the utilitarians
identifying retribution with revenge and demanding that punishment serve
some  good  or mitigate some evil. But sometimes the question is whether
justice and expediency are compatible. In the debate on the treatment of
the   Mytilenians,  which  Thucydides  reports,  Cleon  calls  upon  the
Athenians  to  show  no  mercy  to  their  rebellious  subjects.  "Their
offence,"  he says, "was not involuntary, but of malice and deliberate,"
and  they  deserve to be punished. "If you follow my advice, you will do
what  is just towards the Mytilenians, and at the same time expedient. .
.  .  For  if they were right in rebelling, you must be wrong in ruling.
However,  if,  right or wrong, you determine to rule, you must carry out
your  principle  and  punish the Mytilenians as your interest requires."
Diodotus  objects  to  the policy of putting the Mytilenians to death on
the  ground  that it is not a question of justice but of expediency. "We
are not in a court of justice," he says, "but

[525b]
Chapter  74: PUNISHMENT 491 in a political assembly; and the question is
not  justice,  but  how  to make the Mytilenians useful to Athens. ... I
consider it far more useful for the preservation of our empire to put up
with  injustice,  than to put to death, however justlv, those whom it is
our  interest  to keep alive. As for Cleon's idea that in punishment the
claims  of  justice  and  expediency can both be satisfied, facts do not
confirm  the  possibility  of  such  a  combination."  In the chapter on
justice in Utilitarianism, Mill seems to place justice above expediency,
but  he  also  seems  to reduce retribution to revenge and call it just.
"The sentiment of justice," which includes as "one of its elements . . .
the  desire  to  punish,"  Mill  identifies with "the natural feeling of
retaliation  or  vengeance."  Retribution,  or  the  giving of "evil for
evil," he says /'becomes closely connected with the sentiment of justice
and  is  universally  included in the idea." The principle of "giving to
each  what  they  deserve,"  he adds, "that is, good for good as well as
evil  for  evil,  is  not only included within the idea of Justice as we
have  defined it, but is a proper object of that intensity of sentiment,
which places the Just, in human estimation, above the simply Expedient."
Other  writers  seem  to  think  that  the  utility of punishment is not
incompatible  with  its  retributive justice. The great theologians, for
example,  considering  the  difference between the eternal punishment of
the  damned  in  Hell,  and the cleansing punishment of the repentant in
Purgatory,  do not find it impossible for divine justice to include both
absolute  retribution  and  punishment  which may be remedial as well as
retributive.  Purely  retributive  punishment seems justifiable to them,
but  they  do  not think that punishment can ever be justified simply by
its  utility—by  the  good  it  achieves  without  any  reference to the
retaliation  of  evil  In  the context of saying that the institution of
slavery  among  men  is  a just punishment for Adam's sin, and that "God
knows  how  to  award  fit  punishments  for  every variety of offence,"
Augustine  observes  that  "we must not only do harm to no man, but also
restrain  him from sin or punish his sin, so that either the man himself
who  is punished may profit by his experience or others be warned of his
example." Here there

[526a]
492  THE  GREAT IDEAS seems to be no thought that retribution excludes a
reformative or deterrent use of punishment. Aquinas even more explicitly
combines  the  remedial and the deterrent utility of punishment with the
function of punishment to preserve the order of justice by meting out an
equitable   retribution.  In  willing  justice,  God  wills  punishment,
according  to Aquinas. "The order of justice belongs to the order of the
universe;  and  this  requires  that  penalty  should  be  dealt  out to
sinners."  But  just  retribution is not the only reason for punishment.
Sometimes it is "for the good of those who are punished," sometimes "for
the amendment of others." These reasons for punishment apply to human as
well  as to divine law. "When a thief is hanged, this is not for his own
amendment, but for the sake of others, who at least may be deterred from
crime  through  fear  of  punishment."  Punishment is a proper effect of
human  law, not merely because justice requires it, but because "the law
makes  use  of  the fear of punishment in order to ensure obedience." In
discussing  the  proportion  between the severity of the penalty and the
gravity  of  the  fault  in  the punishment of sin under the Mosaic law,
Aquinas  explains  that  in  addition  to the reason of justice (that "a
greater  sin, other things being equal, deserves a greater punishment"),
there  is the purpose of reformation ("since men are not easily cured of
habitual   sin  except  by  severe  punishments")  and  the  purpose  of
prevention  ("for men are not easily deterred from such sins unless they
be  severely  punished").  Here  three reasons for punishment are stated
side by side. But in the opinion of Aquinas retribution is more than the
primary,  it  is  the one indispensable reason; for punishment cannot be
justified  except  as  doing  the  work of justice. The view of Kant and
Hegel  that  retribution or retaliation is the only basis for punishment
not  merely  the  primary  or  the  indispensable reason—meets its exact
opposite  in  what  appears  to  be the completely utilitarian theory of
punishment  to  be  found  in  the writings of Plato, Hobbes, Locke, and
Rousseau. In the Protagoras, arguing for the proposition that virtue can
be taught, Protagoras insists

[526b]
that  "no  one  punishes  the  evil-doer for the reason that he has done
wrong—only  the unreasonable fury of a beast acts in that manner. But he
who desires to inflict rational punishment does not retaliate for a past
wrong  which  cannot  be  undone.  He  has  regard to the future, and is
desirous that the man who is punished, and he who sees him punished, may
be  deterred  from  doing  wrong  again.  He  punishes  for  the sake of
prevention,  thus  clearly  implying  that  virtue  is  capable of being
taught."  Plato himself seems to adopt the opinion of Protagoras. In the
Laws—wherein  he  sets  forth the provisions of a penal code in a detail
equalled,  in the tradition of the great books, only by the proposals of
Hobbes—Plato  says  no  man is to be punished "because he did wrong, for
that which is done can never be undone, but in order that, in the future
times,  he, and those who see him corrected, may utterly hate injustice,
or  at  any  rate abate much of their evildoing." Yet he also goes on to
say  that the law "should aim at the right measure of punishment, and in
all  cases  at  the  deserved  punishment." This qualification seems, in
turn, to be balanced by his remarks on the death penalty which he thinks
should  be  imposed  only  on  the  incurable  who  cannot  profit  from
punishment  and whose execution "would be an example to other men not to
offend." The notion of desert in Plato's theory of punishment appeals to
justice  without implying any separation between retribution and reform.
In the Gorgias, Socrates says that "to suffer punishment is another name
for  being  justly corrected when you do wrong." A wrongdoer who escapes
punishment  suffers a greater evil than one who is punished, for he "who
is punished and suffers retribution, suffers justly." Thereby justice is
restored  to  his  soul. The judge who prescribes just punishments cures
the  soul,  as the physician who prescribes the right remedies cures the
body.  The  criminal  who,  having  been unjust, goes unpunished "has no
deliverance from injustice." The fact that just punishments are deserved
does  not  seem to be the reason why men should be punished. Considering
the  penalties  imposed  by  gods and men, in the next world or in this,
Socrates  summarizes  his  argument by saying that "the proper office of
punishment is two-

[527a]
fold:  he  who  is  rightly  punished  ought either to become better and
profit  by  it,  or  he ought to be made an example to his fellows, that
they  may see what he suffers, and fear and become better. Those who are
improved  when  they  are punished by gods and men, are those whose sins
are curable; and they are improved, as in this world so also in another,
by  pain  and  suffering."  Like  Plato,  Hobbes  places  the reason for
punishment  in  the  future  rather  than in the past— in its utility to
procure  certain  effects  rather  than in its effecting retaliation. He
states  it as a law of nature that "in revenges (that is, retribution of
evil  for  evil),  men loo\not at the greatness ofthe evil past, but the
greatness  ofthe  good  tofollow.  Whereby  we  are forbidden to inflict
punishment  with  any  other  design  than  for  the  correction  of the
offender, or the direction of others." Anything else he calls "an act of
hostility." The chief aim of punishment, in securing the reformation and
the deterrence of criminals, Hobbes thinks, is to maintain public peace.
"A  punishment  is  an  evil inflicted by public authority" on those who
have  transgressed the law, "to the end that the will of men may thereby
the better be disposed to obedience." A law, without a penalty attached,
is  "not  a  law,  but  vain words." It fails to achieve the end of law,
which is the same as the end of punishment. The worst offenses— those to
be  prevented  by  the  most  severe  penalties—are  crimes, not against
individuals,  but  those  that "are of most danger to the public." Locke
also  derives  from natural law the right to punish those who transgress
that  law,  "for restraint and preventing the like offence," to which he
adds  that  "each transgression may be punished to that degree, and with
so  much severity as to make it an ill bargain to the offender, give him
cause to repent, and terrify others from doing the like." This theory of
punishment  applies  not only to man living in a state of nature, but in
civil  society  as well. Though Rousseau describes the wise statesman as
one who knows how, by punishing crimes, to prevent them, he lays greater
emphasis  on  the  other  motive  for  punishment the reformation of the
criminal.  "There  is  not  a single ill-doer who could not be turned to
some good. The State has no right to put to death,

[527b]
Chapter  74:  PUNISHMENT  493  even  for  the sake of making an example,
anyone whom it can leave alive without danger." Or, as Fetyukovitch says
in his address to the jury in the Brothers Karamazov: "The Russian court
does  not  exist  for punishment only, but also for the salvation of the
criminal.  Let  other nations think of retribution and the letter of the
law,  we  will cling to the spirit and the meaning the salvation and the
reformation  of the lost." This great issue concerning the reason for or
purpose  of punishment seems to affect most of the other questions which
men  raise  about the penalties to be imposed for wrongdoing whether the
wrong  is a sin, a crime, or a vicious act, and whether it is God or the
state,  nature  or  the  individual  himself, who inflicts the pain. The
reverse  also seems to be true. These other questions raise difficulties
or  issues which test the conflicting theories that punishment should be
a  just  retaliation  exclusively,  or  should  be justified only by its
consequences,  or  should  somehow  be  a  combination  of awarding just
deserts  and securing good effects. For example, the question of how the
various  modes  and  measures  of  punishment  should  be determined and
assigned to diverse acts of wrongdoing does not seem to be answerable in
the  same  way  when  the  principle  is simply retribution and when the
purpose of punishment is reformation and deterrence. On the principle of
retribution   the  gravity  of  the  offence  appears  to  be  the  only
determinant of the severity of the punishment. The punishment should fit
the  crime,  not  the nature of the criminal as someone capable of being
benefitted  by  punishment.  Kant  and  Hegel  do  not  think  that  the
justification  of  the  death  penalty,  for  example,  depends  on  the
curability  or  incurability of the offender. Nor do they think that the
taking  of the criminal's life should be motivated, as Aquinas and Locke
seem  to  suggest,  by  the  desire  to  protect society from his future
depredations.  It  is  sufficient that he has taken a life, or committed
some equally serious injury, which ought to be repaid by a proportionate
"What  is involved in the action of the criminal," Hegel writes, "is not
only the concept of crime, the rational aspect in crime as such

[528a]
494  THE  GREAT IDEAS whether the individual wills it or not, the aspect
which  the  state has to vindicate, but also the abstract rationality of
the  individual's volition. Since that is so," Hegel argues, "punishment
is  regarded  as  containing  the  criminal's  right  and hence by being
punished  he is as honored as a rational being. He does not receive this
due  of  honor  unless  the  concept  and  measure of his punishment are
derived from his own act. Still less does he receive it if he is treated
either  as  a harmful animal who has to be made harmless, or with a view
to  deterring  or  reforming  him."  On  these grounds, Hegel criticizes
Beccaria's  unqualified opposition to the death penalty. In addition, he
rejects  Beccaria's  theory  that  "it  could  not  be presumed that the
readiness of individuals to allow themselves to be executed was included
in the social contract." Rousseau takes the diametrically opposite view.
He argues for the death penalty on the ground that "we consent to die if
we  ourselves turn assassins" in order to protect ourselves from falling
victims  to  assassins.  In  making  this  consent  a part of the social
contract,  Rousseau  holds  that  "we  think  only  of securing [our own
lives], and it is not to be assumed that any of the parties then expects
to  get  hanged."  Hegel  disagrees  with  both  Beccaria  and Rousseau.
According  to  him,  the  state is not based upon a social contract; nor
does he admit that "its fundamental essence
[involves]
the  unconditional  protection and guarantee of the life and property of
members of the public as individuals. On the contrary," he holds, "it is
that higher entity"— the state— "which even lays claim to this very life
and property and demands its sacrifice." The state, therefore, according
to  Hegel,  cannot be denied the right of inflicting capital punishment.
Hegel  admits  that  "Beccaria's  requirement that men should give their
consent  to  being  punished  is  right  enough,"  but he adds that "the
criminal  gives  his  consent already by his very act. The nature of the
crime,  no  less  than the private will of the individual, requires that
the  injury  initiated  by the criminal should be annulled. However that
may  be,"  he continues, "Beccaria's endeavor to have capital punishment
abolished  has  had  beneficial effects." Because of the efforts made by
Joseph

[528b]
II  and  Napoleon  to  abolish it, "we have begun to see," Hegel thinks,
"which  crimes  deserve  the  death  penalty  and  which do not. Capital
punishment has in consequence become rare, as in fact should be the case
with  this  most  extreme  punishment."  The  attitude  toward the death
penalty  as  well  as toward all other punishments is different when the
only purpose of punishment is the welfare of society and the improvement
of  individuals,  whether  they  are  actual or potential offenders. The
modes  and  degrees of punishment must then be determined by considering
their  effectiveness as means to the ends in view. Montesquieu discusses
the  penal  codes  in  various systems of law entirely in terms of their
success  in  preventing  crime.  Though  he  does not seem to think that
punishment can improve the character of the individual, he believes that
a  certain  proportion  between  the penalty and the offense may tend to
reduce  the  extent  and gravity of crimes. "In Russia," he says, "where
the  punishment  of robbery and murder is the same, they always murder."
In  general,  Montesquieu  is  opposed to unduly severe punishments, and
especially  to cruel and unusual punishments, not so much on the grounds
of injustice as for the protection of liberty and public morals. Hobbes,
Locke,  and  Rousseau  similarly discuss the severity of punishment with
reference  to  its utility, and, like Montesquieu, they face the problem
that  the  same  measure  or  degree  of  punishment  may not be equally
effective  for  the  purposes  of  reformation  and  deterrence.  Severe
penalties,  for  example,  may  have  a  greater  deterrent  effect upon
potential  offenders  than milder forms of punishment, but they may also
tend  to  harden  criminals  instead  of reforming them. The conflict of
principles  in  the  determination  of punishments seems to be even more
marked in the case of those who try to combine retribution with utility.
If, for example, the death penalty is the just desert for murder, should
it  be  applied  on the grounds of retribution, even though a particular
murderer  can  be reformed by milder treatment ? If heavy penalties were
to prove highly effective as deterrents, should they be applied to minor
offenses, which deserve less severe retaliations, in order to reduce the
amount of crime?

[529a]
There  seems  to  be  agreement  for the most part on who shall have the
authority  to  punish  and  who  shall  be subject to punishment, in the
relation  of  men  to  one  another, to the stateTand to God. Punishment
seems  to  be  annexed  to law, as indispensable for its enforcement, so
that  whoever has the authority to set rules of conduct for another also
has  the  authority  to  impose  penalties  for their violation. Yet the
notion  that  punishment  is  a  necessary  sanction  for  law—which  is
apparently  shared  by those who take the retributive and those who take
the  utilitarian  view  of  punishment—does  not  seem to fit both views
equally  well,  at  least  not to the extent that the end of law and its
enforcement is the common good or the public welfare. Again, it seems to
be  generally  agreed that moral responsibility on the part of offenders
is  an  indispensable  condition  of just punishment for their misdeeds.
Unless  the  sinful  or  the  criminal  act  is  voluntary, unless it is
intentional  rather  than  accidental—or  if negligent, capable of being
attributed  to a willful error of judgment— the act is without fault and
the  agent  without  guilt.  But  although  those  who  make  punishment
retributive and those who make it reformative or deterrent seem to agree
upon  responsibility as prerequisite, this principle does not seem to be
equally  consistent  with  both theories—at least not to the extent that
the   exemplary  punishment  may  deter  others  quite  apart  from  the
responsibility  of  the  person punished. The question of responsibility
raises  other  difficulties, e.g., the metaphysical issue about personal
identity,  on  which  Locke  takes  the  stand  that  unless  the  human
individual  is  an  enduring  substance,  he  cannot  deserve subsequent
punishment for his prior acts; and the issue of free will and causality,
on  which  Hume's  position  seems  to  be that unless human actions are
subject  to  causal  necessity,  a  man cannot be blamed for his acts or
"become  the  object  of punishment or vengeance." Finally, there is the
problem  of  a  natural  need  for punishment and of the penalties which
nature  itself imposes for wrongdoing to fulfill this need. The familiar
statement  that virtue is its own reward and vice its own punishment, is
sometimes interpreted to mean that virtue

[529b]
Chapter 74: PUNISHMENT 495 and vice are intrinsically good and evil, and
sometimes  to  mean  that  through  their natural consequences they heap
benefit  or injury on their possessor. Augustine, for example, says that
by  the  sins  which  he committed God did justly punish him, for "every
disorder  in  the  soul  is  its own punishment"; and Kant distinguishes
juridical  from  natural  punishment  "in  which  Crime as Vice punishes
itself,  and  does  not  as  such  come  within  the  cognizance  of the
Legislator." The other interpretation seems to be represented by Hobbes'
theory  that  "intemperance  is  naturally  punished with diseases . . .
injustice with the violence of enemies . . . cowardice with oppression."
In  the  chain  of  consequences  started by any action, he discerns the
pains  which  are "the natural punishments of those actions that are the
beginning  of  more  harm  than  good." But according to Freud it is the
craving  for  punishment  rather  than  the punishment which is natural,
i.e.,  psychologically determined. Individuals punish themselves or seek
to  be  punished  for  what  is  either  real  or  fancied  guilt.  "The
unconscious need for punishment plays a part in every neurotic disease,"
Freud  writes.  "It  behaves  like  a  part  of the conscience, like the
prolongation  of  conscience  into the unconscious; and it must have the
same origin as conscience; that is to say, it will correspond to a piece
of  aggressiveness  which  has  been  internalized and taken over by the
super-ego.  If  only  the  words  were  less  incongruous,  we should be
justified  ... in calling it 'an unconscious sense of guilt.' " Whatever
its  psychological  validity,  Freud's theory does not resolve the moral
issue  concerning  the  justice  or  utility  of punishment. Nor does it
eliminate  the possibility of other motives for submitting to punishment
voluntarily.  Socrates  in  the Crito explains that he refuses to escape
from the death penalty he thinks he does not deserve, in order to uphold
the  law  which  is  itself just even though in his own case it has been
unjustly  applied  by  men. Thoreau and Gandhi refuse to obey laws their
consciences  cannot  approve,  but do not resist the state's demand that
they  be  punished for the law's infraction. In an unjust society, going
to  prison is for them the necessary fulfillment of the revolution begun
by civil disobedience.

[530a]
496  THE GREAT IDEAS 1a. The nature of punishment: the pain of sense and
the  pain  of  loss  the  righting  of a wrong id. The preventive use of
punishment:  the  deterrence  of wrongdoing 3. Punishment in relation to
virtue  and vice y. Guilt, repentance, and the moral need for punishment
4.  Crime  and  punishment: punishment as a political instrument 4#. The
forms  of  punishment  available to the state (1) The death penalty: its
justification  (3)  Enforced  labor or enslavement mined by positive law
50.  The  origin  and  fulfillment  of  curses 5^. The wages of sin: the
punishment  of  original sin (2) The necessity of expiation in Purgatory
perverse desires to inflict or suffer punishment

[530b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS PAGE i. The general theory of punishment 497 ib. The
retributive  purpose  of  punishment:  the lex talionis; retaliation and
revenge;  ic.  Punishment  for  the  sake of reforming the wrongdoer 499
responsibility  500  ia.  Free  will  in  relation to responsibility and
punishment: voluntariness in relation to guilt or fault; the accidental,
the  negligent,  and  the  intentional  ib.  Sanity, maturity, and moral
competence   in  relation  to  responsibility  501  ijb.  Vice  its  own
punishment 502 40. Punishment for lawbreaking as a necessary sanction of
law  503  (2)  Exile or ostracism: imprisonment or incarceration 504 (4)
Torture:  cruel  and  unusual  punishments  505 4c. The justice of legal
punishment:   the   conventionality   of  the  punishments  deter5.  The
punishment  for  sin  506  5c.  The  pain  of remorse and the torment of
conscience:   the  atonement  for  sin  507  $d.  The  modes  of  divine
punishment: here and hereafter, temporal and eternal 508 5^. The justice
of  divine  punishment 509 (1) The justification of eternal suffering in
Hell or Hades 510

[531a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, H6a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface.  1.  The  general  theory  of
punishment  la. The nature of punishment: the pain of sense and the pain
of loss 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xi
[568-600]
248d249a  7  Plato: Protagoras, 45b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 13
[n53b i4-2o] 405a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b
13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [594-627] 227a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xix,  ch  13 519a520a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 48, aa 5-6
263a-264d;  q  64,  a 3 337a-c; part i-ii, q 39, a 4, contrary 792a-d; q
46,  a 6, rep 2 816d-817d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87,
a  2, ans 186c-187b; a 4, ans 188b-d; a 6 189c-190c; part ii-ii, q 19, a
i 465b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi [1-18] 4a-b; IV
[ J 3-45]
5c'd; v 7a-8b esp
[121-123] 8b;
purgatory, vn
[1-36]
62c-d; xxiii
[1-75]
88b-89a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 145a-147b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
90d-91b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 333b

[531b]
Chapter  74: PUNISHMENT 497 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 7-13
26c-28b  esp  sect  8 26d-27a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 306b-c / Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 393d / Science of Right, 446b 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  i,  par  99100  37b-38a;  additions, 56 125b-c lb. The
retributive  purpose  of  punishment:  the lex talionis; retaliation and
revenge;  the  righting of a wrong Old Testament: Genesis, 4:15,24; 9:6;
34  /  Exodus,  21:12-34  esp  21:24-25  /  Leviticus, 19:18; 24:16-21 /
Numbers,  35:10-34  /  Deuteronomy,  19:11-13,21;  32:35,41-43 / Judges,
15:1-8;  16:21-30  /  /  Samuel,  24:12— (D) I Kings, 24:13 / // Samuel,
13:22-29;  22:48 — (D) II Kings, 13:22-29; 22:48 / // Kings, 9:4-10— (D)
IV  Kings,  9:4-10  /  Psalms,  58; 79:10-12; 94:1; 149— (D) Psalms, 57;
78:1012; 93:1; 149 / Proverbs, 6:34-35; 20:22; 24:29 / Isaiah, 59:17-19—
(D)  Isaias, 59:17-19 /Jeremiah, 5; 9:1-11; 46:10; 50:15,28; 51:11 — (D)
Jeremias,  5; 9:1-11; 46:10; 50:15,28; 51:11 / Ezekiel, 25 esp 25:12-15—
(D)  Ezechiel, 25 esp 25:12-15 / Micah, 5:15— (D) Micheas, 5:14 / Nahum,
1:2-3 Apocrypha: Judith, 2:1-12; 9:1-4; 16:17— (£))

[532a]
(1.  The  general  theory  of punishment. \b. The retributive purpose of
punishment: the lex talionis; retaliation and revenge; the righting of a
wrong.)  OT, Judith, 2:1-6; 9:1-3; 16:20-21 / Rest of Esther, 16:18— (D)
OT,  Esther,  16:18  / Wisdom of Solomon, 1:8; 5:17-23; 11:15-20— (D) OT,
Boof{  of  Wisdom, 1:8; 5:18-24; 11:16-21 / Ecclesiasticus, 5:1-7; 7:17;
12:6;  18:23-24;  25:14;  27:28; 28:1-8; 35:18-19; 39:28-30; 48:7-8— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  5:1-9;  7:19;  12:7;  18:23-24;  25:20-21;  27:31;
28:1-11;  35:22-25;  39:33-36;  48:7-8  / / Maccabees, 2:67-68; 9:33-42;
13:1-6;  15:2-4— (D) OT, / Machabees, 2:67-68; 9:33-42; 13:1-6; 15:2-4 /
//  Maccabees,  6:14-15—  (D)  OT,  // Machabees, 6:14-15 New Testament:
Matthew,  5:38-48;  7:2  / Luke, 6:27-30; 17:3-4; 18:1-8 / Romans, 3:56;
12:17-21;  13:4  /  //  Corinthians,  10:6  / / Thessalonians, 5:15 / //
Thessalonians,  1:7-9  /  Hebrews, 10:29-30 / / Peter, 3:8-9 / Jude, 7 /
Revelation, 18:1-19:2— (D) Apocalypse, 18:119:2 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix
[620-643]
63b-c; bk xviii [497-508] 135b / Odyssey, bk i
[32-43]
183b-c;  bk  in  [195-209]  195a-b; bk xxi-xxii 301a-311a,c 5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon
[1 577-1 611] 68d-69a
/ Choephoroe 70a-80d esp
[306-314]
73a-b,
[400-404] 74a / Eumenides 81a-91d esp [490565] 86b-87a
5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[229-233]
116b / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [430-456] 146d147a / Electra 156a-169a,c esp
[516-633]   160a161a,   [1384-1510]   167d-169a,c   5  Euripides:  Medea
212a-224a,c esp [764-810] 218d-219a / Electra 327a-339a,c esp
[112167] 328a-c,
[880-1180] 335a-337d
/ Hecuba 353a-364a,c esp
[1 109-1295]
362b-364a,c / Heracles Mad [726-814] 371b-d / Orestes 394a410d esp
[478-606]
398d-400a,
[1098-1176]
405a-d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 9c-10a; 16c-17a; 29b-30d; bk ii,
68d-69a; bk hi, 91a-b; 99c100a; 116b-117a; bk iv, 154a-b; bk v, 177a; bk
vi,  204d-205a;  bk  vii,  218a-b; 237d-239a; bk viii, 278c-279a; bk ix,
305a-c;  306c-307a;  313a-314a  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
405a-b;  bk  hi,  424d-429a;  429c-434c;  bk  vii,  556d-557a  7  Plato:
Protagoras,  45c-d  /  Gorgias,  293b294c  / Republic, bk x, 437c-438c /
Laws,  bk x, 769d-770c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5 [iii3b2i-ni4a 2]
359d-360a; bk v, ch 4 379b-380b esp
[1132*7-19]
379c-d; ch 5
[ii32b2i-i 133*3]
380b-c; ch 11
[1138*7-10]
386b;
[1138*2023] 386c / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch 10 [1369^2-14] 612d

[532b]
498 THE GREAT IDEAS \b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b
14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  4a-b  /  Solon,  70d  /  Dion, 798d 15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk  iv, 267d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 16 17c-d/
City  of God,  bk xii, ch 3, 344b; bk xiv, ch 15 388d-390a; bk xix, ch 13
519a-520a; bk xxi, ch 11-12 570b-571c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 19, a 9, ans 116d-117d; q 49, a 2, ans 266a-c; part 1-11, q 46, a 7
818a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87 185c-192d; q 108, a
3, rep 2 334a-336b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[100-130]
10c-d; xx
[1-39] 28b-d; xxvm 41b-43a esp
[130-142]
42d-43a; purgatory, x
[73-93]
68a-b; xix
[70-145]
82b-83a; xxm
[1-75]
88b-89a  22  Chaucer:  Reeve's Tale 225a-232a esp [43114322] 231b-232a /
Tale  of Melibeus, par 30-49 413b-422b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 94a;
part  ii,  147b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 334d-335a 26 Shakespeare: 3rd
Henry VI, act i, sc iv
[27-180] 74d-76b; act ii, sc
ii  [1-55]  78d-79b  / Richard III, act i, sc ii [49-109] 108a-d / Titus
Andronicus  170a-198d / Richard II, act 1, sc 11 322d-323c / Merchant of
Venice, act hi, sc 1 [46-76] 419a-b; act iv, sc i
[1-400]
425c-429d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc v
[74-88]
37d;  act  in,  sc  hi  [73-98]  54a-b; act iv, sc v [115-220] 60d-62a /
Othello, act i, sc i [665] 205a-206a; act ii, sc i
[300-311]
216c; act in, sc in
[442-479] 226d-227b; act
v,  sc  ii  238d-243a,c  /  Timon  of  Athens, act v, sc iv 419d-420d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  1, 68b-73a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  51, schol 439d; prop 63, schol 444a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
ii,  sect 7-13 26c-28b passim 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 10b-lla; 28a-b
37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 20b-21a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi,
43a-b; bk xii, 86c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 351 b-d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 617b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 91a-93a; 224c225a; 404a 42
Kant:  Science of Right, 446a-449c esp 446b447c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
467d-468c; 469c-470c; 472c-d; 474b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i,  par  93  36a-b;  par  99-100  37b-38a; par 103 39b; part in, par 220
73a-b; par 319, 106a; additions, 63-65 126a-c; 74 127d-128a / Philosophy
of History, part i, 214d-216a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\ esp 118a-122b

[533a]
Chapter  74:  PUNISHMENT  Ic  to  \d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk ii
357d-358b;  bk  xi, 505a-511b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii,
398c-399c  53  James:  Psychology,  225a  ^  95c;  bk  ix,  ~" 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  247d-248a  lc.  Punishment  for the sake of
reforming   the   wrongdoer  Old  Testament:  Leviticus,  26:14-46—  (D)
Leviticus,  26:14-45  /  H Samuel, 7:14-15— (D) 11 Kings, 7:14-15 / Job,
5:17-18  /  Psalms,  39:10-11;  141:5—  (D)  Psalms,  38:11-12;  140:5 /
Proverbs,  3:11-12;  13:24;  15:10; 17:10; 19:18,25; 20:30; 22:15; 23 :i
3_I  4»  29:15,17  /  Isaiah,  4:4;  27:7-9—  (D)  Isaias, 4:4; 27:7-9 /
Jeremiah,  2:30;  5:3— (Z>) Jeremias, 2:30; 5:3 / Ezekiel, 14:9-11 — (D)
Ezechiel,  14:9-11 / Zephaniah, 3:1-13— (D) Sophonias, 3:1-13 / Malachi,
3—  (D) Malachias, 3 Apocrypha: Judith, 8:25-27— (D) OT, Judith, 8:21-27
/  Wisdom of Solomon, 3:1-6; 11:5-16; 12 esp 12:25-26; 16:2-12,24-28— (D)
OT,  BooJ{  of  Wisdom, 3:1-6; 11:5-17; 12 esp 12:25-26; 16:2-12,24-28 /
Ecclesiasticus,  7:23; 22:6; 30:1-2,12-13— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:25;
22:6;  30:1-2,12-13  / Baruch, 2:21-33; 3:7; 4 esp 4:29— (D) OT, Baruch,
2:21-33; 3:7; 4 esp 4:29 / // Maccabees, 6:12-17; 7:33; 10:4— (D) OT, //
Machabees,  6:12-17;  7:33;  10:4  New Testament: / Corinthians, 11:52 /
Hebrews,  12:5-11 / Revelation, 3:19— (D) Apocalypse, 3-'i9 5 Sophocles:
Antigone  [1348-1353]  142d  5  Euripides:  Orestes  [491-525]  399a-b 5
Aristophanes: Clouds
[1303-1464]
504b506c  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45b-d  / Gorgias, 267c270c; 293b-294c/
Republic,  bk  ii, 321d-322d; bk ix, 426d-427a / Critias, 485b-d / Laws,
bk  v, 688d-689a; 690d-691b; bk ix, 743c-744a; 747d; bk x, 769d-770c; bk
xi,  782a-b;  bk  xii,  785c-786a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3 [no4b
i4-i8]  350a; bk x, ch 9 [1180*5-13] 434d 10 Hippocrates: The Law, par 1
144a-b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 14-16 4c5b; par 19-23 5d-7a
/  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  16 521d-522a; bk xxi, ch 13 571c-572a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 16 628c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  21, a 4, rep 3 126c-127c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 79, a 4 158d-159c; q 87, a 2, rep i 186c-187b; aa 6-8 189c-192d;
q 105, a 2, rep 9 309d316a; part ii-ii, q 33 550a-558d; part hi suppl, q
99,  a  1, rep 3 1078c-1081a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 94a; part ii,
141b;  147a-b; 157d-158a 35 Locke: Toleration, lc-2c passim 37 Fielding:
Tom Jones, 267b-268b; 380c-381a

[533b]
499  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk vi, 39d38 Montesquieu: 40b 42 Kant: Practical
Reason,   306b-c  /  Science  of  Right,  446b-447c  43  Mill:  Liberty,
271c-272d;  302d-312a  passim  /  Utilitarianism, 471d-472d 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  7d-8a; 199c-200d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 99
37b-d  / Philosophy of History, part i, 214d216a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  ii,  30b32a; bk xii, 395a-401d \d. The preventive use of
punishment:  the  deterrence  of  wrongdoing Old Testament: Deuteronomy,
13:10-11;  19:1920  /  Proverbs, 19:25; 21:11 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
23:22-27—   (D)   OT,   Ecclesiasticus,   23  =32-37  New  Testament:  /
Corinthians, 10:5-11 / // Peter, 2 :6 / Jude , 7 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[739-842]
23a-24b / Agamemnon
[681-781] 59b-60b
/  Eumenides 81a-91d esp [490-565] 86b-87a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[882-895]  107b  /  Ajax  [118-133]  144c  / Electra [121-250] 157b158a;
[1501-1510] 169a,c 5 Euripides: Medea
[271-356]
214b-215b  /  Orestes [478-606] 398d-400a; [917-945] 403b-c 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  ii,  87a-b; bk v, 164c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii,  400d401a;  bk  in,  426b-d;  427d-428a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 45b-d /
Gorgias,  293b294c / Laws, bk v, 690d-691b; bk ix, 743c744a; 747d; 757a;
bk x, 769d-770c; bk xi, 782a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5
[ni3b2i1114*2] 359d-360a; bk x, ch 9 [1179*33-1180*
32]  434a-435a  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 14 [1375*120] 619bc 10 Hippocrates:
The Law, par 1 144a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49d-50a; 57a; 61c-d; bk
xiv,  151d-152b  /  Histories,  bk i, 200d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xix,  ch 16 521d522a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 2,
rep  1  186c-187b;  a  3, rep 2 187b-188b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
140a;  141b;  143b-d;  145c-d; 157d-158a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 446a-b 27
Shakespeare:  Measure  for Measure, act i, sc in 177b-d; act ii, sc i-ii
178d-184a;  act v, sc 1 [318-324] 202b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
63,  schol 444a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3a / Civil Government, ch ii, sect
7-13  26c-28b  passim;  ch  xiv, sect 159 62b-c; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b /
Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect 13 107d-108c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect viii, div 76, 485a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 150b

[534a]
(1.   The   general   theory  of  punishment,  id.  The  preventive  use
ofpunishment:  the  deterrence of wrongdoing^) 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  vi,  37d38a;  38d-40a;  bk  xix,  139c 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy, 371a-c; 372c / Social Contract, bk ii, 399a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  309a-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 175c-d; 199b 41
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 83b-c; 92b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 446b;
448a-b   43   Mill:   Liberty,  271c-272d;  313a-316b  /  Representative
Government,  334d-335a  / Utilitarianism, 471d-472d 44 Boswell: Johnson,
204b;  301c-d;  335c;  344a-b;  363a-b;  482a-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part i, par 99100 37b-38a; part hi, par 232 75c-d; par 319, 106a;
additions,  138  139a-b  /  Philosophy  of History, part i, 214d-216a 49
Darwin:  Descent of Man, 314b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii,
398d-401d  54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787c 2. Personal
responsibility  as  a  condition  of  just  punishment:  the  problem of
collective  responsibility  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:16-19 / Exodus,
20:5-6;  34:7/  Numbers, 14:18 / Deuteronomy, 5:9-10; 24:16 / // Samuel,
21:1-9—  (D) II Kings, 21:1-9 / u Kin8s i 14:5-6— (D) IV Kings, 14:5-6 /
// Chronicles, 25:3-4— (D) // Paralipomenon, 25:3-4 / Jeremiah, 31 ^9-30
—  (D)  Jeremias,  31:29-30  /  Eze^iel,  18 (D) Ezechiel, 18 Apocrypha:
Wisdom   of   Solomon,   3:11-13—  (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  3:11-13  /
Ecclesiasticus, 41:5— (JD) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 41:8 / Baruch, 3:7-8— (D)
OT,  Baruch,  3:7-8  New  Testament:  Romans,  5:12-19  / / Corinthians,
15:21-22 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp
[597-614]
33c-d,
[653-956]
34b-37d  /  Agamemnon 52a-69d / Choephoroe 70a-80d / Eumenides 81a-91d 5
Sophocles:  Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c
/ Antigone 131a-142d esp
[582-626]
136b-c / Electra 156a-169a,c 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[214-228]
260b  /  Phoenician  Maidens  378a-393d / Orestes 394a-410d 6 Herodotus:
History, bk vii, 223c-d; 238d239a; bk ix, 306c-307a 7 Plato: Protagoras,
45b-d  /  Laws,  bk  ix,  746a-751d  esp  746a-748c; bk xii, 785c-786a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5 359c-361a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch 18 124a125a 13 Virgil: Georgics, 1 [501-502] 51a

[534b]
500  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2 tola 14 Plutarch: Camillus, 107b-d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  xiv,  152b  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk xiii, ch 13-14
366a-c;  bk  xiv, ch i 376b,d-377a; ch 20, 392b; bk xxi, ch 12 571a-c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i—ii, q 81 162d-167d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-84] 77b-d; xvm [19-75] 80a-c
22  Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 18 506b-507b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii, 118a-b; 147c 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc ii
[32-50] 79a-b / Henry
V, act iv, sc 1
[136202] 553a-c
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a;
[167-216]
139a-140a;
[274-343]
14  lb143a;  bk  x  [615-640] 287b-288b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 434, 249b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxvii, sect 18-22 225b 226b 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect viii, div 76 485a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 451 b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 95d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
169c-170a  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 391d-392a / Science of Right,
447b-c  43 Constitution of the U.S.: article hi, sect 3 [507-511] 16a 43
Federalist:   number   43,   140c-d;   number  66,  202c-203a  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  471b-472a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par
115—  118 42b-43b; par 132 46b-47a; additions, 74 127d-128a / Philosophy
of  History,  part i, 215b-216a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii, 275a;
bk  xiv,  606b-607a;  epilogue  ii,  688a-694d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  iv, 83c-84a; bk vi, 168c-169c 53 James: Psychology, 225a
2a.   Free   will   in   relation   to  responsibility  and  punishment:
voluntariness  in  relation  to  guilt  or  fault;  the  accidental, the
negligent,  and  the  intentional  New  Testament:  / Timothy, 1:12-13 5
Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[1372-1616]
66d69a / Choephoroe [269-305] 72d-73a;
[10211064]
80a-c / Eumenides
[436-469]
86a-b;
[574-777] 87b-89a
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[1297-1415]
110b-112b / Oedipus at Colonus
[939-999]
123a-c   /   Trachiniae  [672-730]  176a-c  5  Euripides:  Heracles  Mad
[1255-1357]  376a-d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 8b-10a 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  426b-d;  430c; 432b-c 7 Plato: Protagoras,
45b-d  /  Apology, 204b-c / Timaeus, 474b-d / Sophist, 557b-558a / Laws,
bk v, 688d-689a; bk ix, 746a-751d; 754b756a

[535a]
2b  to  3a  Chapter  74: PUNISHMENT 501 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch i
355b,d 357b; ch 5 359c-361a esp
[iii3b2i-ni4a2]
359d360a; bk v, ch 5
[ii32b2i-3i] 380b-c; ch 8
1 4] 383a-384d; ch ii
[ii35ai5]-CH
9
[11 36s
386b-387a,c; bk vii, ch 6 399d-400c<-cTr^ 401c-402a passim 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 18 124a-125a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect
10  257d258a;  bk iv, sect 3, 263b; bk xii, sect 12 308b-c 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk xii, ch 3, 344b; bk xiv, ch 11-15 385d-390a passim 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 64, a 2 335d-336d; part i-ii, q 21,
a  2 718a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 73, a 5 123a-d; q
74,  aa  1-2  129a-130a;  q  75  137c-140d; q 76, aa 3-4 142d-144d; q 78
152b-156a;  qq  80-81  159d-167d;  q  83,  a 3 173a-c; q 105, a 2, rep 9
309d-316a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi 15a-16b; xxvii
[55-136]
40a-41b; purgatory, xvi
[52-84] 77b-d;
xviii
[19-75] 80a-c; xxi
[3475] 85b-d; paradise, iv [64-114] 110b-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 139d-140a; 143b; 157d-158a 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk hi
[80-134] 137a138a; bk v
[224-245] 180a-b / Samson Agonistes [373-419] 347b-348b
35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 57 193b-c; ch xxvii,
sect  18-22  225b226b; sect 26 227c-d; bk iv, ch xvii, sect 4, 373c-374a
35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 76 485a-c 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 399c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 169b
[fa 1]; 169c-170a /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 391c-392a; 393d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
471d-472a;  474d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 96 36c-37a;
par  100  37d-38a;  part  ii,  par  1  15— 118 42b-43b; par 132 46b-47a;
additions,  56 125b-c; 62 126a; 74-75 127d-128a / Philosophy of History,
intro,  165c-166a;  168d;  part i, 207b-c; 215b-216a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vii, 275a; bk ix, 357d-358b; bk xii, 548d-549d; epilogue ii,
686c-687a;  688a-694d  2b.  Sanity,  maturity,  and  moral competence in
relation to responsibility 7 Plato: Protagoras, 45b-d 18 Augustine: City
of God, bk xxi, ch 16 573b574a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxxiii
[1-90]
49c-50c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 132b-c; 142a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet,  act v, sc ii [236-263] 70b-c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi,
sect  54-63  36c-38c  passim  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 169c-170a 43 Mill:
Liberty, 302d-312a passim

[535b]
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 132 46b-47a 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, epilogue ii, 690c-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii
348b,d-401d  passim,  esp  395a-398d 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
241b-c  3.  Punishment  in  relation  to virtue and vice 3a. Rewards and
punishments   as  factors  in  the  formation  of  moral  character  Old
Testament:  Proverbs,  4:1-4;  13:24;  22:15;  23:13-14:29:15 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  30:1-13— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30:1-13 New Testament:
Hebrews,  12:5-11  5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c 5 Sophocles:
Antigone
[1 348-1 353] 142d
5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[1 303-1464]
504b506c  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  45b-d;  46b  /  Gorgias,  283b  285a /
Republic,  bk  ii, 313b-d; bk ix, 426d-427a / Sophist, 556d-557a / Laws,
bk  i,  643d; bk ii, 653a-b; bk x, 760c-761a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii,
ch 3 [uo4b i4-i8] 350a; bk hi, ch 5 [ui3b2i-iii4 a2] 359d-360a; bk x, ch
1  [1172*18-23]  426a;  ch  9  [1179*331180*32]  434a-435a  14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  41a-42b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 14-16 4c-5b; par
19-23  5d-7a / City of God, bk xix, ch 15-16 521a-522a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  48, a 6, contrary and rep i 264a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 2, rep 1 186c-187b; q 95, a i, ans
226c227c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 141a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
16c-d;  66c;  73c-74a; 185c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 69d-70a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  def  27,  EXPL419a-b  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk i, ch ii, sect 5-6 105ac passim; sect 12-13 107b-108c
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div  76,  485a  36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i,  28a-b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 41a-c; 380c-381a 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 37d38b; 39d-40d passim; bk xii, 86b;
bk  xix,  139c  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 270d-271a /
Practical  Reason, 306b-c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383a-b 43 Mill:
Liberty, 302d-312a passim, esp 306c307a / Utilitarianism, 458a-b; 464b-c
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  191bc; 199c-200d; 363a-b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  ii,  30b-32a  54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  758c-759b  /
Civilization   and  Its  Discontents,  792b-  795b  /  New  Introductory
Lectures, 876c-d

[536a]
502 THE GREAT IDEAS (3. Punishment in relation to virtue and vice.) "ib.
Vice  its  own  punishment  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 14:5-10— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  1  4  .^-1 o 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-267c / Republic, bk
ix,  417b-418d;  bk  x,  436c-441a,c  /  Theaetetus, 530d / Laws, bk ii,
656d-658b; bk v, 689d690c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[10141023] 43a-b
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 28, 134b-c; bk 11, ch 10, 149c-d; bk
in, ch 24, 206b-208a; bk iv, ch 5 228a-230b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
ii,  sect  16  259a;  bk  vni, sect 55 290b; bk ix, sect 4 292a; sect 42
295c-296a,c  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 19 5d; bk hi, par 16
17c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 85-86 178b-185c; q 87,
a  i,  ans  and  rep 3 185d-186c; q 89, a 1 199a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part   ii,   163d-164a   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  174d-176c;  389c-d  26
Shakespeare:  Richard  HI, act i, sc iv [1-75] 114d-115b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  ii,  sect  5-6 105a-c passim 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vi,  39b  42  Kant: Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics, 374a-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii, 381c-d; 398a-b
53  James: Psychology, 83a-b 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
793a794a  3c.  Guilt,  repentance, and the moral need for punishment Old
Testament:  Leviticus,  26:40-43  /  /  Kings,  8:46-51—  (D) III Kings,
8:46-51  /  Psalms, 6; 32; 38; 51; 102; 130; 143— (D) Psalms, 6; 31; 37;
50;  101;  129; 142 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 12:10 (D) OT, Bool{ of
Wisdom,  12:10  /  Ecclesiasticus,  20:3;  21:6— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
20:4;  21:7  New Testament: Lul$e, 16:27-31 / Revelation, 2:5,16-22— (D)
Apocalypse,  2:5,16-22  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  9c-10a 7 Plato:
Gorgias, 267c-270c; 293d-294c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 14d / Histories,
bk  hi,  255bc 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch 3 343d344b; bk xix,
ch  13 519a-520a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 1, ans
and  rep  3  185d-186c; part ii-ii, q 33 550a-558d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
388c-395b  passim  27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for Measure, act ii, sc in
[19-42] 184b-c / Cymbeline, act v, sc iv
[1-29] 481a-b

[536b]
3£/o4 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp
[1-46] 339b-340b, [356-380] 347b-348a, [667709] 354a-355a,
[11 56-1 177] 364b-365a
38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall,
54c-55a  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  458b-459b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  i, par 100 37d-38a; part hi, par 220 73a-b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  v,  221d;  bk  ix,  373b-374d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  ii, 30c32a; bk hi, 50c-54b; bk xii, 369a-373c; 380c386a;
epilogue,  404c-408a  passim 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
792b793d  esp  792d-793a,  793d;  795d-796a; 797c798c / New Introductory
Lectures,  831b  4.  Crime  and  punishment:  punishment  as a political
instrument   6   Herodotus:   History,   bk  vi,  191a-b  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  424d-428d 7 Plato: Laws, bk ix 743a-757d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 4 [ii3ib25]-cH 5
[1133*3] 379b-380c; ch
ii
[1138*4-13] 386b-c
/ Politics, bk iv, ch 16
[i3oob i9-38] 501c-d;
bk  vi,  ch  8  [i32i b40-i322a28] 525d-526a; bk vii, ch 13 [1332*12-16]
536d / Athenian Constitution, ch 52-53 576b-577b; ch 56, par 6ch 59, par
7  579a-580c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  12  615c-617c;  ch  14 619a-d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[113611 60] 76a-b
14  Plutarch:  Cicero, 710c-712d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiv, 151d-152b /
Histories, bk 1, 200c-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 6 514b515a
20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 1, ans 185d-186c; part
ii-ii,  q 33, a i, ans and rep 1 550b-551a; a 3, ans 552d-553b; a 4, ans
553b-554b;  a  6,  ans  and rep i 555a-d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch vii,
llb-c;  ch  viii,  14a-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  138d-148b;
conclusion, 281a-d 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act hi, sc i
[223-281] 49c-50a
29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 68b-73a; 177a-b 35 Locke: Toleration,
3c-4a;  5b-6a;  14a-15a / Civil Government, ch vii, sect 87-88 44a-c; ch
xv,   sect  171  65a-b  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28a-b;  29b  38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 37d43d; bk xii, 85a-92b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 351b-d / Political Economy, 371a-c / Social Contract, bk ii,
398b-399a  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 309a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 197b; 198d-200a; 215b-216a; 225d-229b; 387d-388d; 437b-d

[537a]
4a  to  4b{\)  Chapter  74:  PUNISHMENT 503 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
91a-94c;  187b  42  Kant: Science of Right, 446a-448b 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [210-212] [220-225] 13b; ARTICLE III, SECT 3
[507-511]  16a  ^-—  43  Federalist:  number 15, 65a-b 43 Mill: Liberty,
304d-305b;  313a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 90103
35d-39b  esp  par 96-100 36c-38a; part hi, par 218 72c-d; additions, 138
139a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  223a-232a passim; bk xi,
505a-511b;  bk  xii, 547a-551c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
30b-32a  4a. Punishment for lawbreaking as a necessary sanction of law 5
Aeschylus: Eumenides
[490-562]
86b-87a;
[681-710] 88b-c
5 Sophocles: Antigone [640-680] 136d-137a 5 Euripides: Orestes [478-606]
398d-400a  6  Herodotus:  History, bk v, 164c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War, bk hi, 427d-428a 7 Plato: Statesman, 601c-602d / Laws, bk ix, 747d;
757a;  bk x, 769d-770c; bk xii, 792c793a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 4
379b-380b; ch 11
[1138*4-13] 386b-c; bk x, ch 9
[1179*
33-1180*32] 434a-435a / Politics, bk vi, ch 8
[i32i b40-i322a28] 525d-526a; bk
vii, ch 13
[1332*10-16] 536d
18  Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 6 514b515a; bk xxi, ch ii, 570c-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 92, a 2, ans and rep 3-4
214d-215a,c;  q 96, a 5 233d-234d; q 105, a 2, ans 309d-316a 22 Chaucer:
Tale of Melibeus, par 40 418b419a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 131a-b;
145a148b; 157d-158a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act ii, sc hi
[1-15] 44c-d / Romeo and Juliet, act
i, sc i
[71-110] 286b-d / Henry V, act ii, sc ii 539a541a
27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure,  act  v, sc 1 [318-324] 202b 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i, 68b-73a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop  37,  schol  2,  436a;  prop 51, schol 439d; prop 63, schol 444a 33
Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 108b-109a 35 Locke : Toleration, 3a / Civil
Government,  ch  1, sect 3 25d; ch ii, sect 7-13 26c-28b passim; ch vii,
sect  87-88  44a-c; ch ix 53c-54d passim / Human Understanding, bk i, ch
ii,  sect 12-13 107b-108c; bk ii, ch xxviii, sect 5-12 229c-231c passim,
esp sect 6 229d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 76, 485a 38
Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 398b-399a; 406c

[537b]
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 617b-d 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 306bc /
Science  of  Right,  446a-d  43 Federalist: number 15, 65a-b; number 21,
78b-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-303a / Representative Government, 329d-330a
/  Utilitarianism,  467d468c;  471d-472d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 220 73a-b; par 233 75d; additions, 60 125d; 138 139a-b; 173
146d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii 348b,d-401d passim, esp
395a-401d  4b.  The  forms  of  punishment  available  to  the  state  5
Euripides:  Orestes  [491-601]  399a-400a  7 Plato: Apology, 209d-210a /
Gorgias,  264b  /  Laws,  bk v, 690d-691b; bk ix 743a-757d passim; bk xi
771b-  784b  passim;  bk  xii, 784d-786b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 5
[ii32b2i-ii33a 4] 380b-c; ch 11 [1138*4-13] 386bc; bk x, ch 9
[1180*5-13] 434d
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 52-53 576b-577b passim; ch 56-60 578c580d
passim;  ch  67,  par  5  583b  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiv, 152d-153a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xxi,  ch  ii,  570c-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 105, a 2, rep 9-12 309d-316a; part hi suppl, q
99,  a  1,  ans  1078c-1081a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 146b-147b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  23b-24a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act iv,
sc  1  [346-400] 429a-d 35 Locke : Toleration, 3a / Civil Government, ch
i,  sect  3  25d / Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxviii, sect 9 230b 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  28a-29b;  35a-37b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  vi,  37d  38b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 217'c; 450b-c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  85c;  91a-92c; 93a 94c 42 Kant: Science of
Right, 446a-449c 43 Federalist: number 15, 65a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part i, 214d 216a; part iv, 320b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 364a-367a
passim  4b(l)  The  death  penalty:  its  justification  Old  Testament:
Genesis,  9:6 / Exodus, 21:1229; 22:18-20; 35:2 / Leviticus, 20:9-18,27;
24:16-21  /  Numbers,  35:16-31  /  Deuteronomy, 13:1-10; 17:2-7; 18:20;
19:11-13; 21:18-23; 22:21-27; 24:7 / Joshua, 7:10-26— (D) Josue, 7:10-26
/  / Kings, 21:10-13— (D) III Kings, 21:10-13 / Esther, 4:11-5:2; 7:7-10
Apocrypha:  //  Maccabees,  4:38;  13:5-8—  (D)  OT, // Machabees, 4:38;
13:5-8 5 Euripides: Orestes [491-601] 399a-400a

[538a]
504 THE GREAT IDEAS (4b. The forms of punishment available to the state.
4b(l)  The  death  penalty: its justification.} 6 Herodotus: History, bk
iv,  131bc;  135c136a;  137a-138c;  149c;  bk  viii, 275c-d 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  424d-429a  esp 427d-428a 7 Plato: Apology,
209d-210a / Statesman, 607b-c / Laws, bk v, 690d-691b; bk ix, 743b-744a;
747d;   bk  xii,  784c-d;  791c-d;  792c-793a  9  Aristotle  :  Athenian
Constitution,  ch 52, par 1 576b-c; ch 60, par 2 580c; ch 67, par 5 583b
14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 54c-55a / Solon, 70d / Cicero, 710c-712d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 49d-50a / Histories, bk 1, 200d 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk i, ch 21 142d143a; bk xix, ch 6 514b-515a; bk xxi, ch
ii,  570c-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 3, rep 1-2
187b-188b;  q  100,  a  8,  rep  3  259d-261a;  q  105, a 2, rep 9-10,12
309d-316a;  part 11—11, q 25, a 6, rep 2 504d-505d; part hi suppl, q 86,
a  2,  rep 3 993c-994d; q 99, a 1, ans 1078c-1081a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  146b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-24a; 205b-206c; 338b-339a 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act ii, sc hi
[1-16] 44c-d
/ Romeo and Juliet, act i, sc i
[71-110] 286b-d
/ Richard II, act hi, sc i
[1-30] 334d-335b /
1st Henry IV, act v, sc v
[1-15] 466a-c / Henry V, act ii, sc ii [145-181]
540c-541a  27  Shakespeare:  Measure for Measure, act ii, sc 11 [34-141]
182b-183c  /  Coriolanus,  act  hi,  sc 1 [174-336] 371b-373b / Timon of
Athens,  act  in,  sc  v  406d-408a  / Henry VIII, act ii, sc 1 [51-136]
558c-559c  33  Pascal:  Provincial  letters,  108b-109b  35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch i, sect 3 25d; ch 11, sect 11-12 27b-28a; ch iv, sect 22
30a; ch vn, sect 87 44a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28a; part ii, 78b;
part  in,  119b;  122a-123a 37 Fielding: Tom ]ones, 150b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 38a; 39a; 39d-40a; bk xii, 86c-d; 87c-91c passim;
bk  xv,  109d;  bk  xxix,  264c-d  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii,
398b-399a; bk iv, 439a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 175d-176a; 215d216a;
216d-217d  passim;  218d-219a;  617b-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
91c-92a;  95c-96a  passim; 187b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 446b-449c esp
446b-c, 448b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 100 37d-38a

[538b]
4£(1)  to  4£(3)  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk xi, 505a-511b; bk xii,
547a-551c  4b(2)  Exile  or  ostracism:  imprisonment or incarceration 5
Sophocles: Antigone [766-780] 137d-138a 5 Euripides: Medea
[271-356]
214b-215b / Heracles Mad
[1-25] 365a-b
/ Orestes
[491601] 399a-400a
7 Plato: Apology, 209d-210a / Statesman, 607b-c / Laws, bk v, 690d-691b;
bk  ix,  743b-744a;  bk  x,  769d-770c  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[1180*5-9] 434d / Politics, bk in, ch 13
[i284a3-b34]
482a483a; bk v, ch 3
[i302bi5-2i]
504a; ch 8
[i3o8b i7-2o] 510d / Athenian Constitution, ch
22  562d-563c  14 Plutarch: Themistocles, 97b-101d / Alcibiades, 160a-b;
162d-171c  / Coriolanus, 179c184c / Aristides, 263b; 265d-266b / Nicias,
428c-429b  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk xiv, 152d-153a 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xxi,  ch ii, 570c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
87,  a 3, rep 1 187b-188b; q 105, a 2, rep 10 309d316a; part hi suppl, q
99,  a  i,  ans and rep 3 1078c-1081a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xvii
[1399] 132b-133a
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1153-1354]
179a182a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 146d-147b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
91a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act ii, sc hi
[1-16] 44c-d / Two Gentlemen of Verona, act
hi, sc 1 [157-187] 242a-b; act iv, sc i 245b246b / Romeo and Juliet, act
hi, sc i
[146202]
302c-303a / Richard II, act i, sc hi
[1 18-155] 324d-325b / As You Li{e It, act
i,  sc  1  [100-118]  598b-c  27  Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act hi, sc hi
375b-377a / Timon of Athens, act hi, sc v
[96-117] 407d-408a
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi, 119b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xii,  85d;  bk  xxvi,  222d-223a;  bk  xxix,  263c  38  Rousseau: Social
Contract, bk iv, 439a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93a-d passim; 166c 42
Kant:  Science  of Right, 448b; 450a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii,
338c-d;  bk  xiv, 606a-607a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, epilogue,
402a-c  4£(3)  Enforced  labor  or  enslavement  Old Testament: Genesis,
43:18; 44:1-17 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 78b 7 Plato: Statesman, 607c
15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49d-50a; bk xiii, 132a-c

[539a]
4*(4)  to  Ad  Chapter  74: PUNISHMENT 505 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xxi,  ch ii, 570c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 2,
rep  10  309d-316a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 147a ^-~— 32 Milton:
Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp [146] 339b-340b,
[356-380] 347b-348a,
[11561177] 364b-365a, [1391-1409] 370a
35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch iv, sect 22 30a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws,  bk xv, 109b-c; HOa-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 217c 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  445c-446a  43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments,
xiii  18c  44  Boswell: Johnson, 385a -b 50 Marx : Capital, 364a-366a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiv,  606a-607a 4b(4) Torture: cruel and
unusual  punishments Old Testament: Leviticus, 24:14 / Deuteronomy, 25 :
i-3>5-' 2 4 Homer: Odyssey, bkxxii [170-199] 307d-308a;
[433-477] 310b-d
5 Aristophanes: Knights [1395-1408] 487c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 28a
c; bk hi, 92c93a; bk iv, 159b-d; bk viii, 281c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
ii, ch 12 [i274b i5-i7] 471c 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 185b-186a / Sulla,
384a-385b  /  Crassus,  442d-443a  / Artaxerxes, 851a-852d 18 Augustine:
City  of  God, bk xix, ch 6 514b515a 23 Hobbes : Leviathan, part i, 90b;
part  ii,  146b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 4c-5a; 95a-c; 176a-c; 205b-206c;
331a-332a;  338b-339a;  349a-c  26  Shakespeare: King John, act iv, sc i
392d394b  27  Shakespeare: King Lear, act hi, sc vii 267d-269b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i,  35a-37b  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 265a-266a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk vi, 38d39a; 42c-d; bk xii, 86a; 90c-d;
bkxxv,  212b213d;  bk xxviii, 239a-b; 240a-b; bk xxix, 262a-b; 264c-d 38
Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  371a-b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
175d-176a; 212c-d; 216d-217b; 232b-c; 251b-d; 389b-c; 604b; 651b-c; 765d
[n  119]  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 91c-92c; 93b; 94ac; 167a c; 193c;
501c-503a  42  Kant: Science of Right, 447b 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
amendments,  viii 17d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 355a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk ii, 95c; bk x, 429b-d; bk xi, 505a-511b 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 122d-125c

[539b]
4c.  The  justice  of  legal  punishment:  the  conventionality  of  the
punishments determined by positive law 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[1011-1084]  38b-39a,c  5  Sophocles:  5  Euripides:  Antigone 131a-142d
Phoenician Maidens
[162 5- 1766]
392b-393d   7  Plato:  Crito  213a-219a,c  csp  216d-219a,c  /  Gorgias,
267c-270c  /  Laws,  bk  ix  743a-757d  esp  743a-744a, 746a-748d; bk x,
769d-770c  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 4 [ii3i b25]-cH 5 3] 379b-380c;
ch 7
[1 134^0-25] 382c;
ch 11 [1138*4-13] 386b-c
[ii33a
17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 150c-d 18 Augustine: City of
God, bk i, ch 21 142d143a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95,
a  2, ans 227c-228c; q 105, a 2, ans and rep 9-12 309d-316a; q 108, a 3,
rep 2 334a-336b; PART III SUPPL, Q 89, A 6, REP I 1009d-1010c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  101c;  140c-141b; 145a-d; 146d-147c 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 519a-d 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, act v, sc ii
[73-117] 498d-499a
27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for Measure, act ii, sc 1 [1-32] 178d-179b 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i, 68b-73a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Toleration, 16d / Civil Government,
ch  11,  sect 7-13 26c-28b passim; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  vii,  49a50a; bk xv, 109d; bk xix, 138c; bk xxix,
267d-268c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 398b399a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 617c-d 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 306b-c / Science of
Right,  433c-434d;  446a-c;  448b-  d; 449c 43 Mill: Liberty, 271c-272d;
302d-312a passim / Utilitarianism, 467d-468c; 469c-470c; 471b472d; 474b;
474d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 93 36a-b; par 96
36c-37a; par 99-100 37b-38a; part ii, par 132 46b-47a; part hi, par 319,
106a;  additions,  134  138b-c; 138 139a-b / Philosophy of History, part
iv, 320b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii 348b,d-401d passim,
esp  395a-401d  54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 328a-b Ad. Grades of
severity  in  punishment:  making  the  punishment  fit  the  crime  Old
Testament:  Deuteronomy,  25:1-3  New Testament: // Corinthians, 11:24 7
Plato:  Apology, 209b-210b / Laws, bk ix, 754b-756a; bk x, 769d-771b; bk
xi, 782a-b; bk xii, 784c-d

[540a]
(4. Crime andpunishment: punishment as apolitical instrument. Ad. Grades
of  severity  in  punishment:  making  the  punishmentfit  the crime.} 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5
[ui3b2i
b25]-CH ni4a2] 359d-360a; bk v, ch 4
[1131
[ii33 a3] 379b-380c
/ Politics, bk ii, ch 12
[i274b i5-i7]
471c  / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 14 619a-d 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 4a-b / Solon,
70d  /  Artaxerxes,  851a-b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 57a; bk xiv,
152d153b  18  Augustine: City of God, bk xxi, ch 11 570b571a 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 3, rep 1 187b-188b; q 105, a 2, ans
and  rep  9-12  309d-316a;  part  hi suppl, q 99, a i, ans and rep 1-2,6
1078c-1081a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v [1-72] 7a-d; vii [100-130]
10c-d; xii 16b-17d; xiv [43-72] 20a-b; xx
[1-39] 28b-d; xxvm 41b-43a esp
[130-142] 42d-43a; purgatory, x [97I-XI [90]
68b-69c;  xm  71d-73c;  xix  [70-145]  82b-83a;  xxiii [1-75] 88b-89a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  139c-140a; 145d; 157d-158a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  23b-24a  27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for  Measure, act ii, sc 11
[126-141]  183b-c  /  Coriolanus,  act  hi,  sc 1 [263-336] 372c-373b 35
Locke:  Civil  Government, ch ii, sect 11-13 27b-28b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  i,  28a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 399c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  vi,  37d43d; bk xii, 85c-91c; bk xxix, 264d-266b 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  371a-b  /  Social  Contract, bk iv, 439a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  127d-128a;  175d176a; 199b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  83b-c;  91c-94b  passim  42  Kant: Science of Right, 446a-448b 43
Federalist:  number  74, 221d-222d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 472c-d; 474d
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 96 36c-37a; part hi, par 218
72c-d;  par  319,  106a;  additions,  60  125d;  138 139a-b / Philosophy
of History,  part  iv,  320b-c;  355a-b 5. The punishment for sin 5a. The
origin  and  fulfillment  of  curses  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:8-16;
9:21-27;  12:14  /  Numbers,  22-24  /  Deuteronomy,  11:2630; 27:15-26;
28:15-68;  29:18-29  /  /  Samuel,  14:24-25— (D) I Kings, 14:24-25 / //
Samuel,  16:5-13—  (D) // Kings, 16:5-13// Kings, 21:1724— (D) HI Kings,
21 ."17-24 / // Kings, 2:2324; 9:10,30-37— (D) IV Kings, 2:23-24;

[540b]
506 THE GREAT IDEAS 5 to 5b 9:10,30-37 / 7/ Chronicles, 21:12-20; 36 esp
36:21—  (D) II Paralipomenon, 21:12-20; 36 esp 36:21 / Zechariah, 5:1-4—
(D)   Zacharias,  5:1-4  /  Malachi,  2—  (D)  Malachias,  2  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  21:27; 41:8-10— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 21:30; 41:11-13
/  Baruch,  1:20-2:7—  (D)  OT, Baruch, 1:20-2:7 New Testament: Matthew,
25:41 / / Corinthians, 16:22 / Galatians, 3:10-14 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant
Maidens  [524-599]  7c8d  /  Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp [653956]
34b-37d / Agamemnon 52a-69d esp
[1372-1616]
66d-69a / Choephoroe 70a-80d esp
[1 067-1 076] 80d / Eumenides 81a-91d esp
[94-178] 82a-83a
5   Sophocles:   Oedipus  the  King  99a-113a,c  /  Oedipus  at  Colonus
114a-130a,c  esp  [783-799]  121b-c,  [1348-1446] 126c-127b 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk hi, 106b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 380a-d 14
Plutarch:  Camillus,  107b-d / Alcibiades, 165a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
ii,  40d-41a  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 25, a 6, rep 3
504d-505d 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i, sc ii
[1480] 107c-108b; act hi, sc hi 126c-127a; act
iv, sc iv
[1-195] 136a-138b / Richard II, act
hi, sc 11
[129-134] 336d; act
iv, sc i
[114149] 342c-343a / Julius Caesar, act hi, sc
i
[253-275] 583b
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 97c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x
[1 046-1 104]
297a-298b; bk xi
[84-98]
301a;
[162-180]
302b-303a;
[251-262]
304b-305a;
[470-523]
309b-310b;  bk xii [101-120] 321b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 281b-289b;
466b467b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150a; 423c; 469a-d 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk vii, 275a 5b. The wages of sin: the punishment of original
sin  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3:9-24;  6:5;  8:21  / Ecclesiastes, 9:3
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon, 23-2 4-(D) OT, BooJ{ of Wisdom, 2:23-25
New  Testament:  Romans,  5:12-21;  6:23;  7;  8:20-21  / I Corinthians,
15:21-22  /  Ephesians,  2:1-5  18  Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch 12
357a-b;  bk  xm, ch 1-15 360a-366d; ch 23-24 372a376a, c; bk xiv, ch 1-5
376b,d-380b; ch 1213 387a-388c; ch 15-27 388d-397a; bk xv, ch 22 416a-c;
bk xvi, ch 4 425b-426a; bk xix, ch 15 521a-c; ch 28 529d-530a,c; bk xxi,
ch  12  571a-c;  ch  15 572c-573b; bk xxii, ch 30, 617c-618a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 23 648a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
19,  a  6, ans 113c-114d; part i-ii, q 17, a 9, rep 3 692d-693d; q 42, a
3, rep i 802d-803c

[541a]
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 72, a 5 115a-116b; qq 81-83
162d-174b;  qq  85-89  178b-204a,c;  q  91,  a  6  212c-213c;  q 94, a 6
225d-226b;  part  ii-ii, q 24, a 12 499c-500d; q 25, a 7 506a-d ^^__^ 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[1645] 56a-b; xxvm
[91-96] 97a; xxix
[22-30]
97d-98a; paradise, vii [19-120] 115b-116b 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par
18,  507b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 112a-b; part hi, 191D-C 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 52, 195d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi [167-216] 139a140a;
[274-343] 141b-143a; bk ix [780-1189]
264b-273a; bk x 274a-298b esp
[103-123]
276b-277a,
[229-409]
279b-283a,
[585-640]
287a-288b; bk xi
[84-98] 301a; bk xi
[423]-
bk  xii  [371]  308b-327a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  430 245a-247b; 434-435
248a-251a;  446-450  252a-253a  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  482a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part hi, 304d305b 5c. The pain of remorse and the
torment  of  conscience: the atonement for sin Old Testament: Leviticus,
16:29-34  esp 16:29, 16:31 / // Samuel, 12:9-23— (D) // Kings, 12:9-23 /
/  Kings,  8:31-50—  (D)  ///  Kings,  8:31-50 / // Chronicles, 6:24-42;
7:12-14;  33:12-19—  (D)  II Paralipomenon, 6:24-42; 7:12-14; 33:12-19 /
Job,  42:5-6/  Psalms, 32; 34:18; 35:13-15; 38:i8 ; 5*; 697-12; 102:112—
(D)  Psalms,  31;  33:19;  34:13-15;  37:19;  50;  68:8-13;  101:1-13  /
Proverbs,  5; 28:1 / Jeremiah, 2:19— (D) Jeremias, 2:19 / Daniel, 9:3-20
/  Joel, 1:1-2:17 / Jonah, 3— (D) Jonas, 3 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
5:1-13;  11:16;  12:19,23;  17—  (D)  OT,  Boo^of  Wisdom, 5:114; 11:17;
12:19,23;  17  /  Ecclesiasticus,  14:1-2;  17:24-26;  18:21  —  (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  14:12;  17:20-24;  18:21  /  /  Maccabees,  6:1-15  esP
6:12-13— (D) OT, / Machabees, 6:1-15 esP 6:12-13 New Testament: Matthew,
3:1-12;  4:18;  11:2021;  27:3-5  /  Mar{, 1:14-15 / Luke, 3:7-14; 5:32;
7:36-50;  10:13;  x 3 :i -5; i5 :iI ~21 ; 16:2731 / John, 8:1-11 / Acts,
3:19;  17:30;  26:20  /  //  Corinthians, 7:8-12 / // Timothy, 2:25-26 /
Hebrews,  12:16-17  /  James,  4:8-10  /  II  Peter,  3*>  5  Aeschylus:
Choephoroe [1010-1076] 80a-d 5 Sophocles: Antigone [1257-1353] 141d-142d
/ Ajax [646-683] 148c-149a 5 Euripides: Andromache
[802-879] 322a-c
/ Electra
[1 177-1232] 337d-338a / Heracles Mad
[1 229-1 428] 375c-377d / Orestes [1-423] 394a398b
/ Iphigenia Among the Tauri [924-986] 419a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix,
ch 4 [n66bn-24] 419d-420a

[541b]
d Chapter 74: PUNISHMENT 507 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b; bk v [1151-1160] 76a-b
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  87b-c  /  Histories,  bk  hi,  255b-c 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk ii, par 1 9a; par 9, 10d; par 17 12d 13a; bk
hi,  par  5  14b;  bk  iv,  par 14 22d-23a; bk v, par 2 27b-c; bk x, par
65-66,  88a-b  /  City  of God, bk xiv, ch 8 381c-383a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a 5, rep 1 775d-777a; q 37, a 2, rep i
784c785b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 6 189c-190c; a
7, ans and rep 3 190c-191d; a 8, ans 191d-192d; part hi suppl, q 97, a 2
1066d-1067b;  q  98,  a  2 1073b-1074a; a 7 1076d-1077b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xxx
[91-148]
45c-46a;  purgatory,  ii  [io6]-iii [15] 55c-56a; iv [97-135] 58c-d; ix-
xxvii  65d-96a  esp  x-xn  67b-71d, xviii [76-145] 80d-81b, xix [70-145]
82b-83a,  xxi  [34-75]  85b-d,  xxm  [1-75] 88b89a; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b 22
Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  [12,211-220]  370b371a / Parson's Tale, par
1-15   495a-506b;  par  91-103  547a-550a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  14b;
174d-176c  26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i, sc iv 114d117c; act v, sc
in [178-206] 145c-d / Richard II, act v, sc vi
[30-52] 351c-d / King John,
act  iv,  sc  11 [215-248] 396d-397a / Merchant of Venice, act ii, sc ii
[1-33] 412a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [616-633] 46c-d; act
in, sc m
[36-72] 53d-54a; sc iv
54b-56d;  act iv, sc v [16-20] 59d / Othello, act v, sc 11 238d-243a,c /
King Lear, act hi, sc iv
[23-36] 264c / Macbeth, act
ii, sc ii 291a-292a; act hi, sc ii 296b-297a; sc iv 297c-299b; act v, sc
1 306b-307a / Cymbeline, act v, sc i [i]-sc 11
[10] 479a-c
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 123a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi,
prop  51,  schol  411d-412a; part iv, prop 54 440b-c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  iv  [32-104]  153a154b;  bk ix [1042-1189] 270a-273a / Samson
Agonistes
[502-520]
350b-351a;
[606-632]
352b-353b  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch ix 53c-54d passim 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  257a-266b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 267bc; 398d-399a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  54c-55a;  191 b-c; 199a-c; 452b-d 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  306d-307d;  333a-c  /  Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  379b-d  /  Judgement, 593a43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 458b-459b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  304c-d;  part iv, 354a-c 47
Goethe:   Faust,  part  i  [3776-3834]  92a-93b;  part  ii  [11,384-510]
277a-280a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 34b-36b

[542a]
(5.  The punishment for sin. 5 c. The pain of remorse and the torment of
conscience:  the atonementfor sin.) 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 312d-314c
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  216a-d; bk viii, 321b-d; bk xiv,
606a-607a  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 24a-c; 30b-32a; bk
hi,  46c-47b;  bk vi, 159c163d; bk vn, 184b-188a; bk viii, 217c-218c; bk
xn,   381c-d;   395a-398d;   epilogue,   404c408a   passim   54   Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams, 246c; 247c248b passim / General Introduction,
581  d  /  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  793b-c;  797c798a / New
Introductory Lectures, 831b 5d. The modes of divine punishment: here and
hereafter,  temporal  and  eternal  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 3:9-19 esp
3:14-19; 4:8-15; 6-8 esp 6:5-7; 18:20-19:29 / Exodus, 7-12; 22:22-24; 32
/ Leviticus, 10:1-3; 18:2430; 26 / Numbers, 12-14; 15:30-31; 16; 21:5-9;
25  / Deuteronomy, 27-30 passim; 32 / Joshua, 5:6; 7 (D) Josue, 5:6; 7 /
Judges,  9 esp 9:2324, 9:57 / / Samuel, 15— (D) I Kings, 15 / // Samuel,
6:6-8;  21:1;  24—  (D)  //  Kings,  6:6-8;  21:1;  24/  I Kings, 9:6-9;
11:9-13,29-39;  13;  14:7-17;  16:1-7,18-19;  21:19-29—  (D)  /// Kings,
9:6-9;  11:9-13,29-39;  13;  14:7-17; 16:1-7,18-19; 21:19-29 / // Kings,
5:20-27;  9:1-10:11;  17:6-18:12—  (D)  IV  Kings,  5:20-27;  9:1-10:11;
17:6-18:12  / / Chronicles, 10:13-14; 13:9-11; 21 — (D) I Paralipomenon,
10:13-14;  13:9-11; 21 / // Chronicles, 6:24-42; 12; 21 :i220; 26:16-21;
36—  (D)  II  Paralipomenon,  6:2442;  12; 21:12-20; 26:16-21; 36/ Ezra,
g—(D)  I  Esdras,  9  /  Job / Psalms, 9:16-17; 11; 18; 21:8-12; 34; 37;
78-79  passim;  89:28-33;  94;  112; 116:3— (D) Psalms, 9:17-18; 10; 17;
20:913'  33?  3  6 ; 77"7 8 passim; 88:29-34; 93 ! "*! 114:3/ Isaiah, 1;
2:5-3:26; 5; 9:13-10:27; 1324; 28-32; 33:7-14; 345 42:13-25; 47; 63:1-6;
65-66—  (D)  Isaias,  1; 2:5-3:26; 5; 9:13-10:27; 13-24; 28-32; 33:7-14;
34;  42:13-25;  47;  63:1-6;  65-66  /  Jeremiah, 1; 4-9; 11; 13:914:12;
15:1-9; 16; 17:27-19:13; 21-29; 34; 44; 46-52— (D) Jeremias, 1; 4-9; 11;
13:9-14:12; 15:1-9; 16; 17:27-19:13; 21-29; 34; 44; 46-52 / Lamentations
/  Ezekjel,  5-7 esp 5:1-6:7; 9; 11; 13-18; 20-39 esp 28:1-19, 31:10-18—
(D) Ezechiel, 5-7 esp 5:1-6:7; 9; 11; 13-18; 20-39 esp 28:1-19, 31:10-18
/  Daniel,  4;  5:17-30;  12:2  / Hosea, 4-13— (D) Osee, 4:1-14:1 / Joel
passim  / Amos / Obadiah-(D) Abdias I Micah passim— (D) Micheas passim /
Nahum  I  Haba%u\—{D)  Habacuc  /  Zephaniah—(D)  Sophonias I Zechariah,
7:8-14;  11:1-9,17;  1214—  (D)  Zacharias,  7:8-14;  11:1-9,17; 12-14 /
Malachi,  2— (D) Malachias, 2 Apocrypha: Judith, 5:17-18; 16:17— (D) OT,
Judith, 5:17-18; 16:20-21 / Wisdom of Solo-

[542b]
;  508  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5d mon, 3-5; 4:16-5:14; 11:5-16; 12:1-8; 16-19—
(D)  OT,  Book  °f  Wisdom,  3-5;  4:16-5:15;  11:5-17;  12:1-8; 16-19 /
Ecclesiasticus,   7:1617;   18:22,24;   21:9-10;   39:27-30—   (D)   OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  7:18-19;  18:22,24;  21:10-11;  39:32-36 / / Maccabees,
6:1-16—  (D)  OT,  /  Machabees,  6:1-16  /  //  Maccabees,  6:12-17; 9;
12:40-42—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  6:12-17; 9; 12:40-42 New Testament:
Matthew,  3:7-12;  5:22,29;  8:12;  10:14-15,28; 11:20-24; I 3 :4 I_42 ,
49-50;  18:9;  23:33;  25:41-46 / Mar{, 9:42-48; 16:16 / Luke, 16:19-26;
18:28-30  I John, 15:6 / Acts, 12:20-23; 13:4-12 / Romans, 2:5-9; I 3-*2
/ // Thessalonians, 1:7-9 / Hebrews, 10:26-31 / // Peter, 2 / Jude, 5-16
/ Revelation, 9; 14:9-1 1 19:17-21; 20:9-10,12-15; 21:8— (D) Apocalypse,
9; 14:9-11; 19:17-21; 20:9-10,12-15; 21:8 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[1-317] 3a-6b; bk xxiv
[600-619]
177d / Odyssey, bk xi
[100-117]
244a-b;   [568-600]   248d-249a;  bk  xii  [127-141]  251b-c;  [260-419]
252d-254c  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [524-599]  7c8d / Persians
15a-26d esp [739-842] 23a-24b / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon
[320-402]
55c-56b;
[681-781]
59b-60b / Choephoroe
[585-651]
75d-76b  /  Eumenides 81a-91d esp [490-562] 86b-87a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
the King [1-215] 99a-101a / Antigone [278-296] 133c;
[1348-1353] 142d
/ Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[1 18-133] 144c >
L74  8"  783]  149c-d  /  Electra [173-183] 157c 5 Euripides: Bacchantes
340a-352a,c  esp  [12161392] 350b-352a,c 5 Aristophanes: Frogs [137-159]
565d-566a  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 4d; 8a-10a; bk hi, 103b-d; bk iv,
159d;  bk  v,  173d-174b;  bk  vi,  199c-d; 203a-b; 211a-213a,c; bk vii,
218c-d;  219c-220a;  237d-239a;  246b-c;  bk  viii,  283d; bk ix, 308a-c
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 380a-d; bk vii, 560a-b 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  125b-126a / Phaedo, 246d247b / Gorgias, 292b-293d / Republic,
bk  ii,  313b-314d;  bk x, 436c-441a,c / Theaetetus, 530d / Laws, bk ix,
757a;  bk  x,  767c-768c  / Seventh Letter, 806a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [264-594] 218a-227a 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead,
tr  hi, ch 16 150c-d; ch 24 154b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par
34-37  70c-71b / City of God, bk xi, ch 23 334c335c; bk xiii 360a-376a,c
esp  ch 1-15 360a366d, ch 23-24 372a-376a,c; bk xiv, ch 1-5 376b,d-380b;
ch  15 388d-390a; bk xix, ch 15 521a-c; bk xx-xxii 530a-618d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  15  628b-c; ch 20-21 629b; bk ii, ch 23 648a-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  2, rep 2 15c-16a; q 64
333d-338d; q 66, a 3

[543a]
347b-348d;  q  114,  a  i,  rep i 581d-582c; part i-ii, Q 17, a 9, rep 3
692d-693d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  79,  aa 3-4
158a-159c;  qq 85-87 178b-192d; q 91, a 6 212c-213c; q 105, a 2, ans and
K&fipn.  309d-316a;  part  ii-ii,  q 33, a 7, rep 1-2 556a-557d; part hi
suppl,  q  69 885a-893c; q 70, a 3 897d-900d; q 74, aa 7-9 932b935a,c; q
86  992b-996a,c;  qq  91-99  1016a1085a,c  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy 22
Chaucer: Friar's Tale
[7227-7246]
284a / Physicians Tale
[12,211-220]
370b-371a / Pardoner's Tale 374a-382b / Mon/(s Tale 434a-448b / Parson s
Tale,  par  10, 499b 502a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 163d-164a; part
hi,  177d;  191b-198a;  244b-c; part iv, 253b258b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii, 119b-122a 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 204d-205d 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  69b  /  Objections  and  Replies, 226d-227a 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[356-363] 101a;
bk 11
[477-485] 121b; bk in
[167-216]
139a140a; bk xi
[470-523] 309b 310b
/ Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp
[1-46]
339b-340b,
[667-709] 354a-355a,
[11 56-1 177] 364b-365a,
[1669-1707] 376a-b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 194 205b-209b / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a -b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect 13 107d-108c; ch hi,
sect  5  113c; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 62 194c-d; sect 72 198a c; ch xxviii,
sect  8  230a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 108 500b-d; div
114,  503a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 20b-21a; 75c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk  xii, 85d86a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 180b; 187b-189b;
198d-199a;  409b;  438a-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 233c 234d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  363a-b;  482a-c;  514d-515a  48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
30a-36b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiv, 606a-607a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk i, 10clla; bk vi, 169c-170b; bk vii, 185a-c 5e.
The  justice of divine punishment Old Testament: // Chronicles, 6:23,30—
(D)  II  Paralipomenon, 6:23,30 / Ezra, 9:10-15— (D) I Esdras, 9:10-15 /
Job  esp  34:11-12  / Psalms, 7:8-17; 28:3-4; 62:12— (D) Psalms, 7:9-18;
27:3-4;  61:13  / Proverbs, 11:31; 24:12 / Ecclesiastes, 9:1-3 / Isaiah,
59:16-19;  65:6-7  —  (D)  Isaias,  59:16-19;  65:6-7 / Jeremiah, 16:18;
25:14;  50:29;  51:56—  (D)  Jeremias,  16:18;  25:14;  50:29;  51:56  /
Lamentations,  :49—  (P) Eze3:64 / Ezekiel, 9:10; 16:43; 23 :49 / Hosea,
12:2— (D) chiel, 9:10; 16:43; 23 Osee, 12:2

[543b]
Chapter  74:  PUNISHMENT 509 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 12 esp 12:15,
12:18;  14:27-31;  15:18-16:1;  19:4,13—  {D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 12 esp
12:15,  12:18;  14:27-31;  15:18-16:1;  19:4,12 / Ecclesiasticus, 11:26;
35:18-19—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 11:28; 35:22-25 / // Maccabees, 4:38;
7:3638; 9 esp 9:6, 9:18— (D) OT, // Machabees, 4:38; 7:36-38; 9 esp 9:6,
9:18  New  Testament:  Matthew,  16:27  /  Romans,  2:5-11;  3:5-6  / //
Corinthians,  5:10;  11:15  / // Thessalonians, 1:6 / // Timothy, 4:14 /
Hebrews,  2:1-4  /  Revelation,  2:23;  20:12-13 — (D) Apocalypse, 2:23;
20:12-13 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[1 560-1 565]
68c / Choephoroe [585-651] 75d-76b 5 Sophocles: Electra [173-183] 157c /
Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[433-452]
186a,
[131 6—
1347]  193d-194a,  [1408-1444]  194d-195a,c  5  Euripides:  Heracles Mad
365a-377d esp
[726-873] 371b-372c
6  Herodotus:  History, bk vii, 237d-239a 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 125b-126a /
Gorgias,  292b293d  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 321d-322d; bk x, 436c-441a,c /
Laws,  bk  x,  767c-768c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk vi [379-395)
85bc  13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk vii [286-322] 243b-245a 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  16  150c-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiii, ch i
360a-b; ch 3 361a-c; ch 14-15 366b-d; bk xiv, ch 15 388d-390a; bk xv, ch
21, 415d-416a; ch 25 419a-b; bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a; bk xx, ch 27 556b;
bk xxi, ch 13 571c-572a / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 32 633c-d; bk ii,
ch  23  648a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 19, a 9, ans
116d-117d;  q 21, a 4 126c-127c; q 23, a 3 134b-135a; q 49, a 2, ans and
rep  i  266a-c;  q  64,  a  4  337d-338d;  part  i-ii,  q 39, a 2, rep 3
790d-791b;  q 47, a i, rep i 819c820b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 87, 185c-192d; q 105, a 2, ans and rep 9-12 309d-316a; part ii-
ii,  q  19  465a-474d;  q  25, a 6, rep 2-3 504d-505d; part hi suppl, qq
87-90 997a-1016a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, hi
[ 1-18] 4a-b;
[100-136] 5a-b; xi 15a-16b; xiii [91-108] 18d19a;
xix
[1-30]
26d-27a; xx
[1-39]
28b-d; xxiv
[79-120]
35b-d; xxix
[52-57]
43c; purgatory, xvi [52-84] 77b-d; xix J70-145] 82b-83a; xx [85-96] 84a;
paradise, vi [82-92] 114c; vii [16-84] H5b-116a; xv [1-12] 128b-c; xviii
[115-136]  134d-135a 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 40-43 418b419b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 160c-161a; part iv, 254a-b 26 Shakespeare:
Richard  II,  act  i,  sc  ii  [1-43]  322d-323a / Henry V, act iv, sc i
[140-186] 553a-c

[544a]
510 THE GREAT IDEAS 5e. The justice of (5. The punishment for sin divine
punishment.) 27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act hi, sc ii [4259] 263b-c; act
iv,  sc  ii  [37-80] 270d-271b; act v, sc in [170-174] 281a / Cymbeline,
act  v,  sc  iv  [11-29]  481b  / Winter's Tale, act hi, sc 11 [125-155]
502c-503a  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 413d 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  hi [80-166] 137a139a esp [131-134] 138a; [372-415] 143b-144b;
bk iv [1-113] 152b-155a; bk x [145-208] 277b279a / Samson Agonistes
[293-299]
346a;
[356-380]
347b-348a;
[667-709]
354a-355a;
[1156-1177] 364b-365a
35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 62 194c-d 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  282a-287b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 482a-d; 539d-540a 48
Melville: Moby Dic\, 380b-381a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xi,
337a-346a   54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  878a-b  5e(l)  The
justification  of eternal suffering in Hell or Hades Old Testament: job,
26:6  /  Psalms,  9:16-17; 21:8-12; 116:3— (D) Psalms, 9:17-18; 20:9-13;
114:3  /  Proverbs, 15:11,24; 27:20 / Isaiah, 5:1415; 14:4-23; 33:10-14;
66:24—   (D)  Isaias,  5:14-15;  14:4-23;  33:10-14;  66:24  /  Ezekjel,
31:10-18—  (D)  Ezechiel,  31:10-18  /  Daniel,  12:2 Apocrypha: Judith,
16:17—  (D) OT, Judith, 1 6 :20-2 1 / Wisdom of Solomon, 4 : 1 6-5 .-14—
(D)  OT,  Boo{ of Wisdom, 4:16-5:15 / Ecclesiasticus, 7:16-17; 18:22,24;
21:9-10—   (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:18-19;  18:22,24;  21:10-11  New
Testament:   Matthew,  3:7-12;  5:22,29;  8:12;  10:14-15,28;  11:20-24;
13:41-42,49-50;  18:9;  23:33;  25:41-46/  Mar\,  9:42-48; 16:16 / Luke,
12:5;  16:19-26  / John, 15:6 / Romans, 2:5-9; l 3 :2 I H Thessalonians,
1:7-9  /  Hebrews, 10:26-31 1 James, 5:1-6 / Jude, 6-13 / Revelation, 9;
14:9-11;  19:17-21;  20:9-10,1215;  21:8—  (D)  Apocalypse,  9; 14:9-11;
19:1721; 20:9-10,12-15; 21:8 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xi [568-600] 248d-249a
5  Aristophanes:  Frogs [137-159] 565d-566a 7 Plato: Phaedo, 249c-250a /
Republic,  bk  x,  437c-438c  /  Laws,  bk  ix,  757a; bk x, 767c768c 18
Augustine: City of God, bk xiii, ch 2 360b361a; ch 12 365d-366a; bk xiv,
ch  i 376b, d377a; bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a; ch 28 529d530a,c; bk xxi, ch
11-12  570b-571c;  ch  16-18  573b-575b;  ch 23-24 576c-579d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 21, a 4, rep 1 126c-127c; q 63, a 8, ans
332c333b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 79, a 4, rep 2
158d-159c; q 87, aa 3-5 187b-189c;

[544b]
5e{\)  to  6  part hi suppl, q 94 1040d-1042c; qq 97-99 1066a-1085a,c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell  la-52d  esp  in  4a-5b, v [1-51] 7a-c, vi
[94-115]  9b-c,  xi  15a16b,  xiv [16-72] 19c-20b, xxvn [55-136] 40a41b,
xxviii  [112-142]  42c-43a,  xxxm [91-150] 50c-51a; paradise, xv [10-12]
128c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 254a-b 26 Shakespeare: Richard III,
act i, sc iv [4263] 115a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  62  194c-d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 363a-b; 514d-515a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  169c-170b;  bk  xi,  337a-346a  5e(2) The
necessity  of  expiation  in  Purgatory  Old Testament: Isaiah, 4:4— (D)
Isaias,  4:4  Apocrypha:  //  Maccabees, 12:43-45— (^) OT, // Machabees,
12:43-46  New  Testament:  Matthew,  12:32  /  / Corinthians, 3:11-15 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk xx, ch 25 554c555a; bk xxi, ch 13 571c-572a;
ch  16  573b574a;  ch 24 577b-579d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl, q 69, a 2, ans and rep 2 886c-887d; a 7 891d-893c; q 97, a i, rep
2 1066b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory 53a105d esp 1-11 53a-55d, m
[1 18-132]
57a-b, ix 65d-67b, x [97]-xi
[90] 68b-69c, xm 71d73c, xvii [76-139] 79b-d, xvm [76-145] 80d81b, xix
[97-126] 82c-d, xxi
[34-75] 85b-d,
xxv
[io9]-xxvi
[90]
92c-93d,  xxx-xxxi  99b-102b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv, 251b-c;
255b258b  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  i, sc v [9-22] 37a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  173d  6.  Pathological motivations with respect to punishment:
abnormal  sense  of  sin or guilt; perverse desires to inflict or suffer
punishment  6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 95d-97c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
iv, ch 5
[1126*9-30]
373a-c; bk ix, ch 4
[1 166^2-24] 419d-420a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[10141023] 43a-b
15  Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 13c-d; 14d-15a; bk xv, 168a-c 26 Shakespeare:
Titus  Andronicus  170a-198d esp act 1, sc 1 [90-141] 171c-172a, act ii,
sc  hi  [89-191] 178d-179d, sc iv 181b-d 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act v,
sc  i  306b307a; sc 111 [37-46] 308a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 55a-d;
127d-128a;  216a-c;  389b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part i,
224b-d;  228b; part iv, 354a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 24a-25a;
bk iv, 174b; 183d-186c; 188a-190c; bk v, 216a-d;

[545a]
bk  vi,  238a-c; 271c-274a,c; bk viii, 305b307d; 322c; bk ix, 349d-350d;
357a-358b;  bk  xi,  505a-511b;  514c;  bk  xiii,  573d; bk xiv, 610c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  BK_jsir  122d-125c; bk xi, 317b-320a;
324cf329b  passim CROSS-REFERENCES crime and its punishment, see Justice
ioc;  Law  6e-6e(3).  ment,  see  Pleasure  and Pain 8c; Sin 5. idea and
topics  with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two
groups: I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this collection. I. Aquinas. Summa Contra
Gentiles,  bk  hi,  ch  139-  .  Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De  Malo, q 5
Fielding.  Jonathan  Wild A. Smith. The Theory of Moral Sentiments, part
11,  sect  i Kant. Lectures on Ethics, pp 47-70 Dostoevsky. The House of
the  Dead  .  Crime and Punishment Tolstoy. Anna Karenina . Resurrection
Freud.  Totem  and  Taboo  II.  Saadia  Gaon.  The  BooJ{ of Beliefs and
Opinions, treatise ix Anselm of Canterbury. Cur Deus Homo?

[545b]
Chapter  74:  PUNISHMENT 511 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 204b-c;
328a-b  /  General  Introduction,  535c-d  /  Ego  and Id, 71 2b- 715b /
Inhibitions,  Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  730b-731b;  735c-d;  743b-744a /
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 797a- 799a passim / New Introductory
Lectures,  831c-832a;  851d-852d  Bonaventura. Breviloquium, part vii T.
More.  Utopia,  bk  i  Defoe.  Moll  Flanders  J. Butler. The Analogy of
Religion,  part  i,  ch  2-5  Beccaria. Crimes and Punishments Voltaire.
"Crimes  or Offences," "Criminal," in A Philosophical Dictionary Howard.
The  State  of  the  Prisons  Godwin.  An  Enquiry  Concerning Political
Justice, BK VII, ch 1 Coleridge. The Rime ofthe Ancient Mariner Bentham.
An  Introduction  to the Principles of Morals and Legislation, ch 12-17 .
The  Theory of Legislation . The Rationale of Punishment . The Rationale
of  Reward  Dickens.  Oliver  Twist  .  Nicholas Nickleby Hawthorne. The
Scarlet Letter

[546a]
512  THE  GREAT IDEAS Hugo. Les Miserables R. Browning. The Ring and the
BooI{  S.  Butler. Erewhon Maudsley. Responsibility in Mental Disease T.
Hardy. The Return of the Native T. H. Green. The Principles of Political
Obligation,  (k)  S.  M. Green. Crime: Its Nature, Causes, Treatment and
Prevention Ibsen. Ghosts . Hedda Gabler

[546b]
Saleilles.   The  Individualisation  of  Punishment  Bradley.  Collected
Essays,   vol  i  (7)  Pirandello.  The  Outcast  Wharton.  Ethan  Frome
Fauconnet.  La  responsabilite  Malinowski.  Crime  and Custom in Savage
Society  Ewing. The Morality of Punishment Ross. The Right and the Good,
11  (1)  O'Neill.  Emperor  Jones . Mourning Becomes Electra Shaw. Crude
Criminology

[547a]
Chapter^  QUALITY INTRODUCTION is sometimes supposed that the fundamenIT
tal  categories  in terms of which men think they are describing reality
or  their  experience  merely reflect the conventions of their language.
Substance    and    attribute—and    among   attributes,   quality   and
quantity—happen  to  be fundamental categories in western thought, it is
held, only because the group of languages which the western cultures use
all  have  a  grammatical  structure that involves a distinction between
noun  and  adjective  and  between  different kinds of adjectives. It is
said,  for  example,  that  Aristotle's enumeration of the categories is
merely a verbal classification based on Greek grammar. When he says that
the   basic   terms   of   discourse  represent  substances,  qualities,
quantities,  relations,  and so forth, he is recognizing the grammatical
difference  between  such  words as"man" and "white," or between "white"
and  "six  feet  tall"  and  "double."  The  lineaments  of reality, the
varieties  of  being,  or  the  modes of experience are not, it is held,
thereby  finally described. In the tradition of the great books, another
interpretation generally prevails. Even those who disagree in one way or
another about the basic categories do not regard them as conventional or
of  linguistic  origin.  Kant,  for  example, disagrees with Aristotle's
listing  of the categories. He makes substance a mode of relation rather
than  coordinate  with  quality,  quantity,  and  relation. He calls his
categories  "transcendental"  to  indicate  that they are not drawn from
experience  and  that,  as a priori forms of thought, they determine the
structure  of  all  possible  experience.  Aristotle, on the other hand,
draws  his  categories  from  experience.  He thinks that they represent
fundamental  modes  of  being  and  that  they are, therefore, the basic
concepts in terms of which thought apprehends reality. Despite all these
differences,  Kant  and Aristotle agree that the categories signify real
513

[547b]
not  verbal—distinctions.  Their  agreement  on  this  point seems to be
shared  even  by  those,  like  Hume,  who  question our ability to know
whether  substances  exist;  or  those,  like Berkeley, who question the
validity  of the distinction between quality and quantity. In one sense,
no one questions the existence of qualities, as they do the existence of
substances—  the  enduring  things,  material  or  otherwise,  in  which
qualities  are supposed to inhere. Everyone somehow acknowledges the hot
and  the  cold,  the light and the dark, the moist and the dry, the hard
and  the  soft.  But  such acknowledgement does not preclude a number of
basic  questions  about  quality  on which much disagreement exists. Are
qualities  attributes?  Do they exist, that is, only as qualifiers, only
as  belonging to something else ? Or do they exist independently, in and
of  themselves?  If  qualities  are attributes, do they belong to things
quite  apart  from  our  experience of them, or do they belong to things
only  as  experienced  and  have no separate reality ? Do things have in
reality  certain  attributes  that  cause  in us the experience of other
traits  which  we  then attribute to the things themselves ? Are all the
attributes  of  things,  whether  in  or  apart  from  experience, to be
conceived  as  qualities,  and  if  so,  are  there  different  kinds of
qualities?  Or  is quality only one kind of attribute, and if so, how is
quality  related  to other kinds of attributes? Is quality, for example,
distinct  from  quantity,  dependent on quantity, reducible to quantity,
affected  by  quantity  ?  These  questions appear to be related in ways
which  make  the  issues  they  raise  dependent  on one another. If, in
addition,  their  presuppositions and implications are observed, it will
be  seen  that  they  cannot  be  fully  discussed without entering into
matters considered in other chap-

[548a]
514  THE GREAT IDEAS ters, such as the notions of substance and accident
in  the  chapter  on  Being;  the  theory  of experience and the various
accounts  of senseperception and the objects of sense in the chapters on
Experience  and  Sense;  and,  of  course,  some of the principal topics
considered   in   the  closely  related  chapter  on  Quantity.  Spinoza
distinguishes  between substance and mode as that which exists in itself
and  that  which  exists in another thing. He lays down as an axiom that
"everything which is, is either in itself or in another." Whether or not
qualities  are  modes  of  substance,  it seems to be clear that Spinoza
would  not  call  them  substances.  The notion of qualities existing in
themselves,  and  not  as  the  qualities of'anything, seems to be self-
contradictory. As Descartes points out, to assert "the existence of real
accidents,"  by  which he means the existence of qualities or quantities
apart  from substances, is to deny the distinction between substance and
accident.  "Substance,"  he  writes,  "can  never be conceived after the
fashion  of accidents, nor can it derive its reality from them"; whereas
"no  reality can be ascribed to [accidents], which is not taken from the
idea  of  substance."  Anyone  who  acknowledges the distinction between
substance   and  accident  also  conceives  qualities  as  accidents  or
attributes,  i.e.,  as  existing  in  the  things they qualify. Spinoza,
Descartes,  Locke,  and  Aristotle do not conceive substance in the same
way, nor do they all use the word "accident" to name the characteristics
which  inhere  in substance. Locke, for example, uses the word "quality"
with  almost  the same generality that Spinoza gives to the word "mode,"
or Descartes and Aristotle to "accident." And the word "substance" Locke
uses  in  a  sense  that  is  nearer to Aristotle's meaning for the word
"matter,"  when,  in trying to conceive bare substance as the underlying
"I  know not what," Locke defines this substratum as that which supports
qualities.   Apart   from  its  qualities,  substance  has  no  positive
characteristics.   Nevertheless,   such   differences  in  theory  leave
untouched   the   point   ofagreement   that   qualities  do  not  float
freely—without  any  support—  in  either  reality  or  experience. Even
Berkeley's denial of matter, or of bodies existing apart from

[548b]
.  their  being  perceived, does not turn qualities into substances, for
qualities  as  perceived  are  the qualities of bodies as perceived, and
both  together have their existence in the perceiver. The contrary view—
that qualities exist in and of themselves—does not seem to receive clear
or  explicit  expression  in the tradition of the great books. It may be
implied  in  the conception of experience which Hume develops more fully
in  the  Treatise on Human Nature than in the Enquiry. There it seems to
be  supposed that each element of experience has the same reality as any
other;  that  each  stands  by itself without any perceptible dependence
upon  any  other;  and  that  it  has  no existence beyond its momentary
appearance.  On  this view no enduring substances exist. In addition, it
is  as  appropriate to call the elements of experience "qualities" as it
is  to  call  them anything else. Experience can be described as nothing
but  qualities  and  relations—or as qualities related by succession and
contiguity.  The  notion  that  experience  is a continual flux in which
nothing  has  a  continuing  identity from moment to moment, seems to be
basic  to any theory which denies substances and affirms the independent
reality  of qualities. The theory of qualities which Plato attributes to
Heraclitus  or  his followers illustrates this. "Their first principle,"
Socrates tells Theaetetus, "is that all is motion, and upon this all the
affections  of  which  we were just now speaking are supposed to depend;
there  is  nothing  but  motion, which has two forms, one active and the
other passive, both in endless number; and out of the union and friction
of  them  is  generated  a  progeny endless in number, having two forms,
sense  and  the  object  of  sense."  For example, "when the eye and the
appropriate  object  meet  together  and give birth to whiteness and the
sensation connatural with it . . . then, while the sight is flowing from
the  eye, whiteness proceeds from the object which combines in producing
the  color.  . . . This is true of all sensible objects, hard, warm, and
the  like, which are similarly to be regarded not as having any absolute
existence,  but  as  being  all  of  them  generated  by motion in their
intercourse  with  one  another ... for the agent has no existence until
united  with  the patient, and the patient has no existence until united
with the agent. . .

[549a]
And  from  all  these  considerations,"  Socrates  says, "there arises a
general  reflection that there is no self-existent thing, but everything
is becoming and in relation." ^__— Socrates explains that, for those who
assert  a universal flux, qualities are not only the products of motion,
but  also  are  themselves  in motion— "not even white continues to flow
white,  and  whiteness  itself is a flux or change which is passing into
another  color."  There  is  no  need  to refute this doctrine, Socrates
thinks,  since it refutes itself by its unintelligibility or, worse, its
inability  to say anything definite in consequence of denying that words
can  have a constant meaning from moment to moment. Aristotle concurs in
this   attitude   toward   "the  most  extreme  view  of  the  professed
Heracliteans,"  but  goes on to remark that "not even at different times
does  one sense disagree about the quality, but only about that to which
the  quality  belongs.  I  mean,  for instance, that the same wine might
seem,  if  either  it  or  one's  body changed, at one time sweet and at
another  time  not  sweet; but at least the sweet, such as it is when it
exists,  has never yet changed." The sweet thing may become sour, either
in  itself  or  to us, but sweetness itself never becomes sourness. That
qualities  do not change into one another, whereas substances undergoing
alteration  change  from  one  quality to another, seems to Aristotle to
distinguish  quality  from  substance.  "The  most  distinctive  mark of
substance,"  he writes, "appears to be that, while remaining numerically
one  and  the  same,  it  is capable of having contrary qualities. . . .
Thus,  one  and  the same color cannot be white and black. . . . But the
same  individual  person  is at one time white, at another black, at one
time  warm,  at  another  cold,  at  one time good, at another bad." The
qualities  do not change, but the substance in changing, passes from one
quality  to  its contrary. (The difference between change of quality, or
alteration,  and the other types of change which substances can undergo,
is  discussed in the chapter on Change.) Aristotle suggests another mark
of  distinction  between  substance and quality. One substance, he says,
never  stands  to another as its contrary, in the way in which qualities
are con-

[549b]
Chapter  75:  QUALITY 515 trary to one another, like hot and cold, white
and  black,  good and bad. A quality may have a correlative as well as a
contrary,  e.g.,  if knowledge is a quality of mind, the object known is
its  correlative,  whereas  ignorance  of  the object is the contrary of
knowledge.  In some cases, the contrary qualities may be the extremes or
limits  of  a  continuous series of intermediates, e.g., white and black
with  all  the  intermediate greys. In some cases, as with knowledge and
ignorance,  the  contrary  qualities have no intermediates. (Contrariety
and   correlation,   most   frequently  exemplified  by  qualities,  are
considered  in  the  chapter  on  Opposition.)  Still  another  mark  of
distinction  between  substance  and quality, according to Aristotle, is
that  qualities  do  and substances do not admit of variation in degree.
"One  man cannot be more man than another," he writes, "as that which is
white  may be more or less white than some other white object. . . . The
same quality, moreover, is said to subsist in a thing in varying degrees
at  different  times. A white body is said to be whiter at one time than
it  was before, or a warm body is said to be warmer or less warm than at
some  other  time."  This observation raises a number of questions. Does
variation  in  the  degree  of  a  quality  from time to time imply that
qualities thenv selves undergo change, just as substances undergo change
in  quality  ?  Do they remain one and the same in kind while varying in
degree?  Is  this  change  which  qualities  undergo as they increase or
decrease  in intensity, a change in quantity? Furthermore, does the fact
that  something white can become more or less white, mean that a quality
can  have  a  certain  quantity even as a body can ? Aquinas suggests an
answer  by distinguishing between what he calls the "dimensive quantity"
of  bodies  and the "virtual quantity" of qualities. Virtual quantity is
the   degree   or   intensity   which  non-quantitative  attributes  may
possess—such personal qualities as virtues and habits, or such corporeal
qualities  as  colors and textures. But this still seems to leave a very
difficult  question to be answered. How can qualities have the attribute
of  quantity  without  becoming  substances? On the principle which both
Aristotle   and   Aquinas   accept—   that   accidents   exist  only  in
substances—how can one kind of

[550a]
516 THE GREAT IDEAS accident (quantity) exist in another (quality) ? The
view  which  William  James  holds,  namely, that variation in intensity
creates  differences  in  color as much as variation in hue, would solve
the  problem,  or  rather it would dismiss the problem as not genuine by
denying  Aristotle's  thesis  that  a  color  can  remain the same while
varying  in  degree.  However  handled,  the  problem is not peculiar to
qualities.  Actions  and  passions,  Aristotle  points out, also vary in
degree.  Nor  are  qualities  distinguished  from everything else in the
world  by  having  contraries. Correlatives can also have contraries, as
can   actions   and   passions.  Furthermore,  not  all  qualities  have
contraries. Not all admit of variation in degree. Shape, like triangular
or  square, which Aristotle regards as a kind of quality, cannot vary in
this way. The square thing cannot become more or less square. In view of
all  this,  Aristotle  concludes  that there is one characteristic alone
which  differentiates  quality  not  only  from substance, but also from
everything else. Quality is the basis for saying that things are like or
unlike,  similar or dissimilar, as quantity is the basis for saying that
things  are  equal  or  unequal.  Other  contrasts  between  quality and
quantity,  especially  those  bearing  on  the  reduction  of quality to
quantity,  are  discussed  in  the  chapter  on Quantity. Here it may be
illuminating  to  apply  the  foregoing  distinction between quality and
quantity  to  shapes or figures. Shape or figure is a curious mixture of
quality and quantity. It is a quantified quality or a qualified quantity
or,  as  Aquinas  says,  "a  quality about quantity, since the nature of
shape  consists  in  fixing  the  bounds of magnitude." This seems to be
evident  in  the  fact  that  shapes,  like  quantities, do not admit of
variation  in  degree.  But  it may also be seen in the fact that Euclid
deals   quite  separately  with  problems  concerning  the  equality  of
triangles  and  problems  concerning  their  similarity.  Except for the
question   of  whether  qualities  subsist  by  themselves  or  are  the
attributes  of  substances,  most  of  the  problems  of quality seem to
concern  its  distinction from or relation to quantity. As we have seen,
the question of the degree or amount of a quality involves the notion of
quantity. Even more explicitly a

[550b]
problem  of how qualities and quantities are related, is the question of
the  order  of  these two attributes. Can it be said that quantities are
the  more fundamental attributes of things and that they somehow precede
or  underlie  qualities?  Is  it  the reverse? Or are qualities prior in
certain  respects  and quantities in other respects ? Aristotle's theory
of  the  elements seems to give absolute primacy to quality in the realm
of  material  things.  The  four elements of matter are characterized by
combinations  of  two pairs of contrary qualities, the hot and the cold,
the dry and the moist. On the other hand, the atomic theory of Lucretius
appears  to  make  quantities,  such  as  size  and  weight, the primary
properties  of  matter.  Newton's  enumeration  of  what  he  calls "the
universal  qualities  of  all  bodies whatsoever," including, of course,
their  "least  particles,"  lists "extension, hardness, impenetrability,
mobility,  and  inertia."  As  indicated in the chapter on Quantity, the
very  reason  Newton gives for calling these qualities "universal" would
seem  to justify calling them "quantities" rather than qualities. In any
case,  Newton's  view,  like  that  of the ancient atomists, seems to be
opposed  to  the  theory  of  the elementary and contrary qualities. But
Aristotle himself also appears to hold a view which makes quantity prior
to quality. Considering the way in which the quality white is in a body,
he says that it is in the body in virtue of the body's extended surface.
If  surface  or extension is interpreted as a physical quantity, then it
would seem to follow that this quantity underlies a body's possession of
visible  and  perhaps  other  qualities. Aquinas, for example, says that
"quantity   is  the  proximate  subject  of  the  qualities  that  cause
alteration,  as  surface  is of color," and, again, that "quantity is in
substance  before  sensible  qualities  are." This last statement can be
interpreted  to mean that quantity is universally prior to quality among
the  attributes  of  substance.  Or  it  can  be understood to mean that
quantity  is  prior  only  to sensible qualities and then only among the
physical attributes of bodies. Which interpretation is chosen depends in
part  on  whether  all  qualities  are  sensible. It would seem that all
qualities  are  not  sensible,  according  to Aristotle and Aquinas, and
therefore quantity is not prior to every kind of

[551a]
quality  among  the  accidents  of substance. Natural qualities, Aquinas
writes, "may be in the intellectual part or in the body and its powers."
Certainly  the  qualities  inherent  in  the  intellectual part of man's
nature  are  not  sensible; nor are the first two of the four species of
quality   which   both   Aristotle   and  Aquinas  enumerate.  In  their
enumeration,  human qualities— the habits or dispositions of a man, such
as  knowledge  and  virtue, or beauty and health—are the first sort. The
powers or inborn capacities whereby men and other animals act to develop
their  natures  are  a  second  type  of  quality;  e.g.,  the  power of
sensitivity  in  animals, the power of rationality in men, are qualities
proper   to   these   species   and  are,  therefore,  sometimes  called
"properties." This second type of quality does not seem to be restricted
to  living  things.  Inanimate bodies also have, among their properties,
certain  fundamental  powers of action or reaction. The third and fourth
types  of  quality  differ from the first two in that both are sensible,
i.e., capable of affecting the senses directly and, therefore, sometimes
called   "affective  qualities."  Of  these,  the  third  type—shape  or
figure—has  already  been  discussed.  The  fourth type— colors, sounds,
textures, odors, tastes, and such thermal qualities as hot and cold—are,
more  than  shape  or  figure,  regarded  as  the principal affective or
sensible  qualities.  The fact that Aristotle regards certain qualities,
such  as hot and cold, or hard and soft, as being dispositions or powers
as  well  as being affective qualities, need not invalidate his fourfold
classification.  His  classification  of  the  same  attribute under two
distinct  species  of  quality  seems to imply that it can be considered
from  two  points  of  view.  The elementary qualities, for example, are
affective  or  sensible qualities but they are also the active qualities
or   powers   —   the  properties—of  the  elements.  In  view  of  this
classification  of  qualities,  it  does  not  seem  to be the case that
quantities  are prior to all the qualitative attributes of substance. On
the  conception  of  living  things  as  composite of soul and body, the
qualities  which  are  vital  powers  are usually regarded as properties
which  the  thing has in virtue of having a soul. They are certainly not
founded upon the quantitative attributes of the organism's body.

[551b]
Chapter 75: QUALITY 517 The moral and spiritual qualities of men seem to
afford  another  example  of  qualities  either  prior  to,  or at least
independent of, quantities. Even in the case of inanimate bodies, it may
be  that  certain  fundamental  properties  or  powers  are  essentially
qualitative   rather   than   quantitative.   The  proposition  that  in
substances,  quantities  are prior to qualities—or that qualities inhere
in  substances  in virtue of their quantities—may apply only to sensible
qualities,  as,  for example, colors in relation to surfaces. One of the
great issues in the tradition of western thought concerns our perception
or  knowledge  of  qualities.  If  certain characteristics which are not
directly  sensible are to be called "qualities," then the problem of how
we  know  such qualities does not differ from the problem of how we know
anything  else  that  cannot  be  apprehended by our senses. We may, for
example,  be  able  to infer such qualities as habits or powers from the
sensible  evidences  of a thing's behavior, even as in turn we infer the
thing's  nature or essence from its proper qualities or properties. With
regard  to  sensible  qualities,  the problem does not seem to be how we
know  them—  for  the  fact  that  they are sensible means that they are
knowable  by  the  senses.  The  question  is  rather one of the mode of
existence—  the  objectivity  or  subjectivity  of the qualities sensed.
Locke's  famous  distinction  between  primary  and  secondary qualities
states  the  problem.  It  is  preceded  by  his distinction between the
qualities  of  things  and  the  ideas  in  our minds. "A snow-ball," he
writes,  has  "the  power  to produce in us the idea of white, cold, and
round. The powers to produce those ideas in us, as they are in the snow-
ball, I call qualities; and as they are sensations or perceptions in our
understandings,  I  call  them  ideas;  which  ideas, if I speak of them
sometimes  as  in  the  things themselves, I would be understood to mean
those  qualities  in  the objects which produce them in us." The primary
qualities  of  bodies  are  those  which  are  utterly  inseparable from
body—such  as  "sense constantly finds in every particle of matter which
has  bulk  enough  to  be perceived, and the mind finds inseparable from
every par-

[552a]
518  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tide  of matter, though less than to make itself
singly  perceived by our senses." Locke's enumeration of these "original
or  primary  qualities  of  body, which we may observe to produce simple
ideas  in  us,  viz.,  solidity,  extension, figure, motion or rest, and
number,"  closely  resembles Newton's list of the universal qualities of
perceptible bodies and of their "least particles" or atoms. In contrast,
the  secondary  qualities,  such  as  colors,  sounds, tastes, etc., are
"nothing  in  the  objects  themselves,  but  powers  to produce various
sensations  in us by their primary qualities, i.e., by the bulk, figure,
texture, and motion of their insensible parts. . . . From whence," Locke
declares,  "I  think it is easy to draw this observation, that the ideas
of  primary  qualities  of  bodies,  are resemblances of them, and their
patterns  do  really  exist  in  the  bodies  themselves,  but the ideas
produced in us by these secondary qualities, have no resemblance of them
at  all.  There  is  nothing  like  our  ideas  existing  in  the bodies
themselves. They are in the bodies we denominate from them, only a power
to  produce  those  sensations  in  us: what is sweet, blue, or warm, in
idea, is but the certain bulk, figure and motion of the insensible parts
in  the  bodies  which  we  call so." Locke thinks the sensation of pain
confirms  this  insight.  As  the  piece of steel which by its corporeal
properties has the power to produce pain in us, does not itself have the
quality of pain, so it does not have anything corresponding to the ideas
of  blueness  or  coldness  which it produces in us, except the power to
produce  these  ideas through the action of its primary qualities on our
senses.  Yet  Locke  maintains that all our simple ideas of quality— not
only of primary, but also ofsecondary qualities— "agree with the reality
of  things."  By  agreement he does not mean resemblance in the sense of
copying; and therefore he thinks he can, without inconsistency, deny any
resemblance  between  sensations  of  color  or  taste and the secondary
qualities  of  bodies,  while  saying  that "if sugar produces in us the
ideas  we  call whiteness and sweetness, we are sure there is a power in
sugar  to  produce those ideas in our minds, or else they could not have
been produced by it." Locke's point, however, is sometimes given exactly
the opposite implication. Earlier think-

[552b]
ers  who  do  not  speak of primary and secondary qualities attribute to
bodies only the characteristics which Locke calls primary, and give what
he  calls  secondary  qualities no reality at all, that is, no existence
outside  the  mind. The secondary qualities are not qualities of things,
but  of  sensations or images. Descartes, for example, says that nothing
belongs  "to  the nature or essence of body except . . . length, breadth
and depth, admitting of various shapes and various motions. . . . On the
other  hand,  colors,  odors,  savours,  and the rest of such things are
merely  sensations  existing  in  my thought, and differing no less from
bodies  than  pain  differs  from the shape and motion of the instrument
which  inflicts  it."  Hobbes  similarly  regards  the  various sensible
qualities as feelings in us— the seemings or fancies of sense. All these
"qualities  called  sensible are in the object that causes them, nothing
but  so  many  several  motions  of  the matter. . . . The object is one
thing,  the  fancy  is  another." One type of "absurd assertion," in the
opinion  of  Hobbes,  consists  in giving "the names of the accidents of
bodies  without  us, to the accidents of our own bodies, as they do that
say,  the  color  is  in  the  body,  the sound is in the air, etc." The
attributes or accidents which Descartes and Hobbes assign to bodies seem
to  be  quantities  rather  than  qualities.  Accordingly, whereas Locke
attributes  both  primary  and secondary qualities to bodies, Hobbes and
Descartes  seem  to  be  saying that bodies differ from one another only
quantitatively, and that qualities or qualitative differences occur only
in  the  realm of sense or thought. Expounding the atomism of Democritus
and  Epicurus,  Lucretius  appears  to make precisely this point when he
says  that the first-beginnings or atoms are characterized only by size,
weight,  shape,  and motion. "The bodies of matter," he writes, "have no
color  at  all."  They  are  bereft  not  only  of color; "they are also
sundered  altogether  from  warmth  and  cold,  and  fiery heat, and are
carried  along  barren  of  sound and devoid of taste." These qualities,
caused  by  the blows of the atoms upon the sense-organs of animals, are
the  qualities  of  sensations,  not  of  things.  The criticism of this
theory—whether in the formulation of Locke or in that of Descartes,

[553a]
Hobbes,  and  Lucretius—seems  itself  to take two forms. Aristotle, for
example, criticizes Democritus and the atomists for treating perceptible
qualities  differently from perceptible quantities. According to his own
theory  of  the  objects  of  sense,  some,  like colors, sounds, odors,
flavors—which  Locke  calls  "secondary qualities" and the others simply
"qualities"—  are  the  proper  objects  of  the special senses, such as
sight,  hearing,  smell, taste. In contrast to these "proper sensibles,"
each  exclusively  perceived  by  one  and only one sense, there are the
"common  sensibles,"  such as size and shape, number, movement and rest,
which  can  be  perceived  commonly  by  several  senses, e.g., shape is
visible  and  tangible,  motion  is  visible  and audible. Such sensible
attributes of body, which Locke calls "primary qualities," Aristotle, no
less  than  Hobbes  or  Lucretius, regards as quantities, not qualities.
Reporting  his  view,  Aquinas writes that "the common sensibles are all
reducible  to quantity." Aristotle's critical point seems to be that the
atomists  "reduce the proper to the common sensibles, as Democritus does
with  white  and  black; for he asserts that the latter is a mode of the
rough  and  the former a mode of the smooth, while he reduces savours to
the  atomic  figures." The atomists sometimes make the opposite error of
representing  "all  objects of sense as objects of touch." But in either
case  they have no ground, in Aristotle's opinion, for giving to certain
sensible  attributes—whether these be tangible qualities or the commonly
sensible  quantities—an  objective  reality  they deny to other sensible
traits,  like colors, sounds, and odors. Aristotle's theory of sensation
and  the  sensible  is  discussed  more  fully  in the chapter on Sense.
According to it, the qualities, no less than the quantities, perceptible
by  sense  have real or actual existence as the attributes of bodies. On
this  score  Aristotle  does  not  differentiate  between qualities (the
proper  sensibles) and quantities (the common sensibles). Just as a body
actually  has  the  shape we perceive it to have, so it actually has the
color  we  perceive  it to have, on the supposition, of course, that our
perception is accurate in both cases. If the senses are fallible at all,
we are less prone to make errors, Aristotle thinks, in the field of the

[553b]
Chapter  75:  QUALITY 519 proper than of the common sensibles, e.g., the
stick  in  water which looks bent to the eye feels straight to the hand.
Precisely the opposite direction seems to be taken by Berkeley and Hume.
Where  Aristotle  criticizes  the  atomists  for treating quantities (or
common  sensibles)  as objective, and qualities (or proper sensibles) as
subjective, Berkeley criticizes Locke for treating primary and secondary
qualities  differently.  Where  Aristotle's  own theory assigns the same
reality  to  all objects of sense, granting them an actuality apart from
perception,  Berkeley  makes the actuality of the primary as well as the
secondary  qualities  dependent  upon their being perceived. "Some there
are,"  writes  Berkeley,  "who  make  a  distinction betwixt primary and
secondary  qualities. By the former they mean extension, figure, motion,
rest,  solidity or impenetrability and number; by the latter they denote
all  other  sensible  qualities, as colors, sounds, tastes and so forth.
The  ideas  we have of these they acknowledge not to be the resemblances
of anything existing without the mind or unperceived, but they will have
our  ideas  of  the primary qualities to be patterns or images of things
which exist without the mind, in an unthinking substance which they call
Matter."  Berkeley  then argues that the so-called primary qualities are
incapable  of being separated, in reality or thought, from the secondary
qualities,  and  that,  therefore, the one like the other exists only in
the  mind.  "In  short,  let  anyone  consider those arguments which are
thought  manifestly  to  prove  that colors and tastes exist only in the
mind,  and  he  shall find they may with equal force be brought to prove
the  same thing of extension, figure, and motion." His own arguments, he
thinks, "plainly show it to be impossible that any color or extension at
all,   or  other  sensible  quality  whatsoever,  should  exist  in  any
unthinking  subject  without the mind, or in truth, that there should be
any such thing as an outward object." Hume professes to adopt Berkeley's
reasoning.  "It  is universally allowed by modern enquirers," he writes,
"that  all  the  sensible qualities of objects, such as hard, soft, hot,
cold, white, black, etc., are merely secondary, and

[554a]
520  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  perceptions  of  the  mind, without any external
unintelligible,  and  even absurd." attained by Abstraction, an opinion,
which, if become alive." 3. Quality and quantity conditions of variation
in quality 4#. Qualities which imply correlatives 4#. The contrariety of
qualities:  with  or  without intermediate degrees 5. Change of quality:
the  analysis  of  alteration  6.  Qualities as objects of knowledge 6a.
Quality in relation to definition or abstraction secondary qualities

[554b]
PAGE  the  transcendental categories of quality 521 Tyb. Shape or figure
as qualified quantity 523 6b. The perception of qualities 525

[555a]
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12.  tain  cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
[265-283]  12d.  tently  rather than continuously in the work or passage
cited. 1. The nature and existence of qualities: the relation of quality
to  substance  or  matter;  the  transcendental  categories of quality 7
Plato:  Timaeus,  462b-466a / Theaetetus, 519d-520b; 521d-522a; 533b-d /
Philebus, 615c-616c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[3
b  io-23]  7d-8a;  ch 8 13d-16c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 22 a36-b
i3] 113d-114a / Physics, bk v, ch 2
[83
[226*26-30] 306d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 14
541c-542a; bk vii, ch 13
[i038b24~28] 562c;
bk ix, ch 1
[i045b28-32] 570b; bk xii, ch
i
[1069*18-25]
598a; ch 5
[io7ob36-io7i a
4] 600b-c;
[io7i a23-b i] 600d-601a
/  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  6  [445V-21] 683b-d 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167d  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i
[298-304]  4d;  bk  11 [398-521] 20a-21c; [730-864] 24b-26a 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  8,  30d31a  /  Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 8
52c-53a;  ch  13  55b-d;  tr  vi  60c-62d / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-10
110c-113a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 29, 173d-174a; tr vii, ch 8, 196a-b
/  Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 10-12 257b-259d; ch 29 267c-268b; tr ii, ch 14
276c-277a;  tr  hi,  ch  6  284a-c;  ch 15 289a-c; ch 19-20 291d-293a 18
Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 10, 328a-d

[555b]
Chapter 75: QUALITY 521 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 67, a 3,
rep  1  351b-352a;  q  78,  a  3,  rep  1-2  410a411d;  q 83, a 1, rep 5
436d-438a;  q  85,  a i, rep 1 451c-453c; q 115, a 3, rep 2 588c-589c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, aa 1-2 lb-4a; q 53, a 2, rep
1-3  21a-d;  q  iio,  a 2, rep 3 349a-d; part hi suppl, q 91, a 4, rep 1
1022d-1023d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49b-d;  part hi, 172b 31
Descartes:  Rules, xii, 19a-c / Meditations, vi, lOOa-d / Objections and
Replies,  162d-165d  esp 164d-165a; 211a-b; 228c-229c; 229d-230a; 231a-b
34  Newton: Optics, bk i, 428a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
hi,  sect 19 117c-d; bk ii, ch viii 133b-138b passim, esp sect 8 134b-c;
ch  xiii,  sect  19-20  152c-d;  ch xxi, sect 3 178d; ch xxiii, sect 1-6
204a-205c;  ch  xxx,  sect  2  238b-c;  ch  xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; sect 6,
241a-d;  sect  ii  242d-243a;  sect  13,  243b;  ch  xxxii,  sect  14-16
245c-246b;  bk hi, ch iv, sect 16 263b-c; ch vi, sect 2-3 268c-d; sect 6
269d270a;  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  sect  12-14  316a-d;  ch iv, sect 4 324c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge  403a-444d passim, esp intro, sect 7 406a-b,
sect 1-3

[556a]
522  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ( 1 . The nature and existence of qualities: the
relation   of   quality  to  substance  or  matter;  the  transcendental
categories   of  quality?)  413a-d,  sect  7-15  414b-416a,  sect  25-33
417d-419a, sect 48-49 422a-b, sect 56-57 423c-424a, sect 73 427b-c, sect
76 427d428a, sect 78 428a-b, sect 86-91 429c-431a, sect 102 432d-433a 35
Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 122-123 505c-506a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  15bc; 23a-24a; 29d-33d esp30d-31a,31d-32a,32d-33b[fni];41c-45b;
212a-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 385a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
144b-145a  53 James: Psychology, 127b-128a; 457a-459b; 546b-547b [fn 1];
851b-852a;  860b;  882a-883a  2.  The  kinds of quality 2a. Sensible and
nonsensible  qualities:  habits, dispositions, powers or capacities, and
affective qualities 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[8b26-ioa26] 13d15b; ch 15 [i5b i7-i9] 21c / Physics, bk v, ch 2
[226^6-30] 306d / Metaphysics, bk
v,  ch 14 541c-542a; ch 19-21 543d-544b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk viii, ch i
[588ai8-b
4  ]  114b,d  17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr vi, ch i 60c61c / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  i, ch 11-12 258b-259d esp ch 12, 258d-259a; tr hi, ch 16-19
289c292b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2 2b-4a; a 4,
ans 5a-6a; q no, a 3, rep 3 350a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  viii,  sect  8-10  134b-d;  sect  23-26  137a-138b; ch xxi, sect 1-6
178b-180a;  ch xxiii, sect 7-10 205d-206d; sect 37, 214a-b; ch xxx, sect
2 238bc; ch xxxii, sect 14-16 245c-246b esp sect 16 246b 2b. Primary and
secondary  qualities:  the  related  distinction  of  proper  and common
sensibles  7  Plato: Timaeus, 462c-463d; 464b-465d 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
ii,  ch  6  [418*6-19] 648d649a; bk hi, ch i [425*14-29] 657b-c; [425b4~
10] 657c-d / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[437*3-10]
673d-674a; ch 4
[442*30^18]
680a-b; ch 6 [445 b4-446a2o] 683b-684c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 8
[1142*23-31]
391b-c  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 6, 169c-d 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii  [398-521] 20a-21c; [730-864] 24b-26a; bk iv
[522-721]  51a-53d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 78, a 3 esp
rep 2 410a-411d; a 4, rep 2 411d-413d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi suppl, q 92, a 2, ans 1032b-1034b

[556b]
2  to 3a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part 49b-d; part hi, 172b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum, bk aph 66, 114d115a 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 19a-c / Objections
and   Replies,   162d-165d;  228c-229c;  229d-230a;  231a-b  34  Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule hi 270b-271a / Optics, bk 1, 428a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch v 131b; ch viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b; ch
xxi,  sect  3  178d; sect 75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect 7-13 205d-208b; sect
37,  214a-b; ch xxx, sect 2 238bc; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; bk in, ch iv,
sect  16  263b-c; bk iv, ch hi, sect 11-14 315d-316d esp sect 13 316a-b;
sect  28  322a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 9-15 414d-416a; sect
25  417d-418a;  sect  73  427b-c;  sect  102  432d-433a  35  Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  122  505c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15bc;
23a-24a;  29d-33d  esp  30d-31a,  31d-32a,  32d-33b  [fn  1]  53  James:
Psychology,  503a;  651a  3.  Quality  and  quantity 5a. The distinction
between  quality  and  quantity: its relation to the distinction between
secondary  and primary qualities 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6 [6*31-36]
10d-lla;  ch  8  [11*5-14] 16a-b / Generation and Corruption, bk 1, ch 2
[3i5b32-3i6*4] 411b-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4 [ioi4b2o-27] 535a; ch 14
[io2ob3-8]
541d  BK  X, CH I [1052 ch 6 [1063*22-28] 591c; bk xii, ch 4 [1070*31b9]
599d-600a; bk xiii, ch 8
[1083*1-17]
614d ch 28
[io24b io-i6]
546c;  i-io53b8]  578d-580a; bk xi, 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[298-304] 4d; bk 11
[398-521]
20a-21c;
[730-864] 24b26a; bk hi
[221-227] 32d-33a; bk
iv
[522721] 51a-53d
17  Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 13 55b-d / Fourth Ennead, tr vii,
ch  8,  196a-b  / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 14 288b-289a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  78,  a  3,  rep  2 410a-411d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 49, a 2, ans 2b-4a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  49b-d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19a-c  / Objections and Replies,
162d-165d   esp   164d-165a;   228c-229c;   231a-b   35   Locke:   Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b passim, esp sect 9-10
134c-d;  ch  xxi,  sect  3  178d;  ch  xxiii,  sect  8-9 206a-c; sect ii
206d-207a;  sect  37,  214a-b; bk iv, ch ii, sect 9-13 311b-312b; ch in,
sect 12-14 316a-d esp sect 13 316a-b; sect 28 322a-c

[557a]
lb  to  Id  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 9-15 414d-416a; sect 25
417d-418a;   sect   73   427b-c;  sect  102  432d-433a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect xii, div 122 505c-d ^ ^ 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15b-c;
23a-24a;  29d-33d  esp  30c-31a,  31d-32a,  32d-33b  [fn 1]; 66d-72c esp
68a-72c;  211c-213a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 63 28b-c;
additions,  40  122d-123b  50  Marx: Capital, 149d 53 James: Psychology,
320a-322a  3b.  Shape  or  figure  as  qualified  quantity  8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 8
[ioan-i6] 15a-b;
[11*5-14]
16a-b / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 14
[io20a35-b i] 541c
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  vii,  definitions,  16I9l27b  11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  831d-841c  17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 14
288b289a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 7, a i, rep 2 31a-d; q
78,  a 3, rep 2 410a-411d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49,
a  2,  ans  2b-4a; part hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a711c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  iv,  262b 31 Descartes: Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 298b-304a, bk
ii,  308a-314b 33 Pascal: Arithmetical Triangle, 455a-456a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  212a-c  53  James:  Psychology,  548b-552a  3c.  The degrees or
amounts   of  a  quality:  intensity  and  extensity;  the  quantitative
conditions  of  variation  in  quality  7  Plato:  Philebus, 615c-616c 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[3
b32~4 a 9] 8a-b; ch 7
[6b2o-26] lib; ch 8
[iob26-u a i4] 15d16b; ch 10 [i2a2-25] 17b-c / Topics, bk hi, ch
5 166b-c / Physics, bk iv, ch 9
[2i7a34-bn]
297b  /  Metaphysics,  bk  iv, ch 7 [iou b29-37] 531d; bk x, ch 1 [io52b
i-io53b8] 578d-580a; ch 3
[i054b6-n] 581b; ch 7 584c-585b; bk
xi,  ch 3 [io6i ai8-28] 589b-c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii,
ch i ai8-b4] 114b,d / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2 [648bi2-649b
[588
9] 173a-174a / Ethics, bk ii, ch 6 351c-352d; bk x, ch 3
[1173^4-29]
427b-c  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  ii [826-833] 25c; bk iv
[687-705]  53b-c  17  Plotinus:  Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 20, 292d293a 18
Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 10, 328b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 4, a 3, ans 22b-23b; q 8, a 2, rep 3 35c-36b; q 42, a 1, rep 1
224b-225d;  q  45,  a  5,  rep  2-3  245c-247a; q 48, a 4, ans and rep 3
262a263a; part i-ii, q 22, a 2, rep i 721c-722c

[557b]
Chapter 75: QUALITY 523 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a
1,  rep  3 6a-7b; qq 52-53 15d-22d; q 54, a 4, rep 1,3 25b-d; q 72, a 7,
ans  117a-118a; part 11—11, q 5, a 4 412d-413c; q 24, aa 4-10 491d-498a;
part  hi,  q  7, a 12 754c-755c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
131d-132a;  third day, 200b-202a; 205b-d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  13  145b148d  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi, rule hi 270b 271a /
Optics,  bk  i,  431a-443a;  bk  ii,  458b  460a;  466a-467b; 472b-474a;
482b-485a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xvi,  sect  3
165d-166a; ch xvii, sect 6 169a-b; ch xxviii, sect 1 228c; bk iv, ch ii,
sect  11-13  311c-312b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  68a-72c  45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  14a-b; part hi, 99d-103b 45 Fourier:
Theory   of   Heat,   169a-172a;  177a193a  45  Faraday:  Researches  in
Electricity,  411c412c  53  James:  Psychology, 319b-322a esp 319b-320a;
329a-330a;  346a-b;  540a-547a  esp 541a, 544a, 547a 54 Freud: Hysteria,
87a  /  Interpretation  of Dreams, 384d / Narcissism, 403d-404a / Beyond
the  Pleasure  Principle, 639b-d 3d. The priority of quality or quantity
in relation to form, matter, or substance 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch
2
[i85 a20-b
4]  260a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  3 [2iob i-8] 289b-c / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 1
[io45b28-32] 570b; bk x, ch 1
[io52bi-io53b8] 578d-580a; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i a29-b
4] 589c; bk xii, ch 1
[1069^8-25]
598a / Sense and the Sensible, ch 6 [445^- 446 a2o] 683b-684c; ch 7
[449^1-30] 688d689a
17  Plotinus:  Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 13, 55c / Fourth Ennead, tr vii,
ch  8,  196a-b  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 15 289a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  2,  contrary  15c-16a; q 78, a 3, rep 2
410a411d;  q 85, a 1, rep 2 451c-453c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 52, a 1, ans 15d-18a; part hi suppl, q 83, a 2, ans 976c-978c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xii, 18d-19c / Objections and Replies, 162d-165d esp
164d-165a;  228c229c;  231a-b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
viii,  sect 9-26 134c-138b passim; ch xxi, sect 3 178d; ch xxiii, sect 9
206b-c;  sect  37,  214a-b;  ch  xxxi,  sect 2 239b-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect 9-15 414d-416a esp sect 10 414d-415a; sect 73 427b-c 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 15b-c; 41c-45b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i,
par 63 28bc

[558a]
4.  The  relation  of qualities to one another 4a. Qualities which imply
correlatives 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[6b4~8] 11a; ch 8
[11*20-39]
16b-c; ch 10
[n b27-33]
17a  / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246b3~248a8] 329c-330d 4b. The contrariety
cf  qualities:  with  or  without  intermediate degrees 7 Plato: Phaedo,
226d-227b; 243c-244b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4
aio-b i9J 8b-9a; ch 8
[iob u-25] 15d; ch 10 [12^-25] 17b-c /
Physics,  bk  iv,  ch 9 [2i7a34-bn] 297b / Generation and Corruption, bk
11, ch 1-3 428b, d431a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 5
[986a22-b
4]  504b-c;  bk  v, ch 10 [1018^2-31] 539a-b; bk xiv, ch 1 [io87a28-b 4]
619b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch i
[ii 29^-35]
376a-d;  bk  viii,  ch  8  [ii59b  i9-23]  411d  10 Hippocrates: Ancient
Medicine,  par  13-19 4c-7b; par 24 8d-9a,c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties,
bk  i,  ch  2,  167b168b; bk 11, ch 8-9 191b-199a,c passim 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things, bk ii [515-521] 21c Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 19-20 17
Plotinus: 291d-293a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 91-92
13a  48 Melville 53 James: Psychology 387b; 458a-459b Moby Dic{, 39b-40a
327a-328b;  363b-364a;  4c.  The  similarity  of  things with respect to
quality:  likeness  and  unlikeness  in  quality  7  Plato:  Parmenides,
493d-494a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[6*27-35]
10c*-  11a; ch 8 [11*15-19] 16b / Generation and Corruption, bk 11, ch 6
[333*27-34] 434a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 9
[ioi8ai5-i9] 538d-539a;
ch 15 [102^8-14] 542b-c; bk x, ch 3 [i054b313] 581b 9 Aristotle: History
of Animals, bk i, ch 1
[486*15-487*1] 7b-d; bk vm, ch
i  [588*i8-b 4] 114b,d 11 Euclid: Elements, bk vi, definitions, i 99a 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr ii, ch 2, 7b / Fourth Ennead, tr ix, ch 4,
206c-d / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 15 289a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 4, a 3, ans 22b-23b; part i-ii, q 27, a 3 738c-739c; q 28, a
1,  rep 2 740b-741a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 69, a
1,  rep 2 885c-886c; q 92, a i, ans 1025c-1032b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
hi,  prop  57,  schol  415b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 73c- 74a / Judgement,
602b-603a  esp  602b,d [fn 1] 53 James: Psychology, 319b-322a; 344b-348a
esp 346a-348a; 378b-379a

[558b]
5.  Change  of  quality:  the  analysis  of  alteration 7 Plato: Phaedo,
226d-227b  /  Parmenides, 509b-510a / Theaetetus, 533a-534a 8 Aristotle:
Categories,  ch  5 [4*io-b i9] 8b-9a; ch 14 [15*14-32] 20d-21a / Topics,
bk vi, ch 6 i 9ob 5-
[145*2-13] 198c-d / Physics, bk
i,  ch  7 9] 266b; bk v, ch 2 [226*26-29] 306d; [226b 9] 307a; bk vi, ch
10 [241*26-32] 325b-c; bk vii, ch 2
[244b i-245a i2] 328b-d; ch 3 329a330d;
bk vm, ch 7
[26oa26-b i4] 346b-c
/ Heavens, bk 1, ch 3
[270^26-36] 361c; ch 12
[283^7-23] 375c-d / Generation and Corruption, bk
1, ch 1 409a-410c; ch 4 416c-417a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 8
[989
s  ! 8-29] 507b-c; bk v, ch 21 544a-b; bk xi, ch 12 [io68b i5-i9] 597c /
Soul,  bk 11, ch 5 [4i7a2i-4i8 a6] 647d648d / Sense and the Sensible, ch
6
[446b27~
a23-b6]  703a-b 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 5 235c-d; 9] 685b-c /
Dreams, ch 2
[459
a 447 ch 7
[7oib i]-cH 8 [702^2] 236d-237c; ch
ii
[703b8-2i]
239b-c  /  Generation  of Animals, bk 1, ch 18 [724 a2o-b i3] 264b-d; bk
ii, ch 5
[74i b5-i 5 ] 282c
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch 2, 167b168b; ch 5 169b-c; ch 8
171a;  ch  12  172d173c;  bk in, ch 7, 203c-204c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [635-920] 8d-12b; bk ii [730-787] 24b-25a; bk v [235415]
64a-66c  17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 8-10 111c113a 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 48, a 4, ans and rep 3 262a-263a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 1, rep 3 6a-7b; q 52, a i, ans and
rep 3 15d18a; part in suppl, q 82, a 3, ans and rep 2 971a-972d; q 91, a
i,  rep  2,4  1016b-1017c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 172b 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph  50  111b;  aph  66 114d-115c; bk ii, aph 7
139c-140a  34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 541b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch xxi, sect 1-2 178b-c; ch xxii, sect ii 203c-d; ch xxvi, sect
1-2  217a-d  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 25-33 417d-419a passim,
esp  sect  26  418a 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part hi, 87c-d;
103b-c;  105d  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat, 169b 53 James: Psychology,
68a-b;  104a-105a  6.  Qualities  as objects of knowledge 6a. Quality in
relation to definition or abstraction 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 9
[103^7-33]
147a; bk iv, ch i
[i2i a6~9] 168d-169a; ch 2
[i22b i2-i8] 170d-171a; ch 6 [128^0-29] 177d178a; bk vi, ch 6 196d-199c / Metaphysics, bk
v, ch 14
[i020a34-b9]
541c-d;
[io20b i3-i7]
541d; bk xi, ch 6 [1063^2-28] 591c

[559a]
6b  to  6c  Chapter 75: 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr vi, ch i 60c61c /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch 10-12 257b-259d; tr in, ch 16-19 289c-292b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1-11,035,, a 4, ans 774d-775d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 72a-d; part iv, 272b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii, ch xi, sect 9 145b-c; ch xii, sect i, 147b-c; bk hi, ch iv, sect
4-1  1  260b-262b  passim,  esp sect 7 260d; sect 16 263b c 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  6-19 414b-416d passim, esp sect 7-10 414b-415a;
sect  99  432b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 122 505c-d 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 73c-74a 53 James: Psychology, 185a-b; 305a-308b esp
308a-b;  329a-331b  esp  331a-b;  503a b; 668a673a 6b. The perception of
qualities  7  Plato:  Meno,  177b-c  /  Timaeus, 462b-466a / Theaetetus,
519d-520b;  521d-522a;  533b-d / Seventh Letter, 810a-b b35-8 a i2] 12d8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[7
13a / Physics, bk vii, ch 2
[244b io-245a
3] 328c-d / Soul, bk 11, ch 5-BK in, ch 2 647baio-b 659c; bk in, ch 4
[429
4J  661b-d; ch 8 664b-d / Sense and the Sensible 673a-689a,c a23~46oa32]
703a-704b / Dreams, ch 2
[459
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [298-304] 4d; bk iv [26-268]
44b-47d; [478-499] 50b-d;
[522-721] 51a-53d; bk vi [921-935] 92c-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 1, ans 75d-76c; a 2, ans
76d-77d;  q  78,  a  3  410a-411d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  q  82,  aa 3-4 971a-974c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i,
stanza  91-92  13a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49b-d; part hi, 172b 31
Descartes: Rules, xn, 18d-19c / Meditations, vi, lOOa-d / Objections and
Replies,  162d-165d  esp 164d-165a; 211a-b; 229d-230a 34 Newton: Optics,
bk i, 428a-b; bk hi, 519a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect 2
93b-d;  bk ii, ch ii, sect i 127d-128a; ch viii, sect 4 133d; sect 11-21
134d-136d  passim;  ch  ix,  sect  i-io 138b-140b passim; ch xxiii, sect
11-13 206d-208b; bk hi, ch vi, sect 9 270d-271a; bk iv, ch ii, sect 9-13
.311b-312b  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 15b-c; 23a-24a; 29d-33d esp 30d-31a,
31d-32a,  32d-33b  [fn  1];  212a-c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 39b-40a;
144b-145a

[559b]
QUALITY  525 53 James: Psychology, 98b-105a passim, esp 104a-105a; 184b;
327a-341a  esp  327a-b, 329a331b; 363b; 452a-471a esp 452a-456a, 459a-b,
469a-471a;  479a; 502a-505b esp 505b; 520a521a; 526b-527a; 540a-635a esp
541a,  548b549a,  552a-564a,  589b-595a,  606b-608b, 627a-628b 54 Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams,  352d; 367bc; 384c-385c 6c. The objectivity of
sense-qualities:  the  comparative  objectivity of primary and secondary
qualities   7   Plato:   Timaeus,  462b-466a  /  Theaetetus,  517b-520b;
521d-522a;  533b-d  8  Aristotle:  Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[3i5b33-3i6a 3] 41 lc / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5 [ioiob3o-iou a2] 530c /
Soul, bk hi, ch 2
[426^0-26] 658c
/  Sense  and  the Sensible, ch 6 [445 b4-446a2o] 683b-684c 9 Aristotle:
Parts  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch2  [648 15 15-17] 173a 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  2,  167d  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[730-864]  24b-?6a;  [1002-1022]  27d-28a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
49b-d;  57b;  59d;  62b;  part  hi,  172b;  part  iv,  258b-c; 262a-b 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xn, 19a-c / Meditations, vi, lOOa-d / Objections and
Replies,  162d165d;  211a-b;  228c-229c;  229d-230a;  231a-b  34 Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  rule  hi 270b271a / Optics, bk i, 428a-b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b; ch xxi, sect 3
178d;  ch xxiii, sect 7-13 205d-208b esp sect 9 206b-c; sect 37, 214a-b;
ch  xxx,  sect  2  238b-c;  ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; ch xxxii, sect 14-16
245c-246b;  bk iv, ch ii, sect ii14 311c-312d; ch hi, sect 6, 314b; sect
28  322a-c;  ch  iv, sect 4 324c; ch xi, sect 4-9 355b-357a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  1-91  413a-431a  esp  sect  3 413c-d, sect 9-15
414d416a,  sect  48-49 422a-b, sect 56-57 423c424a, sect 73 427b-c, sect
76-78  427d428b, sect 86-91 429c-431a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
xii,  div  1  17-123  504a-506a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 15b-c; 23a-24a;
29d-33d esp 30d-31a, 31d-32a, 32d-33b
[fn
1]; 69c72c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a-c 50 Marx: Capital, 31c-d
53  James:  Psychology,  127b-128a;  150a-151a; 176a-177a; 457a-479a esp
457a-459b, 469ab, 471b-474a, 479a; 650b-651a; 851b-852a; 860b

[560a]
526  THE  GREAT  IDEAS CROSS-REFERENCES qualities, see Knowledge 6b(i) ;
Sense 4-4C to the Corpuscular Philosophy ch 6

[560b]
For:  Discussions  relevant to the problem of the existence of qualities
and of their relation to substance, matter, or experience, see Being 7b,
7b(5)~7b(6);  Experience  i;  Matter  2c.  Discussions  relevant  to the
conception   of   the  categories  as  transcendental  concepts  of  the
understanding,  see  Form  ic;  Judgment  8c-8d;  Memory and Imagination
60(2);  Mind  ie(i);  Principle  2b(3).  The  consideration of such non-
sensible qualities as habits, dispositions, and powers, see Being 7c(2);
Habit  i;  Life  and  Death  2;  Man  4d; Nature ia(i); Soul 2a, 2c. The
distinction  between  proper  and  common  sensibles,  and  the  related
distinction   between   primary   and  secondary  qualities,  see  Sense
3c(2)-3c(4).  Other  discussions of the relation of quantity to quality,
see  Mechanics  4b; Quantity ia; and for the problem of the variation of
qualities  in  degree  or intensity, see Same and Other 3c; Sense 3c(2).
The  contrariety and correlation of qualities, see Opposition ia-ib. The
conception  of similarity as likeness in quality, see Same and Other 3c.
The distinction of alteration, or change in quality, from other kinds of
change,  see  Change 6, 9. The general theory of sensitive knowledge and
its  bearing  on  the objectivity of sensible ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed
below  are  works  not included in Great BooJ^s ofthe Western World, but
relevant  to  the  For  the  date, place, and other facts concerning the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the last chapter of The Great Ideas. Leibnitz.
New  Essays  Concerning  Human Under- *• standing, bk 11, ch 8 Berkeley.
Three   Dialogues   Between   Hylas  and  PhiW.  Hamilton.  Lectures  on
Metaphysics  and Logic, lonous vol 1 (24) Kant. Metaphysical Foundations
of Natural  Science,  C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol 1, par 300-321,
div  11 422-426 J. C. Wilson. Statement and Inference, part v (6, II. 2)
Oreme.  Treatise  on  the  Breadth  of  Forms  Husserl.  Ideas:  General
Introduction  to  Pure  PheSuarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xiv, xvi,
xvm  nomenology,  par  15,  40-41,  52,  124, 129, 133 Boyle. The Origin
of Forms  and  Qualities,  According  Boring.  The Physical Dimensions of
Consciousness,

[561a]
Chapter  ^^QUANTITY INTRODUCTION AS indicated in the chapter on Quality,
the  jl\  traditional  consideration of that fundamental notion involves
questions  concerning  the  relation  of  quality  and  quantity and the
priority  of  one or the other in the nature of things. According to one
theory  of  the  elements, difference in quality rather than in quantity
seems  to be the defining characteristic. Certain kinds of qualities, it
is  thought,  inhere in substances directly and without being based upon
their  quantitative  aspects.  But  it  is seldom if ever suggested that
quality  takes  universal  precedence over quantity. In the tradition of
western  thought, the opposite view— that quantities are primaryseems to
occur  with  some  frequency,  at  least so far as the realm of material
things  is  concerned.  It  is  held  that bodies have only quantitative
attributes.  Such  sensible qualities as colors, odors, tastes, textures
are  thought  to  have  no  reality  apart from experience; or, as it is
sometimes  put,  red  and  blue,  hot  and  cold, sweet and sour are the
qualities  of sensations, not of things. Those who think that bodies can
exist  without being perceived, also tend to think that bodies can exist
totally  bereft  of  qualities,  but  never  without  the  dimensions of
quantity.  The  notions  of  matter  and quantity seem to be inseparably
associated.  For matter to exist without existing in some quantity seems
to  be  as  inconceivable as for experience to exist without qualitative
diversity.  "As  if  there  could be matter," says Hobbes, "that had not
some   determined   quantity,   when   quantity   is  nothing  else  but
determination  of  matter; that is to say, of body, by which we say that
one  body is greater or less than another by thus or thus much." The use
of  the  word "quality" where quantity appears to be meant only slightly
obscures 527

[561b]
this  point.  Newton  refers  to  "extension, hardness, impenetrability,
mobility,  and  inertia"  as  "the qualities of bodies" which "are to be
esteemed  the  universal  qualities of all bodies whatsoever." Following
him,  Locke  calls  our  simple  ideas  of "solidity, extension, figure,
motion  or rest, and number" ideas of "the original or primary qualities
of  bodies,"  and says that even if bodies are divided "till their parts
become  insensible,  they  must  retain  still  each  of  them all those
qualities.  For  division  .  .  .  can never take away either solidity,
extension, figure, or mobility from any body, but only makes two or more
distinct  separate  masses  of  matter,  of  that which was one before."
Though  Locke  uses the word "quality" for those attributes which belong
to  bodies  even  when  they are not sensed or are not even sensible, he
also appears to recognize that number, extension, and figure are, as the
traditional objects of the mathematical sciences, traditionally regarded
as  quantities  rather  than qualities. "It has been generally taken for
granted,"   he   writes,   "that   mathematics   alone  are  capable  of
demonstrative  certainty;  but to have such an agreement or disagreement
as  may intuitively be perceived, being, as I imagine, not the privilege
of  the ideas of number, extension, and figure alone, it may possibly be
the  want  of  due method and application in us . . . that demonstration
has  been  thought to have so little to do in other parts of knowledge."
Yet,  he  adds,  "in other simple ideas, whose modes and differences are
made  and  counted by degrees, and not quantity, we have not so nice and
accurate a distinction of their differences as to perceive, or find ways
to measure, their just equality." Newton also gives some indication that
his   "universal   qualities"  are  quantities.  He  restricts  them  to
attributes   "which  admit  neither  intensification  nor  remission  of
degrees." One dif-

[562a]
528  THE  GREAT IDEAS ference between quantity and quality, according to
an  ancient  opinion,  is  that  qualities  are  subject to variation in
degree,  quantities  not.  One thing may be white or hot to a greater or
less  degree  than another, Aristotle observes, but "one thing cannot be
two  cubits long in a greater degree than another. Similarly with regard
to  number:  what is 'three' is not more truly three than what is 'five'
is  five . . . Nor is there any other kind of quantity, of all that have
been  mentioned,  with  regard  to  which  variation  in  degree  can be
predicated." Granted that what Newton and Locke call "qualities" are not
qualities,  except  in  the  sense  in  which  the  word "quality" means
attribute,  difficult  questions  remain concerning their enumeration of
the  universal  or primary attributes of bodies. Do extension, hardness,
impenetrability,  motion  and  rest,  figure  and  number  constitute an
exhaustive  enumeration? Are these all the corporeal quantities, or only
the  basic  ones  from  which others can be derived? Are they all of the
same  kind  and,  among  them,  are  some more fundamental than others ?
Descartes,  for  example,  seems  to  make  extension  the  one  primary
attribute  of  bodies.  "I  observed,"  he  writes, "that nothing at all
belonged  to the nature or essence of bodies, except that it was a thing
with length, breadth, and depth, admitting of various shapes and various
motions.  I found also that its shape and motions were only modes, which
no  power  could  make  to exist apart from it . . . Finally, I saw that
gravity,  hardness, the power of heating, of attracting, and of purging,
and  all other qualities which we experience in bodies, consisted solely
in  motion  or  its  absence,  and in the configuration and situation of
their  parts."  With  motion  and figure modes of extension, and all the
other   properties   of   bodies   the   result   of  their  motions  or
configurations, the three dimensions of extension (or spatial magnitude)
become almost identical with body itself. Considering the statement body
possesses  extension,  Descartes points out that, though "the meaning of
extension  is  not  identical with that of body, yet we do not construct
two  distinct  ideas  in  our  imagination,  one  of  body, the other of
extension,  but  merely  a  single  image of extended body; and from the
point of view of the thing

[562b]
it  is  exactly  as  if  I  had  said:  body is extended, or better, the
extended  is  extended."  But,  Descartes  adds,  when  we  consider the
expression  extension  is  not  body, "the meaning of the term extension
becomes  otherwise  than as above. When we give it this meaning there is
no  special  idea  corresponding to it in the imagination." It becomes a
purely  abstract  entity,  which  may  properly  be  the  object  of the
geometer's   consideration;   but  then  it  should  be  treated  as  an
abstraction  and  not  as  if  it  had independent reality. Aquinas also
distinguishes  between  physical  and  mathematical  quantities,  or the
quantities   which  inhere  in  bodies  and  the  quantities  abstracted
therefrom. "Quantities, such as number, dimension, and figure, which are
the  terminations  of  quantity,  can  be considered apart from sensible
qualities,  and  this is to abstract them from sensible matter. But they
cannot  be  considered  without  understanding  the  substance  which is
subject  to  quantity"— that is, corporeal or material substance. Like a
body,  a mathematical solid has three dimensions, but, as Aquinas points
out, lacking matter, this three-dimensional object does not occupy space
or  fill a place. The three spatial dimensions are not for him, however,
the  only  primary quantities of either the physical or the mathematical
body. Number and figure are as fundamental. Still another enumeration of
corporeal  quantities  is  given  by Lucretius in his description of the
properties  of  atoms. According to him, atoms vary in size, weight, and
shape. Each of these attributes is a distinct quantity, not reducible to
the  others.  In  addition,  atoms  have the property which Newton calls
"impenetrability" and Locke "solidity." But whereas atoms may be unequal
in  size  and  weight, and different in shape or configuration, they are
all  equal  in their solidity, being absolutely indivisible through lack
of  void  or  pores.  The  distinction between mathematical and physical
quantity  and  the enumeration or ordering of diverse quantities seem to
require  the consideration of two prior questions. What is the nature of
quantity ? What are the kinds or modes of quantity ? Terms like quantity
and quality do not appear to be susceptible of definition. Quantity is,

[563a]
perhaps,  the  fundamental  notion  in  the  mathematical  sciences, yet
neither  it  nor such terms as magnitude, figure, and number are defined
in  the  great books of geometry or arithmetic^ In Aristotle's theory of
the categories as the highest genera, such terms as substance, quantity,
quality,  and  relation are strictly indefinable, if to define a term is
to  give its genus and differentia. With quite a different theory of the
categories,  Kant  also  treats them as indefinable. As indicated in the
chapter  on Quality, they are for him the transcendental concepts of the
understanding.  He  uses  such terms as quantity, quality, and relation,
with  modality  as  a  coordinate  fourth,  to  represent the four major
groupings  of  the  categories.  In  his table of the categories, Kant's
treatment  of  quantity,  under  which  he  lists the concepts of unity,
plurality,  and  totality,  parallels  the  treatment of quantity in his
table  of  judgments,  according  to  which  judgments are classified as
universal,   particular,  and  singular.  All  these  considerations  of
quantity belong to what Kant calls his "transcendental logic." So far as
Kant  considers  quantity  in  its mathematical or physical (rather than
logical)   significance,   he   discusses  it  in  connection  with  the
transcendental  forms of space and time which provide, according to him,
the  a  priori  foundations  of geometry and arithmetic— the sciences of
magnitude  and number. But in none of these connections are quantity and
its  principal modes, magnitude and number, defined. Though indefinable,
quantity  can,  according  to  Aristotle,  be  characterized  by certain
distinctive marks. As we have already observed, where qualities admit of
variation  in  degree,  quantities  do  not.  With  few exceptions, each
quality has a contrary, whereas definite quantities such as an extent or
a number are not opposed by contrary quantities. Aristotle considers the
possibility  that  such  apparently  quantitative  terms  as 'large' and
'small'  may  also  appear  to  be contrary to one another, as hot is to
cold,  or  white  is  to  black.  But,  he argues, these terms represent
quantities  only  relatively,  not  absolutely. When things are compared
with  respect  to  size, one may be judged to be both larger and smaller
than others, but the sizes of each of two things unequal in size are not
contrary to one another.

[563b]
Chapter  76: QUANTITY 529 These two characteristics (lack of contrariety
and  of variation in degree) do not, however, satisfy Aristotle's search
for  a  distinctive  mark of quantity. They apply to substances, such as
tree  or  man,  as  well as to figures and numbers. This fact could have
some  bearing  on  the  issue  whether the objects of mathematics have a
separate  existence comparable to that of substances, but in Aristotle's
view  at  least,  quantities are not substances. Physical quantities are
the  attributes  of  bodies;  the  objects  of  mathematics  consist  of
quantities  abstracted  from sensible matter. Conceiving quantity as one
of   the   attributes  of  substance,  Aristotle  says  that  "the  most
distinctive  mark  of  quantity  is  equality and inequality." Only when
things  are  compared  quantitatively  can  they  be said to be equal or
unequal;  and,  conversely,  in  whatever  respect things are said to be
equal  or unequal, in that respect they are determined in quantity. "How
far  is  it  true,"  Plotinus  asks,  "that  equality and inequality are
characteristic   of  quantity?"  It  is  significant,  he  thinks,  that
triangles and other figures are said to be similar as well as equal. "It
may,  of  course, be the case that the term 'similarity' has a different
sense  here  from  that  understood in reference to quality"; or another
alternative,  Plotinus  adds,  may  be that "similarity is predicable of
quantity  only insofar as quantity possesses [qualitative] differences."
In any case, comparison, whether in terms of equality or likeness, seems
to  generate the relationships fundamental to the mathematical treatment
of  quantities. Euclid does not define magnitude in itself, but only the
relation of magnitudes to one another. The first four definitions in the
fifth book of his Elements illustrate this. "i. A magnitude is a part of
a  magnitude,  the less of the greater, when it measures the greater. 2.
The  greater  is a multiple of the less when it is measured by the less.
3.  A  ratio  is  a  sort  of  relation  in  respect of size between two
magnitudes  of  the same kind. 4. Magnitudes are said to have a ratio to
one  another,  which  are  capable,  when  multiplied,  of exceeding one
another."  Archimedes  also  states his understanding of the distinction
between kinds of magnitudes without defining these kinds—by reference to
their comparability. Assuming that any given

[564a]
530 THE GREAT IDEAS magnitude can, by being multiplied, exceed any other
magnitude  of  the  same kind, he is able to know that magnitudes are of
the  same  kind if, by being multiplied, they can exceed one another. It
follows  that  an indivisible point and a finite or divisible magnitude,
such  as  a line, are not of the same kind, for they cannot have a ratio
to one another. For the same reason, the length of a line, the area of a
plane,  and  the  volume of a solid are not magnitudes of the same kind.
Since  they  bear  no  ratio  to  one  another,  they are quantitatively
incomparable.  The  emphasis  upon  ratios  has  some significance for a
controversial   point  in  the  definition  of  the  subject  matter  of
mathematics.  In  the  tradition  of the great books, mathematicians and
philosophers  seem  to  agree that arithmetic and geometry have as their
objects the two principal species of quantity—number and magnitude. This
is  the opinion of Euclid, Nicomachus, Descartes, and Galileo; it is the
opinion of Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Bacon, Hume, and Kant. But writers
like  Russell  and  Whitehead,  who  reflect developments in mathematics
since  the  19th  century,  reject  the  traditional  opinion  as unduly
narrowing  the  scope of mathematics. To give adequate expression to the
universality  of  mathematics,  they sometimes propose that it should be
conceived  as  the  science not merely of quantity, but of relations and
order. In view of the fact that the great books of mathematics deal with
quantities  largely  in  terms  of  their  relationship  or order to one
another, the broader conception seems to fit the older tradition as well
as  more  recent  developments.  Whether  there  is a genuine issue here
concerning  the  definition  of  mathematical subject matter may depend,
therefore,  on  whether the fundamental terms which generate the systems
of  relationship  and  order are or are not essentially quantitative. To
this  question the traditional answer seems to be that the mathematician
studies  not  relations of any sort, but the relation of quantities. The
problem  of  the  kinds  of quantity seems to appeal for solution to the
principle  of  commensurability. For example, Galileo's observation that
finite  and  infinite  quantities cannot be compared in any way, implies
their utter

[564b]
diversity.  But  he goes further and says that "the attributes 'larger,'
'smaller,'  and  'equal'  have  no  place  either  in comparing infinite
quantities  with  each  other  or  in  comparing  infinite  with  finite
quantities."  If  the  notion  of  quantity  entails  the possibility of
equality  or  inequality  between  two quantities of the same kind, then
either infinite quantities are not quantities, or each infinite quantity
belongs  to a kind of its own. The principle of incommensurability seems
to  be  applied  by  mathematicians  to distinguish quantities which are
different  species  of  the  same  generic  kind.  For example, the one-
dimensional,  two-dimensional,  and  three-dimensional  quantities  of a
line,  a  plane, and a solid, are incommensurable magnitudes. The number
of  days  in  a year and the number of years in infinite or endless time
are  incommensurable  multitudes.  The distinction between magnitude and
multitude  (or number) as two modes of quantity appears to be based upon
another  principle,  that  of  continuity  and  discontinuity.  Yet  the
question  can  be  raised  whether  magnitudes  are  commensurable  with
numbers,  at least to the extent of being measured by numbers. It may be
necessary,  however, to postpone answering it until we have examined the
fundamental  difference between magnitude and multitude as generic kinds
of  quantity.  What  if  magnitude  and  multitude,  or  continuous  and
discontinuous  quantity, do not divide quantity into its ultimate kinds?
Aquinas,  for  example,  proposes that the two basic kinds are dimensive
and virtual quantity. "There is quantity of bul\ or dimensive quantity,"
he  writes,  "which  is  to  be found only in corporeal things, and has,
therefore,  no  place in God. There is also quantity of virtue, which is
measured  according  to the perfection of some nature or form." It is in
the  latter  sense,  according  to  Aquinas,  that Augustine writes: "In
things which are great, but not in bulk, to be greater is to be better."
Just as dimensive quantities can be incommensurable with one another, so
with  respect to virtual quantities, God's infinite perfection makes him
incommensurable  with  finite creatures. But a dimensive quantity cannot
be either commensurable or incommensurable with

[565a]
a  virtual  quantity.  The  standard  of  measurement by which dimensive
quantities  are  compared,  and the standard by which virtual quantities
are  ordered,  represent utterly diverse principles of commensurability.
Euclia  s  statement that "those magnitudes are said to be commensurable
which  are measured by the same measure, and those incommensurable which
cannot have a common measure," cannot be extended to cover dimensive and
virtual  quantities,  for  the very meaning of "measure" changes when we
turn  from  the  dimensions of a body to the perfections of a being. The
distinction which Aquinas makes between dimensive and virtual magnitudes
has  its  parallel  in  the  distinction  he  makes between two kinds of
number,  for  both  depend on the difference between material and formal
quantity.  "Division  is  twofold,"  he writes. "One is material, and is
division of the continuous; from this results number, which is a species
of quantity. Number in this sense is found only in material things which
have  quantity. The other kind of division is formal, and is effected by
opposite  or  diverse  forms;  and  this  kind  of division results in a
multitude,  which  does  not belong to a genus, but is transcendental in
the  sense  in which being is divided by one and many. Only this kind of
multitude  is  found  in  immaterial  things."  According to the example
suggested  in  the context, such is the multitude which is the number of
persons   in  the  Trinity.  The  material  quantities  of  physics  and
mathematics  seem  to  fall  under  the  two main heads of magnitude and
multitude.   "Quantity   is   either  discrete  or  continuous,"  writes
Aristotle.  "Instances  of discrete quantities are number and speech; of
continuous,  lines,  surfaces,  solids,  and,  besides  these,  time and
place."  Nicomachus explains the two kinds of quantity by examples. "The
unified  and  continuous,"  he  says,  is exemplified by "an animal, the
universe, a tree, and the like, which are properly and peculiarly called
'magnitudes'  "; to illustrate the discontinuous, he points to "heaps of
things,  which are called 'multitudes,' a flock, for instance, a people,
a chorus, and the like." The principle of this distinction appears to be
the possession or lack of a common boundary. To take Aristotle's example
of speech as a

[565b]
Chapter  76: QUANTITY 531 quantity, the letters of a written word or the
syllables  of  vocal  utterance  comprise  a  multitude  rather  than  a
continuum or magnitude "because there is no common boundary at which the
syllables  join,  each  being  separate and distinct from the rest." The
continuity of magnitudes can be readily seen, according to Aristotle, in
the  possibility  of  finding  a common boundary at which the parts of a
line  join  or  make  contact.  "In  the case of a line," he says, "this
common  boundary is the point; in the case of a plane, it is the line. .
.  .  Similarly, you can find a common boundary in the case of the parts
of  a  solid, namely, either a line or a plane." Accepting the principle
of  the  distinction, Plotinus insists that "number and magnitude are to
be  regarded  as  the  only true quantities." All others, like space and
time,  or  motion,  are  quantities  only  in a relative sense, that is,
insofar  as they can be measured by number or involve magnitude. Galileo
raises  another  sort  of  difficulty.  The  Aristotelian  conception of
magnitudes as continuous quantities implies their infinite divisibility.
This  means,  in  his  terms,  that  "every  magnitude is divisible into
magnitudes"  and  that  "it  is impossible for anything continuous to be
composed  of  indivisible parts." Galileo acknowledges the objections to
"building up continuous quantities out of indivisible quantities" on the
ground that "the addition of one indivisible to another cannot produce a
divisible,  for  if  this  were  so  it  would  render  the  indivisible
divisible."  Suppose  a  line  to  comprise an odd number of indivisible
points.  Since  such  a  line  can,  in principle, be cut into two equal
parts,  we  are  required  to  do  the  impossible,  namely, "to cut the
indivisible  which  lies exactly in the middle of the line." To this and
other  objections  which  seem  to him of the same type, Galileo replies
that "a divisible magnitude cannot be constructed out of two or ten or a
hundred  or  a thousand indivisibles, but requires an infinite number of
them.  ...  I  am  willing,"  he says, "to grant to the Peripatetics the
truth of their opinion that a continuous quantity is divisible only into
parts  which  are  still  further  divisible,  so  that  however far the
division  and subdivision be continued, no end will be reached; but I am
not so certain that they will concede to me that none of these divisions
of theirs can be a final

[566a]
532  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  one, as is surely the fact, because there always
remains  'another';  the final and ultimate division is rather one which
resolves  a  continuous  quantity into an infinite number of indivisible
quantities."  The  question  remains whether these indivisible units, an
infinite   number  of  which  constitute  the  continuity  of  a  finite
magnitude,  can  properly  be  called  quantities. At least they are not
magnitudes,  as  is indicated by Euclid's definition of a point as "that
which  has  no part," or by Nicomachus' statement that "the point is the
beginning  of dimension, but is not itself a dimension." If, in addition
to  having position, a point had size or extent, a finite line could not
contain  an  infinite  number  of  points.  This problem of infinite and
infinitesimal  quantities  is  more  fully  discussed  in the chapter on
Infinity.  Within  each  of the two main divisions of quantity—magnitude
and  number—further  sub-divisions  into  kinds  are  made. Relations of
equality  and  inequality,  or  proportions  of  these ratios, may occur
between  quantities  different  in  kind—different  plane  figures,  for
example.  But  the great books of mathematics indicate other problems in
the  study  of  quantity  than  those  concerned  with  the  ratios  and
proportions  of  quantities.  The  classification  of  lines and figures
results  in  the  discovery of the properties which belong to each type.
Possessing  the  same properties, all lines or figures of a certain type
are  similar  in  kind, not equal in quantity. In addition to developing
the  properties  of such straight lines as perpendiculars and parallels,
or  such curved lines as circles and ellipses, parabolas and hyperbolas,
the  geometer  defines  the  different  types  of  relationship in which
straight lines can stand to curves, e.g., tangents, secants, asymptotes.
As  there are types of lines and figures, both plane and solid, so there
are  types of numbers. Euclid and Nicomachus divide the odd numbers into
the  prime  and  the  composite—  into those which are divisible only by
themselves  and  unity,  such  as  5  and  7, and those which have other
factors, such as 9 and 15. The composite are further differentiated into
the  variety  which  is  simply secondary and composite and "the variety
which,  in  itself,  is secondary and composite, but relatively is prime
and incom-

[566b]
posite."  To illustrate the latter, Nicomachus asks us to compare 9 with
25.  "Each  in  itself,"  he  writes,  "is  secondary and composite, but
relatively  to  each other they have only unity as a common measure, and
no  factors in them have the same denominator, for the third part in the
former  does not exist in the latter nor is the fifth part in the latter
found  in  the  former." The even numbers are divided by Nicomachus into
the  even-times-even  (numbers  like  64 which can be divided into equal
halves,  and their halves can again be divided into equal halves, and so
on  until  division  must stop); the even-times-odd (numbers like 6, 10,
14,  1 8 which can be divided into equal halves, but whose halves cannot
be  divided  again  into  equal halves); and the odd-times-even (numbers
like  24, 28, 40 which can be divided into equal parts, whose parts also
can  be  so  divided, and perhaps again these parts, but which cannot be
divided  in  this  way  as  far  as  unity).  By  another  principle  of
classification,  the  even  numbers  fall  into  the  superabundant, the
deficient,  and  the perfect. The factors which produce superabundant or
deficient  numbers, when added together, amount to more or less than the
number  itself;  but  a  number  is  perfect,  Nicomachus  writes, when,
"comparing  with itself the sum and combination of all the factors whose
presence  it  will  admit,  it  neither exceeds them in multitude nor is
exceeded  by  them." It is "equal to its own parts"; as, for example, 6,
"for   6  has  the  factors  half,  third,  and  sixth,  3,  2,  and  1,
respectively,  and  these  added  together  make  6 and are equal to the
original  number."  At  the time of Nicomachus only four perfect numbers
were  known—  6,  28,  496,  8128;  since  his  day seven more have been
discovered.  The further classification of numbers as linear, plane, and
solid,  and  of  plane  numbers as triangular, square, pentagonal, etc.,
assigns  properties  to  them  according  to  their  configurations. The
analysis  of  figurate numbers by Nicomachus or Pascal represents one of
the  great  bridges between arithmetic and geometry, of which the other,
in  the  opposite  direction,  is the algebraic rendering of geometrical
loci  in  Descartes'  analytical  geometry.  In  either direction of the
translation   between   arithmetic   and   geometry,  discontinuous  and
continuous quantities seem to have certain

[567a]
properties in common, at least by analogy. Euclid, for example, proposes
numerical  ratios  as  the  test for the commensurability of magnitudes.
"Commensurable  magnitudes  have_jo  one another," he writes, "the ratio
wruch a number has to a number." With the exception of infinite numbers,
all   numbers  are  commensurable  and  so  provide  the  criterion  for
determining  whether  two  magnitudes  are  or  are  not  commensurable.
Introducing the notion of dimensionality into the discussion of figurate
numbers,  Nicomachus observes that "mathematical speculations are always
to  be  interlocked and to be explained one by means of another." Though
the  dimensions  by  which  linear,  plane,  and solid numbers are to be
distinguished "are more closely related to magnitude . . . yet the germs
of  these  ideas  are taken over into arithmetic as the science which is
the  mother  of  geometry  and more elementary than it." The translation
does  not  seem to fail in any respect. The only non-dimensional number,
unity,  finds  its geometrical analogue in the point, which has position
without  magnitude. When diverse magnitudes are translated into numbers,
the  diversity  of  the  magnitudes seems to be effaced by the fact that
their  numerical  measures  do  not  have a corresponding diversity. The
numbers  will  appear  to  be  commensurable  though the magnitudes they
measure  are not, as magnitudes, comparable. As Descartes points out, it
is necessary, therefore, to regard each order of magnitude as a distinct
dimension.  "By  dimension," Descartes writes, "I understand nothing but
the  mode  and  aspect  according to which a subject is considered to be
measOUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  i.  The  nature  and existence of quantity: its
relation  to  matter, substance, and body; the transcendental categories
of quantity i a. The relation between quantity and quality: reducibility
of  quality  to  quantity  lb.  The relation of quantities: equality and
proportion 2. The kinds of quantity: continuous and discontinuous 3. The
magnitudes  of  geometry:  the  relations of dimensionality 3^. Straight
lines:   their  length  and  their  relations;  angles,  perpendiculars,
parallels

[567b]
Chapter  76:  QUANTITY  533  urable. Thus it is not merely the case that
length,  breadth,  and  depth  are  dimensions;  but  weight  also  is a
dimension  in  terms of which the heaviness of objects is estimated. So,
too, speed is a dimension of motion, and there are an infinite number of
similar  instances. For that very division of the whole into a number of
parts  of identical nature, whether it exist in the real order of things
or  be  merely  the  work  of  the  understanding, gives us exactly that
dimension  in  terms of which we apply number to objects." The theory of
dimensions  can  be  illustrated  by  the  choice  of clocks, rules, and
balances  as the fundamental instruments for the measurement of physical
quantities.  They  represent  the  three  dimensions  in the fundamental
equations  of mechanics— time, distance, and mass. Additional dimensions
may  be  introduced  in electricity or thermodynamics. In developing the
theory  of heat, Fourier, for example, enumerates five quantities which,
in  order  to  be numerically expressed, require five different kinds of
units,  "namely,  the  unit  of  length,  the  unit  of  time,  that  of
temperature,  that  of  weight,  and  finally  the  unit which serves to
measure  quantities  of  heat."  To which he adds the remark that "every
undetermined  magnitude  or constant has one dimension proper to itself,
and  that  the terms of one and the same equation could not be compared,
if  they had not the same exponent of dimension." A fuller discussion of
the  basic physical quantities, their definition, measurement, and their
relation  to  one  another,  belongs  to  the  chapter on Mechanics. The
consideration  of  time and space as quantities, or physical dimensions,
occurs in the chapters devoted to those subjects. 535 536 537

[568a]
534  THE GREAT IDEAS (i) Circles (2) Ellipses (3) Parabolas ^d. Surfaces
(1)  The measurement and transformation of areas $e. Solids: regular and
irregular (1) The determination of volume 4. Discrete quantities: number
and  numbering  4*7.  The kinds of numbers: odd-even, square-triangular,
prime-composite  4<r.  The  number  series  as  a  continuum 5. Physical
quantities  50. Space: the matrix of figures and distances 5^. Time: the
number of motion $d. Mass: its relation to weight $e. Force: its measure
and  the measure of its effect of measurement proportion; parameters and
coordinates  balances matical and physical infinite of the great and the
small

[568b]
PAGE  3^.  Curved  lines:  their  kinds,  number,  and  degree  r^8  (4)
Hyperbolas  r™ (2) The relations of surfaces to lines and solids 540 (2)
The  relations of solids: inscribed and circumscribed spheres; solids of
revolution  4^.  The  relations of numbers to one another: multiples and
fractions   541   5c.   The  quantity  of  motion:  momentum,  velocity,
acceleration 542 6a. Commensurable and incommensurable magnitudes 543

[569a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1. The nature and existence of
quantity:   its   relation   to   matter,   substance,   and  body;  the
transcendental  categories  of quantity 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 518b-519b /
Sophist, 566d / Philebus, 616a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[3
b24-4  ao]  8a-b;  ch 6 9a-lla / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 13 a6-io]
108c; ch 18
[8i a40-b6]
110b-c / Topics, bk 1, ch 9 147a-b / Physics, bk i, ch 2
[79
4] 260a-b; ch 4
[i87b i4~22]
262d; bk ii, ch 2 [i93b22-i94au] 270a-c; bk iv, ch i
[i85a2o-b
[2o8b i9-24] 287b-c; ch 2 288b-289a / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 5 [985^2-986^1] 503d-504b;
ch 6
[987b io-34]
505c-506a; ch 8 [989^9990^2] 508a-c; ch 9
[99i b9-992b i7]
509db i3-i8] 514a; [996^3511a; bk in, ch 1
[995
b  i2~998 a i9] 516b-d; ch 5 520c-521b; bk v, ch 13 541bc; bk vii, ch 10
15] 514c; ch 2 [997
[io35b32-io36a i2]
559b-c; ch ii
[io36b321037^] 560b-c; bk viii, ch 3 [i043b34~i044a
14] 568b-d; bk ix, ch 1
[1045^8-32] 570b;
bk xi, ch 2 [io6oa36-b i9] 588c-d; ch 3 [io6i a 29^4] 589c; bk xii, ch i
[1069^8-25] 598a; ch 5
[io7i a23-b i] 600d-601a; bk xiii, ch 1-3
607a-610a;  ch  6-9  611d-618c;  bk  xiv  619b,d626d  / Soul, bk 1, ch 4
[4o8b3i]-cH 5 [409b i8] 638d-639c; bk hi, ch 7 [43i b i3-i9] 664b

[569b]
Chapter  76:  QUANTITY 535 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk 1, 811b-812a 17
Plotinus:  Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 9 53a-b; ch 1 1 -1 2 53d-55b / Third
Ennead,  tr vi, ch 16-18 116c-118c / Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 8, 196a-b
/  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4,  210b-c  /  Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-5
253b-254d;  tr  ii,  ch  13  276a-c;  tr  hi,  ch  n-15 286d-289c; tr vi
310d-321b  esp  ch  3-7  311c-314a, ch 13-18 316d-321b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2, contrary 15c-16a; q 5, a 3, rep 4 25a-d; q
7,  a 1, rep 2 31a-d; q 8, a 2, rep 3 35c-36b; q 10, a 6, ans 45c-46d; q
ii,  a  i,  rep i 46d47d; a 3, rep 2 49a-c; Q 44, a 1, rep 3 238b239a; q
85, a 1, rep 2 451c-453c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 52,
a  1, ans 15d-18a; part hi suppl, q 79, a i, rep 3 951b-953b; q 80, a 5,
rep  3  963a-964b;  q  83,  a  2, ans 976c-978c; a 3, rep 2 978c-980d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  172b;  part  iv, 269d-270a; 271d-272a 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xii, 18d-19c; xiv, 29b-30b / Objections and Replies,
154a;  231a-b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15, schol360d361d; part
11, prop 2 374a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch viii, sect 9-26
134c-138b passim, esp sect 9 134c; ch xxiii, sect 9, 206b; ch xxxi, sect
2, 239d

[570a]
536  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (  1 . The nature and existence of quantity: its
relation  to  matter, substance, and body; the transcendental categories
of quantity.} 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 9-15 414d-416a; sect 73
427b-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15b-c;  41c-45b  esp  43d44a; 69c-72c;
74b-76c;  137a-140a,c;  161d163a;  211c-213a 53 James: Psychology, 551a;
874a-878a  esp  875a876b,  878a  la.  The  relation between quantity and
quality:  reducibility of quality to quantity 7 Plato: Meno, 176d-177a /
Timaeus,   458b460b;   462b-465d  /  Philebus,  615c-616c  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 7
[6b20-26]
lib; ch 8 [ioan-i6] 15a-b;
[iob26-n*i4] 15d-16b /
Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2
[3i5b
32-316*4] 411b-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 4 IOI4 b20-27] 535a; ch 14
[io2ob3-8]
[io20b
ch 28
[io24b io-i6] 546c; bk x,
ch 1 [io52"i-io53b 8] 578d-580a; bk xi, ch 6
[4-17] 541 d;
[1063^22-28] 591c; bk xii, ch
i
[1069*18-25]
598a; bk xiii, ch 8 [1083*1-17] 614d / Soul, bk in, ch 1
[425*14-19] 657b / Sense and the
b4~446*2o] 683b-684c; ch 7 Sensible, ch 6 [445
[448a20-b i6]
687a-d;
[449*21-30]
688d-689a  10  Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 167d168b 11 Euclid:
Elements,  bk vii, definitions, 16-19 127b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk
ii,  831d-841c  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [298-304] 4d; bk 11
[398-521] 20a-21c; [677-687] 23c-d;
[730-864] 24b-26a; bk hi [221-227] 32d-33a;
bk iv [26-268] 44b-47d; [522-721] 51a-53d 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
iv, ch 13 55b-d / Fourth Ennead, tr vii, ch 8, 196a-b / Fifth Ennead, tr
i,  ch  4,  210c  /  Sixth Ennead, tr in, ch 13-15 287d-289c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 8, a 2, rep 3 35c-36b; q 42, a i, rep 1-2
224b225d;  q 78, a 3, rep 2 410a-411d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 49, a 2, ans 2b-4a; q 50, a i, rep 3 6a-7b; q 52 15d-19c; q 53,
aa  2-3 21a-22d; part ii-ii, q 24, aa 4-10 491d-498a; part hi, q 7, a 12
754c-755c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  49a-d;  part  hi,  172b 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  162d-165d;
228c-229c;  231a-b  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  i,  428a-b;  431a-455a esp
450a-453a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch viii, sect 9-26
134c-138b  passim;  ch  xxi, sect 3 178d; sect 75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect
8-9  206a-c; sect ii 206d-207a; sect 37, 214a-b; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d;
bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect 9-13 311b-312b; ch hi, sect 12-14 316a-d; sect 28
322a-c

[570b]
\a  to  \b  Human  Knowledge,  sect  9-15  sect 25 417d-418a; sect 73 35
Berkeley:   414d-416a;   427b-c;  sect  102  432d-433a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  122 505c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15b-c;
23a-24a; 32d-33b
[fn
1];  68a-72c;  211c-213a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 448c-d; 475b [fn 1] 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  63  28b-c;  additions, 40
122d-123b  50 Marx: Capital, 149d 53 James: Psychology, 104b; 319b-322a;
346a348a  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  87a  / Interpretation of Dreams, 384d /
Narcissism,  403d-404a  /  Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 639b-d lb. The
relation  of  quantities:  equality  and  proportion  7  Plato:  Phaedo,
228d-229c   494a-c;   500c-502a;   508c-d;  /  Parmenides,  510d-511a  /
Theaetetus, 518b-519b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[6*27-35] Wd11a / Generation and Corruption, bk
ii, ch 6
[333*27-34] 434a / Metaphysics, bk
v, ch 13
[1020*22-26]
541c; ch 15
[io2ob26-io2i*i4]
542a-c; bk x, ch 3
[io54b i-3] 581b; ch 5-6
583a-584c; bk xiv, ch i
[1088*20-29] 620c /
Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[452b7~23]
694b-d  9  Aristotle  Ethics,  bk  11,  ch  6  [uo6a26-b8]  bk v, ch 3-5
378c-381d passim / 351d-352a; Politics, bk v, ch 1
[i30i b29-36] 503a
11 Euclid: Elements, bk i, common notions 2a; prop 4 4a-b; prop 8 6b-7a;
prop  26 16a-17b; bk v 81a-98b esp definitions, 5 81a, 7,910 81b; bk vi,
prop  23 117a-b; bk x 191a300b 11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i,
assumptions 404b / Spirals, 484b / Quadrature of the Parabola, 527a-b 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic, bk i-ii, 821d-831d; bk 11, 841c-848d 16 Kepler:
Harmonies  of  the  World,  1012b1014b;  1078b-1080a  17 Plotinus: Sixth
Ennead,  tr hi, ch 15 289a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13,
a  7,  ans 68d-70d; q 42, a i, ans and rep i 224b-225d; q 47, a 2, rep 2
257b-258c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 113, a 9, ans
368d-369c  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  142a-145a  31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii, 47c/ Geometry, bk 1, 295a-298b; bk hi,
332b-341b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk i, lemma i 25a; LEMMA II, SCHOL,
31b-32a;  BK  II,  LEMMA  I  159b;  lemma  2  168a-169b  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  9-10  311b-c 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract, bk hi, 407b408b

[571a]
2 to 3a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 73c-d; 211c-213a / Judge - ment, 497a-498b
passim   50   Marx:  Capital,  19a-25d  esp  19d-20b,  25a-d  53  James:
Psychology,  551a;  874a-878a  esp  874b875a  2.  The kinds of quantity:
continuous   and   discontinuous   7   Plato:  Parmenides,  499d-500c  /
Theaetetus, 515b-c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[4
b20-5*37] 9a-d / Physics, bk iv, ch 4
[2ii a29-b
4J 290c; ch 5
[212^-6]
291d; bk v, ch 3
[227*10-34]
307d-308b;  bk  vi,  ch 1-2 312b,d-315d / Heavens, bk i, ch i [268*6-11]
359a  /  Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2 [315^5-317*17] 411b-413a;
bk ii, ch 10 [337*22-34] 439b-c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 4
[iooi*4-b25] 519d520c; bk
v, ch 6
[ioi5b35-ioi6*i7] 536bc;
[ioi6b6-32] 537a-b; ch
13
[1020*9-14] 541b;
bk viii, ch 3 [io43b33-io44*i4] 568b-d; bk x, ch 1
[1052*15-37] 578b,d; ch 3 [1054*20-29]
581a; bk xi, ch 12
[io68b26-io69*i4] 597d598a,c; bk xiv, ch
i [io87b34-io88*i4] 620a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 6
[1106*26-28]
351d   11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  v,  definitions,  3-5  81a;  bk  vii,
definitions,  2  127a;  20  127b;  bk x, prop 1 191b-192a 11 Archimedes:
Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,  assumptions,  5  404b  / Spirals, 484b /
Quadrature  of  the  Parabola,  527a-b  11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i,
811d-812b  17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv, ch 7, 52c / Fourth Ennead,
tr  ii,  ch i, 139d-140a / Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 4 253b-254b; tr hi, ch
13,  287d-288a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, rep 1
14b-15b;  o 7, aa 3-4 32c-34c; q ii, a 2 47d-48d; q 30, a 3, ans and rep
2  169b-170c;  q 42, a 1, rep 1-2 224b-225d; q 52, a 1 278d279b; q 85, a
8,  rep 2 460b-461b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 24, a 4,
rep 1 491d-492b; part hi, q 7, a 12, rep 1 754c-755c 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first  day,  139c-153a passim; third day, 201a-202a 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 48 HOd111a 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv, 32b-33b /
Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a  /  Meditations, v, 93b / Geometry, bk i,
295a-296b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i, prop 13, corol 359d; prop 15,
schol  360b-361d  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  434b439b  34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  lemma  i  25a; lemma 11, schol, 31a-32a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xv, sect 9 164b-d; ch xvi, sect
3-4 165d-166b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 123-132 437c-439c

[571b]
b  Chapter  76: QUANTITY 537 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div
124-125  506a-507a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  66d-72c esp 68a-72c; 131c;
135a-140a,c esp 137d-138d
[antithesis];
152a-d;  161d-163a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk xi, 469a-d 3. The
magnitudes  of  geometry:  the  relations of dimensionality 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 6 [5*1-23] 9b-c; ch 8
[10*1 1-16] 15a-b / Topics, bk vi, ch 6 [i43b
1  1-23]  197b  /  Heavens,  bk i, ch i 359a-c; bk ii, ch 4 [286b i2-33]
378a-c / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 9 [992*10-24] 510bc; bk v, ch 6 [ioi6b25~
31]  537b;  bk xiii, ch 2 [1077*14-37] 608b-d 11 Euclid: Elements, bk i,
definitions,  1-2,5 la; 14 lb; bk xi, definitions, i 301a 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  832b-d 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 865a17 Plotinus:
Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch 13 276a-c; tr in, ch 13-14 287d 289a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  85,  a  8,  rep  2 460b-461b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part iv, 269d 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv, 29b-32a / Discourse,
part  iv, 5 2d- 53a / Meditations, v, 93a- d; vi, 96b-d / Objections and
Replies,  216d-217c;  228c-229a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk 11, ch
xiii,  sect 5-6 149b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 25a-b 53 James: Psychology,
876b-878a  3a. Straight lines: their length and their relations; angles,
perpendiculars, parallels 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 24
[4i b
14-21]  58c;  ch  35  66c-d;  bk  ii, ch 16 [64^865*9] 85c-d / Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 4
[73*34-38] 100b; ch 5 101b-102b passim; ch 24
b37-86"3] H7b-c / Topics, bk vi, ch ii
[8 5
[i48b23-33] 203a / Heavens, bk
i, ch 2 [268b i5~ 20] 359d / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 9 [1051*2326] 577c 9
Aristotle:  Gait of Animals, ch 9 [708^4709*2] 247b 11 Euclid: Elements,
bk  i, definitions, 2-4,812 la; 23 2a; postulates, 1-2,4-5 2a; prop 1-34
2b-21b;  bk  ii,  prop  ii  38a-39a;  bk  iv,  prop  10  73b-74b; bk vi,
definitions,  2-3  99a;  prop  2-17  100b-112a;  prop 30 123a-b; prop 32
124b-125a; bk x 191a-300b passim; bk xi, definitions, ii 301b; prop 1-23
302b'  319a;  prop  26  321b-323a; prop 35 332b-334b; bk xiii, prop 5-12
372b-381a  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and Cylinder, bk i, definitions, 1-2
404a;  assumptions,  i  404b;  prop 2 405a-b / Spirals, prop 1-2 484b 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  26a-  28b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i, 543a-545b; bk ii, 569b-570a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 85 a 8, rep 2 460b-461b

[572a]
538 The magnitudes of geometry: the relations of (3. dimensionality. 3a.
Straight    lines:   their   length   and   their   relations;   angles,
perpendiculars,  parallels.)  28  Galileo:  Two New Sciences, first day,
149d-150d;  third  day,  233d  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  i, lemma i6
53b-54a;  lemma  23  67a; lemma 26 71a-72a; bk hi, lemma 7 339b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  110a;  212c-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
121a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  876b-877a number, and 3b. Curved lines:
their kinds, degree i BK I, CH 2
[2O0 u I5-2O
68b  8  Aristotle: Heavens, 359d 11 Euclid: Elements, bk I, DEFINITIONS,
2-3  la 11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i, definitions, 1-2 404a;
assumptions, 2 404b / Spirals, definitions-prop 28 490a-501a 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences, second day, 195b-c 31 Descartes: Geometry, bk i-iii,
298b-332b;  bk  hi,  341a-353b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk i, lemma ii
29b-30b;  lemma  15-PROP  29  and  schol 50a-75b; lemma 28 76b-78a; prop
48-50  102b-105a;  bk  11,  lemma  3 189b-190a; bk hi, lemma 5 338b-339a
36(1)  Circles  8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  7  [7^9-33] 12c-d/ Prior
Analytics,  bk 1, ch 24 [4i b i4-2i] 58c; bk 11, ch 25 [69*30-34] 91a- b
/ Posterior Analytics, bk 11, ch 11
[94*20-35] 128d-129a / Heavens,
bk 11, ch 4
[286b i3-287a
3] 378b-c / Meteorology, bk in, ch 3
[373*6-17] 477c-d; ch
5  480a-481c  /  Metaphysics,  bk ix, ch 9 [1051* 27-29] 577c 11 Euclid:
Elements, bk i, definitions, 15-18 lb; bk iii-iv 41a-80b; bk vi, prop 33
125a126a;  bk  xii,  prop  2 339a-340b; prop 16 362b-363a 11 Archimedes:
Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk i, assumptions, 5 404b; prop i 405a; prop 3-6
405b-408a  /  Measurement  of  a  Circle  447a451b  /  Spirals, prop 3-9
485a-488a  /  Boo{ of Lemmas 561a-568b 11 Apollonius: Conies, bk i, prop
4-5  606b608b; prop 9 613b-614b; prop 17-19 626a627b; prop 21 628a-629a;
prop  32  638a-640a  prop  34  641a-643a;  prop  36-41 643b-653b prop 43
654b-655b;  prop  45  657a-658b prop 47 659b-660b; prop 50 663a-666b; bk
11,  prop  6-7  686b-687a;  prop 26-30 700b702b; prop 44 710b-711a; prop
49-51 714b726a; bk hi, prop 1-3 731a-735b; prop 16-17 747b-750a; prop 27
761b-762b; prop 37-38

[572b]
lb  to  3b(3)  772b-775b;  prop 42 780b-782a; prop 45-50 783b-790a; prop
53-54  792b-796a  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest, bk i, 14a-21a; 26a-28b; bk vi,
208a-b  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk i,
532b-538a; 545b-556b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 149d-150d;
155b-156d   31   Descartes:   Geometry,  bk  ii,  313b-314a  34  Newton:
Principles,  bk i, lemma 29 138a-b 3£(2) Ellipses 11 Archimedes: Conoids
and  Spheroids,  prop 4-9 459a-464a; prop 11-14 464b-467a 11 Apollonius:
Conies,  bk  i, prop 13 618a620a; prop 15 621b-624a; second definitions,
9,11 626a; prop 17-19 626a-627b; prop 21 628a-629a; prop 23 630a-b; prop
25  631a-b; prop 30 636a-637a; prop 32 638a640a; prop 34 641a-643a; prop
36-41 643b653b; prop 43 654b-655b; prop 45 657a-658b; prop 47 659b-660b;
prop 50 663a-666b; prop 56-58 675b-679b; bk ii, prop 6-7 686b-687a; prop
26-30  700b-702b; prop 4445 710b-711b; prop 47-50 712b-723a; bk ii, prop
52-BK  in,  prop  3  726b-735b;  bk  hi,  prop  16-17 747b-750a; prop 27
761b-762b;   prop   37-38  772b-775b;  prop  42  780b-782a;  prop  45-50
783b-790a;  prop  52-54  791b796a  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk v, 975a-984b
passim  31  Descartes: Geometry, bk ii, 308b-313b 34 Newton: Principles,
bk i, lemma 12 41a; lemma 15-PROP 29 and schol 50a-75b esp lemma 15-PROP
18 50a-51a; lemma 28, corol-prop 31 and schol 78a-81a 34 Huygens: Light,
ch  v,  604b-606b  3^(3) Parabolas 11 Archimedes: Conoids and Spheroids,
prop  3  458b-459a;  prop ii 464b-465a / Quadrature ofthe Parabola, prop
1-5  528a-529b;  prop  1422  531b-536a;  prop 24 537a-b / Method, prop 1
571a-572b  11  Apollonius:  Conies,  bk i, prop ii 615a-616a; prop 17-20
626a-628a;  prop  22 629a-630a; prop 24 631a; prop 26-27 631b-634a; prop
32-33 638a-640b; prop 35 643a-b; prop 42 653b-654b; prop 46 659a-b; prop
49 661b663a; prop 52-53 668a-670b; bk ii, prop 5 686a; prop 7 687a; prop
24   699b-700a;  prop  28-30  701b-702b;  prop  44  710b-711a;  prop  46
711b-712a;  prop  48-51 713a-726a; bk hi, prop 1-3 731a-735b; prop 16-17
747b-750a; prop 37-38 772b-775b; prop 41 778b-780b; prop 54 793b-796a 28
Galileo:  Two New Sciences, second day, 193a-195c; fourth day, 238d-239d
31  Descartes:  Geometry,  bk ii, 308b-310b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i,
lemma  13-14  45a;  lemma  15-PROP 29 and schol 50a-75b esp prop 19 51a;
prop 30 76a-b

[573a]
3*(4)  to  ld{\) Chapter 76: 5b(4) Hyperbolas 11 Archimedes: Conoids and
Spheroids,  prop  ii 464b-465a 11 Apollonius: Conies, bk i, prop 12 616a
618a;  prop  14  620a-621b;  prop i6-raT524b 627b; prop 21-22 628a-630a;
prop  24 631a prop 26 631b-632b; prop 28-32 634a-640a prop 34 641a-643a;
prop  36-41  643b-653b  prop  43-45 654b-658b; prop 47-48 659b-661a prop
50-51  663a-668a; prop 54-55 670b-675a prop 59-60 679b-681b; bk ii, prop
1-5  682a686a;  prop 7-23 687a-699b; prop 25 700a; prop 28-45 701b-711b;
prop  47-51  712b-726a; bk in, prop 1-26 731a-761a; prop 28-40 763a778b;
prop  42-51  780b-791b;  prop 53-56 792b-798b 31 Descartes: Geometry, bk
11,  306b-307a;  308b-312b  34  Newton:  Principles, bk i, lemma 12 41a;
lemma  15-PROP 29 and schol 50a-75b esp lemma 15-PROP 18 50a-51a 3c. The
relations  of straight and curved lines: tangents, secants, asymptotes 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk 1, ch 24
[4i b
14-21]  58c  11  Euclid:  Elements, bk hi, definitions, 2,4-5 41a; 7-1 1
41a-b;  prop  2-4  42b-44a;  prop  7-8 44b-47a; prop 11-12 48b-49a; prop
14-24  50a-56a  esp  prop  16-17 51b-53a; prop 2629 57b-59a; bk hi, prop
31-BK  iv,  prop  16  59b-80b;  bk vi, prop 33 125a-126a; bk xii, prop 1
338a-339a;   prop   16  362b-363a;  bk  xiii,  prop  9-12  375b-381a  11
Archimedes:  Sphere  and Cylinder, bk i, assumptions, 1-2,5 404b; prop i
405a;  prop  3-4  405b-406b;  prop  21-22  418a-419a  / Measurement of a
Circle, prop 3 448b-451b / Spirals, prop 3-9 485a-488a; prop 12-13 490b;
prop  16-20  491b-495b / Quadrature of the Parabola, prop 1-5 528a-529b;
prop  1819  535a / Boof{ of Lemmas, prop 1-3 561a562a; prop 6 563b-564a;
prop 8-13 564b567a; prop 15 567b-568b 11 Apollonius: Conies, bk i, first
definitions,  4-8 604a-b; prop 15-51 621b-668a; bk ii 682a-730b esp prop
14-15  691b-692b,  prop  17  693b-694a; bk hi, prop 1-44 731a-783b; prop
53-56  792b-798b  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  14a-24b;  26a-28b  16
Copernicus  :  Revolutions  of  the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 532b-542b 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,  973a-975a 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first
day,  149d-150d;  third  day, 229d-230a; 233b234b; fourth day, 239b-d 31
Descartes:  Geometry,  bk  i-ii,  298b-331b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i,
lemma  5-7  27a-b; lemma 11 29b-30b; lemma 15-PROP 29 and schol 50a-75b;
lemma  29  138a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 124 506a-c
esp 506c

[573b]
QUANTITY 539 J>d. Surfaces 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 4
[286bi3~
287*3]  378b-c  11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk 1, definitions, 5-7 la; 15-22
lb-2a;  postulates, 3 2a; prop i 2b3a; prop 22 13b-14a; prop 46 27b-28a;
bk  vi, prop 18 112a-b; bk xi, definitions, 2 301a 11 Archimedes: Sphere
and  Cylinder,  bk i, definitions, 3-4 404a 11 Apollonius: Conies, bk i,
first definitions, 1 604a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832c-833b 31
Descartes:  Objections and Replies, 228c-229a 3</(l) The measurement and
transformation   of   areas   7  Plato:  Meno,  180c-182c  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 7
[7
b29~33] 12c-d; ch 14 [15^9-32] 21a / Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 25
[69*30-34] 91a-b
/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 11
[i7i b i2-i8] 236b;
[i7i b34-i72*7]
236d / Physics, bk i, ch 2 f 185*1 4-1 7] 259d260a / Metaphysics, bk hi,
ch  2  [996^  18-22] 515b / Soul, bk 1, ch 2 [413*13-19] 643b 11 Euclid:
Elements,  bk  i, prop 4 4a-b; prop 8 6b-7a; prop 26 16a-17b; prop 35-45
21b27b; bk 1, prop 47-BK 11, prop 14 28a-40b; bk in, definitions, i 41a;
u 41b; bk vi, definitions, i 99a; prop i 99a-100a; prop 14-17 109a-112a;
prop  19-29  112b-123a;  prop 31 123b-124a; bk x, prop 9 197a-198b; prop
13,  lemma-prop  14 200b-202a; prop 16, lemma 203a-b; prop 19 206a; prop
21  and lemma 206b-207b; prop 24-26 209b-211b; prop 32, lemma 217b-218a;
prop  53,  lemma  235a-b;  prop  59,  lemma  242a-b;  bk  xii,  prop 1-2
338a-340b;  bk  xiii,  prop  1-5  369a373a  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and
Cylinder,  bk  i,  assumptions, 3-4 404b; prop 5-16 406b414b; prop 23-25
419a-420b;  prop  28-30 422a-423a; prop 32-33 423b-425b; prop 34, corol-
prop  37  427a-428a;  prop  39-43 429a432b; bk 11, prop 3 437a-b; prop 6
441b442b;  prop  8-9  443b-446a  /  Measurement  of  a  Circle, prop 1-2
447a-448a  /  Conoids  and Spheroids, prop 2-6 458a-460b / Spirals, prop
21-28 495b-501a / Quadrature of the Parabola, prop 14-17 531b-535a; prop
20-24  535b-537b / Boo{of Lemmas, prop 4-5 562b563b; prop 7 564b; prop 14
567a-b  /  Method,  prop 1 571a-572b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk v, 979b-984b
passim  28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, first day, 153d154a; 155b-156d;
second  day,  193a-194d; fourth day, 239d-240a 34 Newton: Principles, bk
i,  lemma  2-4 25a- 26b; lemma 8-9 27b-28b; lemma 22 64a-65b; prop 30-31
and schol 76a-81a; prop 81 140b142b 53 James: Psychology, 673b

[574a]
540 {jbd. Surfaces) 3</(2) The relations of surfaces to lines and solids
8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  9  [992*1024] 510b-c 11 Euclid:
Elements, bk xi, definitions, 2-8 301a-b; prop 1-8 302b-308a; prop 11-19
309a-314b;  prop  24  319b-320b; prop 28 323b-324a; prop 38 336a-337a 11
Archimedes:   Conoids   and  Spheroids,  definitions  455a-b;  prop  7-9
461a-464a;  prop  11-18 464b-468b / Floating Bodies, bk i, prop i 538a-b
11  Apollonius:  Conies,  bk  i,  first  definitions,  1 604a; prop 1-14
604b-621b; prop 52-58 668a-679b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day,
142b-143d  5e. Solids: regular and irregular 11 Euclid: Elements, bk xi,
definitions,  i  301a;  12-28  301b-302b;  prop 27 323a-b; bk xiii, prop
13-18  381a-396a  11  Archimedes:  Conoids  and  Spheroids,  452a455a 11
Apollonius:  Conies,  bk  i,  first definitions, 2-3 604a 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic,  BKii,832c-d;836b-c  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 863b-868b /
Harmonies of the World, 1011a-1012a 3e(l) The determination of volume 11
Euclid: Elements, bk xi, definitions, 9-10 301b; prop 25 320b-321b; prop
28-34  323b332b; prop 36-37 334b-336a; prop 39 337a-b; bk xii, prop 3-15
341a-362b;  prop  18  367a368b 11 Archimedes: Sphere and Cylinder, bk i,
lemmas-prop  20  414b-418a;  prop 26-28 421a-422b; prop 31-32 423b-424b;
prop  34 and corol 425b-427a; prop 38 428b-429a; prop 41 431a-b; prop 44
433a-b;  bk  ii,  prop  1-2  434b-437a;  prop  4-5  437b-441b;  prop 7-9
442b-446a  / Conoids and Spheroids, prop 10 464a; prop 18-32 468b-481b /
Method,  prop  2-4  572b-576b; prop 7 579a-580b; prop 10-15 583a-592a 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day, 154c-155b; second day, 196b-c
3*(2)  The  relations  of  solids:  inscribed and circumscribed spheres;
solids of revolution 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch 4
[287*2-11]
378c  11  Euclid:  Elements, bk xi, definitions, 14 301b; 18,21 302a; bk
xii,  prop  3-4 341a-344b; prop 7 347b-348b; prop 17 363a-367a; bk xiii,
prop   13-17  381a-393a  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,
definitions, 5-6 404a; prop 23-32 419a-

[574b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3d(2)  to 4a 424b; prop 35-41 427a-431b / Conoids and
Spheroids,  452a-455a;  prop  19-20  468b 469b 33 Pascal: Equilibrium of
Liquids,   395a-b  34  Huygens:  Light,  ch  v,  603b-604b  4.  Discrete
quantities:   number   and  numbering  7  Plato:  Parmenides,  496a-d  8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[4
b23~36] 9a-b;
[5*24-36] 9c-d / Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch 2
[72*22-24] 98d / Physics, bk hi, ch 7 [207b i-i4]
285d-286a; bk iv, ch ii
[2i9b2-8]
299b;
[220*21-24]
300a; ch 12
[220*27-32]
300b; ch 14
[223*21-25]
303a / Metaphysics, bk viii, ch 3 [i043b33-i044*i4] 568b-d; bk x, ch 1
[1053*24-31] 579d-580a; ch
3
[1054*20-29]
581a; ch 6
[io56b32-io57*7] 584b; bk
xiii,  ch 6-9 611d-618c; bk xiv 619b,d-626d 11 Euclid: Elements, bk vti,
definitions,  1-2  127a  11  Archimedes:  Sand-  Reckoner  520a-526b  11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i, 811d-812b; 813d-814b 17 Plotinus: Fifth
Ennead,  tr v, ch 4-5, 230b-231a / Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-5 253b-254d;
tr ii, ch 13 276a-c; tr vi 310d321b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
19  76a-b  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 5, a 5, ans 26c-27c; q 30, a 3 169b-170c; q 85, a
8,  rep  2  460b-461b;  q  118,  a  2,  rep 2 601c603b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 52, a 1, ans 15d-18a 33 Pascal: Arithmetical
Triangle,  455a-456b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch xvi
165c-167c 53 James: Psychology, 874b-876b 4a. The kinds of numbers: odd-
even,  squaretriangular, prime-composite 7 Plato: Euthyphro, 196d-197a /
Phaedo,  244c-d  /  Gorgias,  254a-c  / Parmenides, 496a-d / Theaetetus,
515b-c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 13
[96*34^2] 131c /
Topics, bk hi, ch 6 [i2ob36] 168c; bk vi, ch 4
[i42b6-io]
196a; ch ii
[149*29-37]
203c-d / Sophistical Refutations, ch 13
[i73b8-io] 239a
/  Metaphysics, bk v, ch 14 [io20b2-8] 541d 11 Euclid: Elements, bk vti,
definitions,  6-14  127a-b;  16-19 127b; 21-22 128a; prop i 128a-b; prop
21-32 139b-144b; bk viii, prop 5 154b-155a; prop 9 157a-158a; prop 11-12
159b-160b;  prop 14-27 161b-170a; bk ix, prop 1-10 171a-176b; prop 16-17
182a-b;  prop  20-36  183b-190b;  bk  x, prop 28, lemma 1-2 213a-214b 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i, 814b-821d; bk 11, 831d-841c 28 Galileo:
Two New Sciences, first day, 144b-d

[575a]
4£  to  5b  33  Pascal:  Arithmetical  Triangle,  455a-456a; 470b-473b /
Correspondence  with  Fermat,  486b  4b. The relations of numbers to one
anojiierr multiples and fractions 7 Plato: Gorgias, 254a-c / Theaetetus,
515b-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 8
[2i5b i2-i9J
295b / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 15
[i020b261021*14] 542a-c
11  Euclid: Elements, bk vii-viii 127a-170a esp bk vii, definitions, 3-5
127a,  15,20  127b;  bk  ix,  prop  1-19  171a-183b; prop 35 188b189a 11
Archimedes:  Conoids  and  Spheroids,  lemma  455b-456a; lemma to prop 2
456b-457b  / Spirals, prop io-ii 488a-489b / Sand- Reckoner 520a-526b 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk i-ii, 821d831d; bk 11, 841c-848d 16 Kepler:
Harmonies  of  the World, 1012b1014b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first
day,  144b-145a;  second  day,  193b-c 33 Pascal: Arithmetical Triangle,
447a-454b; 456b-460a; 468b-473b / Correspondence with Fermat, 477b-478a;
484b-485a; 486b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 212d-213a 4c. The number series as
a  continuum  11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  v, definitions, 5 81a; BK VII,
DEFINITIONS,  20  127b;  BK X, PROP 5-9 195a-198b 31 Descartes: Geometry
295a-353b  esp  bk  i,  295a-298b  33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration,
434b439b  passim  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  ii,  lemma 2 168a169b 45
Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat  169a-251b  passim 5. Physical quantities 5a.
Space: the matrix of figures and distances 7 Plato: Timaeus, 456a-458a 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5*6-23] 9b-c /
Physics,  bk  iv,  ch 1-9 287a-297c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[418-448]  6b-c; [951-1007] 12d-13b 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch
ii,  286d287a  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a 2, rep 1,3
35c-36b  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 48 HOd-110a 31 Descartes:
Rules,  xiv  28a-33b  /  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a / Objections and
Replies,   169c-170a;  231a-b  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  370a;  372a-373a  /
Geometrical Demonstration, 434a-439b 34 Newton: Principles, definitions,
schol

[575b]
Chapter  76: QUANTITY 541 8b-13a esp 8b-9a, 12a-b; bk hi, general schol,
370a-b  / Optics, bk hi, 542b-543a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  xv  162b-165c  passim  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 110-117
434b-436a;  sect  123-132  437c-439c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23a-26b;
28b-33d; 160b163a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 249a-251b passim 53 James:
Psychology,  399a;  548b-552a  esp  548b-549a;  626b; 877b 5b. Time: the
number  of  motion  7  Plato:  Timaeus, 450c-451d / Parmenides, 505a-b 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5*6-14] 9bc
/ Physics, bk iv, ch 10-14 297c-304a,c; bk vi 312b,d-325d passim, esp ch
1-2 312b,d-315d / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 10
[337*22-34] 439b-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 13
[1020*25-33]
541c; bk xii, ch 6
[io7i b6-i2]
601b  / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2 [452b 7-29] 694b-695a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk vi, sect 15 275a-b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 905a-907a;
bk  v, 979b-985b / Harmonies of the World, 1019b1020b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead, tr vii 119b-129a passim, esp ch 8-10 123b- 126a / Fourth Ennead,
tr  iv,  ch  15  165c-d  /  Sixth  Ennead, tr 1, ch 4-5 253b-254d; ch 16
260d-261c;   tr  in,  ch  11,  286d-287a;  ch  22,  294c  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk xi, par 12-40 92b-99a / City of God, bk xi, ch 6 325c-d;
bk  xii,  ch 15 351b-352d passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
7, a 3, rep 4 32c-33c; q 10, a i, ans 40d-41d; aa 4-6 43b-46d; q 53, a 3
283b-284d; q 57, a 3, rep 2 297b-298a; q 63, a 6, rep 4 330c-331c; q 66,
a  4,  rep 4 348d-349d; part i-ii, q 31, a 2, ans and rep 1 753c-754a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 113, a 7, rep 5 366a-367c; part
hi suppl, q 84, a 3 985d-989b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxvii
[106-120] 148b-c
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day, 201a-202a 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  48 HOd111a; bk 11, aph 46 177c-179a 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies, HOd-110a; 213bc 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[577-591]  187b188a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical  Demonstration,  432b433b;
434a-439b passim 34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol 8b13a esp 8b,
9b-10a,  12a-b;  bk  i, prop 1-3 and schol 32b-35b; prop 4, corol vi-vii
36a;  prop  10,  corol  ii  42a; prop 15 46b-47a; bk in, phenomenon i-ii
272a-273b; phenomenon iv-vi 274a-275a

[576a]
542  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5. Physical quantities. 5b. Time: the number of
motion.) 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv 155b-162a esp sect
22  159d; ch xv 162b165c passim 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 97-98
431d-432a  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 124-125 506a-507a
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  292a-293b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23a-24a;
26b-33d  esp  27a;  72c-76c;  130b-133c  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,
249a-251b  passim  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xi, 469a-c 53 James:
Psychology,  398a-408a passim, esp 399a-b, 407a-408a 5c. The quantity of
motion: momentum, velocity, acceleration 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch
8
[215*242i6a2i] 295a-d; ch
ii
[219*10-13] 298d-299a;
bk  v,  ch  4  [228a20-b i2] 309b-c; bk vi 312b,d325d passim, esp ch 1-2
312b,d-315d;  bk  vii,  ch  4  330d-333a;  bk  viii,  ch  8  348b-352a /
Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6
[1016*4-7]
536b-c;  CH  13  [1020*25-33]  541c;  BK  X,  CH I [l052b24~ 31] 579b 12
Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk ii [294-307] 18d-19a 17 Plotinus: Sixth
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4-5  253b254d;  ch  16 260d-261c 19 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 7, a 3, rep 4 32c-33c; q 25, a 2, rep 3 144c145b
28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, first day, 166d-168a; third day, 197bc;
200a-207d; 209a-210c; 224b-225d; fourth day, 240a-d; 243d-249b 30 Bacon:
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  35,  163ac;  aph  48 179d-188b 34 Newton:
Principles,  def ii 5b; def vii-viii 7a-8a; law i-ii 14a-b; corol i 15a;
corol hi 16b-17b; laws of motion, schol, 20a22a; bk i, lemma 10 28b-29a;
lemma ii, schol, 31b-32a; prop i, corol i 33a / Optics, bk in, 540a-541b
34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 558b-563b passim 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch  xviii, sect 2 174a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv,
div  27,  460c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-c; 470d-471a; bk
xiv, 589d 5d. Mass: its relation to weight 7 Plato: Timaeus, 462d-463c 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 9 296b-297c / Heavens, bk i, ch 6
[273*22-274*18]
364c365b; bk in, ch 2
[30i*2i-b i8] 392c-393a;
3K iv, ch 2 399d-401c

[576b]
5c  to  6  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk i [358-369] 5c; bk 11
[80-108]  16a-b;  [294-296]  18d  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,  970b 17
Plotinus:  Second  Ennead, tr vii, ch 1-2 62d-64b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
bk  vi,  115d-116a  28  Galileo:  Two New Sciences, first day, 158b-c 30
Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 24, 154d-155a; aph 35, 163c-d; aph 36,
166b-c;  aph 40, 171d-172b; aph 48, 179d-180a 34 Newton: Principles, def
i  5a;  bk  ii,  prop  24  203a-204a;  bk  hi,  prop 6 279b-281b; prop 8
282b-283b;  prop  20  291b-294b  45  Fourier:  Theory of Heat, 249a-251b
passim  45  Faraday  :  Researches  in  Electricity, 632a 5e. Force: its
measure and the measure of its effect 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 5
333a-d; bk viii, ch 10
[266*25-267*21] 353c-354d
/  Heavens,  bk  hi,  ch  2 [3oi b2~32] 392d-393b 9 Aristotle: Motion of
Animals,  ch 3 [699*27b i2] 234b-c 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 938b-939a;
bk  v, 969a-971b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 105, a 4, rep 1
541c-542a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 84, a 3, rep 2
985d-989b  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  26d-40b passim; 54d-55c 28
Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 202d-203a 31 Descartes: Rules, ix,
15c  /  Objections  and Replies, 23 lc- 23 2a 34 Newton: Principles, def
iii-viii  5b-8a; definitions, schol, lla-13a; laws of motion 14a-24a; bk
i,  lemma  10  28b-29a;  prop 1-17 and schol 32b-50a esp prop 6 37b-38b;
prop  70-93  and  schol 131b-152b; bk in, prop 1-9 276a-284a esp prop 6,
corol  v 281b; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk in, 531b; 541b-542a
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity, 338a-b; 514d-532a; 646b-655d;
670a-673d;  817a-818d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 570d; epilogue
ii, 678a-b 6. The measurements of quantities: the relation of magnitudes
and multitudes; the units of measurement 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch
12  [22ob  i5-3i] 300c-d; ch 14 [223b i2-224*i] 303c-d / Metaphysics, bk
in,  ch  2  [997^5-33]  516c;  bk  v, ch 6 [ioi6bi8-3i] 537b; bk x, ch i
[io52bi5~ 1053*31] 579a-580a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 5
[ii33*5-b29]
380d-381c 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch 4 253b254b

[577a]
6a to 7 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 5, rep 2 17c-18b; q
10,  a  6,  ans  and  rep 4 45c46d; q 66, a 4, rep 3 348d-349d 30 Bacon:
Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 45-47 176a-179c ^= - 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv,
31b-33b  / Geometry, bk 1, 296a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xvi,  sect 3-4 165d-166b; sect 8 167c; ch xvii, sect 9 170a-b; bk iv, ch
ii,  sect  10  311bc  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 14b 42 Kant:
Judgement,  497a-498d  esp  498b-d  45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
part  hi,  87d-88a  45  Fourier:  Theory  of Heat, 249b-251b 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity,  820d-821c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
additions, 40 122d-123b 50 Marx: Capital, 20b; 44a 53 James: Psychology,
346a-347a;   400a-408a;   551a-b;   567a-570a   6a.   Commensurable  and
incommensurable  magnitudes  7 Plato: Theaetetus, 515b-c / Laws, bk vii,
729bc 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 23
[41*23-27] 58a
/ Physics, bk vii, ch 4 330d333a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[983*1 1-20]
501b-c; bk x, ch 1
[io53ai4-i8] 579c-d
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  v,  definitions,  5  81a; bk x 191a-300b esp
definitions  i,  1,3  191a,  prop  2  192a-193a,  prop  5-9 195a-198b 11
Archimedes:  Equilibrium  of Planes, bk i, prop 6-7 503b-504b 16 Kepler:
Harmonies  of the World, 1012a-b; 1013a-b 6b. Mathematical procedures in
measurement: superposition, congruence; ratio and proportion; parameters
and  coordinates  11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  i,  postulates,  4, common
notions,  4 2a; prop 4 4a-b; prop 8 6b-7a; prop 26 16a-17b; bk v 81a-98b
esp  definitions,  5  81a,  7  81b;  bk  vi,  prop  i  99a100a; prop 4-7
102a-105b;  bk  vii,  definitions,  20 127b; prop 2-3 128b-130b; prop 34
146a-147a; prop 36-39 147b-149b; bk x, prop 3-4 193a-195a 11 Archimedes:
Measurement  ofa  Circle, prop 3 448b-451b / Equilibrium of Planes, bk i
502a-509a / Sand-Reckoner 520a-526b / Floating Bodies, bk i 538a-542a 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest, bk i, 14a-24b; 26a-28b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of
the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  532b-556b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
second  day,  178c-179c  31  Descartes:  Geometry,  bk  hi, 332b-341b 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  i,  lemma  i  25a;  lemma 28-PROP 31 and schol
76b-81a; bk hi, lemma 5 338b-339a

[577b]
Chapter  76:  QUANTITY  543  6c.  Physical  procedures  in  measurement:
experiment  and  observation;  clocks,  rules,  balances 5 Aristophanes:
Birds  [992-1020] 555a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49d-50a; 70b-c; bk
iv,  139c  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk hi, 421b-c; bk v, 487d 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2 [997^733] 516c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest,
bk  i,  24b-26a;  bk  ii,  34b-39b;  bk  hi,  77a-86b;  104b-107a; bk v,
143a-144a;  165a-176a  esp  166a-167b  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres, bk i, 510b; bk ii, 558b-559b; 567b576a; 586b-589a; bk
hi,  646a-652b;  672a674b;  bk  iv,  705a-714b esp 705a-706a 28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  bk  iv, 85c-89c; bk v, 92a-95a 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day,  136d-137c;  148d-149c;  164a-166c;  167a-168a;  third  day,
207d-208c  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the Heart, 286c-288c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk i, aph 109, 129b; bk 11, aph 39, 170b-c; aph 44-48 175d188b
passim  33  Pascal:  Great  Experiment  382a-389b 34 Newton: Principles,
definitions,  schol,  9b10a;  laws  of  motion,  schol,  20a-22a; bk ii,
GENERAL  SCHOL  211b-219a;  PROP  40,  SCHOL  239a-246b;  bk hi, prop 20
291b-294b;  lemma  4  333a-337b  34  Huygens:  Light, ch i, 554b-557b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv, sect 17-21 158a-159d 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv, 169a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-c 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part  i,  14ac;  22d-24a; 33b-36a;
41a-44d; part hi, 87d-90a; 91a-95a; 96b-103b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
175b;   184b185b  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  277d-279a;
316b-318c;  366d-371d;  444a-451a; 465d467a,c; 768d-773d; 778b,d-788c 53
James:  Psychology,  56a-57b; 348a-355b; 401a-404a 7. Infinite quantity:
the   actual   infinite  and  the  potentially  infinite  quantity;  the
mathematical  and  physical infinite of the great and the small 7 Plato:
Parmenides, 495d-497b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i85 a28-b4]
260a-b; bk hi, ch i [200b i5-i9] 278a; ch 4-8 280c-286d / Heavens, bk 1,
ch  5-7  362c-367b / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 3 [318 s 13-24]
414c-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch 2 [994 b 23-27] 513a-b; bk ix, ch 6
[i048b9-i7]  574a;  bk  xi,  ch 10 [io66a35-b22] 594d-595b; bk xii, ch 7
[1073^-13] 603a-b

[578a]
544  THE  GREAT IDEAS (7. Infinite quantity: the actual infinite and the
potentially infinite quantity: the mathematical and physical infinite of
the great and the small.) 11 Euclid: Elements, bk ix, prop 20 183b-184a;
bk  x,  prop  1  191b-192a  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and Cylinder, bk i,
assumptions,   5  404b  /  Spirals,  484b  /  SandReckoner  520a-526b  /
Quadrature   ofthe   Parabola,  527a-b  /  Method  569a-592a  passim  11
Apollonius:  Conies, bk ii, prop 14 691b-692a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic,
bk  i,  812a; bk ii, 829b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [551-634]
7d-8d;  [951-1113]  12d-14d  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  v,  973a-975a 17
Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vi,  ch 2-3 311b312b; ch 17, 319d-320a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God, bk xi, ch 5 324d325c; bk xii, ch 18 354b-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 7 31a-34c; part i-ii, q 1, a 4, rep
2  612a-613a  20  Aquinas  : Summa Theologica, part hi, q 7, a 12, rep 1
754c-755c;  q  10,  a 3, rep 1-2 769d-771b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day,  139c-153a  passim,  esp  145b-146c,  150d-151c;  third day,
201a-202a; 205b-d; 224b-c CROSS-REFERENCES

[578b]
31  Descartes:  Objections and Replies, 112b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop 15, schol 360b-361d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 121 195a; 231-233, 213b214a
/ Geometrical Demonstration, 434a439b 34 Newton: Principles, bk i, lemma
i-ii  and  schol  25a-32a  esp  lemma  ii,  schol, 31a-b; bk 11, lemma 2
168a-169b;  bk hi, general schol, 370a-b / Optics, bk hi, 543a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 4 149b; sect 6 149c-d; ch xiv,
sect  2627  160c-161a;  SECT3ol61c-d;  ch xv, sect 2-4 162c-163b; sect 9
164b-d;  ch  xvi, sect 8ch xvii, sect 22 167c-174a esp ch xvii, sect 7-8
169b-170a, sect 12-21 170d-173d; ch xxix, sect 16 237b-238a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  123-132 437c-439c 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  xii,  div  124  506a-c  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 24d; 26d; 130b-133c;
135a-137a,c;  152a-d;  158a-159d;  160b-163a  /  Judgement, 498b-501b 43
Federalist: number 31, 103d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 17
119a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d; epilogue 11, 695b-c For:
Discussions  relevant  to the problem of the existence of quantities and
of  their  relation  to  matter,  substance,  and  body,  see  Being 7b,
7b(5)~7b(6);   Matter  2a;  Quality  3d.  Discussions  relevant  to  the
conception   of   the  categories  as  transcendental  concepts  of  the
understanding,  see  Form  ic;  Judgment  8c-8d;  Memory and Imagination
6c(i); Mind ie(i); Principle 2b(3). Other considerations of the relation
between  quantity  and  quality,  see  Mechanics  4b;  Quality  3a.  The
conception  of  equality  and  inequality  as the basic relation between
quantities,  see Same and Other 3d; and for the general theory of ratios
and  proportions, see Mathematics 4c; Relation 53(3); Same and Other 3b.
The division of quantities into magnitudes and multitudes, or continuous
and   discontinuous   quantities,  see  Mathematics  2c;  One  and  Many
3a(2)~3a(4); and for the conception of space and time as magnitudes, see
Mechanics  3a;  Space  ia;  Time  i. Other discussions of magnitudes and
numbers  as  the  objects of geometry and arithmetic, see Mathematics 2;
One  and  Many  2a;  Space  3D-3C;  Time  6c.  Other discussions of such
physical  quantities  as  space,  time,  motion,  mass,  and  force, see
Astronomy  7; Change 5a~5b; Mechanics 5d~5e(2), 6b-6e; Space 3d; Time 4.
The  general  theory  of  measurement, see Mathematics 5a; Mechanics 3a;
Physics  4d.  Other  discussions  of infinite quantity, see Infinity ib,
3a~3e; Space 3a; Time 2b

[579a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below  are  works not indudedTmGreat Boo^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Augustine. On Music Descartes. The Principles of Philosophy,
part  ii,  8-9  Hobbes. Concerning Body, part ii, ch 12, 14; part hi, ch
17-20,  23-24  Newton.  The  Method  of  Fluxions  and Infinite Series .
Universal Arithmetic Berkeley. A Defence of Free Thinking in Mathematics
Kant.  Metaphysical  Foundations of Natural Science, div 1 Hegel. Science
of  Logic,  vol  i,  bk i, sect ii-iii II. Sextus Empiricus. Against the
Physicists,  bk ii, ch 4 Oreme. Treatise on the Breadth of Forms Suarez.
Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  iv  (9),  xm  (14), xiv, xvi, xviii (3-6),
xxviii   (1),   xxxixXLI   Leibnitz.   New   Essays   Concerning   Human
Understanding,  bk  11,  ch  16  T. Reid. An Essay on Quantity Voltaire.
"Number,"  "Numbering,"  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary Gauss. General
Investigations  of  Curved  Surfaces  Whewell.  The  Philosophy  of  the
Inductive  Sciences,  vol 1, bk 11, ch 9-10 Riemann. Uber die Hypothesen
welche  der  Geometrie  zu  Grunde  liegen  (The Hypotheses of Geometry)
Jevons.  On  a General System of Numerically Definite Reasoning Dedekind.
Essays on the Theory of Numbers

[579b]
Chapter  76:  QUANTITY  545  Clifford.  The  Common  Sense  ofthe  Exact
Sciences,  ch  1,  3 Helmholtz. Counting and Measuring BOSANQUET. Logic,
VOL  I,  CH  3-4  C.  S.  Peirce. Collected Papers, vol hi, par 252-288,
554-562  McLellan  and  Dewey. The Psychology of Number Poincare. Science
and  Hypothesis,  part i Cassirer. Substance and Function, part i, ch 2;
sup  1  L.  W.  Reid.  The  Elements  ofthe  Theory  of Algebraic Numbers
Whitehead  and  Russell. Principia Mathematica, part in, sect a, b; part
VI  B. Russell. Principles of Mathematics, ch 11-12, 14-15, 19-22, 20-36
.  Our Knowledge of the External World, v . Introduction to Mathematical
Philosophy,  ch  1-2,  7-8,  io-n N. R. Campbell. Physics; the Elements,
part  ii W. E. Johnson. Logic, part ii, ch 7 G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of
Science,  essay  i  J.  B.  S.  Haldane.  "On  Being the Right Size," in
Possible  Worlds  and  Other Essays Eddington. The Nature ofthe Physical
World,  ch  12 Dickson. Introduction to the Theory of Numbers Whitehead.
An  Introduction  to  Mathematics,  ch  6-17 . An Enquiry Concerning the
Principles  of Natural  Knowledge,  ch 9-12 . The Principle of Relativity
with  Applications to Physical Science, ch 3 . Process and Reality, part
iv  Nagel.  On  the  Logic of Measurement Tarski. Introduction to Logic,
part ii

[580a]
the  tradition  of  western  thought, certain IN verbal expressions have
become  shorthand  for  the fundamental ideas in the discussion of which
they happen to be so often repeated. This may be due to the influence of
the  textbooks used in the schools, which copy one from another and hand
down  an  easily  recited  jargon from generation to generation. In most
cases  the  great  books  themselves  are  probably the original source,
though they have usually suffered over-simplification or distortion when
their  insights  are thus transmitted. "Featherless biped" and "rational
animal"  are,  for  example, stock phrases to illustrate the idea that a
definition consists of genus and differentia— the class to which man, in
this  instance,  belongs and the attribute which differentiates him from
other  members  of  this class. Statements such as "the whole is greater
than  the  part"  or  "two  plus  two  equals  four"  similarly serve to
represent  axioms  or at least statements which, whether or not they can
be  proved,  are usually accepted as true without proof. In the field of
reasoning, the familiar verbal landmark is "All men are mortal, Socrates
is  a  man;  therefore,  Socrates  is mortal." Even those who have never
heard  of  syllogisms,  or  who  are  throughly  innocent of the age-old
controversies  about  the  theory  of  the  syllogism and the difference
between deduction and induction, might offer this sequence of statements
if,  pressed to say what reasoning is, they tried to answer by giving an
example.  The  example,  shopworn  though  it  is and far from being the
perfect  paradigm,  does  convey  certain  insights  into  the nature of
reasoning  which  are  generally undisputed. The word "therefore," which
connects   the   third   statement  with  the  first  two,  signifies  a
relationship  which is sometimes described in terms of cause and effect,
as by Aristotle, and

[580b]
Chapter-/-/: REASONING INTRODUCTION sometimes in terms of antecedent and
consequent,  as  by  Hobbes.  The  premises  (i.e., the statements which
precede  the "therefore") cause the conclusion, it is said. We know that
Socrates  is  mortal because we know that Socrates is a man and that all
men  are  mortal.  The premises are the cause in the sense of the reason
why  the conclusion may be regarded as true. The conclusion is also said
tofollowfrom  the  premises,  or the premises are said to imply or yield
the  conclusion.  If  the  premises  are  true,  then  the  truth of the
conclusion  can  be  inferred  or  proved.  The relationship between the
premises  and  the  conclusion  seems  to be the same whether the act of
reasoning  is  called  "proof or "inference." The distinction in meaning
between  these  two  words  seems  to  be  one of direction. We speak of
"proving"  a  conclusion  when  we  look  toward  the  premises  as  the
foundation  for  its truth; we speak of "inferring" a conclusion when we
look  toward  it  as something which can be drawn from the premises. The
words  "if  and  "then"  indicate that reasoning is a motion of the mind
from  one statement to another. Sometimes the inference is immediate, as
when  we  argue  that  if all men are mortal, then some mortals are men.
Here  only  two  propositions  are  involved, one of which is simply the
converse  of the other. Those who deny that immediate inference is truly
inference (because a proposition and its converse are merely two ways of
stating the same fact), insist that, implicitly or explicitly, reasoning
always  involves  at  least  three  statements.  In  any  case, a single
statement  like  "Socrates  is  a  man,"  or  even  a pair of statements
connected  by  "and"  rather  than  "if-then"—^., "Socrates is a man and
Socrates  is  mortal"—does  not  express  what is commonly recognized as
reasoning.  The  motion  of  reasoning  does,  however,  appear  in this
sequence of statements, "If Socrates is a 546

[581a]
man, then Socrates is mortal," even though it omits a statement that may
be  necessary  to  the  validity  of the reasoning, namely, "All men are
mortal."  ^=—=^~ Thus, the familiar grammatical distinctions of word (or
phrase),  sentence,  and  paragraph  do  not  seem  to provide a perfect
parallel  for  the  distinctions which the logicians make between terms,
propositions,  and  syllogisms. But this much is clear. Just as a single
word  or  phrase,  like  "man" or "rational animal," can never express a
proposition,  but  only  a  term,  so a simple sentence expresses only a
proposition, and never a syllogism; and a compound sentence, one made up
of  a  number  of  sentences,  expresses  a syllogism only if its verbal
construction  somehow  indicates  that they form a sequence in which one
follows  from  the others, or if they are related in such a way that the
truth  of  one is caused by the truth of the others. The chapter on Idea
(and  perhaps also the chapter on Definition) deals with that content or
act  of  the  mind—whether  a  percept  or  a  concept,  an  image or an
abstraction—which is verbally expressed in words or phrases and of which
the  term  is  the  logical representative. The chapter on Judgment (and
perhaps  also  the  chapter  on  Principle) deals with the mental act or
content  that  requires  a  sentence for its expression and is logically
represented  by  the  proposition.  Here  we  are  concerned with mental
activity which involves not only two or more ideas, but also two or more
judgments so connected that the mind passes from one to another. Whether
the  logical structure that Aristotle calls a "syllogism" represents all
forms  of  the  mental  activity  called  reasoning, is one of the great
traditional  issues.  Hume  suggests,  for  example, that animals reason
without  making use of syllogisms ; and Descartes and Locke seem to hold
that  the  highest  forms  of  thinking, such as occur in mathematics or
philosophy,  cannot  be  reduced to syllogisms, except perhaps by a tour
deforce.  We  face a different sort of problem when we compare reasoning
with  other  acts  of the mind —with conception (or the having of ideas)
and  with  judgment  (or the connecting of ideas with one another in the
manner which mediaeval writers call "composition and division"). No

[581b]
Chapter  77:  REASONING  547  one denies that reasoning is thinking, nor
does  anyone  deny  that  there  are  forms  of  thinking  which are not
reasoning,  since conceiving and judging are generally regarded as kinds
of  thinking  or  modes  of  thought.  Reasoning  is merely that mode of
thought which is a process— the going step by step from one statement to
an The  problem  which arises from the comparison of reasoning with other
modes  of  thought  turns  on  the  question  whether the mind can learn
anything without having to think rationally. Can certain things be known
by  insight  or  instinct,  by  induction  or  intuition, rather than by
reasoning?  Are  there truths which cannot be known by reasoning at all,
but  only  by some other mode of thought ? These questions in turn raise
the  problem  of the priority or superiority of such modes of thought as
do  not  consist  in  reasoning.  The theory discussed in the chapter on
Induction—  that  induction  is  prior  to  reasoning  because intuitive
generalization  from  experience  must  provide  the starting-points for
demonstration—  indicates  one  solution  of  the  problem.  Our present
concern,  however,  goes  beyond  the  issue  concerning  induction  and
deduction  to  the  most  general contrast between the intuitive and the
rational.  For  Plotinus  any  form  of  thinking—not  merely reasoning—
signifies  a deficiency or weakness. In the scale of intellectual beings
man  occupies  the  lowest  rank  because  he reasons. But even the pure
intelligences,  which know intuitively, rank below the One, because even
the simplest act of thought involves some duality of subject and object.
The One, according to Plotinus, transcends thought even as it transcends
being.  "The  super-essential,"  he says, "is the supra-cogitative." The
One  "has  no need for intellection, being always self-sufficing." Other
writers  do  not  go  as far as this. Christian theologians do, however,
contrast  the  human mind with the angelic intellect and the mind of God
by  saying  that  the latter are supra-rational, i.e., above the need to
reason.  They  do  not,  like Plotinus, hold that the transcendent being
transcends  thought  itself—  certainly  not insofar as they discuss the
divine ideas. But the kind of thinking which is not an instantaneous act
of vision or an immediate intuition involves

[582a]
548  THE  GREAT  IDEAS the mind in a process of thought, somehow akin to
change  or  motion; and this, the theologians hold, cannot take place in
any  immutable  being— the angels or God. The human intellect, according
to Aquinas, gradually comes to know the truth "by a kind of movement and
discursive  intellectual operation ... by advancing from one thing known
to  another.  But  if from the knowledge of a known principle [men] were
straightway  to  perceive  as known all its consequent conclusions, then
there  would be no place for discursiveness in the human intellect. Such
is  the  condition  of the angels, because in the truths which they know
naturally,  they  at once behold all things whatsoever that can be known
in them." That, says Aquinas, is why the angels "are called intellectual
beings" and men "are called rational." Recourse to reasoning on the part
of  men betrays "the feebleness of their intellectual light. For if they
possessed  the  fullness of intellectual light, like the angels, then in
the  first grasping of principles they would at once comprehend all that
they  implied,  by  perceiving at once whatever could be reasoned out of
them." The type of intuitive apprehension which the angels enjoy is even
more   perfectly   exemplified   in  God's  knowledge.  "In  the  divine
knowledge,"  according  to  Aquinas,  "there  is  no  discursiveness"—no
succession,  neither  the  turning  from one thought to another, nor the
advance  from  the  known to the unknown by reasoning from principles to
conclusion.   The  divine  knowledge,  Aquinas  explains,  is  a  single
allembracing  act  of vision, in which "God sees all things in one thing
alone,  which  is  Himself," and therefore "sees all things together and
not successively." Apart from participation in the vision of God through
supernatural   light,  all  human  thinking  on  the  natural  plane  is
discursive.  Even  the conception and the judgment are discursive in the
sense  that the one involves an act of abstraction or definition and the
other  involves  a composition or division of concepts. But though it is
always  discursive,  human thinking is not, according to Aquinas, always
involved  in  the  motion of reasoning, that is, the transition from one
thought to another. "Reasoning," he says, "is compared to understanding"
i.e., the act of judgment by which we

[582b]
affirm  or  deny  a  single  proposition—  "as  movement  is to rest, or
acquisition  to possession." Descartes uses the word "intuition" to name
the  way in which we know certain truths immediately and with certitude.
He  distinguishes  "intuition  from  deduction by the fact that into the
conception  of the latter there enters a certain movement or succession,
into  that  of the former there does not. . . . The first principles are
given by intuition alone, while, on the contrary, the remote conclusions
are  furnished  only by deduction." But while deduction, which Descartes
says he understands to be "all necessary inference from other facts that
are  known  with  certainty,"  supplements intuition, it is never at any
stage  of  the reasoning process independent of intuition. Not only does
intuition,  according  to  Descartes,  supply  the  first  principles or
ultimate  premises  of reasoning, but it also certifies each step in the
process. He asks us to "consider this consequence: 2 and 2 amount to the
same  as  3  and 1. Now we need to see intuitively not only that 2 and 2
make  4, and that likewise 3 and 1 make 4, but further that the third of
the  above  statements  is a necessary conclusion from these two." If in
addition  to  knowing  the  premises  by  intuition,  the  drawing  of a
conclusion  from  them  is,  as  Descartes  says,  itself  "effected  by
intuition"—  if  the  act  of  inference rests on the intuition that the
conclusion  follows  logically  from  the  premises—  in  what  way does
deduction or reasoning supplement intuition? To this question, Descartes
replies  that  though  the  mind "has a clear vision of each step in the
process,"  it  cannot  comprehend  in  one intuition all the connections
involved  in  a  long  chain  of reasoning. Only by taking the steps one
after  another  can  we  "know  that  the  last  link in a long chain is
connected  with the first, even though we do not take in by means of one
and  the  same  act  of  vision all the intermediate links on which that
connection   depends,   but  only  remember  that  we  have  taken  them
successively  under  review."  Like Descartes, Locke contrasts intuition
and  reasoning, or intuitive and demonstrative knowledge. "Sometimes the
mind perceives the agreement or disagreement of two ideas immediately by
themselves, without the interven-

[583a]
tion  of  any  other:  and  this,"  says  Locke,  "we may call intuitive
knowledge. . . . When the mind cannot so bring its ideas together, as by
their   immediate   comparison   ...  to  perceive  their  agreement  or
disagreement,  it  is  fain  by  the  intervention of other ideas ... to
discover  the  agreement  or disagreement which it searches; and this is
that  which  we call reasoning." Again like Descartes, Locke asks, "What
need  is  there  of  reason?"  It is necessary, he thinks, "both for the
enlargement  of  our knowledge and regulating our assent . . . Sense and
intuition  reach  but  very  little of the way. The greatest part of our
knowledge  depends  upon deductions and intermediate ideas; and in those
cases  where  we are fain to substitute assent instead of knowledge, and
take  propositions  for  true without being certain they are so, we have
need   to   find   out,  examine,  and  compare  the  grounds  of  their
probability."  But  though  reasoning enlarges our knowledge beyond what
can   be   known  intuitively,  reasoning  produces  certain  knowledge,
according to Locke, only if "every step in reasoning . . . has intuitive
certainty.  ...  To  make  anything  a demonstration, it is necessary to
perceive  the  immediate agreement of the intervening ideas, whereby the
agreement  or  disagreement  of the two ideas under examination (whereof
the  one is always the first, and the other the last, in the account) is
found."  On this view of reasoning, nothing can be known demonstratively
or  by  proof unless some things can be known intuitively, i.e., without
inference  or  proof. Locke and Descartes seem to agree with Aquinas and
Aristotle that demonstration depends upon indemonstrable truths, whether
these  are  called  axioms, immediate propositions, first principles, or
self-evident  maxims.  Locke  and Descartes, on the one hand, stress the
point  that  in  reasoning  the  logical connection between premises and
conclusion  is  also  indemonstrable  and must be intuitively perceived.
Aquinas  and  Aristotle, on the other, repeatedly observe that the truth
of  the conclusion is implicitly contained in the truth of the premises,
so  that  the  advance which reasoning appears to make from the known to
the  unknown  consists  in  coming  to  know  actually  what  is already
potentially  known.  Nevertheless  they,  unlike  Descartes  and  Locke,
maintain

[583b]
Chapter  77: REASONING 549 that reasoning extends knowledge, even though
it  may not be the method of initial discovery. A somewhat contrary view
seems  to  be  taken  by  Hume.  If  the objects under consideration are
matters  of  fact  rather  than the relations between our own ideas, the
kind  of  reasoning which goes from premises to conclusion avails not at
all.  The  beliefs we hold about such matters, according to Hume, result
from  mental  operations  which are "a species of natural instinct . . .
which no reasoning or process of thought is able either to produce or to
prevent.   "  What  he  calls  "experimental  reasoning"  or  "reasoning
concerning  matters  of  fact"  is  founded,  he  says, "on a species of
Analogy,  which  leads us to expect from any cause the same events which
we  have observed to result from similar causes." Not only men, but also
animals  reason in this way. But Hume thinks "it is impossible that this
inference  of  the  animal  can be founded on any process of argument or
reasoning  by  which  he  concludes  that  like  events must follow like
objects.  .  .  . The experimental reasoning itself, which we possess in
common  with  beasts, and on which the whole conduct of life depends, is
nothing  but  a species of instinct or mechanical power, that acts in us
unknown to ourselves; and in its chief operations is not directed by any
such relations or comparisons of ideas, as are the proper objects of our
intellectual  faculThe  foregoing  considerations  indicate  how diverse
theories  of  the  role  of reasoning arise from diverse theories of the
nature  and  kinds  of  knowledge  in  animals,  men,  angels,  and God.
According  as  various distinctions are made between human knowledge and
opinion,  or between the way in which different objects can be known, or
between   speculative   and  practical  interests,  so,  too,  different
formulations   are   given  of  the  nature  of  reasoning.  Aristotle's
distinction,   for   example,  between  scientific  and  dialectical  or
rhetorical  reasoning  turns  upon  his  understanding of the difference
between  the  objects  of  certain knowledge and the objects of probable
opinion.  This  difference, he says, makes it "equally foolish to accept
probable reasoning from a mathematician and to demand from a rhetorician
scientific proofs."

[584a]
550 THE GREAT IDEAS Hume's distinction between a priori and a posteriori
reasoning  i.e.,  between  reasoning  from principles and reasoning from
experience—depends  upon  his  understanding  of  what  matters  must be
submitted  to experience and of the manner in which experience generates
belief.  The  distinction  which  Aquinas  makes  between demonstrations
propter  quid  and  demonstrations  quia—  i.e.,  between  proving  what
something   is  from  its  causes  and  proving  that  it  is  from  its
effects—depends upon his understanding of the difference between essence
and  existence  as  objects of rational knowledge. To take an example in
the opposite vein, Locke's theory that the same type of demonstration is
possible  in both mathematics and the moral sciences, seems to rest upon
his  view  that  all  knowledge  consists in the comparison of ideas. In
contrast  to this, other theories, which hold that the mode of reasoning
differs  in different disciplines (especially in mathematics and morals,
or  in  metaphysics  and  the  natural sciences), seem to arise from the
contrary  view  that,  in these different fields of inquiry, the objects
and  conditions  of  knowledge are different. Sometimes a distinction in
the  modes  of  reasoning is based upon the same considerations, but the
distinction itself is expressed by different writers in different terms.
The role of causes in reasoning appears to underlie Aquinas' distinction
between  a priori and a posteriori reasoning, or reasoning from cause to
effect  as opposed to reasoning from effect to cause. "Demonstration can
be made in two ways," he writes; "one is through the cause and is called
a  priori, and this is to argue from what is prior absolutely. The other
is  through the effect, and is called a demonstration a posteriori; this
is to argue from what is prior relatively only to us." Descartes appears
to  make  a parallel distinction, though he makes it in different terms.
"The  method  of  proof  is  twofold," he says, "one being analytic, the
other  synthetic.  Analysis  shows  the  true  way  by which a thing was
methodically  discovered,  as it were effect from cause. . . . Synthesis
employs  an  opposite procedure, one in which the search goes as it were
from effect to cause." For both mathematical and metaphysical reasoning,
Descartes  prefers  the  analytic  to the synthetic method. According to
Newton, the method of analy-

[584b]
sis,  in  natural science as well as mathematics, consists in going from
effects  to  causes,  while  the method of synthesis goes from causes to
effects. Newton relates the difference between analysis and synthesis to
the  difference  between  inductive and deductive reasoning. This way of
distinguishing  between  inductive  and deductive reasoning, in terms of
going  from effects to causes or from causes to effects, would also seem
to  be  related  to  the distinction Aquinas makes between demonstration
quia  (i.e.,  reasoning  which  proves  only  that something exists) and
demonstration  propter quid (i.e., reasoning which proves what something
is—  its  nature or properties). The proof that God exists is, according
to  Aquinas,  a demonstration quia; it is also a posteriori reasoning or
reasoning from effect to cause. But he would not call it "inductive." In
one passage at least, he seems to regard induction as the method whereby
we  can come to some knowledge of what God is. "From natural things," he
writes,  "one  does  not  come by a demonstration of reason to know non-
natural  things,  but  by the induction of reason one may know something
above  nature,  since  the  natural  bears  a certain resemblance to the
supernatural." This sense of the word "induction," however, is like that
in  which  Aristotle  opposes  induction  to reasoning, not like that in
which   he  distinguishes  between  inductive  and  deductive  reasoning
according  to  the  order  of  terms  in  the  inductive  and  deductive
syllogism.   In  the  ordinary  deductive  syllogism,  the  middle  term
establishes  the  connection between the two extreme terms (for example,
'being  a  man' establishes the connection between 'Socrates' and 'being
mortal').  But "the syllogism which springs out of induction," according
to Aristotle, establishes "a relation between one extreme and the middle
by  means  of the other extreme, e.g., if B is the middle term between A
and  C,  it consists in proving through C that A belongs to B." Starting
from  C  (particular  cases  of  long-lived animals, such as man, horse,
mule),  we  can  argue  inductively  from the fact that these long-lived
animals  are  bileless,  to  the  general  connection  between  B (being
bileless)  and  A (being long-lived). Such reasoning is valid, Aristotle
adds,  only  if  we  can treat C "as made up of all the particulars; for
induction

[585a]
proceeds  through an enumeration of all the cases. Different theories of
definition  alse-affect  the  place  which  is assigned to definition in
reasoning.   Hobbes,  for  example,  regards  reasoning  as  a  kind  of
calculation  with  names, which wholly depends upon the determination of
their  meanings.  The  operations  of addition and subtraction when done
with  words  rather  than  with  numbers  are,  he thinks, equivalent to
"conceiving  of  the  consequence  of the names of all the parts, to the
name  of  the whole; or from the names of the whole and one part, to the
name  of  the other part." It is "nothing but reckoning (that is, adding
and  subtracting)  of  the  consequences  of general names agreed upon."
Aristotle,  with the theory that definitions state the essential natures
of  things,  not just the meanings of words, holds that a definition may
be  "the conclusion of a demonstration giving essential nature," as well
as  "an  indemonstrable  statement  of  essential nature." In the latter
case,   the  definition  functions  as  a  principle  in  demonstration.
According  to William James, reasoning, like definition, is "a selective
activity  of the mind" which serves an individual's interest or purpose.
"My  thinking,"  he says, "is first, last, and always for the sake of my
doing.  .  .  . Reasoning is always for a subjective interest, to attain
some  particular  conclusion,  or to gratify some special curiosity." It
makes  no  difference whether the interest is practical or the curiosity
speculative.  The  process  of  reasoning  will  be the same, though the
element  which  provides a solution to the problem in any emergency will
be  called  a "'reason' if the emergency be theoretical, a 'means' if it
be practical." Those writers who, like Aristotle and Aquinas, regard the
speculative  and  the  practical  as  distinct  though related orders of
thought  and  knowledge,  seem to think that practical reasoning has its
own  syllogistic  form.  Practical  deliberations for them are different
from  theoretic demonstrations. The conclusion of theoretic reasoning is
an  assertion  that  something  is  either  true  or  false, whereas the
conclusion  of  practical  deliberation  is a judgment that something is
good  or evil, and therefore should either be done or avoided. According
to Aristotle, prac-

[585b]
Chapter  77:  REASONING  551 tical reasoning of the sort which ends in a
decision  that  leads to action, takes the form of a syllogism which has
one universal and one particular premise. The major premise is a general
rule  of  conduct, the minor premise a particular perception of fact. In
the  example  Aristotle  gives  of  the  practical  syllogism, the major
premise  is  the  rule that everything sweet ought to be tasted, and the
minor  premise  is  the  perception that this particular thing is sweet.
These two premises lead to the practical conclusion that this particular
thing  ought  to  be  tasted.  Not  all practical reasoning, however, is
concerned  with  reaching  decisions  or  prompting action in particular
cases.  The  rules  of  conduct  which  decisions  and actions apply may
themselves  be the products of practical reasoning. The process by which
general  rules  are  derived  from  even  more  general  principles— the
precepts  of  law or morality— involves, according to Aquinas, a form of
thinking distinctly different from the theoretic or speculative sort. He
points  out in his Treatise on Law that we are able to formulate certain
practical  rules  only  by making particular determinations of universal
principles,  not  by  drawing  deductions  from  them. "Something may be
derived  from  the  natural  law  in  two ways," he writes: "first, as a
conclusion  from  premises; secondly, by way of determination of certain
generalities.  The  first  way is like that by which, in the speculative
sciences,  demonstrated conclusions are drawn from the principles; while
the  second  mode is likened to that whereby, in the arts, general forms
are  particularized as to details." Of these two ways of thinking in the
field  of  law, it would appear that it is only the second type which is
peculiar  to  the  practical  as  opposed  to the speculative order. The
discussion  of  reasoning in relation to knowledge, opinion, and action,
or   in   relation   to  different  disciplines  and  sciences,  usually
presupposes a theory of the form which reasoning takes regardless of its
subject  matter  or  use.  This  fact is most explicitly attested by the
order  of  three  great  books  concerned  with  reasoning.  Aristotle's
Posterior  Analytics  deals  with  the  theory  of  demonstration in the
sciences.  His  Topics  deals  with  the  theory of probable argument or
reasoning in the sphere of opinion.

[586a]
552  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Both  are  preceded by his Prior Analytics which
treats  of the syllogism in terms of its purely formal structure and its
various  forms.  In  the  later  tradition,  the distinction between the
problems   of  the  Prior  and  the  Posterior  Analytics  comes  to  be
represented  by  the  separation  between  what  are called "formal" and
"material"  logic.  The  formal  analysis  of  reasoning  centers on the
problem  of its cogency. Quite apart from any consideration of the truth
of  its premises or conclusions, reasoning is true or false according as
it  is  valid  or invalid on purely logical grounds. From premises which
are  in fact false, a conclusion, which may be either true or false, can
be  truly  inferred if the structure of the reasoning is formally valid—
that  is,  if  the  form  of  the premises stands in a certain logically
prescribed  relation to the form of the conclusion. The logical problem,
then,  is to prescribe the formal relationships among propositions which
permit  valid  inference  from  certain  propositions to others, without
regard  to  the  content  of  the  propositions  or their truth in fact.
Denning a syllogism as "discourse in which, certain things being stated,
something  other  than  what  is  stated follows of necessity from their
being  so," Aristotle says, "I call that a perfect syllogism which needs
nothing  other  than what has been stated to make plain what necessarily
follows;  a  syllogism  is  imperfect,  if  it  needs either one or more
propositions  which  are  indeed the necessary consequences of the terms
set  down,  but  have  not been expressly stated as premises." Using the
letters  S  and  P  to  symbolize  the  subject  and  predicate  of  the
conclusion,  and  the  letter  M  to symbolize the middle term, the term
which  appears  in  the  premises  but  not in the conclusion, Aristotle
states  the  form of a perfect syllogism in the following manner: "All M
is  P,  all  S  is  M;  therefore  all  S  is  P."  The  first  of these
propositions, the one which contains the predicate of the conclusion, is
called the major premise; the second, the one which contains the subject
of  the  conclusion, the minor premise; the subject of the conclusion is
called   the  minor  term,  the  predicate  the  major  term.  Aristotle
classifies  syllogisms into three figures, or formal types, according to
the  position of the middle term, either as subject of the major premise
and predicate of the minor

[586b]
in  the  first  figure, or as predicate in both or as subject in both in
the second and third figures respectively. Then according to whether the
premises are universal propositions or particular ('All M is P' or 'Some
S  is  M'),  and each is either affirmative or negative ('All M is P' or
'Some S is not M'), he further distinguishes within each figure a number
of  valid moods, or formally correct patterns of inference. For example,
in  no figure can a valid mood be constructed with two particular or two
negative  premises.  No  conclusion can be drawn from the two particular
statements  that  some  poisons  are  liquids  and that some liquids are
indispensable  to  life;  nor  can  any conclusion be drawn from the two
negative   statements  that  no  triangles  are  parallelograms  and  no
rhomboids are parallelograms. In the first figure, the minor premise can
be  particular  and  must  be affirmative, the major can be negative and
must  be  universal.  In  this  figure  the  following  combinations  of
premises—  "some  figures  are  not  rectangular"  with "all rectangular
figures  are  parallelograms," or "all prime numbers are odd" with "some
odd  numbers  are  squares"— yield no conclusions. In the second figure,
one  premise  must  be  negative.  Here it is impossible to draw a valid
conclusion  from  two affirmative premises. Nothing follows from the two
affirmative  statements  that  all fish swim and all whales swim. In the
third  figure,  only a particular conclusion can be drawn from a pair of
premises  both  of which are universal. From the proposition that no men
are  wise  and  the proposition that all men are mortal, we can conclude
only that some mortals are not wise. From these examples it will be seen
that  Aristotle's  rules  of  the  syllogism  are  rules  concerning the
quantity and quality of the premises required in each figure to permit a
valid  inference;  and  as in the third figure these rules permit only a
particular conclusion to be drawn, so for all figures they determine the
character  of  the  conclusion  which  can  be  drawn from premises of a
certain quantity and quality. If one premise is negative, the conclusion
must  be  negative. If one premise is particular, the conclusion must be
particular.  There  seems to be one universal principle of the syllogism
which  underlies  all  these  specific  rules  for  the  valid  moods in
different figures.

[587a]
"When  one  thing  is  predicated of another," Aristotle says, "all that
which  is  predicable  of  the  predicate will be predicable also of the
subject."  The negative aspect of this principle is immediately obvious.
What  cannot  be  predicated of a predicate, cannot be predicated of its
subject.  In  the tradition of formal logic, this principle is sometimes
stated  in  terms  of  the  relation  of classes rather than in terms of
subjects  and predicates: if one class is included in a second, and that
second class is included in a third, the first is included in the third;
and  if  one  class  excludes another, the classes which it includes are
also  excluded  from  that  other.  The  principle  of  the syllogism is
traditionally  called  the  dictum de omni et nullo. The dictum de omni,
which  Kant in his Introduction to Logic calls "the supreme principle of
affirmative   syllogisms,"  is  thus  expressed  by  him:  "Whatever  is
universally  affirmed  of  a  concept  is  also  affirmed  of everything
contained under it." The dictum de nullo, according to Kant, states that
"whatever  is  universally  denied  of  a  concept  is  also  denied  of
everything  that is contained under it." Kant appears to think that both
these rules follow from even more general principles: that "an attribute
of  an attribute is an attribute of the thing itself" and that "whatever
is  inconsistent  with the attribute of a thing is inconsistent with the
thing itself." James also attempts to make a more general formulation of
the  dictum de omni et nullo. This law of thought, he says, is "only the
result  ofthe  function of comparison in the mind which has come by some
lucky  variation  to apprehend a series of more than two terms at once."
As  James states what he calls the "principle of mediate comparison," it
appears to be broader than the principle of the syllogism. It applies to
any  series  of  related  terms—  to  the  relation of equal and unequal
quantities  in  mathematics,  as well as to the relation of subjects and
predicates  in  the logic of predication or classes. James' principle of
mediate  comparison itself depends on what in mathematical logic and the
logic  of  relations  is  called  the  "transitivity"  of relations. The
relation of larger than, for example, is transitive; for if one thing is
larger  than a second, and the second is larger than a third, it follows
that  the  first  is  larger  than  the third. As stated in mathematical
logic, the principle of

[587b]
Chapter  77:  REASONING  553  the  syllogism is merely a special case of
transitivity  as  it  appears  in  the relation of implication; for if P
implies Q, and Q implies R, then P implies R. James recognizes this when
he  writes  that "the principle of mediate predication or subsumption is
only  the  axiom  of  skipped  intermediaries  applied  to  a  series of
successive  predications. It expresses the fact that any earlier term in
the  series  stands  to any later term, in the same relation in which it
stands  to  any  intermediate term; in other words, that whatever has an
attribute  has  all  the  attributes  ofthat  attribute; or more briefly
still,  that  whatever  is of a kind is of that kind's kind." Along with
"the axiom of mediate equality, 'equals of equals are equal,' " the rule
of  mediate predication or subsumption is, according to James, a special
case  of  the law that "skipping intermediary terms leaves relations the
same. This axiom of skipped intermediaries Or of TRANSFERRED RELATIONS .
.  .  Seems  to  be  on  the whole the broadest and deepest law of man's
thought."  James'  attempt  to  state  a  law of thought or principle of
reasoning  which  relegates all the rules of the syllogism to the status
of  a  special  case  represents  one  type  of attack on the syllogism.
Whether,  for  instance, the sample of reasoning which Descartes asks us
to  consider  that  if  2 and 2 make 4, and 3 and 1 make 4, then 2 and 2
amount  to  the same as 3 and 1 — can be reduced to the syllogistic form
of  subject  and  predicate,  or must be formulated under a more general
principle  of  "transferred relations," illustrates the basic issue here
between  subjectpredicate  logic  and  relational or mathematical logic.
Other  aspects  of  that  issue  are discussed in the chapters on Logic,
Judgment,  and  Relation.  Another  type of criticism of the traditional
theory  of  the  syllogism  accepts  the  syllogism  as  the form of all
reasoning,  but  objects,  as  Kant does, to what he calls "the mistaken
subtilty"  of  the classification of syllogisms according to figures and
moods.  But Kant does not deny all distinctions among syllogisms. On the
contrary,  he  says that syllogisms are "threefold, like all judgements,
differing  from  each  other  in  the  manner  in which they express the
relation of knowledge in the understanding, namely, cate-

[588a]
554 THE GREAT IDEAS gorical, hypothetical, and disjunctive. "Whether the
hypothetical and disjunctive syllogisms are distinct types of reasoning,
or  only special cases which it would be a mistaken subtlety to treat as
having  principles  of their own, is a problem considered in the chapter
on  Hypothesis.  Of all criticisms, the most severe is that which either
rejects the syllogism entirely as of no use in reasoning, or regards the
deductive  syllogism  as  useful only in argumentation or debate, not in
the  process of inquiry or discovery, where inductive reasoning alone is
fruitful  or  instructive. From the conclusion of a syllogism, according
to  Mill, one learns nothing more than one already knew in the premises;
whereas  in  inductive reasoning, Mill, like Bacon, thinks that the mind
goes beyond anything contained in the premises and genuinely discovers a
new truth. It seems to be Descartes' opinion that "the syllogistic forms
are  of  no  aid in perceiving the truth about objects." Locke makes the
same  point more extensively. Admitting that "all right reasoning may be
reduced  to  [Aristotle's]  forms of syllogism," he denies that they are
"the  best  way of reasoning for the leading of those into truth who are
willing  to  find it and desire to make the best use of their reason for
the  attainment  of knowledge. . . . The rules of syllogism," he writes,
"serve not to furnish the mind with those intermediate ideas that may i.
Definitions  or  descriptions  of  reasoning: the process of thought \a.
Human  reasoning  compared  with the reasoning of animals ib. Discursive
reasoning contrasted with immediate intuition rational reminiscence, the
collation  of  images  2.  The  rules  of  reasoning:  the theory of the
syllogism ia. The structure of a syllogism: its figures and moods soning
tity  and  the  quality  of  the  premises  2^.  The kinds of syllogism:
categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive, modal

[588b]
show  the  connexion  of remote ones. This way of reasoning discovers no
new  proofs,  but  is the art of marshalling and ranging the old ones we
have already. The forty-seventh proposition of the first book of Euclid,
is  very  true; but the discovery of it, I think, not owing to any rules
of  common  logic.  A  man  knows  first,  and  then he is able to prove
syllogistically; so that syllogism comes after knowledge, and then a man
has little or no need of it. . . . Syllogism, at best, is but the art of
fencing  with  the little knowledge we have, without making any addition
to  it."  It  may  be that the critics of the syllogism attribute to its
exponents  claims  they  do  not  make. Aristotle, for example, seems to
present the syllogism as a method of expounding arguments rather than of
discovering  them,  and of testing the validity of reasoning rather than
of  learning  the truth about things. "All instruction given or received
by  way  of argument," he writes, "proceeds from pre-existent knowledge.
This  becomes  evident  upon a survey of all the species of instruction.
The  mathematical  sciences,  and all other speculative disciplines, are
acquired in this way, and so are the two forms of dialectical reasoning,
syllogistic  and  inductive;  for  each of these latter makes use of old
knowledge to impart new, the syllogism assuming an audience that accepts
its  premises,  induction  exhibiting  the  universal as implicit in the
clearly  known  particular."  OUTLINE  OF TOPICS 556 557 ic. The role of
sense,  memory,  and imagination in reasoning: perceptual inference, 558
(i)  The  number of premises and the number of terms: the middle term in
rea- (2) Affirmation, negation, and the distribution of the middle term:
the quan-

[589a]
3. The truth and cogency of reasoning 558 30. Formal and material truth:
logical  validity  distinguished  from factual truth y. Lack of truth in
reasoning:  sophistical  arguments; material fallacies 3^. Necessity and
contingency  in  reasoning: logical necessity; certainty and probability
4.  The  types  of  reasoning,  inference,  or  argument  4#.  Immediate
inference:  its  relation  to  mediated  inference  or reasoning 4#. The
direction  and  uses  of  reasoning:  the  distinction between proof and
infer4c.  Inductive  and  deductive  reasoning  4*/. Direct and indirect
argumentation:   proof  by  reductio  ad  absurdum;  argument  from  the
impossible  or  ideal  case  \e.  Refutation:  disproof 4/. Reasoning by
analogy:   arguments   from  similarity  5.  Reasoning  in  relation  to
knowledge,  opinion,  and action 561 50. The fact and the reasoned fact:
mere belief distinguished from belief on rational grounds $b. Scientific
reasoning: the theory of demonstration (1) The indemonstrable as a basis
for  demonstration  (3) A priori and a posteriori reasoning: from causes
or  from  effects;  from  principles  or  from  experience; analysis and
synthesis  (4)  The  role  of  causes  in  demonstration  and scientific
reasoning  (5)  Demonstration  in  relation  to  essence  and existence:
demonstrations  propter  5<r.  Dialectical  reasoning: the opposition of
rational arguments 5c. Practical reasoning (1) The form of the practical
syllogism  (2)  Deduction  and  determination  in  legal  thought 6. The
character   of  reasoning  in  the  various  disciplines  6a.  Proof  in
metaphysics  and theology 6b. Demonstration in mathematics: analysis and
synthesis  6c.  Inductive  and  deductive inference in the philosophy of
nature  and  the  natural  6d.  Induction and demonstration in the moral
sciences

[589b]
Chapter  77:  REASONING  555  PAGE  ence,  and between demonstration and
discovery 560 quid and quia 563 sciences 566

[590a]
556  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  1.  Definitions  or  descriptions of reasoning: the
process  of  thought  7  Plato:  Phaedo, 244c-245c / Republic, bk vivii,
383d-398c  /  Theaetetus,  537d-538a  /  Sophist, 570a-577b / Statesman,
594d-595d  /  Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk
i,  ch  i[  24b  i822]  39c  /  Topics,  bk 1, ch 1 143a-d / Sophistical
Refutations, ch i
[165*1-3] 227b; ch 2 227d228a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  7 112b-113d 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  iv, ch 12, 164b 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch
31  651d-652b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 7 81d-82b; q
58, a 3 301d-302d; a 4, ans 302d-303c; q 79, aa 8-9 421c-423d; a 10, rep
2-3  423d-424d;  q  84, a 3, rep 3 443d444d; q 85, a 5, ans 457d-458d 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 2, a 1 391a-392a; q 8, a 1, rep
2  417a-d;  part  hi,  q 11, a 3 773d-774c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
56d-57a;  58a-c;  60a  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 332a-335c 31
Descartes: Rules la-40a,c passim, esp vvn 7d-12a, x-xn 15d-25a, xiv, 28b
29a, 32d / Objections and Replies, 137a

[590b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  James -.Psychology, 116a-l 19b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of  The  Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk iv, ch ii, sect 2-13 309d-312b; ch xv, sect i 365a-c;
ch  xvn  371c-380d  passim, esp sect 2 371d372b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-342c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 15d-16c; 20a; 34c-35b; 108a-209d esp
109d-112d,  115d-116a,  118ac,  119a-b, 129c-130c, 158a-159d, 173b-174a,
185b-c,  187a-c,  193d-194b,  199a-c;  224a-227a  /Judgement, 551a-552c;
570b-572c  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref, la 49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man, 292b-293d; 299b300a 53 James: Psychology, 146a-187a esp
161a-176a,   179b-184a,   186a;   360a-362b;  381b-385b;  664a-693b  esp
666b-668a,  672b-678b,  690a-b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 337a;
363  b364b  esp  364a-b;  367b-c;  377c-379c  esp  379a-c;  384c-385c  /
Unconscious,  442d-443a  /  Ego  and  Id,  700a-701d  esp 701d la. Human
reasoning   compared   with   the  reasoning  of  animals  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98ob25~
27] 499b / Soul, bk 11, ch 3 [4i4b i7-2o] 644d;
[415*7-12] 645b
/  Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2 [453*5-14] 695b 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[488^0-27] 9d / Ethics, bk vi, ch 7 [1141*22-

[591a]
28] 390a-b; bk vii, ch 3
[ii47b2-5] 397d /
Politics,  bk  vii,  ch  13  [i332  a39-b8]  537a-b  10  Galen:  Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a-c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect
i6^2-7ic-d;  bk vi, sect 23 276b; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 76, a 5, rep 4 394c-396a; q 78, a 4, ans and rep 5
411d-413d;  q  81,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  430c431d;  q 86, a 4, rep 3
463d-464d;  q  96,  a  i,  rep  4 510b-511b; part i-ii, q 13, a 2, rep 3
673c-674c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 2
8b-9a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b; 53a-b; 53d54a; 57d; 59b-c; 63a;
64a-c;  79b-c;  part  ii,  lOOa-c;  part  iv, 267b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
215a-223b  passim, esp 220b-223b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35,
163d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59a-60c / Objections and Replies,
156c-d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk vii [449-549] 227a229a; bk viii
[369-451]  240a-242a;  bk  ix  [549566] 259b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 339-344
233a  b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, sect ii 145d-146a;
ch  xxvii,  sect  8 221a222a; bk iv, ch xvii, sect i 371c-d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, intro, sect ii 407b-408a 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  ix  487b488c  36  Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 151b-152a; 159b160a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a;  341d-342a  /  Social Contract, bk i,
393bc  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  199c-200c / Pre/. Metaphysical Elements
of Ethics,  372a-b / Judgement, 602 b,d [fn 1] 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
292b-297c  esp 292b-294c; 400a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
689c690a  53 James: Psychology, 665a-666b; 676b-677a esp 677a; 679a-686b
esp  679a-683a,  686a-b;  873a  lb. Discursive reasoning contrasted with
immediate  intuition  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d-388a / Seventh
Letter,  809c-810d  8  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 6 [i048b 18-34]
574a-c; ch 9
[1051*22-34]
577b-c;  bk  xii, ch 7 [io72b i4~29] 602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d 17 Plotinus:
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 18 151b-c; tr iv, ch 1 159a-d; ch 12, 164b /
Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 3 216c-217b; tr v, ch 1-2 228b-229d passim; ch 7
231d-232b; tr vi 235b-237d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 23-25

[591b]
68a-c; bk xii, par 16 102d-103a / City of God, bk ix, ch 22 296d-297a; bk
xi,  ch  2  323a-c; ch 7 326ac; ch 21 333a-d; ch 29 339a-b; bk xvi, ch 6
426c-427a;  bk xxii, ch 29, 614b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  14,  a  7  81d-82b;  q  34,  a  i,  rep 2 185b-187b; q 46, a 2, rep 3
253a-255a;  q  58, a 3 301d-302d; a 4, ans 302d-303c; q 79, a 8, ans and
rep  3  421c-422b; q 85, a 5, ans 457d-458d; part i-ii, q 14, a 1, rep 2
677b-678a;  q  15,  a  4,  rep  1  683  b-684a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  ii  [43-45]  108a  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17b-c /
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  15 149a 31 Descartes: Rules, in, 4a-d; xi
17b-18b;  xn, 23b-c / Objections and Replies, 123a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii,  prop  40,  schol  2  388a-b;  part v, prop 28 459b 32 Milton:
Paradise   Lost,  bk  v  [469-505]  185b186a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  1-5
171a-173a; 277-288 222b 224b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi,
sect 23 119b-120a; bk iv, ch i, sect 9, 309b; ch ix, sect 2-3 349a-c; ch
xvii,  sect  14-17  378c-379c  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 318b-319a 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 33a-d / Practical Reason, 320c-321b; 337ac; 350c-351b
/  judgement,  572d-574b;  579a  Ic.  The  role  of  sense,  memory, and
imagination  in  reasoning: perceptual inference, rational reminiscence,
the  collation of images 7 Plato: Meno, 179d-183a; 188d-189a / Phaedo, 2
24a-  2 2 5c; 2 28a 230a / Republic, bk hi, 333b-d; bk vi-vii, 383d-398c
/  Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch
19 136a-137a,c / Soul, bk i, ch i
[403^-16]
632a-b; bk hi, ch 7
[43i ai4-b i9] 663d-664b
/ Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436^1 7-437*1 7]
673d-674a / Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[453V15] 695b
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk iv [353-521] 48d-51a esp [469-521]
50b-51a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 10 73d74a; par 16-19 75b-
76b;  par  26-38 78a-81a / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269bc 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4, ans and rep 4-5 411d-413d; q 81, a
3, ans and rep 2 430c-431d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b-54c; 60a-b;
part  iv,  267b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-335c esp 334c-d 31
Descartes: Rules, xii, 18b-c; 20b-d; xiv 28a-33b / Discourse, part 1, 41
d / Objections and Replies, 229d-230c

[592a]
(1.  Definitions  or  descriptions of reasoning: the process of thought.
\c.  The role of sense, memory, and imagination in reasoning: perceptual
inference,  rational  reminiscence,  the collation of images?) 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xi, sect 13 146b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  234b-236b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341d-342a  42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 23a-24a; 34a-c; 54b-64a; 110d-112a / Practical Reason, 352c-353a
49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 292d-293d 53 James: Psychology, 381b-385b;
525a-526b; 664a-666b esp 664b-665b; 667b-674a; 676a686b esp 677a-678b 2.
The  rules  of  reasoning:  the theory of the syllogism 7 Plato: Phaedo,
244c-245c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 3
[i b io-i6] 5c-d /
Prior Analytics 39a-93a,c / Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 14 108d-109a 9
Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [i356bi3-i7]  596a  12  Epictetus:
Discourses, bk i, ch 7 112b113d 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii,
ch  3134  651d-653b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 56b-58a; 58d60b 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 56c-58b esp 57b-58b; 59c-60a; 96d-97a /
Novum  Organum,  bk  1, aph 14 107d-108a; aph 104-106 128a-c; bk ii, aph
27-32  157b-161b  esp aph 32 161a-b 31 Descartes: Rules la-40a,c passim,
esp  v-vn  7d-12a, x-xn 15d-25a, xiv, 28b-29a, 32d / Discourse 41a-67a,c
esp part i, 41d-42b, part ii, 45b-c, 46c-48b, part hi, 50b-51a, part iv,
52a  33 Pascal: Geometrical Demonstration, 430b434a; 442a-443b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xvii,  sect 4-8 372c-377d 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  318b-319a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 59c-108a,c; 110d-112d esp HOd-110c; 115d-119a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-b  /  Judgement, 600d603d esp 601d-602b 53
James:  Psychology, 667b-668a; 868b-873a esp 869b-870a, 871a, 872b-873a;
878b-879a  2a.  The  structure  of  a syllogism: its figures and moods 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 1-26 39a-60b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and Pantagruel, bk i, 22b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 59c-60a

[592b]
558  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2 to 3a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
xvii,  sect  4, 373c-375a; sect 8 377b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 110d-112d
esp  HOd-110c;  118a-c  2a(l)  The  number of premises and the number of
terms: the middle term in reasoning 8 Aristotle : Prior Analytics, bk i,
ch 4
[25**
32-39]  40d;  ch  25  58d-59d;  ch  32  65a-d  / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 3
[ioi4a35-b  3] 534c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 59c-60a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk iv, ch xvii. sect 4, 374d-375a; sect 8, 377c-d
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 318b-319a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 110d-112d
esp  HOd-110c,  112a; 118a-c 53 James: Psychology, 667b-668a; 672b 2a{2)
Affirmation,  negation,  and  the  distribution  of the middle term: the
quantity  and  the quality of the premises 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk  i,  ch  4-7  40d45b;  ch  24  58b-d;  ch 26 59d-60b; ch 33 65d-66a /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 14 108d-109a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 86, a 1, rep 2 461c-462a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  xvii,  sect  8, 377b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 39c-41c esp 39d-40c 2b.
The  kinds of syllogism: categorical, hypothetical, disjunctive, modal 8
Aristotle:  Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 23 57b58b; ch 27-29 60b-63d; ch 44
68d-69b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  HOd-110c  esp  111b;  175c-d  2c. The
connection  of  syllogisms:  sorites, prosyllogisms and epi-syllogisms 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 25
[42b i-26]
59c-d  /  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 25 [86a33-b29] 118a-c 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk iv, ch xvii, sect 4 373a-374d; sect 15, 379a-b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  110d-112d;  115d-119a  53  James:  Psychology,
872b-873a  3. The truth and cogency of reasoning 3a. Formal and material
truth:  logical  validity  distinguished from factual truth 8 Aristotle:
Prior  Analytics,  bk ii, ch 2-4 72d-77a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
12 b i6-34] 106d-107a / Physics, bk i, ch 2
[77
[185^-12] 259d; ch 3 [i86a4-9] 260d-261a
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  14,  178c-d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 7 112b-113d 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk
ii, ch 3134 651d-653b

[593a]
3b  to  4a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 57d-58a; 59c-60c / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  14  107d-108a  31  Descartes: Rules, x, 16d-17a /
Objections and Replies, 126b- 12 7c ^___^ 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  rfTcH  xi, sect 13 146b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36a-37d esp 36b 37b;
180c-182b; 193a-b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 134c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue   ii,  683d684a  53  James:  Psychology,  872b;  879b-885a  esp
880b-882a  3b.  Lack of cogency in reasoning: invalid syllogisms; formal
fallacies  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch 16-21 85c-89b /
Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 12 b i6-34] 106d-107a / Physics, bk i, ch
2
[77
[185*5-12] 259d
:  CH 3 ( l86V9] 260d-261a 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 24 649d-651d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 7 112b113d 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,   bk   ii,  ch  3134  651d-653b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i, 23bc 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 126b-127c
33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  368b-369a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 109b-c; 133d 53
James: Psychology, 108a-b; 2 2 7b- 228a; 236b
[fn
1];  526b  [fn 1] 3c. Lack of truth in reasoning: sophistical arguments;
material  fallacies  7  Plato: Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Phaedo, 237b238a 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk i, ch 34-35 66b-d; bk ii, ch 18 87a-b /
Posterior Analytics, bk 1, ch 16-17 109b-110b / Topics, bk i, ch i
[ioob23-ioi a i8] 143b-d; bk
viii, ch 10
[i6ob
23-39] 218b-c; ch 12-13 220c-221d / Sophistical Refutations 22 7a- 2 53d
/ Physics, bk i, ch 2
[185*5-12] 259d; ch 3 [i86a
4-9]  260d-261a  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  24  649d-651d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  7  112b113d 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 31 651d-652b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-d;
58d-60c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60a-61d / Novum Organum, bk
i,  aph 38-69 109c-116b 31 Descartes: Rules, x, 16d-17a / Objections and
Replies,   126b-127c  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  367a-368b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk 11, ch i, sect 10, 123c; ch xi, sect 13 146b-c; bk iv,
ch  xvii,  sect 19-21 379d-380a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii,
div 75, 484c; sect xn, div 132 509a-d

[593b]
Chapter  77:  REASONING  559  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36d-37d; 109b-c;
120c121c;  133d  3d.  Necessity  and  contingency  in reasoning: logical
necessity; certainty and probability 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i,
ch i [24b i826] 39c; ch 8-22 45b-57b; ch 30
[46*3-10]
63d;  bk  ii,  ch 25 91a-b / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2 [72 a25-b4]
98d-99a; ch 6 [75*12-28] 103a-b / Topics, bk i, ch i
[ioo*25-b23]
143a-b; bk ii, ch 5
[112*16-23]
157b-c; bk viii, ch 12
[i62a35-b2] 220c / Physics, bk
ii, ch 9 [200*15-29] 277c-d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5
[ioi5b6-8]
535d-536a; bk vii, ch 15
[io39b3i-io4oa8]
563d-564a; bk xii, ch 8
[1074*14-16] 604c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b i2-27]
339d-340a; ch 7 [1098*25^7] 343d-344a; bk vi, ch 3 388b-c / Rhetoric, bk
i,  ch  i  [1355*318]  594b;  ch  2 [1357*14-30] 596d-597a; bk ii, ch 25
[i402b  i3-i403a  i7]  652b-653a  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 7,
112d-113d;  ch  26,  131b  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of the Heavenly
Spheres,  505a-506a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 7, ans
and  rep 2 56a-57b; q 19, a 8, rep 3 116a-d; q 44, a i, rep 2 238b-239a;
q 47, a i, rep 3 256a-257b; q 82, a 2, ans 432d-433c; part i-ii, q 13, a
5,  ans  675c-676b; a 6, rep 1-2 676c-677b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d; part ii-ii, q 4, a 8 409a-d; part
hi,  q  9, a 3, rep 2 765b-766b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65c-d; 71c
31  Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b; xii, 23b / Discourse, part ii, 46c-48b /
Meditations,  1,  76c  33  Pascal:  Vacuum, 368b-369a 34 Huygens: Light,
pref,  551b-552a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xv, sect 1-3
365a-d  esp  sect  i  365a-c;  ch  xvi 366d-371c passim; ch xvii, sect 2
371d372b;  sect  15-17  378d-379c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv,
div 20-21 458a-c; sect vi 469d-470d esp 469d
[fn
1]; sect x, div 87-88 489b-490b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 348a,c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 14d; 17d-18a; 194b-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-d
53 James: Psychology, 878a-884b 4. The types of reasoning, inference, or
argument  4a. Immediate inference: its relation to mediated inference or
reasoning 7 Plato: Euthyphro, 196d 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 7
[i7b23~37]
27b-c; ch 10
[20*16-37]
30d-31b / Prior

[594a]
560  THE GREAT IDEAS (4. The types of reasoning, inference, or argument.
4a.   Immediate   inference:  its  relation  to  mediated  inference  or
reasoning!)  Analytics, bk i, ch 2-3 39d-40c; bk ii, ch 8-10 79b-81b; ch
22  [67^6-68^4]  89b-d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  17d-18a; 109d-110c esp
109d-110a,  110d-110c  4b.  The  direction  and  uses  of reasoning: the
distinction  between  proof and inference, and between demonstration and
discovery  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk vi, 383d-388a 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72^5-33] 99c / Topics, bk
1,  ch  2  143d-144a / Sophistical Refutations, ch 2 227d-228a; ch io-ii
234d-237c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[io95a3o-b i3]
340c-d  11  Archimedes: Method, 569b-570a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv,
267a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 56c-58b; 59c-d; 96d-97a /
Novum Organum, pref 105a-106d; bk i 107a-136a,c esp aph 11-26 107d-108d,
aph  29-30  109a,  aph  69  116a-b,  aph 103-106 127d-128c 31 Descartes:
Rules,  11,  2c-3a; x, 16d-17a; xiv, 28b-c / Discourse, part ii, 46c-48b
33   Pascal:   Pensees,   1  171a-172a;  40  177b178a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect 11, 340c-341a; ch xvii, sect 2-3
371d372b;  sect  6-7 376c-377b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15d-16c; 110d-110c;
119a-b;  193a-200c  esp  193d-194b,  199ac  / Practical Reason, 294a-b /
Judgement,   570b572b;   572d-574b;   600d-603d  esp  603b-c  53  James:
Psychology,  381b-385b  esp  382a, 384a385b; 672b-673b 4c. Inductive and
deductive  reasoning  8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 23 90a-c /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[7i ai-n]
97a; ch 3 [72b25-33] 99c; ch 18 110b-c; bk ii, ch 7
[92
a34-b i] 126b / Topics, bk i, ch 12 148d; ch 18
[io8b7-i2] 152d; bk
viii, ch 14 an-i6] 222d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[1095*30b8]
340c; ch 7
[i098a35-b3] 343d;
bk vi, ch 3 388b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356*36-
[i64
1358^5]  596a-598b;  bk  ii,  ch  20-22  640d645a  28  Galileo:  Two New
Sciences,  fourth  day,  252a-b  28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 280c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,  42a-c;  57b58b;  61 d; 96d-97a / Novum
Organum,  bk  i  107a-136a,c esp aph 11-26 107d-108d, aph 69 116a-b, aph
103-106  127d-128c 31 Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3a; in, 4c-d; vn 10b-12a;
xi 17b-18b; xn, 23b-24c / Discourse,

[594b]
4b  to  4/  part vi, 61d-62c / Objections and Replies, 167c-d 34 Newton:
Principles,  bk hi, rule iv 271b / Optics, bk in, 543a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xh,  sect  6-13  360a-362d  35  Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect i, div 9 454c-455a; sect hi, div 19, 458a; sect iv,
div  26  460bc;  sect viii, div 65, 479b-c; sect ix, div 82 487b-c; sect
xii,  div  131-132  508d-509d  passim  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 45b-46a;
195d-197b  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  445a-447b  passim;  475b,d [fn 1]
passim  45 Faraday : Researches in Electricity, 659a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue  ii,  690b 53 James: Psychology, 674a-675b esp 675b 4d.
Direct  and  indirect  argumentation:  proof  by  reductio  ad absurdum\
argument from the impossible or ideal case 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 23 57b58b; ch 29 62d-63d; bk ii, ch 11-14 81b84b; ch 17 86b-87a
/ Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 26 118d-119b / Topics, bk viii, ch 2
[i57b34~i58 a2]
214b-c / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4 [1006*12-29] 525b-c; bk xi, ch 5 [io6i
b 34-io62ai2] 590a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 2 [1146*22-30] 396b
33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  368b  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 227a-228a 4e.
Refutation:  disproof  7  Plato:  Sophist,  558b-d  8  Aristotle:  Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 20 87c-d; ch 26 91b-d / Sophistical Refutations, ch
4-1 i 228b-237c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch i
[ii45b i-7]
395b / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 22 [i396b2o]-CH 26 a34] 644d-653a,c esp ch 25
[i402a29]-cH  26 [1403^4] 651d-653a,c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i,
ch  14, 177a179d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 208a-c 33 Pascal:
Vacuum, 368b
[ r 4°3
4f.  Reasoning  by analogy: arguments from similarity 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  ii,  316a-b;  bk iv, 350a-b; bk vi-vii, 383d-391b 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 24 90c91a / Topics, bk i, ch 18
[io8b6-i9] 152d153a
9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i357b251358^] 597c-d; bk
ii,  ch  20 [1393^2-1394*8] 640d-641d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi  suppl, q 75, a 3, rep 2 938a-939d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 60c;
67c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 34 109b; bk 11, aph 27, 158a-b

[595a]
5  to  5b{\)  Chapter  77:  REASONING  561 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi,
general  schol,  370b-371a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi,
sect  2 144a-c; bk iv, ch xvi, sect 12 370b371a ^___^ 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  SEcf'105-106  433b-d  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix,
div  82  487b-c;  sect  xi,  div  113  502a-d;  div  115 503b-c 42 Kant:
Judgement, 547b-548c; 600d-603d esp 601d-602a, 602b
[fn
1] 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 26a; 241b 53 James: Psychology, 295a-b;
677a-678a;  686b690a  esp  688a-689a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  801b-c  /  New Introductory Lectures, 819a 5. Reasoning in
relation to knowledge, opinion, and action 5a. The fact and the reasoned
fact: mere belief distinguished from belief on rational grounds 7 Plato:
Meno,  188b-189a  /  Republic,  bk  v,  370d-373c 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 6 a i2-37J 103a-c; ch 13 107c-108c; bk ii, ch
[75
1-2  122b,d-123c  /  Soul,  bk  ii,  ch 2 [413*1119] 643a b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[io95 a3o-b i3]
340c-d; ch 7 [i098 a35~b 4l 343d; bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch ii 392c-393b 11
Archimedes:   Method,   569b-570a;   prop  i,  572b  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part hi, q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b-766b 31 Descartes: Rules, xvi,
35a-b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii, sect 25 210c-d 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv  458a463d  passim,  esp div 28-33
460d-463d;  sect  v  463d-469c passim, esp div 38 466b-c, div 45 469c 36
Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 165a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 228c-d; 240b-243c
/   Judgement,   601d-607c   43   Mill:   Liberty,  283c-288c  passim  /
Utilitarianism,  445d-446b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
156d160b  53 James : Psychology, 689b-690a 5b. Scientific reasoning: the
theory  of  demonstration  7  Plato: Meno 174a-190a,c / Republic, bk vi,
386d-388a  /  Parmenides  486a-511d  esp  491a-c / Philebus, 610d-613a 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i, ch 30 63d64b / Posterior Analytics
97a-137a,c / Metaphysics, bk vi, ch 1
[io25b i-i3J 547b; bk vii,
ch 15 [i039b20-i040a8] 563c-564a

[595b]
b  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  3  388b-c;  ch 6 389d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 58a-c; 60a-b; 60d; 65c-d; part iv, 267a-c 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  332a337a,c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
42a-c; 56c-59c; 61d / Novum Organum, pref 105a106d; bk 1 107a-136a,c esp
aph  11-26  107d108d,  aph 69 116a-b, aph 103-106 127d128c 31 Descartes:
Rules,  i-xm  la-27d  /  Discourse, part vi 60d-67a,c 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
365b-366a; 368b-369a / Geometrical Demonstration, 430b-434a; 442a443b 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  rules  270a-271b  / Optics, bk in, 543a35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk hi, ch xi, sect 16 303c-d; bk iv, ch 1,
sect  9,  308d309b;  ch  11, sect 2-13 309d-312b; ch iv, sect 7 325b; ch
vii,  sect  ii,  340c-341a;  ch  xii, sect 6-13 360a-362d; ch xv, sect i
365a-c;  ch  xvii  371c-380d  passim,  esp  sect  2-4 371d-376c, sect 15
378d-379b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20 458a-b; div 30,
462a;  sect  xii,  div  131-132  508d-509d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-13d;
190c-191a;  194b-c;  211c-218d  esp  217c-d  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  264d  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365a-366a /
Judgement,  463a-467a; 542c-543a; 603b-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445b-d
53 James: Psychology, 674a-675b; 677b; 862a865a 5^(1) The indemonstrable
as  a basis for demonstration 7 Plato: Cratylus, 112a 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch i [24 a2ib i6] 39a-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
3  99b-100a; ch 7 [75*38^7] 103c; ch ii 105d106b; ch 19-23 110c-116a; bk
ii,  ch 19 136a137a,c / Physics, bk ii, ch i [193^-9] 269b / Heavens, bk
i,  ch  5  [27i  b  i-i3]  362c-d / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 9 [992^4-993^]
511a-b; bk hi, ch 2
[996b26-997a i4]
515b-d; bk iv, ch 4
[ioo6a4-i2]
525a-b; ch 6
[101^3-14]
530d; bk xi, ch 6 [io63b7-i2] 591d; bk xiii, ch 4
[1078^8-31] 610b-c / Soul, bk
i,  ch  3 [407 s 22-30] 636d-637a 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk
ii, ch 6 [742b i7-35] 283d-284a / Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6 389d;
ch ii 392c-393b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 3, rep 1-2
102d-103c;  q  36,  a  3,  rep  4  194c-195d; part i-ii, q 1, a 4, rep 2
612a613a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, a 2, ans
221d-223a; q 112, a 5, ans 359c360c

[596a]
(5  b.  Scientific  reasoning:  the  theory  of demonstration. 5b(l) The
indemonstrable  as  a  basis  for  demonstration.)  28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation, 333d-334d esp 334a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 59c-d;
97a  31  Descartes:  Rules,  n  2a-3b  /  Discourse,  part ii, 46c-47a /
Meditations,  i,  76c / Objections and Replies, 123a-b; 224b,d 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch ii, sect i, 309d; sect 7-8 310d-311a; ch
hi,  sect  4  313bc;  ch xv, sect i 365a-c; sect 3 365d; ch xvn, sect 15
378d-379b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 217c-d / Practical Reason, 307d-310c esp
309b / Judgement, 542d-543a 43 Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 446d-447a; 461c-462a; 475b,d [fn 1] 44 Boswell: Johnson,
82  b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 3 116a 5b(2) Definitions
used as means in reasoning: definitions as the end of reasoning 7 Plato:
Sophist,  551a-552c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809c-810d  8  Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 43 68d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[72*19-24]
98d; ch 8 [75 b2i-32] 104a; ch 10 [76^5-77*4] 105c-d; ch 22
[82b36-83a i] 113b; ch 33
[89
i7-b  5]  121d-122a,c;  bk  ii, ch 3-10 123c-128d / Topics, bk vii, ch 5
[i54a23~b i3] 209d-210a;
[155*17-23] 210d; bk
viii,  ch  3 214d-215d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9 [992b30~993*i] 511b; bk
hi, ch 2
[996b i8-2i] 515b; bk
iv, ch 4
[ioo5b35-ioo7b2o] 525a-527a; ch 7 [1012*1824] 532a-b; ch 8 [ioi2b5-8] 532c; bk xi, ch 5
590a-d;  bk  xiii,  ch  4  [io78b23-3o]  610b-c / Soul, bk 1, ch 1 [402b
i6-403  a2]631d-632a; ch a3i-b i8] 639bc; bk ii, ch 2 [413*11-19] 643a-b
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i [639b 3
[407*22-30] 636d-637a; ch
5
[409
7-642^]  161d-165d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i, rep 2
10d-lld;  a  2, rep 2 lld-12c; q 3, a 5, ans 17c-18b; q 17, a 3, rep 1-2
102d-103c;  q  85,  a 6 458d-459c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-60c;
65d  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 128c-129a 33 Pascal: Pensees,
1  171a-172a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b-434b  35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk hi, ch xi, sect 15-17 303b-304a esp sect 16 303c-d; BK
IV,  CH III, SECT 20, 319b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vh, div 48
470d-471c;  sect  viii,  div  74  484a-c; sect xii, div 131 508d-509a 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 179d-182b; 211c-218d / Practical Reason, 293c-294b 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 690b 54 Freud: Instincts, 412a-b

[596b]
562  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5b{2)  to  5£(4) 5^(3) A priori and a posteriori
reasoning:  from  causes  or  from  effects;  from  principles  or  from
experience;   analysis  and  synthesis  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  242b-243c  8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72^5-33] 99c / Physics, bk
i,  ch i 259a-b / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 2 [316*514] 411c-d
/ Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 3 [1029* 33-b i2] 552a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 3 [i094b29-i095* 12] 340a-b; ch 4
[io95*30-b i3]
340c-d;  bk  hi, ch 3 [ui2b2o-24] 358d; bk vi, ch 8 [1142* 12-19] 391b /
Politics,  bk  i, ch i [1252*17-24] 445b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk
i,  ch  14, 177a178d esp 177c, 178c-d; bk hi, ch 1-2, 199c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 14, a 5 680ac 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  60a-b; part iv, 267a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-335c 30
Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 104-106 128a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, 11,
2d-3a; iv-v 5a-8a / Objections and Replies, 128a-129a 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
368b-369a  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi, 543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, pref,
551b-552a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 10, 123c; bk
iv,  ch  xii,  sect  6-13 360a362d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 21
417a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect iv 458a463d passim, esp div
20-21  458a-c,  div  30,  462a;  sect  v,  div 34-38, 464a-466c; sect xi
497b-503c passim, esp div 105 498d-499a; sect xii, div 131-132 508d-509d
passim  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14a-20c; 34a-36a; l10d111c; 115d-120c;
129a;  135a-173a  esp  158a160b,  172c-173a; 174a; 179c-182b; 190c-191a;
192a-b;  193d-200c;  211c-218d  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
253a-254d  esp  253d254a;  262a-287d  esp  263a-264d, 268b-d / Practical
Reason,  294a-b; 307d-308b; 309b-d; 329d-330c / Science of Right, 405b-d
/  Judgement, 600d-603d esp 603a-b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445c-446b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182d183c 53 James: Psychology,
91a-94b  esp  94b;  673a674b; 872a-873a 54 Freud: Narcissism, 400d 5b(4)
The  role  of  causes in demonstration and scientific reasoning 7 Plato:
Timaeus,  455a- b; 465d-466a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics 97a-137a,c
esp  bk  11,  ch  n-18  128d-136a  /  Physics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  275b-d /
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996*i8-b26] 514d-515b; bk vi, ch
i [i025b i-

[597a]
5*(4)  to 5c 13] 547b; bk vii, ch 17 [i04i aio-bn] 565b-d; bk viii, ch 4
[i044a33~b2o] 569a-b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i b7-642b5]
161d-165d esp
[639^4-640^]
162b,
[64ob5-i2]
163a,
[6 4 2 a
[639
i 4-2i]^65b / Ethics, bk 1, ch 7
[i098a25]-cH
8
[1098^5]
343d-344b  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 2, ans and rep 2-3 lld-12c;
q  14,  a  7  81d-82b;  a  11,  ans  84c-85c;  q  19, a 5, ans and rep 2
112d-113c;  q  44,  a 1, rep 1 238b-239a; q 57, a 2, ans 295d-297a; part
i-ii,  q 14, a 5 680a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 55, a
4  28c-29d; part hi, q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b766b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  60a-b;  part  iv,  267a-b  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day,
202d-203a;  fourth day, 252a-b 28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 319c
/ On Animal Generation, 335c-336c; 393b-c; 425a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  45a-46a;  46c-47c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48 HOd-110a; aph
99  127b-c  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv, 52a-d; part vi, 61d-62c;
66a-b  /  Meditations,  in  81d-89a  esp  84b-85a,  87c-88c; iv, 90a-b /
Objections  and  Replies, 108b-112a; 120c-122c; axiom v 131d-132a; 212c;
215a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  axiom 2,4 355d; prop 8, schol 2
356d-357d  esp  357b-d;  appendix  369b-372d;  part hi, 395a-d; part iv,
pref,  422b,d-423c;  appendix, i 447a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule
i-ii  270a; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics, BK III, 541b-542a; 543a-b
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xii, sect 9 360d-361b; ch xvii,
sect  2  371d372b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 60, 477a;
sect  ix,  div  82  487b-c;  sect  xii,  div  132,  509b-c  38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 348a,c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 46d-47c; 164a-171a; 183b
[fn 1] / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 285c286a
/  Practical  Reason,  310d-311d;  339a  /  judgement, 574a-b; 578a-d 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry, part i, 9b10b 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  169a; 183a-184a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 217d-218a; 239b240d
50  Marx:  Capital,  10b-llb  esp  lib  53  James:  Psychology, 89b-90a;
668a-671a  esp  670a-b;  745b;  824b-825a;  884b-886a  54 Freud: General
Introduction, 454b-c; 483d484a

[597b]
Chapter 77: REASONING 563 5b(5) Demonstration in relation to essence and
existence:   demonstrations   propter   quid   and   quia  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics,  bk  hi,  ch 2 [996b i221] 515a-b; bk vi, ch i [i025b i-i8]
547b,d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2, a 2 lld-12c; q 3, a 4,
rep  2  16d-17c;  a  5,  ans  17c18b; q 46, a 2, ans 253a-255a 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  hi [3445] 56b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
78d-79a;  79d80b  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  1,  76c; 111 81d-89a; vi
96b-103d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  HOb-c; 216d-218b; 261a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xvii, sect 20, 173a; ch xxxi, sect 6
240d241d  esp  241a-b;  sect  ii  242d-243a;  bk  hi,  ch xi, sect 15-17
303b-304a  esp sect 16 303c-d; bk iv, ch iv, sect 8 325b-c; ch xii, sect
6-9 360a-361b esp sect 9 360d-361b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv
458a463d  passim,  esp div 20-21 458a-c, div 30 461d-462b; sect xii, div
131-132  508d-509d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 85d-88a; 95a-d; 179c182b 53
James:  Psychology,  667b  5c.  Dialectical reasoning: the opposition of
rational  arguments  7  Plato: Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Phaedrus, 134b-c /
Phaedo,  242b-243c  /  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Parmenides,
491a-511d  /  Theaetetus,  525d-526b  /  Sophist,  558b-d  /  Statesman,
594d-595d  8  Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i [24 a2ib i6] 39a-c;
ch 30
[46^-10] 63d
/ Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 6
[75
a2i-28] 103b; ch ii
[77*25-35]
106b / Topics 143a-223a,c / Sophistical Refutations, ch 2 2 2 7d- 2 28a;
ch 9 234b-d; ch ii 236a-237c / Heavens, bk i, ch 10
[279b4~i2] 370d / Generation and Corruption, bk
1, CH2 [316*5-14] 411c-d/ Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[ioo4b i8-27] 523d; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i b8-i2] 589d; bk xiii, ch 4 [io78bi8-28]
610b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [1355*28-39] 594c-d 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 8 113d-114c; bk 11, ch 12, 151d-152a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 83, a 1, ans 436d-438a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q 9, a 3, rep 2 765b-766b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  101b-106a  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
47d-48d   31   Descartes:   Discourse,  part  i,  43d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, sect 9 369b-c

[598a]
d  564 (5. Reasoning in relation to knowledge, opinion, and action. 5 c.
Dialectical  reasoning:  the opposition of rational arguments!) 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect x, div 86-91 488d-491c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
lab;   36d-37d;   108a-d;  120c-173a  esp  129c-130b,  133c;  174b-177b;
187a-192d;   200c-209d;  219a-220b;  229b-c;  231c-232a  /  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic   of   Morals,   260d-261b;  283d-284d  /  Practical  Reason,
291a-292a; 302a-d; 331c-337a,c; 340a-342d; 348d-349a / Science of Right,
407a-408b  /  judgement,  540a-546d;  562a-578a esp 562d564c, 575b-578a;
584c-d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 135 47b-d 54 Freud:
General Introduction, 545 5d. Rhetorical reasoning: the rational grounds
of persuasion 7 Plato: Protagoras, 50d-52d; 57a-c / Phaedrus 115a-141a,c
esp  129d-141a,c  / Meno, 176d177a / Gorgias 252a-294d / Timaeus, 457c /
Sophist, 558a-561a 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 27 92a93a,c /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[7i a i-io]
97a / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5
[1009*16-22]
528c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[109^23-27]
339d-340a / Rhetoric, bk i 593a-622d esp ch i
[i355a4-b22] 594b-595a; bk
ii, ch 18-26 639a653a,c; bk hi, ch 15 669d-670c; ch 17-19 672a-675a,c 10
Galen:   Natural   Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  16,  180c181a  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  5 HOb-c; ch 8 113d-114c 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch 3637 653d-654b; bk iv, ch 4 676d-677a 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 83, a i, ans 436d-438a; part i-ii, q 7, a i,
rep  i  651d-652c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 67c; part ii, 127d; 128d
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  446d-450a;  453c-454d  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  58c-59a;  66c-67c  31 Descartes: Rules, x, 16d-17a 33 Pascal:
Geometrical  Demonstration,  440b442a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
hi,  ch  x,  sect  34 299d-300a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 227a-228a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  261c-d;  320c-321b  42  Kant:  Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics  y  376c-d 43 Federalist: number 14, 62a-d 43 Mill:
Liberty,  284b-c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 209a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi, 243b; epilogue 1, 672a-b

[598b]
d IEAT IDEAS 5d to 5e{2) 5e. Practical reasoning 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk
hi, ch 1-4 162a-166b / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 7
[io32a25-b22]
555b-d  /  Soul, bk i, ch 3 [407^2-23] 636d; bk in, ch 9 [432b26-433a 5]
665c  9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7 [701*539J 236b-d / Ethics, bk
i, ch 3 [i094b i2-27J 339d-340a; ch 4 [io95a30-b i3J 340c-d; ch 7
[i098a2o-b8] 343c-344a; bk
ii,  ch  7  [1107^732]  352d-353a;  bk  x,  ch i [ii72a34-b 7] 426b-c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk hi, ch 2 177c178d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  53a-54a;  60b-61a; 66c-68a; 78a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
57d-58b;  81d-82a  31  Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 48b-50b 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters,  27a-80b;  90a-127a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 60a-c;
149d-150a;   190c191a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals,  253a255d;
260d-261b;  264b-265b; 266b-d; 271ac; 277d-279d; 283d-287d esp 283d-284d
/ Practical Reason, 291a-297c; 298a-300a; 300d
[fn
1];  306d-307a;  307d-321b  esp  307d-309b,  309d-310b;  329a-337a,c esp
329b-d;  338c343d;  349b-350c  /  Pref  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
372b-d  / Intro. Metaphysic oj Morals, 383a-d; 388d; 390b,d-391a; 393a /
Science  of  Right,  398c-399c;  416b-417a  /  Judgement,  461a-467a esp
463a-467a; 596c598b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445c-d; 456a-457b 53 James:
Psychology,  186a;  381b-385b  esp  382a 5^(1) The form of the practical
syllogism 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch ii
[434^ 6-22]
667a 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7 [7oi a539] 236b-d / Ethics, bk
vi, ch 9 391c-392b esp
[ii42b2o-26]
392a; bk vii, ch 3
[ii46b24U47b i9] 396d-398a passim
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  81,  a  3,  ans and rep 2
430c-431d; q 86, a 1, rep 2 461c-462a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 76, a 1, ans 141a-c; q 77, a 2, rep 4 145d-147c 5e{2) Deduction
and  determination  in  legal  thought  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7
382c-383a;  ch  10 385c-386b / Politics, bk hi, ch ii [i282b i6] 480b-c;
ch 15 [1286^0-37] 484b-d; ch 16
[1287*23-28] 485d; [i287b i5-25] 486a-b
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95, a 2 227c-228c; a 4
229b-230c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 86c-87b; 91a96b esp 95c-96b;
part ii, 130c-136b esp 130c; 164a,c; part hi, 165a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  94d-95b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3a; 3c; bk
xxvi, 214b,

[599a]
5<r(3)  to  6b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 149d-150a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
445c-446b;  456a-457b; 475b,d [fn i] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  214  71a-c; par 216 71d-72a; par 222 73ji=c; par £d; a 225-229
73d-75b  esp  par  227  74  l;  ADDItions,  134 138b-c; 140 139b-c 5e(3)
Deliberation:  the  choice  of  alternative means; decision 5 Euripides:
Phoenician Maidens
[528-593]
382c-383a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch i
[1110*28-35]
356a; ch 2-3 357b-359a; bk vi, ch 1-2 387a388b; ch 5 389a-c passim; ch 7
[ii4i b8-2i]
390c-d;  ch  8-9  390d-392b;  ch  12  [1144*6-37] 393d-394a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk iv, sect 12 264c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
19,  a 5, ans 112d-113c; a 7, ans 114d-115d; o 82, a 2, rep 3 432d-433c;
Q 83, a i, ans 436d438a; part i-ii, qq 13-15 672d-684a; o 44, a 2 808b-d
22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a esp par 9-36 403a-417b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 53a; 64a-65c; 77d 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice,
act  ii, sc vii [1-75] 416a-417a; sc ix [19-72] 417d-418b; act in, sc 11
[73-139]  420d-421b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  81d-95b  31
Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 48b-50b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  48  190c-d; sect 53 191d-192b; sect 57 193b-c; sect
60-73  194a-199c  passim  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 60a-c; 169c-170a / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261b;  266b267d;  268b  / Practical
Reason, 327d-329a / Science of Right, 398a-399c / Judgement, 586ab;588b
[fn 2]; 595a-d
43  Mill:  Liberty,  276b-277a; 294d-295b / Utilitarianism, 456a-457b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part ii, par 122 44a 53 James: Psychology,
794a-798b  esp 794a, 796a-b 6. The character of reasoning in the various
disciplines  6a.  Proof  in metaphysics and theology 7 Plato: Parmenides
486a-511d  esp  491a-c  /  Sophist, 570a-d / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[1004*
25-31] 523b-c; bk vi, ch i [io25b i-i8] 547b,d; bk ix, ch 6
[i048 a25~b
9] 573c-574a; bk xi, ch 3
[io6i aio-i8]
589b; ch 7
[1064*1-9]
592b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a10c; q 2, a 2 lld-12c;
q 32, a i, rep 2 175d178a; q 46, a 2 2 53a- 2 55a

[599b]
Chapter  77: REASONING 565 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 2
a  10  399b-400b;  part  hi  suppl, q 75, a 3 rep 2 938a-939d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 78d-79a; 79d-80a; part 11, 163a-b; part hi, 165b 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  122b-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning, 95d-101c 31 Descartes: Meditations, 69a-71a,c / Objections and
Replies,  119d;  128a-129a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, prop ii, schol
358d359b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 355b-356b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
i,  div 2 451b-c; div 4 451d-452c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308c-d 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 85d-88a; 179c 182b; 190a-200c; 211c-218d esp
215d-216d  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d / Practical Reason,
293c-294b;  351b-352c / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365a366a /
Judgement,  600d-603d  6b.  Demonstration  in  mathematics: analysis and
synthesis 7 Plato: Meno, 180b-183c / Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; bk vii,
392a-395c; 397c-d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 41
[49**
32-37] 68c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[71*11-16] 97a-b; ch
10 104d-105d esp
[76**
39-77*2]  105d;  ch 12 106c-107c; ch 18 110b-c; b2i-25] 128a-b / Topics,
bk  v, ch 4 [132*32-34] 183b; bk vi, ch 4 [i4i b3-22] 194d-195a; bk vii,
ch 3
[153*6-11]
208a-b; bk viii, ch 1
[157*1-3] 213a / Physics, bk
ii,  ch  9  [200*15-29]  277c-d  /  Heavens, bk hi, ch bk 11, ch 9 [93 4
[302b27-3i] 394a / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996*21-36] 514d-515a; [996^8-21] 515b; bk
vii, ch 10
[1036*2-8]
559b-c; bk ix, ch 9
[1051*22-34] 577b-c; bk xi, ch 3 [io6i*29-b
3] 589c; ch 4 589d-590a; ch 7 [1063^6-1064*9] 592b; bk xiii, ch 2
[io77b i-io] 608d-609a;
ch  3  609a-610a  9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch 6
[742^3-35] 283d-284a / Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b i9-27] 339d-340a; bk
hi, ch 3 [ui2b 20-24] 358d; bk vii, ch 8
[1151*15-19]
402a  11  Archimedes:  Method,  569b-570a;  prop  i, 572b 11 Apollonius:
Conies,  bk  ii,  prop  44-47  710b713a; prop 49-51 714b-726a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 56b; 58a-c; 59c 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, lb-c 31
Descartes:  Rules  la-40a,c  passim, esp 11, 3a, iv, 7c, vi 8a-10a, xiv,
30d-33b,  xvi-xxi 33d-40a,c / Discourse, part i, 43bc; part ii, 46c-47c;
part  iv,  52d-53a / Meditations, 73a; 1, 76c; v, 93a-d / Objections and
Replies,  128a129a  /  Geometry  295a-353b  esp  bk  i, 295a298b, bk 11,
304a-b, bk hi, 353a

[600a]
(6.   The  character  of  reasoning  in  the  various  disciplines.  6b.
Demonstration  in  mathematics:  analysis  and  synthesis.)  33  Pascal:
Pensees,  1-5 171a-173a / Vacuum, 365b-366a / Geometrical Demonstration,
430a434a;  442a-443b 34 Newton: Principles, la-b / Optics, bk hi, 543a-b
35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi, sect 4 166a-b; bk iv, ch
i,  sect  9,  308d309b;  ch  11,  sect  9-10  311b-c;  ch hi, sect 18-20
317d-319c  passim; ch xii, sect 1-8 358c-360c passim, esp sect 7 360b-c;
sect  14-15  362d-363b;  ch  xvii,  sect  ii  378b  35  Berkeley:  Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  12  408a-b;  sect  15-16 409a-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect iv, div 20 458a-b; sect vii, div 48 470d-471c; sect
xii,  div  131  508d-509a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 17d-18d; 46a-b;
68a-69c; 211c-218d esp 215d-217a / Practical Reason, 295b-d; 330d-331a /
Pre/. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 376c-d / Science of Right, 399a-b
/  Judgement,  551a-553c  43  Federalist:  number 31, 103c-104a 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445a-d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, 2b 45
Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  173a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk xi,
469a-d;  epilogue  11, 695b-c 53 James: Psychology, 874a-878a passim 6c.
Inductive  and  deductive  inference in the philosophy of nature and the
natural  sciences  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  ii, ch 7-9 275b-278a,c /
Heavens, bk ii, ch 5 379b-c; bk hi, ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption,
bk 1, ch 2
[316*5-14] 411c-d
/  Metaphysics,  bk 11, ch 3 [995*15-17] 513d 9 Aristotle: Generation of
Animals,  bk  hi,  ch  10  [760^9-32]  301d-302a 10 Hippocrates: Ancient
Medicine,  par  1-8  la3b  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk hi, ch 1-2
199a-200a esp 199c-d 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres,
505a-506a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i, rep 2 3b-4a; q
32,  a  i,  rep  2  175d-178a  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day,
207d-208c;   fourth   day,  252a-b  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,
267b,d-268a;  280c; 285c-d; 295d-296a / On Animal Generation, 332a-335c;
336b-d;  383d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  16a;  34b; 42a-c;
56c-59c; 96d-97a / Novum Organum 105a-195d esp pref 105a-106d, bk i, aph
ii26  107d-108d,  aph  69  116a-b, aph 103-106 127d-128c, bk 11, aph 1-9
137a-140c, aph 36 164a-168d, aph 52 194c-195d

[600b]
31  Descartes: Discourse, part vi 60d-67a,c esp 61d-62c / Objections and
Replies,  215a-b  33 Pascal: Vacuum, 365b-371a 34 Newton: Principles, bk
hi,  rules  270a-271b;  general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics,  BK  III,
541b-542a;  543a-b  34  Huygens:  Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i, sect 10 123b-d; bk iv, ch hi, sect 25-29
321a-323a  passim; ch vi, sect 13 335c-d; ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 107, 434a 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  i, div 9 454c-455a; sect hi, div 19, 458a; sect iv, div 26 460b-c;
sect  vii,  div  48  470d-471c;  div 60, 477a; sect ix, div 82 487b-c 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part iv, 165a-b 42 Kant: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
387a-b  /  Judgement,  578d-582c  esp  579b-c  45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  659a; 774d-775a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 42a; 239c 50
Marx:  Capital,  6a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 53 James:
Psychology,  91a-94b  esp  94b;  126a127a  passim; 295a-b; 324b; 385a-b;
674a675b   esp   675b;  677b;  862a-865a;  882a-884b  passim  54  Freud:
Narcissism,  400d-401b  /  Instincts,  412a-b  /  General  Introduction,
483d-485a   esp   484c-485a;  502d-503d;  545c  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure
Principle, 661c-662a / New Introductory Lectures, 879c 6d. Induction and
demonstration in the moral sciences 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b i2-27]
339d-340a; ch 4
[i095a30-b i3] 340c-d; ch 7
[i098 a25-b7] 343d-344a; bk
vii, ch i
[ii45b
1-7] 395b; bk x, ch i
[1 172*34^7] 426b-c /
Politics,  bk  1,  ch  1 [1252*17-24] 445b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
58a-b;  part  ii,  130c-136b; 153c-154a; 164a,c; part hi, 165a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect 1 103d-104a; sect 4 104d-105a; bk
hi,  ch  xi, sect 15-17 303b-304a esp sect 16 303c-d; bk iv, ch hi, sect
18-20  317d-319c; ch iv, sect 7 325b; ch xii, sect 8 360c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect i, div 1-5 451a-453b passim; div 9, 454d-455a; sect
v, div 36, 465a-d
[fn
1];  sect  vii, div 48 470d471c; sect xii, div 131-132 508d-509d passim,
esp div 132, 509c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, xxib-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 169b
[fn
1]  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253d-254b; 265c-266d / Practical
Reason, 293c-294b; 304d-305a; 306d-307a; 307d-309b; 309d-310b; 317b318b;
320c-321b;  330d-331a  /  Pref  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 372b-d;
376c-d /

[601a]
414a; 416b-417a / Judgement, 593a-d 140 139b-c 43 Federalist: number 31,
103c-104a;  number  50  Marx:  Capital,  6a-c  CROSS-REFERENCES idea and
topics  with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two
groups: I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by
authors not represented in this collection. I.

[601b]

[602a]
568  THE GREAT IDEAS Hegel. Science of Logic, vol ii, sect i, ch 3 J. S.
Mill. A System of Logic, bk ii, v Faraday. Observations on the Education
of the Judgment W. James. "The Sentiment of Rationality," in The Will to
Believe  II. Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria {Institutes of Oratory), BK
V,  CH  IO-I4;  BK VII, CH 8 Sextus Empiricus. Against the Logicians, bk
ii, ch 3-6 . Outlines of Pyrrhonism, bk i-ii Petrus Hispanicus. Summulae
Logicales  {Logical  Treatises)  Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xix
(5-6),  xxix,  xxx  (2,  8)  John  of Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus
Thomisticus,  Ars  Logica,  part  i, qq 6, 8; part ii, qq 24-25 Arnauld.
Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking,  part  iii-iv  Leibnitz.  New  Essays
Concerning  Human Understanding, bk 11, ch 19 Euler. Letters to a German
Princess T. Reid. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, VII Maine de
Biran.  The  Influence of Habit on the Faculty of Thinking Schopenhauer.
The  World  as  Will and Idea, vol 11, sup, ch 10 Brown. Lectures on the
Philosophy  of  the  Human  Mind,  vol 11, pp 497-525 Bentham. Rationale
of Judicial Evidence . The Bool{ of Fallacies Whately. Elements of Logic,
bk 1, ch 3; bk iv W. Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, vol 11
(15-23)  Whewell.  The Philosophy ofthe Inductive Sciences, VOL I, BK i;
VOL   II,  BK  XI,  XIII  Cournot.  Essai  sur  les  fondements  de  nos
connaissances et sur les characteres de la critique philosophique

[602b]
Mans el. Prolegomena Logica. An Inquiry into the Psychological Character
of  Logical  Processes  G.  C.  Lewis.  A  Treatise  on  the  Methods of
Observation  and  Reasoning  in  Politics Boole. An Investigation of the
Laws  of Thought De Morgan. Formal Logic, ch 5-6 . A Budget of Paradoxes
Taine.  On  Intelligence  SlGWART. Logic, PART I, CH 3; PART III, CH 3-4
Jevons.  The Substitution of Similars . The Principles of Science, ch 4,
6-7,  11  Clifford. Seeing and Thinking LOTZE. Logic, BK I, CH 3; BK II,
CH  4-7  .  Outlines  of  Logic,  div i, ch 3 Venn. Symbolic Logic C. S.
Peirce. Collected Papers, vol ii, par 435-618; vol iv, par 21-79; vol v,
par  15 1-2 12 A. Sidgwick. Fallacies . The Use of Words in Reasoning J.
C.  Wilson.  Statement and Inference, part i, hi Dewey et al. Studies in
Logical  Theory, i-iv Whitehead and Russell. Principia Mathematica, PART
I,  SECT A Bradley. The Principles of Logic, bk ii-iii; Terminal Essays,
1 . Appearance and Reality, bk ii, ch 15 . Collected Essays, vol 1(12) .
Essays  on  Truth  and  Reality,  ch  12 Dewey. How We Think . Essays in
Experimental  Logic,  ii-vi  Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society, vol i-iii
BOSANQUET. Logic, VOL II, CH l~2, 6-7 . Implication and Linear Inference
W.  E.  Johnson.  Logic,  part i, ch 14; part ii, ch 1-6 J. M. Keynes. A
Treatise  on  Probability,  part  ii, ch 12-14 Santayana. Scepticism and
Animal  Faith,  ch  13 Meyerson. Du cheminement de la pensee B. Russell.
Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, ch 14 . An Inquiry into Meaning
and Truth, ch 24

[603a]
CLE  quantity  and  quality, relation is generally recognized as a basic
term  or  category.  But  its  meaning,  like theirs, cannot be defined.
Relation  is,  perhaps,  the  prototype  of  an  indefinable  notion. As
Bertrand  Russell  points  out,  it  seems  to be impossible to make any
statement  of  what  relation is without using the notion of relation in
doing  so.  Any  term  which  is  essentially  relative seems also to be
incapable  of definition. Its meaning cannot be stated without referring
to  its  correlative;  and  since the meaning of the latter reciprocally
involves  the  former  as  its  correlative,  each  member  of a pair of
correlative terms draws upon the other for its meaning. A part is a part
of  a whole; a whole, a whole of parts. Similarly, the meaning of parent
involves  the  notion  of  child  and the meaning of child the notion of
parent. Plato applies this maddening fact about correlative terms to all
comparatives   which  presuppose  the  correlation  of  more  and  less.
"Comparatives  such as the hotter and the colder," he writes, "are to be
ranked  in  the  class  of  the  infinite."  They  cannot be measured or
defined.  Terms  like 'much' and 'little,' 'great' and 'small' look like
quantities,  but,  according to Aristotle, they are "not quantities, but
relatives,  for  things  are  not great or small absolutely; they are so
called  rather  as  the  result  of  an  act  of comparison." Concerning
quantities   and  qualities,  the  ancients  ask  how  they  exist.  The
alternatives  seem to be either that they exist in and of themselves, or
that  they  exist  as  the  attributes  of substances such as stones and
trees.  But  with  regard to relations, the question seems to be whether
they  exist  rather than how they exist. The supposition that a relation
cannot  exist  apart  from  the terms it relates may be thought to imply
that the relation does exist when the

[603b]
terms  it  relates exist. The ancients, however, do not appear to regard
the  relation  as  something  having  a reality distinguishable from the
reality  of  the correlative terms. It seems to be significant that both
Plato  and  Aristotle  discuss  relative terms, rather than relations as
such. For the most part, they signify relations by using a pair of words
which name things standing in a certain relation to one another. Thus in
the  Categories,  Aristotle  refers to 'double' and 'half,' 'master' and
'slave,'  'greater'  and  'less,'  or  'knowledge' and 'object known' as
examples  of  correlative  terms.  "All  relatives,"  he  says,  "have a
correlative."  Sometimes  it  is  necessary to find the precise word, or
even  to  invent  the  right word, for in order to indicate that a given
term   is   relative,  its  correlative  must  be  appropriately  named.
"Concubine,"  says  Locke,  "is,  no  doubt, a relative name, as well as
wife;  but  in  languages  where  this,  and  like  words,  have  not  a
correlative  term, there people are not so apt to take them to be so, as
wanting  that  evident  mark of relations which is between correlatives,
which  seem  to  explain  one  another,  and not to be able to exist but
together."  When  "reciprocity of correlation does not appear to exist,"
Aristotle suggests that it may be the result of our failure to use words
carefully.  If  we  wish to use the term 'rudder' as relative, we cannot
call  its  correlative  a  'boat,'  for  "there  are boats which have no
rudders."  Since there is no existing word, it would be "more accurate,"
Aristotle  thinks,  "ifwe  coined  some word like 'ruddered' to name the
correlative  of  'rudder.'  "  Similarly,  in  the  case of 'slave' as a
relative term, its correlative is not 'man' understood in any sense, but
only  man  understood  as 'master.' The things which are designated by a
pair of reciprocally relative terms must, according to

[604a]
570  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Aristotle,  coexist.  One man cannot be called a
master  unless another man exists who can be called his slave; something
cannot  be  called  larger  unless  something  coexistent with it can be
called   smaller.   Aristotle  considers  possible  exceptions  to  this
principle  of  the  simultaneity or coexistence of correlatives; as, for
example,  in  the case of knowledge and the knowable. It seems possible,
he  thinks, for the knowable to exist before anyone has actual knowledge
of  it.  But  the  exception  may  be  due  to an improper naming of the
correlatives.  If  the correlative of knowledge is the known rather than
the  knowable,  then  knowledge  and  its  object  may  be  said  to  be
necessarily  coexistent,  for  nothing  comes  to  be an object actually
known,  except simultaneously with someone's coming actually to know it.
The  coexistence  of  things  which are correlative to one another still
leaves a question concerning the existence of the relation between them.
When  conceived  as an attribute, a quality or a quantity can be said to
exist  in  the  thing it somehow modifies. In the language of Aristotle,
such  accidents  inhere  in  substances, and accordingly have reality as
long  as  the substances in which they inhere exist. But a relation does
not  seem  to  inhere  in  a  substance. It cannot be the attribute of a
single  thing.  It somehow lies between two things, inhering in neither,
for  if  it  belonged  to either one alone it could have some reality if
that  one  existed  and  the  other did not. The question, therefore, is
whether  relations  really  exist at all, or are only in the mind of him
who  compares  things or considers them relative to one another. "A sign
that  the relative is least of all a substance and a real thing," writes
Aristotle,  "is  the  fact  that  it  alone  has no proper generation or
destruction or movement; as in respect of quantity there is increase and
diminution,  in  respect  of  quality  alteration,  in  respect of place
locomotion,  in  respect of substance simple generation and destruction.
In respect to relation there is no proper change; for, without changing,
a thing will be now greater and now less or equal, if that with which it
is  compared  has  changed  in  quantity."  Plotinus  also questions the
reality of relations. "Has relation— for example, that of

[604b]
right  and  left,  double  and half—any actuality? . . . What can be the
meaning of correlatives apart from our conception of their juxtaposition
?  'Greater'  may refer to very different magnitudes; 'different' to all
sorts  of objects. The comparison is ours; it does not lie in the things
themselves."  In  the  case  of  certain  space  and  time  relations he
maintains that "right and left are in our conception, nothing of them in
the  things  themselves.  Before  and  after  are merely two things; the
relation  is  again  of our making." Yet Plotinus seems unwilling to say
that  "we do not mean anything by relation, but are victimsof words, "or
that  "none  of  the relations mentioned can exist." Recognizing what he
calls  "the  elusive character of relation," he is willing to affirm the
reality of relations "when the actuality of the relationships is derived
from  no other source than relation itself." He thinks that one quantity
may  be the double of another, "quite apart from our speech or thought."
The  fact  that  one  quantity is the double of another is an additional
fact about the two quantities over and above all their other properties.
"In  all the conditions in which we assert relation," Plotinus declares,
"the  mutual  relation exists over and above the objects; we perceive it
as already existent; our knowledge is directed upon a thing, there to be
known—  a  clear testimony to the reality of relation." The problem thus
seems  to  become  one  of  distinguishing  between relations which have
independent  reality  and those which exist only in the mind. "Some have
said that relation is not a reality but only an idea. But this," Aquinas
declares,  "is  plainly  seen to be false from the very fact that things
themselves  have  a  mutual  order  and relation." Not all relations are
real, however. "Relations which result in the things understood from the
operation of the intellect alone are logical relations only, inasmuch as
reason  observes  them  as  existing between two understood things." For
example, "the relation of a thing to itself is not a real relation," for
"reason, by apprehending one thing twice, regards it as two; and thus it
apprehends  a  certain  relation  of a thing to itself . . . The same is
true  of those relations that follow upon an act of reason, as genus and
species, and the like."

[605a]
Aquinas  offers,  in contrast, "other relations which are realities with
regard  to  both  extremes; as when a relation exists between two things
according  to  some  reality  that belongs to both. This is clear of all
relations  consequent  upon  quantity, great and small, double and half,
and  the like; for there is quantity in both extremes." This distinction
between  real  and  logical  relations  seems  to  be  qualified  by the
intermediate case of a relation which is partly logical and partly real;
for, according to Aquinas, "sometimes a relation in one extreme may be a
reality,  while  in  the other extreme, it is only an idea. This happens
whenever  the  two  extremes  are  not  of  one order . . . Since God is
outside  the  whole  order  of creation and all creatures are ordered to
Him,  and  not  conversely,  it  is  manifest  that creatures are really
related  to  God  Himself;  whereas  in God there is no real relation to
creatures,  but  a  relation  onlv  in  idea,  inasmuch as creatures are
related to Him." In the Charmides, Socrates raises some doubts about the
admissibility  of  reflexive  relations,  or  the relations of things to
themselves.  Others  have  questioned the partly real and partly logical
relation,  according  to  which  one thing is related to another but the
second  is  not  related to the first. But the more important issues, in
the tradition of western thought, seem to be whether there are both real
and  logical  relations, i.e., relations both in nature and in the mind,
and whether, in either case, relations enter into the very nature of the
things  related or are merely external, so that the character of a thing
is  unaffected  by the relations in which it stands. As indicated in the
chapters  on  Judgment, Reasoning, and Logic, relation tends to displace
predication  in certain typically modern theories of the proposition and
of inference. What is currently called "relational logic" is set against
"subject-predicate  logic."  Relations themselves, without regard to the
character  of  the  terms  related, become the primary object of logical
analysis. It is said, for example, that the proposition 'John hit James'
has  the  form 'aRb' or 'R(a,b),' and that the proposition 'John went to
school with James' has the form

[605b]
Chapter  78:  RELATION  571 'R(a,b,c,).' The first is a dyadic relation,
the  second  a  triadic relation. Relations are classified not only with
respect to the number of the terms they relate, but also with respect to
such  formal  properties  as  symmetry,  transitivity,  reflexivity. The
relation of parent and child, for example, is asymmetrical. It cannot be
said,  if  A is the parent of B, that B is also the parent of A; whereas
the  relation  of  brotherhood is symmetrical. Statements of symmetrical
relationship  are  convertible. If we say that A is the brother of B, we
can  also  say  that  B  is  the  brother of A. The type of relationship
remains  the  same  regardless  of  the  character of the terms. Unequal
quantities  are  asymmetrically related, equal quantities symmetrically;
'to-the-rightof  is  an  asymmetrical  spatial  relation,  'next-to'  is
symmetrical;  in time, 'simultaneous-with' is symmetrical and 'prior-to'
asymmetrical.   The  distinction  between  transitive  and  intransitive
relations similarly holds for all kinds of terms. The relation of father
to son or of 'standingnext-to' in space is intransitive, for if A is the
father  of  B,  and B the father of C, A is not the father of C; whereas
the  spatial relation of 'standing-to-the-right-of is transitive, for if
A  is to the right of B, and B to the right of C, then A is to the right
of C. The modern analysis of propositions as relational structures which
differ  in  type  according  to  the character of the relations, not the
character  of  the  terms,  has  an  antecedent  in  Locke's analysis of
judgments as acts of comparison which look to the relation between ideas
rather  than  to the ideas themselves. Both analyses lead to a theory of
inference  which is based on the convertibility of symmetrical relations
and  on the transitivity of certain relationships and the intransitivity
of  others.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter on Reasoning, the factor of
transitivity  appears  in William James' discussion of the "principle of
mediate  comparison."  He states this in the formula "more than the more
is  more  than  the  less."  Then he explains that "such a formula would
cover  all  possible cases; as, earlier than early is earlier than late,
worse  than  bad is worse than good, east of east is east of west; etc.,
etc.,  ad  libitum.  Symbolically, we might write itasa<b<c<d... and say
that any number of intermediaries may be ex-

[606a]
572 THE GREAT IDEAS punged without obliging us to alter anything in what
remains  written."  James  thus  formulates  what he regards as the most
fundamental law of thought. For series of "homogeneously related terms,"
the  law  is  that "skipping intermediary terms leaves the relations the
same."  The  factor  of  transitivity  enters  the  picture  when  James
distinguishes  between  relations  which are and relations which are not
transferable.  "All skipping of intermediaries and transfer of relations
occurs  within  homogeneous series," he writes. "But not all homogeneous
series allow of intermediaries being skipped. It depends on which series
they  are, on what relations they contain. Let it not be said that it is
a  mere  matter  of  verbal  association,  due to the fact that language
sometimes  permits  us  to  transfer the name of a relation over skipped
intermediaries,   and   sometimes   does  not;  as  where  we  call  men
'progenitors'  of  their remote as well as of their immediate posterity,
but refuse to call them 'fathers' thereof. There are relations which are
intrinsically  transferable,  whilst  others  are  not.  The relation of
condition,  e.g.,  is  intrinsically  transferable.  What  conditions  a
condition  conditions  what  it  conditions— 'cause of cause is cause of
effect.'  The  relations of negation and frustration, on the other hand,
are  not  transferable: what frustrates a frustration does not frustrate
what  it  frustrates. No changes in terminology would annul the intimate
difference  between  these two cases." The foregoing passages from James
reflect the general tenor of the theory of the calculus of relations. He
himself  does  not  systematically  expound it. Its elaboration is to be
found  in  the  writings  of  Boole, Couturat, and De Morgan, of Jevons,
Pierce,  Bradley, Royce, Russell and Whitehead (whose works are cited in
the Additional Readings). Is this relational logic more general than the
subject-predicate  logic that is traditionally called "Aristotelian," or
is  the  reverse  the  case ? The modern answer insists upon the greater
generality   of   relational   logic.   Royce,   for  example,  defining
"subsumption"  as  a  non-symmetrical, transitive relation which obtains
between  two  classes  when  one  includes the other, declares that "the
entire traditional 'theory of

[606b]
the  syllogism'  can  be  expressed  as  a  sort  of  comment  upon, and
relatively  simple  application  of, the transitivity of the subsumption
relation."   According   to  Royce,  William  James'  axiom  of  skipped
intermediaries represents a step in the right direction, but it fails to
achieve  complete generality. Russell disposes of the traditional theory
of  the  proposition  in  the  same  fashion  that Royce disposes of the
traditional  theory  of  the  syllogism.  Traditional  logic, he writes,
"believed  that  there was only one form of simple proposition (i.e., of
proposition   not   stating   a  relation  between  two  or  more  other
propositions),  namely,  the  form  which  ascribes  a  predicate  to  a
subject."  It  is, therefore, "unable to admit the reality of relations;
all  relations,  it  maintains,  must  be  reduced  to properties of the
apparently  related  terms."  Russell  insists,  on  the  contrary, that
"propositions  stating  that  two  things have a certain relation have a
different  form  from  subject-predicate propositions." This can be most
easily  seen,  he  thinks,  in  the  case of asymmetrical relations. The
proposition  which  states  that  A and B are related by the symmetrical
relation  of  equality,  can  be  interpreted  to mean that A and B both
possess  a common property. "But when we come to asymmetrical relations,
such  as before and after, greater and less, etc., the attempt to reduce
them   to   properties   becomes,"   in  Russell's  opinion,  "obviously
impossible."  The  relational  theory  of  the  proposition,  therefore,
includes  the  subject-predicate  theory as a special case. A defense of
the  subject-predicate  logic  would  not  make  the  counterclaim  that
relational  logic  can  be  treated  as  a special case. Rather it would
insist  that  the  two logics are radically different in principle— that
the  one  belongs  to a philosophy of nature and a metaphysics, in which
substance  is  the  primary  concept;  whereas  the other belongs to the
empirical  sciences  and  to modern mathematics, in which the concept of
relation  supplants  substance.  Whichever  side  of  the controversy is
taken,  the  undeniable  difference  between a relational and a subject-
predicate  logic  represents one of the great differences between modern
and  ancient  thought.  It is not only in logic that the modern emphasis
seems to be upon relations rather than

[607a]
upon  things  related—on relations denuded of their terms rather than on
terms  treated  as  correlatives.  The  same  tendency appears in modern
mathematics,  in  algebra, in the calculus, and especially in the theory
of  equations  and  functions,  of  sets  and series. It also appears in
modern  physics  where,  according  to  Cassirer,  the  great conceptual
revolution  consists in displacing substance by function, and the casual
interaction  of  substances  by  functional relationships and systems of
order. Such substitutions obviously parallel the shift in logic—from the
consideration  of  terms  related  as  subjects  and  predicates, to the
consideration  of  relations  without regard to differences in the terms
related. In the tradition of the great books, this conceptual revolution
seems to be announced by the treatment which Hume and Kant accord to the
notion  of substance. Hume appears to conceive of experience as a series
of  events related, as he says, by "only three principles of connexion .
.  .  namely,  Resemblance,  Contiguity  in  time or place, and Cause or
Effect." These relations make up the fabric of experience. So long as it
consisted  in such connections, our experience would be the same whether
or not there were enduring things or substances. "Nature has established
connexions among particular ideas," Hume writes, so that "no sooner does
one  idea occur to our thoughts than it introduces its correlative." All
our  knowledge of matters of fact depends upon the association of ideas,
or  the  relations  of  resemblance, contiguity, and causation among the
elements  of  experience.  All  other knowledge has for its object those
relations between ideas which do not connect them causally or place them
in  a spatial or temporal order. In either case, relations of all sorts,
rather  than  things  and  their  properties  (or  substances  and their
attributes),  seem  to  be  the  prime  constituents  of  nature  and of
knowledge.   Kant   presents  a  fourfold  classification  of  judgments
according  to their quantity, quality, relation, and modality. Under the
head  of  relation,  he distinguishes the categorical, the hypothetical,
and the disjunctive according to the following criteria: "a. Relation of
the predicate to the subject, b. Relation of the cause to its effect, c.
Relation of subdivided knowledge,

[607b]
Chapter 78: RELATION 573 and of the collected members of the subdivision
to  each  other." These are, he writes, "all the relations of thought in
judgements."  Pointing out that he borrows the term from Aristotle, Kant
calls the pure concepts of the understanding "categories" and constructs
a  table  of  categories  which runs parallel to his table of judgments;
because,  as  he  explains,  "the  same  function which imparts unity to
various  representations  in one judgement imparts unity likewise to the
mere  synthesis  of various representations in one intuition, which in a
general  way  may  be  called the pure concept of understanding." Kant's
categories, in contrast to Aristotle's, afford a striking example of the
shift  from  substance to relation. Where for Aristotle substance is the
primary  category  and  all  other  categories  signify the accidents of
substance,  among  which  relation  seems  to  have least reality in the
nature  of  things,  Kant makes relation one of the four major groups of
categories,  and  under  relation  places  subsistence and inherence (or
substance  and  accident)  along with causality and dependence (or cause
and  effect)  and  community  (or reciprocity between the active and the
passive).  It  is  not  substance,  but  the  relation  of substance and
accident,  which  is  for  Kant  a  transcendental  category.  The issue
concerning  substance  and  relation  takes  another form in the problem
whether  relations  exist  in the very nature of things, as belonging to
their  essence,  or  only  exist  as  connections between things. In the
latter  alternative,  there  is  still  the  question  whether relations
between things are externally affixed to them or are internally inherent
in  them  and affect the natures of the things related. According to the
Christian doctrine of the Trinity, there are real relations in God, each
really  distinct  from  the  others,  yet each identical with the divine
essence.  These  relations are the persons of the Trinity— the relations
Aquinas  calls  "paternity,  filiation,  spiration  and procession," the
relation of the Father and the Son, and of the Holy Spirit to them both.
"Relation  in  God," he writes, "is not as an accident in a subject, but
is  the  divine  essence itself; and so it is subsistent, for the divine
essence is subsistent. Therefore, as the Godhead

[608a]
574  THE  GREAT IDEAS is God, so the divine paternity is God the Father,
Who  is a divine person. Therefore, a divine person signifies a relation
as  subsisting."  Since the three persons of the Trinity are of the same
essence,   the  principle  of  their  real  distinction  must  be  found
elsewhere.  Denying  that  "there  can  be discerned between them a real
distinction in respect of the divine essence," Descartes does not reject
the  possibility  of  a distinction "in respect of their relation to one
another."  Aquinas  considers  "two  principles  of difference among the
divine  persons  . . . origin and relation," but thinks it is "better to
say that the persons or hypostases are distinguished by relations rather
than  by  origin";  for,  among  other  reasons,  "when a relation is an
accident,  it  presupposes  the  distinction  of  subjects; but when the
relation  is  subsistent,  it  does  not  presuppose,  but brings about,
distinction." It would seem to follow that, except in God, relations are
not  subsistent.  In  Aristotle's  theory  of  corporeal substances, for
example,  the  matter and the form which constitute a physical thing are
united,  not  related.  Though  matter  and form are conceived as really
distinct  principles  in  the  composition  of  a composite substance—as
essence  and  existence  are  also  sometimes said to be really distinct
principles in the being of all things except God— their real distinction
does  not  imply  that  they  are  subsistent, as are the persons of the
Trinity,  nor that they are relations, or in relation to one another. If
real  as  opposed  to  logical relations occur only between things which
somehow  really  subsist,  then those principles which must be united in
order  for  a  thing to subsist cannot be really related to one another.
With  a  somewhat  different  analysis, Locke seems to exclude relations
from  the constitution of what he calls "the complex idea of substance."
All complex ideas, according to Locke, "are either modes, substances, or
relations."  The  complex  idea  of  substance is a "collection of those
several  simple  ideas of sensible qualities, which we ... . find united
in  the  thing called horse or stone; yet because we cannot conceive how
they  should subsist alone, nor one in another, we suppose them existing
in, and supported by some common subject; which support we denote by the
name substance,

[608b]
though  it be certain we have no clear or distinct idea of that thing we
suppose  a  support."  The  various  simple  ideas  of  qualities which,
together   with  the  indistinct  notion  of  a  supporting  substratum,
constitute  the  complex idea of a particular substance, are, in Locke's
theory,  compounded,  not  related.  Relation  is itself a complex idea,
consisting  in  "the  consideration  and  comparing  of  one  idea  with
another."  The  ideas  related  may be either simple or complex, but the
relations are between ideas, not in them— certainly not in simple ideas,
nor  in  complex  ideas of modes and substances, which are combinations,
not  relations,  of simple ideas. The exception is, of course, a complex
idea  of  relation,  which  involves  several  distinct  ideas  and,  in
addition,  the  idea  of  a relation between them which, Locke says, "it
gets  from  their  comparison  one  with  another. . . . Since any idea,
whether  simple or complex, may be the occasion why the mind thus brings
two  things  together  .  .  . any of our ideas may be the foundation of
relation"; but, Locke adds, "there must always be in relation two ideas,
or  things,  either  in  themselves  really  separate,  or considered as
distinct,  and  then  ground  or occasion for their comparison." Locke's
theory  of  relations  not  only seems to exclude them from the interior
constitution  of  substances,  but  also  seems  to  make  them entirely
extrinsic  to  the  natures  of the things related. "Ideas of relation,"
Locke  says, "may be the same in men who have far different ideas of the
things  that  are  related  or  that are thus compared." The relation is
unaffected  by  the things it relates, as they in turn are unaffected by
it, for they are "not contained in the real existence of things, but
[are] something
extraneous and super-induced." Berkeley and Hume also seem to agree that
relations  are entirely external. "Relations are distinct from the ideas
or  things  related,"  writes  Berkeley,  "inasmuch as the latter may be
perceived by us without our perceiving the former." To Hume, "all events
seem  entirely loose and separate. One event follows another; but we can
never  observe  any  tie  between  them.  They seem conjoined, but never
connected."  So  far as our understanding goes, nothing in the nature of
one event necessarily

[609a]
leads the mind to the consideration of another, as it would if the event
could  not  be  understood  by  us  except  as  intrinsically related or
connected with that other. ^^—- In the tradition of western thought, the
issue  concerning  the  internality  or  externality  of  relations  has
profound implications for man's conception of the order of nature or the
structure  of  the  world.  The  difference, discussed in the chapter on
Chance,   between   what   William  fames  calls  the  "block"  and  the
"concatenated"   universe   presupposes  not  only  different  views  of
causality,  but also different positions with respect to the internality
or  externality  of  relations,  as  is indicated by James' criticism of
Hegel  and  Bradley.  The relation of part and whole, and of one part to
another  in  the  structure  of  an organic whole, seems to be the prime
example   of   internal   relationship.  Each  part  is  thought  to  be
constituted,  both  in  its being and nature, by the being and nature of
the whole to which it belongs and by the other parts which comprise that
whole.  This may be seen in Spinoza's theory of God or Nature as the one
and  only substance, in and through which everything else both is and is
conceived.  All  things  are  locked  together  in  a system of internal
relationships—the  finite  parts  with  one another through the infinite
whole  which determines each to be what it is, in itself and in relation
to  all others. Relation seems to be the principle of order. At least it
can  be  said  that the various conceptions of order which appear in the
great  books  involve  the  idea  of  relation and of different kinds of
relationship. The order of the universe or of nature, for example, seems
to  be differently conceived according as things are causally related to
one  another,  related  as  lower  and  higher species in a hierarchy of
grades  of  being,  or  as the parts of one all-embracing whole. In each
case,  it  makes  a difference, as we have already observed, whether the
relations  involved  are  thought to be real or logical, and internal or
external   to   the  things  related.  Relation  similarly  enters  into
conceptions  of  psychological, political, and moral order— the order of
the  parts  of the soul, the order of classes or functions in the state,
the order of

[609b]
Chapter  78: RELATION 575 goods, of means and ends, of duties, of loves.
Just  as  the  status of each thing in nature is affected by whether the
universe is conceived as a whole of internally related parts or as a set
of externally related wholes, so the status of the individual in society
is  affected  by  whether  the state is conceived as an organic whole or
merely   as  a  political  order  formed  by  the  free  association  of
individuals.  The  consideration of the various types of order occurs in
other  chapters,  such as Nature, World, Soul, State, Good and Evil, and
Beauty.  Particular types of relationship are also discussed in chapters
concerned  with  the  terms  between  which  such relationships hold the
relation  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  chapter on Cause; spatial and
temporal  relationships  in the chapters on Space and Time; the relation
of species and genus in the chapters on Evolution and Idea; relations of
equality  and  inequality  in  the chapter on Quantity; and relations of
similarity  and  dissimilarity in the chapter on Quality. This last type
of relationship, more broadly conceived as including not merely likeness
in  quality,  but  the sameness or similitude of things in every sort of
respect, is the main consideration of the chapter on Same and Other. The
theory  of  analogy  is discussed there also, for though it is concerned
with  relation—a  proportion  being  a  ratio  of  ratios—  the specific
relationship  by  which relations are themselves related in analogies or
proportions   seems   to  be  one  of  similitude  (either  identity  or
similarity).  Finally,  the idea of relation seems to be involved in the
contrast  between  the  absolute and the relative. Things are said to be
considered  absolutely  when  they  are  considered  in  themselves, and
relatively when they are considered with reference to something else. By
extension of these meanings, relativism tends to assert that with regard
to  most things, if not all, what they are depends on the point of view,
i.e.,  their relation to man, to this group of men, or even to this man.
Absolutism  goes  to the opposite extreme of saying that things are what
they  are  independently  of man's view of them. The opposition of these
two  tendencies  creates  familiar issues concerning the true, the good,
and  the beautiful, which are discussed in the chapters devoted to those
subjects.

[610a]
576  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ideal  relations relations Trinity of persons 4.
Relation  in  the  order of thought or knowledge 4^. The definability or
indefinability  of  relative  terms 4^. The transcendental categories of
relation  4^.  Relations  as objects of knowledge: ideas of relation and
dreams 5. Order as a system of relationships or related things priority,
posteriority, and simultaneity (3) The order of quantities: the types of
proportion  $b. The order of the universe or of nature: the hierarchy of
beings  6.  The  absolute  and  the  relative modes of consideration 6b.
Absolute  and  relative  with respect to truth 6c. Absolute and relative
with respect to goodness or beauty

[610b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  PAGE i. The general theory of relation 577 1 a. The
nature  and being of relations: the distinction between real and logical
or  1  b.  The  effect  of  relations on the nature and being of things:
internal  and  external  \c.  The  coexistence  of correlatives 578 1*/.
Relational  unity or identity of relation: the notion and use of analogy
or proportionality 3. The relation of God to the world: divine immanence
and  transcendence 579 4^. The proposition or judgment as a statement of
relation:  relation in reasoning 4^. The relations between ideas 580 aj.
The  types  of  relationship  underlying  the  association  of  ideas in
thought,  memory,  50.  The  nature  and  types  of order: inclusion and
exclusion; succession and coexistence; (1) The order of the causes or of
cause  and  effect  581 (2) The order of goods or of means and ends: the
order  of loves 582 (4) The order of kinds: hierarchy; species and genus
583  5c.  Order  as  a principle of beauty 584 6a. Absolute and relative
with respect to space, time, motion 585

[611a]
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12.  tain  cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
[265-283]  12d.  tently  rather than continuously in the work or passage
cited.  1.  The  general  theory of relation la. The nature and being of
relations: the distinction between real and logical or ideal relations 7
Plato:  Charmides, 8d-9d / Cratylus, 86d / Phaedo, 242c-245d / Republic,
bk  v,  372d373b  /  Timaeus,  448b-449a / Parmenides, 489a-c / Sophist,
570a-574c  /  Statesman,  594a-b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7 lla-13d /
Physics, BK III, CH I
[200b2Q-32] 278b; BK
V, CH 2
[225b u-i3] 305d
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[990b9-i7] 508d; bk v, ch
15 542a-543a; bk xiv, ch 1 [io88ai5-b 4 ] 620b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 6
[1096*17-29]
341b-c  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr i, ch 6-9 254d257a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 6, a 2, rep 1 28d-29c; q 13, a 7 68d-70d; q
28,  aa 1-2 157c-160a; a 4, ans and rep 1,3-4 160c161d; q 40, a 2, rep 4
214b-215b;  q  42,  a  1,  rep 4 224b-225d; Q 45, a 3, rep 1-3 244a-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, A I, ANS lb-2b; PART III, Q
2, A 7, REP 2 718b-d

[611b]
Chapter  78:  RELATION  577  31 Descartes: Rules, vi, 8c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxv  214d-217a; ch xxx, sect 4 238d-239a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect ii, 415a; sect 89, 430c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  41c-45b  esp  42c,  43d-44c;  61a-64a  esp 62d-63c; 72c-85d esp
72c-74b;  99a-108a,c  / Practical Reason, 339a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  156b-c  53 James: Psychology, 157b-159b esp 158b-159b;
458a-459b; 549a-550b; 863b
[fh 2];
865b866a;  873a-b;  879b-886a passim, esp 880b882a, 884b-885a; 889a-890a
lb.  The effect of relations on the nature and being of things: internal
and  external  relations  7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  521d-522b 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 7
[8ai2-b24]
13a-d / Physics, bk v, ch 2
[225^1-13]
305d / Metaphysics, bk xi, ch 12
[io68aio16]
596d-597a; bk xiv, ch i
[io88ai5-b
4] 620b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 7 68d-70d; q 28,
aa  1-2  157c-160a;  q  30,  a  1,  rep  3 167a-168a; q 40, a 2, rep 3-4
214b215b; q 44, a 1, rep 1 238b-239a; q 45, a 3 244a-d

[612a]
(1.  The  general theory of relation, lb. The effect of relations on the
nature  and  being  of  things:  internal  and  external  relations!) 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q 2, a 7, rep 2 718b-d; part hi
suppl,  q  79,  a 2, rep 2 953b-955c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, axiom 5
355d;  prop  2-3 355d-356a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxv,
sect  4-5  215c-d;  bk iv, ch vi, sect ii 334b335b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
99a-101b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 74 31d / Philosophy
of  History,  part  i,  220c  53  James:  Psychology, 142a-b; 458a-459b;
550b551b
[fn 2]; 640b
[fn
1]; 644b-645a; 660a-b; 669a Ic. The coexistence of correlatives 7 Plato:
Charmides,  8d-9d  /  Gorgias,  267c268a  / Republic, bk iv, 351b-352b /
Theaetetus, 520a-b; 521b-522b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[6b26-8 a i2] 11b13a; ch 10 [ii b23~33] 17a / Topics, bk v, ch 6
[i35b i7~26] 187b-c; bk
vi, ch 4
[142*22-33]
195c-d  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk ii, ch 19 [i392b3~4] 640a 10 Galen:
Natural  Vacuities,  bk i, ch 4 169a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr i, ch
7,  255d256a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 13, a 7, rep 6
68d-70d; q 40, a 2, rep 4 214b215b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  xxv,  sect  2  215b-c;  sect 5 215d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 83b-84d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  72  31c;  par  74 31d Id.
Relational  unity or identity of relation: the notion and use of analogy
or  proportionality  7  Plato:  Gorgias,  267c-268a  / Timaeus, 448b-d 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 10 a36-b2] 105a; bk ii, ch 14
[98*20-23] 134a; ch 17 [99*1-16] 135a-b / Topics, bk i, ch 17
[76
[io8 a6-i4] 152b; bk iv, ch 4 [124*15-20] 172d;
bk  v,  ch 7 [i36b33-i37a2o] 189a-c; ch 8 [i38b 23-27] 191b-c / Physics,
bk  i,  ch 7 [191*8-12] 266d; bk vii, ch 4 [249*22-24] 332b / Generation
and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6 [333*27-34] 434a / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 9
[387b i-6]
491c  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  6  [ioi6b32-ioi7a 3] 537c; ch 9 [ioi8
ai2-i3] 538d; bk vii, ch ii
[1037^-9] 560c; bk ix, ch
i [1046*4-8] 570d571a; ch 6
[i048a3i-b8] 573d-574a; bk
xii, ch 4-5 599d-601a passim / Soul, bk hi, ch 7
[43i a20-b i]
663d-664a; ch 8
[43ib20-432a2]
664b-c

[612b]
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i i 5-487*1] 7b-d; bk viii, ch
i
[588*18b
[486a
5]  114b,d  /  Parts  of Animals,  bk  i, ch 4 167d168c; ch 5 [645b i-33]
169b-d / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[7i5b i7~26] 255d; bk hi,
ch 10
[760*9-17] 301b
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[i096b27-29] 342a; bk
v, ch 3-5 378c-381d passim; bk viii, ch 7
[ii58b29-33] 410d
/ Politics, bk v, ch 1
[i3oi b29~36]
503a / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 2 [i357b25-i358*2] 597c-d; bk 11, ch 20
[1393*22-1394*8]
640d-641d; bk in, ch 4 657b-d; ch 10 662c-663d; ch ii
[I4i2b33-i4i3*i3]
665c-d / Poetics, ch 21
[i457b6~33] 693a-c
11  Euclid:  Elements,  bk  v  81a-98b esp definitions, 3-6 81a; BK VII,
definitions, 20 127b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 841c-d 16 Kepler:
Harmonies of the World, 1078b1080a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  4,  a 3 22b-23b; q 5, a 6, rep 3 27c-28b; q 12, a i, rep 4 50c-51c; q
13,  aa  5-6  66b-68c; a 10 72c73c; q 14, a 3, rep 2 77d-78b; q 16, a 6,
ans  98b-d;  q 33, a 3, ans 182c-183c; q 44, a 3, ans 240b-241a; q 54, a
3,  ans  and rep 2 286c-287b; q 66, a 2, ans 345d-347b; q 93, a 1, rep 3
492a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  20,  a  3,  rep  3  713c-714c; q 27, a 3, rep 2
738c-739c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 61, a i, rep 1
54d-55c;  part  hi,  q 60, a i, ans 847b-848a; part hi suppl, q 69, a i,
rep 2 885c-886c; q 92, a i, rep 6 1025c-1032b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  12d-13b  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 336b-d;
449a-b;  469d-470d  30  Bacon:  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 27 157b158d 31
Descartes:   Objections   and   Replies,   158b161d   35   Locke:  Human
Understanding,   bk   ii,   ch  xxviii,  sect  1  228c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  ix,  div 82 487b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 72c-74b /
judgement,  601d-603a  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 212d-213c 53 James:
Psychology,  688a-689b  passim  2. Order and relation in God: the divine
processions  and  the  relations  constituting the Trinity of persons 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk x, ch 24 312d313c; bk xi, ch 10 327d-328d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part 1, q 3 14a20c; q 11, aa 3-4 49a-50b; q
28  157c-161d; q 29, a 4 165c-167a; qq 30-40 167a-217c passim; q 41, a 5
222b-223b;  q  42  224a230a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, xxiv
[127147] 144a; xxxm [76-145] 157a-d

[613a]
I to 4d 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,794-809]
467a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 97c; part hi, 207b; 207d-208c; part
iv,  259d 31 Descartes: Meditations, v 93a-96a I Objections and Replies,
postulate  v  131br:cfl59b161d; 217d-218b; 232b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,  def  i 355a; def 3-6 355b; def 8, expl 355c; prop 7 356c; prop io-ii
358a-359b;  prop  15,  demonst  360a;  prop 17, schol 362c-363c; prop 20
363d364a;  prop  23  364d-365a;  prop 29, schol 366b-c; prop 32, corol 2
367b;  prop  33,  schol  2  367d-369a  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk hi
[56-415] 136b144b esp
[315-341]
142a-b,
[383-389]
143b144a;  bk  v  [600-615]  188b; bk xii [469-551] 329b-331a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  307b; 310b-313b esp310b-311d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  422a-c;  521c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 306a-c 3.
The  relation of God to the world: divine immanence and transcendence 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb 2a; bk in, par 10 15b-d; bk iv,
par  26  25c-d;  par  31  26c-27a;  bk  vi, par 4 36a-b; bk vii, par 1-2
43b-44a;  par  7  45a-d;  par  17  49a;  par 21 49d-50a; bk x, par 8-1.0
73b-74a;  bk  xii,  par 7 lOOd-lOla; par 21 103d- 104a / City of God, bk
vii,  ch 6, 248a; ch 30 261b-d; bk xii, ch 2 343c-d; ch 17 353a-354a; ch
25  358b-359a; bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 12
627c-d;  ch  32  633c-d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 3, a 8
19d-20c;  Q 6, a 2, rep i 28d-29c; q 8 34c-38c; q 13, a 7 68d-70d; q 18,
a  4  107d-108c; q 26, a 1, rep 3 157c-158d; a 4, ans 160c-161d; q 44, a
1,  rep  1 238b-239a; q 45, a 2, rep 2 242d-244a; a 3 244a-d; q 51, a 3,
rep  3  277a278c;  q  52, a 2, ans 279b-280a; q 61, a 3, rep 2 316a-d; q
103,  a  2,  contrary  and  ans 529a-530a; q 104, aa 1-2 534c-537b; part
1—11,  q 17, a 8, rep 2 692a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
q 28, a 2, rep 3 511a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [1 12-148]
109a-b; xm [52-66] 126a; xix [40-66] 135c-d; xxviii 148d-150b; xxix
[127-145]
151c-d;  xxxiii  [76-93] 157a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 428c-d 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  52a-d  /  Meditations, 111, 87b-88c /
Objections and Replies, 110b-112a; 158b-159a; 213b-d; 214a-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i  355a-372d  esp  def 3-6 355b, axiom 1-2 355c, prop 2-8
355d357d, prop 10, schol 358a-b, prop 17,

[613b]
Chapter 78: RELATION 579 schol 362c-363c, prop 24-30 365a-366d, prop 33,
schol  1-2  367c-369a;  part ii, prop i-ii 373d-377c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk xi [334-346] 306b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol,
370a-371a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c;
ch  xv,  sect  12  165b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 149-150
442d-443b;  sect  155 444b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div
56  475a-b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 192c-d / Practical Reason, 334b-335b /
Judgement,  566c-d; 580c-d; 592a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
i,  220c221a;  224a-b;  246c-247a;  part  hi,  306a-c;  part iv, 322a-c;
349b-350a  4.  Relation  in  the  order  of thought or knowledge 4a. The
definability  or  indefinability  of  relative  terms 7 Plato: Philebus,
615c-616c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[6a36-7b i4] 11a12b;
[8 a i2-b24]
13a-d / Topics, bk iv, ch 1
[i20b36-i2i a6]
168d; ch 4
[i24b i5~34]
173c-d;
[i25 ai4-b i4]
174a-c; bk vi, ch 4
[142*22-33]
195c-d; ch 5
[i42b 3o-i43a i2]
196b-c; ch 6
[i45 a i2-b2o]
198d-199b; ch 8 200b-201a; ch 9
[147*23-32]
201b; ch 12
[i49b4-23]
203d-204a  /  Sophistical  Refutations, ch 13 238d-239a; ch 31 250c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 44, a 1, rep 1 238b-239a 4b. The
proposition  or  judgment  as  a  statement  of  relation:  relation  in
reasoning 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch i, sect 1-7 307a-308a
esp   sect  7  307d-308a;  ch  xii,  sect  6-8  360a-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect iv, div 20 458a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 39c-41c esp
40c-d; 51d52b 53 James: Psychology, 174b-176a; 213b-214a esp 214b
[fn
1]; 302b-304b; 638b; 640b
[fn
1];   869a-874a   passim,   esp   870b-871a;  878a-879b;  889a  4c.  The
transcendental  categories of relation 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 41c-45b esp
42c, 43d-44c; 61a-64a esp 62d-63c 4d. Relations as objects of knowledge:
ideas  of  relation  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  242c-245d  /  Republic, bk vii,
392b-393b  8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7 lla-13d / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch
9 [99ob9-i7] 508d

[614a]
(4.  Relation  in  the  order  of thought or knowledge. Ad. Relations as
objects  of knowledge: ideas of relation.} 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 13, a 7 68d-70d; q 28, a i, ans and rep 4 157c158d; a 4, rep
2-3 160c-161d; q 44, a i, rep 1 238b-239a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch  xi,  sect  4-5  144d-145a;  ch  xii,  sect i 147b-d; sect 3
147d-148a;  sect  7  148c; ch xxi, sect 5 179c-d; ch xxv-xxvin 214d-233d
passim,  esp  ch  xxv  214d-217a; ch xxx, sect 4 238d-239a; bk jv, ch hi
313a-323d  passim;  ch  iv,  sect  1  323d-324a;  sect  7  325b; sect 18
328d-329a;  ch  vi,  sect  13  335c-d;  sect  16  336d; ch vii, sect 1-7
337a-338c  esp sect 2 337a; ch xi, sect 13-14 357d358c; ch xii, sect 6-8
360a-c; ch xvii, sect 8, 377c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div
20  458a-b; sect xii, div 131 508d-509a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 349b 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  24a-33d esp 31d-32c; 61a64a esp 62d-63c; 99a-101b;
119a-120c  53  James: Psychology, 157b-161a esp 158b-159b, 160a-162b [fn
1];  167b;  301b-304b  passim,  esp  302b-303b; 319b-327a esp 319b-320a,
323a,  324b-326a;  386a; 411a-413a; 457a-459b esp 459b [fn 3]; 549a-552a
esp 549b-550b 54 Freud: Unconscious, 442d / Ego and Id, 700d701a 4e. The
relations  between  ideas  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi,
sect  4-5  144d-145a;  ch  xxi,  sect  5  179c-d; bk iv, ch hi 313a-323d
passim;  ch iv, sect i 323d-324a; sect 7 325b; sect 18 328d-329a; ch vi,
sect 13, 335d; sect 16 336d; ch vii, sect 1-7 337a-338c esp sect 2 337a;
ch  xi,  sect 13-14 357d-358c esp sect 13, 358a; ch xii, sect 6-8 360a-c
35   Berkeley:   Human   Knowledge,   sect   89,  430c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  iv,  div  20  458a-b;  div  30, 462a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  41c-45b esp 42c; 43d-44c; 61a-64a esp 62d-63c; 99a-108a,c; 119b
53  James:  Psychology,  167b-176a esp 168a, 174b176a; 300b-301b [fn 1];
319b-320a;  867a-879b  esp  868b-869a,  874a,  878a-879b; 889a-b 4f. The
types  of  relationship  underlying the association of ideas in thought,
memory, and dreams 8 Aristotle: Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[45ib7~452b6] 692d-694b
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 52b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 18
381d382b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxiii 248b-251d esp
sect 5-18 248d-251c

[614b]
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  hi  457c458a;  sect v, div 41-45
467d-469c  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 194a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 51c-d
53  James: Psychology, 360a-364a esp 360a-361a; 367a-370b esp 369a-370a;
378a-387b  esp  378a,  387a-b;  677a-678b  passim  54  Freud:  Hysteria,
74a-75a;  76c-d  / Interpretation of Dreams, 265a-272c passim; 348a-349c
esp  348d-349a;  352a-c  /  General  Introduction, 486b-489c passim, esp
487d-488a  5.  Order  as a system of relationships or related things 5a.
The  nature  and types of order: inclusion and exclusion; succession and
coexistence;   priority,   posteriority,   and   simultaneity  7  Plato:
Statesman, 594a-595a / Philebus, 615c-617d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[7
b i5~23] 12b-c; ch 12-13 19d-20d / Interpretation, ch 13
[23*
18-26] 35b-c / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[24b
26-31] 39d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[7 lb33~72a
5]  98b-c; ch 27 119b; bk ii, ch 12 129d-131b; ch 16 [98 a35~b24] 134b-c
/ Topics, bk 11, ch 4
[in b24-3i]
156d-157a;  bk  vi,  ch  4  194c-196a  passim; ch 6 [i45b2i-33] 199b-c /
Physics, bk vii, ch i
[242*16-243*2]
326b-327b / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 3
[999
s 6-14] 517d; bk v, ch 2 [1014*20-25] 534b-c; ch 11 539c-540a; bk ix, ch
8 575b-577a; bk xii, ch 1 598a-c; bk xiii, ch 2 [io77ai4-b i4] 608b-609a
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 1
[646a25-b io] 170b-c / Generation of Animals,
bk 11, ch 6 [742 ai6-743a i] 283b-284a / Ethics, bk 1, ch 6 [io96ai7~23]
341 b-c / Politics, bk i, ch 1
[i252ai7-24] 445b; ch
5
[1254^9-33]
447d-448a;  bk  hi, ch i [i275a35~b2] 472b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk
i,  813a-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 40 109b-110a / City of
God, bk xix, ch 13, 519b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a i,
ans  14b-15b;  a  6,  ans and rep 2 18c-19a; q 12, a 10 59a-d; q 16, a 4
97a-c;  q  45, a 3, rep 3 244a-d; q 66, a 4, rep 4 348d-349d; q 94, a 3,
ans  504a-505a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2, ans
2b-4a; q 50, a 2, rep 3 7c-8a; q iio, a 4, rep 4 350d-351d 28 Harvey: On
Animal  Generation,  390c;  445c;  447a-b  31  Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  228a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop i 355d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiv, sect 1-12 155b-157c passim, esp sect 3-4
155c-156a,  sect  6  156b-c, sect 12 157bc 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect v, div 41-43 467d-468d

[615a]
5*(1)  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 399c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
72c-85d esp 72c-74b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 691a-693d 53
James: Psychology, 319b-322a passim, esp 319b; 346a-b; 399a-b; 547a-549a
csp^547b
[fn
i],   548b-549a;   571b-573a;   631b  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  779c 5<z(l) The order of the causes or of cause and effect
7  Plato:  Lysis,  24b / Phaedrus, 124b-c / Euthyphro, 195c-d / Gorgias,
267c-268a  /  Timaeus,  455a-b;  465d-466a  /  Theaetetus,  521d-522b  /
Philebus, 617b-c / Laws, bk x, 762b-763b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 12
[i4b io-22] 20b
/  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [7^33-72*6] 98b-c; bk 11, ch 12
129d-131b; ch 16-18 134b136a / Physics, bk ii, ch 6
[198*5-13] 275a;
ch 8-9 275d-278a,c; bk hi, ch 2
[202*2-12]
279c;  bk  vii, ch 1-2 326a-329a; bk viii 334a355d / Heavens, bk i, ch 7
[275 a i-b i2] 366a-d;
[275b i8-29] 366d-367a / Generation and Corruption, bk
1,  ch  7  421d-423b  /  Metaphysics, bk 11, ch 1 [993 b23]-CH 2 [99^31]
512a-513b; bk v, ch 2 533b-534c; bk xi, ch 8 [io65b2~4] 593d; bk xii, ch
3
[1070*21-24] 599c; ch 4
[io70b22~35] 600b; ch
5
[1071*35-36]
601a; ch 6-8 601b-605a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639**
11-642*24] 161d-165b esp
[639b n-3i]
161d162a; bk ii, ch i
[646*25-b io] 170b-c / Motion of Animals, ch 5 235c-d / Generation of
Animals, bk ii, ch 6
[742*1 6-b
i  7]  283b-d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii, ch 23 [1400*28-35] 649a-b 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  4 169a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 854b;
959a-960a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 2 322b323a 18 Augustine:
City of God, bk xii, ch 24-25 358a-359a; bk xxii, ch 2 587b-588a; ch 24,
609b-610a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2, a 3 12c-14a; q 3, a
1,  ans  14b-15b; a 2, ans 15c16a; a 4, ans 16d-17c; a 6, ans 18c-19a; a
7,  ans 19a-c; a 8, ans and rep 1-2 19d-20c; q 4, a 2, ans 21b-22b; a 3,
ans and rep 4 22b-23b; q 5, a 2, rep 1 24b-25a; a 4, ans 25d-26c; q 8, a
1 34d-35c; q 13, a 5, rep i 66b-67d; q 14, a 7, ans and rep 3 81d-82b; a
ii, ans 84c85c; q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 4, ans 110c-112c; a 5,
rep  2-3  112d-113c;  a  6,  ans  and  rep 3 113c-114d; q 22, a 2, rep 2
128d130d; q 23, a 5, ans 135d-137d; q 36, a 3, rep 4 194c-195<i; q 41, a
2,  ans  and  rep  1,3  218c219d;  q  42,  a 2, ans 225d-227a; q 44, a 2
239b-240a; q 45, a 2, rep 2 242d-244a; a 3 244a-d; a 5, ans 245c-247a; q
46,  a  i,  rep  6  250a-252d;  q  52, a 3, ans 280a-d; q 63, a 8, rep 1
332c-333b; q 65, a 3, ans 341c-342b; q 75, a 1, rep 1 378b-379c; q 82, a
3, rep i

[615b]
Chapter 78: RELATION 581 433c-434c; a 4, ans 434c-435c; q 87, a 2, rep 3
466c-467b;  q  88, a 3, rep 2 472c-473a; q 90, a 3 482c-483a; q 103, a 6
532b-533a;  q  104, a 1, ans 534c-536c; a 2 536c-537b; q 105, a i, rep 3
538d-539c;  a  5,  ans  and rep 3 542a543b; q 112, a 1, ans 571d-573a; q
114,  a  3,  ans  583b-d;  q  115,  aa  1-2 585d-588c; q 118, a 2, rep 3
601c-603b;  part i-ii, q 1, a 2, ans 610b-611b; q 46, a i, ans 813b-814a
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 66, a 6, rep 3 80c-81b; q
112,  a i, rep 1-3 356c357b; part ii-ii, q 1, a 7, rep 3 385c-387a; PART
III,  Q 6, A 5, ANS 744adj Q 7, A I, REP 3 745d-746c; a 7, rep i 750a-d;
q  18, a i, rep 2 810a-811c; q 19, a i, ans and rep 2 816a-818b; q 62, a
1 858c-859d; a 5, ans 862b-863a; q 64, a 5 874a-d; a 8, rep i 876c-877c;
part  hi  suppl, q 70, a 3, ans 897d-900d; q 74, a 3, rep 2 927c-928d; q
76,  a  i, rep i 939d-941a; a 2 941b-942b; q 80, a 1, rep i 956c-957c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii
[112148] 109a-b
22  Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 37 417b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
78c-d;  79d80a  28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, first day, 135c-136b 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  390c-d;  416b-c; 426a-429b; 442c-443c;
445c;  447a-b  31 Descartes: Discourse, part iv, 52a-d / Meditations, in
81d-89a  esp  84b-85a,  87b-88c / Objections and Replies, 110a- 112a esp
llld112a;  120c-123a;  def  iii-iv 130b; axiom i-v 131d-132a; axiom viii
132b;  prop  ii 132c; 158b-161d passim; 212a; 213b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  def  i 355a; axiom 3-5 355d; prop 3 356a; prop 21-29 364a366c;
prop  33  367b-369a;  prop 36 369b; appendix 369b-372d; part ii, lemma 3
378d-379a;  prop  48, demonst 391a; part hi, def 2-3 395d-396a; prop 1-3
396a-398c;  part iv, pref, 422b,d-423c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 505 261a-b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 1-4 178b-179c; ch xxii,
sect  ii  203c-d; ch xxvi, sect 1-2 217a-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  25-33  417d-419a passim 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect hi, div
i8-sect viii, div 74 457c-484c passim, esp sect vii, div 60 477a-c; sect
xi 497b-503c esp div 105 498d-499a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 63b; 67d-68b
[fn 1];
76c-83b esp 81c-d; 95a-d; 140b,d-145c; 177b179b; 187c-188c; 214b,d
[fn
1]  /  Practical  Reason,  311d-314d;  334b-337a,c;  339a-b / Judgement,
577c-578a  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 9b-10d / Descent of Man, 285b-c
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 405a-b; epilogue ii 675a-696d 54 Freud:
General Introduction, 588c-589a

[616a]
582  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (5a. The nature and types of order: inclusion and
exclusion;  succession  and  coexistence;  priority,  posteriority,  and
simultaneity)  5a(2)  The order of goods or of means and ends: the order
of  loves  Old  Testament:  I  Kings,  3:5-14—  (D)  HI Kings, 3-5-M New
Testament:  Matthew, 13:44-46 / Philippians, 37-16 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  i,  6c-8a  7  Plato: Lysis, 23a-c / Euthydemus, 69a-71a / Symposium,
165b-167d  /  Meno,  183b-184c  /  Gorgias, 262a-264b / Republic, bk ii,
310c-d;  bk vii, 401b; bk ix, 421a-427b / Timaeus, 465d-466a / Philebus,
635b-639a,c  /  Laws, bk 1, 643c-644a; bk ii, 656d-658c; bk hi, 674b; bk
v,  687c-688c;  689c-690c;  694d695a;  bk  ix,  751c  8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 22
[68a
25-b8]  89d-90a / Topics, bk hi, ch 1-4 162a166b / Metaphysics, bk v, ch
2
[ioi3a32-b
3] 533c; [1013^5-28] 533d-534a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d;
ch 4
[1095*13-29] 340b-c; ch
5
[io95b i3]-cH
7
[i097b22] 340d-343a; bk
ii,  ch  8 354a-d; bk vii, ch 11-14 403c-406a,c; bk x, ch 6-7 430d432c /
Politics, bk i, ch i
[i252 a i-6] 445a;
bk in, ch 12 480c-481b; bk vii, ch i
[1323
22-b2i] 527a-c; ch 13
[133^24-38]
536b-c;
[1332*8-27]
536d-537a; ch 14
[1333*17-37]
538a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 7 604c-607d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii,
ch  19,  163a-c; bk in, ch 14, 189d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect
16  271c-d  14  Plutarch:  Solon,  74c-75c / Pericles, 122a 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead,  tr  iv  12b-19b  esp  ch 2-7 12d-16a, ch 14-16 18a-19b /
Second  Ennead,  tr  ix, ch 15 74d-75b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii,
par  10-14  Ha12b / City of God, bk viii, ch 8-9 270a-271a; bk xi, ch 16
331a-c;  bk  xii,  ch  8  346d-347b; bk xv, ch 22 416a-c; bk xix, ch 1-3
507a511a;  ch  11-17 516d-523a; ch 20 523d-524a / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch  3-5 625b-626a; ch 22 629b-630a; ch 31-33 633b-634b; ch 35 634c-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, ans 14b-15b; a 2, ans
15c-16a;  q 5, a 6 27c28b; q 6, a 2 28d-29c; part i-ii, qq 1-5 609a643d;
q  20, aa 1-4 712a-715b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a
2,  ans  2b-4a;  q  114,  a  4,  rep  i 373a-d 21 Dante : Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xvii [82]- xviii
[75]
79b-80c; paradise, xxvi
[1-69]
145d-146c  22  Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  62a;  part  ii, 155b-c; part in, 237d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 71a-72c; 73d-74a; 75d-76a; 91d-92b

[616b]
5a(2)  to  5a(3) 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b372d; part iv,
pref  422b,d-424a;  appendix,  v  447c  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters,
94a-97a   /   Pensees,   505  261a-b;  793  326b-327a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,   bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  52-53  191d-192b;  sect  55-56
192c-193b;  sect 62 194c-d; sect 72 198a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 235a-b;
238c-239a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b; 257c-d; 266a-267d;
268b;  271d-279d  /  Practical  Reason,  316a-317d;  327d-329a  /  Pref.
Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 377d / Judgement, 478a-479d esp 478a-b;
557d
[fn.2];
584d-587a; 588b
[in 2};
592a;  594b595d  esp 595a-d 43 Federalist: number 23 85a-87a passim, esp
85b-c;  number  41,  132b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-447b; 448a-450a;
461c-463c  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  378a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  61  27b-c;  part 11, par 122 44a; part hi, par 294 98b-d;
additions,  38  122c-d  / Philosophy of History, intro, 168a-d; part ii,
267a-b;  part  hi,  307b-308a; part iv, 348b-c; 365b-c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  213b-214b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 164b-165a 53
James:  Psychology, 14b-15a; 199b-204b esp 202a-203a' 5*(3) The order of
quantities:  the  types of proportion 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 4
330d-333a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6
[ioi6b i8-3i] 537b;
ch 13 541b-c; ch 15 542a-543a; bk x, ch 1
[i052b i5-i053b
9] 579a-580a; ch 5 583a-c; ch 6
[1056^3-1057*16]
584b-c; bk xiii, ch 2
[1077*24-30] 608c; ch 6-9 611d-618c passim
9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 3-5 378c-381d passim / Politics, bk v, ch
i
[i3oi b29-35]
503a  11  Euclid: Elements, bk v 81a-98b; bk vi, prop 23 117a-b; bk vii,
definitions,  20  127b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i-ii, 821d-831d; bk
11,  841c-848d 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1078b1079a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  13,  a  7,  ans  68d-70d  31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  ii,  47c  /  Geometry 295a-353b esp bk i, 295a-298b 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk i, lemma ii, schol, 31b-32a 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  hi,  407b408b  passim  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  73c-d  /
Judgement, 497a498b 50^Marx: Capital, 19d-25d passim, esp 19d-20b, 25a-d
53 James: Psychology, 551a-b

[617a]
5«(4)  to  5b  Chapter  78:  RELATION  583  5a(4)  The  order  of kinds:
hierarchy;  species and genus 7 Plato: Statesman, 582d-583c; 594a-595a 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[2b6-3*5]^§e^bT^
ch 13
[i4b32-i5a i2] 20c-d / Topics, bk iv, ch
2
[123*13-19]
171c; bk vi, ch 4
[i4i b i5-34]
195a-b; ch 5 196b-d / Physics, bk iv, ch 3
[210*17-19] 289a / Metaphysics, bk
v, ch 25 545b-c; bk vii, ch io-ii 558a-561a; bk viii, ch 6 569d-570d; bk
x, ch 8-9 585b-586c 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch i
[588b4-i7] 114d-lf5a / Parts of Animals, bk
i, ch 2-4 165d-168c 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 813a-b 17 Plotinus:
Fourth  Ennead,  tr hi, ch 2 142a143b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 3, a 5, ans 17c-18b; a 6, rep 2 18c-19a; q 13, a 7, ans 68d-70d; q
15,  a  3,  rep  4  93b-94a;  28,  a  1, ans 157c-158d; q 29, a 2, rep 4
163b164b: q 30, a 4, ans 170c-171b; q 47, a 2, ans 257b 258c; q 50, a 2,
rep  i  270a-272a:  a 4 273b-274b; q 66, a 2, rep 2 345d-347b; q 75, a 7
384d-385c;  q  76,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4  391a-393a; q 77, a i, rep i
399c-401b; a 4, rep 1 403a-d; q 85, a 3, ans 455b-457a; a 4, ans 457a-d;
q 88, a 2, rep 4 471c-472c; part i-ii, Q 18, a 7, rep 3 698c-699c; q 23,
a  1,  ans  723c-724c;  q  35,  a  4,  ans 774d-775d; a 8, ans and rep 3
779c-780c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 54, a 1, rep 1
22d-23d;  q 61, a i, rep i 54d-55c; q 72, a 7, ans 117a-118a; part hi, q
2,  a i, ans 710a-711c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch hi, sect
6-9  255c-256c;  ch  vi,  sect  32  277c278b;  sect  36-41  279a-280b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b-342b  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 193a-200c esp
196b-198d  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  30d-31b;  64a;  207a-208a;
210b-211b;  238b-c;  241d-242a  53  James: Psychology, 870b-871a 5b. The
order  of  the universe or of nature: the hierarchy of beings Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  11:20—  (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 11:21 5 Euripides:
Phoenician Maidens
[528-548]
382c-d  5  Aristophanes:  Birds  [685-703]  551b-c  7  Plato: Symposium,
155d-157a  /  Gorgias,  284a-285a  /  Timaeus,  446d-477a,c  / Philebus,
618b-619d 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[23*18-26]
35b-c  /  Physics,  bk  ii, ch 8-9 275d-278a,c; bk viii, ch i [252*5-23]
335d-336a  /  Heavens, bk i, ch 2 359d-360d; bk ii, ch 9-10 382b383a; ch
12  383b-384c;  bk  hi,  ch  2  [300b  i6301*20] 392a-c / Generation and
Corruption,  bk ii, ch 3-5 430c-433d; ch 9-1 i 436d441a,c / Metaphysics,
bk i, ch 3
[984b8-22]

[617b]
502d;  ch 6 505b-506b; ch 7 [988*34^5] 506c; ch 9 508c-511c; bk viii, ch
3  [1043^3-1044* 11] 568b-c; bk xi, ch 8 [io65b2-4] 593d; bk xii, ch 6-8
601b-605a; ch 10
[1075*12-24]
605d-606a; bk xiv, ch 3
[i090b i4-2i] 623b
/  Soul,  bk  11,  ch 2 [4i3*2o-b4] 643b-c; bk hi, ch 11 [433 b32-434*9]
666d  9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii, ch i 114b,d-115b / Parts
of Animals, bk i, ch i
[64i b i3-29]
164c-d; ch 5
[644^2-645*26]
168c-169a; bk iv, ch 5
[681*12-14] 211d; ch
10  [686b23-35]  218b-c / Generation of Animals, bk 11, ch 1 [73i b24-33]
272a-b / Politics, bk i, ch 5
[1254*24-35] 447d-448a; bk
vii, ch 4
[1326*29-35] 530b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 6b-c; bk 11
[167-183] 17a-b;
[294-307] 18d19a;
[569-580] 22b;
[865-930] 26a-d;
[10231174]
28a-30a,c; bk v
[146-234]
63a-64a;
[783-836] 71b-72a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch 8, 146a-b; bk iv, ch 7, 234b 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ii, sect 9 257d; bk iv, sect 3-4 263b-264a;
sect  40  267a-b;  sect  45-46  267b-c;  bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; sect 16
271c-d;  sect  30  273a;  bk vi, sect i 274a; sect 9 274b; sect ii 274c;
sect  36  277c;  sect  38  277c-d; sect 40-44 277d-278c; bk vii, sect 11
280c;  sect  75 285c; bk viii, sect 26-27 287c; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d; bk
x,  sect  6  297a-b;  bk xi, sect 18, 304b-c 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the
World,  1023b1080b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 7 44c45a; ch 13
46c-47b;  ch  18  49c-50a  /  Fourth  Ennead, tr iv, ch 10 163a-c; tr ix
205a207a,c  /  Fifth  Ennead, tr ii 214c-215c; tr ix, ch 12-14 251a-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk vii, par 16-23 48c-50c / City of God, bk xi,
ch  22 333d334c; bk xii, ch 2-5 343c-345b; bk xix, ch 11-17 516d-523a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  2, a 3 12c-14a; q 3, a 1, ans
14b-15b; a 2, ans 15c16a; q 5, a 5, ans 26c-27c; q ii, a 3, ans 49a-c; q
13,  a  7,  ans  68d-70d;  q  18,  a  3,  ans 106b107c; q 19, a 5, rep 2
112d-113c;  a  8  116a-d;  q  21, a 1, rep 3 124b-125b; q 23, a 5, rep 3
135d-137d; a 7, ans 138d-140a; q 42, a i, rep 1-2 224b-225d; a 3 227a-d;
q  47  256a-259a;  q  48,  a  1,  rep  5  259b-260c;  a 2, ans and rep 3
260c-261b;  q 50, a i, ans and rep i 269b270a; a 2, rep i 270a-272a; a 4
273b-274b;  q  57,  a  1,  ans  295a-d;  q 61, aa 3-4 316a317c; qq 65-74
339a-377a,c;  q  75, a i, rep i 378b-379c; a 7 384d-385c; q 76, a 1, ans
385d-388c;  a 3, ans 391a-393a; a 6, rep 1-2 396a-d; q 77, a 2 401b-d; a
4,  rep  i 403a-d; q 88, a 2, rep 4 471c-472c; qq 103-119 528a608d; part
i-ii,  q  1,  a  4,  rep  1  612a-613a;  a  8  615a-c; q 2, a 5, rep 2-3
618d-619c; q 22, a 2, rep 1 721c-722c

[618a]
(5. Order as a system of relationships or related things. 5 b. The order
of  the  universe  or  of  nature: the hierarchy of beings.) 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 52, a 1, ans 15d-18a; part ii-ii, q 2, a
3,  ans  and  rep 1 392d-393c; q 23, a 3, rep 3 485a-d; q 26, a 1, rep 2
510c-511a;  part  hi  suppl,  q  91 1016a-1025b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, i [103-142] 107b-d; 11
[46-148]
108b-109b; x
[1-27]
120b-c; xiii
[52-87]
126a-b; xxvn
[97-120]
148bc; xxviii 148d-150b; xxix
[13-36]
150bc  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk hi, stanza 1-7 54b-55b;
stanza  250-253  87a-b  /  Knight's  Tale  [2987-3016] 209a-b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 78d-79a 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc hi
[62-71] 573b
27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc in [75-139] 108d-109c 28
Harvey:   On   Animal   Generation,  400d-401a;  426b-429b  passim,  esp
426d-427a,  428a-c;  470a  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 17 149bd;
aph  27  157b-158d;  aph  29-30  159b-d;  aph 48 179d-188b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  v,  54c-56a  / Meditations, iv, 90a-b / Objections and
Replies,  139b-c; 215a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 29 366bc; prop
33  367b-369a; appendix 369b-372d; part ii, prop 6-7 374d-375c; part hi,
395a-d; prop 2 396c-398b; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a; prop 2 425a; prop 4
425b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [397-505] 184a186a; bk viii
[1-178]
232a-236a;
[314-356]
239a-240a;  bk  ix  [99-113]  249b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 11 9-12 1 195a 34
Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi 269a-372a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  ix, SECT 12 140c; BK III, CH VI, SECT 11-12 271b272b; bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  27  321d-322a;  ch  vi,  sect  11 334b-335b; ch xvi, sect 12,
370c-371a  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 29-33 418c-419a passim;
sect  146-153 442a-444a passim 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div
44  468d-469c;  sect  viii,  div  79-80 486b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  i,  la-2b  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 93c-99a; 133a-c; 187c189a;
199c-200c;  220a-b;  237b / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256d-257a;
264d-265a  /  Practical Reason, 292a-d; 301d-302d; 307d314d / judgement,
467a-470c  esp  467d-468c;  578d-580a  esp  579b-c 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  173b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions, 168 145c-d /
Philosophy of History, intro, 160b162a; part i, 220c; part iv, 361a-b

[618b]
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  55b-62a; 63d64d; 96b-98a,c esp 96b-c;
179b-180d;  228c229a,c;  238b-239a;  241bc;  243b-d  /  Descent  of Man,
340d-341d  53  James:  Psychology,  95b-98a; 314a; 571b-572a; 641a-643a;
862b 863b
[fn
2);   873a-b;   882a886a;  889a-890a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  779c 5c. Order as a principle of beauty 7 Plato: Republic,
bk hi, 333b-334b; bk iv, 342b-c / Timaeus, 474d-475a / Statesman, 594a-c
/  Philebus,  63  7d  8  Aristotle:  Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246aio-b i9]
329c-330a / Metaphysics, bk i ch 3
[984b822] 502d; bk xiii, ch 3 [i078 a39-b
5] 610a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[645*4-26] I68d-169a
/ Politics,
[1309^3-30] 512a; bk vii, ch
4 530bc / Poetics, ch 7 685bc bk v, ch 9
[1326^9-35]
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i 827a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 868b
814a;  826d17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi, ch i, 21c-d / Sixth Ennead,
tr vii, ch 22 332d-333b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 20 24b-c /
City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch 21, 161b-c; bk xvii, ch 14, 464d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, a 4, rep 1 25d-26c; q 96, a 3, rep 3
512ac 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2, rep 1 2b-4a; q
54,  a i, ans 22d-23d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xii, sect
5   148a-b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  345d-346a  42  Kant:  Judgement,
488a-489a;  544c-545b; 557c-558b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 301d-302a 53
James:  Psychology, 755a; 865b 6. The absolute and the relative modes of
consideration 7 Plato: Phaedo, 242c-244b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5
b i 1-29] 10a-b / Topics, bk 11, ch 11
[ii5b3~35] 161c-162a,c;
bk v, ch 1 178b,d-179b; bk vi, ch 4
[i4i b3142*16] 194d-195c; ch 8 [i46b36-i47an] 200d201a
/ Sophistical Refutations, ch 5
[i66b37~
167^0]  229d-230a;  ch 8 [170*12-19] 234a; ch 25 248b-249b / Physics, bk
i, ch i [i84ai6-2i] 259a / Heavens, bk hi, ch 5
[303b i3-304 a
7]  394d-395b  / Metaphysics, bk v, ch ii 539c540a; bk x, ch 6 583d-584c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 1, rep 1 23c-24a; q 7, a 2
31d-32c;  q  ii,  a  i, rep 2 46d-47d; a 2, rep 1,3-4 47d-48d; q 13, a 2
63c-64d;  a  ii, rep 2 73c-74b; q 30, a i, rep 2-4 167a-168a; q 70, a 3,
rep  2  365b-367a;  q 93, a 3, ans 493d-494c; part i-ii, q 2, a 5, rep 2
618d-619c; q 6, a 6, ans and rep 2 649a-650a; q 17, a 4 688d-689c; q 22,
a i, ans 720d-721c

[619a]
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 1, rep 2 6a-7b; q 52, a
i, ans 15d-18a; q 105, a 4, rep 1,4 318b-321a; part hi, q 17, a 1, rep 7
807a-808d;  a  2,  ans  808d-809d  31 Descartes: Rules, vi, 8a 9a Z~z 31
Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, def 3,6 355b; axiom 2,4-5 355d; prop 10 358a-b
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  12  415b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
130b-133c;  202b-203c  53  James:  Psychology,  227b  6a.  Absolute  and
relative  with  respect to space, time, motion 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv,
350d-351b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 2
[209*31-36]
288b  / Heavens, bk i, ch 3 [269b i8-3o] 360d361a; bk iv, ch 4 402c-403d
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv [387-390] 49b 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i, 514b-515a; 519a; bk ii,
557a-b  16  Kepler:  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1015a-b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  xi,  par 18-27 93c-95c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  36, 165c166b 34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol 8b13a; corol
v-vi 19a-b; bk i, prop 57-61 110b-114b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  XIII,  sect  7-10  149d-150d;  sect  27,  154c; ch xv, sect 5-8
163b-164b;  ch  xxvi,  sect  3-5 217d-218c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  97-98  431d-432a;  sect 110-117 434b-436a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
ii,  47b  53 James: Psychology, 408a-411a esp 409a-b; 511b-512a; 565a-b;
612a-624b  esp  613a-b; 783a-785a 6b. Absolute and relative with respect
to  truth  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  86b-d  /  Timaeus, 447c-d / Theaetetus,
517b-532a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5-6 528c531c; bk vii, ch 3
[io29b i-n] 552a; bk x, ch 1
[io53a3i-b3] 580a; ch
6
[1057*7-11] 584b;
bk  xi, ch 6 [io62b i2-io63b i4] 590d-592a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch
4
[io95 a3o-b i2]
340c-d / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 24
[1402*3-28]
651b-d  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  iv [469-521] 50b-51a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 20 164c166c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a i, ans
and  rep  3  10d-lld; q 16, a i, rep 2 94b-95c; q 85, a 2, ans 453d-455b
23Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; 57d-58a; 65c; part iv, 267b

[619b]
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  209c-212a;  240c-246a;  251d  253c;  259c-261c;
271b-272d;  318a-319b;  439c-440a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,
13a-c;  57d58b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 67 115d116a 31 Descartes:
Rules,  1-11  la-3b;  vi  8a  10a / Discourse, part ii, 46b-c 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  385  238b-239a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, 88b-c 42 Kant:
Pure   Reason,   129c-130a;  194bc;  218d222b;  224a-227a;  240b-243c  /
Practical  Reason,  292d-293b;  311d-313d  43  Mill:  Liberty, 275a-283c
passim 50 Marx-Engels : Communist Manifesto, 427 a-b; 428b-d 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk vi, 245c 53 James: Psychology, 639a-646a 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures,  880b;  881d882b  6c. Absolute and relative with
respect to goodness or beauty 7 Plato: Cratylus, 86d / Symposium, 167a-d
/  Phaedo,  242c-243a  / Gorgias, 261a-c/ Republic, bk iv, 350d-352b; bk
vi,  383d-386c  /  Theaetetus,  528b-c; 531a-532a / Philebus, 630c-631d;
636a-639a,c  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii, ch 22 [68a 25-b8]
89d-90a / Topics, bk hi, ch 1-4 162a166b / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 3
[1029*34b u] 552a
9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 6
[7oob
33-36] 236b / Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; ch 4
[1095*13-29] 340b-c; ch
6
[1096*1 i]-ch 7
[1097*34] 341b-342d; bk
ii,  ch  8  354a-d;  bk  hi,  ch  4  359ac; bk v, ch 3-5 378c-381d; ch 7
382c-383a; bk vii, ch 12
[ii52b25-33] 403d404a; bk x, ch 5 [ii75b24-i 176*29] 430b-d /
Politics, bk 1, ch 6 [1255*32-37] 449a; bk vii, ch 1
[i323*22-b2i] 527a-c; ch 13 [1332*8-27]
536d-537a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  7 604c-607d 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk iv [11411170] 59a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 20
265a-b  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr hi, ch ii, 287bc 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  13 16c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 10,
661d-662a;  ch 14 663c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a i,
rep 1 23c-24a; a 2, rep 3 24b-25a; a 6 27c28b; q 11, a 2, rep 1 47d-48d;
q  26, a 3, rep i 151a-c; q 65, a 1, rep 2-3 339b-340b; q 70, a 3, rep 2
365b-367a;  part i-ii, q 1, a 7, ans 614c-615a; qq 2-4 615c-636c passim;
q  7,  a  2,  rep  1  652d-653c;  q  18,  aa 1-4 694a-696d; q 23, aa 1-2
723c-725c;  q 27, a i, rep 1-2 737b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 92, a 1, ans 213c-214c; q 94, a 4 223d-224d;

[620a]
(6.  The  absolute and the relative modes of consideration. 6c. Absolute
and  relative  with  respect  to  goodness  or beauty?) q 97, a i, rep 3
236a-d;  q  114,  a  10,  ans  377c378a,c;  part ii-ii, q 29, a 2, rep 3
531a-d;  a  3,  rep  1  531d-532c;  q  182, a i, ans 620b621d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 61d-62a; 65a; 73b-c; 75a; 96a-b; part ii, 140b; part
iv,  272c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk iv, 273d-274a 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   46b-47c;   93b-c;  115b119d;  124c-125a;  146b-c;
209c-212a;  230b-d; 281a-284c 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act v,
sc 1 [89-109] 431d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [254-257] 43b /
Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  ii,  sc  ii  [1-96]  113c-114c  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 70b- 74a; 75d-76a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
ii, 46b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 371b372d; part iv, pref,
423c-424a  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  29b-44a / Pensees, 383-385
238b-239a CROSS-REFERENCES 5c, 6d, 7c; Reasoning 2.

[620b]
586  THE  GREAT IDEAS 6c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 90a- d; bk 1, ch
11,  sect  8-12  105d-107d;  sect  21  Ilia;  bk  11, ch xxi, sect 55-56
192c-193b;  ch  xxviii,  sect  10-12  230b-231c  esp  sect  10 230b-c 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 362a-d 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
259c-d;  270d-271a;  271c-272b  /  Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
377c-d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 387a-388a / Science of Right,
397b-398a  /  Judgement,  471b-473a;  476a-495a,c; 513b-516b; 516d-517c;
524d525a;  540b-542a  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 471b-476a,c 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  197a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 70 31a;
additions,  45  123c-d  /  Philosophy  of History, part ii, 280b-281b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  302b-304a  49  Darwin:  Origin of Species, 95a /
Descent  of  Man,  302a;  314c-315d esp 315d; 462d-463a; 569c; 577b-d 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 428b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  15d-16a;  bk  xi,  514c-d; bk xii, 542d; bk xiv, 611a-c; epilogue 1,
645a-646c;  647b-649c passim 54 Freud: War and Death, 757d-759c esp 759a
/  Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  792  b-c For: The conception of
identity as a logical rather than a real relation, see Same and Other i,
2d;  and for the conception of the relation between creatures and God as
partly  real  and partly logical, see God 5e; One and Many ib; World 3b.
Another  consideration  of  correlative  terms,  see  Opposition ia. The
theory  of  proportionality or analogical similitude, see Same and Other
3b;  and  for  the applications of analogy and proportion in metaphysics
and  mathematics,  see Idea 4^(4); Mathematics 4c; Quantity ib; Sign and
Symbol  3d,  5f.  Other discussions of indefinable terms, see Definition
ic;  Principle  23(3).  The  issues  raised  by  a  relational theory of
judgment  and  reasoning,  see Idea 5b; Judgment Discussions relevant to
the  conception  of the categories as the transcendental concepts of the
understanding,  see  Form  ic;  Judgment  8c-8d;  Memory and Imagination
6c(2);  Mind  4d(3); Principle 2b(3). The consideration of the relations
between  ideas  as  objects  of knowledge, see Idea ia; Knowledge 6a(3).
Other  discussions  of the association of ideas, see Idea 5e; Memory and
Imagination  2c. Another discussion of the prior, the posterior, and the
simultaneous,  see Time 5d. The order of causes, see Cause ib. The order
of  goods, or of means and ends, see Good and Evil 5D-5C The relation of
quantities  and  the relation of qualities, see Quality 4c; Quantity ib;
Same  and  Other 3c~3d. The order of kinds, see Animal 2a; Evolution ib;
Idea  4K3); Opposition icfa); Same and Other 3a(i)~3a(3) ; Universal and
Particular  5b.  Order in the soul, in the state, and in the universe or
nature, see Man 5~5a; Nature 3a~3b;

[621a]
For: The doctrine of the Trinity as concerned with order and relation in
God, see God 9a. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included
in Great Booths ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not represented in this collection. For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part i, sect v Kant.
Metaphysical  Foundations  of Natural  Science,  DIV  III  Hegel. Science
of Logic,  vol  i,  bk ii, sect ii, ch 3; sect in, ch 1, 3 J. S. Mill. An
Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamilton's  Philosophy,  ch 4-7 W. James.
Essays  in  Radical  Empiricism . The Meaning of Truth, ch ii, 13 . Some
Problems  of  Philosophy, ch 9 II. Petrus Hispanicus. Summulae Logicales
{Logical  Treatises)  Duns Scotus. Tractatus de Primo Principio (A Tract
Concerning   the   First   Principle),   ch  1-2  Suarez.  Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  x (1), xxvm (3), XXXII (2), XXXIX, XLVII, XLVIII (1-4), L
(4),  LIII-LIV  John  of Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus,
Ars  Logica,  part ii, q 17 Leibnitz. Philosophical Worlds, ch 12 (A New
System  of  the  Interaction  of  Substances),  13  (Reply of M. Foucher
Concerning  the Interaction of Substances) . New Essays Concerning Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch 25, 28, 30

[621b]
Chapter  78:  RELATION  587  De  Morgan.  Formal Logic, ch 3-5 Boole. An
Investigation  of  the  Laws  of  Thought  Jevons. Pure Logic, ch 1-2, 4
Lotze.  Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 3 C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol hi,
par  45-149,  214-251;  vol vi, par 318-324, 386-392 Bradley. Appearance
and  Reality,  bk  1, ch 3; bk ii, ch 26 . Collected Essays, vol ii (31)
Couturat.  The  Algebra of Logic Woodworth. Psychological Issues, ch 5-6
Cassirer.  Substance  and  Function, part i; part ii, ch 7-8; sup 11—III
Whitehead  and  Russell.  Principia Mathematica, PART I, SECT C, D; PART
II,  SECT  B,  C,  D,  EJ  PART  iv-v  Royce. The Principles of Logic B.
Russell.  Principles  of  Mathematics,  ch  9,  24-  .  The  Problems of
Philosophy, ch 9 . Our Knowledge of the External World, v . Introduction
to  Mathematical  Philosophy,  ch  4-6  W. E. Johnson. Logic, part i, ch
12-13  Moore.  Philosophical  Studies,  ch  9 Whitehead. Science and the
Modern  World,  ch  10  Tarski.  Introduction to Logic, v Blanshard. The
Nature of Thought, ch 31-32

[622a]
INTRODUCTION    ARGUMENT    is   unprofitable—worse   than   x~V   that,
unintelligible—when  opponents  do not share some common ground. Between
the  complete skeptic who denies reason's competence and the philosopher
or scientist who appeals to it, no common ground exists. Between the man
who  obeys  the  rule  not  to  contradict himself and the man who finds
nothing  repugnant  in  answering Yes and No to the same question, there
can  be  no  argument.  There is an issue between them, but the position
each  takes  reduces  the other to silence. Lack of a common measure for
judging  opposed  views  tends  to  render  them  incommunicable  to one
another.  For  men  to be in this plight is the exception in science and
philosophy,  but  it  seems  to be the typical situation where the basic
issues   of   religion   are   concerned.   Of  all  subjects  the  most
controversial,  religious  issues  seem to be the least capable of being
settled  by  controversy.  No  divisions  among men— certainly not those
which  separate  philosophers  or  scientists—are as unbridgeable as the
chasm between the faithful and those they call infidels, between Jew and
gentile,  or  Christian  and  pagan.  Faith  and  lack  of faith, or the
diversity of faiths, seem to render certain questions as imponderable as
they  are  weighty.  On  the  definition of religion itself, the deepest
issue  lies  between  those  who  conceive  it  as having a supernatural
foundation  in  God's  revelation  and authority, and those who think of
religion  as having a purely natural origin in certain human tendencies,
which makes it no different from philosophy and science as an element of
culture.  But  religion  can  be supernatural only for those whose faith
declares  it  to be so. Those who deny that it is supernatural may offer
many  reasons  for  thinking  so,  and  try in many ways to explain away
faith. What they all come to is that it is an illusion to suppose faith

[622b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION  is  God's  gift  rather  than  man's own will to
believe.  To  the man of faith this only means that his critic lacks the
gift of faith or even the wish to have it. Many consequences follow from
this  unarguable difference concerning the meaning of religion. Religion
to  the  man  of  faith usually means much more than the acceptance of a
creed.  It  means  acts  of  piety  and worship, recourse to prayer, the
partaking   of  sacraments,  the  observance  of  certain  rituals,  the
performance  of  sacrifices and purifications. It means rendering to God
what  is  His  due, obeying His commandments, beseeching and gaining the
help  of  His  grace,  whereby to lead a life which shall seem worthy to
Him.  When  religion  is conceived as nothing more than a set of beliefs
which  men have adopted, it is restricted to one part of life. It may or
may not involve action as well as thought, but it is not the fabric of a
whole  life.  It  does  not  qualify every other part of it. It does not
demand  that inner devotion and external conduct constitute the practice
of  a  man's  belief  if  he  is  to  avoid hypocrisy. According to this
difference in the conception of religion as supernatural or natural, men
seem  to  hold  incommunicably  different  views of religious belief, of
revelation,  miracles, and prophecies. But those who agree that religion
is  not  man-made,  that it requires, in some form, divine authority and
inspiration, do not all have the same faith, worship in the same way, or
conform  to  the  same  rites.  The  issue,  therefore,  between  men of
different  faiths—men  who  live  according  to  the  rules of different
religious  communities—  is  almost  as  difficult  as  that between the
religious  and  the irreligious. In the western tradition, the plurality
of  religions necessarily raises a question of truth and falsity for any
religionist whose faith excludes 588

[623a]
the  possibility  of  several  equally  true religions. "Idolatrous" and
"superstitious,"  "heretical"  and "schismatic," are epithets which draw
their   special   significance  from  controversies^about  religion  and
religions.  The  word  "pagan,"  as  Gibbon  points  out,  comes to mean
idolatry  or the worship of false gods. "The Latin Christians," he says,
"bestowed  it on their mortal enemies, the Mahometans." The Mohammedans,
in turn, held the view, according to Gibbon, that "all except themselves
deserved  the  reproach  of  idolatry  and  polytheism."  The charges of
idolatry  and  superstition  occur  also in the conflict between Jew and
Christian,  between  Protestant and Catholic, countered often by charges
of infidelity or heresy and schism. Quite apart from the general problem
of church and state, with its issues of political toleration and freedom
of  worship,  the  very  meaning  of  religion  raises  the  question of
tolerance  in  its  most  acute  form. It is not a question of political
rights  and  liberties,  but  of being right or wrong in one's religious
beliefs  and  acts.  To the extent that the communicants of one religion
regard themselves as believing what God has revealed to them, and to the
extent  that  they  hold  their  religious practices to be prescribed by
divine  law,  they  are  not  free in conscience, it seems, to entertain
contrary  beliefs  and  practices  as conceivably true alternatives. The
conflict  between men of diverse faiths, alike in their understanding of
faith as divinely inspired, somehow appeals beyond any human decision to
God  himself  for judgment. The controversy between men of any religious
faith  and  those who treat such faith as a purely human prejudice seems
to  be  even less susceptible of resolution by the ordinary processes of
discourse. If these observations are accurate and just, the materials of
this  chapter  cannot be assembled dialectically—either as opposed views
or  as  belonging  together—simply  by  reference  to the content of the
various opinions which can be found in the great books. In this chapter,
as  in no others except, perhaps, those which treat of matters connected
with  religion—such  as  God,  Immortality,  Sin, and Theology— it seems
necessary  to  pay  some attention to the opinion's author as well as to
the opinion, and

[623b]
Chapter  79: RELIGION 589 even in some cases to the community or culture
in  which  the  opinion  arises. It is not as necessary, for example, to
know  whether  the man who writes about virtue is himself virtuous as it
is to know whether the man who writes about religion is religious and to
know  furthermore  in what sense he conceives himself as being religious
and  what  religion  he  espouses.  The  distinction  between sacred and
profane,  and between religious and secular, applies to books as well as
to  other  things. In the tradition of the great books, only one book is
set apart as sacred. None of the writers included in this set regard the
Koran  as  sacred  scripture,  though Gibbon as an historian reports the
Mohammedan  belief  in  the Koran. Mohammedans believe that the Koran is
the  word  of  God revealed to His one and only prophet, as Jews believe
that  the  Old  Testament  is  divinely inspired writing, and Christians
believe  in  both  Testaments  as Holy Writ. But though the Bible is the
traditionally sacred book of the west, it is not read as such by all who
write  about  it.  The historian or the philosopher who is not himself a
religious  Jew or Christian may acknowledge the belief of others without
sharing  it.  He reads the Bible as a collection of human writings which
have  exercised an unparalleled influence upon western culture. Whatever
the  merit  of these writings as wisdom, history, preachment, or poetry,
they  do  not  command  a  special  kind  of  reading  unless  they  are
distinguished  from  all  others  by  being  the  word  of God, not man.
Controversies over interpretations of the Bible may thus begin with each
side  begging the main question in issue. Is the Bible sacred scripture,
or  is  it no different in kind from the poetry of Homer and the sayings
of  the  Greek  wise  men  ?  The  two  ways  of  reading  the Bible are
incommensurable.  If  the Bible is not sacred, a critical reading may be
expected  to  disclose  inconsistencies in it, and many of the things it
says  may  be questioned in fact or in principle. But if, though humanly
recorded,  it  is  the  repository  of divine revelation, then it has an
authority  which  puts  it above questioning, though not beyond the need
for  interpretation. There is one sort of proposition, says Locke, which
challenges  "the  highest  degree  of  our  assent  upon bare testimony,
whether the thing

[624a]
590  THE  GREAT IDEAS proposed agree or disagree with common experience,
and the ordinary course of things, or no. The reason whereof is, because
the  testimony  is of such a one as cannot deceive, nor be deceived, and
that  is of God himself. This carries with it an assurance beyond doubt,
evidence   beyond   exception.  This  is  called  by  a  peculiar  name,
revelation;  and our assent to it, faith: which as absolutely determines
our  minds,  and  as  perfectly  excludes all wavering, as our knowledge
itself; and we may as well doubt of our own being, as we can whether any
revelation  from  God  be  true.  So  that  faith  is a settled and sure
principle  of  assent  and  assurance,  and leaves no manner of room for
doubt  or  hesitation.  Only  we  must  be  sure  that  it  be  a divine
revelation,  and that we understand it right." Locke seems to be putting
two   qualifications  upon  his  remark  that  "the  bare  testimony  of
revelation  is  the highest certainty." The first concerns our assurance
that  we are not mistaken in accepting something as revealed. The second
concerns  the  correctness of our understanding of that which we take to
be God's word. On the first point, Hobbes, though he says that "faith is
a  gift  of God, which man can neither give nor take away by promises of
rewards  or menaces of torture," also says that faith depends "only upon
certainty  or  probability  of  arguments  drawn  from  reason  or  from
something  men  believe  already."  Faith does not come "by supernatural
inspiration  or  infusion"  but,  according  to  Hobbes,  "by education,
discipline,  correction,  and  other  natural ways, by which God worketh
them in his elect, at such time as he thinketh fit." The object of faith
is  not  God, but the men whom God has appointed to instruct us; belief,
which  Hobbes  distinguishes  from  faith,  goes  beyond  faith  to  the
acceptance  as  true  of  what  they say. "Consequently," Hobbes writes,
"when  we  believe  that  the  Scriptures are the word of God, having no
immediate  revelation  from God himself, our belief, faith, and trust is
in  the Church, whose word we take, and acquiesce therein." On this same
point,  Aquinas  gives  a different answer. He distinguishes between the
material and the formal aspects of the object of faith. As in the object
of  science, so in the object of faith there is "that which is known . .
. and is the

[624b]
material  object,  so to speak," and "that whereby it is known, which is
the  formal  aspect of the object. Thus, in the science of geometry, the
conclusions are what is known materially, while the formal aspect of the
science  consists  in  the  means  of  demonstration,  through which the
conclusions  are  known. Accordingly, if in faith we consider the formal
aspect  of  the object, it is nothing else than the First Truth. For the
faith  of  which  we  are  speaking  does not assent to anything, except
because  it  is revealed by God." The articles of religious faith may be
drawn  from the content of Holy Writ, but that Holy Writ is the revealed
truth of God must first be accepted by an act of faith. Aquinas seems to
be  meeting  Locke's point by saying that it is faith itself which makes
us sure that the propositions to which we assent by faith are the matter
of divine revelation. On Locke's other point concerning the Tightness of
our  interpretation  of  Scripture,  Locke  himself remarks that "though
everything  said  in the text be infallibly true, yet the reader may be,
nay, cannot choose but be, very fallible in the understanding of it. Nor
is to be wondered that the will of God, when clothed in words, should be
liable  to  that  doubt  and uncertainty, which unavoidably attends that
sort of conveyance." From which he concludes that since "the precepts of
natural  religion  are  plain, and very intelligible to all mankind, and
seldom  come  to  be  controverted; and other revealed truths, which are
conveyed  to  us  by  books  and  languages are liable to the common and
natural obscurities incident to words, methinks it would become us to be
more careful and diligent in observing the former, and less magisterial,
positive,  and  imperious, in imposing our own ideas and interpretations
of  the latter." That Scripture is difficult to interpret and subject to
various  interpretations  Augustine  also  acknowledges,  but he differs
somewhat  from Locke concerning the task or duty which that fact imposes
upon  the religious man. "Let no one then go on bothering me," Augustine
writes,  "with  such words as 'Moses did not mean what you say, he meant
what  I  say.'  If  he  said to me: 'How do you know that Moses meant by
these words what you say ?'— I should

[625a]
take  the  question  with complete calmness. . . . But when he says: 'He
did  not mean what you say, he meant what I say,' yet does not deny that
what  each  of  us  says  is true, then, QjLtfVof the poor, O my God, in
whose  bosom  is no contradiction, rain down the gift of moderation upon
my  heart,  chat  I may hear such talk with patience. For what they say,
they  say not because they are godly men and have seen it in the mind of
Your  servant Moses, but because they are proud men: it is not that they
know  the  opinion  of  Moses, but that they love their own opinion, and
this  not because it is true but because it is their own." Confronted by
a  variety  of  interpretations,  each  of  which may be true, Augustine
remarks  "how  foolish  it  is,  in  such a flood of true meanings . . .
rashly  to assert that Moses intended one or the other of them. ... If I
had  been  N loses ... if I had been the same as he and You had given me
the  book of Genesis to write, I should have wished that You would grant
me such skill in writing, such an art for the construction of what I had
to  say,  that not even those who cannot yet grasp how God creates would
reject my words as too much for their strength; and again that those who
can  grasp  so much, would find fully contained in the few words of Your
servant  whatever  truths  they  had  arrived at in their own thinking."
Those  "who  thirst  for  truth  and  not  for  vanity"  honor the human
dispensers  of  God's  revelation,  Augustine thinks, by believing that,
when  under  God's inspiration they wrote these words, they "had in mind
whatever  is  most  excellent  in  them by the illumination of truth and
their fruitfulness for our profit. "Thus when one man says to me: 'Moses
meant what I think,' and another 'Not at all, he meant what I think,' it
seems  to me," Augustine declares, "that the truly religious thing is to
say:  Why should he not have meant both, if both are true; and if in the
same  words  some  should see a third and a fourth meaning and any other
number  of  true meanings, why should we not believe that Moses saw them
all, since by him one God tempered Sacred Scripture to the minds of many
who  should  see truths in it, yet not all the same truths." Augustine's
position  combines  belief  in  the  truth  of  Scripture,  which  is  a
consequence of

[625b]
Chapter  79: RELIGION 591 the faith that it is God's word, with latitude
of  interpretation  in determining what that truth is, appealing here to
the ordinary standards of what seems to be true to the thinking mind. In
the  course  of  commenting on Augustine's own interpretation of certain
passages  in Genesis, Aquinas summarizes what he takes to be Augustine's
two  rules.  "The  first  is,  to  hold  the  truth of Scripture without
wavering.  The second is that since Holy Scripture can be explained in a
multiplicity  of  senses,  one should adhere to a particular explanation
only  in such measure as to be ready to abandon it, if it be proved with
certainty to be false; lest Holy Scripture be exposed to the ridicule of
unbelievers,  and  obstacles  be  placed  to  their  believing."  As the
question whether the Bible is sacred writing affects the way it is to be
read,  so  the  distinction  between religious and secular writing seems
relevant  to  what  the  great  books have to say about religion. In the
pagan  tradition,  for  example,  Herodotus  in  his History reports and
discusses  a  great  variety  of  religious  doctrines  and practices as
characteristic  of  the peoples he visits or inquires about. There seems
to  be  no  indication that Herodotus is judging the truth or falsity of
these  various religions, either by reference to their reasonableness or
from  convictions born of his own adherence to one of these religions as
against  all  the  rest. For the most part, he is writing about religion
rather  than  religiously, with the possible exception of those passages
in  which  he  expresses  his  own  views,  discussed  in the chapter on
Prophecy,  on  the oracles, omens, and portents which reveal the will of
the  gods.  In  contrast,  the  tragedies  of  Aeschylus, especially the
Oresteian  trilogy,  are  religious poetry, comparable to Dante's Divine
Comedy  and  Milton's Paradise Lost. These are not books about religion,
as,  in  a sense, the great poem of Lucretius On the Nature of Things is
about  religion—a  passionate  attack  on  religion  by a man who is not
religious.  It  may  be  thought  that the aim of Lucretius is to purify
religion when he wishes to banish "all belief in things degrading to the
gods  and  inconsistent with their peace," so that men can "approach the
sanctuaries of the gods with a calm breast," and "with tranquil peace of
mind." But even a person who

[626a]
592  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  thinks  this  will  still find a marked contrast
between Lucretius and poets like Aeschylus or Dante who are writing from
religious  convictions  to  which  they adhere as members of a religious
community.  Both  kinds  of  writing  may  be  found in the same author.
Hobbes,  for  example,  in  examining the phenomena of religious belief,
seems to make public acceptance the criterion of the distinction between
religion  and  superstition.  "Fear of a power invisible, feigned by the
mind,"  he says, "or imagined from tales publicly allowed," is religion;
when they are "not allowed, superstition." Still writing as an observer,
he  says that "this fear of things invisible is the natural seed of that
which  everyone  in  himself calls religion; and in them that worship or
fear  that power otherwise than they do, superstition." Originating from
"natural  seeds" which he enumerates, "religion," he says, "by reason of
the different fancies, judgments, and passions of several men, has grown
up  into  ceremonies  so different, that those which are used by one man
are  for  the  most  part ridiculous to another." Yet Hobbes also writes
religiously,  when  he treats all other religions from the standpoint of
the  special  truth  of  his  own. "These natural seeds of religion," he
points  out, "have received culture from two sorts of men. One sort have
been  they  that have nourished and ordered them, according to their own
invention.  The  other  have done it by God's commandment and direction.
...  Of  the  former sort were all the founders of commonwealths and the
law-givers  of the Gentiles. Of the latter sort were Abraham, Moses, and
our  Blessed  Saviour, by whom have been derived unto us the laws of the
Kingdom  of  God."  It  is as a Christian that Hobbes compares the state
religion of the Romans with the divine religion of the Jews. The Romans,
he writes, "made no scruple of tolerating any religion whatsoever in the
city  of  Rome  itself,  unless  it  had  something in it that could not
consist  with  their  civil government; nor do we read that any religion
was  there  forbidden,  but  that  of  the Jews, who (being the peculiar
Kingdom  of  God)  thought  it unlawful to acknowledge subjection to any
mortal  King  or  State whatsoever. And thus you see how the religion of
the Gentiles was a part of their policy.

[626b]
"But  where God himself," Hobbes continues, "by supernatural revelation,
planted  religion; there he also made to himself a peculiar kingdom, and
gave  laws,  not  only  of  behavior toward himself, but also toward one
another ; and thereby in the Kingdom of God, the policy, and laws civil,
are  a  part of religion; and therefore, the distinction of temporal and
spiritual  domination  has  there  no  place."  Again  it is as a man of
Christian  faith  that  Hobbes ascribes belief in Christian teachings to
that  faith.  "The  causes  why  men  believe any Christian doctrine are
various," he writes. "For faith is the gift of God, and he worketh it in
each  man  by  such  ways  as  it seemeth good to him. The most ordinary
immediate  cause of our belief, concerning any point of Christian faith,
is  that  we  believe  the Bible to be the Word of God." But when Hobbes
goes  on  to  say  that  the "only article of faith, which the Scripture
makes  necessary  to  salvation,  is this, that Jesus is The Christ," he
becomes  the theologian with whom other theologians within the Christian
community   may  disagree,  on  this  or  other  points  of  dogma.  The
disagreements  we find between Augustine or Aquinas and Hobbes or Locke,
or  the  differences in dogma which appear in a comparison of the Divine
Comedy  and  Paradise  Lost, represent the division between Catholic and
Protestant   Christians.  But  such  theological  disagreements  do  not
obliterate  certain  common  tenets  of  religious  belief among all who
profess  Christianity.  Above  all,  they  leave untouched the belief in
religion  itself  as  transcending  all  merely  human  teaching  and as
providing  the  precepts  of  life through which God himself directs and
helps  man  to  his  salvation.  This belief—even if no other except the
belief  in  one  God  Who  created  the  universe  and  made  man in His
image—seems to be shared by Jews and Christians. It marks the difference
between  the religious writings of ancient polytheism and of those which
draw their inspiration from the Pentateuch and the Gospels. It makes the
issue,  as  Pascal  suggests,  between  those who write about a religion
which they themselves either have or seek, and those who, neither having
nor  seeking,  oppose  all  religions equally or treat all with the same
secular detachment.

[627a]
Writing  as  a Christian apologist, Pascal says that "it is the glory of
religion  to  have for enemies men so unreasonable; and their opposition
to it is so little dangerous that it serves_on-the contrary to establish
its  truths.  For the Christian faith goes mainly to establish these two
facts, the corruption of nature, and redemption by Christ. Now I contend
that  if  these men do not serve to prove the truth of the redemption by
the  holiness  of  their behavior, they at least serve admirably to show
the  corruption of nature by sentiments so unnatural. "Let them at least
be  honest  men," he adds, "if they cannot be Christians. . . . Let them
recognize  that  there  are two kinds of people one can call reasonable:
those  who  serve  God  with  all their heart because they know Him, and
those  who  seek  Him with all their heart because they do not know Him.
But  as  for those who live without knowing Him and without seeking Him,
they  judge themselves so little worthy of their own care, that they are
not  worthy  of  the care of others; and it needs all the charity of the
religion  which  they  despise, not to despise them even to the point of
leaving  them  to  their  folly." The very existence of other religions,
according to Pascal, helps to prove the truth of the Christian religion.
"I should equally have rejected the religion of Mahomet and of China, of
the  ancient Romans and of the Egyptians, for the sole reason, that none
having  more  marks  of  truth  than  another, nor anything which should
necessarily  persuade  me,  reason cannot incline to one rather than the
other."  As  for  Judaism, it seems to Pascal to be divinely intended as
the  historic  foundation  and the prophetic forerunner of Christianity.
Apart from these comparative judgments, Pascal attributes certain unique
signs  of truth to the Christian religion. "Every religion is false," he
writes, "which as to its faith does not worship one God as the origin of
everything,  and  which as to its morality does not love only God as the
object  of  everything.  .  .  .  The  true  religion  must  have  as  a
characteristic the obligation to love God. This is very just, and yet no
other  religion  has  commanded  this; ours has done so. It must also be
aware  of  human  lust  and  weakness;  ours is so. It must have adduced
remedies for this; one is prayer. No other reli-

[627b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION 593 gion has asked of God [the power] to love and
follow  him. . . . That we must love one God only is a thing so evident,
that  it  does  not  require  miracles  to  prove  it."  Yet Pascal also
interprets Christ's saying, "Though you believe not Me, believe at least
the  works,"  as  meaning  that  miracles  are  the strongest proof of a
religion.  "Miracles," he writes, "furnish the test in matters of doubt,
between  Jews and heathens, Jews and Christians, Catholics and heretics,
the   slandered   and   slanderers,  between  the  two  crosses."  After
criticizing  the evidence for miracles on rational grounds, Hume appears
to  agree  that  "the  Christian religion not only was at first attended
with miracles, but even at this day cannot be believed by any reasonable
person without one." But his meaning seems to be that belief in miracles
is itself the miracle of faith. "Mere reason," he says, "is insufficient
to  convince us" of the veracity of the Christian religion; "and whoever
is  moved  by Faith to assent to it, is conscious of a continued miracle
in   his   own   person,  which  subverts  all  the  principles  of  his
understanding,  and  gives  him  a determination to believe what is most
contrary  to  custom  and  experience."  Here  is another issue on which
philosophers  and  theologians  disagree. Where Hume says that "our most
holy  religion  is  founded  on  Faith,  not on reason"—with the further
implication  that to adhere to it with faith requires the abandonment of
reason—Augustine and Aquinas think that there can be no conflict between
faith  and  reason,  though faith declares the truth of more than reason
can prove; and that the support which reason can give to faith in no way
lessens  the  merit  of  believing.  With this Hobbes seems to agree, at
least  to the extent of holding that it discredits supernatural religion
to  make  it  consist  in  believing  impossibilities or contradictions.
Revelation,  he  says,  can consist "of nothing against natural reason."
But  for  Hume  the difference between supernatural and natural religion
turns  on  what  one  must  believe  both  without and against reason as
contrasted   to  what  one  believes  as  the  result  of  a  reasonable
interpretation  of  the  evidence.  Like  philosophy,  natural religion,
"which is nothing but a species of philosophy, will nev-

[628a]
594  THE  GREAT  IDEAS er be able to carry us beyond the usual course of
experience,  or  give us measures of conduct and behavior different from
those  which  are  furnished  by reflections on common life." Those who,
like  Marx  and  Freud,  regard  religion  as  a social imposture or the
response  to  a  neurotic  need, not only impute falsity or worse to the
traditional  religions  of  the  west;  they also tend to reject natural
religion.  Science is enough— for truth's sake, for the conduct of life,
for  society's  welfare.  Yet  in commenting on the following lines from
Goethe,  He  who has Science and has Art, Religion, too, has he; Who has
not  Science,  has no Art, Let him religious be! Freud says that "on the
one   hand,   these   words  contrast  religion  with  the  two  highest
achievements  of  man, and on the other, they declare that in respect of
their value in life, they can represent or replace each other." In these
terms  Freud  thinks the religion of the ordinary man is justified— "the
only  religion  that  ought  to  bear  the name." If a man does not have
science  or  art to live by, he must have religion, for "life as we find
it  is  too hard for us" and "we cannot do without palliative remedies."
It  is  the religion of the philosophers and the theologians which Freud
questions.  He  criticizes  the philosophers for trying "to preserve the
God of religion by substituting for him an impersonal, shadowy, abstract
principle";  and  he  challenges  the  grounds  on  which  he thinks the
theologians  hold  it  to  be "an impertinence on the part of science to
take  religion  as  a  subject  for  its investigations." They deny that
science has any competence whatsoever "to sit in judgment on religion. .
.  .  Ifwe  are not deterred by this brusque dismissal," Freud declares,
"but  inquire on what grounds religion bases its claim to an exceptional
position  among  human concerns, the answer we receive, if indeed we are
honored  with  an  answer at all, is that religion cannot be measured by
human  standards, since it is of divine origin, and has been revealed to
us  by  a  spirit  which the human mind cannot grasp. It might surely be
thought,"  he continues, "that nothing could be more easily refuted than
this  argument;  it  is  an obvious petitio principii, a 'begging of the
question.'

[628b]
The  point  which  is  being  called  in question' is whether there is a
divine  spirit  and  a  revelation; and it surely cannot be a conclusive
reply  to say that the question cannot be asked because the Deity cannot
be  called  in  question." Marx takes a similar view of the theologians.
According  to him, the theologians beg the question in much the same way
as  do  the  classical  economists for whom there are "only two kinds of
institutions,  those of art and those of nature. Feudal institutions are
artificial   institutions,   those   of   the  bourgeoisie  are  natural
institutions.  In  this,"  Marx says, "they resemble the theologians who
establish  two  kinds  of  religion.  Every religion but their own is an
invention  of  men,  while their own religion is an emanation from God."
Plato,  on the other hand, excoriates those who think that "all religion
is  a cooking up of words and a make-believe." It is almost as if he had
Marx  and Freud in mind when, in the Laws, the Athenian Stranger carries
on the discussion of religion in terms of the distinction between nature
and  art,  and refers to those who "would say that the Gods exist not by
nature,  but  by  art, and by the laws of states, which are different in
different  places,  according  to the agreement of those who make them."
They  are the very same people who hold that "the honorable is one thing
by nature and another by law, and that the principles of justice have no
existence  at  all by nature." In Plato's view, the justice of the state
and  its  laws  must  be founded not only on nature rather than art, but
also upon religion and a right belief in the gods. The Athenian Stranger
answers  those  who  think it is "dreadful that [we] should legislate on
the  supposition  that there are Gods," by saying why "it is a matter of
no small consequence ... to prove that there are Gods, and that they are
good  and  regard justice more than men do." The reason he gives is that
"no one who in obedience to the laws believed that there were Gods, ever
intentionally did any unholy act, or uttered an unlawful word, but those
who did must have supposed one of three things— either that
[the Gods] did not
exist,  which  is  the first possibility, or secondly, that if they did,
they took no care of man, or thirdly, that they were easily appeased and
turned aside

[629a]
from  their  purpose  by  sacrifices  and  prayers."  That  is  why  the
demonstration  of  the  existence  of  the  gods  "would be the best and
noblest  prelude  of  all  our  laws."  e=  Rousseau's  legislator, like
Plato's,  is  also  concerned  with the role which religion plays in the
foundation  and  life  of  the state. But the question "Which religion?"
arises at once for Rousseau, as it does not for Plato, who can treat the
nature  of  the  gods  and the nature of the state as equally within the
province  of  the  political  philosopher. But for Rousseau, living in a
Christian  civilization,  the  political philosopher cannot approach the
subject of religion without being confronted by the theologian. He finds
it necessary, therefore, to distinguish between a revealed religion like
Christianity   and  the  natural  or  civil  religion  of  the  citizen.
Christianity, says Rousseau, "not the Christianity of today, but that of
the Gospel, which is entirely different," is the religion of man, not of
the  citizen.  "So  far  from  binding the hearts of the citizens to the
State,  it has the effect of taking them away from all earthly things. I
know  of  nothing more contrary to the social spirit. We are told that a
people   of   true  Christians  would  form  the  most  perfect  society
imaginable.  I see in this supposition only one great difficulty: that a
society  of  true  Christians  would  not be a society of men. . . . The
country  of  the  Christian is not of this world." What the state needs,
Rousseau  goes  on  to  say,  is "a purely civil profession of faith, of
which  the  Sovereign  should fix the articles, not exactly as religious
dogmas,  but  as  social sentiments without which a man cannot be a good
citizen  or  a  faithful subject." He then enumerates what he calls "the
dogmas  of  civil  religion"  which  "ought  to  be few, simple, exactly
worded,  without explanation or commentary," such as "the existence of a
mighty, intelligent, and beneficent Divinity, possessed of foresight and
providence,  the life to come, the happiness of the just, the punishment
of  the  wicked,  the  sanctity  of  the  social contract and the laws."
Montesquieu  takes  the diametrically opposite view. "With regard to the
true religion," he writes, "I have never pretended to make its interests
submit  to  those of a political nature, but rather to unite them. . . .
The Christian religion, which ordains that men should love each

[629b]
Chapter  79: RELIGION 595 other, would, without doubt, have every nation
blessed  with  the  best  civil, the best political laws; because these,
next  to  this  religion,  are  the  greatest good that men can give and
receive."  Montesquieu  meets  the argument that "true Christians cannot
form a government of any duration," by saying that the more men "believe
themselves  indebted to religion, the more they would think due to their
country.  The  principles of Christianity, deeply engraved on the heart,
would  be  infinitely  more powerful than the false honor of monarchies,
than  the  human  virtues  of republics, or the servile fear of despotic
states."  Any  consideration  of  the political significance of religion
tends  to lead into the controversy over the relation between church and
state.  Three  main  positions seem to be taken: one which calls for the
integration  of church and state, one which calls for a subordination of
either  state  to  church or church to state, and one which insists upon
the  autonomy  of  each as a basis for their relation to one another, or
carries  separation  even further, to the point of complete divorce. The
theocratic  state  of the Old Testament represents the Jewish version of
the first position, distinguished by the fact that the priesthood was in
the  service  of  the  king.  Hobbes defines a Christian commonwealth in
almost parallel terms. It is indifferent whether it is called a "church"
or  a  "state,"  because  it  is  "a company of men professing Christian
religion,  united  in  the  person of one sovereign." It follows, Hobbes
argues,  that  "there  is  on  earth,  no  such  universal church as all
Christians  are  bound  to  obey; because there is no power on earth, to
which  all  other commonwealths are subject. There are Christians in the
dominions  of  several  princes  and  states;  but  every one of them is
subject  to  that  commonwealth,  whereof  he  is  himself a member; and
consequently, cannot be subject to the commands of any other person. And
therefore a church, such a one as is able to command, to judge, absolve,
condemn,  or  do  any  other  act,  is  the  same  thing  with  a  civil
commonwealth,  consisting of Christian men; and is called a civil state,
for  that the subjects of it are men; and a church for that the subjects
thereof are Christians.'"

[630a]
596  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  According  to  Hobbes,  "temporal  and spiritual
government  are  but  two  words brought into the world, to make men see
double,  and mistake their lawful Sovereign. . . . There is therefore no
other  government  in  this  life,  neither  of state, nor religion, but
temporal."  Agreeing  with  Hobbes  on  the  unity of government and the
integration  of church and state, writers like Augustine and Roger Bacon
place  kings  in  the  service  of  the priesthood, and make the supreme
pontiff,  who  governs both spiritually and temporally, the only earthly
sovereign.  Gilson  summarizes  their  view by saying that for them "the
definition  of the Church includes the State," and that the church has a
universality  which  embraces  "the  temporal  and the spiritual domains
alike."  The position of Aquinas is indicated in the Treatise on Law, in
the  passage  in  which  he  declares  that no civil law can be valid or
binding  if  what  it  commands  is  contrary  to divine law. It is more
explicitly  developed  in  his little tract On the Governance of Rulers.
"It  is  not the ultimate end," he writes, "of an assembled multitude to
live virtuously, but through virtuous living to attain to the possession
of  God.  Furthermore, if it could attain this end by the power of human
nature,  then  the duty of a king would have to include the direction of
men to this end." But, Aquinas holds, men attain this end by divine, not
human,  power  and  therefore divine, not human, government is needed to
direct  men  to  their end. "Consequently," he maintains, "in order that
spiritual  things  might  be  distinguished  from  earthly  things,  the
ministry of this kingdom has been entrusted not to earthly kings, but to
priests, and in the highest degree to the chief priest, the successor of
St. Peter, the Vicar of Christ, the Roman Pontiff, to whom all the kings
of  Christian  peoples  are  to  be  subject as to our Lord Jesus Christ
Himself. For those to whom pertains the care of intermediate ends should
be  subject to him to whom pertains the care of the ultimate end, and be
directed  by  his  rule."  This  last  statement indicates that Aquinas,
unlike  Augustine  and  Roger  Bacon,  assigns to the state a subsidiary
dominion  and  to  the  king a subordinate jurisdiction. The opponent of
Aquinas is usually thought to be Marsilius of Padua, whose Defensor Pads
separates church

[630b]
and   state,  but  subordinates  priest  to  king,  in  a  manner  which
corresponds  to the Averroistic subordination of theology to philosophy.
Agreeing with both that church and state are distinct, Dante agrees with
neither on the relation which should obtain between the temporal and the
spiritual  domains,  or  between  civil  and  ecclesiastical government.
Whereas Aquinas holds that only man's spiritual end is ultimate and that
all  temporal  ends  are  intermediate,  Dante  insists that man has two
ultimate  goals.  "Man  exists  for  a  double  purpose,"  he says in De
Monarchia.  "Since he alone among beings partakes of both corruptibility
and  incorruptibility,  he  alone  among  beings  belongs  in  two final
orders—one  ofwhich  is  his  goal  as a corruptible being, the other as
incorruptible."  Man  has  two  beatitudes, or two forms of happiness—an
earthly perfection which consists in the complete realization throughout
time  of  the  intellectual powers of mankind, and a heavenly perfection
which  consists in the vision of God. "These two states of bliss," Dante
argues, "like two different goals, man must reach by different ways. For
we  come to the first as we follow the philosophical teachings, applying
them to our moral and intellectual capacities; and we come to the second
as  we  follow  the  spiritual  teachings,  which transcend human reason
according  to  our theological capacities, faith, hope, and charity." In
terms  of  this theory of man's two ends, and of the distinct spheres of
reason  and  faith,  or  philosophy  and  civil law on the one hand, and
religion  and  divine law on the other, Dante formulates his doctrine of
the  autonomy  of  state and church. "The reins of man," he writes, "are
held  by  a  double  driver according to man's two-fold end : one is the
supreme  pontiff,  who  guides mankind with revelations to life eternal,
and  the  other  is  the  emperor, who guides mankind with philosophical
instructions  to temporal happiness." Church and state may be related as
sun and moon in the sense that the state receives some illumination from
the  church  even  about  matters  within  its  own  jurisdiction;  but,
according  to  Dante,  the  state has its own source of light in reason.
"Temporal  power,"  he maintains, "receives from spiritual power neither
its  being,  nor  its  power  or  authority,  nor  even its functioning,
strictly

[631a]
speaking;  but  what  it  receives  is  the light of grace, which God in
heaven  and  the  pope's blessing on earth cause to shine on it in order
that  it may work more effectively." ^=— All these mediaeval theories of
what  should  be  the  relation  between  church  and  state—  with  the
exception,  perhaps,  of  the  doctrine  of  Marsilius of Padua—conceive
religion  as  having  a  supernatural  source and the church as having a
supernatural  foundation,  both being instituted for the sake of guiding
man  to  his supernatural end. They differ from one another according to
the  view they take of man's earthly or temporal goods, the power of his
reason, and the jurisdiction of his laws. Their difference, according to
Gilson,  verifies  the principle that "the manner in which one conceives
the relationship of the State to the Church, that in which one conceives
the  relationship  of philosophy to theology, and in which one conceives
the  relationship of nature to grace, are necessarily correlated." These
mediaeval   theories   of   church   and  state  persist,  with  certain
modifications,  in  modern times. But the characteristically modern view
of  the  matter  begins  with  a  different view of religion itself. Its
mediaeval  prototype  is  to  be  found in the rationalism of Marsilius.
Within  the  secular  state,  the  church is a purely human institution,
religion  is defended by philosophy for the contribution it makes to the
peace  of the civil community— or, perhaps, condemned by the apostles of
earthly  progress  as  "the  opiate  of  the  masses."  The principle of
religious  tolerance  involves  not  merely  tolerance  of religion, but
tolerance  for a diversity of religions and often the complete rejection
of  all religion. "I esteem it above all things necessary," writes Locke
in  his  Letter  Concerning  Toleration,  "to  distinguish  exactly  the
business  of  civil  government  from  that  of  religion, and to settle
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  I  .  Faith  as  the foundation of religion \a. The
nature,  cause,  and  conditions  of faith: its specific objects lb. The
sources  of  religious belief (i) Revelation: the word of God and divine
authority  (2)  Miracles  and  signs  as  divine  confirmation  (3)  The
testimony of prophets: the anointed of God

[631b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION  597 the just bounds that lie between the one and
the  other. . . . The commonwealth," Locke continues, "seems to me to be
a  society  of  men  constituted only for the procuring, preserving, and
advancing  their  own civil interests." A church is "a voluntary society
of  men, joining themselves together of their own accord in order to the
public  worshipping  of  God  in such manner as they judge acceptable to
Him, and effectual to the salvation of their souls." Locke's doctrine of
the  separation  of church and state is reflected in the Constitution of
the  United  States. In the form which Jefferson gives it, it appears in
the   declaration  that  "Congress  shall  make  no  law  respecting  an
establishment  of  religion,  or prohibiting the free exercise thereof."
Mill  carries  out  the  same  principles  in his attack on "Sabbatarian
legislation."   Such   laws,  he  thinks,  exceed  the  power  of  civil
government.  They  represent  an  "illegitimate  interference  with  the
rightful  liberty  of  the individual. . . . The notion that it is one's
duty  that  another  should  be  religious"  is, in Mill's opinion, "the
foundation  of  all the religious persecutions ever perpetrated." Hegel,
on  the other hand, holds that "the state should require all citizens to
belong to a church," but he points out that "# church is all that can be
said,  because since the content of a man's faith depends on his private
ideas,  the  state  cannot interfere with it." The positions men take on
the  great issues of church and state thus seem to be determined in part
by the diverse conceptions men have of religion. This is no less true of
opposing  views  on  religious  liberty,  on the treatment of heresy and
schism,   on  religious  education,  the  missionary  calling,  and  the
conversion of infidels. In the discussion of religion, perhaps more than
anywhere  else,  the  first  Yea  or  Nay  seems  to determine all other
affirmations or denials. PAGE 599 600 601 602

[632a]
598  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 2g. Profanations and sacrileges y. The nature and
organization  of  the  religious  community  (1)  The institution of the
priesthood  and  other ecclesiastical offices $d. The monastic life: the
disciplines  of  asceticism  5.  The  dissemination  of religion 5a. The
function  of preaching 5c. Religious education worship 6c. The unity and
tradition  of  a  religion  beliefs  and practices; the psychogenesis of
religion   7.  Historical  observations  concerning  religious  beliefs,
institutions, and controversies

[632b]
1  PAGE  2. The virtue and practice of religion: piety as justice to God
602  ia.  Prayer  and  supplication:  their efficacy 604 2b. Worship and
adoration:  the  rituals and ceremonials of religion 605 2c. The nature,
institution,   and  uses  of  the  sacraments  606  2d.  Sacrifices  and
propitiations 607 2e. Fasting and almsgiving 608 2f. Purificatory rites:
the  remission  of sin by baptism and penance 609 3. The religious life:
religious  offices  and  the  religious  community  610  Christ  61  (2)
Ecclesiastical   government   and  hierarchy  613  (3)  The  support  of
ecclesiastical  institutions:  tithes,  contributions,  state subsidy 4.
Church  and state: the issue concerning temporal and spiritual power 614
\a.  Religion  in  relation to forms of government: the theocratic state
615  5b.  Religious  conversion 616 6. Truth and falsity in religion 617
6b.  Religious  apologetics:  the defense of faith 618 (1) Orthodoxy and
heresy:  the  role  of  dogma in religion; the treatment of heretics (2)
Sects  and  schisms  arising from divergences of belief and practice 619
6e.  Religious  liberty: freedom of conscience; religious toleration 620
science and religion 621

[633a]
sage  is  in  section  d  of  page  12.  tain  cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii
[265-283]  12d.  tently  rather than continuously in the work or passage
cited.  1.  Faith  as  the foundation of religion Old Testament: Isaiah,
7:9—  (D)  Isaias,  7:9  / Haba%u\, 2:4— (D) Habacuc, 2:4 New Testament:
Matthew, 21:31-32 / Mar\, 16:16-18 I John, 1:12-13; 3:14-18; 5:24; 6:35,
40,47;  8:24; 10:27-28; 11:25-26; 12:36; 14:114; 16:27; 20:24-31 / Acts,
10:43;  16:25-33 / Romans passim, esp 1:16-17, 3:21-5:2, 9:3033, 10:8-17
/ / Corinthians, 13:2 / // Corinthians, 1:24; 4:13-18; 5:6-8 / Galatians
passim,  esp  2:16-3:27,  5:5-6  /  Ephesians,  2:8-9;  3  :iI  ~  12  /
Philippians,  3:8-9  /  Colossians,  1:21-23; 2:5-7,12 / / Timothy, 1:5;
4:10; 6:10-12 / Hebrews passim, esp 10:22-23, 10:38-39, 11 :i40 / James,
2  esp 2:5, 2:17-26 / / Peter, 1 7-9; 2:6-7 / I John, 3:23; 5:1,4-5,9-10
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk i, par 1 la-b; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c /
City  of God, bk xi, ch 2 323a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i,  a  i  3b-4a  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 62, a 4, ans
62b-63a;  q  65,  aa  4-5 73d-75a; q 66, a 6 80c-81b; part ii-ii, qq 1-7
380a-416d;  PART  III  SUPPL,  Q  99,  A 4, ANS and REP I 1083a-1084a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxiv [5281I 143b-c

[633b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION  599  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  83a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  209a-215b  passim;  238c239c;  293d-294b  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  19b-c;  95d-96c;  100b  33  Pascal: Pensees,
248-252  219a-220a;  286-288 224a-b 35 Locke: Toleration, 3b-4a; 10c-llb
35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect x, div ioo-ioi 496d-497b; sect xii,
div 132, 509c 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 344c-349b esp 345c-d, 347b-c 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  395a-b; 482a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
196d197b;  part  iv,  349b-350a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c  passim  la.  The  nature, cause, and conditions of faith: its
specific objects New Testament: Mar\, 9:13-29; 11:20-24 / Luke, 8:4-15 I
John,  1:12-13;  6:29;  10:37-38;  1 2 ^4-46 514:1 ,7-1 1 ; 1 6 :27 ; 20
:24~3 1 / Romans passim, esp 3:21-5:2, 9:30-33 / / Corinthians, 2:4-10 /
//  Corinthians, 4:3-4 / Galatians, 3; 5:22 / / Thessalonians, 2:13; 5:8
/  Hebrews esp 4:2, 11:1-12:3 / James, 2 esp 2:17-26 / / Peter, 1:7-9,21
/ / John, 1:2.^-1^', 4:1-3; 5:4-5

[634a]
(1.  Faith  as  the  foundation  of religion, la. The nature, cause, and
conditions  of  faith: its specific objects.} 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  i,  par  i la-b; par 17-18 5b-d; bk in, par 6-10 14b-15d; bk hi, par
19-BK  iv,  par  1 18b-19c; bk v, par 12-13 30a-c; par 23-25 33c-34c; bk
vi,  par  7-8  36d37c;  bk  vii, par 24 50d-51a; bk viii 52c-61c esp par
29-30 60d-61c; bk ix, par 14 65a-c; par 23-25 68a-c / City of God, bk x,
ch  2 299d-300a; bk xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b; bk xxi, ch 5,
564b-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a10c; q 2, a 2, rep 1
lld-12c;  q  12, a 13 61c-62b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
62,  a  3,  ans  and  rep 2 61c-62b; q 67, a 3 83b84d; q 100, a 4, rep 1
253d-255a;  q 108, a 2, rep 1 332b-333d; q no, a 3, rep i 350a-d; q 112,
a  5,  ans  and  rep 2 359c-360c; part 11—11, qq 1-9 380a-426c 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy, purgatory, hi [3445] 56b; paradise, 11 [37-45] 108a; xix
[6977]  135d;  xxiv  142d-144b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 63b; 66a-c;
78d80d;  83a-84c;  part  ii,  149c-d;  part  hi, 209b; 209d; 240a-246a,c
passim,  esp  241a-242a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 98b-99a; 209a-c; 211b213a;
239b-c;  267c-268a;  293d-294b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c;
55b-d; 95d-97c; 100c / Novum Organum, bk 1, aph 65 114b-c; aph 89 124a-d
31  Descartes:  Rules,  in,  4d-5a / Meditations, 69a-d / Objections and
Replies,  125c-126a;  168c;  232b;  284d  33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
147b;  163a-166b  passim / Pensees, 242-245 217b-218b; 248 219a; 254-256
220a;  262  221a;  265-290 221b225a esp 278-282 222b-223b; 425 243b244b;
523 264a; 543 266a; 561-567 272b273b; 585-588 277a-b; 619-620 284b-286a;
794-796   327b   35   Locke:  Toleration,  3b-4a;  10c-d;  15b  /  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv, ch vii, sect ii, 340b-c; ch xvi, sect 14 371b-c;
ch  xvii,  sect  23-24  380b-d; ch xviii 380d-384b passim 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  x, div 101, 497b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 379c-380a
38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxv, 208a-209a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  179a-181c;  186c191a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 151d; 227d-228a
42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 179a-b; 242a-243a / Practical Reason, 320c-321b;
344c-348b  esp  347b-c;  353a-354d / Judgement, 599d-600a; 604d-606d esp
606a-d;  607d-609b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 84d-85a; 121c-d; 129b; 394d-395b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part i, 228d; 234d-235c; 236a-c; part
ii, 268b-271c;

[634b]
part  in, 290b-292a; 307b-308a; 311b-d; 312d-313a; part iv, 349b-350a 47
Goethe:   Faust,  part  i  [3414-3468]  83b-84b;  part  11  [10,113-121]
246b-247a  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 302b-303d; 593b-c 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  v,  196a-198b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
11a15a,c esp lla-b, 13a-d; bk ii, 21b-24d; 26b27d; bk in, 64c-67a; bk v,
129c-132b;   bk   vi   146b,d-170d;  bk  vii,  171a-180a  esp  172c177b;
189a-191a,c;  bk  xi,  313c-314d;  337a346a; bk xii, 396d-397a 53 James:
Psychology,  652a-659a  passim;  661b;  826b-827a  lb.  The  sources  of
religious  belief lb(l) Revelation: the word of God and divine authority
Old  Testament: Genesis, 12:1-9; 13:14-17; 15; 17-18; 21:12-13; 22:1-18;
26:1-6,23-24;   28:10-22;  32:23-32;  35:1-15;  46:1-4  /  Exodus,  3-4;
6:1-8,28-30;   7:1-5;  19-20;  24;  33-34  /  Numbers,  12;  14:20-25  /
Deuteronomy, 4:10-15,36; 5; 8:3; 18:18; 29:29; 31:14-21"/ Joshua, 1:1-9—
(D)  Josue, 1:1-9 / / Samuel, 3— (D) I Kings, 3 / / Kings, 3:5-15; 9:19;
19:9-18—  (D)  III  Kings,  3:5-15;  9:1-9;  19:9-18  /  Job,  33:14-17;
38:1-42:5  / Psalms, 12:6; 119:81-82,103-105,114-116,130-133,147148— (D)
Psalms,  11:7;  118:81-82,103-105,  114-116,130-133,147-148  / Proverbs,
30:5  /  Isaiah, 6; 48:3-8— (D) Isaias, 6; 48:3-8 / Jeremiah, 1; 26:1-6—
(D)  Jeremias, 1; 26:1-6 / Ezekiel, 1-3; 8-12— (D) Ezechiel, 1-3; 8-12 I
Amos,  7  /  Zechariah,  1-6—  (D)  Zacharias,  1-6 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  16:26—  (D)  OT,  Boof{  of  Wisdom,  16:26  / Ecclesiasticus,
17:6-14—   (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  17:5-12  New  Testament:  Matthew,
3:16-17;   7:28-29;   10:1-20,26;  11:25-27;  13:10-23;  17:5;  21:2327;
28:18-20  /  Mar\,  1:9-11,22;  4:1-2,10-23;  9:3-7;  11:27-33  /  Luke,
2:25-26;  3:21-22;  4:4,31-32; 8:4-15; 9:33-35; 10:21-22; 12:1-3 / John,
2:22;  3:2,9-12;  4:41-42;  5:31-47  esp  :35"3  8 ; 10:26-27; 12:28-30;
15:15;  :395  9  5  16:29-31;  17:6-8  /  Acts,  1:15-16; 9:3-8; 22:616;
26:13-18  /  Romans,  1:16-20;  10:17;  15:4 / / Corinthians, 2:9-10,13;
12:1-7;   15:1-2  /  //  Corinthians,  12:1-5  /  Galatians,  1:11-17  /
Ephesians,  1  :3~9,  17-23;  3:1-5  /  / Thessalonians, 2:13/1 Timothy,
1:14-16///  Timothy, 3:14-16 / Hebrews, 4:11-12 / / Peter, 1:10-12,22-25
/  //  Peter,  1:16-25  /  I  John,  2:20-21,27;  5:7-10  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk ii, par 7, 10b; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c; bk ix, par 8-12
63c65a;  bk  xi, par 2-5 89c-90c; bk xiii, par 16-18 114d-115c / City of
God,  bk x, ch 13 307bc; bk xi, ch 2-4, 323b-324a; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b;
bk xx, ch 28, 556c / Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 15 643c-644a

[635a]
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q i 3a10c passim; q 12, a 13
61c-62b;  Q32,  ai  175d178a;  q  46,  a  2  253a-255a;  Q  68, a i, ans
354a-355c;  q  117,  a  2, rep 2 597c-598c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-u^jQ-qi,  aa  4-5 210c-212c; q 98, aa 2-6 240c-245b; q 100, a 3,
ans  253a-d;  q  ioi,  a 2, rep i 267a-268a; part ii-ii, q 1, a 7, rep 3
385c387a;  aa  9-10  388d-390d;  q  2,  a  1,  rep  i  391a-392a; aa 2-4
392a-394b;  a 10, ans 399b400b; q 4, a 8 409a-d; q 6, a 1, ans 413d414c;
q  16,  a  1  454c-455c; part hi, q 7, a 7, ans 750a-d; q ii, a 6, rep 2
775d-776b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxxxxxiii 99b-105d passim;
paradise, v [73-78] 112d-113a; xxiv [52-114] 143b-d; xxv [64-96] 145a-b;
xxvi  [1-45]  145d-146b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 83a-b; part ii,
137b-138b;  160b-c; part hi, 165a-167b; 181a188a; 241a-242a; conclusion,
281d-282a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  209a-c;  212a; 238c-239c; 267c-268a;
273a-b;  293d-294b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 19b-c; 38a;
98a-100b  /  New Atlantis, 203a-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c /
Meditations,  69a-d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  168c169a  32  Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk viii
[267-318]
238a-239a;  bk  xii  [106-151]  321b-322b;  [173269]  323a-325a / Samson
Agonistes  [472-478] 350a 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 147b; 163a-166b
passim  /  Pensees, 561-566 272b-273b; 622-628 286a-287a; 880-881 345b /
Vacuum,  355b  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  440a-b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  ix, sect 23 291b-c; bk iv, ch vii, sect ii,
340b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect  14  371b-c; ch xviii, sect 2-3 381a-d; sect 6-9
382d-383d;  ch  xix  384c-388d  passim,  esp  sect 4 385b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xii, div 132, 509c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 366c-d
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 179b-c; 186c187b; 201a; 307d-308a; 346b-c
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 227d-228a; 231a-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 311a-b
/  Utilitarianism,  455a-c  44  Boswell: Johnson, 347a; 394a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  159b160a;  part 1, 245d-246c; part hi,
307b-308a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk v, 127b-137c passim, esp 129b-130a; bk vi, 150d153d \b{2)
Miracles  and  signs as divine confirmation Old Testament: Genesis, 15 /
Exodus,  4:1-9;  7-12;  14;  16:1-17:7;  19:1-20:22  esp 19:1620, 20:18;
24:15-17;   33:8-10;  34:10,29-35  /  Numbers,  11:24-25;  12;  16-17  /
Deuteronomy, 4:10-15,36; 5 esp 5:22-26; 8:2-4 / Joshua,

[635b]
3:7-4:24—  (D)  Josue,  3:7-4:24  /  Judges,  6:1124,36-40  /  / Samuel,
12:15-19— (D) I Kings, 12:15-19 / / Kings, 17-18— (D) /// Kings, 17-18 /
// Kings, 1-2; 5; 6:25-7:20; 20:1-11 — (£)) IV Kings, 1-2; 5; 6:25-7:20;
20:1-11  /  Isaiah,  38— (D) Isaias, 38 / Daniel, 2:1-5:31; 6:18-28— (D)
Daniel,   2:1-3:23;  3:91-5:31;  6:18-28  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon,
12:17-27;  16  (D)  OT,  Boo{  of Wisdom, 12:17-27; 16 / Bel and Dragon,
31-42—  (D)  OT,  Daniel,  14  :30~4i  /  //  Maccabees,  9—  (D) OT, //
Machabees,  9  New  Testament: Matthew, 8:1-17,23-34; 9:18,18-34; io:i ;
12:22-29;  m :i 3-33; 15:23-39; 17:1-8,14-20; 20:29-34; 21:17-22 / Mar\,
1:23-2:12;  4:37-40;  5;  6:34-56;  7:24-8:26;  9:1-10,16-29;  10:46-52;
15:31-32;   16:16-18   /   Luke,  1:5-66;  4:31-5:26;  7:1-23;  8:22-56;
9:1-2,12-20,28-44;   14:1-6;   17:11-19;   18:35-43   /  John,  1:43-51;
2:1-11,22;  3:2;  4:46-54;  5:1-9,36; 9; 11:1-48; 12:27-30,37-40; 13:19;
14:29;  20:1-9,24-31  /  Acts,  2:1-22;  3:2-16;  :3-20>33-42 ; 12:5-11;
5:1-24; 8:6-8,13; 9 13:9-12; 14:7-10; 19:11-20; 20:9-12; 22:616; 28:3-10
/  Hebrews,  2:3-4  18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 8-9 303a304c; ch
12-13  306d-307c;  ch  17  309c-310b; ch 32, 320c-321d; bk xxii, ch 5-10
589a599b  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 41-42 656a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 12, a 13, ans and rep 2 61c-62b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 112, a 5, ans 359c-360c; part ii-ii, q 2, a i,
rep i 391a-392a; a 9, rep 3 398c-399b; q 5, a 2 411b-412a; q 6, a 1, ans
and  rep  2  413d414c  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, paradise, xxiv [52114]
143b-d 22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law [4869-4924] 242b-243b / Prioress's
Tale [13,418-620] 392a395b esp
[13,537-599]
394a-395a / Second Nun's Tale
[15,787-816]
467a-b;
[15,98716,021] 470b-471b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  83c-d;  part  ii,  137b-c;  part  in,
166a-167b; 188a-191a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 98b-99a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  13d-14a;  19b;  33c-d;  38a; 41b-d; 55c-d / New Atlantis,
201d-203c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[173-222]
323a-324a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [23-29]  340a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 263
221a-b;  587-588  277a-b;  643-644  290b-291b;  744-745  319a-b; 803-856
328b-341b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, sect 13 371a-b;
ch  xix,  sect 15 388a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 63 425b-c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  x,  div  86  488d-489b;  div  98-101
495d-497b

[636a]
(lb. The sources of religious belief. lb(2) Miracles and signs as divine
confirmation.) 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 180b-c; 189b-190d; 294a-296d
esp  295c-296b; 445d-446b; 465d467b; 547a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
232a-c; 398b-399b 44 Boswell :/oto>rt, 126b-c; 359a; 481d-482a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  307a-b;  part iv, 338b-c 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part  i [765-770] 20a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 219b-220a
52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk i, lla-b; bk v, 127b-137c; bk vii,
171a-180a;  189a-191a,c;  bk xi, 337a-346a passim l£(3) The testimony of
prophets: the anointed of God Old Testament: Exodus passim, esp 4:10-16,
6  :28~7 :2 / Leviticus passim / Numbers passim, esp 11:16-17, 11:24-30,
12:1-9  / Deuteronomy passim, esp 18:15-22, 34:9-12 /Joshua, 1; 3:74:14;
23-24—  (D)  Josue,  1;  3:7-4:14;  23-24  /  Judges, 6:7-10 / / Samuel,
2:27-36; 7-13 passim, esp 10:1-13; 15-16; 28:7-20— (D) I Kings, 2:27-36;
7-13  passim,  esp 10:1-13; 15-16; 28:7-20 / // Samuel, 7:4-17; 12:1-14;
23:1-2;  24:10-14—  (D)  II  Kings, 7:4-17; 12:114; 23:1-2; 24:10-14 / /
Kings,  14:1-18;  18;  20;  21:17-22:38— (D) III Kings, 14:1-18; 18; 20;
21:17-22:38  /  //  Kings,  1-2;  3:10-27; 6-9; 17:13; 19:1-7,20-34; 20;
21:10-16;  22:8-20;  24:1-4—  (D)  IV  Kings,  1-2; 3:10-27; 6-9; 17:13;
19:1-7,20-34;  20;  21:10-16;  22:8-20;  24:1-4 / / Chronicles, 17:3-15;
21:9-26—  (D) I Paralipomenon, 17:3-15; 21:9-26 / // Chronicles, 11:2-4;
15:1-15;  18;  20:14-27;  21:1219; 25:5-16; 28:1-15; 34:i4-33; 36:14-21-
(D)  II Paralipomenon, 11:2-4; 15:1-15; 18; 20:14-27; 21:12-19; 25:5-16;
28:1-15;  34:1433;  36:14-21  /  Ezra,  9:10-11— (D) I Esdras, 9:10-11 /
Nehemiah, 9:30— (D) // Esdras, 9:30 / Isaiah passim, esp 6:1-13, 11:1-5,
61:13—  (D)  Isaias passim, esp 6:1-13, ii:i-5> 61:13 / Jeremiah passim,
esp  1,  7:25-27, 23:5-6, 25:4-7' 2 5:i3. 28:5-9, 38:14-23— (D) Jeremias
passim,  esp  1,  7:25-27,  23:5-6,  25:4-7,  25:13,  28:5-9, 38:14-23 /
Ezekjel passim, esp 1-3, 8-1 1, 13— (D) Ezechiel passim, esp 1-3, 8-1 1,
13  /  Daniel,  5;  6:18-28;  7-12  passim, esp 9:25-26, 10:5-19 / Rosea
passim,  esp  6:4-6,  12:9-10 (D) Osee passim, esp 6:4-6, 12:9-10 / Joel
passim,  esp  2:28-29  /  Amos  passim, esp 3:7-8 / Obadiah-(D) Abdias /
Jonah  esp  3—  (D)  Jonas  esp  3  / Micah passim, esp 3:8— (D) Micheas
passim,  esp  3:8  /  Nahum  /  Haba%u\  —  (D)  Habacuc / Zephaniah-(D)
Sophonias  I  Haggai—(D)  Aggeus / Zechariah passim, esp 1:1-6, 7:12-14—
(D)  Zacharias passim, esp 1:1-6, 7:12-14 New Testament: Matthew passim,
esp 1:18-23, 2:3-6, 2:19-23, 3:1-17, 4:12-16, 5:17-18, 8:14-

[636b]
17,  11:1-15, 12:14-21, 13:57-58, 21:1-5, 27:310, 27:35, 28:18-20 / Mar\
passim,  esp 1:1-8, 6:4-6, 16:15-16 / Luke passim, esp 1:67-79, 4:16-21,
4:24,  11:48-50  / John passim, esp 1:6-8, 1:45, 4:43-44, 5:39, 7:37-52,
12:37-41  /  Acts  passim,  esp  2:1-36, 3:18, 3:20-25, 7:3560, 8:30-39,
9:15,  13:27-41, 15:13-17, 19:17, 24:14-15, 26:15-20, 28:16-27 / Romans,
10:12-11:36  /  /  Corinthians,  2:4-5; 3 : 55 *4» 15:10-11 / Ephesians,
1:12-13  /  Hebrews,  1:12;  2:6-10;  4:3-7;  5:5-10; 8:4-12 / // Peter,
1:16-21  /  I  John,  5:9-13  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk vii, ch 32
262a-b;  bk  x, ch 32, 320c-321d; bk xi, ch 2-4, 323a-324a; bk xv, ch 26
419b-420a;  bk  xvi,  ch  2  422b-423d;  ch  37-42  444b-448a;  bk  xvii
449a-472a,c esp ch 3 450c-451c; bk xviii, ch 11 477c-d; ch 23 483d-485a;
ch  28  486c-487a;  ch  33-34 490c-491c; ch 44, 498a-d; ch 46 500a-d; bk
xix, ch 22 525b-c; bk xx, ch 29-30 557a-560a,c; bk xxii, ch 6, 590a-d 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q i, a 4, rep 4 382c-383b; q 5, a
1,  rep 3 410a411b; a 2, ans 411b-412a; q 6, a 1, ans 413d414c; part hi,
q 26, a 1, rep 1 845b-846a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxii
[55-93] 87a-c; paradise, xxv [64-96] 145a-b;
xxvi  [1-45] 145d-146b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 137b-138b; 160b-c;
part  in,  165a-167b;  176d-177c;  182d188a;  244b-c;  part  iv, 248a-b;
conclusion,  281d-282a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  239b-c  30  Bacon:  New
Atlantis, 202d-203c; 209a-b 32 Milton: Christs Nativity
[1-7] la
/  Paradise  Lost,  bk  in  [167-193] 139a-b; bk xi [656-749] 313b-315b;
[802-834]  316b-317b;  bk xii [235248] 324b; [315-330] 326a-b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,   570-578  273b-276a;  598-600  278b-279a;  616-618  283b-284a;
637-641  289b-290a;  642-692 290b-301a passim; 693741 301b-319a; 751-758
320a-321a;  761  321b322a;  770  323a;  829-830 333b-334a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect x, div 101 497a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 181b;
187a-188c;   206a-b;  297a;  307d-308a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
230c-231d  48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 30a-36b 2. The virtue and practice of
religion:  piety  as  justice  to  God  Old  Testament: Genesis, 26:4-5;
28:18-22 / Exodus passim, esp 20, 32, 34 : 12-14 / Leviticus, 18:1-5; 26
/  Numbers  passim  /  Deuteronomy,  4:1-40;  5-6;  8-11  esp  10:12-13;
12:28,32; 2832 / Joshua, 22:1-6; 24:14-28— (D) Josue, 22:1-6; 24:14-28 /
/  Kings,  8:57-61  — (D) III Kings, 8:57-61 / // Kings, 17:36-37; 21:8—
(D)   IV   Kings,  17:36-37;  21:8  /  /  Chronicles,  22:12-13—  (D)  /
Paralipomenon, 22:12-13 /

[637a]
c  Nehemiah,  1:8-9— (D) // Esdras, 1:8-9 / Psalms passim, esp 22:22-31,
27:1-14,   29:2,   40:7-8,   45:11,  78:5-8,  89:15-32,  96:8-9,  99:19,
119:1-176—  (D)  Psalms passim, esp 21:2332, 26:1-14, 28:2 > 39 :8-9» 44
:i2>^7^5-8 > 88:16-33, 95:8-9, 98:1-9, 118:1-176 / Ecclesiastes, 12:13 /
Isaiah,  1-3; 9-10; 29-30; 37:21-36; 42; 44; 48; 58; 64:1-7— (D) Isaias,
1-3;  9-10;  29-30;  37:21-36;  42;  44; 48; 58; 64:1-7 / Jeremiah, 1-44
passim,  esp  7:22-23,  11:1-4—  (D)  Jeremias, 1-44 passim, esp 7:2223,
11:1-4  /  Ezekiel,  5-8; 11-16 passim; 20; 23-24— (D) Ezechiel, 5-8; 11
-16  passim; 20; 23-24 / Hosea passim, esp 6:6— (D) Osee passim, esp 6:6
/  Amos  passim,  esp  4:4-5,  5:4  /  Micah,  6:8—  (D)  Micheas, 6:8 /
Zephaniah—  (D) Sophonias / Zechariah passim, esp 14:1621— (D) Zacharias
passim,  esp  14:16-21  /  Malachi  esp  3:7-14—  (D) Malachias esp 3:7M
Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  13:14—  (D) OT, Esther, 13:14 / Wisdom of
Solomon  passim—  (D)  OT,  BooJ{  of  Wisdom  passim  / Ecclesiasticus,
2:15-18;  19:17-24;  35— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:18-23; 19:17-21; 35 /
Baruch,  4:1-3—  (D)  OT,  Baruch, 4:1-3 / Maccabees, 2:20-28— (D) OT, /
Machabees,  2 :2o-28 New Testament: Matthew, 4:8-10; 22:21,34 40 / Mar\,
12:17,28-34  /  Luke,  4:6-8; 10:25-27; 17:7-10; 20:25 / John, 4:21-24 /
Romans,  3:19-28;  4:1-8;  5:8-21;  8:1-17 / Galatians, 3:10-13; 5:1-5 4
Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  3a-9a,c;  bk  ix [485-549] 62a-c / Odyssey, bk hi
[1-68]  193a-d  5  Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c / Seven Against
Thebes [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c / Agamemnon
[351-402]
55d-56b;
[681-829]
59b-61a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[863-910]
107b-c / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[446-470]
134d-135a / Ajax [666-677] 148d ? [^^~^ 2 A 154b-155a,c / Electra
[1058-1097] 164d-165a
/ Philoctetes
[1 440-1 444] 195a,
5 Euripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[9831035]
233a-c / Heracleidae
[748-783]
254d255a / Ion 282a-297d esp
[1 12-153] 283a-b,
[585-647]
287d-288b / Helen
[865-1031]
306c-308a  passim  /  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  esp  [977-1023]  348b-c 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi, 201d-202c 7 Plato: Euthyphro 191a-199a,c /
Apology 200a-212a,c passim / Gorgias, 284a-285a / Republic, bk i, 297a-b
/ Laws, bk iv, 682d683b; bk x, 769d-771b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  16,  122a-d;  ch  27, 132c-133a; bk ii, ch 16, 158b-d; bk hi, ch 24,
204b-d;  208d-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  3,  224d;  ch  12, 243c-d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk hi, sect 13 262c; bk ix, sect 1 291a-c; sect 40 295b 14
Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus, 214b-d

[637b]
Chapter  79: RELIGION 603 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 2 27b-c /
City  of  God,  bk i, ch 15 138c-139c; bk x 298b,d-322a,c; bk xix, ch 19
523b-d; ch 21, 524c-525a; ch 25 528c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 10
627b;  ch  15  628b-c;  ch  22-23  629b-630c;  ch 26-27 631b-d; ch 29-30
632a633b;  ch  35 634c-d; bk ii, ch 7 638d-639c; ch 38, 654c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  60,  a  3,  ans  51c-52b;  qq 99-108
245c-337d;  part  ii-ii,  qq 186-189 650b-700d; part hi suppl, q 99, a 4
1083a-1084a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  xv [4081] 75d-76a;
paradise, hi 109b-110c esp
[67-87] HOa-b; v
[13-84] 112b-113a; xx [94138] 137d-138a; xxvi [1-81] 145d-146c
22  Chaucer:  Second Nun's Tale 463b-471b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
161b-163d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 152b-156d; 209b-213a; 233a-b; 238c-239c;
242d;  267c-268a  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 338b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  37, schol i, 434d-435a; appendix, xxii 449b 32
Milton: Comus 33a-56b esp [416-475] 42b44a / Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise
Lost, bk iv
[720-735] 168a-b; bk xi [251-262] 304b-305a
/ Samson Agonistes
[1 334-1 409] 368b-370a
/  Areopagitica, 402a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 470 256a; 476 256b-257a; 482
258a;  489,491  259a;  531  264b; 540-542 265b 266a 35 Locke: Toleration
la-22d  passim, esp lb, 3b-4a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 155-156
444b-d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 255a-268a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
187d-188a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxv, 208a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  81d-82d; 180c182c; 190d-194a; 291d-292b; 302b-304a;
327d-328b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 232c-233c; 259b260a 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  325a-327d;  344c348b  esp 347b-c / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  368c-d  /  Judgement, 504b-505a; 509ac; 611a-c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  290a-292a;  307d-309a;  311a312a  44  Boswell: Johnson,
84b-c;  262b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 175c176c; part 1,
234d-235c;  part  hi,  290b-292a;  311b-d; part iv, 346c-347b 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part  i  [3415-3468]  83b-84b 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 30a-36b 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 50a-d; bk hi, 122b-c; bk v, 218b-220b; bk
vi,  271c-274a,c; bk ix, 373b-377b 52 Dqstoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
1, 11a15a,c; bk 11, 24a-c; 37c-38a; bk vi, 146b, d170b; bk xi, 313c-314d
53 James: Psychology, 203a-204b

[638a]
(2.  The  virtue and practice of religion: piety as justice to God.) 2a.
Prayer  and  supplication:  their efficacy Old Testament: Genesis, 4:26;
18:20-33;  19:1722; 20:7,17; 21:33; 24:10-27; 25:20-21; 32:912; 33:1-4 /
Exodus,  2:23-25;  3:7-10; 17:4-6; 32:30-33; 33:12-23; 34:8-9 / Numbers,
11   :i2,10-34;   14:11-20;   16:19-26;  20:16;  21:7-9  /  Deuteronomy,
9:18-20,25-29  /  Joshua, 7:615; 10:12-14— (D) Josue, 7:6-15; 10:12-14 /
Judges, 13:8-9; 15:18-19; 16:27-30 / I Samuel, 1; 12:19-25— (D) I Kings,
1; 12 : 19-25 / II Samuel, 7:18-29; 22:4-20 esp 22 7 524: 1 0-25— (D) II
Kings,  7:18-29; 22:4-20 esp 22:7; 24:10-25 / I Kings, 3:5-15; 8; 9:2-3;
13:6;  18:36-39—  (D)  III  Kings,  3:5-15;  859:2-3; 13:6; 18:3639 / //
Kings,  4:32-35;  6:17-18;  19:1420:11  — (D) IV Kings, 4:32-3556:17-18;
19:1420:11 / / Chronicles, 4:10; 17:16-27; 21:8-27— (D) I Paralipomenon,
4:10;  17:16-27;  21:8-27  /  // Chronicles, 6:14-42; 7:12-22; 14:10-13;
16:12;   20:1-25;   30:18-20,27;   32:19-24;   33:1113,18-19—   (D)   //
Paralipomenon,  6:14-42;  7:12-22; 14:10-13; 16:12; 20:1-25; 30:1820,27;
32:19-24;  33:11-13,18-19 / Ezra, 8:2223; 9:5-15— (D) I Esdras, 8:22-23;
9:5-15  /  Nehemiah,  1:4-11;  9:27—  (D)  II Esdras, 1:411; 9:27 / Job,
6:8-9;  8:5-6;  9:13-16;  10;  16:17-22;  21:15; 22:27; 30:20; 33:26-28;
42:8-10  /  Psalms passim, esp 4:1-3, 5:1-3, 6:9, 9:12, 17:1-6, 18:1-19,
21:1-4,  22:1-5,  28:1-9,  30:8-31:17,  31:22,  38:9-15,  39:12, 40:1-2,
42:8-11,  50:15,  54:2-55:2, 55:16-17, 61:1-3, 64:1, 66:17-20, 69:13-18,
81:7,  86:1-7,  88:113,  102:1-2,  102:17,  107:1-30,  116:1-6,  119:58,
119:170,  130:1-8,  140:6,  141:1-5,  142:1-143:1, 145:18-19— (D) Psalms
passim,  esp  4:2-4,  5:25, 6:10, 9:13, 16:1-6, 17:1-19, 20:2-5, 21:2-6,
27:1-9,  29:9-30:18,  30:23,  37:10-16,  38:13, : i7-i 8 > 60:2-4, 63:2,
65:17-20,  68:14-19,  80:8, 85:139:2-3, 41:9-12, 49:15, 53:4-54:3. 54 7,
87:2-14,  101:1-3,  101:18,  106:1-30, 114:16, 118:58, 118:170, 129:1-7,
139:7;  140:1-5,  141:2-142:1,  144:18-19  /  Proverbs,  15:8,29; 28:9 /
Isaiah,  1:15;  26:16; 37:14-38; 43:22; 55:6-7; 56:7; 58:7-9; 66:24— (D)
Isaias,  1:15;  26:16;  37:14-38;  43:22;  55:6-7; 56:7; 58:7-9; 66:24 /
Jeremiah,  7:16;  11:14;  14:11-15:1;  17:13-18;  29:7,12-14;  32:16-44;
42:1-6,20—  (D)  Jeremias, 7:16; 11:14; 14:11-15:1; 17:1318; 29:7,12-14;
32:16-44;  42:1-6,20  / Lamentations, 3:8,44,55-57 / Daniel, 6:4-13; 9 /
Joel,  2:32  /Jonah,  1:4-6; 2; 4:1-4— (D) Jonas, 1:4-6; 2:2-11; 4:1-4 /
Micah,  3:1-4—  (D)  Micheas, 3:1-4 / Zechariah, 7 esp 7:12-13; 8:20-23;
10:1-2;  13:9—  (D)  Zacharias,  7  esp  7:12-1358:20-23;  10:1-2;  13:9
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  3;  12:8;  13— (D) OT, Tobias, 3; 12:8; 13 / Judith,
4:9-15;  8:14-17,31;  9— (D) OT, Judith, 4:7-15; 8:14-17,28-33; 9 / Rest
of Esther, 10:8-10; 13:8-14:19— (D) OT,

[638b]
:  Esther,  10:8-10;  13:8-14:19 / Wisdom of Solomon, 7:7; 9; 16:28— (D)
OT,  Boo{  of  Wisdom,  7:7;  9; 16:28 / Ecclesiasticus, 4:5-6; 7:10,14;
13:14;  17:25;  18:22-24;  21:5;  28  :2; 34:24-26; 35:13-17;. 37;i5; 38
:9-M;  39:5-6;  51  —  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 4:5-6; 7:9-10,15; 13:18;
17:23; 18:22-24; 2i;6; 28:2; 34:29-31; 35:16-21; 37:19; 38:9-14; 39:6-9;
51  /  Baruch,  1:7-13; 2:14-19; 3:1-8; 4 :27-28-(D) OT, Baruch, 1:7-13;
2:14-19; 3:1-8; 4:27-28 / Song of Three Children, 10-27— (D) OT, Daniel,
3:25-50 / Susanna, 42-44— (D) OT, Daniel, 13 ^2-44 / / Maccabees, 4 :8-i
1  ;  7  =37—  (D)  OT,  /  Machabees,  4  :8-i 1 ; 7 37 / // Maccabees,
1:5-6,8,23-30;  2:10; 3:14-36; 12:39-45; 15:21-29— (D) OT, II Machabees,
1:5-6,8,2330;  2:10; 3:14-36; 12:39-46; 15:21-29 New Testament: Matthew,
6:5-15; 7:7-11; 18:19-20; 21:17-22; 26:36-45 / Mar\, 9:1430 esp 9:28-29;
11:24-26;  13:33;  14:32-39  / Luke, 11:1-13; 18:1-14; 21:36; 22:40-46 /
John,  4:10;  9:31;  14:13-16;  15:7; 16:23-26; 17 / Acts, 4:23-33; 6:4;
8:22-24;  9:36-41;  10:1-4,30-31  / Romans, 8:26-27; 10:12-13; 12:12 / /
Corinthians,  11:4-5;  I  4 :i 3_I 6 / Ephesians, 6:17-18 / Philippians,
4:6  /  Colossians,  4:2-3  /  / Thessalonians, 5:17 / // Thessalonians,
3:1-2  /  /  Timothy,  2:1-8;  4:4-5; 5:5 / Hebrews, 13:18 / James, 4:3;
5:13-18  /  /  Peter,  3:12;  4:7  / / John, 3:22; 5:13-16 / Revelation,
Apocalypse,  5  :8  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk i [i-ioo] 3a-4b; bk ii [394421]
14a-b; bk ix
[485-512] 62a-b; bk xvi
[218-254]
114c-d / Odyssey, bk hi
[43-68]
193c-d; bk v
[436-463]
212b-c; bk xx
[91121] 297a-b
5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la 14a,c esp
[1-175]
la-3a,
[516-710]
7c-10b,
[1018-1073]
13d-14a,c  /  Persians  [215-225] 17c; [517-693] 20c-22b / Seven Against
Thebes
[69-282]
28a-30b / Agamemnon
[351-398]
55d-56b;
[810-854] 60d-61a
5  Sophocles:  Oedipus the King [15 1-2 18] 100c101b; [863-910] 107b-c /
Oedipus at Colonus
[461-509] 118b-d / Ajax [684-692] 149a
5 Euripides: Electra [190-212] 328c-d 5 Aristophanes: Peace
[973-1016]
537a-c  / Thesmophoriazusae [295-371] 603d-604c 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i,  20d-21a;  bk  vi,  196d-197a; bk vii, 226c; 239d-240a; bk viii, 270c
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  vi, 517d 7 Plato: Cratylus, 94a /
Phaedrus,  141c  / Republic, bk 11, 313c-314d / Timaeus, 447a / Critias,
478a-b  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  669c-670a;  bk  vii, 719d-720b; bk x, 759b-c;
770d-771b  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 16, 156d157a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk v, sect 7 269d; bk ix, sect 40 295b

[639a]
13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi [84-120] 149b-150a; bk iv [206-237] 172b-173b;
bk vi
[42-76] 212a213a; bk
viii
[67-80]
260b-261a;
[558-584]
274a-b; bk ix
[621-633]
295b 296a; bk x
[249-255] 309a; [417-431] 313b; BK31477S835] 349a-350b
14 Plutarch: Camillus, 104b-d; 107b-d 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World,
1011a  17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 14, 74b / Fourth Ennead, tr
iv,  ch 30 174b-c; ch 4041 180b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1
lab;  bk  11,  par 1 9a; bk v, par 1 27a b; bk vi, par 1 34c-35a; bk ix,
par  34-37  70c-71b; bk x, par 1-7 71c-73a; par 37-40 81a-c; par 42 82a;
bk  xi,  par  1-4  89b-90b  /  City of God, bk x, ch 12 306d-307a; ch 19
310d-311b;  ch 22 312ab 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 181,
a 3, rep 3 618c-619b; part hi, q 21 823d-827c; part hi suppl, q 71, a i,
ans  901b-902b;  a  9, ans and rep 5 910d-912b; q 72 917c-922b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi [133145] 57b-c; v
[i]-vi
[48] 59a-61b; vn
[112123] 63d-64a;
xi
[1-36] 68d-69a; xm
[103129] 73a-b; xxm [76-96] 89a; paradise, xx
[94-148]
137d-138b; xxxi
[79-102]
154a-b; xxxii [i39]-xxxm
[54] 156a-d
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[2221-2419]
196b199b / Tale of Man of Law
[4869-4895]
242b-243a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162d; 163b; part hi, 182d-183b
24   Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  32c-35a;  49c-d  25
Montaigne: Essays, 152b-153d; 155c-156d 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act
i,  sc  iv  [6674]  115b  27  Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc hi [36-72]
53d-54a / Measure for Measure, act ii, sc iv
[1-17] 184c-d
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi
[185-197]
139b; bk v [205-208] 179b; bk x [io86]-bk xi
[71] 298a-300b
/  Samson  Agonistes  [356367]  347b  /  Areopagitica, 402a-b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  250 219a; 491 259a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82a; 466c-467d
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  232c-233a  42 Kant: Judgement, 504d 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 52c-53a; 224b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i,
224a-b;  part in, 291c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3587-3619] 87b-88a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  130b-131a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vii,
281d-282a; bk ix, 373b-377b; bk x, 407c-d; 435c-436c; bk xii, 544b-545a;
553d-554a;  bk  xiii,  585b-d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
21b-24d; bk vi, 167b-c 53 James: Psychology, 203b-204a

[639b]
2b.  Worship  and adoration: the rituals and ceremonials of religion Old
Testament:  Genesis,  4:2-16,26; 8:18-22; 12:7-8; 17:9-14,23-27; 21:3-4;
28:18-22  /  Exodus,  12-13; 15:1-21; 16:29; 20:1-11; 23:1019; 24-31 esp
31:12-17;  35-40 / Leviticus passim, esp 16:29-34, 19:3, 19:30, 23:1-44,
25:1-12,  26:2  /  Numbers,  5:5-9:14;  15;  18-19; 28-29 / Deuteronomy,
5:6-15;  6:13;  12;  14;  15:19-17:1;  26;  32  passim  / Joshua, 5:2-9;
22:9-34-(#) Josue, 5:2-9; 22:9-34 / Judges, 11:30-40 / / Samuel, 2:1-10—
(D)  I Kings, 2:1-10 / // Samuel, 6:1-15; 22— (D) // Kings, 6:1-15; 22//
Kings,  8-(D)  III  Kings,  8 / // Kings, 17:36— (D) IV Kings, 17:36 / I
Chronicles,   15:25-16:36;  17:16-27;  29:10-22—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon,
15:25-16:36;  17:16-27;  29:1022  / // Chronicles, 5:1-7:9; 15:1-15; 30;
35:119—  (D) II Paralipomenon, 5:1-7:9; 15:1-15; 30; 35:1-19 / Ezra, 1-8
passim—  (D)  I Esdras, 1-8 passim / Nehemiah, 9 esp 9:14; 10:31; 13:22—
(D)  II  Esdras,  9  esp  9:14;  10:31; 13:22 / Esther, 9:20-32 / Psalms
passim  /  Song of Solomon— (D) Canticle of Canticles / Isaiah, 1:10-18;
2:2-3; 8:13-14,17; 12; 25-26; 27:13; 29:18-19; 40:9-31; 42:10-12; 44:23;
45:23-25;  49:13;  56:1-7;  58;  66:18-23—  (D)  Isaias,  1:1018; 2:2-3;
8:13-14,17;  12;  25-26;  27:13;  29:1819;  40:9-31  ;  42:10-12; 44:23;
45:23-25;   49:13;  56:1-7;  58;  66:18-23  /Jeremiah,  15:16;  17:2127;
20:11-13—  (D)  Jeremias, 15:16; 17:21-27; 20:11-13 / Ezekiel, 20:12,20;
44:24;  46:3—  (D)  Ezechiel, 20:12,20; 44:24; 46:3 / Hosea, 6:6-7 — (D)
Osee,  6:6-7  /  Amos,  5:21-24  /  Micah,  6:6-8  -(D) Micheas, 6:6-8 /
Haba%u\, 3:1819— (D) Habacuc, 3:18-19 / Zephaniah, 2:11 — (D) Sophonias,
2:11  / Zechariah, 14:16-21 — (D) Zacharias, 14:16-21 Apocrypha: Judith,
16—  (D)  OT,  Judith,  16  /  Rest  of Esther, 13:14; 16:20-22— (D) OT,
Esther,  13:14;  16:20-22 / Wisdom of Solomon, 10:19-20— (D) OT, Boo\ of
Wisdom,  10:19-20  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1:11,25;  17:24-29; 35:1-7; 39 :i
5-355  47  :8-i°;  50-51 -(£>) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:11,31-32; 17:24-29;
35:1-7;  39:17-41;  47:8-12;  50-51 / Song of Three Children, 28-68— (D)
OT,  Daniel,  3:51-90  /  I  Maccabees,  2:15-48;  4:52-59—  (D)  OT,  I
Machabees, 2:15-48; 4:52-59 / // Maccabees, 15:1-5 (D) OT, II Machabees,
15:1-5  New Testament: Matthew, 2:1-12; 4:8-10; 12:1-12 / Mar\, 2:23-3:4
/  Luhe, 2:21-24; 4:6-8; 6:1-9 / John, 4:19-26; 7:22-23 / Acts, 15:1-29;
21:19-25  /  Romans,  2:25-29;  4:8-12;  14  esp  14:10-11, 14:17-19 / /
Corinthians,  7:18-19  / Galatians, 4:9-11; 5:1-11; 6:12-15/ Colossians,
2:10-14; 3:9-11 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii [394-431] 14a-b; bk vii
[313-326] 49b; bk ix
[527-549] 62c; bk xii
[1-33] 82a-b; bk xxiv
[64-76]
171d-172a / Odyssey, bk ix [543-555] 234d-235a; bk xii

[640a]
(2.  The  virtue  and practice of religion: piety as justice to God. 2b.
Worship and adoration: the rituals and ceremonials of religion.)
[352-365]
253d-254a; bk xiv
[233-261]
262c-d  5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [810-829] 60d-61a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at
Colonus
[461-509]
118b-d / Ajax
[693-713]
149a;
[1040-1421]
152a-155a,c / Philoctetes [446-452] 186a 5 Euripides: Trojan Women
[1 123-1250] 279c280c / Ion [82-183] 282d-283c / Electra [190212] 328c-d;
[774-858] 334b-d
/  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [237-279] 458a-b /
Frogs  [312-459]  567d-569c  /  Plutus  [627-747] 636d-637d 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  31a-c; 32d-33a; 40d-41b; 45a-b; bk ii, 56d-64c; bk hi,
95a-c;  bk  iv,  129c-130b;  134b-d;  138a-b;  142b-c;  155c-156a; bk v,
176a-b;  bk  vi, 205c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk i, 297b; bk iv, 345d346a /
Laws,  bk  vii,  718d-719a; bk viii, 731d-732c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
vi,  ch  8  [i322b  i9-29]  526c  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[600-660]  22c-23b; bk v[i 194-1203] 76d; bk vi [56-79] 81a-b 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk  iv  [504-521]  181a-b; bk v [42-103] 188a-190a 14 Plutarch:
Numa Pompilius 49a-61d passim, esp 56d / Camillus, 104b-d; HOb-d / Aemil
ius  Paulus,  214b-d  / Marcellus, 247d-248b / Nicias, 424b-d / Crassus,
445d-446b / Alexander, 541b-c / Demetrius, 735c-d 15 Tacitus: Histories,
bk  iv,  282d-283b;  bk  v,  296a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 1
27a-b;  bk  vi,  par 2 35a-c; bk ix, par 14-16, 65c-66a; bk x, par 49-50
83c-84b  /  City  of  God,  bk vii, ch 27-31 259c-262a; bk x, ch i 298b,
d299d; ch 3 300b-301a; ch 15-17 308a-310b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch
6  626a-b; bk hi, ch 9 661a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
99,  a  3  247a-248a; q 100, a 4, rep i 253d-255a; qq 101-103 265d-304a;
part ii-ii, q 3, a i, ans and rep 1 400c-401a; a 2, ans 401a-d; part in,
q  25  839c-845a; part hi suppl, q 71 900d-917b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, viii
[i36] 64a-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 80c; 90b-d; part ii, 161b-163d; part hi,
180a-d;  206c207a;  226b-227c; part iv, 249b-250a; 261c262a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 193d-194a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 209b-c;
246c-d; 300c-d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 491a

[640b]
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  18b-c;  55a-b; lOla-b 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk iv
[720-739]
168a-b; bk v
[136-208]
178a-179b; bk vii
[550-640] 229a-231a; bk xii [227-256] 324a-b;
[285-306] 325b-326a / Areopagitica, 402a-b
33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 62b-64b / Pensees, 249-253 219a-220a; 489
259a  35  Locke: Toleration, 5a-b; 10d-15a 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect v, div 41, 468a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 187d-188a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk  xxv,  208a209a; 211a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
59c-60a; 81d-82a; 93b-c; 98a; 180d-182c esp 181b-d; 184d-185d; 208a-211a
passim;  349c-350b;  353b-c;  356d357b; 457d-467d esp 457d-458c, 460a-b,
463a-c,  464c-467d;  547a-c; 583d-584b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 83d;
HOb-d;  195a-198d;  207a-208c;  226a-227b;  232c-233a;  378b-d  42 Kant:
Judgement, 504b-505a; 509a-510a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 27b; 290b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, intro, 175c176c; part 1, 225b; 227c-228c; 239b-c;
244c245d;  246c-247a;  253c-254b;  part  hi,  290b292a; part iv, 322a-c;
331d-332c;  346c347b  48  Melville: Moby Dic\, 25b-28a; 39a-b; 60b65a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  viii,  323b;  bk  ix,  373b-377b;  bk x,
435c-436c;  bk  xii,  553c-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
13a-d;  bk  v,  131c-d; bk vii, 171a-c; bk xi, 313c-314a 2c. The nature,
institution,  and  uses  of  the  sacraments  New Testament: Matthew, 3;
18:18;   19:4-6,1012;   20:20-23;   26:26-29;  28:19  /  Mar\,  1:4,810;
10:2-12,35-40;   14:22-24;  16:16  /  Luke,  3:3,16;  22:14-20  /  John,
1:25-27,33;  3:3-7;  6  esp 6:32-35, 6:47-59; 19:33-34; 20:20-23 / Acts,
2:37-42;  8:12-17,26-40;  11:16;  19:1-7;  22:16  /  Romans,  6:3-4  / /
Corinthians,  1:1217;  6:11;  7:8-14,34-39;  10:16-17;  11:23-30; 12:13;
15:28-29  /  Galatians,  3:27  /  Ephesians,  4:5;  5:21-33 esp 5:31-32/
Colossians, 2:11-12 / Hebrews, 5:1-6 / James, 5:14-16 / / Peter, 3:18-22
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk ix, par 12 64d65a; par 14, 65a-b; par 36
71a;  bk  xiii, par 26-29 117c-118c / City of God, bk x, ch 6 302a-d; ch
19-20  310d-311c;  bk xiii, ch 3-4 361a-362a; ch 7 362d-363b; bk xvi, ch
26-27  438c-439d; bk xx, ch 26 555a-556b; bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a; ch 20
575c-d;  ch  25 579d581a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3 637c-d; ch 41
656a-c; bk hi, ch 9 661a-c; bk iv, ch 21, 690d-691b

[641a]
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, a 3, ans 490c-491b; q 113, a
5,  ans  579a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 101, a 4, ans
and  rep  1-2  269a-270b;  q  102,  a  5  283c-292c;  q  103, a i, rep 3
298b-299b; a 4, ans 302a-304a; q 108, a 2, ans XtuTrep 2 332b 333d; part
ii-ii,  q  i,  a  i,  rep  i  380b381a; a 3, rep 4 381d-382c; a 8, rep 6
387a388c;  q  2,  a 7, ans 396a-397c; q 3, a 1, rep i 400c-401a; q 10, a
12,  rep  5  436b-437d;  q  ii,  a  4,  ans 441b-442b; part hi, qq 60-65
847a884a,  c;  part  hi suppl, q 71, a 9, rep 3 910d912b; q 83, a 3, ans
and  rep  4  978c-980d;  q  99, a 4 1083a-1084a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, xxvii [67-132] 40c-41a; purgatory, ix
[73-145]
66c  67b;  xxvii-xxxiii  94c-105d  22 Chaucer: Prologue [653-662] 170b /
Wife of Bath's Prologue
[5583-5749]
256a 258b / Merchant's Tale
[9193-9210]
320a-b   /  Pardoners'  Tale  [12,829-902]  381b-382b  /  Parson's  Tale
495a-550a  esp  par  1-22  495a-510b,  par  85-90  543a-546b  23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  71b;  part hi, 177d-178a; 180c-d; 206c-207a; 208b;
211c212c;  part  iv, 249b-250c; 263d-264a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i,
sc v
[74-79]
37d; act in, sc m [36-98] 53d-54b / Othello, act v, sc 11 [25-57] 239b-c
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 427d-428a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  101a  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  162d-165d 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[436-445]
328b-329a  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 71b-80b; 128b137b / Pensees,
554  270a;  862, 343a; 870 344a-b; 904-905 348b-349a; 923 351b 35 Locke:
Toleration,  12a  / Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xx, sect io 391c-392a
36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 221a-224a; 257a259b; 260b-261a; 373b-376a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 193a-b; 297c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
329d;  334b-c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 173d-174a; 481c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  History,  part  iv,  331d332c; 338a-d; 349d-350a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  38b;  43b-44b;  bk  iv,  183c-d;  bk  xi,  476c-478a  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  21d22b;  bk  in, 80c-81a 2d.
Sacrifices  and  propitiations  Old Testament: Genesis, 4:1-16; 8:18-22;
15:617; 22 / Exodus, 8:1,25-29; 9:1; 10:3-11,2426; 12:1-13:16; 20:24-26;
22:29-30;  23:19;  24:5-8;  29-30; 34:19-20,26; 35:20-21,29 / Leviticus,
1-10;  12;  14:1-32;  16-17;  19:5—7; 21-23; 27 / Numbers, 3:12-13; 5-9;
10:10;  1516;  18:1-19:6;  28-29; 3 i:25"54 / Deuteronomy, 12; 14:22-29;
15:19-21;  16:1-17;  x  7  :i  '  2I :i ~ 9; 26:10-15 / Joshua, 8:30-31;
22:9-12,21-29 — (D) Josue, 8:30-31; 22:9-12,21-29 / Judges,

[641b]
6:19-21,25-28; 11:28-40; 13:15-23 / I Samuel, 1:11,19-28; 2:12-17,27-29;
6:13-15; 7:8-10; 13:5-14; 15:1-23 esp 15:21-23— (D) / Kings, 1:11,19-28;
2:12-17,27-29;  6:13-15; 7:8-10; i3-5-*4; i5 :i ~23 esP I 5 :2I ~2 3 / I
Kings  y  8:62-64;  9:25;  18:16-39—  (D)  ///  Kings,  8:62-64; 9 :2 55
18:16-39  /  // Kings, 16:12-16 — (D) IV Kings, 16:12-16 / / Chronicles,
29:1-9,14,20-21  —  (D) I Paralipomenon, 29:19,14,20-21 / // Chronicles,
7:1-7;  29:20-35; 35:1-19— (D) II Paralipomenon, 7:1-7; 29:2035; 35:1-19
/  Ezra,  8:35—  (D) I Esdras, 8:35 / Nehemiah, 10:29-39— (D) II Esdras,
10:29-39  /  Job,  1:5  /  Psalms,  4:5; 27:6; 40:6; 50; 51:16-19; 54:6;
66:15;  107:22—  (D) Psalms, 4:6; 26:6; 39:7; 49; 50:18-21; 53:8; 65:15;
106:22/  Proverbs,  3:9-10;  15:8;  21:3,27 / Isaiah, 1:11-17; 43:23-24;
53:10;  66:20-21  —  (D)  Isaias,  1:11-17;  43:23-24; 53:10; 66:20-21 /
Jeremiah,  7:21-27,— (D) Jeremias. 7^21-23 / Ezekiel, 43:18-27; 44:7,30;
45:13-46:24-^)  Ezechiel,  43:18-27;  44:7,30; 45:13-46:24 / Hosea, 6:6;
8:11-9:4— (D) Osee, 6:6; 8:11-9:4 / Joel, 2:12-14 / 4mos, 4:4-5; 5:21-27
/  Micah,  6:6-8  -(D)  Micheas,  6:6-8  /  Malachi, 1:7-14; 3:3-10— (D)
Malachias,  1:7-14;  3:310  Apocrypha: Judith, 16:16-19— (D) OT, Judith,
16:22-23  / Ecclesiasticus, 7:9,31; 14:11; 30:19; 34:18-20; 35:1-12— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus, : ">33-35; 14:"; 3 o: !9-2o; 34 :2 i~2 4; 35 ; i" 7
15  /  Song  of Three Children, 14-17— (D) OT, Daniel, 3:37-40 / Bel and
Dragon,  1-22—  (D) OT, Daniel, 14:1-21 / / Maccabees, 4:49-56 (D) OT, /
Machabees, 4:49-56 / // Maccabees, 1:18-36; 2:9-11; 3: 3 i-35-(D) OT, II
Machabees,  1:18-36;  2:9-11;  3:31-35  New Testament: Matthew, 5:22-24;
9:13;  12:7;  26:26-29  / Marl^ 12:32-33,41-44; 14:2225 / Luke, 2:22-24;
21:1-4;   22:14-20   /  John,  11:51-52  /  Romans,  5:7-11;  12:1  /  /
Corinthians, 5:7; 11:23-29; 15:3 / // Corinthians, 5:14— 21 / Ephesians,
5:2  /  Hebrews,  5:1-3; 7:26-27; 8:3-4; 9:1-10:22; 11:4,17; 13:9-16 / /
Peter, 1:18-19; 2:5,24; 4:1 / I John, 1:7; 3:16 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i
[1-120] 3a-4b;
[304-317]
6b;
[364-392] 6d-7a;
[428-471]
7c-8a; bk ii
[394-431]
14a-b; bk vi
[263-311]
42d-43b; bk vii
[313-326] 49b; bk ix
[527-549] 62c;
bk  xii  [1-33]  82a-b;  bk  xxiii  [54-261]  161d163d;  bk xxiv [64-76]
171d-172a  /  Odyssey,  bk hi [1-11] 193a; bk ix [543-555] 234d-235a; bk
xii  [352-365]  253d-254a; bk xiv [233-261] 262c-d 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[215-225]  17c; [517-693] 20c-22b / Seven Against Thebes [265-282] 30b /
Agamemnon  [40-257]  52c-54d  esp  [205-238]  54b-c;  [1412-1425]  67a /
Choephoroe [514-539] 75a-b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[461-509]
118b-d / Ajax [646-692] 148c-149a / Electra
[404-471] 159b-d

[642a]
(2.  The  virtue  and practice of religion: piety as justice to God. 2d.
Sacrifices   and  propitiations?)  5  Euripides:  Haracleidae  [403-629]
251c-253c / Ion
[247-282]
284a-c / Electra
[998-1034]
336b-c  /  Hecuba  [501-582]  357a-d  /  Phoenician  Maidens  [896-1018]
386a-387b / Iphigenia Among the Tauri 41 la-424d esp [1-41] 411a-b,
[456-471] 414c-d
/ Iphigenia at Aulis 425a439d esp [87-110] 425d-426a, [358-365] 428a,
[1 164-1208] 435d-436a
5 Aristophanes: Peace
[180-194]
528a;
[362426] 530b-d;
[922-1022] 536c-537c
/ Plutus
[1 107-1209] 641a-642d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6a;  32d-33a: 48c; bk 11, 57b-58b; 59a;
72d-73a;  77c-d; bk iv, 125a-b; 134b-d; 142b-c; 157b; bk v, 174d175b; bk
vi,  199d-200a; 200d; bk vii, 226c; 235a; 248c-d; 250c-d; bk viii, 267a;
282b-c  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  122d-123a  /  Symposium, 163a / Euthyphro,
198a-c  /  Phaedo,  247a  /  Republic,  bk  i, 295d-296a; 297b-c; bk 11,
313d-314d  /  Critias,  484d-485a / Laws, bk iv, 683a-b; bk vi, 712a; bk
vii,  719b-d;  721b-c;  724a-b;  bk  viii,  731d-732d;  bk  x, 768d769c;
770d-771b;  bk  xii,  791d-792a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch 9
[1160*19-29] 412b-c / Politics, bk vi, ch 8
[i322b i9-29]
526c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[80-101]
2a-b;  bk v [1194-1203] 76d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [728-740] 123a-b: bk
ii
[108-136] 127a-b; bk hi [356-462] 157a-160a
esp  [404-440]  158a-159a; [525-550] 161b-162a; bk iv [48-67] 168b-169a;
[195-237] 172a-173b;
[450-456]
179b; bk v
[42-103]
188a-190a;
[762-778] 207a-b; bk vi [212-263] 216b-218a;
bk  xii  [166-215]  358b-360a  14  Plutarch:  Theseus  la-15a,c passim /
Romulus,  25b-26a  / Themistocles, 94a-b / Camillus, 108d-109c / Fabius,
142d-143a  /  Pelopidas,  239d-240c  / Marcellus, 248c-249d / Aristides,
273b-c  /  Agesilaus,  483a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiii, 140d-141a; bk
xiv, 148d-149a; bk xv, 168a-b / Histories, bk ii, 215a; bk iv, 282d-283b
18  Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch i 298b, d299d; ch 3-7 300b-303a; ch
ii 305b-306d; ch 16-21 308b-312a; ch 24, 313a-b; ch 25-26, 314b-315b; ch
31 319b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q ioi, a 4 269a-270b;
q 102, a 3 272b-276c; a 5, rep 2 283c-292c; q 103, a i, rep i 298b-299b;
a  2,  ans  299b-300d;  part ii-ii, q 2, a 7, ans and rep 2 396a-397c; q
182,  a  2, rep 3 621d623a; part hi, q 22 827c-833a; q 62, a 5 862b863a;
part  in suppl, q 71 900d-917b passim 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
v  [13-84]  112b-113a 23Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162d; 163b; part hi,
197d-198a; 204b-c

[642b]
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  250b-251c  35  Locke:  Toleration,  12a-13a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xxv, 211a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
93b; 98a; 121a-b; 349c-350b; 397b; 460a-b; 461d; 463a-c; 547b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  226d-227b  44  Boswell  -.Johnson, 482a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  227c228a; part hi, 305b-c 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[8568-8590]
208b209a  2e.  Fasting  and almsgiving Old Testament: Exodus, 34:27-28 /
Leviticus,  19:9-10;  23:22;  25:35-37 / Deuteronomy, 15:7-11; 24:17-22;
26:12-13  /  Judges, 20:24-28 / / Samuel, 7:3-6— (D) / Kings, 7:3-6 / II
Samuel,  12:15-23—  (D)  II Kings, 12:15-23 / Ezra, 8:21-23; 10:6— (D) /
Esdras,  8:21-23; 10:6 / Esther, 4:1-3,15-17 / Job, 29:11-16; 31:16-22 /
Psalms,  35:13;  41:1-3; 69:10-11; 109:21-24— (D) Psalms, 34:13; 40:2-4;
68:1011;   108:21-24   /  Proverbs,  3:27-28;  11:24;  14:21,31;  19:17;
21:13,26;  22:9;  28:27; 29 :7 / Ecclesiastes, 11:1-2 / Isaiah, 58:3-12—
(D)  Isaias,  58:3-12  / Jeremiah, 14:12— (D) Jeremias, 14:12 / Ezefyel,
18:4-21  —  (D)  Ezechiel,  18:4-21  /  Daniel, 10:2-3 / Joel, 2:12-18 /
Zechariah,   7—   (D)   Zacharias,   7  Apocrypha:  Tobit,  1:16-17;  2;
4:7-11,16-17;   12:8-10;   14:10-11   —  (D)  OT,  Tobias,  1:19-20;  2;
4:7-12,17-18;  12:8-10; 14:10-11 / Judith, 4:13— (D) OT, Judith, 4:10-11
/  Ecclesiasticus,  3:30;  4:1-8;  7:10,32-33;  12:1-7;  14:13; 17:2223;
29:1-2,8-13,20; 34:26; 35:2; 40:24— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 3:33; 4:1-8;
7:9-10,3637;  12:1-5; 14:13; 17:18-19; 29:1-2,11-17,26; :3i; 35:4; 40:24
New Testament: Matthew, 4:1-4; 5:42; 6:134 4,16-18; 9:14-15; 10:8,40-42;
17:14-22;  19:1622  /  Mar\, 2:18-20; 9:24-29; 10:17-22; 12:4144 / Lu\e,
3:11;  4:1-4;  5:33-35; 6:30,38; 11:41; 12:33; 14:12-14; 18:11-12,18-23;
21:14  /  Acts,  10:1-4; 20:35 / Romans, 12:8 / / Corinthians, 13:3 / //
Corinthians,  6:4-6;  8-9  /  Galatians,  2:10  /  /  Timothy, 6:17-19 6
Herodotus:  History, bk iv, 156d-157a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xxi,
ch 22 576a-c; ch 27, 583a-584c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
q  3, a 1, ans 400c-401a; q 32 540a-550a; q 187, a 2 665a-666a; a 3, ans
and rep 4 666a-669b; aa 4-5 669b-673b; part hi suppl, q 71, a 9, ans and
rep  1-2,6  910d-912b  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 66a; 91a-94a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82a;  197b-d; 198b-d; 596c-597a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  HOd-110c;  232c;  233a-c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
443b-d 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 60b-65a

[643a]
2/.  Purificatory rites: the remission of sin by baptism and penance Old
Testament:  Exodus,  19:9-11,14-15;  30:1721 / Leviticus, 4-6; 7:1-7; 9;
n-17; 19:20-22 / Numbers, 5:5-31 ; 6:9-12; 8:5-7; 15^22=29; 19; 31:19-24
/ Deuteronomy, 21:1-9; 23:9-11 / / Samuel, 3:12-14— (D) I Kings, 3:12-14
/  //  Chronicles, 29-30— (D) II Paralipomenon, 29-30 / Nehemiah, 13:22—
(D)  II  Esdras,  13:22  / Psalms, 51:1-2,7-10— (D) Psalms, 50:3-4,912 /
Isaiah,  1:16-18— (D) Isaias, 1:16-18 / Ezefyel, 36:24-25; 43:18-27— (D)
Ezechiel,  36:24-25;  43:18-27 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 34:25— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  34:30  /  /  Maccabees,  4:38-61 — (D) OT, / Machabees,
4:38-61  /  //  Maccabees,  i:i8-36-(D)  OT,  II  Machabees, 1:18-36 New
Testament:  Matthew,  3;  15:1-20;  16:19;  18:18;  20:20-23;  23:25-26;
28:18-20  /  Mar{,  1:4-8;  10:35-40; 16:16 / Luke, 2:22; 3:3,16; 12:50;
13:1-5  /  John,  1:25-33;  3:5,22-27;  13:1-15;  15:1-3:20:22-23/ Acts,
1:5:2:37-41;   3:19;   5:31;  8:12-17,20-22,35-38;  10:47-48;  11:16,18;
13:23-24;  17:30-31; 19:1-5; 21:26; 22:16; 26:19-20 / Romans, 2:4-5; 6/1
Corinthians,  6:11;  12:13  / // Corinthians, 7:9-10 / Galatians, 3:27 /
Ephesians,  4:5 / / Peter, 3:20-21 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [446-451] 7c; bk
vi [263285] 42d-43a; bk ix
[173-181] 58d-59a; bk
xxiv
[281-313]
174b-c / Odyssey, bk hi
[430-446]
197c; bk xii
[325-338]
253c;  bk xxii [478-501] 310d-311a,c 5 Aeschylus: Choephoroe [1021-1076]
80a-d  / Eumenides [276-298] 84a-b; [436-469] 86a-b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus
at Colonus
[461-509]
118b-d / Ajax [646-692] 148c-149a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 8b-c; 45a:
bk  ii,  56d-57a;  bk  iv,  136d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
442c-443a  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  96a  b  10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease,
154a-155d esp 155c-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk hi [270-283] 154b; bk iv
[474-521] 180a-181b; bk
vi
[212-235] 216b217b
14  Plutarch:  Solon,  68a-d  15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 282d-283a 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 17-18 5b-d; bk iv, par 8 21a-b; bk ix,
par  12  64d65a  /  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  9-10 303d-305b; ch 26-28
314d-316d;  bk  xiii, ch 7 362d363b; bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part 1-11, q 81, a 1, ans 163a-164d; q 102, a 5, ans
and  rep 3-9 283c-292c; q 113, a 3, rep 1 362c-363c; part ii-ii, q 10, a
12,  rep  5 436b-437d; part hi, q 60, a 6, ans 851b-852b; q 65, a i, ans
and rep 3 879c-881d; part hi suppl, q 71, a 9, rep 3 910d-912b

[643b]
21  Dante  : Divine Comedy, hell, iv [23-42] 5c-d; purgatory, 1 53a-54c;
xxvii-xxxiii 94c105d passim; paradise, xix
[58-85] 135c-d;
xxx  [1-105]  151d-152d;  xxxn  [61-84] 155b-c 22 Chaucer: Parson s Tale
495a-550a  esp  par  1-22  495a-510b.  par  85-103  543a-550a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  hi,  206c-207a;  211c212b; 244d-245a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote, part ii, 427d429d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[436-445]
328b329a  33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 71b 80b / Pensees, 870 344a-b:
923  351b  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 221a-224a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
89a-c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 191b; 199b; 297d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 384b-385b; 664c-d
[n 53]
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part i, 238c-d; part iv, 332b-333b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk iv, 183c-d 2g. Profanations and sacrileges
Old   Testament:   Exodus,  20:1-10,24-26;  19:1013,21-24  /  Leviticus,
7:18-21; 10; 17:1-9; 18:21; 19:5-8,12; 20:2-3; 21-22; 24:10-16/ Numbers,
15:32-36;  18:32  /  Deuteronomy,  5:6-14;  23:1-4/  / Samuel, 2:12-7:17
passim;  21 :i-6— (D) I Kings, 2:1 2-j:i j passim; 21 :i-6/ // Samuel, 6
:6-j—{D)  II Kings, 6 :6-7 / / Kings, 21 :g-i^— (D) III Kings, 21 =9-1 3
/  /  Chronicles,  13:9-10;  15:12-13—  (D)  /  Paralipomenon,  13:9-10;
15:12-13  /  //  Chronicles,  26:16-21; 36:14-21 — (D) // Paralipomenon,
26:16-21;  36:14-21  /  Nehemiah,  13—  (D)  // Esdras, 13 / Job, 1:9-11
52:9-10  /Psalms,  74:1-10,18— (D) Psalms, 73:1-10,18 / Proverbs, 30:9 /
Isaiah  passim,  esp  1:1-31,  28:1-29,  36:13-37:38, 43:22-28, 47:1-15,
52:5,  56:2,  57:1-59:21, 65:1-7, 66:3-4, 66:17— (D) isaias^ passim, esp
1:1-31, 28:1-29, 36:13-37:38, 43:22-28, 47:1-15, 52:5, 56:2, 57:1-59:21,
65:1-7,  66:3-4, 66:17 / Jeremiah passim, esp 2:1-3:25, 5:2, 5:12, 6:15,
7:1-34,  8:12,  13:27,  14:10-12,  17:2127,  23:9-40,  27:14-15, 29:8-9,
34:15-16,  36:132,  42:1-22, 44:1-30— (D) Jeremias passim, esp 2:1-3:25,
5:2,  5:12,  6:15,  7:1-34,  8:12,  13:27,  14:10-12, 17:21-27, 23:9-40,
27:14-15,  29:89,  34:15-16, 36:1-32, 42:1-22, 44:1-30 / Ezekiel passim,
esp  5:5-11,  6:11-7:9,  7:24, 8:1-9:11, 11:14-21, 13:1-14:11, 16:15-59,
20:1-49,  22:8,  22:24-31,  23:1-49,  28:18,  35:9-14,  36:16-24,  39:7,
43:7-8,  44:5-13—  (D)  Ezechiel  passim,  esp  5:5-11,  6:11-7:9, 7:24,
8:1-9:11,  11:14-21,  13:1-14:11,  16:15-59,  20:1-49,  22:8,  22:24-31,
23:1-49,  28:18,  35:9-14,  36:16-24,  39:7,  43:78,  44:5-13  / Daniel,
5:2-4,23;  11:30-31  /  Hosea  passim—  (D)  Osee passim / Amos, 2:6-8 /
Zephaniah,  3:4—  (D)  Sophonias, 3:4 / Malachi esp 1:7-13, 2:10-12— (D)
Malachias esp 1:7-13, 2:10-12

[644a]
610  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (2. The virtue and practice of religion: piety as
justice  to  God. 2g. Profanations and sacrileges.) Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  1:6-7;  14:2231—  (D)  OT,  Boo/{  of Wisdom, 1:6-7; 14:2231 /
Ecclesiasticus,  23:7-15—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 23:7-20 / / Maccabees
passim,  esp  1:20-2:48,  4:38-46, 7:41-42, 9:54-56— (D) OT, I Machabees
passim,  esp  1:20-2:48, 4:3846, 7:41-42, 9:54-56 / // Maccabees passim,
esp  5:15-18,  6:1-9,  8:1-4—  (D) OT, // Machabees passim, esp 5:15-18,
6:1-9,  8:1-4 New Testament: Matthew, 5:34-35; 9:2-6; 12:1-15; 16:18-20;
21:12-13;  26:63-67  /  Mar\, 2:5-7,23-28; 3:28-29; 11:15-17; 14:61-65 /
Luke, 6:1-10; 19:45-46 I John, 2:13-16; 10:3336 / Acts, 8:9-24; 21:26-30
/  / Corinthians, 11:17-34 / / Timothy, 6:1 / II Timothy, 3:1-2 / Titus,
2:5 / Revelation. 13:1-6; 16:8-11,21— (D) Apocalypse, 13:1-6; 16:8-11,21
5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c esp
[418-479] 6a-7a, [748-929] 10d-12d / Persians
[709-842]
22c-24b / Agamemnon
[320-398]
55c-56b; [681-715] 59bc; [905-957] 61c-62b 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[863-910]
107b-c / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[441-470]
134d-135a / Ajax
[748-783]
149c-d;
[13161421] 154b-155a,c / Electra [404-471] 159b-d
/ Philoctetes
[1 423-1 444] 195a,c
5  Euripides:  Bacchantes 340a-352a,c 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [1464-1510]
506c-d / Frogs [354-371] 568b-c / Thesmophoriazusae
[574-729] 606d-608c / Plutus [627-747] 636d637d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  4d;  36b-c; bk 11, 70d-71a; 78d; bk hi,
92c-93a; 95c; bk v, 173d-174b; 176c-d; bk vi, 200c-d; 203a-b; 204d-205a;
211b-c;  bk viii, 283d; bk ix, 313a-314a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  i, 380a-d; bk ii, 400c-d; bk hi, 434c-435a; bk iv, 471b-472a; bk vi,
516b-c  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 122d-123a / Phaedo, 220a-c / Republic, bk ii,
321a-324c / Laws, bk vii, 719c-d; bk ix, 743a-744a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk
hi   [219-269]   153a-154b   14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  54c-55a  /
Alcibiades,  162d-165b  /  Coriolanus,  185b-186a  / Marcellus, 255a-d /
Caius  Marius,  350a-b  / Lysander, 357a-b / Agesilaus, 483a-b / Caesar,
580b-581b  /  Phocion,  615b-d  /  Cato  the  Younger, 639d / Demetrius,
729d-731a;  734b735a  / Dion, 801 b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii,  qq  13-14  444b-452a  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xiv [1-72]
19c20b; xix [1-123] 26d-28a; paradise, ix [127142] 120a; xviii [118-136]
134d-135a  22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par 35-38, 520b522b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 90d; part ii, 163a-b; part hi, 180bc

[644b]
2g to 3a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, lOOd 32 Milton: Lycidas
[108-131] 30a-b
/ Samson Agonistes [433-447] 349a 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 94a-97a
36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 256a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xii, 85d86a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 180a; 353a; 357b358a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  42b;  379b-c; 380c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 307d-309a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk hi, 64c-67a 3. The religious life:
religious offices and the religious community 3<*. The Jewish conception
of  the  religious  community:  the  Torah and the Temple Old Testament:
Genesis,  13:14-17;  15;  17;  18:17-19; 22:15-18; 26:1-6; 27:22-29; 28;
32:24-28;   48-49   /  Exodus  passim,  esp  2:233:22,  4:18-31,  6:1-8,
12:31-13:22, 19:5-6, 20:1-17, 25:1-31:18, 35:1-40:36 / Leviticus passim,
esp  18:1-5,  26:1-45  /  Numbers passim / Deuteronomy passim, esp 4-12,
23:1-8,  28:1-33:29  / Joshua, 1:8-15; 3-4; 22:1-6; 24:14-28— (D) Josue,
1:8-15;  3-4; 22:1-6; 24:14-28 / / Samuel, 8-(D) / Kings, 8 / // Samuel,
6-7—  (D)  II  Kings, 6-7 / / Kings, 5:19:9— (D) III Kings, 5:1-9:9 / //
Kings,  11:17;  17;  2  5  :8-i5-(D)  IV  Kings,  11:17;  17; 25:815 / /
Chronicles,  13;  15-17;  22:1-29:10—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon, 13; 15-17;
22:1-29:10  /  //  Chronicles,  2-7;  24:4-14;  29-31;  33:8; 34:135:19;
36:14-21—  (D)  // Paralipomenon, 2-7; 24:4-14; 29-31; 33:8; 34:1-35:19;
36:14-21 / Ezra passim— (D) I Esdras passim / Nehemiah, 1 :5-9; 8-9— (D)
//  Esdras, 1 ^-9; 8-9 / Esther, 3:8-4:17; 7-9 / Psalms passim, esp 5:7,
23:16, 27:1-14, 33:12, 40:8-10, 44:1-26, 50:1-7, 65:4, 68:1-35, 78:1-72,
79:1-13,  81:1-16, 84:1-12, 89:15-37, 105:1-106:48, 111:1-10, 119:1-176,
122:1-9,  124:1-8,  126:1-6,  132:1-18,  135:1-137:9,  138:2— (D) Psalms
passim, esp 5:8, 22:1-6, 26:1-14, 32:12, 39:8-10, 43:1-26, 49:1-7, 64:5,
67:1-36,   77:1-72,  78:1-13,  80:117,  83:1-13,88:16-38,  104:1-105:48,
110:1-10,  118:1-176,  121:1-9,  123:1-8, 125:1-7, 131:118, 134:1-136:9,
137:2  / Proverbs, 6:23 / Isaiah passim, esp 2:2-3, J 4 :i ~3' 30:18-26,
35:1-10,   40:1-2,  42:1-6,  43:1-12,  43:22-28,  44:1-5,  44:21,46:3-4,
49:1-50:11,  54:1-17,  5  6:i  "7>  60:1-63:19,  65:1-66:24—  (D) Isaias
passim, esp 2:2-3, J 4 :i_3' 30:18-26, 35:1-10, 40:1-2, 42:1-6, 43:1-12,
43:22-28, 44:1-5, 44:21, 46:34, 49:1-50:11, 54:1-17, 56:1-7, 60:1-63:19,
65:1-66:24  /Jeremiah  passim,  esp  2-5,  7:1-7,  7:28-34, 11:1-23, J 7
:i2-i3i  18:1-10,  26:1-7,  30:1-35:19—  (D)  Jeremias  passim, esp 2-5,
7:1-7,   7:28-34,  11:1-23,  17:12-13,  18:1-10,  26:1-7,  30:1-35:19  /
Lamentations, 2:7 / Ezel^ iel passim, esp 8:6-18, 11:15-20, 16:1-63,

[645a]
lb  to  3c(l)  20:1-49,  23:38-39,  33:1-37:28, 40:1-43:27— (D) Ezechiel
passim,  esp  8:6-18,  11:15-20,  16:163,20:1-49,  23:38-39, 33:1-37:28,
40:1-43:27/  Hosea  passim,  esp  11  —  (D)  Osee passim, esp 11 / Amos
passim,  esp  3:1-2  /Jonah,  2:4—  (D)  Jonas,  2:5 / Micah, 4:1-2— (D)
MicheafTy.  1-2 / Habahftuk, 2:20— (D) Habacuc, 2:20 / Zephaniah passim,
esp  3:8-20—  (D)  Sophonias  passim,  esp  3:8-20 / Haggai-(D) Aggeus /
Zechariah  passim, esp 2:10-13, 6:12-15, 8:923, 14:20-21 — (D) Zacharias
passim,  esp  2:1013,  6:12-15,  8:9-23,  14:20-21 / Malachi passim, esp
1:1-3,  3:1  —  (D)  Malachias  passim, esp 1:1-3, 3:1 Apocrypha: Tobit,
14:4-9—  (D)  OT,  Tobias, 14:6-11 / Judith, 4-5; 7:19-10:10; 13-16— (D)
OT,  Judith,  4-5:  7:18-10:10:  13-16 / Wisdom of Solomon, 9:8— (D) OT,
Boo\  of  Wisdom, 9:8 / Ecclesiasticus, 9:15; 17:11-21; 19:20,24; 24:23;
39:1-11; 4 2:i -2 = 44 :i 9-45 : 5; 49:1250:21 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
9:12;   17:9-17;   19:18,21;   24:32-33;   39:1-15;  42:1-2;  44:2045:6;
49:14-50:23  /  Baruch,  2:26—  (D)  OT, Baruch, 2:26 / / Maccabees, 1-9
passim—  (D)  OT,  / Machabees, 1-9 passim / // Maccabees passim, esp 3—
(D)  OT,  //  Machabees  passim,  esp  3  15  Tacitus:  Histories, bk v,
295d-296a;  297d298a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 34 206d207a,c;
bk  xvi,  ch  16 433c-434a; ch 18 434c; ch 21-28 435a-440b passim; ch 32
441c  442c;  bk  xvii,  ch 7 458c-459d; bk xix, ch 22 525b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 21, a 4, rep 2 126c-127c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 98, aa 4-5 242b-244b; q 99, aa 3-5 247a-250a; q
101,  a 4, ans and rep 4 269a-270b; q 102, a 4 276d-283c; a 6 292c-298a;
qq  104-105  304a-321a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 82d-83a; part ii,
137d-138a;  160b-c;  part hi, 177c-180d; 182d186c; 198b; 199b-204a; part
iv, 269a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[101-269]
321b-325a;  [315-356]  326a-327a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 610-612 280b-282b;
619-641  284b-290a;  713-718  304b-308b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
179d-183a   esp   180a181a;  208a-c;  352c-354d  esp  354a-b  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d247b;  part in, 305b-c; part iv,
322a-b  3£.  The Christian conception of the church: the doctrine of the
mystical  body of Christ Old Testament: Song of Solomon— (D) Canticle of
Canticles New Testament: Matthew, 4:18-22; 5:38-48; 8:21-22; 9:35-10:42;
13; 16:18-19,24; 18:1520; 19:19; 20:25-28; 22:34-40; 24:14; 25; 28:16-20
/  Mar\,  10:42-45;  12:28-34; 13:10; 16:14-20 / Luke, 4:43-44; 6:27-38;
9:16; 10:16,25-37; 12:11-12; 22:24-30; 24:47 /

[645b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION 611 John, 4:34-38; 10; 13:31-17:26; 20:20-23; : 3
2~  21:15-17 / Acts passim, esp 1:8, 2:1-47, 4 5:11, 16:1-40, 22:14-15 /
Romans   esp   1:8-16,  2:5-4:25,  8:14-17,  9:1-11:14,  12:1-15:7  /  /
Corinthians  esp  4:9-13,  10:16-17,  12:28-29,  13:113,  15:1-11  /  //
Corinthians  passim, esp 1-2, 5-9 / Galatians, 1:1-2:9 esp 1:15-16; 3-4;
5:14;  5:22-6:2  /  Ephesians  esp  1:22-23,  3:812,  4:1-5:2, 5:23-33 /
Philippians,   1:27-2:4   /   Colossians   esp  1:15-2:3,  3:12-15  /  /
Thessalonians, 4:9-10 / Hebrews, 3:5-6; 10:24-25; 13:1-3 / James, 2:8-17
/ I Peter, 1:22; 2:1-10 / I John I II John 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
i, ch 35 149b-c; bk x, ch 20 311b-c; bk xi-xxii 322b,d-618d esp bk xiii,
ch  21 371a-c, bk xvii, ch 9 461b-d, ch 11 462c-463a, ch 15-16 465b466d,
ch 20 469a-470c, bk xviii, ch 47-50 500d-502d, bk xx, ch 7-12 535b-541d,
bk xxii, ch 18 603c-604b / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 16 628c-d; ch 18
628d-629a;  bk hi, ch 31-32 669c-670a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 102, a 4, rep 4 276d-283c; part ii-ii, q i, aa 9-10 388d-390d; q
2,  aa  5-8 394b-398b; q 5 410a-413c; qq 183-189 625a-700d; part hi, q 8
756c-763b; part hi suppl, q 71, aa 9-1 1 910d-914b; q 95 1042c-1049d esp
a 3, ans and rep 4 1045b-1046d, a 4, rep 5 1046d1047d; q 99, a 4 1083a-]
084a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  ix  [73145]  66c-67b; xvi
[58-129]   77c-78a;  xix  [127141]  82d-83a;  xxix  97d-99b;  xxxii-xxxm
102b-105d; paradise, xxiii-xxiv 141b-144b; xxvii
[1-66]
147b-148a; xxx
[ioo]-xxxii
[144] 152d-156a
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 151a; part hi, 198a-199a; 204a-207b; part
iv,  247a-249b;  275a-278d  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 473-484 256b-258b; 646
291b;  857-861  342a;  867-905  343b-349a 35 Locke: Toleration, 4b-5d 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  436a438c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  hi,  307b310c;  part  iv,  315d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk v, 129c-135a 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 674c-d; 691d-692a
3c.  The  nature  and  organization of the religious community 3c(l) The
institution  of  the  priesthood  and  other  ecclesiastical offices Old
Testament:  Genesis,  14:18-20/Exodus,  19:6; 28-29; 3 o:i 7-2I >3°; 39'
40:12-15  /  Levitic«^  passim,  esp  4:3-12,  7:5-10, 8:1-10:20, 14:13,
16:1-34,  21:1-22:16,  24:1-9  / Numbers, 1:4954; 3-5; 6:10-11,16-27; 8;
10:1-10;  15:2428; 16:1-19:7; 20:23-29; 25:6-13; 27:18-23; 35:24-28,32 /
Deuteronomy,  10:8-9;  12:1819;  17:8-13; 18:5-7; 20:1-4; 2i: 55 24 :8 ;
26:i"

[646a]
(3c.  The  nature and organization of the religious community. 3c(l) The
institution  of  the  priesthood  and  other ecclesiastical offices?) 4;
33:8-11  /Joshua,  3:3,6-17;  4:1-18;  6:1-20;  8:33;  19:51— (D) Josue,
3:3,6-17; 4:1-18; 6:120; 8:33; 19:51 / / Samuel, 2:12-17,27-36; 4:10-18;
21:1-9;  22:9-21—  (D) I Kings, 2:1217,27-36; 4:10-18; 21:1-9; 22:9-21 /
//  Samuel, 15:24-29— (D) II Kings, 15:24-29/ 1 Kings, 8:1-11; 12:30-32;
13:33-34—  (D) HI Kings, 8:1-11; 12:30-32; 13:33-34 / II Kings, 12:4-10;
16:10-16;  17:26-28,32;  22:3-14;  23:4-9,20—  (D)  IV  Kings,  12:4-10;
16:10-16;  17:26-28,32;  22:3-14;  23:4-9,20  /  / Chronicles, 15:11-27;
16:4-6,37-42;  23-26— (D) I Paralipomenon, 15:11-27; 16:4-6,37-42; 23-26
/  //  Chronicles,  5;  7:6;  8:14-15; 11:13-15; 13:9-12; 15:3; 19:8-11;
23:1-24:16;  29-31; 34:8-15; 35:19; 36:14— (D) II Paralipomenon, 5; 7:6;
8:1415;  11:13-15;  13:9-12;  15:3;  i9 :8-n; 23:124:16; 29-31; 34:8-15;
35:1-9;  36:14  /  Ezra,  1:1-5;  2;  6-12 passim, esp 6:16-20, 7:24-25,
8:24-30—  (D)  /  Esdras,  1:1-5;  2; 6-12 passim, esp 6:16-20, 7:24-25,
8:24-30 / Nehemiah, 8; 10:37-39; 12:27-47; i3:4-ii,28-3 i-(D) II Esdras,
8; 10:37-39; 12:27-46; 13:4-11,2831 / Psalms, 110:4— (D) Psalms, 109:3 /
Isaiah,  61:6;  66:20-21—  (D)  Isaias,  61:6; 66:20-21 / Jeremiah, 2:8;
5:30-31;  6:13;  8:10;  18:18;  23:14,11;  33:18-22—  (D) Jeremias, 2:8;
5:30-31;  6:13; 8:10; 18:18; 23:1-4,11; 33:18-22 / Lamentations, 4:13,16
/  Ezefyel,  7:26;  22:26;  34; 44:9-31; 45:4-5; 48:10-11— (D) Ezechiel,
7:26; 22:26; 34; 44:9-31; 45 :4-5; 48 : 10"11 / Hosea, 4:4-10— (D) Osee,
4:4-10  /  Micah,  3:11  —  (D)  Micheas,  3:11  /  Zephaniah,  3:4— (D)
Sophonias,  3:4  /  Haggai,  2:11-13— (D) Aggeus, 2:1214 / Zechariah, 3;
6:9-13—  (D)  Zacharias,  3; 6:9-13 / Malachi, 1:6-2:9— (D) Malachias, 1
:6-2   :g  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  7  129,31  ;  45;  50—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus, 7:31,33-35; 45; 50 / / Maccabees, 2:54; 4:42-53— (D) OT,
/  Machabees,  2:54;  4:42-53 / // Maccabees, 1:19-32; 3 passim; 4:7-29—
(D)  OT, // Machabees, 1:19-32; 3 passim; 4:7-29 New Testament: Matthew,
12:3-5;  16:18-19;  26:57-65  /  Mar\,  2:25-26; 14:53-64 / Lufe, 6:3-4;
22:52-53,63-71  /  John,  18:19-24  /  Acts,  1:15-26;  6:1-8; 14:22-23;
20:28-35;  23:1-5 / / Timothy, 3; 5:17-22 / // Timothy, 1-3 / Titus, 1 /
Hebrews,  2:17-3:2;  4:14-5:10;  6:18-9:28;  10:11-12,19-22  /  / Peter,
2:5-10;  5  /  Revelation,  1:5-6;  5:9-10; 20:6— (D) Apocalypse, 1:5-6;
5:9-10;  20:6  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  32d-33a; bk ii, 56d-57a;
60d-61b;   bk   iv,  125a-b;  135b-136a;  bk  v,  167d-168b;  171d-172a;
173d-174b;  bk vi, 197d-198a; 200d; 211b-d; bk vii, 242d243a; 250c-d; bk
viii, 278c; 284d-285b; bk ix, 295d-296c; 308a-c

[646b]
7  Plato: Statesman, 597c-598a / Laws, bk vi 700d-701b; bk xii, 787b-c 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  vi,  ch  I322b  I929]  526c;  bk  vii,  ch  9
[1329*26-34]  533d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 16, 122c-d 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii [108-136] 127a-b; [162233] 128b-130b; bk hi
[356-462] 157a-160a;
bk v
[700-718]
205b-206a; bk vi
[33-101]
212a-213b;  bk  viii  [280-305]  266b-267a  14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius,
53d-56c  /  Camillus,  HOb-d  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  67d-68a  /
Histories,  bk iv, 285d-286a; 287a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xvii,
ch  4, 451cd; ch 4-6, 455b-458a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 91, A 5, CONTRARY 211c-212c; Q 98, A 5, REP 2-3 243c-244b; q 103, a i,
rep  3  298b-299b; a 2, ans and rep 1-2 299b-300d; part ii-ii, q i, a 10
389d-390d;  q  ii,  a 2, rep 3 439a-440b; q 184, aa 5-8 633c-639b; q 185
639c-650b;  q  187,  a  1 663c-665a; q 189, a 7 695d-696c; part in, q 22
827c-833a;  q  26,  a i, rep i 845b-846a; q 64 870b-879c; q 65, a i, ans
and  rep  3  879c-881d; a 2, ans and rep 2 881d-882c; a 3, ans and rep 2
882d-883d;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  3 883d-884a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, ix
[73145] 66c-67b
22 Chaucer: Prologue
[477-528]
167b-168a  /  Prologue  of  Pardoner's  Tale 372a-374a / Pardoner's Tale
[12,829-902]  381b-382b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83a-84c; part hi,
177c-180d;   182d-186b;  199a;  200b-203b;  205a;  207b-240a;  part  iv,
248b-250c;  266ac;272d-273a; 273d-274a; 275a-278d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  195d119b-122a passim; bk hi, 186d-188c; 196b;
219b-222b;  bk iv, 273c-274b; 297b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 7d
32 Milton: Lycidas
[1 08-131] 30a-b
33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 160b-163b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  i,  ch  hi,  sect  12, 115c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxv,
209d285c210b  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  436c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 82c-d; 194c-195a; 197a-b; 200b-c; 300d-301c; 350b-d;
457d458b  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 226d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 189a;
196ac;  218c-220d; 313d-316d; 466b-467c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  i,  224a227d;  241a-b;  part  hi,  310a-c;  part  iv,  332b333b 48
Melville:   Moby  Dic\,  30a-36b  esp  35a36b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  v, 127b-137c passim; bk vi, 164a-165a; bk vii, 171a-180a
passim

[647a]
3c(2)  Ecclesiastical government and hierarchy Old Testament: Leviticus,
21:10-15  /  Numbers, 3:5-10 / / Chronicles, 23-24— (D) / Paralipomenon,
23-24  /  //  Chronicles,  19:11  —  (D)  //  Paralipomenon,  19:11  New
Testament:  Matthew,  16:18-19;  18:18;  20  :25-28;  28:  1 8-20 /Mark,
10:42-44;  13:34-35  /  Luke,  22:24-30 / Acts, 1:21-26; 5:30-31; 6:1-6;
13:1-3;  15:1-30; 17:7,14-15; 20:28-35; 23:1-5; 26:9-12 / / Timothy, 3 /
Titus,  1  esp  1:5  / Hebrews, 1:1-8; 3:1; 4:14-5:10; 6:1910:21; 13:7 /
Revelation, 11:15; 17:14— (D) Apocalypse, 11:15; 17:14 7 Plato: Laws, bk
xii,  787bc  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  i,  a 10
389d-390d;  o  2,  a 6 395b-396a; o 11, a 2, rep 3 439a-440b; part hi, q
65.  a  i, rep 3 879c-881d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvii [67-132]
40c-41a;  purgatory, xix [127-141] 82d-83a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xi
16d-17d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  178c-180a passim, esp 179c;
198a-199a;  207b-240a;  part  iv, 248a-249b; 266ac; 273c-d; 275a-278d 24
Rabelais:   Gargantua   and  Pantagruel,  bk  iv,  288d-297b  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 101a 32 Milton: New Forcers of Conscience 68a-b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  871-877 344b-345a; 885 346a 35 Locke: Toleration,
4c-6a; 7c-8c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 436d [fn 1] 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 194a 197b; 299b300d; 302b-303c; 304a-d; 642d-643a 41
Gibbon:   Decline   and  Fall,  154a-b;  214c-215c;  517a-d;  567c-569d;
582c-586a  passim;  589b-d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 173b; 342a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  224a227d;  part in, 310a-c 3c(3) The
support  of  ecclesiastical  institutions:  tithes, contributions, state
subsidy  Old  Testament: Genesis, 14:18-20; 28:18-22; 47:22,26 / Exodus,
13:2,12-13;    22:29-30;    23:18-19;    25:1-9;   29:27-34;   30:11-16;
34:1920,25-26;   35:4-36:7   /  Leviticus,  2:10;  5:13;  6:16-18,24-30;
7:6-15,30-36;  8:31;  10:12-20;  14:13;  22:10-13;  23  passim;  24:5-9;
25:32-34;  27  / Numbers, 3:12-13; 5:9-10; 7 passim, esp 7:3-9; 18:8-32;
31:25-54;  35:1-8  / Deuteronomy, 10:8-9; 12:5-6,19; 14:22-29; 16:16-17;
18:1-8;  26:1-16  /  Joshua,  13:14,33;  14:3-5; 18:6-7; 21 — (D) Josue,
13:14,33;  14:3-5;  18:6y; 21 / I Samuel, 2:13-17— (D) I Kings, 2:1317 /
//  Kings, 12; 22:3-7— (D) IV Kings, 12; 22:3-7 / H Chronicles, 24:4-14;
31:3-12; 34:813— (D) II Paralipomenon, 24:4-14; 31:3-12; 34:8-13 / Ezra,
8:24-30—  (D) / Esdras, 8:2430 / Nehemiah, 10:32-39; 12:44,47; 13:5,12 —
(D)  // Esdras, 10:32-39; 12:43,46; 13:5,12 / Proverbs, 3:9-10 / Isaiah,
66:20-21— (D)

[647b]
Isaias,  66:20-21  /  Ezekiel,  20:40-41;  44:2731; 45:1-6; 48:8-21— (D)
Ezechiel,  20:40-41;  44:27-31;  45:1-6; 48:8-21 / Malachi, 3:8-10 — (D)
Malachias,  3:8-10  Apocrypha:  Tobit,  1:6-8—  (D)  OT,  Tobias, 1:68 /
Ecclesiasticus,   7:31;   35:8-11;  45:20-22—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,
7:33-35; 35:10-13; 45:25-27 New Testament: Matthew, 23:23 / Luke, 11:42;
18:12  /  / Corinthians, 9:13-14 / Hebrews, 7:110 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk ii, ch 8 [i267b30~36] 463c; ch 10
[i272ai8-2i] 468c-d; bk vii, ch
10   [1330*8-14]  534c;  ch  12  [i33i  b4-7]  536a  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 185, a 7 647c-649b; q 187, aa 4-5 669b673b;
part  111.  q  65,  a  1, rep 7 879c-881d 22 Chaucer: Prologue [692-714]
171a-b  /  Summoned  s  Tale  285a-295a  /  Prologue  of Pardoner's  Tale
372a-374a  / Pardoner's Tale [12,829-902] 381b382b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  hi, 223a-224c; part iv, 248d-249a; 278c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  11, 99c-100a; bk iv, 295d-296a 26 Shakespeare: Henry V,
act  i,  sc i 533a-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxv, 210b211a; bk
xxxi,  298b-302a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 56b-57a; bk v,
343b,d-356d  esp  343b,d-346c,  347d-348a;  357c  40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 82d; 197b-198c; 301c-302b; 392c-393d: 597ac 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  417b-c  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 444a-c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
219b-c; 342a-b "bd. The monastic life: the disciplines of asceticism Old
Testament:   Numbers,   6:1-21   /judges,   13:5;   16:17  /  /  Samuel,
1:9-12,19-28—  (D)  I Kings, 1:9-11,19-28 / Amos, 2:11-12 New Testament:
Matthew,  3:1-4; 4:1-2; 6:2534; 19:10-12,21 / Mark, 1:2-6,12-13; 10:21 /
Luke,  1:13-15,80;  3:2-4;  4:1-2;  12:22-36;  18:22  /  /  Corinthians,
7:1,7-8,25-40  /  //  Corinthians,  6:1-10 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
viii,  par  26-27  60b-c  /  City  of  God,  bk i, ch 16-18 139c-140d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, a 1, rep 3 66d-67c; q 98, a
5,  rep  2-3  243c244b;  q  108,  a  4 336b-337d; part ii-ii, q 184, a 5
633c-634c;  aa  7-8  636a-639b;  q 185, a 6 646c-647c; a 8 649b-650b; qq
186-189  650b700d; part in suppl, q 89, a 2 1006b-1007c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  hell,  xxvii  [67-132]  40c-41a;  paradise,  hi  109b-110c;  xi
[28-139] 122b-123c; xn [31-126] 124a-125a 22 Chaucer: Prologue [165-207]
162a-b  /  Friar's Prologue 277a-b / Friar's Tale 278a-284a / Summoner's
Prologue 284b-285a / Summoner's Tale 285a-295a

[648a]
614  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (3. The religious life: religious offices and the
religious   community,   id.  The  monastic  life:  the  disciplines  of
asceticism.)  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk i, 32c-35a;
46a-54a;  60c-67d;  bk  ii,  98b-d;  126a-d;  bk  hi, 156d-158a; 165b-d;
168a-173d; 191a-b; 193d-194a; 195d-196b; bk iv, 253d255a 26 Shakespeare:
Midsummer-Night''s   Dream,  act  i,  sc  i  [67-78]  353a-b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  7d:  71b-c 32 Milton: II Penseroso [156-176]
24b-25a  33 Pascal: Pensees, 539 265b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
v, 19a; bk xiv, 105a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 191c-193c; 475d476a;
533c-d;  593b,d-599a  43  Mill:  Liberty, 290c-291c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
102a-b;  283a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part i, 224b-d; 228b;
234d-235c;  part iv, 333b-d; 340d341a; 353a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  v,  218b-220b; bk vi, 273c-274a,c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  i,  11a15a,c;  bk  11,  37c-38a:  bk  iv,  83c-84a;  85a-86b;  bk vi
146b,d-170d  passim,  esp  164a-165a; bk vii, 171a-180a passim 4. Church
and  state:  the  issue  concerning  temporal  and  spiritual  power Old
Testament:  //  Samuel,  7—  (D)  II Kings, 7 / / Kings, 5-6; 8 -(D) III
Kings,  5-6,  8  /  /  Chronicles,  17—  (D)  I  Paralipomenon,  17 / //
Chronicles,  1-7;  19:11—  (D) II Paralipomenon, 1-7; 19:11 / Ezra-(D) I
Esdras Apocrypha: / Maccabees, 11:26-27— (D) OT, I Machabees, 11:26-27 /
//  Maccabees,  7:30— (D) OT, // Machabees, 7:30 New Testament: Matthew,
17:24-27; 22:15-22 — (D) Matthew, 17:2.7,-26', 22:15-22 / Mar\, 12:13-17
/  Luke,  20:19-26 / Acts, 5:29 / Romans, 13:1-7 / Titus, 3:1 / / Peter,
2:13-17  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii,  ch  9 [1160*19-29] 412b-c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 30 138a, c; bk 11, ch 5, 143d-144a; bk
iv,  ch  3  224b-d  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 59d-60c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par 15 17a-b / City of God, bk i, pref 129a-d; bk
iv, ch 33-34 206c-207a,c; bk v, ch 15-16 220d-221b; ch 25 228b-c; bk xi,
ch   i  322b,d-323a;  bk  xv-xviii  397b,d-507a,c  esp  bk  xv,  ch  1-5
397b,d-400c, bk xvii, ch 1-3 449a-451c, bk xviii, ch 1-2 472b,d-473d; bk
xix,  ch 5 513d-514b; ch ii 516d-517b; ch 14 520a-d; ch 17 522b-523a; ch
19-26  523b-529a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, a 4, rep
2-3  233a-d;  a  5, rep 2 233d-234d; part 11—11, q 10, a 10 434c-435c; q
12, a 2 443b-444b

[648b]
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii
[10-27] 2d;
xxxiv
[1-69]
51b-52a; purgatory, vi
[58151] 61b-62c; xm
[79-96] 72d; xvi
[58-129]
77c-78a; xxxn
[i]-xxxiii
[78] 103c-105a esp
xxxii
[100-160] 102b-104a; paradise,
vi
[iiii] 113c-114d
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 80d-81a; 82d-83a; 84a-c; part ii, 151a-c;
155d-156b;  part iiiii, 159d-172a; part hi, 177c-191b; 193c-d; part iii-
iv,   198a-258b;  part  iv,  266a-c;  270c-d;  273c-274a;  274c-278d  26
Shakespeare:  1st  Henry  VI, act i, sc hi 5b-6c; act in, sc 1 14b-16b /
King John 376a405a,c esp act hi, sc i [135-347] 387c-389d, act v, sc 1
[1-24] 399b-c, sc
11  400a-401d  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act  iv,  sc  ii  [1-42] 489d-490a 27
Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII  549a-585a,c  esp  act  in, sc 11 568b-573d 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 27c 32 Milton: New Forcers of Conscience
68a-b / Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-b / Paradise Lost, bk xii
[485-551] 329b-331a
/ Samson Agonistes
[1334-1379] 368b-369b
/  Areopagitica,  386b388a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  870  344a-b 35 Locke:
Toleration,  2d-21c  esp 2d-3a, 7c, 13ab, 20d-21c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk  xii,  85c86a;  bk xix, 144c-145a; bk xxiii, 196c-197c; bk
xxiv-xxvi,  200a-215a;  bk  xxvi,  217c219d;  bkxxx,  284d-285c; bkxxxi,
298b-308c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  327a-c  / Social Contract, bk 11,
401c-402a; bk iv, 435a-439c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk, v 347d-354a
40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 197a-b; 233d; 299b-304d passim, esp 299b-d;
390c-393d  passim;  443d-446b esp 444c-445b; 452b-453a; 582c; 611d-612a;
623d-624b;  631d-632a;  642c-643a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, HOb-110d;
138b140a;  145d-150c  passim,  esp 147d-148b; 195a; 199c-202d; 204b-207a
esp   205d-206b;   212d213d;   214c-215c;   320d-321b;  356c;  360b361b;
417b-418d;  557c-563d  esp  560d-561c;  567c-569d; 582c-589d esp 586a-c,
588b-589d  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  442c-d;  444a-c  / Judgement,
509d-510a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article vi
[591-599] 16d; AMENDMENTS,
i  17a  43  Federalist:  number  52,  165c;  number 57, 177b 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  314c-315b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 270
84d-89c;  additions,  162  143b-144c  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
175c-177b;   192c-d;  205d-206a,c;  part  hi,  308b-c;  310c;  part  iv,
316a-317a; 325d-326b; 330b-331d; 336c337d; 345c-346c; 350b-c; 351b-354a;
365b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [10,977-11,034] 267a268b 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 28b32c; bk v, 133c-135a

[649a]
4a.  Religion  in  relation to forms of government: the theocratic state
Old  Testament:  Numbers,  27:12-23  /  Judges,  8:22-23  / / Samuel, 8;
10:18-19,24; 12:12-^ 14,17-19— (D) I Kings, 8; 10:18-19,24^12:1214,17-19
/  Isaiah,  43:15—  (D)  Isaias, 43:15 / Daniel, 4:17,25,32— (D) Daniel,
4:14,22,29  Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  14:3—  (D) OT, Esther, 14:3 7
Plato:  Statesman,  597c-598a  /  Laws,  bk  vi,  700d-701b 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  8  [i267b30~36]  463c-d; bk hi, ch 14 [1285*3-7]
483a-b; bk v, ch 11
[i3i4b35-i3i5a
4] 517d; bk vi, ch 7
[i32i a35-b i]
525a; ch 8
[i322b i9-29]
526c; bk vii, ch 8
[i328b2-22]
532d-533a; ch 9
[1329*26-34]
533d; ch 10
[1330*8-14]
534c;   ch  12  [1331*19-28]  535d;  [1331V7]  536a  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 99, aa 4-5 248a-250a; qq 104-105 304a-321a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xi  16d-17d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i,
82b-83a;  part ii, 110b-112c; part in, 177c-180d; 199b-204a; 208d; 228ac
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  611  282b  35  Locke: Toleration, 14b-15a / Civil
Government,  CH xviii, sect 210 73b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
ii,  7c-8c;  bk  in,  12d-13c  passim;  bk v, 27d; bk xix, 138c-140c esp
139c-140a;  bk  xxiv,  201a202b;  bk xxv, 211c-212b; 214a,c 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  ii, 405d; bk iv, 435a-439c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  13bc;  208ac  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 202c-d; 252c; 288a,c;
557c-563d  passim, esp 558b-c, 561c562b, 563c-d; 586c-589d esp 589b-d 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  343a  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 245c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 355 112d-113a / Philosophy of
History,  part  i,  207d-208c;  216b-217c;  246d-247b;  part iv, 316c-d;
365b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 28b-32c 4b. The service
of  religion  to  the state and the political support of religion by the
state  7  Plato: Statesman, 597c-598a / Laws, bk vii, 718d-720b; bk xii,
789a-b  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 8 [1267^0-36] 463c-d; bk v, ch
ii
[i3i4b35-i3i5*4] 517d;
bk vi, ch 7
[i32i*35-b i] 525a; bk vii, ch 8
[i328b 2-22] 532d-533a; ch 10 [1330*8-14] 534c
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk 1
[291-296] Ilia; bk xii
[175-194] 358b-359a; [829-842] 376a-b
14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d esp 52d-53a, 57b / Themistocles,
92a-c / Camillus, 114c-116a / Fabius, 142d-143a / Marcellus, 247c-248b /
Lysander,   365a-366a   /  Sertorius,  462a-c;  466d-467a  /  Cleomenes,
659d-660a

[649b]
18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 1-6 129d132d; ch 34 149a; bk xix, ch
26  528d-529a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii, q 187, a 2
665a-666a;  q  188,  aa  2-4  675d-679d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i,
80d-81a; 82b-d; part iv, 258d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 306a-d; 324c-326b 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, act i, sc i
[187-215] 470a-b; act
iv, sc i
[30-87] 487c488a; sc
11
[1-42] 489d-490a / Henry
V,  act  1,  sc  1  533a-d  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 290c 32
Milton:  Areopagitica,  397a 35 Locke: Toleration, 6b-7b; 7d-8c; 9c-10c;
20d-21c  /  Civil  Government,  ch  xviii,  sect 210 73bc 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  v, div 43, 468c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
ii,  7c-8c;  bk  in,  13b-c;  bk  v,  27d;  bk  xviii,  134c-d;  bk xxiv
200a-208a,c;  bk  xxv,  212a-b;  214a,c; bk xxvi, 214d-215a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,   327a-c;  358d-359a;  366c-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,
401c-402a;  bk iv, 435a-439c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 56b-57a;
bk  v,  343b,d-346c; 347d-348a; 357c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 13b-d;
229c-230a   289b,d-294a   esp  291d-292d;  328c-330a,c  348a-361a,c  esp
349c-351d;  382a-383b 457b,d-460b passim; 601c-d; 611d-612a 631d-632a 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 147d-148b; 204b207a; 352b-353b; 381a-383c 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  444a-c / Judgement, 509d-510a 43 Articles of
Confederation:   hi   5b   43   Mill:   Liberty,   279a-d;  290c-291a  /
Representative   Government,  341a-c;  437d-438b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,
189c-d;  251c;  314c-315b; 445bc 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
176b177b;  part  in,  287a-d; 311b-d; part iv, 350b-c; 353a-b 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[4897-4916]
121b122a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii, 304c-d; bk ix, 374d-377b;
bk  x,  435c-436c;  443b;  bk  xii,  534c-d;  bk  xiii,  572d;  574a  52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 28b32c; bk v, 127b-137c passim,
esp  133c-135a  5.  The  dissemination  of  religion 5a. The function of
preaching  New  Testament:  Matthew passim, esp 3:1-3, 4:17-25, 7:28-29,
9:35,  10:1-11:6,  13:10-11, 28:19-20 / Mar\ passim, esp 1:2-8, 1:21-22,
3:13-15,  6:7-13, 13:9-13, 16:14-20 / Luke passim, esp 4:16-21, 4:43-44,
8:1,  9:1-6,  9:5960,  10:1-20, 16:16, 19:47-48, 24:46-47 / John passim,
esp 1:6-8, 1:15-42, 18:20 / Acts

[650a]
(5.  The  dissemination  of  religion.  5 a. The function of preaching.)
passim, esp 4:18-20, 5:19-20, 8:4-12, 8:27-37, 9:15, 10:42-43, 13:23-24,
13:38,  13:44-47,  14:12-15,  18:24-28,  20:16-21,  26:16-18  /  Romans,
1:9-15;  10:8,11-21;  16:25  /  /  Corinthians,  1:17-18,21;  2:1-5;  95
12:27-31;  15:1-2/ // Corinthians, 3-4 esp 4:5-6 / Galatians, 1:12:9 esp
1:15-16  /  Ephesians, 3 / Colossians, 1:23-29; 3:16; 4:3-4 / / Timothy,
2:5-7;  3:16;  4:6-13;  6:1-5 / H Timothy, 1:8-11; 2:2,24-26; 4 / Titus,
1:1-3; 1:7-3:11 / Hebrews, 4:1-11 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1
la-b:  bk  v, par 23-BK vi, par 3 33c-36a; bk vi, par 6, 36c / Christian
Doctrine 621a-698a,c esp bk iv 675a-698a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  q  6,  a  1,  ans  and  rep 2 413d-414c; q 10, a 12, rep 5
436b-437d;  q  187,  a 3, rep 5 666a-669b; q 188, a 4 678b-679d; part hi
suppl,  q  96,  a  7 1061b-1062a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxix
[67126] 151a-c 22 Chaucer: Prologue
[477-528]
167b-168a  / Parson's Prologue [17,333-371] 494a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  hi,  205b-d; 207b211c; 215b-216b; 219d-221b; 224c-225d; 241d-242a;
242c-d;  part  iv,  273d-274a  35  Locke:  Toleration,  7d-8c 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 253b-268a; 367b368b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
343b,  d344b; 352b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 303c-304a; 529b530b 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 110b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
340d341a  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 30a-36b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  244d-245c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk i, 13a-d; bk vi,
150d-153d  5b.  Religious  conversion  Old  Testament: Ruth, 1:1-18 / //
Kings,  5:1-15 — (D) IV Kings, 5:1-15 / Psalms, 51:13— (D) Psalms, 50:15
/ Daniel, 2-4— (D) Daniel, 2:13:23; 3:91-4:34 Apocrypha: Bel and Dragon—
(D)  OT,  Daniel,  M  New  Testament:  Matthew, 9:2-8; 15:30-31; 18:2-3;
27:50-54  /  Mar\,  2:3-12;  4:11-12;  9:16-27; 15:37-39 / Luke, 2:8-20;
5:18-26;  7:11-16;  13:11-13;  17:11-19;  l8:35-435 22: 32 ; 23 :44~47 /
John,  2:22-23;  45  6:5-14;  7:31,3741; 8:28-32; 9; 11:41-45; 12:10-11;
16:29-30 / Acts passim, esp 2:38-47, 3:19, 8:25-9:20, 11:19-21, 13:4-43,
14:1,  16:14-15,  16:25-34,  18:7-8,  22:1-16,  26:9-20/  I Corinthians,
14:2425 / Galatians, 1:13-19 / Hebrews, 4:1-6 / James, 5:19-20

[650b]
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i-ix la-71b esp bk 1, par 17-18 5b-d, bk
hi,  par  6-10  14b-15d,  bk iv, par 1 19b-c, par 7-8 20d-21b, bk v, par
12-13  30a-c,  par 23-25 33c-34c, bk vi, par 7-8 36d-37c, bk vii, par 24
50d-51a,  bk  viii  52c-61c,  bk  ix,  par  14  65a-c  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 62, a 2, rep 3 318d-319c; a 4, rep 2 320b-321b 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii, q 10, a 8 432b-433b; a 9, ans
433b-434c;  a 12 436b-437d; q ii, a 4 441b-442b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxii
[55-93] 87a-c
22 Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law [4953-4959] 244a;
[5100-5106] 246b-247a / Second Nun's
Prologue  461a-463a  /  Second Nun's Tale 463b471b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  83d-84a;  part  hi,  204a;  part iv, 264d; 265c-266a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  41b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 189-194 205b-209b;
769-770  323a  35  Locke:  Toleration, la-2c; 3b; 3c-4a; 7d-8c; 10d-lla;
13b-15a;  15d-16a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 165b-d; 379c-380a 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk v, 343b,d344b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 179a-d;
180c-181c;  189a-b;  200a-206b;  296b-299a; 599d-602b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  152c-161a,c  passim,  esp  153c-155b;  234d-245a; 251d-252a;
285d287c;  345d-347a,c 43 Federalist: number i, 30a 44 Boswell: Johnson,
174a-b; 372a-b; 394d395b; 536c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
322c323a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 194a-203a; 216d-218b; bk xi,
476c-480a  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim; bk
vi,  153d-164a;  bk xi, 313c-314c 5c. Religious education Old Testament:
Exodus,  12:24-27;  18:19-20;  24:12 / Leviticus, 10:8-11 / Deuteronomy,
4:1-5,9-10,14;  5:31;  6:1,6-9,20-25;  11:18-21;  17:9-10; 24:8; 31:9-13
/Joshua, 8:30-35— (D) Josue, 8:30-35 / // Kings, 17:26-28; 23:12— (D) IV
Kings,  17:26-28;  23:1-2  /  //  Chronicles,  17:7-9;  34:29-30— (D) II
Paralipomenon,  17:7-9;  34:29-30  /  Nehemiah,  S—  (D)  II Esdras, 8 /
Psalms,  78:1-4—  (D)  Psalms,  yy.i4 / Ezekiel, 44:21-23— (D) Ezechiel,
44:21-23  New  Testament: Matthew, 5-7; 10:1-31; 13:123 / Mar\, 3:13-19;
4:1-25;  6:6-11 / Luke, 2:46-49; 6:12-49; 8:4-18; 9:1-6 I John, 7:1417 /
Acts,  22:3  /  /  Corinthians,  12:27-31  / Ephesians, 4:11-15; 6:4 / /
Timothy,  1:5-7;  2:5-7; 3:2; 4:6-13; 6:1-5 / // Timothy, 1:1011; 2:1-2;
12:15-16,23-25;  13:14-16;  14:1-5 / Titus, 1:7-3:11 esp 2:15 / Hebrews,
5:12

[651a]
7  Plato: Laws, bk x 757d-771b; bk xii, 797c798b 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine  621a-698a,c  esp  bk  iv,  ch  16  685d-686c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  prologue la b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 105,
a 4, ans 318b-321a; q hi, a i, ans 351d352d; a a 4-5 354c-356c; part ii-
ii,  q  2,  a 6 395b 396a; q 16, a 2, ans and rep 2 455c456d; q 181, a 3
618c-619b; q 188, aa 4-5 678b 681a; a 6, ans 681b-682c; part hi suppl, q
96,  a  7  1061b-1062a;  a  ii,  ans 1063d1064d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, xii
[22105] 123d-124d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 123a-b; 154b156b; part in, 208d-209b;
211b-c;  241d-242a;  part  iv,  269a;  278b-c;  conclusion,  282d283a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 24c-d; 27a; bk ii, 82c 83b 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 41c-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 185-194 205a
209b;  285  224a  35  Locke:  Toleration,  7a-b;  7d-8c; 17d-18a; 18c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv,  15c; bk xxiv, 202b-c 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk v, 343b,d-356d esp 343b,d-346c, 347d-348a, 348c-d,
352b-c, 354d-355d; 357c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82d; 355b-d; 601b-c
41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 522d-523a 43 Mill: Liberty, 285b; 290a-292a
passim  /  Representative  Government,  437d-438b  44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
151b-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 150d-153d; 164a-165a 6.
Truth  and  falsity  in  religion  6a.  The  religious  condemnation  of
idolatry,  superstition, and other perversions of worship Old Testament:
Exodus,  20:1-5,22-23;  22:20; 2 3 :i 35 3 2 5 34 :II ~ I 7 / Leviticus,
17:7;  19:4,31; 20:1-6,27; 26:1,28-30 / Numbers, 25:1-5,1618; 33:51-52 /
Deuteronomy,  4:14-28;  5:69;  6:14-15;  7:1-5,25-26;  8:19-20; 9:15-21;
11:16-17,28;     12:2-3;     12:29-13:18;     16:21-17:7;    18:9-14,20;
20:16-18527:15; 28:14^68; 29:1629; 30:15-20; 31:16-21; 32:15-17,21,36-39
/  Joshua,  22-23;  2  4  :i  4_25~(^)  Josue, 22-23; 24:14-25 / Judges,
2:10-23;  3:5-8; 6:24-32; 8:33-34; 10; 17-18 / I Samuel, 7:3-4; 15:22-23
—  (D) I Kings, 7:3-4; 15:22-23 / / Kings, 3:14; 9:6-9; 11-16; 18:16-40;
20:22-28;  21:25-29;  22:51-53—  (D)  ///  Kings,  3:1-4;  9:6-9; 11-16;
18:16-40;  20:22-28;  21:25-29;  22:51-54 / // Kings passim, esp 1:1-18,
8:16-9:10,  10:1-36,  11:17-18, 14:1-4, 15:1-18:37, 19:16-19, 21:124:20—
(D) IV Kings passim, esp 1:1-18, 8:16-

[651b]
9:10,  10:1-36,  11:17-18, 14:1-4, 15:1-18:37, 19:16-19, 21:1-24:20 / //
Chronicles,  12:1-8;  13:6-9;  15:8-16;  21:5-20; 26:16-21; 28:15,22-25;
33:1-13;  34:3-7;  ^:n-2i-(D) II Paralipomenon, 12:1-8; 13:6-9; 15:8-16;
21:520;  26:16-21;  28:1-5,22-25;  33:1-13;  34:3-7:  36:11-21 / Psalms,
81:8-14;  97  :  7»  IQ6; 115:1-8; 135:15-18— (D) Psalms, 80:9-15; 96:7;
105;  113:1-8;  134:15-18  /  Isaiah, 2:5-21; 10:10-11: 30-31; 40:18-20;
42:8,17;  44:9-20; 45:20-21; 46:1-7; 57:3-8; 65:3-5— (D) Isaias, 2:5-21;
10:10-11;  30-31;  40:18-20; 42:8,17; 44:9-20; 45:20-21; 46:1-7; 57:3-8;
65:3-5  /  Jeremiah  passim,  esp  1-13,  16,  19:3-5, 23:20-39, 25:4-7,
44:1-30,  51:44-52— (D) Jeremias passim, esp 1-13, 16, 19:3-5, 23:20-39,
25:4-7,  44:1-30, 51:44-52 / Ezekjel passim, esp 5-6, 14, 16, 20, 22-23,
36:16-26,  37:23—  (D)  Ezechiel  passim,  esp  5-6,  14, 16, 20, 22-23,
36:16-26,  37:23  /  Daniel,  3;  6— (D) Daniel, 3:1-23,91-97; 6 / Hosea
passim,  esp  2:8-13,  4:12-13,  8:1-14,  13:1-2—  (D)  Osee passim, esp
2:8-13,  4  :i2-I  3>  8:1-14,  I  3  :i ~2 / Amos, 2:4-16; 4:1-5; 5 esp
5:25-27  /  Nahum  passim,  esp 1 :i4 / Haba/fau{, 2:18-19— (D) Habacuc,
2:18-19  /  Zephaniah passim, esp 1:4-6— (D) Sophonias passim, esp 1:4-6
Apocrypha:  Judith,  3:8;  5:23-6:4;  8:16-18—  (D)  OT,  Judith,  3:13;
5:19-6:4;  8:16-18  / Rest of Esther, 14:6-10— (D) OT, Esther, 14:6-10 /
Wisdom   of   Solomon,   12-15—   (D)   OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  12-15  /
Ecclesiasticus,  30:19534:1-7 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30:19-20; 34:1-7
/  Baruch,  6-(D) OT, Baruch, 6 / Bel and Dragon— (D) OT, Daniel, 14 / /
Maccabees,  1:4  1 -2:28 -(D) OT, / Machabees, 1:43-2:28 / // Maccabees,
2:1-2;  6-7;  12:39-45—  (D)  OT, // Machabees, 2:1-2; 6-7; 12:39-46 New
Testament:  Matthew, 23:1-33 / Acts, 7:39-44; 8:9-11; 12:21-23; 14:7-18;
15:20,2829;  17:16-31  /  Romans,  2:22 / / Corinthians, 5:9-11; 6:9; 8;
10:7,14-21;  12:2  /  //  Corinthians,  6:14-17  /  Galatians, 5:19-20 /
Ephesians,   5:5   /   Philippians,   3:18-19  /  Colossians,  3:5  /  /
Thessalonians,  1:9 / / Peter, 4:3 / / John, 5:20-21 / Revelation, 2:20;
9:20;  21:8;  22:14-15—  (D)  Apocalypse,  2:20;  9:20; 21:8; 22:14-15 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  12d-13b;  bk hi, 95ac 7 Plato: Laws, bk x,
769d-771b  14  Plutarch:  Camillus,  104d-105a  /  Pericles, 123c-124a /
Alexander, 575a-576a / Dion, 781d-782a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 296a
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i-x  129a-322a,c;  bk  xviii, ch 5-6
474d-475c; ch 8 475d476b; ch 12 477d-478d; ch 18 480d-482a; ch 24 485a-b
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 4, rep 3 103c-104b; q 67,
a 4, ans 352a354a

[652a]
618  THE GREAT IDEAS (6. Truth andfalsity in religion. 6a. The religious
condemnation   of  idolatry,  superstition,  and  other  perversions  of
worships  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-h,  q 98, a 2, ans
240c-241b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy, hell, i [i-iii] la-2b; vii [1-60]
9c-10a;  xix-xx  26d-29d;  xxvn [55136] 40a-41b; purgatory, hi [103-145]
57a-c; xvi
[58-129I 77c-78a; xxxn [37]-xxxin
[78]
102d-105a; paradise, v
[64-84]
112d-113a; ix
[109-142] 119d-120a; xi
[118-139] 123b-c;
xii [82-126] 124c-125a; xvm
[1 18-136] 134d135a; xxi [i2i]-xxn
[18] 139c-d; xxn [61-96]
140b-c; xxvii
[1-66]
147b-148a; xxix
[67126] 151a-c
22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,749-769]
466b  / Parson's Tale, par 63-64 530a-531a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
51d-52b;  78d83a passim; part hi, 172b-d; part iv, 247a267a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 53a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 18d-20d;
91b-c;   152b156d;  209b-213a;  246a-258b  passim;  497d501c  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, lOla-b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 46 HOb-c 32
Milton:  Christs Nativity la-7b esp [165-228] 5b- 7a / Paradise Lost, bk
i
[331-621]
100 b107a; bk xii
[101-126] 321b-322a
/ Samson Agonistes
[433-471]
349a-350a;
[871-902]
358b-359a;
[1 139-1243] 364b-366b
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  71b-80b;  87a-88a; 94a-97a 34 Newton:
Optics,  bk  hi,  543b-544a  35  Locke: Toleration, 13b-15a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  94  431b-c  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 20a-c 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk iv, 437a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
184b-185d;  457b,d;  458d-459c;  460a-463c; 600d-601a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  195a-202a  passim;  207a-208c;  229c-230b; 252b-c; 328a-334c
passim,  esp  329c-330b,  334c 42 Kant: Judgement, 504b-505a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  173d-174a;  301c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
270,  85b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 196d197d; part 1, 237d-238a;
243d;  245d-246c;  part  in,  313c-d;  part  iv,  322a-c  6b.  Religious
apologetics:  the defense of faith 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 191d-192b 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk v, par 23-25 33c-34c; bk vi, par 3-8 35c-37c
/  City  of  God 129a-618d esp bk i, pref 129a-d, bk i, ch 36bk 11, ch 2
149c-151b,  bk iv, ch 1-2 188b, d190a, bk vi, pref-ch i, 230b,d-231a, bk
vii,  pref 243b,d-244a, bk viii, ch i 264b,d-265b, bk x, ch 32, 322c, bk
xi, ch 1 322b,d-323a,

[652b]
1  6b  to 6c{\) bk xv, ch i, 397b,d-398a, bk xvm, ch i 472b,d, bk xx, ch
i, 530a-b, bk xx, ch 30bk xxi, ch 1, 560a-d / Christian Doctrine, bk iv,
ch 2 675d-676a; ch 4-5 676d-677d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q
1,  a  8  7c-8d; q 2, a 2, rep 1 lld-12c; q 32, a 1 175d178a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part ii-ii, q 2, a 10 399b-400b; part hi suppl, q 96,
a  11,  ans  1063d-1064d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 208a-294b esp 208a215b,
238c-239c,  250a-b,  270a-271a, 293d294b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part
i, 122b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 41b-d; lOla-b 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  69a-71a,c  /  Objections and Replies, 125d-126a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  219-241 212a-217b; 289290 224b-225a; 430-609 245a-280b; 803858
328b-342a  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect xi, div 107 499c-500b 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiv, 200b201a; 202a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  206a-b;  348c-d; 670b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
hi, 309a-d 6c. The unity and tradition of a religion 6c(l) Orthodoxy and
heresy:  the  role  of  dogma in religion; the treatment of heretics New
Testament:  Acts,  4:1-22;  5:14-42;  6:78:3; 9:1-25 esp 9:1-2, 9:22-25;
13:43-50;  15:1-31;  17:5-14;  18:12-16;  21-26  passim / / Corinthians,
1:10;  11:18-19  / Galatians, 1:89; 5:19-20 / Titus, 3:10-11 / // Peter,
3:16  / // John, 9-1 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10-18 15b-18b
esp  par 18 18b; par 21 19a-b; bk v 27a-34c passim; bk vii, par 25 51a-c
/  City  of  God,  bk  xvi,  ch  2,  422b-d; bk xviii, ch 51 502d-503d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi, ch 33 670b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 28, A I, CONTRARY 157c-158d; A 3, CONTRARY 160ac; q 31, a 2,
ans  172b-173c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, a 4, rep 3
69b-70a;  q  81,  a  i,  ans  163a-164d;  part  ii-ii, q 1, a 9, rep 2,4
388d-389d; a io, ans and rep i 389d-390d; q 2, a 6, rep 2-3 395b-396a; a
10,  rep  3  399b-400b;  q  5, a 3 412a-d; q 10, a 5, ans 429c-430c; a 6
430d-431b;  a  8,  ans  and  rep  1,3-4  432b433b;  a  9,  ans and rep 2
433b-434c; q ii 438a-442b; part hi suppl, q 99, a 4 1083a1084a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, viii
[io6]-xi
[12]
12a-15b; purgatory, xxxii 102b-104a esp
[1 18-123]
103c-d; paradise, vi
[10-27]
113d; xiii [112-142] 126c-d

[653a]
6<r(2)  to  6d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 78a-b; part hi, 212d-215b;
238b-240a;  part  iv, 248c-d; 273c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-c; 82a-b;
154a155c;  208bc;  242d;  250a-b  ^  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
27a-c;  lOla-b  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  386a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  la-7a; 11 7b- 166b / Pensees, 775 323b-324a; 862-865 342b343b;
891-896  347a-b;  903 348a 35 Locke: Toleration, la-2a; 6c-d; 21c-22d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xii, 86d87b; 87d 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  iv, 438d439c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 344a-b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83a;  182d-184b;  198d-200a; 305a-313d esp
305a-d,  310b312b;  438b-443d esp 438bc, 441a-443d; 541a-c; 601d-605b 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134a-151c esp 134d-138a, 143c-145d; 198a-202a;
328a335a,c  esp  330b-334a;  421b,d-423c 43 Federalist: number i, 30a 44
Boswell  : Johnson, 221d-224a passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par  270,  88c-89a / Philosophy of History, part i, 245d-246c; part
hi,  313b-d;  part  iv,  331d332c;340d;355a-b  47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4897-4916] 121b-122a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 128b-135a
6c(2)  Sects and schisms arising from divergences of belief and practice
6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 52c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
10-18  15b-18b;  bk  v  27a-34c passim; bk vii, par 25 51a-c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk hi, ch 33 670b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
q  i, a 10, ans and rep 1 389d-390d; q 10, a 8, rep 1 432b-433b; qii.ai,
rep  3  438a-439a;  q 39 574a-577d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxviii
41b43a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 229d 27 Shakespeare: Henry VIII,
act v, sc hi
[831] 581a-b
32   Milton:  Areopagitica,  404b-405a;  406a-b;  409b-410a  33  Pascal:
Provincial  Letters,  7a-13a  / Pensees, 862, 342b 35 Locke: Toleration,
22c-d / Human Understanding, bk 11, ch xxxiii, sect 18 251a-c; bk iv, ch
xix,  sect  i  i  386d-387c  36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 22a-b; part iv,
149b-150b  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  332a-334b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations, bk v, 344a-b; 345b-346c

[653b]
Chapter 79: RELIGION 619 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 80d-81a; 181c184b;
214a;  305a-328c  esp  309c-313d;  382b-d;  391a-392c; 438d-441d; 541ac;
601d-608a,c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 134a-161a,c esp 151d-161a,c;
195a-202a;  207a-208c;  306a307a;  328a-335a,c;  421b,d-424a; 462c-464a;
510b,d-522b;  529c-534a;  544b-545c; 583c586a 42 Kant: Science of Right,
444a-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  114b;  189b-c; 359a; 536c-537a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  193a-b;  part  in,  313b-c;  part  iv,
331d-332c;  348a355b  6d.  The  relation  of  men of diverse faiths: the
attitude  of  the  faithful toward infidels Apocrypha: / Maccabees, 1-2—
(D)  OT, / Machabees, 1-2 / // Maccabees, 6-7— (D) OT, // Machabees, 6-7
New  Testament:  Acts  esp  7:54-8:3,  9:1-5,  9:2224, 12:1-6, 12:18-20,
13:27-29,  13:44-50,  14:4-5,  16:19-40,  17:5-14,  18:12-16,  19:23-40,
28:17-29   /  Romans,  8:35-36  /  /  Corinthians,  4:9-13;  15:9  /  //
Corinthians, 1:5-8; 12:9-10 / Galatians, 1:13-24; 2:1-5; 4 :295 5:10-12;
6:12  /  Philippians,  1:28-30  /  /  Thessalonians, 2:1416 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  hi,  97c-98a;  bk  iv,  137ac;  138ac;  bk viii, 287c-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals, bk ii, 44b-c; bk xv, 168a-c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  i-x  129a322a,c; bk xviii, ch 14 479c-d; bk xix, ch 17 522b-523a; ch
23 525c-528a; ch 26 528d529a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40 655b656a
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 98, aa 4-5 242b-244b; part
ii-ii,  q  1,  a  5,  rep  i  383b-384b;  q 3, a 2, rep 2-3 401a-d; q 10
426c-437d  esp  aa  7-12 431b-437d; q 12, a 2 443b-444b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  hell,  iv 5c-7a; paradise, xix-xx 135a-138b 22 Chaucer: Troilus
and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza  265-267  154b-155a  / Tale of Man of Law
236b-255b esp [4638-4686] 238a-239a, [47504777] 240a-b,
[4960-4970]
244a / Prioress's Tale [13,418-620] 392a-395b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  80d; part hi, 246a,c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 116d-117c 26 Shakespeare:
Merchant  of  Venice  406a-433d  esp  act  1,  sc in 409c-411b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 41b-d; 96c-d / New Atlantis, 209a-b 32 Milton:
Samson Agonistes
[433-471]
349a350a; [871-902] 358b-359a;
[1 139-1243] 364b366b; [1334-1379] 368b-369b / Areopagitica,
386a-b; 388b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 589-692 277b-301a passim; 852 341a-b

[654a]
620  THE  GREAT IDEAS (6. Truth andfalsity in religion. 6d. The relation
of men of diverse faiths: the attitude of the faithful toward infidels.}
35  Locke:  Toleration  la-22d esp 6a-b, 13c-d / Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxxiii,  sect  18  251a-c;  bk  iv, ch xix, sect ii 386d387c 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  257a-268a  passim  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones,
152a-153b; 379c380a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, HOa-d; bk xix,
139d;  bk  xxi,  169b-c;  bk xxiv, 201c-d; 206c; bk xxv, 208a-c; 209a-b;
212d214a,c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv, 435a-436a; 437a-c;
439b-c  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 344a-b; 345b-346c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 12a-d; 83a-b; 179d-181a; 188d-189a; 206b,d-234a,c esp
207b-211a,  225b-d;  290b-291a;  328c-330a,c;  348d-361a,c  passim,  esp
348d-349c,  352c354d;  457b,d-464d  passim; 607b-608a: 643c-d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  138d;  148c-149b;  227d-228a; 237c-243b; 285d-288a;
323a-c;  377b-380d  esp  378d,  380c-d;  383c-384b;  386c-387a;  401b-d;
531b-534a  43  Federalist:  number  io, 50c 43 Mill: Liberty, 270c-271a;
307d-309a;  311a312a  / Representative Government, 437d-438b 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  173b-174b;  285a-c;  299bd;  313a;  347a-c; 431a-b; 436d-438b;
512a-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part hi, 311d312a; part iv,
322c-323a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 39a-b; 60b-66a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,   bk  hi,  64c-67a  54  Freud:  Group  Psychology,  676c-d  /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 788c 6e. Religious liberty: freedom of
conscience;  religious  toleration  Old  Testament: Daniel, 6 Apocrypha:
Rest  of  Esther,  16—  (D) OT, Esther, 16 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  q  io,  a  9,  ans  433b-434c;  a  ii 435d-436b; a 12, ans
436b-437d;  q  ii, a 3 440b-441a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 82d; part
ii,  102d-103a;  104a;  149b-c; 163c-d; part hi, 209a-211a; 245c-246a,c;
part  iv,  249b;  273c-d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 23b-c; 153d-155c; 208bc;
324c-326b   32  Milton:  New  Forcers  of  Conscience  68a-b  35  Locke:
Toleration  la-22d  esp  5d-lla 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 257a-258a 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 85d86a; 86d-87b; bk xix, 144c-145a;
bk  xxv,  211d-213d; bk xxvi, 218d-219a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
iv, 439b-c

[654b]
;  6e  to  6f  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 345b-346c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  12b-14a;  231a-c;  290c-291c  ;  349a-c  ; 383a-b ;
390c-391a  ;  464b-d 603b; 607b-c; 642c-d; 643c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  227b-d;  285d;  333d-335a,c  esp  334d-335a,c; 480d-481a 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  444a-c  43  Articles  of  Confederation:  hi  5b 43
Constitution of the U.S.: article vi
[591-599] 16d; amendments,
i  17a  43  Federalist:  number  i,  30a  43  Mill:  Liberty, 270c-271a;
274b-293b  passim;  307d-309a; 310c-312a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 221d-224a;
421d; 436d437a; 445b-c; 512c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
353cd;  367a-b  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 39a-b 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  428b-c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c
passim  6/.  The rejection of supernatural foundations for religion: the
criticism  of  particular  beliefs  and  practices; the psychogenesis of
religion 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-158]
ld-3a; bk ii
[167-183]
17a-b; bk hi
[4171094]
35c-44a,c; bk v
[146-234]
63a-64a;
[1161-1240]
76b-77b; bk vi
[43-79]
80d81b;  [379-422]  85b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 69c-71b; 78d80d;
83b; 90c; part ii, 149c-d; 151a-c; 162a163b; part in, 165b-166a; 172b-d;
176d177b; 188a-198a; 198d-199a; 212d-215b; 236b-238c; part iv, 247a-278d
passim 25 Montaigne: Essays, 256c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect x
488d497b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93b-c; 189d-190c; 200d-201b;
294a-297a esp 295c-296d; 345b347a passim, esp 347a; 465b-467d; 599b-c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  334a-d;  449a-d; 452b; 476b-477a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History, part i, 217bc; 220c-221a; 227c-228a; 244c-245a;
253b254b; part in, 292b-d; 304b; part iv, 348d349b; 354d-355b; 361b-c 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man, 302b-303d 50 Marx: Capital, 31d; 35b-c; 181 d
[fn  3];  305d306b  [fn  2]  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428bd;
430a-b   52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  21d22b;  bk  v,
123b-125c;  127b-137c  passim,  esp 129b-130b; bk xi, 312b-c; 313c-314d;
337a346a   passim   54   Freud:   Psycho-   Analytic   Therapy,  126c  /
Interpretation of Dreams, 138c-d / Group Psychology, 692a-693a / Ego and
Id,  707c-d  / War and Death, 763b-c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
767a-772a esp 767a-c, 770c-771b;

[655a]
6g  to  7  774c-d; 793b-c / New Introductory Lectures, 875d-879c 6g. The
relation  between  sacred doctrine and secular learning: the conflict of
science and religion 7 Plato: Laws, bk vii, 729d-730d; bk xii, 797c-798b
8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch i
[284^-5]
376a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-158]
ld-3a;  bk  hi  [1-93]  30a-31b; bk v [1-90] 61a62b 14 Plutarch: Nicias,
435b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 3-5 27c28c / City of God, bk
viii,  ch  1-12  264b,  d273a;  bk xviii, ch 41 495b-496c; bk xix, ch 18
523a-b  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 18-40 646a-656a; ch 42 656c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q i 3a10c passim; q 2, a 2, rep i
lld-12c;  q  12, aa 12-13 60d-62b; q 19, a 5, rep 2 112d-113c; q 32, a 1
175d-178a; q 39, a 7, ans 209a-210a; q 46, a 2, ans 253a-255a; q 84, a 5
446c-447c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 109, a 1 338b-339c;
part  ii-ii,  q i, a i 380b381a; aa 3-5 381d-384b; Q 2, a 4 393c-394b; a
10  399b-400b;  q  4,  a  i,  ans 402a-403d; a 8 409a-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, hi
[1645] 56a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  70c;  83b;  part ii, 163a-b; part hi,
165a-c;  part  iv,  260b-c; 274c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82b; 89c-d;
155a-c;  208d-209c;  212a-d;  238c-239c;  267c-268a; 272d-273b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c;  17b20a;  33c-d;  39d-42a  esp 41b-d;
95d-97c  /  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c; aph 79 119d-120a; aph 89
124a-d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  m,  4d-5a  /  Discourse,  part  1, 43c /
Meditations,  69a-d  /  Objections and Replies, 125b-126a; 162c-165d esp
164d165d;  283d-284a;  284d  33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 163a-166a /
Pensees,  226  212b-213a;  243-253  218a-220a;  265-290  221b-225a;  434
248a-250a;   561-564   272b-273a   /   Vacuum,  355b-356b;  365b-366a  /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv,
ch  xvii, sect 23-CH xviii, sect ii 380b-384b; ch xix, sect 4 385b; sect
14  387d-388a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 102 497b-d; div
104, 498c; div 107 499c-500b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333d-334a; 362d 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 334c-335b; 336b-337a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  12d-13b;  159a-d;  190c-d;  200d-201a; 204d-205b; 205d-206a;
307a-309d; 599c; 658b-c; 670b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 335a,c

[655b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION  621  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 239d-240a / Practical
Reason,  346b-347a  43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 455a-c 44 Boswell: Johnson,
102c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  270, 87c-d /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158c160b;  part  iv, 361b-c 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species,  239c-d  /  Descent  of Man, 593d 50 Marx: Capital,
305a-306b  [fn  2]  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 196a-197c; bk vi,
248d-249a; epilogue ii, 675a-677b; 680b-c; 684b-d; 696a-c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv,  87c-d;  bk vi, 164b 53 James: Psychology,
847b-848a  54  Freud:  New  Introductory Lectures, 874a-881c esp 875a-d,
878d-880b, 881c 7. Historical observations concerning religious beliefs,
institutions, and controversies 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 5d-6a; 8b-c;
31a-c;  32d-33a; 36b-c; 39a-b; 40d-41b; 45ab;48c; bk ii, 49d-50a; 52c-d;
56d-64c; 66cd; 72d-73a; 75a-c; 76b-c; 77a-b; 77c-d; 78d; 80b-85d; bk hi,
92c-93a;  95a-c;  97c-98a; 99d-100a; bk iv, 125a-b; 126d-127a; 129c130b;
134b-d;  136d;  137a-c;  138a-c; 140c141a; 142b-c; 155c-156a; 156d-157a;
157b;  bk  v, 176a-b; 183d-184a; bk vi, 199d-200a; 200d; 205c-d; bk vii,
235a;  242d-243a; 248c-d; 250c-d; bk viii, 267a; 282b-c; bk ix, 308a-c 6
Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk iv, 471b472a; bk vi, 516b-c; 517d-518a
7  Plato:  Apology,  204c-205c  / Phaedo, 220a-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[291-296] Ilia; bk xii
[829-842] 376a-b
14 Plutarch: Theseus la-15a,c passim / Romulus, 25b-26a / Numa Pompilius
49a-61d  passim,  esp 56d / Solon, 68a-d / Camillus, 110b-d; 114c-116a /
Fabius,  142d-143a  /  Alcibiades,  162d-165b  / Coriolanus, 185b-186a /
Aemilius  Paulus, 214b-d / Pelopidas, 239d-240c / Marcellus, 247c-249d /
Aristides,  271b-273c  /  Lysander,  365a-366a  /  Alexander,  541 b-c /
Demetrius,  735c-d  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk i, 4c; bk hi, 59b; 59d60c;
62b-c;  bk  iv,  67d-68a;  bk xii, 112d113a; bk xiii, 140d-141a; bk xiv,
148d-149a;  bk  xv,  168a-c  /  Histories,  bk  ii,  214d-215a;  bk  iv,
282d-283b;  293a-294a;  bk v, 295b296a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i-x
129a-322a,c;  bk  xviii, ch 50 502b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  98, a 6 244c-245b; q 102, a 6, rep i-ii 292c298a passim; q 103
298b-304a;  q  106, aa 3-4 323a-325c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xxii
[55-93] 87a-c; xxxn [100-160] 103c-104a

[656a]
622  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (7. Historical observations concerning religious
beliefs, institutions, and controversies.} 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xi
16d-17d  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 79b-84c; part ii, 104a; part in,
207b-240a; part iv, 258b267a; 275a-278d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 152b-156d;
246a-258b;  324c-326b  27  Shakespeare: Henry VIII 549a-585a,c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 19c-d 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters la-167b 35
Locke:  Toleration,  10b  /  Human  Understanding,  bk i, ch ii, sect 9,
106b-c;  CH  III,  sect 8 114a-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xvi,
116c;  bk  xix, 144c-145a; bk xxiii, 196c-197c; bk xxv, 208a-211a passim
38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  435a-439c 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  334c-335b;  343b,d-356d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
12a-14a; 80d-83b; 93b-d; 98a-c; 179a-234a,c; 289b,d-330a,c; 344a-361a,c;
382a-383b;   387d-388d;  390c393d;  438a-453a;  457b,d-467d;  529b-532a;
541a-542c; 547a-c; 582b-584b; 593b,d-608a,c; 611a-615a; 622c-624c; 629a;
642c-644a CROSS-REFERENCES 4 b. 4a.

[656b]
41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 9d-10a; 49d-50d; 109b-110d; 124b-133d esp
124c,   128d-130c,   133b-c;   134a-161a,c;  195a-220a,c  esp  195a202a,
204b-209c,   214c-215c;   226a-310d   esp  226a-246c,  251d-261b,  282c,
285d-288a,c,  306a-307a;  320d-321b; 323a-324c; 328a335a,c; 345d-347a,c;
351d-367d passim, esp 352c-353b, 360b-361b, 365a-b; 371a-372a; 377b-441b
esp  377b-387c,  406a-409c,  417b420c, 422a-424d, 434d-437a; 451c-453a,c
passim;   460d-464a;   476b-477b;   480d-481a;  510b,d-522b;  529c-537a;
538b,d-556d passim, esp 544b-545c; 557a-572d esp 565a-569d; 582c-589d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  270c-271a; 278c-281c; 285c286b; 307d-309a; 310c-312a 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 314c-315b; 436d-438b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  192c-d;  part  i,  216b-217c;  227b-228d;  233b-235c; 237a-239c;
246c-247a;  252a-d; part ii, 268b271c; part in, 289d-293b; 303c-317d esp
313c-d; part iv, 321d-323c; 330b-335a; 337d342a; 348b-355b; 358b-360c 50
Marx:  Capital,  358a-d  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428b-c 54
Freud:  Civilization and Its Discontents, 788c For: Other discussions of
the  nature and causes of faith, see God 6c(2); Knowledge 6c(5); Opinion
4a;  Truth  4a;  Will  30(3); and for the relation of religious faith to
theology,  see  Theology  2,  4b,  5.  Other  considerations  of  divine
revelation  and the problem of interpreting the Word of God, see God 2a,
6c(i);  Language  12;  Rhetoric 2d; Sign and Symbol 5e; Theology Matters
bearing  on the religious significance of miracles, omens, portents, and
prophecies,  see  God  ye;  Nature  3c (4); Prophecy id, 3a~3b; Sign and
Symbol  5b. Other discussions of religion as a virtue and of the virtues
of the religious life, see God 3C~3e; Justice lib; Temperance 6a; Virtue
and  Vice  8b,  8f-8g;  and  for  the related doctrines of grace and the
theological  virtues,  see  God  yd; Habit 5e(i)~5e(3); Liberty 5c; Love
50-5^2);  Nature  6b;  Sin 7; Virtue and Vice 8b, 8d-8e; Will 7e(2). The
theory  of  religious  sacraments,  see  God gt; Sign and Symbol 5c. The
comparison  of ecclesiastical and civil government, and of the religious
with  other  communities, see Government ib; State id. Other discussions
of  the Jewish and Christian conceptions of the religious community, see
God  8a-8d,  od.  The problem of church and state, see History 5b; State
2g.  Another  consideration  of religious education, see Education 7~7b;
God  6c(i).  The general issue concerning truth and falsity in religion,
and  concerning  orthodoxy  and  heresy  in religion, see God 10, 12-14;
Liberty  2b;  Opinion  4b; Prophecy 5; Theology 4c, 4e - The relation of
religion to science and philosophy, see Philosophy ia; Science 2a; Truth

[657a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Boofe
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Plutarch.  "Of  Superstition,  or  Indiscreet Devotion," "Of
Isisand  Osiris,  or  the  Ancient Religion and Philosophy of Egypt," in
Moralia  Augustine. De Vera Religione . De Fide et Symbolo . The Harmony
of the Gospels Aquinas. Contra Impugnantes Dei Cultum et Religionem . On
the  Trinity of Boethius, q 3 . Summa Contra Gentiles, bk hi, ch 99-103;
bk  iv,  ch 56-95 . De Perfectione Vitae Spiritualis . Contra Pestiferam
Doctrinam Retrahentium Homines a Religionis Ingressu . Summa Theologica,
part ii-ii, qq 81-105, 178; PART III, QQ 66-90; SUPPL, QQ I~68 Dante. On
World-Government  or  De  Monarchia,  esp  BK III F. Bacon. "Of Unity in
Religion,"  "Of  Superstition,"  in Essays Milton. The Reason of Church-
Government Urg'd Against Prelaty Spinoza. Tractatus Theologico-Politicus
(Theological-Political  Treatise),  ch 5-10 Locke. The Reasonableness of
Christianity . A Second Vindication ofthe Reasonableness of Christianity
.  A Discourse of Miracles Swift. A Tale of a Tub . An Argument to Prove
That  the  Abolishing  of  Christianity in England May . . . Be Attended
with  Some  Inconveniences Hume. Dialogues Concerning Natural Religion .
The  Natural  History  of  Religion  Gibbon.  An  Essay  on the Study of
Literature,  lvilxxvii  Kant.  Lectures on Ethics, pp 71 -116 . Religion
Within  the Limits of Reason Alone Hegel. The Positivity ofthe Christian
Religion  . The Spirit of Christianity . The Phenomenology of Mind, vn .
The Philosophy of Mind, sect hi, sub-sect b . Lectures on the Philosophy
of  Religion  J.  S. Mill. "The Utility of Religion," "Theism," in Three
Essays on Religion Tolstoy. What Men Live By . The Gospel in Brief

[657b]
Chapter 79: RELIGION 623 W. Iames. The Varieties of Religious Experience
.  Pragmatism,  lect  viii  Freud.  Totem  and  Taboo . The Future of an
Illusion  .  Moses and Monotheism II. Hesiod. Worlds and Days . Theogony
Cicero.  De Natura Deorum (On the Nature of the Gods) Lucian. The Fisher
.  The  Gods  in  Council  .  Icaromenippus:  An  Aerial Expedition . Of
Sacrifice  .  Sale  of  Creeds . Alexander the Oracle-Monger Tertullian.
Apology,  ch  7-50  .  The Prescription Against Heretics Lactantius. The
Divine  Institutes Eusebius Pamphili. Ecclesiastical History Athanasius.
Treatises  in  Controversy  with  the  Arians  John  Chrysostom.  On the
Priesthood  Boethius.  De Fide Catholica (On the Catholic Faith) Gregory
of Tours. History of the Franks . Libri Septem Miraculorum The Venerable
Bede.  The  Ecclesiastical  History  of the English Nation Hugh of Saint
Victor.   De   Sacramentis   Maimonides.   Mishneh   Torah  Bonaventura.
Breviloquium,  part  v-vi  R.  Bacon.  Opus  Majus,  part  vii  Eckhart.
Tractates  vn The Cloud of Unknowing Theologia Germanica Langland. Piers
Plowman  Albo.  The Bool^ °f Principles (Sefer ha-I%arim)^ BK I, CH 1-26
Thomas  a.  Kempis.  The  Imitation  of  Christ,  bk  i, ch 15-25; BK IV
Ariosto.  Orlando Furioso Melanchthon. Loci Communes Ignatius of Loyola.
Spiritual  Exercises  Zwingli.  Commentary  on  True  and False Religion
Calvin.  Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion, bk hi, CH I-I3; BK IV
Luther.  A  Treatise  on Christian Liberty . The Babylonian Captivity of
the Church

[658a]
624  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Luther.  Table  Tal\ Teresa of Jesus. The Way of
Perfection  .  Boo\  of  the  Foundations  . Interior Castle John of the
Cross.  Spiritual  Canticle  .  Ascent  of Mount Carmel Tasso. Jerusalem
Delivered  Suarez.  De  Religione  Francis of Sales. Introduction to the
Devout  Life  .  Treatise on the Love of God Boehme. Of the Supersensual
Life . The Way from Darkness to True Illumination . De Electione Gratiae
(On  the  Election  of Grace)  .  The  Way to Christ Calderon. The Mighty
Magician   Corneille.   Polyeucte  Browne.  Religio  Medici  Herbert  of
Cherbury. De Religione Laid (Of a Layman's Religion) Dryden. Absalom and
Achitophel  Penn. Primitive Christianity Revived Defoe. The Shortest Way
with  the  Dissenters J. Butler. The Analogy of Religion Doddridge. Rise
and  Progress  of Religion  in the Soul J. Edwards. A Treatise Concerning
Religious   Affections   Voltaire.  Letters  on  the  English,  i-vii  .
"Baptism,"   "Blasphemy,"   "Christianity,"   "Church,"  "Clerk-Clergy,"
"Confession,"  "Dogmas,"  "Eucharist,"  "Expiation,"  "Heresy,"  "Jews,"
"Martyrs," "Mass," "Messiah," "Miracles," "Religion," "Superstition," in
A  Philosophical  Dictionary  Holbach.  The  System  of  Nature Woolman.
Journal  Lessing.  Nathan  the  Wise  Paley.  A View of the Evidences of
Christianity  Jefferson.  Democracy,  ch  6 Blake. The Boo\ of Thel . The
Marriage of Heaven and Hell . The Everlasting Gospel Shelley. Preface to
Alastor Schleiermacher. On Religion . Soliloquies . The Christian Faith,
par  1-3  1,  11  3- 163 Heine. Religion and Philosophy in Germany S. R.
Hirsch.  The  Nineteen  Letters  of  Ben Uziel Feuerbach. The Essence of
Christianity Tennyson. Locl^sley Hall Whewell. The Elements of Morality,
bk hi; bk v, ch 16-17 Comte. The Catechism of Positive Religion . System
of Positive  Polity,  vol  i,  General  View of Positivism, ch 6; vol ii,
Social  Statics,  ch  i  Kings  ley. Westward Hoi Fechner. Religion of a
Scientist  Reade. The Cloister and the Hearth George Eliot. Romola J. H.
Newman.  An  Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine . Callista .
Apologia Pro Vita Sua

[658b]
J. H. Newman. "An Internal Argument for Christianity," in vol in, Essays
and Sketches . An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent Arnold. Empedocles
on Etna . Literature and Dogma Flaubert. The Temptation of Saint Anthony
Renan.  The  Life  of Jesus . Caliban Clifford. "The Ethics of Religion,"
"The  Influence  upon Morality of a Decline in Religious Belief," in vol
ii,  Lectures  and  Essays  Caird.  An  Introduction  to  the Philosophy
of Religion  Lotze. Microcosmos, bk viii, ch 4 . Outlines of a Philosophy
of  Religion  .  Outlines  of Encyclopedia of Philosophy, sect hi Pater.
Marius  the  Epicurean  Martineau.  A Study of Religion, Its Sources and
Contents  C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol vi, par 428-451 Nietzsche.
The  Will  to  Power,  bk  ii  (i)  Frazer.  The Golden Bough Billot. De
Ecclesia  Sacramentis  T.  Hardy. Jude the Obscure Peguy. Basic Verities
(Abandonment;  Sleep;  A  Vision  of  Prayer)  .  Men  and Saints (Hope)
Chesterton.  Orthodoxy  Weber.  The  Protestant  Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism,  ch  1  .  Essays in Sociology, part hi Claudel. The Tidings
Brought  to  Mary  Harrison.  Ancient  Art  and Ritual Hugel. Essays and
Addresses  on the Philosophy of Religion Joyce. A Portrait of the Artist
as  a  Young Man Bosanquet. What Religion Is Buber. Jewish Mysticism and
the  Legends  of  Baalshem  . Hasidism . Tales of the Hasidim Kafka. The
Castle  Tawney.  Religion  and the Rise of Capitalism Whitehead. Science
and  the  Modern  World,  ch  12  . Religion in the Maying J. S. Huxley.
Religion  Without  Revelation  A.  E.  Taylor.  The Faith of a Moralist,
series  ii  Eddington.  Science  and the Unseen World J. S. Haldane. The
Sciences and Philosophy, lect xvii, XIX Bergson. Two Sources of Morality
and  Religion  Dewey. A Common Faith Dawson. Enquiries into Religion and
Culture  .  Religion  and  the  Modern  State  B. Russell. Philosophical
Essays, ch 2 . Mysticism and Logic, ch 3 . Religion and Science Blondel.
Uaction  T.  S.  Eliot.  After  Strange Gods . Murder in the Cathedral .
"Religion and Literature," in Essays, Ancient and Modern

[659a]
De  Burgh.  Towards  a  Religious  Philosophy  Sturzo. The Inner Laws of
Society,  ch 4-5 . Church and State Gilson. Reason and Revelation in the
Middle  Ages  Jung.  Psychology and Religion ^ Maritain. The Things That
Are  Not  Caesar's,  1iii  .  Religion  and  Culture . Scholasticism and
Politics, ch viii-ix . Ransoming the Time, ch 4-6, 8

[659b]
Chapter  79:  RELIGION  625  E.  Frank.  Philosophical Understanding and
Religious  Truth  Santayana.  Interpretations of Poetry and Religion, ch
3-4,  9 . Reason in Religion . The Idea of Christ in the Gospels Hendel.
Civilization  and  Religion  A. J. Toynbee. Civilization on Trial, ch 12
Barth. Epistle to the Romans . Dogmatics in Outline

[660a]
INTRODUCTION   MOST   of   the  words  commonly  used  as  synonyms  for
"revolution,"  such as "insurrection," "uprising," "rebellion, "or"civil
war," carry the connotation of violence and the use of armed force. Most
of  the  great revolutions in western history which come readily to mind
those in the city-states and empires of the ancient world, the Peasants'
Revolt  in Germany in the 15th century, the rebellion led by Cromwell in
17th  century  England,  the American and French Revolutions in the 18th
century,  the  Russian  and the Spanish Revolutions in our own time—have
been  affairs  of  bloodshed.  Yet  neither  in  political theory nor in
historic  fact  does  revolution  always involve the use of force or the
resort  to  violence.  Thucydides  describes both violent and nonviolent
revolutions  in  the  alternations  of  democracy  and  oligarchy in the
constitution  of  the Greek city-states. In England, the Great Rebellion
which,  by civil war, succeeds in beheading one Stuart king, is followed
by  the  Bloodless  Revolution  of  1688  which, without any war at all,
unseats  another.  Some of the revolutions in the European states in the
middle  years  of  the  1  9th century are accompanied by barricades and
fighting. Some, however, like the revolutions accomplished by the Reform
Bills  in  England or by constitutional amendments in the United States,
are fundamental changes in government effected by due process of law, by
peaceful shifts in the distribution of political power. A revolution may
involve  action  in  defiance  of  the law and yet be prosecuted without
violence  on  the  part  of  the  revolutionists,  as in the case of the
rebellion  which  Gandhi led against British rule in India by the method
of  civil  disobedience. The use of armed force may not, however, be the
only  technique  of revolutionary violence. "Revolutions are effected in
two ways," according to Aristotle, "by force and by

[660b]
Chapter  80:  REVOLUTION fraud." Though fraud does no physical violence,
it  does  violence  to the will of those who are deceived. In some cases
when  fraud  is  used,  "the citizens are deceived into acquiescing in a
change  of  government,  and  afterwards," Aristotle observes, "they are
held  in  subjection  against  their  will."  In  other  cases, they may
subsequently be persuaded and their allegiance and good will won. But as
Machiavelli's  later  consideration  of  these two techniques of seizing
power indicates, the choice between force and fraud is one of expediency
rather  than  of  principle.  He  recommends  guile as an alternative to
force,  with  force  held  in reserve should cunning fail. Both methods,
however,  employ  the  strategy of warfare. As opposed to both force and
fraud,  and even to the method of civil disobedience, which acts outside
the  law  or  in violation of it, the writers of The Federalist conceive
the possibility of a revolutionary process which is at once peaceful and
legal.  It  is precisely because they think that the Constitution of the
United  States affords the opportunity for achieving political change by
constitutional  amendment  that  they defend the clause which guarantees
"to  every  State  in  this  Union a republican form of government," and
promises  to  protect  each  of  them,  upon  application to the federal
government,  "against  domestic  violence." To the objection that such a
guaranty may involve "an officious interference in the domestic concerns
of the members," Hamilton replies: "It could be no impediment to reforms
of  the  State  constitutions by a majority of the people in a legal and
peaceable mode. This right would remain undiminished. The guaranty could
only  operate  against  changes  to be effected by violence. Towards the
prevention  of  calamities  of  this  kind,  too  many  checks cannot be
provided." In another of the Federalist papers, Madison 626

[661a]
considers  the possibility of "an insurrection pervading all the States,
and  comprising  a  superiority  of  the  entire  force,  though  not  a
constitutional right." He thinks such a casebeyond "the compass of human
remedies."  It  is  enough if the Constitution "diminishes the risk of a
calamity  for  which  no  possible constitution can provide a cure." Nor
does  "a  conflagration  through a whole nation, or through a very large
proportion  of  it,  proceeding either from weighty causes of discontent
given  by  the  government or from the contagion of some violent popular
paroxysm"  seem  to  Hamilton  to  "fall  within  any  ordinary rules of
calculation."  In  his  estimation,  "no  form  of government can always
either  avoid  or  control"  such  revolutions. But, he adds, "where the
whole  power  of  the government is in the hands of the people, there is
the  less  pretence  for  the  use  of  violent  remedies  in partial or
occasional   distempers   of   the  State."  When  Aristotle  thinks  of
revolutions  as  taking place without violence, he does not have in mind
the  strictly  modern  device  of  constitutional  amendment.  Political
change,  he  suggests,  may  be  the  result of accidents rather than of
planned  actions.  "Political revolutions," he writes, sometimes "spring
from  a  disproportionate  increase  in any part of the state. . . . And
this  disproportion  may  sometimes  happen by accident, as at Terentum,
from  a defeat in which many of the notables were slain in a battle with
the  Iapygians just after the Persian War, the constitutional government
in consequence becoming a democracy." Or "when the rich grow numerous or
properties increase, the form of government changes into an oligarchy or
a  government of familes." On the other hand, to writers like Hobbes and
Locke,  revolution means war and is inseparable from violence. Those who
"deny  the authority of the Commonwealth"—apart from which, according to
Hobbes, men live in a state of war—by renouncing their subjection to the
Sovereign, "relapse into the condition of war commonly called Rebellion.
. . . For rebellion is but war renewed." Unlike bees and ants, the peace
of  whose societies is never threatened by rebellion, there are "amongst
men . . . very many that think themselves wiser, and abler to govern the
public, better than the rest; and

[661b]
Chapter 80: REVOLUTION 627 these strive to reform and innovate, one this
way,  another  that way; and thereby bring it into distraction and civil
war."  Locke's  principle  seems  to be that "whoever uses force without
right—as  everyone does in society who does it without law— puts himself
into  a  state  of  war  with  those against whom he so uses it." Having
entered  into  society  "and  introduced  laws  for  the preservation of
property,  peace  and  unity  amongst themselves," men who "set up force
again in opposition to the laws, do rebellare— that is, bring back again
the  state  of war—and are properly rebels." Aquinas also seems to align
revolution  (which  he  calls "sedition") with war and strife, though he
thinks  it  differs  from  them in two respects: "First, because war and
strife  denote actual aggression on either side, whereas sedition may be
said  to  denote  either  actual  aggression or the preparation for such
aggression.  .  .  .  Secondly,  they  differ  in  that war is, properly
speaking, carried on against external foes, being as it were between one
people  and  another,  whereas  strife  is  between  one  individual and
another,  while  sedition,  in its proper sense, is between the mutually
dissentient  parts of one people, as when one part of the state rises in
tumult  against  another part." Though the word "revolution" may be used
in  both  senses,  it nevertheless seems to be the case that traditional
discussions  of  the  causes  and  prevention of revolution, theories of
revolutionary  strategy and tactics, and the great issue of the right of
rebellion  all seem to contemplate the resort to, or at least the threat
of,  force  to gain an end. This also seems to be implied in the popular
conception  of  the  difference  between  revolution  and evolution. The
contrast  between  revolution  and evolution may explain why the note of
violence,  disorder,  or  disruption  colors the idea of revolution. The
word  "evolution"  usually  signifies  change which is gradual and which
tends in one direction rather than another, that direction being for the
most   part   toward   a  progressive  development  of  changes  already
accomplished.  Revolution  is  abrupt.  Revolutions  can occur in either
direction,  against  the tide as well as with it. As action and reaction
can be equal and opposite in physical motion, so in social change

[662a]
628  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  revolution  and  counter-revolution  can  aim in
opposite  directions.  In  either  case, whether revolution reverses the
direction  of  change  or  precipitates  a radical transformation toward
which  things  are  moving  too  slowly,  revolution  seems  to  involve
overthrowing  the  established  order  rather than developing its latent
tendencies.  It is in this sense that the revolutionist is a radical. He
may  also  be  a  reactionary in the sense that the radical change he is
willing  to  use force to achieve, is a return to some earlier condition
rather  than one which, in the judgment of his opponents, is in the line
of  progress  or  evolution.  But whether reactionary or progressive the
revolutionist  is  never conservative. If the established order does not
submit  readily  to  the  radical change which a revolutionary person or
party  seeks,  or  if  it  resists,  it  must  be  forced  to yield. The
revolutionist  can  be reluctant to use force, but he can never forswear
it  entirely.  This  seems  to  be  the  sense  in which Marx and Engels
conceive  the  program  of  the  Communist  Manifesto as a revolutionary
program.  Their  conception  of  a  revolutionary class or party is not,
however,  limited  to  the  proletariat  in  their  struggle against the
bourgeoisie.  They  apply it to the bourgeoisie, not in the contemporary
world  when  the  established  order of capitalism makes the bourgeoisie
conservative   or   reactionary,  but  in  the  18th  century  when  the
bourgeoisie  overthrew  the  landed aristocracy. "The bourgeoisie," they
write,  "historically  has  played  a most revolutionary part. . . . The
French  revolution,  for  example, abolished feudal property in favor of
bourgeois  property."  And again: "When Christian ideas succumbed in the
18th  century to the rationalist ideas, feudal society fought its death-
battle  with  the  then  revolutionary  bourgeoisie."  That  the  French
Revolution  represents  the  struggle not between the propertied and the
propertyless   classes,   but   between   two  propertied  classes—  the
bourgeoisie  and  the aristocrats—seems evident to Marx in the fact that
"during  the very first storms of the revolution, the French Bourgeoisie
dared  to  take  away  from  the  workers  the right of association just
acquired."   No   less   than  the  Communist  Manifesto,  the  American
Declaration of Independence is a rev-

[662b]
olutionary  document. Its signers are prepared to use force to overthrow
the  established  order  which,  in  their  view,  has  worked  grievous
iniquities and injustices upon the colonies. But in the Marxist view the
rebellion  of  the colonists, unlike the French Revolution, is political
rather  than  economic,  even  if  it  has economic as well as political
motivations.  This distinction between economic and political revolution
seems  to  be peculiarly modern. It is not that the ancients—Thucydides,
Plato,  and  Aristotle,  for example— fail to recognize the "class war,"
which  is  paramount  for  Marx.  They  observe  (as is indicated in the
chapter  on  Oligarchy)  the  struggle between the rich and the poor for
control  of the state. They know that the opponents, in the frequent and
violent  revolutions  which  disturbed  the  Greek  city-states, are the
oligarchs  and  the  democrats —the men of great property and the men of
little  or  none.  The revolt of the Helots in Sparta is the exceptional
case  of a rebellion of slaves against their masters. For the most part,
the  struggle  is  between  free  men  belonging  to  different economic
classes. The oligarchical and democratic revolutions which these classes
in  society  foment  are political in the sense of seeking to change the
constitution  rather  than  the  economic system itself, even though the
constitutional  changes  may have economic as well as political effects.
"In the opinion of some," Aristotle reports, "the regulation of property
is  the  chief  point  of  all,  that  being the question upon which all
revolutions  turn." Aristotle is willing to admit that "the equalization
of  property"  may  "prevent the citizens from quarrelling," but he does
not  think  that  economic injustice is the only cause of revolution, or
economic justice its absolute cure. "The avarice of mankind," he writes,
"is insatiable; at one time two obols was pay enough; but now, when this
sum has become customary, men always want more and more without end; for
it  is  of  the  nature of desire not to be satisfied, and most men live
only  for  the  gratification  of  it.  The beginning of reform," in his
opinion,  "is  not  so  much to equalize property as to train the nobler
sorts  of  natures  not  to  desire  more, and to prevent the lower from
getting more; that is to say, they must be kept

[663a]
down,  but not ill-treated." Such a reform would hardly cure the evil of
chattel   slavery.   That   requires  a  revolution  which  effects  the
equalization of political status, not the equalization of property. If a
rebellion of slaves in the ancient world had succeeded in abolishing the
institution  of  slavery,  it  would  have  been, in the modern view, an
economic  as well as a political revolution, for it would have radically
altered the mode of production. It is in this sense that what Adam Smith
describes  as the change from an agrarian to a manufacturing economy, is
strictly an economic revolution, though it is Marx, not Smith, who gives
currency  to  the  word  "revolution"  as  used  in  this  sense.  It is
exemplified  in  our  common understanding of the phrase "the industrial
revolution"  which  refers  to the radical change in an economy based on
manufactures, when mass production by machines in factories replaces the
system  of  production  by  workers  using  their own tools in their own
homes.  "In  manufacture,"  writes  Marx, "the revolution in the mode of
production  begins  with  labor-power; in modern industry it begins with
the instruments of labor. Our first inquiry then is, how the instruments
of  labor  are  converted  from  tools  into  machines,  or  what is the
difference  between  a  machine and the implements of a handicraft?" But
for  Marx  the  meaning of economic revolution is not limited to radical
changes   in   the  physical  conditions  of  production.  Such  changes
necessarily  involve equally radical changes in the social relationships
of  economic classes, and in their possession of political power. In the
Manifesto, "the modern bourgeoisie" is said to be "itself the product of
a long course of development, of a series of revolutions in the modes of
production  and  exchange."  The  bourgeoisie,  in  turn,  "cannot exist
without  constantly  revolutionizing  the instruments of production, and
thereby  the  relations of production, and with them the whole relations
of society." According to Marx and Engels, "each step in the development
of  the bourgeoisie was accompanied by a corresponding political advance
of that class. An oppressed class under the sway of the feudal nobility,
an armed and selfgoverning association in the mediaeval com-

[663b]
Chapter  80:  REVOLUTION  629  mune  .  .  . afterwards in the period of
manufacture  proper,  serving  either  the  semi-feudal  or the absolute
monarchy  as  a  counterpoise against the nobility . . . the bourgeoisie
has  at  last,  since  the  establishment  of Modern Industry and of the
world-market,  conquered  for itself in the modern representative State,
exclusive political sway." On the question whether economic revolutions,
in  their social and political aspects, require violence, the writers of
the  Manifesto  seem to be unambiguous— at least so far as the communist
program  is  concerned.  Since  "the  Communist  revolution  is the most
radical  rupture with traditional property-relations," and "involves the
most  radical rupture with traditional ideas," it can hardly be expected
to occur without open warfare, no less violent than the earlier struggle
of  the bourgeoisie against the aristocrats. Standing "face to face with
the  bourgeoisie  today, the proletariat alone is a really revolutionary
class,"  in  whose development Marx and Engels see the transition from a
"more  or  less  veiled civil war, raging within existing society, up to
the  point where that war breaks out into open revolution, and where the
violent overthrow of the bourgeoisie lays the foundation for the sway of
the proletariat." It is precisely on the use of force that the Manifesto
distinguishes  between communism and socialism, especially the "utopian"
variety  of  the  latter.  The  Socialists  "reject  all  political, and
especially  all  revolutionary action; they wish to attain their ends by
peaceful means, and endeavor by small experiments, necessarily doomed to
failure, and by the force of example, to pave the way for the new social
Gospel.  .  .  .  They,  therefore,  endeavor, and that consistently, to
deaden  the  class  struggle  and  to  reconcile the class antagonisms."
Communist   strategy,   on  the  contrary,  everywhere  supports  "every
revolutionary  movement  against the existing social and political order
of things. . . . The Communists disdain to conceal their views and aims.
They openly declare that their ends can be attained only by the forcible
overthrow  of  all  existing  social  conditions."  Though fundamentally
economic, the communist revolution cannot help having political effects.
"Political power," according to Marx

[664a]
630  THE  GREAT  IDEAS and Engels, "is merely the organized power of one
class  for  oppressing  another."  This  applies  to  the  proletariat's
conquest  of power. Yet they also seem to think that the dictatorship of
the  proletariat  is only a temporary phase in the communist revolution.
"If   the  proletariat  during  its  contest  with  the  bourgeoisie  is
compelled, by the force of circumstances, to organize itself as a class;
if,  by means of a revolution, it makes itself the ruling class, and, as
such,  sweeps  away  by  force the old conditions of production, then it
will,  along  with  these conditions, have swept away the conditions for
the  existence  of class antagonisms, and of classes generally, and will
thereby  have  abolished its own supremacy as a class." In aiming at the
economically  classless  society,  with the consequent transformation of
the  state,  the  communist  program seems to conceive its revolution as
abolishing  the  possibility  of  or  need  for any further revolutions,
peaceful  or  violent,  economic or political. In addition to the issues
raised  by the economic theory and history which underlie revc lutionary
communism,  there  is  the  debatable  question  whether an economically
classless  society  means  the  withering away of the state, or at least
such changes in political institutions that revolution would cease to be
possible  or  necessary.  Even  a  hypothetical  consideration  ot  this
question  seems  to  call  for  attention  to  the various ways in which
political  revolutions  take  place.  With  the advent of the "classless
society,"  no opportunity would remain, at least in theory, for the type
of  revolution in which one ruling class replaces another. But in such a
society  it  is  still  conceivable  that  the  equivalent  of  a palace
revolution  might  substitute  one  ruling individual for another—by the
old-fashioned  methods  of  assassination  or usurpation. For Aristotle,
however,  all  revolutions  which  produce  a  change  from  one form of
government  to  another also involve the replacement of one ruling class
by  another.  He  distinguishes  between  such revolutions as affect the
constitution,  "when  men seek to change from an existing form into some
other,  for  example,  from  democracy into oligarchy, or from oligarchy
into   democracy,"  and  those  revolutions  which  do  not  affect  the
constitution,  when  men,  "without  disturbing  the form of government,
wheth-

[664b]
er  oligarchy  or  monarchy  or any other, try to get the administration
into their own hands." To these two types of revolution Aristotle adds a
third,   which   "may   be  directed  against  only  a  portion  of  the
constitution,  e.g.,  the  establishment  or  overthrow  of a particular
office;  as  at  Sparta, it is said that Lysander attempted to overthrow
the  monarchy,  and  king Pausanias, the ephoralty." Conceivably, any of
these  political  changes  might  be  accomplished  without violence. In
modern  constitutional  states, the basic principle of constitutions can
be  changed  from  oligarchy to democracy by amendments or legal reforms
which  extend  the franchise. The structure of the government, as to its
offices  or  their organization, can be changed by some form of peaceful
plebiscite.  As  the Federalists point out, the polls provide a "natural
cure   for   an   ill-administration  in  a  popular  or  representative
constitution,"  namely,  a change of men. But such changes of government
in the ancient citystates, even when constitutional, appear to Aristotle
to  be  revolutionary  in the double sense of involving violence, or the
threat  of  it, and of being radical transformations of the polity. What
is  true  of constitutional changes in ancient republics is also true of
monarchies  and  tyrannies, both ancient and modern. When absolute power
is  concentrated  in  the hands of one man, his subjects are necessarily
without  juridical means for redressing their grievances by changing the
occupant  of  the throne, much less for abolishing the monarchy entirely
in  favor  ofself-government.  Machiavelli's  advice  to  the  prince on
safeguarding  his  power against usurping rivals or rebellious subjects,
seems  to  be  written  against the background of force and fraud as the
normal  methods  of  changing rulers or modes of rule. They are the very
same  methods  which  the  prince  in  power must employ to maintain his
position.  "There  are two ways of contesting," Machiavelli writes, "the
one  by  law, the other by force; the first method is proper to men, the
second to beasts; but because the first is frequently not sufficient, it
is  necessary  to have recourse to the second. Therefore it is necessary
for  a  prince  to  understand how to avail himself of the beast and the
man. . . . Being compelled knowingly to adopt the beast,
[a prince] ought

[665a]
to choose the fox and the lion; because the lion deals with in theory as
the  degeneration  of  the  cannot defend himself against snares and the
state  into  anarchy by the repudiation of the fox cannot defend himself
against   wolves."  It  social  contract,  calls  to  mind  no  historic
exfollows,  according  to  Machiavelli,  thstt^xhe^  amples; but the few
historic  instances  of  "wars  prince  seldom  can be, though he should
always  try  to  appear  to  be, "merciful, faithful, humane, religious,
upright.  ...  A  prince, especially a new one, cannot observe all those
things  for  which  men  are  esteemed,  being often forced, in order to
maintain  the  state, to act contrary to fidelity, friendship, humanity,
and  religion." The stories of oriental despotism told by Herodotus, the
account of the Caesars given by Tacitus and Gibbon, the chronicle of the
English  monarchy  in  the  historical plays of Shakespeare, all seem to
indicate   that   crowns   seldom   change   heads   without  bloodshed.
Machiavelli's   rules  for  the  prince  do  not  greatly  enlarge  upon
Aristotle's  description  of "the arts by which the tyrant preserves his
power." Even when Aristotle proposes, as an alternative method, that the
tyrant  can  try  to be benevolent, he adds the Machiavellian suggestion
that  the  tyrant  should at least "appear to act" like a good king. The
tyrant,  Aristotle  writes,  "should  lop off those who are too high. He
must  put  to death men of spirit. . . . He must be on his guard against
anything  which  is likely to inspire either courage or confidence among
his subjects. He must prohibit literary assemblies or other meetings for
discussion,  and he must take every means to prevent people from knowing
one  '  After  enumerating  many similar prac- ' another. tices which he
calls "Persian and barbaric arts," Aristotle concludes that "there is no
wickedness  too  great  for  the tyrant" if he is to maintain himself in
power. These matters are more fully discussed in the chapter on Tyranny.
In  our  present  consideration of the types of revolution, we must note
one  other  political  change  which  usually  involves  the  widespread
turbulence  of  civil  war.  That  is  the  rebellion of subject peoples
against  their  imperial  masters. Unlike civil uprisings, which seek to
overthrow  governments  or  effect  a  change  in  the ruling classes or
persons,  these  wars  of  rebellion  seek  to  liberate one people from
another  or  to establish the independence of colonies at the expense of
empire.  Still  another  type of insurrection aims at the dissolution of
the state itself. What Rousseau

[665b]
Chapter 80: REVOLUTION 631 of secession" certainly illustrate the point.
They  aim  to  dissolve  a federal state by severing ties of union which
have  something  like  a  contractual character. The distinction between
these  types of civil war may be clear in theory, yet difficult to apply
to historic cases. Which sort of insurrection—a rebellion of colonies or
a  secession of states—does the Declaration of Independence announce ? A
theory  current  among  American political writers in 1775 suggests that
the  thirteen colonies claimed the status of self-governing dominions in
a  confederacy  united under the British crown. On this theory, does the
principle stated in the Declaration— that it is sometimes "necessary for
one  people  to  dissolve  the political bands which have connected them
with  another,  and to assume among the powers of the earth the separate
and  equal  station  to  which  the  laws  of nature and of nature's God
entitle  them"—cover  the  secession  of  the  Southern  states from the
American  union, as well as the revolt of the American states from Great
Britain,  or  the British Commonwealth of nations? Questions of fact are
involved,  of course, in any comparison of the Revolutionary War of 1776
and the war between the states in 1 86 1 ; but the question of principle
turns  on  the whole issue of whether revolution is a matter of might or
right.   The  right  of  revolution  does  not  seem  to  be  a  central
consideration  in  ancient  political  theory. The ancient discussion of
revolutions  appears  to  be  more  concerned  with  their causes, their
methods,  and  their  prevention.  This  does not mean that the ancients
treat  revolutions  entirely  as  contests  for  power. On the contrary,
Aristotle   declares   that  "the  universal  and  chief  cause  of  the
revolutionary  impulse"  is "the desire of equality, when men think that
they  are  equal to others who have more than themselves; or, again, the
desire  of  inequality and superiority, when conceiving themselves to be
superior  they  think  that they have not more but the same or less than
their inferiors—pretensions which may or may not be just."

[666a]
632  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Nevertheless,  Aristotle's elaborate treatise on
revolution   in  the  fifth  book  of  his  Politics  deals  alike  with
revolutions  that  spring  from  real  and  from fancied injustices. The
object  of  his  inquiry seems to be "what modes of destruction apply to
particular  states,  and  out  of what and into what they mostly change;
also  what  are  the  modes of preservation in states generally, or in a
particular  state,  and  by what means each state may be best preserved"
not  how  revolution  can  be justified or why rebellion is the crime of
treason  or  the  folly  of  anarchy. Such questions seem to come to the
foreground  in  modern political theory, though they also have a certain
prominence  in  mediaeval  teaching.  Aquinas,  for  example, holds that
sedition  is "a special kind of sin" because it is "opposed to a special
kind  of  good,  namely,  the unity and peace of a people." He qualifies
this,  however,  in  the case of an uprising against tyranny, even if it
involves civil strife. Since in his view "a tyrannical government is not
just,  because it is directed, not to the common good but to the private
good  of the ruler . . . there is no sedition in disturbing a government
of   this  kind,  unless  indeed  the  tyrant's  rule  be  disturbed  so
inordinately  that  his subjects suffer greater harm from the consequent
disturbance  than from the tyrant's government. Indeed," Aquinas writes,
"it  is the tyrant rather who is guilty of sedition, since he encourages
discord and sedition among his subjects, that he may lord over them more
securely."  Holding that "the end of government is the good of mankind,"
Locke  asks, in a similar vein, which is better: "that the people should
be  always  exposed to the boundless will of tyranny, or that the rulers
should  be  sometimes  liable to be opposed when they grow exorbitant in
the  use  of  their power, and employ it for the destruction and not the
preservation  of  the  property of their people" ? Since "force is to be
opposed  to  nothing but unjust and unlawful force," Locke argues that a
king  may  be  resisted when he exceeds his authority or prerogative and
uses his power unlawfully. Since such a king "has dethroned himself, and
put  himself  in  a state of war with his people, what shall hinder them
from prosecuting him who is no king, as they would any other man who has
put himself into a state of war with them?"

[666b]
The  right  to  resist  a  tyrant,  or a king turned despot, may lead to
regicide,  but  this  seems no different to Locke from the punishment of
any  other  criminal. "He who may resist must be allowed to strike"; and
furthermore,  Locke  continues,  "he  has  a right, when he prevails, to
punish the offender, both for the breach of the peace, and all the evils
that  followed  upon  it."  Rousseau  is  even  less hesitant to condone
tyrannicide.  "The  contract of government is so completely dissolved by
despotism,"  writes Rousseau, "that the despot is master only so long as
he remains the strongest; as soon as he can be expelled, he has no right
to complain of violence. The popular insurrection that ends in the death
or  deposition  of  a  Sultan  is  as lawful an act as those by which he
disposed,  the  day before, of the life and fortunes of his subjects. As
he  was  maintained  by  force  alone, it is force alone that overthrows
him."  Those  who  say  that  "it  may  occasion civil wars or intestine
broils, to tell the people they are absolved from obedience when illegal
attempts  are  made upon their liberties or properties . . . may as well
say  upon the same ground," in Locke's opinion, "that honest men may not
oppose  robbers  and  pirates  because  this  may  occasion  disorder or
bloodshed."  Nor  does  Locke  think  that the right to resist injustice
means   that   governments   will   be  overthrown  "upon  every  little
mismanagement  in public affairs. Great mistakes in the ruling part," he
writes,  "many  wrong  and inconvenient laws, and all the slips of human
frailty  will  be borne by the people without mutiny or murmur. But if a
long  train  of  abuses,  prevarications, and artifices, all tending the
same  way,  make  the  design  visible to the people ... it is not to be
wondered  that they should then rouse themselves and endeavor to put the
rule  into  such  hands  which  may  secure  to  them the ends for which
government  was  at  first  erected."  Hence,  to those who say that his
revolutionary  principle  "lays  a  perpetual  foundation for disorder,"
Locke  replies that it will never operate until "the inconvenience is so
great  that  the  majority  feel  it,  and  are weary of it, and find it
necessary  to  have  it  amended."  Rebellions  will occur only when the
majority  feel that "their laws, and with them their estates, liberties,
and lives are in danger, and perhaps their religion

[667a]
too,"  and so will exercise their natural right to resist, with force if
necessary,  the illegal force used against them. But strictly, it is not
the  people  who  rebel; rather it is they vvho put down the sedition of
the  tyrant. What Locke states as a right of resistance, the Declaration
of  Independence  seems  to put more positively as a right of rebellion,
apparently  deducing  it from other natural rights—of life, liberty, and
the pursuit of happiness. It is to secure these rights that "governments
are  instituted  among  men,"  so  that "whenever any form of government
becomes  destructive  of  these  ends,  it is the right of the people to
alter  or  to  abolish  it  and  to  institute  a  new  government." The
Declaration  admits  that  "governments  long  established should not be
changed  for  light  and  transient causes"; but when a people suffer "a
long  train of abuses and usurpations ... it is their right, it is their
duty,  to throw off such government, and to provide new guards for their
security."  Against  such revolutionary sentiments or principles Hobbes,
Kant,  and  Hegel  seem  to take a stand, though in each case they place
some  qualification  on  their  denial  of  a  right  of  resistance  or
rebellion.  Hobbes, for example, denies the right of men to change their
form  of government, or of subjects to resist their Sovereign, exceptfor
the  sake ofself-preservation. When men covenant to form a commonwealth,
they  are bound, Hobbes says, to uphold the actions and judgments of the
Sovereign  they  have created; they "cannot lawfully make a new covenant
amongst  themselves,  to  be  obedient  to  any  other . . . without his
permission.  .  .  . They that are subjects to a monarch, cannot without
his  leave cast off monarchy, and return to the confusion of a disunited
multitude."  Furthermore, "because every subject is by this institution,
author  of all the actions and judgments of the Sovereign instituted, it
follows,"  according  to Hobbes," that whatsoever he doeth, it can be no
injury to any of his subjects; nor ought he to be by any of them accused
of  injustice."  Yet "every subject has liberty in all those things, the
right whereof cannot by covenant be transferred," such as the right of a
man  to  defend  his own body, "to resist those that assault him," or to
have access to

[667b]
Chapter  80:  REVOLUTION  633  "food,  air, medicine, or any other thing
without  which  he cannot live." Kant disallows rebellion as a matter of
right, unless resistance is required to fulfill a moral duty outside the
sphere  of public right. " 'Obey the authority which has power over you'
(in  everything  which  is  not  opposed  to  morality) is a Categorical
Imperative."  Hence, though a juridical constitution "may be vitiated by
great   defects   and  coarse  errors,  it  is  nevertheless  absolutely
unallowable  and  punishable  to  resist it." Since, in his view, public
right  is  founded  on the institution of "a sovereign will, uniting all
particular  wills  by  one  law,"  Kant argues that "to allow a right of
resistance   to   this  sovereignty,  and  to  limit  its  power,  is  a
contradiction."  It  should  be  remembered  also that for Kant the only
legitimate  form  of government is a republic, resting on the foundation
of popular sovereignty. Kant is not considering resistance to tyrannical
or  despotic  power  which  lacks  all  juridical  authority.  A similar
qualification  appears in Hegel's distinction between the rebellion of a
conquered  people  and  revolution  in  a well-organized state. Only the
latter  action  is a crime, for only the latter situation corresponds to
the   Idea   of  the  state—  fully  realized,  for  Hegel,  only  in  a
constitutional  monarchy,  never in a despotism or tyranny. "A rebellion
in  a  province conquered by war," he says, "is a different thing from a
rising  in  a  well-organized state. It is not against their prince that
the conquered are in rebellion, and they are committing no crime against
the  state, because their connexion with their master is not a connexion
within  the Idea, or one within the inner necessity of the constitution.
In  such  a case, there is only a contract, no political tie." With such
qualifications  on their position, those who disfavor revolution or deny
its basis in right may not be completely opposed to those who apparently
think  rebellions  can  be justified. There may be qualifications on the
other  side  too.  Aquinas, for example, justifies sedition, not against
any  government  or  ruler, but only against tyranny. The signers of the
Declaration  of  Independence  speak of a right to alter or abolish "any
form  of  government,"  but  the writers of the Federalist papers do not
seem   equally   willing   to  acknowledge  a  right  to  overthrow  the
Constitution of the United States.

[668a]
634  THE  GREAT IDEAS political, or economic change states 2. The nature
of  political  revolutions  ia.  Change  in  the  form  of government or
constitution  3.  The  process of political revolution justice, equality
(1) Revolution in monarchies (3) Rebellion against tyranny and despotism
slaves,  serfs,  proletariat  tion  and  distribution 5. The strategy of
economic  revolution the state 6. The justice of revolution insurrection
imperialism

[668b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS PAGE i . The nature of revolution 635 1 a. The issue
concerning violent and peaceful means for accomplishing social, 1 b. The
definition  of  treason or sedition : the revolutionist as a treasonable
conspirator  636  \c.  Revolution  and  counter-revolution: civil strife
distinguished  from war between ib. Change in the persons holding power:
deposition,  assassination,  usurpation  637 ic. Change in the extent of
the  state or empire: dissolution, secession, liberation, federation 638
30.  The  aims  of  political  revolution:  the  seizure  of  power; the
attainment  of  liberty,  ijb.  Ways  of  retaining power and combatting
revolution 639 (2) Revolutions in republics: aristocracies, oligarchies,
and democracies 640 4. The nature of economic revolutions 641 40. Change
in  the condition of the oppressed or exploited: the emancipation of 4#.
Change  in  the economic order: modification or overthrow of a system of
produc50.  Revolution  as  an expression of the class struggle: rich and
poor, nobles and commons, owners and workers 642 5^. The organization of
a  revolutionary  class:  the bourgeoisie and the proletariat as 5^. The
classless society as the goal of economic revolution: the transformation
of  6a.  The  right  of  rebellion:  the  circumstances justifying civil
disobedience or violent 6b. The right to abrogate the social contract or
to secede from a federation 643

[669a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases: e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult the Preface. 1. The nature of revolution la.
The  issue  concerning  violent  and  peaceful  means  for accomplishing
social,  political,  or economic change 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  hi,  436c438b  7  Plato:  Apology  200a-212a,c  esp  203c  /  Crito,
216d-219a,c / Statesman, 600d-601c / Seventh Letter, 804a-b 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 10 [1272^-16] 468d-469a; bk iv, ch 5
[i2Q2b n-22] 492a;
bk  v,  ch  3  [1303*14-24]  504c-d;  ch  4 [i304b817] 506b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  34b-d  / Lysander-Sulla, 387b,d-388a / Cleomenes, 660b-661a /
Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-h, q
97,  aa  1-2  236a-237b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxviii 41b-43a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch vi, 9b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 154b-c
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  47a-51a;  318c-319b;  462c-465c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum, bk i, aph 90 124d125a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 45b-46a

[669b]
Chapter  80:  REVOLUTION  635 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xviii, sect
203210  72a-73c;  ch  xix,  sect 225-239 77a81b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
361c-362a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 292b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,   575a-576a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right,  439a-441d  esp  441b-c;
450d-451a; 457d-458a,c 43 Declaration of Independence: [15-25] lb;
[95-105] 3a
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article v 16c 43 Federalist: number i,
29a-b;  number 21, 78d-79b 43 Mill: Representative Government, 344a-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  176  147c-d  / Philosophy of
History, part ii, 280b281b; part in, 307b-308a; part iv, 321d322a; 364ac
50  Marx-Engels : Communist Manifesto, 416b-d; 432b-434d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245c;  epilogue  i,  668a-669d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  165c 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures,
870d-871a; 883d-884c

[670a]
636  (1.  The  nature  of  revolution.) lb. The definition of treason or
sedition:  the  revolutionist  as a treasonable conspirator 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk vi, 186a-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 381a384a;
bk  vi,  519c-520d;  525b-d;  532d-534c;  bk  vm, 574d-576c; 579d-581c 7
Plato: Republic, bk v, 367c-d 14 Plutarch: Solon, 71d / Poplicola, 81d /
Alcibiades  155b,d-174d / Alcibiades-Corio- /a/2«.f 193a-195a,c/ Cicero,
70Sa-713a  /  Marcus  Brutus 802b,d-824a,c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xix,  ch  12,  517c-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part ii-ii, q 42
583c-584d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xxxiv  [28-69] 51c-52a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 77c; part ii, 121d-122b; 146a-b; 147c; 153c
26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc hi
[170-227]
39b-40a; act ii, sc 111
[86-108]
45c-d; act in, sc 1
[1-281] 47a-50a; act iv,
sc 11 [129-200] 59a-d / Richard II, act ii, sc hi
[140-171] 334b-c; act
iv, sc i
[1 13-149]
342c-343a  / 1st Henry IV, act v, sc ii [1-25] 462b-c; sc v 466a-d / 2nd
Henry IV, act i, sc 1
[187-209] 470a-b
/  Henry  V,  act  ii, prologue [19-31] 537c; sc 11 [79-181] 540a-541a /
Julius Caesar 568a-596a,c esp act i, sc in
[101-130] 573c-d, act
11, sc 1
[10-34] 574cd,
[162-183]
576b, act in, sc 1
[164-176]
582b  35 Locke: Toleration, 14d / Civil Government, ch xix, sect 226-229
77a-78a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  33a-38a; part hi, 114b-115b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xii,  88a90c  38  Rousseau:  Social
Contract,  bk  ii,  398d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 251d; 474c-475a;
525d-526b  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 93c; 473b-d; 587b588a 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  439a-441d;  450d451a  43  Constitution of the U.S.:
article  hi,  sect  3  15d-16a;  amendments,  xiv,  sect  2-4 18d-19a 43
Federalist:  number  43, 140c-d; number 69, 208c-d; number 74, 222b-d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  274b,d [fn 1] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions,
172 146c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4812-4830]
119b120a;  [10,242-284]  249b-250b  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk viii,
338c-d; bk xi, 483b-484a; 505a-511b; epilogue i, 668a669d

[670b]
d  THE  GREAT IDEAS \bto 2a lc. Revolution and counter-revolution: civil
strife  distinguished  from  war between states 6 Herodotus: History, bk
hi,   102d-107c;   bk  v,  172c-174b;  bk  viii,  260b-c  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  355ab;  bk  in,  434c-438c;  bk iv, 459a-c;
463a-465c;  bk  v,  482d-483a;  bk  viii,  575c-576c; 577b-d; 579c-583c;
585d-586b;  587a-589a;  590a-c  7 Plato: Laws, bk i, 641c-643a / Seventh
Letter,  806d-807b  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  v,  ch  4 [1304*18-39]
505d-506a   /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  14-19  558d-561d;  ch  29-41
566b-572a  14 Plutarch: Pompey, 533a-c / Caesar, 598b- / Otho, 875b-d 15
Tacitus:  Histories, bk hi, 261d-262a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,
ch  7  515a-c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 42, a 1, ans
583c-584b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xix, 26b-d; ch xx, 31b-c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 85d-86a; part ii, 99d-100a; 114b-c; 147c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  54a-c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 331a;
470a-b;  504c-506a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc ivact in, sc
1  llb-16b; act iv, sc i [182-194] 21d / 2nd Henry VI 33a-68d esp act i,
sc i
[180-259] 35c-36b
/ 3rd Henry VI 69a-104d esp act 1, sc 1 69a-72d / Richard III 105a148a,c
esp act v, sc v
[16-41] 148a,c
/  1st  Henry  IV, act i, sc i 434b,d-435c / Julius Caesar, act hi, sc i
[253-275] 583b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiii, sect 155 60d-61a; ch
xix,  sect  224-243  76d-81d esp sect 224-230 76d-78c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  48d-49a;  113b;  437d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 474a;
594b-595b 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b esp
[80-94] 2b-3a
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: article iv, sect 4 16b-c 43 Federalist:
number  16  66c-68d;  number 28 96c-98b; number 29, 99b-101a; number 43,
141a-142d;  number  46,  152a-153a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
hi,  297a-d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 424d; 428a-b 2. The
nature  of political revolutions 2a. Change in the form of government or
constitution  Old  Testament:  /  Samuel, 8— (D) / Kings, 8 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  14a-c;  bk  hi,  107c108d;  bk  v,  167a-b; 171c-172c;
177d-180a; bk vi, 193b-c

[671a]
2b  Chapter  80:  REVOLUTION  637 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
391c-d;  bk  vin,  575c-576c;  577b-d;  579c-583c; 585d-586b; 587a-589a;
590a-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 401c-d; bk viii^ 403a-404a; 405c-406a;
408b-409b;  411cr=4T4b  / Seventh Letter, 800b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
ii, ch 12
[i273b361274*22] 470c-d; bk
hi, ch 3
[i276a35-b i6]
473b-c; bk iv, ch 5 [i292bn-22] 492a; bk v, ch 1
[i30i b4-26] 502d-503a; ch
3
[1303*1424]
504c-d; ch 4
[i304b8-i8]
506b; ch 12
[i3i6a i-b27] 518d-519d
/  Athenian  Constitution, ch 1-41 553a-572a passim, esp ch 5 554d-555a,
ch  14-19  558d-561d,  ch 29 566b-d, ch 33-34 568b-569a, ch 38 570a-c 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  32d-35d  /  Solon, 68d71d / Timoleon 195a-213d esp
205d-207a  / Lysander 354b,d-368a,c esp 359c-361a / Pompey 499a-538a,c /
Caesar 577a-604d / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c / Cleomenes, 657a-663c /
Dion  781b,d-802a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2a; 3a-b; 6a-b 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxvi  36b-37d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
150b-151a; 154b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 47a-51a; 462c-465c; 504c-506a 35
Locke:  Civil  Government, ch xiii, sect 149 59b-d; sect 155 60d-61a; ch
xix  73d-81d  passim 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk viii, 51a53d; bk
xi,  76c-78a  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 418a-420a; 424a-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-28b; 50b51d; 153c-156a; 622d-623c 41
Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  73b-74d;  202a-d;  217a-219a;  561c-565a;
574b-582c esp 575a577d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 438d-441d; 450d-452a 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-23]  lab 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article  iv,  sect  4  16b-c 43 Federalist: number 14, 62a-d; number 21,
78d-79b;  number  43,  141a-142d;  143b-144a;  number 49-50 159b-162c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b  /  Representative  Government,  327b,d-332d;
350c-353b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right,  part  hi,  par  258, 81a-b;
additions,  166 145b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 203b-206a,c; part
hi,  294c295a;  300c-301c;  part  iv,  355d-357a; 364a-c 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist Manifesto, 424c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d;
260a-262a;  epilogue  i,  668a-669d  2b.  Change  in the persons holding
power:  deposition, assassination, usurpation Old Testament: Judges, 9 /
II Samuel, 15-18— (D) II Kings, 15-18 / I Kings, 12:1-25; 16:8-20

[671b]
—  (D)  III  Kings,  12:1-25;  16:8-20  /  //  Kings, 8:7-15; 9:1-10:11;
11:1-16;  12:19-21;  14:17-21;  15:8-10,13-14,23-26,30; 21:18-26— (D) IV
Kings,     8:7-15;     9:1-10:11;     11:1-16;    12:19-21;    14:17-21;
15:8-10,13-14,23-26,30;  21:18-26  /  //  Chronicles,  10;  23—  (D)  II
Paralipomenon, 10; 23 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[199-243]
42b-c 5 Aristophanes: Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d esp
[1-570] 615a-621b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2c-3d;  12b-13b; bk 11, 84a-86a; bk hi,
120b-c;  bk  v,  164d165a;  171c-172c;  177d-180a;  182a  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk vi, 523c-524d 7 Plato: Seventh Letter, 813d-814c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 10 [i272b2-io] 468d-469a; bk v, ch i
[i3oi b4-i3] 502d; ch
10
[131 1*28-1312*39]
513c-514d;  bk  vii,  ch  14 [i333b28-38] 538c-d 14 Plutarch: Poplicola,
77a-81c  /  Caius  Marius, 344c-354a,c / Sulla, 369a-374a; 382a-387a,c /
Crassus,  440a-445d / Sertorius, 469a-470d / Pompey 499a-538a,c / Caesar
577a-604d  /  Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c / Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d /
Cicero,  708a-713b  / Antony, 749c-755c / Marcus Brutus 802b,d824a,c esp
803d-811a  /  Galba  859a-869d / Otho 869b,d-876d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
xi, 102d-103a; bk xii, 112a-113b; bk xv, 169a-176b / Histories, bk i-iii
189a-266a  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  hi, ch 15-16 176d-178d 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  viii  12d-14c;  ch  ix,  15d-16a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  78b;  part  ii, 152b-c; 159a-c 26 Shakespeare: 1st
Henry  VI,  act  ii,  sc  v  [33129] 13b-14a / 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc i
[151259]  35b-36b;  act  ii,  sc  ii 43c-44c; act hi, sc 1 47a-51a / 3rd
Henry  VI 69a-104d / Richard III 105a-148a,c / Richard II 320a351d / 1st
Henry IV 434a-466d / 2nd Henry IV 467a-502d esp act iv, sc i 487b-489d /
Julius Caesar 568a-596a,c esp act ii, sc i [10191] 574c-576c, act hi, sc
i  580b-583c  27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth  284a-310d  esp  act  iv,  sc in
303b-306b / Tempest, act i, sc ii
[16-148] 525b-526d; act
ii, sc i
[270-296]
534c-d;  act  v,  sc  i [71-79] 545c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xvii
70c-71a;  ch  xix  73d-81d  passim  36  Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 80b 38
Rousseau  :  Inequality,  361c-362a  /  Social  Contract, bk in, 419a-c;
424a-d;  bk  iv,  432c433a;  438a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 33d-49a
passim,  esp  39c-d,  41d-42a,c,  44b-c;  56a-61a  esp  56b-c,  60c-61a;
63b-64a; 69a-79a passim, esp

[672a]
(2.  The  nature  ofpolitical  revolutions.  2b.  Change  in the persons
holding  power:  deposition,  assassination,  usurpation.) 69a-b, 70a-c,
76a,  78c; 110b-113a; 114b,d115b; 128a,c; 159b,d-178d passim; 386a-387d;
436a-438a;  489d-491a; 515b-518a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 113c-117b;
161a194d  passim,  esp  166a-167d,  189a-194d;  428a; 472b-476b 42 Kant:
Science  of Right, 440a-441b 43 Federalist: number i6, 68a-c; number 20,
77b-c; number 21, 78d-79b; number 26, 93c-94d; number 28 96c-98b; number
29,  99b-101a;  number  33,  108b-109a; number 38, 124b-125a; number 44,
146c-d;  number 46, 152a-153a; number 48, 157b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 268d;
274b,d  [fn  1]  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  195c-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part hi, 294c295a; 300c-301c; part iv, 359a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  8d-9a  2c.  Change in the extent of the state or empire:
dissolution,  secession,  liberation,  federation Old Testament: Judges,
3:14-4:24;  6; 10:111:33; 13:1-5,24-25; 14-16 / // Chronicles, io-ii-(D)
II  Paralipomenon,  10-11 / Jeremiah, 41 — (D) Jeremias, 41 Apocrypha: /
Maccabees,  1-9  passim— (D) OT, / Machabees, 1-9 passim / // Maccabees,
613  passim—  (D) OT, // Machabees, 6-13 passim 6 Herodotus: History, bk
hi,  121c-123c;  bk v 160a-185a,c passim; bk vi, 186a-191c 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  ^^3498-5933^ 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 9a-d / Romulus, 20c28a
/  Agesilaus  480b,d-499a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 17c-d; 18c-20b; bk
hi,  54d-56b;  bk  iv,  76a-77c;  82d-83b;  bk  xii,  116d-117d; bk xiv,
149a-151b  / Histories, bk iv, 269b-277d esp 269d-270b; 283b-292b; bk v,
297a-302a  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxvi 36b-37d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  152d-153a  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch viii, sect 113118
51b-52c;  ch  xix,  sect  211 73d-74a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
viii, 57b-c; bk ix, 59b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk 11, 403a404a 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 144d-146a; 521a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
218c-219a;   439d451c   passim;  465a-466a;  577b-c  43  Declaration  of
Independence:  la-3b  43  Articles  of Confederation: 5a-9d esp xi 9a 43
Constitution  of the U.S.: article iv, sect 3 16b; amendments, xiv, sect
2-4 18d19a

[672b]
638 THE GREAT IDEAS 2c to 3a 43 Federalist: number 15-16 62d-68d; number
58,  181d-182a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  428b-430a 3. The
process  of  political revolution "ha. The aims of political revolution:
the  seizure  of  power;  the attainment of liberty, justice, equality 5
Aristophanes: Lysistrata
[476-597]
588d591a  /  Ecclesiazusae  [173-240] 617a-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
29d-30c;  bk  v,  175b  7  Plato:  Seventh  Letter,  800d;  813d-814c  9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 7 461d-463c esp [i266a3i-b i4] 461d-462b;
ch  10  [1272*28b  i6]  468c-469a;  bk v, ch 1-4 502a-506b; ch 12 [i3i6a
i-b27] 518d-519d / Athenian Constitution, ch 2 553a-c; ch 5 554d-555a 14
Plutarch:  Timoleon 195a-213d esp 205d207a / Pelopidas, 233d-237b / Agis
648b,d656d  / Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c esp
678b-d  /  Caius  Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c  / Dion 781b,d-802a,c / Marcus
Brutus  802b,d-824a,c  esp  811b-d, 813d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 4a-d;
6b-7a;  10d-llb;  bkiv,  76a;82d-83a;  bk  vi,89c;  BKxi,104a-c; bk xii,
112a-b;  117c-d;  bk xiv, 149a-b; bk xv, 169b; 174b-d / Histories, bk i,
191a-b;   195a-c;   198d-199c;  203b-c;  bk  ii,  215d-216b;  224d-225a;
233d-235c;  bk  iv,  269c-270b;  290a-c  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxvi
36b-37d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114b-115a 26 Shakespeare: Julius
Caesar 568a-596a,c esp act 1, sc in
[101-130] 573c-d, act
11, sc 1
[10-34] 574c-d, [162-183] 576b, act hi, sc
1
[164-176] 582b
35  Locke:  Toleration, 18c-21c / Civil Government, ch xiv, sect 166-168
63d-64c; ch xviii-xix 71a-81d passim 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 80b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v, 29a; bk viii, 54b-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 361a-362a / Social Contract, bk ii, 402c-d; bk hi, 418a-419c
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 29c-d; 35a; 44b47a esp 44c-45a, 45d-46a;
48d-49a;  73b-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 216d-217b; 574b575d 43
Declaration  of  Independence: la-3b 43 Federalist: number 45, 147d-148b
43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi,
299c301c; part iv, 364a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[10,242-284] 249b250b
51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 9d-10b; epilogue 1, 666c-669d; epilogue
ii, 680b684a

[673a]
3b to 3c(l) Chapter 80: REVOLUTION 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
v,  127b-137c  passim, esp 131a-c, 133c-134d 3b. Ways of retaining power
and  combatting revolution _^-- Old Testament: Exodus, 1:7-22 Apocrypha:
/  Maccabees, 1:41-64; 10:22-46 (D) OT, / Machabees, 1:43-67; 10:22-46 5
Aristophanes: Wasps [652-724] 515c-516d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21b;
35c-36a;  bk hi, 99a-b; 106a-c; 118b; 123c; bk iv, 148a-b; bk v, 164a-c;
166c-d;  172c-174b; 178a-180a; bk vii, 243b-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk hi, 425a-428d; bk v, 491b-c 7 Plato: Seventh Letter, 806d-807b;
811b-813d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk ii, ch 7 461d-463c; ch 11 [i273b
i7-24] 470b; bk hi, ch 13 [1284 s 3-b34] 482a-483a; bk v, ch 3
[1 302^5-20]
504a;  ch  8-9  509d-512d;  ch  ii 515d-518c; bk vi, ch 5-6 523b-524c 14
Plutarch:  Romulus, 27c-28d / Poplicola, 80d-81c / Camillus, 119a-121a,c
/  Pericles,  124a-130b  / Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Agesilaus, 482a-484a;
489b-c;  495a-b  /  Pompey,  521a-b  /  Caesar, 580b / Cato the Younger,
636c-d  /  Agis  648b,d-656d  /  Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c / Caius
Gracchus  681  b,d689a,c / Cicero, 708a- 713b / Marcus Brutus, 809b-811a
15  Tacitus: Annals, bk 1, 2c-3a; 6d-15a; 21b22b; bk 11, 29b-d; 32d-33d;
35c-d;  38c-d; bk hi, 58d-59a; bk iv, 68b-69c; 82a-b; bk xiv, 155b-156a;
bk  xv,  168a-c;  170d-176b  /  Histories,  bk  i, 192d-193a; 196d-198c;
200c201b;  208b-c;  209d-210b;  bk  ii,  222b-c;  bk  iv,  280c-281a  23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  hi,  3c-5a; ch v 8a-c; ch vi, 9b-10a; ch vii,
llb-c;  ch  viii-x, 14a-16d; ch xv-xx 22b-31c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk hi, 131b,d-133b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 51a-55d; 324c-326b
esp 326a-b 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act ii, sc vi
[1-30] 83b-c; act iv, sc vii 96c-97c / Richard
II,  act in, sc iv [29-66] 340c-d / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v [178-225]
496b-d  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 40d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  78a-d 35 Locke: Toleration, 19a-d / Civil Government, ch xix,
sect  218  75a-b; sect 226 77a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 37a-b; part
hi,  102b-103a  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372a-377b  /  Social
Contract,  bk  hi,  424a-d; bk iv, 432b433a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
14d-18b;  42b,d43b;  50b-d;  501d-503a;  522c-523a,c;  525d526c; 624c 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 216c-d

[673b]
639 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article iv, sect 4 16b-c 43 Federalist:
number  10,  49c-51b  passim;  number  21,  78d-79b; number 25, 90a-91d;
number  28  96c-98b;  number 43, 141a-142d; number 46, 152a-153a; number
55,  174c-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 366a-c; 425b-426b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  226d227b;  part  11, 263b-d;
276d-277a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue i, 668a669d 3c. The causes
and  effects  of  revolution  under  different  forms  of government Old
Testament:  /  Samuel,  7:15-8:5—  (D)  I  Kings,  7:15-8:5 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,  427d-428d; 436d-438b 7 Plato: Republic, bk
viii  401d-416a  / Seventh Letter, 801 b-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii,
ch 6 [i265b io-i2] 461a; ch 7 [i266a37-i267a i6] 462a-d; bk iv, ch 11
[i295b35-i296a i2] 496a-b; bk v 502a519d
15 Tacitus: Histories, bk ii, 224d-225a; bk hi, 261b-262a; bk iv, 266b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  77a; 78c-d 82b-d; part ii, 102d-103a;
103c-104d;  112b-d  114d-115a; 116c-d; 121a-122b; 148c-153a 159a-c; part
hi, 240a-b; part iv, 273a-c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i,
sc in [78-138] 109a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 78a-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  hi,  102b-103a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk viii,
51a54b;  57b-c;  bk  xv, 112c-114a 38 Rousseau : Inequality, 361a-362a /
Social Contract, bk 11, 402b-d; 404c-d; bk hi, 418a420a 39 Smith: Wealth
of Nations, bk iv, 239a-240b; 262a-d; 269d-271a; bk v, 308b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 48d-49a; 436a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 559c-560d
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 439a-441d 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b  43  Federalist: number 27, 95b-c; 96b; number 48, 157b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  321b-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  195c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  iv, 364a-c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 423b425b
3c(l)  Revolution  in monarchies 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21b; 24a-b;
bk  ii,  84a-d;  85b-c;  bk  hi,  107c-108c; 118b; bk iv, 138a-c; 148a 7
Plato: Laws, bk hi, 667c-672a esp 667c-d, 670c-672a

[674a]
(3c.  The  causes  and  effects  of  revolution  under differentforms of
government.  3c(l)  Revolution in monarchies.) 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
v, ch io
[1310*39]-
ch  11  [1313^3]  512d-516a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  35c-d;  47a-48a /
Agesilaus,  482a-485b  /  Demetrius, 732a-c 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i,
190a-191a;  192d193a;  193c-194a;  195c-198c; 201a-b; 208b-c; 209d-210b;
210d-212d;  bk  iv,  266b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God, bk hi, ch 15
176d178a  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch iv 7a-8a; ch vi, 9b-d; ch viii-ix,
14a-16a;  ch  xv-xx  22b31c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 108d-109a;
148d-149b; 150c-151a; 153a-156c; 159a-c; part iv, 273a-c 26 Shakespeare:
1st  Henry VI la-32a,c esp act 11, sc iv llb-12d, act iv, sc 1 [30-1 13]
20a-21a  /  2nd Henry VI 33a-68d esp act i, sc i 33b,d36b / 3rd Henry VI
69a-104d esp act i, sc i 69a-72d / Richard III 105a-148a,c esp act v, sc
v [15-41] 148a,c / Richard II, act iv, sc i
[107-149] 342c-343a /
1st  Henry  IV> act iv, sc in 459b-460b; act v, sc i [30-120] 461b462a /
2nd  Henry IV, act iv, sc i 487b489d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xiv,
sect  166168  63d-64c;  ch  xviii-xix 71a-81d passim 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part hi, 102b-103a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 25d-26c; bk vii,
45c-46a;  bk  viii,  53a-54a; 56d-57a; bk xi, 77b-78a; bk xxv, 212a-b 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 419b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
68b,d-69a  43  Federalist: number 48, 157b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-268b
44 Boswell: Johnson, 120a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d;
260a-262a;   epilogue  i,  668a-669d  3c(2)  Revolutions  in  republics:
aristocracies, oligarchies, and democracies 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi,
202d-203b   6Thucydides:   Peloponnesian   War,  bk  hi,  434c-438c  esp
436d-438b;  bk  iv,  459a-c;  463a-465c;  466a-469b;  bk  v,  482d-483a;
502d-504b  esp  503d-504b;  bk vi, 519c-520d; 533a-c; bk viii, 574d-590c
esp  575c-576c, 577b-d, 579c-583c, 585d-586b, 587a-589a, 590a-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  viii,  402a-413d  / Laws, bk ix, 744c-d / Seventh Letter,
806d-807b  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [i270b7-34] 466d-467a; ch
ii
[i273b i7~24] 470b; ch
12
[i273b36-i274a22]
470c-d; bk hi, ch 13
[i284a3-b
3 4 ] 482a-483a; ch 15
[i286b i2-i6]
485a; bk iv, ch 5 [i292b u-22] 492a; bk v, ch 1
[1302*8-16] 503b; ch
3
[i302b2i-i303 a24]
504a-d;
[i303b5-i8] 505a; ch 4 [1304*18-29]

[674b]
640 THE GREAT IDEAS 3c(2) to 3c(3) 505d-506a; ch 5-9 506b-512d; ch 12
[1316s
19^27]  519a-d; bk vi, ch 5-6 523b-524c / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-41
553a-572a  passim, esp ch 5 554d-555a, ch 29 566b-d, ch 33-34 568b-569a,
ch  38 570a-c 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 13a-14c / Lycurgus, 35c-d; 47a-48a /
Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d64a,c/ Solon, 68d-70d; 75c-76d/ Themistocles, 96b-c /
Camillus,  117c-121a,c / Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Lysander, 361a-368a,c /
Crassus, 444d-445d / Pompey, 521c-d; 525a-b; 533a-c / Caesar, 581d-582a;
588c-589a;  590d-591a  /  Cato  the  Younger,  631  b-c;  636c-d  / Agis
648b,d-656d / Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c esp
680b-d  / Caius Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c / Cicero, 708a-b / Antony, 750a-b
15  Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-2a; 3a-b; bk vi, 97b-c / Histories, bk ii,
224d-225a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii 149a-b; 152c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, , 105c-106b; bk ii, 6c-7b; 23a-25a; bk bk x, 64a-b; bk
in,  10c-lla;  bk  v,  21d-22b;  vii, 44d-45b; bk viii, 51a-53a; bk xii,
91c-92b;  bk xv, 114c-115b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 411 b-c;
418c-419b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  308b-c;  420b-c  43
Federalist:  number  i,  30b; number 9-10 47a-53a; number 15-16 62d-68d;
number  17-20,  70a-78b;  number 21, 78d-79b; number 25, 90a-91d; number
27,  95b-c;  number  29,  99b-101a;  number  38,  124b-125a;  number 43,
141a-142d;   number   46,  152a-153a;  number  48,  157b-c;  number  58,
181b-182a;   number   60,   184b-d;   number   63,  194b-195b  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  329b-330c;  350c-351d;  366a-367b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part ii, 276d277a; 278d-279b; part hi, 300a-301c;
part   iv,   355d-357a;  364a-c  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
423d424b;   429c-430b;   432b-d  3c(3)  Rebellion  against  tyranny  and
despotism  Old  Testament: / Kings, 12:1-25— (D) /// Kings, 12:1-25 / //
Chronicles,  10—  (D)  //  Paralipomenon,  10  Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees,
1:1-2:44—  (D)  OT,  / Machabees, 1:1-2:44 / H Maccabees, 6:1-11; 8:1-4—
(D)  °T  //  Machabees,  6:1-11;  8:1-4 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21b;
24a-b;  bk  iv,  148a;  bk  v,  170c-172c;  178a-180a;  bk  vi, 187b-c 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk vi, 523c-524c 7 Plato: Republic, bk
viii-ix,  411d-420d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 4 [1304*30-38] 506a;
ch 10 [1310*39]-^ 12 [i3i5b39] 512d518d; ch 12
[1316*25-35]
519b / Athenian Constitution, ch 14-19 558d-561d

[675a]
4/o 5 14 Plutarch: Galba, 859a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, la-4d; bk iv,
82a-b;  bk  xi, 102d-103a; bk xii, 112a-b; bk xv, 169a-176b / Histories,
bk  i,  200d; 202c-205a; bk ii, 234b-235a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
150c-151a;  part  iv,  273a-b;  conclusion, 280d 26 Shakespeare: Richard
III, act v, sc hi
[237-270] 146b-c / Julius Caesar 568a-596a,c
esp act 1, sc 11 [25-177] 569c-571a, [215-326] 571c-572c 27 Shakespeare:
Macbeth,  act  iv, sc hi [1-49] 303b-304a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
xiv,  sect  166168  63d-64c; ch xviii-xix 71a-81d passim 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk v, 25d-26c; 28b-29a; bk viii, 54a-b; bk xix, 137c-d;
bk  xxv,  212a-b;  214a,c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 361c-362a / Social
Contract,  bk  ii,  404c-d; bk hi, 417b-c; 419b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  29b-31a  esp  29c30a;  35c-39d;  42b,d-44c; 49a; 50b-51d; 56a59a;
63a-64d; 68c; 71b-76b; 126d-127c; 246a; 652d-655c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  113d-115a;  166a167d;  464a-466b  43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b,d
[fn
1]  /  Representative  Government,  343b-344d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of
History, part 1, 230a-c 4. The nature of economic revolutions 4a. Change
in  the  condition  of  the  oppressed or exploited: the emancipation of
slaves,  serfs,  proletariat  Old Testament: Exodus, 1-14 / Deuteronomy,
26:5-9  / Jeremiah, 34:8-17— (D) Jeremias, 34:8-17 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  iv,  124a-d  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi, 435b; bk iv,
467a-b;  bk v, 482d-483a; 491b-c 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 709d 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9 [1269^7^7] 465c; ch 10 [1272^7-19] 469a; ch 12
[i273b  36-1274*22]  470c-d;  bk  v,  ch 11 [1315*32-39] 518b / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  2  553a-c;  ch  5-6  554d-555c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36a-37c  /  Solon,  68d70c  /  Agis  648b,d-656d  / Cleomenes 657a671d /
Tiberius  Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  /  Caius  Gracchus,  681b,d-689a,c 15
Tacitus:  Annals, bk iv, 70c-d; bk xiii, 132a-c; 133c; bk xiv, 151d-152b
27   Shakespeare:   Coriolanus,   act  i,  sc  i  [1-167]  351a-353a  38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 112c113a; 114c-115b 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  hi,  165b175b  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 16d-17b;
144a-d; 505c; 509a; 628d

[675b]
Chapter   80:  REVOLUTION  641  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  82a-b;
452c453a,c 43 Constitution of the U.S .: article 1, sect iv, sect 2
[5299
[260-266]
13d;  ARTICLE 535] 16b; AMENDMENTS, sect i 18c 43 Federalist: number 42,
137b-c  43  Mill: Representative Government, 332c; 339dxiii, sect i-xiv,
340c; 351d-352b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 276d277a; part
hi, 295d-296c; 307b-308a 50 Marx: Capital, 7b-d; 79d-80b
[fn
4];  131a146c  esp  131a,  134d,  137a,  138b-c, 141c, 146b-c; 231b-248d
passim,  esp 242d-244a, 248c-d; 295a-d; 364a-368b esp 367b-368b 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  415a417a,c esp 416b-d; 419b,d; 422c-425b
esp  423c-d,  424b-425a; 426b-c; 428d-429c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
v,  211a-213a; 216c-d; bk vi, 235a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
vi,  165b-c  54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788a / New
Introductory  Lectures,  883d884c  4b.  Change  in  the  economic order:
modification  or  overthrow of a system of production and distribution 5
Aristophanes: Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d esp
[553-729] 621b-623c
/ Plutus 629a-642d esp
[415-618] 633d-636d
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 349b-d; 350d-351a; 352c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-319a;  bk  viii,  404a;  405d-408a 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i,  ch 4 [i253b33~39] 447b-c; bk ii, ch 5 458a-460a; ch 6
[1265*28b25]  460c-461a;  ch  7  461d-463c;  bk  hi,  ch 10 [1281*11-28]
478d-479a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-d  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
104b-106b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 27b-37b; bk hi, 165b-175b;
178d-179a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 452c-453a,c 43 Federalist: number
41,  135a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 335a336c 50 Marx:
Capital,  80b-81a;  153b-d;  157a-188c esp 163a-c, 164a-165b, 176a-180d,
183b-184b,   187a-c;  205a-250c  esp  218d-219a,  221c-223c,  226d-227d,
240c-241a;  290a-c; 308d-311b; 351a-c; 354a-378d esp 354a-355d, 377c378d
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  416c-d;  419d-422c;  425c-427b;
428d-429c  54  Freud:  Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788a 5. The
strategy  of  economic  revolution  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
415c416c; 417a,c; 425b-c; 428d-429b; 434a-d

[676a]
(5.   The  strategy  of  economic  revolution.)  5a.  Revolution  as  an
expression  of  the  class  struggle: rich and poor, nobles and commons,
owners  and  workers  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk vi, 202c-203b; bk vii,
243b-c  6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 423a-b; 434c-438c; bk iv,
463a-465c;  bk  v,  482d-483a;  503d-504b;  bk  vi,  524d-525d;  bk  vni
564a-593a,c  passim,  esp  568d-569a,  575c-576c, 579c-583c, 587a-590c 7
Plato: Republic, bk iv, 343d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[i265b6-i2]
461a; ch j 461d-463c; ch 9 [1269*37-^] 465c; bk v, ch 3 [i303b5-8] 505a;
ch 4 [i304ai8-b6] 505d-506a; ch 7 [1306^2-1307*2] 508c-d; ch 9
[1310*19-25] 512c; ch 10 [i3iob9-i5] 512d513a; ch 12 [i3i6a39-b22] 519c-d / Athenian
Constitution,  ch 2 553a-c; ch 5 554d-555a 14 Plutarch : Solon, 68d-70c/
Pericles,  124a-130b  esp  126d-127a  /  Coriolanus,  176b-184c  /  Agis
648b,d-656d/  Cleomenes,6S7a-663c  /  Tiberius  Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c /
Caius  Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c / Cicero, 708a-713b 15 Tacitus: Histories,
bk  11, 224d-225a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv, sc ii 57d-59d 27
Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[1-47]
351a-d  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 77b79b 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  126d-127c;  144a-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 574b-582b
passim,  esp  575a-d,  578c-581a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part
n,263b-d;  275b-276a;  part hi, 295d-296c 50 Marx: Capital, 8d-9c; 113c;
131a-146c   esp  131a,  134d,  137a,  138b-c,  141c,  146b-c;  209c210c;
294b-295a  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto 415a434d 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk x, 410c-421c 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 884a 5b.
The  organization  of  a  revolutionary  class:  the bourgeoisie and the
proletariat  as  revolutionary classes in relation to different economic
systems  50 Marx: Capital, 9c; 354a-378d esp 356c-358a, 371d-372b, 378c,
378d-379b   [fn   2]  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  416c-  d;
419b,d-425b  esp  419d-420c,  421d-422a,  422c,  423b-424b;428d  5c. The
classless society as the goal of economic revolution: the transformation
of  the  state 50 Marx: Capital, 9c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
416c-d; 424d-425b; 429b-c

[676b]
642  THE GREAT IDEAS 5a to 6a 6. The justice of revolution 6a. The right
of rebellion: the circumstances justifying civil disobedience or violent
insurrection  4  Homer: Iliad, bk ix [50-64] 57c-d 5 Sophocles: Antigone
131a-142d esp [441-470] 134d-135a 5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata 583a-599a,c
esp
[476-597] 588d-591a
6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 103d-107c 7 Plato: Apology, 210a-b / Crito,
216d-219a,c  esp  216d-217d  /  Seventh  Letter,  800c;  804a-b;  812d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk 11, ch 10
[1 272^-16]
468d-469a;  bk  v,  ch  i  [i30i  a38-b2]  502b-c  14 Plutarch: Tiberius
Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c esp 678b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk 1, 6b-7a; 10d-
lld;  bk xv,174b-d/ H/^or/^,BKi,198d-199c; 212a-b; bk 11, 234b-d; bk iv,
290a-c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, a 4 233a-d; part
h—ii, q 42, a 2, rep 3 584b-d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxvi 36b-37d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 91b-92b passim; part 11, 101a-102c; 104b-d;
112b-c; 115a-116a; 153c; part iv, 273a-b; conclusion, 279d 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 47a-51a; 318c-319b; 462c-465c; 504c-506a 26 Shakespeare: Richard
HI,  act  v, sc in [237270] 146b-c / 1st Henry IV, act iv, sc hi [52105]
459d-460b / 2nd Henry IV, act i, sc 1
[187-215] 470a-b; act
iv, sc i 487b-489d / Julius Caesar, act ii, sc i [10-191] 574c-576c; act
in,  sc  1  [78-121]  581  b-d  27  Shakespeare:  Macbeth, act iv, sc in
303b306b  35  Locke: Toleration, 16d-17c / Civil Government, ch in, sect
18  29b;  ch  xiii,  sect  149 59b-d; sect 155 60d-61a; ch xiv, sect 168
64b-c;  ch  xvi,  sect 176 66a-b; sect 190-192 69b-d; sect 196 70b-c; ch
xviii-xix  71a-81d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk viii, 54b-c 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 361a-362a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 71b-74a esp
73b-c;  144a-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 92d; 166a-167d; 473b-d 42
Kant:  Science of Right, 439a-441d; 457a 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b  43  Federalist:  number  9,  47a-c;  number 14, 62b-d; number 21,
78d-79b;  number  26,  92a-94b;  number 28 96c-98b; number 60, 184b-d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b;  274b,d  [fn  1] 44 Boswell: Johnson, 120ac;
195c-d; 219d-220a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,342c-d; 364a-c
50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 430a; 432b-c;434d

[677a]
6b  to 7 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 9d-10b; epilogue i, 668a 669d;
epilogue  ii,  680b684a 6b. The right to abrogate the social contract or
to  secede  from  a  federation  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
358d360c;  bk in, 418d-419d 7 Plato: Crito, 216d-219a,c esp 21 7c- 2 18b
/  Laws,  bk  vi, 706b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 91a-92b; part ii,
101a-102a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  vtii,  sect 95-99 46c-47c
passim; sect 1 13-122 51b 53c passim; ch xix, sect 211 73d-74a; sect 243
81d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  358b-359a / Political Economy, 374a-b /
Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  419a-b;424d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 449d;
450d-451c   43  Declaration  of  Independence:  la  3b  43  Articles  of
Confederation: xiii 9c 43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, xiv 18c-
19a  43 Federalist: number 22, 84d-85a; number 43, 143b-144a; number 58,
181d-182a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 172 146c-d 7. Empire
and  revolution: the justification of colonial rebellion and the defense
of  imperialism 6 Herodotus: History, bk 1, 23a 31a; bk v-vt 160a-213a,c
esp bk vi, 191a-d; bk ix, 307b308a;308d-310c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  358d360c;  363a-b;  368a-d;  373d-374a;  378c-380a; bk 11,
402d-404a; bk hi, 418d-419d; 425a428d; bk iv, 468a-469b; bk v, 504c-507c
esp 505c, 506b-c; bk vi, 514b-d; 530d-531b; bk viii 564a-593a,c passim 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [1269*37 -h j] 465c;
[i27i b i-6]
467d; ch 10
[i272b i6-22]
469a;  ch  11  [1273^7-24] 470b; ch 12 [1274 s 10-15] 470d; bk in, ch 13
[i284a36-b2] 482c; bk v, ch 3
[i303a25~b
3] 504d-505a; ch 4
[1304*18-39]
505d-506a; ch 7
[i307b i9~23]
509d; bk vii, ch 2
[i324b2-i325ai5]
528c529a;  ch  14 [i333b i 1-1334*10] 538c-d / Athenian Constitution, ch
27,  par  1-2  565a-b  CROSS-REFERENCES  racy  3;  Constitution  7,  7b;
Democracy 7a; Oligarchy 3a~3b; Tyranny 8.

[677b]
Chapter  80: REVOLUTION 643 Flamininus 302b,d-313a,c pas14 Plutarch: sim
15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 17c-d; bk iv, 76a; 82d-83a; bk xii, 117c-d; bk
xiv,  149a-b  / Histories, bk i, 191d-192a; bk iv, 269d-270b; 290a-d; bk
v,  301c-d  18  Augustine: City of God, bk hi, ch 14 175b176d; bk iv, ch
3-4  190a-d;  ch  15  196c-197a;  bk v, ch 12, 216d-218a; bk xix, ch 21,
524c-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, HOb-110a; conclusion, 279d-281a 26
Shakespeare:  1st  Henry VI la-32a,c esp act 1, sc 1 lb,d-3c / 2nd Henry
VI 33a-68d esp act 1, sc 1 33b,d-36b, act hi, sc 1
[82-92]
47d-48a  /  3rd  Henry  VI  69a-104d esp act hi, sc in 88a-91b / Henry V
532a-567a,c  esp  act  1, sc 11 534a-537b, epilogue 567c 27 Shakespeare:
Cymbeline,  act  hi,  sc  1 463c464c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi,
sect 176 66a-b; sect 192 69c-d; sect 196 70b-c; ch xix, sect 211 73d-74a
36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 182b-183a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
x,  62b-63d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 355c-d / Social Contract, bk 11,
402d-403a;  403d-404a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk iv, 255a-279b
passim  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 18a;21c-23c;71b-d; 144d-146a; 246a;
255c-d;  420b-422d  esp  420b-d;  436c-438a;  449d-451a; 477b,d-491a esp
489d-491a;  521a-523a,c;  608b,d  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 51a-54d
passim;  216c-217b; 285a-c; 307a-c; 443b-444a; 464a466b 42 Kant: Science
of  Right,  413d;  454a-455a;  456c-457a 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b  43  Federalist:  number  46,  152a-153a  43 Mill: Liberty, 272a /
Representative  Government,  339a-340d;  353c;  433b-442d  44  Bosw ell:
Johnson,  179c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, additions, 172 146c-d /
Philosophy  of  History, part i, 241 d242b; part 11, 281d-282a; part hi,
299c-301c;  part  iv,  324d-326c  50  Marx: Capital, 379a-383d passim 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 466b-d; bk xi, 498c-499a

[678a]
644  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I.  Machiavelli. The Discourses, bk hi, ch 1-8 .
Florentine History F. Bacon. "Of Seditions and Troubles," "Of Factions,"
in  Essays  Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments  Concerning Government and
Society, ch 12 . The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, PART II, CH 8
Hume. Of Passive Obedience Engels. The Peasant War in Germany . Germany:
Revolution and Counter-Revolution J. S. Mill. "A Few Observations on the
French  Revolution"  in  vol i, "Vindication of the French Revolution of
February  1848"  in  vol ii, Dissertations and Discussions . Thoughts on
Parliamentary  Reform  Dostoevsky. The House of the Dead . The Possessed
Marx  and  Engels.  The  German  Ideology,  part  i Marx. The Eighteenth
Brumaire  of  Louis  Bonaparte  .  The Civil War in France II. Polybius.
Histories, vol i, bk vi Sallust. The War with Catiline Appian. The Civil
Wars  Luther.  Address  to the German Nobility . Against the Robbing and
Murdering  Hordes  of  Peasants  .  Whether  Soldiers, Too, Can Be Saved
Bodin. The Six Bookes ofa Commonweale, bk iv Spenser. The Faerie Queene,
bk  i  Hooker. Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity Digges. Unlawfulness
of  Subjects Taking up Arms Against Their Soveraigne Bentham. A Fragment
on  Government,  ch  i  (22-29)  Paine.  Common Sense Godwin. An Enquiry
Concerning  Political  Justice,  BK  IV,  ch 2 Burke. Reflections on the
Revolution in France . Letter to a Noble Lord

[678b]
For:  Other  discussions relevant to economic change and to the strategy
of  economic  revolution,  see  History  43(2);  Labor 7^3); Liberty 6b;
Opposition  5b;  Progress  3b; Slavery 3c; State 5d(2)~5e; War and Peace
2c;  Wealth  oil.  The  general problem of the right of rebellion or the
right  of secession, see Justice 10b; Law 6c; Liberty 6b; Tyranny 3; and
for the issue concerning anarchy and the condemnation of the rebel as an
anarchist, see Government ia; Liberty ib; Tyranny 3. ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed  below are works not included in Great Books ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are divided into two groups: For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  Burke.  Thoughts  on  the  Prospect  ofa  Regicide  Peace Byron.
Prometheus Shelley. Prometheus Unbound T. Carlyle. The French Revolution
Thoreau. Civil Disobedience Tocqeville. L'ancien regime {Ancient Regime)
Proudhon.  General Idea of the Revolution in the Nineteenth Century . De
la  justice  dans  la  revolution et dans Veglise Dickens. A Tale of Two
Cities Coster. The Glorious Adventures of Tyl Ulenspiegl Bakunin. God and
the  State  Hugo.  Ninety-Three  A.  Toynbee. Lectures on the Industrial
Revolution   Ritchie.  Natural  Rights,  part  ii,  ch  i  i  Shaw.  The
Revolutionist's  Handbook  Andreyev.  The  Seven  Who Were Hanged Sorel.
Reflexions  on  Violence  Lenin.  Collected  Worlds, vol xxi, Toward the
Seizure  of  Power  .  The  State  and  Revolution T. E. Lawrence. Seven
Pillars  of  Wisdom  L.  P.  Edwards.  The Natural History of Revolution
Berdyayev.  Christianity  and  the  Class  War  Trotsky.  Literature and
Revolution  .  The  History of the Russian Revolution Maritain. Theonas,
Conversations of a Sage, ix . "On the Purification of Means," in Freedom
in  the  Modern  World  Gorky.  Mother  .  Forty  Years—the Life of Clim
Samghin,  vol  ii,  The Magnet; vol hi, Other Fires; vol iv, The Specter
Malraux.  Man's  Fate . Man's Hope Brinton. The Anatomy of Revolution B.
Russell.  Power, ch 7 E. Wilson. To the Finland Station Ortega y Gasset.
The  Revolt  of  the  Masses  .  Toward  a  Philosophy of History Laski.
Reflections on the Revolution of Our Time Diwakar. Satyagraha: The Power
of Truth

[679a]
Chapter^  RHETORIC  INTRODUCTION RHETORIC is traditionally regarded as ^
one of the liberal arts. When the liberal arts are counted as seven, and
divided  into  the  three  and the four— the trivium and the quadrivium—
rhetoric  is  grouped  with grammar and logic, not with the mathematical
arts of arithmetic and geometry, astronomy and music. The implication of
this  grouping seems to be that rhetoric, like grammar, has something to
do  with  language  or  discourse; and that, like logic, it is concerned
with  thought,  with reasoning or argument. But if grammar is the art of
writing  or  speaking  correctly,  and  if  logic is the art of thinking
correctly, it may be wondered what rhetoric can add to these other arts,
either  on  the side of language or of thought. Logic by itself does not
suffice  to  ensure that words are properly used to express thought; nor
does  grammar  guarantee that discourse which is flawless in syntax also
complies  with  the  demands  of  rationality. Hence neither grammar nor
logic  seems  to  challenge  the function of the other, as together they
challenge  the  function of rhetoric. Upon the way this challenge is met
depends not only the definition of rhetoric, but also the value put upon
it.  In  the tradition of the great books, rhetoric is both praised as a
useful  discipline  which  liberally  educated  men  should possess, and
condemned as a dishonest craft to which decent men would not stoop. Like
the  words  "sophistical"  and  "dialectical,"  the epithet "rhetorical"
carries,  traditionally  as well as currently, a derogatory implication.
The  three words sometimes even tend to merge in meaning, expressing the
same  reproach  against  trickery. Yet of the three, "sophistical" alone
implies  an  unqualified  rebuke.  We  do  not  speak  of  good  and bad
sophistry.  But  dialectic  has its defenders as well as its detractors;
and even those who, like Plato, charge 645

[679b]
rhetoric  with  being  an  art of enchantment or a form of flattery also
distinguish between a true and a false rhetoric, the one associated with
dialectic  as  a  wholly  admirable  pursuit,  the  other  classed  with
sophistry  as  a  vocation divorced from virtue. According to Bacon, the
aim  of rhetoric is to support reason, "not to oppress it." Rhetoric may
be  misused,  but  logic  also  has its abuses. "Rhetoric can be no more
charged," in Bacon's opinion, "with the coloring of the worse part, than
logic  with  sophistry, or morality with vice." The purpose and scope of
rhetoric  are capable of broad and narrow definitions. The broader view,
which  we  shall  consider  subsequently,  tends  to merge rhetoric with
poetics  as  together the art of eloquence in any sort of discourse. The
narrower view tends to restrict rhetoric to the art of persuasion in the
sphere of practical affairs. Rhetorical skill consists in getting others
to  embrace  certain beliefs, to form the opinions or make the judgments
which  the  speaker  or writer wishes them to adopt. Usually action, not
persuasion,  is the ultimate goal. The rules of rhetoric are supposed to
give  one  power  not  merely  to  move  the  minds  of  men  to certain
conclusions  but,  through persuasion of their minds, to move men to act
or  not  act  in a certain way. The sphere of rhetoric, so conceived, is
limited  to  moral  and  political  problems. The things about which men
deliberate  before acting, the things on which they pass moral judgments
or  make  political decisions, constitute the subject matter of oratory,
or  what  Hobbes  calls "exhortation and dehortation," that is, "counsel
accompanied with signs in him that giveth it, of vehement desire to have
it  followed." In the narrower conception, rhetoric seems to be confined
to oratory. It is with oratory and

[680a]
646  THE GREAT IDEAS orators that Socrates seems to be concerned when he
discusses  rhetoric  with  Phaedrus  or with Gorgias. Gorgias, who was a
teacher  of  rhetoric,  praises the power of the orator to persuade "the
judges in the courts, or the senators in the council, or the citizens in
the  assembly, or at any other public meeting." In view of this Socrates
asks  him  whether  he  will  accept  the definition of rhetoric as "the
artificer  of  persuasion."  When Gorgias admits that "persuasion is the
chief end of rhetoric," Socrates goes on to ask whether rhetoric is "the
only  art which brings persuasion, or do other arts have the same effect
?  Does he who teaches anything persuade men of that which he teaches or
not?"  If  so,  "then  arithmetic as well as rhetoric is an artificer of
persuasion."  Gorgias  reminds  Socrates  of his initial point about the
orator,  that  "rhetoric  is  the art of persuasion in courts of law and
other assemblies . . . about the just and unjust." But Socrates is still
not  satisfied that rhetoric has been sharply defined. He introduces the
distinction between knowledge and belief or opinion, and gets Gorgias to
agree  that,  whereas  there  cannot be false knowledge as well as true,
beliefs  and  opinions  may  be  either  true  or false. Persuasion can,
therefore,  be  of  two sorts—"one which is the source of belief without
knowledge,  as  the  other is of knowledge." Gorgias is willing to limit
rhetoric  to that form of persuasion "which only gives belief," to which
Socrates  adds  the  emphatic  negative  that  "the rhetorician does not
instruct  the  courts  of  law or other assemblies about things just and
unjust,  but creates beliefs about them." If an assembly wishes to learn
about  matters  connected with medicine or shipbuilding, it consults the
physician  or  shipwright,  not  the  orator. But, says Gorgias, "when a
decision  has  to  be  given  in  such matters, the rhetoricians are the
advisers;  they  are  the  men who win their point." He confirms this by
reminding  Socrates  that the speeches of Themistocles and Pericles, not
the suggestions of the builders, determined the Athenian assembly in the
construction  of  the  harbor,  the  docks  and walls. By way of further
illustration,  Gorgias  tells  of  occasions  when  he  has succeeded in
getting  patients  to  do  what they would not do on the advice of their
physicians. "I have persuaded

[680b]
the  patient,"  he  says,  "to  do  for  me what he would not do for the
physician,  just  by  the  use of rhetoric." Similarly, in a contest for
public  office  between a rhetorician and a man of any other profession,
"the  rhetorician  more  than  any other would have the power of getting
himself chosen, for he can speak more persuasively to the multitude than
any of them, and on any subject. Such is the nature and power of the art
of  rhetoric!" In comparing it with dialectic, Aristotle seems to have a
different  conception of the function of rhetoric. "Neither rhetoric nor
dialectic,"  he  says,  "is  the  scientific  study  of any one separate
subject;  both  are  faculties  for  providing arguments." Both also are
concerned  with  arguments which fall short of scientific demonstration,
that is, with matters of opinion concerning which something probable can
be  said  on  either side of the issue. Though for Aristotle rhetoric is
the  counterpart  of  dialectic, in that both deal with arguments on any
subject,  his  differentiation  between  the  two  disciplines  seems to
indicate that rhetoric is limited to the consideration of oratory in the
familiar  sense  of  public  speaking. The rhetorician is concerned with
persuading  an audience, not, as the dialectician is, with carrying on a
dispute   in  which  two  individuals  may  be  privately  engaged.  The
persuasion,  furthermore,  is  directed  to obtaining a certain response
from  that  audience—  not  merely  agreement,  but  either action, or a
decision  to  act,  or  approval  which, charged with emotional force or
enthusiasm,  has  practical  significance.  The  divisions  of rhetoric,
according  to  Aristotle,  are  determined  by  the kinds of oratory, as
these, in turn, are determined by the types of audience to be addressed.
"Of  the  three  elements  in speech-making—speaker, subject, and person
addressed,"  Aristotle  writes,  "it  is  the last one, the hearer, that
determines  the  speech's  end  and  object. The hearer must be either a
judge  with  a  decision  to  make  about  things  past or future, or an
observer.  A  member  of  the  assembly  decides  about future events, a
juryman about past events; while those who merely decide on the orator's
skill  are  observers.  "From  this  it  follows  that  there  are three
divisions   of  oratory:  (i)  political,  (2)  forensic,  and  (3)  the
ceremonial oratory of display"—or,

[681a]
as these three are sometimes named, deliberative, legal, and epideictic.
"Political  speaking  urges  us  either to do or not do something. . . .
Forensic  speaking  either  attacks  or  defends  somebody.  .  .  . The
ceremonial oratory of display either praises or censures somebody. These
three  kinds  of  rhetoric  refer  to three different kinds of time. The
political  orator is concerned with the future; he tries to persuade men
about  things  to  be done or not done hereafter. The party in a case at
law is concerned with the past; one man accuses the other, and the other
defends  himself,  with reference to things already done. The ceremonial
orator  is, properly speaking, concerned with the present, since all men
praise  or  blame  in  view of the state of things existing at the time,
though  they  often  find  it useful also to recall the past and to make
guesses about the future. "Rhetoric has three distinct ends in view, one
for  each  of its three kinds. The political orator aims at establishing
the expediency or the harmfulness of a proposed course of action Parties
in  a  lawsuit  aim  at  establishing  the  justice or injustice of some
action. . . . Those who praise or attack a man aim at proving him worthy
of  honor or the reverse." This conception of rhetoric as concerned with
oratory  or  public  speaking  gives  one answer to the question of what
rhetoric adds to grammar and logic as arts of discourse. In oratory more
is  involved  than  the  communication  of  ideas,  the  marshalling  of
arguments,  the  making of proofs. Discourse, whether written or spoken,
has an effect upon the emotions as well as upon the mind, and disposes a
man to act as well as the mind to assent. "The communicating of ideas by
words,"  Berkeley  observes, "is not the chief and only end of language,
as  is  commonly  supposed. There are other ends, as the raising of some
passion,  the  exciting  to or deterring from an action, the putting the
mind  in  some  particular  disposition—  to which the former is in many
cases  barely subservient, and sometimes entirely omitted. ... I entreat
the reader to reflect with himself, and see if it doth not often happen,
either  in  hearing  or  reading a discourse, that the passions of fear,
love, hatred, admiration, disdain and the like, arise immediately in his
mind

[681b]
Chapter  81:  RHETORIC 647 upon the perception of certain words, without
any  ideas coming between." Engaged in the oratorical task of persuading
the  people  of New York to ratify the federal constitution, the writers
of  the  Federalist  papers  are  aware  that  "a  torrent  of angry and
malignant  passions will be let loose" in the debate of that issue. They
realize that arguing for the adoption of certain political principles or
conclusions  is  not  like  teaching  geometry, the objects of which are
"entirely abstracted from those pursuits which stir up and put in motion
the unruly passions of the human heart." Hamilton admits at once, in the
opening  paper,  that "the plan offered to our deliberations affects too
many  particular  interests, innovates upon too many local institutions,
not  to  involve  in its discussion, a variety of objects foreign to its
merits,  and  of views, passions, and prejudices little favorable to the
discovery  of truth." Nevertheless, he tries to persuade his audience to
judge  the  issue  on the merits of the argument alone. The opponents of
the  Constitution, he says, "may be actuated by upright intentions." The
opposition  may  "spring  from  sources,  blameless  at  least,  if  not
respectable—  the  honest  errors  of  minds  led astray by preconceived
jealousies  and fears. So numerous indeed and so powerful are the causes
which  serve  to  give  a false bias to the judgment, that we, upon many
occasions,  see  wise  and good men on the wrong as well as on the right
side of questions of the first magnitude to society." To recognize this,
Hamilton  tells  his  audience, is to be on guard "against all attempts,
from  whatever  quarter,  to influence your deciby any impressions other
than  those sion which may result from the evidence of truth." He wishes
them to consider him as relying upon nothing but the merits of his case.
"I  frankly  acknowledge  to you my convictions," he writes, "and I will
freely  lay  before  you the reasons on which they are founded. . . . My
motives  must  remain  in  the depository of my own breast. My arguments
will  be  open  to all, and may be judged by all. They shall at least be
offered  in a spirit which will not disgrace the cause of truth." We can
detect  here another element in the art of rhetoric. The orator seems to
be concerned, not only with the strength of his argu-

[682a]
648 THE GREAT IDEAS ments and with the passions of the audience which he
hopes  to move by these arguments, but also with the impression he makes
upon  that audience as a person of good character and honest intentions,
devoted to the truth and, above all, to the best interests of those whom
he  addresses.  The  great speeches reported—or perhaps polished, if not
invented— by Thucydides exemplify this effort on the part of the orator,
as  do  also  the orations written by Shakespeare for his characters, of
which  the  speeches of Brutus and Antony in Julius Caesar are among the
most notable as well as the most familiar. The point is also illustrated
by  the Communist Manifesto, which is denounced as "propaganda" by those
who  mistrust  the  writers, but to those who trust them is powerful and
persuasive oratory. Separating the use of witnesses and documents by the
forensic  orator  from  what  he  calls  the  strictly artistic means of
persuasion  i.e.,  the  means intrinsic to the art of rhetoric Aristotle
divides the latter into the three elements already noted. Persuasion, he
says,  depends  "on the personal character of the speaker ... on putting
the audience into a certain frame of mind . . .
[and] on the proof, or apparent
proof,  provided  by  the  words  of  the  speech  itself. Persuasion is
achieved  by  the  speaker's  personal  character  when the speech is so
spoken  as to make us think him credible. . . . Secondly, persuasion may
come  through  the  hearers  when the speech stirs their emotions. . . .
Thirdly,  persuasion  is effected through the speech itself when we have
proved a truth or an apparent truth by means of the persuasive arguments
suitable to the case in question." These being the three technical means
of  effecting persuasion, Aristotle concludes that rhetorical skill must
consist in the ability "(i) to reason logically, (2) to understand human
character and goodness in their various forms, and (3) to understand the
emotions  ...  to  know  their  causes  and  the  way  in which they are
excited." The art of rhetoric, therefore, involves more than training in
grammar  and  logic.  It  requires  the  study of ethics and psychology—
particularly  knowledge of the types of human character and knowledge of
the passions. The same consideration of the conditions of

[682b]
oratory  seems  to  lead  Socrates to tell Phaedrus that Thrasymachus or
anyone  else who teaches rhetoric ought "to give an exact description of
the  nature  of  the  soul," to explain "the mode in which it acts or is
acted  upon."  The  rhetorician,  he goes on, "having classified men and
speeches,  and  their  kinds  and  affections,  and  adapted them one to
another," will be able to "tell the reasons of his arrangement, and show
why  one soul is persuaded by a particular form of argument, and another
not."  This fact about rhetoric— that it must adapt speech to persons as
well  as  to  subject  mattersseems  to occasion Socrates' definition of
oratory  as  "the  art  of  enchanting  the  soul."  It is not, he tells
Phaedrus,  confined to courts and public assemblies. Whether this art is
a  good  or  evil  thing  depends  on whether it requires the speaker to
know—more  than  the  nature  of  the person he is addressing— the truth
about  the  matters spoken of. To engender probabilities in the minds of
the  many  by the likeness of the truth, it is necessary, says Socrates,
to  know the truth. "He who knew the truth would always know best how to
discover  the  resemblances of the truth." Such a man might be able, not
only  to  please  and so to persuade his audience, but also, perhaps, he
might  "be  able  to  say  what  is  acceptable to God." The issue about
rhetoric  then—  at least so far as that issue concerns its being an art
consistent  with  virtue—seems  to turn on the admixture of pleasure and
truth.  The  question is whether, given a particular sort of audience to
persuade,  the  orator does not have to choose between pleasing them and
telling  them  the  truth.  Does  the  art  of  rhetoric  extend  to the
persuasion  of bad men as well as good? Is the skill of the orator to be
measured  by  his success in persuading, without regard to the character
of  the  audience  he  has persuaded and the means he has been forced to
use?  Does  the goodness of the orator—and of his speech—depend upon his
being  morally  virtuous  as  well as rhetorically skillful? One view of
rhetoric  seems  to  identify persuasion with pleasure and to divorce it
from   truth.   Pascal,   for  example,  in  his  essay  On  Geometrical
Demonstration,  speaks of "two methods, the one of convincing, the other
of pleasing " In order

[683a]
to  persuade, he writes, "one must consider the person with whom one has
to  deal,  whose  spirit  and  heart  one  must  know, the principles he
accepts,  the things he loves." In view of such-con^ siderations, Pascal
holds  that  "the  art  of  persuasion consists more in pleasing than in
convincing, to such an extent is it true that men are controlled more by
whim  than by reason." He does not doubt that "there are rules which are
as  reliable  with  respect to pleasing as there are for demonstrating";
nor  does  he  seem to condemn rhetoric for being such an art, unless he
writes  with  irony  when  he  says  that "pleasing is incomparably more
difficult,  more  subtle,  more useful, and more admirable." Rhetoric so
conceived  appears  to  Locke  to be a "powerful instrument of error and
deceit";  and  to  Plato to be no art at all, but a form of flattery. As
cookery  tries  to please the palate without caring what is good for the
health  of  the  body,  so rhetoric, according to Plato, aims to delight
without  caring  what  is  good  for  the soul or the state. Cookery and
rhetoric  are  shams  or simulations of the genuine arts of medicine and
politics,  which  aim at the good, not at pleasure. "This is the sort of
thing,"  Socrates  tells  Callicles,  "which  I  term  flattery, whether
concerned with the body or the soul, or whenever employed with a view to
pleasure  and without any consideration of good and evil." Socrates then
asks  Callicles whether he knows rhetoricians who "aim at what is best .
.  . and seek to improve the citizens by their speeches," or whether all
"are  bent  upon giving them pleasure, forgetting the public good in the
thought of their own interest, playing with the people as with children,
and  trying to amuse them, but never considering whether they are better
or  worse  for  this."  When Callicles replies that he thinks "there are
some  who  have  a  real care for the public in what they say," Socrates
says  that  he  is "contented with the admission that rhetoric is of two
sorts:  one,  which  is  mere  flattery and disgraceful declamation; the
other,  which  is  noble and aims at the training and improvement of the
souls  of the citizens, and strives to say what is best, whether welcome
or  unwelcome,  to the audience." But, he asks Callicles, "have you ever
known such a rhetoric; or if you have, and

[683b]
Chapter  81:  RHETORIC  649 can point out any rhetorician of this stamp,
who  is he?" Socrates may not be asking a rhetorical question. He may be
presenting  the defenders of rhetoric with this critical dilemma: either
the  orator  adheres  to  the  truth  and aims at the good, even if such
highmindedness  defeats  his efforts at persuasion with an audience whom
he  thus  displeases;  or  the  orator  takes  persuasion as his end and
subordinates everything else to the rhetorical means for succeeding with
any  sort  of  audience.  Bacon  rises  to  the defense by rejecting the
dilemma  as ungenuine. "The duty and office of rhetoric," he writes, "is
to  apply  reason to the imagination for the better moving of the will."
He  admits  that rhetoric is controlled by other considerations than the
truth.  Though  "logic  handleth  reason exact and in truth," and though
"the  proofs  and demonstrations of logic are toward all men indifferent
and  the  same  .  .  .  the proofs and persuasions of rhetoric ought to
differ  according  to  the auditors." Nevertheless, Bacon thinks "it was
great  injustice in Plato, though springing out of a just hatred for the
rhetoricians  of  his  time,  to  regard  rhetoric  as a voluptuary art,
resembling  it  to  cookery  that  did  mar  wholesome  meats,  and help
unwholesome  by a variety of sauces to please the taste. For we see that
speech  is  much  more conversant in adorning that which is good than in
coloring  that  which  is  evil;  for  there is no man but speaketh more
honestly  than  he  can  door  think;  and  it  was excellently noted by
Thucydides  in  Cleon,  that  because he used to hold on the bad side in
causes  of state, therefore he was ever inveighing against eloquence and
good  speech  knowing  that  no man can speak fair of courses sordid and
base." Aristotle's defense of rhetoric seems to be implied in the remark
that "its function is not simply to succeed in persuading, but rather to
discover  the  means of coming as near such success as the circumstances
of  each  case  allow."  Just  as, for him, the sophist differs from the
dialectician  not  in  the  skills  of argument or dispute, but in moral
purpose  or  respect for truth, so the name "rhetorician" may be applied
to  two  sorts  of  men.  Rhetoric  may  signify  "either  the speaker's
knowledge of his art, or his moral

[684a]
650  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  purpose."  For  want of separate names, both the
honest  and  the  sophistical  orator  are  called  and  can claim to be
"rhetoricians,"  and  it  is  this  which  confuses  the  issue.  In the
tradition  of  the  great  books,  Aristotle's Rhetoric occupies a place
comparable to that which, as noted in the chapter on Poetry, his Poetics
unquestionably  fills.  It  seems  to  be  not  merely the first but the
standard  treatise  on oratory. It divides rhetoric into three parts the
first concerned with invention, the second with the disposition or order
of a speech, the third with problems of expression. To the last of these
belongs  the  analysis  of the orator's use of language and his style in
speaking;  to  the  second,  the analysis of the structure of an oration
into  such parts as proem, statement, argument, and epilogue; and to the
first,  under  the  head  of invention, belongs the consideration of the
means  of  persuasion.  As  we have already noted, the artistic means of
persuasion  are,  according to Aristotle, threefold—emotions, character,
and  argument.  The  orator  must  consider  how  to  arouse and use the
passions  of  his  audience,  as  well  as  calculate  how  far to go in
displaying his own emotions. He must consider the moral character of the
audience to which he is appealing, and in this connection he must try to
exhibit  his  own moral character in a favorable light. Finally, he must
know the various types and sources of rhetorical argument— not only what
sorts  of  argument are available for a particular purpose, but also how
to  employ  each  argument  most  persuasively.  In  this  last respect,
Aristotle  distinguishes rhetorical proof from rhetorical induction— the
use  of  what  he  calls  the  "enthymeme"  as  opposed  to  the  use of
examples—and  he  relates  this  distinction  to  the difference between
dialectical  proof  and  induction which he treats in the Topics. Cicero
and  Quintilian  may  extend Aristotle's analysis in certain directions,
but neither they nor modern writers like Campbell and Whately depart far
from the framework Aristotle sets up for the discussion of oratory. Even
those who reject Aristotle's authority in logic, natural philosophy, and
metaphysics  pay  him  the  tribute  of  following  (as does Hobbes) his
treatment of oratory, or of approving (as does Bacon) his

[684b]
contribution  to  rhetoric.  In  the  case  of this science, as with few
others,  Bacon  finds no serious deficiencies in the accepted tradition.
He  calls  rhetoric  "a science excellent and excellently well labored,"
and places "the emulation of Aristotle" first among the causes why later
writers  "in their works of rhetorics exceed themselves." Yet by another
standard  Aristotle's  Rhetoric  may  be  judged  deficient.  Because he
confines  his  attention  almost  exclusively  to  oratory,  Aristotle's
discussion  leaves  rhetoric  in  a  larger sense almost untouched. This
limitation  of  rhetoric  to  the  subject matter of oratory does not go
unexplained.  "Every  other  art,"  Aristotle  writes,  "can instruct or
persuade about its own particular subject matter; for instance, medicine
about  what  is  healthy and unhealthy, geometry about the properties of
magnitudes,  arithmetic about numbers, and the same is true of the other
arts and sciences. But rhetoric," he says, "we look upon as the power of
observing  the  means  of  persuasion on almost any subject presented to
us."   This   last  statement  would  seem  to  give  rhetoric  complete
generality. Aristotle qualifies it, however. "People fail to notice," he
says,  "that the more correctly they handle their particular subject the
further  they  are  getting  away from pure rhetoric." So far as knowing
good  arguments and knowing how to use them are concerned, the physicist
and the mathematician need no help from rhetoric. The art of rhetoric is
necessary  only  in  dealing  with such topics as do not fall within the
subject  matters  or  systems of the established arts and sciences. Such
topics are precisely those with which the orator must deal. "The duty of
rhetoric," Aristotle writes in summary, "is to deal with such matters as
we  deliberate  upon without arts or systems to guide us, in the hearing
of  persons  who  cannot  take in at a glance a complicated argument, or
follow  a long chain of reasoning." This is his answer to those who have
given rhetoric "a far wider subject matter than strictly belongs to it."
But  Aristotle's  explanation  of  his  limitation of rhetoric is itself
limited  to  only  one  of  its major parts, namely, the construction of
arguments.  As contrasted with the mathematician, the physician, and the
philosopher, whose mastery of the subject matter of their arts or sci-

[685a]
ences  gives  them  a  command of the relevant principles and methods of
argument,  only  the orator needs the special art of rhetoric to provide
him  with the topics from which examples and enthymemes can be drawn and
to  give  him skill in the use of such arguments. But it is not only the
orator  who must consider the character and emotions of his audience. It
is  not only the orator who must consider the best way in which to order
the  parts  of  an  elaborate  discourse.  Above all, it is not only the
orator  who  is  faced  with  the problem of using language more or less
effectively  in  the  expression  of  thought,  and  especially  in  its
communication  to  others.  All  these  considerations  and problems are
common  to  the  orator  and  the  teacher.  They are considerations and
problems  which must be faced not merely by the public speaker who tries
to  move  an  audience  to  action,  but by anyone poet, philosopher, or
scientist—who  tries  to  write whatever he has to say as effectively as
possible.  Competence  in  a  particular  art  or science may give a man
competence  with  respect  to  arguments  in the field of his particular
subject matter, but it does not seem to give him competence with respect
to these other considerations and problems, which he faces when he tries
to  communicate his knowledge or thought. Here, then, is the possibility
of  a  broader  conception  of  the art of rhetoric—an art concerned not
merely with being persuasive in the sphere of action, but with eloquence
or  effectiveness  in  the  expression  of thought. We find this view of
rhetoric  reflected  in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. In his Prologue, the
Franklin  asks  his  companions  "to forgive his crude speech" ; for, he
explains,  "I  never learned rhetoric, to tell you the truth; whatever I
say must be blunt and plain. I never slept on Mount Parnassus or studied
Marcus  Tullius Cicero." And the Squire apologizes for the inadequacy of
his  English  to  describe  the  beauty  of  Canace.  "It  would take an
excellent  rhetorician,"  he  says,  "who  knew  his colorful figures of
speech, to describe her adequately." Though Aristotle's Rhetoric for the
most  part  neglects  this  broader  conception  of rhetoric in order to
expound  the  rules  of  oratory,  the third book of his treatise, which
deals  with  the  use  of language, indicates that problems of style are
common to oratory

[685b]
Chapter  81:  RHETORIC 651 and poetry and to other types of discourse as
Kant seems to hold this broader conception of rhetoric when he says that
"the  arts  of  speech  are  rhetoric  and  poetry." In the tradition of
western  thought,  the  two  arts tend to become identified when each is
separated  from any particular subject matter. As appears in the chapter
on Poetry, poetry like rhetoric has a broader and a narrower meaning. In
the  narrower  meaning,  it  is the art of the narrative, just as in its
narrower  meaning,  rhetoric  is  the art of oratory. The other sense in
which  poetics  as an art can be understood is, according to Bacon, with
respect  to  words, not matter. "In this sense," he writes, "it is but a
character  of style, and belongeth to arts of speech." In this sense the
poetic  art  is  hardly  distinguishable  from  the  rhetorical art. The
problems  involved  in composing a good speech are not the same as those
involved  in  writing  a  good  poem  (or  what  Bacon  calls a "feigned
history").  But  when  poetics and rhetoric are each separated from such
problems  to become the arts of writing or speaking well about anything,
then,  in  becoming  as general as discourse itself, they tend to become
one  and the same art—an art of style or expression, an art of preaching
or  teaching  the  truth  about  any  matter  on which one mind seeks to
communicate  with  another. In the tradition of the great books, no book
does  for  the art of rhetoric in general what Aristotle's Rhetoric does
for  that art in the limited sphere of oratory. But Augustine's treatise
On  Christian  Doctrine engages in a general rhetorical analysis that is
in  a  way  comparable  to Aristotle's analysis of oratory. In this work
Augustine  brings  his own professional training as an orator to bear on
the  problems of reading, interpreting, and expounding Sacred Scripture.
The  fact  that  he  is  dealing with Sacred Scripture and hence, in his
view,  with the teaching of the most fundamental truths, lifts him above
the  limited concerns of the orator; but the fact that he limits himself
to  Sacred  Scripture  also  prevents  him from formulating his rules of
interpretation  and  exposition  with the complete generality they would
have  to  possess in order to be the rules of a general art of rhetoric.
At the opening of the fourth book of Chris-

[686a]
652  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tian  Doctrine,  Augustine declares that, having
considered  in  the preceding books "the mode of ascertaining the proper
meaning"  of  Scripture, he will now treat "the mode of making known the
meaning when it is ascertained." He disclaims any intention "to lay down
rules  of  rhetoric";  he  wishes  merely  "to  engage it on the side of
truth." To this end he tries to show how Scripture itself, and such holy
men  as  St.  Cyprian  and  St. Ambrose in commenting on Scripture, have
employed  the  art  of rhetoric. "It is the duty," Augustine writes, "of
the  interpreter  and teacher of Holy Scripture . . . both to teach what
is  right  and refute what is wrong; and in the performance of this task
to  conciliate  the  hostile,  to  rouse  the  careless, and to tell the
ignorant  both  what is occurring at present and what is probable in the
future.  But  once  his  hearers  are  friendly, attentive, and ready to
learn,  whether  he  has found them so, or has himself made them so, the
remaining  objects  are  to  be  carried  out  in  whatever way the case
requires."  The  first  rule of a general rhetoric would thus seem to be
one  of  creating  a  receptive  frame  of  mind  in  the  persons being
addressed.  This  accomplished,  the  teacher  must proceed with various
alternatives  in mind. "If the hearers need teaching," Augustine writes,
"the  matter  treated of must be made fully known by means of narrative.
On  the  other  hand,  to  clear  up  points  that are doubtful requires
reasoning and the exhibition of proofs. If, however, the hearers require
to  be roused rather than instructed, in order that they may be diligent
to  do  what  they already know, greater vigor of speech is needed. Here
entreaties  and  reproaches,  exhortations  and upbraidings, and all the
other  means  of  rousing the emotions, are necessary." In Scripture and
its great commentators, Augustine finds "wisdom not aiming at eloquence,
yet  eloquence not shrinking from wisdom." He also finds examples of the
three  kinds  of  style which Cicero had distinguished— the eloquence of
those  "who can say little things in a subdued style, moderate things in
a  temperate  style,  and great things in a majestic style." These three
styles  Augustine connects with the three ends which Cicero had assigned
to  eloquence— teaching, giving pleasure, and moving. The subdued style,
he says, should be used "in order to give

[686b]
instruction,"  the  temperate style "in order to give pleasure," and the
majestic  style "in order to sway the mind." The great books of history,
science,   and  philosophy  provide  additional  materials  for  general
rhetorical  analysis. They offer us the light of examples at least, even
if  they  do  not, like Augustine's commentary on Scripture, give us the
guidance  of  rules.  Such historians as Herodotus, Thucydides, Tacitus,
and  Gibbon exhibit a diversity of styles in the writing of history. The
diversity  is  not only on the grammatical level of the use of language,
but  also  on  the  logical  level  of  order  and  argument. Rhetorical
principles control the way in which the language and the organization of
the  parts  are  suited to each other and to the historian's purpose— to
the effect he wishes to produce upon his reader. The way in which Euclid
writes  the Elements is a style of exposition, having rhetorical as well
as  logical  features.  In  its rhetorical (if not its strictly logical)
form  it  is  applicable  to  other subject matters. This may be seen in
Spinoza's  adoption of it in his Ethics and in Newton's adaptation of it
in  his  Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy. The dialogue form
which  Plato  seems  to  have invented for writing philosophy appears to
recommend  itself  rhetorically not only to other philosophers, but also
to  a scientist like Galileo in the composition of his Two New Sciences.
If  the  doctrines  of  the  Summa Theologica or of the Critique of Pure
Reason  were  separated from the very special styles of these two works,
they  would  probably  not  have the same effect upon the reader; and as
they   are  written,  they  affect  different  readers  differently,  as
differently  as  do  the  styles of Dante, Milton, Melville, Dostoevsky,
Adam  Smith,  and  Karl  Marx.  Some  methods  of exposition may be more
appropriate  than  others  to certain subject matters. "There is a great
difference  in  the  delivery  of  mathematics,"  says  Bacon,  "and  of
politics."  But  in  every subject matter or field of learning, there is
the  common  problem  of  how to make language serve most effectively to
enlighten  or  convince  in  the  communication  of thought. The problem
arises  in  the  writing  of  a  single  sentence  as  well  as  in  the
organization of a whole discourse.

[687a]
The  choice  of  words and the formation of new words, the invention and
employment  of figures of speech, by which abbreviation or amplification
of  discourse  may  be achieved and the imagination freshened— these are
some  of  the considerations of style which Aristotle discusses (both in
his  Rhetoric and in his Poetics) and which Augustine illustrates in his
analysis  of  Scripture.  They  suggest the rules of a general rhetoric,
founded  on  principles  as  universal  as  Pascal's insight that "words
differently  arranged have a different meaning, and meanings differently
arranged  have a different effect." This observation indicates a further
answer  to  the  question  raised  much  earlier, namely, why the art of
rhetoric  is  needed over and above the skills of grammar and logic. For
oratory  the  question  has been answered by reference to those rules of
rhetoric  which deal with the passions and with moral character. But for
a  more  general rhetoric, concerned with all discourse, the answer must
be in terms of rules of style of the sort Pascal's observation suggests.
If  there  were  never more than one grammatically and logically correct
way  of  saying  anything,  then grammatical and logical standards would
suffice  for  the regulation of sound discourse. But if there are always
several  ways  of  stating  something  and if each of them satisfies the
rules  of  grammar  and logic, but differs in the impression it makes on
the  mind,  then  criteria other than those of grammar and logic will be
needed  to  determine our choice of which to use. Such criteria may take
the  passions  and  the imagination into account, but they may also look
primarily  to  the  manner in which the mind itself naturally works. The
fact  that  there  are  several ways of presenting the same truth to the
mind—and  usually  several ways in which the mind can interpret the same
statement—defines  the  scope  of a general rhetoric and the relation of
its rules to those of grammar and logic. Nevertheless, some of the great
authors  seem  to  doubt the worth of rhetoric in science or philosophy.
Locke,  for  example,  admits that "in discourses where we seek pleasure
and delight rather than information and improvement, such ornaments"— as
"figurative speeches and allu-

[687b]
Chapter  81: RHETORIC 653 sion in language"—"can scarce pass for faults.
But,"  he  adds, "if we would speak of things as they are, we must allow
that  all  the  art  of  rhetoric,  besides order and clearness, all the
artificial  and figurative application of words eloquence hath invented,
are  for  nothing  else but to insinuate wrong ideas, move the passions,
and  so,  indeed, are perfect cheats . . . and where truth and knowledge
are  concerned,  cannot  but  be  thought  a  great fault, either of the
language or person that makes use of them." Descartes also declares that
"those who have the strongest power of reasoning, and who most skilfully
arrange  their  thoughts in order to render them clear and intelligible,
have  the  best  power  of  persuasion  even  if  they can but speak the
language  of  Lower  Britanny  and  have never learned rhetoric." Yet he
qualifies  this severity somewhat by identifying dialectic with rhetoric
and  granting  its  "possible  use ... to serve to explain at times more
easily  to others the truths we have already ascertained." Plato for the
most  part  tends  in  the  opposite  direction,  keeping  dialectic and
rhetoric  poles  apart.  But  if there were a true as opposed to a false
rhetoric,  a  rhetoric  concerned  with  knowledge and truth, not merely
opinion  and pleasure, he would be willing, it seems, to admit it to the
company  of  dialectic,  and regard it as an aid in the teaching, if not
the discovery, of the truth. The pedagogical utility of rhetoric as well
as  dialectic  appears  in the summary which Socrates gives to Phaedrus,
after they have finished examining the speeches about love. "Until a man
knows  the  truth  of  the several particulars of which he is writing or
speaking,"  Socrates  says, "and is able to define them as they are, and
having  defined  them  again  to divide them until they can no longer be
divided,  and  until  in like manner he is able to discern the nature of
the  soul,  and  discover  the  different  modes  of discourse which are
adapted  to different natures, and to arrange and dispose them in such a
way  that  the  simple  form  of  speech may be addressed to the simpler
nature,  and  the  complex and the composite to the more complex nature—
until  he  has  accomplished  all  this,  he  will  be  unable to handle
arguments  according  to  rules  of  art . . . either for the purpose of
teaching or persuading."

[688a]
654  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  philosopher  2.  The  function  of  rhetoric  in
expository,  speculative,  and  poetic  discourse  course ic. Methods of
exposition  in history, science, philosophy, and theology of oratory 3b.
The  structure  of  an  oration:  the  order  of its parts y. The use of
language  for  persuasion:  oratorical style 4. The means of persuasion:
the  distinction  between artistic and inartistic means cance of his own
character  (1)  Rhetorical  induction:  the use of examples knowledge of
various  subject matters end of success in persuasion $a. The purpose of
oratory  and  the  exigencies  of  truth  orator  forms of government 8.
Examples of excellence in oratory

[688b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS PAGE i. The nature and scope of rhetoric 655 lb. The
relation of rhetoric to grammar, logic, and psychology 656 ib. The canon
of  excellence  in style 657 id. Principles of interpretation: the modes
of  meaning  658  3#.  The  kinds  of  oratory:  deliberative, forensic,
epideictic  659  4^.  The  orator's treatment of emotion: his display of
emotion;  the  arousal of his audience 660 (2) Rhetorical proof: the use
of enthymemes 661 (3) The topics or commonplaces which are the source of
premises:  the  orator's  6. The education of the orator: the schools of
rhetoric 662

[689a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] ]2d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, W^ql-I 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References : The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (£>)  // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface.  1.  The  nature and scope of
rhetoric 7 Plato: Phaedrus 115a-141a,c esp 136a-141a,c / Meno, 176d-177a
/  Gorgias  252a-294d  esp  260a-262a,  280d-283a  9 Aristotle: Rhetoric
593a-675a,c  esp  bk i, ch 1-3 593a-599c, ch 4 [i359b i-i8] 599d, bk hi,
ch  1 [1404*1-2] 654a 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 16, 180d181a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 8 113d-114c; bk 11, ch 23 170a-172d
14  Plutarch: Pericles, 129b-130a 17 Plotinus : Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch
31,  175a  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr ix, ch ii, 250d 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  3637  653d-654b;  bk  iv,  ch 1-5 675b,d-677d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 27, a 2, rep 2 737d-738c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 72a-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 147b-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 56b; 62c69c esp 66b-67c 33 Pascal: Geometrical
Demonstration, 439b446a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x, sect
34 299d-300a 42 Kant: Judgement, 532b-d; 535b-c

[689b]
Chapter  81: RHETORIC 655 la. The distinction of rhetoric from dialectic
and  sophistry:  the  rhetorician  and  the  philosopher  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk hi, 425c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 39d-42c; 47d-48a;
50d52d; 57a-d / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c esp 83a-b / Phaedrus, 131b-141a,c /
Apology,   200a-201b;  203a-205c  /  Gorgias  252a-294d  esp  253b-256c,
258b-259c,   265a-267c,280d-285a/  Theaetetus,  525d-526a;  528c-530b  /
Sophist, 555d-556b; 559c-561a; 579a-d / Philebus, 634b-635a 8 Aristotle:
Topics, bk i, ch 3 144a-b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1-2 593a-598b;
CH  4  [i359b9-i7]599d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 7 253b-d 14
Plutarch:  Themistocles,  88d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 7-8
14c15a;  bk  v,  par  10  29b-d  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk 11, ch 36-37
653d-654b;  bk  iv,  ch 5 677a-d; ch 12 683d-684c; ch 27-28 696a-697a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 83, a 1, ans 436d-438a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua   and   Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  1011>T06a25  Montaigne:  Essays,
446d-450a; 453c-455a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 66c-67c

[690a]
(1.  The  nature  and scope of rhetoric, la. The distinction of rhetoric
from  dialectic  and sophistry: the rhetorician and the philosopher.) 31
Descartes:  Rules,  x,  16d-17a  33  Pascal  : GeometricalDemonstration,
439b-446a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x, sect 34 299d-300a
43  Mill:  Liberty, 292b-293b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [1995-2000] 47a-b
lb.  The relation of rhetoric to grammar, logic, and psychology 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  131b-141a,c  / Gorgias, 281c282c 8 Aristotle: Interpretation,
ch i
[16*5-8] 25a;
ch  4  [i7a i-7] 26b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1-2 593a-598b; ch 4
[i359b9~i7]  599d;  bk  hi,  ch  1-12  653b,  d667b  10  Galen:  Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch 16, 180d181a 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk
ii, ch 3637 653d-654b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55a-b; 67c; 72a-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 75a-77d; 448d-449c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
31a-d;  56b67c  passim, esp 58c-59a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 14-16 174a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi,
ch  x,  sect 34 299d-300a 42 Kant: Judgement, 575b-c lc. The relation of
rhetoric  to  the  arts  of  government:  the orator and the statesman 4
Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [278-393] 12d-13d 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-425]
261d-262a  / Orestes [852-956] 402d-403d 5 Aristophanes: Peace [601-656]
532d-533c 6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 180c-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  hi,  425c-d;  427a-c  7  Plato:  Phaedrus, 129d-130c / Apology
200a212a,c  /  Gorgias  252a-294d esp 254d-256d / Statesman, 604c-605c /
Laws, bk iv, 684a-686b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[u8ob28u8i a i8] 435d-436a
/ Politics, bk iv, ch 4
[1292*4-38] 491b-d passim; bk v, ch 5 [1305
7-15] 506d / Rhetoric 593a-675a,c esp bk i, ch 1
[i354b23~34] 593d-594a, ch 3-8 598b608c, bk
11, ch 1
[i377bi4-i378ai9] 622b,d623a
12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk viii, sect 30 287d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[142-156]  107a  14 Plutarch: Pericles, 129b-130b / Alcibiades, 159a-b /
Phocion,   604b,d-605c   /   Cato   the   Younger,  621c  /  Demosthenes
691b,d-704a,c / Cicero 704a- 723d esp 709a / DemosthenesCicero 724a-725d

[690b]
656 THE GREAT IDEAS \b to 2a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 10d-llb; 12c-13d;
bk  xiii,  126a-b  /  Histories,  bk  iv, 290a-d 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  5  677a-d;  ch 18-19 686d-688a; ch 24, 694b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  7, a 2, rep 3 652d-653c 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxiii  33d-34b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
106a-b;  127d128d;  129b-c; 158d-159a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 147b-148a 26
Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  hi,  sc ii 583c-586c 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus,  act  hi,  sc  ii  [3986]  374a-c  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  ld-2b;  25a-c; 78a-d 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 383a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 290a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxix, 266b-c
38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 64a-c;
303c;  384d385b  43  Federalist: number i, 29d-30c; number 58, 181b-c 43
Mill:  Representative  Government, 361b-362c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 374a-c
46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 153d154a; part ii, 273d-274a 2.
The   function  of  rhetoric  in  expository,  speculative,  and  poetic
discourse 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 129d-141a,c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch
2 [i355b26-35] 595b;
[i356b36-i357a
7] 596c;
[1358*3-26]
597d-598b; ch 4
[i359b i-i8]
599d;  bk  hi,  ch  1-12  653b,d-667b  / Poetics, ch 6 [i449b20I450b i3]
684a-685a esp
[i45ob4-i3]
684d685a;  ch 19 691d-692b 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 6
638a-d; ch 36-37 653d-654b; bk iv 675a698a,c 22 Chaucer: Clerks Prologue
295a-296a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, llb-12c esp 12b-c; 38c-39a;
62c-69c esp 65b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees,
22-23  175b; 50-59 178b-179b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x,
sect  34  299d-300a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 3c-4a,c / Practical Reason,
294b-c  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 376c-d / Judgement,
524a-b;  532b-d;  575b-c  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 130c-131a; 180b 2a. The
devices of rhetoric: figures of speech; the extension and contraction of
discourse 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk viii, ch i
[157*1-18]
213a-b  9  Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 1-12 653b, d667b / Poetics, ch
21 [i457bi-i458a 7] 693a-d; ch 22 694a-695a

[691a]
2b  to  2c  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  42c-43b / Phocion, 606c-d / Marcus
Brutus,  803b-c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk xi, ch i8 331d332a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  29 668a-d; ch 37, 674b-d; bk iv, ch 7
678c-682a^__  r  22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 37 26b;
stanza 147-149 40b-41a / Prologue
[725-746] 171b-172a
/ Clerks Prologue 295a296a / Squires Tale
[10,348-355]
339b;
[10,715-722] 345b / Franklin's Prologue 351a /
Sir Thopas 396a-400a / Prologue to Melibeus 400b-401a / Manciple's Tale
[17,154-186]
491a-b  /  Parson  s  Prologue [17,341-375] 494a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  67b;  part ii, 127d; conclusion, 282c-d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  77b-78b; 101b-106a; bk hi, 195c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,   15c-d;  113d-114b;  148a149a;  196b-197a;  198b-c;  465c-d  26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act i, sc hi [209210] 439d / Henry V, act iv,
sc vii
[35]
559a  27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act hi, sc 11 [180-189] 122a
/  Sonnets,  lxxxii 598d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, 2b-c 29 Cervantes:
Don Quixote, part i, xia-xvid passim; lb-c; part ii, 251a-252a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  llb-12c;  24a;39b-d;68a-b;99b-c  33  Pascal:
Pensees,  26-29  175b-176a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x,
sect  34  299d-300a  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 228b-229b; 243a244a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 49a-50c 43 Federalist: number 24, 87b-88c; number
29,  lOOa-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 284b; 353c-354a 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  40c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xii, 534c-d 53 James:
Psychology,  687a-688a;  692b-693b  passim 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure
Principle,  662a-b  2b. The canon of excellence in style 5 Aristophanes:
Knights
[1373-1383]
486d487a / Clouds [314-340] 491c-492a; [518-562] 494d-495c;
[1351-1379] 504d-505b
/ Peace
[734-818] 534c-535c/ £^[1372-1 409] 559b-c
/ Frogs
[777-1533]
573b-582a,c  / Thesmophoriazusae [95-175] 601c-602b 7 Plato: Protagoras,
52d-57a / Republic, bk hi, 328b-331c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 8
[ii28ai8-25]
375b-c  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [i265aio-i2]460b;  bk  viii,  ch 7
[i342a32-b i8] 548a, c / Rhetoric, bk in, ch 1-12 653b,d-667b / Poetics,
ch 19
[i456b8-i9] 692a-b; ch 22 694a-695a; ch 24
[i46oa32-b4] 696c-d; ch 25 [i46ob i2-i4] 696d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk viii, sect 30 287d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
42c-43b / Marcus Cato, 279d / Phocion, 606c-d

[691b]
Chapter  81: RHETORIC 657 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 9 15a-b;
bk  xi,  par  35-37  97c-98b  /  City  of God,  bk  xi, ch 18 331d-332a /
Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 36 653d; bk iv, ch 14 684d-685b; ch 17-26
686c-696a  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii, stanza 147-149
40b-41a / Prologue [725-746] 171b172a / Miller's Prologue
[3 167-3 186] 212a-b /
Clerks Prologue
[7888-7932]
295a-296a / Squire's Tale
[10,715-722] 345b
/ Franklin's Prologue 351a / Sir Thopas 396a-400a / Prologue to Melibeus
400b-401a / Manciple's Tale
[17,154-186] 491a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  67b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 75a-77d;
104d-105c; 113d-114b; 145d-146b; 148a-149a; 194c-200d passim; 309c-310c;
422c-423c;  449b-c;  453d454a;  455a-d;  465c-d;  482b-483b;  502c-504b;
511c-d  27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  xxi  589b-c; lxxvi 597d-598a; lxxxii
598d;  cxxx  606a-b  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, xiiia-c; lb-c;
185a-b;  part  ii, 251a-252a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, llb-12c;
63b-c;  64a  66b  31  Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b; part vi, 66d 32
Milton:  Vacation  Exercise  59a-61b  33  Pascal: Pensees, 14-16 174a-b;
22-35 175a177a; 48 178b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 209a-210b; 230b231a;
287b-289b;  344b-345a  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, la-2a; 49a-50c; 223a225a;
246a-247a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 494d-495a,c; 529d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 300b; 327c; 522c523c passim; 573a 42 Kant: Judgement,
513d-514b;  524a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  59c-61d;  167d-168b; 215b-c;
217a-b;  284b;  353c-354a;  381d-382a; 454a; 455b 53 James : Psychology,
381a  2c.  Methods  of  exposition  in history, science, philosophy, and
theology  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  354b-c  7  Plato:
Protagoras,  50d-52d; 54c-55a; 57a-c / Phaedrus, 132b-140b / Theaetetus,
542a  /  Statesman,  590d-591c  /  Seventh  Letter,  809a-c 8 Aristotle:
Posterior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 13 b 38_39l 133c / Topics, bk viii, ch 3
[i58b8-
[97
17]  215b  9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i 161a165d passim, esp
[639  ai-b i2] 161a-d / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 2 [1358*3-26] 597d-598b; ch 4
[i359b  1-18] 599d; bk in, ch 1 [1404*1-12] 654a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i  [921-950]  12b-c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bkii,ch23
170a-172d; bk in, ch 23, 203a-b 14 Plutarch: Phocion, 606c-d

[692a]
(2.  Thefunction  of  rhetoric  in  expository,  speculative, and poetic
discourse.  2c.  Methods  of exposition in history, science, philosophy,
and theology.} 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch i6 644a-645d;
bk hi, ch 5 659d-660a; ch 10-13 661c-663c; bk iv 675a-698a,c passim, esp
ch  8-1  1  682a-683d,  ch  14 684d-685b, ch 22-26 693c-696a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  prologue  la-b  part  1,  q  1, a 9 8d-9c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i, 57d-58a; 67c part in, 169b-c; conclusion, 282c-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  197b-198a;  198c-200d  423c;  448b-449d; 455d-456a;
482b-d   28   Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref,  2b-c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation, 336d-337a,c 30 Bacon : Advancement of Learning, 12a-c; 64b-c;
65a-c   33   Pascal:   Pensees,   797-800   327b-328a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  87d-88a;  bk  hi, ch x, sect 34 299d-300a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vii, div 61, 478a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 19a-20a;
49b-50c  38  Montesquieu  -.Spirit  of Laws, bk xxix, 266b-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  334a / Social Contract, bk 11, 401c-402a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  213b-d  passim;  471c-d  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 40c-d;
186a-b;  526c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 2d-4a,c / Practical Reason, 294b-c
/  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  376c-d / Judgement, 514a;
575b-c  44 Boswell: Johnson, 217a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
pref,  2b-d 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 758a; 777d-778c; 851b
49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 40c-d 53 James: Psychology, 121b-122b;
146b; 153b154a; 235b 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 662a-b 2d.
Principles  of interpretation: the modes of meaning 7 Plato: Protagoras,
52d-57a  9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 25 696d-698c 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  i,  ch 17 122d124a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 9 15a-b; bk
v,  par  24  34a-b; bk vi, par 6 36c-d; bk xii, par 32-36 107a-108c; par
41-43  HOa-d; bk xiii, par 36-37 120c-121a / City of God, bk xi, ch 30-32
339c-340d;  bk  xiii,  oh  21  371a-c; bk xv, ch 2-3 398c-399c; ch 25-27
419a421d;  bk  xvi,  ch  2 422b-423d; ch 6 426c427a; ch 37 444b-445a; bk
xvii,  ch  3 450c451c; bk xviii, ch 42-44 496d-498c; bk xx, ch 21, 549d;
ch 28-29 556c-557c / Christian

[692b]
658  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 2d to 3 Doctrine, bk i-iii 624a-674d esp bk i, ch
3537  634c-635c, bk ii, ch 6 638a-d, ch 9-10 640c-641a, ch 12 641c-642b,
ch  16  644a645d,  bk  in,  ch 5 659d-660a, ch 10-13 661c-663c, ch 24-37
666d-674d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, aa 9-10 8d-10c 21
Dante:  Divine Comedy, hell, ix [61-63] 13a; purgatory, viii [19-21] 64c
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  246c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  lb,d-3a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 4c;
39b-d;  63a-b;  99bc 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 163b-164b / Pensees,
570-579  273b-276a; 642-692 290b301a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 346a-b
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  329d-330a  42  Kant: Practical Reason,
294b-c;  339b-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  290a-b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,
151b-152a  54  Freud:  Interpretation of Dreams, 248c / New Introductory
Lectures,  816a-b , The role of rhetoric as concerned with persuasion in
the  sphere  of  action:  the  analysis  of  oratory  7 Plato: Phaedrus,
131b-138c  /  Gorgias  252a294d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch 4
[1292*4-38] 491b-d; bk v, ch 4
[i304b7-i8]
506b  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  28,  par  3-4  565d566a / Rhetoric
593a-675a,c esp bk i, ch i
[i3548 i]-ch
2
[1356*35]
593a-596a, ch 3 598b-599c, bk ii, ch i
[i377b2i-i378ai9]
622b,d-623a, ch 18 [i39ib8-2o] 639a-b, ch 26
[i403a33-b
3] 653c, bk hi, ch i
[i403b5~i3]
653b,  ch  16  [i4i6b i5-22] 670c-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 8
113d-114c  14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  129b-130b  18  Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  11-14  683c-685b;  ch 23-26 693d-696a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  73b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  147b-148a 32 Milton:
Paradise   Lost,   bk  ix  [664-678]  261b262a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical
Demonstration,  439b446a esp 441a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro,
sect   20  410d-411a  42  Kant.  Judgement,  535b-c  43  Declaration  of
Independence:
[1-6]
la;
[95-108] 3a
43   Federalist:   number   i,   29d-30c;  number  58,  181bc  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  361b-362c  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 374a-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153d154a; part i, 250d-251a 50
Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 429c433d passim

[693a]
b  3a  to  4a  Chapter  81  :  RHETORIC 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x,
426a-430b  passim;  bk  xi,  482b-484c;  504b-c;  bk  xiii, 572b-573b 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  xii,  369a-398d 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  450b /-^Group Psychology, 668c 3>a. The kinds of oratory:
deliberative,  forensic, epideictic 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 137b 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[i354b22i355a3]
593d-594a;  ch 3-15 598b-622d esp ch 3 598b-599c; bk ii, ch 18 639ac; bk
hi, ch 12 [i4i3b3-i4i4a i7] 666b-667a passim; ch 13-14 667b-669c passim;
ch 16
[i4i6b i5]-CH
17  [i4i8b23]  670c-673b  passim  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 23
201a203b  18  Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine, bk iv, ch 18 686d-687d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 67c; part ii, 127d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 38b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 343a b 3b. The structure of
an  oration:  the  order  0/  its  parts  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 132c-135b 9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 26 [1403*33b3) 653c; bk hi, ch i
[i403b5-i3] 653b; ch
13-19  667b-675a,c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 466ac 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 58c-59a; 68a3c. The use of language for persuasion: oratorical
style  7  Plato: Protagoras, 50d-52d; 57a-c / Symposium, 172c / Apology,
200ac  9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  hi,  ch  1-12  653b, d667b esp ch i
653b,d-654c  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [921-950] 12b-c; bk iv
[1-25]  44a-b  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 8 113d-114c; bk in, ch
23  201a-203b  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  42c-43b  / Alcibiades, 159a-b /
Marcus   Cato,  279d-281b  /  Demosthenes,  692d-695d  /  Cicero,  706a;
713b-715a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 10-11 29b-30a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  11,  ch  36  653d;  bk  iv,  ch 10-12 682c-684c; ch 17-26
686c-696a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 127d; conclusion, 282c-d 26
Shakespeare:  King  John,  act  ii,  sc  i  [423467]  384a-c  30  Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 12a-c; 83d-84a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i,
43b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 20 410d-411a

[693b]
659  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 206a-b; 343a-b; 529d 43 Federalist:
number  i,  29d-30c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  292b-293b 44 Boswell: Johnson,
130c-131a; 475b 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [522-557] 15a-b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  ii, 65d-66d; bk v, 194a-198b passim; bk vii, 302c-d; bk
viii, 308d; 326d-327a; bk ix, 347b-348a; 351c-d; bk x, 402b-403a; bk xi,
497c-499c;  504b-c;  505d-506a;  bk  xii, 536a-537b; 554b-555c; bk xiii,
565a-b;  bk  xv,  622a-c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk xii,
369a-370b; 386a-387d 4. The means of persuasion: the distinction between
artistic  and inartistic means 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 131b-138c 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i355b361356^5] 595b-d; ch 15 619d-622d; bk
ii, ch 1 [i377b2i-i378a i9] 622b,d-623a; bk hi, ch i
[i403b5-i3]
653b; ch 7 659a-660a; ch 16
[i4i6b i5-22]
670c-d; ch 19
[1419^0-13]
674c  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk iv, ch 4 676d-677a 47 Goethe:
Faust,  part  i  [522-557]  15a-b  4a.  The  orator's  consideration  of
character  and  of  the  types  of audience: the significance of his own
character 4 Homer: Iliad, bk hi [203-224] 21a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk
viii, 271c-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 358d360c; 365c-369a;
370a-c;  378c-d;  379b-d;  385a-b;  bk  ii, 395d-399a; 402b-404a; bk hi,
425a-429a;  429d-434a; bk iv, 478d-479b; bk v, 484a-c; 504c-507c; bk vi,
511c-d; 512c513d; 519c-520d; 533a-c; 534b-c 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 136a-137c
/ Critias, 478b-d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356*1-25]
595b-d; ch 9 608c-611c; ch 15 [1376^24-32] 621a; bk ii, ch i
[i377b2i-i378 ai9] 622b,d623a; ch
12
[i388b3i]-CH
18
[i39i b22] 636a639b; ch 21 [i395ai8-b i9] 643a-c; bk hi, ch 7
[i4o8 aio-37]
659ac; ch 14
[i4i5 a25-b2i]
668c-669b; ch 16 [i4i7ai6-b i2] 671b-d; ch 17
[1418^3-33] 673b-c; ch 19 [1419^0-19] 674c
13  Virgil: Aeneid, bk 1 [142-156] 107a 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 129b-130b
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  lla-b;  12d-13c  18  Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch 6, 678a; ch 27-28 696a-697a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
345a-b  26  Shakespeare:  Julius  Caesar,  act  hi,  sc  ii 583c-586c 27
Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[51192] 351d-353c; act
ii,  sc  hi  [44-162]  366b367d  32  Milton:  Areopagitica, 381b-383b 33
Pascal: Pensees, 47 178b / Geometrical Demonstration, 441a-442a

[694a]
660 THE GREAT IDEAS (4. The means of persuasion: the distinction between
artistic  and  inartistic  means.  4a.  The  orator's  consideration  of
character  and  of  the  types  of audience: the significance of his own
character.}  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 529d 43 Federalist: number i,
29d-30c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  331a; 349bc 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  374a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 153d154a 48
Melville: Moby Dic{, 30a-36b; 117a-122b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
194a-198b   passim;   bk  xi,  497c-499c;  504b-c;  505d-506a;  bk  xii,
536a-537b;  bk  xv,  622a-c  4b.  The orator's treatment of emotion: his
display  of  emotion;  the  arousal  of  his  audience  5  Aristophanes:
Acharnians
[352-565]
459c461c   6   Herodotus:   History,   bk  vii,  214d-215c  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v, 484a-c; bk vii, 557a-b; bk viii, 584b-585a 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  136b-137c  /  Ion,  145a-b  /  Symposium, 169c-170a /
Apology,  208c-209b;  210b-d  / Gorgias, 260a-262a 9 Aristotle: Athenian
Constitution,  ch  28,  par  3-4  565d-566a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  i
[1354*1326] 593b; ch 2
[1356*13-25] 595c-d; bk
ii, ch 1—11 622b,d-636a; bk hi, ch 7 659a-660a; ch 14
[1415*25-40] 668c-d; ch
16
[1417*37b
7] 671c-d; ch 19
[i4i9b io-27]
674c-d / Poetics, ch 19 [i456a33-b8] 691d-692a 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  hi,  ch  23  201a203b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  i [142-156] 107a 14
Plutarch: Pericles, 129b-130b / Nicias, 427a / Tiberius Gracchus, 672b-c
/ Caius Gracchus, 682d-684a / Demosthenes, 692d-695d / Cicero, 719d-720a
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk i, lla-b; 12d-13c / Histories, bk 1, 198c-199c;
20  7  d-  208a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 27 7c-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 36 653d; bk iv, ch 2 675d-676a; ch 4 676d-677a; ch
24  694b-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a; part ii, 127d-128a;
129b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  147b-148a; 310c; 405a-b 26 Shakespeare:
Julius  Caesar,  act  hi  580b587a  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
66c-67c  33  Pascal:  Pensees, 15-16 174a-b / Geometrical Demonstration,
441a-b  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 20 410d-411a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  x,  div  93, 492b-c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
320c-321b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 529d

[694b]
4b to 4c{\) 43 Federalist: number i, 29d-30c 43 Mill: Liberty, 292b-293b
44  Boswell:  Johnson,  209a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 570c-571b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v, 194a-198b passim; bk viii, 326d-327a;
332a-b;  bk  ix,  347b-348a;  bk  xi,  497c-499c  esp  498c-d;  bk  xii,
533a-534d; 536a-537b; bk xv, 622a-c 54 Freud: General Introduction, 450b
4c.   Rhetorical   argument:  the  distinction  between  persuasion  and
demonstration  7 Plato: Protagoras, 50d-52d; 57a-c / Phaedrus, 137b-138c
/  Meno,  176d-177a  /  Gorgias,  254d256c  /  Timaeus,  457c / Sophist,
558a-561a  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  27 92a93a, c /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i [71*1-10] 97a / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5
[1009*15-22]
528c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[1094^4-28]
339d-340a / Rhetoric, bk i 593a-622d esp ch i
[1355*4^22]
594b-595a, ch 2
[1356*1-25]
595b-d; bk ii, ch 18-26 639a-653a,c; bk hi, ch 1
[i403b5-i3] 653b; ch
15 669d-670c; ch 17-19 672a-675a,c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch
16,  180c181a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 5 HOb-c; ch 8 113d-114c
18  Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3637 653d-654b; bk iv, ch 4
676d-677a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  83,  a  1, ans
436d-438a;  part  i-ii,  q 7, a i, rep i 651d-652c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  67c;  part  ii,  127d;  128d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 446d-450a;
453c-454d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  58c-59a;  66c-67c  31
Descartes:  Rules,  x,  16d-17a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical Demonstration,
440b442a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x, sect 34 299d-300a
36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 227a-228a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 261c-d 42
Kant: Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 376c-d 43 Federalist: number
14,  62a-d  43  Mill:  Liberty, 284b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi,
243b; epilogue 1, 672a-b 4c(l) Rhetorical induction: the use of examples
8  Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 24 90c91a / Topics, bk viii, ch
i   [i56b  io-i8]  212c-d;  ch  8  [i6o*35-b  i]  21  7d  /  Sophistical
Refutations,  ch  5  [167*9-13]  229d-230a  /  Metaphysics,  bk ii, ch 3
[995*6-8] 513c 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[1356*361358*2] 596a-597d; ch 9 [1368*29-31] 611b-c;
bk 11, ch 20 640d-641d; ch 23 [i398*32-b i8]

[695a]
4<r(2) to 5b Chapter 81 : RHETORIC 646d-647a; ch 25
[1403*5-9] 652d;
bk  hi,  ch  17  [1418*1-3]  672b  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 8
113d-114c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  99c  42  Kant:  Pref.
Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 376c-d 4c(2) Rhetorical proof: the use
of  enthymemes  8  Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 27 92a93a,c 9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355*4-17]
594b;  ch  2 [1356*36-1358*35] 596a-598b; ch 9 [1368*31-33] 611c; bk 11,
ch  20  [i394*9]-ch  26  [i403b i] 641d-653a,c; bk hi, ch 17 672a673c 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 8 113d-114c 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  376c-d 4c(3) The topics or commonplaces which are
the  source  of  premises:  the  orator's  knowledge  of various subject
matters 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 131b-141a,c / Euthyphro, 193d-194b / Gorgias,
253b-262b esp 257a-d, 258b-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i-vii 143a-211a,c 9
Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1356*21-29] 595d; ch 2
[1358*2]-^
15
[i377b i3] 597d622d; bk
11, ch 18 [i39i b23]-CH 19 [1393*20] 639b-640d; ch 22
[i395b2o]-CH 26 [1403*34]
643c-653a,c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 58c-59c; 68a-b; 83b-85a
5.  The  evaluation  of  oratory  and  the  orator: the justification of
rhetorical  means  by  the  end  of  success  in persuasion 5 Euripides:
Suppliants   [399-425]   261d-262a   /  Orestes  [852-956]  402d-403d  5
Aristophanes: Acharnians [352-384] 459c-d / Knights 470a-487a,c esp
[1333-138 3] 486c487a / Clouds 488a- 506d esp [882-1104] 499b502a / Wasps [652-724] 515c-516d
6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d396a; bk hi, 425c-d; 427a-c
7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  74d-75a  / Phaedrus 115a141a,c esp 136a-141a,c /
Apology, 200a-d; 208c-209b / Gorgias 252a-294d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk
i 593a-622d esp ch i
[i354*i-i355b22] 593a-595a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 8 113d-114c; bk 11, ch 23 170a-172d
12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 7 253b-d 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk
iv,  290a-d  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk iv, par 2 19d; bk ix, par 2
61d-62a  / Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 36 653d; bk iv, ch 2 675d-676a;
ch  4-6  676d-678c;  ch  12  683d-684c;  ch 23-26 693d696a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  67c-68a;  75a-76b;  147b149a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
12a-c

[695b]
661   32   Milton:   Areopagitica,  382a  383a  33  Pascal:  Geometrical
Demonstration, 439b446a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x, sect
34 299d-300a 42 Kant: judgement, 535b-c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 285c; 475b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part  ii,  280a-b 5a. The purpose of
oratory  and the exigencies of truth 6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 169a-d;
bk  vi,  186bc  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 425a-d; bk viii,
584b-585a  7  Plato: Phaedrus, 131b-138c / Symposium, 161 b-d / Apology,
200ac / Gorgias 2 5 2a- 294d / Theaetetus, 525c-526a; 544a-c / Philebus,
634b-635a  9  Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [i355*2i-b 7] 594c-d; ch 2
[1356^6-1357*7]  596c; [1358*326] 597d-598b; bk hi, ch i [1404*1-2] 654a
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  24  172d174b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  28-29  7d-8b;  bk  v, par 10 29b-d; par 23-24
33c-34b  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 36 653d; bk iv, ch 2 675d-676a;
ch  4-6  676d-678c;  ch  10-12  682c-684c;  ch  28  696c-697a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  67c;  conclusion,  282c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
147b-148a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 12a-d; 66c-67c 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  ii  [108-228] 113b116a / Areopagitica, 382a-383a 35
Locke:   Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  x,  sect  34  299d-300a  43
Federalist:  number  i,  29d-30c; number 29, lOOac 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
374a-c  5b.  The  orator's  concern with justice, law, and the good: the
moral  virtue  of  the  orator  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk viii, 274b 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk i, 358d360c; bk 11, 395c-399a; bk hi,
424d-428d  esp  427ac;  429d-434a;  bk  iv,  468a-469b;  469d470b; bk v,
504c-507c;  bk  vi,  512d-513a  7  Plato:  Apology,  208c-209b / Gorgias
252a294d  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  314c  /  Sophist,  579a-d  9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric, bk i, ch i [1354*1-1355* 3] 593a-594a; ch 2
[1356*1-13] 595bc; ch
3-15  598b-622d;  bk  ii,  ch  i  [i377b2i-i378*i9]  622b,d-623a;  ch 21
[1395*18^19]  643a-c  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 23, 203a-b 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  129b-130b  / Nicias, 427a / Phocion, 604b,d-605c /
Cato  the  Younger, 628b-d; 643a-644b / Demosthenes, 696a-697a / Cicero,
709a / Demosthenes-Cicero 724a725d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xi, 101c-102a

[696a]
(5.  The  evaluation  of  oratory  and  the orator: the justification of
rhetorical  means by the end of success in persuasion. 5 b. The orator's
concern  with  justice,  law,  and  the  good:  the  moral virtue of the
orator.)  17  Plotinus:  Fifth  Ennead, tr ix, ch ii, 250d 18 Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 37 653d-654b; bk iv, ch 18 686d-687d; ch
24,  694b-c; ch 27-30 696a-697d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  7,  a  2, rep 3 652d-653c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 77d; part ii,
106a-b;  127d-128b;  129b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 345a-b 26 Shakespeare:
Julius  Caesar,  act  hi,  sc  ii  583c-586c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,  66b-69c  esp  66c-d  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  382a-383a 43
Federalist:   number   i,   29d-30c   43   Mill:  Liberty,  292b-293c  /
Representative Government, 361b-362c 44 Bosvvell: Johnson, 374a-c 6. The
education  of  the  orator:  the  schools of rhetoric 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
136a-138c; 141a-c 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i7-i84b i] 253a-c
9 Aristotle: Rhetoric 593a-675a,c esp bk i, ch 1
[i354a i2-i355 a
3]  593a-594a  14 Plutarch: Pericles, 124d-125a / Demosthenes, 692d-696a
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 27-29 7c8b; bk in, par 6-7 14b-d;
bk  iv,  par  2  19d;  bk  v,  par  22-23 33b-34a; bk ix, par 2 61d62a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  3  676a-d;  ch  5  677a-d  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  llb-12c;  31a-d;  66b-c  39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  338d-339a  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 19b; 364a-b;
389d390a;  529c;  669a-670b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 40b 7. The
history  of  oratory: its importance under various social conditions and
in different forms of government 5 Aristophanes: Knights [211-222] 472c;
[342358] 474a-b; [815-880] 480a-481a 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 141a-c / Apology
200a212a,c   /  Gorgias,  285a-294d  /  Republic,  bk  vm,  413d-416a  8
Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i7-i8 4
b  i] 253a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 4 [1292^-38] 491b-d; bk v,
ch 5
[1305*7-15] 506d / Athenian Constitution, ch 28, par 3-4 565d-566a /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[i354ai2-i355a3]
593a594a; bk hi, ch i
[i403b i5-i404a39] 653b, d654c

[696b]
662 THE GREAT IDEAS 6/08 14 Plutarch: Theseus, 13a-14c / Solon, 66d-67a;
76a-c  /  Pericles,  129b-130b  /  Coriolanus,  179c184c  / Marcus Cato,
287d-288c  / Nicias, 427a / Caesar, 579c-580b / Cato the Younger, 628b-d
/   Tiberius   Gracchus   671b,d-681a,c  esp  672bc  /  Caius  Gracchus,
681b,d-685c  esp  683c  / Demosthenes 691b,d-704a,c / Cicero 704a-723d /
Demosthenes-Cicero  724a-725d  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk xi, 101c-102a; bk
xiii, 126a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 106a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
147b-148a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, llb-12c; 66b-67a 32 Milton:
Areopagitica,  383a  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 290a b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk xii, 89c90c 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 338d-339a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
23d-24a;  303c304a;  364a-c; 669a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 225b-c;
327a-d  43  Federalist:  number  58,  181b-c  43 Mill: Liberty, 284b-d /
Representative  Government,  331a;  361b-362c;  375a-377a  44  Boswell :
Johnson,  374a-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 273d274a 50
Marx:   Capital,  8d-9c  passim  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
430c432a  passim 8. Examples of excellence in oratory 4 Homer: Iliad, bk
i [59-303] 3d-6a; bk ii [56394] 10c-13d; bk vm
[1-37]
51a-b; bk ix
[225-655] 59c-63c; bk x [203-253] 67a-c; bk
xi  [655-803] 79a-80c; bk xii [309-328] 85b-c; bk xix [54-275] 137c-139d
5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[352-627]
459c462b 6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 182b-d; bk vii, 214d-220a; bk viii,
269c-270c;  279b-280b;  286b-287d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
357a360d;  365a-371b; 378c-380a; 384c-386c; bk ii, 389d-390b; 395c-399a;
402a-404d;  411b412c;  bk  in,  418d-420c;  424d-429a;  429d434c; bk iv,
449b-c;  451a-452c;  461b-463a;  468a-469b;  469d-470b; 478d-479b; bk v,
484a-c;  504d-507c;  bk  vi,  511c-516a;  518a520d;  529b-534d;  bk vii,
555b-557b; 559d560b 7 Plato: Phaedrus 115a-141a,c / Symposium, 169c-172d
/  Apology  200a-212a,c  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xi [234-444] 334b-340a 14
Plutarch: Pericles, 124d-125b / Coriolanus, 179c-184c / Aemilius Paulus,
217d-218a;  226c227c / Cato the Younger, 628b-d; 643a644b / Demosthenes,
697c-698b / Cicero, 709a-b; 719d-720a / Marcus Brutus, 815d816a

[697a]
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk i, 6c-8a; 12c-13d; bk ii, 26c-27a; 34d-35c; bk
hi,  56a-b;  bk  xiv, 150b-c / Histories, bk i, 198c-199c; 211c-212b; bk
in,  241d-242c;  244c;  bk  iv,  269d-270b;  290a-d  ^—  ^ 18 Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  iv,  ch  7  678c-682a;  ch  20-21 688a-693c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk ii, 101b-106a 26 Shakespeare:
Richard III, act v, sc hi
[237-270] 146b-c
/ Henry V, act iv, sc hi
[16-67] 555d-556b / Julius Caesar, act hi, sc
ii 583c-586c 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i [1-167 351a-353a 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 23a-26a; 69a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk ii
[1-487]
111a121b;   bk  v  [663-904]  189b-195a;  bk  vi  [414495]  205a-207a  /
Areopagitica  381a-412b  esp 381b-383b CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general
consideration  of the liberal arts, see Art 4; Education 5b; and for the
relation  8d(2).  4c-4d.  3a~3b;  Induction  4b; Reasoning 56; Truth 4d.
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Tacitus.  A  Dialogue on Oratory Plutarch. "Lives of the Ten
Orators,"  in  Moralia  Augustine.  Divine Providence and the Problem of
Evil . The Harmony of the Gospels Hobbes. The Whole Art of Rhetoric

[697b]
Chapter 81: RHETORIC 663 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 255a-256a; 393a395a
37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 320c-321b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 25b-c;
64a-c; 269b270a; 337a-b; 384d-385b; 427a-c; 564bc 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  381a-d; 408d409c; 426b-c; 428c-d; 574b-575d; 577b-d; 587b-588a 43
Declaration of Independence:
[1-6]
la;
[95-108] 3a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  30a-36b 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
415a417a,c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 149d-150a bk ix, 380d-381c;
bk  x,  415b-416c;  426a-430b  passim; 445c; 466b-467a; bk xi, 482b-484c
497c-499c;  504bc;  bk xii, 533a-534d; 536a 537b; bk xm, 565a-b; 566a-c;
572b-573b  bk  xv,  621b-622c  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
148c-170b;  bk  xii,  369a-398d II. Isocrates. Aegineticus . Against the
Sophists  .  Panegyricus  .  Antidosis  Demosthenes.  Philippics Cicero.
Orations

[698a]
664  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Cicero. De Oratore {On Oratory) . Brutus . Orator
Longinus.  On the Sublime Quintilian. Institutio Oratoria {Institutes of
Oratory),  bk  ii-vi, VIII, x-xn Demetrius. On Style Alcuin. Rhetoric T.
Wilson.  Arte  of Rhetorique  Fenelon. Dialogues on Eloquence La Bruyere.
"Of  the  Works  of  the  Mind,"  in  Characters J. Harris. Hermes, or A
Philosophical  Inquiry Concerning Universal Grammar Buffon. Discours sur
le  style  Voltaire.  "Style,"  in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary  W.  G.
Hamilton. Parliamentary Logic G. Campbell. Philosophy of Rhetoric Blair.
Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres Bentham. The Boo\ of Fallacies

[698b]
De  Quincey.  Rhetoric Whately. Elements of Rhetoric T. Carlyle. "Stump-
Orator,"  in  Latter-Day  Pamphlets  Schopenhauer. The World as Will and
Idea,  volii,  sup, CH II . "The Art of Controversy," in Complete Essays
Lewes.  The Principles of Success in Literature Emerson. "Eloquence," in
Society  and  Solitude  Verlaine.  Art poetique Pater. An Essay on Style
Brunetiere.  An  Apology  for  Rhetoric  Croce.  Aesthetic as Science of
Expression  .  "On  Telling the Truth," in The Conduct of Life Buchanan.
Symbolic  Distance . The Doctrine of Signatures Richards. The Philosophy
of Rhetoric . Interpretation in Teaching

[699a]
Chapter  8z:  SAME  AND  OTHER INTRODUCTION THE problems of identity and
diversity— of sameness and otherness, similarity and difference—occur at
that  level  of  philosophical  thought  which deals with being and with
unity.  Plotinus,  for  example, says that in addition to Being, Motion,
and  Rest,  "we  are  obliged  to  posit  the  further two, Identity and
Difference,  so  that  we  have  in  all  five  genera."  In Aristotle's
conception,  terms  like  'being,'  'one,'  and  'same'  have  a greater
universality   than  the  terms  he  calls  the  highest  genera,  e.g.,
'substance,'  'quantity,'  'quality,'  'relation,'  and  so forth. These
latter  represent  categories or classes under which certain things fall
and  others  do not. Not everything is a substance or a quantity, but in
Aristotle's  opinion there is nothing of which it cannot be said that it
is  a  being  in  some sense, that it has some kind of unity, that it is
identical  with  itself,  and  that,  compared with anything else in the
whole universe, it is in certain respects the same, in others different.
The  fundamental  relation  of  quantities  with  one  another,  namely,
equality,  consists in their being the same. The fundamental relation of
qualities  consists  in  their being alike, or the same in spite of some
difference  in degree or intensity, e.g., a brighter and a darker red of
the  same  hue. The notion of relation itself seems to be as fundamental
as  that  of  sameness, since in comparisons one thing is said to be the
same  or different only in relation to something else; yet it also seems
to be true that relations can be the same or similar, for the essence of
proportion or analogy lies in one thing's being related to a second as a
third is to a fourth. The sameness of two relationships is the object of
the  comparison. Such considerations are sometimes called "metaphysical"
with  an  invidious tone. But no one, not even those who would eliminate
meta-

[699b]
physical discussion as indulging in "vicious abstractions" or as verging
on  the  meaningless,  can  easily  avoid  such  notions as identity and
diversity.  It is not merely that ordinary speech, as well as scientific
discourse,  must  use  such  words  as  "same"  and  "other"  almost  as
frequently  as  the  words "is" and "not" or "one" and "many." Those who
are  critical  of  theorizing and who want to save discourse itself from
becoming  "too  metaphysical"  are still obliged to give some account of
what  it means for things to be the same or different and of how we know
when  they  are.  Semantics currently has vogue as a critical instrument
for  safeguarding discourse from ambiguity and nonsense and perhaps also
for  spotting  metaphysical  legerdemain. But semantics itself cannot go
far  in its own analysis of words and meanings without having to explain
how  the  same  word can have different meanings or how the same meaning
can  be  expressed  by  different words. It does not seem likely that an
adequate  explanation could be developed without some theory of sameness
and otherness. The "sense of sameness," says William James, "is the very
keel and backbone of our thinking." He is here speaking "of the sense of
sameness  from  the point of view of the mind's structure alone, and not
from  the point of view of the universe. . . . Whether there be any real
sameness  in  things or not, or whether the mind be true or false in its
assumptions  of  it," he goes on, the point remains that "the mind makes
continual  use  of  the notion of sameness, and if deprived of it, would
have  a  different  structure  from  what  it  has.  .  .  . Without the
psychological  sense  of identity, sameness might rain down upon us from
the outer world forever and we be none the wiser. With the psychological
sense, on the other hand, the outer world might

[700a]
666  THE  GREAT  IDEAS be an unbroken flux, and yet we should perceive a
repeated  experience." James distinguishes three principles of identity.
In  addition to the psychological law according to which we feel a later
experience  to  be  the  same  as  an  earlier  one,  he  refers  to the
ontological  principle  which  "asserts that every real thing is what it
is,  that  a  is  a, and b, b"; and the logical principle which declares
that  "what  is once true of the subject of a judgment is always true of
that  subject."  James  seems  to  think  that "the ontological law is a
tautological   truism,"   whereas  the  logical  and  the  psychological
principles  have  further  implications  not  immediately obvious. Locke
appears  to  take  a  contrary  view. He finds the identity of all ideas
self-evident,  while  to  him  the  real identity of things is much more
difficult  to  grasp.  The  principle  of  identity  and  its  companion
principle  of  contradiction  are,  according to Locke, expressed in the
propositions  'Whatsoever  is,  is'  and  'It is impossible for the same
thing to be and not to be'— "these two general propositions amounting to
no  more, in short, but this, that the same is the same, and the same is
not  different."  But,  Locke  adds,  "the mind, without the help of any
proof  or  reflection on either of these general propositions, perceives
so  clearly, and knows so certainly, that 'the idea of white is the idea
of  white,  and not the idea of blue,' and that 'the idea of white, when
it  is  in the mind, is there and is not absent,' that the consideration
of  these  axioms  can  add  nothing to the evidence or certainty of its
knowledge. ... I appeal to everyone's own mind, whether this proposition
'A  circle  is  a  circle'  be not as self-evident a proposition as that
consisting  of  more  general  terms 'Whatsoever is, is.' But unlike the
comparing  of  an  idea  with itself, real identity, according to Locke,
requires  us to consider a thing "as existing at any determined time and
place"  and  to  "compare it with itself existing at another time. . . .
When, therefore, we demand whether anything be the same or no? it refers
always  to something that existed at such a time in such a place, which,
it  was certain, at that instant, was the same with itself and no other;
from  whence  it  follows  that  one thing cannot have two beginnings of
existence, nor two things one beginning,

[700b]
it  being  impossible  for two things of the same kind to be or exist in
the  same  instant in the very same place, or one and the same thing, in
different  places.  That,  therefore, that had one beginning is the same
thing;  and  that which had a different beginning in time and place from
that,  is not the same, but diverse." In short, across a lapse of time a
thing  remains identical, in Locke's view, or maintains its identity, if
existence  having  made it "one particular thing under any denomination,
the  same existence continued preserves it the same individual under the
same  denomination."  This  understanding of real identity Locke applies
without  difficulty to an atom of matter which, being at a given instant
"what  it  is  and  nothing else ... is the same and so must continue as
long as its existence is continued; for so long it will be the same, and
no  other.  In like manner, if two or more atoms be joined together into
the  same  mass,  every  one  of  those  atoms  will  be the same by the
foregoing  rule;  and  whilst  they  exist  united  together,  the  mass
consisting  of  the  same atoms, must be the same mass or the same body,
let the parts be ever so differently jumbled. But," Locke continues, "if
one  of these atoms be taken away, or one new one added, it is no longer
the  same  mass  or  the  same  body." The problem of identity in living
organisms  Locke does not find so easy to solve. "In the state of living
creatures,"  he  says, "their identity depends not on a mass of the same
particles,  but  on  something  else. For in them the variation of great
parcels  of  matter alters not the identity; an oak growing from a plant
to  a  great  tree,  and  then lopped, is still the same oak; and a colt
grown up to a horse, sometimes fat, sometimes lean, is all the while the
same horse, though in both these cases there may be a manifest change of
the  parts,  so that truly they are not, either of them, the same masses
of  matter."  The  problem  of the real identity or continuity of living
things  through  time  and  change is, as we shall see presently, only a
special  case  of  the larger problem of whether anything at all remains
identical  for more than an instant in the universal flux of things. But
supposing that problem solved in favor of en-

[701a]
during  substances, or things which somehow remain continuously the same
while changing in this or that respect, the point of Locke's observation
about  living things still holds^ior their identity does not seem to lie
in  the  continuity  or permanence of the matter— the particles—of which
they  are  composed. The familiar riddle about the pipe—whether it is in
any respect the same after it has its broken bowl replaced by a new one,
and  then  has  a  new  stem added to the new bowl—may be propounded for
living  organisms.  But  in  their  case,  Locke  argues, a principle of
identity can be found. A plant, he says, "continues to be the same plant
as  long  as  it  partakes  of  the  same  life,  though  that  life  be
communicated  to  new  particles  of matter vitally united to the living
plant,  in  a  like  continued  organization conformable to that sort of
plant."  The principle, he thinks, applies to animals and men. "The case
is  not  so  much different in brutes but that anyone may hence see what
makes  an  animal and continues it the same. Something we have like this
in  machines,  and  may  serve  to illustrate it. For example, what is a
watch?  It is plain it is nothing but a fit organization or construction
of  parts  to  a certain end, which, when a sufficient force is added to
it,  it  is  capable  to  attain.  If  we would suppose this machine one
continued  body,  all whose organized parts were repaired, increased, or
diminished  by  a  constant  addition or separation of insensible parts,
with  one  common life, we should have something very much like the body
of an animal. . . . This also shows wherein the identity of the same man
consists;  viz.,  in  nothing  but a participation of the same continued
life  by  constantly fleeing particles of matter, in succession, vitally
united  to  the same organized body." In the case of man, however, Locke
thinks  we  must  face the additional problem of personal identity. What
makes  a man the same person from moment to moment, sleeping and waking,
remembering or not remembering his past ? In what does the continuity of
the  self  consist, on the identity of which, Locke insists, "is founded
all  the  right and justice of reward and punishment" ? His answer seems
to be that, as a living organism is identical throughout one

[701b]
Chapter  82:  SAME AND OTHER 667 and the same life, it is the continuity
of  the same consciousness which "makes a man be himself to himself" and
establishes  his  personal  identity. "Whatever has the consciousness of
present  and  past  actions,"  Locke writes, "is the same person to whom
they  both  belong.  .  .  .  That  with which the consciousness of this
present  thinking  thing  can join itself, makes the same person, and is
one  self  with  it,  and  with  nothing else. ... If the same Socrates,
waking and sleeping, do not partake of the same consciousness, Socrates,
waking  and  sleeping,  is  not  the same person. And to punish Socrates
waking for what sleeping Socrates thought, and waking Socrates was never
conscious  of,  would  be no more right than to punish one twin for what
his  brother  twin  did, whereof he knew nothing, because their outsides
were  so  like that they could not be distinguished." William James also
attributes   the   sense   of   personal   identity   to  continuity  of
consciousness,  but  for him there still remains a problem of explaining
that  continuity.  In  the  flow of consciousness from moment to moment,
"continuity,"  he  thinks,  "makes  us  unite  what  dissimilarity might
otherwise  separate;  similarity makes us unite what discontinuity might
hold  apart.  . . . The sense of our personal identity, then, is exactly
like any one of our other perceptions of sameness among phenomena. It is
a  conclusion  grounded  either  on  the  resemblance  in  a fundamental
respect,  or  on  the  continuity  before  the  mind,  of  the phenomena
compared."  In  his opinion, "resemblance among the parts of a continuum
of  feelings  (especially bodily feelings) experienced along with things
widely  different  in  all  other regards, thus constitutes the real and
verifiable  'personal identity which we feel. There is no other identity
than  this  in  the  'stream' of subjective consciousness. ... Its parts
differ, but under all their differences they are knit in these two ways;
and if either way of knitting disappears, the sense of unity departs. If
a  man  wakes  up  some  fine  day  unable  to  recall  any  of his past
experiences,  so that he has to learn his biography afresh . . . hefeels
and he says that he is a changed person. He disowns his former me, gives
himself a new name, identifies his present life with nothing from out of

[702a]
668  THE  GREAT  IDEAS the older time. Such cases are not rare in mental
pathology."  In  the  tradition  of the great books, other solutions are
offered  to  the problem of personal identity. Kant thinks, for example,
that   a   ''transcendental  unity  of  apperception"  is  necessary  to
constitute  "in  all  possible  phenomena which may come together in our
experience, a connection of all these representations according to laws.
Unity of consciousness," he writes, "would be impossible if the mind, in
the  knowledge  of  the  manifold,  could  not  become  conscious of the
identity  of  function  by which it unites the manifold synthetically in
one  knowledge.  Therefore,  the original and necessary consciousness of
the  identity  of  one's self is at the same time a consciousness of the
equally  necessary  unity of the synthesis of all phenomena according to
concepts."  Where  Kant  posits  a transcendental ego to account for the
experienced  identity  of  the  self, other philosophers who hold one or
another theory of the soul as an imperishable substance or an unchanging
principle  seem  to  find  no  special  subtleties in the problem of the
identity  of  living  organisms or persons. So far as such theories bear
upon  that  problem, the consideration of them belongs to the chapter on
Soul.  Here  we are concerned with the notions of same and other as they
apply to everything in the universe. Hence we must face all the problems
of  how  two  things  can  be  the same, not merely the problem of self-
sameness or the identity of a thing with itself. The word "identical" is
sometimes  used  as a synonym for "same," as when we say that two things
are  identical  in  a  certain  respect.  But  without the qualification
expressed  by "in a certain respect," it is seldom if ever said that two
things  are identical, for if they can be discriminated from one another
in  any  respect  at  all,  they  are  two,  not  one, and therefore not
identical.  This  seems  to  be the sense of Leibnitz's principle of the
identity  of indiscernibles, concurred in by all who understand identity
as  the  self-sameness  of  that which is one in number and existence. A
plurality  of  things  involves  a  numerical diversity—each of the many
being  an  other. To this extent at least, the traditional discussion of
same and other tends to merge

[702b]
with  matters  discussed  in the chapter on One and Many. For both Plato
and  Aristotle,  the  relation between these two pairs one and many and.
same and other—seems to be much closer. In the comparison of two things,
Aristotle  appears  to treat sameness as a kind of oneness, referring to
the  various  ways  in  which  two  things can be "one and the same." Of
sameness,  he says that "it is a unity of the being, either of more than
one  thing  or of one thing when it is treated as more than one"; and of
the  one  he says that to it "belong . . . the same and the like and the
equal,  and  to  plurality  belong  the  other  and  the  unlike and the
unequal."  The  enumeration  he  gives  of  kinds  of  unity seems to be
paralleled  by his enumeration of kinds of similitude. As a thing may be
one  essentially  or  one  by  accident,  so  two things may be the same
essentially  or by accident. Aristotle's statement that "some things are
one  in  number, others in species, others in genus, others by analogy,"
finds  its counterpart in his statement that " 'different' is applied to
those  which,  though  other,  are the same in some respect, only not in
number,  but  either in species or in genus or by analogy." As indicated
in  the chapter on Relation, a distinction is traditionally made between
relationships  which  really exist among things apart from the mind, and
logical  relationships  which  occur  in thought alone. This distinction
seems  to  separate  self-sameness  or  identity  from  all relations of
similitude  which  obtain between two things. "The relation signified by
the  term  the  same" Aquinas says, "is a logical relation only if it is
taken  in  regard  to absolutely the same thing, because such a relation
can  exist  only  in  a  certain order observed by reason as regards the
order of anything to itself. The case is otherwise, however, when things
are  called the same, not numerically, but generically or specifically."
Nevertheless,   identity  seems  to  underlie  all  other  relations  of
sameness,  for among things or ideas lacking identity no comparisons can
be  made.  Those  who  deny identity on the ground that everything is in
flux,  nullify  all  further  discussion  of  sameness.  The theory of a
universal  flux,  which  Plato attributes to Heraclitus, permits nothing
ever to remain stationary or the

[703a]
same  for  an  instant;  and "the professed Heraclitean," Cratylus, went
even  further,  according  to  Aristotle : he "criticized Heraclitus for
saying  that it is impossible to step twice into tjie-same river; for he
thought  one  could not do it even once. In saying of men that "they are
nothing  but  a  bundle  or  collection  ofdifferent  perceptions, which
succeed  each  other  with  an  inconceivable  rapidity,  and  are  in a
perpetual  flux  and  movement,"  Hume  does  more  than  deny  personal
identity.  He affirms an utter diversity— "as if there were no manner of
relation" at all— between distinct perceptions, each of which is for him
a  distinct  existence.  The opposite point of view affirms things which
have   an   enduring   existence   and  which  can,  as  Aristotle  says
ofsubstances,   undergo   change   in  many  respects  "while  remaining
numerically one and the same." Time and change raise the question of how
any one thing can be the same from moment to moment. The question of how
two things can be one and the same in any respect arises from the simple
fact  that, at the instant of comparison, they are two. If they were the
same only for the comparing mind, then their sameness would be a logical
and  not  a  real relationship. For two things to be the same in reality
seems  to  imply  that,  although  two  in  number, they are one in some
respect. To use Hegel's language, there is identity in diversity; or, in
the  language  of  Aquinas,  a real community exists, according to which
some  one  thing  is  common  to two. The problem of the sameness of two
things  can  be  stated  in  terms  of  the significance of what Hobbes,
Berkeley, and Hume call common or general names. Denying that such words
as  "man"  or  "tree" or "stone" express abstract or general ideas, they
seem  to  say that common names like these signify what is common to two
or  more  individuals—whether  things, perceptions, or ideas. Those who,
like  Aristotle,  Aquinas,  and  Locke,  take general or common names to
signify  abstract  ideas, seem to say such ideas themselves signify that
in  reality  two  or more things have something in common. Still another
view is that, apart from all individual things, real universals exist as
the objects of the mind's conceptions.

[703b]
Chapter 82: SAME AND OTHER 669 If the latter alternative is chosen, then
two  individuals— two men, for example—may be thought alike only because
both somehow resemble, as Plotinus suggests, the separate archetype Man.
What  is  common to the two men lies in a third and separate reality, of
which  Plotinus  says  that  it  is "present in multiplicity," as if "in
multi-impression  .  .  . from one seal." But as Parmenides observes, in
Plato's  dialogue of that name, if a separate idea of Man is required to
explain  how  two individuals are alike in being men, then still another
idea  is  needed to account for the likeness between each individual man
and  the idea Man. On the other hand, the view that the real sameness of
two  individuals,  or  the reality of the one kind to which both belong,
resides in them— in their common possession of the same nature, quality,
or  other  attribute—seems  to lead to the difficulty already intimated,
namely, the difficulty of understanding how distinct existences can have
anything  in  common—how  they  can be two in number and yet also one in
nature.  If  John and James are alike as men because they share a common
humanity,  then  can  it  be said that each has his own human nature? If
their  natures and properties are as individual as their existences, how
can  two  things  be  really  the same in any respect? Must not kinds or
universals—or  whatever  is supposed to be common to many and the source
of  their sameness—exist only in the general meaning of words, or in the
mind's  abstract  concepts,  or  as separate archetypes? But, then, what
truth  is there in the familiar statement that two individual things are
in  some respect really alike or the same? These questions indicate that
the  traditional  discussion  of the same and the other tends to involve
not  merely  the  theory  of  the one and the many, but also, in certain
issues at least, the problem of the individual and the universal. As the
chapter  on  Universal  and  Particular  shows,  the  several  positions
traditionally  taken  with regard to universals afford different answers
to  the  problem  of how any sameness between two or more things exists.
The  factor  of  similitude  in  knowledge  (the  nature of the likeness
between  image or idea and its object) and the function of similitude in
love (the attrac-

[704a]
670 THE GREAT IDEAS tion, or repulsion, of like by like) also extend the
consideration of sameness and diversity into the field of problems dealt
with  in  other chapters. Here attention must be given to the meaning of
sameness itself, as that is affected by the distinction between the same
and  the  similar,  by  the  enumeration  of various kinds or degrees of
likeness,  and  by  the  range  of  opposite  meanings in the notions of
diversity  and  difference.  Discussing  discrimination  and comparison,
William  James,  for  example, draws a sharp line between the simple and
complex  components  of  our experience. Simple impressions, he seems to
think,  are either absolutely alike or absolutely unlike. Here there can
be  no degrees of resemblance or similarity. "Two resembling things," he
writes,  "owe their resemblance to their absolute identity in respect to
some attribute or attributes, combined with the absolute non-identity of
the  rest  of  their  being. This, which may be true of compound things,
breaks  down when we come to simple impressions." The latter, apart from
their  numerical  non-identity  or  otherness,  are  either  the same in
quality  or  diverse.  But  compound  things  may be more or less alike,
varying in degree of similarity or difference according to the number of
simple  respects  in which they are or are not the same. "Similarity, in
compounds,"  says  James,  "is  partial  identity,"  and  he  gives  the
following  illustrations.  "The moon is similar to a gas-jet, it is also
similar to a foot-ball; but a gas-jet and a foot-ball are not similar to
each  other.  .  . Moon and gas-jet are similar in respect of luminosity
and  nothing  else;  moon  and  foot-ball  in  respect of rotundity, and
nothing  else.  Football and gas-jet are in no respect similar— that is,
they  possess  no  common  point, no identical attribute." Other writers
seem  to agree on this distinction between the same and the similar, the
diverse  and the different. The latter in both cases combine elements of
sameness  and  diversity  to  give  degrees  of  likeness.  Aquinas, for
example,   says  that  "we  seek  for  difference  where  we  also  find
resemblance.  For  this  reason, things which differ must in some way be
composite,  since  they  differ in some respect and in some respect they
resemble each other. In this sense, although all things that differ are

[704b]
diverse, yet all things that are diverse do not differ For simple things
are  diverse  through  themselves, and do not differ from one another by
differences  as  their components. For instance, a man and an ass differ
by  the  difference  of  rational and irrational, but we cannot say that
these  again differ by some further difference." The specific difference
between  man  and  ass with respect to rationality, accompanied by their
generic  sameness with respect to animality, makes them similar. If they
were  utterly  diverse,  i.e., the same in no respect, they would not be
said  to  differ;  just as if they were identical in all respects except
number,  they  would  not  be  called similar. "The other and the same,"
writes  Aristotle,  "are thus opposed. But difference is not the same as
otherness.  For  the  other  and that which it is other than need not be
other  in  some  definite  respect  . . . but thai which is different is
different from some particular thing in some particular respect, so that
there  must be something identical by which they differ." But within the
area  of  this  agreement  on  fundamental terms, there seems to be some
disagreement about whether two things can be utterly diverse. Since they
are  two,  they  cannot  be  the  same in all respects— certainly not in
number—  but  can they be totally incomparable? James appears to say Yes
in  his  remark  about  the  football  and the gas jet having "no common
point,  no  identical  attribute." Yet he also seems to hold that no two
things  are  ever  absolutely  incomparable.  They  may not differ or be
similar as the diverse species of the same genus, e.g., man and ass; but
regarding  them as " 'thinkables' or 'existents,' " he writes, "even the
smoke  of  a  cigarette  and  the worth of a dollar bill are comparable—
still  more so as 'perishables' or as 'enjoyables.'" The gas jet and the
football   would   appear  to  be  comparable  also  as  'existents'  or
'usables'—or  even,  perhaps,  as  'bodies.'  The  question  thus arises
whether—all  things  being  somehow comparable— they are all the same in
genus,  as,  for  example,  all three-dimensional material things may be
said  to  belong to the genus 'body' no matter how much else they differ
as  species  or  subordinate  kinds within this genus. Kant answers this
question by affirming a principle of ultimate homogeneous-

[705a]
ness.  According to this principle, "there are no different original and
first genera, as it were isolated and separated from each other, but all
diverse  genera  are  divisions  only of one supreme and general genus."
Kant  states  a  correlative  principle  of  variety  or  specification,
according  to  which "every genus requires species, and these again sub-
species, and as none even of these sub-species is without a sphere . . .
reason  in  its utmost extension requires that no species or sub-species
should  in  itself  be  considered as the lowest." Aristotle's theory of
species  and  genera  appears  to  be exactly opposite to Kant's on both
points.  For  Aristotle,  there  is  no  single all-embracing genus, but
rather  a  number  of  diverse  yet  supreme  genera, such as substance,
quantity,  quality,  etc.  There is a finite, not an infinite variety of
species.  The  lowest species is further divisible only into kinds which
differ,  as  individuals  of  the  same  species  do, in accidental, not
essential  respects,  e.g., white man and red man differ in the same way
as  John and James do within the species 'man,' not as the species 'man'
and  'ass'  differ  within  the  genus 'animal.' Furthermore, where Kant
insists upon a third principle of continuity, according to which between
any  two  species  "there  always  remain possible intermediate species,
differing from the first and the second by smaller degrees than those by
which  these  differ  from  each  other,"  Aristotle  seems  to  find no
intermediates  possible  between the contrary species of a single genus.
The order of species is for him a discontinuous series like the order of
the  whole  numbers, between proximate members of which no fractions are
admitted. Does Aristotle's position with respect to the heterogeneity of
an animal and the color blue the one in the genus 'substance,' the other
in  the  genus  'quality'—mean  that  such things, absolutely diverse in
genus,  are  absolutely incomparable? His answer seems to be twofold. In
one  place  he  says that things which are diverse in genus may still be
the  same by analogy: "things that are one by analogy are not all one in
genus."  In  another,  he  gives us an example of analogical resemblance
(between the soul and the hand): "As the hand is a tool of tools, so the
mind is the form of forms and sense the form of sensible things."

[705b]
Chapter 82: SAME AND OTHER 671 If the example seems inappropriate on the
ground  that  the  soul  and  the hand are of the same genus, i.e., both
substances  or  parts  of the same substance man, it may be necessary to
introduce  the distinction between natural and logical genera. According
to  this  distinction,  a material and a spiritual substance can both be
called  "substances" as a matter of logical classification, but they are
not  in  the  same  genus  by  their own natures. In this sense, Aquinas
assigns  a  geometrical  solid  and  a physical body to the same logical
genus   'body'  but  regards  them  as  of  heterogeneous  natures;  and
Descartes,   calling   an   extended   and  a  thinking  substance  both
"substances,"  insists  upon  the  utter  diversity of their natures. An
easier  example,  however, may not be too difficult to find. A man and a
number   belong  to  different  genera,  according  to  Aristotle—one  a
substance,  the other a quantity. But the man can be related to his sons
as  the  number  one  is related to any other whole number. The relation
which  is the same in both cases is that of priority, according to which
the  man  and unity are the principles or generators respectively of his
sons  and  other  numbers. Here, then, we see two heterogeneous things—a
substance  and  a quantity—which are, nevertheless, the same by analogy,
each  standing to another in the same relationship; both, therefore, can
be  called  "principle"  or  "generator" analogically. Aristotle's other
indication   that   a   special   mode  of  similitude  obtains  between
heterogeneous things, occurs in all those passages in which he says that
terms  like  'being'  can  be  predicated of things in every category or
genus.  Just  as  James  seems  to  think  that  any  two  things may be
comparable  as  'thinkables'  or  'existents/ so Aristotle seems to hold
that  all  things, though otherwise heterogeneous, are at least alike in
being,  i.e.,  in  having  some  mode of existence. Yet the term 'being'
cannot  be  equated  with  Kant's single supreme genus. Though Aristotle
agrees  with  Kant  that  every  genus  must be capable of division into
species,  he  does  not think that 'being' can be so divided by specific
differences.  Two  points must be observed concerning Aristotle's theory
of the predication of a term like 'being' of everything in the universe.

[706a]
672  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  First, he repeatedly asserts that 'being' is not
said  in  the  same  sense  of substances, quantities, qualities, and so
forth. Hence when such heterogeneous things are all called 'beings,' the
implication  cannot be that, as beings, they are all the same. The point
seems to be that they are somehow at once both the same and diverse. As,
to  use an example from Aristotle's Physics, a tone and a taste can both
be  sharp,  though  the  sharpness  of  a  tone  is  as diverse from the
sharpness  of  a  taste as tone and taste are qualitatively diverse from
each  other;  so  a  man  and a number can both have being, though their
modes of being are as diverse as substance is from quantitv. If the word
"similarity" were to be used to signify not the combination of separable
elements of sameness and diversity, but rather the inseparable fusion of
the  two to constitute a diversified sameness, then heterogeneous things
should be called similar, not the same, in being. Second, Aristotle does
not  identify  such similarity of heterogeneous things with the sameness
by  analogy  which  heterogeneous  things  can  have.  'Being'  is not a
relative  term  and  therefore  it cannot be predicated analogically, as
'principle'   or   'generator'   can  be.  Terms  which  are  predicated
analogically,  as  'principle'  can  be  predicated  of a father and the
number  one,  may  signify  similarity  (in  the  sense  of  diversified
sameness)  rather than simple sameness in a single respect. The relation
of  generation  which creates the analogical similitude between a father
and  the  number  one  seems  to  be  the same relation in the two cases
(between  a  father and his sons, and between one and other numbers); it
is  not,  however,  simply  the  same,  for that relation is diversified
according  as  the things related—substances in the one case, quantities
in  the  other—are  absolutely  diverse  in  genus.  But  in Aristotle's
analysis  it  does  not  follow  that because some analogical predicates
signify diversified rather than simple sameness, all do; or that because
some  instances  of  diversified sameness happen to be analogical (i.e.,
sameness in a relation), all are. The interest in Aristotle's separation
of  these  two  points  lies in the fact that Aquinas combines them in a
theory  which  states  that,  when  being and other terms (which are not
genera and yet are above all genera) are predicated of

[706b]
heterogeneous  things, they must be predicated analogically of them. The
existence  which is found in all things, he says, "is common to all only
according  to some sort of analogy," not "according to the same specific
or  generic  formality."  This  is  most easily seen in the "likeness of
creatures  to  God,"  which is "solely according to analogy, inasmuch as
God   is   essential   being,   whereas   other  things  are  beings  by
participation."  Aristotle's  statement  that  "things  which are one by
analogy are not all one in genus," seems to be converted by Aquinas into
the  proposition  that  things  which  are not one in genus, and yet are
alike  in  some  way, are all one by analogy. For Aristotle, sameness by
analogy  may  be  either  simple sameness or diversified sameness {i.e.,
similarity); and diversified sameness may or may not be analogical, that
is, it may be the kind of similarity which two heterogeneous things have
in  respect  to being or in respect to some relation in which they stand
to  other things. For Aquinas, on the other hand, whenever heterogeneous
things are the same in any single respect, their diversified sameness is
always  analogical',  and  whenever the similitude between two things is
truly  analogical, then it is always similarity, that is, a diversified,
not  a simple sameness. Likeness in being, according to Aquinas, affords
us  the prime example of a similitude which is at once an analogical and
a  diversified  sameness.  Aquinas  applies his theory of the analogy of
being  to  the  great  traditional  issue,  which  puts  all theories of
similitude  to the test— the question of the resemblance between God and
creatures,  or  between  infinite  and  finite being. Against the answer
first  given  by Maimonides, and later expressed by Spinoza when, of all
comparisons  between  God and man, he says that "His essence . . . could
resemble  ours  in  nothing  except  in name"; and against those, on the
other  hand,  who  think  that  whatever  names  apply  to  both God and
creatures (such as "being" or "good" or "one"), apply simply in the same
sense,  Aquinas  seems  to  take  the middle ground. The names which are
properly  applicable  to  both  God and creatures, according to him, are
said of them, not equivocally and not univocally, but analogically. This
threefold distinction of univocal, equiv-

[707a]
ocal,  and  analogical names, especially as it utterly diverse, and have
no  similarity  even  in  concerns the names of God, is discussed in the
being. We can say, (2) that they are homogenechapter on Sign and Symbol.
The  theological  ous— that, with respect to being, for example, problem
of  the  similitude between God and they have the kind of sameness which
things  creatures  confronts  us with three basic akerna^ have when they
belong  to  the  same  genus.  Or  tives  in man's speculation about the
sameness we can say, (3) that they are only similar in the and diversity
which  exists  among all things. sense ofa diversified sameness, whether
such  simWe can say, (1) that infinite and finite being are ilarity isor
is notalways analogical in character. OUTLINE OF TOPICS i. The principle
of identity: the relation of a thing to itself 674 \a. Oneness in number
or  being:  numerical  diversity  or otherness 2. The sameness of things
numerically diverse 2a. The being of sameness or similitude: the reality
of  kinds  or  universals  2b.  The relation between sameness and unity:
sameness  as  a  participation  in  the  one 2C. The distinction between
sameness  and  similarity and their opposites, diversity and difference:
the  composition  of  sameness  and  diversity;  degrees of likeness and
difference  2d.  The distinction of things in terms of their diversities
and differences: real and 2e. The limits of otherness: the impossibility
of  utter  diversity 3. The modes of sameness and otherness or diversity
30.   Essential  sameness  or  difference  and  accidental  sameness  or
difference (1) Specific and generic sameness: natural and logical genera
(3) Generic otherness or heterogeneity $b. Relational sameness: sameness
by  analogy  or  proportional  similitude  3d.  Sameness in quantity, or
equality:  kinds  of  equality 4. Sameness and diversity in the order of
knowledge  4#.  Likeness or sameness between knower and known: knowledge
as  involving  imitation, intentionality, or representation 4c. Sameness
and  diversity in the meaning of words or the significance of terms: the
univocal  and  the  equivocal  5.  The principle of likeness in love and
friendship  6.  Similitude  between  God  and  creatures: the degree and
character of the similitude;

[707b]
Chapter 82 : SAME AND OTHER 673 PAGE logical distinctions 676

[708a]
674 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The principle
of  identity:  the  relation  of  a thing to itself 7 Plato: Theaetetus,
518d-519b;  521b-522b  /  Sophist,  571d-574c esp 572d-573b 8 Aristotle:
Topics,  bk  i,  ch 7 146a-c; bk vii, ch 1 206b,d-208a / Metaphysics, bk
iv,  ch 5 528c-530c; bk x, ch 3 581a-d 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr ix,
ch  1-2  353d355a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 7, ans
68d-70d;  q  28,  a  i, rep 2 157c158d; a 2, rep i 158d-160a; a 3, rep i
160a-c;  a 4, rep 1 160c-161d; q 40, a 1, rep 1-2 213b214b 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies, 159d-160a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i,
ch  hi, sect 3-5 113a-c; bk ii, ch xxvii, sect i 218d-219b; bk iv, ch i,
sect  4 307b-c; ch hi, sect 8 315b-c; ch vii, sect 4 337b-338b; ch viii,
sect  2-3  345a-346b 53 James: Psychology, 299a-301a esp 299b [fn 1] la.
Oneness  in  number  or being: numerical diversity or otherness 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  vii,  392a-394a / Theaetetus, 537b-c / Sophist, 561d-574c
esp 564d574c

[708b]
Symbols:  The  abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's attention to one or
more  especially  8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  vii,  ch  i  206b,d-208a /
Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch ii
[338b i2-io] 440d-441a,c / Metaphysics, bk hi,
ch 4
[iooi a5-b25]
519d-520c; bk v, ch 4
[ioi4b22-26]
535a; ch 9
[ioi7b26-ioi8ai4]
538c-d; bk viii, ch 6 569d-570d; bk x, ch 3
[1054*33-34] 581a; bk xii, ch 8 [1074*31-39]
604d; bk xiv, ch i
[1088*8-14] 620b / Soul,
bk  11,  ch 1 [4i2b6-9] 642c 11 Euclid: Elements, bk vii, definitions, i
127a  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  838c; 839d840a 17 Plotinus:
Fourth Ennead, tr ix, ch 2 205c206a; ch 5 206d-207a,c / Sixth Ennead, tr
ii,  ch 9-11 273c-275d; tr vi, ch 5 312c-313b; ch n-16 315d-319d; tr ix,
ch  1-2  353d355a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 6, a 3, rep 1
29c-30b;  q  ii, a i, rep 1-2 46d-47d; q 30 167a-171b passim; q 76, a 2,
rep  2 388c391a; q 79, a 5 418c-419b; q 103, a 3, ans 530a-c; part i-ii,
q  17,  a  4  688d-689c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi, q 17
806d-809d;  q  79 951b-956b passim 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
152d156a; 224d-225d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 512. 262a

[709a]
\b to 2c Chapter 82: SAME AND OTHER 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 99a-108a,c esp
lOOa-b,  102b-c, 105a-106b lb. The identity of the changing yet enduring
individual:  personal  identity,  the  continuity of self; the denial of
identity"ln   the  realm  of  change  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  94c-d;  99b;
113c-114a,c  / Theaetetus, 517d-534b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5 6a-9a
/  Physics, bk 1 259a-268d; bk iv, ch ii 299b-d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch
5 529c-530a; bk xi, ch 6 [1063*10-28] 591b-c b I2-3 2]
[1010*6-38]
[2I 9
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811b-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi,
sect  15  275a  b;  bk  viii,  sect  6 285d-286a; bk ix, sect 19 293b 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi, q 79 951b-956b passim 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  292c-293b;  388c-d  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi,
sect  4-5  113b-c;  bk  ii, ch i, sect 11-12 123d124c; sect 19, 126a; ch
xxvii  218d-228c  esp  sect 9-26 222a-227d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  95  431c;  sect  139 440d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 49c-51d esp 51c-d;
74b76c;   120c-129c   esp  121a-124d,  126a-128b;  200c-204c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i, par 47 24a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
297b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 147a-149a esp 147b; 154a157a; 191a-192b;
194b-196a;  213a-259b  esp  213a-219a,  226a-228a, 239a-240a, 258b-259b;
299a-301a 2. The sameness of things numerically diverse 2a. The being of
sameness  or  similitude:  the  reality  of kinds or universals 7 Plato:
Cratylus, 87d-89a; 113c-114a,c / Phaedo, 228d-230c; 231c-232a; 240b-246c
esp 242c-244b / Republic, bk x, 427c-429c / Timaeus, 457c-d / Parmenides
486a-511d  /  Theaetetus,  535a-536b  /  Sophist,  570a-574c / Philebus,
610d-613a  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch ii a3i-b
[77*5-9]
105d-106a; ch 24
[85
3] 116c;
[85b i5-22] 117a / Sophistical Refutations, ch 22
t I 7^b37_ 39] 246c / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 6 505b-506b; ch 9 508c-511c;
bk hi, ch i b i 3-i8] 514a;
[995
b3i"38] 514b; [996*4-9] 514c; ch 2 [997
[995
a34-b  i2]  516a-b;  ch  3  [998b  i4]  -ch  4  [999^4]  517b-518c; ch 4
[iooi*4-b25] 519d-520c; ch 6 [ioo2bn-3i] 521b-d; bk vii, ch 8
[io33b i9-io34a8]
556d-557b; ch 10
[io35b28-32] 559b; ch 11 [1037*5-9] 560c; ch
13-14 562a-563c; ch 15
[1040*8^4]
564a-c; ch 16 [i040b i6-i04i a4] 564d-565a; bk ix, ch 8
[i05ob35-io5i a2] 576d-577a; bk
x, ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch i [io59*39-b8] 587b-c; bk

[709b]
675  5  xii,  ch  3  [1070*4-30]  599b-d;  bk xiii, ch 4610a-611d; ch 10
618c-619a,c  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic, bk i, 811b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 3, a 3, ans 16a-d; q 15, a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 16,
a 7, rep 2 99a-d; q 29, a 2, rep 4 163b-164b; q 30, a 4 170c-171b; q 84,
a  1, ans and rep i 440d-442a; a 2, ans 442b-443c; a 5 446c447c; q 85, a
1,  ans  and  rep  1-2  451c-453c;  a  2,  rep 2 453d-455b; a 3, rep 1,4
455b457a;  part  i-ii,  q  29, a 6, ans and rep i 748b- 749a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  a  5,  rep  2 715a-716b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  55b-56a; 59d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40,
schol i 387b-388a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk in, ch hi, sect 6-20
255c-260a;  ch vi, sect 26-51 274d-283a esp sect 36-37 279a-b; bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  31  323c-d;  ch  vi,  sect  4  331d-332b  35  Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,   intro,   sect   6-19   405d-410c   passim  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  125,  507b [fn 1] 53 James: Psychology,
299b-300a;  305a-314a;  873a  b  2b.  The  relation between sameness and
unity:  sameness  as  a  participation  in  the one 7 Plato: Parmenides,
493b-d;  498a-499a  8  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6 536a537c; ch 9
538c-539a;  bk  x,  ch  3 581a-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 838c;
839c840a  2c.  The distinction between sameness and similarity and their
opposites,  diversity  and  difference:  the composition of sameness and
diversity; degrees of likeness and difference 7 Plato: Protagoras, 49a-b
8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  16-17 152a-b / Physics, bk vii, ch 4
330d-333a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 9 538c-539a; ch 28
[io24b io-i6]
546c;  bk  x,  ch 3 [io54b3-io55*3] 581b-d; ch 8-9 585b-586c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 3, a 8, rep 3 19d-20c; q 4, a 3 22b-23b; q
ii, a i, rep 2 46d-47d; q 13 62b-75b passim, esp a 5 66b-67d; q 57, a 2,
rep 2 295d-297a; q 93 492a-501c passim; part i-ii, q 27, a 3 738c739c 20
Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 69, a 1, rep 2 885c-886c; q
92,  a  i, ans and rep 7 1025c-1032b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
22  153b-c;  aph  27  157b-158d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xxviii,  sect  1  228c  53  James:  Psychology, 319b-322a; 344b-348a esp
347a-348a; 378b

[710a]
676 THE GREAT IDEAS (2. The sameness of things numerically diverse.) 2d.
The distinction of things in terms of their diversities and differences:
real  and  logical  distinctions  7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  134b-c / Phaedo,
227d228a  / Theaetetus, 548c-549d / Statesman, 595a 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk i, ch 7 146a-c; ch 16 152a-b; bk vii, ch i 206b,d-208a / Metaphysics,
bk  x, ch 3 581a-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 2-4 165d-168c
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 8, rep 3 19d-20c; q 11, a 1
46d-47d;  q  13,  a  7,  ans  68d-70d; q 14, a 6, ans 80a-81c; q 28, a 3
160a-c;  a  4,  rep  i  160c-161d;  q  30,  a  i,  rep 2 167a-168a; q 31
171b-175c; q 36, a 2, ans 192a-194c; q 40, a 2, ans and rep 3 214b-215b;
q  47,  aa  1-2  256a-258c;  q  50,  a  2,  ans  270a-272a; a 4, rep 1-2
273b-274b; q 75, a 3, rep 1 380c-381b; q 76, a 3, rep 4 391a-393a; q 77,
a  3,  ans  401d-403a;  q  85,  a  7,  rep 3 459c-460b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  a  3,  rep  1 713a-714c; q 17, a i, rep 7
807a808d  31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 87c-d / Objections and Replies,
114d-115a,c;  119d-120c;  136a-b;  152d-156a;  224d-225d;  231a-232d  31
Spinoza: Ethics, part 1, axiom 5 355d; part 11, prop 1-2 373d-374a; prop
7,  corol  and schol 375a-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch hi,
sect  13-14 257c-258b; ch vi, sect 7-25 270b-274d; sect 36-42 279a-280c;
bk  iv,  ch 1, sect 4 307b-c; CH III, sect 8 315bc 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
99a-108a,c  esp  100ab,  102b-c,  105a-106b;  193a-200c  esp 197b198a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  25d-29a esp 28b29a; 30d-31b; 241d-242a 53
James:  Psychology,  315a-336a  esp  319a,  320a322b, 324a-b, 327a-334a;
550b-551b
[fn
2]; 867a-874a; 878a; 880b 2e. The limits of otherness: the impossibility
of utter diversity 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 4
[i b25-2 a
4]  5d-6a / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 3 517a-518a; bk x, ch 3 [io54b i4~23]
581b-c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 3, a 5 17c-18b; a 8, rep
3  19d-20c;  q  ii,  a  i,  rep 2 46d-47d; q 90, a i, rep 3 480d-481d 25
Montaigne: Essays, 516b-c; 518d-519a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, axiom 5
355d; prop 2-3 355d-356a; prop 17, schol 362c-363c; part in, prop 5 398d
42  Kant: Pure Reason, 107b-c; 197b-198a 53 James: Psychology, 320a-322a
esp 321a-b; 344b-345b

[710b]
2dto3a(\)  3.  The  modes  of  sameness  and otherness or diversity 3<z.
Essential sameness or difference and accidental sameness or difference 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  v, 358a-360a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 5 [ioi
b37-io2a i7] 144d-145a; ch 6 [i02b27-35] 145d; bk vi, ch 1
[i39a24-b2] 192a-b; ch
4 194c-196a; ch 5
[i42b30-i43 a8] 196b-c; ch 6 [144^3-27] 197d;
ch  6  [i44b3]-CH 7 [i46a35] 198a-200b; bk vii, ch 2 208a / Metaphysics,
bk v, ch 9 538c539a; bk vii, ch 12
[1038^-30] 561d-562a;
bk x, ch 3 [io54a33-b2] 581a-b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch
i
[486ai5-487a i] 7b-d / Parts of Animals, bk
i,  ch  2-4  165d-168c / Generation of Animals, bk v, ch 1 [778 ai5-b2o]
320a-321a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 3, a 3 16a-d; q 4, a
3,  ans 22b-23b; q 29, a i, rep 3 162a-163b; q 57, a 2, rep 2 295d-297a;
q  75,  a 3, rep 1 380c-381b; q 77, a i, rep 7 399c-401b; q 93, a 2, ans
493a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a  4, ans 688d-689c; q 35, a 8 779c780c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi, q 2, a 3, rep 1 713a-714c; q 17, a
i,  rep 7 807a808d; q 79, a 1, rep 2,4 951b-953b; a 2, rep 1-2 953b-955c
31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies,  136a-b; 152d-156a; 224d-225d;
231a-232d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, prop 4-5 356a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  hi,  sect  13-14 257c-258b; ch vi 268b-283a
passim, esp sect 22 273d-274a, sect 49 282c; ch x, sect 20-21 296d-297b;
bk  iv,  ch  vi,  sect  4  331d-332b  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 193a-200c 49
Darwin:   Origin  of  Species,  212d-213c  3a(l)  Specific  and  generic
sameness: natural and logical genera 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 7
[103^-23]
146a-b  / Physics, bk v, ch 4 [227^-2 1 ] 308b-c; bk vii, ch 1 [242^2^4]
326c-d; ch 4 330d333a / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch ii
[338^2-19] 440d-441a,c / Metaphysics, bk hi,
ch  3  517a-518a;  bk  v,  ch 6 [ioi6a24-b i] 536d537a; [ioi6b32-ioi7a3]
537c; ch 9 [1018*4-11] 538d; ch 10
[ioi8 a38-b8]
539b-c; ch 28
[io24b io-i6] 546c; bk
x, ch 1
[io52a28-37]
578d; ch 3 [io54 a33-b2] 581a-b; ch 8-9 585b586c 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk 1, ch i ai5-487a i] 7b-d / Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 1 [639
[486
ai2-b9] 161b-d; ch 2-4 165d-168c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[10771089] 28d
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q  3,  a 5 17c-18b; q 4, a 3
22b-23b;  q ii, a i, rep 2 46d-47d; q 15, a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 28, a i,
rep 2 157c-158d; q 29, a 2, rep 4 163b-164b;

[711a]
q  30, a 4, ans and rep 3 170c-171b; q 50, a 2, rep 1 270a-272a; q 57, a
2,  rep  2  295d297a;  q  66,  a  2,  rep  2 345d-347b; q 75, a 3, rep 1
380c-381b;  q 76, a 3, rep 4 391a-393a; q 77, a 4, rep 1 403a-d; q 79, a
5,  REP33I8C419b;  q  85,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  4 45Sb-457a; a 5, rep 3
457d-458d;  q 88, a 2, rep 4 471c472c; q 93, a 1, rep 3 492a-d; a 2, ans
493a-d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  61, a 1, rep 1
54d-55c;  part  hi  suppl,  q  92,  a i, ans 1025c-1032b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  25  155a-d;  aph  28  158d-159a  35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk hi, ch hi, sect 6-20 255c-260a; ch iv, sect 16 263b-c
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  341b-342b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 197b-198a 49
Darwin:  Origin of Species, 28b-29a; 207a208a esp 207d / Descent of Man,
332b-c;  347a-b  53  James:  Psychology, 344b-345b; 870a-871a 3<*(2) The
otherness  of  species  in  a  genus:  the  diversity  of  contraries  8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 5
[188*18-25]
263c;  ch  6 [189*11-14] 264c; [i89b23-27] 265b; bk iv, ch 14 [224*2-16]
303d-304a,c  / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 10 [ioi8a25-b 7) 539a-b; bk x, ch 4
581d-582d;  ch  8-9  585b-586c  /  Soul,  bk 1, ch 1 [402b i~9] 631c-d 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch i
[486*15-487*1] 7b-d / Parts of Animals, bk
i, ch 2-4 165d-168c / Politics, bk iv, ch 4
[1290^5-36] 489d-490a
17  Plotinus:  Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 18-20 291a-293a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 4, a 3, ans 22b-23b; q ii, a i, rep 2 46d47d; q
50, a 4 273b-274b; q 75, a 3, rep i 380c-381b; part i-ii, q 23, a i, ans
723c724c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 54, a 1, rep 1
22d-23d;  q  72, a 7, ans 117a118a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi,
ch  vi,  sect  39  279c-280a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 197b-198a 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species, 30d-31b; 241 d242a 53 James: Psychology, 344b-345b;
387b  3<*(3) Generic otherness or heterogeneity 8 Aristotle: Categories,
ch 4
[i b25-2*4] 5d-6a
/ Topics, bk 1, ch 15 149d-152a passim; ch 16
[i07b37]-cH
17
[108*14] 152a-b
/ Physics, bk vii, ch 4 330d-333a esp [249*3-24] 331d332b / Metaphysics,
bk  hi, ch 3 517a-518a; BK V, CH 28 [l024b IO-l6] 546c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part 1, q 3, a 5 17c-18b; Q 4, a 3 22b-23b; q 88, a 2, rep 4
471c-472c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 197b-198a

[711b]
5b.  Relational sameness: sameness by analogy or proportional similitude
7  Plato:  Gorgias,  267c-268a  / Timaeus, 448b-d 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 10
[76*36^2] 105a; bk
11, ch 14 [98*20-23] 134a; ch 17
[99*16]
135b / Topics, bk i, ch 17
[108*6-14] 152b; bk iv, ch 4 [124*15-20] 172d;
bk v, ch 7
[i36b33-i37*2o]
189ac; ch 8
[138^3-27] 191b-c / Physics, bk
i, ch 7 [191* 8-12] 266d; bk vii, ch 4 [249*22-24] 332b / Generation and
Corruption,  bk  ii,  ch  6 [333* 27-34] 434a / Meteorology, bk iv, ch 9
[38yb  i6]  491c  /  Metaphysics,  bk v, ch 6 [ioi6b321017*3] 537c; ch 9
[1018*12-13]  538d;  bk  ix, ch 1 [1046*4-8] 570d-571a; ch 6 [1048*31^8]
573d-574a; bk xii, ch 4-5 599d-601a passim / Soul, bk in, ch 7 [43i*2o-b
i]  663d-664a; ch 8 [43^20-432*2] 664bc 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk i, ch i
[486*15-487*1] 7b-d; bk vm, ch
1  [588*i8-b  5]  114b,d  /  Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 4 167d168c; ch 5
[645b i-646*5] 169b-d / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch i
[7i5b i7-26] 255d; bk
in, ch 10 [760*9-17] 301b / Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[io96b27-3o] 342a; bk v, ch 3 378c-379b; bk
vm,  ch  7  [ii58b29-33]  410d / Politics, bk v, ch 1 [130^29-36] 503a /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i357b25-i358*2] 597c-d; bk
ii,  ch  20  [1393*  22-1394*8]  640d-641d; bk hi, ch 4 657b-d; ch io-ii
662c-666b  /  Poetics, ch 21 [i457b633] 693a-c 11 Euclid: Elements, bk v
81a-98b  esp  definitions,  5-6  81a;  bk  vii,  definitions, 20 127b 11
Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 841c-d 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World,
1078b1080a  passim  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  1,  q 4, a 3
22b-23b; q 13, aa 5-6 66b-68c; a 10 72c-73c; q 14, a 3, rep 2 77d-78b; q
16,  a 6, ans 98b-d; q 44, a 3, ans 240b-241a; q 66, a 2, ans 345d-347b;
q  93, a i, rep 3 492a-d; part i-ii, q 20, a 3, rep 3 713c-714c; q 27, a
3,  rep  2 738c-739c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, a 1,
rep  1  54d-55c;  part  hi,  q 60, a i, ans and rep 3 847b-848a; part hi
suppl,  q  69,  a  1,  rep  2  885c-886c;  q  92,  a  1, ans and rep 6-7
1025c-1032b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk i, 12d-13b 28
Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 336b-d; 449a-b; 469d-470d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph 27 157b158d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
158b-161d  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxviii, sect i 228c
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ix,  div 82 487b-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 72c- 74a / Judgement, 601d-603a

[712a]
678  The  modes  of  sameness  and  otherness  or  diver- (3. sity. 3 b.
Relational sameness: sameness by analogy or proportional similitude.) 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species, 212d-213c 53 James: Psychology, 549b-550a;
688a-689b  passim  3c.  Sameness  in quality, or likeness: variations in
degree  of  the same quality 7 Plato: Parmenides, 493d-494a 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 5
[3
b32-4a9] 8a-b; ch 6
[6*27-35]
10d-lla; ch 8
[iob26-u a i9]
15d-16b / Topics, bk hi, ch 5 166b-c / Physics, bk iv, ch 9
[2i7a34-b n] 297b
/ Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6 [333*27-34] 434a / Metaphysics,
bk v, ch 9 [ioi8ai5-i9] 538d539a; ch 15
[i02i a8-i4] 542b-c;
bk x, ch 3
[io54b8-i3] 581b
9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 1
[486a i5-487a i] 7b-d; bk viii, ch
i  [588*18-31]  114b,d  /  Parts  of Animals,  bk ii, ch 2 [648b i2649b9]
173a-174a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 2, 7b / Fourth Ennead, tr
ix,  ch 4, 206c-d / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 15 289a-c 18 Augustine: City
of  God, bk xi, ch 10, 328b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 4, a
3,  ans  22b-23b;  q  42,  a  i,  rep  i 224b-225d; part i-ii, q 27, a 3
738c-739c; q 28, a i, rep 2 740b-741a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 52 15d-19c; q 72, a 7, ans 117a-118a; part hi suppl, q 69, a 1,
rep  2  885c-886c;  q 92, a i, ans and rep 7 1025c-1032b 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph 13 145b148d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 57,
schol 415b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxviii, sect 1 228c;
bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect  11-13  311c-312b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 73c-74a /
Judgement,  602b-603a esp 602b,d [fn 1] 53 James: Psychology, 319b-322a;
329a-b;  346a348a;  378b 3d. Sameness in quantity, or equality: kinds of
equality  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  228a-229c / Parmenides, 494b-c; 500c-502a;
508c-d;  510b-511a  8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch 6 [6*27-35] 10d-lla /
Generation  and Corruption, bk ii, ch 6 [333* 27-34] 434a / Metaphysics,
bk  v,  ch  15  [1021 s 8-14] 542b-c; bk x, ch 3 [ic>54b i-3] 581b; ch 5
583a-c  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 3-5 378c-381d 11 Euclid: Elements,
bk  i,  common notions 2a; prop 4 4a-b; prop 8 6b-7a; prop 26 16a-17b 11
Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  821d-822b  16 Kepler: Harmonies of the
World, 1012b1014b

[712b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 3c to 4a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 15 289a-c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  42,  a  1,  ans and rep i
224b-225d; q 47, a 2, rep 2 257b-258c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 113, a 9, ans 368d-369c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
ii,  sect  9-10  311b-c  50 Marx: Capital, 19a-25d esp 19d-20b, 25a-d 53
James:  Psychology, 874a-875a 4. Sameness and knowledge diversity in the
order of Aa. Likeness or sameness between knower and known: knowledge as
involving   imitation,   intentionality,   or  representation  7  Plato:
Phaedrus,  124c-126c  esp  126a-c / Phaedo, 231b-232b / Republic, bk hi,
333b-d  bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  esp  bk vti, 397a-398c bk x, 427c-431b /
Theaetetus, 521d-522b 538d-541a / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle:
Interpretation, ch i
[i6a4~9] 25a /
Metaphysics,  bk xii, ch 7 [i072b i7-24] 602d603a; ch 9 [i074b36-i075au]
605c-d / Soul, bk 1, ch 5
[409b i8-4ii a7] 639c-641a; bk
ii, ch 5
[4i6b32-4i7a2] 647b;
[4i7ai7-2i] 647d;
[418*2-6]
648c-d; bk hi, ch 2
[425b i7~26]
657d-658a; ch 3
[427
ai6-b6]  659c-d; ch 4 661b-662c; ch 5 [430*14-16] 662c; [430^0-22] 662d;
ch 7
[431*1-8]
663c; ch 8
[43^20432
a2]  664b-c  /  Memory and Reminiscence, ch 1 [450^5-45^19] 691a-692b 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk iv [26-109] 44b-45c; [722-817] 53d-54d
17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr viii, ch 6, 132a; ch 8, 132d-133b; ch 9,
134a-b  /  Fifth Ennead, tr 1, ch 4, 210b-c; tr in, ch 4-5 217b-218c; ch
10-13  221b-224b;  tr  v,  ch  1-2 228b-229d; tr ix, ch 7 249b-c / Sixth
Ennead,  tr vii, ch 36-41 339c-342c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
17  75c-d;  par  19  76a-b; par 22-24 76d-77c; par 27-28 78b-d / City of
God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 2
51c-52c;  a 4, rep 1 53b-54c; a 9 58b-59a; q 14, a 2, rep 2 76d-77d; a 5
79a-80a;  a  6, rep 1,3 80a-81c; a 9, rep 2 83b-d; q 15 91b94a passim; q
18,  a 4 107d-108c; q 27, a 4, rep 2 156b-d; q 30, a 2, rep 2 168a-169b;
q 34, a 1, rep 3 185b-187b; q 55, a 2, ans and rep 1 289d-290d; a 3, rep
1,3  291a-d;  q  57, a 2, ans and rep 2-3 295d-297a; q 58, a 2 301b-d; q
75,  a  1, rep 2 378b-379c; q 85, a 8, rep 3 460b 461b; q 87, a i, rep 3
465a-466c;  q  93,  a  2,  rep  4  493a-d;  part  i-ii, q 28, a i, rep 3
740b-741a   31   Descartes:  Meditations,  111,  84a-85a;  vi,  99a-b  /
Objections  and Replies, 108b-109d; axiom v 131d-132a; 219bc 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  axiom  6  355d;  part  ii,  prop 7 375a-c; prop 11-13
377b-378c

[713a]
4b  to 5 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxx, sect 2 238b-c; ch
xxxi,  sect 2 239b-d; ch xxxii, sect 14-16 245c-246b; bk iv, ch iv, sect
1-12  323d-326d  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 1-91 413a-431a esp
sect  2-4 413b-414a, s-Ect_ 8^9 414c-d, sect 25-33 417d-419a, sect 48-49
422a-b,  sect  56 423c-d, sect 86-91 429c431a; sect 135-142 440a-441c 35
Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 118, 504d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
7b-d; 12c-d
[fn
1];  15d16c;  23a-24a;  34a-35b;  55a-56c; 88b 91d; 99a-101b; 101d-102a;
115bc  /  Judgement, 550a-551a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  146-147  55c-56a  53  James: Psychology, 126b-129a; 142a-143b; 153b
154a;  307a-311a  esp  307a, 309a; 325b327a esp 326a-b [fn 1]; 851b 852a
4b.  The  role  of  differentiation  in  definition:  the  diversity  of
differences  7  Plato: Phaedrus, 134b-d / Theaetetus, 548c549d / Sophist
551a-579d  esp  552b-561d  / Statesman 580a-608d / Philebus, 610d-613a 8
Aristotle:  Topics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [ioi  b37-io2a  i7] 144d-145a; ch 18
[io8a38-b6]  152d;  bk  vi,  ch  6 196d-199c; bk vii, ch 3 [i53a i3-b24]
208b209a / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 3
[998b2i-27J
517c; bk vii, ch 10-12 558a-562a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch
2-4  165d-168c  17  Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 8-10 285a-286d; ch
16-18  289c-291d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i, rep 3
162a-163b;  q 75, a 3, rep i 380c-381b; q 77, a 1, rep 7 399c-401b; a 3,
ans  401d-403a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 2, rep 3
2b-4a;  part  hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a711c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii,
aph  24  154c155a  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch hi, sect 10
256c-257a;  ch  vi  268b-283a  passim  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 193a-200c;
215d-216c  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 28b-29a; 30d-31b; 241d-242a 53
James:  Psychology,  344b-345b;  669a-671a 4c. Sameness and diversity in
the  meaning of words or the significance of terms: the univocal and the
equivocal  7 Plato: Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Sophist, 551a552c / Philebus,
609d-610a / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch i 5a-b
/ Interpretation, ch 1
[i6a3-8] 25a /
Topics, bk i, ch 18
[io8ai7-37J 152b-d; bk vi, ch 10 [148^3-25]
202b;  [i48a38-b4] 202c; bk viii, ch 3 [i58b8i59a2] 215b-c / Sophistical
Refutations, ch i
[165^-13] 227b-c; ch 33 [182^3-21] 251d /

[713b]
Chapter 82: SAME AND OTHER 679 Physics, bk 1, ch 2
[i85 a2o]-cH
3
[187^0]
260a-262a;  bk  vii, ch 4 [249^3-24] 331d-332b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[990^3-99^8] 508c509b; bk iv, ch 2
[ioo3 a33-b i2] 522b-c; bk
vii, ch 4 [i030a32-b 3] 553a-b; bk viii, ch 3
[i043a29-b4]
567d; bk ix, ch i
[1046^-8]
570d-571a; bk xi, ch 3
[io6ob34-io6i a io]
589a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  4-5  599d-601a  / Soul, bk in, ch 2 [425^6-426^6]
658a-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[64 8b i]-CH 3
[649
b22] 172d-174b 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 168c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q i, a 10, rep 1 9c-10c; q 3, a 2, rep 1-2
15c-16a; a 6, rep 1 18c-19a; q 13 62b-75b; q 16, a 6, ans 98b-d; q 29, a
4,  ans and rep 4 165c167a; q 32, a i, rep 2 175d-178a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, a 1, rep 1 54d-55c; part hi, q 60, a i, ans
and  rep  3  847b-848a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  60bc;  65b-c  /  Novum Organum, bk i, aph 43
109d110a;  aph  59-60  112b-113a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part i, prop 17,
schol362c363c;  part  11,  prop  40, schol 1-2 387b-388b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch iv, sect 5, 131a; ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c; ch
xxix,  sect  6-12 234d-236c; bk hi, ch vi, sect 28 276a-b esp 276b; sect
47-51  282a283a; ch ix 285a-291c; ch x, sect 5 292d293a; ch xi, sect 3-7
300b-301c;  bk  iv, ch vii, sect 15 343d-344a; ch viii, sect ii 348bc 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div  62-63  478b-d 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  307b-308b  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  315d-316a /
Science  of  Right,  400d  /  Judgement,  547b-548c; 602 b603a 53 James:
Psychology,   332b-334a;   549b-550a;   689a-b;   875b-876a   54  Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams, 277d-278a / General Introduction, 517c-518b .
The principle of likeness in love and friendship 7 Plato: Lysis, 19d-21b
/  Symposium,  167ac / Gorgias, 285d-286b / Statesman, 608b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk viii, ch i
[ii55a33~
b i5] 406d-407a; ch 3 [ii56b6-24J 408a-b; ch 4 [n5 6b33-u57ai 5] 408c-d;
ch 5 [1157^5-37] 409c-d; ch 6 [ii58 a i7-2i] 410a;
[ii58 a38-b
3J  410b;  ch  7-9  410c-412c; ch 13 [n62a34-b 4] 414d-415a; bk ix, ch 3
418c-419a; ch 4
[n66a29-b2]
419c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37i bi2-25] 615a-b; bk
ii,  ch  4 [i38i a8-i9] 626d-627a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 11, ch 22
167d170a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 22-23 24d-25a

[714a]
680  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5.  The  principle  of  likeness  in  love  and
friendship.)  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 27, a 4, rep 2
156b-d;  q  30,  a  2,  rep  2  168a-169b;  part  i-ii, q 25, a 2, rep 2
731b-732a; q 27, a 3 738c-739c; q 28, a 1 740b-741a; q 32, a 7 763c-764b
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 26, a 2, rep 2 511a-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  83a-d;  395b-398c  passim  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  89a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 31 405d-406a; prop 33
406c;  prop  45-46  410b-c;  prop 52 412b-d; prop 55, corol, demonst and
schol  413d-414a; part iv, prop 29-40 431d-437a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
iv,  165b-166a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 317c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  15a-b;  bk  vi,  242c-243c;  270b-c;  bk vii, 278c-279b:
296a300c;  bk  viii,  311a-313a;  314c-316a;  326b-c; 330d-332a; bk xii,
543b-544b;  bk xiii, 576ab; bk xv, 616a; 617c; 631c-633a; 640a; epilogue
1,   669d-672a   54  Freud:  Narcissism,  404d-406c  esp  405a  /  Group
Psychology,  677c-678b;  678d-684a  esp 680b, 681b,d [fn 4], 682c, 684a;
685b-686a  6.  Similitude  between  God  and  creatures:  the degree and
character  of  the  similitude; traces or images of God in creatures Old
Testament:  Genesis,  1:26-27;  5:1;  9:6  / Job, i2:j-g I Psalms, 19:1;
75:1;  107:23-24  (D)  Psalms,  18:2;  74:2; 106:23-24 Apocrypha: Wisdom
of Solomon,  2:23;  13:1-5—  (D)  OT,  Boo{  of  Wisdom,  2:23;  13:1-5 /
Ecclesiasticus,  17:1-3;  42:15-43:33—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3;
42:15-43:37  New  Testament: Romans, 1:20 / I Corinthians, 11:7; 15:49 /
// Corinthians, 3:18 / Colossians, 3:9-10 / James, 3:9 / // Peter, 1:3-4
/  I John passim, esp 2:29, 3:7, 3:9-10, 3:16, 3:24, 4:711, 4:16, 4:19 /
U  John  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 849a-b; 853b-854a; 860a / Harmonies
ofthe World, 1038a; 1048a; 1080b-1085b passim 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  ii,  par 14 12a-b; bk iv, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, par 4
36a-b;  bk xiii, par 32 119a-b / City of God, bk xi, ch 25-28 336b-338d;
bk  xii,  ch  23  357d-358a  / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22 629b-630a
CROSS-REFERENCES see Soul id; State 3g.

[714b]
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 3, a i, rep 1-5 14b-15b; a 2,
rep  1-2  15c-16a;  a 3, rep 1-2 16a-d; a 5, rep 2 17c-18b; a 7, ans and
rep  i  19a-c; q 4, a 3 22b-23b; q 6, a 2, ans and rep 3 28d-29c; q 8, a
1,  rep  3  34d35c;  q 13, aa 2-6 63c-68c; q 14, a 2, rep 3 76d-77d; a 6
80a-81c;  q  15,  a  2,  ans  92a93b;  q  18,  a  4 107d-108c; q 26, a 4
151c152a,c; q 27, a i, ans 153b-154b; q 44, aa 3-4 240b-241d; q 47, a i,
ans  and  rep  2-3 256a-257b; q 50, a i, ans 269b-270a; q 55, a 3, rep 3
291a-d;  q  57,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2  295d-297a; q 59, a i, contrary
306c-307b; q 65, a 2, rep 1 340b-341b; q 72, a i, rep 3 368b-369d; q 77,
a  2,  ans and rep i 401b-d; q 84, a 2, ans and rep 3 442b-443c; q 88, a
2,  rep 4 471c-472c; a 3, rep 3 472c-473a; q 91, a 4, rep 1-2 487d-488c;
q 93 492a-501c; q 103, a 4, ans 530d-531b; part i-ii, q 1, a 8 615a-c; q
2, a 4, rep i 618a-d; a 5, rep 3 618d-619c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, q 55, a 2, rep 3 27a-d; q iio, a 4, ans 350d351d; part in, q
4,  a  1,  rep 2 730d-731d; part in suppl, q 69, a i, rep 2 885c-886c; q
92,  a 1, ans and rep 7 1025c-1032b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, 1
[103-142]  107b-d;  11  [112-148]  109a-b;  vii  [64-87]  115d116a; xiii
[52-84]  126a-b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 238d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act
ii,  sc  ii  [314-322]  43d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 41b-d;
80b-81a  31  Descartes:  Meditations, in, 88c-d; iv, 90b91b / Objections
and Replies, 122a-b; 214a-d; 228a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17,
schol  362c-363c  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [345-353] 118b119a; bk
iv [288-294] 158b; bk vii [150-173] 220b-221a;
[519-528] 228b; bk xi
[466-522]
309b-310b  /  Areopagitica, 384a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 430-431, 246b-247b;
434435, 249b-251a; 537 265b; 555 270a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
xi,  div 113, 502c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 90 130b-d /
Philosophy  of History,  part  ii,  270d271c;  part  in,  306a-c; 310d 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 84b-85a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
153b-d  For:  Other  discussions of the principle of identity and of its
significance  for being, change, and thought, see Being 2b, 7K5); Change
2;  Logic ia; One and Many 2a; Principle ic, 33(3); Relation ia; and for
the problems of personal identity and the identity of a state,

[715a]
2a-2c.  I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by
authors  not  represented  in  this  collection. J. S. Mill. A System of
Logic,  bk hi, ch 20 6; Terminal Essays, iv Bosanquet. Logic, vol ii, ch
3 (11, 14-15, 17) Santayana. The Realm of Matter, ch 8-9

[715b]
Chapter  82  :  SAME AND OTHER 681 Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human
Under-

[716a]
IN  our  time,  science, philosophy, and religion have come to represent
three   quite   distinct  intellectual  enterprises.  Each  appeals  for
allegiance  not  merely  on  the  ground  that it can answer fundamental
questions,  but  also  because  of  its  contribution  to human life and
culture.   In  other  periods,  philosophy  and  religion  competed  for
supremacy,  though,  as  appears  in  the  chapter  on  Philosophy, some
philosophers  and  theologians  tried to remove this conflict by arguing
for the complete compatibility of reason and faith. Nevertheless, before
the  19th century, the issue, if one existed, was between philosophy and
religion.   Science  had  not  yet  become  sufficiently  distinct  from
philosophy  to  complicate  the picture. When science and philosophy are
not  themselves sharply distinguished, men are not confronted with three
separate  claims  upon  their intellectual allegiance. Modern science as
something  quite  distinct in method and subject matter from traditional
philosophy  may  actually  make  its  appearance  as  early  as the 17th
century.  But not until Kant are two kinds of science plainly set apart.
Not until then are they so defined that one becomes identified with what
men have always called "philosophy" and the other gradually appropriates
the name of "science" and regards itself as a quite separate enterprise.
Kant  differentiates  between  the  empirical and the rational sciences.
This  differentiation tends to correspond with the distinction by others
before  him of experimental and abstract philosophy. It also corresponds
with  a  later  division  into  the  experimental  or  inductive and the
philosophical   or  deductive  sciences.  But  Kant  does  not  seem  to
contemplate   the   possibility   of   conflict   between   science  and
philosophy—between  the experimental study of nature and metaphysics or,
what is for him the

[716b]
Chapter  83:  SCIENCE  INTRODUCTION same, between empirical and rational
physics.  Hume  is  willing to admit only mathematics to the status of a
rational   science,   capable  of  demonstrating  its  conclusions  with
certainty.  He  insists  upon  experimental  reasoning  in  the study of
nature,  wherein  only probable conclusions can be attained. But he does
not make these critical points in terms of science versus philosophy. If
the  traditional  metaphysics is to be rejected, it is not because it is
philosophy  rather  than science, but because it represents a failure in
philosophy  or  science, resulting from the wrong method of dealing with
matters  of fact. In the 19th century, however, Auguste Comte formulates
a  doctrine  which,  under  the title of Positive Philosophy, explicitly
declares  that only the positive sciences— the study of natural, mental,
and   social   phenomena  by  empirical  methods—deserve  to  be  called
"sciences" in the eulogistic sense of that term. In contrast, philosophy
is   mere   speculation,   and   religion   is  superstition.  The  word
"speculation"  is  for  the positivist only slightly less invidious than
"superstition."   Whereas   superstition   implies   irrational  belief,
speculation  represents  a  futile  attempt  by  reason to go behind the
phenomena  in  order  to  discover  ultimate  causes or substances. This
cannot result in anything but guesswork or conjecture—never in knowledge
or  science,  which are the same for the positivist. For all its show of
logic  and  system, philosophy cannot produce conclusions which have the
validity  or  objectivity  of  science, because it tries to do more than
explore  and  describe the phenomena and because it tries to do whatever
it  does  without  investigation  or  experiment.  From  many sources in
addition  to  Comte similar views converge to form an attitude generally
prevalent  in  the  world  today  under  the name of positivism. All its
current varieties 682

[717a]
seem  to  have  this  much in common: the identification of science with
knowledge  of  fact,  and  further, the restriction of such knowledge to
conclusions  obtained and verified empirically. Whatever does not accord
with  this conception of science is either, like mathematics or logic, a
purely  formal  discipline  or,  like  philosophy  and  religion,  it is
conjecture,  opinion,  or  beliefpersonal,  subjective, even wishful. It
seems  appropriate that the most recent author in the set of great books
should  provide  us  with a declaration of positivism and that he should
set  science against philosophy and religion. It is also fitting that he
should  be a scientist in the field of psychology, since psychology is a
late-comer among the disciplines which, once branches of philosophy, now
claim  to  be  positive  sciences. Not only late, but last, according to
Freud,  for "sociology, which deals with the behavior of man in society,
can be nothing other than applied psychology. Strictly speaking, indeed,
there  are  only two sciences— psychology, pure and applied, and natural
science."  In  his  New  Introductory  Lectures on PsychoAnalysis, Freud
concludes   with   a   statement   of  what  he  calls  the  "scientific
Weltanschauung"  In  essence,  he  thinks,  "it asserts that there is no
other  source  of  knowledge  of  the  universe,  but  the  intellectual
manipulation of carefully verified observations, in fact, what is called
research,  and  that  no  knowledge  can  be  obtained  from revelation,
intuition, or inspiration." Freud makes the drastic implications of this
statement  quite  explicit.  "It is inadmissible to declare," he writes,
"that  science  is  one  field  of human intellectual activity, and that
religion  and  philosophy  are  others,  at  least as valuable, and that
science  has  no business to interfere with the other two, that they all
have an equal claim to truth, and that everyone is free to choose whence
he  shall  draw  his convictions and in which he shall place his belief.
"Such an attitude," he goes on, "is considered particularly respectable,
tolerant,  broadminded,  and free from narrow prejudices. Unfortunately,
it is not tenable; it shares all the pernicious qualities of an entirely
unscientific  Weltanschauung,  and  in  practice  comes to much the same
thing.  The  bare fact is that truth cannot be tolerant and cannot admit
compromise

[717b]
Chapter  83:  SCIENCE 683 or limitations, that scientific research looks
on  the  whole  field  of  human  activity as its own, and must adopt an
uncompromisingly critical attitude towards any other power that seeks to
usurp  any part of its province." As a threat to the dominion of science
over  man  and  society,  "religion  alone  is  a really serious enemy."
Philosophy,  Freud  thinks,  "has  no  immediate  influence on the great
majority  of  mankind";  whereas  "religion  is a tremendous force which
exerts  its power over the strongest emotions of human beings." Religion
and  science  might  be  compatible  if religion, offering men something
"incomparably  more  beautiful, more comforting, and more ennobling than
anything  they  could  ever  get from science," would only say: 'It is a
fact  that  I  cannot  give  you what men commonly call truth; to obtain
that,  you  must  go  to science.' " But religion cannot say that, Freud
thinks,  without  losing  "all  influence over the mass of mankind," and
science cannot, on its side, yield at all in its claim to being the only
avenue  to  truth.  Employing  a  method  which  "carefully examines the
trustworthiness   of  the  sense  perceptions  on  which  it  bases  its
conclusions,"  which  "provides  itself  with  new perceptions . . . not
obtainable  by  everyday means," and which "isolates the determinants of
these  new  experiences  by  purposely  varied experimentation," science
alone   can  "arrive  at  correspondence  with  reality."  It  is  "this
correspondence  with  the  real  external world we call truth"; and thus
when  "religion  claims  that it can take the place of science and that,
because  it is beneficent and ennobling, it must therefore be true, that
claim is, in fact, an encroachment, which, in the interests of everyone,
should  be  resisted."  Philosophy does not seem to Freud to offer men a
genuine  alternative  to scientific truth. Unlike religion, it is not in
his view necessarily opposed to science; at times it even behaves "as if
it  were a science," and to some extent makes "use of the same methods."
But  insofar  as  it  parts  company  with  science  by clinging "to the
illusion  that  it  can  produce  a complete and coherent picture of the
universe,"  philosophy  must  be regarded as an impostor in the halls of
knowledge.  The picture philosophy tries to construct, Freud says, "must
needs fall to pieces with

[718a]
684  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  every  new advance in our knowledge." Not itself
knowledge,  but  mere  opinion  or speculation, philosophy does not, any
more  than  religion, offer a substitute for science. Both together fall
under  Freud's  interdict.  Both  together  would be outcasts from human
culture  if  what he calls "our best hope for the future," that is, "the
intellect—  the  scientific  spirit,  reason—should  in time establish a
dictatorship  over  the  human mind." William James, almost contemporary
with  Freud,  also  draws  a  sharp line between science and philosophy.
Writing  his  Principles  of  Psychology at a time when the experimental
methods  of  the natural sciences, especially physiology, have just been
introduced  into the study of mental phenomena, he is at pains to define
the  scope  of  psychology  as  a  natural  science, and to separate the
questions  which  can  be  properly considered by a scientist from those
which  belong to the philosopher. But, unlike Freud, James does not seem
to  regard  the  philosopher  as  engaged  in  a  futile effort to solve
problems  which  are either insoluble or better left until science finds
means  for  solving  them. For James the distinction between science and
philosophy  does not seem to lie only in the methods they employ, though
the  empirical  or experimental approach does have a bearing on the kind
of  problems  scientists can undertake to solve and the conclusions they
can   reach.   The   problems   and   the   conclusions  are  themselves
characteristically   different   from  those  of  the  philosopher.  The
scientist  describes  the phenomena, according to James, as precisely as
possible and as comprehensively, but without any implication of finality
or  totality.  He  recognizes  that  his  descriptive  formulations  are
tentative and incomplete, always subject to the discovery of new data or
a  more  refined presentation of the evidence. Above all, he admits that
he  is  only  describing,  not  explaining—not  laying bare the ultimate
reality  which  gives  the  phenomena  their deepest intelligibility, or
ascertaining the causes which show why, not merely how, things happen as
they  do. In the Preface to his Principles, James says that he has "kept
close  to the point of view of natural science throughout the book . . .
This

[718b]
book,  assuming  that  thoughts  and  feelings exist and are vehicles of
knowledge,  thereupon contends that psychology, when she has ascertained
the  empirical  correlation  of  the various sorts of thought or feeling
with  definite  conditions  of  the  brain,  can go no farther—can go no
farther, that is, as a natural science. If she goes farther, she becomes
metaphysical. All attempts to explain our phenomenally given thoughts as
products  of  deeper-lying  entities  .  .  .  are  metaphysical."  This
scientific  point  of  view, James admits, "is anything but ultimate The
data  assumed  by  psychology,  just like those assumed by physics, must
sometime  be  overhauled.  The  effort  to  overhaul  them  clearly  and
thoroughly is metaphysics." James does not imply that metaphysics cannot
"perform  her  task  well," but he does think that "she . . . spoils two
good things when she injects herself into a natural science. Science and
metaphysics  should be kept quite separate, even though the sciences, in
accumulating  "a  mass  of descriptive details," run "into queries which
only a metaphysics alive to the weight of her task can hope successfully
to  deal  with.  That will perhaps be centuries hence; and meanwhile the
best  mark  of  health that a science can show is this unfinishedseeming
front."  The variance of James' conception of metaphysics and its future
from other traditional views on that subject is discussed in the chapter
on  Metaphysics.  Here  it  is  relevant  to  observe  that  James has a
conception of science broad enough to include both the empirical natural
sciences   and  what  he  calls  the  "pure  or  a  priori  sciences  of
Classification,  Logic,  and  Mathematics."  Yet in his view metaphysics
does  represent  philosophy  as  opposed  to science, because it aims at
ultimate  reality  or  underlying  causes.  For  example, he rejects the
theory  of  a  soul, not because he knows it to be false, but because he
thinks  it  has  no  place  in  "a psychology which contents itself with
verifiable   laws"   and   which   is   to   "remain   positivistic  and
nonmetaphysical."  James seems to embrace the positivist view, prevalent
in  the  19th  century and our own day. He limits science to, as well as
excludes philosophy from, the domain of empirical

[719a]
knowledge.  In  discussing  the  possibility  of free will, he says that
"Psychology will be Psychology and Science, Science, as much as ever (as
much and no more) in this world, whether free-will be true in it or not.
Science, Tiowever, must be constantly reminded that her purposes are not
the only purposes, and that the order of uniform causation which she has
use  for,  and  is therefore right in postulating, may be enveloped in a
wider order, in which she has no claims at all." Those modern scientists
and philosophers who do not make a sharp distinction between science and
philosophy  and  who antedate any explicit formulation of the positivist
doctrine,  nevertheless do for the most part conceive natural science as
experimental in its method and as having for its goal the formulation of
general  laws  describing and correlating the phenomena. They do not all
exclude  causes  from the consideration of the natural scientist; nor do
they  all,  as  stringently  as  James, rule out explanation in favor of
description  or  correlation. Furthermore, the almost universal emphasis
by  modern  writers  upon  the  experimental  character  of  the natural
sciences  does  not  mean a universal identification of science with the
experimental  disciplines. Mathematics, for example, is usually regarded
as  a science in spite of its being nonexperimental. For Locke and Hume,
as  well  as  for  Descartes,  it exhibits certain characteristics — the
self-evidence  of principles, the certainty of demonstrations—which make
it  more  genuinely  worthy  of  the  high  name of science than are the
tentative  hypotheses  and probable conclusions of experimental physics.
Other  disciplines  are called "sciences" by comparison with mathematics
rather  than  physics.  Descartes,  for  instance,  seems  to think that
metaphysics can as surely be made a science as mathematics can be. Locke
argues  that  demonstration from axioms is not limited to the science of
quantity. As much clarity and certainty is attainable in reasoning about
moral  matters.  Ethics  is  no  less a science than mathematics. Hobbes
appears  to  take a similar view of politics, though it must be noted in
his case that he differs from Descartes and Locke, from Bacon, Hume, and
others in not distinguishing mathe-

[719b]
Chapter 83: SCIENCE 685 matics from physics with respect to the latter's
need  for  experimental  evidence. All the sciences are for him alike in
being   "the  demonstrations  of  consequences  of  one  affirmation  to
another,"  regardless of "the diversity of the matter." The "certain and
infallible"  sign  that  a  man  is  a scientist in any field of subject
matter  is  that  he can "demonstrate the truth thereof perspicuously to
another."  Hobbes,  furthermore,  seems  to  think  that what is true of
geometry  is  true  of  every  science,  namely, that it must begin with
definitions.  "In  geometry,"  he  says,  "men  begin  at  settling  the
signification  of  their  words;  which settling of significations, they
call  definitions."  Without definitions, science is impossible. "In the
right  definition  of  names,"  Hobbes maintains, "lies the first use of
speech,  which  is  the  acquisition of science; and in the wrong, or no
definitions,  lies  the  first  abuse,  from  which proceed all false or
senseless tenets." Freud expresses the opposite view, which is generally
more  characteristic of the attitude of the modern scientist, especially
the  experimentalist  or  empiricist  in  method.  "The  view  is  often
defended,"  he  writes,  "that  sciences  should  be  built on clear and
sharply  defined  basal  concepts." But "in actual fact, no science, not
even the most exact, begins with such definitions. The true beginning of
scientific  activity,"  Freud  holds,  "consists  rather  in  describing
phenomena  and  then  proceeding  to group, classify and correlate them.
Even  at  the stage of description, it is not possible to avoid applying
certain  abstract  ideas  to  the  material  in hand, ideas derived from
various  sources and certainly not the fruit of new experience only. . .
.  They  must  at first necessarily possess some measure of uncertainty;
there  can  be  no question of any clear limitation of their content. So
long as they remain in this condition, we come to an understanding about
their  meaning  by  repeated  references to the material of observation,
from  which  we seem to have deduced our abstract ideas, but which is in
point  of  fact subject to them." The basic concepts or definitions of a
science  are,  according  to  Freud,  "in  the  nature  of  conventions;
although,"  he  adds,  "everything  depends  on their being chosen in no
arbitrary manner, but determined by the important

[720a]
686  THE  GREAT IDEAS relations they have to the empirical material. ...
It  is  only after more searching investigation of the field in question
that  we  are  able  to  formulate with increased clarity the scientific
concepts underlying it. . . . Then indeed, it may be time to immure them
in  definitions.  The  progress  of  science, however, demands a certain
elasticity  even  in  these  definitions."  This  may  not  be  true  of
mathematical concepts or definitions, but, Freud points out, the science
of  physics  illustrates  "the  way in which even those 'basal concepts'
that  are  firmly  established in the form of definitions are constantly
being  altered  in  their  content."  With  the exception of Hobbes, the
notion  that scientific conclusions can be drawn from definitions or can
be  established  without recourse to experiment, is not usually extended
by  modern  writers  from mathematics and metaphysics to physics. As the
chapter on Physics shows, the basic division of the study of nature into
philosophical  and  scientific  physics  becomes  equivalent,  in modern
times, to a separation of the philosophy of nature from the experimental
natural  sciences.  We shall return presently to that sense of "science"
in  which  physics  is  associated with mathematics and metaphysics as a
branch  of  theoretic  philosophy or as one of the speculative sciences.
All  three  disciplines are thought of as proceeding in the same way: by
the  demonstration  of conclusions from principles obtained by induction
from  experienceordinary  sense-experience,  that  is,  not  the special
experiences  artificially  contrived  in a laboratory under experimental
conditions.  But  it should be observed that, in the modern period, even
those authors who use "science" in the foregoing sense when they discuss
mathematics  and  metaphysics, treat physics differently. They hold that
physics must be experimental if it is to be scientific. In proportion as
modern  physics  becomes more and more the model of science, the meaning
of  the  word "science" tends to become reserved for experimental study,
or  at  least  for  empirical  investigation,  so  that non-experimental
disciplines,  like  metaphysics or ethics, are questioned when they call
themselves  "sciences." Other disciplines try to establish themselves as
sciences by imitating physics. Marx, for exam-

[720b]
ple,  in  presenting  his own work as economic science, seeks to explain
how  it  can  be  scientific  even  if  it  is  not  experimental.  "The
physicist,"  he  writes,  "either observes physical phenomena where they
occur  in  their  most  typical  form  and  most  free  from  disturbing
influence,  or, wherever possible, he makes experiments under conditions
that  assure  the  occurrence  of  the  phenomenon in its normality." If
experiment,  in  the  strict sense, is impossible in economics, at least
the  student of economics can be scientific in his effort to observe the
phenomena "in their most typical form." England, Marx thinks, offers the
most  typical  example  of  "the  capitalist mode of production, and the
conditions  of  production  and  exchange  corresponding  to that mode."
Hence,  for  scientific  purposes,  he  has  used  England "as the chief
illustration  in  the  development  of  [his]  theoretical  ideas."  The
experimental  character  of modern physics, whether it is called natural
science  or  natural philosophy, is discussed in the chapter on Physics.
The  distinction  between the construction or use of experiments and the
appeal  to  experience—apart  from experiment—either as a source or as a
test  of  scientific  formulations,  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on
Experience, as well as in the chapters on Hypothesis and Induction. Here
it  seems  pertinent  to  note  that  neither  the  distinction  between
induction  and  deduction,  nor  the  distinction between hypotheses and
axioms,  unequivocally  marks  the  line  which  separates  science from
philosophy.  Aristotle  and  Bacon, for example, regard induction as the
source  of  axioms  in  metaphysics  or  philosophia prima as well as in
physics or the philosophy of nature. They may have different theories of
induction,  but  only insofar as one conceives induction as an intuitive
generalization  from  ordinary  sense-experience,  and  the  other makes
induction  an  inference  from  experiments, does the difference between
them  seem  to  have a bearing on the distinction between philosophy and
science.  Similarly,  the  difference  between  the  scientist's and the
philosopher's  consideration  of hypotheses seems to lie not in the role
they  play  in  reasoning or argument, but rather in their having or not
having a special relation to experi-

[721a]
mentation,  either  to  guide  it  or to submit to its test. Experiment,
then,  seems  to  be  the  distinguishing  mark  of  science on the side
ofiriethod;  and,  by  an  extension  of  meaning, even in those subject
matters  where  experiments  in  the strict sense— in laboratories, with
apparatus,  under  controlled  conditions—are  impossible, the scientist
differs  from  the  philosopher  in  an  analogous  point of method. The
scientist  investigates,  does  research,  makes  observations  which go
beyond  the  experiences  which ordinary men have in the course of daily
life.  It  seems  to be in this spirit that Newton opens the Optics with
the  statement  that  "my  design  in  this  book  is not to explain the
properties  of  light  by  hypotheses,  but to propose and prove them by
reason and experiments." In the same spirit Faraday says of himself: "As
an  experimentalist,  I  feel  bound to let experiment guide me into any
train  of thought which it may justify; being satisfied that experiment,
like  analysis,  must  lead  to strict truth if rightly interpreted; and
believing  also  that  it  is  in  its nature far more suggestive of new
trains  of  thought  and  new  conditions  of  natural power." Lavoisier
imposes upon himself the rule "never to form any conclusion which is not
an  immediate  consequence  necessarily  flowing  from  observation  and
experiment."  Gilbert criticizes those who write about magnetism without
recourse    to   experiments—philosophers   who   are   not   themselves
investigators and have no first-hand acquaintance with things. Referring
to  "what  has  been held by the vulgar and by tradition" concerning the
motion  of the heart and arteries, Harvey proposes to separate true from
false  opinions  "by  dissection,  multiplied  experience  and  accurate
observation."  Even  a  scientist  like  Fourier, who conceives physical
theory  as  a  kind  of  applied mathematics, says that "no considerable
progress  can  hereafter be made which is not founded on experiments ...
for  mathematical  analysis can deduce from general and simple phenomena
the  expression  of  the  laws of nature; but the special application of
these  laws  to  very  complex  effects  demands  a long series of exact
observations."  Like  Fourier,  Galileo  also  combines  mathematics and
experiment in the study of nature. But though he is willing to introduce
experiments where they

[721b]
Chapter  83: SCIENCE 687 are necessary in order to test rival hypotheses
or alternative mathematical formulations of the laws of motion, he seems
to express a preference for the rigor of purely mathematical physics. In
the Fourth Day of the Two New Sciences, discussing the parabolic path of
projectiles,  one  person in the dialogue, Sagredo, says that "the force
of  rigid demonstrations such as occur only in mathematics fills me with
wonder  and  delight."  The  understanding  thus  derived, he adds, "far
outweighs  the  mere  information obtained by the testimony of others or
even  by  repeated  experiment."  Agreeing  with this, Salviati, another
person  in  the  dialogue,  claims  that "the knowledge of a single fact
acquired  through  a  discovery  of  its  causes  prepares  the  mind to
understand  and  ascertain  other  facts  without  need  of  recourse to
experiment,  precisely  as  in  the present case, where by argumentation
alone  the  Author  proves  with certainty that the maximum range occurs
when the ele- . He thus demonstrates what has vation is 45 perhaps never
been  observed  in  experience,  namely, that of other shots those which
exceed  or  fall  short  of  45 by equal amounts have equal ranges." The
conception  of  science  as  consisting  in  a rigorous demonstration of
conclusions   from   axioms—whether  in  mathematics  or  other  subject
matters—seems  to be modern as well as ancient. It is found in Descartes
and  Spinoza,  in  Hobbes  and Locke, as well as in Plato and Aristotle.
Holding  that  "science  in its entirety is true and evident cognition,"
Descartes  may  add that "it has been mathematicians alone who have been
able  to succeed in making any demonstrations, that is to say, producing
reasons  which  are  evident  and  certain";  yet  he also hopes to make
metaphysics a science after the model of mathematics. This conception of
science  is  somewhat qualified by Descartes when he discusses the study
of  nature.  Here  he  tends  toward  experimentalism. Here he says that
"experiments  .  .  .  become so much the more necessary the more one is
advanced  in knowledge." Referring to particular effects which "might be
deduced  from the principles in many different ways," he thinks that the
only  way  to  overcome  the difficulty of discovering the principles on
which the effects

[722a]
688  THE  GREAT IDEAS do depend is "to try to find experiments of such a
nature  that  their  result is not the same if it has to be explained by
one  of  the  methods, as it would be if explained by the other." On the
other  hand,  the  conception  of  science  as  knowledge  founded  upon
experiment,  or  at least upon extended observation, seems to be ancient
as  well  as  modern.  Aristotle criticizes those of his predecessors in
physics  whose  "explanation  of the observations is not consistent with
the  observations." The test of principles "in the knowledge of nature,"
he  says, "is the unimpeachable evidence of the senses as to each fact."
It  is  for  this  reason  that  he  praises the method of Democritus as
scientific.  "Lack  of  experience,"  Aristotle  writes, "diminishes our
power  of taking a comprehensive view of the admitted facts. Hence those
who  dwell  in  intimate  association with nature and its phenomena grow
more  and  more able to formulate, as the foundations of their theories,
principles  such  as  to admit of a wide and coherent development; while
those  whom devotion to abstract discussions has rendered unobservant of
the facts are too ready to dogmatize on the basis of a few observations.
The  rival  treatments  of  the  subject  now  before  us  will serve to
illustrate  how  great  is  the  difference between a 'scientific' and a
'dialectical'  method  of inquiry. For whereas the Platonists argue that
there  must  be atomic magnitudes 'because otherwise "The Triangle" will
be  more  than  one,'  Democritus would appear to have been convinced by
arguments  appropriate  to  the subject, i.e., drawn from the science of
nature."   There  are  many  passages  in  which  Aristotle  rejects  an
astronomical   hypothesis   because   it   does   not  account  for  the
observations,  or  favors one theory against all others because it alone
seems  to  fit the sensible phenomena. So, too, in his biological works,
he  makes experience the test of theories. Speaking of the generation of
bees,  for  example,  he says that if we ever learn the truth about this
matter,  "credit  must  be given to observation rather than to theories,
and  to  theories  only  if  what  they  affirm agrees with the observed
facts."  And  in  his  treatise  On  the  Motion of Animals, he calls for
"reference  to particulars in the world of sense, for with these in view
we  seek  general  theories,  and  with  these  we  believe that general
theories ought to harmonize."

[722b]
But  Aristotle  also  defines  science  as  the certain demonstration of
universal   and  necessary  conclusions  from  self-evident  principles.
"Scientific  knowledge,"  he  writes, "is judgment about things that are
universal  and  necessary;  and  the  conclusions of demonstration . . .
follow   from   first  principles  (for  scientific  knowledge  involves
apprehension ofa rational ground)." The emphasis here is on knowledge of
causes,  and  on the certainty and necessity of conclusions which can be
demonstrated  from  axiomatic truths. By these criteria, metaphysics and
mathematics  are,  in  Aristotle's conception of the three philosophical
sciences, perfect examples of scientific knowledge; physics as a general
philosophy of nature is also scientific knowledge in this sense; but the
particular  natural  sciences,  such  as  astronomy or zoology, are more
empirical  than  philosophical  in  character.  At  least  they  involve
admixtures  of  demonstration  from  principles with the verification of
hypotheses  by  observation. To the extent that they are empirical, they
are qualified by an uncertainty and a tentativeness in formulation which
do  not  seem  to  be  present  in  Aristotle's conception of the purely
philosophical  sciences.  It  might  even  be said that the knowledge of
nature which depends on empirical research is not strictly scientific at
all.  Locke appears to say just that. "How far soever human industry may
advance  useful  and  experimental  philosophy  in  physical things," he
writes, "scientifical will still be out of our reach." Holding that "our
knowledge  of  bodies is to be improved only by experience," Locke adds:
"I  deny  not  but a man accustomed to rational and regular experiments,
shall  be  able  to  see  farther  into  the nature of bodies, and guess
righter  at their yet unknown properties, than one that is a stranger to
them;  but  yet,  as  I have said, this is but judgment and opinion, not
knowledge and certainty. This way of getting and improving our knowledge
in substances only by experience and history . . . makes me suspect that
natural  philosophy  is not capable of being made a science. Whether the
experimental study of nature is the type of all scientific knowledge (in
its  object,  its  method,  and  the  character  of  its conclusions) or
whether,  according to another conception, the philosophical disciplines
are the

[723a]
more  perfect, perhaps even the only examples of science, there seems to
be  no  question  that  different values attach to these two meanings of
science—or,  as  it  is currently exprejssedr ^o science and philosophy.
The   philosophical  sciences  may  be  either  theoretic  or  practical
according  as  they  aim  at  wisdom  or  at action, but they are seldom
praised  as  being useful productively. The practical sciences which are
also  traditionally  regarded  as  branches  of moral philosophy—such as
ethics,  politics,  and  economics—may  be  knowledge  put to use in the
guidance of individual conduct or the affairs of society, but apart from
poetics,  which  may  direct  production in the sphere of the fine arts,
there  does  not  seem  to  be  any  philosophical science, or branch of
philosophy,  that  provides  a  mastery  of  matter or some control over
nature.  None  has  applications  in  the  sphere of the useful arts. As
indicated  in  the  chapters  on  Art,  Knowledge, and Philosophy, Bacon
appears  to  take  a  contrary  view. Using the word "practical" to mean
productive  rather  than  moral  or  civil, he divides the philosophy of
nature  into speculative and practical branches. He regards mechanics as
the  application  of  physics to useful purposes, and finds a productive
counterpart  to  metaphysics  in  what  he calls "magic." Nor is Bacon's
point  merely  that "the real and legitimate goal of the sciences is the
endowment  of  human life with new inventions and riches," in opposition
to  those  whom he criticizes for thinking that "the contemplation of i.
Conceptions  of  science  i  a.  Science  as a philosophical discipline:
certain  or  perfect  knowledge  (2)  The  division and hierarchy of the
philosophical  sciences  mental knowledge: the scientific spirit mastery
of nature; machinery and inventions technology rational science

[723b]
Chapter  83:  SCIENCE  689  truth is more dignified and exalted than any
utility  or  extent of effects." In addition he thinks that the truth of
science  can  be  tested  by its productive utility. "That which is most
useful  in  practice,"  he  writes, "is most correct in theory." Bacon's
position  with  regard to the productive utility of science would not be
contrary  to  the  traditional  view if by "the philosophy of nature" he
meant  science  in the experimental rather than the philosophical sense.
His  emphasis  upon  experimentation in all parts of the study of nature
suggests  that  that is the case. The fact that he places equal emphasis
upon  machinery  and inventions and power over nature also suggests that
technology  is  the  other  face of any science which is experimental in
method.  Bacon  and  Descartes  seem  to  be  the first to perceive that
knowledge  which  is  experimental  in origin must be by its very nature
capable  of  technological  applications.  The instruments and apparatus
which Bacon regards as necessary implements of science, no less than the
machinery  and  inventions  which  science  can  be expected to produce,
represent   the   very   same   techniques  of  operating  upon  nature.
Experimental science is thus seen to be at once the creature and creator
of  technology.  As  Plato's Republic projects a society which cannot be
realized  unless  it  is  ruled  by  the  science of the philosopher, so
Bacon's  New  Atlantis  prophesies a civilization which the dominance of
experimentalism and technology have brought to present reality. PAGE 691
692 693

[724a]
690  THE GREAT IDEAS a science lb. The comparison of science with poetry
and  history  politics,  economics, and jurisprudence as sciences useful
arts  4  a.  The  principles  of  science:  facts,  definitions, axioms,
hypotheses 5. Scientific method 50. The role of experience : observation
and  experiment  5<r. The use of mathematics in science: calculation and
measurement 5^. The use of hypotheses: prediction and verification ments
or  apparatus  ment  of  science ja. The praise of science by comparison
with  opinion,  superstition,  magic yb. The satirization of science and
scientists: the foibles of science

[724b]
PAGE  4^.  The  objects  of  science:  the  essential and necessary; the
sensible   and   measurable   697   ^d.  The  generality  of  scientific
formulations:  universal  laws  of  nature 698 clusions: the adequacy of
scientific theories 699 5b. Techniques of exploration and discovery: the
ascertainment  of fact 700 ^d. Induction and deduction in the philosophy
of nature and natural science 701

[725a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1.
Conceptions  of  science  la.  Science  as  a  philosophical discipline:
certain  or perfect knowledge 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 370d-373c; bk vi,
383d-388a;  bk vii, 391b-398c / Sophist, 570a574c esp 571a-c / Philebus,
633a-635a  esp 634b-635a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics 97a-137a,c esp
bk 1, ch 2 97d-99a / Physics, bk i, ch i
[184*10-16] 259a; bk
ii,  ch  7  275b-d  /  Metaphysics,  bk 1, ch 2-3 500b-502d; bk ii, ch i
511b,d-512b;  bk  iv, ch 2 [ioo4b i8-27] 523d; BK VI, CHI " 547b,d-548c;
bk  xi, ch 7 592b593a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3 388b-c; ch 6 389d
18  Augustine  City  of God, bk viii, ch 2-9 265b-271a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i  1-8  3b-8d passim; part i-ii, q 14, a 677b-678a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 54, Q I, AA , REP 2 a 4, rep 3
25b-d;  q  57, a 2 36a-37b; q 66, a 5, rep 3 79b-80c; part ii-ii, q 9, a
2,  ans  424b-425a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 60a-d; 65c-d; 71c-d;
72a-d; part iv, 267a-c 31 Descartes: Rules, 11-111 2a-5a / Discourse,

[725b]
Chapter  83: SCIENCE 691 part 1, 43d; part 11, 47a-48a; part iv, 51b 52a
/  Meditations,  1  75a-77c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 40-43
387a389b;  part  v,  prop  25-28  458d-459b; prop 31 459d-460b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 26 321b-c; sect 29 322c-323a 35
Hume:  Human Understanding, sect iv, div 20 458a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
la-13d;  211c-218d;  243c250a,  c  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
253b-c; 264b-d; 270c-d / Practical Reason, 360d-361d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of Ethics, 365a-366a; 376c-d / Judgement, 463a467a; 560d-561a;
603a-b  l<z(l)  The  intellectual  virtue  of  science:  its relation to
understanding   and  wisdom  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,  386d-388a  9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch i-ii 387a393b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 54, a 4, rep 3 25b-d; q 57, a 2 36a-37b; q 64, a 3 68b-69b;
q 66, a 5 79b-80c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 66c-d; 68b 31 Descartes:
Rules,  1  la-2a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40-43 387a 389b; part
v, prop 25-28 458d-459b; pro 31 459d-460b

[726a]
692  THE GREAT IDEAS (la. Science as a philosophical discipline: certain
or  perfect  knowledge.}  1<*(2)  The  division  and  hierarchy  of  the
philosophical  sciences 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 391b-398c / Philebus,
634b-635b  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk i, ch 7 103c-d; ch 9
104b-d; ch ii
[77
&26]-ch 12 b i5] 106b-d; ch 13
[78^1-79*16] 108b-c;
ch 27-28 119b-c / Topics, bk i, ch 14 [io5b i9-
[77
29] 149c / Sophistical Refutations, ch 9
[i7oa20-b3]
234b-c / Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92a33-b2] 268c-d; bk ii, ch 2 270a-271a; ch
7 [198*22-31] 275b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch i
[298b i3~24] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 2 500b-501c; ch 9
[992
a29-b  9]  510c-d; bk ii, ch 3 [994 b3i]-BK in, ch 2 [997*34] 513c-516a;
bk  iv,  ch  1-3  522a-525a;  bk  vi,  ch  i  547b,d548c;  bk vii, ch 11
[1037*13-21]  560d;  bk  xi,  ch  1  587a-588a;  ch  3-4 589a-590a; ch 7
592b593a; bk xii, ch i [io69a30-b2] 598b-c; ch 8
[io73b3~7] 603d;
bk xiii, ch 3
[io78 a9-b6]
609c-610a / Soul, bk 1, ch i
[403*25-^ 9]
632b-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639b32-640aio] 162a-b; [64i a33-b io] 164b-c
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic, bk 1, 812b-813d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i,
5a-6a  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  viii,  ch  4  266d267c;  bk xi, ch 25 336b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q i, aa 1-8 3b-8d esp a 5 5c-6a; q 85, a i, rep 2
451c-453c;  part  i-ii,  q  35,  a  8,  ans  779c-780c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  54,  a  2,  rep 2 23d-24c; q 57, a 6, rep 3
40a-41a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 71c-d; 72a-d; part iv, 268c-d;
269b-c  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 258b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  15d-16b; 40a-48d esp 40a-41b, 43a-45a / Novum Organum, bk
1,  aph  80 120a-b; bk ii, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, 1-11 la-3b;
iv 5a-7d / Discourse, part 1, 43c-44a; part ii, 46c-48b / Objections and
Replies,   169c-170a   34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk iv, ch xxi 394d-395a,c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
v,  335b-337a 45 Kant: Pure Reason, la-13d; 15c-16c; 17d-19a; 211c-218d;
243c-248d  passim  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-d; 264b-d /
Practical  Reason,  351b-352c  /  Judgement,  560d561a; 578a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  867a  lb. Science as the discipline of experimental inquiry
and the organization of experimental knowledge: the scientific spirit 16
Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, pref, la-2b; bk i,
6a7a; bk 11, 27b-c

[726b]
d  \a(2) to \b(\) 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 171a-d; third
day,  202d-203a;  207d-208a;  214d  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,
267b,d-268d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  331a-337a,c;  411c-d  30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  13a-c;  16a;  42a-c; 57d-58b / Novum Organum
105a-195d  passim,  esp bk i, aph 9 107d, aph 46 HOb-c, APH 49 Ilia, APH
51  lllC,  APH  54 110c-d, APH 63-64 113d-114b, aph 67 115d-116a, aph 74
118b,  aph 95 126b-c, aph 98-106 126d-128c, aph 126 134b / New Atlantis,
210d-214d  31  Descartes: Discourse, part vi 60d-67a,c passim 33 Pascal:
Vacuum,  356a-357a;  361a  /  Weight of Air, 429a 34 Newton: Principles,
lb-2a;  bk  hi, rule iiiiv 270b-271b; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics,
bk  1,  379a;  bk  hi,  542a;  543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553a-b 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  105-109  433b-434b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect v, div 36, 465a-d
[fn
1];  div  38  466b-c;  sect  xii 503c509d passim, esp div 116, 504a, div
129-130  508a-d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 103b-115b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  5a-13d  esp 5c-6c; 146a149d; 248d-250a,c / Judgement, 567c-568a
45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, lc2c; 6d-7a,c; part hi, 87b-c
45  Fourier: Theory of Heat, 175b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
276d [fn 5]; 318d-319a,c; 332b; 440b,d; 659a; 774d-775a; 848c; 851a-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part iv, 361a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
253d  53  James:  Psychology,  xiva;  3b-4a;  89b-90b; 862a-866a passim;
882a-884b   54   Freud:   General   Introduction,  463d;  503c-d  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  818c-819b;  874a-c; 879b-882b esp 879c, 881b-c,
882b  lb(l)  The  utility  of  science: the applications of experimental
knowledge   in  the  mastery  of  nature;  machinery  and  inventions  5
Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c45a  5  Sophocles: Antigone
[332-375]  134a-b  11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812d-813a 13 Virgil:
Georgics,  1  [121-146]  40b-41a  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus, 252a-255a 16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of the Heavenly Spheres, bk i, 510b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  73b; part iv, 267a-b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk hi,
75a-b;  bk  iv,  85c-89c;  bk v, lOOc-lOld 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day, 154c-155b; 160d-161a; second day, 191b193b 28 Harvey: Motion
ofthe Heart, 289d / Circulation of the Blood, 305a-

[727a]
U(2)  to \c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 14b-15a; 34b; 56b / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  ii  107d;  aph 8i 120b-c; aph 124 133c-d; aph 129
134d-135d;  bk  ii,  aph  39 169d-170c; aph 44-51 175d-194c passim / New
Atlantis~199ei^   214desp210d-214d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  vi
60d-67a,c  esp  61b-d,  66d-67a,c  33  Pascal:  Equilibrium  of Liquids,
392b-393a  34  Newton: Optics, bk i, 412a-423b 34 Huygens: Light, ch vi,
607a-b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 106a-107a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
363b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 5d-6a; bk v, 308d-309a,c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  661c-663c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
291d-292c;  509d510a,c  43  Mill: Representative Government, 346c-347a /
Utilitarianism,  452a-b  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of Chemistry, part i,
26c-27a;41a-44d;45c-d  45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 170a; 183b-184a; 213b
45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  390b;  433a440a,c  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History,  part  ii,  267a-b; part iv, 347d-348a 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii
[6835-6860]
167b168a  49  Darwin: Origin of Species, 19c-d 50 Marx: Capital, 170a-c;
180d-188c  esp  181c184b, 186b-188c; 190d [fn 2]; 239c-d 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto,  420d421a;  421d  54  Freud:  Civilization and Its
Discontents  , 777a-c; 778b-779a; 802a,c 1&(2) The effects of science or
human  life:  the  economic  and  social  implications  of  technology 5
Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c45a  5  Sophocles: Antigone
[332-375]  134a-b  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph ii 107d; aph 81
120b-c;  aph 124 133c-d; aph 129 134d135d; bk 11, aph 49-51 188b-194c 31
Descartes:   Discourse,   part  vi,  61b-d;  66d67a,c  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk iv, ch xii, sect 10-12 361b-362c passim 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div 5 452d-453b esp 453a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  ii,  78a-b;  part  hi, 106a107a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xxiii,  191bc  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 363a-366d passim, esp 363a-b 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 308d-309a,c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
633c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 291d-292c; 509d510a,c

[727b]
7 Chapter 83: SCIENCE 693 42 Kant: Judgement, 586a-587a esp 586d-587a 43
Constitution of the U.S. : article i, sect 8
[214-217] 13b
43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 452a-b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 170a; 172a;
174b175a;  184a; 213b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 343d344a
50  Marx:  Capital, 170a-c; 176d-178d esp 177a; 180d-250c esp 180d-181a,
181d [fn 3], 186b-d, 188bc, 190d
[fn
2],  192d-195c,  197a-200a,  205c-207a, 211a-212b, 214a-215a, 216d-217b,
219d-220a,  239b-241a;  299b-301b  esp  299b-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  421d423a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi, 158c;
164b-d;  bk  xi, 311d-312d 53 James: Psychology, 866a-b [fn 2] 54 Freud:
Psycho  -Analytic  Therapy, 127a,c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 7
7a-  7  79a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  882d-883a  lc.  The  issue
concerning  science and philosophy: the distinction and relation between
experimental   and  philosophical  science,  or  between  empirical  and
rational science 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 391b-398c 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 30 [46 ai827] 64a / Heavens, bk ii, ch 13
[293
ai5~3i] 384d; bk in, ch 7 [3o6ai-i8] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption,
bk i, ch 2
[316*5-14]
411c-d  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  161a165d;  ch 5
[644b2i-645a37]  168c-169b  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  pref, la-b; bk ii,
27b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 202d203a; 214d 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  331a-337a,c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
43a-d;  48d49b / Novum Organum, pref 105a-106d; bk i 107a-136a,c esp aph
15  108a,  aph  51  111c,  aph 63-64 113d-114b, aph 66 114d-115c, aph 95
126b-c,  aph 109 128d-129c; bk ii, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  i,  43d;  part  vi  60d-67a,c passim, esp 61d-62c / Objections and
Replies,  285b-d  34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk hi, 269a; rule iii-iv
270b-271b; general schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk in, 542a-543b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 26 321b-c; sect 29 322c-323a; ch
vi,  sect  13  335c-d; ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d esp sect 10 361b-c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv,  div 20-sect v, div 38 458a-466c
passim;  sect xii, div 131-132 508d-509d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
v, 336b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d
esp 5c-6c; 93d94b; 175b
[fn
1] / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-d; 264d; 271a-c; 277d-279d /

[728a]
(1.  Conceptions  of  science.  \c.  The  issue  concerning  science and
philosophy:  the  distinction  and  relation  between  experimental  and
philosophical  science,  or  between  empirical  and rational science. )
Practical  Reason,  331a-332d / Judgement, 463a467a; 561c-562a,c; 578a-b
45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, lc-2d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, intro, 182d183c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 197b; epilogue
ii,  694c-d  53 James : Psychology, xiiib-xiva; 89b-90b; 882a886a passim
54 Freud: Narcissism, 400d / General Introduction, 545c-d / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and Anxiety, 722a-b / New Introductory Lectures, 874a-875b 2.
The  relation  of  science  to other kinds of knowledge 2a. The relation
between  science  and  religion:  the conception of sacred theology as a
science  7  Plato:  Republic, bk iv, 345d-346a / Theaetetus, 528c-531a /
Laws, bk xii, 797c-798b 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch i
[284b i~5]
376a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2 [982b28-983au] 501a-b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk i
[62-158]
ld-3a; bk hi
[1-93] 30a-31b; bk v
[55-90]
61d-62b 14 Plutarch: Nicias, 435b-d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk v, par 3-9 27c29b / City of God, bk viii, ch
1-12  264b,  d273a; bk xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk xviii, ch 37 493c-494a; ch 41
495b-496c  / Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 40 655b-656a; ch 42 656c-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a10c; q 2, a 2, rep 1 lld-12c; q
12,  aa  12-13  60d-62b;  q  14,  a  6,  rep 2 80a-81c; q 19, a 5, rep 2
112d-113c;  q  32,  a  1  175d-178a;  q  39, aa 7-8 209a-213a; q 46, a 2
253a-255a;  q 84, a 5 446c-447c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 71, A 6, REP 5 HOb-110b; PART II—II, Q 2, AA 3-4 392d-394b; q 19, a 7,
ans 469d-470c; q 45 598c-603c esp aa 3-4 600c-601c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  65b-66c;  70c;  83b;  part  11, 137b-c; 160b; 163a-b; part hi,
165a-c;  part iv, 260bc; 267a-c; 269b-271c; 274c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
89c-d;  155a-c;  208d209c;  212a-d;  238c-239c;  267c-268a;  271b273b 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c;  19d20a;  39d-40c; 41b-d; 55b-d;
95d-101c  esp  96d-97b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 65 114b-c; aph 79
119d-120a; aph 89 124a-d

[728b]
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c  /  Meditations,  69a-71a,c  /
Objections  and Replies, 125b126a; 127d; 162c-165d; 168b-169a; 283d-284d
33 Pascal: Pensees, 77 186a; 185-195 205a-210b; 219 212a; 226 212b-213a;
245-253  218b-220a;  265-290  221b-225a;  543  266a;  557-567 272b273b /
Vacuum,  355b-356b  34  Newton:  Optics, bk hi, 543b-544a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xi,  div  102  497b-d;  sect xii, div 132, 509c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 336b-337a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
12d-13b;  159a-d; 186a-d; 200d-201a; 204d-205b; 307b-309d esp 308b-309b;
599c;  658bc;  670b-d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 177b-192d esp 190a-192d;
236b-240b   esp   239a-b,  239d-240a  /  Judgement,  560d-561b;  578a-b;
591b-592c;   600d601c;607d-609b   43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  455a-c  44
Boswell:  Johnson,  102c-d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
270,  87c-d  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 158c160b; 177c-d; part hi,
308c-309d;  part  iv, 361b-c; 368d-369a,c 49 Darwin : Origin of Species,
239c-d  /  Descent  of Man,  593d  50  Marx: Capital, 305a-306b [fn 2] 51
Tolstoy:     War     and     Peace,     bk     v,     197b;    bk    vi,
248d-249a;EPiLOGUEii,675a-677besp676a-b;  680b-c;  684b-d;  695d-696d 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk iv, 87c-d; bk vi, 158b-159a 53 James:
Psychology, 847b-848a 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 874a-881c esp
875b-d,  877d-880d,  881c  2b. The comparison of science with poetry and
history  7  Plato:  Lysis,  19d-20a  /  Protagoras,  57a-c  /  Phaedrus,
138c-140d  /  Ion  142a-148a,c  / Republic, bk x, 427c-434c 9 Aristotle:
Poetics,  ch  9 [i45i a36-b32] 686a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q ioi, a 2, rep 2 267a-268a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 67b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  41b-42a;  258c-259a  28  Harvey:  Circulation ofthe
Blood,  316a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 32d; 38c39a; 44c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43a-b  33 Pascal: Vacuum, 355a-356b 35
Hume:  Human Understanding, sect i, div 5, 452d-453a; sect viii, div 65,
479b-c;  sect  xii,  div  132,  509c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333d-334a;
348a,c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  345b-346b  42 Kant: Judgement,
526a-527b;  532b-c;  575b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
157b158a;182d-183c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-470c; bk xiii,
563a-b; epilogue ii, 690a-b; 694d696d

[729a]
3  to  3b  53  James: Psychology, 687a; 863a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  239c-240a;  246b- 248c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 796c
3.  The  relation of science to action and production 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  v, 369c-d; bk vi, 375b383b passim; bk vii, 401b 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk vi, ch 6
[145*12-18]
198d / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 7 [i032a26-b29] 555b-d; ch 9 [1034*22-29]
557c;  bk  ix, ch 2 571c-572a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
57,  a  5,  rep  3  39a-40a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 65d-66a /
Novum  Organum,  bk  ii, aph 1-9 137a-140c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
vi,  61b-d;  66d67a,c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div 5
452d-453b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 266c267a / Practical
Reason, 300d
[fn
1]  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  388d;  390b,d-391a  / Judgement,
463a-464c;  523d-524a  43  Mill: Representative Government, 346c-347a 50
Marx:  Capital,  170b-c;  190d  [fn  2]  "ha.  The  distinction  between
theoretic  and  practical  science:  the  character of ethics, politics,
economics,  and  jurisprudence  as  sciences 7 Plato: Charmides, 7d-8b /
Statesman, 581a; 604c-608d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 14
[io5b i9-29]
149c;  bk  vi,  ch 6 [145*12-18] 198d / Heavens, bk in, ch 7 [306*14-18]
397b-c / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 2
[982*30-b 4] 500c-d; bk
ii, ch i
[993^0-23]
512a; bk hi, ch 2
[996*23-36]
514d-515a; bk iv,ch 4[ioo8b2-32] 527d-528b; bk vi, ch 1
[i025b i9-28] 547d; bk
xi, ch 7
[1064*10-19] 592b-c; bk
xii,  ch 9 [1074^71075*2] 605c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[639b  32-640*10]  162a-b  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-3  339a340b;  ch  7
[i098*20-b8] 343c-344a; bk ii, ch 2
[uo3b26-uo4*9] 349b-c; ch 4 350d-351b; bk
hi, ch 3 [ni2*3o-b i2] 358b-c; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b passim; bk x, ch 9
[n8ob20n8i b24] 435c-436a,c
/  Politics,  bk iv, ch i 487a-488b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk viii, ch 4 266d267c; ch 8 270a-d; bk xi, ch
25  336b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 1, a 4 5a-b; a 5, ans
5c-6a;  q  14,  a  16  90b-91b;  q  79,  a  11 424d-425b; q 84, a 8, ans
450b451b;  part  1-11,  q  1, a 6, rep 1-2 614a-c; q 3, a 5 626b-627a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, a 3, ans 31a-32b; q 57, a 5,
rep 3 39a-40a; Q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d; part hi, q ii,

[729b]
Chapter  83: SCIENCE 695 a 1, rep 3 772b-773a; q 13, a i, rep 3 780a781b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 60c-61a; 72a-d; 78b-c; 95d-96b; part ii,
158c-d;  164a,c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 16d-17a; 40ac; 42a-c;
46c-47c;  55b-d;  65d-66a;  81d82a;  86b-c  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 3
107b; bk 11, aph 9 140b-c 31 Descartes: Rules, 1 la-2a / Discourse, part
i,  44a-b;  part  hi,  48b-49b; part vi, 61b-d / Objections and Replies,
126a-b;   162d;   206c207a;   215a-b;  237bc;  243c-d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 1 103d-104a; sect 4 104d-105a; bk hi,
ch  xi, sect 15-18 303b-304b; bk iv, ch hi, sect 18-20 317d-319c; ch iv,
sect  7-10  325b326b;  ch  xii,  sect 8 360c; ch xxi 394d395a,c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  1-5  451a-453b; sect viii, div 65,
479b-c  esp  479c;  sect  xi,  div  104  498b-c;  sect  xii, div 131-132
508d-509d passim, esp div 132, 509c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 78a-b
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  329a-334a,c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall,
75d-80b  passim 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d; 148c; 190c-191a; 234c-235a
/  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253a-254b;  260d-261b; 264b-d;
266a-b;  271a-c;  283d-284d  /  Practical  Reason,  291a297c; 314d-321b;
329a-330c; 360d-361d/ Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 366d; 367c /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 383a-d; 388a-d; 390b,d-391a / Science of
Right, 397a-b; 398c399c / Judgement, 461a-475d esp 463a-467a, 474b-475d;
578a-b;  596c-598b 43 Federalist: number 9, 47c-d; number 31, 103c-104a;
number  37,  119b-120b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  283d-284b / Utilitarianism,
445a-447a  passim;  453c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, pref, 5c-6a;
Intro,  par  2-3 9b-12c; part i, par 101 38b39a; additions, i 115a-d; 19
119c-d; 120 136b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 6a-lld passim, esp 6a-d, 8a9b, 10b-
llb 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 361d-365c; epilogue ii, 680d-681a;
689b  53  James  :  Psychology, 865b-866a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  800c801b  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  883c-d  3&. The
distinction between pure and applied science: the relation of science to
the  useful  arts  7  Plato:  Lysis,  16c-18b  / Protagoras, 43b-d / Ion
142a-148a,c  /  Gorgias,  261a-262a  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  392a-398c /
Statesman,  580d581a;  581c-582a  /  Laws, bk iv, 684c-685a 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19
[100*6-9] 136c /
Topics, bk vi, ch 6 [145*1218] 198d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i 499a-500b;
bk vii, ch 7 [1032*26-1033*4] 555b-556a; ch

[730a]
696  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (3.  The  relation  of  science  to  action  and
production.  5  b. The distinction between pure and applied science: the
relation of science to the useful arts.) 9 [103^21-32] 557c; bk ix, ch i
571c-572a; ch 5 573ac; ch 7 [i049a5-i2] 574c-d; bk xii, ch 9
[io74b35-io75 a2] 605c
/  Sense  and  the  !  6-b2]  673b  /  Youth, Life, and Breathing, ch 27
[48ob2i-3i] 726d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch i 339a-b; ch 7
[io98 a28-32]
343d;  bk  vi,  ch 3-4 388b389a 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine la-9a,c
esp par 1-4 la-2c, par 14 5a-c; par 20-22 7b-8d / Epidemics, bk hi, sect
hi,  par  16  59b-c  /  Surgery, par 1 70b / Articulations, par 58, 112d
Sensible, ch i [436 s / The Law, par 4 144d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties,
bk  ii,  ch  9,  195c196a  11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 812d-813a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  17,  158d159b  13 Virgil: Georgics
37a-99a   passim,  esp  11  [475515.  65a-66a  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus,
252a-255a 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, bk 1, 510b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  17, a 1, ans lOOd-lOld 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  57,  a  3, ans and rep 1,3
37b-38a;  a 4, ans and rep 2 38a-39a; a 5, rep 3 39a-40a; q 95, a 2, ans
227c-228c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  73b  25 Montaigne: Essays,
450d-451a; 523c-524b 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, second day, 179c-d 28
Harvey:  Motion  ofthe Heart, 289d / Circulation of the Blood, 305a-d 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  145c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  5b-6a;  46bc;  48d-49b; 50c-51d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph ii
107d; aph 81 120b-c; aph 85 121d-122d; aph 129 134d-135d; bk ii, aph 1-9
137a-140c esp aph 4 137d-138b; aph 44-52 175d-195d passim / New Atlantis
199a-214d  esp  210d-214d 31 Descartes: Rules, 1 la-2a / Discourse, part
vi,  66a-67a,c  34  Newton:  Principles,  la-b  34 Huygens: Light, pref,
551b-552a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv, ch xii, sect 11-12
361c-362c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i, div 5 452d-453b 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 78a-b; part hi, 97b-98a; 106a-112a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations,  bk  i,  5b-6a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 633c;
661c-663c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  60a-c  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 266c-267a / Practical Reason,

[730b]
3b  to  4#  300d [fn 1] / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 388d / Judgement,
463aA64c;  523d-524b; 551a-556a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 369a
45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 172b; 181a-b; 184a; 213b 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of History, part i, 218d219a 50 Marx: Capital, 170bc; 183b 184a; 190d
[fn2]; 239c-d; 299b-d
54  Freud:  Psycho-  Analytic  Therapy, 123a-125a / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  111  2,;  778b-d 4. The nature of scientific knowledge Aa.
The  principles  of  science:  facts,  definitions, axioms, hypotheses 7
Plato:  Meno,  183b-c / Republic, bk vi, 383d388a; bk vii, 391b-398c esp
397a-398c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 30 63d64b esp
[46
a i8-27] 64a / Posterior Analytics, bk 1 97a-122a,c esp ch 1-3 97a-100a,
ch  io-ii  104d-106b,  ch  19-22  110c-115b, ch 32 120c121b; bk 11, ch 9
128a-b; ch 19 136a-137a,c / Topics, bk 1, ch i
[iooa25-b2i] 143a-b; ch 2
[ioi a34-b
4] 144a; bk vi, ch 4
[i4i a26-i42 a
9]  194c-195c / Physics, bk viii, ch 1 [252a20-b 7] 335d-336b / Heavens,
bk i, ch 5
[27i b i-i8]
362c-d;  bk  hi, ch 7 [3o6a i-i8] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk
i, ch 2 [316^-14] 411c-d / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982a5-b io]
500b-d; bk ii, ch 2
[994
b i6~3o] 513a-b; bk hi, ch 1
[995
a2i]-cH  2  [997^4]  513b,d-515c;  bk  iv, ch 3-7 524b-532b; bk vi, ch i
[io25b ii026a6] 547b,d-548a; bk xi, ch 1 [i059a24-26] 587a; ch 4
[io6i b i7]-cH
7
[1064^8]
589d592c; bk xiii, ch 4
[io78b i8-3o]
610b-c / Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[402 a io-403^2] 631b-632a
a  i6-b2]  673b  /  Sense and the Sensible, ch i [436 / Youth, Life, and
Breathing, ch 27 [48ob2i-3i] 726d ch 7
[i098a35-b8]
"39  BK CH b25-34l 388c; 9 Aristotle: Ethics, 343d-344a; bk vi, CH6 389d
11   Euclid:   Elements,  bk  i,  definitions-common  notions  la-2a  18
Augustine:  City  of  God, bk viii, ch 2-10 265b-271d passim 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q i, a 2, ans and rep 1 4a-c; q 17, a 3, rep
1-2  102d103c; q 32, a 1, rep 2 175d-178a; q 36, a 3, rep 4 194c-195d; q
85,  a 6, ans 458d-459c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a
2,  ans  221d-223a;  part  ii-ii,  q  i, a 5, rep 2 383b-384b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,   part  i,  56b-d;  58a-61a;  part  iv,  268c-d  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  pref,  lb-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 197b-d;
200a-d;  207d-208a: 236d-237a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 334c-d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 56c-59c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 63
113d-114a;

[731a]
4b  to  4c  Chapter  83:  SCIENCE  697  aph 82-83 120d-121b; aph 103-106
127d-128c; aph 121 132b-d; bk ii, aph 4-5 137d-139a 31 Descartes: Rules,
m,  4a-5a; iv, 5c-d; 6d; vm, 13c-d; ix, 15b-c / Discourse, part ii, 47a;
part  iv-v,  51b-54c; part vi, 61d-62cjjj6a-b-/' Meditations, 1 75a-77c;
in,  82a-d;  83c-d;  iv,  89b-c;  v,  95b-96a  / Objections and Replies,
123a-d;  125a-b;  postulate  i-vii  130d-131c;  162a;  226d;  229c-d  31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40  387a-388b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 1
171a-172a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,  430b-434b  passim  34 Newton:
Principles,  la-2a;  definitions-laws  of  motion  5a-24a; bk hi, 269a /
Optics,  bk  i, 379a; bk hi, 541b-542a 34 Huygens: Light, ch i, 553a; ch
v,  600a-601b  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk hi, ch xi, sect 15-18
303b-304b; bk iv, ch vii 337a344d esp sect i 337a, sect io-ii 339b-342d;
ch  xii,  sect  1-6  358c-360a; sect 12, 362b-c; sect 15 363a-b 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div  2  451b-c  42  Kant: P«r<?/to^o/2,
68a-69c;   179d-182b;   211c218d   esp  215d-216d  /  Practical  Reason,
293c294b;302d-303b;330d-331a  /  Science  of Right, 457a-b 43 Federalist:
number 31, 103c-104a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-447a passim; 461c464d
passim  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref, lb-c 45 Fourier:
Theory  of  Heat, 169b-'l70a; 172a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  2  9b10a;  part  in,  par  279, 93b / Philosophy of History, intro,
157b-158a  53  James:  Psychology,  xiiib;  862a-864a  passim  54 Freud:
Narcissism,  400d-401a  /  Instincts, 412a-b 4b. The objects of science:
the  essential  and  necessary;  the  sensible  and  measurable 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk v, 370d-373c; bk vi-vii, 383d-398c esp bk vii, 391b-398c /
Philebus, 633a-635a esp 634b-635a 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch
13  [32^-  23]  48b-d  / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 4-9 100a-104d; ch
30-31  119d-120c;  ch  33  121b122a,c;  bk ii, ch 1-2 122b,d-123c; ch 19
136a137a,c  /  Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2 499a-501c; bk in, ch 2 [996 a i
8-997*34]  514d-516a;  bk  vi,  ch 1-2 547b,d-549c; bk xi, ch 8 593a-d /
Soul, bk 1, ch 1 [402*10-403*2] 631b-632a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals,
bk i 161a-169d esp ch 5
[644b2i-645a37] 168c-169b / Ethics,
bk vi, ch 3 [ii39b i8-25] 388b-c; bk x, ch 9
[n8obi3-23]435b-c
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-812a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 57, a 3, ans 297b-298a; q 86, a 4, ans 463d-464d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  84,  a 1, rep 3 174b-175a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 60a-b

[731b]
28   Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day,  202d-203a  30  Bacon  :
Advancement  of Learning,  42a-c ; 43a-c ; 45a-46a / Novum Organum, bk i,
aph  51  111c;  bk 11, aph 2-20 137b-153a 31 Descartes: Rules, 11 2a-3b;
vi,  8d-9a;  xiv, 30d-32a / Discourse, part ii, 47b-d; part v, 54c;55a-b
31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 37-47 386b391a 34 Newton: Principles,
la-2a; bk hi, rule hi 270b-271a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch
vi  268b-283a  passim,  esp  sect  9  270d-271a; bk iv, ch 11, sect 9-13
311b-312b;  ch hi, sect 29 322c-323a; ch vi, sect 13 335c-d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge, sect 106 433c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv,
div  20-21  458a-c; sect xii, div 131-132 508d509d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
46d-47c  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-d / Judgement, 550a551a,c;
562d-563b;   564a-c;  581a-582c;  603d604b  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of
Chemistry,  pref, lb 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a; 177a; 183a184a 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  851  b-c  49  Darwin:  Origin of
Species, 239c 53 James: Psychology, 89b-90b; 647b-648b; 876a-b;882a-884b
54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  874a-b; 879c-d 4c. The role of
cause  in  science:  explanation  and  description as aims of scientific
inquiry  7 Plato: Meno, 188b-189a / Phaedo, 240d-246c / Republic, bk vi-
vii,  383d-398c  /  Timaeus,  455a-b  8  Aristotle:  Posterior Analytics
97a-137a,c  passim,  esp  bk  ii, ch 1-2 122b,d-123c, ch 9 128a-b; ch ii
128d-129d,  ch  16-18 134b-136a / Physics bk 11, ch 3 [194^6-23] 271a-b;
ch 7
[198*22-24] 275b; bk iv, ch 4 [211*6-11] 290a
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [981*24-982*1] 499c500b; ch 2
[982*28-30]
500c;  bk ii, ch 2 b i6-3i] 513a-b; bk hi, ch 2 [996*1 8-b26] 514d-515b;
bk vi, ch i
[io25b i-i8] 547b,d;
bk  vii,  ch  17  565a-566a,c;  bk  viii,  ch  4  568d-569b; bk xi, ch 7
[io63b36-io64*9] 592b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[994
[639bio-642b
4]  161d-165desp  [642*1-30]  165a-c  /  Gait  of Animals,  ch i 243a-b /
Generation  of  Animals,  bk  i,  ch  i  [715*1-18]  255a-b; bk iv, ch 1
[765*35-b 5] 306c; bk v, ch i
[778b5-io]
320d  /  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  7 [io98*35-b 8] 343d344a 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  4  169a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk v
[509-533] 67d-68a; bk vi [703-711] 89c-d

[732a]
698 THE GREAT IDEAS (4. The nature of scientific knowledge. 4c. The role
of  cause  in science: explanation and description as aims of scientific
inquiry.}  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a
16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv. 958b-960a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i, q 19, a 5, ans and rep 2 112d-113c; q 32, a i, rep 2 175d-178a; q 57,
a  3,  ans  297b-298a;  q  86,  a  4,  ans  463d-464d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 9, a 2, ans 424b-425a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  60a-b;  part  iv,  267a-c  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk i, 5a-7a
passim;  bk ii, 27b-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 202a203a;
fourth day, 252a-b 28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 319c / On Animal
Generation,  335c-336c;  393b-c; 425a 30 Bacon : Advancement of Learning,
42a-c  :  43a-c 45a-46a; 46c-47c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 48 HOd-110a;
aph  99  127b-c;  aph  121 132b-d; bk ii, aph 2-3 137b-d / New Atlantis,
210d 31 Descartes: Rules, ix, 15b-d / Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c; 66a-b
/ Meditations, 111, 84a-87a; iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies, axiom 1
131d; 158b-162a; 215a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, parti, axiom 4 355d; prop 8,
schol  2  356d-357d;  appendix  369b-372d;  part iv, pref 422b,d-424a 34
Newton:  Principles,  lb-2a;  def  viii  7b-8a;  bk  in, rule i-ii 270a;
general  schol,  371b-372a  /  Optics,  bk  hi,  541b-542a;  543a544a 34
Huygens:  Light,  ch  i, 553a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  9-17  315c-317c;  sect  28-29  322a-323a;  ch  vi,  sect 5-15
332b-336d  passim 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 29-33 418c-419a esp
sect 32 418d-419a; sect 50-53 422c-423a passim; sect 60-66 424b-426a esp
sect   65-66   425d-426a;   sect   102-109   432d434b   35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div 9 454c-455a; sect iv, div 21-22 458b-459a;
div 26 460b-c; sect vii, div 57, 475d-476b
[fn
2];  div  60,  477a; sect viii, div 67 480c481a; div 70, 481d-482a; sect
ix,  div 82 487b-c; sect xii, div 132 509a-d esp 509b-c 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations, bk v, 335b-336d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 46d-47c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic   of  Morals,  285c-286a  /  Practical  Reason,  311d-314d  /
Judgement,  557c-558b;  564a-c;  581a-582c  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of
Chemistry,  part i, 9d10b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a; 183a-184a 45
Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 298d; 440b,d

[732b]
*<c  to  4d  46  Hegel  Philosophy of History, ntro, 157b158a 49 Darwin:
Origin  of  Species, 239c-240d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 344a-b;
bk xi, 470a-c; bk xm, 563a-b; epilogue i, 650b-c; epilogue 11, 694d-696d
53  James:  Psychology, 69b-70a; 89b-90b; 324b; 742a-b; 745b; 824b-825a;
882a-884b   passim;  885b-886a  54  Freud:  Instincts,  412a  /  General
Introduction,   454b-c   :484a   Ad.   The   generality   of  scientific
formulations:  universal  laws  of  nature  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk vi,
386d-388a;  bk vii, 391b-398c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
4-5 100a-102b; ch ii
[77*5-9] *05d-106a; ch 1314 107c-109a; ch 24 116b-118a; ch 31 120a-c;
bk  11, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2 [982a2i-25] 500c; bk
vi,  ch  i  [1026*2333]  548b-c;  bk  vii,  ch 15 563c-564c; bk xi, ch 7
[io64b6-i3]  592d-593a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x ^« ^ rrrR^b ch 9 [u8ob
i3-23] ch 2
[i356b28-35]
435b-c / Rhetoric, bk i, 596b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part Q 84,
A  1,  ans  440d-442a  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day, 197a-b;
200a-b;  202d-203a;  fourth  day,  238a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
332a-334d  esp  334c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 98c / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  17-25  108a-d;  aph  103-106  127d-128c;  aph 130
135d-136a,c;  bk  ii,  aph  5  138b-139a;  aph  33  161b-d 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  ii,  47c-d; part v, 54c; 55b / Objections and Replies,
167c-d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, 395a-d 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a-b 34
Newton:  Principles,  la-2a;  bk  hi, rules 270a-271b; prop 7 281b-282b;
general  schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk hi, 541b-542a; 543a-b 34 Huygens:
Light,  pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch i, sect
9,  308d-309b;  ch  hi,  sect  14  316b-d; sect 28-29 322a-323a; sect 31
323c-d;  ch  vi,  sect 4-16 331d-336d passim; ch xii, sect 713 360b-362d
passim  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 12 408a-b; sect 15-16
409a-d;  sect  62-66  425a-426a;  sect  103-109  433a-434b  passim; sect
126-128  438b-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9 454c-455a;
sect  iv,  div  26 460b-c; sect xii, div 132, 509c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
195d-200a  esp  197b-198a;  211c-218d  /  Judgement,  562d-563b; 564a-c;
581a-582c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 169a-b; 173b; 175b; 177a; 184a

[733a]
45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 391 ad; 398c; 406b; 440b,d; 595a;
603d;  655c; 670a-b; 673b,d-674a; 851b-c; 855a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  additions,  120 136b-c / Philosophy of History, iNTR£s~4S2d183c;
part  iv,  361a-b  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 98c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  xi,  469a-470c;  bk  xiii, 563a-b; epilogue ii, 693d-696d 53
James:   Psychology,  524a;  861b-886a  passim  4e.  The  certitude  and
probability or the finality and tentativeness of scientific conclusions:
the adequacy of scientific theories 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a;
bk  vii, 397a-398c / Timaeus, 447b-d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i,
ch  13  [32b4~  23] 48b-d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2 97d99a; ch 6
102b-103c; ch 31 120a-c; ch 33 121b-122a,c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 5
[28yb28a i5-3i] 384d; bk hi,
ch 7 [3o6ai-i8] 397bc 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b u-27J
339d-340a;  ch  7 [i098 a20-b2] 343c-d; bk ii, ch 2 [uo3b26-uo4a 288 a2]
379b-c; ch 13 [293 9] 349bc; bk vi, ch 3 388b-c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk
hi,  83a;  bk  xiii,  429a-b  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly
Spheres,  505a-506a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  888b-890a;  929a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 32, a 1, rep 2 175d-178a; q 57, a
3,  ans  297b298a  ;  q  85,  a 6 458d-459c ; q 86, a 4, ans 463d464d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 4, a 8 409a-d; q 9, a 2, ans
424b-425a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65c-d; 71c; part iv, 267a-b 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day,  200a-b;  202d-203a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  14b-15a; 47d-48d / Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
19-20  150c-153a  31  Descartes:  Rules, i-xn la-25a passim / Discourse,
part  11, 47a-48b; part iv 51b-54b; part vi, 62b-c; 66a-b / Meditations,
1,  76c;  in,  82a-d;  83c-d;  iv,  89b-c;  v,  95b-96a / Objections and
Replies,  123a-d;  125a-b;  postulate i-vii 130d-131c; 143c; 162a; 226d;
229c-d  / Geometry, bk ii, 304b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, def 4 373b;
prop  37-47 386b-391a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii [66-84] 233b234a
33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  357a-358b;  365b-366a / Geometrical Demonstration,
430b-434b  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi, 543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, pref,
551b-552a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  ii, sect 2-13
309d-312b  passim;  ch  hi,  sect  14  316b-d;  sect  26 321b-c; sect 29
322c-323a;

[733b]
b  c ch vi, sect 5-16 332b-336d passim, esp sect 13 335c-d; ch xii, sect
7-14  360b-363a  passim,  esp  sect  8 360c, sect 10 361b-c 35 Berkeley:
Human Knowledge, sect 58-59 424a-b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i,
div 8, 454b-c; sect iv, div 20-21 458a-c; div 26 460b-c; sect ix, div 82
487b-c;  sect  xii,  div  129-132 508a-509d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
118a-119a   38   Rousseau:  Inequality,  348a,  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,
129c-130a;   133c-134d;  194b-c;  218d-222b  esp  221c-222b;  227a-230c;
248d-250a,c / Practical Reason, 311d-313d; 335b-c / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  387a-d  / Judgement, 603a43 Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a 43
Mill:  Liberty,  277a;  283d-284b  / Utilitarianism, 445a-447a passim 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  part i, 9d10a; 32d-33a 45 Fourier:
Theory of Heat, 181b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 273b [fn 2];
298d;  391a-c;  774d-775a; 850b,d-851c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 42a;
239c / Descent of Man, 590a 53 James: Psychology, 89b-90b; 647b-648b esp
648a;  655a-659a  passim, esp 655a, 658b-659a; 863a-866a esp 863a, 864a;
882a-884b  passim  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  463c-d; 484c485a;
546a-b  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  661c-662b  esp  661d / New
Introductory  Lectures,  818c-819b  5. Scientific method 5a. The role of
experience:  observation  and  experiment  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi,
386d-388a;  bk  vii,  391b-398c  /  Timaeus,  455a-c  8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk i, ch 30 63d64b / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[71*1-8]
97a; ch 3 [72^5-33] 99c; ch 18 110b-c; ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 2
[90*24-30] 123b-c; ch 7
[92
a34-b  i]  126b;  ch  19  136a-137a,c  / Topics, bk 1, ch 12 148d; ch 18
[io8b7-i2] 152d; bk viii, ch 1
[i55b35-i56a7] 211d-212a; [i56b io18] 212c-d /
Physics, bk 1, ch 1 259a-b; bk viii, ch 1 [252 a20-b7] 336a-b / Heavens,
bk i, ch 3
[270b i-24J
361c-362a; bk ii, ch 13 ai5-3i] 384d; bk hi, ch 7
[3o6ai-i8]
397b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  1,  ch 2 [316^-14] 411c-d /
Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  i  499a-500b;  bk  xi,  ch 7 [1064*4-9] 592b 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 6
[293
[491*5-15]
12c-d; bk in, ch 2
[5ii b io-25]
35a-b  /  Parts  of Animals,  bk  hi, ch 4 [666a710] 193d / Generation of
Animals, bk hi, ch 10 [760^7-35] 301d-302a / Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[n8ob20-n8i b24] 435c-436a,c
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13 173d177a; bk hi, ch 2 199d-200a

[734a]
(5.  Scientific  method.  5a.  The  role  of experience: observation and
experiment.}  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 84, a 4, ans
444d-446b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  ii [46-105] 108b-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 60a-d; part ii, 129a-b; part iv, 267a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  285c-286a;  377a-d;  516b-c  28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
pref,  la-b; bk i, 6a-7a; bk 11, 27b-c; bk iv, 85b-c 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first day, 131a138b passim; third day, 203d-205b; 207d208c 28
Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart,  267b,d-274b  esp 268c-d, 273c; 285c-d;
286b-304a,c  esp  286b-c,  295d-296a  /  Circulation of the Blood, 320b;
322d-323d;  324c-d  /  On Animal Generation, 331b-335c; 411c-d; 451 b-d;
473a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 16a; 42a-c; 43d-44c / Novum
Organum  105a-195d esp BK I, APH 8 107c-d, APH 19 108b, APH 22 108c, aph
50  111b,  aph  54  110c-d,  aph  70 116b-117a, aph 82-83 120d-121b, aph
95-103  126b-128a,  aph  121  132b-d, bk 11, aph 10-15 140c-149a, aph 36
164a-168d,  aph  38-43 169c-175c / New Atlantis, 210d-214d 31 Descartes:
Rules,  11,  2d-3a;  vm,  12b-13a; xii, 22c-23a; xiv, 28a-b / Discourse,
part  i,  44a-c;  part hi, 50b-51a; part v, 56a-59d; part vi 60d-67a,c /
Meditations,  1  75a-77c  33  Pascal: Vacuum, 355a-358b / Weight of Air,
429a  34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule iii-iv 270b271b / Optics, bk 1,
379a;  bk  hi,  543a-b  34  Huygens:  Light,  ch i, 553a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk iv, ch hi, sect 14 316b-d; sect 16 317a-c; sect 25-29
321a-323a  passim;  ch  xii,  sect  9-14  360d363a  35  Berkeley:  Human
Knowledge,  sect  30 418c; sect 58-59 424a-b; sect 104 433a-b; sect 107,
434a  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect iv, div 23-27 459a-460d; sect
vii,  div  48, 471b-c; sect vm, div 65, 479b-c; sect xii, div 132 509a-d
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 329d-330b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5c-6c; 185ac;
227bc  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 253a-c; 254b-c; 263b-c /
Practical   Reason,   329d-330c   /   Judgement,   562d-563b   43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,   446a;  461c-464d  passim,  esp  463c-d  45  Lavoisier:
Elements  of Chemistry, pref, lc2b; 6d-7a,c; part i, 23c; part hi, 87b-c
45  Fourier:  Theory of Heat, 175b; 181b; 184a 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  385b-c;  440b,d;  467a-b;  542b-c;  607a,c;  659a; 774d 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 361a-b

[734b]
49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 12bc; 14c-18a passim; 136b-139a passim,
esp  137b-c;  149d150a  50  Marx:  Capital,  6c-d  53 James: Psychology,
56a-66a   esp  56a-57b,  61b64a;  122b-127b  esp  125b-127b;  265a-268a;
341a-344b;  352b-355b  passim;  538a;  677b; 862a-865a esp 864a, 865a 54
Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  291d-292a / Narcissism, 400d-401a /
General  Introduction,  488a-b;  545c-d  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,
815a-b;   879c   5b.   Techniques  of  exploration  and  discovery:  the
ascertainment  of fact 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 13 173d177a
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 907b-908b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 27c-d
28   Galileo:   Two   New  Sciences,  first  day,  131a138b;  148c-149c;
157b-177a,c  passim; third day, 203d-205b 28 Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart,
273c-d;  280c-d;  285c-d / On Animal Generation, 331b-333d; 335c-336c 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 13d-14b; 15d-16a; 30d-31a; 34b; 56c-60a
esp  57d-58b,  59c-60a  / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 50 111b; aph 64 114b;
aph  70  116b-117a;  aph  82-83 120d-121b; aph 98-106 126d-128c: aph 109
128d-129c;  aph  113 130a-b; aph 121 132b-d; bk 11, aph 4 137d-138b; aph
10  140c-d; aph 21 153a-b; aph 39 169d-170c; aph 45 176a-177c 33 Pascal:
Vacuum,  356a-365b  / Great Experiment 382a-389b / Equilibrium of Liquids
390a403a  passim,  esp 390a-392a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule i-ii
270a; rule iv 271b / Optics, bk i, 379a; 386b-455a; bk 11, 457a-470a; bk
ii-iii,  496a-516a;  bk hi, 543a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi,
ch vi, sect 46-47 281d-282b; bk iv, ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d 42 Kant:
Intro.  Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
part  i,  10d12d;  17a-20d; 22c-24a; 29d-33b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
169a; 175b; 184a 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 440b, d; 607a,c;
659a;  774d  49  Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 136b-139a passim 53 James:
Psychology, 385a-b; 677b 54 Freud: General Introduction, 545d-546b / New
Introductory  Lectures,  881  b-c 5c. The use of mathematics in science:
calculation  and  measurement  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk vii, 391b-398c /
Timaeus, 449b-450a; 453b-454a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch 2
[1 94^-1 1]
270b-c  /  Meteorology,  bk  hi,  ch  3  477a-478a;  ch  5  480a-481c  /
Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[997^7-33] 516c

[735a]
5d  to  5e  Chapter 83: SCIENCE 701 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par
3~6  27c-28c  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk ii, ch 29 650d-651c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  9,  a 2, rep 3 424b-425a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 58a-c; PARTjy, 268c-d 28 Galileo: T«^o New Sciences,
first  day,  131d132a; 133b; 136d-137c; 164a-166c; second DAY-FOURTH DAY
178a-260a,C  esp  THIRD  DAY,  207d-208c,  fourth  day, 252a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 37b-c; 46b-c / Novum Organum, bk 11, aph 44-48
175d-188b  31  Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43b-c 34 Newton: Principles
la-372a  esp  la-2a,  def viii 7b-8a, bk 1, prop 69, schol 130b-131a, bk
in,  269a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect iv, div 27 460c-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  ii,  78b  45  Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i,
14a-c;  33b-36a;  41a-44d; part hi, 96b 103b 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
172a-173b;   175b;   177a;   182b-185b;  196a-251b  passim  45  Faraday:
Researches in Electricity, 316b-318c; 366d-371d; 444a-451a; 465d-467a,c;
768d773d;  778b,d-793c; 831b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d;
bk  xiv,  589c-590c; epilogue ii, 695b-c 53 James: Psychology, 348a-359a
esp  351a-352a;  882a-884b  esp  884a 5d. Induction and deduction in the
philosophy  of  nature and natural science 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk i, ch 30
[46*18-28] 64a; bk
ii, ch 23 [68^5-29] 90b-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[71*1-11] 97a;
ch 3 [72^5-33] 99c; ch 18 110b-c; bk ii, ch 7 a34-b i] 126b / Topics, bk
i, ch 12 148d; ch 18 [io8b7-i2] 152d; bk viii, ch i
[i55b35~
[92
156*7] 211d-212a;
[i56b io-i8] 212c-d; ch
14
[164*11-16] 222d / Physics, bk
1, ch i 259a-b; bk vm, ch 1
[252*20-b7] 335d-336b / Heavens, bk in, ch 7 [306*6-18] 397b-c / Generation and
Corruption, bk 1, ch 2
[316*5-14]
411c-d / Metaphysics, bk xi, ch 7 [1064*4-9] 592b; bk xiii, ch 4
[io78b i8-3o] 610b-c
/  Soul,  bk 1, ch 1 [402*10-403*2] 631b-632a 9 Aristotle: Generation of
Animals, bk hi, ch 10 [760^9-32] 301d-302a / Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[i095*30-b8] 340c; ch 7 [1098*35^3] 343d /
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  2  [1356*36-1358*35]  596a598b;  bk  11, ch 20-22
640d-645a  10  Hippocrates  :  Ancient Medicine, par 1-8 la-3b 10 Galen:
Natural  Faculties,  bk hi, ch 1-2, 199c-d 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of
the  Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
32,  a  1,  rep  2  175d-178a  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day,
207d-208c; fourth day, 252a-b

[735b]
28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 267b, d -268a; 280c; 285c-d; 295d-296a /
On  Animal  Generation,  332a-334d  esp  334c-d;  336b-d; 383d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  42a-c;  57b58b; 61d; 96d-97a / Novum Organum
105a195d  esp  pref 105a-106d, bk i, aph 11-26 107d-108d, aph 69 116a-b,
aph  103-106  127d128c,  bk 11, aph 10-52 140c-195d 31 Descartes: Rules,
11, 2d-3a; in, 4c-d; vn 10b-12a; xi 17b-18b; xn, 23b-c / Discourse, part
vi,  61d-62c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  167c-d  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,
365b-371a  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk hi, rule iv 271b; general schol,
371b-372a  / Optics, bk hi, 543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii,  sect  12-13  362a-d 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 15-16 409a-d; sect 107-108, 434a
35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 9 454c-455a; sect hi, div 19,
458a; sect iv, div 26 460b-c; sect viii, div 65, 479b-c; sect ix, div 82
487b-c;  sect  xii,  div  131-132 508d-509d passim 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
195d-197b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-447b passim; 475b,d
[fn
1] 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 659a; 774d775a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 690b 53 James: Psychology, 674a-675b esp 675b
5e.  The use of hypotheses: prediction and verification 7 Plato: Phaedo,
242b-243c  / Republic, bk vi, 383d-388a esp 386d-388a; bk vii, 391b-398c
esp  397a-398c / Timaeus, 447a-d; 462b-c 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk ii, ch
5  379b-c;  bk  hi,  ch  7  [306*1-18]  397b-c / Meteorology, bk 1, ch 7
[344*5-9]  450b  /  Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 6 [io7i b i2]-cH 7 [1072*22]
601b-602b; ch 8 603b-605a 10 Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 1-2 la-d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [509-533] 67d-68a; bk vi
[703-711] 89c-d
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  hi,  83a;  bk  ix, 273a; bk xiii, 429a-b 16
Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a; 507a-508a 16
Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 852a-853a; 888b890a; 911a-b; 929a; bk v, 964b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 32, a 1, rep 2 175d-178a; q 86, a
4,  ans  463d464d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, 119a-b 28 Harvey: Motion
of  the Heart, 285c-d; 286b304a,c esp 286b-c, 295d-296a / Circulation of
the  Blood, 316a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 18, 149d; aph 36,
165d-166a

[736a]
b  702 THE GREAT IDEAS (5. Scientific method. 5e. The use of hypotheses:
prediction and verification.} 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c;
65d-66b  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk viii [66-84] 233b234a 33 Pascal:
Vacuum,  368b-369a  34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule iv 271b; general
schol,  371b-372a / Optics, bk 1, 379a; bk hi, 543a-b 34 Huygens: Light,
pref-ch  i,  551b-553b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect
16  317a-c; ch xii, sect 12-13 362a-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
105  433b-c  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix, div 82 487b-c; sect
xi,  div  107,  499d-500a  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333d-334a; 348a,c 42
Kant: Science of Right, 457a-b 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part
i,  9d10b; part 11, 62a-63a 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat, 184a 45 Faraday:
Researches  in  Electricity, 607a.c; 758a-759c; 777d-778c; 850b,d-855a,c
esp  850b,d-851c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part hi, 285d286a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  239c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii,
563a-b;   epilogue  11,  694d-696d  53  James:  Psychology,  95a;  357b;
647b-648b esp 648a; 863a-865a; 882a-884b passim 54 Freud: Interpretation
of Dreams, 351c / Narcissism, 400d-401d esp 401a / General Introduction,
483d-485a   passim;   502d-503a   /   Group  Psychology,  686c-d  /  New
Introductory   Lectures,  840a6.  The  development  of  the  sciences  8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  ii,  ch i [993*30b8] 511b,d 11 Archimedes:
Sphere  and Cylinder, bk i, 403a-b / Sand- Reckoner, 520a-b / Quadrature
of  the Parabola, 527a-b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 6b; 10b-12b; bk hi,
77a-83b;  bk iv, 109a-112a; bk vii, 223a232b; bk ix, 272a-273a; bk xiii,
465b  16  Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, 505a-509b; bk
i,  511a;  515a-b;  517b520b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 845a-850a; 851a;
852a-853a; 857b-863b; 907b-910a / Harmonies of the World, 1009b-1010a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  276b-278a  28 Galileo: Two New Sciences, third day,
197a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 14c-15c esp 15a-b; 16c-d;
29c-32c  esp  30d-31a;  48d49b; 51d-53d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 30-31
109a; aph 50 111b; aph 70-115 116b130d

[736b]
6  to  6b  31  Descartes:  Discourse  41a-67a,c esp part vi 60d-67a,c 34
Newton:  Principles,  la-2a; laws of motion, schol, 19b-20a; bk ii, prop
52,  schol,  265a-b;  prop  53, schol 266a-267a / Optics, bk in, 526b 34
Huygens:  Light,  pref-ch  1,  552a-553b  35 Locke: Human Understanding,
89a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 224b-225a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  335b-337b  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 23d; 148a-b 41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 298a-300a; 325d328a,c esp 326b-327b; 526c; 664d
[n
5556]  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  ld-2b  [fn 2] 43 Federalist: number 37,
119b-d  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry, pref, 3c-4a 45 Fourier:
Theory  of  Heat,  169a-b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 391a-c;
440b,d;824a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 217c219c 49
Darwin: Descent of Man, 590a 53 James: Psychology, 3b-4a; 37b; 125b-127b
passim  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams, 137b-139a esp 138d-139a /
General  Introduction,  545d546b; 550d-551a / New Introductory Lectures,
880d-881c  6a.  The  technical  conditions  of  scientific progress: the
invention  of  scientific instruments or apparatus 16 Ptolemy: Almagest,
bk i, 24b-26a; bk ii, 38b-39b; bk v, 143a-144a; 166a-167b 16 Copernicus:
Revolutions  of the Heavenly Spheres, bk ii, 558b-559b; 567b; 586b-589a;
bk iv, 705b-706a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 908a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  30d-31a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 50 111b; bk ii, aph 39
169d-170c;  aph  45,  176a  / New Atlantis, 210d-214d 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
362a  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  i,  412a-423b  34  Huygens: Light, ch v,
599b-600a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  xii, sect 11,
361d-362a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-d 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  part hi 87a-133d passim, esp 87a-d 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  277d-279a;  316b-318c;  366d-371d;  444a-451a; 465d467a,c;
768d-773d;  778b,d-793c  50  Marx:  Capital, 170a-c; 187d-188a 53 James:
Psychology,  126a  6b.  The  place  of  science  in  society: the social
conditions favorable to the advancement of science 7 Plato: Republic, bk
vii, 395a-b / Statesman, 601c-602c

[737a]
8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98i b i3~
a3o-b 8] 511b,d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 73b; part iv, 24] 500a; bk
ii,  ch i [993 267c-d z^L28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 472tP4~73sT 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,  7a; 14c-15a; 29c-32c csp 30d-31a, 32a;
54a-b;  56b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 72 117c-d / Netv Atlantis, 214a-b
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi,  51b; part vi, 66d-67a,c 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  iv, ch xii, sect 11, 361d-362a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xi,  div  102  497b-d;  div  114  503a b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part ii, 78a b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 365d 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations, bk i, 5d-6a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 148a b; 158d-159a;
658b-c;  669a-671b  esp  669c,  670b-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,
327a-328a,c passim, esp 327b; 522d-523c 42 Kant: Judgement, 551a-552a 43
Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [214-217] 13b 43 Federalist:
number  43, 139d-140a 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b passim, esp 277a, 283d
-284b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 270, 85d
[fn
2];  87c-d;  88c-89a;  par  319,  106b / Philosophy of History, part ii,
277d-278a  53  James:  Psychology,  866a-b  [fn  2]  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  581c  /  War and Death, 755a / New Introductory Lectures,
879d-880b  7.  The  evaluation  of  science la. The praise of science by
comparison  with  opinion,  superstition, magic 7 Plato: Republic, bk v,
370d-373c  8  Aristotle:  Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 33 121b-122a,c /
Generation and Corruption, bk 1, ch 2
[3i6a5-i4]
411c-d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[ioo4b i8-27] 523d;
bk vii, ch 15
[io39b3i-i040 a8] 563d-564a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[62-158]
ld-3a; bk ii
[1-61] 15a-d; bk hi
[1-93] 30a31b; bk iv
[1-25] 44a-b; bk v
[1-54] 61a-d;
bk  vi  [1-95]  80a-81c  14 Plutarch: Pericles, 138d / Nicias, 435b-d 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  5a-6a  16  Copernicus:  Revolutions  of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  510a-b  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 847b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 13, rep 3 61c-62b; q 79, a 9,
rep 3-4 422b423d

[737b]
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 1, aa 4-5 382c-384b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 56b-d; 60a-c; 65c-d 28 Gilbert: Loadstone,
pref,  lc-2a  28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 168a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 13a-c; 14b15a; 54c-55a; 57d-58b / Novum Organum
105a-195d passim, esp bk i, aph 46-49 110b111a, aph 61-67 113a-116a, aph
74  118b,  aph  89  124a-d,  aph 124 133c-d / New Atlantis 199a-214d esp
210d-214d  31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi 60d-67a,c 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
380b-381b  34  Newton:  Principles, la-2a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
89a-b  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 6-10 453b-455b passim,
esp  div  6-7  453b454a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 335b-337a esp
336b-337a;  347c-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 159a-c 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, ld-2b
[fn 2]; 129c-130a;
133c-134d; 146a-149d; 175b
[fn
1]; 218d227a; 248d-250a,c / Practical Reason, 299d 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  169a-b  45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 440b, d; 534a-b;
655c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 319, 106b / Philosophy
of  History, part iv, 361 b-c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 85d; 118d 53
James: Psychology, 865b-866a esp 866a-b
[fn 2]; 882a-883a esp 883a
54   Freud:   New   Introductory  Lectures,  873d-884d  passim  lb.  The
satirization  of  science  and  scientists:  the  foibles  of  science 5
Aristophanes:  Clouds  [126-41 1] 489c-493c 22 Chaucer: Canon's Yeoman's
Prologue  471b474a  /  Canon's  Yeoman's  Tale  474b-487a  25 Montaigne:
Essays,  257d-261c;  276b-278a; 377a-d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 76-79 186a 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 17 409d-410a 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  ii,  78a-b; part hi, 103b-115b esp 106a-115b; 118a-119a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  224b-225a  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 342d 47 Goethe:
Faust, part i
[656-675] 17b-18a
48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 95b-105b; 204a-b; 257a; 365b-367a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  epilogue ii, 689c690a 53 James: Psychology, 358b-359a;
866a-b
[fn 2]
54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 177a-b

[738a]
704  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  CROSS-REFERENCES  6d-6e;  Truth  8d. I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this collection. I. Aquinas. On the Trinity of
Boethius,  qq  5-6  Hume.  Of  the  Rise  and  Progress  of the Arts and
Science's  Sextus  Empiricus.  Against  the Ethicists Kant. Metaphysical
Foundations  of  Natural  Science  .  Against  the Logicians Goethe. Zur
Natur- und Wissenschaftslehre . Against the Physicists

[738b]
physics  i, 3b; Philosophy 1, 2b; Physics i-ia; Theology 3a; and for the
consideration  of science as one of the intellectual virtues, see Virtue
and Vice 2a(2); Wisdom 2a. Matters relevant to the conception and spirit
of  science  as  experimental  inquiry, see Experience 3b; Knowledge 5c;
Opinion 4a; Physics 2; and for the discussion of particular experimental
or empirical sciences, see Astronomy i ; Man 2b; Mechanics 4~4a, y-J^(^)
;  Medicine  2a;  Physics  2;  Soul  5b.  Other  considerations  of  the
differences and relations between philosophy and science, see Definition
6b;  Metaphysics  3b;  Nature 4b; Philosophy ic; Physics 2, 2b; Progress
6b;  Truth  4c.  The relation of science to religion, see Philosophy ia;
Religion  6g;  Truth  4a; and for the conception of sacred theology as a
science,  see  Theology  4a~4d.  The comparison of science or philosophy
with  poetry  and  history,  see History i; Philosophy id; Poetry 5, 5b.
Other  discussions  relevant  to  the  distinction between theoretic and
practical  science, see Judgment 2; Knowledge 6e(i); Mind 9a; Philosophy
2a;  Prudence  2a;  Theology  3b,  4d;  Truth 2c; Wisdom ib; and for the
consideration  of  the practical or moral sciences, see Knowledge 6e(2),
8b-8c;  Logic  4e;  Philosophy  2c;  State 8d; Wealth 9. The relation of
science  to  art,  and  for the technological applications of scientific
knowledge,  see Art 6a, 6c; Experience 3; Knowledge 6e(2), 8a; Labor ie;
Physics  5;  Progress  3c.  Other  discussions bearing on the nature and
objects  of  scientific  knowledge, see Astronomy 1, 3a~3b; Cause 5a~5b;
Hypothesis  4a~4b;  Knowledge  5c; Mechanics 4; Physics 2a-2b; Principle
3c(i)~3c(3); Truth 4c; Universal and Particular 4f. Other discussions of
scientific method, see Art 6b; Astronomy 2a-2c; Definition 4; Experience
5-5C;  Hypothesis 4d; Induction ib; Logic 4b; Mathematics 5-5^ Mechanics
2-3;  Physics 3, 4a~4d; Reasoning 4c, 50-5^4). The effects of science on
human  life,  see  State  7b;  Wealth  3a; and for the social conditions
favorable  to  the advancement of science, see Knowledge 10; Opinion 5b;
Progress Engels. Herr Eugen Duhring's Revolution in Science, II.

[739a]
Campanella.  The  Defense of Galileo Glanvill. The Vanity of Dogmatizing
Cowley.  To  the Royal Society Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea,
vol ii, sup, ch 12 j^J~—-^ Ampere. Essai sur la philosophic des sciences
Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy,  intro  Renan.  The Future of Science
Cournot.  Essai  sur  les  fondements  de  nos  connaissances et sur les
characteres  de la critique philosophique Whewell. The Philosophy of the
Inductive  Sciences,  VOL  II,  BK  XI,  CH  8  .  On  the Philosophy of
Discovery,  ch i— i8 Helmholtz. Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects,
I,  VIII  Jevons. The Principles of Science, bk iii-iv, vi Clifford. The
Common  Sense  of  the  Exact Sciences . "On the Aims and Instruments of
Scientific  Thought,"  "The  Philosophy of the Pure Sciences," in vol i,
Lectures  and  Essays  T. H. Huxley. Methods and Results, i-ii Mach. The
Analysis of Sensations C. S. Peirce. Collected Papers, vol i, par 43-283
Nietzsche.  The  Will to Power, bk hi (i) Frazer. The Golden Bough, part
1,  ch  4;  part  vii,  ch 13 Pearson. The Grammar of Science Bosanquet.
Science  and  Philosophy,  1  T.  Veblen.  The Place of Science in Modern
Civilization, pp 1-55 Poincare. The Value of Science, part hi Santayana.
Reason  in  Science, ch 1 , 11 Cassirer. Substance and Function Gregory.
Discovery  Weber. Science as a Vocation N. R. Campbell. What Is Science?
Einstein. Relativity: The Special and the General Theory

[739b]
1 1 Chapter 83: SCIENCE 705 Einstein. Sidelights on Relativity Meyerson.
De  Vexplication  dans les sciences G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of Science,
essay  i,  vii  Bridgman.  The  Logic  of  Modern  Physics, ch 1-2 J. S.
Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lect i-xiv M. R. Cohen. Reason and
Nature,  bk  i,  ch  3  (1-2)  Jeffreys.  Scientific Inference Northrop.
Science  and  First  Principles  Tennant.  Philosophy  of  the  Sciences
Whitehead.  The  Organization of Thought, ch 6-7 . An Enquiry Concerning
the Principles of Natural Knowledge, ch 3 . Science and the Modern World,
ch  1, 9, 12 . Adventures of Ideas, ch 9-10 Carnap. The Unity of Science
.  Philosophy  and  Logical  Syntax,  in (5-9) J. S. Huxley. Science and
Social Needs W. R. Thompson. Science and Common Sense Bernal. The Social
Function  of  Science Dewey. Reconstruction in Philosophy, ch 3 . Logic,
the  Theory  of  Inquiry,  ch  19, 21, 232 4 . Freedom and Culture, ch 6
Maritain. The Degrees of Knowledge, ch i . Science and Wisdom, pp 3-33 .
Scholasticism  and  Politics,  ch  2 Conant. On Understanding Science B.
Russell.  The  Analysis of Matter, ch 15-26 . Skeptical Essays, 11 . The
Scientific  Outloo\,  ch  1-3,  6-1 . Religion and Science, ch 9 . Human
Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part 1, iii-iv, VI Sarton. The Study of
the  History  of Science . The Life of Science Planck. The Philosophy of
Physics,  ch 3 . Scientific Autobiography Dewey and Bentley. Knowing and
the Known

[740a]
INTRODUCTION  THE nature of sensation seems at first to be as obvious as
its  existence.  In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books  there may be
controversy  concerning  the  existence of sense in plants as well as in
animals,  and  there  may  be  controversy  over the existence in man of
faculties  higher  than  sense.  But  no one disputes that men and other
animals  are endowed with a power of sense. The extent of this power may
be  questioned,  but  not  the  fact  that  animals and men, when awake,
experience sensations or perceive through their senses. Sleep, according
to Aristotle, can occur only in those living things which have the power
of   sense-perception.   "If   there  be  an  animal  not  endowed  with
senseperception, it is impossible that this should either sleep or wake,
since  both  these are affections of the activity of the primary faculty
of  sense-perception."  The  existence  of  the  sensible—of an external
something  which causes sensation and can be sensed—also seems to escape
denial  or  dispute. The existence of a purely intelligible reality of a
world  of  immaterial  things  incapable  of being sensed— is subject to
debate  in  all  periods  of  western  thought.  The  sensible  world is
sometimes regarded as the only reality; sometimes it is regarded as mere
seeming,  or  appearance,  in  comparison  with  the  reality  of purely
intelligible  being.  Men may also differ on the question whether things
possess  sensible qualities when they are not being sensed. But with few
exceptions, notably Berkeley and Hume, the existence of a sensible world
of material things is not denied or seriously doubted. The controversies
and  issues indicated above are, for the most part, discussed elsewhere.
The  chapter  on Animal considers the sensitivity of plants. There also,
as  well  as  in  the chapters on Man, Idea, and Mind, is considered the
distinc-

[740b]
Chapter  84:  SENSE  tion between the senses and the higher faculties of
reason  or  intellect.  The chapter on Memory and Imagination deals with
these two functions in their relation to sense and sense-perception; and
the  contrast  between sensible and intelligible reality is discussed in
the  chapters  on  Being,  Form,  Idea, and Matter. Some of these topics
necessarily recur here, especially as they bear on what for this chapter
are  the  primary problems— the nature of sensation, the analysis of the
power  of sense, and the character of the knowledge which is afforded by
the senses. As we have already observed, no difficulty seems to arise at
first  concerning  the  nature  of  sensation.  It  is  supposed by many
inquirers,  early and late in the tradition, that matter is sensitive as
well  as  sensible.  Animals  have  sense-organs which react to physical
stimulation.  Bodies either act directly upon the senseorgans, as in the
case  of  touch  and  taste;  or, as in the case of vision, hearing, and
smell,  they exert their influence through an intervening medium, yet in
a  manner  which  seems to be no less the action and reaction of bodies.
Those who distinguish between living organisms and inanimate bodies tend
to  regard  sensitivity  as a property of living matter, but it does not
follow  for  all  who  make  this  distinction  that other than material
factors  are  needed to explain sensation. On the contrary, some writers
seem  to  think  that  the  motions  of  matter account for sensation as
readily as the laws of mechanics account for all the sensible changes we
are  able  to perceive. Lucretius, for example, holds that living things
consist  of  body and soul, and that the soul (or mind) differs from the
body  only in the size, the fineness of texture, and the mobility of the
material particles which compose it. It 706

[741a]
is,  he  says,  "by  the common motions of the two"— body and soul— that
"sensation is kindled and fanned throughout our flesh." Sensation occurs
when  the  particles  of body and^soui together are set in motion by the
impact  of  external bodies upon the organs of sense. "When the pupil of
the  eye  receives  in  itself  a  certain  kind  of blow, it is said to
perceive  white  color,  and  another  again  when  it perceives black."
Similarly,  "every kind of sound and voice is heard when they have found
their  way  into the ears and struck upon the sense with their body; for
that  voice,  too,  and  sound are bodily you must grant, since they can
strike  on  the  senses."  Either the external body itself, as in touch,
strikes  the  sense and sets up those bodily motions in the animal which
are  sensation;  or,  according  to Lucretius, minute replicas or images
—composed  of  atoms,  as  all  things  are— fly off from the surface of
distant bodies and enter through the pores of our sense-organs to awaken
in  us  vision, hearing, or smell. In either case, sensation is a bodily
reaction ; and, for Lucretius, imagination and memory, even thought, are
consequent   motions   in   the   atoms  of  the  mind  —further  bodily
reverberations,  as  it were, of sensation. "The cause of sense," writes
Hobbes,  "is the external body or object, which presses the organ proper
to  each sense, either immediately, as in taste and touch, or mediately,
as in seeing, hearing, and smelling; which pressure, by the mediation of
nerves,  and  other strings and membranes of the body, continues inwards
to  the  brain and heart, causes there a resistance or counter-pressure,
or  endeavor  of  the  heart, to deliver itself; which endeavor, because
outward,  seems  to be some matter without. And this seeming or fancy is
that  which  men  call  sense"  The object seems to be colored or hot or
sweet  when  it  causes  certain  sensations  in  us which are projected
outward  upon it, in response or counter-action to the inward motions it
sets  up. But, says Hobbes, these sensible qualities are, in the object,
nothing  but  "so many several motions of the matter by which it presses
our  organs diversely. Neither in us that are pressed, are they anything
else but diverse motions (for motion produces nothing but motion)."

[741b]
Chapter 84: SENSE 707 The foregoing theory, reducing sensation to bodily
motion,  seems  to  draw  its cogency from the fact that only bodies are
sensible,  that sense-organs are bodily parts, and that senseorgans must
be  activated  by some sort of physical contact for sensations to occur.
Some  writers, like Descartes, accept the theory for animals, but reject
it for men; or they distinguish, in the case of men, between thought and
sensation.  They  regard  sensation,  with  its  subsidiary functions of
memory and imagination, as reducible to corporeal motions, but refuse to
grant  that  external  sense-impressions  or  interior fancy can produce
knowledge  without  the  activity  of  an  immaterial  soul. To animals,
Descartes  declares,  "we  can ascribe ... no knowledge at all, but only
fancy  of a purely corporeal kind." In contrast, "that power by which we
are  said to know things is purely spiritual, and not less distinct from
every  part  of the body than blood from bone, or hand from eye." In men
as  well as animals, the external senses, "in so far as they are part of
the  body  .  . . perceive in virtue of passivity alone, just in the way
that  wax  receives  an impression from a seal." Fancy or imagination is
also  "a  genuine part of the body"; and "memory, at least that which is
corporeal  and  similar to that of the brutes, is in no respect distinct
from   imagination."   These   corporeal  faculties  are,  according  to
Descartes,  of  use  to  the  understanding  or  the  mind  only when it
"proposes to examine something that can be referred to the body"; but if
it  "deal with matters in which there is nothing corporeal or similar to
the  corporeal,  it  cannot  be  helped  by those faculties." Hence, for
Descartes,  the  "mind can act independently of the brain; for certainly
the  brain  can  be  of  no  use  in  pure  thought; its only use is for
imagining   and   perceiving."  For  others,  like  William  James,  the
distinction  between  sensation and thought, so far as their relation to
matter is concerned, seems quite untenable. He objects to those who look
upon  sensational  consciousness  as  "something  quasi-material, hardly
cognitive,  which  one  need  not  much wonder about," while they regard
rational consciousness as "quite the reverse, and the mystery of it
[as] unspeakable."
We can correlate consciousness with the brain's

[742a]
708 THE GREAT IDEAS workings only in an empirical fashion, James thinks,
and  we ought to confess that "no glimmer of explanation of it is yet in
sight.  That  brains should give rise to a knowing consciousness at all,
this  is  the  one  mystery  which  returns,  no matter of what sort the
consciousness or of what sort the knowledge may be. Sensations, aware of
mere  qualities,  involve  the  mystery  as  much  as thoughts, aware of
complex systems, involve it." Still others, like Plotinus and Aristotle,
think  that the mystery of conscious matter is not essentially different
from  the  mystery of living matter, for if there is anything mysterious
about nutrition and growth, or sensation and imagination, it consists in
the  same thing the union of material and immaterial principles, of body
and soul. "If the soul were a corporeal entity," Plotinus writes, "there
could  be  no  sense-perception, no mental act, no knowledge. ... If the
sentient  be a material entity (as we are invited to believe), sensation
could only be of the order of seal-impressions struck by a ring on wax."
Perception  is  not a passively received impression. It is, according to
Plotinus, an act of awareness "determined by the nature and character of
the  living  being in which it occurs. . . . In any perception we attain
by  sight,  the object is grasped there where it lies in the direct line
of vision. . . . The mind looks outward; this is ample proof that it has
taken  and  takes  no  inner imprint, and does not see in virtue of some
mark  made  upon  it, like that of the ring on the wax; it need not look
outward  at  all if, even as it looked, it already held the image of the
object,  seeing  by virtue of an impression made upon itself." According
to  Aristotle,  "two  characteristic  marks  have  above all others been
recognized  as  distinguishing that which has soul in it from that which
has  not—self-movement  and  sensation."  By self-movement he appears to
mean  such  things as the nutrition and growth which is found in plants,
as  well  as  the  additional animal faculty of local motion. Both self-
movement  and  sensation require soul as well as body. "Nothing grows or
decays  naturally,"  he  writes,  "except what feeds itself, and nothing
feeds  itself  except what has a share of soul in it." So, too, "nothing
except what has soul in

[742b]
it  is capable of sensation." But "the exercise of sense-perception does
not  belong to soul or body exclusively." Sensation "is not an affection
of  the  soul"  by  itself, nor has a soulless body "the potentiality of
perception."  But,  Aristotle  asks,  are  all  affections  of  the soul
"affections  of  the complex of body and soul, or is there any one among
them  peculiar to the soul by itself? ... If we consider the majority of
them,  there  seems  to be no case in which the soul can act or be acted
upon  without  involving  the  body; e.g., anger, courage, appetite, and
sensation  generally.  Thinking seems to be the most probable exception;
but  if this too proves to be a form of imagination, or to be impossible
without  imagination,  it  too  requires  a  body  as a condition of its
existence."  Aquinas tries to answer the question Aristotle asks, with a
threefold  distinction  which  places  sensation  and imagination midway
between  the  vegetative  functions  and  rational thought. The power of
thought,  or "the intellectual power," Aquinas says, "does not belong to
a  corporeal  organ,  as  the power of seeing is the act of the eye; for
understanding  is an act which cannot be performed by a corporeal organ,
like  the  act  of seeing." At the other extreme from this "operation of
the  soul  which so far exceeds the corporeal nature that it is not even
performed by any corporeal organ," are those "operations of the soul . .
.  performed by a corporeal organ and by virtue of a corporeal quality."
Because  it  is a kind of self-movement, digestion requires soul as well
as  body, but it is a corporeal action in the way in which, according to
Aquinas,  it  involves  "the  action  of  heat." Between these extremes,
Aquinas  places sensation and imagination, operations "performed through
a  corporeal  organ,  but  not through a corporeal quality." He explains
this  further  by  means  of a distinction between natural and spiritual
immutation—physical  and psychic change. "Natural immutation takes place
by  the  form  of  the thing which causes the immutation being received,
according  to  its  natural  existence,  into  the  thing  in  which the
immutation  is  effected,  as  heat  is received into the heated thing."
Vegetative activities, while remaining psychic in the sense of occurring
only in living or be-

[743a]
souled  matter,  involve  only  natural  immutations in the vital organs
involved.  In contrast, "spiritual immutation takes place by the form of
the   thing  causing  the-immutation  being  received,  according  to  a
spiritual  mode  of existence, into the thing in which the immutation is
effected,  as the form of color is received into the eye, which does not
thereby  become  colored."  Though some sensations may require a natural
immutation  of  the  senseorgan,  as  hot  and  cold  do, all sensations
necessarily  involve  a  spiritual  immutation, which enables the sense-
organ  to  perform  its  proper  act  of knowing, as the eye knows color
without  becoming  colored.  "Otherwise,"  Aquinas  says,  "if a natural
immutation  alone  sufficed  for  the sense's action, all natural bodies
would  feel  when  they  undergo alteration." These diverse views of the
nature  of  sensation  seem  to  be  paralleled  by diverse views of the
sensitive  faculty.  That  the  function  of  the  senses  is somehow to
apprehend  or know does not seem to be disputed. But whether the senses—
including  memory  and imagination are the only faculty of knowing is an
issue  to  which  the great books seem to give a variety of answers. The
opposite  answers  appear  to  be  correlated, not only with conflicting
positions  in  respect to body and soul, but also with opposing theories
of  the  distinction  between men and other animals. Those who hold that
the  motions  of matter are adequate to explain the phenomena of knowing
and  thinking,  tend to make senseperception the primary function of the
mind and to treat not only memory and imagination, but also reasoning or
thought  as  subsequent  activities  of  the  same general faculty which
receives  impressions from external sources in the first instance. Since
other  animals  possess senses and give evidence that perception in them
has  consequences  for  memory and imagination, those who hold this view
also tend to attribute thought to animals and to regard man as differing
from  them only in degree. Those who take the contrary view that knowing
involves an immaterial principle or cause—a soul as well as a body— tend
to  distinguish  the  various  functions of sense from the activities of
thought—such as conception,

[743b]
Chapter  84:  SENSE  709  judgment,  and  reasoning.  They also take the
position   that   man,   while  sharing  sense-perception,  memory,  and
imagination  with other animals, alone possesses the higher faculty. The
difference  between men and brutes is thus conceived as one of kind, not
of  degree, when the difference between the senses and the reason in man
is  also  conceived  as  a difference in kind. A functional relationship
between  sensation  and  thought  is  not thereby denied, but a distinct
faculty is affirmed to be necessary for going beyond the apprehension of
particulars  to  knowledge  of  the  universal,  or for rising above the
imagination  to  abstract  thought.  The  distinction  between sense and
reason  as  faculties  of  knowing  is  sometimes  stated  in terms of a
difference  in  their  objects—  the  particular  versus  the universal,
becoming  versus being, the material versus the immaterial. Sometimes it
is stated in terms of the difference between a corporeal power requiring
a  bodily  organ  and a spiritual power which belongs exclusively to the
soul.  Sometimes  it is stated in terms of the contrast between sense as
intuitive  and  reason  as  discursive,  the  one  beholding its objects
immediately, the other forming concepts, judgments, or conclusions about
objects  which  are either beheld by the senses or cannot be intuitively
apprehended  at  all. The exceptions to the foregoing summary are almost
as  numerous  as  the  exemplifications of the points mentioned. Nothing
less  than  this  intricate  pattern  of agreements and differences will
serve,  however,  to  represent the complexity of the discussion and the
way  in  which diverse theories of sense imply different views of nature
and  man,  of  mind  and  knowledge. The situation can be illustrated by
taking  certain  doctrines which seem to be opposite on most points, and
then  considering  other  theories which seem to agree, on this point or
that,  with  both  extremes.  We  have  already  observed the opposition
between  Hobbes and Aquinas with regard to matter and spirit in relation
to  the  activity of the senses. Hobbes, like Lucretius, not only treats
all  mental  phenomena  as  manifestations  of  bodily  motion, but also
reduces  thought  to the train or sequence of images. Images are in turn
reducible to the sensations from which they derive.

[744a]
710 THE GREAT IDEAS "As we have no imagination," Hobbes writes, "whereof
we  have  not  formerly  had  sense, in whole or in parts; so we have no
transition  from  one  imagination  to another, whereof we never had the
like  before  in our senses." Using the word "thoughts" to stand for the
images  derived  from  sense, Hobbes goes on to say that "besides sense,
and  thoughts,  and  the train of thoughts, the mind of man has no other
motion;  though by the help of speech and method, the same faculties may
be improved to such a height as to distinguish men from all other living
creatures." Only man's use of words makes the difference in the exercise
of  the  imagination  "that we generally call understanding," and which,
according to Hobbes, "is common to man and beast." Similarly, it is only
the  fact  that common names have general significance which gives human
discourse the appearance of abstract thought, for Hobbes denies abstract
ideas. Thoughts or images are no less particular than sensations, "there
being  nothing in the world universal but names." Berkeley and Hume seem
to  agree  with  Hobbes  that  man  has  no  abstract ideas or universal
concepts;  that all the operations of thought are merely elaborations of
the  original  impressions of sense; and that no special power, but only
the use of language, distinguishes men from other animals. Berkeley uses
the   word  "idea"  to  stand  for  sense-impressions—  "ideas  actually
imprinted  on the senses"—and for whatever is "perceived by attending to
the  passions and operations of the mind." To these two he adds a third:
"ideas  formed by the help of memory and imagination, either compounding
or  dividing, or barely representing those originally perceived in the '
The only difference between the ' aforesaid ways. first and the third is
that  "the  ideas  of  sense  are more strong, lively, and distinct than
those of the imagination." But our ideas of sense and imagination do not
cover  all  the objects of which we can think. He admits, therefore, the
possibility  of our having notions, whereby we understand the meaning of
a  word  like "spirit" or "soul" which refers to a substance of which we
can form no idea. Hume divides "all the perceptions of the mind into two
classes or species, which are dis-

[744b]
tinguished  by  their  different degrees of force and vivacity. The less
forcible  and  lively  are  commonly denominated thoughts or ideas." The
other  he  calls  "impressions,"  meaning  thereby  "all our more lively
perceptions."  Impressions  are  the  source  of  all  other  ideas, the
creative  power  of  the mind consisting in "no more than the faculty of
compounding,  transposing,  augmenting,  or  diminishing  the  materials
afforded  us  by  the senses" and every simple idea being "copied from a
similar  impression."  Yet,  though Berkeley and Hume seem to agree with
Hobbes  in reducing all thought to primary sense-perceptions and derived
memories  or  imaginations,  Hume does not attempt to explain thought by
the  motions  of matter. Berkeley differs even more radically. He denies
that  matter  or  bodies exist, and so he regards sense-perception, like
all  the  rest  of  thought,  as  purely  spiritual.  The soul passively
receives  its  original impressions directly from God and actively forms
the  ideas it is able to derive from these impressions. Nor do all those
who  somehow  conceive  man as composed of both body and soul agree upon
the  function  of  sense  in relation to the rest of thought. Locke, for
example,  uses  "understanding"  to  cover all sorts of mental activity.
Mental activity begins with the passive reception of the simple ideas of
sense—  the impressions produced in us when "the bodies that surround us
do diversely affect our organs"—and the simple ideas of reflection which
arise  from  an  awareness  of  our  own  mental  operations. But mental
activity also includes the formation of complex ideas by the compounding
of  simple  ones,  and  even  the act whereby we form abstract ideas, in
doing  which  man, in Locke's opinion, is distinguished from brutes. All
these  activities  require soul as well as body. All are somehow nothing
more  than a reworking of the original sensations passively received. In
this  last  respect, Locke's view accords with that of Hobbes, Berkeley,
and Hume, though he differs from them with respect to abstract ideas and
in  his  theory  of  body  and soul. On the very point which he holds in
common  with  Hobbes,  Berkeley,  and Hume, Locke seems to disagree with
Descartes. Thinking, for Descartes, is the activity of a

[745a]
purely spiritual substance— the rational soulpeculiar to the dual nature
of man; whereas sensation and imagination, common to men and brutes, are
purely  corporeal  functions.  In  man,  the  soul or thinking substance
may~~form  certain  of  its  ideas,  those relative to bodies, under the
influence  of  sense  or  fancy; but with regard to other ideas, such as
those  we  have  of  geometrical figures, Descartes says he cannot admit
that  they  "have  at any time entered our minds through the senses." He
objects  to  the  use  of  the  word "idea" for images, or what he calls
"pictures  in  the  corporeal  imagination,  i.e.,  in  some part of the
brain."  He  criticizes  those  who  "never  raise their minds above the
things  of sense," so accustomed are they "to consider nothing except by
imagining  it,"  with  the result that whatever "is not capable of being
imagined  appears  to  them  not to be intelligible at all." Against the
maxim  which Locke, no less than Hobbes or Berkeley, would approve— that
"there  is  nothing in the understanding which has not first of all been
in  the  senses"—  Descartes  offers the ideas of God and of the soul as
plainly  contrary  examples,  ideas  clearly  in  the mind which have no
origin  in  sensation  or  fancy. "Those who desire to make use of their
imagination to understand these ideas," he adds, "act in the same way as
if,  to  hear  sounds  or  smell odours, they should wish to make use of
their eyes. In making a sharp distinction between the faculties of sense
and  understanding  or  reason, Descartes seems to share the position of
Plato,  Aristotle,  Aquinas, Spinoza, and Kant. Yet for Descartes as for
Plato,  the intellect in its own sphere of objects is like the senses in
theirs,  since  each  is  able to behold its proper objects intuitively;
whereas  for  Kant  as  for  Aristotle,  sense  alone  is  a  faculty of
intuition.  The  ideas  by  which  we  apprehend  intelligible  objects,
according  to  Plato,  Descartes,  and  Spinoza,  are  not  derived from
sensations  or  images. According to Aristotle and Aquinas, on the other
hand, the intellect abstracts all its ideas, or universal concepts, from
the  particulars of sense. In this respect Aristotle and Aquinas seem to
be in agreement with Locke, even though that agreement must be qualified
by the observa-

[745b]
Chapter 84: SENSE 711 tion that Locke sees no need for a special faculty
to  obtain abstract ideas. On the other hand, Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas,
and  Descartes  all  seem  to  agree in holding that understanding is as
immaterial  as  its objects. Unlike sense, which requires bodily organs,
rational  thought  is, according to them, an activity peculiar either to
the  soul  itself  or to a power of the soul which is not embodied in an
organ,  as  the  power of vision is embodied in the eye or the powers of
memory and imagination are embodied in the William James denies this. He
holds  the view that all forms of consciousness are somehow functions of
the  brain.  Yet  he also insists that percept and concept are radically
distinct  forms of consciousness. To this extent, James makes as sharp a
separation  as  the  authors above mentioned between the sensory and the
rational  phases of thought. He places sensation, perception, memory and
imagination  on one side, and conception, judgment, and reasoning on the
other. But this is for him not a distinction of faculties or powers, but
only  of  different  functions  which  one  and the same mind is able to
Certain  points  or  problems in the traditional discussion of sense are
unaffected  by  the  basic  issues  just  considered.  For example, most
writers  tend  to  make  some  distinction  between the special exterior
senses,  such  as  vision  and hearing, touch and taste, and the several
interior  senses,  which Aquinas enumerates as the common sense, memory,
imagination,  and  the  estimative or cogitative powers. Yet not all who
consider  memory  and  imagination  as activities consequent upon sense-
perception  call  them  "interior  senses." Not all recognize a distinct
estimative  or  cogitative  power  even  when  they  recognize a kind of
thinking  about  particulars  done  by  animals  and  men  with  sensory
materials.  Nor do all who discuss discrimination or comparison, and the
collation  or  combining  of  the  impressions received from the special
senses, attribute these functions to the special faculty which Aristotle
first  calls "the common Frequently the same analytical point is made in
different  ways. As indicated in the chapter on Quality, the distinction
which Aristotle

[746a]
712  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  and  Aquinas  make  between  proper  and  common
sensibles,  according as the quality, such as color and odor, belongs to
a  single  sense,  or, like shape and motion, can be perceived by two or
more  senses, seems to parallel the distinction between what Locke calls
"secondary"  and  "primary"  qualities. But where Locke and others treat
the  so-called  "secondary  qualities" as entirely subjective, occurring
only in the experience of the sentient organism and having no reality in
the  sensible  thing,  Aristotle  takes  a contrary view. When it is not
actually seen or smelled, the sensible thing, according to Aristotle, is
potentially  colorful  or  odoriferous;  just as when it is not actually
seeing  or  smelling, the sense of vision or smell is also in a state of
potentiality  with  respect  to  these  qualities. But when the sensible
thing  is  actually  sensed, then, Aristotle says, "the actuality of the
sensible  object  and  of  the  sensitive faculty is one actuality." The
thing  is  actually  colored when it is actually seen, though it is only
potentially  colored  when  it  is  merely  able to be so seen. "Earlier
students  of  nature,"  he  writes,  "were  mistaken  in their view that
without  sight there was no white or black, without taste no savor. This
statement  of  theirs  is  partly  true,  partly false: 'sense' and 'the
sensible  object'  are  ambiguous  terms,  i.e.,  they may denote either
potentialities  or  actualities.  The  statement  is true of the latter,
false  of  the  former."  Another  example  of the same analytical point
(which   is   made   differently  by  different  writers)  concerns  the
distinction  between  sensation  and  perception.  According  to William
James,  "perception  involves  sensation  as  a  portion  of itself, and
sensation  in  turn  never  takes place in adult life without perception
also  being  there." The difference between them is that the function of
sensation   is   "that  of  mere  acquaintance  with  a  fact,"  whereas
"perception's  function  ...  is  knowledge  about  a.  fact,  and  this
knowledge admits of numberless degrees of complication." Hearing a sound
is  having a sensation, but perception occurs when, as James points out,
we  "hear a sound, and say 'a horse-car.' But James does not agree that,
when  perception  is  so  described,  it is, as other psychologists have
suggested, a species of reasoning. "If, ev-

[746b]
ery  time a present sign suggests an absent reality to our mind, we make
an  inference,  and if every time we make an inference we reason; then,"
James  admits,  "perception  is  indubitably reasoning. Only one sees no
room  in  it for any unconscious part." No inference is consciously made
in  perception;  and  James  thinks that "to call perception unconscious
reasoning  is  either  a  useless  metaphor,  or a positively misleading
confusion  between  twodifferent  things."  In  his opinion, "perception
differs from sensation
[simply] by the consciousness of further
facts associated with the object of sensation." For him, "perception and
reasoning  are coordinate varieties of that deeper sort of process known
psychologically  as  the association of ideas." What James treats as the
object  of  sensation, Aristotle refers to as a quality sensed by one or
more  of  the special senses, either a proper or a common sensible. What
James treats as the object of perception, Aristotle calls an "accidental
object  of  sense," because it is strictly not sensible at all by any of
the  exterior  senses, singly or in combination. When we call "the white
object  we  see"  the  son  of Diares or a man, we have an example of an
accidental  sensible  or  an  object  incidentally  perceived, because "
'being  the  son  of Diares' is incidental to the directly visible white
patch"  we  see  with  our  eyes. This distinction between sensation and
perception  seems to have a bearing on the problem of the fallibility of
the  senses.  Again  the  same  point  seems  to  be  differently  made.
Aristotle,  for  example,  holds  that  whereas  each  of  the senses is
normally  infallible  in  the  apprehension  of  its  proper  object  or
appropriate  quality, error is possible in the perception of the complex
thing  which is not strictly an object of the special senses. "While the
perception  that  there  is white before us cannot be false," he writes,
"the  perception  that  what  is  white  is  this or that may be false."
Lucretius   likewise  insists  that  the  senses  themselves  are  never
deceived,  but  that  all  the  errors  attributed to the senses are the
result  of a false inference or judgment which reason makes on the basis
of  the  evidence  presented  by  the  senses. That also seems to be the
opinion  of  Descartes,  who  thinks that "no direct experience can ever
deceive the understanding if

[747a]
it restricts its attention accurately to the object presented to it. ...
Thus  if a man suffering from jaundice persuades himself that the things
he  sees  are  yellow, this thought of his will be composite, consisting
partly  of what his imagi^ nation presents to him, and partly of what he
assumes  on  his  own  account, namely, that the color looks yellow, not
owing  to  the  defect in his eye, but because the things he sees really
are yellow. . . . We can go wrong only when the things we believe are in
some  way compounded by ourselves." Descartes holds that "no falsity can
reside"  in sensations themselves, but only in those judgments which, on
the  basis  of  sensations,  we  are  "accustomed  to  pass about things
external  to  us."  The  most fundamental judgment which men make on the
basis of sensation is that an external world exists—a reality not of our
own  making.  Descartes  argues  from  the evidence of the senses to the
independent  existence  of a world of bodies. Though Berkeley argues, on
the  contrary, that bodies do not exist except as objects of perception,
he  attributes  the  senseimpressions,  over  which  we  seem to have no
control,  to  the  action of an external cause— to God, who uses them as
signs  for  instructing  us.  Locke  defines sensitive knowledge as that
which  informs  us  of  "the existence of things actually present to our
senses."  We  may know OUTLINE OF TOPICS i. The nature of sense i a. The
power of sense as distinct from the power of understanding or reason \b.
Sense  and  intellect in relation to becoming and being, particulars and
universals  \c.  The  distinction  between  perception  or intuition and
judgment  or reasoning: the transcendental forms of intuition id. Sense-
perception   as  a  primary  function  of  the  mind  or  understanding:
sensations  ideas  and  notions, percepts and concepts 2. Sensitivity in
relation  to  the grades of life 2a. The differentiation of animals from
plants  in  terms  of  sensitivity ib. The degrees of sensitivity in the
animal  kingdom: the genetic order of the several senses ic. Comparisons
of human and animal sensitivity

[747b]
Chapter 84: SENSE 713 our own existence intuitively, and God's existence
demonstratively,  but "the knowledge of the existence of any other thing
we can have only by sensation." And though, he adds, "the notice we have
by our senses of the existing of things without us ... be not altogether
so  certain as our intuitive knowledge or the deductions of our reason .
. . yet it is an assurance that deserves the name of knowledge." Against
such  views,  the most fundamental skepticism goes further than doubting
the  veracity  of the senses because of the illusions and hallucinations
they  cause  us  to  suffer.  "By what arguments," Hume asks, "can it be
proved  that  the  perceptions  of  the  mind must be caused by external
objects  .  .  .  and could not arise either from the energy of the mind
itself or from the suggestion of some visible or unknown spirit?" "It is
a  question  of fact," he adds, "whether the perception of the senses be
produced  by  external objects, resembling them. How shall this question
be  determined?  By  experience surely; as all other questions of a like
nature.  But  here experience is, and must be, entirely silent. The mind
has  never  anything  present  to  it  but  the  perceptions, and cannot
possibly  reach  any  experience  of  their  connexion with objects. The
supposition of such a connexion is, therefore, without any foundation in
reaPAGE 7*5 716 717

[748a]
714  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (1)  Enumeration  of  the exterior senses: their
relation  and order y. The activity of the exterior senses bles; primary
and  secondary  qualities  tal unity of apperception 3^. The activity of
the  interior  senses collation or perception (2) Memory and imagination
as  interior  powers  of  sense  sensitive  appetite  4a.  Comparison of
sensitive  with  other  forms  of  knowledge  ception  and  judgments of
experience   senses   (2)   Error  in  sense-perception:  illusions  and
hallucinations  5.  The  contribution  of  the  senses  to scientific or
philosophical knowledge lars: verification by appeal to the senses

[748b]
PAGE  3.  The  analysis of the power of sense: its organs and activities
717  30.  The  anatomy  and physiology of the senses: the special sense-
organs,  nerves,  brain  3#.  The  distinction  between the exterior and
interior  senses  718  (2)  Enumeration  of  the  interior senses: their
dependence  on  the  exterior  senses  (1) The functions of the exterior
senses:  the  nature  and  origin  of  sensations  (2) The attributes of
sensation:  intensity, extensity, affective tone; the psychophysical law
719  (3) The classification of sensations or sense-qualities: proper and
common  sensi- (4) The distinction between sensation and perception: the
accidental  sensible;  complex  ideas of substance 720 (5) Sensation and
attention:  pre-perception  and  apperception;  the transcenden- (1) The
functions  of the common sense: discrimination, comparison, association,
(3)  The  estimative or cogitative power: instinctive recognition of the
harmful  and  beneficial  721 y. The relation of sense to emotion, will,
and  movement:  the  conception  of  a  4.  The  character  of sensitive
knowledge 722 4^. The object of sense-perception: the evident particular
fact;  judgments  of  per4^. The relation of sense and the sensible: the
subjectivity  or  objectivity  of  sensequalities  723  4^.  The  limit,
accuracy, and reliability of sensitive knowledge: the fallibility of the
(1) The erroneous interpretation of sense-data: the problem of judgments
based on sensation 724 5#. Sensation as the source or occasion of ideas:
the  role  of memory or reminiscence; the construction of complex ideas;
the  abstraction  of  universal concepts 725 $b. Sense-experience as the
origin  of  inductions  726 5c The dependence of understanding or reason
upon sense for knowledge of particusensible and intelligible beauty 727

[749a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James -.Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand sideof the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 1 63 and
ends  in  the  upper  half of the right-hand side of page 1 64. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  1. The nature of sense la. The power of sense as
distinct  from  the  power  of  understanding or reason 7 Pl\to: Phaedo,
224a-225a;  231c-232a  / Republic, bk vi, 386d-388a; bk vii, 392c-393c /
Theaetetus,  534d-536a  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 31
120a-c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 4
[999
b  i~4]  518b  /  Soul, bk 11, ch 5 647b-648d; bk hi, ch 4 [429*2 Q-b 4J
661c-d;  ch  8  664b-d  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk ix, ch 9 [ii7oai6-i8]
423d-424a  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr 1, ch 7 3d-4a / Fourth Ennead,
tr  vi,  ch  1-2  189b-190b  /  Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2-3 216b-217b 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 12-20 74b-76c / City of God, bk vii,
ch  23, 256b-c; bk viii, ch 6, 269b; bk xi, ch 27, 337d-338a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 12, a 3 52c-53b; q 14, a 2, ans and rep i
76d-77d; q 75, a 3, ans and rep 2 380c-381b; q 78, a 1 407b-409a; aa 3-4
410a-413d  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3 8b-9a; q
56, a 5 33c-34b; part hi suppl, q 70, a 2 896a-897d 31 Descartes: Rules,
viii,  13a;  xn  18b-25a  /  Meditations,  vi,  98d-99c / Objections and
Replies, 218c-d; 229d-230c

[749b]
Chapter 84: SENSE 715 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14ac; 23a-24a; 37b-39c; 98c;
101d-102a;  112d-113b: 115bc / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 282 b-c
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a-c  / judgement, 5 70c- 5 71c 53
James: Psychology, 158b-159a; 450a-451b; 469a-b; 628b-631a lb. Sense and
intellect  in relation to becoming and being, particulars and universals
7  Plato:  Phaedrus,  126b-d  /  Symposium,  167a-d / Phaedo, 224a-225a;
231b-232b  / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d-398c / Timaeus, 447b-d; 457b-458a
/  Theaetetus, 534d-536a / Sophist, 565a-569a esp 568a-569a 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2
[7^33-72*6]
98b-c;  ch  18  110b-c;  ch  31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 19 [iooai6-b i] 136d /
Topics, bk 11, ch 7
[113*23-32]
158d; bk vi, ch 4
[i4i b2-i4] 194d-195a; bk viii, ch
i [156*4-6] 211d-212a / Physics, bk i, ch 5
[189*5-8]
264b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*2898^13] 499a-500a; ch 6 [987*29^18] 505b-d;
4] 518a-b; bk vii, ch 10 bk hi, ch 4 [999*24-b
[io35b34-io36*i2] 559b-c / Soul, bk
ii, ch 5
[4i7bi7-28] 648b-c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 8
[1142*12-31]
391b-c; bk vii, ch 3
[11 47*25^6] 397c-d
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811c-d

[750a]
(1. The nature of sense. lb. Sense and intellect in relation to becoming
and  being,  particulars and universals.) 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
vi,  ch  1-2  189b190b / Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch i 228b-229c; tr ix, ch 5
248a-249a  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  27-28  266c-267c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk vii, par 23 50b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  14, a 11 84c-85c; q 18, a 2, ans 105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 54,
a  5  288a-d;  q  57,  a  i, rep 2 295a-d; a 2 295d-297a; q 75, a 5, ans
382a383b;  q  76,  a  2,  rep  4  388c-391a;  q  86,  a i, ans and rep 4
461c-462a;  a  3 463b-d; part i-ii, q 1, a 2, rep 3 610b-611b; q 2, a 6,
ans  619d-620d; q 29, a 6, ans and rep 1,3 748b749a 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  332a-333b  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn  18b-25a; xiv 28a-33b
passim / Discourse, part iv, 53b / Meditations, 11, 79a-81d esp 81d; vi,
96b-d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  130a-b;  136d-137a; 218c-d; 219b-c;
229d-230c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 341d-342a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
445d-446a  53 James: Psychology, 307a-311a esp 309a, 311b312b [fn 1] \c.
The   distinction  between  perception  or  intuition  and  judgment  or
reasoning:  the  transcendental forms of intuition 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
23a-41c  esp  23a-24a,  34a-c,  38c-41c;  42a; 45d-46a; 47c-48a; 53b54b;
58a-64a  esp  61a-64a;  66a-d; 98c; 109d110a; 112d-113b; 115b-c; 199bc /
Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 282b-c / Practical Reason, 307d-308b;
329b-c  /  Judgement,  461a475d  esp  461a-462d,  464c-467a,  474b-475d;
482d-483d;  492c-d; 570b-572c 53 James: Psychology, 629a-631a Id. Sense-
perception   as  a  primary  function  of  the  mind  or  understanding:
sensations  as  received  impressions; the distinction between sensation
and  reflection,  ideas and notions, percepts and concepts 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk hi [231-251] 33a-b; bk iv
[26-41] 44b-d;
[722-817] 53d54d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  PARTi,49a-d;  52b-c;  54a;  part  iv, 258b-c 31
Spinoza:   Ethics,   part   h,  prop  14-18  380c382b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch i-ii 121a-128c esp
ch  1,  sect 1-8 121a-123a, sect 20-25 126d127d; ch in, sect 1, 128d; ch
viii,  sect  i 133b-c; sect 8 134b-c; ch ix 138b-141a passim, esp sect 1
138b-c, sect 15 141a; ch xi, sect 17-cH xn, sect 1, 147a-b; ch xix, sect

[750b]
716 THE GREAT IDEAS \c to 2a 1, 175b; ch xx, sect i 176b-c; ch xxi, sect
4 178d-179c; sect 74-75, 200a-d; ch xxii, sect 2, 201a; ch xxiii, sect i
204a-b; sect 5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; sect 29 211d212a; sect 32 212c-d;
bk  hi,  ch iv, sect 11 261d-262b; ch v, sect 2 263d-264a; bk iv, ch 11,
sect 11 311c-312a; ch iv, sect 4 324c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
i  413a-b;  sect  25-33  417d-419a  passim; sect 36 419c-d; sect 135-142
440a-441c  passim,  esp  sect 139-140 440d-441a, sect 142, 441c 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  ii  455b457b  passim  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
115b-c  53  James:  Psychology, 144a-145a; 160a; 313b314a; 452a-457a esp
453a-454a,  455a-456a;  472b-473a;  593a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of
Dreams,  352d  2.  Sensitivity in relation to the grades of life 2a. The
differentiation  of animals from plants in terms of sensitivity 7 Plato:
Timaeus, 469d-470a 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 5
[4iob i6-4ii a2]
640d-641a; bk ii, ch 2 [4i3a3i-b 4] 643c; ch 3
[4i4a28-33] 644c;
[41 4^2-4 15^] 645a-b; ch
12  [424*32^4]  656b-c  / Sense and the Sensible, ch 1 [436b8-i2] 673c /
Sleep,  ch  i  [454^2-18] 696c-d; [454^3-455^] 697b-c / Youth, Life, and
Breathing,  ch  i  [467b23-25]  714b 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk
viii, ch i
[588b4-589
a  i]  114d-115b  / Parts of Animals, bk 11, ch 10 [655^3-656^] 182a; bk
iv, ch 10
[686b23-687a i] 218b-c / Gait of Animals, ch
a26-b i3] 244a-b / Generation of Animals, bk 1, ch 23
[73i a24-b8] 271c-d; bk
ii, ch 1 4 [705 ai2-i4] 272c; ch 3
[736^5^14]
276d277b; ch 4 [740b25]-CH 5 [74^30] 281d-282b; bk in, ch 7 [757
[732
b i4~3o] 298c-d; bk v, ch 1
[778b30-779
a 4] 321a-b / Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[i097b33-i098a2] 343b
10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk 1, ch 1 167a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk viii, sect 7 286a; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
vii,  ch  23, 256bc 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, a 2, ans
and  rep  1  105c-106b; a 3, ans 106b107c; q 69, a 2, rep 1 361c-362c; q
78,  a  i,  ans  407b-409a  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 368a-b;
369d-370b; 372b; 397c-398c; 457c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  ix, sect 11-15 140b-141a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 114b-115c esp
115a-b 53 James : Psychology, 8a 54 Freud: Unconscious, 429c-d

[751a]
2b  to  3a  Chapter  84: SENSE 717 2b. The degrees of sensitivity in the
animal  kingdom:  the  genetic  order of the several senses 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk ii, ch 2 [413* 4-ioJJi43cf b3i"434a a i-3] 644a; bk hi, ch ii
[433
[4 i 4
4]  666d;  ch  12-13  667a-668d  /  Sense and the b i2-437*i7] 673c-674a
Sensible, ch i [436 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 3
[489*17-19] 10b; ch 9 [49^26-34] 13c; ch
ii
[492*27-30]
14a-b; bk ii, ch 12
[504*19-23]
26c; ch 13 [505*32-34] 27d-28a; bk iv, ch 7
[532*5-7] 58d; ch
8 59d-62a; bk v, ch 16
[548b io-i5] 75b-c; bk
viii,  ch i [588^7-31] 115a-b / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 8 [653 b2229]
179b;  ch  10-17 181d-188a,c passim; bk hi, ch 4 [667*9-14] 195b; bk iv,
ch  5  [68^14-17] 212b; ch 11 [690^7-691*28] 222d-223c / Gait of Animals,
ch 4 [705b9~i3] 244b / Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 23
[73i*24~b8] 271c-d;
bk v, ch 1
[778b2o]-cH 2 [78^29] 321a-324a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk iv [633-721] 52c-53d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 78, a 3, ans
410a-411d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  59a-c  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch ix, sect 11-15 140b-141a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,   261c-262a;  366c;  397d-398a;  402b-c;  406c;  432c-434c  passim;
447b-448a  passim;  456b-d; 474a-b; 480a-482b passim; 529a-b; 553d-554b;
568d-569b;  595b596a  53 James: Psychology, 27a-42b passim, esp 40a, 41b
2c.  Comparisons  of  human and animal sensitivity 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk
ii, ch 9 [421*6-16] 652c;
[421*19-26]
652d;
[42^8-422*6]
653a-c / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436^ 7-437*1 7]
673d-674a;  ch  4  [440^8-441*3]  678b-c;  ch 5 b i7-445*3i] 681c-683b 9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 15
[443
b i7~i9] 16d / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch
[494
16
[660*1 3]-ch 17
[660*23] 187a / Generation
of Animals,  bk  v,  ch  2  [78^17-23]  323d-324a  / Ethics, bk in, ch 10
[iu8*i7-b7]  364d-365a  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [706-721]
53c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3, ans and rep 2
430c-431d;  q  91,  a 3, rep 1,3 486b-487d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q  2,  a  2, rep 2 711d-712d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 286a-287b;
290c-291b  30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 40, 173c-d 31 Descartes:
Objections and Replies, 156a-d; 229d-230c 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk ii, ch ix, sect 12-15 140c-141a

[751b]
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk i, ld-2a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-338a  42  Kant:  Judgement,  479b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right,
additions,  25 121a 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 244a-245b 49 Darwin: Descent
of  Man,  259d-260a;  261c262a;  301c-302b;  366c;  568d-570a  53 James:
Psychology,  19b-42b  passim,  esp 41a-b 3. The analysis of the power of
sense:  its organs and activities "ba. The anatomy and physiology of the
senses:  the  special  sense-organs,  nerves,  brain  7  Plato: Timaeus,
454b-455a 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii, ch i
[4i2b i8-24]
642d; ch 8 [420*2-19] 651b-c; ch 9 [421*1926] 652d; [42^8-422*6] 653a-c;
ch 10 [422^- 9] 654a; ch ii
[422b
i 7-424*9] 654b-655d; bk ii, ch 12 [424*24]-bk in, ch i
[425*13] 656a657a; bk
hi, ch 2
[426^-17] 658d; ch
13
[435*1 i-b3] 668a-b
/  Sense  and  the  Sensible, ch 2-5 674a-683b passim / Youth, Life, and
Breathing, ch 3
[468b28]-cH
4
[469^]
715b716a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk i, ch 4
[489*24-27] 10c; ch 15 [494bn-i6] 16d; bk
ii, ch 10 25b-c; ch 12
[504*19-23]
26c; ch 13
[505*32-34] 27d-28a; bk iv, ch
i  [524*33^5]  50a;  ch  7  [532*5-10]  58d-59a;  ch  8  59d-62a / Parts
of Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  i [647*1-34] 171a-c; ch 8 [653b i9-29] 179b; ch
10-17  181d-188a,c esp ch 10 [656*i4]-ch 12 [657*24] 182b-183d, ch 16-17
185d-188a,c;  bk  hi, ch 4 [666*io-b i] 193d-194b; ch 5 [667^2-32] 196a;
bk iv, ch 5
[678^-18] 208b-c;
[68 i b
i  5-682*9]  212b-d; ch 11 [690^8-691*28] 222d-223c / Motion of Animals,
ch 9 [702^2-25] 238b / Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 6
[743^5-744*18]
285a-b; bk v, ch i
[779*27]-^
2
[78^29]
321c-324a 10 Hippocrates: Sacred Disease, 159c-160a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk hi [136-160] 31d-32a;
[231-251]
33a-b;
[359-369]
34d;
[406-416] 35b-c; bk iv [237-253] 47b-c; [324352] 48c-d; [615-629] 52b-c
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 855a 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 23
153d154b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 76, a 5, ans and rep 2
394c-396a;  q  77,  a  5,  rep 3 403d-404c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
49a-d; 50b-51b; part in, 172c; part iv, 258b-c 28 Harvey: Circulation of
the Blood, 326b / On Animal Generation, 455c; 456b-458a esp 457a-d; 494b
30  Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 27, 157b-d 31 Descartes: Rules, xn,
19a-20d / Objections and Replies, 209c

[752a]
718  THE  GREAT IDEAS (3. The analysis of the power of sense: its organs
and  activities.  ?>a.  The  anatomy  and  physiology of the senses: the
special  senseorgans, nerves, brain.) 34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 384b-385b
35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch hi, sect i 128d-129a; ch viii,
sect  12  135a;  ch  xxix,  sect  3  234b-c  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
270a-271b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  102b,d-103b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  244a-245b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 85d-87c;
90b-c  /  Descent  of  Man,  259c-261c;  397d-398a;  595d596a  53 James:
Psychology,  8a-52b  esp 27a-42b; 151a-b; 453a; 456b-457a; 497a-501b esp
500a501b; 533a-538b passim, esp 533a-534a, 536a, 538a-b; 546b-547b
[fn 1];
562b-563a  esp  562b-563b  [fn  1];  575b-584a;  768b;  787a  54  Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  351b-352b;  367b-c  /  Beyond  the Pleasure
Principle,  647a648a  3b.  The  distinction  between  the  exterior  and
interior   senses  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch  19
b36-iooa3] 136b-c / Soul, bk hi, ch 2 657d-659c; ch 3
[428*5-16]
660b; ch 7
[43i a i4-b2] 663d-664a
/ Sleep, ch 2
[455*3b i3] 697c-698b
[99
17  Plotinus  :  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 29 157b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4, ans and rep 1-2 411d-413d; q 81, a 3, rep
3  430c-431d;  part  i-ii, q 35, a 2, rep 2 773b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  50a-c; 52b-c; part iv, 258b-c 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
457b  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19a-20a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 24a-b;
26b-29d   /   Intro.   Metaphysic   of  Morals,  386d-387a,c  54  Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  367b-c;  384c-385b 3^(1) Enumeration of the
exterior  senses:  their  relation and order 8 Aristotle: Generation and
Corruption, bk ii, ch 2
[329b6-i7] 429c / Soul, bk
ii,  ch  7-1  i  649b-656a;  bk  hi,  ch  1-2 656b,d-659c/ Sense and the
Sensible  673a-689a,c  9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk iv, ch 8
59d-62a / Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 10
[656*24]-ch
11
[657*18] 182c-183c
10  Hippocrates: Sacred Disease, 159d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
ii  [434-443]  20c;  [680-687]  23c-d; bk iv [478-499] 50b-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  18,  a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 76, a 5, ans
394c-396a;  q 78, a 3 410a-411d; q 91, a 3, rep i 486b487d; part i-ii, q
31, a 6 756d-757c

[752b]
3hto3c(l)  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi  suppl,  q 82, a 4
972d-974c;  q 91, a 4, rep i 1022d1023d 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
457b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules, xn, 19a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii, ch ii, sect 3-CH in, sect 1 128b-129a; ch ix, sect 8-9, 139c-140a 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect i 413a-b; sect 42-44 420c-421a 53 James
:  Psychology,  62a-63a;  569b-570a;  650b651a  3£(2) Enumeration of the
interior  senses:  their  dependence on the exterior senses 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 b36-ioo*6] 136b-c / Metaphysics, bk i,
ch i
[980*22^24] 499a
/ Soul, bk hi, ch 3
[428b
[99
b3i-434*9]  666d  /  Memory and Reminiscence, ch i 690a692b 9 Aristotle:
Motion of Animals, ch 8
[702*
19-20] 237c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii [1370*2810-429*9] 660d-661b; ch ii
[433
31]  613c  17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 29 157b-d; tr iv, ch 8,
161d-162b;  tr  vi  189b191c  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 12-15
74b-75b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4 411d-413d; q 84,
a  7,  rep  2  449b-450b;  q  in,  a 3, rep 1 570b-571b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[13-18] 78c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 50a-c; 52b-c; 54b-c; part iv, 262a-c 28
Harvey: On Animal Generation, 334c-d 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 19a-20d 31
Spinoza:   Ethics,   part  ii,  prop  17-18  380d382b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i,  ch hi, sect 21 118b-119a; bk ii, ch ii, sect 2-3
128a-c;  ch x 141b-143d esp sect 7 142c-d; ch xi, sect 1-7 143d-145b; ch
xii,  sect  i,  147b-c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect ii, div 13
455d-456b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 41c-42b; 54b-55a 53 James: Psychology,
13a;  391a;  480a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams, 352a-c 3c. The
activity  of  the  exterior  senses  3c(l) The functions of the exterior
senses:  the  nature  and  origin  of sensations 7 Plato: Meno, 177b-d /
Republic,  bk  vi,  385c386c / Timaeus, 453b-454a; 454c-455a; 463d465d /
Theaetetus,   518b-522b;  533b-534b  /  Philebus,  621a-c  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch 8 [9*28-b8] 14b-c / Topics, bk 1, ch 14
[i05b4-9]
149b; bk iv, ch 5 [i25b i5-i8] 174d / Generation and Corrup-

[753a]
3<r(l) to 3c(S) tion, bk i, ch 8
[32.^26-32] 423b;
[326bn21] 425c-d / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 6
[ic>48b
18-34] 574a-c / Soul, bk ii, ch 5 647b-648d; bk in, ch 7
[43^1-8] 663c
/  Sense  and  the  Sensible  673a-689a,c  passim  9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk iir-cTTT a7-i9] 171a-b; ch 10
[656b26-657a i3J
[647
183a-c; bk iv, ch ii
[690^6-69^13] 222d223b
/ Generation of Animals, bk v, ch i
[78ob i3]-CH 2 [78i b29] 322d-324a / Ethics, bk
ii,  ch  1  [1103^6-31]  348d;  bk  x, ch 4 [ii74b i5-ii75 a3] 429a-b 10
Hippocrates:  Sacred Disease, 159d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[398-477] 20a-21a; [865-990] 26a-27c; bk hi
[231-257]
33a-b;
[323-416]
34b-35c; bk iv
[26-268]
44b-47d; [522-776] 51a-54b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 6-7 3c-4a
/  Second  Ennead,  tr  viii  64c-65c  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 23
153d-154b;  ch 25-26, 155c; tr iv, ch 23-25 169c-171b; tr v, ch i-tr vi,
ch  2  183a-190b  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 1, ans
75d-76c; a 2, rep i 76d-77d; q 75, a 3, ans and rep 2 380c-381b; q 77, a
5,  rep  3  403d-404c; q 78, a 3 410a-411d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi suppl, q 70, aa 1-2 893d-897d; q 82, aa 3-4 971a974c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 49a-d; 62b; part in, 172b; part iv, 258bc 28 Harvey:
On  Animal  Generation,  456c-457d  passim,  esp  457c-d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum, bk ii, aph 45, 176a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 19a / Objections
and  Replies,  163b;  228c-229c;  229d-230c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
axiom  4  373d;  prop  11-16  377b-380d  esp postulate 3 380b 34 Newton:
Optics,  bk  i,  428a-b; 434a-435a; 442a-443a; bk hi, 518b-519b; 522a 35
Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 3 121c-d; sect 23 127b; ch
hi,  sect i 128d-129a; ch viii, sect 4 133d; sect 7-26 134b-138b passim,
esp  sect  11-13  134d-135b,  sect 21 136c-d; ch ix, sect 1-4 138b-d; ch
xix, sect 1, 175b; ch xxiii, sect 11-13 206d208b; ch xxix, sect 3 234bc;
ch  xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d;  bk  hi, ch iv, sect 10 261b-d; ch v, sect 2
263d-264a;  bk iv, ch ii, sect 11-13 311c-312b; ch hi, sect 28 322ac; ch
iv, sect 4 324c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 18-20 416b-417a; sect
25-33  417d-419a  passim;  sect  36  419c-d;  sect  44, 421a; sect 56-57
423c-424a; sect 90 430c-d; sect 146-149 442a-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xiv,  102b,d-103b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 23a-24a; 115b-c /
Judgement, 477b-d; 518a 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 202a

[753b]
b Chapter 84: SENSE 719 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, part i, 14a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions, 25 121a 50 Marx: Capital,
31c-d  53  James:  Psychology,  98b-103b;  108a-b;  149b151b esp 151a-b;
184b-185a;   193b-194a;   422a;   452a-457a  esp  456b-457a;  470b-471a;
472b479a;  520a-521a;  547a-627a esp 549a, 550a-b, 553b-554b, 562a-563a,
584b-589b, 593a, 595b-597b
[fn
2],  596a-608b,  611b,  613b616b;  856b-858a passim 54 Freud: Instincts,
412c-413a  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  647c-648a / Ego and Id,
701b-d   3c(2)   The  attributes  of  sensation:  intensity,  extensity,
affective  tone; the psychophysical law 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 15
[106^2-36] 150a-b; [i07b27-37] 152a / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [246b2o-247a
i9] 330a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch 8
[420a27-b4] 651c-d; ch 9 [42^6-16] 652c; bk
hi, ch 2 [426a27-b8] 658c-d; ch 13 [435 b4-i9] 668c 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk  x,  ch 4 [ii74bi5-ii75a 3] 429a12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[398-477] 20a-21a; [963-972] 27b; bk iv [324-331] 48c;
[524-548] 51a-b; [615-721] 52b-53d
17  Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr viii, ch i, 65a / Fifth Ennead, tr viii,
ch  ii,  245c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 31, aa 5-6
755c-757c   23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  62b-c  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  ii, sect 11-13 311c-312b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  33  419a; sect 36 419c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  ii,  div n-i2 455b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiv, 103a-c
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 69c-72c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a-c /
Judgement,  477b478a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 450a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  569a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  275b-276b;  319b-321a; 348a-359a;
498a-501b  passim;  526b-527a;  533a-b; 540a-547a; 552a-554b; 563a-566a;
651a-b;  829b-830a  54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 367b-c; 384c-d /
Narcissism, 403d-404a / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 639b-d; 648b-649c
passim  /  Ego  and  Id, 701a-b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 773a
3c(3)  The  classification  of  sensations or sensequalities: proper and
common  sensibles;  primary  and  secondary  qualities 7 Plato: Timaeus,
462c-463d; 464b-465d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 8
[9
a28-b8] 14b-c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch 1-3

[754a]
720  THE GREAT IDEAS (3c. The activity of the exterior senses. 3c(3) The
classification  of  sensations  or  sense-qualities:  proper  and common
sensibles;  primary and secondary qualities?) 428b,d-431a / Soul, bk ii,
ch 6
[418*6-19]
648d-649a; ch 9
[^2i &2-j-h2]
652d; ch 10
[422b io]-cH
11 [422^3] 654b-c; bk hi, ch i
[425*14-29]
657b-c;
[425b4-io]
657c-d / Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[437*3-10] 673d674a; ch 3-5 676a-683b; ch 6 [445
b4-446a2o]  683b-684c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 6, 169c-d 12
Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk ii [398-521] 20a-21c; [730-864] 24b-26a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 78, a 3 esp rep 2 410a-411d; a
4,  rep 1-2 411d-413d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 92,
a  2, ans 1032b-1034b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49b-d; part hi, 172b
31   Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19a-c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  163b;
228c-229c;  231a-b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi, rule hi 270b271a /
Optics, bk i, 428a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch hi, sect 1
128d-129a; ch v 131b; ch vii, sect i 131c; ch viii, sect 7-26 134b-138b;
ch  ix,  sect  8-9,  139c-140a;  ch xxi, sect 3 178d; sect 75 200b-d; ch
xxiii,  sect  7-13  205d208b; sect 37, 214a-b; ch xxx, sect 2 238b-c; ch
xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d; bk hi, ch iv, sect 16 263b-c; bk iv, ch hi, sect
11-14  315d-316d; sect 28 322a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 9-15
414d-416a;  sect  25  417d-418a;  sect  73 427b-c; sect 102 432d-433a 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  122  505c-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  15b-c;  29d-33d  esp  30d31a, 31d-32a, 32d-33b [fn 1] 53 James:
Psychology, 185a-b; 502b-503b; 569b570a; 572a-b; 627a-b; 650b-651a 3c(4)
The   distinction  between  sensation  and  perception:  the  accidental
sensible;  complex ideas of substance 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xiii,
ch 10 [1087* 18-21] 619c / Soul, bk 11, ch 6
[418*20-26]
649a  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  i  [437*3-17]  673d-674a;  ch 6
[446^8-27]  685a-b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 92, a
2,  ans  1032b-1034b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix, sect
8-10  139b-140b;  ch  xxiii, sect i 204a-b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  i  413a-b;  sect  42-44  420c-4?la;  sect 148 442b-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 115b-c 53 James: Psychology, 452a-453a; 502a-505b; 526b-527a

[754b]
3r(4)  to  3d(2)  3c(5)  Sensation  and  attention:  pre-perception  and
apperception;  the  transcendental  unity  of  apperception 8 Aristotle:
Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  7  685c-689a,c  21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, iv
[i18] 57c
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14a-108a,c esp 14a-15c, 23a-33d, 41c-42b, 48d-59b,
66d-93c  48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 244a-245a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xiv,  605c-d  53  James: Psychology, 184b-185a; 232b-235a; 262a-291a esp
262b-268a,  275b-276b, 282a288a; 295b-297a; 328a-329a; 469a-b; 522b525a;
562a-b;  620b-621a  3d.  The  activity  of the interior senses 3d(l) The
functions  of the common sense: discrimination, comparison, association,
collation or perception 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch i
[425*i4-b io]
657b-d; ch 2
[426^-427*14]
658d-659c  /  Sleep, ch 2 [455*3-b i3] 697c-698b 10 Hippocrates : Sacred
Disease,  159c-d  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk iv, 855a 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 3 143b-c; tr vii, ch 6-7 194b-195b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4, ans and rep 1-2 411d-413d; q 87, a 3, rep
3  467b-468a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 52a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  457b-458a  esp  457b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules, xn, 19c-d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xi, sect 1-7 143d-145b 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  14a;  51c-d;  54b-64a  /  Judgement, 493c-d; 528c-529b 53
James:   Psychology,   185a-b;   313b-341a   esp  313b-319a,  322b-326a,
336a-340a;   344b-346a;  360a-399b  esp  378a-380a,  396a-397a,  399a-b;
411a-420b esp 414a-416b
[fn
1],  415a-418a;  502b-504b;  506a-507a;  525a-526b; 547a552a esp 547a-b,
551b-552a; 561a-575a esp 561a, 570a-573a; 584a-589b esp 584a-b; 867a868b
54  Freud:  Interpretation of Dreams, 367b-c; 384c-385c 3d(2) Memory and
imagination as interior powers of sense 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 523d-524a /
Philebus  y  621a-b  8  Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii, ch 19
b20-ioo*9] 136a-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[980*28^24] 499a / Memory and Reminiscence
690a-695d 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 7 [70i b i3]-
[99
ch 8
[702*21] 237a-c / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch ii
[1370*28-31] 613c

[755a]
Chapter  84:  SENSE  3d(3)  to  3e 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch
28-32  156d-159a;  tr  vi 189b-191c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
12-17  74b-75d  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 55, a 2, rep 2
289d-290d;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  arH^hTEP^  3 411d-413d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 3 8b-9a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  50a-52b  esp 50a-d; part iv, 258b-c; 262a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  55b-c  31  Descartes:  Rules, xn, 19d; 20b-d / Objections and
Replies, 208d-209a; 218c; 219b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 17-18
380d382b;  part  in,  postulate 2 396a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  x,  sect  1-2  141bc;  sect  7  142c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341d-342a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 41c-42b; 54b-64a / Judgement, 493c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 219d220a 53 James: Psychology,
13a-15a  esp  13a;  145a; 421b-431b passim, esp 424b-425a; 480a-501b esp
480a-b,  497a-501b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 352a-d 3</(3) The
estimative  or  cogitative power: instinctive recognition of the harmful
and  beneficial  6 Herodotus: History, bk 11, 63b-c 9 Aristotle: History
of Animals, bk viii, ch 12 b20-28] 122d; bk ix, ch 5-6 136d-138b
[596
passim  17  Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 20 167d-168b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 59, a 3, ans 308b-309a; q 76, a 5, rep 4
394c396a;  q  78,  a  4,  ans  and  rep  4-5 411d-413d; q 81, a 2, rep 2
429c-430c; a 3, ans and rep 2 430c-431d; q 83, a 1, ans 436d-438a; q 96,
a  1,  ans  and  rep 4 510b-511b; part i-ii, q 29, a 6, ans 748b-749a 22
Chaucer: Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,279-287]
457b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 286d-287b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
456d-457a   31  Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  lOOa-d  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 3 104b-d; bk ii, ch x, sect 3 141c-d;
ch  xi,  sect  5  144d-145a;  sect ii 145d-146a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-338a  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 144a 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
121a;  122c  /  Descent  of  Man,  287d-288a; 290c-291a; 292bc 53 James:
Psychology,  13a;  708a-709a;  720b725a  passim;  729b 54 Freud: General
Introduction, 607d-609c esp 607d-608c; 612c-614a esp 613d-614a; 623b-c

[755b]
721  /  Beyond  the  Pleasure  Principle,  640d-641a  /  /  Inhibitions,
Symptoms,  and  Anxiety,  720a721c  esp  720c-d; 737b-d; 751a-752b / New
Introductory  Lectures,  845a-846a  e. The relation of sense to emotion,
will,  and  movement:  the  conception  of a sensitive appetite 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  i28a-129c  /  Republic,  bk  iv, 350b-353d esp 352c-d; bk ix,
421a-b / Timaeus, 466a-467b / Laws, bk vi, 712b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
vii, ch 3
[246^0247*19] 330a-b / Soul, bk
ii,  ch  2  [4i3b  i7-24] 643d; ch 3 [4i4a28-b i6] 644c-d / Dreams, ch 2
[460*34^27]  704b-d  9  Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 6 [7oob4]- ch 8
[702*22] 235d-237c / Ethics, bk hi, ch 10
[iu8a i-b
7] 364c-365a; bk vi, ch 2 [1139*1621] 387d; bk vii, ch 3
[ii47a25-b6] 397c-d;
ch 4
[1148*4-22] 398b-c; ch
6
[ii49*23-b
3]  399d-400a  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk iv [877-891] 55d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  CH23,  170a-171a  17  Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  28 156d-157b; tr iv, ch 20 167d-168b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii,  par  1-2 9a-b; par 10 lla-b; bk hi, par 1 13bc 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 6, a 1, rep 2 28b-d; q 18, a 3, ans
106b-107c;  q  78,  a  1  407b-409a;  q  81  428d-431d; q 82, a 2, rep 3
432d-433c;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2,  rep  3 610b-611b; q 2, a 6, rep 2
619d-620d; q 17, a 7 690d-692a; qq 22-48 720b,d-826a,c passim, esp q 22,
a  3  722d-723b  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, aa 4-5
32b-34b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[85-102] 77d
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-d; 62b-c; 64a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
288a-290b  27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc iv [65-81] 55b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 55b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 9 399bc
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 164b-c; 235c-d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
259a-c; 265b,d
[fn
1];  270c-d; 284d-285a / Practical Reason, 298d-300a; 341c-342a / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c-386d / Judgement, 477b-c; 586a-b 53 James:
Psychology,   13a-15a;   51a-b;   521a-522a;  694a-699a;  738a-759a  esp
743a-745b,  754b755b,  757b-759a;  767b-794a  esp  768a-771a, 790a-794a;
808b-810b;  812a-813a;  827b-835a  esp  827b-828a,  830b-831b  54 Freud:
Interpretation   of   Dreams,   351c-353b  esp  351d-352a;  363c-364b  /
Instincts, 412c413d; 419a-420c esp 420a / Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
648b-c / Ego and Id, 701b

[756a]
4.  The  character  of  sensitive  knowledge 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-225a;
231c-232a  /  Republic,  bk  vi-vn,  383d-398c / Theaetetus, 517b-536a 8
Aristotle:  Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 31 120a-c / Metaphysics, bk i,
ch i
[98oa2o-b24]
499a;
[98i b io-i3]
499d-500a; bk iv, ch 5
[ioo9 b i-i7]
528d-529a;
[ioio b i-ion a 2]
530a-c; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b34-io63a
9] 591a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 3-7 ld-4a / Fourth Ennead,
tr  hi,  ch  26,  155c; tr iv, ch 20 167d-168b; ch 23-25 169c-171b; tr v
183a-189b  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk x, par 10-11 73d-74b; bk xii,
par  5  lOOa-b / Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 27 650a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 12, a 4, ans and rep 3 53b-54c; q 14, a 6, rep i
80a81c;  Q  78,  a  3,  ans 410a-411d; a 4, ans and rep 4-6 411d-413d 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-333c  31  Descartes:  Rules, xii,
19a-20a  /  Meditations, vi 96b-103d / Objections and Replies, 136d137a;
163b;  229d-230d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, prop 11-16 377b380d 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii, sect 29 211d-212a; bk iv,
ch  ii,  sect  14  312b-d;  ch  hi, sect 2-5 313a-c; sect 21 319c; ch xi
354c-358c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect 18, 416b; sect 135-145
440a-442a  passim  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  23a-24a; 30b-31a esp 30b-c;
34a-b;  54b-55a;  58a-59b 53 James: Psychology, 157b-168a esp 158b-161a,
167b;  453a-479a  esp  453a-454a,  456b-459b,  469a-b  4a. Comparison of
sensitive  with  other  forms  of knowledge 7 Plato: Symposium, 167a-d /
Phaedo,  224a225a;  231c-232a / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d398c / Timaeus,
447b-d / Theaetetus, 534d536a 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
31  120a-c  / Topics, bk ii, ch 8 [114*17-26] 159d160a / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch i
[98oa20-b24]
499a  /  Soul, bk ii, ch 5 647b-648d 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals,
bk i, ch 23
[73i a3o-b
5] 271c-d / Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[i095a 30-b i2] 340c-d; bk
vi, ch 8
[1142*1231] 391b-c
17  Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch 1-3 228b230a / Sixth Ennead, tr hi,
ch  18,  291a-b  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10 15b-d; bk xii,
par  5  lOOa-b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 4, ans and
rep  3 53b-54c; q 13, a 7, ans 68d70d; q 14, a 6, rep 1 80a-81c; q 54, a
2, ans 285d-286c; q 57, a i, rep 2 295a-d; a 2, ans

[756b]
722  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4/o  4^  295d-297a;  q  78, a 4, ans and rep 4-6
411d413d;  q  85, a 2, rep 3 453d-455b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49d
28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-333c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
iv,  53b  /  Meditations,  in,  83d-84a;  vi  96b-103d  / Objections and
Replies,  136d-137a; 218c-d; 229d-230d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
hi,  ch  i, sect 5 252b-c; bk iv, ch ii, sect 14 312b-d; ch in, sect 2-5
313a-c;  sect  21  319c;  ch  xi,  sect  13 357d-358a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  intro,  sect  1 405a-b; sect 18 416b-c; sect 27 418a-b; sect
135-142  440a-441c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v, div 41, 468a-b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  14ac; 22a,c; 23a-24a; 34a-c; 45d-46a; 199a-c /
judgement,   528c-d;   542b-543c;  570b-572b  esp  571c-572a  53  James:
Psychology,  144a-145a;  167b; 311b312b [fn 1]; 450a-451b; 453a-459b esp
453a-b,  456a 4b. The object of sense-perception: the evident particular
fact;  judgments  of  perception  and  judgments  of experience 7 Plato:
Phaedo,  224a-225a;  231c-232a  /  Republic, bk vi, 383d-388a / Timaeus,
447b-c;  457d  /  Theaetetus,  517b-536a  /  Sophist,  568b 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 19 b2o-ioob 5] 136a-d / Topics, bk ii, ch
8
[99
[ii4 ai8-26] 159d-160a
/ Physics, bk i, ch 5
[i88b26-i89a9] 264b-c
/ Heat/ens, bk hi, ch 7 [306*1-18] 397b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98i b io-i3] 499d-500a; bk
iv, ch 5
[ioo9b i17] 528d-529a; [ioiob i-iou a2] 530a-c; bk xi,
ch 7
[1064^-9] 592b
/ Soul, bk ii, ch 5
[4i7b i8-28] 648b-c; bk hi, ch
ii [434^6-22] 667a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io98 a34-b8]
343d-344a; bk vi, ch 8
[1 142^3-31] 391b-c
17  Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr i, ch 7 3d-4a / Fourth Ennead, tr vi, ch
1-2 189b-190b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10 15b-d; bk iv, par
15-17 23a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 12, a 4, ans and rep
3 53b-54c; q 14, a ii, ans and rep 1-2 84c-85c; a 12, ans 85d-86d; q 17,
a  2 102a-d; q 18, a 2, ans 105c-106b; q 57, a i, rep 2 295a-d; a 2, ans
295d-297a; q 59, a i, rep 1 306c-307b; q 75, a 5, ans 382a-383b; q 76, a
2,  rep 4388c-391a; q 77, a 5, rep 3 403d404c; q 79, a 6, ans 419b-420d;
q  85,  a  i,  ans  451c-453c;  a  6,  ans  458d-459c  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 3 8b-9a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  49a-d;  part  hi, 172b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 332a-333c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  53b  /  Meditations,  11, 80c-81d; vi
96b-103d passim / Objections and Replies, 229d-230d

[757a]
4r  to  4d Chapter 84: SENSE 723 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop ii-i6
377b380d  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix,  sect 8-io
139b-140b;  bk  iv,  ch  ii,  sect 14 312b-d; ch hi, sect 2 313a; sect 5
313c; sect 14 316b-d; sect 21 319c; ch xi-354c358c esp sect 13 357d-358a
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  18  416b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
16d-17d;  108a-d;  115bc  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 445d-446a 53 James:
Psychology,  150b-151b;  184b  185b;  363b-364a;  453a-457a;  472b-479a;
502a504a;   506a-507a;   564a-b;   569b-570a;  606b610b  esp  608b-609a;
867a-868b esp 868a-b 54 Freud: Unconscious, 430c / Ego and Id, 702d-703a
4c.  The  relation  of  sense  and  the  sensible:  the  subjectivity or
objectivity of sense-qualities 7 Plato: Theaetetus, 517b-520b b35~8a i2]
12d8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[7
13a / Physics, bk vii, ch 2
[244b i-245 a i2]
328b-d;  ch 3 329a-330d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5 [ioiob30-ion a2] 530c
/ Soul, bk ii, ch 5 647b-648d; ch ii
[423b27]-CH
12
[424*24]
655c-656a; bk hi, ch 2 657d-659c; ch 4
[429*10-29] 661 b-c; ch 8 664b-d / Sense and
the  Sensible  673a-689a,c  /  Dreams,  ch 2 [459* 23-460^2] 703a-704b 9
Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[648b i5-i8] 173a/ Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[1 174^5ii75 a3] 429a-b
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties, bk i, ch 2, 167d 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  ii [730-864] 24b-26a; [1002-1022] 27d-28a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 14, a 2, ans 76d-77d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl,  Q82,  A3,  ANs971a-972d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
49a-d; 57b; 59d; part hi, 172b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 285b-292d passim 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  19a-c  / Meditations, vi, 100a / Objections and
Replies, 162d-165a; 228c-229c; 231a-b 34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 428a-b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch viii 133b-138b passim; ch xxi,
sect  3  178d;  sect  75 200b-d; ch xxiii, sect 7-13 205d-208b; sect 37,
214a-b;  ch  xxx,  sect  2 238bc; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; ch xxxii, sect
14-16 245c-246b; bk iv, ch ii, SECTii-14 311c-312d; ch in, sect 6, 314b;
sect  11-14  315d-316d;  sect 28 322a-c; ch iv, sect 4 324c; ch xi, sect
4-9 355b-357a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 1-91 413a-431a esp sect
3  413c-d,  sect  8-15 414c416a, sect 48-49 422a-b, sect 56-57 423c424a,
sect  73  427b-c,  sect  76-78 427d-428b, sect 86-91 429c-431a; sect 102
432d-433a

[757b]
2  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect xii, div 1 17-123 504a-506a 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 23a-24a; 29d-33d esp 30d-31a, 31d-32a, 32d-33b
[fn
1];  88b-89c; 101b-102a; 115b-c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385a-c 50
Marx:  Capital,  31c-d  53  James  :  Psychology,  98b-105a;  127b-128a;
150a151a;  176b-177a;  459a-479a  esp 459a-b, 471b473a, 479a; 851b-852a;
860a-b  4d. The limit, accuracy, and reliability of sensitive knowledge:
the  fallibility  of  the senses 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-225a; 231c-232a /
Republic,  bk  vi-vii,  386d-398c  /  Theaetetus, 534d-535c / Statesman,
594d-595c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 31 120a-c / Topics,
bk  v,  ch  3  [13^19-36]  182bc / Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 3
[3i8b  19-24]  415c  /  Metaphysics,  bk iv, ch 5 [ioiob 15-29] 530b-c /
Soul, bk h, ch 6
[418*6-18]
648d-649a;  bk hi, ch 3 [427^-14] 659d-660a / Sense and the Sensible, ch
4 [442b4~9] 680a-b 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 23
[73i a3o-b5]271c-d
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i [693-700] 9c; bk iv [324-521]
48c-51a esp [469-521] 50b51a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr viii 64c-65c
/  Fifth Ennead, tr v, ch i 2 28b29c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,ch
18  523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 2 102a-d; q 85,
a 6, ans 458d-459c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii [46-57] 108b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  285c-292d 28 Harvey: Circulation ofthe Blood, 320b;
322d323d;  324c-d / On Animal Generation, 332a333c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, 51c-d; 57d58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 10 107d; aph 14-17
107d-108a;  aph  41  109c-d; aph 50 111b; bk 11, aph 6 139b-c; aph 39-40
169d173d; aph 44, 175d 31 Descartes: Rules, viii, 13a-b; xn, 18c; 22c23a
/  Discourse,  part  iv,  53b / Meditations, 1 75a-77c; 111, 83d-84a; vi
96b-103d  esp  103a-d  /  Objections  and  Replies,  postulate  i  130d;
206c-207a; 229d-230d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 16, corol 2 380d;
prop 24-28 383c-384c; prop 29, corol 384d-385a; prop 40, schol 2-prop 41
388a-c 32 Milton -.Paradise Lost, bk v [544-576] 187a-b; bk viii
[1 14-130] 234b-235a
33  Pascal: Pensees, 9 173b; 83 188b-189a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,ch  xxiii,  sect  11-13 206d-208b; ch xxx, sect 2 238bc; ch xxxi,
sect  2  239b-d;  ch  xxxii, sect 14-16 245c-246b; bk iv, ch ii, sect 14
312b-d; ch iv, sect 4 324c; ch xi, sect 3-9 355a-357a

[758a]
(4.  The  character of sensitive knowledge. Ad. The limit, accuracy, and
reliability  of  sensitive knowledge: the fallibility of the senses.) 35
Berkeley:   Human   Knowledge,   intro,   sect   i  405a-b;  sect  14-15
415c-416a;sECT27418a-b;  sect  40  420b;  sect 86-88 429c-430b; sect 101
432c-d; sect 135-142 440a-441c passim 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
iv,  div  29  461a-d;  sect  xii,  div  1 17-123 504a-506a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  27b-33d  esp  29d-30c; 108a-despl08d [fn 1] / Practical Reason,
337a-c  /Judgement,  603b-d  49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 96c 53 James:
Psychology, 125a-126a; 400a-405a; 460a-471a esp 469a-b; 508a; 544a-545b;
589b625a   esp   589b-590a,   593a-595a,   606b-610b,   625a  54  Freud:
Interpretation  of Dreams,  383b-c  4d(l) The erroneous interpretation of
sensedata:  the  problem  of  judgments  based  on  sensation  7  Plato:
Republic,  bk  x, 431c-d / Theaetetus, 538d-541a 8 Aristotle: Generation
and  Corruption, bk i, ch 3 [3i8b i9-3i] 415c-d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch
5
[ioo9b i-i7]
528d-529a; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b34-io63 a
9] 591a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch 6
[418*14-18] 648d-649a; bk hi, ch
i
[425*30b3] 65 7c; ch 3 [428
15  18-24]  661a  /  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch 4 [442^-9] 680a-b 12
Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk iv [324-468] 48c-50b; [1149-1170] 59a-b
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 2 102a-d; q 85, a 6, ans
458d-459c   29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i,  50b-52d  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  58b  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xn,  22c-23a  /
Meditations,  in,  83d-84a  / Objections and Replies, 229d230d 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bkii,ch xxxii, sect 19-26 247a-248b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect xii, div 117, 504bc 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 108a-d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  13c-d  53  James:  Psychology,  Ilia;  460a-469a esp
462b463b, 468b-469a; 508a; 568b-570a;589b-595a esp 589b-590a, 593a-595a;
617a-625a  esp  618b-620a Ad{2) Error in sense-perception: illusions and
hallucinations  7  Plato:  Theaetetus,  520c-522b  8  Aristotle:  Dreams
702a-706d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[648b i5-i8] 173a
12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk iv [324-336] 48c; [722-748] 53d-54a
14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Brutus,  816d-817c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr
viii 64c-65c

[758b]
724  THE  GREAT IDEAS Ad(l) to 5 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
17,  a 2, ans 102a-d; q 85, a 6, ans 458d-459c; q in, a 4, ans 571b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 82, a 3, ans 971a-972d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 50d-52b; part hi, 172b-d; 174b; 189d-190a;
part  iv,  249d; 258b-d; 261a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 50b-52d
30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph 50 111b / New Atlantis, 213d 31
Descartes: Rules, xii, 22c-23a / Meditations, 1, 75c-d; vi, 101d-102d 34
Newton:  Optics,  bk  1,  384b-385b;  434a-435a;  443a  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,   bk  ii.ch  xxix,  sect  3  234b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human
Knowledge,  sect  14,  415d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 234b-236b 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  13c-d  53  James:  Psychology, 132a-139a; 248b-249b;
264b-269a;  462b-469a  esp 462b-465a, 468a469a; 475a-477b; 508a-520a esp
508a;   521a522a;   527a-538b;  545a-b;  565a-b;  601a-606a;  610b-625a;
662a-663a  [fn 1]; 747b [fn 3]; 780a785a; 786a-787b [fn 1]; 842b-847b 54
Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  3a-d  / Hysteria,
31b-38d   passim,   esp   31b-d,   36b-d;   102a-106c  esp  104d-105d  /
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  148d-149a;  149d150d; 337a-d; 353d-356b esp
354c-355b,  356a-b  / General Introduction, 472a-c / Ego and Id, 700c 5.
The  contribution of the senses to scientific or philosophical knowledge
7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-225a; 228a-230c / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383d-398c /
Timaeus,  455b-c  /  Theaetetus,  534d-536b / Seventh Letter, 809c810d 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46*1828] 64a / Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 13
[78b3i-79ai6]
108b-c;  ch 18 110b-c; ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c / Physics,
bk 1, ch 1 259a-b; ch 8
[191*24-34] 267a-b
/ Heavens, bk hi, ch 7
[306*6-18]
397b-c  /  Generation  and  Corruption,  bk  i,  ch 2 [316*514] 411c-d /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch i [980*20982*1] 499a-500b; bk xi, ch 7
[1064*4-9]
592b  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  1  [402b i 1-403*2] 631d632a / Sense and the
Sensible, ch i [436^3437*17] 673c-674a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk
hi, ch 4
[666*7-10] 193d / Generation of Animals, bk
hi,  ch  10 [760^8-32] 301d-302a / Ethics, bk ii, ch 2 [1104*14-15] 349c
10  Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 1-8 la3b / Aphorisms, sect i, par
1  131a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 9, ans 8d-9c; q 84,
aa  6-8 447c-451b; q 87, a i, ans 465a-466c; q 89, a 5, ans 477a-478b; q
91, a 3, rep 1-3 486b-487d; q 96, a i,

[759a]
5  to 5a Chapter 84: SENSE 725 rep 3 510b-511b; part i-ii, q 3, a 3, ans
624b-625a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 3
8b-9a;  part  hi, q 9, a 4 766b-767b; Q12, A3, REP2 778b-779a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  54b-c;  J&srbT  part  11, 129a; part iv, 267a-b 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   260c-261c;   285c-288a;   291b-292d  28  Gilbert:
Loadstone,  pref,  la-b;  bk  i,  6a-7a;  BKii,27b-c 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences,  first  day,  131a138b  passim 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart,
267b,d-268d;  280c  /  Circulation  of the Blood, 322d-323d; 324c-d / On
Animal  Generation, 331b-335c; 411c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
5b-c;  16a; 34b; 44c; 50c-51d; 57b-d / Novum Organum 105a-195d esp bk i,
aph  64  114b,  aph  95-103  126b-128a,  bk  ii,  aph 38-43 169c-175c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  11,  2d-3a;  vn,  10c-12a; xii, 22c-23a; 24a-b; xiv,
28d-33b  /  Discourse,  part iv, 53b; part vi, 61d-62c / Meditations, 1,
75b-76c;  vi,  97a-103d  /  Objections  and  Replies, 128d-129a; 215b-c;
217c-d;  229d-230d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol 2 388a-b
34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  rule iii-iv 270b271b / Optics, bk in,
543a-b  34  Huygens: Light, ch i, 553a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  i, sect 24 127b-c; ch xxiii, sect 3 204c-d; sect 6-7 205b-206a;
sect  28-29  211b-212a;  sect  32-37 212c-214b; bk hi, ch xi, sect 21-23
304d-305b;  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  sect  14 316b-d; sect 16 317ac; sect 25-29
321a-323a passim; ch vi, sect 13 335c-d; ch xii, sect 9-13 360d-362d; ch
xvi,  sect 12 370b-371a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 30 418c; sect
58-59  424a-b;  sect  104  433a-b;  sect  107  433d-434a  35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  iv,  div  20-sect v, div 38 458a-466c passim; sect
vii,  div 48, 471b-c; div 60 477a-c; sect viii, Div65,479b-c;sECTXi, div
m-113  501b-502d  esp  div  112  501c-502a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 5a-13d;
14a-c;  15c-16c;  31b-d;  46a-b; 58a-b; 66d-67b; 68a-69c; 85ab; 86d-87b;
94b-95a;  211c-218d  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253a-254d esp
253a-c,  254b-c;  263b-c;  273a-b  /  Practical  Reason, 295b-d; 312c-d;
329d-330c;  331a-332d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 387a-b 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  445b-447a passim; 475b,d[fni] 45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry, pref, lc2b; 6d-7a,c; part hi, 87b-c 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity, 774d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 3, 10a-lla /
Philosophy of History, intro, 156c190b

[759b]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 684a 53 James: Psychology,
385a-b;  647b-648b; 677b; 851a-884b esp 860b-861a, 862a-865a, 867a, 884b
54   Freud:   Narcissism,   400d-401a   /  Instincts,  412ab  /  General
Introduction,  545b-d  /  Ego  and Id, 701d / New Introductory Lectures,
815a; 879c 5a. Sensation as the source or occasion of ideas: the role of
memory   or   reminiscence;  the  construction  of  complex  ideas;  the
abstraction of universal concepts 7 Plato: Phaedo, 228a-230d / Republic,
bk vii, 392b-393b / Timaeus, 455a-c / Theaetetus, 538d-541a 8 Aristotle:
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 19 136a-137a,c /
Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 1 [980*20-981*13] 499a-c / Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[403*2-15] 632a-b; bk
hi, ch 7
[43i a i4]-cH
8
[432*14] 663d-664d
/  Memory  and  Reminiscence,  ch  i [449^0-450*25] 690c691a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 55, a 2, rep 2 289d-290d; q 75, a 2, rep 3
379c380c; a 3, rep 2 380c-381b; q 79, aa 3-5 416a-419b; q 84, a 2, rep i
442b-443c;  a 6 447c-449a; q 85, a 1 451c-453c; part i-ii, q 2, a 6, rep
2  619d-620d; q 29, a 6, ans 748b749a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  12,  a  2,  ans  777b-778b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv
[28-48]  Ilia  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 49a; 52b-c; 54a-c; part iv,
262a-b  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 105c 28 Harvey: Circulation of the
Blood, 305a / On Animal Generation, 332a-335c 31 Descartes: Rules, viii,
13a; 14b; xii, 18b-c / Discourse, part ii, 47c-d; part iv, 53b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch  i,  sect  15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch i-iii
121a-129b esp ch 1, sect 1-8 121a-123a, sect 20-25 126d127d, ch 11, sect
2  128a-b;  ch vii, sect 10 133a-b; ch ix, sect 15 141a; ch xi, sect 4-9
144d-145c;  ch  xi,  sect  15-CH  xii,  sect 2 146d-147d; ch xii, sect 8
148c-d;  ch  xiii, sect 2 149a; sect 4-6 149b-d; sect 27 154c-d; ch xiv,
sect  27 160d-161a; sect 30-31 161c162a; ch xvi, sect 1-2 165c-d; sect 5
166bc;  ch  xvii,  sect  3  168b;  sect 5 168d-169a; ch xvii, sect 22-cH
xviii,  sect  i  173d-174a;  ch  xviii,  sect  6 174c-d; ch xxii, sect 2
201a-b; sect 9 202c-203a; ch xxiii, sect i 204a-b; sect 3 204c-d; sect 9
206bc;  sect 15 208c-d; sect 29 211d-212a; sect 32-37 212c-214b; ch xxv,
sect  9  216d;  sect  ii 217a; ch xxx, sect 3 238c-d; ch xxxii, sect 6-8
244b-d;  sect 12 245b-c; bk hi, ch i, sect 5 252b-c; ch ii, sect 3 253c;
ch  hi,  sect  6-9 255c-256c; ch iv, sect 12-14 262b-263a; ch vi, sect 9
270d-271a; sect 28-47 276a-

[760a]
(5.  The  contribution  of  the  senses  to  scientific or philosophical
knowledge. 5a. Sensation as the source or occasion of ideas: the role of
memory   or   reminiscence;  the  construction  of  complex  ideas;  the
abstraction  of  universal  concepts.) 282b esp sect 46-47 281d-282b; ch
xi,  sect  21-23 304d-305b; bk iv, ch iv, sect 11-12 326b-d 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect  6-16 405d-409d passim; sect i 413a-b 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  ii 455b457b esp div 13-14 455d-456b;
sect  vii,  div 49 471c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23a-24a; 45b-46a / Fund.
Prin.   Metaphysic  of  Morals,  281c-282c  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of
Chemistry, pref, lc-2a 53 James: Psychology, 171b-175a;' 302b; 327a331b;
405b-407a; 455a-b; 480a-484a; 540a635a esp 547a-550b, 551b-552a, 561a-b,
584a-b,  593a-595a,  626a-628a,  630b-631a,  632b-635a;  787a  54 Freud:
Interpretation of Dreams, 353d-354a; 367c / Unconscious, 442b-443d / Ego
and  Id,  700a-701d  5b.  Sense-experience as the origin of inductions 8
Aristotle:  Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  30  [46*1828] 64a / Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch 18 110b-c; bk 11, ch 2
[90*24-30] 123b-c; ch
19  136a137a,c / Physics, bk i, ch 8 [191*24-34] 267a-b / Generation and
Corruption,  bk  i,  ch  2  [316*514]  411c-d  / Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
499a-500b  /  Soul,  bk  1, ch 1 [402b i 1-403*2] 631d-632a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io98 a34-b8]
343d-344a; bk vi, ch 8
[ii42 a i2-3i] 391b-c;
ch 11 [ii43a25-b 5] 392d-393a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
51, a 1, ans 12b-13c 28 Harvey: Motion ofthe Heart, 273c-d / Circulation
of  the  Blood,  322d-323d; 324c-d / On Animal Generation, 332a-335c esp
334c-d;  473a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 16a; 34b; 43d-44c /
Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph n-17 107d-108a; aph 19 108b; aph 22 108c; bk
ii,  aph  38-43 169c-175c 31 Descartes: Rules, vn, 10c-12a; xiv, 28a-b /
Discourse, part vi, 61d-62c / Objections and Replies, 167c-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part ii, prop 40, schol 1-2 387b-388b 34 Newton: Principles, bk
hi,  rule  iii-iv  270b271b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  107
433d-434a  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  hi,  div  19, 458a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  341c-342b 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
659a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 361a-b

[760b]
726  THE  GREAT IDEAS 5b to 5c 53 James: Psychology, 862a-865a 54 Freud:
Instincts, 412a 5c. The dependence of understanding or reason upon sense
for  knowledge  of  particulars:  verification by appeal to the senses 7
Plato: Republic, bk ix, 421a-422b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 8
[191*24-34]
267a-b; bk vii, ch 3 [247^-7] 330b / Heavens, bk 1, ch 3
[27ob i-i3] 361c-d; bk
hi, ch 7
[306*1-18] 397b-c / Generation and Corruption,
BK I, CH 2 [316*5-14] 411C-d / Soul, BK I, CH I
[402b
i  1-403*2]  631d-632a; bk hi, ch 8 [432*29] 664c 9 Aristotle: Motion of
Animals, ch i [698*1015] 233a / Generation of Animals, bk hi, ch 10
[760^8-32] 301d-302a
/ Ethics, bk ii, ch 7
[1107*27-32]
352d-353a; ch 9
[uo9b20-23]
355c; bk x, ch i
[ii72*34-b
7] 426b; ch 8
[1179*17-22] 433d-434a / Politics, bk vii, ch
1
[^3
a33-b  7]  527b  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  hi,  ch 2, 199d 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk i [418-448] 6b-c; [690-704] 9c; bk iv
[469-521]  50b-51a  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk viii, ch 7 269c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 11 84c-85c; q 32, a i, rep 2
175d-178a;  q  57,  a  2  295d-297a;  q  84, aa 7-8 449b-451b; q 86, a 1
461c-462a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 85d; part hi, 165a; part iv,
249b-250a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 260c-261c; 285c-286a; 287b;291b-292d 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, third day, 200a-b 28 Harvey: Motion of the
Heart,  268d;  273c;  286b-c;  295d-296a  /  Circulation  of  the Blood,
322d-323d;  324c-d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  331b-335c;357b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 57d-58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 50 111b; aph
70  116b-117a;  bk ii 137a-195d passim 31 Descartes: Discourse, part vi,
61d-62c;  66a-b  /  Meditations,  1  75a-77c/  Objections  and  Replies,
229d-230d  34  Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule iii-iv 270b271b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch iv, sect 6 131a; bk iv, ch xii, sect 13
362c-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect x, div 86 488d-489b; sectxi,
div  uo501a-b;  sectxii,  div  132 509a-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 85d-93c;
114d-115a;  146a149d; 153a-c; 231b-c / Practical Reason, 337a-c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  461c-d;  463c-d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 129a 45 Faraday:
Researches in Electricity, 774d-775a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
ii,  684a  53  James: Psychology, 307a; 456a; 647b-648b esp 648b [fn 1];
655a'; 863a-865a; 881a-b 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 819d-820a;
879c

[761a]
6.  The role of sense in the perception of beauty: the beautiful and the
pleasing  to sense; sensible and intelligible beauty 7 Plato: Symposium,
167a-d  /  Republic,  bk  v^  370d-373c;  bk vi, 385c-386c / Theaeteius,
513a-b;535c  9  Aristotle:  Parts  of  Animals,  bk i, ch 5 [645 s 4-26]
168d-169a/ Ethics, bk hi, ch 10 [m8 aib7] 364c-365a; bk x, ch 4
[ii74b i5-H75 a
3]  429a-b;  ch 5 429d-430d / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2 [i405b i7-2o] 656a /
Poetics, ch 7 [i45ob341451*6] 685b-c 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv, ch
11  240d242d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr vi 21a-26a / Fifth Ennead, tr
viii  239b-246c / Sixth Ennead, tr vii, ch 30-34 336b-338d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  x,  par 38 81a / City of God, bk viii, ch 7 269c-d; bk
xxii,  ch  19,  605b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 4 625b-c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  5, a 4, rep 1 25d-26c; q 91, a 3, rep 3
486b487d;  part  i-ii,  q  27,  a  i,  rep  3  737b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part ii-ii, q CROSS-REFERENCES For: Discussions relevant to
the controversy over the distinction between sense and reason or

[761b]
Chapter  84: SENSE 727 180, a 2, rep 3 608c-609c; part hi suppl, q 82, a
1,  rep  5  968a-970c;  q 91, aa 3-4 1020d1023d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, xxx
[1936] 152a
27  Shakespeare:  Sonnets,  liv  594c;  lxix  596d;  xciii-xcv 600b-d 28
Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  first  day,  175a176c  29  Cervantes: Don
Quixote, part ii, 381d-382a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 23d
[fn
1]  /  judgement, 476a-479d; 482b-483d; 492b-495a,c; 501b502d; 506a-511a
esp  508b-c;  537a-539d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 220b-c;
part  11, 266a-267a; part hi, 304a; part iv, 346d-347a 47 Goethe: Faust,
part ii
[11,288-303] 274b275a
48  Melville:  Moby Dic{, 307b-308b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 95a- d
esp  95d / Descent of Man, 301c-302a; 451b; 568d-569b; 577b; 595d-596a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  hi,  53c54b 53 James: Psychology,
157a;  755a-758a  esp  755b  54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents,
775b-c

[762a]
728   THE   GREAT  IDEAS  I.  Augustine.  Answer  to  Skeptics  Aquinas.
Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De  Anima,  a  13 Descartes. The Principles of
Philosophy,  part  i,  45-46,  48,  66-70;  part 11, 3; part iv, 189-198
Hobbes. Concerning Body, part iv, ch 25, 29 Berkeley. An Essay Towards a
New Theory of Vision . Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous Hume.
A  Treatise  of Human  Nature,  bk  i, part hi, sect v-vii Kant. De Mundi
Sensibilis  {Inaugural  Dissertation)  Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind,
1—in  W. James. Some Problems of Philosophy, ch 4-6 II. Theophrastus. On
the  Senses  Epicurus.  Letter  to  Herodotus  Cicero.  Academics Sextus
Empiricus.  Outlines  of Pyrrhonism Albertus Magnus. De Sensu et Sensato
R.  Bacon. Opus Majus, part v John of Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus
Thomisticus,  Philosophia  Naturalis, part iv, qq 4-8 Malebranche. De la
recherche  de  la  verite,  bk  i,  ch  5-9, 10 (2, 4-6), 12-15, 17-20 .
Dialogues  on  Metaphysics  and  Religion,  iv-v  Leibnitz.  New  Essays
Concerning  Human  Understanding,  bk 11, ch 2-9 . Monadology, par 10-18
Condillac.  Treatise  on  the  Sensations  Voltaire.  "Sensation,"  in A
Philosophical Dictionary T. Reid. An Inquiry into the Human Mind

[762b]
For:  The relation of sense to emotion and will, and for the distinction
between  the  sensitive  and  the  rational  appetite, see Desire 30(1);
Emotion  i; Good and Evil 4a; Memory and Imagination id; Will 20(2). The
comparison  of  sensitive  with  other forms of knowledge, see Knowledge
6b(i)-6b(3);  and  for the problem of truth and falsity in sensation and
sense-perception, see Memory and Imagination 2e(4), 5c; Principle 2b(i);
Truth  3a(i)~3a(2).  The  contribution  of sense to thought, and for the
role  of  sense in theories of reminiscence, induction, and abstraction,
see  Experience  3b,  4b;  Idea  2b,  2f-2g;  Induction  2;  Memory  and
Imagination  3a,  3c,  6c-6d;  Mind  ia(2);  Reasoning ic; Universal and
Particular 4c. The role of sense in the perception of beauty, see Beauty
4-5; Pleasure and Pain 4c(i). ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works
not  included  in  Great  Boofe ofthe Western World, but relevant to the
idea  and  topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided
into  two  groups:  For  the date, place, and other facts concerning the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great Ideas. T. Reid.
Essays  on the Intellectual Powers of Man, 11 Schopenhauer. The World as
Will  and Idea, vol 11, sup, ch 1-4 Brown. Lectures on the Philosophy of
the  Human  Mind, vol 1, pp 417-548; vol ii, pp 90-152 J. Mill. Analysis
of  the  Phenomena  of  the  Human  Mind,  ch i W. Hamilton. Lectures on
Metaphysics  and Logic, vol 1 (21-28) Bain. The Senses and the Intellect
Fechner.   Elemente   der   Psychophysi\   Whewell.  On  the  Philosophy
of Discovery,  ch  19-21 Helmholtz. Treatise on Physiological Optics . On
the  Sensation of Tone as a Physiological Basisfor the Theory of Music .
Popular  Lectures on Scientific Subjects, vi Herschel. Familiar Lectures
on  Scientific  Subjects, IX E. Hartmann. Philosophy of the Unconscious,
(b)  VIII  Lotze.  Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2 Galton. Inquiries into Human
Faculty  and  Its  Development  (Sensitivity,  Sequence of Test Weights,
Whistles  for  Audibility of Shrill Notes, Appendices c, d, e) Mach. The
Analysis  of  Sensations  Bradley.  Appearance and Reality, bk i, ch 1,5
Bergson.  Matter  and  Memory,  ch  4  Wundt. Principles of Physiological
Psychology,  parti  .  Outlines  of  Psychology,  (6,  8-1 1) Woodworth.
Psychological  Issues,  ch  5  McTaggart. The Nature of Existence, ch 35
Moore. Philosophical Studies, ch 2, 5, 7 Broad. Perception, Physics, and
Reality, ch 4 . The Mind and Its Place in Nature, ch 4

[763a]
Broad.  Scientific  Thought,  part  ii  Parsons.  An Introduction to the
Theory  of Perception  B.  Russell.  Our Knowledge of the External World,
m-iv  . Mysticism and Logic, ch 8 . The Analysis of Mind, lect 7-8 . The
Analysis  of  Matter,  ch i 5-26 Adrian. The Basis of Sensation Koehler.
Gestalt  Psychology,  ch  5  Whitehead.  Process  and  Reality,  part hi
Lovejoy. The Revolt Against Dualism Powys. In Defence of Sensuality

[763b]
Chapter 84: SENSE 729 Dewey. "Appearing and Appearance," "A Naturalistic
Theory  of  Sense  Perception,"  "Perception  and  Organic  Action,"  in
Philosophy  and  Civilization  Price.  Perception  Boring.  The Physical
Dimensions  of  Consciousness,  ch  2-8  Hartshorne.  The Philosophy and
Psychology of Sensation Koffka. Principles of Gestalt-Psychology Straus.
Vom Sinn der Sinne Blanshard. The Nature of Thought, ch 1-6

[764a]
INTRODUCTION  A  SIGN  points to something. A symbol stands for or takes
the place of another thing. Sign and symbol are sometimes differentiated
according  to  whether  emphasis is placed on that which is signified or
pointed  out,  or  on that which functions as a surrogate or substitute.
Yet  "sign"  and  "symbol"  are  often used interchangeably. We call the
notations  of  music  or mathematics either "signs" or "symbols." Words,
too,  are  traditionally  spoken of as signs or symbols. Words and other
conventional  notations  for  expressing meaning both point to and stand
for  something  else.  It is only in certain cases that one of these two
functions  seems  to  predominate,  as  the  road  marker points out the
direction to take, and paper money takes the place of the precious metal
whose value it represents. On what is common to signs and symbols of all
sorts  there  seems  to  be  no disagreement throughout the tradition of
western  thought.  From  Augustine's  statement  that "a sign is a thing
which,  over  and  above  the  impression it makes on the senses, causes
something else to come into mind as a consequence of itself," to Freud's
analysis  of the symbolism of dreams, of symptoms, and symptomatic acts,
the  great  books consider sign or symbol as one term in a relation, the
relation  being  one  of  meaning  or,  as Freud says, of "significance,
intention,  tendency."  The fundamental problems traditionally discussed
concern  the  nature  of  meaning itself, and the modes of signification
which vary with the kinds of things that function as signs and the kinds
of   things   they  signify.  With  respect  to  things  which  function
symbolically,  the  primary distinction seems to be that between natural
and   conventional  signs.  Augustine  at  first  suggests  a  threefold
division.

[764b]
Chapter 85: SIGN AND SYMBOL Some things are simply things, and not signs
at  all. Some (for example, "the ram which Abraham offered up instead of
his  son")  are  not  only things, but "also signs of other things." And
some  things,  such  as  words,  "are  never  employed except as signs."
Augustine adds that words are not merely signs. "Every sign," he writes,
"is  also  a  thing,  for  what  is  not a thing is nothing at all." The
distinction  between  natural  and  conventional signs falls within this
threefold  division.  "Natural signs," Augustine says, "are those which,
apart  from  any intention or desire of using them as signs, do yet lead
to  the  knowledge  of  something  else,  as, for example, smoke when it
indicates  fire.  For  it  is not from any intention of making it a sign
that  it is so, but through attention to experience we come to know that
fire  is  beneath,  even  when  nothing  but  smoke can be seen. And the
footprint  of  an  animal  passing  by  belongs to this class of signs."
Augustine  seems  to  find  natural  signs in things that are related as
cause  and  effect. Berkeley, on the other hand, tends to substitute the
relation  of  sign  and  thing  signified  for the relation of cause and
effect. "The fire which I see," he writes, "is not the cause of the pain
I  suffer  upon  my approaching, but the mark that forewarns me. In like
manner the noise that I hear is not the effect of this or that motion or
collision  of  the  ambient bodies, but the sign thereof." Every natural
thing  or event thus tends to become the sign of something else, so that
the  whole  of  nature constitutes a vast symbolism or language by which
God  informs us of his plan. Aristotle tends, in the opposite direction,
to limit natural signs to those things which, according to our knowledge
and  experience,  permit  a necessary or probable inference to something
else. The fact that a woman is giving milk 730

[765a]
he  regards as an infallible sign that she has lately borne a child; the
fact  that  a  man  is breathing fast is merely a probable and refutable
sign  that he has a fever. In any case, signs are generally acknowledged
to  be  natural if they satisfy Augustine's criterion that they were not
intentionally   devised   by   men   for   the  purpose  of  signifying.
"Conventional  signs,  on  the  other hand," he writes, "are those which
living  beings  mutually exchange for the purpose of showing, as well as
they  can,  the  feelings of their minds, or their perceptions, or their
thoughts."  Of  conventional signs, Augustine goes on to say, words hold
the  chief place, because everything which can be expressed by gestures,
or  by  such  non-verbal  symbols  as  flags or bugle calls, can also be
expressed in words, whereas many thoughts which words readily express do
not  lend themselves easily to other modes of expression. Except for the
hypothesis  (discussed  in the chapter on Language) of a natural form of
speech  common  to  all men and consisting of words perfectly adapted to
the  objects they name, it is never proposed that words are anything but
conventional signs. As Aristotle says, "nothing is by nature a noun or a
name—  it is only so when it becomes a symbol." The audible sound or the
visible  mark  becomes a symbol only by human institution or convention.
Yet  not  all  the  audible  sounds  which men and other animals make to
express  their  feelings  or  desires are, in Aristotle's opinion, to be
regarded  as  words.  "Inarticulate  sounds,  such as those which brutes
produce, are significant, yet none of these constitutes a noun." Nor are
such  cries,  whereby  one  animal calls another or communicates fear or
anger,  strictly  conventional signs; for, as Augustine points out, they
are  instinctive  modes  of  expression,  and so are natural rather than
conventional.  They  are  not  voluntarily  instituted.  In terms of the
ancient distinction between the conventional and the natural— that which
changes  from  time  to  time  and  place  to  place  and  that which is
everywhere and always the same—no one would question the conventionality
of  words  and of all other non-verbal symbols which are peculiar to one
people, one culture, or one epoch. That words are con-

[765b]
Chapter  85:  SIGN  AND  SYMBOL  731  ventional signs raises the central
problem  concerning  their  meaning  or significance. Utterly dissimilar
words  in  different  languages can have the same meaning, and identical
sounds  or marks in different languages can mean quite different things.
Since  the  sounds or marks which constitute spoken and written words do
not  possess  meaning  naturally,  from what source do such conventional
signs get the meanings they have ? The usual answer, given by Aristotle,
Locke,  and  others,  is  that  words get their meanings from the ideas,
thoughts,  or  feelings  which  men use them to express. "Spoken words,"
writes  Aristotle,  "are  the  symbols  of mental experience and written
words  are  the symbols of spoken words. Just as all men do not have the
same  writing,  so  all  men do not have the same speech sounds, but the
mental  experiences,  which  these  directly symbolize, are the same for
all,  as also are those things of which our experiences are the images."
In  addition  to  being able to make articulate sounds, it was necessary
for  man,  Locke  says,  to  "be  able  to  use these sounds as signs of
internal  conceptions,  and  to  make  them stand as marks for the ideas
within  his  own mind, whereby they might be made known to others." Thus
words  came  to  be used by men "as the signs of their ideas; not by any
natural connexion that there is between particular articulate sounds and
certain ideas, for then there would be but one language amongst all men;
but  by  a voluntary imposition, whereby such a word is made arbitrarily
the  mark of such an idea. The use then of words is to be sensible marks
of  ideas,  and  the ideas they stand for are their proper and immediate
signification."   Locke  goes  further.  Not  only  does  the  immediate
signification  of words lie in the ideas they stand for, but in his view
words  "can  be  signs  of nothing else." Yet he also considers the fact
that men, because they "would not be thought to talk barely of their own
imaginations, but of things as they really are . . . often suppose their
words   to  stand  also  for  the  reality  of  things."  Locke  thinks,
nevertheless,   that   "obscurity   and   confusion"   enter   into  the
signification  of  words  "whenever  we make them stand for anything but
those ideas we have in our own minds."

[766a]
732  THE  GREAT IDEAS But though the meaning of a word may come from the
idea  it signifies, the word which is thus made meaningful seems, in the
common  usage  of  mankind,  to serve as the name or designation of some
real  thing.  It refers to something other than ideas or concepts in the
human mind. Locke himself talks of "the application of names to things,"
and  in  his  consideration of the distinction between proper and common
names  is  concerned  to  point  out that, though they differ in meaning
{i.e.,  differ in the type of idea they signify), both refer to the same
sort  of reality— individual existences. Aristotle and other writers who
distinguish  between  things  in the order of nature and the concepts we
form  of  them,  tend  to  take both views of the significance of words.
Words signify the real things which they name as well as the ideas whose
meanings  they  express. If we waive for the moment the possibility that
some words may signify only ideas, whereas others signify both ideas and
things,  two  questions  may be asked. Are there any words which signify
things  alone  ?  What  is the relation between the idea and the thing a
word  signifies,  when  a word signifies them both; that is, when a word
has  both  sorts  of significance, how are they related to one another ?
Aquinas  answers the second question by saying that since "words are the
signs  of ideas, and ideas the similitudes of things, it is evident that
words function in the signification of things through the conceptions of
the  intellect."  Ideas  may  be the immediate or proximate object which
words signify, but through them words ultimately signify the real things
which  are themselves the objects of ideas. According to this theory, an
idea  may  be both the object signified by a word and the medium through
which  that  word  also  signifies  the thing of which we have the idea.
Aquinas  seems  to  think  that  ideas are always required as the medium
whereby words signify things. "We can give a name to anything," he says,
"only  insofar  as  we can understand it." Accordingly, it is impossible
for  words  to  signify  things directly, i.e., without the mediation of
ideas.  This  position  has  a  number of consequences for the theory of
signs  and  raises a number of issues. Augustine's statement that "every
sign

[766b]
is also a thing" has a different meaning when it is said of the sensible
things  which  also  happen  to  be  signs and of the things of the mind
—concepts   or   ideas—which   cannot   be   without  being  signs.  The
understanding  of  this difference helps to explain the relation between
verbal  signs  and  the  mental signs through which they signify or from
which  they  get their meanings. Whereas words are in the first instance
meaningless  marks  and  sounds  which  get meaning when men use them to
express  their  thoughts  or  feelings,  ideas  and  images  are at once
meaningful,  however  they  arise in the mind. They are natural signs in
the  sense that it seems to be their very nature to signify. They do not
get meaning. They do not even have meaning, in the way in which smoke as
a  natural  sign  of fire has a meaning which is distinct from, though a
consequence  of, its nature as smoke. An idea is a meaning, an intention
of the mind, as it is sometimes called, a reference to an object thought
about.  The  idea  of  fire  is  the meaning the word "fire" has when it
designates the natural phenomenon which that word is conventionally used
to  name; and as Aristotle suggests, the conventional signs of different
languages  [e.g.,  "fire" and "feuer"]—have the same meaning because the
idea  of  fire  is  the same, and the natural phenomenon experienced and
thought  about  is  the  same, for men of diverse tongues. That ideas or
mental  images  are  themselves  meanings  or intentions— the symbols of
things  thought  about—seems  to be recognized in different ways by many
writers  in  the tradition of the great books. In the Cratylus, Socrates
suggests  that  signs  should  be  like  the  things  they signify. Some
conventional  signs,  he thinks, are better than others in this respect.
He implies that all words are inferior to mental images, which, by their
very  nature,  imitate  or  resemble  their  objects. The act of memory,
according to Aristotle, requires a memory image which is "something like
an  impression or picture" of the thing remembered. If the memory image,
through  its resemblance to something once experienced, did not function
as  the  sign  of  that  absent  thing, memory would not be memory, for,
Aristotle argues, it would consist in beholding

[767a]
the  memory image itself, which is present, rather than the absent thing
it  stands  for.  Aquinas,  perhaps,  is the writer most explicit in his
treatment  of  images  and  ideas  as  in  their very nature meanings or
intentions  of  th^-rrrmd.  His  calling  them  "mental  words" seems to
indicate  that  in  his view they, like physical and sensible words, are
signs;  but  the  added  qualification  of  "mental"  also implies their
difference.  "The  vocal  sound  which has no signification," he writes,
"cannot be called a word; wherefore the exterior vocal sound is called a
word  from  the fact that it signifies the interior concept of the mind.
It  follows that, first and chiefly, the interior concept of the mind is
called a word." The mental word or concept suffices "when the mind turns
to  the  actual consideration of what it knows habitually," for then, he
adds,  "a  person  speaks  to  himself." But unlike angels, who can make
their  concepts known to one another immediately, men require the medium
of external speech. They must use sensible physical signs to communicate
their  thoughts.  Without referring to ideas as mental words, Locke does
appear  to identify ideas with meanings and to regard them as signs. The
definition  of a word, he says, is an attempt to make known "the meaning
or  idea  it  stands  for."  Denying  that the general and the universal
belong to the real existence of things, he holds that they "concern only
signs,  whether  words  or  ideas. Words are general . . . when used for
signs  of  general ideas . . . and ideas are general when they set up as
the  representatives of many particular things; but universality belongs
not  to  things  themselves,  which  are all of them particular in their
existence, even those words and ideas which, in their signification, are
general."  The  basic  issue  to  which  Locke  is addressing himself is
discussed  in  the chapter on Universal and Particular. Locke's solution
seems to involve the affirmation of abstract ideas, which are general or
universal  in  their significance and through which common names come to
have  a  different  sort  of  meaning  from the meaning of proper names.
"Ideas  become general by separating them from the circumstances of time
and  place,  and any other ideas that may determine them to this or that
particular existence." Common nouns like "man"

[767b]
Chapter  85:  SIGN  AND  SYMBOL  733  or  "cat"  become general in their
significance,  according  to  Locke, "by being made the signs of general
ideas." To the question of what kind of signification it is that general
words  have,  Locke replies: "As it is evident, that they do not signify
barely  one  particular thing; for then they would not be general terms,
but  proper  names; so, on the other side, it is as evident, they do not
signify  a plurality; for man and men would then signify the same. . . .
That,  then, which general words signify," Locke declares, "is a sort of
things,  and  each of them does that by being a sign of an abstract idea
in the mind." It seems to follow, therefore, that those who, like Hobbes
and  Berkeley,  deny  the  existence  of  abstract  ideas  or  universal
concepts,  must  offer  a different explanation of the meaning of common
nouns  or general names. "There being nothing in the world universal but
names,"  Hobbes  writes, a name is universal when it "is imposed on many
things  for  their  similitude  in  some  quality or other accident; and
whereas  a  proper  name  bringeth  to  mind one thing only, a universal
recalls  any one of those many." On similar grounds, Berkeley criticizes
Locke's theory of how words acquire general significance. His own theory
is that words become general "by being made the sign, not of an abstract
general  idea,  but  of  several  particular  ideas, any one of which it
indifferently suggests to the mind." And, in another place, he says that
"an  idea  which, considered in itself, is particular becomes general by
being  made  to represent or stand for all other particular ideas of the
same  sort."  He  does  not himself explain how we come by the notion of
"the  same  sort,"  or how one particular idea can represent the sort to
which  other particular ideas belong. But he rejects Locke's explanation
because it involves ideas which are not only general, but also abstract.
The  attempt  to  account  for  the  meaning  of  general  names  is, in
Berkeley's  view, the cause of Locke's acceptance of abstract ideas. "If
there  had  been no such thing as speech or universal signs," he writes,
"there  never [would have] been any thought of abstraction." Not only do
men  mistakenly suppose that "every name has, or ought to have, one only
precise and settled signification, which inclines [them]

[768a]
734  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  to think there are certain abstract, determinate
ideas  that constitute the true and only immediate signification of each
general  name";  but  they  also suppose that "it is by the mediation of
these abstract ideas that a general name comes to signify any particular
thing.  Whereas,  in truth," Berkeley concludes, "there is no such thing
as  one precise and definite signification annexed to any general name."
Where  Locke  would  say  that a common name gets its general meaning by
signifying  one  idea  which  itself  has general significance, Berkeley
reiterates  that a general name gets its meaning from "a great number of
particular ideas," all of which it signifies indifferently. The relation
of  words  to  ideas raises still other problems in the theory of signs,
problems  which  have  peculiar interest in the tradition of the liberal
arts.  One  of  these  problems  has  already  been mentioned. It is the
question  whether  some  words signify ideas alone, in contrast to words
which  signify  ideas  and,  through  them,  things.  This  suggests the
parallel  problem  of  words  which  signify words, in contrast to words
which  are  the  names  of  things.  In  his little tract Concerning the
Teacher,  Augustine  points  out  that  some  words,  such as "noun" and
"adjective,"  signify kinds of words, just as other words, such as "man"
and  "stone," signify kinds of things. Furthermore, in the sentence "man
is  a  noun," the word "man" signifies itself as the object referred to;
whereas  in  the sentence "man is an animal," the word "man" signifies a
living organism of a certain sort. The same word, therefore, may signify
both  itself  and  some thing other than itself. These differences which
Augustine  observes  in the signification of words come to be formulated
in  the  traditional distinction between the first and second imposition
of  words.  A  word  is  used in the first imposition when it is used to
signify things which are not words, as, for example, the word "man" when
it refers to a human being. A word is used in the second imposition when
it  is  applied  to  words rather than things, as, for example, the word
"noun"  said  of  "man,"  or  the word "man" when it is used to refer to
itself  in  the sentence "man is a noun." A parallel distinction is that
between words

[768b]
used  in the first and the second intention. When the word "man" is used
to  signify a living organism of a certain sort, it is used in the first
intention because it signifies a reality, not an idea. A word is said to
be  used in the second intention when it signifies an idea rather than a
thing.  For  example,  in  the  sentence,  "man  is a species," the word
"species"  signifies  a  logical  classification and so is in the second
intention; and the word "man" is also in the second intention because it
refers  to  the  idea  which is denominated a species. In some cases, an
idea  may  not  signify things at all, but only other ideas, such as the
logical  notions of genus and species. Words like "genus" and "species,"
unlike  the  words  "man" and "stone," can therefore be used only in the
second intention. The idea man is called a "first intention of the mind"
because  its  primary  function  is  to  signify  the living thing. Only
secondarily  does  it signify itself as an object able to be considered.
The  idea  species,  on  the  other hand, is called a "second intention"
because its sole function is to signify ideas which stand to other ideas
in  a certain relation. Hobbes concisely summarizes most of these points
when  he  points  out  that  some  words  "are  the  names of the things
conceived,"   whereas   "others   are  the  names  of  the  imaginations
themselves,  that  is to say, of those ideas or mental images we have of
all  the things we see and remember. And others again are names of names
...  as  'universal,' 'plural,' 'singular,' are the names of names." The
names which we apply to particular species and genera, such as "man" and
"animal,"  Aquinas says, "signify the common natures themselves, but not
the intentions of these common natures, which are signified by the terms
genus  or  species."  Another  traditional  distinction  in the modes of
signification  is  that  between intrinsic and extrinsic denomination. A
name  is  said  to  be an intrinsic denomination when it is applied to a
thing  in  order  to  signify  its nature or its inherent properties and
attributes,   as,  for  example,  when  we  call  a  thing  "animal"  or
"rational,"  "white"  or  "square."  A  name  is said to be an extrinsic
denomination when it is applied to a thing only in order to signify some
relation in which that thing stands to some-

[769a]
thing  else, as, for example, when we call sunshine "healthy" because it
helps  to  produce  healthy  organisms  or  when  we  apply the names of
animals,  such  as "pig" or "fox," to rnen_because we think the men bear
certain  resemblances  to  these  animals.  The same word can be used in
different   connections  both  as  an  intrinsic  and  as  an  extrinsic
denomination.  "Healthy" means an inherent quality when it is applied to
living  organisms,  and  a  causal relation to organic health when it is
applied  to  sunshine;  "pig"  means a certain kind of animal when it is
applied to the four-footed mammal, and only a resemblance to this animal
in certain characteristics when it is applied to men. This double use of
the  same  word  exemplifies  what  is  traditionally  called "equivocal
speech"  or  the  equivocal use of a name. Some writers tend to identify
equivocation   with  ambiguity,  on  the  ground  that  both  involve  a
multiplicity  of meanings for the same word. Others seem to think that a
word  is  used ambiguously only if its user is indefinite as to which of
its  several  meanings  he intends to express; but they hold that a word
can  be  used equivocally without ambiguity if its user makes plain that
he  is  employing it now in this sense, now in that. Aristotle says that
two  things  are named equivocally "when though they have the same name,
the  definition  corresponding  with the name differs for each"; and "on
the  other  hand, things are said to be named univocally which have both
the  name  and  the definition answering to the name in common." When we
call  a  man  and  a  pig an "animal," we are using that word univocally
because  we  are  using  it  with the same definition or meaning in both
cases;  but when we call a pig and a man a "pig," we are using that word
equivocally  because we are using it with different meanings, signifying
having  the  nature  of  a  pig  in one instance and being like a pig in
certain  respects in the other. Aristotle distinguishes several types of
equivocation,  of  which  we have already noted two. The use of the word
"healthy"   to   describe  an  animal  and  sunshine  is  that  type  of
equivocation  in  which  the  same  word  is  used  to  name an inherent
attribute  and also a cause of that attribute; in other instances of the
same  type,  it  might  be  used to name the nature or attribute and the
effect rather than the cause.

[769b]
Chapter  85:  SIGN AND SYMBOL 735 Speaking of a man and a pig as a "pig"
represents the metaphorical type of equivocation, in which the same word
is  used to name the nature of a thing and something else of a different
nature which has only a likeness to that nature. Metaphors, in turn, can
be divided into types. Some are based on a direct similitude between two
things  in  some  accidental respect, e.g., the man who is like a pig in
manner  of  eating.  Some,  Aristotle  says,  are  based on analogies or
proportions,  as,  for  example,  when we call a king the "father of his
people."   Here   the  metaphor  is  based  on  the  similarity  of  the
relationship  of a king to his subjects and of a father to his children.
The name "father" is used metaphorically when it is transferred from one
term  in  this  proportion  to  the  term  which  stands in an analogous
position.  A third kind of metaphor, according to Aristotle, consists in
the  use  of the same word now in a more generic, now in a more specific
sense,  or  with  broader  and  narrower  meanings.  Of this he gives an
example  in  the  Ethics  when he discusses general and special justice,
using  the word "justice" narrowly to signify one of the special virtues
and  broadly  to mean all the virtues considered in their social aspect.
There is a sense of the word "justice," he writes, in which it signifies
"not  part  of  virtue  but  virtue  entire";  "this  form of justice is
complete  virtue,  though  not  absolutely,  but only in relation to our
neighbor."  The  word "injustice" is also used in a correspondingly wide
sense.  But  there  is  "another  kind  of  injustice which is a part of
injustice  in  the  wide  sense." This "particular injustice," Aristotle
says,  "shares  the name and nature of the first, because its definition
falls  within  the  same  genus."  As  Aristotle  treats  this  type  of
equivocation  in  the  Rhetoric  and  the  Poetics,  it  includes  three
possibilities:  the  transfer  of  the  name  of  a  genus to one of its
species,  the  transfer  of  the name of a species to its genus, and the
transfer of the name of one species to another in the same genus. It may
be  questioned  whether this type of equivocation is properly classified
as  metaphorical, on Aristotle's own definition of metaphor as "giving a
thing   a  name  that  belongs  to  something  else."  In  the  type  of
equivocation exemplified by the use of the word "justice," now

[770a]
736  THE GREAT IDEAS with a generic and now a specific meaning, the name
does  not  seem  to  belong  to  the  genus any more than it does to the
species,  or conversely. In contrast, when the name "father" is given to
a king in relation to his people, the usage is metaphorical, because the
name  "father"  belongs  to  something  else,  i.e.,  the  man  who is a
progenitor.  The  same  point  can  be  made  in  terms of intrinsic and
extrinsic denomination. When "justice" is used as the name for the whole
of  virtue  (regarded  socially) and also for one particular virtue, the
word  is an intrinsic denomination in both instances. In all other types
of  equivocation,  the  equivocal  word is used once as an intrinsic and
once  as  an  extrinsic  denomination;  for  example,  as applied to the
animal,  the  word  "pig"  is  an  intrinsic  denomination, but it is an
extrinsic denomination when it is applied to a man in order to signify a
certain resemblance to the animal to which the name belongs. The same is
true  in  the  case  of  the  word "healthy" as said of an animal and of
sunshine.  In  all  these cases of equivocation, the two meanings of the
same word are not totally distinct. On the contrary, the two senses have
something  in  common.  One of the meanings seems to be derived from the
other;  one  appears  to  be  secondary (usually the one involved in the
extrinsic  denomination)  and  the  other primary. What is traditionally
called   "equivocation  by  chance,"  in  contrast  to  equivocation  by
intention,  is  the  extreme  case in which the same word is used in two
utterly  distinct  senses,  having  no common element of meaning at all;
e.g.,  the word "pen" used for a writing instrument and an enclosure for
animals. Equivocation by intention, in which the different meanings of a
word  have  something in common, thus appears to be intermediate between
equivocation  by  chance (in which the meanings share no common element)
and  univocal  usage (in which the meaning is exactly the same each time
the  word  is  used).  In the Physics, Aristotle seems to discover still
another  type of equivocation. "A pen, a wine, and the highest note in a
scale  are not commensurable," he writes. "We cannot say whether any one
of  them  is sharper than any other . . . because it is only equivocally
that the same term 'sharp' is applied to them." This

[770b]
does  not  seem to be equivocation by chance, for the word "sharp" seems
to have some common meaning as applied to the three objects which affect
the  diverse  senses  of  touch,  taste, and hearing; nor is it like all
other  cases of equivocation by intention, in that no one of these three
meanings  of "sharp" seems to be primary and the others derived from it.
Furthermore,  in  all  three  meanings,  the  word "sharp" is used as an
intrinsic denomination. In the Metaphysics, Aristotle also considers the
special  pattern  of meaning which words like "being" or "one" have when
they are applied to such heterogeneous things as substances, quantities,
qualities,  etc.  He  refers  to  these words as ambiguous or equivocal,
comparing  them  with  the  word  "healthy" as said of an animal, and of
other  things which either cause health or are effects of health. It may
be  questioned,  however,  whether  "being" is equivocal in the same way
that  "healthy"  is,  since  it  always  carries  the significance of an
intrinsic,  never  of  an  extrinsic  denomination.  "Being"  as said of
heterogeneous  things  seems  to  be  more  like "sharp" said of diverse
sensible qualities—having a meaning which remains somehow the same while
it is diversified in each case according to the diversity of the objects
to  which  it  applies.  These  considerations  of  the univocal and the
equivocal  sign, along with the treatment of ambiguity and intrinsic and
extrinsic  denomination,  indicate  the  extent  and manner in which the
great  books  anticipate the kind of analysis which in our time has come
to be called "semantics." The chapter on Language gives further evidence
of   the  fact  that  many  of  the  points  and  distinctions  made  in
contemporary  semantics  have  a  long  history  in the tradition of the
liberal  arts.  Furthermore,  as  the  chapter  on  Language  indicates,
contemporary  semantics cannot even claim novelty for its great interest
in  freeing  men  from  the tyranny of words or in serving as a critical
instrument  to  cut  through  the "vicious abstractions" of metaphysics.
Hobbes and Locke frequently dismiss theories not on the ground that they
are  false,  but  rather  because  they think that the statement of them
consists in so many meaningless words.

[771a]
In  the  tradition  of  the great books, the analysis of words and their
modes  of signification seems to be motivated by other interests as well
as  these.  The distinction between the univocal and the equivocal sign,
for  example,  is  considered  in its bearing on the logical problems of
definition  and  demonstration  as  well  as  for  the sake of proposing
remedies to safeguard discourse against ambiguity. It is also brought to
bear  upon the theological problem of the meaning of the names men apply
to  God  and  on  the  way  in  which they interpret the words of Sacred
Scripture.  The  problem of the names of God is discussed in the chapter
on  Same  and  Other  in  terms of the kind of likeness which can obtain
between  an  infinite  being  and  finite  creatures.  As there appears,
Aquinas  takes  the position that God and creatures are neither the same
in any respect, nor are they in all respects so diverse as to be utterly
incomparable.  Though  an  infinite  and  a finite being are in his view
incommensurable,  yet they can also have some sort of similitude— not an
unqualified  sameness, but the kind of similarity which can be described
as an intrinsically diversified sameness. Aquinas holds, therefore, that
no  names  can  be applied to God and creatures univocally, for "no name
belongs  to God in the same sense that it belongs to creatures." Nor, he
goes  on,  "are names applied to God and creatures in a purely equivocal
sense,"  for  it  would  follow then that "from creatures nothing at all
could  be  known  or  demonstrated about God," which supposition Aquinas
denies. Between these two extremes of the simply univocal and the purely
equivocal,  he finds a middle ground in a type of signification which he
calls "analogical." The meaning of an analogical name, he says, "is not,
as  it  is in univocals, one and the same; yet it is not totally diverse
as in equivocals." What he means by "pure equivocation" seems to be what
earlier  writers call "equivocation by chance," and what he means by the
"analogical"  seems  to  correspond  to  what they call "equivocation by
intention."  "Univocal  names  have  absolutely  the  same  meaning," he
writes, "while equivocal names have absolutely diverse meanings; whereas
in analogical, a name taken in one signification must be placed

[771b]
Chapter 85: SIGN AND SYMBOL 737 in the definition of the same name taken
in  other  significations; as, for instance, "being" which is applied to
substance is placed in the definition of "being" as applied to accident;
and "healthy" applied to animal is placed in the definition of "healthy"
as  applied to urine and medicine." But, as we have seen, there are many
types  of equivocation by intention— the attributive, based on cause and
effect, as exemplified by the word "healthy"; that involving broader and
narrower  meanings, exemplified by the word "justice"; metaphors, of the
sort  exemplified  by  calling  a  man  "pig,"  and of the sort based on
analogies,  when  we speak of a king as the "father" of his people; and,
finally,  the very special type of equivocation found in "sharp" applied
to  a  tone,  a  taste,  and  a  touch.  If  Aquinas  places the kind of
signification  he calls "analogical" in the general area of equivocation
by  intention,  it may be asked whether the various names of God are all
analogical  in  the  same  way.  The answer seems to be negative, for he
distinguishes those names which have only a metaphorical sense when said
of God, such as "angry" or "jealous"; and he denies the opinion of those
who  say  that  God is called "good" only in an attributive sense, i.e.,
signifying  him  to  be the cause of the goodness found in creatures. On
the  contrary,  he  thinks  that  words  like  "good"  and  "wise,"  and
especially  the  name  "being,"  are  to  be  interpreted  as  intrinsic
denominations  when  applied  to both God and creatures. For Aquinas, as
for  Aristotle,  that  would  appear  to  make  the  pattern  of meaning
exhibited  by the word "sharp" the model for the significance of "being"
rather  than  that  found  in the merely attributive equivocation of the
word "healthy"—whether "being" is said of substance and accidents, or of
God  and  creatures.  The  point seems to be unaffected by the fact that
Aquinas calls this type of signification "analogical," whereas Aristotle
always  refers  to "being" as equivocal. Aristotle never treats any type
of  equivocation  as  analogical  except the metaphor which results from
transferring  the  name  of  one  term  in  a proportion to another term
standing in the same or a similar relationship.

[772a]
738  THE  GREAT  IDEAS The distinction between literal and figurative or
metaphorical  speech seems to be of prime importance in the theologian's
rules  for  interpreting the word of God. As indicated in the chapter on
Religion,  Augustine insists that the language of Holy Writ must be read
in  many  senses. Aquinas distinguishes a basic literal sense from three
modes  of  spiritual  meaning. That signification "whereby words signify
things  belongs  to  the  first  sense,  the historical or literal. That
signification  whereby  things signified by words have themselves also a
signification  is  called  the  spiritual  sense,  which is based on the
literal  and  presupposes  it." The spiritual sense Aquinas divides into
the  allegorical,  the  moral,  and the analogical. To grasp the various
spiritual  meanings,  the  reader must understand that in Holy Scripture
"divine  things  are  metaphorically  described  bv  means  of  sensible
things." As in the symbolism of the sacraments, physical things serve as
the  outward and visible signs of an inward and spiritual grace, so also
"in  Holy  Scripture  spiritual  truths  are  fittingly taught under the
likeness  of  material things." A theologian like Aquinas thus justifies
metaphors  not  only  in  Scripture,  but  also  in  sacred  doctrine or
theology, as "both necessary and useful," whereas in his view the poet's
employment  of them is solely for the sake of pleasure. Philosophers and
scientists,  on  the  other  hand,  often  take  the opposite view— that
metaphors  have  a  place  only  in  poetry and should be avoided in the
exposition  of  knowledge.  In  the  writing  of poetry, "the command of
metaphor,"  says  Aristotle,  "is the mark of genius," but all his rules
for  the  construction  of  i.  The  theory of signs \a. The distinction
between  natural  and conventional signs lb. The intentions of the mind:
ideas  and  images as natural signs \c. The things of nature functioning
symbolically: the book of nature id. The conventional notations of human
language: man's need for words medium through which words signify things

[772b]
scientific  definitions  and  demonstrations  require  the  avoidance of
metaphors,  as  of  all  other  forms  of  equivocation. So, too, Hobbes
inveighs  against  metaphors and figures of speech, giving as one of the
main  causes  of absurdity in science "the use of metaphors, tropes, and
other  rhetorical  figures,  instead  of  words proper; for though it be
lawful  to say (for example) in common speech, the way goeth, or leadeth
hither  or  thither,  the Proverb says this or that (whereas ways cannot
go,  nor  Proverbs  speak); yet in reckoning, and seeking of truth, such
speeches  are  not to be admitted." Darwin looks forward to the day when
"the  terms used by naturalists, of affinity, relationship, community of
type,   paternity,  morphology,  adaptive  characters,  rudimentary  and
aborted  organs,  and  so  forth, will cease to be metaphorical and will
have  a  plain  significance."  Freud,  on  the other hand, aware of how
pervasive  symbolism  is  in  all the works of man, normal and neurotic,
dreaming  and  awake,  seems  to  be  reconciled to the inevitability of
metaphors  in  scientific  discourse.  The  difficulty  we  meet with in
picturing  certain  psychological  processes, he writes, "comes from our
being   obliged  to  operate  with  scientific  terms,  i.e.,  with  the
metaphorical  expressions  peculiar  to  psychology.  . . . Otherwise we
should  not  be able to describe the corresponding processes at all, nor
in  fact even to have remarked them. The shortcomings of our description
would  disappear  if  for  the  psychological  terms we could substitute
physiological   or   chemical   ones.  These,  too,  only  constitute  a
metaphorical language, but one familiar to us for a much longer time and
perhaps also simpler." PAGE 740 741 742

[773a]
2.  The modes of signification 742 signifying names ^z-—-— ia. The first
and  second  imposition  of words: names signifying things and names lb.
The  first  and  second  intention of names: words signifying things and
words  signifying  ideas  ic. Intrinsic and extrinsic denominations: the
naming  of  things  according  to their natures or by reference to their
relations  ie. Abstract and concrete names 3. The patterns of meaning in
human  discourse $a. Verbal ambiguity: indefiniteness or multiplicity of
meaning  (1)  The  same  word used literally and figuratively: metaphors
derived from analogies or proportions and from other kinds of similitude
(2)   The  same  word  used  with  varying  degrees  of  generality  and
specificity:  the  broad  and narrow meaning of a word (3) The same word
used   to  signify  an  attribute  and  its  cause  or  effect  $d.  The
significance of names predicated of heterogeneous things: the analogical
as  4.  The  determination  of meaning in science and philosophy 4#. The
relation  between  univocal meaning and definition 4^. The dependence of
demonstration  on  univocal  terms: formal fallacies due to equivocation
4c.  The  nature  and utility of semantic analysis: the rectification of
ambiguity;  the  clarification  and precision of meanings 4^. The use of
signs  in reasoning: necessary and probable signs; the interpretation of
symptoms  in  medicine 5. Symbolism in theology and religion 5a. Natural
things  as  signs  of divinity $e. The interpretation of the word of God
5/.  The names of God : the use of words to signify the divine nature 6.
Symbolism  in  psychological  analysis  750 6a. The symbolism of dreams:
their latent and manifest content 6b. The symbolism of apparently normal
acts:  forgetting,  verbal slips, errors 6c. The symbolism of anxieties,
obsessions, and other neurotic manifestations

[773b]
Chapter  85:  SIGN AND SYMBOL 739 PAGE intermediate between the univocal
and the equivocal 745

[774a]
740 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1. The theory of
signs  la.  The  distinction  between natural and conventional signs Old
Testament: Genesis, 2:19-20; 11:1-9 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49a-c 7
Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c  8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16*4-9]
25a  11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  ii,  832a 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch 2 624d-625a; bk ii, ch 1-2 636b,d-637c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 34, a 1, ans 185b-187b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part hi, q 60, a 4, rep 1 849c-850b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  62c-63a 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59c-60b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  341a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 252c-d; part
11,  269c-d  l£.The  intentions of the mind: ideas and images as natural
signs  8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16*4-9] 2 ^a / Soul, bk in, ch
8 664b-d / Memory and Reminiscence, ch i
[450*25-451*19]
691a692b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 3, 8a

[774b]
c  REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (£))  //  Esdras,  7:46. Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 18
Augustine:  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i,  ch  13  627d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 13, a 1, ans 62c-63c; a 4 65c-66b; q 14, a i, ans
and  rep  3  75d-76c;  a  2,  ans  and  rep  2-3 76d-77d; q 27, a i, ans
153b-154b;  a  2,  ans and rep 2 154c-155b; a 3, ans 155c-156a; a 4, ans
and  rep 2 156b-d; q 34, a 1 185b-187b; q 37, a 1, ans 197c-199a; q 107,
a  i  549b-550b;  PART  I-H,  Q 22, A 2, ANS 721C-722C 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  93,  a  1,  rep 2 215b,d-216c 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  hi  81d-89a  passim  /  Objections and Replies, def iii-iv
130b;  axiom  vi  132a;  prop ii 132c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, def 3
373b; prop 5 374c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxx, sect 2
238b-c;  ch xxxii, sect 8 244d; sect 14-16 245c-246b; bk iv, ch ii, sect
14  312b-d;  ch  xxi, sect 4 395a, 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 15
415d416a;  sect  43-44  420d-421a;  sect  65-66  425d-426a; sect 145-154
441d-444b  passim,  esp  sect 148 442b-d 53 James: Psychology, 161a-176a
esp  164a-165b,  166a-b,  168b-169a, 175a-176a; 299a-311a esp 300a-301a,
307a-308a, 310b-311a; 313a; 411a;

[775a]
\c  to  \e  Chapter 85: SIGN AND SYMBOL 741 478a-b; 502a-503a; 553b-558b
esp 555a-b, 558b-561b
[fn
2];  573b-574a;  606b-610b  esp  608a-609a; 620b-621a; 664b-665b lc. The
things  of  nature  functioning  symbolically:  the  book  of  nature  5
Aeschylus:  Prometheus  Bound  [442-506]  44c45a  5  Aristophanes: Birds
[708-715]  551  d 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 27 92a93a,c 16
Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv, 853b-856b / Harmonies of the World, 1080b-1085b
passim 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 2 624d-625a; bk ii, ch
i  636b,d-637a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 10 9c-10c; q
57, a 4, ans and rep 3 298a299a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q
12,  a  3,  rep 2 778b-779a; q 60, a 2, ans and rep i 848a-d; a 4, rep i
849c-850b  21 Dante : Divine Comedy, hell, xxiv [1-21] 34d 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 212a-c 26 Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act v, sc vi
[44-79] 103c-104a / Richard II, act
ii, sc iv
[7-17] 334c-d / 1st Henry IV, act hi, sc
i  [1249]  450a-c  /  2nd  Henry  IV,  act i, sc i [60-103] 468d-469b 27
Shakespeare: King Lear, act i, sc ii
[112166] 249a-c
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  381a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 173
203b-204a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 43-44 420d-421a; sect 65-66
425d-426a;  sect  108109 434a-b; sect 146-154 442a-444b passim, esp sect
148  442b-d  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 110a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro, 203a-c; part 1, 235d-236c; 252c-d; part ii, 263d265c 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[4679-4727]
116b117b 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, la-3a; 115b-122b esp 120a-b; 135a-137a;
138b-145a;  204a-205a;  231a;  236a-238a; 331a-332a \d. The conventional
notations  of  human  language:  man's  need  for  words  Old Testament:
Genesis,  2:19-20;  11:1-9  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk ii, 49a-c; bk v,
171a-b  7  Plato: Cratylus, 107c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 138c139b / Philebus,
612d-613a  8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i [16*4-8] 25a / Soul, bk 11,
ch 8 [420bi6-22] 652a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[10281090] 74c-75b
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk xi, 103c-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
19  76a-b;  bk  xiii, par 34 119d-120b / City of God, bk x, ch 13, 307b /
Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 1-4 636b,d-638a; ch 24 648d-649a

[775b]
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 107, a 1, rep 1-3 549b-550b 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi, q 60, a 6, ans 851b-852b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, xxvi [124138] 147a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 54c-56a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 300c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
62d-63a  31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59c-60b 33 Pascal: Geometrical
Demonstration,  430b431b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi,
sect  5-7  166b-167b;  ch  xviii,  sect  7  174d175a;  ch xxii, sect 5-7
201d-202b; ch xxiii, sect 36 213c-d; ch xxviii, sect 2 228c-229a; bk hi,
ch  1,  sect  i-ch  ii,  sect 2 251b,d-253c; ch ii, sect 8-ch in, sect 5
254b-255c;  ch  v,  sect  8 265c-266a; ch vi, sect 43-51 280c283a; ch x,
sect  24  298b; sect 27 298c-d; sect 31 299a; ch xi, sect 5 300d; bk iv,
ch  v, sect 10 331a; ch xxi, sect 4 395a,c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  121  436d-437b  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part hi, 110a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  339d-342c;  349d-350a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 675d [n
83]; 756a
[n 43]
45  Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry, pref, la-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part i, par 78 32d-33a / Philosophy of History, part i, 218ac 49
Darwin:  Descent  of Man,  298d-299b;  329a-b; 592a 53 James: Psychology,
650b; 683b-685a 54 Freud: General Introduction, 516b-c le. The invention
of  non-verbal  symbols:  money, titles, seals, ceremonies, courtesies 4
Homer: Iliad, bk ii
[84-109]
10d-lla;  bk xviii [478-613] 135a-136d 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes
[375-675]  31b-34b  /  Agamemnon  [905-957]  61c-62b 5 Euripides: Hecuba
[299-331] 355b-c / Phoenician Maidens [1098-1140] 387d-388a 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  iv,  146d-147a;  bk  v, 174b; bk viii, 264c; bk ix, 306b-c
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395c-d; bk v, 485bc 7 Plato:
Cratylus, 104d-105a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 5
[ii33a5-b29]
380d-381c  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [i36i a27-b2] 601d-602a 17 Plotinus :
Fifth  Ennead, tr viii, ch 6 242c-d 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk
ii,  ch  i  636b,d-637a;  ch  3  637c-d;  ch 25 649b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  2,  aa  1-2  615d-617b  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part hi, q 62, a 1, ans 858c-859d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 73c-75d

[776a]
742  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (1.  The  theory  of signs, le. The invention of
nonverbal  symbols:  money,  titles,  seals, ceremonies, courtesies.) 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk i, lld-14b; bk ii, 101b-106a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  215b-216b 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act hi, sc ii
[160177] 337b; act iv, sc 1
[181-211] 343b-c
/ King John, act iv, sc ii
[1-34] 394b-d
/ Merchant of Venice, act ii, sc vii
[48-60]
416d; sc ix [20-52] 417d-418a; act hi, sc ii
[73-107] 420d-421a
/  1st Henry IV, act v, sc iv [77-101] 465a-b / 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc
1
[4-31] 482d-483a; act
iv, sc v
[21-47]
494c-d / Henry V, act iv, sc i
[250-301]
554a-c  27  Shakespeare: Hamlet, act iv, sc v [175-186] 61c; act v, sc 1
[241-266] 66d-67a / Timon of Athens, act i, sc n
[15-18] 397a; act iv, sc
in  [23-44]  410d-411a / Winter's Tale, act iv, sc iv [73-108] 508c-509a
35  Locke: Civil Government, ch v, sect 37 33a-b; sect 46-51 35a-36a; ch
xvi,  sect 184 68b-d 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 310c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk xviii, 128b-c; bk xxii, 174b-175a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341a-b  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 10b-12c; bk ii, 123b-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  154d-155a; 240c244c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,   75b-d;   178b;   307b;   317b-319b;  322a;  389b-390a  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  462c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 58 27a;
par  64  28c-d;  par  78 32d-33a; part hi, par 164 59a-d; par 217 72b-c;
additions,  37 122c; 40 122d-123b; 49 124b-c; 106 134a 48 Melville: Moby
Dic{,  138b-139b;  385b  50  Marx:  Capital,  40c-41a; 41d-44a; 44d-45c;
58a-60a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v, 198b-203a; 206b-c; 212a-c;
230b;  232a-233b;  bk  vi,  244b-c;  248b-249a;  bk  ix,  355b-c;  bk x,
423d-424a;  424c-d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 36b-c; bk
vi,  147c-d;  bk  vii,  171a-c  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of
PsychoAnalysis,   4a-b   /   General  Introduction,  510c;  555a  /  New
Introductory Lectures, 815c-d 1/. Natural signs as the source of meaning
in conventional signs: thought as the medium through which words signify
things  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  104d-114a,c  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8
Aristotle: Interpretation, ch i
[16*4-8] 25a
/ Soul, bk 11, ch 8
[420b29-42i a i] 652b
/ Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[437*11-17] 674a

[776b]
If  to  2c  II,  CH  3  18  Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk 637c-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 1, ans 62c-63c; a 4, ans and
rep  i 65c-66b; a 10, rep 5 72c-73c: q 27, a i, ans 153b154b; q 85, a 2,
rep  3 453d-455b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, a 1, rep
2  215b,d-216c;  part  hi,  q  60, aa 6-8 851b-854d passim 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part v, 59c-60b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi,
sect 9 145b-c; ch xxxii, sect 8 244d; bk hi, ch 11, sect 5 253d-254a; ch
hi,  sect  13 257c-258a; ch iv, sect 2 260b; ch v, sect 12 266d-267a; ch
xi,  sect  24  305b-d  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 18-19
410a-c  53  James: Psychology, 18b 2. The modes of signification 2a. The
first  and second imposition of words: names signifying things and names
signifying  names 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 57b; part iv, 270a-b 2b.
The  first  and  second  intention of names: words signifying things and
words  signifying ideas 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 29, a 1,
rep  3  162a-163b; a 2, ans 163b-164b; q 30, a 4, ans 170c-171b; q 85, a
2, rep 2 453d455b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a; part iv, 270a-b
24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk ii, 79c; bk hi, 150a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  ii  252d-254c passim; ch hi, sect ii
257a-b;  ch iv, sect 2 260b; ch v, sect 12 266d-267a; sect 14 267b-c; ch
vi,  sect  19,  273b;  sect  48-50  282b-d; ch xi, sect 10 302b; sect 24
305b-d  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  4b-c  53 James:
Psychology,  127b-128a  2c.  Intrinsic  and extrinsic denominations: the
naming  of  things  according  to their natures or by reference to their
relations Old Testament: Genesis, 2:19-20 7 Plato: Cratylus 85a-114a,c /
Theaetetus, 520b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch i
[1*13-16] 5b
/ Topics, bk 1, ch 15
[106*1-9] 149d; [io6b29~
107*2]  150d-151a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 13, aa 2-3
63c-65c; a 5, ans 66b-67d; a 6, ans and rep 2-3 67d-68c; aa 7-8 68d-71b;
a  10  72c-73c;  a  ii,  rep  3 73c-74b; q 29, a i, rep 3 162a-163b; a 4
165c-167a; q 34, a 3 188b-189a; q 40, a 2. ans 214b-215b

[777a]
2d  to 3a Chapter 85: SIGN AND SYMBOL 743 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  ii,  ch  xxv  214d-217a  passim;  bk  hi, ch i, sect 5 252b-c; ch vi
268b-283a  passim  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 15 409a-b
^^___^ 2d. Proper and common names 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[2 au-i8] 6a-b /
Interpretation,  ch  7  [17^7-40]  26d  / Sophistical Refutations, ch 22
[i78b38-i79a  io]  246c / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 10 [io35 b28-32] 559b;
ch  11  [1037^-9]  560c;  ch  15  [1040*8-13]  564a  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part i, q 13, a 1, rep 3 62c-63c; a 9 71b-72c; a ii 73c-74b;
q  30,  a 4 170c-171b; q 33, aa 2-3 181c-183c; q 34, aa 1-2 185b-188a; q
108, a 5, ans and rep 1 555d-558b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-
ii, q 9, a 2, ANs424b-425a 22 Chaucer: Second Nuns Prologue
[15,553587] 462b-463a
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b-c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i,
ch  i, sect 15 98d-99a; bk ii, ch xi, sect 9 145b-c; bk in, ch 1, sect 3
251d-252a;  ch hi, sect 1-9 254d-256c; sect 11-12 257a-c; ch vi, sect 42
280b-c  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 11-12 407b-408b; sect
15   409a-b;   sect  18-19  410a-c;  sect  122  437b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect xii, div 125, 507b [fni] 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
217b-221a;  351a353b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 341b-342b 45 Lavoisier:
Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  4b-c  53  James: Psychology, 310a-311a;
447b-448a  2e. Abstract and concrete names 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics,
bk  i, ch 34 66b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 3, rep 1
16a-d;  q  13,  a  i,  rep  2 62c-63c a 9, ans 71b-72c; q 31, a i, rep 5
171c-172b  q  32,  a  2 178a-179b; q 39, aa 4-6 205c-209a q 40, a 2, ans
214b-215b;  q 54, a i, rep 2 285a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b-c;
57a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch viii 284b-285a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  341b-c  53  James:  Psychology,  305a-308b;  689a 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  516b-c  3.  The  patterns  of  meaning  in human
discourse  "ha.  Verbal  ambiguity:  indefiniteness  or  multiplicity of
meaning 5 Aristophanes: Knights
[960-1089]
482a483c / Wasps [471-507] 513a-c / Birds [959991] 554c-555a;
[1372-1409] 559b-c
/ Frogs
[923-935] 575a-b / Plutus [1-55] 629a-d
6 Herodotus: History, bk i, llb-d; 21b-22a

[777b]
d  7  Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c  /  Cratylus,  107d-109a / Phaedrus,
132c-133a;  138c-141a,c  / Republic, bk i, 297b-300b / Critias, 478c-d /
Theaetetus,  520b  /  Sophist,  552b-c  /  Philebus, 609d-610a / Seventh
Letter,  809c-810b  8  Aristotle:  Topics,  bk i, ch 15 149d-152a; ch 18
[108*18-36] 152b-d; bk ii, ch 3 154d155d; bk viii, ch 3
[158^-24] 215b; ch 7
217c-d / Sophistical Refutations, ch i
[i65 a5~
13]  227b-c;  ch  33  [182^3-31]  251d / Heavens, bk 1, ch 11 [28ob i-7]
371d-372a / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 9 [992 a i-9] 510b; bk iv, ch 4 [ioo6a
29-b i8] 525c-d; bk vii, ch ii [1037^-9] 560c; bk viii, ch 3 [i043 a29-b
4]  567d  / Soul, bk hi, ch 2 [425^6-426^6] 658a-c 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[648 a37]-CH 3 [649^2] 172d-174b / Ethics, bk
v, ch 1
[ii29ai8-3i] 376b-d /
Politics, bk ii, ch 3 456c-457a; bk hi, ch 3 [1276^-24] 473a / Rhetoric,
bk  hi,  ch  2  [i404b38-39]  655b;  ch  5  657d-658c  10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk i, ch 2, 168c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch
6  638a-d; ch 10 640d-641a; bk hi 657a674d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q 60, a 3, rep 1 848d-849c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b;
57d-58a;  60c;  part  11,  100b;  127a;  135c;  157c;  part  hi, 172a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  253c-254a;  284d-285a;  517b-519a  26  Shakespeare:
Taming  of  the  Shrew,  act  i,  sc 11 [1-44] 205b-c / Two Gentlemen of
Verona,  act  1,  sc 1 [70-158] 230a-d / Romeo and Juliet, act 11, sc iv
[38-140] 297d-298d / Richard II, act 11, sc 1
[69-99] 328b-d
/ Julius Caesar, act 1, sc 1 [1-36] 568b, 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v,
sc  i [127-149] 65d-66a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60b-c / Novum
Organum,  bk  i,  aph  43  109d-110a;  aph 59-60 112b-113a 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  11,  80d-81a  / Objections and Replies, 208c-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part ii, prop 47, schol 390c-391a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk ii, ch iv, sect 5, 131a; ch xiii, sect ii, 150d-151a; sect 18 152a-c;
sect  28  155a-b;  ch  xxix,  sect 6-12 234d-236c; bk hi, ch vi, sect 28
276a-b;  sect  30-31  276d-277c;  sect 47-51 282a-283a; ch vii, sect 4-6
283c-284b;  ch  ix 285a-291c; ch x, sect 5 292d-293a; sect 22 297c-298a;
ch  xi,  sect  3-7  300b-301c;  sect  9 301d-302a; bk iv, ch hi, sect 19
318b-319a;  ch  viii,  sect ii 348b-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
143  441c-d  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect vii, div 48 470d-471c;
sect viii, div 62-63 478b-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 154a

[778a]
d  744  THE  GREAT IDEAS (3. The patterns of meaning in human discourse.
$a.  Verbal  ambiguity:  indefiniteness  or multiplicity of meaning.} 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  234b-236b;  307b308b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
38d-39a;  264b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 89c-d 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  113b-c / Practical Reason, 294b-c; 315d-316a / Science of
Right,  400d  43  Federalist: number 37, 120a-b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
447b-d 46 Hecel: Philosophy of History, part i, 218a-c 50 Marx: Capital,
104d [fn 4] 53 James : Psychology, 549b-550a 54 Freud: Interpretation of
Dreams,  277d-278a  /  General Introduction, 517c-518b; 540c541b 5b. The
distinction   between   univocal   and  equivocal  speech  8  Aristotle:
Categories, ch i
[i a i-i2] 5a / Interpretation, ch
1 [16*4-8] 25a / Topics, bk vi, ch 10 [148^3^4] 202b-c / Metaphysics, bk
i, ch 9
[990b33-99i a8]
509a-b; bk xi, ch 3
[io6ob3i-36] 589a
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 1, a 10, rep 1 9c-10c; q 13, a 5
66b-67d;  a  10  72c-73c;  q  29,  a 4, ans and rep 4 165c167a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  60b-c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 17,
schol  362c363c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch iv, sect 5,
131a;  ch xxix, sect 9 235c-d; bk hi, ch ix, sect 15-16 288d-289c; ch x,
sect  5  292d-293a;  ch  xi,  sect 3-7 300b-301c; bk iv, ch vii, sect 15
343d-344a;  ch  viii,  sect ii 348b-c 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
viii,  div  62-63  478b-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 307b-308b 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right, 400 53 James: Psychology, 875b-876a 3c. The types of
equivocation  3c(l)  The  same  word  used  literally  and figuratively:
metaphors  derived from analogies or proportions and from other kinds of
similitude 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch i
[i a i-6]
5a  /  Topics, bk vi, ch 2 [i39b33-i40a6] 192d-193a 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk v, ch ii
[ii38b5-i4]
387a,c / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2
[i404b27i405b3] 655a-d; ch 3 [i4o6b5]-CH 4 [i407a i6]
657a-d; ch 6 [1408^-9] 659a; ch io-ii 662c666b / Poetics, ch 21
[i457b i-33] 693a-c; ch
25
[i 4 6i a8-2o] 697c-d

[778b]
lb  to 3c(3) 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk v, par 24 34a-b; bk vi, par 6
36c-d  /  City  of God,  bk  xvii,  ch  3 450c-451c; bk xx, ch 21, 549d /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 10 640d-641a; bk hi, ch i 657b; ch 5-37
659d-674d  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, aa 9-10 8d-10c; q
3, a 1, rep 1-5 14b-15b; a 2, rep 1-2 15c-16a; a 3, rep i 16a-d; q 13, a
2, ans and rep 1 63c-64d; a 3 64d-65c; a 6, ans and rep 2 67d-68c; a 10,
contrary  72c73c;  q  34,  a  1,  ans  and  rep 1,4 185b-187b; q 67, a 1
349d-350b;  a  2,  rep 3 350b-351a; q 68, a 4, ans 358b-359b 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, a 2, rep 2 252b-253a; part hi, q 8,
a  i,  rep 2 756d-757c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b; 59d; 61c; part
in,  176d-177d;  181d;  193d-195d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  422c-423c 28
Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 267a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
65b-c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi, ch i, sect 5 252b-c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 144 441 d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
114b-115b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  775c-d  [n  173]  42  Kast:
Judgement,  547b-548c  53 James: Psychology, 380a-381a; 689a-b 54 Freud:
General  Introduction,  510bc;  512d513a  3c(2)  The same word used with
varying  degrees  of  generality  and  specificity: the broad and narrow
meaning of a word 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 1-2 376a-378c / Poetics,
ch 21 [i457b7-i6] 693b 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 34-35
670c-672d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  27,  a  2, ans
154c-155b;  q  67,  a  1  349d-350b;  a  2,  rep  3 350b-351a; q 68, a 4
358b-359b;  q 115, a 2, ans 587c-588c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 49, a 1 lb-2b; part 11—11, q 9, a 2, ans and rep 2 424b-425a; q
186,  a  i,  ans 650c-651d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk ii, 123b-d 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism, 447b-d 54 Freud: General Introduction, 509d 3c(3)
The  same  word  used  to signify an attribute and its cause or effect 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 15
[io6a i~9]
149d;
[io6b33-io7a8] 150d-151a; bk
v, ch 2
[i29b30-i30a i] 180a / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 2
[ioo3 a33-b n]
522b; bk vii, ch 4
[1030^1b3]
553a-b; bk xi, ch 3
[io6ob36-io6i a
7]  589a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 5, ans 66b-67d;
a 6, ans and rep 3 67d-68c;

[779a]
a  io,  ans  72c-73c;  q i6, a 6, ans 98b-d; part i-ii, q 20, a 3, rep 3
713c-714c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  theologica,  part  hi,  q  6o,  a i, ans
847b-848a  3d.  The  significance  of  names predicStecFof heterogeneous
things:  the  analogical  as  intermediate  between the univocal and the
equivocal 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 3
[i6b i9-26]
25d-26a   /   Topics,  bk  i,  ch  15  149d-152a  passim  /  Sophistical
Refutations, ch 7 [169*22-25] 232d / Physics, bk i, ch 2
[i85a2o]-cH
3
[187*10] 260a-262a; bk vii, ch 4 [248b7~249*
24] 331b-332b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992b i8-24]
511a; bk hi, ch 3
[998b22-27]
517c;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [ioo3b23-34]  522d;  bk v, ch 6-7 536a-538b; ch 9
538c-539a; bk vii, ch i 550b,d-551a; bk x, ch i
[io52b i-i5]
578d579a;  ch  2 580b-d; bk xi, ch 2 [io6oa36-b io] 588c; bk xii, ch 4-5
599d-601a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*17-29]
341bc  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, rep 1 16d-17c; a
6,  rep  i  18c-19a;  q  4, a 3, ans 22b-23b; q 13, aa 5-6 66b-68c; a 10
72c-73c;  q  29, a 4, rep 4 165c-167a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 61, a 1, rep 1 54d-55c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xiii,   sect   18  152a  c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  181b-182b  4.  The
determination  of  meaning  in  science  and philosophy 4a. The relation
between  univocal  meaning  and  definition  7  Plato: Sophist, 552b-c 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[3*32-b9]
7c-d  b37~39]  133c  /  Topics, bk iv, ch 3 [123*27-29] 171d; ch 6 [i27b
5-6]  177a;  bk vi, ch 2 192c-193b; ch 10 [148*22^22] 202b-203a; bk vii,
ch 4
[154*14-18] 209c; bk viii, ch 3 [i58b8-i59a2]
215b-c  /  Soul,  bk  1,  ch  1  [402b i-8] 631c-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals,  bk i, ch 2-3 165d-167d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
13,  a  1, ans 62c-63c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; part iv, 269bc
33   Pascal:   Geometrical   Demonstration,  430b434a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk hi, ch xi, / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 13
[97
sect  12  302d  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect 18 410a-c 43
Federalist:  number  37,  120a-b  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 347a-c 53
James: Psychology, 121b-122a

[779b]
4b.  The dependence of demonstration on univocal terms: formal fallacies
due  to  equivocation  8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 34 66b-c /
Posterior  Analytics,  bk i, ch ii [77*5-9] 105d-106a / Topics, bk viii,
ch 3
[1 58^-17]
215b / Sophistical Refutations, ch 4
[i65b24~
i66b2i] 228b-229c; ch 24
[179^38-180*7]
247d-248a / Heavens, bk i, ch ii
[28ob i-7]
371d-372a / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4
[1006*
33-b i2] 525c-d 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 24 [1401*13-23] 650b 12
Epictetus:   Discourses,   bk  i,  ch  7  112b-113d  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q i, a 10, rep 1 9c-10c; q 13, a 5, ans 66b-67d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  57d-58a;  part  hi,  172a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch  ix,  sect  15-16  288d-289c;  ch x, sect 22
297c298a;   ch   xi,   sect   7-26   301a-306d  passim  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  viii, div 62-63 478b-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
307b-308b   4c.  The  nature  and  utility  of  semantic  analysis:  the
rectification  of ambiguity; the clarification and precision of meanings
7 Plato: Protagoras, 52d-57a / Euthydemus, 68c-d / Cratylus, 107c-114a,c
/ Phaedrus, 120a-b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch i [1*13-16] 5b; ch 7
[6b26-7b i4] llb-12b; ch 8 [io*26-b n] 15b-c /
Topics,  bk  1,  ch  15  149d-152a; ch 18 [108*1836] 152b-d; bk ii, ch 3
154d-155d; bk v, ch 4
[i33b i5-i34*4] 184d-185b; bk vi, ch 10 [148*
23-b22]  202b-203a  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  19-23  243d-247a /
Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[245^-246*4] 329a-b / Heavens, bk
i, ch ii 371d-372d; ch 12 [28^2-15] 373a-b / Metaphysics, bk 1, ch 9
[992b i8-24] 511a; bk
iv,  ch  4 [1006*33^4] 525c-d; bk v 533a-547d; bk ix, ch 7 [i049*i9-b i]
574d-575a/  Soul, bk ii, ch 4 [416^0-25] 647a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v,
ch i
[1129*18-31]
376b-d  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk i, ch i 167a-b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 17, 122d-123c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk
hi  657a674d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, qq 27-43 153a-237a,c
passim;  part  i-ii,  q  22,  a  i,  ans  720d-721c  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  49, a 1 lb-2b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
54c-58a;  58d-60a;  60c;  part  11,  157c-d; part iv, 269b-272b; 273a-b;
274a-b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 60b-c; 63a-b

[780a]
(4.  The  determination  of  meaning  in science and philosophy. 4c. The
nature and utility of semantic analysis: the rectification of ambiguity;
the  clarification  and  precision  of  meanings^) 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  la-14a  / Geometrical Demonstration, 430b-434a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  hi, ch i, sect 6 252c-d; ch v, sect i6 267d-268a; ch
vi,  sect  28  276a-b; ch ix, sect 3 285b-c; sect 15-16 288d-289c; ch xi
300a-306d  passim,  esp sect 7 301a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
122  437b-c  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 62-63 478b-d;
div  74 484a-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 418a-419b 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract, bk hi, 419b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 115b-c / Practical Reason,
294bc;  339b-d / Judgement, 546d-547d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 465c-469b
passim 44 Boswell: Johnson, 81b-82c 45 Lavoisier: Elements of Chemistry,
pref,  la-c;  4a-5d:  7c  53 James: Psychology, 121b-122b 4d. The use of
metaphors  and  myths  in  science  and  philosophy 7 Plato: Protagoras,
44a-45a / Phaedrus, 124a129d; 138c-139a / Symposium, 157b-159b / Phaedo,
246d-250a   /  Gorgias,  260a-262a  292b-294d  /  Republic,  bk  vi-vii,
383d-391b  bk  x,  437c-441a,c  /  Timaeus,  444c-446b 477a,c / Critias,
478b-d  / Theaetetus, 542a544a / Sophist, 565a-b / Statesman, 586d589c 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics, bk ii, ch 13 b38-39] 133c / Topics, bk
viii, ch 3 [i58b8-
[97
17J 215b 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 2
[1 40^27i405b2o]
655a-656a; ch 3
[i4o6b 5]-cH
4
[i407a i6] 657a-d; ch 10-11 662c-666b
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 1, a 9 8d-9c; q 13, a 3 64d-65c;
a  6, ans and rep 2 67d-68c; a 9, ans and rep i 71b-72c: a 10 72c-73c; q
34,  a  i,  ans  and  rep  1,4 185b187b; q 67, a 1 349d-350b; a 2, rep 3
350b351a;  q  68,  a 4, ans 358b-359b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  60,  a 5, rep 1 850b-851b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 57d-58a;
61c;   67c   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  422c-423c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation, 336d-337a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch i, sect 5
252b-c 42 Kant: Judgement, 575b-c 45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity,
758a-759c; 777d-778c 49 Darwin: Origin of Species, 40c-d; 242b 53 James:
Psychology, 153b; 686b-687b

[780b]
54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 510b-d passim; 566d-567b / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle, 662a-b 4e. The use of signs in reasoning: necessary
and  probable signs; the interpretation of symptoms in medicine 7 Plato:
Protagoras, 59b-c 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 27 92a93a, c /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 6 [75*2835] 103b-c 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk iv, ch 10 r537bl 4-2°] 64b; bk vii, ch 12
[588 a9-i2]
114c; bk viii, ch 18
[6oi b6-8]
127c; ch 21
[603^0-24]
129c; ch 23
[6o4a i8]-cH
24
[6o4b2o] 130a-c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2 [1357*23b24] 596d-597c; bk ii, ch 24 [i40i b8-i4] 650d;
ch   25  [i402b  i3-i403a  i7]  652b-653a  10  Hippocrates:  Prognostics
19a-26a,c  esp  par  1  19a-b, par 25 26a,c / Regimen in Acute Diseases,
appendix, par 9-14 38b-40d / Epidemics, bk i, sect ii, par 5 46c-d; sect
hi,  par  1  49c-d; bk hi, sect hi, par 16 59b-c / Injuries of the Head,
par  5  65a / Articulations, par 10 94d-95a; par 26 99a-b; par 30, 100a;
par  51 109a-b; par 54 Ilia; par 57 110d-112b; par 59 113b / Instruments
of  Reduction,  par  4-24  122d-126c  passim / Aphorisms, sect i, par 12
131d;  sect  ii  132b-134a  passim;  sect  iv,  par  17-SECT  v,  par 15
135d-138b; sect v, par 30-SECT vn, par 86 138d-144a,c passim 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 57, a 4, ans 298a-299a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  53d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk hi, 197a 25
Montaigne:   Essays,  372b-373b;  531d-532b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  49b-50b; 77d-78d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 112b-113a; 114b
37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 145b-146a 53 James: Psychology, 324b 54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  lb-2b  / Hysteria, 31b-d;
38d-40a;  50b-c;  54b-55d;  56b-c;  60c-62c  passim;  87a90d esp 87b-d /
Psycho-  Analytic  Therapy,  124b  / General Introduction, 550d-557a esp
556a-b;  593b-c;  605b-607b passim 5. Symbolism in theology and religion
5a. Natural things as signs of divinity Old Testament: Genesis, 9:8-17 /
Job, 12:7-9; 37-41 / Psalms, 8; 19:1-4; 75:1; 104; 135:6-7; 147:7-9— (D)
Psalms,  8;  18:1-5;  74:2;  103;  134:6-7; 146:7-9 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  13:1-5—  (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  13:1-5 / Ecclesiasticus,
42:15-43:33—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  42:1543:37 / // Maccabees, 7:28
-(D) OT, // Machabees, 7:28

[781a]
5b  Chapter  85:  SIGN  AND SYMBOL 747 New Testament: Matthew, 6:26-30 /
Lu^e,  12:24-28 / Romans, 1:18-20 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
438d-439a  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk nj5$n=66oL 22c-23b; bk v
[110-145] 62c-63a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 16-17 121d-124a; bk
hi,  ch  i  177a-c  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk xii, sect 28 310a 16
Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv,  853b-854a;  860a  /  Harmonies of the World,
1009b-1010a; 1049b1050a; 1061a; 1080b-1085b passim 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  xi,  ch  24-28  335c-338d; bk xvi, ch 26 438c-439a 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 10, ans and rep i 9c-10c; q 3, a i, rep
1-5  14b15b;  q  12,  a  3, rep 2-3 52c-53b; q 13, a 2 63c-64d; a 4, ans
65c-66b;  Q  27,  a i, ans 153b-154b; q 34 185a-189a; q 47, a i, ans and
rep 2 256a-257b; q 65, a i, rep 3 339b340b; q 103, a 1, ans 528b-529a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part hi, q 12, a 3, rep 2 778b-779a; q 60, a
2,  ans and rep 1 848a-d; a 5, rep i 850b-851b; part hi suppl, q 92, a 2
1032b-1034b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxviii
[1-78] 148d-149c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  78d-79a;  81a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
212a-c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation, 421 d; 490d494a esp 491a-b,
492c-493a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 2c-4c; 38a; 41b-d / New
Atlantis, 203a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[1 14-130]
234b-235a; bk ix [780-794] 264b; [990-1004] 269a; bk xi [181-207] 303a-b
33 Pascal: Pensees, 643-646 290b-291b; 652657 292a-293a; 670 295a-b; 675
296b-297a;  693-736  301b-317b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 32
418d-419a;  sect  146-154  442a-444b  passim,  esp  sect  148  442b-d 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 186c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81 d; 346d-347a
42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187a-190a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i,
228a-c;  235d-236c;  252a-255b; part ii, 263d-265c; 266a-267a; 268b-271c
47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3432-3468] 84a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  248d-249a  5b.  Supernatural  signs:  omens, portents, visitations,
dreams,  miracles  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 4:1-16 esp 4:14-15; 9:8-17;
28:10-22;   37:1-11;  40-41  /  Exodus,  3:1-4:9;  7-17  passim;  31:18;
32:15-16;   40:3438—   (D)   Exodus,   3:1-4:9;   7-17   passim;  31:18;
32:15-16540:32-36/ Numbers, 9:15-23; 11-12; 16-17; 20:1-13; 22 5 26:9-11
/  Deuteronomy,  4:9-14,32-39;  5:22-27;  6:20-25;  7:17-23; 10:20-11:9;
13:1-5; 28:1-29:9 / Joshua, 3-4;

[781b]
5:13-6:20;   10:12-14—  (D)  Josue,  3-4;  5:136:20;  10:12-14  /Judges,
6:11-24,36-40; 7:1315; 13 / / Samuel, 10:1-16; 12:12-20; 28 (D) I Kings,
10:1-16;  12:12-20; 28 / I Kings, 13:4-6; 17; 18:16-39 esp 18:30-39; 19—
(D)  ///  Kings,  13:4-6;  17; 18:16-39 esp 18:30-39; 19 / // Kings, 1-6
passim;  13:20-21; 20:1-11— (D) IV Kings, 1-6 passim; 13:20-21; 20:1-11/
//  Chronicles,  32:9-22 esp 32:21-22— (D) II Paralipomenon, 32:9-22 esp
32:21-22 / Job, 4:13-21; 38:1-42:8 / Psalms, 105 esp 105:1641; 135:8-12—
(D)  Psalms,  104  esp 104:16-41; 134:8-12 / Isaiah, 6; 7:10-16; 38:1-8—
(D)  Isaias,  6;  7:10-16;  38:1-8  /Jeremiah,  32:16-24 — (D) Jeremias,
32:16-24  /  Ezehiel passim, esp 1-3, 11:22-24, 40:1-48:35— (D) Ezechiel
passim, esp 1-3, 11:22-24, 40:1-48:35 / Daniel, 2-12 passim— (D) Daniel,
2:1-3:23  passim;  3:91-12:13 passim / Hosea, 1-3— (D) Osee, 1-3 / Amos,
7-8  /  Jonah— (D) Jonas / Zechariah, 1-6— (D) Zacharias, 1-6 Apocrypha:
Rest  of  Esther,  10-11  — (D) OT, Esther, 10:4-11:12 / Bel and Dragon,
30-42—  (D)  OT, Daniel, 14:30-42 / // Maccabees, 1:18-22; 15:11-17— (D)
OT,  //  Machabees, 1:18-22; 15:11-17 New Testament: Matthew passim, esp
1:20-21,  2:12-13,  2:19-23,  8:1-17, 8:23-9:8, 9:18-34, 10:1, 12:22-29,
12:38-40,  14:13-33,  15:22-16:  4,  17:1-8,  17:14-20,  20:29-34 / Mar\
passim,   esp  1:23-2:12,  5:1-43,  7:24-8:26,9:1-9,  9:1629,  10:46-52,
16:16-18 / Luke passim, esp 1:5-66, 4:33-5:26, 7:1-23, 8:22-56, 9:28-43,
11:16,  11:29,  14:1-6, 17:11-19, 18:35-43 / John passim, esp 1:43-2:11,
2:18,  2:22,  3:14-18,  4:46-54,  5:36, 6:30, 9:1-41, 11:1-48, 12:27-30,
12:37-40,  20:1-9  /  Acts passim, esp 2:1-24, 3:2-11, 5:15-24, 7:55-56,
8:6-8,   8:13,  9:3-8,  9:33-42,  10:1-48,  13:9-12,  14:7-10,  18:9-11,
19:11-20,  20:9-12,  28:3-10 / / Corinthians, 1:22-24 I Hebrews, 2:3-4 /
Revelation— (D) Apocalypse 4 Homer: Iliad, bk i [33-100] 3b-4b; bk ii
[i83] 10a-d; [301-332] 13a-b; bk viii [167-183]
52d-53a;
[245-252]
53c-d; bk xii
[195-250]
84a-d / Odyssey, bk ii
[146-207] 189c-190b;
bk iv
[787-841] 207a-d;
bk xvii
[541-550]
282d; bk xix
[509-581] 294c-295a,c; bk xx
[91-121]
297a-b;
[240-246]
298c;
[345-357]
299d;  bk  xxiv [520-548] 322c-d 5 Aeschylus: Persians [176-230] 17a-c /
Seven Against Thebes
[24-29]
27b / Prometheus Bound
[484-499]
45a;
[645-668]
46d-47a / Agamemnon
[104-159]
53a-d / Choephoroe
[5H-552 ] 75a-c
5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [976-986]  108b  / Oedipus at Colonus
[1447-1666] 127b-129b / Antigone
[988-1097]
139c-140c / Electra
[404-515] 159b-160a
5 Euripides: Iphigenia Among the Tauri [4260] 411c-d; [1234-1283] 422b-c
5 Aristophanes: Birds [708-722] 551d-552a

[782a]
(5.  Symbolism  in theology and religion. 5b. Supernatural signs: omens,
portents,  visitations,  dreams,  miracles.) 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
4d;  8a-b;  12b-d;  17a-b; 18b; 20d-21a; 38a-b; 39c-40a; bk ii, 60d-61b;
79a-c;  83bc;  86c-87a;  bk  hi,  90d91a; 95d; 116a-b; bk iv, 124d-125a;
126d127a;  135b-c; 138a-b; 150b-d; 154c-d; 155b-c; bk v, 170c-d; 176c-d;
183d-184a;  bk  vi,  190c-d;  200d-201a;  204b-c;  208b; bk vii, 219a-c;
238d-239a;  bk  viii,  266b-d;  267a; 270c-271a; 283d; bk ix, 289d-290a;
302c;  309d-310a;  313d-314a 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 66a / Apology, 207b-c;
211a-b   /  Timaeus,  467a-c  8  Aristotle:  Prophesying  707a-709a,c  9
Aristotle: History of Animals, bk hi, ch ii
[518*32-36] 43a; ch 20 [522*13-19] 47a-b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[11611240] 76b-77b; bk vi [43-79] 80d-81b; [379422] 85b-d
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 17, 123c124a; bk hi, ch i, 177a-b 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[387-401]
113b-114a; bk 11
[162-233] 128b-130b;
[679-704]
143b144a; bk hi
[90-101]
149b-150a;
[135-191]
150b-152b;
[388-393]
157b-158a;
[523-547]
161b-162a; bk vi
[190-211]
216a-b; bk vii
[59-80]
237b-238a; bk viii
[26-89]
259b261b;
[520-540]
273a-b; bk xii
[244-265]
360b-361a  14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  52b-c  /  Poplicola, 82a-b /
Timoleon,  198c-d  /  Pelopidas,  239d-240c / Aristides, 268a-d / Sulla,
371d372c  /  Lucullus,  404d-405a; 405c / Agesilaus, 483a-b / Alexander,
568a-b  /  Demosthenes,  698b-699a  / Dion, 781 d- 782a / Marcus Brutus,
818a-b;  822b  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk i, 9a-b; bk ii, 26c; 27b; bk iv,
79b;  bk vi, 95d-96a; bk xi, 105c; bk xii, 112d-113a; 119b; 124b; bkxiv,
149bc;  bk  xv,  168d-169a  /  Histories,  bk  i, 206a; 212d213a; bk ii,
228a-b; 235a-c; bk hi, 256d; bk iv, 293a-294a 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  hi,  par  19-20  18b-19a  / City of God, bk x, ch 8 303a-d; ch 12-13
306d-307c;  ch  16-18  308b-310d;  bk  xi,  ch 2, 323b; bk xxii, ch 8-10
591d-599b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  51, a 2, rep 1
276b-277a; q 104, a 4, ans 538ac; q 105, a 7 544a-d; q 106, a 3, ans and
rep 2 547c-548b; q no, a 4 567c-568b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
ix  [1369]  66a-c;  xix  [1-63]  81c-82a;  xxvn [91-108] 95c 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  v,  stanza  52-55  127a-b;  stanza  177-186
143b-144b;   stanza  207-219  147a-149a;  stanza  245  152a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  51b-52a;  80b-d;  81d-82b; part ii, 160b; part hi,
165d-167a; 177ac; 183b-187a; 188a-191a

[782b]
b 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar, act i, sc hi
[1-71]
572c-573b; act iv, sc hi
[275-289]
591c; act v, sc 1 [71-89] 592d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc i
[64-125]
30b-31a / Macbeth, act ii, sc iv [1-20] 294a-b / Cymbeline, act v, sc iv
[91-122]  482a-b  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 381a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  8c; 19b; 41b-c; 54c-d; 55b-d / New Atlantis,
202c203c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [594-599] 106b; bk v
[28-128]
176a-178a; bk xi
[193-366]
303b-307a  /  Areopagitica,  389a33  Pascal:  Pensees, 803-856 328b-341b
passim  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvi, sect 13 371a-b; ch
xix,  sect  15  388a-c  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 63 425b-c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect x, div 92-101 491c-497b esp div 98-101
495d-497b  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  180b-c;  189b-190d; 206b-d;
294a-296b; 445d-446b; 465d-467a; 547a-b; 571a; 605b-d; 614b-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  232a-c;  398b-399b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 126b-c 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i [430-513] 12b-14b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
ix,  377b-379a;  bk xii, 561b-562a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
i,  lla-b;  bk v, 129c-135a 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 138a-c /
General  Introduction, 477b-c 5c. The symbolism of the sacraments and of
sacramental  or  ritualistic  acts  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  17:9-14 /
Exodus, 12:113:16; 20:8-11; 24:5-8; 31:13-17 / Leviticus passim, esp 16,
23 / Numbers, 15:37-41; 16:3740 / Deuteronomy, 5:12-15; 6:5-9; 11:18-21;
16:1-17  /  Joshua, 4:1-9— (D) Josue, 4:1-9 / Esther, 9:20-32 / Ezekiel,
20:12,20— (D) Ezechiel, 20:12,20 Apocrypha: Rest of Esther, 16:20-22 (D)
OT,  Esther,  16:20-22  /  //  Maccabees, 1:18-22— (D) OT, // Machabees,
1:18-22  New  Testament:  Matthew,  26:26-28  /  Mar\,  14:22-24 / Luke,
12.\\<)-?.q>  I  John,  3:3-7;  6:3059  / Acts, 2:38-39; 22:16 / Romans,
6:3-4  / ^ Corinthians, 10:16-17; 11:23-27 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
x, ch 5-6 301b302d; ch 19-20 310d-311c; bk xvi, ch 26 438c-439a; bk xxi,
ch  20 575c-d; ch 25 579d-581a / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3 637c-d;
bk  hi,  ch  5-9  659d-661c;  bk  iv,  ch 2i,690d-691b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,   part  i,  q  92,  A3,  ANs490c-491b  20  Aquinas  :  Summa
Theologica,   part  i-ii,  qq  101-103  265d-304a;  part  hi,  qq  60-65
847a884a,c  22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale, par 1-22 495a-510b esp par 22,
510b

[783a]
)d  to  5/  23Hobbes:  Leviathan, part hi, 177d-178a; 180c-d; 206c-207a;
211c-212a; part iv, 249b250c; 263d-264a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[436-445]
328b-329a  ^ 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 71b-80b; 128b137b / Pensees,
862,  343a;  870  344a-b; 923 351b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect v,
div 41, 468a-b; div 43, 468c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82a; 294b-d 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  83d; 334b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  iv, 331d332c;338a-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 198b-203a; bk
vi,  244b-c;  248b-249a  54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 512a 5d. The
symbolism   of  numbers  in  theology  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  20:8-11
Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 11:20— (D) OT, Boo/{ of Wisdom, 11:21 New
Testament:  Revelation—  (D)  Apocalypse  14  Plutarch:  Numa Pompilius,
56d-57a  16  Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a / Harmonies of the World,
1049b-1050a;  1077b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 16, 17c / City
of  God,  bk xi, ch 30-31 339c-340b; bk xii, ch 18 354b-d; bk xv, ch 20,
414d415b;  bk  xx,  ch  7  535b-536d; bk xxii, ch 30, 618c-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 16, 644d645d; bk in, ch 35 672a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 5, a 5, rep 1 26c-27c; q 74, a 3, rep 3 375a377a,c
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi suppl, q 96, a 4 1054b-1055c 21
Dante:  Divine Comedy 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 259a-b 51 Tolstoy: War
and   Peace,   bk   vi,   248b-c;  bk  ix,377c-378c  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  511c  5e.  The  interpretation  of  the  word  of God Old
Testament:  Daniel,  2:47;  5:5-28  New Testament: Matthew, 12:1-12; 13;
15:1020;  18:23-35;  19:3-9;  20:1-16; 21:28-45; 22:114,31-32; 25:1-30 /
Mar\,  2:23-28;  4:1-34;  10:2-9;  12:1-12,18-27  /  Luke,  6:1-5,39-49;
8:4-18;   12:16-21,36-48;   14:7-11,15-33;   1516;   18:1-8;   19:11-27;
20:9-19,37-38  / John, 5:38-39,46-47; 10:1-14,33-36 / Acts, 7; 13:1636 /
Romans,  4;  9-11  passim;  12:19-20;  14:1013;  15:1-4 / Galatians, 3-4
passim  /  /  Peter,  1:10-16;  2:5-8  / II Peter, 1:19-21 5 Aeschylus :
Prometheus   Bound  [645-668]  46d47a  5  Sophocles  :  Oedipus  theKing
[463-512] 103c-d;
[1432-1445] 112b-c
5 Aristophanes: Knights
[40-222]
470c-472c;
[960-1089]
482a-483c / Peace
[1043-1126]
537d-539a / Birds
[959-991]
554c-555a /

[783b]
Chapter 85: SIGN AND SYMBOL 749 -55l Lysistrata
[762-780]
593a-b  /  Plutus  629a-d 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, llb-c; 21b-22a; bk
vi,  199d-201a;  bk ix, 295d-296c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
392a-b; 401a-b 7 Plato: Apology, 201d-203a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
hi,  par  9  15a-b;  bk v, par 24 34a-b; bk vi, par 6 36c-d; bk xii, par
32-36  107a-108c;  bk  xii, par 41-BK xiii, par 53 110a-125a,c / City of
God,  bk  xi,  ch  30-32 339c-340d; bk xiii, ch 21 371a-c; bk xv, ch 2-3
398c-399c;  ch  25-27 419a-421d; bk xvi, ch 2 422b-423d; ch 6 426c-427a;
ch  37 444b-445a; bk xvii, ch 3 450c-451c; bk xviii, ch 42-44 496d-498c;
bk  xx  530a560a,c  esp  ch  21,  549d,  ch  28-29 556c-557c / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i-iii 624a-674d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q r,
aa 9-10 8d-10c; q 3, a 1, rep 1-5 14b-15b; q 29, a 3, rep 1 164c-165c; q
51,  a  2,  rep i 276b-277a; qq 65-74 339a-377a,c passim, esp q 68, a 1,
ans 354a-355c, a 2, ans 355d-357a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-
ii,  q i, aa 9-10 388d-390d; part hi, q 60, a 4, ans 849c-850b; a 5, rep
i  850b-851b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  iv [28-48] Ilia 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 70c-71a; part ii, 160b-c; part in, 165a-188a;
191b-199a; 215b216b; 246c; part iv, 247a-258b; 259a-260c 27 Shakespeare:
Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  v  [426485]  488b-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning,   2c-4c;  17b20a;  98a-100b  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,
78b-80b;  163a164b  / Pensees, 570-588 273b-277b; 642-692 290b-301a; 775
323b-324a 35 Locke: Toleration, 21c-22d / Human Understanding, bk in, ch
ix,  sect  9  286d-287b;  sect 23 291b-c; ch x, sect 12 294bc 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  256a-258a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 329d-330a 42
Ka^t:  Judgement, 547b-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 290a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part
i  [1220-1237]  30a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk ix, 377c-378c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk v, 129c-135a; bk vi, 150d-153d 5/.
The  names  of  God:  the  use of words to signify the divine nature Old
Testament:  Exodus, 3:13-14; 6:2-3; J 5 :3» 20:7; 34:5-7,14 / Leviticus,
19:12;  21:6;  22:32  / Deuteronomy, 5:11; 28:58-59 / // Samuel, 22:2-3;
23:3—  (D)  // Kings, 22:2-3; 23 :3 / Psalms, 8 esp 8:9; 68:4; 83:15-18;
135:13—  (D)  Psalms, 8 esp 8:10; 67:5; 82:16-19; 134:13 / Isaiah, 41:4;
42:8;  44:6;  47:4;  48:2;  51:15;  54:5; 63:16— (D) Isaias, 41:4; 42:8;
44:6;  47:4;  48:2;  51:15;  54:5; 63:16 / Jeremiah, 10:16; 16:21; 23:6;
31:35; 32:18; 33:2; 50:34;

[784a]
750  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (5.  Symbolism in theology and religion. 5/. The
names of God: the use of words to signify the divine nature?) 51:19— (D)
Jeremias, 10:16; 16:21; 23:6; 31:35; 32:18; 33:2; 50:34; 51:19 / Daniel,
7:9,13  /  Amos,  4:13; 5:8; 9:6 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 14:20-21 —
(D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 14:20-21 New Testament: Matthew, 6:9 / Lu\e, 11:2
/  Revelation,  1:8;  21:6;  22:13—  (D)  Apocalypse, 1:8; 21:6; 22:13 5
Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[160-183] 53d-54a
6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 49d-50a; 60a-d; 80a-c; bk iv, 134a 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  91c-d;  93d-97d  18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 6
626a-b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2, rep 1-2 15c-16a;
a  3, rep i 16a-d; a 6, rep 1 18c-19a; q 4, a 1, rep i 20d-21b; a 3, ans
22b-23b;  q  5,  a  2,  rep  i 24b-25a; q 13 62b-75b; q 14, a i, rep 1-2
75d-76c;  part  i-ii,  q  14,  a  1,  rep  2 677b-678a; q 47, a i, rep 1
819c-820b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, iv [28-48] Ilia; xxvi
[124-138]
147a-b; xxx
[34-99]
152a-d  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 54b; 78d-79a; 79d-80b passim; part
ii,  162a-163b;  part  hi,  172d-173a;  183d-184a  25 Montaigne: Essays,
238d-239b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 443c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,  prop 17, schol 362c363c 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general schol,
370a-371a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c
38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk iv, 435b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 176a-b
47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3432-3468] 84a-b esp
[3455-3457] 84b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk vi, 248d 6. Symbolism in psychological
analysis  54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 9b-14a esp
9d,  10d-lla,  12c-d,  13c-d  /  Psycho-Analytic  Therapy,  123d-124a  /
Interpretation of Dreams, 279b-291c / General Introduction, 504d-513d esp
508c-513b; 526d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 778b, d
[fn
2] / New Introductory Lectures, 815a-816b; 848c849b 6a. The symbolism of
dreams: their latent and manifest content 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xix
[509-581]
294c295a,c 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[176-230]
17a-c  /  Choephoroe  [523-552]  75b-c  5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the King
[977-982] 108b

[784b]
s  6  to  6c  Iphigenia  Among  the  Tauri  [425 Euripides: 66] 411c-d 6
Herodotus: History bk 1, 25b-d; 28c-29a; bk vii, 218b-220b esp 47a-c; bk
ii,  78d; 219a-c 7 Plato: Crito, 213b-d / Phaedo, 221d-222a 8 Aristotle:
Prophesying 707a-709a,c esp ch 2
[464V18] 709c
14  Plutarch:  Pyrrhus,  329c-d  /  Cimon,  398d399b / Eumenes, 473a-b /
Alexander,  548d549a  /  Demosthenes,  702c-703b  / Demetrius, 727b-d 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory, ix [1369] 66a-c; xix [1-63] 81c-82a;
xxvn  [91-108]  95c 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk v, stanza 52-55
127a-b;  stanza  177-186 143b-144b; stanza 207-219 147a-149a; stanza 245
152a / Nun's Priest's Tale
[14,898-15,162]
451a455b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 533d-534a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI,
act i, sc ii
[17-55] 36c-37a
/ Richard III, act i, sc iv
[1-74] 114d-115b
/ Romeo and Juliet, act i, sc iv
[49-103]
291a-c / Midsummer-Night' Dream, act ii, sc ii [145-156] 360b-c / Julius
Caesar, act ii, sc ii [58-107] 578d-579b 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act v,
sc  i  306b307a  /  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv  [30-150] 481c482c; sc v
[426-485] 488b-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[28-128] 176a178a esp [100-109] 177b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part ii, 263d265c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  19a-20a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ii, 86a; bk vi, 249a-250a;
bk  xi,  481a-482a;  bk  xii,  561b562a;  bk  xiv,  608a-b;  epilogue i,
673d674a,c  54  Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, lla-13a
esp  lld-12c  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  173a-174d;  178a-205c  esp
178a179c, 189b-190a, 194b-d, 197b-198d, 204c-d; 230b-231c; 252c-340a esp
252c-253a,  264c272c,  282a-285b,332a-333b,339b-340a;356d373a  passim  /
General  Introduction, 476a-478b; 489c-494d esp 492d-493c; 504d-526c esp
504d-506c,  518d-519d;  539c-544d  esp 539c540a, 541b / New Introductory
Lectures,  808d817a  esp 809b, 810b-d, 812d, 813d-814b 6b. The symbolism
of  apparently  normal  acts: forgetting, verbal slips, errors 54 Freud:
Origin  and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 13a-c / General Introduction,
453b476a,c  esp 467d-468a; 546b-547a / New Introductory Lectures, 852a-b
6c.   The   symbolism  of  anxieties,  obsessions,  and  other  neurotic
manifestations 5 Euripides: Orestes
[1-423]
394a-398b esp
[255-259] 396c, [385-400] 397c-398a

[785a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  speech,  see Idea 4^4); Language 5—5b. idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
I. Works by authors represented in this collection. II. Works by authors
not  represented  in  this  collection.  .  The Harmony of the Gospels .
Epistle  to Can Grande della Scala Aquinas. Summa Contra Gentiles, bk i,
ch 22-25 Hobbes. Concerning Body, part i, ch 2

[785b]
tion   3;   Language   ia,  7;  Reasoning  3b;  and  for  other  logical
considerations  in  the  use  of  8d(i)-8e;  and  for  the theory of the
neuroses  and  neurotic  behavior  relevant  to  the  interpretation  of
psychological  signs,  see  Desire  4a~4d;  Emotion  33-3^4); Memory and
Imagination 2e(2) ; Opposition 4c.

[786a]
752  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  J.  S.  Mill. A System of Logic, bk i Freud. The
Psychopathology   of  Everyday  Life,  ch  8-12  .  A  Review  of  ''The
Antithetical  Sense of Primal Words" . A Connection Between a Symbol and
a Symptom II. Philodemus. On Methods of Inference Quintilian. Institutio
Oratoria  {Institutes of Oratory}, bk vn, ch 9 Sextus Empiricus. Against
the Logicians, bk ii, CH 2 Maimonides. The Guide for the Perplexed, part
i,   ch   1-30,  37-45,  61-64  Bonaventura.  Breviloquium,  prologue  .
Itinerarium  Mentis  in  Deum  (The  Itinerary  of the Mind to God) Duns
Scotus.  Opus Oxoniense, bk iv Ockham. Studies and Selections, Logic, ch
11-12 Thomas of Erfurt. Grammatica Speculativa Nicolas of Cusa. De Docta
Ignorantia,   bk   i,   ch  12  Cajetan.  De  Nominum  Analogia  Suarez.
Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xxvm  (3),  xxx (13), xxxii (2), xxxix (3)
Boehme.  The  Signature  of  All  Things  John  of  Saint Thomas. Cursus
Philosophicus  Thomisticus, Ars Logica, part 1, qq 1-3; part h, QQ 21-22
Arnauld.  Logic  or  the  Art  of  Thinking, part i, ch 11, 15 Leibnitz.
Characteristica  .  New  Essays  Concerning  Human  Understanding, bk hi
Condillac.  Essai  sur  Vorigine  des connaissances humaines, part ii J.
Harris.  Hermes, or A Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Universal Grammar
Voltaire.   "Allegories,"  "Figure  in  Theology,"  in  A  Philosophical
Dictionary  T. Reid. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, 1, ch 1 ;
vi,  ch  5  Creuzer.  Symbolic  und Mythologie der alten Voider Emerson.
Nature Venn. Symbolic Logic

[786b]
;  C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  ii, par 219-444; vol v, par
388-410  Frazer.  The Golden Bough, part i, ch 3, 8-21; PART II, CH 5-6;
PART  III,  CH  8;  PART IV, BK I, CH 4; PART V, CH I-9 Breal. Semantics
Royce.  The  World  and the Individual, series i (7) Supplementary Essay
(2)  J.  C.  Wilson. Statement and Inference, part ii (18) Whitehead and
Russell.  Principia  Mathematica, ch 3 Welby-Gregory. What Is Meaning? .
Signifies and Language W. E. Johnson. Logic, part i, ch 6-8; part ii, ch
3  Wittgenstein.  Tractatus Logico-Philosophicus Ogden and Richards. The
Meaning  of Meaning Santayana. Scepticism and Animal Faith, ch 18 Eaton.
Symbolism  and  Truth  Eddington. The Nature ofthe Physical World, ch 12
Whitehead. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge, ch
i  .  Symbolism, Its Meaning and Effects . Process and Reality, part ii,
ch  8  Penido.  Le  role  de Vanalogie en theologie dogmatique Richards.
Mencius  on  the  Mind Buchanan. The Doctrine of Signatures, ch 1-2, 5"6
Dewey.  Essays in Experimental Logic, iv . Experience and Nature, ch 5 .
Logic,   the  Theory  of  Inquiry,  ch  18  B.  Russell.  Principles  of
Mathematics,  ch  4-8,  27  . The Analysis of Mind, lect 10 . An Inquiry
into  Meaning  and  Truth,  ch  1-6,  13-15, 22 Maritain. The Degrees of
Knowledge,  ch  2  .  Ransoming the Time, ch 9 M. R. Cohen. A Preface to
Logic, ii-iv Cassirer. Language and Myth . An Essay on Man . The Myth of
the  State,  part i (1-3) Ayer. Thinking and Meaning Carnap. Foundations
of  Logic  and  Mathematics  .  Introduction  to Semantics . Meaning and
Necessity Dewey and Bentley. Knowing and the Known

[787a]
Chapter  86:  SIN  INTRODUCTION THE sin of Satan and the sin of Adam are
among  the  great  mysteries of the Christian religion. Satan is highest
among  the  angels,  the  first of God's spiritual creatures. He is only
less  than  God  in  the  perfection of his nature. Adam is created with
supernatural   graces   and  gifts,  his  immortal  body  is  completely
responsive  to  his  spirit, his appetite in all things is submissive to
his  reason,  and  his  reason  is  turned  toward God, according to the
original  justice which harmonized his faculties and the elements of his
nature.  The  only  evil  latent  in  either Satan or Adam would seem to
reside  in  the  privation  of infinite being, power, and knowledge. But
this  is  not  a  moral  evil  in  them;  it  is  neither  a  sin  nor a
predisposition  to  sin.  Hence  the only cause of their sinning, if God
himself  does not predestine them to sin, must be a free choice on their
part  between  good and evil. If God positively predestines them to sin,
then  they  would seem to be without responsibility, and so without sin.
If  they  are  not predetermined to evil— if, except for the weakness of
being  finite,  they  are without positive blemish—how does the conflict
arise  in  them  which opens the choice between good and evil and impels
them,  almost  against  the inclination of their natures, away from good
and  toward  evil ? In Milton's Paradise Lost, God says of Adam: "I made
him  just  and right, sufficient to have stood, though free to fall." Of
Satan  and  fallen  angels,  as  well  as  of  Adam,  God observes: They
therefore  as  to  right belongd, So were created, nor can justly accuse
Thir  maker,  or  thir  making, or thir Fate; As if Predestination over-
rul'd  Their  will,  dispos'd  by absolute Decree Of high foreknowledge;
they  themselves  decreed  Thir  own  revolt,  not  I:  if  I  foreknew,
Foreknowledge  had no influence on their fault, Which had no less prov'd
certain unforeknown. 753

[787b]
Yet  there is a difference between Adam and Satan. The fallen angels "by
their  own  suggestion  fell,  self-tempted,  deprav'd."  Satan,  having
sinned,  becomes  man's tempter. "Man falls deceiv'd by the other first:
Man therefore shall find grace, the other none." As Satan approaches the
Garden  of  Eden to work his will on man, he contemplates his plight. He
does  not deny his sin, he does not repent it, he does not seem fully to
understand  it.  Thus  Milton has him speak: O thou that with surpassing
Glory  crowned,  Look'st from the sole Dominion like the God Of this new
World;  at whose sight all the Starrs Hide thir diminisht heads; to thee
I  call,  But with no friendly voice, and add thy name Sun, to tell thee
how  I  hate  thy  beams  That bring to my remembrance from what state 1
fell, how glorious once above thy Spheare; Till Pride and worse Ambition
threw  me  down  Warring  in  Heav'n  against Heav'ns matchless King; Ah
wherefore!  he  deserved  no such return From me, whom he created what I
was  In  that bright eminence, and with his good Upbraided none; nor was
his  service  hard.  What  could  be less than to afford him praise, The
easiest recompense, and pay him thanks, How due! yet all his good prov'd
ill  in  me,  And  wrought  but  malice;  lifted  up  so  high  I sdeind
subjection,  and  thought one step higher Would set me highest, and in a
moment quit The debt immense of endless gratitude, So burthensome, still
paying,  still  to owe . . . O had his powerful Destiny ordained Me some
inferior  Angel,  I  had stood Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais'd
Ambition.  Yet  why  not ? some other Power As great might have aspir'd,
and  me  through  mean Drawn to his part; but other Powers as great Fell
not, but stand unshak'n, from within Or from without, to all temptations
arm'd.  Hads't thou the same free Will and Power to stand ? Thou hads't:
whom  has  thou  then  or  what  to accuse, But Heav'ns free Love, dealt
equally  to  all?  Be  then  his  Love accurst, since love or hate To me
alike,  it deals eternal woe. Nay cursed be thou; since against his, thy
will

[788a]
754  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Chose  freely  what  it  now  so justly rues. Me
miserable!  which  way  shall  I  flie  Infinite  wrauth,  and  infinite
despaire?  Which  way I flie is Hell; my self am Hell; And in the lowest
deep a lower deep Still threatning to devour me opens wide, To which the
Hell  I  suffer seems a Heav'n. O then at last relent: is there no place
Left  for Repentance, nor for Pardon left ? None left but by submission;
and  that  word  Disdain  forbids  me,  and  my dread of shame Among the
spirits  beneath,  whom  I  seduc'd With other promises and other vaunts
Then  to  submit,  boasting  I could subdue Th' Omnipotent. Before Satan
approaches Eve, Adam reminds her of their debt of obedience, saying that
God  requires From us no other service than to keep This one, this easie
charge,  of  all  the  Trees  In  Paradise that beare delicious fruit So
various,  not to taste that onely Tree Of Knowledge, planted by the Tree
of  Life.  So neer grows Death to Life, what ere Death is, Some dreadful
thing  no  doubt  ; for well thou knowst God hath pronounc'd it death to
taste  that  Tree,  The  only  sign  of our obedience left Among so many
signes  of  power and rule Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv'n Over all
other  Creatures  that  possesse  Earth,  Aire, and Sea. Then let us not
think  hard  One easie prohibition, who enjoy Free leave so large to all
things  else,  and choice Unlimited of manifold delights. The temptation
to  disobey  first  moves  Eve  in a dream in which the apparition of an
angel  speaks  of the forbidden fruit as onely fit For Gods, yet able to
make  Gods  of  Men;  And  why  not  Gods  of  Men, since good, the more
Communicated, more abundant growes, The Author not impair'd, but honourd
more?  "Here,  happie  Creature,"  the  vision says to her, Happier thou
mayst be, worthier canst not be: Taste this, and be henceforth among the
Gods Thy self a Goddess, not to Earth confind, But sometimes in the Air,
as  wee,  sometimes  Ascend to Heav'n, by merit thine, and see What life
the  Gods  live there, and such live thou. Later when Satan in the guise
of  the Serpent actually addresses Eve, he argues in the same vein, that
as  he,  by  tasting of this fruit, speaks as a man, so Eve and Adam, if
they too partake, "shall be as Gods, knowing both Good

[788b]
and  Evil  as  they  know." Eve succumbs and, as Milton tells the story,
Adam,  knowing fully the evil of his act, joins Eve in disobedience, not
from  envy  of the gods, but out of love for her, willing to die because
unwilling to live without her. Willing "to incurr divine displeasure for
her  sake,  or  Death.  .  . . he scrupl'd not to eat Against his better
knowledge,  not  deceav'd,  But  fondly overcome with Femal charm. Earth
trembled  from her entrails, as again In pangs, and Nature gave a second
groan,  Skie  lowr'd,  and  muttering  Thunder,  som  sad  drops Wept at
compleating  of  the mortal Sin Original. In the poet's expansion of the
third  chapter  of  Genesis,  the  basic elements in the JudaeoChristian
conception  of sin seem to be plainly accented: the pride and envy which
move  Satan and Eve, the disobedience which results from the disorder of
Adam's  loving Eve more than he loves God. In the Divine Comedy, another
great  poem  of  sin and salvation, Adam speaks to Dante in Paradise and
tells  him  that "the tasting of the tree was not by itself the cause of
so  great  an  exile,  but  only  the overpassing of the bound." Earlier
Beatrice  explains why, in order to redeem man from sin, the Word of God
assumed  human  nature—  "the nature which has estranged itself from its
Maker."  She  tells Dante that "this nature, thus united with its Maker,
was  pure  and  good  such  as it was created; but by itself it had been
banished  from  Paradise,  because it turned aside from the way of truth
and from its own life." Man can fall from his nobility by "sin alone . .
.  which  disfranchises  him,  and makes him unlike the Supreme Good, so
that  he  is  little illumined by Its light; and to his dignity he never
returns,  unless  where  fault  empties, he fills up with just penalties
against  evil  delight." In both the pagan and the Christian conceptions
of  sin,  man's  pride  and  his  disobedience of divine commandment are
usually  connected  with the very notion of sin. The heroes of the Greek
tragedies,  exhibiting  the  tragic fault of pride, seem to forget that,
though  they  strive  with gods, they are only men, subject to laws they
cannot disobey without catastrophe. In

[789a]
the Iliad, Phoenix cautions Achilles to "battle with your pride and beat
it; cherish not your anger for ever; the might and majesty of heaven are
more  than  ours,  but  even  heaven  mayjae appeased ; and if a man has
sinned  he prays the gods, and reconciles them to himself by his piteous
cries."  In  pride  and  disobedience  we find the deep disorder of love
which lies at the heart of sin. Pride is self-love in excess of what the
self  deserves.  Disobedience,  as  in the case of Milton's Adam, may be
prompted  by  a  love which, too, exceeds the worth of the object loved.
The  measure  of  that worth, or the bounds put upon the love of self or
other,  is  set  by  the  Supreme  Good which, ordering all other goods,
should  also order our loves in proportion to their goodness. This seems
to  be  the  central insight of the Divine Comedy. It is given a summary
statement  in Purgatory, where Virgil explains how love is the root both
of  virtue and of sin. "Neither Creator nor creature," he says to Dante,
"was  ever  without  love,  either natural or of the mind, and this thou
knowest-  The  natural  is  always  without error; but the other may err
either  through  an  evil  object,  or through little or too much vigor.
While  love is directed on the primal goods, and with due measure on the
secondary, it cannot be the cause of ill delight. But when it is bent to
evil,  or  runs  to  good  with  more zeal, or with less, than it ought,
against  the  Creator  his  own  creature  is  working. Hence thou canst
comprehend  that  love  is of necessity the seed in you of every virtue,
and  of  every  action  that  deserves punishment." Dostoevsky offers us
further  thoughts  concerning  the  relation  of  love  and  sin. In the
Brothers  Karamazov, Father Zossima makes lack of love the punishment as
well  as the substance of sin. To those who ask, "What is Hell ?" Father
Zossima replies: "I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to
love.  .  .  .  They talk of hell fire in the material sense. I don't go
into  that  mystery and I shun it. But I think if there were fire in the
material  sense,  they  would  be  glad  of  it, for, I imagine, that in
material  agony,  their still greater spiritual agony would be forgotten
for  a moment. . . . Oh, there are some who remain proud and fierce even
in hell, in spite of their certain knowledge and con-

[789b]
Chapter  86:  SIN  755  templation of the absolute truth; there are some
fearful  ones  who  have  given  themselves  over to Satan and his proud
spirit  entirely.  For  such, hell is voluntary and ever consuming; they
are  tortured  by  their  own  choice.  For they have cursed themselves,
cursing  God  and To avoid sin, the only positive commandment, according
to Father Zossima, is to love in accordance with God's love. "Love a man
even in his sin," he counsels, "for that is the semblance of Divine Love
and  is  the  highest  love  on  earth. . . . And let not the sin of men
confound  you  in your doings. Fear not that it will wear away your work
and hinder its being accomplished. There is only one means of salvation;
then  take  unto  yourself, and make yourself responsible for, all men's
sins; that is the truth, you know, friends, for as soon as you sincerely
make  yourself  responsible for everything and for all men, you will see
at  once that it is really so, and you are to blame for everyone and for
all things. But throwing your own indolence and impotence on others, you
will end by sharing the pride of Satan and murmuring against God. Of the
pride  of  Satan,  what  I  think is this: it is hard for us on earth to
comprehend  it,  and  therefore  it is so easy to fall into error and to
share it, even imagining that we are doing something grand and fine." In
the  disorder  of love which leads to sin, sin is itself enjoyed for its
own  sake,  and the disobedient act is pleasant because it is forbidden.
In that also there is the pride of supposing one's self to be a law unto
one's  self. In his Confessions, concerned most immediately with his own
sinfulness,  Augustine  reflects  upon  the pears he stole in his youth,
not,  as he says, from "any desire to enjoy the things I stole, but only
the  stealing  of  them and the sin." He asks himself: "What was it then
that  in my wretched folly I loved in you, O theft of mine, deed wrought
in  that  dark  night  when I was sixteen?" He had no need of the pears.
"Once I had gathered them," he says, "I threw them away, tasting only my
own sin and savouring that with delight; for if I took so much as a bite
of  any  one of those pears, it was the sin that sweetened it." He keeps
on  asking himself what it was that attracted him in that theft, what it
was that

[790a]
756  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  he  enjoyed  in  that  childish act of stealing.
"Perhaps," he finally answers, "it was the thrill of acting against Your
law—at  least  in appearance, since I had no power to do so in fact, the
delight   a  prisoner  might  have  in  making  some  small  gesture  of
liberty—getting  a  deceptive  sense of omnipotence from doing something
forbidden  without immediate punishment. I was that slave, who fled from
his Lord and pursued his Lord's shadow. O rottenness, O monstrousness of
life  and  abyss  of  death!  Could  you  find pleasure only in what was
forbidden,  and only because it was forbidden?" In the pagan and Judaeo-
Christian  conceptions  of  sin, the fundamental meaning seems to depend
upon  the  relation of man to the gods or to God, whether that itself be
considered  in terms of law or love. The vicious act may be conceived as
one  which  is  contrary  to  nature  or reason. The criminal act may be
conceived  as a violation of the law of man, injurious to the welfare of
the   state  or  to  its  members.  Both  may  involve  the  notions  of
responsibility  and  fault.  Both  may  involve evil and wrongdoing. But
unless the act transgresses the law of God, it is not sinful. The divine
law  which  is  transgressed may be the natural law that God instills in
human  reason,  but  the act is sinful if the person who commits the act
turns  away  from  God  to  the  worship  or  love  of  other things. To
disbelieve  in  God,  in  divine  law  and divine punishment, is also to
disbelieve  in  sin  at  least  in the sense in which religious men have
distinguished  between saints and sinners, between the righteous and the
wicked  in  the  eyes  of God. "There are only two kinds of men," writes
Pascal:  "the  righteous  who  believe  themselves  sinners;  the  rest,
sinners,  who  believe  themselves  righteous."  Those  who  reject  the
religious  meaning  of sin do not deny the wide prevalence of a sense of
sin,  nor  do  they deny that many men suffer remorse for transgressions
which  they  suppose  to  be  evil  in God's eyes; but, with Freud, they
interpret  these feelings of guilt in terms of natural causes. They hold
that  the person who is tormented by conscience suffers from an illusion
concerning  the  true  nature  of  his  guilt.  When the sense of sin is
intensely active and is, in addition, apparently unexplained by the

[790b]
character and conduct of the person, the guiltfeelings, according to the
Freudian  view,  take  on  the attributes of pathological distortion and
become  part  of  the symptomology of the neuroses. There is no question
about  the  sincerity of the person who is thus agonized, but only about
the true causes of the agony. "When one asks how a sense of guilt arises
in  anyone,"  Freud  says,  "one  is  told something one cannot dispute:
people  feel  guilty (pious people call it 'sinful') when they have done
something  they  know  to  be  'bad.'  But then one sees how little this
answer tells one." What accounts for the judgment a man makes of himself
as  good or bad ? Freud's answer is that "what is bad is, to begin with,
whatever causes one to be threatened with a loss of love; because of the
dread of this loss, one must desist from it. That is why it makes little
difference  whether  one  has  already  committed  the  bad deed or only
intends  to  do  so."  The external authority of the father and, through
him,  of  society  becomes,  according  to  Freud,  "internalized by the
development  of  a  super-ego. The manifestations of conscience are then
raised  to a new level; to be strict one should not call them conscience
and sense of guilt before this. ... At this second stage of development,
conscience  exhibits  a peculiarity which was absent in the first. . . .
That  is,  the more righteous a man is, the stricter and more suspicious
will  his conscience be, so that ultimately it is precisely those people
who  have  carried  holiness  farthest  who reproach themselves with the
deepest  sinfulness.  ... A relatively strict and vigilant conscience is
the  very  sign  of  a  virtuous  man,  and  though  saints may proclaim
themselves sinners, they are not so wrong, in view of the temptations of
instinctual gratifications to which they are peculiarly liable—since, as
we  know,  temptations do but increase under constant privation, whereas
they   subside,   at  any  rate,  temporarily,  if  they  are  sometimes
gratified."  Freud applies his theory of the origin of feelings of guilt
(in "the dread of authority" first and later in "the dread of the super-
ego,") to the religious sense of sin. "The people of Israel," he writes,
"believed  themselves  to  be  God's  favorite child, and when the great
Father hurled visitation after visitation upon

[791a]
them,  it  still never shook them in this belief or caused them to doubt
His  power  and  His  justice;  they  proceeded  instead  to bring their
prophets into the world to declare their^sjjifulness to them, and out of
their  sense  of  guilt  they  constructed the stringent commandments of
their  priestly religion." In general, Freud thinks, the great religions
"have  never  overlooked  the  part  played  by  the  sense  of guilt in
civilization.  What  is more, they come forward with a claim ... to save
mankind  from this sense of guilt which they call sin. We have drawn our
conclusion  from the way in which in Christianity this salvation is won—
the sacrificial death of one who therewith takes the whole of the common
guilt of all upon himself, about the occasion on which this primal sense
of guilt was first acquired." The conclusion referred to is developed in
two  of Freud's works which are devoted to the consideration of religion
and sin— the Future of an Illusion and Totem and Taboo. In the latter of
these  books,  Freud  tells us, he had first "expressed a suspicion that
perhaps  the sense of guilt in mankind as a whole, which is the ultimate
source  of  religion  and  morality,  was  acquired  in the beginning of
history  through  the  Oedipus complex." Other writers, who approach the
problem  of  sin  in  legalistic rather than psychological terms, either
make  no  distinction  between  crime  and  sin  or make the distinction
without referring to God. Spinoza, for example, prefaces his explanation
of  the  meanings  of  "praise  and  blame,  merit  and  crime,"  with a
discussion  of  the  difference  between "the natural and civil state of
man." In a state of nature, he says, no one is "bound by any law to obey
any  one  but himself. Hence in a natural state sin cannot be conceived,
but only in a civil state, where it is decided by universal consent what
is good and what is evil, and where everyone is bound to obey the State.
Sin,  therefore,  is  nothing but disobedience, which is punished by the
law  of the State alone." Though Hobbes does not identify crime and sin,
his  distinction  between them does not seem to be based on the contrast
between  the  civil law and the divine law, unless the latter is equated
with the law of nature. "A crime is a

[791b]
Chapter  86:  SIN 757 sin," he writes, "consisting in the committing (by
deed  or word) of that which the law forbiddeth, or the omission of that
which it hath commanded. So that every crime is a sin, but not every sin
a  crime. To intend to steal or kill is a sin, though it never appear in
word  or fact, for God that seeth the thoughts of man, can lay it to his
charge;  but  till  it  appear  by something done, or said, by which the
intention may be argued by a human judge, it hath not the name of crime.
"From  this relation of sin to the law," Hobbes continues, "and of crime
to  the  civil  law, may be inferred, first, that where law ceaseth, sin
ceaseth.  But  because  the  law  of  nature  is  eternal,  violation of
covenants,  ingratitude,  arrogance, and all facts contrary to any moral
virtue, can never cease to be sin. Secondly, that the civil law ceasing,
crimes  cease;  for  there  being  no  other  law remaining, but that of
nature, there is no place for accusation; every man being his own judge,
and  accused  only by his own conscience, and cleared by the uprightness
of his own intention. When therefore his intention is right, his fact is
no sin; if otherwise, his fact is sin, but not crime." The more strictly
religious  conception  of sin seems to be exemplified by Pascal's remark
that  "all  that  God  does  not permit is forbidden" and that "sins are
forbidden  by the general declaration that God has made, that He did not
allow  them." Whatever God does not permit, "we ought to regard as sin,"
for  "the  absence of God's will, which is all goodness and all justice,
renders  it  unjust  and  wrong."  With the precision of a theologian in
these  matters,  Aquinas defines the peculiar type of evil which is sin.
"Evil," he writes, "is more comprehensive than sin, as also is good than
right.  .  .  .  Now  in  those  things  that  are done by the will, the
proximate  rule  is  the  human  reason,  while  the supreme rule is the
eternal  law. When, therefore, a human act tends to the end according to
the  order of reason and of the eternal law, then that act is right; but
when  it  turns aside from that rectitude, then it is said to be a sin."
Elsewhere  he says that "every created will has rectitude of act only so
far  as it is regulated according to the divine will. . . . Thus only in
the divine will can there be no sin,

[792a]
758  THE  GREAT IDEAS whereas in the will of every creature, consid ered
according  to  its nature, there can be sin." The theological discussion
of   sin  involves  a  tremendous  range  of  topics,  and  problems  as
significant  as they are subtle. The dogma of original sin, for example,
raises  questions  not  only  about  the  cause  and character of Adam's
transgression,  but  also about the punishment which is visited upon the
children of Adam in perpetuity, and about the conditions under which man
can  be  reclaimed  from his bondage to sin, both original and actual or
personal.  There  seems  to  be  some  resemblance between the Christian
doctrine  that  Adam's sin merits a penalty to be paid by all subsequent
generations, and the Jewish doctrine of the collective responsibility of
the  people  of  Israel  for  the sins of their ancestors, even unto the
third  and  fourth generation. But the points of difference appear to be
more  fundamental  than  the similarity. In the first place, the sins of
the  fathers from which later generations suffer are the individual sins
of men whose natures are predisposed to sin, as Adam's, before the fall,
was  not.  In  the  second place, the punishment is visited not upon the
whole  human  race,  but only upon the Chosen People, and in the form of
temporal  scourges  rather  than in a corruption of human nature itself.
Furthermore,  the  Hebrew  prophet  Ezekiel  questions  the  justice  of
collective  responsibility.  "What  mean  ye," he asks, that ve use this
proverb  concerning  the  land of Israel, saving, The fathers have eaten
sour  grapes, and the children's teeth are set on edge? As I live, saith
the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this proverb in
Israel.  .  .  .  The soul that sinneth, it shall die. The son shall not
bear  the  iniquity  of  the  father,  neither shall the father bear the
iniquity  of  the  son: the righteousness of the righteous shall be upon
him,  and  the  wickedness  of  the wicked shall be upon him. But if the
wicked  will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep all
my  statutes,  and  do  that  which is lawful and right, he shall surely
live,  he  shall not die. All his transgressions that he hath committed,
they  shall not be mentioned unto him: in his righteousness that he hath
done he shall live.

[792b]
Have  I  any  pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord
God: and not that he should return from his ways, and live? But when the
righteous  turneth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity,
and  doeth  according to all the abominations that the wicked man doeth,
shall  he  live?  All  his  righteousness that he hath done shall not be
mentioned:  in his trespass that he hath trespassed, and in his sin that
he  hath  sinned, in them shall he die. According to Christian teaching,
the  justice  of  individual  punishment  for the sins which individuals
commit in their own lifetime does not apply to the penalty which all men
must pay for the sin of Adam. "Wherefore, as by one man sin entered into
the  world,"  St.  Paul  writes  to the Romans, and death by sin; and so
death  passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: (For until the law
sin  was  in  the  world  : but sin is not imputed when there is no law.
Nevertheless,  death reigned from Adam to Moses, even over them that had
not  sinned  after  the  similitude  of Adam's transgression, who is the
figure  of  him that was to come. But not as the offence, so also is the
free gift. For if through the offence of one many be dead, much more the
grace  of God, and the gift by grace, which is by one man, Jesus Christ,
hath abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that sinned, so is the
gift:  for the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the free gift is
of  many  offences unto justification. For if by one man's offence death
reigned  by  one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of
the  gift  of  righteousness  shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.)
Therefore  as  by  the  offence  of  one  judgment  came upon all men to
condemnation;  even  so  by  the righteousness of one the free gift came
upon   all  men  unto  justification  of  life.  For  as  by  one  man's
disobedience  many  were  made sinners, so by the obedience of one shall
many  be  made  righteous.  The  Christian doctrine of original sin thus
appears  to be closely connected with the Christian doctrine of the need
for  a  divine  saviour  —God  Himself become man to redeem man from the
taint  of  sin,  and through the sacraments He instituted to provide the
instruments  of  healing  grace  and  the  means  of repentance for, and
absolution  from,  both  original  sin and the individual's own personal
sins.

[793a]
The  understanding of the sacraments; the theory of grace in relation to
the  original  and  fallen nature of man; the issue concerning grace and
good  works,  or God's justification and man's merit, in the achievement
of  sarTcTTty  and  salvation;  the  distinction between the everlasting
perdition  of  Hell and the expiatory punishments of Purgatory—all these
fundamental  theological  problems  are involved in the consideration of
sin  and  its  consequences,  both  temporal  and eternal. Some of these
problems  are  discussed in the chapters on Man, Angel, Immortality, and
Punishment.  Other matters, such as the classification of sins according
to  the distinction between spiritual and carnal, mortal and venial, and
the  enumeration of the various species of both mortal and venial sin in
the  order of their gravity, are problems of moral theology. Though they
belong  primarily  to  this  chapter,  they  are  also  related  to  the
classification  of  virtues  and  vices, especially to the theory of the
theological  virtues;  and  among the theological virtues, especially to
charity,  which  is  the  principle  of  sanctity,  even as pride is the
principle  of  sin.  Of  all  points  in  the  consideration of sin, the
distinction  between  original  and  acquired  sin  is  perhaps the most
important,  not  only  because  inherited sinfulness is conceived as the
predisposing  cause of all other sins, but also because the human nature
corrupted by sin is conceived as fallen below the perfection of a purely
natural  man  as  well  as  below  the  state of grace in which Adam was
created.  As  Adam  had gifts which made him superior to the natural man
immortality,  infused  knowledge  and  freedom from error, immunity from
concupiscence,  exemption  from  labor  and servility—so the children of
Adam, cast out of Eden, have ingrained weaknesses which make them unable
to  achieve  the  goods  or attain the ends proportionate to their human
nature.  According  to some theologians, the purely natural man, without
either the gifts of grace or the wounds of sin, has never existed. It is
this  mystery  of  man,  having  natural  aspirations  which  exceed the
.weakened  powers of his fallen nature, that Pascal seems to contemplate
in  all his observations on "the greatness and wretchedness of man"— the
"astonishing contradic-

[793b]
Chapter  86:  SIN 759 tions" which he thinks only the Christian religion
explains.  In  the state in which men now are, he writes, "there remains
to them some feeble instinct of the happiness of their former state; and
they  are  plunged in the evils of their blindness and their lust, which
have  become  their second nature." "As the result of original justice,"
Aquinas writes, "the reason had perfect hold over the lower parts of the
soul,  while reason itself was perfected by God in being subject to Him.
Now  this  same  original  justice was forfeited by the sin of our first
parent  ...  so  that  all  the powers of the soul are left, as it were,
destitute  of their proper order, whereby they are naturally directed to
virtue.  This  destitution is called a wounding of nature. ... In so far
as  the  reason is deprived of its order to the true, there is the wound
of  ignorance;  in  so  far  as the will is deprived of its order to the
good,  there  is  the  wound  of  malice;  in so far as the irascible is
deprived  of  its  order to the arduous, there is the wound of weakness;
and  in  so  far  as  the  concupiscible is deprived of its order to the
delectable  as moderated by reason, there is the wound of concupiscence.
Accordingly,  these  are the four wounds inflicted on the whole of human
nature as a result of our first parent's Aquinas rejects the supposition
that  "the entire good of human nature can be destroyed by sin," arguing
that what sin diminishes is "the natural inclination to virtue, which is
befitting  to  man  from the very fact that he is a rational being." But
"sin  cannot  entirely take away from man the fact that he is a rational
being,  for  then he would no longer be capable Other theologians take a
more  extreme  view than Aquinas and Augustine. They attribute depravity
rather  than  weakness to human nature as a consequence of original sin.
"On  the Calvinistic theory," Mill writes, "the one great offense of man
is  self-will." Under the maxim that "whatever is not a duty, is a sin,"
men  are  left  with  no choice. "Human nature being radically corrupt,"
Mill  continues,  "there is no redemption for any one until human nature
is killed within him." But, according to Augustine and Aquinas, original
sin does not deprive the individual man entirely of the power to estab-

[794a]
760  THE GREAT IDEAS 2a. The distinction between original and actual sin
ib. The distinction between spiritual and carnal sin ic. The distinction
between mortal and venial sin (1) The classification and order of mortal
sins  (2)  The classification and order of venial sins natural gifts 3b.
The  sin  of Adam 4. Actual or personal sin 40. The relation of original
sin  to  actual  sin /\b. The causes and occasions of actual sin ^d. The
consequences  of  actual  sin:  the  loss  of charity and grace penance;
contrition, confession, and absolution tion or election 6c. The temporal
punishment  of  sin: divine scourges 7. Grace and good works in relation
to salvation from sin

[794b]
lish his worth, though it puts him in need of tion by the merit of their
own  good works, God's help to be worthy of salvation. Between Augustine
and  Aquinas try to take the middle the one extreme which holds that men
can  be  position,  according  to which neither grace withsaved by God's
grace alone, and the other exout good works nor good works without grace
treme which supposes that men can win salvawill avail. OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGE  i.  The  nature of sin: violation of divine law; disorder in man's
relation  to God 761 2. The kinds and degrees of sin 762 3. The doctrine
of  original  sin  763  3<r.  The nature of fallen man in consequence of
Adam's  sin  764  y.  The  remission  of  sin: baptism; the state of the
unbaptized  765  4<r.  Pride  as  the principle of sin: the tragic fault
oihybris  766  pression  of  the  sense  of  sin  767  6.  Guilt and the
punishment of sin 768 6b. Collective responsibility for sin: the sins of
the fathers 769 Hell 770 6e. The purifying punishments of Purgatory 771

[795a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the nmTTbersln heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in  one column, the letters a and b refer to the upperand lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James . Psychology, \\6a.-\l9b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The nature of sin: violation of
divine  law;  disorder  in man's relation to God Old Testament: Genesis,
2:15-17;  3  esp  3:11;  4:7;  6:11-13  / Exodus, 20:1-17 / Deuteronomy,
5:6-21  / Job, 35:6 / Psalms, 36:1-4— (D) Psalms, 35:1-5 / Isaiah, 59:2—
(D)    Isaias,   59:2   New   Testament:   Matthew,   4:1-11   /   Luke,
4:113/70^/2,8:34;  9:31;  15:22  /Romans,  5:13,1921; 6:7-14,23; 7:7-11;
14:23  /  / Corinthians, :55-56 / James, 1:15; 4:17 / I John, 3:4-8; 1 5
5:17  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk  i  [91-147]  4a-c;  bk  ix [485526] 62a-b 5
Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon
[355-398]
55d-56b;
[905-957]
61c-62b  / Eumenides [490-565] 86b-87a 5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d /
Ajax 143a155a,c 5 Euripides: Hippolytus [1-57] 225a-c / Electra
[907-956] 335b-d/ Bacchantes 340a-352a,c esp
[1302-135 1] 351a-c / Iphigenia at Aulis [1146i2io]435c-436a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch 10 88a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 9-14
10d12b;  bk in, par 15-17 17a-18a; bk v, par 2 27b-c; bk vii, par 22 50a
/ City of God, bk xii,

[795b]
Chapter  86: SIN 761 ch 3 343d-344b; bk xiv, ch 3-4, 378a-379a; ch 10-15
385b-390a;  bk  xv, ch 22 416a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
63 325b-333d; part i-ii, q 1, a 7, rep i 614c615a; q 21, a 1 717a-d; a 4
719d-720a,c; q 34, a 1, ans 768c-769d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  71 105c-110b; q 72, a 2, ans 112b-113a; a 4 114a115a; a 5, ans
115a-116b;  q  73,  a  1  119c-120c;  q  74  128d-137c;  q  91, a 4, ans
210c-211c; part in, q 8, aa 7-8 761d-763b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
hi [1-18] 4a-b; xi 15a-16b; xxvn
[55-132] 40a-41a; purgatory, xvi
[52-114] 77b-78a; xvn
[9i]-xvin
[75]
79b-80c; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b esp xxx
[96J-XXX1
[63]
lOOb-lOlc; paradise, 1
[94142] 107b-d; vii [16-120] 115b-1116b
22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par 19, 507b-508a; par 21 509a-b; par 30,
516a;  par  34  519b;  par 35-43, 520b-524a passim; par 53, 526b; par 63
530a-b;  par  70,  534b; par 74, 535b; par 85 543a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  85d;  part ii, 138d-139c; 142c-d; 149b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
233b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 80d-81a; lOOd 31 Descartes:
Meditations, 73d-74a / Objections and Replies, 125d-126a

[796a]
762  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (1.  The nature of sin: violation of divine law;
disorder  in  man's  relation to God.) 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
37,  schol  2  435b-436a  32  Milton  :  Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk i
[128168] 96a-97a, [209-220] 98a, bk ii
[648-666]
125b,
[746-814]
127b-129a, bk hi
[1-415]
135b-144b, bk iv
[32-113]
153a-155a, bk v
[600-904] 188b-195a, bk vi [262-295] 202a-b,
bk  vii  [519-549]  228b-229a, bk viii [316-337] 239a-b, bk ix [679-779]
262a-264a  /  Areopagitica,  395a  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 19b;
24b-26b;  45a-b;  78b-80b  /  Pensees,  668  294b-295a  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxviii, sect 7-8 229d-230a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall, 93c 43 Mill: Liberty, 296b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  hi,  304c306a; part iv, 354a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 30a-36b esp
31a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk hi, 65a-67a; bk v, 132b-c; bk vi, 165b-c 2. The kinds and
degrees  of  sin Old Testament -.Exodus, 20 \1-1j / Deuteronomy, 5:6-21;
25:2  New Testament: Matthew, 4:1-11; 5:22; 12:3132 / Mar\, 3:29 / Luke,
4:1-13;  12:10,47-48  / John, 19:11 / / Corinthians, 8:10-12/ Galatians,
5:19-21  /  /  Timothy,  1:13 / Hebrews, 10:26-29 /James, 2:10 / 1 John,
2:16;  5:16-17  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  ix,  sect  i  291a-c 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk ii, par 9-16 10d12d; bk in, par 16 17c-d; bk
x,  par  41-64 81c-87d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 72-73
110b-128d;  q 100, aa 4-6 253d-258c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell la-52d
esp xi 15a-16b; purgatory 53a-105d esp xvn
[91139] 79b-d
22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale  495a-550a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv,
257c-258a  31  Descartes:  Objections  and Replies, 125d-126a 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters  la-167b passim, esp 27a-127a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  198d;  220c-221b  44 Boswell: Johnson, 196b-c 2a. The distinction
between  original  and  actual  sin  New  Testament:  Romans, 5:14-16 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xiv,  ch  i  376b,d-377a; ch 3 378a-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 81, a 1, ans 163a-164d; a 2
164d-155c;  a 3, ans 165d-166b; q 82, a i, rep 2 168a-d; part hi, q 1, a
4, ans 706a-707a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-114] 77b-78a
22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 18, 507b

[796b]
/  2  to  2c(2) 2b. The distinction between spiritual and carnal sin Old
Testament:  Exodus, 20:1-1 7 Deuteronomy, 5:6-21 New Testament: Matthew,
4:1-11 / Lul^e, 4:113 / // Corinthians, 7:1 / I John, 2:16 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi, par 16 17c-d; bk v, par 4 27d-28a; bk x, par 41-64
81c-87d  esp  par  41  81c-d, par 54 85a-b / City of God, bk xiv, ch 2-3
377a-378d  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk in, ch 2, 658b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 63, a 2 326c-327b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 72, a 2 112b-113a; q 73, a 5 123a-d; q 77, a 5 149a-150a; q
100, a 4, ans 253d-255a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v
[25-45]
7b-c;  purgatory,  xvn [76-139] 79b-d 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 18,
507b  2c.  The  distinction between mortal and venial sin New Testament:
Matthew,  12:31-32  / / John, 5:16-17 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xxi,
ch  24,  577d-578a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 72, a 5
115a-116b;  q  74, a 4 131a-d; aa 8-10 134b-137c; q 77, a 8 151c-152a; q
88  192d198d;  q  89,  a  1  199a-c; part ii-ii, q 186, a 9 661a-662b 22
Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par  21 509a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
66a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk xi, 477d 2c(l) The classification
and  order  of mortal sins Old Testament: Exodus, 20:1-17 / Deuteronomy,
5:6-21  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  63, a 2, rep 2
64b-65a;  q  84 174b-178a; q 100, aa 4-6 253d-258c; part ii-ii, qq 10-15
426c454c;  qq  20-21  474d-480d;  qq 34-43 558d592d; q 46 603c-605a,c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell, ix [52-63] 12d13a; xi 15a-16b; purgatory,
xvn
[91-139]
79b-d 22 Chaucer: Summoner's Tale
[7587-7670]
290a-291b / Pardoner's Tale
[12,397-593]
374a-377b  /  Parson's  Tale,  par  23-84 510b542b 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  33b-34a;  67a;  118b-119b;  140a  42  Kant:  Science of Right,
440b-441b  The  classification  and  order  of  venial  2c(2)  sins  New
Testament:  /  Corinthians,  3:12-15  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 89, a 2 199c-200d 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 22 509b-510b 33
Pascal: Provincial Letters, 67b; 118a-119b

[797a]
3  to  lb  Chapter  86:  SIN  763  3.  The  doctrine of original sin Old
Testament:  Genesis,  2:16-17;  3  esP  3  :I 7_I 9 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  2:23-24—  (D)  OT,  Boo{  of  Wisdom,  2 =23-25 New Testament:
Romans,  5  esp  5:12-19  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 18 5c-d /
City  of  God,  bk  xii, ch 21-22 357a-c; bk xiii, ch 1-15 360a-366d; bk
xiv,  ch  i  376b,d-377a;  ch  10-16  385b-390b; bk xxi, ch 12 571a-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 47, a 2, ans 257b-258c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 81-83 162d-174b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxviii
[91-96]
97a; xxix
[22-30]
97d-98a; xxxm
[52-72]
104d-105a; paradise, vii
[16-120]
115b-116b 22 Chaucer: Pardoner's Tale [12,432-445] 375a / Parson's Tale,
par 18 506b-507b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17d-18a; 81a / Novum
Organum,  bk  ii,  aph  52, 195c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 68,
schol 445a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk i
[i26] 93b-94a, bk hi [80-415] 137a-144b, bk iv
[411-439]
161b-162a,
[512-520]
163b, bk v
[28-94]
176a-177a,
[224-247]
180a-b,
[512553] 186b-187a, bk viii [316-333] 239a-b, bk
ix
[647-1004]
261b-269a,
[1110-1133]
271b272a, bk x
[585-640]
287a-288b,
[720-844]
290a-292b,
[1013-1104]
296b-298b, bk xii
[386-435]
327b-328b   /   Areopagitica,   394b395b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  434-435
248a-251a;  445-448  251b-253a  37  Fielding:  Tom ]ones, 38d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 183b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 296b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  intro,  par  18  16c-d; additions, 14 118c-d / Philosophy of
History,  part  hi,  304d-306a  50 Marx: Capital, 354b 54 Freud: War and
Death,  763b-c  "ha.  The condition of Adam before sin: his supernatural
state of grace; his preternatural gifts Old Testament: Genesis, 1:27-29;
2:7-8,15-25  /  Ecclesiastes,  7:29—  (D)  Ecclesiastes, 7:30 Apocrypha:
Wisdom of Solomon, 1:13-14; 2:23 — (D) OT, Boo^ of Wisdom, 1:13-14; 2:23
/ Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-15— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-13 18 Augustine:
City of God, bk xi, ch 12 329b-c; bk xii, ch 21-23 357a-358a; bk xiii, ch
i 360a-b; ch 13-14 366a-c; ch 19 369c-370c; bk xiv, ch 1 376b,d-377a; ch
10-28  385b397d  passim;  bk  xxii,  ch  30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 76, a 5, rep 1 394c-396a; qq 94-102 501c-527a,c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 81,

[797b]
a  5, rep 2 167a-d; q 89, a 3 200d-201d; q 109, a 2, ans 339c-340b; a 3,
contrary  and  ans  340c-341b;  a  4,  ans 341c-342a; a 8, ans and rep 3
344d-346a; a 10, rep 3 347a-d; part 11—11, q 2, a 7, ans 396a-397c; q 5,
a 1, ans 410a-411b; part hi, q 1, a 3, rep 1,5 704d706a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xxviii
[i]-xxix
[36] 96a-98a
/ paradise, vii
[6484] 115d-116a; xiii [31-111] 125d-126c
22  Chaucer:  MonJ(s  Tale  [14,013-020]  434b  / Parson's Tale, par 18,
506b-507a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 191b-c; 192a-b; part iv, 250d
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, prop 68, schol 445a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk i [650-654] 107b; bk in
[56-371]
136b-143b; bk iv
[32-538]
153a-164a   esp  [131-171]  155a-156a,  [205-392]  157a-161a;  [610-775]
165b-169a; bk v [1-560] 175a-187b; bk vii
[40-108] 218a-219b;
[519550] 228b-229a; [617-632] 230b-231a; bk viii
232a-246b; bk ix [192-454] 251b-257a; bk xi
[45-71] 300a-b; bk xii [63-110] 320b-321b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  560  272b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
179d180c; part in, 304d-305a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii, 275a 3b.
The  sin  of  Adam  Old  Testament: Genesis, 3 / Ecclesiastes, 7:29— (D)
Ecclesiastes,  7:30  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 1:13-16; 2:2324— (D)
OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  1:13-16;  2:2325  New  Testament:  Romans, 5:12 18
Augustine:  City  of God,  bk  xii,ch 21 357a-b; bk xiii, ch 1 360a-b; ch
12-15  365d-366d;  bk  xiv, ch 11-15 385d-390a; bk xxi, ch 12 571a-c; bk
xxii,  ch  24, 609a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 81, a 5
167a-d; q 82, a 2, rep i 168d-169c; q 89, a 3 200d-201d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xxviii
[91-96] 97a; xxix [22-30] 97d-98a; paradise,
vii  [16-120] 115b-116b; xxvi [109-117] 147a 22 Chaucer: Pardoner's Tale
[12,432-445]  375a  / Monf(s Tale [14,013-020] 434b / Parson's Tale, par
18, 507a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 112a-b; part hi, 177d; 191b-c;
195d  25  Montaigne: Essays, 233b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 81a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, prop 68, schol 445a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk i [27-75] 94a-95a; bk in
[167-216] 139a-140a;
[274-294]
141b;   bk   iv  [505-535]  163b-164a;  bk  ix  [647-1004]  261b-269a  /
Areopagitica,  394b-395a  33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 82a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part hi, 304d305b

[798a]
764  (3.  The doctrine of original sin.) 3c. The nature of fallen man in
consequence of Adam's sin Old Testament: Genesis, 3:9-24; 6:5-13; 8:21 /
Job,  15:14-16;  25:4-6  / Psalms, 14:1-3; 39:56,11; 51:2-5; 53:1-3— (D)
Psalms,   13:1-3;   38:6-7,12;   50:4-7;   52:1-4  /  Proverbs,  20:9  /
Ecclesiastes,   7:20,27-29;   9:3—  (D)  Ecclesiastes,  7:21,28-30;  9:3
/Jeremiah, ij:g—(D)Jeremias, 17:9 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23-24—
(D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  2:23-25  New Testament: John, 8:3-8 / Romans,
3:95:21  esp  5:12-21;  7;  8:20-21;  9:29  /  / Corinthians, 15:21-22 /
Galatians, 2:16; 3 esp 3:11, 3:22; 4:1-7; 5:19-21 / Ephesians, 2:1-5 / J
/o^/2,  2:15-17  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 18 5c-d / C/Vy of
God,  bk  xii,  ch 21-22 357a-c; bk xiii, ch 1-15 360a-366d; bk xiii, ch
23-BK  xiv,  ch  5  372a-380b;  bk  xiv,  ch  12-13  387a-388c; ch 15-27
388d-397a;  bk  xxi,  ch  12  571a-c;  ch  15  572c-573b; bk xxii, ch 22
606d-608b;  ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 97,
a  1,  rep 3 513c-514c; q 98, a 2 517d-519a; part i-ii, q 17, a 9, rep 3
692d-693d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, qq 81-83 162d-174b; q
85  178b-184a; q 91, a 6 212c-213c; q 94, a 6, rep 1-2 225d-226b; q 109,
a 2, ans 339c-340b; a 3, ans 340c341b; a 8, ans 344d-346a; part hi, q 8,
a  5,  rep  1  760a-d;  qq  14-15  784a-796a  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy,
purgatory, hi
[1645] 56a-b; x
[121-129] 68c-d; xxvm
[91-96]
97a; xxix
[16-30]
97d-98a; paradise, vii
[16-120] 115b-116b
22  Chaucer: Tale of Man of Law [4778-4791] 240b-241a / Pardoner 's Tale
374a-382b esp
[12,432-445-] 375a,
[12,829-837] 381b
/  Parson's  Tale,  par  18, 507b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 112a-b;
part  hi, 191b-c; 192a-c; 195d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
ii,   81a-b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  213a-215b;  218c-219a;  233a-234a;
238b-239c; 250a-b; 294a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 52, 195c-d
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [167-216] 139a140a; [274-304] 141b-142a;
bk ix [780-1189] 264b-273a; bk x 274a-298b esp
[103-123]
276b-277a,
[229-409]
279b-283a,
[585-640]
287a-288b, [720-844] 290a-292b; bk xi
[8498]
301a;
[162-180]
302b-303a;
[251-262]
304b-305a;  bkxi  [423]-bkxii  [371]  308b-327a  33  Pascal:  Provincial
Letters,   82a  /  Pensees,  426427  244b;  430-431  245a-247b;  434-435
248a251a;  439-450  251a-253a;  560  272b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 38d 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 183b-c

[798b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 3c to Id 44 Boswell: Johnson, 482a 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  additions,  14  118c-d  /  Philosophy  of  History, part hi,
304d305b;  part  iv,  354ac  50 Marx : Capital, 354b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vii, 275a 3d. The need for a mediator between God and man to
atone  for  original sin New Testament: Matthew, 1:21; 9:2-6; 18:11— 14;
26:26-28  /  Mar\, 2:3-11 / Luke, 1:67-69; 2:11; 5:20-24; 7:37-50; 9:56;
19:1-10;  24:4447 / John, 1:29; 3:16-17; 4:42; 6:31-39; 10:918; 14:18-19
/  Acts, 3:19-26; 4:10-12; 5:30-31; I0:37~43; I 3 :23'26,32~39; 16:30-31
/  Romans, 1:16; 3:20-26; 5-6; 8:1-11,31-39; 9:29-10:21 / / Corinthians,
5:7;  15:1-4,12-23,55-57  /  II Corinthians, 5:14-21 / Galatians, 1:3-4;
2:1621;  3:19-27;  5:1-5  /  Ephesians,  1:5-7,12-14;  2  /  Colossians,
1:12-14,19-24;  2:11-15;  S :i_I ° / I Timothy, 1:15; 2:5-7 / H Timothy,
1:8-10  /  Titus,  3:4-7  /  Hebrews, 1:1-3; 2:9-18; 5; 7:110:22; 12:24;
13:12  /  /  Peter,  1:7-9,18-21; 3:18; 4:1 / I John, 2:1-2,12; 3:5-10 /
Revelation,  1:4-6—  (D) Apocalypse, 1:4-6 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
vii, par 24 50d51a / City of God, bk ix, ch 1-18 285b,d-295d esp ch 15-17
293a-295c; bk x, ch 22 312a-b; ch 24-25 312d-314c; bk xi, ch 2-3 323a-d;
bk  xiii,  ch  2-4  360b-362a;  ch  23-24  372a376a,c;  bk  xvii,  ch ii
462c-463a;  bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 14-18
627d-629a;  ch  34  634bc;  bk  ii,  ch  41  656a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica, part i, q 97, a 1, rep 3 513c-514c; part i-ii, q 5, a 7, rep
2 642a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, a 12 264d-265d;
q  103,  a  2  299b-300d;  part  hi,  prologue-q  1  701a-709c; q 3, a 8
729b-730b;  Q  22,  a  3 829c-830c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, vi
[82-93] 114c; vii
[19-120] 115b-116b
22  Chaucer:  Pardoner's Tale [12,834-837] 381b / Parson's Tale, par 87,
545a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 191c-d; 197d198a; 204a-c 32 Milton:
Christs Nativity
[1-14]
la-b;
[125156] 4b-5a / The Passion 10b-12a / Upon the
Circumcision  12b-13a  / Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk 1 [1-26] 93b-94a,
bk hi [56-415] 136b144b, bk xi
[1-44] 299a-300a, bk
xii
[285484] 325b-329b
33 Pascal: Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 527-550 264b-267b; 556 270b-272a; 560
272b;  692  300b-301a;  780-783 324b-325a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 482a-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part  hi, 306b- c; part iv, 331d-333b 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim  54  Freud:
Civilization and Its Discontents, 797b-c

[799a]
3e  to  4£  Chapter  86:  SIN 765 3e. The remission of sin: baptism; the
state  of  the unbaptized New Testament: Matthew, 3:11-17; 28:19 / Mar\,
1:4-8;  16:16/  Lu^e, 3:3,16 / John, 1:2526,33; 3:5 / Acts, 1:5; 2:38-41
esp  2-4&r?rrcrr  8:35-38;  10:43-48;  11:16;  19:1-5;  22:16  / Romans,
3:20-26;   5-6;   8:1-11;   9:29-10:10  /  /  Corinthians,  12:13  /  //
Corinthians,  5:14-19  /  Galatians,  3:19-27  /  Ephesians,  2;  4:5  /
Colossians, 2:8-15 / Titus, 3:5-7 / Hebrews, 6:1-6 / I Peter, 1:18-23 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk i, par 6 2b-c; par 17-18 5b-d; bk ii, par 15
12b-c; bk iv, par 7-8 20d-21b / City of God, bk x, ch 22 312a-b; bk xii,
ch 22 357c; bk xiii, ch 7 362d-363b; bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 97, a 1, rep 3 513c-514c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  81,  a  1,  ans  163a-164d;  q 89, a 6, ans
203b204a,c; q 113 360d-370b; part hi, q 3, a 8, ans and rep 3 729b-730b;
q  65, a i, ans 879c-881d; a 4, ans 883d-884a,c; part hi suppl, q 69, aa
4-7  889c-893c  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv 5c-7a; purgatory, vii
[1-36] 62c-d; xxii [55-93] 87a-c; paradise, xix
[22-1 11]
135b-136a; xx
[31148] 137a-138b; xxxn [37-84] 155a-c
22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale, par 3 496a; par 1819, 507b-508a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part hi, 206c-207a; 211c-212b; 244d-245a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost, bk xii
[436-445]
328b-329a  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 221a-224a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  297c-298b  4. Actual or personal sin 4a. The relation of original
sin  to actual sin New Testament: Romans, y.j-16', 5:12-21 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  17-18  5b-d  /  City  of God,  bk  xiv,  ch  i
376b,d-377a;  ch 3 378a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 114, a
3,  ans  583b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 81, a 1, ans
163a-164d;  q  89,  a  6  203b-204a,c;  part  in,  q 1, a 4 706a-707a 22
Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 18-19 507b508b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi [167-216] 139a140a; [274-343] 141b-143a; bk ix [994-1080] 269a-271a /
Areopagitica,  394b-395b  4b. The causes and occasions of actual sin Old
Testament: Numbers, 15:27-31 / Job, 1:15; 31 / Proverbs, 1:10-19; I0-I 9
passim;   21:4;   24:9;   28:20;   30:8-9   /  Ecclesiastes,  7:26—  (D)
Ecclesiastes,   7:27   /  Isaiah,  5:11-12,22-23;  28:7-8—  (D)  Isaias,
5:11-12,22-23; 28:7-8

[799b]
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon,  2  esp  2:24;  14: 22-29— (D) OT, Boo\of
Wisdom,  2  esp  2:2425; 14:22-29 / Ecclesiasticus, 8:2; 10:9,13; 11:10;
12:13-14;  19:2;  23:1-6,13,16,18; 25:24; 26:29; 27:2,10; 31:5-11,25-31;
47:19-20—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  8:2-3;  10:9,15-16;  11:10; 12:13;
19:2-3;  23:1-6,17,21-23,25-26;  25:33;  26:28;  27:2,11; 31:5-11,30-42;
47:21-22  New  Testament:  Matthew,  13:18-23;  15:10-20 / Mar{, 4:1-20;
7:14-23  /  Luke,  4:1-13;  8:4-15  / Romans, 1:18-32; 6:19; 7:22-23 / /
Corinthians, 7:4-5; 8:9-13; 9:27; 15:56 / // Corinthians, 2:10-11; 4:3-4
/  Galatians,  5:16-21  /  Ephesians,  4  :22  /  Colossians, 3 S5-7 / /
Timothy,  6:9-10  /  //  Timothy, 2:25-26 / Titus, 3:3 / James, 1:15; 2;
4:1-6  /  / Peter, 4:1-3; 5:8-9 / // Peter, 1:4; 2:10-22 / 1 John, 3:4-9
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 6-18 10a13a; bk in, par 16 17c-d;
bk  vii,  par  4-5  44b-d;  bk  viii, par 10-11 55c-56b; bk x, par 41-66
81c-88b  /  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  16-27  139c-146a; bk xiv, ch 3-6
378a-380c;  ch  1314  387c-388d;  bk  xv,  ch  22  416a-c;  bk xix, ch 6
514b-515a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 48, a 5, rep 3 263a-d;
q  63,  a 7, ans 331c-332b; a 8 332c-333b; q 92, a 1, rep 3 488d-489d; q
114 581d-585c; part i-ii, q 1, a 7, rep i 614c-615a; q 42, a 3 802d-803c
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, qq 75-84 137c-178a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell la-52d passim, esp xi 15a-16b, xm
[31-108] 18b-19a, xxiv
Xi-78] 34d-35b, xxvii
[55-132]
40a-41a; purgatory 53a-105d passim, esp xi 68d-70b, xiii
[103-129]
73a-b, xv
[40-81]
75d-76a, xvi
[52-114]
77b-78a, xvn
[9i]-xvin
[75]
79b-80c, xix
[1-69] 81c-82a, xxx-xxxi 99b102b; paradise,
i  [94-142]  107b-d  22  Chaucer:  Friar's  Tale 278a-284a / Prologue of
Pardoner's Tale 372a-374a / Pardoner's Tale 374a-382b esp
[12,397-593] 374a-377b,
[12,829-852] 381b
/ Tale of Melibeus, par 48-52 421b-425b / Second Nun's Prologue
[15,469-489] 461a
/ Parson's Tale 495a-550a esp par 3 496a, par 20-86 508b-544a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  85d;  part  ii,  138d-139c; 151b; part iv, 272d 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act v, sc i
[175-190] 66d-67a
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii [129-137] 32d-33a; act hi, sc hi
[36-72] 53d-54a; sc
iv
[144-152]
56a-b  /  Measure  for Measure, act 11, sc 11 [162-187] 183d-184a; sc in
[1039] 184b-c; act in, sc 1 [95-151] 187d-188b / Othello, act 1, sc in
[60-69] 209c /
Pericles,  act  1,  prologue-sc  i  421b-423c / Cymbeline, act in, sc iv
[76-80]  467c / Henry VIII, act hi, sc 11 [435-457] 573c-d 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies,  125d-126a  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk iv
[505-535] 163b164a; bk v
[26-94]
175b-177a / Samson

[800a]
c  (4.  Actual  or  personal sin. 4b. The causes and occasions of actual
sin.) Agonistes [766-842] 356b-358a esp
[831-842]
357b-358a 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 19b-26b; 29b-61b; 66a-70b; 72a;
74a-80b;  91a-110b passim; 112b-113a / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b
47  Goethe:  Faust,  prologue  7a-9b  48  Melville:  Moby Dic\, 3b-4a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk hi, 53c-54b; 64c-67a; bk iv, 88d-89a
4c.  Pride  as  the  principle  of  sin:  the tragic fault of hybris Old
Testament:  Numbers,  15:30  /  Job,  31:2628; 33:16-17; 35:12 / Psalms,
10:1-6;  12:1-5;  101:5—  (D)  Psalms,  9:1-6; 11:1-5; 100:5 / Proverbs,
6:16-17; 8:13; 11:2; 14:3; 15:25; 16:18-19; 18:12; 21:4; 29:23 / Isaiah,
2:11-17;  10:12-15;  13:11;  14:4-22  esp  14:11-17;  16:6-7;  23:9— (D)
Isaias, 2:11-17; 10:12-15; 13:11; 14:4-22 esp 14:11-17; 23:9 / Jeremiah,
48:  26,29-31;  50:29-32—  (D) Jeremias, 48:26,2931; 50:29-32 / Ezekjel,
16:49-50—  (D)  Ezechiel, 16:49-50 / Daniel, 5:18-20 / Hosea, 5:5; 7:10—
(D) Osee, 5:5; 7:10 / Zephaniah, 2:910— (D) Sophonias, 2:9-10 Apocrypha:
Tobit,  4:13—  (D) OT, Tobias, 4:14 / Ecclesiasticus, 10:7-18 esp 10:13;
11:3031; 13:1; 23:4,8; 32:12— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:7-22 esp 10:15;
11:32-33;  13:1; 23:5,8; 32:16 New Testament: Luke, 18:10-14 / Acts, 12:
20-23  /  /  Timothy, 3:6 / James, 4:6-7 / / Peter, 5:5 / I John, 2:16 4
Homer:  Iliad, bk i 3a-9a,c; bk ix 57a64a, 5 Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d
esp
[739-831]
23a-24a / Seven Against Thebes
[375-675]
31b-34b / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp
[1-87] 40a-41a, [944-1093] 50b-51d / Agamemnon [905-957] 61c-62b
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[863-910] 107b-c / Antigone [100-147] 132a-b /
Ajax  143a-155a,c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 8a-b; bk vii, 217c; bk
viii,  279d-280a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  hi, ch 14 189c190a 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk hi, par 16 17c-d; bk v, par 3-5 27c-28c; bk
x,  par 58-64 86a87d; bk xii, par 34-35 107c-108b / City of God, bk xii,
ch  6,  345b-c;  bk  xiv,  ch 9, 384b-385b; ch 13-15 387c-390a; ch 27-28
396c-397d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 77, a 4 148b-149a;
q  84,  a  2  175b-176a;  a  4, ans and rep 4 176d-178a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, viii
[65]-ix
[103] llc-13b; xiv [43-72] 20a-b; xxv
[1-15]
36b-c; purgatory, x-xn 67b-71d

[800b]
; 766 THE GREAT IDEAS 4<r to 4e 22 Chaucer: Monl(s Tale 434a-448b esf>
[13,997-14,012] 434a, [14,189-684] 437b-44 7a /
Parson's  Tale,  par  23-29  510b-515b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 233b 234a;
238b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and Cressida, act ii, sc in [122-228]
117a-118a  /  Henry  VIII,  act  hi,  sc  11 [350-372] 572c-d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk i 93a-110b esp
[27-75] 94a-95a,
[84-124] 95b-96a, [622-662]
107a-108a; bk ii [1-105] 110a-113b; [299-389] 117b-119b; bk iv
[32-119]
153a-155a;
[505535]
163b-164a; bk v
[600-904]
188b-195a; bk ix [99-178] 249b-251a / Samson Agonistes
[521-540] 351a-b
33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 66a-b / Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 455-460
253b-254b;  492 259b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 183b-184a 37 Fielding:
Tom  Jones,  379c-380a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk iv, 83c84a;
bk  v,  130b-135a; bk vi, 168a-c 4d. The consequences of actual sin: the
loss  of charity and grace Old Testament: Isaiah, 57:21— (D) Isaias, 57:
21  I  Jeremiah, 13:23— (D) Jeremias, 13:23 Apocrypha: Tobit, 12:10— (D)
OT, Tobias 12:10 / Ecclesiasticus, 19:4; 21:2-3— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
19:4;  21:2-4  New  Testament:  Matthew,  27:3-5  I John, 8:34 / Romans,
1:16-32;  7:5-13  /  Hebrews,  3:13  /  James, 1:15/// Peter, 2:18-22 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 65-66 87d-88b / City of God, bk xii,
ch  3  343d344b;  bk  xiv,  ch  3,  378a-b;  ch  8-9 381c-385b; ch 12-15
387a-390a; bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  64, aa 1-3 334a-337c; q 114, a 3 583b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii, qq 85-87 178b-192d; q 89, a 1 199a-c; q 94, a 6 225d-226b; q
109  338a-347d passim; part ii-ii, q 24, a 12 499c-500d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell la-52d; purgatory, ii [118-133] 55d; xi 68d-70b 22 Chaucer:
Parson's  Tale,  par  53  526b-527a  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi-xii
299a-333a  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  19b-26b; 28b-31b; 36a-61b;
132a-b;  137a  4e.  The  prevention  and purging of sin: purification by
sacrifice;   the  sacrament  of  penance;  contrition,  confession,  and
absolution Old Testament: Exodus, 29:36-37; 30:10-16 / Leviticus passim,
esp 4-6, 16:5-34, 17:11, 19: 20-22, 23:26-32, 26:39-43 / Numbers, 5:5-9;
6:9-12; 8:19; 15:22-29; 16:46-48; 19:1-10; 25:1-13 / Deuteronomy, 21:1-9
/ // Samuel, 12:7-23— (D) 77 Kings, 12:7-23 / / Kings, 8: 31-50— (D) ///
Kings,  8:31-50  /  // Chronicles, 6:24-42; 7:12-14; 29:21-24; 33:12-19—
(D) II Paralipomenon, 6:24-42; 7:12-14; 29:21-24;

[801a]
4?  to 5 Chapter 86: SIN 767 33:12-19 / Job, 1:4-5; 42:1-6 / Psalms, 32:
1-5,  10;  34:18;  38:17-18;  40:6;  51; 69:5-13— (D) Psalms, 31:1-5,10;
33:19; 37:18-19; 397; 50; 68:6-14 / Isaiah, 1:16-20; 58:1-7— (D) Isaias,
1:16-20;  58:1-7  /  Ezekiel, 43:18-27— (D) Ezechiel, 43:18-27 / Daniel,
y.^-zcyfJoeX  1:8-15;  2:12-17  / Jonah, 3— (D) Jonas, 3 / Micah, 6:6-8—
(D)  Micheas, 6:6-8 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 12:19— (D) OT, Book of
Wisdom,  12:19  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1:21;  3:3,14-15;  17:24-26;  18:21;
20:2-3; 21: 1,6; 23:1-6; 28:2-5; 34:18-19,25-26— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
1:27;  3:4,15-17;  17:20-24;  18:  21;  20:1;  21:1,7;  23:1-6;  28:2-5;
34:21-23,3031  /  // Maccabees, 12:39-45— (D) OT, // Machabees, 12:39-46
New  Testament:  Matthew, 3:1-12; 4:17; 9:13; 11:20-21 / Mark, 1:14-15 /
Luke, 3:8; 5:32; 7:35-50; 10:13; 13:1-5; 15; 16:27-31 / John, 20:22-23 /
Acts,  3:19; 5:31; 8:9-24; 17:30; 26:20 / Romans, 2:4-6 / / Corinthians,
6:9-11 / // Corinthians, 7:8-12 / // Timothy, 2:25-26 / Hebrews, 5:1-10;
6:4-8;  7:20-10:18  /  James,  4:8-10;  5:13-16,20 / / Peter, 4:1-2 / //
Peter,  3:9  /  I  John, 1:9; 3:4-5 / Revelation, 2:18-23; 3:1-6,19— (D)
Apocalypse,  2:18-23;  3:1-6,19  4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix [485-526] 62a-b 5
Aeschylus:   Choephoroe   [1021-1076]  80a-d  /  Eumenides  81a-91d  esp
[276-298]   84a-b,   [443453]   86a  5  Euripides:  Electra  [1233-1359]
338b-339a,c  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 17 5b-c; bk 11, par 1
9a;  par  15  12b-c;  bk v, par 1 27a-b; bk ix, par 12 64d-65a / City of
God,  bk  xiii,  ch 7 362d-363b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part mi, q
35,  a  5,  rep 1 775d-777a; Q37, a 2, rep i 784c785b 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 87, a 6, ans and rep 2 189c-190c; a 7, ans and
rep  3  190c-191d;  a  8, ans 191d-192d; q 102, a 3, rep 8-11 272b-276c;
part  hi,  qq  61-65  855a-884a,c  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvii
[55-132] 40a-41a; purgatory, hi
[103-145] 57a-c; iv
[97-135] 58c-d; v [37-136] 59b-60c; ix 65d67b; xxii [1-54] 86c-87a; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b
22 Chaucer: Prologue
[208-234]
162b-163a  /  Prologue  of  Pardoner's  Tale  372a-374a  / Parson's Tale
495a-550a  esp  par 1-22 495a-510b, par 85-103 543a-550a / VEnvoi 550a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iit,  207a;  212a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
152b-153d;  156a-d;  388c-395b  26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V, act iv, sc i
[309-322] 554c-d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc v
[74-80]
37d; act in, sc in
[36-72] 53d-54a; sc
iv
[140-180] 56a-c / Winter's Tale, act hi, sc h
[204-243] 503c-504a
29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 427d429d

[801b]
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x
[io86]-bk
xi
[44] 298a-300a / Samson Agonistes [472-540]
350a-351b  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 21b; 28b-34b; 43b; 62b-64b;
71b-80b  passim;  124a;  132a-b;  137a  /  Pensees,  870 344a-b; 904-905
348b349a;  923  351b  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 260b-261a; 476a477a 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 191b-c; 199b-c; 452b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  384b-385b  44 Boswell: Johnson, 314c-315b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part iv, 332b333b;349a-b;354a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 34b-36b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i, 38b; 43b-44b; bk xi, 476c-478a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 22b24c; bk in, 64c-67a; bk v,
127b-137c passim; bk vi, 157b-164a; 167b-169c 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  793b  5.  The  remorse  of conscience and feelings of
guilt: the psychogenesis and pathological expression of the sense of sin
Old  Testament:  Job,  42:5-6  /  Psalms,  34:18; 38; 5i:i 7-(D) Psalms,
33:19;  37;  50:19  /  Proverbs, 28:1 / Isaiah, 57:15; 66:2— (D) Isaias,
57:15; 66:2 I Joel, 2:12-13 Apocrypha: Wisdom of'Solomon, 5:1-13517— (D)
OT,  Boo/{  of  Wisdom,  5 :i_I 4; l 7 I Ecclesiasticus, 14:1-2— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  14:1-2  /  I  Maccabees,  6:1-15 esP 6:12-13— (D) OT, I
Machabees,  6:1-15 esP 6:12-13 New Testament: Matthew, 27:3-5 / Luke, 7:
36-38; 15:11-32 I John, 8:1-9 / 77 Corinthians, 7:8-12 I James, 4:8-10 5
Sophocles: Antigone [1091-1353] 140b-142d 5 Euripides: Andromache
[802-879] 322a-c
/ Electra
[1 177-1232] 337d-338a / Heracles Mad
[1 229-1 428] 375c-377d / Orestes [1-423] 394a398b
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  9d-10a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 4
[n66b i2-24] 419d-420a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b; bk v [1143-1160] 76a-b
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk vi, 87b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par
17 12d13a; bk in, par 5 14b; bk v, par 2 27b-c / City of God, bk xiv, ch
8  381c-383a;  ch  13-14,  388b-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  q 87 997a-1000c; q 97, a 2 1066d-1067b 21 Dante : Divine Comedy,
hell, xxx [i3o]-xxxi
[6] 45d-46a; purgatory,
ii [io6]-iii
[15] 55c56a; xiii [130-144] 73b-c; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b
22  Chaucer: Physician's Tale [12,211-220] 370b371a / Parson's Tale, par
5-15 496b-506b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 14a-c; 174d-176c; 388c395b passim

[802a]
d  (5. The remorse of conscience andfeelings of guilt: the psychogenesis
and  pathological  expression  of the sense of sin.) 26 Shakespeare: 2nd
Henry  VI,  act  ill,  sc  in 55d-56a / Richard III, act i, sc iv [1-75]
114d115b; act v, sc in [177-206] 145c-d / Titus Andronicus, act v, sc i
[73-85] 193a; sc in
[184-190] 198c / Richard II, act v, sc vi [3052] 351c-d / King John, act iv, sc ii [215-248]
396d-397a / Merchant of Venice, act ii, sc ii
[1-33] 412a-b
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc ii [616-633] 46c-d; act in, sc 1
[44-54] 47b-c; sc 111 [3672] 53d-54a; sc iv [88-96] 55c; act iv, sc v
[16-20] 59d / King Lear, act hi, sc iv [23-36]
264c  / Macbeth, act ii, sc ii 291a-292a; act hi, sc 11 296b-297a; sc iv
[60-144]  298b-299b;  act  v,  sc  1  306b-307a;  sc  111 [37-46] 308a /
Cymbeline, act v, sc i
[i]-sc
ii
[10] 479a-c;
sc in [63-83] 480c-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 123a-b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  96a-c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 51,
schol  411d-412a;  part iv, prop 53-54 440b-c 32 Milton: Comus [170-229]
37a-38b / Paradise Lost, bk in
[167-216]
139a-140a  /  Samson  Agonistes  [590-605]  352b  33  Pascal: Provincial
Letters, 19b-26b; 72a-b; 73b-80b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch
ii, sect 9 106a-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 255a-268a esp 261b-262a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  57c-58a; 379c-380c; 398d-399a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 54d-55a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 306d-307d; 333a-334a / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 374c379d esp 375b-d, 379b-d / Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 389a-b / Judgement, 593a43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
458b-459b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part hi, 304c-d; part iv,
354a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [3544-3619] 86b-88a;
[3776-3834] 92a-93b; 108b-109b; [4405-4612]
110a-114b  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 312d-314c esp 313a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk hi, 115d-116a; bk v, 216b-d; bk vi, 248b-250a; 251a-b;
bk  vii,  275a; 301b-d; bk viii, 320b-323a; bk ix, 370c-372a; 373b-374d;
bk  x,  406c-410c;  416c417b;  465c-467a;  bk  xi, 505a-511b passim, esp
509b-511b;  bk xii, 549d-551c; bk xiv, 598d599a; 606b-607a; epilogue ii,
689b  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov. bk ii, 24a-c; bk iv, 95b-109a,c
passim;   bk  vi,  157b164a;  bk  viii,  217c-218c;  bk  xi,  317b-320a;
337a-346a;  epilogue,  402a-408a  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of Dreams,
247d-248b / General Introduction, 582a-b / Group Psy-

[802b]
768  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5 to 6a chology, 690c-691c / Ego and Id, 703b-c;
706b707c;  712a-715c  /  War  and  Death,  763b-c / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  792a-  799a  esp  792b-794a,  795c-796b,  797c-798c  / New
Introductory  Lectures,  831b; 852a-d 6. Guilt and the punishment of sin
6a.  Man's  freedom  in  relation  to  responsibility and guilt for sin:
divine   predestination   or   election  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3  /
Deuteronomy,  30:15-20 /Joshua, 11:19-20— {D) Jo sue, 1 1:1920 / Psalms,
81:11-12—  (D)  Psalms,  80:12-13/  Isaiah,  6:8-10;  63:17— (D) Isaias,
6:8-10;  63:17  /  Jeremiah, 46:27-28— (D) Jeremias, 46:27-28 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of Solomon,  19:4  (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 19:4 / Ecclesiasticus,
15:1120—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-21  New  Testament:  Matthew,
13:13-15  / Lu^e, 22:3-4 / John, 6:64-66; 10:26-29; 12:37-40; 13:18-27 /
Acts,  4:27-28;  7:51;  28:25-27  / Romans, 1:16-32; 9:9-24; 11 passim /
Ephesians,  1:3-12  /  //  Thessalonians, 2:11-14— (D) // Thessalonians,
2:12-14  /  /  Peter,  1:1-5  4  Homer:  Iliad,  bk vi [342-358] 43c-d 5
Aeschylus: Choephoroe 70a-80d esp
[269314] 72d-73b, [885-1076] 78d-80d / Eumenides
81a-91d  5  Sophocles:  Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus
114a-130a,c esp [258-291] 116c-d, [939-1015] 123a-d 5 Euripides: Electra
327a-339a,c esp
[11681359]
337d-339a,c / Orestes 394a-410d esp
[478-629] 398d-400b
12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk ii, sect ii 258a-b 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  v, ch 9-10 213b216c; bk xii, ch 3 343d-344b; ch 8 346d347b; bk
xiv,  ch  11-12  385d-387b; ch 15 388d-390a; bk xv, ch i 397b,d-398c; bk
xxii,  ch  1 586b,d-587b; ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  17, a 1, ans lOOd-lOld; q 19, a 9 116d-117d; q 22, a 2, rep
4-5  128d-130d; q 23, a 3 134b-135a; q 24, a 3 142d-143c; q 62, a 3, rep
2 319c320b; a 8, rep 3 323c-324a; q 113, a i, rep 3 576a-d; part i-ii, q
6,  a  4,  rep  3  647b-648a; q 24, a 3, rep 3 728c-729c; q 42, a 3, ans
802d-803c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 73, a 6 123d-124c;
a  10  128a-d;  q  74  128d-137c;  q  75, aa 1-2 137d-139b; q 76, aa 3-4
142d144d;  q 77, aa 6-7 150a-151c; qq 78-80 152b162d; part ii-ii, q 186,
a 10 662b-663b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvr
[52-114] 77b-78a; xvm [1-75] 79d-80c; paradise,
1
[94-142] 107b-d;
iv
[64-114] 110b-d;
xix
[22-111]
135b-136a; xx
[31-148]
137a138b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 250a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
17d-18a

[803a]
6b  to  6c  Chapter  86:  SIN  769 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv 89a-93a
passim, esp 91b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp bk hi
[80-134] 137a-138a, [167-216] 139a-140a, [274302] 141b-142a, bk
iv
[505-535]
163b-164a,  bk  v  [224-245] 180a-b, [506-543] 186a^IS7aT bk x [615-640]
287b-288b / Samson Agonistes
[23-67]
340a-341a;
[373-419]
347b-348b  /  Areopagitica,  394b-395b  33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters,
19b-26b;  155b157b;  158b-159a  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii,
div  78-81  485c-487a  42 Kant: Judgement, 594d [fn 1] 47 Goethe: Faust,
prologue [296-335] 8a-9a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689b 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 121a-135a 54 Freud: Interpretation
of  Dreams,  246c-247d  / General Introduction, 581d-582b 6b. Collective
responsibility  for sin: the sins of the fathers Old Testament: Genesis,
3:16-19 / Exodus, 20:5-6; 34:6-7 / Numbers, 14:18 / Deuteronomy, 5:9-10;
24:16  / // Samuel, 21:1-9— (D) II Kings, 21:1-9 / // Kings, I4 :i-6-(D)
IV  Kings,  14:1-6  /  // Chronicles, 25:4— (D) II Paralipomenon, 25:4 /
Psalms,  109:1-16—  (D)  Psalms,  108:1-16  /  Jeremiah,  31:29-30—  (D)
Jeremias,  31 ^9-30 / Ezetyel, iS— (D) Ezechiel, 18 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  3:11-13—  (D)  OT,  Boo\of  Wisdom,  3:11-13 / Ecclesiasticus,
41:5-7—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 41:8-10 / Baruch, 3 7-8-(D) OT, Baruch,
3:7-8  New  Testament:  Romans,  5:12-19  /  /  Corinthians,  15:21-22 5
Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp
[568-614]
33b-d,
[653-956]
34b-37d  /  Agamemnon 52a-69d / Choephoroe 70a-80d / Eumenides 81a-91d 5
Sophocles:  Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c
/  Antigone  131a-142d  esp  [582-626]  136b-c  /  Electra  156a169a,c 5
Euripides: Phoenician Maidens 378a-393d / Orestes 394a-410d 6 Herodotus:
History, bk vi, 203a-b; bk vii, 237d-239a; 246bc; 246d-247a 6 Thucydides
:  Peloponnesian War, bk i, 380a-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii, ch
21-22  357a-c;  bk  xiii,  ch  3  361a-c;  ch 23, 372c373c; bk xiv, ch i
376b,d-377a;  ch 20, 392b; bk xvi, ch 27 439a-d; bk xxi, ch 12 571a-c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  81  162d-167d;  q  87, a 8
191d-192d 26 Shakespeare: Henry V, act iv, sc i
[136202] 553ac; [309-322] 554c-d
32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  hi [274-302] 141b142a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 20b-d

[803b]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiv, 606b-607a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  iv, 83c84a; bk v, 122b-d; bk vi, 149d-150a; 167b169c; bk
xi,  313c-314d  6c.  The temporal punishment of sin: divine scourges Old
Testament:  Genesis,  3:9-19;  4:8-15; 6:17,11-13; 18:20-19:29 / Exodus,
7-12;   14;  22:18-20,22-24;  32  /  Leviticus,  10:1-3;  18:24-30;  20;
24:10-23;  26 / Numbers, 12; 14; 15:32-36; 16; 21:5-9; 25 / Deuteronomy,
4:20-31;  11 :i 6-17 528:1 5-68529:16-29 /Joshua, 5:6; 7—(D) Josue, 5:6;
7 / Judges, 9 / / Samuel, 3:11-15; 5; 15; 28:3-20— (D) I Kings, 3:11-15;
5;  15;  28:3-20  / // Samuel, 6:6-8; 12; 21:1; 24— (D) II Kings, 6:6-8;
12;  21:1;  24  /  /  Krngs,  8:31-53;  9:6-9; 11; 13; 14:7-16; 16:1-13;
21:18-24—  (D)  III  Kings,  8:31-53;  9:6-9;  11; 13; 14:7-16; 16:1-13;
21:18-24  /  //  Kings, 2:23-24; 5:20-27; 9:1-10:11; 17:6-18:12 — (D) IV
Kings,  2:23-24;  5:20-27;  9:1-10:11;  17:6-18:12  /  / Chronicles, 10;
13:9-11;  21  —  (D) I Paralipomenon, 10 ; 13 :9-i 1,2.1/ II Chronicles,
6:24-42;  12; 21:12-20; 26:16-21; 36— (D) II Paralipomenon, 6:24-42; 12;
21:12-20;  26:1621;  36 / Job passim, esp 4-5, 8, 11, 15:20-35, 18:1-21,
20:1-29,  22:1-30,  24:1-25,  27:1-23,  32:1-36:33 / Psalms, 11; 21; 37;
39:10-11;  89:28-33; 94— (D) Psalms, 10; 20; 36; 38:1112; 88:29-34; 93 /
Proverbs,  1:20-33;  2:10-22;  3:33-35;  5:3-14,21-23;  10-30  passim  /
Ecclesiastes,  2:26;  8:11-13  / Isaiah passim, esp 1, 2:5-3:26, 5:1-30,
9:13-10:27, 13:1-24:23, 28:1-32:20, 33:7-14, 34 ; i-i7> 4°-i-2, 42:1325,
43:22-28,  47.:i  -!5>  5i:i7-2 3> 63:1-6, 65:166:24— (D) Isaias passim,
esp  1, 2:5-3:26, 5:1-30, 9:13-10:27, 13:1-24:23, 28:1-32:20, 337-i4» 34
;  i-i7>  40;  i-2  >  42:13-25.  43:22-28,  47:1-15,  51:17-23, 63:1-6,
65:1-66:24   /   Jeremiah   passim,   esp  1:11-16,  4:1-9:26,  11:1-23,
13:9-14:12,  15:1-9, 16:1-21, 17:27-19:13, 21:129 :32, 34:1722, 44:1-30,
46:i-52:34-(D)   Jeremias   passim,   esp  1:11-16,  4:1-9:26,  11:1-23,
13:9-14:12,  15:1-9,  16:1-21, 17:27-19:13, 21:129:32, 34:1-22, 44:1-30,
46:1-52:34  / Lamentations passim, esp 1:18-22, 3:42, 4:11-14 / Ezehiel,
3-39  passim—  (D)  Ezechiel, 3-39 passim / Daniel, 4; 5:17-30; 9:3-20 /
Hosea  passim—^)  Osee  passim / Joel passim / Amos passim / Obadiah—(D)
Abdias  /  Jonah,  3—  (D) Jonas, 3 / Micah passim— (D) Micheas passim /
Nahum  passim  / Habal^uf^ passim (D) Habacuc passim / Zephaniah passim—
(D)  Sophonias  passim  / Zechariah, 9:3-6; 11:1-9 (D) Zacharias, 9:3-6;
11:1-9  /  Malachi,  2; 4 — (D) Malachias, 2; 4 Apocrypha: Tobit, 3:1-6—
(D)  OT,  Tobias, 3:1-6 / Judith, 5:17-18; 8:18-25; 95 11:9-19 — (D) OT,
Judith,  5:21-22;  8:18-25;  9; 11:919 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1:7-8,12-16;
2:24; 3:9-19; 5:17-6:9; 10:1-8; 11:9-20; 12; 14:7-31;

[804a]
(6. Guilt and the punishment of sin. 6c. The temporal punishment of sin:
divine scourges.) 15:18-16:19; 17; 18:10-19:22— (D) OT, Boof{ of Wisdom,
1:7-8,12-16;  2:24;  3:9-19;  5:176:9;  10:1-8;  11:9-20;  12;  14:7-31;
15:18-16:19;  17;  18:10-19:20  / Ecclesiasticus, 5:2-7; 10:1316; 11:26;
16:6-13;  23:18-26; 27:25-28:6; 39:27-30— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 5:2-7;
10:13-16;  11:28;  16:6-13;  23:25-36;  27:2528:6; 39:32-36/ Baruch, 1-5
passim—  (D)  OT, Baruch, 1-5 passim / / Maccabees, 2:62-63; 6:1-16— (D)
OT,  /  Machabees,  2:62-63;  6:116 / // Maccabees, 6:12-17; 7:31-38; 9;
10:4;  12:40-42—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  6:12-17;  7:31-38;  9; 10:4;
12:40-42 New Testament: Acts, 12:20-23; 13:4-12 / / Corinthians, 11:32 /
Revelation, 8-9; 11; 16-18 — (D) Apocalypse, 8-9; 11; 16-18 5 Aeschylus:
Persians  15a-26d  /  Seven  Against Thebes 27a-39a,c / Prometheus Bound
40a-51d  /  Agamemnon 52a-69d / Choephoroe 70a-80d / Eumenides 81a-91d 5
Sophocles:  Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c
/ Antigone 131a-142d esp [582-626] 136b-c / Ajax 143a155a,c 5 Euripides:
Electra  327a-339a,c  /  Bacchantes  340a-352a,c  /  Orestes 394a-410d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 4d; bk ii, 70d-71a; bk in, 95c-d; 103b-d; bk
iv,  159d;  bk  vi,  199c-d;  201b-c;  201d-202c;  203a-b; bk vii, 217c;
237d-239a;  246b-c;  246d-247a;  bk  viii, 279d-280a; 283d 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b; bk vi [379-422] 85b-d
14  Plutarch:  Camillus,  107b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 5
14b  /  City of God, bk xix, ch 15 521a-c; bk xxi, ch 13-14, 571d-572c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  11, ch 23 648a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  79,  aa 3-4 158a-159c; q 87, a 4 188b-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, hi [103145] 57a-c; v
[85-129] 59d-60c; xx
[34-96]
83c-84a;  xxm  [85-1  11]  89a-b; xxxm [34-78] 104c-105a; paradise, xvii
[46-99] 132c-133a; xviii
[115-136]
134d-135a; xxi
[i2i]-xxn
[18] 139c-d; xxvii [1-66] 147b-148a; [121-148]
148c-d  22  Chaucer: Physician's Tale [12,211-220] 370b371a / Pardoner's
Tale   374a-382b   /  Monl(s  Tale  [14,149-684]  437a-447a  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan,   part  ii,  160c-161a;  163d164a  30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis,
204d-205b  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii [101-120] 321b / Samson
Agonistes
[667-709J
354a-355a;
[1156-1177] 364b-365a; [1669-1707] 376a-b
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 139a-140a 35 Locke: Toleration, la-2c;
5c-6a; 14a-15a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 282a-287b

[804b]
770  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6c  to  6d  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 20b-21a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, ml xn,85d-86a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
180b;  188b-c;  198d200a; 302d-303c: 452b-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
93c-94c  passim  44 Boswell: Johnson, 314c-315b 48 Melville: Moby Dicl(,
30a-36b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk xiv, 606b-607a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 30b-32a 6d. The eternal punishment of sin:
the  everlasting  perdition  of  the  unrepentant in Hell Old Testament:
Psalms, 9:16-17— (D) Psalms, 9:17-18 / Proverbs, 7:6-27; 11:31 / Isaiah,
33:10-14;  66  :24—(D)  Isaias, 33:10-14; 66:24/ Daniel, 12:2 Apocrypha:
Judith,  16:17—  (D)  OT, Judith, 16:20-21 / Wisdom of Solomon, 4:16-20;
5:114— (D) OT, Boo{ of Wisdom, 4:16-20; 5:115 / Ecclesiasticus, 7:16-17;
12:6;   18:22,24;   21:9-10—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  7:17-19;  12:4;
18:22,24;  21:10-11  New  Testament:  Matthew, y.y-12; 5:22,29-30; 8:12;
10:14-15,28;  11:20-24;  13:41-42,49-50; 18:7-9; 2 5 :3 I -46 esP 25:41,
25:46  / Mar\, 3:29; 9:42-49; 16:16 / Lul^e, 12:5; 16:19-26 / John, 15:6
/  Romans, 6:23; 7:5 / / Corinthians, 6:9-11; 7:9; 15:55-56 / Galatians,
6:8  /  //  Thessalonians,  1:7-9 / Hebrews, 10:26-31 / James, 5:1-6 / /
Peter,  4:18  /  Jude, 6-13 / Revelation, 2:20-23; 14:9-11; 19:17-20:15;
21:8—  (D)  Apocalypse,  2:20-23;  14:9-11;  19:17-20:15521:8  4  Homer:
Odyssey,  bk  xi  [568-600]  248d-249a  5  Aristophanes: Frogs [143-153]
565d-566a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xiii, ch 2 360b361a; ch 12 365d-366a; ch
14-15  366b-d; ch 23, 372b-d; bk xiv, ch i 376b,d-377a; ch 15 388d-390a;
bk  xv, ch i 397b,d-398c; bk xix, ch 13 519a-520a; ch 28 529d-530a,c; bk
xx,  ch  15  543d-544b; bk xxi 560a-586a,c esp ch 1-3 560a-562a, ch 9-10
568d-570b,  ch  13  571c-572a, ch 17 574a-b, ch 23 576c-577b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 10, a 3, rep 2 42c-43b; q 21, a 4, rep i
126c-127c;  q  63, a 8, ans 332c-333b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 87, aa 3-5 187b-189c; part hi suppl, q 70, a 3 897d-900d; q 87,
a  1,  rep  4 997b-998c; qq 97-99 1066a-1085a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell  la-52d  esp in 4a-5b, v [1-51] 7a-c, vi [94-115] 9b-c, vn [100130]
10c-d, xi 15a-16b, xiv [16-72] 19c-20b, xxvii [55-136] 40a-41b, xxviii
[1 12-142] 42c43a, xxxm
[91-150] 50c-51a; paradise, xv
[10-12] 128c
22  Chaucer:  Friar's Tale 278a-284a / Monl(s Tale [14,005-020] 434a-b /
Parson's Tale, par 8

[805a]
6e  to 7 Chapter 86: SIN 771 497b-498a; par io 498b-502a; par 15 506a-b;
par  75,  536a; par 99 548b; par 101 549a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
193d-195d;  part  iv,  250c-251b;  253b-255b  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk ii, ~-^~~~ 119b-122a 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i,
sc  iv  [4263] 115a-b 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act ii, sc hi [1-23] 292b
31 Descartes -.Meditations, 69b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[i]-bk
ii
[628]
93b-125a  esp  bk  ii  [85-92]  113a; bk iv [1-113] 152b-155a 33 Pascal:
Provincial  Letters,  82a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  62  194c-d;  sect  72  198a-c;  ch  xxviii, sect 8 230a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  188d-189a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 149c-150c;
234a-b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  363a-b 48 Melville: Moby Dick-, 3b-4a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk i, 10b11a; bk vi, 169c-170b; bk xi,
337a-346a   passim  6e.  The  purifying  punishments  of  Purgatory  Old
Testament:  Isaiah,  4:4—  (D)  Isaias,  4:4  /  Zechariah,  13:8-9— (D)
Zacharias,  13:8-9  / Malachi, 3:1-6— (D) Malachias, 3:1-6 Apocrypha: //
Maccabees,  12.143-46—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees, 12:43-46 New Testament:
Matthew,  3:11-12;  12:32  /  Lul^e, 3:16-17 / / Corinthians, 3:10-15 13
Virgil:  Aeneid, bk vi [724-751] 230b-231a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xx,  ch  25-26  554c-556b;  bk  xxi,  ch 13 571c-572a 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 69, a 2, ans and rep 2 886c-887d; a 7, ans
and rep 6 891d-893c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory 53a-105d esp 1-11
53a-55d, m
[103-145] 57a-c, v
[85129] 59d-60c, ix 65d-67b, x [97]-xi [90] 68b69c, xiii 71d-73c, xvn [76-139] 79b-d, xvm
[76-145]
80d-81b, xxi
[34-75]
85b-d, xxv
[io9]-xxvi [90] 92c-93d, xxx-xxxi 99b-102b
23  Hobbes : Leviathan, part hi, 244b-c; part iv, 250c-251c;255b-258b 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act 1, sc v [9-22] 37a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
234b;   520b-c   44  Boswell:  Johnson,  173d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  xi,  341d-342c  7.  Grace  and good works in relation to
salvation from sin Old Testament: Exodus, 34:7-9 / Numbers, 14:18-20 / /
Kings,  8:33-39,46-50  (D)  III  Kings,  8:33-39,46-50  / // Chronicles,
6:2030,36-39;  7:14—  (D) II Paralipomenon, 6:2030,36-39; 7:14 / Psalms,
32:1-5; 51; 78:38; 85:2; 86:5; 99:8; 103:1-13; 130— (D) Psalms,

[805b]
31:1-5;  50;  77:38;  84:3;  85:5;  98:8; 102:1-13; 129 / Isaiah, 44:22;
55:7—  (Z>)  Isaias,  44:22;  55:7  / Jeremiah, 3:12; 31:34; 33:8; 36:3;
50:20 — (D)Jeremias, 3:12; 31:34; 33:8; 36:3; 50:20 /Daniel, 9:9/ Hosea,
14:1-7—   (D)  Osee,  14:28  /  Micah,  7:18-20—  (D)  Micheas,  7:18-20
Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 11:23; 12:19 (D) OT, Book °f Wisdom, 11:24;
12:19  /  Ecclesiasticus,  2:11;  16:11-14;  18:11-14;  28:2-5  —(D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  2:13;  16:11-15; 18:9-14528:2-5 New Testament: Matthew,
5:7;  6:12,14-15;  9:26;  12:31-32; 18:21-35 / Mark, 2:5-10; 3:28; 4:12;
11:25-26/  Luke,  1:77-78;  5:20-24;  6:36- :37-5°; ":4; 12:10; 18:9-14;
23:34  /  John,  3:16-17  / Acts, 5:31; 15:1-11 esp 15:11; 375 7 26:18 /
Romans,  3-8;  9:15-18; 9:30-10:21; 11:5-32 / // Corinthians, 5:15-6:2 /
Galatiansf   2:16-21;   3:13-14  /  Ephesians,  1:1-10;  2:4-9;  4:32  /
Philippians,  2:12-13  /  Colossians,  1:1314;  2:13; 3:13 / // Timothy,
1:8-10  /  Titus,  2:11-14;  3  :3-8 / Hebrews, 4:16; 8:1-10:22 / James,
1:22-27; 2:14-26; 5:15,20 / / Peter, 1:3,13; 2:1054:8 / 11 Peter, 1:3-11
/  1  John,  1:9;  2:12; 3:1-10 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 15
12b-c  /  City  of God, bk xiv, ch i 376b,d-377a; ch 15, 388d-389b; ch 20
392a-b;  ch  27 396c-397a; bk xix, ch 4 511a-513c; bk xxi, ch 12 571a-c;
ch  16 573b-574a; bk xxii, ch 30, 617c618c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 62, aa 2-4 318d-321b 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  63,  a 2, rep 2 64b-65a; q 109, aa 7-10 344a-347d; q in, A2 352d-353d
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii la-4a; iv
[13-66] 5c-6a; vm [65]-ix [103] llc-13b; xxiv
[1-60] 34d-35b; purgatory 53a-105d
esp 1 53a-54c, iv
[25-51]
57d-58a,
[85-96]
58b-c, vii [37-60] 62d-63a, vm
[1-108] 64a-65b, ix
65d-67b, xi
[1-36]
68d-69a, xxx
[85-145]
lOOb-d;  paradise,  xxviii  [94-114]  149d-150a; xxxii [37-84] 155a-c 22
Chaucer:  Troilus  and Cressida, bk i, stanza 144 19b-20a / Second Nun's
Tale  [15,787-821]  467a-b  /  Parson's  Tale  495a-  550a  esp  par  13
504b-505a,  par  56,  527b-528a / UEnvoi 550a-b 26 Shakespeare: Henry V,
act iv, sc i
[309322] 554c-d
32 Milton : Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk ii [1028-1033] 133b; bk
in  [56-415]  136b-144b  esp  [130-134] 138a, [227-238] 140b; bkx [1-84]
274b-276a; [209-223] 279a; [1046-1104] 297a298b; bk xi
[1-21] 299a-b;
[251-262] 304b305a; bk
xii
[411-551] 328a-331a esp
[421427] 328b,
[543-551]
331a;
[574-605] 331b332a
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, la-13a; 15a-b; 19b26b; 29b-34b; 65a-b;
78b-80b; 155b-157b; 158b-159a

[806a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  of guilt, see Duty 4-4^; Honor 2a; Punishment 5c, 6. .
On  the  Merits  and  Remissions  of  Sins lect vi-vii . On the Grace of
Christ  and on Original Sin Freud. Totem and Taboo . Against Two Letters
ofthe  Pelagians,  bk iv, ch 7 . The Future of an Illusion . Of Marriage
and  Concupiscence,  bk ii (xxiv) Aquinas. Summa Contra Gentiles, bk hi,
ch 139F. Bacon. "Of Envy," in Essays treatise iv-v

[806b]
772  THE GREAT IDEAS 7 . . . . 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
332d-  (7. Grace and good works in relation to salvation 333a; 349c _ d;
354a .C ; 362a from sin.) 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii [11,934-941] 290b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  38d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 41
Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  233d-234b;  334b-c  164a  169c;  bk  vii,
180a-191a,c  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 295b 53 James: Psychology, 200b For:
The meaning of sin, and for discussions bearing on the difference of sin
from  crime  and  vice,  see  Law  3a~3b,  6e-6e(3) ; Punishment 3b, 5b;
Religion  2;  Virtue  and  Vice  i,  8a-8b.  Discussions relevant to the
doctrine of original sin, see Angel 5a; Good and Evil 3f; Man 90-9^(2) ;
Virtue  and  Vice  8a;  Will  7e(i)  ;  and  for the conditions of man's
atonement  for and remission from original sin, see God 9c, 9e; Religion
2c.  The causes and consequences of actual or personal sin, see Good and
Evil  3f  ;  Virtue  and  Vice  8b;  Will 8b(i). The conditions of man's
salvation  from  sin, and the issue concerning grace and good works, see
God  7d;  Liberty  5c; Nature 6b; Punishment 5c; Virtue and Vice 8b. The
nature of sanctity and heroic virtue, see Pleasure and Pain 7b; Religion
3d;  Temperance 6a; Virtue and Vice 8f-8g. Other considerations of man's
freedom and responsibility for sin in relation to divine predestination,
see  Fate  4;  God  7f;  Liberty 5a~5b; Punishment 2a; Will 5K4), 7e(2).
Other  discussions  of  the  divine punishment of sin, both temporal and
eternal,  see  Eternity  4d; God 5i; Happiness 7c(3); Immortality 5d~5e;
Punishment  2,  5d~5e(2); Virtue and Vice 8c. Treatments of the sense of
sin  in  relation  to  duty,  honor,  conscience,  and abnormal feelings
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great BooJ^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The Great Ideas. Hobbes. Philosophical Rudiments Concerning
Govern- *• ment and Society, ch 14 Plutarch. "Of the Love of Wealth," in
Moralia  .  The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, Augustine. On Free
Will,  bk  hi,  ch  14  part i, ch 7 . Reply to Faustus, bk xxii (27) W.
James.  The Varieties of Religious Experience, -. Summa Theologica, part
ii-ii, qq 1 61-165 Saadia Gaon. The BooJ{ of Beliefs and Opinions,

[807a]
Anselm  of  Canterbury.  Cur  Deus  Homo?  .  De  Conceptu  Virginali et
Originali  Peccato  Abailard.  Ethics  (Scito  Teipsum)  Maimonides. The
Guidefor  the Perplexed, part hi, ch 40-41 _____— Francis of Assisi. The
Rules  Bonaventura.  Breviloquium, part hi, v R. Bacon. Opus Majus, part
vii  Albertus  Magnus. Summa Theologiae, part i, Q 26, MEMB I, ART 2 (2)
Langland. Piers Plowman Albo. The Bool^ of Principles (Sefer ha-I%arim),
bk iv, ch 5-6 Thomas a Kempis. The Imitation of Christ, bk i Ignatius of
Loyola.  Spiritual  Exercises  Luther. A Treatise on Christian Liberty .
The  Schmalkald Articles, part hi . Table Tal{ Calvin. Institutes of the
Christian  Religion,  bk  ii, ch 1-3, 6-17 . Commentaries on the Epistle
of Paul  the  Apostle  to  the  Romans,  ch  5 (12) Suarez. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xi  (1-3), xix (7) Marlowe. The Tragical History of Doctor
Faustus Baxter. The Saints' Everlasting Rest J. Taylor. Of Holy Living .
Of  Holy Dying Racine. Phedre Malebranche. De la recherche de la verite,
bk ii (i), CH 7 (5) Bunyan. Pilgrim's Progress

[807b]
Chapter  86:  SIN  773  Leibnitz.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics,  xxx-xxxn
Bossuet.  Traite  de  la concupiscence Clarke. An Inquiry into the Cause
and  Origin  of Evil  Law.  A  Serious  Call to a Devout and Holy Life J.
Edwards.  The Great Christian Doctrine of Original Sin Defended Voltaire.
"Conscience,"  "Original  Sin," in A Philosophical Dictionary Coleridge.
The  Rime  of  the  Ancient  Mariner Schopenhauer. The World as Will and
Idea,  vol  i,  bk  iv  (65)  J.  H. Newman. Lectures on the Doctrine of
Justification  Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality,  bk  ii,  ch 13l 7
Kierkegaard.  The  Concept  of  Dread . The Sickness Unto Death, sect ii
Hawthorne.  The Scarlet Letter Baudelaire. Flowers of Evil Flaubert. The
Temptation  of  Saint  Anthony  Nietzsche.  The  Genealogy of Morals, 11
Frazer.  The  Golden  Bough,  part  ii; part vi; part vii, ch 4-7 Royce.
Studies  of Good and Evil Peguy. Men and Saints (Mortal Sin and Leprosy)
Tennant.  The  Concept of Sin Joyce. A Portrait of the Artist as a Young
Man  O'Neill.  Mourning  Becomes  Electra  Tsanoff.  The  Nature of Evil
Niebuhr. The Nature and Destiny of Man, vol i C. S. Lewis. The Screwtape
Letters . Perelandra

[808a]
INTRODUCTION  MORALISTS  and  political philosophers who appear to be in
substantial  agreement  on  the  principles of justice differ remarkably
from  one  another  on  whether  slavery  is just. The sharpness of this
disagreement  is  made  all  the more remarkable by the almost unanimous
condemnation  of  slavery—in  two senses of that term. As appears in the
chapter  on  Tyranny,  the  condition of those who live under tyrannical
rule is generally conceived as a kind of slavery, involving not only the
loss  of  political  freedom  but  also the suffering of other abuses or
injuries.  With  the possible exception of Hobbes, who says that tyranny
is  merely monarchy "misliked," none of the great authors from Plato and
Aristotle  to  Rousseau,  Hegel, and Mill, writes of tyranny except as a
perversion  of government— unjust, lawless, or illegitimate. The evil of
tyranny  for them lies in the enslavement of men who deserve to be free,
who  should  govern  themselves or at least should be governed for their
own  good,  not  exploited  by a ruler who uses them for his own private
interests.   Some  writers,  like  Montesquieu,  who  tend  to  identify
despotism  and  tyranny  see  little  difference  between subjection and
slavery,  regarding both alike as degradations. Yet Montesquieu—and with
him  Aristotle—also  thinks that for certain races of mankind subjection
or  slavery may be justified. Mill later makes the comparable point that
for a people at a certain stage of political development, subjection may
be  necessary  for  a time in preparation for citizenship. The two basic
distinctions in political status which are here implied —between slavery
and subjection and between subjection and citizenship—are developed more
fully in the chapter on Citizen. The first of these distinctions relates
to the difference in

[808b]
Chapter  87:  SLAVERY  the  condition  of  men  under  tyranny and under
benevolent  despotism; the second, to the difference in the condition of
men  under absolute and under constitutional government. The other sense
in  which  the  word  "slavery'*  seems  always  to  be  used  with  the
connotation  of  evil  is  the  sense in which Augustine speaks of man's
slavery  to  lust  as a consequence of original sin; or in which Spinoza
writes of human bondage— the condition of men enslaved by the tyranny of
their  passions—as compared with human freedom under the rule of reason.
This  meaning of slavery is discussed in other chapters, such as Emotion
and  Liberty. The slavery which results from the tyranny of the passions
is a disorder from which any man may suffer; it stems from a weakness in
the  human  nature  which  is common to all. Similarly, the slavery of a
whole people under tyrannical rule is a perversion of government for all
the members of the community, not just for some. But whenever slavery is
defended,  it is justified only for some men within a community, not for
all; or if for a whole people, not for all mankind, but only for certain
peoples  under  certain  conditions.  With  regard to slavery, the basic
issue of justice is, therefore, whether some men should be slaves or all
should  be  free,  not  whether  all  should  be slaves or all free. The
distinction  between  the slavery of some men within a community and the
enslavement  of  a whole people appears to be related to the distinction
between  economic  and  political enslavement. In the ancient meaning of
the word "economic," the economic slave is the slave of the household or
family.  "A  complete  household," writes Aristotle, "consists of slaves
and freemen." The elements of a family are 774

[809a]
"master  and  slave,  husband  and  wife, father and children." That the
distinction  between  slave  and free man signifies economic rather than
politkaL  status for Aristotle, and for the ancients generally, seems to
be  indicated  by  the  fact  that,  under certain types of oligarchical
constitution,  free  men  are  excluded from citizenship without thereby
becoming  slaves.  But  in  all ancient republics, democratic as well as
oligarchical, slaves are ineligible for citizenship. Though the relation
of  master and slave is essentially economic rather than political, such
slavery  has  a  political  aspect  in  the  sense that some men have no
function  in  the  state  except to serve other men. Aristotle speaks of
them  as  necessary to the state, but not, as are citizens, parts of it.
"The  necessary people," he says, "are either slaves who minister to the
wants  of individuals, or mechanics and laborers who are the servants of
the  community."  The  mark  of economic slavery seems to be the kind of
work  a  man  does  and  the  conditions  under which he labors, whereas
political  slavery seems to depend upon the kind of life a man leads and
the  conditions  under  which  he  lives  in society. The economic slave
serves  a  master by his work. The political slave lives under a tyrant.
In  Aristotle's view it is only the man who is economically free who has
anything  to  lose  from being enslaved by a tyrant. "No free man, if he
can  escape  from  it,  will endure such government," he writes; but the
barbarians,  who  "are  by nature slaves," do not rebel against tyranny.
Where  some  men are by nature free, there is also a natural distinction
between   women   and  slaves,  "but  among  barbarians,"  according  to
Aristotle,  "no  distinction  is  made between women and slaves, because
there  is  no  natural ruler among them: they are a community of slaves,
male  and  female."  The  difference  between economic bondage which can
include  what Marx calls the wage slavery of the proletariat, as well as
chattel  slavery  and other forms of serfdom—and the political condition
of  those  enslaved  by  a  tyrant  does not seem to affect the issue of
justice.  Those, like Hobbes and Locke, who think that the vanquished in
war  must pay for being allowed to live by submitting to slavery, do not
seem concerned whether the servitude takes

[809b]
Chapter  87: SLAVERY 775 the form of private possession by an individual
master or the subjugation of a whole people by the conquering state. Nor
do  those,  like  Aristotle and Montesquieu, who regard some men or some
races  as naturally servile, seem to offer reasons for political slavery
different from those which they think justify economic serWhat does seem
to  affect the issue concerning the justice of slavery is the difference
between  the  natural  slave  and the slave by force or law. This is the
difference  between  the  man  who  is  born a slave (not merely born of
slaves  and  into  slavery)  and the man who, born with a nature fit for
freedom,  is  made  a  slave, either because his parents before him were
slaves,  because  he is sold into slavery, or because, for one reason or
another, he forfeits his birthright If no men are by nature slaves, then
the  only  questions  of  justice  concern  the conditions which justify
making  slaves  of free men. These may remain the only questions even if
there  are  natural slaves, since it cannot be unjust to treat as slaves
those  who  are  by  nature  slaves, any more than it is unjust to treat
animals  as  In both cases some consideration may be given to how slaves
or  animals  should  be  treated. "The right treatment of slaves," Plato
declares in the Laws, "is to behave properly to them, and to do to them,
if  possible,  even  more  justice  than  to  those who are our equals."
Justice  also requires, according to Plato, that if a slave or an animal
do  any  harm,  the  master shall pay for We have already observed that,
with  regard to natural slavery, the main issue is one of fact. The fact
in question concerns human equality and inequality. Within that equality
of all men which rests upon their common possession of human nature, are
some  men  by  nature inferior to others in their use of reason or their
capacity  for  leading the life of reason? Does such inferiority prevent
them  from  directing their own lives or even their own work to the ends
which  are  the  natural fulfillment of man's powers ? And if so, do not
such  men profit from being directed by their superiors, as well as from
serving them and, through serving them,

[810a]
776  THE GREAT IDEAS participating in the greater good their betters are
able  to achieve ? These are the questions of fact which Aristotle seems
to answer affirmatively as he develops his theory of natural slavery. If
the  facts  are  granted, then no issue of justice arises, for Aristotle
can  say  that  "the  slave  by  nature and the master by nature have in
reality  the  same  interests."  It  is  by  the justice inherent in the
relation  of  master  and  slave when both are naturally so related that
Aristotle  can  criticize  the  injustice  of  all conventional forms of
slavery. But the question of fact must be faced, as Aristotle himself is
aware.  "Is  there  any  one intended by nature to be a slave," he asks,
"and for whom such a condition is expedient and right, or is all slavery
a  violation  of  nature?"  Aristotle recognizes that "others affirm the
rule  of  a  master  over  slaves  to be contrary to nature and that the
distinction  between  slave  and free man exists by law only, and not by
nature,  and  being an interference with nature is therefore unjust." He
himself questions the justice of making slaves of captives taken in war,
for  that  may  violate the natures of men of high rank who have had the
misfortune  to  be captured or sold. But he thinks that the same kind of
difference  which  exists  between  male  and  female— the male being by
nature  superior,  the  female  inferior;  the  one  ruling,  the  other
submitting  to rule—can be extended to all mankind. "Where there is such
a  difference,"  Aristotle  explains, "as that between soul and body, or
between  men  and animals . . . the lower sort are by nature slaves, and
it is better for them as for all inferiors that they should be under the
rule  of a master. For he who can be, and therefore is, another's and he
who participates in a rational principle enough to apprehend, but not to
have,  such a principle, is a slave by nature; whereas the lower animals
cannot even apprehend a principle; they obey their instincts. And indeed
the  use  made  of slaves and of tame animals is not very different; for
both with their bodies minister to the needs of life ... If men differed
from  one  another  in  the  mere  forms  of their bodies as much as the
statues of the gods do from men, all would acknowledge that the inferior
class should be slaves of the superior. And if this is true of the body,
how

[810b]
much  more  just that a similar distinction should exist in the soul ...
It  is clear, then, that some are by nature free, and others slaves, and
that for these latter slavery is both expedient and right." According to
the  theory  of  natural  slavery, it is as good for the slave to have a
master  as  for the master to have a slave. This reciprocity of interest
does  not  occur  in  legal  or  conventional  slavery. In both types of
slavery,  the  slave  is  a  piece of property, a possession. Whether by
nature  or by institution, a slave does not own himself; he is another's
man.  "He  may  be  called another's man," Aristotle says, "who, being a
human  being,  is  also  a  possession."  Does  this mean that the slave
belongs  wholly  to the master, in all that he is and has? He would seem
to  belong to his master insofar as he is a possession-, but not wholly—
in all that he is and has—insofar as he is a human being. Aristotle does
not  introduce  such  a qualification where he says that "the slave is a
part  of  the  master, a living but separated part of his bodily frame";
yet he adds: "where the relation of master and slave is natural they are
friends  and have a comon interest, but where it rests merely on law and
force,  the reverse is true." Aristotle considers the difference between
the natural slave and other forms of personal property, whether domestic
animals,  beasts  of  burden,  or  the inanimate instruments used in the
household  for  productive  purposes.  Do  slaves,  he  asks,  have  any
excellence  "beyond  and higher than merely instrumental and ministerial
qualities"  of  the sort to be found in tools and animals ? Do they have
virtues,  and  if  so, then "in what way will they differ from freemen?"
Aristotle  answers  by  saying that "since they are men and share in the
rational  principle,  it  seems absurd to say that they have no virtue."
But  since  the  rational principle in them is weak and consists only in
the ability to execute decisions—not to make them or to know the end for
which  they  are  made—  the slave will have a capacity for only so much
virtue  as he requires; enough virtue, for example, to "prevent him from
failing  in  his  duty through cowardice or lack of self-control." It is
precisely  because  of  his limited competence and virtue that the slave
needs, and

[811a]
profits by having, a master. Aristotle thinks that he is better off than
the  artisan out of bondage. "The slave shares in his master's life; the
artisan is less closely connectexL-wtth him, and only attains excellence
in  proportion  as he becomes a slave. The meaner sort of mechanic has a
special  and  separate  slavery, and whereas the slave exists by nature,
not  so  the  shoemaker or other artisan." The "separate slavery" of the
artisan makes him more like an animal or an inanimate tool in the way he
is  used  ;  for,  according  to  Aristotle,  he  is  an  instrument  of
production, while the natural slave participates in his master's life by
being an instrument not of production, but of action. The work the slave
does  enables  the  master to live well— to achieve the happiness of the
political   or   contemplative  life—and  since  "life  is  action,  not
production . . . the slave is a minister of action." If the slave had in
his  own  nature  the  capacity  for human happiness, he would not be by
nature  a  slave,  nor  be  limited to the good of serving another man's
happiness.  "Slaves  and  brute  animals cannot form a state," Aristotle
says,  because "the state exists for the sake, not of life, but the good
life"  and  slaves  "have  no  share  in  happiness or in a life of free
choice.  .  . . No one assigns to a slave a share in happiness," he says
in another place, "unless he assigns to him also a share in human life."
At  best, that share could come only from being a part of the master and
contributing  to  the master's happiness. But though to this extent "the
slave  by  nature  and  the  master  by  nature have in reality the same
interests,"  the  rule  under  which  the  slave  lives "is nevertheless
exercised  primarily  with  a  view  to  the  interest  of  the master."
Aristotle's  doctrine of natural slavery is rejected by those who affirm
the fundamental equality of all men in their common humanity and who, in
addition,  insist  that  their  inequality  as  individuals in talent or
capacity,  should  not affect their status or determine their treatment.
On  these  grounds,  Roman  Stoics  and  Christian  theologians  seem to
agree—and  with  them such modern thinkers as Rousseau, Kant, Hegel, and
Mill—  that all men are by nature born to be free. Freedom, writes Kant,
belongs "to every man in virtue of his Humanity. There is, in-

[811b]
Chapter  87: SLAVERY 777 deed, an innate Equality belonging to every man
which  consists  in his right to be independent of being bound to others
...  in  virtue  of  which he ought to be his own master by Right." That
"all  persons are deemed to have a right to equality of treatment" seems
to  follow  for  Mill  from  the principle that "one person's happiness,
supposed  equal  in degree (with the proper allowance made for kind), is
counted for exactly as much as another's." The "equal claim of everybody
to  happiness"  involves "an equal claim to all the means of happiness,"
among  them  freedom.  But though theologians like Augustine and Aquinas
deny that slavery is instituted by nature, they do not seem to regard it
as  contrary  to  natural  law  or  to the will of God. Something can be
according  to  natural  law  in  two ways, Aquinas says: "First, because
nature inclines thereto. . . . Secondly, because nature does not require
the  contrary."  Just as we can say, in the second sense, that nakedness
is  natural  for  man, "because nature did not give him clothes, but art
invented  them,"  so  we can say that all men are by nature free because
slavery  was  not instituted by nature, "but devised by human reason for
the benefit of human The institution of slavery, whereby one man belongs
to another for his use, seems due to the fallen nature of man, as one of
the  penal  consequences of original sin. If man had remained in a state
of  innocence,  one  man would have ruled another for the latter's good,
but  no  man  would  have  been  the master of slaves to be used for the
master's  good.  Since  "it  is  a grievous matter to anyone to yield to
another  what  ought  to  be  one's own," it follows, says Aquinas, that
"such  dominion  necessarily  implies  a pain inflicted on the subject."
This  painfulness  of  slavery in turn seems to imply a contradiction to
Aristotle's  view  that  slavery  fits  certain natures and is for their
benefit. "By nature, as God first created us," writes Augustine, "no one
is  the  slave  either  of  man  or  of  sin." Both sorts of slavery are
"introduced  by  sin  and  not by nature." Both are punishments for sin,
though  one  seems  to  Augustine more grievous than the other. "It is a
happier  thing,"  he says, "to be the slave of a man than of a lust; for
even this very lust of ruling . . .

[812a]
778  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lays  waste  men's hearts with the most ruthless
dominion.  Moreover, when men are subjected to one another in a peaceful
order,  the lowly position does as much good to the servant as the proud
position  does  harm  to the master." Not sin, but climate, according to
Montesquieu,  is  the  cause  of  slavery and to some extent its excuse.
Though he thinks that "the state of slavery is in its own nature bad . .
.  neither  useful  to  the  master nor to the slave," Montesquieu, like
Hippocrates  before him, regards the Asiatics as reduced to servility by
the  physical  conditions  of  their  life.  "There  reigns in Asia," he
writes, "a servile spirit which they have never been able to shake ofT."
Under   Asiatic   despotism,  where  whole  peoples  live  in  political
servitude,  domestic  slavery is more tolerable than elsewhere. In those
countries  "where  the excess of heat enervates the body and renders men
so slothful that nothing but the fear of chastisement can oblige them to
perform  any  laborious  duty,  slavery  is  .  . . more reconcilable to
reason."  Montesquieu  seems  to  accept  Aristotle's doctrine with some
qualifications.  "Aristotle  endeavors  to  prove that there are natural
slaves, but what he says is far from proving it. If there be any such, I
believe  they  are  those of whom I have been speaking." Slavery is both
natural  and  unnatural.  "As  all  men  are  born  equal,"  Montesquieu
declares, "slavery must be accounted unnatural, though in some countries
it  be  founded  on natural reason . . . Natural slavery, then, is to be
limited to some particular parts of the world." But in arguing the right
of  Europeans  "to  make  slaves  of the negroes," he concludes with the
equivocal  remark  that  "it  is  impossible  for  us  to  suppose these
creatures to be men, because, allowing them to be men, a suspicion would
follow  that  we  ourselves  are not Christians." Hegel's comment on the
enslavement  of  African negroes by Europeans runs somewhat differently.
"Bad  as  this  may be," he writes, "their lot in their own land is even
worse, since there a slavery quite as absolute exists." But though Hegel
thinks  that the negroes are naturally given to slavery, he regards "the
'natural  condition'  itself as one of absolute and thorough injustice."
To  remove  this  injustice, however, is not easy. "Man must be matured"
for free-

[812b]
dom,  Hegel writes. "The gradual abolition of slavery is therefore wiser
and  more  equitable  than  its  sudden  removal."  Mill also looks upon
slavery  as  a  stage  in  the  rise of certain peoples from savagery to
political  life,  and  maintains  that the transition to freedom must be
gradually  effected.  "A slave properly so called," he says, "is a being
who has not learnt to help himself. He is, no doubt, one step in advance
of  a  savage.  He  has  not the first lesson of political life still to
acquire.  He  has  learnt  to  obey.  But what he obeys is only a direct
command.  It  is  the  characteristic  oiborn  slaves to be incapable of
conforming  their  conduct  to  a  rule, or a law. . . . They have to be
taught  self-government,  and  this,  in  its  initial  stage, means the
capacity  to act on general instructions." Extenuations of the injustice
of  ruling  men as slaves, such as those proposed by Hegel and Mill, are
rejected  by  Rousseau.  The  notion that some men are by nature slaves,
whether in Asia or in Europe, seems to Rousseau to be an illusion due to
the  fact that those who are made slaves by force have had their natures
debased  to  slavishness.  Aristotle,  he says, "took the effect for the
cause.  Nothing  can be more certain than that every man born in slavery
is  born  for  slavery. Slaves lose everything in their chains, even the
desire  of escaping from them ... If then there are slaves by nature, it
is  because  there have been slaves against nature. Force made the first
slaves, and their cowardice perpetuated the condition." It is sophistry,
he thinks, for philosophers to "attribute to man a natural propensity to
servitude,  because the slaves within their observation are seen to bear
the  yoke with patience; they fail to reflect that it is with liberty as
with  innocence and virtue; the value is known only to those who possess
them,  and  the  taste  for  them  is  forfeited when they are forfeited
themselves."   The  issue  concerning  slavery  as  a  social  or  legal
institution  does  not  seem  to  be  resolved  by the views men take of
natural  slavery.  Aristotle,  who  holds  that  only natural slavery is
justified,  criticizes those who "affirm to be unjust and inexpedient in
their  own  case what they are not ashamed of practising towards others;
they demand just rule for themselves,"

[813a]
he  writes,  "but  where other men are concerned thev care nothing about
it.  Such  behavior is irrational, unless the one party is, and other is
not,  born  to  serve." This cannot be determined by conquest. Aristotle
questions,  therefore, the convention "by which whatever is taken in war
is  supposed  to  belong to the victors," or the principle that "because
one  man  has  the  power  of  doing  violence  and is superior in brute
strength,  another  shall  be  his slave and subject." Those who "assume
that  slavery in accordance with the custom of war is justified by law,"
are confronted by Aristotle with the question: "What if the cause of the
war be unjust?" Hobbes and Locke appear to take an opposite view. Men in
a  state of nature are free, though they can actually enjoy only as much
freedom  as  they  have  power  to secure. Yet the natural inequality in
their  powers  does  not  establish  a  natural right on the part of the
stronger  to enslave the weaker. Hobbes makes the right of mastership or
what  he  calls  "despotical dominion" depend not merely upon victory in
war,  but  upon  a covenant into which the vanquished enter voluntarily,
"when  the vanquished, to avoid the present stroke of death, covenanteth
.  . . that so long as his life, and the liberty of his body, is allowed
him, the victor shall have the use thereof at his pleasure." Only "after
such  covenant  is made, the vanquished is a servant, and not before ...
It  is  not,  therefore,  the victory, that giveth the right of dominion
over  the  vanquished,  but his own covenant." That Hobbes means chattel
slave  when  he says "servant," seems to be indicated by his remark that
"the  master of the servant is master also of all he hath, and may exact
the  use  thereof;  that  is to say, of his goods, of his labour, of his
servants,  and  of  his children, as often as he shall think fit." Locke
disagrees with Hobbes that one man can give another the right to enslave
him by contracting to become a slave in order to avoid death. "A man not
having the power of his own life," he writes, "cannot by compact, or his
own consent, enslave himself to anyone. . . . Nobody can give more power
than  he  has himself; and he that cannot take away his own life, cannot
give  another  power  over  it." As among the ancient Jews, men can sell
themselves into temporary service to requite a debt. But this was a kind
of drudgery, not slavery; "the per-

[813b]
Chapter  87:  SLAVERY 779 son sold was not under an absolute, arbitrary,
despotical power, for the master could not have the power to kill him at
any  time,  whom  at a certain time he was obliged to let go free out of
his  service."  No  Jew,  Aquinas  concurs,  "could own a Jew as a slave
absolutely,  but  only  in a restricted sense, as a hireling for a time.
And  in  this way the Law permitted that through stress of poverty a man
might  sell  his  son  or  daughter."  Absolute  slavery, for Locke, "is
nothing  else  but the state of war continued between a lawful conqueror
and  a  captive."  It is lawful, he thinks, to kill a violent aggressor,
"for  to  that hazard does he justly expose himself whoever introduces a
state of war, and is aggressor in it." But he who has forfeited his life
necessarily  forfeits  his  freedom. Slaves, then, are those "who, being
captives  taken  in  a just war, are by right of nature subjected to the
absolute  dominion and arbitrary power of their masters." In contrast to
the  limited  servitude  which  a  man  can contract for wages, absolute
slavery  "is  the effect only of forfeiture which the aggressor makes of
his  own  life when he puts himself into the state of war with another."
Against  Locke  and  Hobbes,  as well as Aristotle, Rousseau denies that
there is any justice in slavery—by nature, by covenant or compact, or by
right  of war. To think as Hobbes appears to, that "the child of a slave
comes into the world as a slave," is, in Rousseau's opinion, to say that
"a  man  shall  come  into the world not a man." Holding that slavery is
"contrary  to nature," Rousseau also holds that it "cannot be authorized
by  any  right  or  law."  A  man cannot alienate his freedom by selling
himself  into  slavery,  for "to renounce liberty is to renounce being a
man."  In  Kant's language, "a contract by which the one party renounces
his  whole freedom for the advantage of the other, ceasing thereby to be
a  person and consequently having no duty even to observe a contract, is
self-contradictory,  and is therefore of itself null and void." Agreeing
that  such  a  contract is a nullity, Hegel holds that the "slave has an
absolute  right to free himself," but he adds that "if a man is a slave,
his  own  will  is responsible for his slavery. . . . Hence the wrong of
slavery  lies  at the door not simply of enslavers or conquerors, but of
the slaves and the conquered themselves."

[814a]
780  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  As  for  Grotius and the others who "find in war
another  origin  for  the so-called right of slavery"—on the ground that
"the victor having . . . the right of killing the vanquished, the latter
can  buy  back  his  life  at the price of his liberty"— Rousseau thinks
their argument begs the question. "The right of conquest," he says, "has
no  foundation  other  than  the right of the strongest. If war does not
give  the  conqueror  the  right  to massacre the conquered peoples, the
right  to  enslave  them  cannot  be  based  upon a right which does not
exist."  Since Rousseau denies that victory gives the victors a right to
kill  those  who have laid down their arms, he regards it unfair to make
the  captive  "buy  at the price of his liberty his life, over which the
victor  holds  no  right.  .  .  .  From  whatever  aspect we regard the
question,"  he  concludes,  "the  right of slavery is null and void, not
only   as  being  illegitimate,  but  also  because  it  is  absurd  and
meaningless.  The  words  slave  and right contradict each other and are
mutually exclusive." In modern as well as ancient times, in the European
colonies  in  the  New  World  if  not  in  Europe  itself,  slave labor
characterizes  a  certain  type  of  economy  and determines the mode of
production,  especially  in agriculture and mining. The slave as chattel
is  bought and sold like other property. He may be a source of profit to
his  owner  in  exchange as well as in production. The traffic in slaves
depends  upon  an original acquisition, either through the spoils of war
or  by  the  activity  of  slave  traders  who  hunt men as if they were
animals,  to transport them in chains and sell them into slavery. In the
ancient  world,  individual  slave owners emancipated their slaves, even
as,  under modern feudalism, a great landowner like Prince Andrew in War
and Peace freed his serfs. Aristotle speaks of those in his own time who
opposed  the  institution  of  slavery; and the Roman Stoics did a great
deal to ameliorate the condition of the slave and to protect him legally
against abuse. But there seems to have been no political party or active
political movement among the ancients corresponding to the abolitionists
and  their  struggle in the 18th and 19th centuries. Even then, however,
the abolitionists were looked upon as a radical minority who had no

[814b]
respect  for  the rights of property in their overzealous sentimentality
about  the  rights  of men. Those who were willing to outlaw the African
slave  trade as outrageous were less outraged by the treatment of men as
chattel,  once  they  were possessed. Madison, for example, referring to
the  prohibition  affecting  the  importation  of slaves into the United
States,  which the Constitution postponed until 1808, thinks it "a great
point  gained  in  favor  of humanity, that a period of twenty years may
terminate  forever, within these States, a traffic which has so long and
so  loudly  upbraided  the  barbarism  of modern policy." But in another
paper  the  writers  of  The  Federalist  present  their  version of the
Southern   argument   defending   the  Constitution's  apportionment  of
representation,  "determined  by  adding  to  the  whole  number of free
persons,  including  those  bound  to  service  for a term of years, and
excluding  Indians not taxed, threefifths of all other persons." They do
not  object  to  the  view of the negro slave as two-fifths property and
three-fifths  a  person,  confessing  themselves reconciled to reasoning
which,  though "it may appear a little strained in some points," appeals
to  a  principle  they  themselves  approve, namely, that "government is
instituted  no  less  for  the  protection of property than of persons."
There  are  even those, in the 18th century, who defend the slave trade.
Boswell  reports  an  argument  set  forth  by  Dr.  Johnson in favor of
granting  liberty  to a negro, who claimed his freedom before a Scottish
Court  of  Session.  The  sum  of  Dr.  Johnson's argument, according to
Boswell,  came to this: "No man is by nature the property ofanother; the
defendant is, therefore, by nature free. The rights of nature must be in
some  way forfeited before they can be justly taken away . . . and if no
proof  of  such forfeiture can be given, we doubt not but the justice of
the  court  will declare him free." Admitting that Johnson may have been
right  in  the  particular  case  at  hand, Boswell protests his general
attitude  toward  slavery  and  the  slave trade. "To abolish a status,"
Boswell  writes,  "which  in  all  ages  God has sanctioned, and man has
continued,  would  not  only  be  robbery to an innumerable class of our
fellow-subjects; but it

[815a]
would  be  extreme  cruelty to the African savages, a portion of whom it
saves  from  massacre,  or intolerable bondage in their own country, and
introduces  into a much happier state_of life, especially now when their
passage  to  the  West  Indies  and  their  treatment  there is humanely
regulated."  Issues  of  justice  aside,  economists like Smith and Marx
question the productivity of slave labor. Improvements in machinery "are
least of all to be expected," writes Smith, when the proprietors "employ
slaves  for  their  workmen.  The  experience of all ages and nations, I
believe, demonstrates that the work done by slaves, though it appears to
cost  only their maintenance, is in the end the dearest of any. A person
who  can  acquire  no property, can have no interest but to eat as much,
and  to labor as little as possible." He explains the lack of mechanical
progress in Greece and Rome by the fact that "slaves ... are very seldom
inventive;  and  all the most important improvements in machinery, or in
the  arrangement  and distribution of work, which facilitate and abridge
labor,  have  been  the  discoveries  of  free  men."  Marx  also judges
"production by slave labor" to be "a costly process . . . The principle,
universally  applied  in  this  method of production," is "to employ the
rudest and heaviest implements and such as are difficult to damage owing
to their sheer clumsiness. In the slave-states, bordering on the Gulf of
Mexico,  down  to  the date of the civil war, ploughs constructed on old
Chinese  models,  which turned up the soil like a hog or a mole, instead
of  making furrows, were alone to be found." But Marx does not limit his
judgment  of  slavery  to  criteria of efficiency, nor does he limit his
consideration  of servitude to its more obvious forms of chattel slavery
and  feudal  serfdom.  For  him,  all  use of labor by those who own the
instruments  of production involves exploitation; it differs only in the
degree  to  which the owner derives a surplus value from the labor power
he  possesses,  through  property  rights or wage payments. According to
Marx,  "the  essential  difference between the various economic forms of
society,  between,  for instance, a society based on slave labor and one
based on wage labor, lies only in

[815b]
Chapter  87: SLAVERY 781 the mode in which this surplus-labor is in each
case  extracted from the actual producer, the laborer." As all the value
produced by a slave, in excess of the cost of keeping him alive, profits
his  owner,  so  during "the period of surpluslabor, the usufruct of the
labor-power  creates  a  value  for  the  capitalist  that  costs him no
equivalent  ...  In  this  sense  it is that surplus-labor can be called
unpaid labor"—whether it is the labor of chattel or wage slaves. Because
a  laborer  is forced to sell his laborpower in the open market in order
to  subsist,  Marx  regards  his so-called "freedom" as a pious fiction.
"The  contract by which he sold to the capitalist his labor-power proved
in  black  and white," Marx writes, "that he disposed of himself freely.
The  bargain  concluded,  it  is discovered that he was no 'free-agent,'
that  the  time for which he is free to sell his labor-power is the time
for which he is forced to sell it." Others take the view that there is a
fundamental moral difference between chattel slaves and men who work for
wages.  Hobbes,  for example, thinks that between slaves who "are bought
and  sold  as beasts" and servants "to whose service the masters have no
further  right  than  is  contained in the covenants made betwixt them,"
there  is  only this much in common— "that their labor is appointed them
by  another." In slightly varying terms, Aquinas, Locke, and Kant make a
similar  distinction  between  the free servant, or paid worker, and the
slave.  The  point  is  summarized  by  Hegel  as  a  difference between
alienating  to  someone  else  "products  of  my particular physical and
mental  skill," and alienating "the whole of my time, as crystallized in
my work." In the latter case, "I would be making into another's property
the substance of my being." Debating with Douglas, Lincoln insisted that
political  freedom  was  the  difference between the white slaves of the
North  and  the  black  slaves of the South. The legal right, won by the
proletariat, to organize and strike, seems to be a difference which Marx
himself  recognizes  between the wage earner and the bonded slave. Until
his  chains  are  struck,  the  slave is not in the position of the free
workingman  to fight for political rights and privileges. Citizenship is
not  always  extended to the laboring classes, but it is never conferred
upon slaves.

[816a]
782  THE GREAT IDEAS to slavery ic. Slavery in relation to natural or to
divine  law  3.  Slavery as a social institution: the conventionality of
slavery  30.  The  acquisition of slaves: conquest, purchase, indenture,
forfeiture  y. The emancipation or manumission of slaves : the rebellion
of slaves of inalienable human rights 40. Chattel slavery: slaves of the
household  and  slaves  of  the  state Ofb. Serfdom or peonage 4<r. Wage
slavery:  the  exploitation  of  the  laborer 5. The political aspect of
economic slavery politic or political community 6. Political enslavement
or subjection paternalistic government dependencies will: human bondage

[816b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  PAGE  i. The nature of enslavement: the relation of
master  and  slave  783 2. The theory of natural slavery and the natural
slave  784  2a.  Characteristics  of  the  natural slave: individual and
racial  differences  in relation ib. The conception of the natural slave
as  the  property  or  instrument  of  his  master 2d. Criticisms of the
doctrine  of natural slavery 785 $b. Laws regulating slavery: the rights
and  duties of master and slave 786 $d. Criticisms of the institution of
slavery:  the  injustice  of  slavery; its transgression 4. The forms of
economic  slavery  787  50.  The  disfranchisement of chattel slaves and
serfs:  their  exclusion from the body 5#. The political deprivations of
the  laboring  classes or wage slaves: the struggle for enfranchisement;
the  issue  between oligarchy and democracy with respect to suffrage 788
6b. Subjection as the condition of men living under benevolent despotism
or  6c.  The  transition  from subjection to citizenship: the conditions
fitting  men for self-government 789 6d. The imperialistic subjection or
enslavement of conquered peoples or colonial

[817a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  relevant  parts  of  a  whole
reference; "passim" signifies that the topic is discussed intermittently
rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. For additional
information  concerning the style of the references, see the Explanation
of  Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of The Great Ideas,
consult  the  Preface.  1.  The  nature  of enslavement: the relation of
master and slave Old Testament: Genesis, 9:25 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
33:24-31  —  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 33:25-33 New Testament: Ephesians,
6:5-9  /  Colossians,  3:22-4:1  /  /  Timothy,  6:1-3 / Titus, 2:9-10 /
Philemon / / Peter, 2:18-25 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk i
[421-444] 187c-d; bk
xiv  260a-265d; bk xv [351-492] 269c-271a; bk xviii [313-345] 287b-d; bk
xxii [390-477] 309d-310d 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[1035-1046] 63a-b
5 Sophocles: Ajax
[1226-1263]
153c-154a  /  Trachiniae  [246-290]  172b-c 5 Euripides: Helen [722-738]
305a;   [1621-1641]  313b-d  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [303-316]  427b  5
Aristophanes:  Plutus [1-8] 629a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 21b; bk iv,
124a-d;  bkvii,  223c-d  7  Plato:  Lysis,  16c-18a  /  Gorgias,  271c /
Theaetetus,  528c-d / Statesman, 597a-b / Laws, bk vi, 709a-710a; bk xi,
772a-773a  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2  [982^527]  501a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch ii
[1161*30bio] 413c-d; bk x, ch 6
[1177*6-10] 431c /

[817b]
Chapter  87:  SLAVERY 783 Politics, bk 1, ch 2 [i252a24-b i2] 445b-d; ch
3-7 446d-449c; ch 13 454a-455a,c; bk hi, ch 5
[1278*1-14] 475a-b; ch 6 [1278*30-37] 476a-b;
ch 9
[1280*30-34] 477d-478a; bk
iv, ch 4
[1291*7-10] 490b; bk vii, ch 10 [1330*25-34]
534d;  ch  15  [1334*16-40] 539a-b 10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places,
par  16  15d-16a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 19, 126a; ch 29,
137c-d  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 46c-47a / LycurgusNuma, 62a / Coriolanus,
185b-186a / Marcus Cato, 278b-279a; 287b-d / Crassus, 439a-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk xiv, 151d-152c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 15 521a-c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 21, a 1, rep 3 124b-125b; q 81,
a  3,  rep  2 430c431d; q 92, a 1, rep 2 488d-489d; q 96, a 4 512d-513c;
part  i-ii,  q  2,  a 4, rep 3 618a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  98, a 6, rep 2 244c-245b; q 104, a i, rep 3 304a305a; a 4, ans
306d-307c;  q  105,  a 4, ans and rep 1-4 318b-321a; part ii-ii, q 10, a
10, rep 3 434c-435d; q 183, a i 625a-626a 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par
65-67,  531a-532a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, HOb-110a; part iv,
261d-262a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 219b-d; 344d-345d

[818a]
(  1.  The  nature of enslavement: the relation of master and slave.) 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch iv 29d-30b; ch vii, sect 85 43c-d; ch xv,
sect  172-174  65b-d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv, 109a;
110d-112a;  114a-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 388a-c; 389a-390d
39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations,  bk  iv, 298c-299a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  16c-d  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 404d; 421c-422d; 445c-446a 43
Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, xiii 18c 43 Federalist: number 54,
170b-171b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  339d-340c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 57 26b-27a; par 66, 29b; additions, 36
122b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  198a-199c; part 11, 273c 48
Melville: Moby Dic\, 3b 50 Marx: Capital, 79c-d esp 79d-80b
[fn
4]; 95a-b
[fn
1]; 128d-129a; 266c; 267c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; bk
vii,  277a-287a passim, esp 278c, 280b281d; bk x, 410c-421c; epilogue i,
654a-655c  2.  The  theory  of  natural  slavery and the natural slave 7
Plato:  Laws,  bk  vi,  709a-710a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i, ch 2
[i252a24~b i2] 445b-d; ch 3-6 446d-449b; ch 8 [i256b2o-25] 450c; bk vii,
ch 14 [i333b38-i334a2] 538d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 13 120b-c
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch 15 521a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  94,  a 5, rep 3 224d-225d 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par
65-67,  531a-532a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 94b-c 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch iv 29d-30b; ch vi, sect 54 36c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk xv, 109b111c; bk xvii, 122a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 347a-d;
356b-357a  /  Social  Contract,  bk 1, 388a-c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
401c-402a;  445a-c 43 Federalist: number 54, 170c-d 44 Boswell: Johnson,
363c-364a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 57 26b-27a;
additions,  36  122b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro, 198a-199c 2a.
Characteristics  of the natural slave: individual and racial differences
in  relation  to  slavery  6  Herodotus: History, bk iv, 124a-d 7 Plato:
Laws, bk vi, 709a-710a

[818b]
784 THE GREAT IDEAS 2 to 2c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bkviii, chii [u6i a3o-b
io]  413c-d;  bk  x,  ch  6  [1177*1-11]  431c  /  Politics,  bk 1, ch 2
[1252^4^12]  445b-d; ch 5 [i254b 3] 448b-c; ch 13 454a-455a,c; bk hi, ch
9
[1280^0-34] 477d-478a; bk
iv, ch 4
[129^7-10] 490b; bk
vii, ch 7
[i327b i9-32]
531d-532a; ch 10
[1330^25-34] 534d; ch
15
[1334*16-40] 539a-b
10  Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  16  15d-16a i5-i255 a 14
Plutarch:  Crassus,  439b-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  94b-c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xv, 110c111b; bk xvii, 122a-b; 123a-b;
124c-d  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 347a-d / Social Contract, bk 1, 388b-c
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 402 b 43 Federalist: number 54, 170b-171b
43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  340a-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro, 198a199c 50 Marx: Capital, 95a-b [fn 1] 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, bk v, 215b-d; 216c-d 2b. The conception of the natural slave
as  the  property  or  instrument  of  his  master 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi,
709a-710a; bk xi, 772a773a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch ii
[n6i a30b io]
413c-d  /  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  4  447b-c;  ch 5 [i254b i5-26] 448b 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, a 4 512d-513c; part i-ii, q 20,
a  6,  rep  3 716b-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 445c-446a 43 Federalist:
number  54,  170b-171b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 198a199c
2c.  Slavery  in  relation  to  natural  or to divine law Old Testament:
Genesis,    9:25    Apocrypha:   Ecclesiasticus,   33:24-31—   (D)   OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  33:25-33  New Testament: Ephesians, 6:5-9 / Colossians,
3:22-4:1 / / Timothy, 6:1-3 / Philemon 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,
ch  15  521a-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, a 1, rep 2
488d-489d;  q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  94,  a  5,  rep 3 224d-225d; q 105, a 4, ans and rep 1-4 318b-321a 22
Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale, par 65-67, 531a532a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 94b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[79-110]
321a-b  esp  [101-104]  321b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 4
25d26a;  ch  iv 29d-30b; ch xv, sect 172 65b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws, bk xv, 109b111c

[819a]
2d  to 3a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 357c-358b / Political Economy, 368a /
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  389a  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 401c-402a;
445c-446a  43  Declaration  of  Independence: [7-9] la 43 Mill: Liberty,
316b-d  _^__ - 44 Boswell: Johnson, 363c-364a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 3b
2d. Criticisms of the doctrine of natural slavery 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk  i,  ch 3 [i253b20-23] 447a; ch 6 448c-449b 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  i,  ch  13  120b-c  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, a 4
512d-513c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3
224d-225d  22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par 65-67, 531a532a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 94b-c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 54 36c;
ch  xv, sect 172 65b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 109a; HOd-
110c;  bk  xvii,  124b-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  347a-d; 356b-357a;
357c-358b  /  Political Economy, 368a / Social Contract, bk i, 388a-390d
42 Kant: Science of Right, 401b-402a; 421c-422d; 445c-446a 43 Declaration
of  Independence: [7-9] la 43 Mill: Liberty, 316b-d 44 Boswell: Johnson,
363b-364c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 48 24b-c; par 57
26b-27a;  additions,  36  122b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 161a-c;
199c  50  Marx:  Capital,  25c-d 3. Slavery as a social institution: the
conventionality  of slavery 7 Plato: Laws, bk vi, 709a-710a 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  3 [i253b20-23] 447a; ch 6 448c-449b; bk vn, ch 10
[1330*3334]  534d  14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 46c-47a / LycurgusNuma, 62a /
Coriolanus,  185b-186a  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk xiii, 132a-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3 224d-225d; q 105, a 4, ans
and rep 1,3 318b-321a 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 65-67, 531a-532a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  94b-c  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch iv
29d-30b;  ch  vii,  sect 85 43c-d; ch xv, sect 172 65b-c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xv  109a115d;  bk  xvii,  122a-124d  38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  347a-d  / Social Contract, bk 1, 387b,d-390d; bk hi, 422c-d
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  34b-c;  bk  hi, 167a-c; bk iv,
239c-240a;  253c-254a;  298c299a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 16c-17b;
620a-c; 628d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 45b

[819b]
d  Chapter  87:  SLAVERY  785  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 421c-422d;
445c447c;  454d-455a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, xiii, sect
i-xiv, sect i 18c 43 Federalist: number 42, 137b-c; number 54, 170c-d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  316b-d  / Representative Government, 332c-d; 339d-340c;
428c;  430c-d  /  Utilitarianism, 467a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 363c-364c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  additions,  36  122b-c  /  Philosophy of
History,  intro,  161a-c; 199bc; part 11, 273c; part iv, 364d 49 Darwin:
Descent of Man, 315a 50 Marx: Capital, 113d-114a; 114d
[fn 3]; 145c146a; 361b [fn
1];  364a-366a  54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  882  "ha.  The
acquisition  of  slaves:  conquest,  purchase, indenture, forfeiture Old
Testament:  Genesis,  44:1-10  /Exodus,  21 :26 esp 21 :5~6 / Leviticus,
25:39-55  / Deuteronomy, 15:12-17 esp 15:16-17 / / Kings, 9:22— (£>) ///
Kings,  9:22  /  // Chronicles, 28:8-15— (D) II Paralipomenon, 28:8-15 /
Nehemiah  y  5:1-12—  (D)  II  Esdras,  5:1-12  4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xiv
[109-120]  261b;  bk  xv  [380-492]  270a-271a  5  Sophocles: Trachiniae
[293-306]  172c-d  5  Euripides:  Trojan  Women [1260-1333] 280d281a,c /
Andromache
[1-146]
315a-316c  / Hecuba [342-378] 355d-356a 5 Aristophanes: Plutus [144-148]
630d;  [507526]  635a-b  7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 404a / Laws, bk xi,
772a-773a; 780bc; 783b-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 6 448c-449b; ch
7   [1255^7-40]   449c;   ch   8   [i256b20-25]   450c;  bk  vn,  ch  14
[i333b38-i334*2]  538d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 19, 126a 14
Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato, 278b-279a; 287b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  105, a 4, ans and rep 1,4 318b-321a 22 Chaucer: Parson's
Tale, par 65-67, 531a-532a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, HOb-110a; part
iv,  261d-262a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 22-23 30a-b; ch
vii,  sect  85  43c-d;  ch xv, sect 172-174 65b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws, bk x, 62d-63a; bk xv, 109b-110a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk
i,  389d-390d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 16c-d; 144b; 147a-b; 402b;
510d-511a;  620a-c;  628d; 880d [n 96] 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 45b;
551d-552c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  445c-446a; 447b; 454d-455a 43
Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 9 [260-266] 13d 43 Federalist:
number 42, 137b-c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 363c-364c

[820a]
(3.  Slavery  as a social institution: the conventionality of slavery. 3
a.   The   acquisition   of   slaves:   conquest,  purchase,  indenture,
forfeiture.)  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part i, par 57 26b-27a /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  216a-b;  part ii, 276d-277a 50 Marx:
Capital, 114d [fn 3]; 128d-129a; 361b
[fn
1];  364a-366a  esp  364c-365b;  376c-377a  54  Freud:  New Introductory
Lectures,  882d  }>b.  Laws regulating slavery: the rights and duties of
master  and  slave  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  21:1-11,20-21,26-27,  32 /
Leviticus,  19:20-22;  25:39-55  / Deuteronomy, 5:14; 15:12-18; 23:15-16
/Jeremiah,  34:  8-17—  (D) Jeremias, 34:8-17 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
4:30;  33:24-31  — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 4:35; 33:25-33 New Testament:
Ephesians,  6:5-9  /  Colossians,  3:22-4:1  / / Timothy, 6:1-3 / Titus,
2:9-10 / Philemon / I Peter, 2:18 5 Aristophanes: Clouds
[1-7]
488a / Frogs
[605-628] 571a-b
6  Herodotus : History, bk i, 21b; bk vii, 223c-d 7 Plato: Gorgias, 271c
/  Theaetetus,  528c-d  /  Laws, bk vi, 709a-710a; bk ix, 757c-d; bk xi,
772a-773a; 780b-c; 783b-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 7 [i255b20-37]
449b-c; ch 13
[i26oa3i-b8] 454d-455a,c; bk
hi, ch 4 [i277a30-b i] 474b-c; bk vii, ch 10
[i33oa33-34l 534d
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus-Numa, 62a / Coriolanus, 185b-186a / Marcus Cato,
287b-d  /  Crassus,  439a-c  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk ii, 30b-c; bk xii,
121d122a; bk xiii, 133c; bk xiv, 151d-152c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 104, a 4, ans 306d-307c; q 105, a 4, ans and rep 1-4 318b-321a;
part  ii-ii,  q  10, a 10, rep 3 434c-435d; q 189, a 5, ans 693b-694c 22
Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 65-67, 531a-532a 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  ii,  280c  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 22-23 30a-b; ch
vii,  sect  85  43c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 112a115b 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 253c-254a; 298c-299a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  16d-17a;  620a-c  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 400b,d-402a;
421c422d  43  Constitution of the U.S.: article iv, sect 2 [529-535] 16b
43 Federalist: number 42, 137b-c, number 54, 170b-171b 43 Mill: Liberty,
316b-d  / Utilitarianism, 467a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions,
99 133a / Philosophy of History, part i, 216a-b; part ii, 276d-277a

[820b]
786 THE GREAT IDEAS lb to 3d 50 Marx: Capital, 364c-365b 51 Tolstoy: War
and   Peace,  bk  v,  197c;  215a-d;  216c-d  5c.  The  emancipation  or
manumission  of  slaves: the rebellion of slaves Old Testament : Exodus,
1-14521  12-4 / Leviticus, 2 5 :39~55 / Deuteronomy, 15:12-15; 23:15-16;
26:5-9 / u Chronicles, 28:8-15— iP) II Paralipomenon, 28:8-15 /Jeremiah,
34:8-17—  (D)  Jeremias,  34:8-17 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 71b-c; bk
hi,  117a-c; 118a-119b; bk iv, 124a-d 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
hi,  435b; bk iv, 467a-b 7 Plato: Republic, bk ix, 420a-b / Laws, bk xi,
772a-b  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [i269a29-b i3] 465b-d; ch 10
[i272b i7~i9] 469a; bk v, ch ii
[1315*32-39] 518b; bk vii, ch 10 [1330*33-34]
534d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch i, 139d; bk iv, ch 1, 214c-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  iv,  70c-d;  bk  xiii,  132a-c  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  a  4,  ans  and  rep 1,3 318b-321a 29
Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 280c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
x,  62d-63a;  bk  xv,  112c-113a; 114c-115b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
16d-17b;  144a-d; 505c; 509a; 628c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82a-b;
452d453a,c  43  Constitution  of the U.S.: amendments, xiii, sect i-xiv,
sect  1 18c 43 Mill: Representative Government, 332c-d; 340ac; 351d-352b
44  Bosvjell:  Johnson,  364a-b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
199c;  part  11,  273c; 277a 50 Marx: Capital, 145c-146a 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; 216c-d; bk vi, 235a; bk x, 410c-421c; bk xv,
640b-c  3d.  Criticisms  of the institution of slavery: the injustice of
slavery;  its  transgression  of  inalienable  human rights 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i,  ch  3 [i253b20-23] 447a; ch 6 448c-449b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  13  120b-c  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46c-47a /
LycurgusNuma,  62a  /  Coriolanus, 185b-186a / Marcus Cato, 278d-279c 22
Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 65-67, 531a-532a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  94b-d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii-iv 25d-30b esp ch iv 29d-30b
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  x,  62d-63a;  bk xv, 109a-110d 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 357c-358b / Political

[821a]
4  to  5a  Economy,  368a  /  Social Contract, bk i, 388ac; 389a-390d 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 34b-c; bk hi, 167a-c; bk iv, 298c-299a 40
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 620b-c ^ 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 45b-c 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  401b-402a; 421c422d; 445c-446a; 454d-455a 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  [7-9]  la  43  Constitution of the U.S.:
amendments,  xiii  18c  43  Federalist:  number  42,  137b-c; number 54,
170d-171a   43   Mill:  Liberty,  316b-d  /  Representative  Government,
339d-340a  44 Boswell: Johnson, 363b-364c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i,  par  57 26b-27a; additions, 36 122b-c / Philosophy of History,
intro,  161a-c;  part  hi, 310d311a; part iv, 364d 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  315a 50 Marx: Capital, 25c-d; 113d-114a; 376c-377a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  v,  216c-d 4. The forms of economic slavery 4a. Chattel
slavery:  slaves of the household and slaves of the state Old Testament:
Exodus,  1:8-14; 21:1-11 / Leviticus, 25:39-55 / Deuteronomy, 15:12-18 5
Aristophanes: Plutus [507-526] 635a-b 7 Plato: Lysis, 16c-18a / Laws, bk
vi,  709a710a;  bk  vii,  722d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch 3-4
446d-447c;  ch  8  [1256*1-3] 449d; bk ii, ch 7 [i267b io-i9] 463b-c; bk
vii, ch 8
[1328*35-38]
532c-d;  ch 10 [1330^5-34] 534d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [1361*12-14] 601c
14  Plutarch: Marcus Cato, 278d-279a / Crassus, 439a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  87, a 8, ans 191d-192d; q 105, a 4, rep 1-4
318b-321a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  261d-262a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk xv, llld112a; bk xvi, 116a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
353c-d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk iv, 239c-240a; 253c-254a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 16d; 17b-c; 147a-b; 498b-500b passim; 620a-b
42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  445c-446a  43  Constitution of the U.S.:
article i, sect 9 [260-266] 13d 43 Federalist: number 42, 137b-c; number
54,  170b-171b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 66 29a-c 50
Marx: Capital, 95a-b [fn 1]; 113c-114a; 128d129a; 266c; 267c 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk vii, 285b-d passim

[821b]
Chapter 87: SLAVERY 787 4b. Serfdom or peonage 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xiii, 96d97b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 165b-171c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 144a-b; 628c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
404c-d;  452d453a,c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 351d-352b 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 66, 29b / Philosophy of History,
part iv, 346a-b; 352a 50 Marx: Capital, 34b; 79d-80b
[fn
4];   113d115c;  266b-c;  355d-364a  passim  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  424d425a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a; bk vi,
235a; bk vii, 285b-d passim; bk viii, 308c; bk x, 410c-421c; epilogue i,
654a-655c  4c.  Wage  slavery:  the exploitation ofthe laborer 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 20b-21c; 27b-37b passim, esp 27b-28d 50 Marx:
Capital, 82d-84a,c; 88d-89b; 104b105c; 110c-146c passim, esp 112c, 138b,
146a-c;  150a-c;  161b-163c;  173b-180d passim, esp 176a-178d; 192c-248c
passim;  251c-253b;  262a-275c  esp 263c-d, 266b-c, 272c-275c; 282b-286a
esp  283c-d,  285c-286a;  302d-368b  esp  307a-c,  316d-317c, 318a-320a,
354b-355d,  364a-368b;  369c-371c  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
420c-d; 422c-423a; 424d-425a; 426b-c 5. The political aspect of economic
slavery  5a.  The  disfranchisement  of  chattel slaves and serfs: their
exclusion  from  the  body  politic or political community 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 374a; bk iv, 467b; bk vii, 545b; bk viii, 573c
7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  viii,  740d-741a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk n, ch 5
[1264^0-23] 459b-c; ch 7
[i267b i4~i9]
463b-c; ch 8
[1268*16-33] 464a-b; bk iii, ch 4 [i277a3o-b6]
474b-c; ch 5 [i277b33-i278 ai4]475a-b; [1278 s 31-34] 475c; ch 9
[1280*32-34] 477d-478a;
bk iv, ch 6 [i292b22-i293 a io] 492b-c; bk v, ch 3 [1303*6-8] 504b-c; bk
vi,  ch 4 [i3i9b3~ 31] 523a-b; bk vii, ch 9 533a-d; ch 10 [1330 s 25-34]
534d  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  2-5  553a-555a  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  98,  a  6,  rep 2 244c-245b 35 Locke: Civil
Government, ch vii, sect 85 43c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv,
114c115b  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iii, 422c-d; bk iv, 429c-d 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iii, 168d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 16c;
17a-b; 144b

[822a]
(5.  The  political aspect of economic slavery. 5a. The disfranchisement
of  chattel  slaves  and  serfs: their exclusionfrom the body politic or
political  community.) 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 82a-b; 404d; 452d 43
Constitution  of  the U.S.: article i, sect 2 [17-25] lib 43 Federalist:
number  54,  170b-171b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 273c;
part  iv, 356d 5b. The political deprivations of the laboring classes or
wage  slaves:  the  struggle  for  enfranchisement;  the  issue  between
oligarchy  and  democracy with respect to suffrage 7 Plato: Republic, bk
viii, 405c-407a / Laws, bk viii, 740d-741a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii,
ch 7 [i267bio-i9] 463b-c; ch 8
[i268 ai6-33]
464a-b; ch ii 7J 469d-470a; bk hi, ch 4 [1277*30b
[i273 a22-b
7] 474b-c; ch 5
[i277b33~i278*25] 475a-c;
ch  9-12 477c-481b passim; bk iv, ch ii [i295b 2-i296b2] 495c-496c; bk v
502a-519d esp ch 1
[1301*25-39] 502b-c, [130^26-1302*8] 503a-b,
ch 2 503b-d, ch 3 [i302b34-i303 a i4] 504b-c,
[i303b4-7] 505a, ch 4 [1304*18-39] 505d-506a,
ch 6
[i305a36-b2i]
507b-c, ch 7
[i3o6b221307*28] 508c-509b, ch 8 [1308*3-14] 510a-b,
[i3o8b3i-i309*32]
511a-c, ch 9
[i309b i41310*13]
511d-512b, ch 12
[i3i6*39-b24]
519c-d; bk vi, ch 7
[1321*26-32]
525a  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  2-5  553a-555a 14 Plutarch: Solon,
68d-71c / Poplicola, 79d80a / Poplicola- Solon, 87a / Tiberius Gracchus,
674c-681a,c / Caius Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
hi,  ch  17,  178d179a  38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk hi, 412b-c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 27b-37b; bk hi, 168d-169a 41 Gibbon:
Decline   and  Fall,  73b  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c  43
Federalist:  number  54,  170b-171b  passim;  number  57,  178d 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  345c-346a; 383d-384a; 392b-399d passim, esp
393c-395a;  419a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 273c; part
iv,   356d;  364a-c  50  Marx:  Capital,  137b-141b  esp  138b,  140a-b;
283d-286a;  364a-368b esp 367c-368b 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto,
415b-c;  423b; 424d-425a; 428a; 428d; 429b-c 6. Political enslavement or
subjection  6a.  Slavery as the condition of men living under tyrannical
government   5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-456]  262a-b  6  Herodotus:
History, bk vii, 238b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 413d-416a; bk ix,

[822b]
420a  /  Laws,  bk  vi,  709d-710a  / Seventh Letter, 80 5d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk hi, ch 14
[1285*1729] 483b-c; bk iv, ch 10 [1295*17-24] 495a-b;
bk  v,  ch  11  [1313*34-1314*29]  516a-517a; bk vii, ch 7 [i327b i9-32]
531d-532a  10  Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23
18a-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, lb-c; 3a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  81,  a  3, rep 2 430c-431d; q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105, a 1, rep 5 307d-309d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  HOb-110a;  114d115a;  150c-151a  35  Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  hi,  sect  17  28d-29a;  ch iv 29d-30b; ch vii, sect 93
45d-46a;  ch  xiv, sect 163 63a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi,
12a13c;  bk  iv,  15a-c;  bk v, 28c; bk vi, 33d-34d; bk xii, 94d-95a; bk
xiii,  99b-100c;  bk  xv,  109a-b;  110d-110a  38  Rousseau: Inequality,
356b-358b;  360a-b;  361c-d / Social Contract, bk i, 388a-c; 389a390d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 33a-34a,c; 51c-d; 154b-c; 342a-b; 523d-524a;
592a  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 125a; 161c-162b; 320d-321b 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  342b-344d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part i, 222a-c; part in, 289b; 302a-d 6b. Subjection as the condition of
men  living  under  benevolent  despotism  or paternalistic government 9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk viii, ch ii [1161*10-22] 413b-c / Politics, bk i,
ch  2  [i252b  i9-26] 446a; ch 7 [i255b i6-2o] 449b; bk hi, ch 14 [i285b
29-34]  484a 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 21a-27c 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv,
271b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d; q
92,  a i, rep 2 488d489d; q 96, a 4 512d-513c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  HOb-110a  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 27a-c 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  vi, sect 61 38a-b; sect 74-76 41b-42b; ch xiv, sect 162
63a  36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 216b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xii, 94d95a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 357a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
50a;  154b-c;  255c-d;  342a-b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 81d-82a 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  439a-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 271d-272a; 273b-d /
Representative  Government,  340a-c;  342b-344d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, additions, iii 134d-135a / Philosophy of History, intro, 172b-d

[823a]
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim 6c. The
transition  from  subjection  to citizenship: the conditions fitting men
for_setf*  government  6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 120bc; bk v, 167a-b;
171c-175b;  bk vi, 187d; 193b-c; bk ix, 314a,c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
ii, ch 12 470b-471d; bk in, ch 15
[i286b8-22] 484d-485a; bk
iv, ch 12 496d-497b; ch 13
[i297b i6-28] 498a;
bk v, ch 4
[1304*18-38] 505d-506a; bk
vi,  ch  4  522a-523b  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  2-13 553a-558c 10
Hippocrates:  Airs,  Waters,  Places,  par  16  15d-16a; par 23 18a-c 14
Plutarch:  Romulus,  22c  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xi, 106a-107b 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect 100iii 47c-51a; ch xiv, sect 162-166
63a-64a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xiv,  107b-d;  bk  xv,
114c-115b;  bk xvi, 118b-c; bk xvii-xytii, 122a-125c; bk xviii, 126ac 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  324a / Social Contract, bk 11, 402b-403a; bk hi,
411a-c;   422c-423a   40   Gibbon:   Decline  and  Fall,  15bc;  513b-c;
521a-523a,c;  624bc  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 562c-565a esp 562c-d,
563d-564a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 436d-437c 43 Federalist: number 39,
125b;  number  55,  174c-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268b;  271d-272a /
Representative   Government,   328d-331a;   339d-340c;   344a-d  passim;
350b-355b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 161a-c; 199b-c; part
1,  222a-c;  part  ii,  271c-d;  273c;  part  iv,  346a-c;  364d 6d. The
imperialistic subjection or enslavement of conquered peoples or colonial
dependencies  Old  Testament: Exodus, 1:8-14; 5 / / Kings, 9: 20-23— (D)
HI  Kings,  9:20-23  /  // Chronicles, 87-8— (D) II Paralipomenon, 8:7-8
Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees,  1:41-64—  (D)  OT,  / Machabees, 1:43-67 / //
Maccabees,  5:21-7:  42—  (D)  OT,  // Machabees, 5:21-7:42 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  i,  4a-6c; 16b-20b; 30b-31a; 35c-36a; 37b-40b; 46a-48a; bk
iv,   139a-159d;  bk  v-vi,  184a-191c;  bk  vii,  222b-c;  225d-226b  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk i, 358a; 367b-369a; 379bc; 384d-385b;
bk  ii,  403b404a;  406a-407b;  bk  hi,  424d-434c;  bk  iv,  461c-463a;
468a-469b; bk v, 504c-508a,c; bk vi, 529b-d; bk vii, 559b-d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 2
[i252b i-9J
445c-d; ch 6 448c-449b; ch 8
[i256b2o-25]
450c; bk in, ch 13
[i284a26-b2] 482b-c; bk
vii, ch 2
[i324b23~4i]
528d-529a; ch 14
[i333b38-i334a2] 538d

[823b]
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[845-853] 233b-234a;
bk  viii  [714-731]  278a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 17c-d; bk iv, 76a;
82d-83a;  bk  xii, 117c-d; bk xiv, 149a-b / Histories, bk iv, 286c-287a;
290a-d  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk iv, ch 15 196c197a; bk v, ch 12,
216d-218a; bk xix, ch 21, 524c-d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch iii-v 3c-8c;
ch  viii,  14ac  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, HOb-110a; conclusion,
280b-281a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c / 2nd Henry VI 33a-68d /
Henry V 532a-567a,c 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[241-276] 344b345b
35  Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi 65d-70c esp sect 176 66a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i, 24b- 2 5a; part iv, 182b-183a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws, bk x, 62b63d; bk xi, 83c-84c; bk xiii, 96d-97a; bk xv, 109bc 38
Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk i, 389d-390d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  iv,  248b-d;  251c-d;  253a-c;  288b-c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
14d-16b;   17d-18a;   33d-34a,c;   147a-b;   420b-d;  518b-519a  passim;
550b-551b;  608b,d-609a; 620a; 632d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 51a-53b
passim;  420c;  443b-c  42  Kant:  Science  of Right,  413d; 454a-455a 43
Declaration  of  Independence: la-3b 43 Mill: Representative Government,
427a-b; 436b-442d passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 351
112a-b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  299ac  50 Marx: Capital,
372c-374b; 379a-383d passim 7. The analogy of tyranny and slavery in the
relations  between  passions  and  reason  or  will:  human  bondage New
Testament  :John,  8:31-36  /  Romans,  6:1623;  7:14-8:21  / Galatians,
4:1-5:1  /  Titus,  3:3  /  Hebrews,  2:14-15///  Peter,  2:19  7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  120b-c  /  Gorgias, 275c276a / Republic, bk i, 296b-c; bk iv,
347d348d;  bk ix, 416a-418c; 419b-421a; 425c427b / Theaetetus, 528c-529a
/ Seventh Letter, 806a; 814b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 5
[ii48b321149*15] 399b-c / Politics, bk i, ch 5 [1254*33b9] 448a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 29, 137c-d; bk iv, ch 1 213a-223d; ch
4,  225a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 68 284c-d 17 Plotinus:
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii, ch i, 343a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi,
par  25  42c-d / City of God, bk iv, ch 3, 190c; bk xiv, ch ii, 386b; ch
15, 389a-b; bk xix, ch 15 521a-c; bk xxi, ch 16 573b-574a

[824a]
790  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (7.  The  analogy  of tyranny and slavery in the
relations  between  passions  and  reason  or  will:  human bondage^) 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 72, a 2, rep 4 112b-113a 22
Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par 65-67, 531a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act
hi,  sc  ii [61-79] 49c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, pref, 422b CROSS-
REFERENCES  I. Hobbes. Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Government and
Society,  ch 8 . The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, part 11, ch 3
Hegel.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  iv (a) Dostoevsky. Poor Foll^ II.
Seneca.  De  Beneficiis  (On Benefits), bk hi, ch 18-25 La Boetie. Anti-
Dictator,  the Discours de la servitude volontaire Bodin. The Six Bootes
ofa Commonweale, bk i, ch 5 Grotius. The Rights of War and Peace, bk ii,
ch  5;  bk  in,  ch  7  Voltaire. "Master," "Slaves," in A Philosophical
Dictionary

[824b]
32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vi [169-188] 200a; bk x [144-156] 277b; bk
xii  [79-110]  321a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv 135a-184a 38 Rousseau:
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  393c  42 Kant. Judgement, 586d-587a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part i, 233b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov,
bk  vi,  164b-d  54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  715d-716a / New Introductory
Lectures,  838d-839b  For:  Other  discussions relevant to the theory of
natural  slavery, see Justice 6, 6c; Law 4I1; Liberty ia; Will 7a. Other
discussions  of  the  institution  of slavery, see Justice 6c; Labor if,
5a~5c,  70(1); Progress 3b; Punishment 40(3) ; State 5a, 5c; Tyranny ib;
Wealth 7b(i). The discussion of slave rebellions and of the emancipation
of slaves, see Liberty 6b; Progress 3b; Revolution 4a. Other discussions
of  the  forms of economic slavery or servitude in relation to different
systems  of  production,  see Justice 8c(i); Labor if, 5a~5c; Wealth 6a,
7b(i);  and  for the political aspects of economic slavery or servitude,
see  Citizen  2c; Constitution 5a; Democracy 4a(i)~4a(2) ; Labor 7d, 7f;
Liberty  2d;  Oligarchy  4,  5a.  The  differentiation  of  citizenship,
subjection, and slavery as three conditions of men under political rule,
see  Citizen  2b; Liberty if; Tyranny 5a~5b; and for factors involved in
the  change  from  subjection to citizenship, see Democracy 4d; Monarchy
4e(2);  Tyranny  4b. Discussions of imperialism and of the government of
colonial  dependencies and conquered peoples, see Government 5b; Liberty
6c;  Monarchy  5—5b;  State  10b;  Tyranny  6.  Other discussions of the
slavery  of men in bondage to their passions, see Liberty 3a. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included in Great Booths ofthe
Western  World, but relevant to the For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  Franklin.  Essay  on  the  African Slave Trade Channing. Slavery
Gogol.  Dead Souls Whewell. The Elements of Morality, bk ii, ch Thoreau.
Civil  Disobedience  Comte.  The  Positive  Philosophy, bk vi, ch 6-12 .
System  of  Positive Polity, vol hi, Social Dynamics Nieboer. Slavery as
an  Industrial  System  Vinogradoff.  The  Growth of the Manor Hobhouse.
Morals  in  Evolution, part i, ch 7 Kohler. Philosophy of Law, ch 6 (12)
Maritain.  Freedom  in  the Modern World Mann. Joseph and His Brothers .
Young Joseph . Joseph in Egypt Berdyayev. Slavery and Freedom

[825a]
the  language  of  the  poets  as  well  as  in  the IN discourse of the
philosophers,  body  and  soul  are  correlative terms. Each affects the
meaning  of  the other. The words are used together in daily speech. Men
who   are   unaware  of,  or  deny,  the  metaphysical  and  theological
significance  of  having a soul, nevertheless use the word "soul" with a
sense of contrast to body, even if only to refer to vague manifestations
of  spirit  —feelings and sympathies which seem to be alien to the world
of matter. With few exceptions, traditional theories of the soul involve
its  distinction  from and relation to the body. Berkeley represents one
of the major exceptions. Denying the reality of matter, he conceives the
soul  as  existing in and by itself; souls or spirits differ from God as
finite  from  infinite  spiritual beings. The something "which knows and
perceives"   and   which   "exercises  divers  operations,  as  willing,
imagining,  remembering,"  Berkeley  says, "is what I call mind, spirit,
soul,  or  myself."  Berkeley,  therefore, would not speak of himself or
other  men  as  having souls, but rather as being souls. The other major
exception  is  exemplified by Lucretius. It is not that Lucretius denies
soul  as Berkeley denies body. Nor does he deny that soul adds something
to  body which differentiates living organisms from inorganic things. On
the  contrary,  he  declares  the mind to be "a part of man no whit less
than  hand  and  foot  and  eyes  are  parts of the whole living being."
Distinct  from mind, soul is also part of a living being. "Mind and soul
are  held  in  union one with the other, and form of themselves a single
nature,"  but  whereas  the mind is, as it were, the lord or head of the
whole  body,  "the  rest of the soul, spread abroad throughout the body,
obeys  and  is  moved at the will and inclination of the mind." But when
Lucretius refers to mind and soul

[825b]
as  parts  of  the body, he means no more than is implied in speaking of
the  hand  and eye as parts of the body. "The nature of mind and soul is
bodily,"  he  writes.  Just  as  flesh  and bones are composed of atomic
particles,  so  the  mind is formed of atoms "exceeding small and smooth
and  round,"  and  the  soul is "made of very tiny seeds linked together
throughout  veins,  flesh, and sinews." Apart from these exceptions, the
traditional  discussion  of  soul considers it as somehow conjoined with
body  to  constitute  a whole of which it is the immaterial principle or
part.  Even  those who, like Descartes, define the soul as an immaterial
substance, capable of existing by itself, do not actually ascribe to the
human  soul  complete  independence  of  the  human  body.  Nor  do  the
theologians  who  think of God as a purely spiritual being and of angels
as  immaterial  substances attribute soul to them. Precisely because God
and  the  angels do not have bodies, neither do they have souls. Whether
everything  which  has a body also has a soul is another question. It is
variously  answered;  but  certainly those who, like Plato and Plotinus,
speak  of a world-soul or a soul of the universe, confirm the point that
soul is the coprinciple or complement of body. The same point appears in
theories  of the celestial bodies which conceive them as being alive and
as  therefore  having  souls.  Unfolding  to  Socrates  the story of the
creation,  Timaeus  says: "Using the language of probability, we may say
that   the  world  became  a  living  creature  endowed  with  soul  and
intelligence  by the providence of God." To the world, Timaeus explains,
God  "gave  a body, smooth and even, having a surface in every direction
equidistant  from  the center, a body entire and perfect, and formed out
of perfect

[826a]
792  THE GREAT IDEAS bodies. And in the center, he put the soul which he
diffused  throughout  the  body,  making  it  also  to  be  the exterior
environment  of  it." Comparing the magnetic force of the loadstone with
the animation of a soul, Gilbert says that "this one eminent property is
the  same  which  the  ancients held to be a soul in the heavens, in the
globes,  and  in  the  stars,  in  sun  and  moon.  .  .  .  The ancient
philosophers  ...  all  seek  in the world a certain universal soul, and
declare  the  whole world to be endowed with a soul. Aristotle held that
not  the  universe  is  animate,  but  the heavens only. ... As for us,"
Gilbert writes, "we deem the whole world animate, and all globes, stars,
and  this glorious earth, too, we hold to be from the beginning by their
own  destinate  souls governed . . . Pitiable is the state of the stars,
abject  the  lot  of earth, if this high dignity of soul is denied them,
while  it  is  granted  to  the  worm, the ant, the roach, to plants and
morels;  for  in  that  case, worms, roaches, moths, were more beauteous
objects  in  nature  and more perfect, inasmuch as nothing is excellent,
nor  precious,  nor  eminent,  that  hath  not  a soul." On the question
whether  the  earth,  each  heavenly body, or the whole world is endowed
with   life,  intelligence,  and  soul,  Kepler  differs  from  Gilbert,
Augustine from Plato and Plotinus, Aquinas from Aristotle. Nevertheless,
the  many-sided controversy indicates the traditional connection of soul
with  life  and mind on the one hand, and with animate or organic bodies
on the other— bodies which manifest certain properties and tendencies to
motion.  The  major  issues  concerning  soul  seem to follow from these
traditional  associations. Does the soul which is somehow conjoined with
a body exist as an immaterial substance or principle, in such a way that
the  being composed of body and soul consists of two distinct substances
or  entities,  united  as  related parts of a whole ? Or is the soul the
substantial  form of an organic body, with the consequence that the form
and  matter  together  constitute a single composite substance, which is
the  living thing? In the latter alternative the unity of soul and body,
according  to Aristotle, is like that of "the wax and the shape given to
it by the die." On either conception of soul and its relation

[826b]
to  body  or  matter,  further  questions  arise  concerning  the soul's
existence  apart from the body. Does it exist before being united to the
body  ?  Does  it exist after the union is dissolved ? How does it exist
when  it  exists  separately  or  apart  from  matter?  For  those, like
Lucretius,  who  conceive  the  soul  as  itself  composed  of  material
particles  within  the  framework  of  the body, such questions can have
little  meaning.  For  those, like Plato and Descartes, who conceive the
soul  as  an  immaterial  entity  having  being  in its own right, these
questions  can  be  immediately answered in favor of the soul's capacity
for separate existence. Only when the soul is conceived as a form which,
together  with  matter, constitutes the substance of a living body, does
there seem to be both meaning and difficulty to the question whether the
soul  continues  to  endure separately when a plant, an animal, or a man
dies,  i.e., when such composite substances decompose. If the individual
soul  ceases  to  be  when  the  body  with  which  it is somehow united
perishes,  it  is  as  mortal  as  the body. The traditional theories of
personal   immortality—such   as   the  Platonic  myths  concerning  the
transmigration  or reincarnation of souls, and the Christian doctrine of
man's  immortal  soul,  specially  created  for union with the body, but
destined  to  survive  its  separation  from the body—are theories which
involve  conceptions  of  the  soul  as capable of self-subsistence. The
controversy  over  these  doctrines  is  dealt  with  in  the chapter on
Immortality. Here are we concerned to see how different implications for
immortality  necessarily follow from various theories of the soul. Still
other  issues  concerning  soul arise in connection with other chapters.
For  example,  the  question  whether soul is to be found only in living
things,  or  only  in  animals  but  not  in plants, or in man alone, is
discussed in the chapters on Life and Death and on Mind. If soul, on any
conception,  is  the  principle  or  cause of life, then the distinction
between  animate  and inanimate bodies is identical with the distinction
between  things  which  have  and  things  which do not have a soul. If,
furthermore,  the  kind  of  life  possessed  by a vegetable or plant is
radically  different from animal life, and that in turn from human life,
then souls, too, may have

[827a]
to  be differentiated in kind according to the mode of life or the range
of  vital  powers  of  which  each  type is the principle. Some writers,
however,  tend to equate "soul" with "mind" or "understanding." When, as
by  Descartes,  soul  is  identified  with  rational  soul  or  thinking
substance,  it  is  usually  attributed  to  man alone. Soul is then not
thought  necessary  to  explain  the  phenomena  of  life  in plants and
animals,  at  least  in  no  sense  of  soul  which  implies  either  an
incorporeal  or a formal principle; that is, anything beyond the complex
interaction  oforganic  parts.  Other  authors, like Locke, who conceive
soul  or understanding not merely in terms of rational thought, but also
in  terms of sensation, imagination, and memory, may exclude plants, but
not animals, from the possession of soul or mind. Descartes takes notice
of these ambiguities in the traditional use of the word "soul." Probably
because  "men in the earliest times," he writes, "did not distinguish in
us that principle in virtue of which we are nourished, grow, and perform
all  those  operations which are common to us with the brutes . . . from
that  by which we think, they called both by the single name soul; then,
perceiving  the  distinction between nutrition and thinking, they called
that  which  thinks mind, believing also that this was the chief part of
the soul. But I, perceiving that the principle by which we are nourished
is  wholly  distinct  from that by means of which we think have declared
that the name soul when used for both is equivocal; and I say that, when
soul  is  taken to mean the primary actuality or chief essence ofman, it
must be understood to apply only to the principle by which we think, and
I  have  called  it  by  the  name  mind  as  often as possible to avoid
ambiguity;  for  I consider the mind not as part of the soul, but as the
whole  of  that  soul  which thinks." In another place, he uses the word
"soul" to stand for "that subtle fluid styled the animal spirits" which,
pervading  the organs of brute animals, accounts for their peculiar type
of  animation.  "We  can recognize no principle of motion in them beyond
the  disposition  of  their  organs  and  the continual discharge of the
animal spirits that are produced by the beat of the heart as it rarefies
the  blood."  Soul  in  this  sense  is  not  to  be  confused with "the
incorporeal and

[827b]
Chapter  88:  SOUL 793 spiritual nature of man's soul." It is "something
corporeal,  of  a  fine  structure  and  subtle,  spread  throughout the
external  body,  and  the  principle  of all sensation, imagination, and
thought.  Thus  there  are three grades of being, Body, the Corporeal or
soul,  and  Mind or spirit." In the opening pages of his treatise On the
Soul,  Aristotle  says  that  "to attain any assured knowledge about the
soul  is  one of the most difficult things in the world." The difficulty
seems  to  apply  both to what the soul is and to whether it exists. The
questions  are  connected.  Even  Lucretius,  who  regards  the  soul as
material  in  nature,  does  not  claim  to know its existence by direct
observation.  It is not, like the body itself or like other parts of the
body,  a  sensible  object.  It  must  be inferred to exist. Just as the
existence  of  unobservable  atoms  is  inferred in order to explain the
constitution and change of all natural objects, so the existence of soul
is  inferred  in  order to explain the constitution and motion of living
things.  Those who conceive the soul as immaterial—whether as substance,
principle,  or  form—would  seem  to  face an even greater difficulty in
establishing its existence and in describing its nature. Admittedly, the
soul   as  some  sort  of  immaterial  being  cannot  be  discovered  by
observation   and   experiment.   The   alternatives,   which  represent
traditional  solutions  of  the  problem,  seem  to  include  the soul's
reflexive  knowledge  of  its own existence, inferential knowledge about
the  soul  based on observed facts, various religious beliefs concerning
the  nature  and  destiny of the soul, and the postulation of the soul's
existence  on  practical,  not theoretic, grounds. Not all writers agree
with  Aristotle  that  the  soul is an object difficult to know, or with
Kant  that  it  is  absolutely  impossible  for  us  to  reach any sound
theoretic   conclusions  about  the  soul's  existence.  Descartes,  for
example,  says  that  if there are "any persons who are not sufficiently
persuaded of the existence of God and of the soul by the reasons which I
have brought forward, I wish them to know that all other things of which
they  perhaps  think themselves more assured (such as possessing a body,
and  that there are stars and an earth and so on) are less certain." The
argument for the soul's existence which

[828a]
794 THE GREAT IDEAS precedes this remark is the famous Cogito, ergo sum—
"I  think;  therefore,  I  am."  From  the fact that, in the very act of
doubting  the  existence  of everything else, he could not doubt that he
was  doubting,  and hence thinking, Descartes assures himself of his own
existence, or, more precisely, of the existence of himself as a thinking
being. "I knew," he writes, "that I was a substance the whole essence or
nature of which is to think, and that for its existence there is no need
of  any  place,  nor  does it depend on any material thing; so that this
'me,'  that  is  to  say,  the soul by which I am what I am, is entirely
distinct  from  body,  and is even more easy to know than is the latter;
and  even  if  the body were not, the soul would not cease to be what It
IS.  Locke  appears  to agree that "if I doubt of all other things, that
very doubt makes me perceive my own existence, and will not suffer me to
doubt  of that. ... I have as certain perception of the existence of the
thing  doubting,"  he  goes  on, "as of that thought which I call doubt.
Experience  then convinces us that we have an intuitive knowledge of our
own  existence,  and an internal infallible perception that we are." But
Locke  does  not  turn the proposition that a thinking being exists into
the  assertion  that  a  spiritual  being,  the  soul  as  an immaterial
substance, exists. "We have the idea of matter and thinking," he writes,
"but  possibly  shall  never  be  able to know whether any mere material
being  thinks or no; it being impossible for us, by the contemplation of
our  own  ideas, without revelation, to discover whether Omnipotency has
not  given to some systems of matter fitly disposed, a power to perceive
and  think,  or  else joined and fixed to matter so disposed, a thinking
immaterial substance: it being, in respect of our notions, not much more
remote  from  our comprehension to conceive that God can, if he pleases,
superadd  to  matter a faculty of thinking, than that he should superadd
to it another substance with a faculty of thinking." For Locke, however,
our idea of soul is as clear as our idea of body. "Our idea of body," he
says,  "is  an extended, solid substance capable of communicating motion
by  impulse;  and  our  idea  of  soul, as an immaterial spirit, is of a
substance that thinks, and has a power of exciting

[828b]
motion  in  body,  by  willing  or  thought ... I know thar people whose
thoughts  are  immersed  in matter, and have so subjected their minds to
their  senses, that they seldom reflect on anything beyond them, are apt
to say, that they cannot comprehend a thinking thing; which, perhaps, is
true:  but  I  affirm,  when  they  consider  it  well, they can no more
comprehend  an  extended thing." And in another place, he adds: "If this
notion  of immaterial spirit may have, perhaps, some difficulties in it,
not  easy to be explained, we have, therefore, no more reason to deny or
doubt  the  existence of such spirits, than we have to deny or doubt the
existence  of  body,  because  the  notion of body is cumbered with some
difficulties,  very  hard,  and,  perhaps, impossible to be explained or
understood  by  us." Berkeley differs from Locke not onlv in maintaining
that  we  have no idea of matter at all, but also in holding that, if we
use  the  word  "idea"  for sense-impressions or the images derived from
them, we can have no idea of soul or spiritual substance. But we can, he
thinks,  form  what  he  calls  a "notion" of the soul, which grasps the
meaning of the word "spirit" as signifying "that which thinks, wills, or
perceives."  He  differs from Locke further in proportion as he tends to
agree  with  Descartes,  asserting  that  the  existence  of a spiritual
substance,  a  thinking  being,  necessarily follows from the undeniable
existence  of  thinking  itself.  For  both  Descartes and Berkeley, the
immortality  of the soul can be directly concluded from our knowledge of
the  soul's  existence  and  nature.  "The  soul,"  writes Berkeley, "is
indivisible,   incorporeal,   unextended,   and   it   is   consequently
incorruptible.  Nothing  can  be plainer than that the motions, changes,
decays  and dissolutions which we hourly see befall natural bodies . . .
cannot possibly affect an active, simple, uncompounded substance; such a
being  therefore is indissoluble by the force of nature; that is to say,
'the  soul  of  man  is  naturally  immortal.'" The arguments in Plato's
Phaedo for the proper existence of the soul before it joins a particular
body,  and  for  its  existence  after it leaves the body to dwell apart
before entering another body—arguments, in short, for the

[829a]
soul's  immortality—seem to stem from a slightly different principle. It
is  not  merely  that  the  soul  is  simple  or  uncompounded and hence
indissoluble,  or  that  the  knowledge  we^haye__o£  the absolute ideas
requires  us  to  posit  a  principle of knowledge other than the bodily
senses  which  can apprehend only changing things. In addition, Socrates
argues  that  the knower must be like the known. If it is the soul which
knows  the unchangeable and eternal essences, it must be as unchangeable
and  eternal  as they are. When the soul uses "the body as instrument of
perception,"  Socrates  says,  it  is "then dragged by the body into the
region  of  the  changeable  .  .  . But when returning into herself she
reflects,  then  she  passes into the other world, the region of purity,
and  eternity,  and  immortality,  and  unchangeableness,  which are her
kindred." Against any form of argument for the existence and immortality
of  the  human  soul  which  proceeds  from the nature of our thought or
knowledge,  Kant takes the position that the premises do not warrant the
conclusion.  He  claims  to  expose  the  fallacies in what he calls the
"paralogism  of  a rational psychology." The "I" of the Cogito, ergo sum
may be the necessary logical subject of all our judgments, but this does
not give us intuitive knowledge of a really existing substance which has
the   attributes   of   simplicity,   spirituality,  and  permanence  or
immortality.  "In  all our thinking," Kant writes, "the I is the subject
in  which  our  thoughts  are inherent; nor can that I ever be used as a
determination  of any other thing. Thus everybody is constrained to look
upon  himself  as  the substance, and on thinking as the accident of his
being."  But,  he goes on, "though the I exists in all thoughts, not the
slightest  intuition  is  connected with that representation by which it
might  be  distinguished from other objects of intuition. . . . Hence it
follows  that in the first syllogism of transcendental psychology reason
imposes upon us an apparent knowledge only, by representing the constant
logical  subject  as  the  knowledge  of  the real subject in which that
knowledge inheres. Of that subject, however, we have not and cannot have
the  slightest knowledge. ... In spite of this, the proposition that the
soul is a substance may well be allowed

[829b]
Chapter  88:  SOUL 795 to stand, if only we see that this concept cannot
help  us  on in the least or teach us any of the ordinary conclusions of
rational  psychology,  as,  for instance, the everlasting continuance of
the  soul  amid  all  changes  and  even in death; and that it therefore
signifies  a substance in idea only, and not in reality." Similarly with
respect  to the simplicity of the soul, Kant contends that the absolute,
but  merely  logical, unity of apperception or thought is illegitimately
converted  into the absolute unity of a real substance. The proposition,
/  am  a  simple substance, he declares, "teaches us nothing at all with
reference  to  myself  as an object of experience." Its only value is to
enable  us  "to distinguish the soul from all matter, and thus to exempt
it  from  that  decay  to which matter is at all times subject." To this
extent,  rational  psychology  may  "guard our thinking self against the
danger  of  materialism."  The  concept of the soul as an immaterial and
simple   substance  may  thus  function  regulatively,  but  we  deceive
ourselves  with  the illusion of knowledge when we treat that concept as
if  it  had intuitive content when, as he says, we change "thoughts into
things."  Kant  does  not deny that the "I" is substantial in concept or
simple  in  concept. Though these propositions are "incontestably true,"
he says, "nevertheless, what we really wish to know of the soul, becomes
by  no  means  known to us in that way, because all these predicates are
with  regard  to  intuition  non-valid,  entailing  no consequences with
regard  to  objects  of  experience,  and therefore entirely empty." The
existence  and  immortality  of  the  soul  is, for Kant, a postulate or
demand  of  the practical reason. "Of the psychic substance, regarded as
an immortal soul, it is absolutely impossible to obtain any proof from a
theoretical  point  of  view,"  but  if such an object must be thought a
priori in order for "pure practical reason to be used as duty commands,"
it  becomes  what Kant calls "matter of faith." Immortality seems to him
rationally  required  as  the  practically  necessary  condition for the
fulfillment of the moral law and the endless progress of the soul toward
holiness  of will. William James questions even such practical arguments
for the soul. The imperishability of

[830a]
796  THE  GREAT  IDEAS a simple substance does not, he thinks, guarantee
"immortality  of  a sort we carefor." Nor, following Locke, does it seem
to  him  that  a  substantial soul is required for personal identity and
moral   responsibility.   Writing   as   an   empirical   or  scientific
psychologist, who feels "entirely free to discard the word Soul" because
he  finds  the  concept  useless  "so far as accounting for the actually
verified  facts of conscious experience goes," James tells those who may
find "any comfort in the idea" that they are "perfectly free to continue
to   believe  in  it;  for  our  reasonings  have  not  established  the
nonexistence  of  the  Soul;  they  have only proved its superfluity for
scientific purposes." James' conclusion that "the substantial Soul . . .
explains  nothing  and  guarantees nothing," along with the arguments of
Kant  and Locke, may not apply to the soul conceived as the principle of
life  rather  than  as the agent of thought, or to the soul conceived as
the  form of an organic body rather than as a spiritual being associated
with  or  somehow  imprisoned  in the body. Precisely because this other
conception  affirms  reality  of soul as something other than a complete
substance, precisely because it applies to plants and animals as well as
men,  this  other  conception  of soul would seem to require a different
sort  of  criticism. The Greek and Latin words psyche and anima—which we
translate  by  "soul" seem to have life as their primary connotation. In
the  Cratylus,  Socrates  suggests  that  "those who first used the name
psyche  meant to express that the soul when in the body is the source of
life,  and  gives  the  power  of  breath  and revival." Other dialogues
express  the  Greek conception of the living thing as that which has the
power  of  self-motion, and ascribe this power to the soul as source. In
the  Phaedo,  for example, Socrates asks, "What is that the inherence of
which  will  render the body alive?" to which Cebes answers, "Soul," and
agrees  with  Socrates'  further statement that "whatever the soul takes
possession  of,  to  that she comes bearing life." In the Laws, Cleinias
having  identified  the  power  of  self-motion  with life, the Athenian
Stranger  gains  his assent to the proposition that whatever has life or
self-motion also has soul.

[830b]
To  this  much  Aristotle  also  agrees. "What has soul in it," he says,
"differs  from what has not, in that the former displays life"; to which
he  adds that "living may mean thinking or perception or local movement,
or  movement  in  the  sense  of  nutrition and growth," so that we must
"think  of  plants  also  as living," and as having souls. But Aristotle
goes   further.   In  defining  soul  as  the  cause  of  life,  and  in
differentiating   three  kinds  of  souls—  vegetative,  sensitive,  and
rational—according  to  the vital powers manifested by the activities of
plants,  animals,  and  men,  he  uses  his  general theory of corporeal
substances  to state precisely what the soul is and how it is related to
the  body.  Corporeal substances are, according to him, all composite of
two principles, form and matter. "What is called matter is potentiality,
what is called form, actuality." As exemplified in works of art, wood is
the  matter which has the potentiality for a certain shape and a certain
function  that  is  the  actuality  or  form  of a chair. In the case of
natural things, that which determines "the essential whatness" of a body
is  its form or, as Aristotle sometimes says, "its formula ble essence."
If  living  things  are  essentially  distinct  from  inert  bodies,  as
Aristotle  supposes  them  to  be,  then the forms which determine their
essences must be different from the forms of inanimate substances. It is
this difference in forms which Aristotle appropriates the word "soul" to
signify.  In each kind of living thing, the soul is the substantial form
or  "the  first  grade  of  actuality  of  a  natural  body  having life
potentially  in  it."  He speaks of the first grade of actuality here to
distinguish  merely being alive or besouled from the various acts which,
as  operations  of  the vital powers, constitute living. If an axe or an
eye  had  a soul, it would consist of its power to cut or to see, not in
its  actually  cutting  or  seeing.  While  nourishing  or  thinking "is
actuality  corresponding  to  the  cutting  and  the seeing, the soul is
actuality in the sense corresponding to the power of sight and the power
in  the  tool  ...  As the pupil plus the power of sight constitutes the
eye,  so  the  soul  plus  the  body  constitutes the animal." From this
conception  of  soul as the form or actuality of a living substance, "it
indubitably

[831a]
follows,"  Aristotle  says, "that the soul is inseparable from its body,
or  at  any  rate  certain parts of it are— for the actuality of some of
them  is nothing but the actualities of their bodily parts." Where Plato
holds  that  the soul is prior in existence to the body, Aristotle holds
that  soul  and  body  come into existence together when the organism is
generated.  Where  Plato  attributes an independent mode of being to the
soul,  distinct  in  character  from that of bodies, Aristotle says that
"the soul cannot be without a body. Yet it cannot be a body; it is not a
body,  but something relative to a body. That is why it is in a body and
a  body  of  a definite kind," being nothing more than "the actuality or
formulable essence of something that possesses the potentiality of being
besouled."   Further   consequences   follow   from   these  conflicting
conceptions  of  soul. In the Timaeus, Plato advances the view that only
the  lowest grade of soul— the plant soul— is mortal, in contrast to the
souls of animals and men. Aristotle would seem to attribute mortality to
every  grade of soul. If any exception is to be made, it is only for the
human  soul  because  it involves the power of rational thought. Mind or
the  power  to think, he writes, "seems to be a widely different kind of
soul,  differing  as  what  is  eternal  from  what  is perishable." The
critical  point is whether thinking, unlike all other psychic powers, is
an  activity of the soul alone. For the most part, "there seems to be no
case  in  which  the soul can act or be acted upon without involving the
body  Thinking  seems the most probable exception; but," Aristotle adds,
"if  this  too  proves  to  be a form of imagination or to be impossible
without  imagination,  it  too  requires  a body as the condition of its
existence.  If  there is any way of acting or being acted upon proper to
soul,  soul will be capable of separate existence; if there is none, its
separate  existence  is impossible." Is there any way of acting or being
acted  upon  proper  to  soul  ? Aristotle seems to answer this question
affirmatively  when  he says that "insofar as the realities it knows are
capable  of  being  separated  from their matter, so is it also with the
powers of mind." On one interpreta-

[831b]
Chapter  88:  SOUL  797 tion this means that the mind or intellect is as
immaterial  in its mode of operation as some of its objects are in their
mode  of  being;  with  the  further consequence that what is capable of
acting  apart  from  body  is  also  able  to exist apart from bod^. But
whether  Aristotle's  further  statement  that  "mind  set free from its
present conditions ... is immortal and eternal" applies to the intellect
alone  or  to the rational soul as a whole, has been disputed by various
interpreters.  Adopting Aristotle's conception of soul as the form which
is  the  actuality  of life in an organic body, Aquinas for one seems to
think  that  the immortality of a rational soul can be demonstrated from
the  special  character of its intellectual powers. A theory of the soul
which  regarded it as a simple and incorporeal substance, or as having a
being independent of the body, would seem to harmonize more readily with
the  Christian  belief  in  the  human  soul's  special creation and its
individual  survival  after  death. But Aquinas rejects such a theory on
the  ground that then man would be two substances or two beings, not one
;  or else if the human person is identified with the soul, man would be
a  soul using a body rather than a single substance of composite nature.
The  doctrine  of body and soul which holds them to be related as matter
and  form,  preserves  the  unity of man and, in the opinion of Aquinas,
fits  the  way  in  which  man  learns  through  his senses, experiences
passions,  and,  in  thinking,  depends  upon imagination. But though he
admits  that  men  cannot  think  without  images, Aquinas also insists,
contrary  to  Locke,  that  thinking,  insofar  as  it involves abstract
concepts,  cannot be performed by matter. To make matter think is beyond
even  the  power  of God. Unlike nourishing or sensing, understanding is
not  and cannot be "the act of a body, nor of any corporeal power." This
theory—  that the acts of understanding by which the intellect abstracts
and  receives  universal concepts cannot be accounted for by the motions
of  the  brain—  is  further  discussed  in the chapter on Universal and
Particular.  Here we are concerned simply to note that, for Aquinas, the
fact  that  the  concepts with which men think are universal, means that
they  are  abstracted from matter; and the fact that they are abstracted
from matter means that the

[832a]
798  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  various  acts  of  understanding  must  also  be
immaterial—  that is, not acts of bodily organs like the brain. To these
premises Aquinas adds one further principle, namely, that a thing's mode
of  being  is  indicated  by  its  mode  of operation. In these terms he
concludes  that, since the intellect has "an operation per se apart from
the body," the human soul, which is called rational because of its power
of  understanding, can have a being per se apart from the body. Hence it
is  "something  incorporeal  and subsistent." Nevertheless, according to
Aquinas, though the human soul can subsist separately, it belongs to its
nature  to be embodied, that is, to be the form of a material substance.
"The  soul,  as  part  of  human  nature,"  he  writes, "has its natural
perfection  only  as  united  to  the body. Therefore it would have been
unfitting  for the soul to be created without the body." Furthermore, if
the  entire  nature of man were to be a soul—the soul making "use of the
body  as  an  instrument, or as a sailor uses a ship"— there would be no
need  for  the  resurrection  of  the  body after the Last Judgment. The
Christian  dogma  of  the  resurrected  body  more  properly accords, in
Aquinas'  view, with a conception of soul "united to the body as form to
matter"; for, as he says in another place, "if it is natural to the soul
to  be  united to the body, it is unnatural for it to be without a body,
and  as  long  as  it  is  without  a body it is deprived of its natural
perfection."  In  the consideration of the relation of body and soul, an
opposite  estimation  of the body's role goes with an opposite theory of
the  soul's  nature.  Socrates, in the Phaedo, describes the body as the
soul's prison-house, or worse, the source of the soul's contamination by
the imi. Conceptions of soul an organic body and the transcendental ego

[832b]
purities  of  sense  and  passion. "In this life," he says, "we make the
nearest   approach   to  knowledge  when  we  have  the  least  possible
intercourse  or  communion with the body, and are not surfeited with the
bodily  nature."  But  complete purification requires "the separation of
the  soul  from  the body . . the release of the soul from the chains of
the  body." That is why, Socrates tells his friends gathered in the cell
where he is to drink the hemlock, "true philosophers are ever seeking to
release the soul" and "are always occupied in the practice of dying." It
is  also  the  opinion of Plotinus that it is evil for the soul to be in
the  body. But Christian theologians, for the most part, take a contrary
view.  Aquinas,  for  example, criticizes Origen for holding that "souls
were embodied in punishment of sin." To him there is nothing "of a penal
and  afflicting  nature"  in  the  soul's  union  with  the body. Though
Scripture  says  that  "the corruptible body weigheth down the soul, and
the  earthly  tabernacle  presseth  down the mind," Augustine interprets
this  to  mean,  not  that  the flesh is evil in itself, but that man is
beset  by  sin when "the flesh lusteth against the spirit." "There is no
need, therefore," according to Augustine, "that in our sins and vices we
accuse  the nature of the flesh to the injury of the Creator, for in its
own kind and degree the flesh is good." Man is both body and soul, human
nature  is  a  thing  of  both  flesh and spirit, and "he who extols the
nature  of  the  soul  as  the  chief  good,"  Augustine continues, "and
condemns  the  nature  of  the  flesh  as  if it were evil, assuredly is
fleshly  both  in  his  love  of  the soul and his hatred of the flesh."
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  800  la.  Soul  as  the  ordering  principle of the
universe:  the  world soul and its relation to ib. Soul as the principle
of  self-motion  or  life  in living things: soul as the form of 801 \c.
Soul  as  the principle of distinction between thinking and non-thinking
beings:  id. Soul as the principle of personal identity: the doctrine of
the self; the empirical

[833a]
ia.  The  distinction  between  the  soul and its powers or acts lb. The
order, connection, and interdependence of the parts of the soul: the id,
ego, ic. The kinds of soul and the modes of life: vegetative, sensitive,
and  rational  souls and their special powers (1) The vegetative powers:
the  powers proper to the plant soul (3) The rational powers: the powers
proper  to the human soul 3#. The soul as an immaterial principle, form,
or  substance 3#. The immateriality of the human soul in comparison with
the  materiality  of  the  plant  and  animal  soul: the intellect as an
incorporeal  power  3c.  The  relation of soul and body: the relation of
formal and material principles, or of spiritual and corporeal substances
3d.  The  denial of soul as an immaterial principle, form, or substance:
the  atomic  y. The corporeal or phenomenal manifestation of disembodied
souls  as  ghosts,  wraiths, or spirits 40. The unity of the human soul:
the  human  mode  of  the  vegetative  and sensitive powers $. The issue
concerning  the  self-subsistence  or immortality of the human soul: its
^d.  The  life  of  the  soul  apart  from  the body (1) The doctrine of
transmigration  or  perpetual  reincarnation (2) Comparison of separated
souls  with men and angels release from the body 5. Our knowledge of the
soul  and its powers tal or noumenal object; the paralogisms of rational
psychology soul

[833b]
Chapter  88:  SOUL 799 PAGE and super-ego in the structure of the psyche
802  (2)  The sensitive powers: the powers proper to the animal soul 803
theory of the soul 805 (3) The need of the soul for its body : the dogma
of the body's resurrection for the soul's perfection 808

[834a]
800  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage  cited.  1.  Conceptions  of  soul  la. Soul as the ordering
principle  of  the  universe:  the  world  soul  and its relation to the
intellectual  principle;  the  souls  of  the  heavenly  bodies 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  93c-d  /  Phaedrus,  124b-d  /  Apology,  204d-205a / Phaedo,
241b-242b  /  Timaeus,  447a-455d  esp 449c-450c / Philebus, 618b-619d /
Laws,  bk  x,  757d-765d  esp  762b765d;  bk xii, 797c-798b 8 Aristotle:
Heavens, bk ii, ch i
[284a27-b i]
376a;  ch  12  383b-384c  / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 6 [io7i b32-io72 a3]
601d / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[4o6b26-407b25] 636b-637b; ch
5
[411*6-23]
641a-b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch 14 120d121c 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk iv, sect 29 266a; sect 40 267a-b; bk v, sect 30 273a; bk
vi,  sect  38 277c-d; bk vii, sect 9-10 280b-c; bk viii, sect 7 286a; bk
x,  sect  6-7  297a-c;  bk  xii, sect 30 310a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[724-751]  230b-231a  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk iv, 853b-856a; 890a895b;
896a-897a;  914a-b;  932a-933a;  959a960a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,
1080b-1085b esp 1083b-1085b

[834b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b, the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  4  36d-37b; tr 11 40a-42a; tr hi, ch 2 42c-d; ch 13
46c47b;  ch  16-18 48b-50a; tr ix, ch 4 67c-68a; ch 7-9 69c-72a passim /
Third Ennead, tr i, ch 4 79d-80a; tr ii, ch 3, 84b; tr iv, ch 6, 99d; tr
v, ch 6 103b-104a; tr vii, ch 11-13 126a-129a; tr viii, ch 4-5 130b-131d
/  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  1-2  141c-143b;  ch  4 143d144b; ch 6-7
144c-145d; ch 9-10 146d-148b; tr iv, ch 6-16 161b-166b; ch 22 168d-169c;
ch 26-27 171b-172a; ch 29-45 173b-183a passim; tr viii, ch 1-2 200d-202a
passim;  tr  viii, ch 7-TR ix, ch 5 204b-207a,c / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch
2,  208d-209a;  ch 6-8 211a213a; ch 10, 213c; tr ii, ch 2 215a-c; tr ix,
ch  3 247b-d; ch 13-14 251a-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 11-12
194c-196a;  bk  vii, ch 6 248a-b; ch 9, 249d250a; ch 13 251c-252a; ch 23
256b-257b;  BK XIII, ch 16, 367c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a  8,  ans  19d-20c;  q  18,  a  i,  rep i 104c-105c; q 47, a 1, ans
256a-257b;  q  70,  a  3 365b-367a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  q  79, a 1, ans 951b-953b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b 28
Gilbert: Loadstone, bk ii, 38b; bk v, 104b105d

[835a]
\b  to  2a  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  426b-429b  34  Newton:
Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol, 370a / Optics, bk hi, 542b-543a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  767c  [n  18]  42 Kant: Judgement, 565d 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  115b-117a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk v,
216d-218b; bk xn, 561b-c; bk xiv, 608a-b 53 James: Psychology, 658b-659a
lb.  Soul as the principle of self-motion or life in living things: soul
as  the  form  of  an  organic body 7 Plato: Cratylus, 93b-d / Phaedrus,
124b-c  / Phaedo, 244b-246c / Laws, bk x, 763a-764a 8 Aristotle: Topics,
bk iv, ch 6
[i27b i3~i8]
177a-b / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 8 [ioi7b io-i7] 538b; bk vn, ch io [i035b
i4-28] 559a-b; bk viii, ch 3
[i043a29-b
4] 567d; bk xii, ch 5
[107^2-4] 600c; bk
xiii, ch 2
[1077*20-23]
608c  /  Soul 631a-668d esp bk ii, ch 1-3 642a645b 9 Aristotle: Parts of
Animals, bk i, ch i
[640b30-64i a33]
163c-164b  /  Generation of Animals, bk i, ch 19 [726b i5~3o] 266d-267a;
bk 11, ch 1
[73i b2 9-3i] 272a; [733b23-735a28
l 274a-276a; ch 3
[737*18-34]
278a-b; ch 4
[73 8b i8-2 7 ] 279c; ch 4
[74ob2 5 ]-cH 5
[74i»
281d-282b; bk hi, ch ii
[762*1 8-b27] 303b-d
10 Galen: Natural Faculties^ bk i, ch i 167a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  iv,  sect 21 265b-c; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  1  la-6b  passim  / Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 13 46c-47b; tr ix, ch 7
69c-  70a  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr i 139a- b; tr in, ch 8, 146b-d; ch 19,
151d;  ch  23,  153d;  tr iv, ch 29 173b-174b; tr v, ch 7, 188b-c; tr vn
191c-200c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr i, ch 2 208c-209b; tr ii, ch 2 215a-c /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr iv, ch 16, 305a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk vii, ch
23, 256b-c; bk xiii, ch 2 360b-361a; bk xix, ch 3, 510a-b; bk xxi, ch 3,
561c-d;  bk xxii, ch 4 588b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3,
a  i,  ans  14b-15b; q 18, a 3, ans and rep i 106b107c; q 51, a 1, rep 3
275b-276b;  q  70,  a  3,  ans  and  rep  2  365b-367a; q 72, a i, rep i
368b-369d;  qq  75-76 378a-399b; q 97, a 3, ans 515a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 56, a 1, rep 1 30a-c; part ii-ii, q 23, a 2,
rep  2  483d-484d;  part hi, q 2, a 5, ans and rep 3 715a-716b; q 5, a 3
737d-739a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[40-54]
80b-c; xxv
[1-108]
91b-92c;  paradise,  ii  [127-148]  109a-b;  iv  [49-54] 111b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  intro, 47a-b; part iv, 251a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
384d-390b passim; 488d-496d passim 53 James: Psychology, 139b-140a

[835b]
Chapter  88:  SOUL  801 lc. Soul as the principle of distinction between
thinking  and  non-thinking  beings: the identity or distinction between
soul  and  mind  or intellect 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 3 [4o6b26-407b
i3]  636b-637b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk in [94-416] 31b-35c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a;  part  v,  56a-b;  59a-60c /
Meditations,  71b-d;  11 77d-81d / Objections and Replies, 119d120a; def
vi   130c;  135b-136b;  152b,d-156a  passim;  207a;  208c-d;  219b-220a;
224d-226d;  249d-250b  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii,
sect  5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; sect 18-22 209a-d; sect 28-32 211b-212d;
ch xxvii, sect 12-14 223a-224b passim 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
26-28  418a-c;  sect  89  430b-c;  sect  98 432a; sect 135-142 440a-441c
passim;  sect  148  442b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 47
24a-b  53  James: Psychology, 85a-b; 130b-131a; 139b140a Id. Soul as the
principle  of personal identity: the doctrine of the self; the empirical
and  the  transcendental ego 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch hi,
sect  4-5 113b-c; bk 11, ch xxvii, sect 7 220d-221a; sect 9-29 222a-228c
esp  sect 12-14 223a-224b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect i39 440d 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 49c-51d esp 51c-d; 120c129c esp 121a-124d, 126a-128b;
200c-204c  esp  203d-204c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 47
24a-b; additions, 28 121b 53 James: Psychology, 188a-197a esp 191a-192b,
194b-196a;  213a-240a  esp  213a, 216b-220a, 221a-225b, 232b-238b 2. The
analysis  of the powers of the soul 2a. The distinction between the soul
and its powers or acts 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch i [402b9-i2] 631d; ch
5 [4ii b5-3i] 641c-d; bk ii, ch i [412*21-28] 642b; ch 2
[4i3b io-4i4a4] 643c-644a; bk hi,
ch 9
[432*1 5^9] 664d-665a; ch 10 [433*33b
4 ] 666a-b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 7
[652V-16] 177d-178a
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch 2, 168b-c 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  vi, ch 2 107a108a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 23-25 169c171b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  77, a 1 399c-401b; aa 5-6
403d-405c; q 79, a 1 414a-d

[836a]
802  THE GREAT IDEAS (2. The analysis of the powers of the soul. 2a. The
distinction  between the soul and its powers or acts.) 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 50, a 2 7c-8a; q 83, a 2, rep 3 172b-173a; q
no, a 4 350d-351d; part hi, q 6, a 2, ans and rep 1,3 741c-742a; part hi
suppl, q 70, a i, rep 4 893d-895d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv
[1-18]  57c; xxv [37-84] 91d-92b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 54b-c
31  Descartes:  Rules,  xii,  20a-b / Objections and Replies, 135b-136b;
208c-209a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  i,  sect 9-25
123a-127d  esp  sect  10  123b-d;  ch xix, sect 4 176a-b; ch xxi, sect 6
179d180a;  sect  14-20  181b-183a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 98
432a  53  James:  Psychology,  130b-131a  2b. The order, connection, and
interdependence  of the parts of the soul: the id, ego, and super-ego in
the  structure of the psyche 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 128a-129c / Republic, bk
ii-iv,  316a-356a;  bk  ix,  425c-426a / Timaeus, 466a-467a 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk i, ch 5
[4ii a23-b3i]
641b-d; bk hi, ch 6-13 662d-668d 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 10
[703
28-b i] 239a / Ethics, bk i, ch 13 347b-348d; bk v, ch n
[ii38b5-i5] 387a, c; bk vi, ch
i
[ii38b35)-cH 2
[ii39b i3] 387b-388b; bk
ix, ch 4 [n66b i3-24] 419d-420a / Politics, bk i, ch 5 [i254a34-i255 a2]
448a-c; ch 13 [i26oa4~8] 454c; bk hi, ch 4 [1277^-12] 474a; bk vh, ch 14
[1333^7-25] 538a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 826d-827a 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead, tr i la-6b passim / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 3 143b-c; ch
19  151d-152b; tr iv, ch 17, 166c-d / Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch 15, 304c-d
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  13, 519a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  77,  aa  4-7 403a-406b; part i-ii, q 9, aa 1-2
657d659c;  q  37,  a 1, ans 783d-784c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  15,  a 9, rep 3 794c-795b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv
[1-18] 57c; xxv [37-84] 91d-92b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 151a-d 28
Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  444c-445c;  447a-b 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xii  [79-97]  321a / Areopagitica, 407b 54 Freud: Ego and Id,
701d-703a;  703c-708c;  712a-717a,c  esp  712b-c,  714b-c,  715c-716a  /
Inhibitions,   Symptoms,   and  Anxiety,  721d-722c  esp  722b-c  /  New
Introductory Lectures, 830a840a esp 836d-839d

[836b]
2b  to  2<r(l)  2c. The kinds of soul and the modes of life: vegetative,
sensitive,  and  rational  souls  and  their  special  powers  7  Plato:
Republic,  bk  iv,  350c-353c;  bk  ix, 421a-427b / Timaeus, 469d-470a 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch 4
[i33a28-33]
184c; bk vi, ch 10
[148*23-37]
202b-c / Heavens, bk ii, ch 12 [292^-1 1] 384a / Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[402b i-403 a2]
631c-632a; ch 3
[407^-6] 636b-c; ch
5
[4iob i6-4ii a2] 640d641a; bk
ii, ch 2-3 643a-645b 9 Aristotle : Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[64i a33-b io] 164b-c / Generation of Animals,
bk 11, ch 3 [736*25-737^9] 276d-278a; ch 4
[740b25]-cH 5 [74^30] 281d-282b; bk hi, ch
bM-3o]  298c-d  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  i 167a-b 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk in [231-322] 7 [757 33a-34b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk hi, sect 16 262d263a, c; bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  854b  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i la-6b passim /
Second  Ennead, tr ii, ch 3 41c-42a; tr ix, ch 2, 67a / Third Ennead, tr
iv,  ch 2, 97d / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 19 151d-152b; ch 23 153d-154b;
tr iv, ch 13 164d-165b; ch 28 172a-173b; tr vii, ch 14 200b-c; tr ix, ch
3  206a-b  /  Fifth Ennead, tr ii, ch 2 215a-c; tr hi, ch 9 220d-221b 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; ch 29 261a-b; bk xix, ch
13,  519a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 8, 626c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 18, aa 1-2 104c-106b; a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 69, a
2,  rep  1 361c-362c; q 70, a 3 365b-367a; qq 77-83 399b-440b; q 118, aa
1-2  600a-603b;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  aa 8-9 692a-693d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  no,  a  4, rep 3 350d-351d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  iv  [1-18]  57c; xxv [37-84] 91d-92b; paradise, vii
[121148]  116b-c  28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 369d-370b; 386b-388a;
397c-398c;  441a-443b;  445c;  447a-b  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v,
60b-c  /  Objections and Replies, 156a-d; 207a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  v  [469-490]  185b186a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix,
sect  11-15  140b-141a;  ch  xxvii,  sect 4-5 220a-c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  271a 42 Kant: judgement, 465c-467a 2c(l) The vegetative powers:
the  powers  proper  to  the  plant  soul  7 Plato: Timaeus, 469d-470a 8
Aristotle: Generation and Corruption, bk i, ch 5 417b-420b / Soul, bk i,
ch 5 [4ii b27-3i] 641d; bk ii, ch 2
[4 i3 a2o-34] 643b-c; [413V

[837a]
2c(2)  to 2c(3) Chapter 9] 643c; ch 4 645b-647b; bk hi, ch 12 [434*2226]
667a-b  9  Aristotle:  Generation  of  Animals,  bk  ii,  ch  b9-74 ia5]
281c-282a  4  [740  10  Galen: Natural Faculties 167a-215d^esp-*KI, ch i
167a-b,  ch 5-8 169b-171a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr iv, ch 2 97d-98a
/  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  22  168d-169c;  ch  26-27  171b-172a 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; ch 29 261a-b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 18, a 3, rep 3 106b-107c; q 78, a i, ans
407b409a;  a  2  409a-410a;  q  118,  a  1  600a-601c;  q  119, a 1, ans
604c-607b;  a  2, ans 607b-608d; part i—11, q 17, a 8 692a-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 50, a 3, rep 1 8b-9a; part hi suppl, q
80,  a  4,  ans  959c-963a  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 384d-390b
passim;  404b;  418b-419d;  427c-428b  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  11,
78d-79a  /  Objections  and  Replies,  207a;  244b-c 2c(2) The sensitive
powers: the powers proper to the animal soul 7 Plato: Timaeus, 466a-467d
8  Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 5 [4ii b27-3i] 641d; bk 11, ch 2 [4i3b4~io]
643c; [413^7-24] 643d;
[414*1-3] 644a; ch 3 [414*29^20] 644c-d; bk
II,  ch 5-BK in, ch 3 647b-661b; bk hi, ch 813 664b-668d / Sense and the
Sensible, ch 7
[448b i7-449a2i] 687d-688d
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[64i a33-b io] 164b-c; bk hi, ch 5 [667b2i-32]
196a  /  Motion  of Animals, ch 10 238c-239a / Generation of Animals, bk
11, ch 3
[736*24737*19] 276d-278a; ch 5 [741*6-30] 282a-b /
Ethics, bk vi, ch 2 [1139*17-21] 387d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i,
ch  i 167a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 9 292b-d 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead, tr i, ch ii 5b-c / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 19 151d-152b;
ch  23  153d-154b;  tr  iv,  ch  20-21  167d-168c; ch 23-25 169c-171b 18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256bc; ch 29 261a-b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  72,  a  1,  rep  1 368b-369d; q 75, a 3
380c-381b;  q 78, a 1 407b-409a; aa 3-4 410a-413d; qq 80-81 427a-431d; q
118, a 1 600a-601c; part hi, q 17, a 2, rep 2 687d-688b 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xxv [3478] 91d-92a 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
369d-370a  31  Descartes: Rules, xn, 19a-20a / Discourse, part v, 56a-b;
59a-60c  /  Meditations,  11,  78d79a  / Objections and Replies, 156a-d;
226a-d  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch ix-x 138b-143d passim,
esp  ch ix, sect 11-15 140b-141a, ch x, sect 10 143c-d; ch xxvii, sect 5
220b-c

[837b]
88:  SOUL  803 2c(3) The rational powers: the powers proper to the human
soul  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv, 350b-353d; bk vi, 386d-388a; bk vii,
389d-390b;  bk  ix, 421ac / Timaeus, 453b-454a / Theaetetus, 535b-536a 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 2 571c572a; ch 5 573a-c / Soul, bk ii,
ch 3 [4i4b i7~ 20] 644d;
[415*7-12]
645b;  bk hi, ch 3-8 659c-664d 9 Aristotle: History of Animals, bk viii,
ch i
[588*1 8-b4]
114b,d / Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[i097b23-i098*i9] 343a-c; ch
13  347b-348d; bk vi, ch 1 [ii38b35]-cH 2 [ii39b5] 387b-388a / Rhetoric,
bk  1,  ch  i [i355b i~3] 594d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12,
173a-c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 23, 170a171d; bk iv, ch 7,
233a-b  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 15-16 262d-263a,c; bk v,
sect  16  271c-d;  bk  ix,  sect  8-9  292b-d;  bk  xi, sect i 302a-b 17
Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead,  tr viii, ch 3, 202c / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch
10,  213d-214a  18  Augustine: City of God, bk vii, ch 23, 256b-c; ch 29
261a-b;  bk  xii, ch 23 357d358a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a  1,  rep  2  14b-15b;  q  7,  a 2, rep 2 31d-32c; q 76, a 5, rep 4
394c-396a;  q  78, a i, ans 407b409a; qq 79-80 413d-428d; qq 82-83 431d'
440b;  q  118,  a 2 601c-603b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
50, aa 4-5 9a-10d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[1-75] 79d-80c; xxv [61-84] 92a-b
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  427d-428a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  55b-d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  56a-b;  59c60c /
Meditations,  71b-d;  m,  82d-83a;  iv  89a93a;  vi  96b-103d  passim  /
Objections  and Replies, 156a-d; 207a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, axiom
2  373d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk v [95-116] 177b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  vi  131b-c;  ch xi 143d-147b esp sect 9-1 i
145b146a;  ch  xxi,  sect 4-21 178d-183b passim, esp sect 5-6 179c-180a,
sect  15-20  181c183a;  ch xxiii, sect 5 205a-b; sect 15 208c-d; sect 18
209a;  sect  22  209d;  sect  2830  211b-212b;  bk  iv, ch xiv, sect 3-4
364d365a;  ch  xvii,  sect  1-3  371c-372b  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
270a-271b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 41c-42b; 164b-c / Judgement, 465c-467a
esp  466a-c; 474b-475d; 522b; 568c-575b esp 568c-d, 570c-571c, 572b-575b
46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 168b-d; part 1, 257d-258a; part
hi,  304d-305b  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 278a-b 53 James: Psychology,
85a-b  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  384c-385c  esp  385b-c /
Unconscious, 429c-d / General Introduction, 532a

[838a]
804  3.  The  immateriality  of  the  soul ia. The soul as an immaterial
principle,  form,  or  substance  7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-126c / Phaedo,
223d225c;  231c-234b  /  Republic, bk x, 435a-436c / Timaeus, 449b-450c;
452d-454a  /  Sophist,  567c-d  /  Laws,  bk  x,  761a-765d 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk vii, ch io
[i035b i4-28] 559a-b; bk
viii, ch 3 [1043*29b 4] 567d; bk xiii, ch 2
[1077*20-23] 608c
/ Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[403*3^19] 632a-d; bk
ii,  ch  1-2 642a-644c 12 Aurelius : Meditations, bk iv, sect 21 265b-c;
bk  xii,  sect  30  310a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i la-6b / Third
Ennead,  tr i, ch 8-9 81d-82b; tr vi, ch 2 107a-108a / Fourth Ennead, tr
i-ii  139a-141c; tr hi, ch 2 142a-143b; ch 8, 146b-d; ch 2023 152b-154b;
tr vii 191c-200c: tr ix, ch 4, 206c-d / Fifth Ennead, tr ii, ch 2 215a-c
/ Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch i 297b-d; ch 4-5 299a-300a; ch 12-16 303a-305c
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 51, a 1, rep 3 275b-276b; q 75,
a  i  378b-379c;  aa  4-5  381b-383b;  q  76,  a i 385d-388c; a 4, rep 1
393a-394c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  269d-271b  31  Descartes:
Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a;  part  v,  59c-60c / Meditations, 71b-d;
72d73c;  11,  78a-80a;  vi  96b-103d  passim,  esp  98c-d,  101d-102a  I
Objections  and  Replies,  114d-115a,c;  119d-120a;  127c-d;  def vi-vii
130c-d;  def  x  130d;  prop  iv  133c;  135d-136b;  153c-155d;  170b-c;
207d-208a; 209c; 224d225d; 231a-232d; 261a-b; 276b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  v,  pref 451a-452c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxiii,
sect  5  205a-b;  sect  15  208c-d;  sect  22 209d; sect 28-32 211b-212d
passim; ch xxvn, sect 12-17 223a-225a passim; sect 27 227d-228a; sect 29
228b-c;  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 6 313c-315b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  26  418a;  sect  89  430b-c;  sect  141 441a-b; sect 148 442b-d 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  271a-b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186b 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 120c-129c esp 124d-128a; 203d-204c 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  27b-28a  53  James:  Psychology,  220b-223b esp 221a-222b 3b. The
immateriality  of  the  human soul in comparison with the materiality of
the  plant  and  animal  soul:  the  intellect as an incorporeal power 8
Aristotle:  Soul,  bk i, ch 4 [4o8b i8-29] 638c; ch 5 [41^13-18] 641c-d;
bk ii, ch 2 [4i3b2429] 643d-644a; bk hi, ch 4 [429*10^23] 661b662a; ch 5
662c-d 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 3 [736b i5-737a i2]
277b-d

[838b]
THE GREAT IDEAS 3 to 3c 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 2, 107b-c /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 8, 195b-196a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
vii,  par 2, 43c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 1, rep 2
14b-15b;  q  7,  a  2,  rep  2  31d-32c;  q 75, aa 2-3 379c-381b; aa 5-6
382a-384c;  q  79,  a  1, rep 4 414a-d; a 2, rep i 414d-416a; a 3, rep 3
416a-417a;  a 4, rep 4-5 417a-418c; a 5, rep 1-2 418c-419b; a 6, rep 1-2
419b420d; q 83, a 1, rep 5 436d-438a; q 84, a i, ans 440d-442a; a 2, ans
442b-443c;  a  4,  ans  444d-446b;  a  6,  ans 447c-449a; q 85, a 6, ans
458d-459c;  q  87,  a  3, rep 3 467b468a; q 89, a i, ans 473b-475a; part
i-ii, Q2, a 6, ans 619d-620d: q 35, a 5, ans 775d-777a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  50,  a 4 9a-10b; q 53, a i, ans and rep 2-3
19d-21a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv [6184] 92a-b 28 Harvey:
On Animal Generation, 494a-b 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 20a-b / Discourse,
part  v, 60b-c / Objections and Replies, 226a-b 3c. The relation of soul
and  body:  the  relation  of  formal  and  material  principles,  or of
spiritual and corporeal substances 7 Plato: Charmides, 2d-3c / Cratylus,
93b-d / Phaedo 220a-251d ' Republic, bk hi, 334b-c / Timaeus, 453b-454a;
466a-467d; 474d-475d / Laws, bk x, 761b-765d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi,
ch  14  [151*20-31]  206a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  vii, ch 10 [i035b i4-28]
559a-b;  bk viii, ch 3 [i043*29-b 4] 567d; ch 6 569d-570d; bk xii, ch 10
[i075b34-37] 606d / Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[403*3-24] 632a-b; ch 3
[407^3-25]
637b; ch 5
[4iob io-i6]
640c;
[4ii a23-b3i] 641b-d; bk
ii, ch 1-2 642a-644c; ch 4
[4i5b8-28] 645d-646a
/ Sense and the Sensible, ch i
[436^-8] 673b-c
/ Longevity, ch 2
[465*18-32]
710c-d  /  Youth,  Life,  and  Breathing, ch 1-4 714a-716b passim; ch 14
720d-721a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640^0-641*33] 163c-164b; ch
5
[645^4-19]
169c; bk 11, ch 7 [652^-17] 177d-178a; bk hi, ch 5
[667b i5-32] 195d-196a / Motion of
Animals, ch 9-10 238a-239a / Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 4
[738b i8-27J
279c / Politics, bk 1, ch 5 [1254*34-1255*2] 448a-c 12 Lucretius: Nature
of  Things, bk hi [94-829] 31b-40c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect
3  260b;  bk  iv,  sect  21  265b-c;  bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 13 \ irgil:
Aeneid, bk vi [724-751] 230b-231a 14 Plutarch: Romulus, 29a-b 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  893a  17  Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i la-6b / Second
Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  5,  37c; tr ii, ch 3 41c-42a / Third Ennead, tr 4-5
108c-109d  / Fourth Ennead, tr i-ii 139a-141c; tr hi, ch 4 143d-144b; ch
8-23,  146b-154b;  tr  iv, ch 18 166d-167b; ch 20-21 167d-168c; ch 23-25
169c-171b; ch 29 173b-174b; tr v, ch 7,

[839a]
3c  to  3e  Chapter  88:  SOUL  805  188b-c;  tr  vn 191c-200c esp ch 8,
197c-198b;  tr  ix  205a-207a,c  /  Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 2 208c-209b /
Sixth   Ennead,  tr  iv,  ch  i  297b-d;  ch  4-5  299a-300a;  ch  12-16
303a-305cjjTR  vn,  ch  4-5 323c-324b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch
29,  317b-c;  bk xiii, ch 2 360b-361a; bk xiv, ch 5 379c380b; bk xix, ch
3,  510a-b; ch 13, 519a; bk xxi, ch 3 561a-562a; bk xxii, ch 4 588b-d 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a 1, rep 2 34d-35c; a 2, rep 2-3
35c-36b; q 51, a 1, ans and rep 3 275b-276b; q 52, a 1 278d279b; q 75, a
1  378b-379c; a 2, ans 379c380c; a 4 381b-382a; a 5, ans 382a-383b; q 76
385c-399b; q 81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d; q 84, a 4, ans 444d-446b; q 89, a
1,  ans 473b475a; q no, a 2, rep i 565d-566d; part i-ii, q 4, a 5, rep 5
632c-634b  20  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, a 4, rep 3
32b-33c;  q  58,  a  2,  ans  42a-43a;  part in, q 2, a 1, ans and rep 2
710a-711c;  a  5 715a-716b; q 6, a i 740b-741b; aa 3-4 742a-743d; q 8, a
2, ans 757c-758a; q 17, a 2, rep 4 808d-809d; q 62, a i, rep 2 858c859d;
a 4, rep 1,3 861a-862a; part hi suppl, q 70, a 3, ans 897d-900d; q 75, a
1,  rep 3-4 935b-937a; q 80, a i, ans and rep i 956c957c; q 92, a 1, ans
and  rep 8-10 1025c1032b; q 93, a 1 1037d-1039a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory,  xxv [10108] 91c-92c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 250c-251b
25  Montaigne: Essays, 264a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 431b-434a
esp  433c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 49b-50b 31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  iv,  51d-52a;  part  v,  56a-b;  60b-c  / Meditations,
72d-73c;  11  77d-81d  passim; vi 96b-103d esp 99d-101a / Objections and
Replies,  114d-115a,c;  119d120c;  127c-d;  def vi-vh 130c-d; def x 130d
prop  iv  133c;  135d-136b;  152b,d-156a  170b-c;  207d-208a; 219b-220a;
224d-226d  231a-232d;  248b; 261a-b; 276a-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii,
prop 11-13 377b378c; part v, pref 451a-452c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 512 262a
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect n-12 123d-124c; ch xxi,
sect  4  178d179c;  ch  xxiii,  sect  15-32 208c-212d; ch xxvii, sect 27
227d-228a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 18-20 416b-417a; sect 26-27
418a-b;  sect  148  442b-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div
51-52  472b-473c  esp  div  52,  472d; div 58 476a-b 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  231a-b;  270a-271b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 136d 42 Kant:
Judgement,  557c-558a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 48
24b-c;  additions, 2 115d; 16 118d-119a / Philosophy of History, part i,
255c-256b

[839b]
47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii  [6891-6896]  168b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{,
27b-28a;   68a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  la-4a  esp  2b-3a;  118b119b;
139a-140a  54  Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 154c-155a 3d. The denial
of  soul  as  an  immaterial  principle,  form, or substance: the atomic
theory  of  the  soul  7  Plato: Phaedo, 235b-236c; 238b-240a / Sophist,
567a-568a  / Laws, bk x, 761b 8 Aristotle: Generation and Corruption, bk
ii, ch 6
[334*10-15] 435a / Soul, bk
i, ch 2-5 633a-641d 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 12 172d173c 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk hi [94-829] 31b-40c; bk iv [722-817]
53d-54d; [877-961] 55d-56d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3 79b-c /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr vii 191c-200c esp ch 1-4 191c-193c, ch 8, 195b-196a,
196c-197c  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk viii, ch 5, 268b-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 75, a 1 378b-379c; q 84, a 2, ans 442b-443c;
a  6,  ans 447c-449a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 80a-b; part hi, 176d;
part  iv,  250c-251c;  269d-271b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  264b-267a  31
Descartes: Objections and Replies, 226a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  iv, ch hi, sect 6 313c-315b; ch x, sect 5 350a-b; sect 10 351b-352a;
sect  17  353b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 93 431b; sect 137
440b-c;  sect  141  441a-b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 126c-d / Judgement,
582b-c; 600c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 255d 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a 53 James: Psychology, 95a-119b "be.
The  corporeal  or  phenomenal  manifestation  of  disembodied  souls as
ghosts,  wraiths,  or  spirits  Old  Testament: / Samuel, 28:8-19— (D) ^
Kings, 28:8-19 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xxiii [54-107] 161d-162b / Odyssey, bk
xi 243a-249d; bk xxiv
[1-203]
317a-319a 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[623-842]
21d-24b / Eumenides [94-139] 82a-c 5 Aristophanes: Birds
[1 552-1 564] 561b
6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 126d-127a; bk v, 179c-180a 7 Plato: Phaedo,
232d-233b  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk i [102-135] 2b-d; bk iv
[26-41] 44b-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii [771-794] 146a-b; bk v
[719-745] 206a-b; bk vi 211a-235a
14 Plutarch: Cimon, 392b-c / Caesar, 603d604d / Dion, 781d-782a / Marcus
Brutus, 816d-817c

[840a]
806 THE GREAT IDEAS (3. The immateriality of the soul. 3e. The corporeal
or  phenomenal manifestation of disembodied souls as ghosts, wraiths, or
spirits.)  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr vii, ch 15 200c 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 89, a 8, rep 2 479c-480c 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 69, a 3 887d-889c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, hi
[1633] 56a; xxv
[79-108] 92b-c; paradise,
hi
[1-30] 109b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 51b-52b; 80a; part iv, 250c-251c passim;
258c-d; 270c271b passim; 274b-c 26 Shakespeare: Richard HI, act v, sc hi
[118176] 144d-145c / Julius Caesar, act iv, sc m
[275-308] 591c-d
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc i
[40-175]
30a-31c; sc iv
[38]-sc v
[91] 36b-37d; act
hi,  sc  iv [102-136] 55d-56a / Macbeth, act hi, sc iv [37-107] 298a-d /
Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc  iv [30-122] 481c-482b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 95b;
114b-115a esp 115a-b
[fn
1];  189a-b;  193b-c;  373a;  394c-d;  412a-b;  472b-c 54 Freud: War and
Death,  763d-764a  4.  The  being of the soul 4a. The unity of the human
soul: the human mode of the vegetative and sensitive powers 8 Aristotle:
Soul, bk i, ch 5 [4iob io-i6] 640c;
[4ii a23-b3i]
641b-d; bk ii, ch 2
[4i3b ioai5~b8]
664d-665a; ch 10 [433*32^4] 666a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1102*27-32]
347d  17  Plotinus:  Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 3 143b-c; 4] 643c-644a; bk
hi, ch 9
[432
4i4a  ch  19 151d-152b; tr vii, ch 14 200b-c; tr ix, ch 2-3 205c-206b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 76, aa 1-3 385d-393a; q 78, a 4,
rep  5  411d-413d;  q  81,  a  3,  rep  2  430c-431d  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  hi, q 2, a 2, rep 2 711d-712d; part hi suppl, q 79, a
2,  rep  3  953b-955c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, iv [1-12] 57c;
xxv  [37-84]  91d-92b;  paradise,  ii  [127148]  109a-b  4b.  The  issue
concerning  the  self-subsistence  or immortality of the human soul: its
existence  or capacity for existence in separation from the human body 5
Euripides:  Helen  [1013-1016]  307d  6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 75b 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-c  /  Meno,  179d-183a  / Apology, 211b-212a,c /
Phaedo 220a-251d /

[840b]
3  4/o  4^  Republic,  bk  x, 434d-436a / Laws, bk xii, 793c-d / Seventh
Letter, 806a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 3
[1070s
21-28] 599c / Soul, bk 1, ch 1
[403*2-24]
632a-b; ch 2
[405*29-34] 634d; bk
ii, ch i U * a3-9] 643a ; CH 2 [413^4-29] 643d-644a; bk hi, ch 4
[429
a29-b4]  661c-d;  ch 5 662c-d 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii,
ch  3  [736b  i5-737ai2]  277b-d  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[323-349]  34b-c;  [417-1094] 35c-44a,c 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii,
sect 14 258d; sect 17 259b-d; bk iv, sect 21 265b-c; bk v, sect 13 271b;
bk  viii,  sect  37  288c;  bk  xii,  sect  5 307d-308a; sect 14 308c 14
Plutarch:  Romulus,  29a-b  17 Plotinus : First Ennead, tr i, ch 2, lc /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  i  139a-b; tr iv, ch 15 165c-d; tr vii 191c-200c 18
Augustine:  City  of God,  bk  vi,  ch 12, 243c-d; bk x, ch 31 319b-d; bk
xiii,  ch  2  360b-361a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 61, a 2,
rep  3 315c-316a; q 75, a 2 379c-380c; a 6 383c-384c; q 76, a 3, rep 1-2
391a-393a;  PART  I-II,  Q  22,  A  I, REP 3 720d-721c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  85,  a 6 182d-184a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xxv
[1-108]
91b-92c; paradise, vii
[121-148]
116D-C 22 Chaucer: Second Nun's Tale
[15,787-800]
467a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  192c-193c; part iv, 250c-251c;
253b-255b;  269d-271b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  264a-269b  31 Descartes:
Discourse,  part  v,  60b-c  /  Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 72d-73c /
Objections  and  Replies, 127c-d; def vi-vii 130c-d; def x 130d; prop iv
133c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 23 458b-d; prop 29-33 459b-460c;
prop  36-40  461a-462d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk x [720-844] 290a292b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  194-195,  206b-210b; 556, 271b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  141  441a-b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 186a-187b 42
Kant:  Pure Reason, 120c-129c esp 124d-128a; 201bc; 203d-204c; 218d-223d
esp  219b-d;  234c-240b  esp  234c-235c,  237d-238a  / Practical Reason,
291a-292a;  344a-c;  348b-351b  /  Judgement, 600c-d; 603b-d; 606d-607c;
610a-b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part i, 246d247a; 255c-256b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 25b-28a esp 27b-28a; 380b-381a 49 Darwin: Descent
of  Man,  593c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vii, 295b-c 53 James:
Psychology, 224a-225a 54 Freud: War and Death, 763d-764b

[841a]
4r  to  4^(2) Chapter 88: SOUL 807 Ac. The origin of the human soul: its
separate  creation;  its emanation or derivation from the world soul Old
Testament:  Genesis,  1:26-27;  2:7^^4-2  / Ecclesiastes, 12:7 / Isaiah,
42:5; 57:16— (D) Isaias, 42:5; 57:16 / Ezekiel, 18:4— (D) Ezechiel, 18:4
/  Zechariah,  12:1  — (D) Zacharias, 12:1 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
2:23;  15:11—  (D)  OT,  Boo{of  Wisdom,  2:23;  15:11  New Testament: /
Corinthians,  15:45  7 Plato: Timaeus, 452c-454a / Philebus, 618b619d 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi [323-349] 34b-c; [670-712] 38d-39b 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk iv, sect 21 265b-c; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[724-751] 230b-231a
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  ix, ch 3-4 67b-68a; ch 7-8 69c-70d /
Third  Ennead, tr iv, ch 2-5 97d-99b / Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch i-tr in,
ch  7 139c-145d; tr hi, ch 9-18 146d151c; tr vii, ch 13 200a-b; tr viii,
ch  3-TR  ix,  ch  5  202a-207a,c / Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch 4 299a-d; ch
12-16  303a-305c  18 Augustine : City of God, bk vii, ch 29 261a-b; bk x,
ch  31  319b-d;  bk xi, ch 22, 334c; bk xii, ch 23 357d-358a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 75, a 6, rep 1 383c-384c; o 96 480c-484a; q
100, a 1, rep 2 520d-521c; q 118 600a-604b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q 6, a 3, rep 2 742a-743a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xvi
[85-93] 77d; xxv [37-84] 91d-92b; paradise,
iv  [49-54]  111b;  vii  [64-75]  115d-116a;  [121148] 116b-c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  hi,  173d; 176d; part iv, 251a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
264b-c 30 Bacon : Advancement of Learning, 54b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part  v, 56a-b; 60b-c / Meditations, 111, 88b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,  prop  29-31  366b367a;  part  ii,  prop  ii, corol 377b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  186b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 640a-b [n 8] 42
Kant: Judgement, 565d 4d. The life of the soul apart from the body 4d(l)
The  doctrine  of  transmigration  or  perpetual  reincarnation 4 Homer:
Odyssey,  bk xi [298-304] 246a 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 75b 7 Plato:
Phaedrus,  125b-126a  /  Meno, 179d183a / Phaedo, 226c-234c; 246d-250b /
Republic,  bk x, 437c-441a,c / Timaeus, 452d453b; 476b-477a,c / Laws, bk
x, 767c-768d 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk i, ch 3 [4o6a3o-b5] 635d; !4°7bl3-25]
637b

[841b]
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things, bk i [102-119] 2b-c; bk in [670-783]
38d-40a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect 21 265b-c 13 Virgil:
Georgics,  iv  [219-227]  89b  /  Aeneid,  bk  vi [703-751] 229b-231a 14
Plutarch:  Romulus,  29a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch ii 5b-c /
Third  Ennead, tr ii, ch 13 88d-89b; ch 17, 91d-92b; tr hi, ch 4, 95b-c;
tr iv, ch 2-3 97d-98c; ch 6 99b-100b / Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 8, 145d;
ch  9,  146d; ch 13-15 149b150c; ch 24 154b-d; ch 27, 156d; tr iv, ch 5,
161a-b;  tr vii, ch 14 200b-c; tr viii, ch 3-5 202a-203d / Sixth Ennead,
tr  iv, ch 14-16 304a-305c; tr vii, ch 6-7, 324c-325a 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk  x,  ch  30 318b319b; bk xii, ch 20 355b-357a; bk xiv, ch 5
379d-380b;  bk  xxii,  ch  27-28 613b-614a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi  suppl,  q  77,  a 1, ans 943a-944d; q 79, a i, ans 951b953b 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, iv [49-63] 111b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
206c-207a;    249b-250a;    264b-265c;   268a-269a   35   Locke:   Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxvii, sect 6 220c-d; sect 14 223d-224b; sect
27  227d-228a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiv, 207a-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  2d-3a  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 135a; 226b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  187a-b;  part  1, 255c-256b 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic\, 316b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii, 295b-c 54
Freud:  War and Death, 764b 4d(2) Comparison of separated souls with men
and  angels New Testament: Luke, 20:34-36 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr
hi, ch 18 151b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiii, ch i 360a-b; bk xxi,
ch  10  569d-570b; bk xxii, ch 29, 614b-d 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part i, q 29, a 1, rep 5 162a-163b; q 62, a 5, contrary 321b-322a; q 77,
a  8  406b-407a;  q 89 473a480c; part i-ii, q 4, a 5, rep 6 632c-634b 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 67 81b-87c; q 68, a 6 93c-94c;
part  ii-ii,  q  26,  a  13  519d-520d;  part hi suppl, q 69, a 3, rep 5
887d-889c; q 70 893c-900d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxv [i108]
91b-92c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvii, sect 14 378c-d 36
Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 318b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 192d-193a; 363a-b 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 22c23a

[842a]
(4d.  The  life  of the soul apart from the body.) 4d(i) The need of the
soul  for  its body: the dogma of the body's resurrection for the soul's
perfection 18 Augustine: City of God, bk x, ch 29, 317b318b; bk xiii, ch
16-20  367a-371a;  bk  xiv,  ch  3 378a-d; ch 5 379c-380b; bk xxi, ch 3,
561d-562a; bk xxii, ch 26-27 612c-613c / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 24
630c-631a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  29, a 1, rep 5
162a-163b; q 51, a i, ans 275b276b; q 89, a 1, ans 473b-475a; a 2, rep i
475a-d;  part  i-ii,  q  3, a 3, ans 624b-625a; q 4, aa 5-6 632c-635a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 75 935a-939c; q 80, a i, ans
and rep i 956c957c; a 3, ans and rep 2 958b-959c; q 81, a 4 966d-967d; q
93, a 1, ans 1037d-1039a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi
[94-111]
9b-c;  paradise, xiv [1-66] 126d-127c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 311a-b 4d{4)
The  contamination of the soul by the body: the purification of the soul
by release from the body 7 Plato: Cratylus, 93d; 95c / Phaedo, 223a226c;
230d-234c  /  Republic,  bk  iv,  350c-355c;  bk  vii, 388a-390b; bk ix,
425c-427b;  bk  x,  434c-441a,c  /  Timaeus, 474b-476b / Seventh Letter,
805d-806a  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  9, 115a-c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk vi [724-751] 230b-231a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr i, ch 4,
2b;  ch 910 4c-5b; ch 12 5c-6a; tr ii 6b-10a esp ch 4-5 8a-9a; tr iv, ch
4-16  14a-19b;  tr  vi,  ch 6 24a-c; tr vii, ch 3 26d-27a; tr viii, ch 4
28c29a;  ch  7-8  30c-31c;  ch  ii  33a-d  / Second Ennead, tr ix, ch 15
74d-75b;  ch  17-18 76b77d / Third Ennead, tr i, ch 8-10 81d-82b; tr iv,
ch  2-6 97d-100b passim; tr vi, ch 4-5 108c-109d / Fourth Ennead, tr hi,
ch  32  158c159a; tr iv, ch 17, 166c-d; tr vii, ch 10 198d199c; tr viii,
ch  1  200d-201b;  ch  3-8  202a205a passim / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 1-2
208a209b; ch 10-12 213c-214c; tr hi, ch 17 226a-c / Sixth Ennead, tr iv,
ch  14-16  304a-305c;  tr  vii,  ch  34-36  338b-339d;  tr  ix, ch 8-1 i
358b-360d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiii, ch 16 367a-d; bk xiv, ch 3
378a-d;  ch  5  379c-380b;  bk  xix,  ch  4, 512a-513c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  1,  q  89, a 1, ans 473b-475a 5. Our knowledge of the
soul  and its powers 5a. The soul's knowledge of itself by reflection on
its  acts:  the  soul  as  a  transcendental  or  noumenal  object;  the
paralogisms of rational psychology 7 Plato: Phaedo 220a-251d / Republic,
bk iv, 350c-353d

[842b]
808  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4</(3)  to  55  8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk i, ch i
631a-632d;  bk  11,  ch  4  [415*14-22] 645b-c; bk hi, ch 4 b5-9 ] 661d;
[429^5-29] 662b;
[430*2-9]
662b-c
[4 2 9
Ethics, bk ix, ch 9
[ii7oa28-b i]
9  Aristotle:  424a  Discourses,  bk i, ch 1, 105a-b Meditations, bk xi,
sect i 12 Epictetus: 12 Aurelius: 302a-b 18 Augustine: : City of God, bk
xi, ch 26-27 336d-338a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, 464d-468d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii part 1, q 87
[49-60] 80b-c
25   Montaigne:  Essays,  261c-269b  passim  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  54b-c  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part iv 51b-54b passim, esp
51c-52a  /  Meditations, 69a-71a,c; 11 77d-81d; vi 96b-103d / Objections
and  Replies,  207b;  224b,d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, prop 19-23
382b383c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch i, sect 1-8 121a-123a
esp  sect 7-8 122c-123a; sect 10 123b-d; ch ix, sect 1-2 138b-c; ch xix,
sect  1-2 175b-d; ch xxi, sect 30 185a-c; ch xxiii, sect 15-32 208c-212d
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  i,  div 710 453c-455b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  150c  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, la-b; 32a-c; 55a-56c;
99a101b;  120c-129c  esp  124d-128a;  200c-209d  passim;  218d-223d  esp
219b-d;  234c-240b  esp 234c-235c, 237d-238a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  271a-c;  281c-282d;  285c-d  /  Practical Reason, 291a-293b esp
291a-b, 292a-293b; 294a-b; 307d-310c; 311d-314d; 337ac; 344ac; 348b-349b
/ Judgement, 599d600d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 7 14a-c;
part  1,  par  35  21a-b;  additions, 22 120c-d; 25 121a / Philosophy of
History,  part  1,  257d-258a;  part  hi,  304a-b  53 James: Psychology,
121a-b;   122b-126a;   177a178a;  191a-197a  esp  191a-193a,  196a-197a;
232b-238b  esp  233a-b,  236b  [fn 1] 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams,
383b-c  /  Unconscious, 429c-430c / General Introduction, 451b; 620a 5b.
The  concept of the soul in empirical psychology: experimental knowledge
of   the   soul  53  James:  Psychology,  xiiib-xiva;  la-4a;  118b119b;
126a-127b; 221a-226a esp 221b-223a, 225b-226a; 822b 54 Freud: Origin and
Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  12d-13d  esp 13c-d / Interpretation of
Dreams,  154d-155a  /  Unconscious,  428a-429c;  431b-d;  434c / General
Introduction,  549d550b  /  New Introductory Lectures, 830a-831c passim,
esp 831c

[843a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other  discussions of the notion of a world soul
and of the theory that the heavenly bodies have souls, see Astronomy 8b;
World  ia.  ple  of thought, see Mind ib-id, if. The problem of personal
identity, see One and Many 3^5) ; Same and Other ib. ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed  below are works not included in Great Books ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. Descartes.
The  Principles of Philosophy, part i, 7-8, 11-12, 52-53, 62-65; PART IV
>   196-197   Plutarch.  "Concerning  the  Procreation  of  the  Hobbes.
Concerning  Body,  part  ii,  ch  ii Soul, as Discoursed in Timaeus," in
Moralia  Berkeley.  Three  Dialogues Between Hylas and Augustine. On the
Immortality  of  the  Soul Philonous . The Soul and Its Origin sect v-vi
Aquinas.  On Being and Essence, ch iv . Of the Immortality of the Soul .
Summa  Contra  Gentiles,  bk  ii, ch 56-90; . Of Suicide bk iv, ch 79-95
Kant.   Prolegomena  to  Any  Future  Metaphysic,  par  .  On  Spiritual
Creatures,  a  i i 46-49 . Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, q 19; De
Anima,  aa  1-2,  6-15,  17-21  "•  .  The  Unicity of the Intellect, 11
Epicurus.  Letter  to  Herodotus  Dante.  Convivio  {The Banquet), third
treatise,  Tertullian.  A Treatise on the Soul ch 5-8 Gregory of Nyss a.
On the Soul and the Resurrection

[843b]
Chapter 88: SOUL 809

[844a]
810  THE GREAT IDEAS Proclus. The Elements of Theology, (n) Saadia Gaon.
The  Book^  of Beliefs and Opinions, TREATISE VI-VII Albertus Magnus. De
Natura  et  Origine  Animae  .  On  the  Intellect and the Intelligible,
treatise  i—  ii  Melanchthon.  Commentarius de Anima John of the Cross.
Spiritual  Canticle  . Dar{ Night of the Soul . The Living Flame of Love
Suarez.  Disputationes  Metaphysicae,  xin  (14),  xxxiv (5) Burton. The
Anatomy  of Melancholy, part 1, SECT I, MEMB II, SUB-SECT 5— I I John of
Saint  Thomas.  Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis,
part  iv,  qq  1-12  Marvell.  Dialogue  Between  the  Soul and the Body
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche  de  la  verite,  bk  i,  ch 10 (1, 3) .
Dialogues   on  Metaphysics  and  Religion,  1  Leibnitz.  Discourse  on
Metaphysics, xxxiii-xxxiv . Philosophical Worlds, ch 12 {A New System of
the  Interaction  of Substances), 13 {The Reply of M. Toucher Concerning
the Interaction of Substances), 23 (Considerations on the Doctrines of a
Universal  Spirit),  34  (The  Principles  of Nature and of Grace) . New
Essays  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  bk iv, ch 9 . Monadology, par
19-28 Lamettrie. Histoire naturelle de Vdme

[844b]
Lamettrie. Man a Machine Voltaire. "Soul," in A Philosophical Dictionary
Helvetius.  Traite  de  Vesprit  .  A Treatise on Man Schelling. Von der
Weltseele  Emerson. "The Over-Soul," in Essays, 1 Gratry. Philosophic De
la  connaissance  de Vdme Bain. Mind and Body Clifford. "Body and Mind,"
in  vol  ii,  Lectures  and  Essays  Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk  ii-iii  .
Metaphysics,  bk  hi,  ch  i . Outlines of Psychology Frazer. The Golden
Bough,  part  ii;  part  hi,  ch  7;  PART V, CH l6; PART VII, CH IO~I I
Bradley. Appearance and Reality, bk 1, ch 9-10; bk 11, ch 23 . Collected
Essays,  vol  i (20) Vonier. The Human Soul and Its Relations with Other
Spirits  Driesch. Mind and Body Bergson. Matter and Memory, ch 4 . Mind-
Energy,  ch  2  Whitehead.  Religion in the Maying, ch 3 . Adventures of
Ideas,  ch  2 B. Russell. Religion and Science, ch 5 Jung. Modern Man in
Search  of  a  Soul  . Psychology and Religion Santayana. Scepticism and
Animal  Faith,  ch  24,  26 . The Realm of Matter, ch 8-9 . The Realm of
Spirit, ch 1-3

[845a]
Chapter^:  SPACE INTRODUCTION ON the level of our everyday observations,
space  and  time  seem  to be the obvious, the common, and the connected
properties of physical things. We distinguish things from one another by
their  position  in  space,  as  we mark happenings by the date of their
occurrence.  The where and when of a thing is often used to identify it,
for  it is generally agreed that two bodies cannot occupy the same place
at  the  same time, and that at the same time two distinct places cannot
be  occupied  by  the same body. According to a theologian like Aquinas,
these limitations of space and time apply even to bodiless things, i.e.,
to  angels.  "An angel and a body are said to be in a place," he writes,
"in  quite  a  different  sense."  Whereas  a body is in the place which
contains it, "an angel is said to be in a corporeal place by application
of  the  angelic  power  .  .  .  not as being contained, but as somehow
containing  it." It follows, nevertheless, that at a given time an angel
"is  not  everywhere, nor in several places, but in only one place." Nor
does  the  incorporeality  of angels permit more than one angel to be at
the  same  time  in  the same place. According to the manner in which an
angel  is  at a place—by the action of his power— "there can be only one
angel  in  one  place,"  Aquinas declares, even as there can be only one
body  in one place at a time. Location or position in space, and spatial
relationships  such  as  higher  and  lower,  nearer and farther, are so
familiar  and  intelligible that they provide terms of reference whereby
men speak metaphorically of the moral hierarchy and spiritual distances.
The  whole  of  Dante's  Divine  Comedy, for example, involves a spatial
metaphor  which  sets  forth  the  gradations  of sin and the degrees of
blessedness  in  terms  of  places  beneath the earth and in the heavens
above. As he mounts from sphere to sphere in Para811

[845b]
dise,  Dante  meets  Piccarda  Donati  in  the  Heaven  of the Moon. She
explains to him that this place "which appears so far down," is assigned
to  those who have violated their vows in some particular. Dante wonders
why  she and the others do not "desire a more exalted place, in order to
see  more."  Piccarda  replies:  "Brother,  virtue of charity quiets our
will,  and  makes  us wish only for that which we have, and quickens not
our  thirst  for  aught  else.  ... So that as we are, from seat to seat
throughout  this realm, to all the realm is pleasing, as to the King who
inwills  us  with  His will ; and His will is our peace." This speech of
Piccarda's  makes  it  clear  to  Dante  "how  everywhere  in  Heaven is
Paradise, even if the grace of the Supreme Good does not there rain down
in  one measure." These different measures of beatitude in the diffusion
of  God's  love  and light are represented by the celestial spheres from
the  earth-adjacent  moon to the Crystalline Heaven, the outermost bound
of  the  physical  universe,  of  which Dante says that it "has no other
Where than in the Divine Mind." When the whole expanse of physical space
or the boundary of the universe is considered, Newton no less than Dante
conceives  the  omnipresence  and  eternity of God as that which somehow
encompasses  all  space and time. God "is not duration or space," Newton
writes  at the end of the Principles, "but He endures and is present . .
.  and  by  existing  always and everywhere, He constitutes duration and
space." In the concluding queries of the Optics, Newton appears to think
of  infinite  space  as  the Divine Sensorium in which all things are at
once  present  to God, who "being in all places is more able by His will
to  move  the bodies within His boundless uniform sensorium, and thereby
to form and reform the parts of the Universe, than

[846a]
812  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  we  are by our will to move the parts of our own
bodies."  The physicist does not have to turn theologian, however, to be
confronted  with  the  mysteries  of  space.  Even  without  the  modern
complication of the relation of its three dimensions to time as a fourth
dimension,  the  physical  concept  of  space  raises  difficulties  for
analysis. In the tradition of western thought conflicting definitions of
space  seem  to result from a fundamental difference in the object being
defined—whether  it  is  an inseparable property of bodies, perhaps even
identical with unformed matter, or a reality apart from the bodies which
move  and have their being in it. Sometimes this difference is signified
by  a  difference between the meaning of the word "place" or "extension"
and  the  meaning  of  "space."  It  appears  also to be involved in the
contrast  between  filled  space  and  empty  space  {i.e.,  the void or
vacuum);  and  it bears some relation to Aristotle's distinction between
space  and  place,  and  to  Newton's  distinction  between absolute and
relative  space. The controversial character of space in physical theory
may  be  appreciated  in  terms of these oppositions in meaning, and the
issues which they raise. In addition, physical theory is confronted with
the  problem  of  action-at-a-distance  {i.e.,  action through a void or
through  an  ethereal  medium), the problem of the infinity of space (or
the  question  of  a bounded or unbounded universe), and the distinction
between one physical space and the variety of geometrical spaces. Space,
which  at  first  seems  easily  apprehended by sense and susceptible to
measurement,  becomes  upon  examination  so  subtle  as  to be almost a
vanishing  object. Reason finds it difficult to say precisely what space
is  in  itself,  and  how  it  is related to matter and motion. Even the
familiar space of ordinary sense-perception seems to have its puzzles. A
psychologist  like  James  is concerned with how the different fields of
touch,  vision,  and  hearing  coalesce  to form the single space of our
experience;  and  in  dealing  with  the  process  by  which we learn to
perceive  the  spatial  manifold  of positions and directions, he cannot
avoid the issue of innate as opposed to acquired space-perception.

[846b]
Plato's  theory  of  space  is  set forth in the Timaeus as part of "the
likely  story" which Timaeus tells about the production and constitution
of the universe. The sensible things which come into being and pass away
are, according to him, patterned after the eternal forms. To the eternal
patterns  and  their  copies  in  the  world of change, Timaeus finds it
necessary  to  add  a  third factor in order to account for the physical
elements  and  their  generation. This factor, he says, is "difficult to
explain  and  dimly  seen. ... It is the receptacle, and in a manner the
nurse,  of  all  generation."  In  contrast  to  the  elements which are
perpetually  changing into and out of one another, the receptacle "never
departs  from  her  own nature, and never in any way assumes a form like
that  of  any  of the things which enter into her. . . . The forms which
enter  into  and  go  out  of  her are the likenesses of real existences
modelled  after  their patterns in a wonderful and inexplicable manner."
Timaeus distinguishes the three principles as that which comes to be and
passes  away  in the process of generation, that in which the generation
takes  place,  and that which the generated thing resembles and which is
its  source.  He  likens  the  receptacle  or  "receiving principle to a
mother, the source to a father, and the intermediate nature to a child,"
and  adds  that "if the model is to take every variety of form, then the
matter in which the model is fashioned will not be duly prepared, unless
it is formless and free from the impress of any of those shapes which it
is  hereafter to receive from without. . . . Wherefore, that which is to
receive  all  forms should have no form. . . . The mother and receptacle
of  all  created,  visible, and in any way sensible things, is not to be
termed  earth,  or air, or fire, or water, or any of their compounds, or
any  of  the  elements from which these are derived, but is an invisible
and formless being which receives all things, and in some mysterious way
partakes  of the intelligible, and is most incomprehensible." This third
factor  which  Timaeus sometimes calls "matter" as well as "receptacle,"
he  also  sometimes  calls "space." When matter and space are identified
with each other under the conception of a receptacle for the forms, they
have the characteristics of being absolutely

[847a]
formless  and  imperceptible  to  the  senses.  Nor are they, as are the
forms,  genuinely  intelligible  to  reason. "The third nature, which is
space,  and  is  eternal,"  Timaeus says, "admits not of destruction and
provides  a  home  for aircreated things, and is apprehended without the
help  of  sense, by a kind of spurious reason, and is hardly real; which
we  beholding  as  in  a  dream,  say  of  all existence that it must of
necessity be in some place and occupy a space, but that which is neither
in  heaven  nor  on earth has no existence." The precise meaning of this
conception  of  space  is  difficult to determine. Does it, for example,
find  an  echo  in  Plotinus'  statement  that  "space is a container, a
container  of body; it is the home of such things as consist of isolated
parts"? But he also says that space "in a strict sense is unembodied and
is  not,  itself,  body," and that "body is not a void," but rather that
"the  void  must  be  that  in which body is placed," seeming thereby to
imply  that  space is essentially the void. The statement in the Timaeus
that  "there  can  be  no such thing as a vacuum," may apply only to the
filled  space  of  the created heaven and earth. May it not also be said
that  space  is a void when it is identified with the formless matter of
the receptacle prior to creation ? This raises further questions. Is the
receptacle  space  or  matter?  And  is  the  conception of space in the
Timaeus  rightly  interpreted  by  Aquinas, in commenting on Augustine's
reading  of  "the  earth  was  void and empty" in Genesis 1:2? Augustine
holds  that by the word "earth" in this passage formless matter is to be
understood.  Because  of its formlessness, Aquinas writes, "the earth is
said  to  be void and empty, or invisible and shapeless,'" and, he adds,
"that  is  why  Plato says matter is place." However these questions are
answered, one thing seems to be clear. Space, functioning as receptacle,
can  be  identified only with matter devoid of form, not with the matter
of  threedimensional bodies. The relation of space to matter seems to be
differently  conceived  by Descartes. Space is for him not an antecedent
principle  involved  in  the original production of sensible things, but
rather—as  the  extension of bodies— it is inseparable in existence from
them. It is a property which signifies the essence of

[847b]
;  Chapter  89: SPACE 813 material substances, as thinking signifies the
essence   of  mind  or  soul.  "By  extension,"  Descartes  writes,  "we
understand  whatever  has  length,  breadth,  and  depth,  not inquiring
whether  it be a real body or merely space." Nevertheless, he goes on to
say  that  "by  extension  we  do  not  here  mean anything distinct and
separate  from  the  extended  object  itself."  Descartes considers the
significance  of  three  statements:  "extension  occupies  place,  body
possesses extension, and extension is not body." The first statement, he
thinks,  means  no more than "that which is extended occupies place" The
second  statement  seems  to imply that "the meaning of extension is not
identical  with  that  of  body  yet,"  Descartes  insists,  "we  do not
construct  two distinct ideas in our imagination, one of body, the other
of  extension,  but merely a single image ofextended body ; and from the
point  of  the view of the thing it is exactly as if I had said: body is
extended,  or  better,  the  extended  is  extended."  Finally,  in  the
statement that extension is not body, the word "extension," according to
Descartes,  expresses  a  purely  abstract  conception  nothing which in
itself  has  any sensible reality. So far as its existence is concerned,
the  thing  conceived  as extension cannot be separated from body. Those
who   think   otherwise,   Descartes   asserts,  are  involved  in  "the
contradiction of saying that the same thing is at the same time body and
not  body."  The  point is summarized in his Principles of Philosophy by
the  statement  that  "the  nature of matter or of body in its universal
aspect,  does  not consist in being hard, or heavy, or colored . . . but
solely  in  the fact that it is a substance extended in length, breadth,
and  depth." But, it may be asked, are the dimensions of a body the same
as  space?  Descartes replies that "the same extension which constitutes
the nature of a body constitutes the nature of space . . . not only that
which  is  full  of body, but also of that which is called a vacuum." If
there  were  a vacuum, or empty space, extension might be separated from
body.  This  Descartes  flatly  denies.  "As  regards  a  vacuum  in the
philosophic  sense  of  the  word,  i.e.,  a  space in which there is no
substance,  it  is evident that such cannot exist, because the extension
of space or internal place is not different from that of body." And even
"when we take

[848a]
814  THE  GREAT IDEAS this word vacuum in its ordinary sense," Descartes
goes  on,  "we do not mean a place or space in which there is absolutely
nothing,  but only a place in which there are none of those things which
we  expected to find there." These points made in the Principles confirm
the  identification  of  three-dimensional  space or extension with body
which  appears  in  the  Rules. They seem to be further confirmed in the
Discourse   by   the  reference  to  "a  continuous  body,  or  a  space
indefinitely  extended  in length, height or depth" which is "the object
of   the  geometricians."  Descartes  does  not,  however,  neglect  the
distinction  between  space  as  the extension of body, and place as the
position  one  body occupies in relation to another. According to common
usage,  he  says,  the word "place" signifies that "in virtue of which a
body  is  said  to  be  here  or  there."  He objects to those who, like
Aristotle,  mean  by  "place"  the  surrounding surface of a body. Local
motion  or  change  of  place  is not, he argues, a change in the body's
surrounding  surface, but a change in its relative position. It is place
rather  than  space  which  Aristotle  seeks to define, and place in the
sense  of the circumference of a body rather than its position in space.
He  rejects  the  notion that place is the extension of a magnitude, for
that  would,  he thinks, identify it with matter. Place belongs to body,
not  as  matter  or  a  property  of matter, but as its boundary. It is,
Aristotle  writes,  "the  innermost  motionless  boundary  ... a kind of
surface and, as it were, a vessel, i.e., a container of the thing." This
boundary  is  itself made at the surface of a body by a surrounding body
or  bodies.  "If  a body has another body outside it and containing it,"
Aristotle writes, "it is in place, and if not, not." The consequences of
this  conception  of place are, first, a denial of space in the sense of
void  or  empty place, since place is always "coincident with the thing"
contained or bounded; second, a denial of any infinite place, since that
would   presuppose   an   actually   infinite  body—  to  Aristotle,  an
impossibility;  and third, the conclusion that the whole universe itself
does not have a place, for outside the outermost heaven which bounds the
world, there can be no containing body by which the universe is bounded.

[848b]
a   Aristotle   explains   that   by  "heaven"  he  means  "the  extreme
circumference  of the whole"— whole "composed of all natural perceptible
body."  The  two  words  which  Einstein  uses  when  he  discusses "the
possibility of a 'finite' and yet 'unbounded' universe" seem to apply to
Aristotle's  conception  of  the  world—finite  in  body  or matter, yet
unbounded,  i.e., without anything outside itself to determine or define
its boundary. Aristotle's view of the world seems to be directly opposed
to  that  of  the  ancient  atomists.  For  them, the whole of matter is
discontinuous,  existing in indivisible units or atoms, each of which is
a  plenum—  that is, a unit of matter absolutely continuous without void
in  it—  but  between which there is void or empty space. For Aristotle,
the material world as a whole is a plenum, i.e., continuous body without
void.  Hence  if  by  "space"  is  meant  not  place but void—a bodyless
interval  between  or  within  bodies—  there  is  no  space.  Aristotle
considers  the  arguments  of  Democritus that without void local motion
would  be  impossible,  but  he  thinks "there is no necessity for there
being  a  void  if  there  is movement." Following Democritus, Lucretius
gives   another  reason  for  positing  void  or  empty  space.  As  the
indivisibility  of the simple bodies or atoms consists in their absolute
solidity—  their  lack  of  void—so the divisibility of composite bodies
derives  from  their being constituted by both atoms and void. "Wherever
space  lies  empty,  which we call the void," Lucretius writes, "body is
not  there; moreover wherever body has its station, there is by no means
empty void. Therefore the first bodies are solid and free from void. ...
If  there  were  nothing  which  was  empty and void, the whole would be
solid; unless . . . there were bodies determined, to fill all the places
that  they  held, the whole universe would be but empty void space." For
Aristotle,  in contrast, the divisibility of matter seems to depend upon
its  being  continuous.  On his view, the composite body, constituted by
atoms  separated  from  one  another  by  void, is not divisible, but is
already actually divided; whereas the very thing which Lucretius regards
as  indivisible  because  it  is  continuous—  the voidless atom— is for
Aristotle divisible. To call an atom divisible is, of course,

[849a]
to  deny  that  it  is  atomic  or,  in  the  language  of Lucretius, an
uncuttable  bit  of  "solid single- >> ness. Thus diametrically opposite
theories  ofspace  and place seem to be connected with opposite theories
of  matter  or  body.  Space as the empty interval or void between solid
bodies  goes  along  with atomism, whereas place as "the boundary of the
containing  body at which it is in contact with the contained body" goes
along  with  the  theory  of  the world as a material plenum. The atomic
theory  and  the  plenum  theory  are  opposed  in one other fundamental
respect  concerning  space. According to Aristotle, the impossibility of
an  actually  infinite body makes the largest place finite. According to
Lucretius,  the  infinite  number  of  atoms requires an infinite space.
Asking  whether  "the void that we have discovered, or room or space ...
is  altogether  bounded or spreads out limitless and immeasurably deep,"
Lucretius  answers that "the whole universe is bounded in no direction."
His  argument  seems to be like Aristotle's for an "unbounded universe."
Since there can be "nothing outside the whole sum," he writes, "it lacks
therefore  bound  or  limit."  But where Aristotle's meaning seems to be
that  the  universe  has  no  place,  since  all  places  are inside it,
Lucretius  appears  to  mean  that empty space extends infinitely in all
directions. Modern atomists like Newton and Locke hold a theory of space
which  accords  with the view of matter existing in discontinuous units,
separated  by intervals of emptiness. Newton's distinction, for example,
between  absolute  and  relative  space  acknowledges  a  space  that is
relative  to  bodies,  but also affirms an absolutely independent space,
which has being in separation from matter or bodies. "Absolute space, in
its  own  nature,  without  relation  to  anything external," he writes,
"remains  always  similar  and immovable. Relative space is some movable
dimension  or measure of the absolute spaces, which our senses determine
by  its  position  to  bodies  and which is commonly taken for immovable
space."  As for place in distinction from space, Newton holds that it is
"a  part  of space which a body takes up, and is according to the space,
either absolute or relative." In opposing Aristotle's view, he adds that
place is

[849b]
Chapter  89:  SPACE  815 "not the situation, nor the external surface of
the  body.  For  the  places of equal solids are always equal; but their
surfaces,  by  reason  of  their dissimilar figures, are often unequal."
Locke  also distinguishes between space and place, the one consisting in
"the  relation  of distance between any two bodies or points," the other
in  "the  relation  of  distance  betwixt  any thing and any two or more
points  which  are  considered  as  keeping  the  same distance one with
another  and, so considered, as at rest." With this conception of place,
he  holds in apparent agreement with Aristotle that "we can have no idea
of the place of the universe, though we can of all the parts of it." Yet
he  goes  on  to  say that what lies beyond the universe is "one uniform
space  or  expansion,  wherein the mind finds no variety or marks." This
seems  to  indicate  that Locke's idea of space, like that of Lucretius,
conceives an infinite void. "Those who assert the impossibility of space
existing   without  matter  must,"  he  writes,  "make  body  infinite."
Furthermore,  "those  who  dispute  for  or against a vacuum, do thereby
confess  that  they have distinct ideas of vacuum and plenum, i.e., that
they  have  an  idea of extension void of solidity, though they deny its
existence,  or  else  they dispute about nothing at all. For they who so
much  alter  the signification of words, as to call extension, body, and
consequently  make  the  whole  essence  of  body to be nothing but pure
extension, must talk absurdly whenever they speak of vacuum, since it is
impossible for extension to be without extension: for vacuum, whether we
affirm or deny it, signifies space without body, whose very existence no
one  can deny to be possible who will not make matter infinite, and take
from God a power to annihilate any particle of it." Precisely because he
thinks  no  one  can  affirm  an infinite body, and because he conceives
space  to  be  a void, distinct from bodies, Locke finds it necessary to
affirm  the  infinity  of space. "I would ask," he says, "whether if God
placed  a man at the extremity of corporeal beings, he could not stretch
his  hand  beyond his body. If he could, then he would put his arm where
there  was before space without body." Furthermore, if "it be impossible
for  any  particle  of  matter  to  move  but into empty space, the same
possibility of a body's moving into a void space, be-

[850a]
816  THE  GREAT  IDEAS yond the utmost bounds of body, as well as into a
void  space  interspersed  amongst  bodies, will always remain clear and
evident.  ...  So  that, wherever the mind places itself by any thought,
either  amongst  or remote from all bodies, it can, in this uniform idea
of  space,  no  where  find any bounds, any end; and so must necessarily
conclude  it  ... to be actually infinite." It may seem paradoxical that
pure  space  space  existing  without  matter— is denied by one who also
denies  the  existence of matter. "When I speak of pure or empty space,"
Berkeley  writes, "it is not to be supposed that the word 'space' stands
for  an  idea distinct from or conceivable without body or motion." What
is  meant,  he suggests, is merely that the resistance one body gives to
another  in motion is absent when space is relatively empty. But this is
always relative. "In proportion as the resistance is lesser or greater,"
Berkeley  says,  "the  space  is  more  or  less  pure."  There would be
absolutely  pure  space  only  if  all  bodies  other  than his own were
annihilated. "If that, too, were annihilated," Berkeley concludes, "then
there  could  be  no  motion,  and  consequently  no  Space."  All these
contradictions concerning space enter into Kant's statement of the first
cosmological  antinomy,  in  which  the thesis that the world is limited
with  regard  to  space and the antithesis that the world is infinite in
space  seem  to be equally susceptible to proof—and so to disproof! Both
alternatives  violate  our empirical concepts. If space "is infinite and
unlimited,"  Kant  writes, "it is too large for every possible empirical
concept.  If  it  is finite and limited, you have a perfect right to ask
what  determines that limit. Empty space is not an independent correlate
of  things,  and  cannot  be  a final condition, still less an empirical
condition  forming  part  of  possible  experience— for how can there be
experience  of  what  is  absolutely  void?  But  in order to produce an
absolute totality in an empirical synthesis, it is always requisite that
the unconditioned should be an empirical concept. Thus it follows that a
limited  world  would  be  too  small  for  your concept." Space itself,
however,  is  for  Kant "not an empirical concept which has been derived
from external experience." Rather it "is a necessary

[850b]
representation  a  priori  forming  the  very foundation of all external
intuitions"  and,  as  Kant  explains in his Prolegomena, it establishes
geometry  as  an a priori science. "Space is nothing but the form of all
phenomena  of the external senses; it is the subjective condition of our
sensibility, without which no external intuition is possible for us. . .
.  Nothing which is seen in space is a thing by itself," nor is "space a
form  of  things supposed to belong to them by themselves." The external
objects  which  we perceive in space "are nothing but representations of
our  senses,  the  form  of which is space." So far as the experience of
space  is  concerned, William James seems to take an opposite view. Time
and  space  relations,  he says, "are impressed from without" and "stamp
copies  of  themselves  within."  To the Kantian theory that space is "a
quality  produced  out  of the inward resources of the mind, to envelope
sensations  which,  as given originally, are not spatial," James replies
that  he  can find "no introspective experience of mentally producing or
creating  space."  He proposes two other alternatives: "either (i) there
is no spatial quality of sensation at all, and space is a mere symbol of
succession;  or  (2)  there is an extensive quality given immediately in
certain particular sensations." The second seems to James best suited to
explain  the  development  of  our perceptions of space, and he does not
think  it  inconsistent  with the a priori or non-empirical character of
geometry,  whose  necessary  truths  refer  to  ideal  objects,  not  to
experienced  things  in  physical  space.  The  chapter  on  Mathematics
considers  the  relation  of the postulates of diverse geometries to the
diversity  of  Euclidean  and  non-Euclidean spaces, such as that of the
flat  plane, the surface of a sphere, and the surface of a pseudosphere.
Just  as  different  parallel  postulates  select  different  spaces for
geometrical  construction,  so  a postulate like Euclid's concerning the
equality of all right angles seems to assume a uniformity of space which
permits  geometrical  figures  to  be transposed without alteration. "If
translation  through  space  warped  or magnified forms," James remarks,
"then the relations of equality, etc., would always have to be expressed
with a position-qualification added."

[851a]
Confronted  with  a variety of purely mathematical spaces, the physicist
is concerned with the problem of which geometry is, as Einstein says, in
"correspondence  with  a  'real'  object,"  or  true  of the real world.
"According   to  the  general  theory  of  relativity,  the  geometrical
properties  of  space  are  not  independent," Einstein writes, "but are
determined  by  matter."  It  follows  that  our  assumptions  about the
distribution  of matter determine the character of the world's space. On
the assumption of a world "not inhabited by matter everywhere," in whose
infinite  space "the average density of matter would necessarily be nil"
Einstein  says  we can imagine "a quasi-Euclidean universe" analogous to
"a  surface  which  is  irregularly  curved in its individual parts, but
which  nowhere  departs  appreciably  from  a  plane: something like the
rippled  surface of a lake." But if the "average density of matter . . .
differs  from  zero,  however  small  may  be  that difference, then the
universe   cannot   be  quasi-Euclidean."  It  would  be  spherical  (or
elliptical)  if  the  matter  were  uniformly distributed; but "since in
reality  the  detailed  distribution of matter is not uniform," Einstein
concludes  that "the real universe will deviate in individual parts from
the  spherical,  i.e., the universe will be quasi-spherical. But it will
be  necessarily  finite." The nature of the actual space of the universe
thus  seems  to  be  related to the issue whether physical as opposed to
mathematical space is a void or filled with matter. Defining a vacuum as
"a  space  empty of all bodies known to the senses," Pascal insists that
"there  is as much difference between nothingness and space, as there is
between  empty space and a material body," so that "empty space occupies
the  mean between matter and nothingness." Torricelli's experiments seem
to him complete proof against the disciples of Aristotle, for they upset
the  belief  that  "nature  abhors  a vacuum." Gilbert's observations on
magnetic  influences, Newton's observations on the transmission of light
and  heat  as  well  as  gravitational pull, and Faraday's on electrical
phenomena, all seem to admit the possibility of action at a distance, or
through  a  vacuum.  But  the  question  remains  whether  the so-called
physical vacuum

[851b]
Chapter 89: SPACE 817 is an absolute void or merely empty of "all bodies
known to the senses." "Is not the heat of the warm room conveyed through
the  vacuum"  Newton  asks, "by the vibrations of a much subtiler medium
than  air which after the air was drawn out remained in the vacuum ? And
is not this medium the same with that medium by which light is refracted
and  reflected,  and  by  whose  vibrations  light  communicates heat to
bodies?  .  . . And is not this medium exceedingly more rare and subtile
than  the  air, and exceedingly more elastic and active? And does it not
readily  pervade  all  bodies?  And  is  it  not  (by its elastic force)
expanded  through  all  the heavens?" Huygens also refers to an ethereal
matter  as  the  medium for the propagation of light. "One will see," he
writes,  "that  it  is  not  the same that serves for the propagation of
sound  ...  It  is not the same air, but another kind of matter in which
light  spreads;  since  if the air is removed from the vessel, the light
does  not  cease  to  traverse  it as before." But this ethereal medium,
without  which  bodies  would  act  at  a  distance  upon  one  another—
gravitationally,  magnetically,  electrically— through an absolute void,
seems  to  have contrary properties. It is not only "subtiler" than air,
but,  as  Newton suggests, it may be "denser than quick-silver or gold,"
since  "planets  and  comets, and all gross bodies perform their motions
more  freely,  and with less resistance in this aethereal medium than in
any  fluid, which fills all space adequately without leaving any pores."
And,  in  still  another place, he asks: "What is there in places almost
empty  of  matter,  and  whence is it that the Sun and Planets gravitate
towards one another, without dense matter between them?" Whatever may be
thought of the ether as a physical hypothesis, the problem still remains
whether  action  can  take  place  at  a distance through a void or must
employ  what  Faraday  calls  "physical  lines  of force" through filled
space.  Faraday  thinks the evidences support the latter alternative for
both  electricity  and  magnetism.  He  quotes  a  letter from Newton to
Bentley  to  show  that Newton was "an unhesitating believer in physical
lines  of  gravitating  In  that letter, posthumously discovered, Newton
says: "That gravity should be innate, in-

[852a]
818 THE GREAT IDEAS and becoming position in space id. The exclusiveness
of  bodily  occupation  of  space:  impenetrability  2. Space, void, and
motion  and  relative space (1) The distinction between empty and filled
space  of  void  in atoms (3) The denial of void or vacuum in favor of a
plenum phenomena of gravitation, radiation, and electricity tions lax 4.
The  knowledge of space and figures the a priori foundations of geometry
\b.  The  controversy  concerning  innate  and acquired space-perception
perspective and spatial illusions relation to intelligible matter

[852b]
herent  and  essential to matter, so that one body force may be conveyed
from  one to another, is may act upon another at a distance through a to
me  so  great  an  absurdity,  that  I  believe  no  vacuum, without the
mediation  of  anything man who has in philosophical matters a cornelse,
by  and  through  which their action and petent faculty of thinking, can
ever  fall  into it." OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE i. Space, place, and matter
819 1 a. Space or extension as the essence or property of bodies: space,
the  receptacle, lb. Place as the envelope or container of bodies: place
as  a  part of space or as relative ic. The tridimensionality of bodies:
the  indeterminate  dimensions of pure space or prime matter 820 2a. The
role  of  space  or  place in local motion: the theory of proper places;
absolute   ib.   The   issue   of   the  void  or  vacuum  821  (2)  The
indispensability  of void or vacuum for motion and division: the absence
2c.  Space  as  a  medium of physical action: the ether and action-at-a-
distance; the 3. Space, quantity, and relation 822 3c Geometrical space,
its  kinds  and properties: spatial relationships and configura- ^d. The
measurement  of  spaces,  distances, and sizes: trigonometry; the use of
paral40.  Space  as  the  divine sensorium and space as a transcendental
form  of  intuition:  4<r.  The perception of space: differences between
visual,  auditory,  and  tactual space; 6. The spiritual significance of
place, position, and space 824

[853a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283I 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult the Preface. 1. Space, place, and matter la.
Space  or  extension  as  the  essence or property of bodies: space, the
receptacle,  and  becoming  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  455c-458b  8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk i, ch 9
[192*9-14]
268a; bk iv, ch 2 [209^-2 ioan] 288b-d; ch 4
[2iib5-2i2a2] 290c-291a
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr vi, ch 13 114c115b; ch 19 118c-119a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 66, a 1, rep 1 343d-345c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  iv,  270d-271a  31  Descartes:  Rules,  xiv, 29b-32a /
Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a / Meditations, 11, 78c-d / Objections and
Replies, def vii 130c-d; 135d136a; 154a 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 370a 35 Locke
: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 11-27 150d-154d; ch xv, sect
4,  162d163a;  ch xvii, sect 20 172d-173c; bk hi, ch vi, sect 5, 269b-c;
sect 21 273c-d; ch x, sect 6, 293b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 28b-33d

[853b]
Chapter  89: SPACE 819 lb. Place as the envelope or container of bodies:
place  as  a part of space or as relative position in space 8 Aristotle:
Physics,  bk iv, ch 1-5 287a-292c esp ch 4 289d-291c / Heavens, bk i, ch
7
[275b
5-i2]  366d  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr hi, ch 20, 152b-c / Sixth
Ennead,  tr i, ch 14 260b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a
2,  ans and rep 3 35c-36b; q 50, a i, rep 3 269b-270a; q 52 278d-280d; q
53,  a  i,  ans  280d-282a; q 66, a 4, rep 5 348d-349d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 83, a 2, ans and rep 5 976c-978c; a 3, rep
3-4 978c-980d; a 5, ans 981b-982c; q 84, a 2, rep 1 984c-985d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  hi,  172b; part iv, 270d-271c 31 Descartes: Rules, xn,
23c-d;  xm,  26b-c  /  Meditations,  11, 78c-d / Objections and Replies,
228c-229a   33   Pascal:   Vacuum,   375a-376a  34  Newton:  Principles,
definitions, schol, 9a; 10a-lla 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
iv,

[854a]
(1.  Space, place, and matter, lb. Place as the envelope or container of
bodies: place as a part of space or as relative position in space?) sect
2  129c-d:  sect  5 130d-131a; ch xiii, sect 7-10 149d-150d; ch xv, sect
5-8  163b164b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  hi, 434c 42 Kant:
Judgement,  611d-612a  53  James:  Psychology,  139a-140a;  626b \c. The
tridimensionality  of bodies: the indeterminate dimensions of pure space
or  prime matter 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455c-458b 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi,
ch 5
[1 42^0-29]
196b / Physics, bk iv, ch i
[209*5-7] 287d /
Heavens,  bk i, ch i 359a-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6 [ioi6b25-3i] 537b;
ch  13  [1020*7-14] 541b; bk vii, ch 3 [io29an-i9] 551c-d 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic, bk ii, 832c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr iv 50a-57c esp ch
7-9  52a-53b,  ch  15 56c-57a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xii, par 3-4
99d100a;  par  15 102b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2,
contrary  15c-16a;  q  66,  a  i,  rep  1  343d-345c  20  Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 79, a 1, rep 3 951b-953b; q 80, a 5, rep 3
963a-964b;  q  83,  a 2, ans 976c-978c; a 3, rep 1-2 978c-980d; a 5, ans
981b-982c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 269d 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv,
29b-c;  31d  /  Meditations, v, 93b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15,
schol,  360b  33  Pascal: Vacuum, 370a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  iv,  sect  5 130d-131a; ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d; ch xv, sect 1-8
162b-164b passim; ch xvii 167d-174a passim 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge,
sect  117  436a  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 121a-b Id. The
exclusiveness   of   bodily   occupation  of  space:  impenetrability  8
Aristotle: Phvsics, bk iv, ch i
[209*5-7]
287d;  ch  6 [213V12] 293a 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 139d
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a 2, ans 35c-36b; q 52, a 3,
rep  i  280a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 83, aa 2-4
976c-981b; a 5, ans and rep 2 981b-982c; a 6, ans and rep 2 982c-983b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 54b-c; part iv, 271b-c 28 Galileo: Two New
Sciences, first day, 153a; 156d-157b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph
36,  167b;  aph  48,  179d-180a  31 Descartes: Meditations, 11, 78c-d 33
Pascal: Pensees, 512 262a / Vacuum, 370a

[854b]
820 THE GREAT IDEAS \c to 2a 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule hi, 270b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch iv 129b-131a; ch xv, sect ii
165a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  5  338b  45  Faraday  :  Researches in
Electricity,  854c-855a,c  2.  Space,  void,  and motion 2a. The role of
space  or  place  in local motion: the theory of proper places; absolute
and  relative space 7 Plato: Timaeus, 453c; 455c-458b; 460c-d / Laws, bk
x, 762b-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 5
[205*10206*8]
283b-284b; bk iv, ch i
[208^-24]
287a-c; ch 2
[210*2-4] 288d; ch 4
[211*4-6]
290a;
[212*20-28]
291c; ch 5 [212^9-213*4] 292b; ch 8
[214^3-18]
294b;
[215*1-19]
294c-d;  bk  vi  312b,d-325d  passim  / Heavens, bk 1, ch 2 [268bu]-cH 3
[270*13] 359d-361b; ch 7
[274b3o-33] 366a; ch 7
[275b3o]-cH
8
[277^5]
367a-369a; ch 9
[278^2-279*8]
370a-b; bk ii, ch 2 376b-377c; bk hi, ch 5
[304bu-23]395d-396a; ch 6 [305*22-28)3960;
bk  iv,  ch  1  399a-d;  ch  3-5  401c-404d  /  Metaphysics, bk v, ch 13
[1020*25-33] 541c; BK XI, ch 10 [1067*8-33] 595c-596a / Soul, bk i, ch 3
[406*12-29] 635c-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 4
[ii74*29-b
5]  428d  11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832c 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things,  bk  i [988-1007] 13b; [1052-1082] 14a-c; bk ii [184-250] 17b18b
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk i, 10b-llb 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres, bk i, 517b-518a; 519b-520b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
855b;  931b-932a  17  Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr vii, ch 8, 123d124a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 53 280d-284d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 84, a 2, rep 1,4-5 984c-985d; a 3, ans and
rep 2-3 985d-989b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[22-33] 80a; paradise,
i [94-142] 107b-d; iv
[73-87] 110b-c; xxm [40-45] 141d
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a; 61b; part hi, 173a; part iv, 271a-b;
271d  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, HOb-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first day, 162d; 164a-c; third day-fourth day 197a-260a,c esp third day,
197b-d, 200b-c, 203a-b, 205b208c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 35,
163a-d;  aph  36,  166b-c;  aph 45 176a-177c; aph 48, 179d-180d; 181d 34
Newton:  Principles,  definitions-laws of motion 5a-24a esp definitions,
schol  8b13a;  bk  1-11  25a-267a  passim,  esp  bk  i, prop 1-17, schol
32b-50a, prop 32-39 81a-88a

[855a]
2b  to  2c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xiii, sect 7-10
149d-150d;  sect  27, 154c; ch xv, sect 5-8 163b-164b 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect 110-117 434b-436a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 29c-d; 31d-32a;
55c-56a; 84b-c; 135d [fn 2] 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi, 469a-d 2b.
The  issue of the void or vacuum 2b{\) The distinction between empty and
filled space 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch r
[2o8b25-26]
287c; ch 6-9 292c-297c esp ch 7
[2i3b30214*16] 293b-c / Heavens, bk
i, ch 9 [279^218] 370b-c; bk hi, ch 2
[3oi b32-302 a
9]  393b  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [329-369] 5b-c; [418-448]
6b-c;  [503-550]  7b-d 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 20, 152c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  46,  a  1, rep 4 250a-252d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 83, a 2, ans 976c-978c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  prop  15,  schol, 361b-d 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
359b-361a;  363b-365b;  370a;373b-376a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  iv,  sect 2-5 129c-131a; ch xiii, sect 1 1-27 150d154d esp sect
21-27  152d-154d;  ch  xiv,  sect  26  160c-d; ch xv, sect 1-4 162b-163b
passim;  ch  xvii,  sect  4 168b-d; sect 20 172d-173c 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect 116-117 435d-436a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 71b-72a; 84b-c;
135d
[fn 2]; 152c-d
2b(2)  The  indispensability  of void or vacuum for motion and division:
the  absence  of  void  in  atoms  8  Aristotle:  Physics,  bk  iv, ch 6
292c-293b; ch 7
[2i4ai6]-CH
8
[2i6a26]
293d-295d / Heavens, bk 1, ch 7
[275b3o-276^]
367a; bk in, ch 2 [30^32-302*9] 393b; bk iv, ch 2
[3o8b29-3ioai3] 400b-401c
/  Generation  and  a24-b  n]  423d-424b  Corruption, bk 1, ch 8 [325 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [329-397] 5b-6a; [418-448] 6b-c;
[483-550] 7a-d; [9881007] 13b;
[1052-1082]
14a-c; bk vi
[9981041] 93c-94a
20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 84, a 3, rep 2 985d-989b
28  Galileo: Two New Sciences, first day, 138b141d; 151c-153a; 156d-160a
passim  30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 48, 187c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i, prop 15, schol, 361b-d 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 359a-381b / Weight of
Air, 405b-415b 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, prop 6, corol iii-iv 281b /
Optics, bk in, 541b

[855b]
Chapter  89:  SPACE  821  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii,
sect  23  153c-d;  ch  xvii,  sect  4  168b-d  45 Lavoisier: Elements of
Chemistry,  part  i,  9a-b  45 Faraday: Researches in Electricity, 850b,
d855a,c  esp  851a-b  2£(3)  The  denial of void or vacuum in favor of a
plenum  7 Plato: Timaeus, 460c-d; 470d-471c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv,
ch  6-9 292c297c / Heavens, bk i, ch 9 [279 s ! 2-1 8] 370b-c; bk in, ch
2
[30i b32~302a9] 393b; ch 6 [305
a  14-22]  396b-c  10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 6, 188c189c 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i  [370-383] 5c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 46, a 1, rep 4 250a-252d; q 52, a 3, rep 2 280a-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  hi,  172b;  part iv, 269d 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum,   bk  ii,  aph  8  140b;  aph  48,  180a;  187c  31  Descartes:
Meditations, vi, lOOd 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 15, schol, 361b-d
33  Pascal: Vacuum, 376a-b; 379a-380a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
116-117  435d-436a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 71b-72a; 84b-c; 135d [fn 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity, 850b, d855a,c esp 854a-855a,c 2c.
Space  as  a  medium  of  physical  action:  the  ether and action-at-a-
distance;  the  phenomena  of  gravitation, radiation, and electricity 8
Aristotle:  Physics,  bk viii, ch 10 [266*25267*20] 354b-d / Heavens, bk
hi, ch 2
[30i b
16-31] 393a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch 7 [4i8a27]-CH 8
[420^6] 649b-651c; bk
hi,  ch  12  [434^2aio] 667c-668a / Dreams, ch 2 [459*28-34] 703b 435 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [440-448] 6c; bk vi [906-1041] 92b-94a
16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 897b-905a esp 900b901b; 906a-b; 922a-b; 934b;
bk  v,  965a-b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 8, a 1, rep 3
34d-35c  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  ii,  26d-40b  esp  30a32c; 43a-c;
45d-47b;  51a-c;  54d-55c;  bk v, 102d-104b; bk vi, 112d 28 Galileo: Two
New  Sciences,  third  day, 202d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 36,
167b-c;  aph  37  168d-169c;  aph  45 176a-177c; aph 48, 183a-c; 186a 31
Descartes:  Rules,  ix,  15c  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  366a-367a 34 Newton:
Principles,  def  v-viii  6a-8a;  bk 1, prop 69, schol 130b-131a; bk hi,
general

[856a]
(2.  Space,  void, and motion. 2c. Space as a medium of physical action:
the  ether  and  action-at-a-distance;  the  phenomena  of  gravitation,
radiation,  and  electricity.) schol, 371b-372a / Optics, bk hi, 516a-b;
520a-522b  esp  521a-b; 525b-529a; 531b542a passim, esp 531b 34 Huygens:
Light,  ch  i,  553b-560b  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 102-108
432d-434a  passim  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 57, 475d
[fn  2]  36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi, 118b-119a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 8d
[fn  2];  227b  45  Lavoisier:  Elements  of Chemistry,  part  i, 9b-c 45
Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity,  441a-442b; 451a-454a; 463d-465d;
513d-514c;  521a-524a;  528c-532a;  604b-c;  631b-c;  648b-d;  685d686c;
816b,d-819a,c; 819a-d; 824a-b; 832a-c; 840c-842c; 855a,c 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, epilogue ii, 687d; 695c 3. Space, quantity, and relation "ha.
The  finitude  or  infinity of space: the continuity and divisibility of
space 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5*6-23] 9b-c
/ Physics, bk in, ch 5 [205 aio-2o6a8] 283b-284b; bk iv, ch 5 [2i2bn-2i]
292a  /  Heavens, bk i, ch 9 [279 ai2-b4] 370b-d / Metaphysics, bk v, ch
13  [1020*25-33]  541c; bk xi, ch io [1067*833] 595c-596a 11 Archimedes:
Sand-Reckoner  520a-526b  passim  12  Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i
[951-1007] 12d-13b; bk ii
[89-94]
16a-b;
[1048-1063]
28b-c;  bk  vi  [647-652]  89a  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  10b  16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly  Spheres, bk i, 516a-517b 16
Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 882a-886b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 5
324d325c  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 8, a 4, rep 3 37c-38c;
q  46, a i, rep 8 250a-252d; q 52, a 1 278d-279b; q 53, a i, ans and rep
i  280d-282a; a 2, ans and rep i 282a-283b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi suppl, q 84, a 3, contrary 985d-989b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  54b-c; 61b; part ii, 162b; part iv, 271b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
1,  aph 48 HOd111a 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 112b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  121  195a; 205-206 211a / Geometrical Demonstration, 434b-439b
34  Newton:  Principles, definitions, schol, 8b11a / Optics, bk in, 543a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiii, sect 4 149b; sect 21
152d-153b; ch xiv,

[856b]
822  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 3 to 3c sect 26 160c-d; ch xv, sect 1-8 162b-164b
passim;  ch  xvi,  sect  8  167c;  ch xvii 167d174a passim, esp sect 3-4
168b-d,  sect  ii  170c  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 117 436a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  24c-d;  28b-29c; 135a137a,c; 152a-d; 160b-163a esp
162b  /  Judgement,  501a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, epilogue ii,
693c694a   passim   53   James:   Psychology,  631a  54  Freud:  General
Introduction,  562c-d  3b.  The  relation  of  physical and mathematical
space: sensible and ideal space 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch i
[209*5-7]
287d; ch 8
[2i6b2-n] 296a-b / Metaphysics,
bk  xiv,  ch  5 [1092*18-21] 625a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part hi
suppl,  q  83,  a  2, ans 976c-978c; a 3, rep 1-2 978c980d 31 Descartes:
Rules,  xiv  28a-33b  /  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a / Objections and
Replies,  169c-170a  33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  370a;  373a-374a  34  Newton:
Principles,  definitions,  schol  8b13a esp 8b-9a, 12a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch iv, sect 5 130d-131a; ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d;
ch  xv,  sect  1-8  162b-164b  passim 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
110-117 434b-436a; sect 124-128 437d-438d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 24a-26b;
161d-163a   /  Judgement,  574b-575a  53  James:  Psychology,  877b  3c.
Geometrical  space,  its kinds and properties: spatial relationships and
configurations 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5*1-23] 9b-c
/ Heavens, bk i, ch i 359a-c / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 6 [ioi6b25-3i] 537b
11  Euclid: Elements, bk i, definitions, 1-2,5 la; 14 lb; postulates esp
5  2a; common notions, 4 2a; prop 4 4a-b; prop 8 6b-7a; prop 16 10b-lla;
prop  26  16a-17b;  prop  29  18b-19a;  bk  x,  prop i 191b-192a; bk xi,
definitions,   1   301a  11  Archimedes:  Sphere  and  Cylinder,  bk  i,
assumptions  esp  5  404b  / Spirals, 484b / Quadrature of the Parabola,
527b 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 832b-d 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv,
865a-b  17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 13-14 287d-289a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  85,  a 8, rep 2 460b-461b 31 Descartes:
Rules,  xiv  28a-33b  esp  30d-32a  /  Discourse,  part  iv,  52d-53a  /
Meditations,  v,  93a-d;  vi,  96b-d  /  Objections and Replies, 217a-c;
228c-229a

[857a]
3d  to  5 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 5-6 149b-d
35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  sect  123-132 437c-439c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect xii, div 124-125 506a-507a passim ^-— 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  24a  26b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v, 121a-b 53
James:  Psychology,  550b-551b  [fn  1-2];  876b878a  esp  877b  3d. The
measurement  of  spaces,  distances, and sizes: trigonometry; the use of
parallax  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  v,  165a-176a;  bk  ix, 270a-b 16
Copernicus:   Revolutions   of  the  Heavenly  Spheres,  bk  i,  516a-b;
521b-529a;  bk  iv,  705a714b  16  Kepler:  Epitome,  bk  iv, 861a-863b;
868b887a  / Harmonies of the World, 1016b-1018a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk  i,  aph  109,  129b;  bk  11,  aph  39,  170b-c; aph 45 176a-177c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  xiv,  31b-33b  34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, lemma 4
333a337b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  299b-c 53 James: Psychology,
551a-b;  673b  4.  The  knowledge  of space and figures 4a. Space as the
divine  sensorium and space as a transcendental form of intuition: the a
priori  foundations  of  geometry  34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, general
schol,  370a-371a / Optics, bk hi, 529a; 542a-543a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
16a-c;  17d-18d;  23a-26b; 31b-d; 46a-c; 55c-56a; 62a-d; 68a-69c; 86b-c;
87b-c; 94b-95a; 99a-101b; 110a; 131a-c; 135d
[fn 2]; 136c-137c [antithesis]; 153c-155a; 186d187a; 211c-218d esp 211c-212a, 213d-215a
/   Practical   Reason,  307d-308b;  312c-313d  /  judgement,  471  b-c;
551a-553c; 574b-575a 53 James: Psychology, 629a-631a; 874a; 876b878a 4b.
The controversy concerning innate and acquired space-perception 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  23a-24a; 25c-26a; 31d32c / Practical Reason, 307d-308b 53
James:   Psychology,  474a-475a;  627a-635a  esp  628b-631a,  633a-635a;
852b-853a;  860b-861a  4c.  The perception of space: differences between
visual, auditory, and tactual space; perspective and spatial illusions 8
Aristotle:  Sense  and  the  Sensible,  ch  6 b4-i8] 683b-d / Memory and
Reminis-
[445
cence,  ch  2  [452b7~i8]  694b-c  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[308-332]  19a-b;  bk  iv [230-255] 47b-c; [269-291] 47d48a 5 [353-452 ]
48d-50a

[857b]
Chapter  89:  SPACE  823  17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr viii 64c-65c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii, sect 2 149a; sect 5 149b-c
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 42-44 420c-421a 53 James: Psychology,
318b;  400a;  406b; 410a-b; 471b-479a esp 474a-477b; 540a-635a esp 541a,
548b-552a,  560a-575a, 627a-635a 5. The mode of existence of geometrical
objects: their character as abstractions; their relation to intelligible
matter  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  vi, 387b-c; bk vii, 394b-c / Philebus,
636b-c  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk
i, ch 13
[79*6-10]
108c; ch 18
[8i a40-b
5 ] 110b-c / Topics, bk vi, ch 6
[i43b
i 1-33] 197b-c / Physics, bk 11, ch 2
[i93b23-i94an]
270a-c; bk in, ch 5 [204*17-19] 282a-b; bk iv, ch i
[2o8b i9-24] 287b-c
/ Heavens, bk hi, ch i a i-i7] 390b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[987^4-19] 505d; ch 8 [989b29-33] 508a; ch
[299
9
[99i b9-992b i8]
509d-511a; bk hi, ch i b i3-i8] 514a;
[996*13-15]
514c; ch 2
[995
b i2-998a i9] 516b-d; ch 5
[iooi b26]-cH 6
[ioo2b25] 520c-521c; bk vii, ch 2 [io28b i8-28]
551a-b; ch 10 [io35b32-io36a i2] 559b-c; ch
[997
11
[io36b32-io37a
4] 560b-c; bk xi, ch 2
[io6oa36-b i9] 588c-d; ch 3 [io6i a29-b4] 589c;
bk xii, ch 1
[1069*30-37] 598b; bk
xiii,  ch  1-3 607a-610a; ch 6 [1080^3-30] 612c; ch 9 616d-618c; bk xiv,
ch 3 622d-623d passim; ch 5
[1092*18-21]
625a; ch 6
[io93b24-29]
626d  /  Soul,  bk  in,  ch  7  [43i  b  i3-i9] 664b 9 Aristotle: Motion
of Animals,  ch  i  [698*24b i] 233b-c / Ethics, bk vi, ch 8 [1142*16-19]
391b   11   Nicomachus:   Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a-812a  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk x, par 19 76a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
5, a 3, rep 4 25a-d; q ii, a 3, rep 2 49a-c; q 44, a 1, rep 3 238b-239a;
q 85, a i, rep 2 451c453c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q
83,  a  2,  ans 976c-978c; a 3, rep 2 978c-980d 31 Descartes: Rules, xiv
28a-33b  esp  30d-32a  /  Discourse,  part iv, 52d-53a / Meditations, 1,
76b-c;  v,  93a-d;  v-vi,  96a-d  /  Objections  and Replies, 169c-170a;
217a-d;  218c;  228c229a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiii,
sect  5-6 149b-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 19 259c260a; bk iv, ch iv, sect 5-8
324d-325c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 12-16 408a-409d;
sect  12-16 415b-416a; sect 123-128 437c-438d esp sect 125-126 438a-c 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  iv, div 20 458a-b; sect xii, div 122
505c-d;  div  124-125  506a-507a  esp div 125, 507b [fn 1] 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  16a-c;  17d-18d;  24d-25b;  31b-d;  35b-36a; 46a-c; 55c; 62a-d;
68a-69c; 86b-c; 87bc; 91c-d; 94b-95a; 211c-213c;

[858a]
824  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (5. The mode of existence of geometrical objects:
their character as abstractions; their relation to intelligible matter.}
217c-d  /  Practical  Reason,  312c-d  /  Judgement, 551a-552c 53 James:
Psychology, 876b-878a; 880b-881a 6. The spiritual significance of place,
position, and space 7 Plato: Timaeus, 455b-c 8 Aristotle: Heavens, bk i,
ch 3
[2yob i-i2]
361c-d; bk 11, ch 1 375b,d-376a; ch 13 ai5-b i5] 384d-385a 16 Copernicus
: Revolutions of the Heavenly
[293
Spheres,  bk  i,  520b;  526a-528a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-854a;
857b860b;  915b-916a / Harmonies of the World, 1080b-1085b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  20-21 49d-50a CROSS-REFERENCES Infinity 4c;
Matter  ia.  The  role of space or place in local motion, see Change 7a;
Relation 6a.

[858b]
;  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 1, rep 5 14b-15b; q 8, a
1,  rep  3  34d-35c;  q  61,  a  4 316d-317c; q 66, a 3 347b-348d; q 102
523d-527a,c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 84, a 2, rep
5 984c-985d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v
[1-15]
7a; vi [77-87] 9a-b; ix [16-33] 12b-c; purgatory, iv
[1-96]
57c-58c; xvm
[22-33]
80a-b; xx
[i24]-xxi
[72] 84c-85d; paradise,
i
[64-142]
106d-107d; 111
[34-90] 109d-110b;
iv [28-48] Ilia; xxviii 148d-150b; xxx-xxxn 151d156a 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  ii  [850-1009]  129b133a;  bkiii  [523-539] 146b-147a; bkviii
[114130]  234b-235a 33 Pascal: Pensies, 194, 207b; 205-206 211a 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  360d-361d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro,
186c-d  54 Freud: General Introduction, 562c-d For: Other discussions of
the  theory of the receptacle, see Form id(i); Matter i; World 4b. Other
discussions  of extension as a property of bodies, see Being 7K4) ; Form
2d;  Matter  2a.  Other discussions of the doctrine of prime matter, see
Being  70(3)  ;  Change  2a;  Form  2c(3)  Discussions  bearing  on  the
measurement  of space, see Mathematics 5a; Mechanics 3a; Quantity 6b-6c.
Matters  relevant  to space as a transcendental form of intuition and to
the  related  problem  of  the  foundations  of  geometry,  see Form ic;
Mathematics  ic;  Memory  and Imagination 6c(2); Mind ie(i), 4^(3); Time
6c;  and  for other discussions bearing on space-perception, see Quality
2b;  Sense 30(3). The problem of the mode of being which is possessed by
the  objects  of  geometry, see Being 7d(3); Idea 2g; Mathematics 2a-2b;
Matter  ic  The  issue  concerning a void or vacuum, and for the related
problem  of  action-at-a-distance,  see Astronomy 3b; Change 7a; Element
5c;  Mechanics  ^d,  6d(2).  Other  considerations  of  the  infinity or
continuity  of  space,  see  Infinity  3d;  Mathematics 2c; One and Many
33(4); Quantity 2, 5a; and for discussions of astronomical space and the
size  of the universe, see Astronomy 5, 9e; World 6a, 7. The analysis of
geometrical space, spatial relationships and configurations, see Quality
3b; Quantity 3-36(2). The relation of spiritual being or action to place
or  space,  see  Angel 3f; Astronomy 6; God 7g; Immortality 5g; Soul 3e,
4^(3).

[859a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included w^Gruat Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Descartes.  The  Principles of Philosophy, part ii, 4-19, 21
Hobbes. Concerning Body, part ii, ch 7 Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature,
bk  i, part ii Berkeley. An Essay Towards a New Theory of Vision . Siris
Kant.  On  the First Grounds of the Distinction of Regions in Space . De
Mundi  Sensibilis {Inaugural Dissertation) . Metaphysical Foundations of
Natural  Science  W. James. Collected Essays and Reviews, xxi II. Sextus
Empiricus. Against the Physicists, bk ii, ch 1 . Outlines of Pyrrhonism,
bk  hi,  ch  1-20 Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxx (7), xxxix, xl
(7), li-liii Leibnitz. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding, bk 11,
ch  13  .  Correspondence  with  Clarke  D'Alembert. Traite de dynamique
Voltaire. "Space," in A Philosophical Dictionary Whewell. The Philosophy
of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  VOL  I,  BK II, CH 2-6 Riemann. LJber die
Hypothesen  welche  der  Geometrie  zu  Grunde liegen (The Hypotheses of
Geometry)  Hodgson.  Time  and  Space  Helmholtz.  Popular  Lectures  on
Scientific Subjects, 11 Clifford. The Common Sense ofthe Exact Sciences,
ch  2, 4 Lotze. Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 1-2; bk hi, ch 4 Stallo. Concepts
and Theories of Modern Physics, CH 13-15

[859b]
Chapter  89:  SPACE  825 Bradley. Appearance and Reality, bk 1, ch 4; bk
ii,  ch 18 Hilbert. The Foundations of Geometry Mach. Space and Geometry
in  the  Light  of  Physiological,  Psychological  and  Physical Inquiry
Poincare.  Science  and Hypothesis, part ii . The Value of Science, part
i,  ch  3-4  .  Science  and Method, bk ii, ch i Cassirer. Substance and
Function,  part  i,  ch 3; sup iv-v J. W. Young. Lectures on Fundamental
Concepts  of  Algebra and Geometry, lect xvi-xvii Robb. A Theory of Time
and  Space Weyl. Space— Time—Matter S. Alexander. Space, Time, and Deity
Eddington.  Space,  Time, and Gravitation Whitehead. The Organization of
Thought,  ch  8  .  An  Enquiry  Concerning  the  Principles  of Natural
Knowledge,  ch 14 . The Concept of Nature, ch 5-6 Bergson. Time and Free
Will  .  Duree et simultaneity, a~ propos de la theorie d'Einstein, ch 6
Einstein. Relativity: The Special and the General Theory . Sidelights on
Relativity  .  The  Meaning  of  Relativity  G. N. Lewis. The Anatomy of
Science,  essay  ii  Santayana.  The  Realm  of Matter, ch 4 Lenzen. The
Nature  of  Physical  Theory,  part  ii,  ch  ii  Boring.  The  Physical
Dimensions   of  Consciousness,  ch  4  B.  Russell.  An  Essay  on  the
Foundations  of Geometry  .  Principles  of  Mathematics,  ch 44-52 . The
Analysis  of  Matter,  ch 28-29, 32, 36 . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and
Limits, part hi, ch 6; PART IV, ch 6-7

[860a]
IS  man gregarious in the same sense as other animals are? Is he, unlike
other  social  animals,  the only political animal? Does man pattern the
state  after his own nature, or does he, in imitation of the angels, try
to  live up to a "city in the skies"—a model of rationality or a Utopian
illusion?  According  to  the way such questions are answered, different
theories  of  the state develop in the tradition of western thought. But
it is not only the view man takes of his social nature which affects his
view  of  society  or  the  state.  His  conception of the state is also
colored  by  his  understanding  of  man's  place  in  nature and by his
understanding of man's relation to God. On one view the state is ordered
to  the  service  of man; on another, man is thought to be a creature of
the  state,  and  the  state  is  made  God; on still another, man— like
Antigone  in  Sophocles' play—seems to be torn between serving the state
and  serving  God.  If  man  admits  anything  to  be  his  superior, he
acknowledges  his inferiority only to God or to the state. That the idea
of  God  and  the idea of the state compete for maximum attention in the
tradition  of  western thought is a significant and readily intelligible
fact.  That  the word "sovereign," which connotes absolute supremacy has
both  political  and religious significance throws further light on this
rivalry.  It immediately suggests all the issues of church and state, of
the spiritual and the temporal power, of the city of God and the city of
man.  Even without the aura of divinity, the state, in the conception of
many  writers,  assumes  by  comparison  with  the  individual  man  the
proportions  of  the greatest living thing on earth. For Plato it is the
counterpart of the human soul, many times magnified. For Aristotle it is
like  an  organic whole to which the individual belongs, just as his own
arm or leg belongs to

[860b]
Chapter  90: STATE INTRODUCTION him as an organic part. For Hobbes it is
the  body politic— that Leviathan which dwarfs its members. For Rousseau
it  is the corporate person, having a general will more perfect than the
individual  will— infallible, or almost infallible. When to these images
of  the  state  is  added the highest transfiguration— that by which the
state  becomes,  according  to  Hegel,  the image of God on earth or the
embodiment  of  Absolute  Spirit—  the  greatness of the state cannot be
magnified  further. The passages in which these conceptions first appear
are  among the most famous in the literature of the theory of the state.
In  the  Republic, Socrates proposes that "we inquire into the nature of
justice and injustice, first as they appear in the State and secondly in
the  individual, proceeding from the greater to the lesser and comparing
them."  After  the  structure of the state has been examined in terms of
its constituent classes and their functions or relations to one another,
Socrates returns to the individual. We may assume, he says, that "he has
the same three principles in his own soul which are found in the state";
and  in  another place he adds that "there appear to be as many forms of
the  soul  as  there  are  distinct  forms  of the State." Whereas Plato
analogizes  the  social classes in the state with the parts of the soul,
Aristotle compares the state in relation to the individual with the body
in relation to its members. "The state is by nature clearly prior to the
family  and to the individual," Aristotle writes, "since the whole is of
necessity  prior  to  the  part;  for  example,  if  the  whole  body be
destroyed,  there will be no foot or hand, except in an equivocal sense.
.  . . The proof that the state is a creation of nature and prior to the
individual is that the individual, when isolated, is not self-sufficing;
826

[861a]
and  therefore  he  is  like  a  part  in  relation  to  the whole." The
analogical  conception  of the state takes a different turn with Hobbes.
The  state  is a work of art, not a creation of nature. "Nature-ftne Art
whereby  God  hath made and governs the world)," says Hobbes, "is by the
Art  of  man, as in many other things, so in this also, imitated that it
can  make  an  Artificial  Animal." The machines men make— "engines that
move themselves by springs and wheels as doth a watch" seem to Hobbes to
"have  an  artificial  life."  But "Art goes yet further, imitating that
Rational  and  most excellent work of Nature, Man. For by Art is created
that  great  Leviathan called a Commonwealth or State (in Latin Civitas)
which  is  but an Artificial Man; though of greater stature and strength
than  the Natural, for whose protection and defense it was intended; and
in  which  the  Sovereignty  is  an  Artificial Soul, as giving life and
motion  to  the  whole  body." Hobbes also speaks of the multitude being
"united  in  one  Person" as the "generation of that great Leviathan, or
rather  (to  speak  more reverently) of that Mortal God, to which we owe
under  the  Immortal  God, our peace and defence." It is both divine and
human,  for  "that which is compounded of the powers of most men, united
by  consent  in  one  person, natural or civil" is, according to Hobbes,
"the greatest of human powers." Rousseau has a number of different names
for  the  "moral  and  collective  body"  formed  by  the association of
individuals.  "This  public  person,"  he  says, "formerly took the name
city,  and  now  takes that of Republic or body politic, it is called by
its  members  State  when passive, Sovereign when active, and Power when
compared with others like itself." But Rousseau's primary emphasis seems
to  be upon the personality of the State; it is a corporate person, with
moral  qualities and intellectual faculties. He refers repeatedly to the
State  "as  a persona ficta" and as "a moral person whose life is in the
union  of  its members." Many of these comparisons or analogies recur in
Hegel's theory of the state. But for Hegel they are no longer metaphors,
they  are  the  elements  of  a  literal  definition.  "The  state is an
organism," says Hegel. It is the organic whole

[861b]
Chapter  90:  STATE  827  no  part of which can have a separate life. As
"occurs with life in the physical organism," he writes, "life is present
in  every  cell" and "separated from that life, every cell dies. This is
the  same  as the ideality of every single class, power, and Corporation
as  soon  as  they have the impulse to subsist and be independent. It is
with  them  as  with  the  belly  in  the organism. It, too, asserts its
independence,  but at the same time its independence is set aside and it
is  sacrificed and absorbed into the whole." But the state is not merely
a  living  organism.  "To  the  mature  state," says Hegel, "thought and
consciousness  essentially  belong.  ...  As  high  as mind stands above
nature,  so  high  does  the  state  stand above physical life. Man must
therefore venerate the state as the divine on earth, and observe that if
it  is  difficult  to  comprehend  nature,  it  is  infinitely harder to
understand  the  state." In saying this Hegel seems to go beyond analogy
to  the  assertion of a definition. "The march of God in the world, that
is what the state is," he declares. "The basis of the state is the power
of the reason actualizing itself as will. In considering the Idea of the
state,  we  must not have our eyes on particular states or on particular
institutions.  Instead  we  must  consider the Idea, this actual God, by
itself."  To  those  who  object that the state is finite, Hegel replies
that  "to  hold  that  mind  on earth, i.e., the state, is only a finite
mind,  is  a  onesided  view,  since  there  is nothing irrational about
actuality.  Of  course,  a  bad  state is worldly and finite and nothing
else.  But  the rational state is inherently infinite." As simply stated
by Hegel in the Introduction to his Philosophy of History, "the State is
the  Divine  idea as it exists on Earth." The diverse conceptions of the
state  raise  major  issues in political theory concerning the origin of
the  state  and  the  ends  it  serves, in both of which is involved the
problem  of  the  individual's  relation  to  the state. That problem is
touched  on  in  the chapter on Citizen, and wherever the problem of the
common  good  or  the  general  welfare  is discussed. Here the question
whether  the  state  is  made  for man or man for the state, whether the
state  subordinates the individual in every phase of his life or only in
those matters wherein the public welfare

[862a]
828  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  takes  precedence over private interests, serves
critically  to  test the practical significance of different theories of
the  state. Here also questions concerning the relation of the family to
the  state—discussed from the point of view of the domestic community in
the  chapter  on  Family—  throw  light  on the nature and origin of the
political community. The word "community" and its synonym "society" seem
to  be  more inclusive in meaning than "state." The family and the state
are  both  communities—associations  of individuals for a common purpose
and  sharing in a common life. The word "state" is customarily used only
for  the  developed  political  society—whether  a  city-state, a feudal
state,  or  a nation-state; the word "society" usually covers the tribal
community,  the village, or any community which is politically primitive
and has some of the characteristics of a large family. In addition there
are  within  the state, at least in its modern formation, many organized
groups  which deserve the name "society"—economic corporations and other
associations,  religious,  educational,  professional, recreational; and
more  comprehensive  than  any  particular  political  community are the
cities  of God and man which, in Augustine's conception of them, are not
to  be  identified with either the Church or the State. With the rise of
the science of sociology in our time, the idea of society has come to be
regarded as more general than that of state. But in the tradition of the
great  books, particularly those of political theory, the state seems to
be  considered  the  epitome  of  human  society.  All  other  forms  of
association  are, for the most part, discussed only in their relation to
the  state,  either as the antecedents from which the state develops, or
as  the subordinate organizations which it includes, or sometimes, as in
the  case of the church, a distinct but coordinate community. The nature
of  society  in  general  and  the  problem of different types of social
organization  and  development are not treated in the great books except
in  their  bearing  on  the  family, the church, or the state— the three
communities  which  seem  to  be taken as representative or basic. Hence
there is no chapter on society or community as such. What for modern

[862b]
sociology  is  a  unified  subject  matter here divides into a number of
related  yet distinct ideas— the domestic community being treated in the
chapter  on  Family, the religious community in the chapter on Religion,
the  various forms of economic organization in the chapters on Labor and
Wealth.  In  this  chapter, therefore, we shall confine our attention to
the  specifically political community, both in itself and in relation to
these  other communities or social groups. Conceived in political terms,
the problems of the state would seem to be inseparable from the problems
of government. Yet the ideas of state and government may be separated to
the extent that one signifies the political community as a whole and the
other  the  organization  of  its  members according to relationships of
ruler and ruled. Furthermore, the state may in one sense remain the same
while in another it changes with changes in its form of government. Some
writers,   like   Aristotle  and  Hegel,  tend  to  identify  state  and
government. Aristotle, for example, says that "the sameness of the state
consists  chiefly  in  the  sameness  of its constitution." Others, like
Locke  and Rousseau, seem to regard government as part of the state, the
chief  institution  of  a  civil  society  or  political  community, but
definitely  a means for securing the ends for which the state is formed.
For Locke government is primarily the legislative power, for Rousseau it
is "the supreme administration, the legitimate exercise of the executive
power,"  but  for both it is a representative body—an organ of the whole
body  politic.  Insofar  as  the  great  political theorists distinguish
problems  of the external relation of states with one another from those
which  concern  the internal organization of the state, and the relation
of  the  state  to  its own members, they also tend to distinguish state
from  government.  Hegel's  distinction  between  external  and internal
sovereignty,  for  example, conceives the whole community as a sovereign
state  in  relation  to  other  communities and the state as a sovereign
government   in   relation   to  its  own  members.  Such  questions  of
sovereignty, or more generally of the relation of states to one another,
belong to this chapter as well as to the chapter

[863a]
on  War  and  Peace;  but  the theory of government is for the most part
treated  elsewhere—  in the chapters on Government and Constitution, and
in  all the chapters dealing with the special forms of government. Still
other  problems of government, which have a bearing on the nature of the
state,  its  powers,  and  its limits, are dealt with in the chapters on
Justice  and  Law.  That  it  is  somehow  natural  for men to associate
politically  is  generally  affirmed,  even  by those who also think the
state is artificial or conventional. No one takes either of the possible
extreme  positions:  that the state as a purely voluntary association is
without  any  basis at all in man's nature and needs; or that the state,
like the bee hive and the ant mound, is purely a production of instinct.
Saying  that "man is by nature a political animal," Aristotle goes on to
remark  that  "man  is  more  of  a  political animal than bees or other
gregarious animals." But the difference Aristotle points out between man
and  other  social  animals  may  make man the only political animal. It
consists in the fact that man, being "the only animal . . . endowed with
the  gift  of  speech," can communicate with his fellows concerning "the
expedient  and  inexpedient,  and  therefore  likewise  the just and the
unjust."  What characterizes human associations, according to Aristotle,
is  that  they  are  built  upon a shared sense of the expedient and the
just.  "Justice," he writes, "is the bond of men in states." Hobbes also
distinguishes between human and animal societies, but seems to interpret
the  distinction  differently "Bees and ants live socia- ' 'and yet have
no  bly  one  with  another,  '  he  says,  ' other direction than their
particular  judgments and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of them can
signify  to  another  what  he thinks expedient for the common benefit."
Inquiring  "why  mankind  cannot  do  the  same"— that is, live sociably
without  government  and  law—Hobbes offers a number of explanations, of
which  the  last  is  that "the agreement of these creatures is natural;
that  of  men is by covenant only, which is artificial; and therefore it
is  no  wonder  if there be somewhat else required (besides covenant) to
make their agreement constant and lasting, which is common power to keep
them in awe

[863b]
Chapter  90:  STATE  829  and  to direct their actions to the common But
though  Hobbes  calls the state artificial because he holds it to be the
product  of  a  contract,  he  does not deny the natural necessity which
drives  men  to  the  creation of a commonwealth. Man quits the state of
nature,  which  is  a  "war  of every man against every man," to achieve
self-preservation,  or at least to enjoy the security of civil peace and
the freedom from fear of violence. As natural as it may be for men to be
"in that condition which is called war" when "they live without a common
power  to  keep  them  all  in awe," it is equally natural, according to
Hobbes,  for  men to seek peace. "The passions that incline men to peace
are  fear of death, desire of such things as are necessary to commodious
living;  and  a  hope  by  their  industry  to  obtain  them. And reason
suggesteth  convenient articles of peace, upon which men may be drawn to
agreement."  The  commonwealth  is therefore natural, to the extent that
man's  needs and passions require it and man's reason recognizes certain
natural  laws  for constructing The state is naturally necessary, not as
the   effect  of  instinctive  determinations,  but  as  the  rationally
determined  means  to  an  end.  If  the  end  the state serves were not
naturally  sought,  or  if there were any other means which reason could
devise   for   accomplishing   that  end,  the  state  would  be  purely
conventional—and dispensable. "The final cause, end, or design of men in
the introduction of that restraint upon themselves (in which we see them
live in commonwealths) is," according to Hobbes, "the sight of their own
preservation  and  of  a  more  contented  life  thereby."  In this main
particular  Aristotle's  account  of the origin of the state seems to be
the  same. Though he does not attribute its formation to a contract, and
does  not  make fear the predominant motive, he does regard the state as
natural  only  because  of its indispensability as a means for achieving
the  ends men naturally seek. The family is natural, Aristotle suggests,
because  it  is  necessary for the perpetuation of the race and "for the
supply  of  men's  everyday wants." When men aim "at something more than
the supply of daily needs, the first society

[864a]
830  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  to  be  formed  is  the  village"—  normally, an
association  of  families.  And  "when  several villages are united in a
single  complete  community,  large  enough  to be nearly or quite self-
sufficing, the state comes into existence, originating in the bare needs
of  life,  and  continuing  in  existence  for  the sake of a good life.
Therefore,  if  the  earlier  forms  of  society  are natural, so is the
state."  The  implication  seems  to  be  that if men were not naturally
impelled  to  seek a better life than the family or the tribal community
can  provide  —in other words, if the family or village satisfied all of
man's  natural needs for society— the larger community, the state, would
be  neither  natural  nor  necessary.  That man is by nature a political
animal  does  not,  therefore,  mean that men have always and everywhere
lived  in  states.  Aristotle  refers  to  the  man who lives apart from
society,  describing  the  natural  outcast  "the  'tribeless,  lawless,
heartless  one'  whom Homer denounces"—as "a lover of war." He conceives
the  state  as  coming  into being subsequent to more primitive forms of
social life, each type of community being successively "established with
a  view  to  some  good,  for mankind always act in order to obtain that
which  they think good." Since he thinks that the state "aims at good in
a  greater  degree  than any other, and at the highest good," he praises
the  man "who first founded the state" as "the greatest of benefactors."
For  Aristotle,  then, there seems to be no inconsistency in saying that
the  state is as natural as the family and also that it is the result of
a  convention,  i.e., a voluntary association ofmen. Nor does there seem
to  be any inconsistency between Hobbes' view that the state is produced
by a "covenant of every man with every man" and his understanding of the
naturalness  of  the  state  in  terms of the impulses which lead men to
enter into this contract. The same double note appears in the account of
the  state's  origin  which  Locke,  Rousseau,  and Kant give. The issue
raised  by  the contract theory thus seems to turn on the interpretation
of  the original convention—whether or not it has legal significance and
what  obligations  or limitations it imposes. Where Hobbes, for example,
interprets the contract as creating, along with the common-

[864b]
wealth,  a  sovereign  person having absolute power, Locke seems to make
majority  rule  the  legal  consequence  of  the  original  compact. God
"designed  man  for  a  sociable creature," according to Locke, "with an
inclination  and  under a necessity to have fellowship with those of his
own  kind."  Yet even what he calls "the first society . . . between man
and  wife,"  Locke  says,  "is made by a voluntary compact." It makes no
difference  to  Locke's  theory  whether  political societies develop by
expansion  from  the  family  (which he takes to be the normal course of
events)  or  result  from a voluntary association of independent men. In
either  case,  political as distinguished from domestic society does not
begin  until  "every  man,  by  consenting  with others to make one body
politic  under one government, puts himself under an obligation to every
one of that society, to submit to the determination of the majority. . .
.  This  is done by barely agreeing to unite into one political society,
which  is  all the compact that is, or needs be, between the individuals
that  enter  into  or make up a commonwealth. And thus that which begins
and  actually  constitutes  any  political  society  is  nothing but the
consent  of  any  number  of free men capable of a majority to unite and
incorporate  into  such a society." If it is "that, and that only, which
did  or  could give beginning to any lawful government in the world," it
seems  to  be equally evident to Locke that "absolute monarchy, which by
some  men  is  counted  the  only  government  in  the  world, is indeed
inconsistent  with  civil  society,  and  so  can  be  no  form of civil
government  at  all."  Though Rousseau says that the most ancient of all
societies,  the  family, is "the only one that is natural," he qualifies
this by adding that it remains natural only so long as the children need
the  family  for their preservation. If the members of the family remain
united   thereafter,   "they   continue  so  no  longer  naturally,  but
voluntarily;   and   the  family  itself  is  then  maintained  only  by
convention."  By  the  same  criterion,  civil  society would seem to be
natural,  at  least on Rousseau's own supposition that "the obstacles in
the  way  of their preservation in the state of nature" are greater than
the power of isolated individuals or families to maintain

[865a]
themselves,  and  so  "the human race would perish unless it changed its
manner  ofexistence."  Rousseau, furthermore, explicitly denies that the
transition  from  a  state  of  nature to astate of civil society can be
treated  as  an  historical  fact.  It  is  an hypothesis "calculated to
explain  the  nature  of things, [rather] than to ascertain their actual
origin."  The social contract, which Rousseau sometimes calls the "first
convention," is, therefore, the legal, not the historical, origin of the
state. As he formulates the compact, "each of us puts his person and all
his  power  in  common  under the supreme direction of the general will,
and, in our corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible
part  of  the whole." Though "all the qualities of the general will" may
"reside  in the majority," so that the general will can be discovered by
a  majority  vote,  unanimity  is  required to create the sovereign body
politic,  with the right as well as the power to compel "whoever refuses
to obey the general will." Rousseau points out that "the law of majority
voting  is  itself  something established by convention, and presupposes
unanimity,  on  one  occasion  at least." To this extent Rousseau agrees
with  Locke  about the juridical significance of the original convention
or  the universal consent which establishes a civil society; and just as
Locke  calls  absolute monarchy inconsistent with the very nature of the
state,  so  Rousseau  uses  the  words  "republic"  and  "body  politic"
interchangeably. "To be legitimate," he writes, "the government must be,
not  one  with the sovereign, but its minister." But Rousseau identifies
government   with   the   executive,  rather  than  primarily  with  the
legislative  as  Locke  does.  He  therefore  denies  that  the original
convention  institutes  government  as  well as the body politic itself—
"the  Sovereign  having  no  force other than the legislative power." In
consequence,  Rousseau  and Locke differ somewhat in their discussion of
the  dissolution  of government as distinguished from the dissolution of
society,  or  the  death of the body politic. Rousseau regards no law as
irrevocable,  "not  excluding  the social compact itself; for if all the
citizens  assembled of one accord to break the compact, it is impossible
to doubt that it would be very legitimately broken."

[865b]
Chapter  90:  STATE  831  According  to Kant, "a state is the union of a
number  of  men  under  juridical  laws"—  the  opposite of the state of
nature,  "in which there is no distributive justice." It is incumbent on
men,  says  Kant, "to accept the principle that it is necessary to leave
the  state  of  nature, in which every one follows his own inclinations,
and to form a union of all those who cannot avoid coming into reciprocal
communication,  and  thus  subject  themselves in common to the external
restraint  of  public compulsory laws." Kant refers to this principle as
the "postulate of public right" which obliges "all men to enter into the
relations  of a civil state of society." The state thus seems to be both
necessary  and  voluntary;  for  though he says that "the act by which a
people  is represented as constituting itself into a state is termed the
original  contract"  yet  he  also  adds  that "this is properly only an
outward  mode  of representing the idea by which the rightfulness of the
process of organizing the constitution may be made conceivable." Against
all  these  notions  of the original contract, Hegel, criticizing Kant's
treatment  of  marriage  under the concept of contract, says that "it is
equally  far  from  the  truth  to ground the nature of the state on the
contractual  relation, whether the state is supposed to be a contract of
all  with all, or of all with the monarch and the government." Contract,
according  to  Hegel, belongs to the sphere of "relationships concerning
private  property  generally."  Hence "the intrusion of this contractual
relation  .  .  . into the relation between the individual and the state
has been productive of the greatest confusion in both constitutional law
and  public  life." A contract, Hegel explains, "springs from a person's
arbitrary  will,  an  origin  which  marriage  too  has  in  common with
contract.  But  the  case is quite different with the state; it does not
lie  with  an  individual's  arbitrary will to separate himself from the
state,  because  we  are  already  citizens  of  the state by birth. The
rational  end  of  man  is  life  in the state, and if there is no state
there, reason at once demands that one be founded. Permission to enter a
state  or leave it must be given by the state; this then is not a matter
which depends on an individual's ar-

[866a]
832  THE  GREAT IDEAS bitrary will and therefore the state does not rest
on  contract,  for  contract  presupposes  arbitrariness. It is false to
maintain  that the foundation of the state is something at the option of
all  its  members.  It  is nearer the truth to say that it is absolutely
necessary  for  every  individual  to be a citizen." Hegel dismisses all
questions  concerning historical origins in general or particular as "no
concern  of  the Idea of the state." In the Idea itself, its antecedents
are  to  be found. The family and civil society are the earlier— logical
—moments  in  the development of the Idea of the State. "Civil society,"
Hegel writes, "is the
[state of] difference which intervenes between
the  family  and  the state, even if its formation follows later in time
than that of the state." The social contract theory applies only to what
he calls "civil society," by which he means the modern conception of the
state  "as  a  unity  which  is  only  a  partnership. . . . Many modern
constitutional  lawyers," Hegel goes on, "have been able to bring within
their  purview  no  theory  of the state but this. In civil society each
member  is  his own end" and, "except by contract with others, he cannot
attain  the  whole  compass  of his ends, and therefore these others are
means  to  the  end  of the particular members." In another place, Hegel
describes  civil society as a system of complete interdependence for the
attainment  of  selfish  ends,  "wherein  the livelihood, happiness, and
legal  status  of  one man is interwoven with the livelihood, happiness,
and  rights  of  all."  In still another, he observes that only when the
state  is  confused  with  civil society, only when "its specific end is
laid  down  as  the  security  and  protection  of property and personal
freedom,"  does  "the  interest  of  the  individuals as such become the
ultimate  end  of their association." Whence "it follows that membership
in  the  state  is  something  optional. But the state's relation to the
individual  is  quite  different  from  this.  Since  the  state is mind
objectified,  it  is  only  as  one  of  its members that the individual
himself  has  objectivity,  genuine individuality, and an ethical life."
The  unity  of the state, unlike that of civil society, is, according to
Hegel,  "an  absolute unmoved end in itself, in which freedom comes into
its supreme right. . . . This final end has

[866b]
supreme  right  against  the  individual,  whose supreme duty is to be a
member  of the state." It does not seem to be an inevitable corollary of
the  social  contract  theory that the state be conceived as serving the
private  interests  of  individuals.  "The  welfare  of the state," Kant
declares,  "is  its own highest good." It is not to be understood merely
as  "the  individual  well-being  and  happiness  of the citizens of the
state;  for— as Rousseau asserts— this end may perhaps be more agreeably
and more desirably attained in the state of nature." Kant and Locke both
affirm  a  social  contract,  but  where  Kant  makes  the safety of the
republic  itself  the highest law (salus reipublicae suprema lex), Locke
makes  it the security of the people (salus populi). "The reason why men
enter into society is the preservation of their property," writes Locke.
The  property  of  the  individual  is insecure in a state of nature; to
avoid  this  insecurity "men unite into societies that they may have the
united  strength  of  the  whole  society  to  secure  and  defend their
properties." When Locke says that the chief end of civil society is "the
preservation  of  property," he does not refer solely to economic goods,
but  to  all  the goods to which he thinks man has a natural right— "his
life,  liberty,  and estate." Men would not quit the state of nature, he
writes,  "were  it  not to preserve their lives, liberties and fortunes,
and  by  stated  rules  of  right and property to secure their peace and
quiet."  In  the light of Locke's conception of "property," his position
resembles  Hobbes'  statement  of  the  end  which men seek in forming a
commonwealth:  "to  live  peaceably  amongst themselves and be protected
against  other  men"  and  to  get  "themselves  out from that miserable
condition  of war" in which life is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and
short."  It  seems  to be in a different sense of property that Rousseau
holds  that  "the  foundation of the social compact is property; and its
first  condition,  that  everyone  should  be maintained in the peaceful
possession  of  what belongs to him." Restricting "property" to economic
possessions,  Rousseau  asks, "Are not all the advantages of society for
the  rich  and  powerful?"  Society,  he  observes, "provides a powerful
protection for the immense possessions of the rich,

[867a]
and  hardly  leaves  the  poor man in quiet possession of the cottage he
builds  with  his own hands." This and Adam Smith's statement that^cjyil
government,  so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is
in  reality  instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or
of  those  who  have  some property against those who have none at all,"
seem  to  anticipate  the  Marxist  view  of the state as the bulwark of
property rights and an instrument of class oppression. If the protection
of  property  and  the  maintenance of economic inequalities is the sole
purpose  of  the state, then the ultimate resolution of the class war in
favor of a classless society will, in the opinion of Marx and Engels, be
accompanied  by  what  they  call  "the  withering away of the state"—an
atrophy  from  loss  of  function.  But even in a classless society, the
state  would  not cease to function if its end were to secure not merely
the  individual's  wealth,  but  his whole well-being. Then, however, we
must  face  another  question—whether the happiness of the individual is
the  end of the state. Plato, for example, seems to answer this question
in  opposite  ways.  In  the Protagoras, it is said that "the desire for
self-preservation  gathered  men  into  cities."  This  is  part  of the
Promethean  legend  of  the origin of civilization. As told by Aeschylus
and  in  a  similar  account  of  early  history by Lucretius— the story
intimates  that  men  contract  to  live together for protection against
violence  and  to  enjoy  a  better life— the fruits of civil society or
civilization.  But  in the Republic, Socrates says that, in constructing
the  ideal  state, the aim is "not the disproportionate happiness of any
one class, but the greatest happiness of the whole." To the objection of
Adeimantus  that the citizens may be miserable in such a state, Socrates
replies  that  we must consider whether "we would look to their greatest
happiness  individually, or whether this principle of happiness does not
rather  reside in the State as a whole." Later Socrates reminds Glaucon,
who  wonders  whether the members of the guardian (or ruling) class will
not  be  unhappy,  that  we are "fashioning the State with a view to the
greatest happiness, not of any particular class, but of the whole."

[867b]
Chapter  90:  STATE 833 Aristotle criticizes Socrates for depriving even
the  guardians of happiness and for saying that "the legislator ought to
make the whole state happy." In his own view, "the whole cannot be happy
unless  most,  or  all,  or  some  of its parts enjoy happiness. In this
respect,  happiness is not like the even principle in numbers, which may
exist  only  in  the whole, but in neither ol the parts." When Aristotle
asserts that "the state exists for the sake of a good life," he seems to
have  the  happiness  of individuals in mind, for he excludes slaves and
brute  animals  from membership in the state on the ground that they can
have  "no share in happiness or in a life of free choice." But Aristotle
also  seems  to give the state preeminence over the individual. "Even if
the  end is the same for a single man and for a state," he writes, "that
of  the  state  seems at all events something greater and more complete,
whether   to  attain  or  to  preserve."  This  does  not  seem  to  him
inconsistent  with  thinking  that  that  "form of government is best in
which  every  man, whoever he is, can act best and live happily." Nor is
Hegel  reluctant  to  embrace  both  horns of the dilemma. Civil society
rather  than the state in its perfect realization seems to be devoted to
the  "attainment  of  selfish  ends,"  such as individual happiness. But
Hegel also says it is "perfectly true" that "the end of the state is the
happiness  of  the  citizens. ... If all is not well with them, if their
subjective aims are not satisfied, if they do not find that the state as
such  is  the means to their satisfaction, then the footing of the state
is itself insecure." The foregoing considerations of the nature, origin,
and  end  of political society enter into the various conceptions of the
ideal  state which appear in the tradition of western thought. They also
have  a  bearing  on the division of social classes in the state, on the
duties of the statesman or prince, and the principles of statecraft— the
art  or  science  of  the ruler. Finally, they have implications for the
relation  of  states  to  one  another  and  for  the different historic
formations   of  the  state.  All  the  modern  writers  who  make  some
distinction  between  the state of nature and the state of civil society
seem to agree that independent or sovereign states in their relation to

[868a]
834  THE  GREAT  IDEAS one another are in a state of nature. Identifying
the  state  of nature with the state of war, Hobbes remarks that "though
there  had  never  been  any  time,  wherein  particular  men  were in a
condition  of  war  one  against  another,  yet  in all times, kings and
persons  of  sovereign  authority"  are  "in  the  state  and posture of
gladiators  .  .  .  which  is  the  posture  of war." Similarly, to the
question,  "Where are or ever were there any men in a state of nature ?"
Locke  replies,  "all  princes and rulers of independent governments all
through  the  world  are in a state of nature." Because "bodies politic"
remain  "in  a  state  of  nature  among  themselves,"  they experience,
according  to  Rousseau,  "all  the  inconveniences  which  had  obliged
individuals  to  forsake it." With the same intent, Montesquieu observes
that  "princes  who  live  not  among themselves under civil law are not
free;  they  are  governed  by  force;  they may continually force or be
forced." In Kant's opinion, "states, viewed as nations in their external
relations  to  one another— like lawless savages—are naturally in a non-
juridical  condition,"  and  he  adds  that "this natural condition is a
state  of war." Similarly, Hegel writes that "since the sovereignty of a
state  is  the  principle of its relations to others, states are to that
extent  in  a  state of nature in relation to each other." On any of the
theories  concerning  the  origin  of  the  state,  it  may be asked why
political  society  cannot  be  enlarged to include all mankind. If, for
example,  in  Aristotle's view, the state is a union of villages, as the
village  is  a  union  of  families,  why may not a further expansion of
political  society  be brought about by a union of states ? The question
is  not  simply  one of geographical limits or extent of population. The
modern  national  state,  though  normally larger than the ancient city-
state, remains an individual state and in the same external relationship
to  other  states.  Even the expansion of a city-state like Rome, at the
greatest extent of its imperial domain, does not exemplify the principle
of  the world-state unless it is proposed that the political unification
of  mankind  be  brought  about by conquest and maintained by despotism.
Though  Aristotle  describes  the  state  as  formed by a combination of
villages, he does

[868b]
a  not  propose  a combination of states to form a larger community. His
reason  may  be  that  the  essence  of  the  state  lies  in  its self-
sufficiency.  Consequently, "the best limit of the population of a state
is  the  largest number which suffices for the purposes of life, and can
be  taken in at a single view"; and the territory need be no larger than
one  which  enables the population to be "most entirely self-sufficing."
The  moderns,  in  contrast,  propose  the  expansion  of  the political
community  by the amalgamation of separate political units. Montesquieu,
for  example, suggests that by entering into a "confederate republic," a
number of small states can obtain the security which none of them has by
itself.  "If  a  republic  be  small,"  he writes, "it is destroyed by a
foreign   force;   if   it  be  large,  it  is  ruined  by  an  internal
imperfection."  A confederate republic, he thinks, "has all the internal
advantages  of  a  republican,  together  with  the  external force of a
monarchical,  government.  .  .  . This form of government," Montesquieu
continues,  "is  a  convention  by  which  several petty states agree to
become  members of a larger one, which they intend to establish. It is a
kind  of  assemblage of societies, that constitute a new one, capable of
increasing  by means of further associations, till they arrive at such a
degree  of  power as to be able to provide for the security of the whole
body."  It  is  not  security  against external aggression, but internal
peace,  which  leads  Rousseau  to propose an association more extensive
than  anything  Montesquieu  seems to have in mind— confederation of all
the  states  of  Europe.  But  he  does not see beyond Europe to all the
states  of  the  world.  He  regards  "the  great  city of the world" as
something  less  than a political society with civil laws, for he speaks
of  it  as  "the  body  politic  whose general will is always the law of
nature."  Nor  are the American Federalists, Hamilton, Madison, and Jay,
able,  at  the  end  of  the  18th  century,  to  envisage the unlimited
extension  of  the  principle  of federal union. They content themselves
with  arguing  for  the  possibility  of  so  extensive  a  union as the
projected  United  States  of  America,  against  those  who quoted "the
observations  of  Montesquieu on the necessity of a contracted territory
for a Republican Government."

[869a]
Before our own day Kant alone seems to contions to either, are discussed
in  the chapter on template the possibility of a world state through War
and   Peace.   Here   it   seems   appropriate  to  federal  union.  The
"cosmopolitical  ideal," he conclude with that vision of the world state
says,  is  "a universal union of states analogous-to which appears early
in  the  tradition  of  the that by which a nation becomes a state." The
postulate  of  reason  which obliges men to quit the state of nature and
form  a  civil  union  applies  to states as well. "The natural state of
nations,  as  well as of individual men," Kant writes, "is a state which
it  is a duty to pass out of, in order to enter into a legal state." But
the  ideal  is  impracticable  in  Kant's  opinion—again  because of the
supposed  limits  of government with respect to extended territories and
populations.  "With  the  too  great extension of such a union of states
over vast regions, any government of it, and consequently the protection
of  its  individual  members,  must  at  last  become  impossible." Kant
therefore  proposes as an alternative a "permanent congress of nations,"
but  one  which, being "a voluntary combination of states . . . would be
dissolvable  at  any time"— a mere league or confederacy, and not such a
federal  union  "as is embodied in the United States of America, founded
upon  a political constitution, and therefore indissoluble." The further
implications  of  Kant's  proposal,  the  alternative  it  replaces, and
Hegel's  objecOUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  1.  The  nature  of human society la.
Comparison   of  human  and  animal  gregariousness:  human  and  animal
societies  ib.  Comparison  of  the  family  and  the  state  in origin,
structure,  and  government  \c.  Associations  intermediate between the
family  and the state: the village or tribal community; civil society as
the  stage  between  family  and  state id. Social groups other than the
family  or  the  state: religious, charitable, educational, and economic
organizations;  the  corporation  2. The general theory of the state ia.
Definitions  of  the  state or political community: its form and purpose
(i) Comparison of the state and the soul: the conception of the state as
a  living organism; the body politic (2) The state as a corporate person
(3)  The progressive realization of the state as the process of history:
the state as the divine idea as it exists on earth; the national spirit

[869b]
Chapter  90:  STATE  835 great books. It is conceived not as a worldwide
federal  union,  but  as a universal or unlimited community in which all
men  are citizens together even as they belong to one human brotherhood.
"If  our  intellectual  part  is common," argues the philosophical Roman
Emperor,  Marcus  Aurelius, "the reason also, in respect of which we are
rational  beings,  is  common;  if this is so, common also is the reason
which  commands  us what to do, and what not to do; if this is so, there
is  a common law also; if this is so, we are fellow-citizens; if this is
so, we are members of some political community; if this is so, the world
is in a manner a state." Centuries later Dante, in the first book of his
De Monarchia, recaptures this ancient vision of the world state. Because
"a  plurality of authorities is disorder," authority must be single; and
therefore,  Dante  argues,  "world  government  is necessary ... for the
well-being  of the world." It must be conceived as governing "mankind on
the basis of what all have in common." By that "common law, it leads all
toward peace." PAGE 838 839 840 841

[870a]
836  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  the  sovereignty  of the people happiness of its
members 30. The development of the state from other communities tJ?. The
state as natural or conventional or both state of war in relation to the
state   of   nature   state   government  5.  The  social  structure  or
stratification  of  the  state  and denizens birth: the social hierarchy
ligious minorities

[870b]
PAGE  ib. The state as a part or the whole of society 841 ic. The source
or  principle of the state's sovereignty: the sovereignty of the prince;
id.  The  economic  aspect  of  the  state:  differentiation  of  states
according  to  their economic systems ie. The political structure of the
state:  its  determination by the form of government 842 if. The primacy
of  the  state or the human person: the welfare of the state and the ig.
Church and state: the relation of the city of God to the city of man 843
3. The origin, preservation, and dissolution of the state 844 (1) Man as
by  nature  a  political  animal:  the  human need for civil society (2)
Natural  law  and the formation of the state 845 y. The condition of man
in  the  state  of nature and in the state of civil society: the 3d. The
social  contract  as the origin of civil society or the state: universal
consent y. Love and justice as the bond of men in states: friendship and
patriotism 846 3/". Fear and dependence as the cause of social cohesion:
protection  and security 3£. The identity and continuity of a state: the
dissolution of the body politic or civil society 847 40. The territorial
extent  of  the state: its importance relative to different forms of 4^.
The  influence  of  climate  and geography on political institutions and
political   economy  4<r.  The  size,  diversity,  and  distribution  of
populations:  the  causes  and effects of their increase or decrease 848
50.  The  political  distinction between ruling and subject classes, and
between  citizens  5#. The family as a member of the state: its autonomy
and its subordination 849 5c. The classes or sub-groups arising from the
division  of labor or distinctions of $d. The conflict of classes within
the  state  850  (1)  The  opposition of social groups: the treatment of
national, racial, and re- $e. The classless society 851

[871a]
6. The ideal or best state: the contrast between the ideal state and the
best  that  is  his6a. The political institutions of thcicteaT state 6b.
The  social  and  economic  arrangements  of  the ideal state 7. Factors
affecting the quality of states 852 ja. Wealth and political welfare yb.
The  importance  of  the  arts  and  sciences  in political life yc. The
state's concern with religion and morals: the cultivation of the virtues
8.  The  offices  of  state:  the statesman, king, or prince 854 $a. The
duties  of public office and the responsibilities of office holders: the
relation  of  the statesman or king to the people he represents or rules
Sb.  The  qualities  or virtues necessary for the good statesman or king
Sd.  Statecraft: the art or science of governing; political prudence (1)
The  employment of the military arts (3) The role or function of experts
in  the  service  of  the  state Se. The advantages and disadvantages of
participation in political life 9. The relation of states to one another
858  9a.  Commerce  and  trade  between states: commercial rivalries and
trade  agreements;  free  trade  and  tariffs  gb.  Social  and cultural
barriers between states: the antagonism of diverse customs and ideas gd.
The  sovereignty  of  independent  states:  the  distinction between the
sovereignty  of  the  state  at  home  and abroad; internal and external
sovereignty  (1)  The  military  problem  of  the state: preparation for
conquest  or  defense  (2)  Treaties between states: alliances, leagues,
confederacies,  or  hegemonies 10. Historic formations of the state: the
rise  and  decline of different types of states 10a. The city-state ioc.
The  feudal  state  lod.  The  national  state  iOd\  The federal state:
confederacies and federal unions 1 of. The ideal of a world state

[871b]
Chapter 90: STATE 837 PAGE

[872a]
838 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather than continuously in the work or passage cited. 1 . The nature of
human society 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319c; bk v, 356c; 363b-365d
/ Laws, bk hi, 664a-666c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 12 [n6i bu-i5]
413d-414a / Politics, bk i, ch 1-2 445a-446d; bk 11, ch 1-2 455b,d-456c;
bk hi, ch i
[i274b32-i275a3]
471b; ch 3
[i276bi-i2]
473b-c; ch 4
[1276^7-35]
473c-d; ch 6
[i278bi5-29]475d-476a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 23 128c-d; bk 11, ch 20, 165a-d 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk ii, sect i 256b, d; bk iv, sect 4 264a; bk v,
sect  16  271c-d; bk vii, sect 13 280c; sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect 34
288a-b;  bk  ix,  sect  9  292b-d; sect 23 293c; bk xi, sect 8 303a-b 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21  161b162d;  bk  xii,  ch  27
359c-360a,c;  bk  xix,  ch  5  513d-514b;  ch  13-17  519a-523a;  ch  21
524a-525b;  ch 24 528b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, a 4
512d-513c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 2 221d-223a;
q  96,  a  4,  ans  233a-d;  q  100, a 2, ans 252b-253a 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, viii
[94148] 118a-c

[872b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand side of thepage. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D)> follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 99a-101a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
20c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  35-37  433b436a 35 Locke:
Toleration,  4c-d  /  Civil  Government, ch vii 42b-46c; ch ix, sect 128
54b-c  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 69a 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy, 369b-370a / Social Contract, bk ii, 395a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  96a;  194a-b;  198d  42  Kant: Science of Right, 402c; 433d-434b;
435c-436b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 460a-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 237a-b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  685d686b  54 Freud: Group
Psychology   664a-696a,c   esp   664b-674a,   677a-678d,  684b-689b  la.
Comparison   of  human  and  animal  gregariousness:  human  and  animal
societies  9  Aristotle:  History  of  Animals,  bk i, ch i b35"488ai 4]
8d-9a; bk ix, ch i
[6o8b26-
[487
37] 134b; ch 2 136a-b; ch 40 149a-153a / Ethics, bk viii, ch 12
[1 162^6-25]
414c  /  Politics, bk 1, ch 2 [1253^-18] 446b-c; bk hi, ch 9 [1280^1-34]
477d-478a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 9 292b-d

[873a]
lb to Id Chapter 90: STATE 839 13 Virgil: Georgics, iv
[149-227]
87a-89b / Aeneid, bk i [418-440] 114b-115a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
54c; part ii, lOOa-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 228b-229a ^_> 26 Shakespeare:
Henry V, act i, sc ii [175-220] 535d-536b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
vii,  sect  78-80  42b-43a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  iv 135a-184a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  i, ld-2a; 2d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
469c-d  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  282a-284a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
304b-310d  esp  308a-d,  310a-d;  321b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
499c-500c;   bk  xv,  634a;  epilogue  ii,  683b-684a  54  Freud:  Group
Psychology,  669a-b;  684d686c  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 791
d792a  lb.  Comparison of the family and the state in origin, structure,
and government 5 Aristophanes: Lysistrata
[486-590]
589a590d  7  Plato:  Crito,  216d-217d  /  Republic,  bk  v, 360d-365d /
Statesman,  581a-c / Laws, bk i, 641a-642b; bk hi, 664a-666c esp 666b-c;
670d-671a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[1 134^-17]
382b-c; bk vi, ch 8
[1 14^28-1 142*11] 390d391a; bk viii, ch 10 [n6ob23]-CH 11 [u6i b io]
413a-d;  ch 12 [n62ai6-i8] 414c / Politics, bk 1, ch 1-2 445a-446d; ch 7
[1255^6-20] 449b; ch 11
[i259a33]-cH
12
[i259b i6] 453d-454a;
bk   11,   ch  2  455d-456c;  ch  5  [i263b30~35]  459a;  bk  hi,  ch  6
[i278b30-i279a2] 476a-b; ch 14
[i285b29-33] 484a
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 36a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 12,
517c-d; ch 14-17 520a-523a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 92, a
1,  rep  2 488d-489d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 3,
rep  3 207a-c; q 105, a 4, rep 5 318b-321a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
67d-68a;   86a;   part  11,  99b-d;  109c-110b;  121a;  155b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning,  34a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch i, sect 2
25c;  ch vi-vii 36a-46c; ch viii, sect 105-112 48c-51b; ch xiv, sect 162
63a;  ch xv 64c65d passim 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 216b; 410a-411a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk i, 3b; bk iv, 13b; bk xvi, 118b-c; bk
xix,  140a-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357a-b  /  Political  Economy,
367a-368c;  377a / Social Contract, bk 1, 387d-388a; bk hi, 411c-d; 414c
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  412c-413b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
82b-83c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 170 60d; par 203
68a-c; par 256-257 79d-80b;

[873b]
par  303 101c-102a; par 349 110d-112a; additions, 47 124a-b; 113 135a-b;
157  142b-c  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 172b-d; part i, 21ia-212c;
246d-247b; part hi, 288c-289d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 308b-d 54 Freud:
Group  Psychology,  664b-d; 686c689a / Civilization and Its Discontents,
781  d782d  lc.  Associations  intermediate  between  the family and the
state:  the  village  or  tribal  community;  civil society as the stage
between  family  and state 6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 132a-b; 154b158d
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 391c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii,
316c-319a  / Laws, bk 1, 641a-b; bk hi, 664a-666c 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk i, ch 2
[i252b io~3o]
445d-446a   14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  9a-d  /  Romulus,  22b  23  Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 85d-86a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch viii, sect 102
48a-b;  sect 105-112 48c-51b; ch x, sect 133 55b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
267a-c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xviii, 126d-134d passim 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 349c-d / Social Contract, bk in, 411c-d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations,  bk  v, 309c-311c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 91b-d;
95b-96c; 412c-413b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 33d-34b; 2 23c- 2 24a 42
Kant:  Science of Right, 434a; 452a-b 43 Mill: Representative Government,
352b-353a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 157 57d; par 172
61a;  par  181-256  63c-80a  esp  par  181 63c-d, par 188 65c-d, par 256
79d-80a;  additions,  20  119d-120b;  109  134c;  116-117 135c-136a; 146
140b-c;  157  142b-c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 172b-d; 194c-195a;
part  i,  237b-c;  245d-247b;  part  ii,  260c-261a;  part hi, 287a-d 49
Darwin:  Descent  of Man,  581a-b  50  Marx:  Capital, 174d-175c 50 Marx-
Engels: Communist Manifesto, 419b
[fn.2]
54  Freud  :  Group Psychology, 686c-687d; 692a-b / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  782c Id. Social groups other than the family or the state:
religious,  charitable,  educational,  and  economic  organizations; the
corporation  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  ii,  56d-57b 14 Plutarch: Numa
Pompilius, 58c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, hi
[97120] HOb-c; xi-xii 122a-125a
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 117b-122b; part in, 198a-d; part iv, 269b

[874a]
840  THE  GREAT IDEAS (1. The nature of human society. Id. Social groups
other  than the family or the state: religious, charitable, educational,
and economic organizations; the corporation.) 35 Locke: Toleration, 4b-c
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part hi, 106a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xx,  149a-c;  bk  xxi, 170d; bk xxui, 199b-200a,c 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy , 369b-370a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 28b-d; 51a56b; bk
v,  343b,d-346b;  357c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 191c-200a esp 191c,
194a-195c, 198d-199a; 299b-304d esp 299c-d; 668d-670b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall, 389b-390b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 442c-d; 444a-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 201 68a; par 229 75b; par 235 76a; par
249-256  78c-80a; par 264 84a; par 288-289 97a-d; par 302-303 101a-102a;
par  308 102c-103a; additions, 151 141b-c; 174 146d-147b / Philosophy of
History,   part  iv,  335a-336c;  340d341c;  342c-d  50  Marx:  Capital,
149c-150a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 423c-d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  v,  198b-203a;  epilogue  11, 685d-686a 54 Freud: Group
Psychology,  670b-c;  674b-676d  2.  The general theory of the state 2a.
Definitions  of the state or political community: its form and purpose 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  i-ii,  301c-319a;  bk  iv, 342a-344a; bk v, 356c;
363b-365d  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  678b-c;  bk  ix,  754a-b; bk xii, 795b-c 9
Aristotle : Ethics, bk i, ch 2 339b-d / Politics, bk 1, ch 1
[1252*1-6] 445a; ch 2 [1252^71253*39] 446a-d; bk
ii, ch i
[i26ob37]-cH 2
[i26i b i5] 455b,d-456c; ch
5
[i263b3o-i264a
10] 459a-b; bk hi, ch i
[i274b32-4o] 471b;
ch 3
[i276a7]-cH
4
[i276b35] 473a-d; ch 6
[1278^5-29]
475d-476a; ch 9
[1280*31i28i a2] 477d-478c; ch
12
[i282b i5-i8] 480c;
bk  vii,  ch 8 532c-533a 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [847-853] 233b-234a 18
Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d; bk iv, ch 4 190d; bk xix,
ch  21-24  524a-528c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 2
206b-207a;  q  96,  a  1  230d-231c;  q  100,  a  2 252b-253a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  intro,  47a-b;  part  i,  71d-73a; 97c-d; part ii, 99a-104d;
116c-d;  148b;  153a 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc 111
[75~  l  37] 108d-109c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 34a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3a;
16c-17a / Civil Govern-

[874b]
2  to  2a{\)  ment,  ch  vii,  sect  87-90  44a-45a; ch viii, sect 95-99
46c-47c;  ch  ix  53c-54d; ch x, sect 133 55b; ch xi 55b-58b passim, esp
sect  136  56c-d; ch xix, sect 217 75a; sect 222 75d-76c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3b-c; bk xi, 69a-c 38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
368d-369a; 370b-c; 374b-c; 380d-381a: 381c-382b / Social Contract, bk i,
391b-393b;  bk ii, 395a-b; 396d-398b; bk hi, 417d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  91b;  96a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  408c-409c;  435a-436c;
438d-439a  43  Federalist:  number 29, 101a; number 41, 132c; number 43,
141d;  number  51,  164c-d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
256258  79d-81c;  par  260  82a-83a;  par  267  84b;  par  270  84d-89c;
additions,  161-162  143a144c  / Philosophy of History, intro, 170c178a;
part   i,   230a-c;  part  iv,  321a  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  780b-d  2a{\)  Comparison  of  the state and the soul: the
conception  of the state as a living organism; the body politic 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  ii-iv,  316a-356a; bk v, 363b-364b; bk viii 401d-416a esp
402b-c  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  669d-670b;  bk  xii,  794b-796d  9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i, ch 5 [1254^4^4] 447d-448a; ch 13 [1260^-20] 454c-d; bk
hi, ch 4 [1277^-13] 474a; bk iv, ch 4 [i290b2i40] 489d-490a;
[129^24-33]
490c; bk vii, ch 8 [i328 a2i-b 5] 532c-d 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 177a-b
/  Agesilaus, 495c-d / Phocion, 605a-b / Agis, 648b,d649b / Aratus, 834d
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk hi, ch 10, 172d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
intro,  47a-b; part ii, 107d; 116c-d; 117b; 122b-124b; 126b-d; 148b-153a
25 Montaigne: Essays, 504c-505d 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc 1
[67167] 352a-353a
28  Harvey:  Motion ofthe Heart, 267a-b 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 407b 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch xix, sect 212 74a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
hi,  112a-115b  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 215b-216b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk x, 61b,d62a 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 368d-369a
/  Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 407a; 418a-c; 419c420a 42 Kant: Judgement,
547b-c  43  Federalist:  number  30, 101b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  269  84d;  par  271 89c; par 278 92c-93a; additions, 157
142b-c;  161  143a-b;  168  145c-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 174d;
188a-b; part i, 222a-c; part hi, 302d-303c; part iv, 321a

[875a]
2a(2) to 2d Chapter 90: STATE 841 2a (2) The state as a corporate person
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  97c-d; part ii, lOOc-lOla; 101d-102c;
104a-b; 117b-120c; 122b-c; 130b-d; 132a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
viii,  sect  9599  46c-47c  38  Rousseau: Political Economy, 368d-369a /
Social Contract, bk i, 392a; 392c-393b; bk ii, 395a-b; 396d-397a; bk hi,
406b,d-409a  passim,  esp  406b,d-407a;  412c; 418ac; 419c-420a 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  452b; 454b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi
55a114a,c;  additions,  191  150a-c 2*(3) The progressive realization of
the  state as the process of history: the state as the divine idea as it
exists on earth; the national spirit 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
HI, par 256-259 79d-82a; par 270 84d-89c; par 340360 110b-114a,c esp par
349  110d-112a;  additions, 19-20 119c-120b; 152 141c-d; 164 144c-145a /
Philosophy  of History, intro, 170c-178a esp 171b, 176d-177a; 180c-182c;
203b-206a,c;  part  i, 230a-231b; 257c-258d; part 11, 266a-267a; 271c-d;
part  hi, 287a288b; part iv, 327d-328a; 333b-c; 351d354a; 357b-c 2b. The
state  as  a  part  or  the  whole  of  society 7 Plato: Republic, bk v,
364c-365d  /  Laws,  bk  xi,  776c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk viii, ch 9
[1160*8-30] 412b-c / Politics, bk vii, ch 8
[1328^-22]
532d-533a; bk viii, ch i [1337*28-30] 542b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
xix,  ch 17 522b523a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 21, a 4,
rep  3  719d-720a,c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, a 4,
ans  233a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q 10, a 10 434c-435c; q 12, a 2 443b-444b 35
Locke:  Toleration,  2d-3c;  7c;  16a-c  / Civil Government, ch xi, sect
138-140  57b-58a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b-d 43 Mill: Liberty,
271c-d;  272d-273d;  302d312a;  320c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right,
additions,  162  143b-144c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  174a-d;
175d-176c;  177b-178a; 182d-183a; part iv, 316a-d; 333b-c 2c. The source
or  principle of the state's sovereignty: the sovereignty of the prince;
the sovereignty of the people Old Testament: Judges, 8:22-23 / 1 Samuel,
8—  (D)  I  Kings,  S/  II  Samuel,  2:4— (D) II Kings, 2:4 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk hi, ch i [i275 a22-b2i] 472a-c; ch 3 [i276a40-b i] 473b; bk
iv, ch 9 b34-39] 494d
[i294

[875b]
14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus,  678b-d  15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i,
197ac  20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 3 207a-c; q 96,
a  6,  ans 235a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 71d-73a; 97c-d; part 11,
100c-105c;  109b-c;  117c-d; 130d; 149d-150b 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  viii,  sect  95-99  46c-47c;  ch  ix, sect 127 54a-b; ch x, sect 132
55a-b; ch xi, sect 135 55d-56b; sect 141 58a-b; ch xiii, sect 149 59b-d;
ch xiv, sect 163 63a-b; ch xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch xvi, sect 179 66d-67a;
ch xvii, sect 198 70d71a; ch xix, sect 243 81d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk i, 3b-c; bk ii, 4b; 7c-d; bk xv, 109c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
323d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  1,  392a-393b; bk ii, 395a-d; 396d-397a;
399b-400c;  bk  hi,  406b,d-409a;  424a-b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
51c-d; lOOd; 241b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 74c-d 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  436c;  437c-d;  439a441d;  445a-c;  448b-d;  450a-b;  451c-d  43
Declaration of Independence : [1-25] la-b;
[43-47] 2a; [109-121] 3a-b
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: preamble lla,c; AMENDMENTS, IX-X 17d 43
Federalist: number 22, 84d-85a; number 33, 108b-c; number 39, 126b-128b;
number  46, 150b-c; number 49, 159c; number 84, 252b-c 43 Mill: Liberty,
267d-269c / Representative Government, 344d; 355b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part hi, par 275 92a-b; par 279 93a-94d; par 320-321 106c-d;
additions,  167  145c  / Philosophy of History, part 11, 272b-273a; part
iv,  355c-d;  365a366b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 680b684a
passim  2d.  The economic aspect of the state: differentiation of states
according  to their economic systems 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
i,  350d351a; 352c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319c; bk hi, 341c-d;
bk  v,  364c-365d / Laws, bk v, 692d697a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch
ii  [1259*23-36]  453c-d;  bk  ii,  ch i [i26ob37-i26i a8] 455b, d; ch 5
458a-460a; ch 6
[i265 a28-b i8]
460c461a; ch 7 461d-463c; ch 8
[1267^0-36]
463c-d;
[i268 ai6-b
4] 464a-b; ch 9
[1270*15b6] 466b-c; bk hi, ch 9 [1280^6-32] 478b-c;
bk v, ch 9
[i309b i4-i3ioa2] 511d-512b; bk
vi, ch 4 522a-523b; ch 8 [i32i b i2-34] 525bc; bk vii, ch 8-10 532c-534d
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  / Solon 64b,d77a,c / Tiberius Gracchus
671b,d-681a,c / Caius Gracchus 681b,d 689a,c

[876a]
842  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (2.  The  general  theory  of the state. 2d. The
economic  aspect  oj  the  state: differentiation of states according to
their economic systems.) 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 94d-95a; part it,
124b-126d;  156c-157a 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, ch
v,  sect  38 33b-c; sect 45 34d-35a; ch vi, sect 72-73 40d-41a; ch viii,
sect  117  52b;  sect  120-121  52d-53b;  ch xi, sect 138-140 57b-58a 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  215b-216b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
iv, 16a17b; bk v, 19a-21d; 23a-25c; 27d-28a; 29b30a; bk vii, 44a-48a; bk
xiv, 105a; bk xv, 109a-b; 110d-112d; bk xx, 147a-d; bk xxxxi, 151b-153d;
bk xxii, 174a-b; 183b-184b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 377b-385a,c /
Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405c-d;  bk  hi, 415b 417c; 421c-d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk hi 163a-181a,c esp 165a-166b, 176a-181a,c; bk iv
182a-300d esp 182a-b, 188a-190b, 193a, 195a, 225d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  21c-22c  43  Federalist:  number 11-13 53b-60a passim; number 21,
79b-80c;  number  30,  101b;  number  35  112a-114c; number 54 170a-172b
passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 299 99c-100b 50 Marx:
Capital,  163a-c;  171d-176a  esp  174c175c; 275c-278a,c passim 50 Marx-
Engels: Communist Manifesto, 416c-d 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures,
882c-884c 2e. The political structure of the state: its determination by
the form of government 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii 401d-416a / Statesman,
598b-604b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch i 445a-b; bk ii, ch 1 455b, d;
bk  hi,  ch 3 473a-c; ch 6 [i278b614] 475d; ch 13 [i283b5~7] 481c; ch 17
486c487a; bk iv, ch 3-4 488d-491d esp ch 4
[290b2I
I29i  b  i3]  489d-490d; ch 11-12 495b497b; bk v, ch 9 [i309b i4-i3ioa2]
511d-512b; bk vii, ch 8 532c-533a / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 4
[i36oai7-36] 600c-d; ch 8 608a-c
15  Tacitus: Annals, bk iv, 72a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, lOla-b;
104d105c;  117b-124b;  138b;  151c-152a; part hi, 228a-b 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch viii, sect 95-99 46c-47c; ch x, sect 132-CH xi, sect 134
55a-d;  ch  xix,  sect 211-212 73d-74b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
i-ii,  2d-4a;  bk  xi,  69d-70a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-d / Social
Contract,  bk  in,  406b,d-409a;  423a-424d  42  Kant: Science of Right,
436b-c; 441b-c; 450a452a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 327b,d-332d

[876b]
2e  to If 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 273274 90c-92a; par
276   92b;  additions,  166  145b-c;  170  145d-146a;  178  147d-148a  /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  173a-175c;  part iv, 364d-365c 2/. The
primacy  of  the state or the human person: the welfare of the state and
the happiness of its members 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c
esp  [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c 5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d esp [162-210]
132c-d  / Ajax [1047-1090] 152a-b / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c 5 Euripides:
Phoenician Maidens
[834-1018]
385c-387b / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d esp
[1255-1275] 436c, [1368-1401] 437c-d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 6c-7a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
ii,  397d398c;  402b-404a;  bk vi, 520a-d 7 Plato: Crito 213a-219a,c esp
216d-219a,c  /  Republic,  bk i, 302c-306a; bk iv, 342a-d; 350b-d; bk v,
364c-365d;  bk  vi,  379d-380b;  bk  vii, 390b-391b; 401a-b / Statesman,
600d601b / Laws, bk hi, 672d-676c; bk v, 692c693a; bk ix, 754a-b; bk xi,
776c; 777d-778b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[io94b8-io]
339c-d; bk v, ch i
[ii29b i5-i8] 377a / Politics, BK
I, CH 2 [1253^9-29] 446c; BK II, CH 5
[i264b i6-25] 459d-460a; bk
hi, ch 4 473c475a; ch 6 475d-476c; ch 12
[i282b i5-i8]
480c; bk vii, ch 1-3 527a-530a; ch 8 532c533a; ch 13 536b-537b; bk viii,
ch  i  [1337  s  28-30]  542b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 19
125b-126c; bk 11, ch 10 148c-150a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect i
268b,  d;  sect  6  269b-d; sect 16 271c-d; sect 22 272b; bk vi, sect 14
274d-275a;  sect  54  279c;  bk  ix,  sect 23 293c 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus
32a-48d   esp   44d-45c  /  Numa  Pompilius,  51c-52b  /  Solon,  71d  /
Demosthenes, 699c-700a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d;
bk  xix,  ch  17 522b-523a; ch 21 524a525a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 60, a 5, ans 313b-314c; q 96, a 4 512d-513c; part 1-11, q 21,
a 3 718d-719c; a 4, rep 3 719d-720a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  90,  a  2 206b-207a; a 3, rep 3 207a-c; q 92, a i, ans and rep
1,3-4  213c-214c;  q  94,  a  2, ans 221d-223a; q 96, a 3, ans and rep 3
232b-233a;  a  4,  ans 233a-d; q 98, a i, ans 239b-240c; q 100, a 2, ans
252b-253a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  93d-94a;  part ii, 104a-b;
113d-115a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 48a-51a passim; 381a388c; 486b-489b 26
Shakespeare: Henry V, act i, sc ii [183-213] 535d-536a

[877a]
2g Chapter 90: STATE 843 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc
hi
[78-134] 109a-c /
Coriolanus, act i, sc i
[67-167] 352a-353a
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71a-76a -~"~~ passim ^-— 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[843-870]  358a-b  35  Locke:  Toleration,  lib;  15d;  16d-17b  / Civil
Government,  ch viii, sect 95-99 46c-47c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  iv, 16c; bk v, 18d-19d; bk xi, 69a-c; bk xii, 92b-c; bk xxiii, 199c;
bk  xxvi,  221c-222a  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 368d-369a; 372a-b;
374a-375b;  376a-b  / Social Contract, bk 1, 391d; 392b-393b; 393d-394d;
bk  ii, 396b-399a; bk hi, 421c-423a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 272d-273b / Science of Right, 438d-439b 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  [1-15]  lab 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
preamble 11a, c; AMENDMENTS, I~X 17a-d 43 Federalist: number 43, 143b-c;
number  45,  147c-148a  43  Mill:  Liberty, 267b,d-274a; 293b-323a,c esp
297a, 322d-323a,c / Representative Government, 337b; 338b-c; 392b-396d /
Utilitarianism,  453a-454a;  460a-461c;  464d-476a,c  passim  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 185 64b-d; par 187 65a-c; par 236
76a-c; par 258, 80c-d; par 260-261 82a-83d; par 270 84d-89c; par 288-289
97a-d;  par  294 98b-d; par 323 107a; par 328 108b-c; par 337 109d-110a;
additions,  47  124a-b;  116-118 135c-136b; 127 137b; 143 139d-140a; 145
140b;  154-156  142a-b;  158  142d;  162 143b-144c; 177 147d; 189 149d /
Philosophy of History, intro, 164b; 166b; 170c-172b; 192c-193a; part ii,
271c-d;  276a;  part  hi,  289b-d; 298c-299a; part iv, 320c-321a;365b-c;
366c-367a;   367d368a  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  429c  51
Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a; bk xi, 505a-511b;
513d-521c  esp  513d-515a; 527b-532a,c esp 527b-528b; bk xii, 537b-538a;
bk xiii, 577b-c; epilogue i, 670d-671c 54 Freud: War and Death, 757b-c /
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  799b-d  2g.  Church and state: the
relation  of  the  city of God to the city of man Old Testament: Judges,
8:22-23  / / Samuel, 8; 10:18-19,24; 12:12-14,17-19; 13— (D) I Kings, 8;
10:18-19,24;  12:12-14,17-19;  13  /  //  Chronicles,  19:11  —  (D)  //
Paralipomenon,  19:11  /  Psalms,  2;  48:1-8; 72:8-11; 87; i27:i-2-(£>)
Psalms,  2;  47:1-9;  71 :8-n ; 86; 126:1-2 / Isaiah, 43:15— (D) Isaias,
43:15 / Daniel, 2:44; 4: 17,25,32— (D) Daniel, 2:44; 4:14,22,29

[877b]
Apocrypha:  Rest  of  Esther,  14:3—  (D)  OT,  Esther, 14:3 / Wisdom of
Solomon,  6:1-4  (D)  OT, Boo{ of Wisdom, 6:2-5 / H Maccabees, 7:30— (D)
OT,  // Machabees, 7:30 New Testament: Matthew, 17:24-27; 22:15-22 — (D)
Matthew,  17:23-26;  22:15-22  / Mar\, 12:13-17 / Luke, 20:21-26 / John,
18:33-37  /  Acts,  5:27-29 / Romans, 13:1-8 / / Corinthians, 15:24-25 /
Ephesians,  2:19  /  /  Timothy, 2:1-3 / Titus, 3:1 / Hebrews, 13:14 / I
Peter,  2:13-17  7  Plato: Laws, bk x, 757d-761b; 769d-771b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk viii, ch 9 [1160*19-29] 412b-c / Politics, bk hi, ch 14
[1285*3-7]
483a-b;
[1285^0-23]
484a;  bk  v,  ch ii 4] 517d; bk vi, ch 7 [1321*35b i] 525a; ch 8 [i322b
i9-29] 526c; bk vii, ch 8
[i3i4b36-i3i5a
[1328^-22]
532d-533a; ch 9
[1329*26-34]
533d;  ch  10 [1330*8-14] 534c; ch 12 [1331*1928] 535d; [1331V7] 536a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 30 138a, c; bk 11, ch 5, 143d-144a; bk
iv, ch 3 224b-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xii
[175-194] 358b-359a;
[829-842] 376a-b
14  Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius,  52d-53a;  57b  /  Themistocles, 92a-c /
Camillus,  114c-116a  /  Fabius,  142d-143a  /  Marcellus,  247c-248b  /
Cleomenes,  659d-660a  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 59d-60c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  15  17a-b  /  City  of  God, bk i, pref-ch 6
129a-132d;  bk iv, ch 33-34 206c-207a,c; bk v, ch 15-16 220d-221b; ch 25
228b-c;  bk xi, ch i 322b,d323a; bk xv-xviii 397b,d-507a,c esp bk xv, ch
1-5 397b,d-400c, bk xvii, ch 1-3 449a451c, bk xviii, ch 1-2 472b,d-473d;
bk  xix, ch 5 513d-514b; ch ii 516d-517b; ch 14 520a-d; ch 17 522b-523a;
ch  19-26  523b529a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, a 4
233a-d; q 100, a 2, ans 252b-253a; part ii-ii, q 10, aa io-ii 434c-436b;
q  ii, a 3 440b-441a; q 12, a 2 443b-444b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
ii
[10-27] 2d;
xxxiv
[1-69]
51b-52a; purgatory, vi
[58151] 61b-62c; xm
[85-96] 72d; xvi
[52-129]
77b-78a; xxxn [ioo]-xxxm
[78] 103c-105a;
paradise,  vi  [i-ni] 113c-114d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xi 16d-17d 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 80d-81a; 82b83a; 83d-84c; part ii, 110b-112c;
151a-c;  155d-156b;  163c-d;  part  hi,  165a-167c; 171c172a; 177c-180a;
187c-188a;  191b;  193c-d;  198a-246a,c;  part iv, 248a-249b; 251c-252d;
266a-c;   273c-274a;   275a-278d   25   Montaigne:   Essays,  306b-d  26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act i, sc hi 5b-6c; act in, sc 1
[1-145] 14b-15d
/ King John 376a-405a,c esp act hi, sc 1 386a-389d, act v, sc 1
[1-24] 399b-c, sc
11 400a-401d / 2nd Henry IV, act i, sc i
[187-215] 470a-b;
act iv, sc 1
[1-96] 487b-488b;
sc 11
[1-42]
489d-490a / Henry V, act i, sc i 533a-d

[878a]
844  THE GREAT IDEAS (2. The general theory of the state. 2g. Church and
state:  the  relation  of  the  city  of  God  to  the  city of man.) 27
Shakespeare:  Henry  VIII  549a-585a,c  esp  act  in, sc ii 568b-573d 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 27c 32 Milton: New Forcers of Conscience
68a-b / Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-b / Paradise Lost, bk xn
[485-551] 329b-331a
/  Areopagitica,  386b-388a  35 Locke: Toleration, 2d-21c esp 2d-3a, 7c,
13a-b,  16b, 20d-21c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 7c-8c; bk v,
27d;  bk  xn,  85c-86a;  bk  xviii, 134c-d; bk xix, 144c-145a; bk xxiii,
196c-197c;  bk xxiv-xxv 200a-214a,c; bk xxvi, 214b, d215a; 218a-219d; bk
xxx,  284d-285c;  bk  xxxi,  298b-308c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 327a-c;
358d-359a / Social Contract, bk ii, 401c-402a; bk iv, 435a439c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk i, 56b-57a; bk iv, 232b; bk v, 343b,d-356d; 357c
40   Gibbon:   Decline   and   Fall,  13b-d;  197a-b;  229c-230a;  233d;
289b,d-294a;  299b-304d passim, esp 299b-d, 303c; 328c-330a,c; 349c351d;
382a-383b;   390c-393d   passim,  esp  392c;  443d-446b  esp  444c-445b;
451d453a;  457b,d-460b  passim;  582c;  611d-612a; 623d-624b; 631d-632a;
642c-643a; 863c
[n68]
41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 147d-148c; 195a; 199c-202d; 204b-207a esp
205d-206b;  212d213d; 214c-215c; 252c-d; 352b-353b: 360b361b; 381d-383c;
417b-418d;  557c-562b  esp  560d-561c;  567c-569d; 582c-589d esp 586a-c,
588b-589d  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  442c-d; 444a-c 43 Articles of
Confederation:  hi  5b  43 Constitution of the U.S.: article vi [591599]
16d;  amendments,  i 17a 43 Federalist: number 52, 165c; number 57, 177b
43 Mill: Liberty, 279a-d; 290c-291a / Representative Government, 341a-c;
437d-438b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 189c-d; 251c; 314c-315b; 445b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 270 84d-89c; additions, 162 143b-144c
/  Philosophy of History, intro, 175c-177b; 192c-d; 205d-206a,c; part i,
216b-217c;  245d-247b;  part  hi,  308b-c;  309d-310c;  311b-d; part iv,
316a-d;  321b-322a;  325d-326b;  331b  d;  333b-c; 336c-337d; 345c-346c;
350b-c;  351b354a;  365b-c  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part ii [10,977-11,034]
267a268b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk ix, 354b-c; 374d-377b; bk x,
435c-436c; bk xiii, 572d; 574a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
28d-32a; bk v, 127b-137c passim

[878b]
2gtolb(\)  3. The origin, preservation, and dissolution of the state 3a.
The  development  of  the  state  from  other  communities  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  391c-d  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  hi, 666a-c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 12 [1162*16-19] 414c / Politics, bk 1, ch
2
[i252b9~i 253
a i] 445d-446b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
19  Aqutnas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 96, a 4 512d-513c 20 Aquinas :
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94,  a  2  221d-223a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  viii  46d-53c  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 410a-b 38
Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk hi, 411c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi, par 181 63c-d; par 258, 80d; par 349 110d-112a / Philosophy of
History, part ii, 260b-261a; part in, 287a-d 3b. The state as natural or
conventional  or both 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a / Laws, bk hi,
663d-666c;  bk x, 760a-761d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 445b-446d;
bk  in,  ch  6  [i278b i5-29] 475d-476a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv,
sect  4 264a; bk vii, sect 13 280c; bk viii, sect 34 288a-b; bk ix, sect
9 292b-d; bk x, sect 6 297a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
95,  a  4,  ans  229b-230c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b; part ii,
lOOa-c; lOla-b; 113c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 462d-463a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop 35-37 433b436a esp prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  304  227b-228a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 14-15
28b-c;  ch  vii,  sect  87-89  44a-d;  ch viii 46c-53c; ch xix, sect 211
73d-74a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  lc-2d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  358b-c  /  Political Economy, 367b / Social Contract, bk i,
387b,d-392a; bk 11, 399b-c; bk hi, 419c-d; 423a-c; 424d 42 Kant: Science
of  Right,  412c-413a;  433c-434c; 435a-436b; 437c-d; 450d-451a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  302d-303a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i, par 75
31d-32b; part hi, par 203 68a-c; par 280 94d-95a; additions, 47 124a-b /
Philosophy  of History,  intro,  164b-c  54  Freud:  Civilization and Its
Discontents, 780b-d 3£(1) Man as by nature a political animal: the human
need  for  civil society 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Republic, bk ii,
316c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 12 [1162*16-25]

[879a]
3>b{2)  to 3d 414c; bk ix, ch 9 [n69b i8-22] 423b / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[i252b27-i253  a  39]  446a-d;  bk  hi,  ch 6 [i278b i5-29] 475d-476a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 23 128c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
ii,  sect  L-256b,d;  bk  iv, sect 4 264a; sect 29 266a; bk vii, sect 13
280c;  sect  55  283b-c;  bk viii, sect 34 288a-b; sect 56 290c; sect 59
290d;  bk  ix,  sect 9 292b-d; sect 23 293c; bk x, sect 6 297a-b; bk xi,
sect 8 303a-b; bk xii, sect 30 310a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xii,
ch  27  359c360a,c;  bk  xix, ch 5 513d-514b; ch 17 522b523a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  96,  a  4  512d-513c  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica.  part  i-ii,  q  94, a 2 221d-223a; q 96, a 4. ans 233a-d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii
[91148] 117d-118c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  84c-86b;  93d-94a; part 11, 99a-100c;
conclusion,  279ac  28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  454a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 18,
schol  429a-d;  prop 35, corol 1-2 433c-d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch
11,  sect  13-15 28a-c; ch vii, sect 77 42b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
159a-163b  esp  160a-b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk i, ld-3a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  330d-331d;  362c-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,
387d-388c;  bk  ii,  397a-b  43  Federalist: number 6, 39a-b; number 10,
50bc;  number  15,  65b-d;  number 17, 69c; NUMBER 34, HOc-d; NUMBER 49,
160a;  NUMBER  55,  174c-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 460a-461c; 469c-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 183 64a; par 188-195 65c-67a;
additions,  47 124a-b / Philosophy of History, part iv, 361c-d 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  310a-d; 321b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c passim 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 684d / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  787a-c;  791b-c 3£(2) Natural law and the formation of the
state  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 86c-87b; 91a-96b; part 11, 99a-d;
131a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35 Locke:
Civil Government, ch i-ix 25a-54d passim, esp ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi, sect
136  56c-d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  i, la-2d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,   329a-334a,c  esp  330a331c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,
433c-434c 43 Declaration of Independence: [1-15] la-b

[879b]
Chapter  90:  STATE  845  43  Federalist:  number  43,  143b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History,  part  iv, 361c-d 3c. The condition of man in the
state  of  nature and in the state of civil society: the state of war in
relation  to the state of nature 7 Plato: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Laws, bk
i, 641a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253*30-39]
446d  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,
ch  12,  517d518c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 96, a 4
512d-513c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 84c-87b; 90b-d; 94b-c; 96a-b;
part  ii,  99a-b;  131ac;  138c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 93b-94a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  20c-d  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37,
schol  2  435b-436a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch i-ix 25a-54d esp ch
11—in  25d-29d, ch ix 53c-54d; ch xi, sect 136-137 56c-57b; ch xii, sect
145-146 58d59a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 2b-3a; bk viii, 52a
38   Rousseau:   Inequality,   329a-334a,c;  342c345c;  354a-b;  355b-c;
362a-366d / Political Economy, 374a-b / Social Contract, bk i, 389d390a;
391b;  393b-c;  bk  ii, 398a-b; 399b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
309a-311c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 86d-87b; 237c-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  222b-c  /  Science  of  Right, 405d-406c; 408c-409c; 433c-434d;
435c-436b;  450d-451a;  452a-d  43  Federalist:  number  51,  164c-d  44
Boswell:/oA^o«,  204d-205b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
187  65a-c;  par  194 66c-d; par 333-334 109b-c / Philosophy of History,
intro,  171c-172b: 199b c; part iv, 317d-318a 3d. The social contract as
the origin of civil society or the state: universal consent as the basis
of  the  constitution  or  government  of  the  state  7  Plato:  Crito,
216d-219a,c / Republic, bk ii, 311b-c / Laws, bk hi, 666b-667d / Seventh
Letter, 807a-b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9 [i2joh'20-22] 466d; bk
iv, ch 9 [i294b34~39] 494d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 4 190d; bk xix, ch 21 524a-525b; ch
24  528b-c  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 3 207a-c; q
97,  a 3 237b-238b; q 105, a 2, ans 309d-316a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 97c-d; part ii, 100c-102c; 109b-c; 113c; 133b; part hi, 200a-b

[880a]
846 THE GREAT IDEAS (3. The origin, preservation, and dissolution of the
state.  3d.  The  social  contract as the origin of civil society or the
state:  universal consent as the basis of the constitution or government
of the state) 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 14-15 28b-c; ch vii, sect 87-CH vm,
sect  122  44a53c; ch x, sect 132 55a-b; ch xi, sect 134 55b-d; sect 141
58a-b;  ch  xv, sect 171 65a-b; ch xvi, sect 175 65d; sect 192 69c-d; ch
xix  73d-81d  passim, esp sect 211 73d-74a, sect 243 81d 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ix, 58b, d60a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 353c-355b;
358b-d  /  Political  Economy,  367b;  370b-c  /  Social  Contract, bk i
387b,d-394d  esp  391b-392a;  bk ii, 400a-c; bk hi, 423a-424d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 403b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 412c-413a; 434b-c;
435a-436c;  437c-d;  450d-452a  43  Declaration of Independence: [1— 15]
la-b  43  Federalist:  number  i,  29a-b; number 22, 84d-85a; number 38,
121b-c;   number   44,   144d-145a   43   Mill:   Liberty,  302d-303a  /
Representative  Government,  327b,d-332d  passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part i, par 75 31d-32b; part hi, par 258, 80d-81b; additions, 47
124a-b;  116  135c-d "be. Love and justice as the bond of men in states:
friendship  and  patriotism  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [332-375] 134a-b 5
Euripides: Suppliants [286-364] 260d-261c / Phoenician Maidens
[528-567] 382c-d;
[9911018] 387a-b
6   Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  225d-226b;  255c-d;  bk  viii,  273d
6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  397d-398c; 402b-404a; bk vi,
513d-514b;  534b-c  7  Plato:  Protagoras,  44a-45a / Symposium, 152b-d;
154a-b  / Republic, bk i, 308b-309b; bk iv, 346a-356a; bk v, 360d-365d /
Laws,  bk  iv,  678d-679a;  bk  v,  692b-c;  694d; bk vi, 701a / Seventh
Letter,  814b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch i [1155*22-28] 406d; ch
9-12 411d-414d passim; bk ix, ch 6 420c-421a / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253*29-39]
446d;  bk 11, ch 4 [1262*2 5-b23] 457b-d; ch 5 1281*2] 477d-478c; bk iv,
ch ii
[i295b i-34]
495c-496a  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect ii 262a-b 14 Plutarch:
Romulus,  20c-21a  /  Lycurgus,  36a-b; 44d-45c / Pelopidas, 238d-239d /
Dion, 784d-785a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 284c-285a

[880b]
d 3e to 3/ 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d; bk iv, ch 4
190d;  bk xix, ch 21 524a525a; ch 23-24, 528a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, xi [13-90] 15b16a; xxxii-xxxiv 47c-52d; purgatory, vi
[58-151] 61b-62c; xv 75b-76d
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  75c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
appendix, x-xvii 448a35 Locke: Civil Government, ch viii, sect 107 49b-d
/  Human  Understanding,  bk i, ch ii, sect 2 104a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  iv,  165b-166a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, xxiia-d; bk v,
18d-19d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 323b-d / Political Economy, 373c-374a;
376a-b  / Social Contract, bk hi, 421c-422a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
4d  43  Federalist:  number  14,  62a-d;  number 17, 69c-70d; number 27,
95c-d;  number  29, lOOa-b; number 46, 150c-151a 43 Mill: Representative
Government.   343a:   424c425b;   428b-c  /  Utilitarianism,  460a-461c;
464d-476a,c passim, esp 469c-d, 473d-474b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  267269  84b-d;  par  289 97b-d; par 325 107d; additions,
160-161  142d-143b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 172b-d; part hi,
300c-301a;  part  iv, 318a; 320c-321a; 334b-c; 365b-c 49 Darwin: Descent
of  Man,  310c-d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 384c-388a,c; bk xi,
474a-b; 475b-476c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 158b-159a 54
Freud: Group Psychology, 672a-678d esp 674a, 678a-c; 685d-686c / Ego and
Id,  707c-d  /  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 780c; 785 d; 791c 3/.
Fear  and  dependence  as  the  cause of social cohesion: protection and
security 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides
[681-710] 88b-c
5 Sophocles: Antigone [162-210] 132c-d / Ajax
[1047-1090] 152a-b
6   Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  402b-  '  404a  7  Plato:
Protagoras,  44a-45b  /  Republic,  bk ii, 311b-c;316c-319a 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  6 [i278b i5~29] 475d-476a; ch 9 [1280*32-1281*2]
477d-478c;  bk  v,  ch  8  [1308*25-30]  510b-c  12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[ioii1027] 74b-c
18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 30 147b-d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch
ix,  15b-c;  ch  xvii,  24a-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 77a; 77c;
84c-86b;  86d-87b;  90b-d; part ii, 99a-101a; 109b-c; 116c-d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a

[881a]
3g  to  4b  Chapter  90:  STATE  847 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil
Government,  ch  ii,  sect  13-15  28a-c;  ch viii, sect 95 46c-d; ch ix
53c-54d;  ch  xi,  sect 136-137 56c-57b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 262a
---—  ~~  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  354c-355a / Political Economy, 370b-c; 374a-375b; 381c-382b
/  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  391b-c; bk ii, 398a-d; bk m,417d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 309a-311c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 91b 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  435c-436b  43  Federalist: number 15, 65b-c;
number  29,  101a; number 51, 163b-c 43 Mill: Representative Government,
422b  /  Utilitarianism,  471a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  261, 83d / Philosophy of History, part ii, 283b-c; part in, 285a-b;
287a-288b;  289b-d;  300c301c;  part  iv,  328b-330b;  342b-d; 344a-c 49
Darwin:  Descent of Man, 321b-c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c  passim  54  Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures, 884a 3g. The
identity  and continuity of a state: the dissolution of the body politic
or  civil  society 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 3 473a-c 15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk  i, 212b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 116c-d; 148c153a;
154b-c;  conclusion, 280c-281a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 464c-465c 35 Locke:
Civil  Government, ch xvi, sect 175 65d; ch xix 73d-81d passim, esp sect
211  73d-74a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  x, 62d 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  374b / Social Contract, bk i, 392d; bk ii, 395b; bk
hi,  407c;  408c;  418a-420a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 450d-451b 43
Declaration  of  Independence:  [41-47] 2a 43 Articles of Confederation:
xii  9b  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  vi  [578582]  16d 43
Federalist: number 43, 142d-143a; number 84, 254b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  hi,  par  269  84d;  par  272,  90b-c; par 347 110b-c;
additions, 161 143a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 175c 4. The physical foundations
of  society: the geographical and biological conditions of the state 4a.
The  territorial  extent  of  the  state:  its  importance  relative  to
different  forms  of  government 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 318c-319a; bk
iv, 343d-344a / Laws, bk v, 691d

[881b]
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch 6 [1265*10-18] 460b-c; bk in, ch 3
473a-c; bk iv, ch 4
[1291*19-21]
490b-c; ch 15
[i299a32-b io]
500a-b;  bk  vi,  ch  4 [1319*20^2] 522d-523a; bk vii, ch 5 530d-531b 14
Plutarch:  Numa Pompilius, 58a-b / Solon, 72d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
58a-b  /  Histories,  bkii, 224d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk hi, ch 10
172d173c  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect 38 33b-c; sect 45
34d-35a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 17a-b; bk viii, 56b-57c;
bk ix, 58b,d-59b; bk xi, 83c-d; bk xvii, 124c-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
323b-c  /  Political Economy, 380a-b / Social Contract, bk i, 394b-c; bk
ii, 403a-404c; bk hi, 411a; 412a-b; 413a-d; 417b-c; 422d-423a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  lb-3c; 8b-lld; 33d-34a,c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
455c-456a 43 Articles of Confederation: ix
[262-274]
7d-8a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article iv, sect 3 16b 43 Federalist:
number i, 30d-31a; number 2, 31c-d; number 7, 41d-42d; number 9, 47c48d;
number  10,  51c-53a; number 13-14 59a-62d passim, esp number 14, 60b-d;
number  28, 97c-98b; number 37, 120b-d; number 43, 140d-141a; number 51,
164d165a;  number  63, 192d-193a; number 84, 253d-254b 43 Mill: Liberty,
273b-c  / Representative Government, 330a-c; 352a-353a; 432b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 296 99a-b / Philosophy of History,
part i, 243c-d; part 11, 273d-274a; part iv, 342c-d 4b. The influence of
climate  and geography on political institutions and political economy 6
Herodotus: History, bk ix, 314a, c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
349b-d;  352c-d;  372c-d 7 Plato: Laws, bk iv, 677a-c; bk v, 696d-697a 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 10 [i27i b30-38] 468a;
[i272a4o-b2] 468d;
[i272b i7~2o] 469a;
bk v, ch 3 [1303^-18] 505a-b; bk vii, ch 5
[i326b26]-cH
7
[i327b32]
530d-532a; ch ii
[i33oa34-b i7] 535a-b
10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a 14 Plutarch: Solon,
72d  / Themistocles, 96b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 224a-b; 295b-296b
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk i, 3c-d; bk vii, 46c-47a; bk xiv
102b,d-108d; bk xv, lilac; bk xvi, 116a-120a; bk xvii-xviii 122a134d; bk
xix, 138b-c; 140c-d; 143d-144b; bk xxi, 153a-154a

[882a]
(4. The physical foundations of society: the geographical and biological
conditions  of  the state. 4b. The influence of climate and geography on
political  institutions and political economy.) 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
325b / Social Contract, bk ii, 404b-c; 405c-d; bk hi, 415b-417c; 422c 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 8b-10b; bk hi, 173b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  83c-d; 87d-91b esp 90c-91 b ; 236c-237a ; 396b-398a passim ;
567a-d  ;  655d-657c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 220b-225a passim, esp
221b-222d,   224b;   338b-c;  341c-343b  passim;  355c-d;  427b-428a  43
Federalist:  number  2,  31c-d; number 5, 38a; number 8, 46a-47a; number
ii,   55b56b;   number  12,  57b-58b;  number  24,  88c89a;  number  25,
89d-90a;NUMBER38,124c-d;   number   41,   133c;   134d-135a   43   Mill:
Representative  Government,  424c-428a  passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part hi, par 247 78a-b / Philosophy of History, intro, 190b201a,c
esp  194b-196a;  part  i,  243d-244c;  248c-249d;  251c-252d;  part  ii,
259d-260a;  261a;  263d-264a;  part  hi, 286b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
323a-b  50  Marx:  Capital,  253b-255a  4c.  The  size,  diversity,  and
distribution of populations: the causes and effects of their increase or
decrease  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 22d-23a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War, bk i, 349b-d; bk ii, 391c-392a; 399b-401b 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv,
343d-344a  /  Laws,  bk  in,  663d-667a; bk v, 691d; 693a-c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  ix,  ch  10  [ii7ob29-34]  424c  /  Politics,  bk  ii, ch 6
[1265*10-18] 460b-c;
[i265a38-b i7]
460d-461a; ch 9
[i27oai5-b6]
466b-c; bk hi, ch 15 [i286b8-22] 484d-485a; bk iv, ch 6
[i292b4i-i293 an]
492c; ch ii
[1296^-13] 496b; ch
13
[1297^2-28] 498a;
bk v, ch 3
[i303 a25~b4] 504d-505a; bk
vi, ch 6
[i320b39-i32i a
4]  524c;  bk  vii,  ch  4  530a-d;  ch 6 531b-d esp [1327^2-17] 531b 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  138b-139a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 157a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  330b-d  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch xiii, sect
157158 61c-62b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vii, 46c47a; bk xviii,
127a-b;  bk  xxiii  187b,d-200a,c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 365c-366b /
Political  Economy,  367d; 378b / Social Contract, bk ii, 404a-c; bk hi,
407c-408b;  413d;  417b-418a; 420b-c; 422d-423a; bk iv, 428b-c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  33c-34b;  71a-d;  bk hi, 163a-165b; bk iv,
243b,d-244a; bk v, 384b-d

[882b]
848  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4c  to  5a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 17d-18a;
88a-c; 90c-d; 239a-d;486c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 108d-109a; 221b-c
42  Kant: Pure Reason, 229d-230a 43 Declaration of Independence: [48-51]
2a  43  Federalist: number 2, 31d; number 10, 52a-53a; number 13, 59b-c;
number  54  170a-172b passim; number 55, 172b-173c; number 56 174d-176d;
number  58  179c-182a  passim  43 Mill: Liberty, 319b-d / Representative
Government,  424c-428a  passim 44 Boswell: Johnson, 172b-c; 373c-374a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  243  77b-c  / Philosophy
of History, part ii, 263b-d; part in, 286b; part iv, 318c-319b 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man,  275d-277c;  323b327a; 383b-384d; 391d-394a,c 50 Marx:
Capital,  172b-c;  249a-250a; 312c-313a; 317c-319a; 348a-350d; 360a-364a
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 421c-d 5. The social structure or
stratification of the state 5a. The political distinction between ruling
and subject classes, and between citizens and denizens 5 Sophocles: Ajax
[1226-1315]   153c-154b   5   Aristophanes:  Frogs  [686-705]  572a-b  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  28c-29a  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iii-iv,
339b-350a  /  Laws,  bk  viii,  742c-d;  bk  xi,  774d-775a 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 13
[i259b33~
i26oa2o] 454b-d; bk ii, ch 5
[1264s ! i-b25]
459b-460a; ch 6 [i265b i8-2i] 461a; bk hi, ch 1-5 471b,d-475d passim; bk
iv, ch 4 489b491d; bk vii, ch 2
[i324ai4~i7] 528a; ch
4
[1326^7-24] 530b; ch 6 [1327^-14] 531d; ch
8-9  532c-533d  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  7 555c-556a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  46c-47a  /  LycurgusNuma,  62b-c  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk xi,
106a-107b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 98, a 6, rep 2
244c-245b;  q 104, a 4 306d-307c; q 105, a 3, rep 2 316a-318b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part ii, 108d-109a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 9
27a-b;  ch  viii,  sect  122 53b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv,
109a-b; 110a; 112c-d; 114c-115b 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 392b
[fn  1];  bk  hi, 420b-c; bk iv, 426b-c; 427c; 428b430a 39 Smith: Wealth
of Nations, bk iv, 269d-271a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14a-15c passim;
16c-17d;  147a-b  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 81d-82b; 404d 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 436d-437c 43 Articles of Confederation: iv
[17-36]
5b-c

[883a]
5b  to  5c Chapter 90: STATE 849 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i,
sect 8
[204-206] 13b
43  Federalist:  number  42,  138d-139c;  number  43, 142b-c; number 54,
171a-b   43   Mill:  Representative  Government,  345e-346a;  366a-370a;
380c-389b  passim  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 273c 5b. The
family  as  a  member of the state: its autonomy and its subordination 5
Aeschylus:  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1011-1084]  38b-39a,c  5 Sophocles:
Antigone 131a-142d 5 Euripides: Iphigenia at Aulis
[1255-1275]
436c;
[1368-1401] 437c-d
5  Aristophanes: Ecclesiazusae [611-650] 622a-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk
iv,  139a-b;  bk  vii,  223c  d 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk ii,
398c-d  7 Plato: Republic, bk v,360d-365d / Statesman, 608a-d / Laws, bk
hi,  665d-666c;  bk  vi,  707b-708c;  bk  vii,  721d; bk xi, 775d-781c 9
Aristotle:  Ethics, bk x, ch 9 [n8oa25-b i3] 435a-b / Politics, bk i, ch
2  [1253*19-29] 446c; ch 13 [i26ob8-i9] 455c; bk ii, ch 2-3 455d457a; ch
9
[i269b i3-i270b6] 465d-466c; bk
hi,  ch  9  [i28ob30-i28i  a2]  478c  14  Plutarch:  Romulus,  21a 26b /
Lycurgus,  39a-41a  / Numa Pompilius, 58d / LycurgusNuma, 62d-64a / Cato
the  Younger,  629a-c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii, 32b-d; bk hi, 51a;
51d-52a; bk xv, 162b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 16 521d522a
20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 3, rep 3 207a-c; q 95,
a  i,  ans  226c-227c; q 104, a 4, ans 306d-307c; q 105, a 4 318b321a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 121a; 155b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 344a-c 35
Locke:  Civil  Government, ch vi 36a-42a; ch vii, sect 83 43b-c; ch xvi,
sect  180-183  67b68b;  sect  188-192  69a-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i,
29b-31a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 13b; bk v, 22d-23a; bk
xix,  140a-c;  bk  xxiii,  189b-c; 192d-199b; bk xxvi, 216c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  327c-d; 364d-365b / Political Economy, 376b-377a; 377d-378a
/  Social  Contract,  bk  iv, 439b,d [fn 2] 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
175c-d  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73c; 82b-83c; 88d89a; 92c 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  420b-421c  43  Mill: Liberty, 317c-319d 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 280c-281a;304a-b;355b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  166  59d-60a;  par 174 61b; par 180 62c-63c; par 238-239 76c-d; par
255-256  79d-80a;  additions,  127  137b; 146-147 140b-c / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  172b-d;  part  i,  246d-247a;  part 11, 277c; part in,
288c-289b

[883b]
50  Marx:  Capital, 241a-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 427b428a
54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 783d784a 5c. The classes or
sub-groups  arising from the division of labor or distinctions of birth:
the social hierarchy 6 Herodotus: History, bk h, 59b-c; 84d-85b 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk ii-iv, 316a-350a esp bk ii, 316c-319c; bk v, 358d-360d; bk
viii,  413a-c  / Timaeus, 442 b; 445c / Critias, 480a-481b / Laws, bk v,
695a-c;  bk vii, 722d; bk viii, 740d-741a; bk xi, 774a-775a 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 2
[i26i a24-b6]
456a-b; ch 5
[i264ai]-cH
6
[1265^]
459a460b;  ch  8 [1267^0-36] 463c-d; [i268ai6-b 4J 464a-b; bk hi, ch 4-5
473c-475d; bk iv, ch 3
[i289b27-i290a i2] 488d-489a; ch 4 [1290^1i29i b29] 489d-491a; ch 12 [i296b2o~34] 496d497a; bk
vii,  ch  8-10  532c-534d  /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch 7 555c-556a 14
Plutarch:  Theseus, 9a-d / Romulus, 20c-21a / Numa Pompilius, 57d-58c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xvi  130a132a  22  Chaucer: Prologue
159a-174a  /  Parson  s Tale, par 64-67, 530b-532a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
131b-132a; 411a-d 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv 56a-64d esp sc 11
57d-59d  27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida, act i, sc in [75-136]
108d-109c  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  221d222d  36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i, 30a-31a; part iv, 154b-155b; 158a-b 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 134a-b; 297d-298a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 5b-c; bk
in,  llc-12a;  bk  xv,  110a-112a;  bk xx, 151b-152a; bk xxii, 184a-b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 365d-366a / Political Economy, 381c-382b / Social
Contract,  bk hi, 422a; bk iv, 428b-430a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
i,  6d-8b; 51a62a passim; 109d-110d; bk hi, 169c-170b; bk iv, 269d-271a;
bk  v,  301a-309a,c  passim;  309a-311c; 382a-383b; 391b-392a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  89d;  144a-b;  242a-c;  497a-501d passim 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 73b; 81c-d; 317b318b; 389b-c; 404c-d; 452d-456a,c esp
452d;  571a-572c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d-437c; 444c-445c /
Judgement, 586a-c 43 Articles of Confederation: vi
[82-93]
6a-b  43  Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 9 [289-295], sect 10
[300-303J 14a 43 Federalist: number 35, 113a-114a; number 36, 114c-115a;
number 84, 252a

[884a]
(5.  The  social  structure  or  stratification  of  the state. 5 c. The
classes or sub-groups arising from the division of labor or distinctions
of   birth:   the   social   hierarchy.}  43  Mill:  Liberty,  270a-b  /
Representative  Government,  385a-d;  392b-399d  passim,  esp  398a-d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  124d-126a; 127b-c; 140b141a; 211b-c; 247c-d; 299a-b;
383b; 470b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 201206 68a-69b;
par  255 79d; par 288 97a-b; par 295 98d-99a; par 303 101c-102a; par 305
102b;  par  308 102c-103a; par 326 107d-108a; additions, 127-130 137b-d;
151  141b-c;  189 149d / Philosophy of History, intro, 181d182a; 193b-c;
part i, 222a-223c; 237b-c; 250ac; part ii, 275b-276a; part hi, 287d288b,
294c-297b;  part  iv,  335a-336c;  356c357a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man,
324a-c;  578b-c  50 Marx: Capital, 95d-96b [fn 2]; 164a-180d esp 165a-b,
165d-166a,  171a-c, 173b, 176b-d, 178c-179c; 218c-219d; 239d-240c; 303d;
317c321b  esp  317c-319b, 319d-321b; 355a-364a passim, esp 364a; 366a-b;
368c-369a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 419b
[fn
1];  419d-420b;  422c-424c;  430b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, la-
llb;  bk v, 204a-206c; bk vii, 278c; 281a-284a; bk ix, 347d-350d passim;
384c-388a,c;  bk x, 403a405a; bk xi, 503a-505a; epilogue ii, 685d686a 54
Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  882c-d 5d. The conflict of classes
within the state 5d(l) The opposition of social groups: the treatment of
national,  racial,  and  religious  minorities  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  i,
641c-642b;  bk  iv, 678d679a; bk viii, 742c-d; bk xi, 774d-775a; bk xii,
790a-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 5
[1277^41278^] 475a-b; bk v, ch 3 [i303a25-b4] 504d505a; bk vii, ch 10 [1330*25-33] 534d
14 Plutarch: Theseus, 9c / Romulus, 21a-27c / Numa Pompilius 49a-61d esp
58c 22 Chaucer: Prioress's Tale
[13,418-620] 392a395b
esp
[13,418-424] 392a
/  Second  Nun's Tale 463b-471b esp [15,826-16,021] 467b-471b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part ii, 108d-109a 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i,
sc  hi  [106-143] 410c-411a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 46 410c 32
Milton:  Sonnets, xv 66b 35 Locke: Toleration la-22d 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  i,  21b-23a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xxiv, 206c 38
Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk iv, 428b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
12a-b;  13b-14a;  83a-b; 147a-b; 179d-180a; 206b,d-234a,c esp 207b-211a,
229c-232b; 290b-291c; 348d-

[884b]
850 THE GREAT IDEAS 5d to 5d(2) 361a,c esp 348d-349c, 352c-354d, 356b-d;
383a-b;  390c-391d;  607b-608a;  617a-b;  622b-d;  638d-639a;  643c-d 41
Gibbon:   Decline   and   Fall,  138d;  285d-288a;  404d;  480d-481a  43
Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 9
[260-266]
13d; article vi
[597-599]
16d;  amendments, i 17a; xv 19b 43 Federalist: number 42, 137b-c; number
52,  165c;  number  54  170a-172b;  number  57,  177b  43 Mill: Liberty,
270c-271a;  278a-282a;  307d312a  passim  /  Representative  Government,
366c-d;  424c-428a  /  Utilitarianism,  475b476a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part hi, par 270, 86d-87b [fn 1] / Philosophy of History, intro,
172d-173a;  part  ii,  276d-277a;  part  hi, 287d-288b 54 Freud: War and
Death,  755d-756a  /  Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 788c 5d{2) The
clash  of  economic  interests  and  political factions: the class war 5
Euripides:  Suppliants  [229-245]  260b-c  6  Herodotus: History, bk vi,
202c-203b; bk vii, 243b-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 423a-c;
434c-438c  esp  436d-437d;  bk  iv,  459a-c; 463a-469b; bk v, 482d-483a;
502d;  504a-b;  bk vi, 520a-d; bk viii 564a-593a,c 7 Plato: Republic, bk
iv,  343c-d;  bk  viii,  405c406b  /  Laws,  bk  v,  695a-c 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7  461d-463c  passim;  bk hi, ch 10 [1281*11-29]
478d-479a;  bk  iv,  ch  3-4  488d-491d; ch 11-12 495b497b; bk v, ch 3-8
503d-511c; ch 9 [i309b i41310*11] 511d-512b; bk vi, ch 7
[1321*5-27]
524c-525a  / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-41 553a-572a passim, esp ch 2-6
553a-555c;  ch  29-41  566b-572a  14 Plutarch: Solon, 68d-71c; 75c-76d /
Coriolanus,   176b-177b;   179c-184c  /  Agis  648b,d656d  /  Cleomenes,
657a-663c   /   Tiberius   Gracchus   671b,d-681a,c   /  Caius  Gracchus
681b,d-689a,c  /  Cicero,  708a-713b  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk vi, 97b /
Histories,  bk  ii,  224d-225a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi [58-75]
9a;  x  [34-93]  14a-c;  xxvm 41b-43a; purgatory, vi [58-151] 61b-62c 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  ix,  14c-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii,
121b-122b  26  Shakespeare:  2nd Henry VI, act iv 56a64d 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus, act i, sc i 351a354d / Pericles, act ii, sc i [30-56] 427c-d
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  21b-23a;  part ii, 60a; 80a-b; part iv,
154b-155b  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  375b-d; 381c382b / Social
Contract, bk ii, 396b-d; bk iv, 429c-431c

[885a]
5e to 6b Chapter 90: STATE 851 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 28a-d;
109dl10d; bk in, 170c-173b; 175b-179a; bk iv, 269d-271a; bk v, 309a-311c
esp  309a-c;  420b421a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 144a-d __ 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  570d-572d  passim;  574b-582c; 588a-589a; 594b-c 43
Federalist:   number  io  49c-53a;  number  51,  164a-165a;  number  60,
185b-186c;  number  85,  256b-c  43  Mill:  Liberty, 289c-290a; 309b-c /
Representative  Gofernment,  345c-346a  ;  366a-3  70a; 3 76a-c; 387c-d;
392b-399d  passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 236 76a-c;
par  304  102a / Philosophy of History, part 1, 250a-c; part ii, 263b-d;
275b-276a;  283c-d;  part hi, 294c-297b; part iv, 335a336c; 356c-357a 50
Marx:  Capital,  6d-7d;  9a-c;  63b-c; 113c; 127c-146c esp 131a, 134c-d,
141b-c,   144a-146c;   275a-c;   295a;  317b-c;  355d-368b  passim,  esp
356c-361d,  366a-368b;  377c-378d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto
415a434d  esp  416c-d, 419b,d-420a, 422c, 423b424d, 425c, 429b-c, 434c-d
51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk x, 410c-421c 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its Discontents, 78 7d / New Introductory Lectures, 882c-d; 884a 5e. The
classless  society  50  Marx:  Capital,  9c  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  416c-d;  429b-c  6.  The  ideal  or best state: the contrast
between  the  ideal  state  and  the  best  that is historically real or
practicable  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 395d399a 7 Plato:
Republic  295a-441a,c  esp bk v-vi, 368c-383a, bk vii, 401c-d / Timaeus,
442b443b  /  Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws 640a799a,c esp bk v, 692c-693a,
696a-b,  bk  vii,  722d-723c,  bk  ix,  754a-b  / Seventh Letter, 807b 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7
[1135*2-4]
382d / Politics, bk ii, ch i
[i26ob26]-cH 9
[1269^3]
455b,d-465c;  bk  iv, ch i 487a488b; ch 2 [1289*30-35] 488b; ch 7 [i293b
i21]  493a-b;  ch  ii  495b-496d  esp [i295 a25-b i] 495b-c; bk vii-viii
527a-548a,c esp bk vii, ch 4 [i325b34-39] 530a 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  ix,  sect  29  294a-b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 48b-c / Numa
Pompilius 49a-61d / Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch
xv,  22b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 164a,c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
462c-465c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 94d-95a / New Atlantis
199a-214d

[885b]
32 Milton: Areopagitica, 393a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 323a-b / Social
Contract,  bk  11, 402b-403a; 405a-c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv,
201b-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  114b-d  / Science of Right, 450b-451d;
455c-458a,c  / Judgement, 586a587a 43 Federalist: number 37-38 117d-125a
passim;  number  41,  132b-c;  number  65,  200bc;  number  85,  257a-c;
258d-259a  43  Mill:  Representative Government, 327b, d355b esp 341c-d,
344d-345a,  350b-355b;  368cd;  380c-381a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par 185 64b-d; par 273 90c-92a / Philosophy of History, Intro,
173a-175c;  part  i,  251b;  part  hi,  300c-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  432d433d 6a. The political institutions of the ideal state 5
Aristophanes:  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  ii,  396c397d  7  Plato:  Republic, bk ii-iv, 316a-350a / Statesman,
598b-604b  / Laws 640a-799a,c esp bk in, 669d-672b, bk iv, 679c-682c, bk
v, 692c-693a, bk vi, 697a-706c, bk viii, 733b734a, bk ix, 754a-b, bk xii
784b-799a,c / Seventh Letter, 806d-807b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch
i
[i26ob28~36]
455b; ch 2 [i26i a24-b i5] 456a-c; ch 5 [i204b 7-25] 459d-460a; ch 6
[1265^6-1266*30]
461b-d;  ch  8  463c-465b;  bk iv, ch ii 495b496d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
34d-35d;  45c-46a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 1
307d-309d  27  Shakespeare: Tempest, act ii, sc i [143-184] 532d-533b 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  268c-269b  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 323a-325b /
Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  410d-411c; bk iv, 427d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
114b-d  / Science of Right, 450b-451d; 455c-456a 43 Mill: Representative
Government,  338a;  341  d350a; 369b-389b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 185 64b-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 174a175c; part 1,
251b;  part  hi,  300c-d;  part  iv, 365c-366a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  428d  6b.  The social and economic arrangements of the ideal
state 5 Aristophanes: Birds 542a-563d / Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d / Plutus
629a-642d  7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a; bk iii-iv, 339b-344a; bk
v, 356b-365d; bk vii, 401c-d / Timaeus, 442d / Critias, 481a-485c / Laws
640a-799a,c  esp bk i, 645b-652d, bk ii, 655b-663d, bk iv, 677a-678c, bk
v, 691b-

[886a]
(6.  The  ideal  or best state: the contrast between the ideal state and
the  best  that  is historically real or practicable. 6b. The social and
economic  arrangements  of  the ideal state.) 697a, bk vi, 706d-713c, bk
vii, 717b-728b, bk vin 731d-743a, bk xi 771b-784b 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk  ii,  ch  i-8  455b,  d465b;  bk  vii, ch 8-12 532c-536b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  36a-47a / Numa Pompilius, 58a-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 93d-94a
27 Shakespeare: Tempest, act ii, sc i
[146175] 533a-b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 299 99c-100b 50 Marx:
Capital,  292d;  377c-378d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 425b429c
esp  428d-429c;  432b-433d  passim 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
vi, 158b-159a 54 Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d788b / New
Introductory  Lectures,  883d-884c  7.  Factors affecting the quality of
states la. Wealth and political welfare 5 Aristophanes: Plutus 629a-642d
esp
[415618] 633d-636d
6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350b352c; bk 11, 397b-c; bk viii,
569d  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-319a  esp 318c319a; bk iii-iv,
339b-344a  esp 341c-344a; bk v, 364c-365d; bk viii, 405c-408a / Critias,
485b-c  /  Laws, bk hi, 665b; bk iv, 677a-c; bk v, 687d-688a; 694a-695c;
bk  viii,  733b-d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  7 [i267ai8-36]
462d-463a; bk vii, ch 4
[i325b33-i326a
4J 530a; ch 6
[1327*25-31] 531b-c; ch 8 532c533a
14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b; 47d / Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-c / Coriolanus,
180b-d  /  Aristides-Marcus  Cato,  291b-292b / Agis, 649b-c 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk ii, 31a-b; bk hi, 57b-58d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch
30-33 147b-149a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[1-60] 9c10a; xvi [64-78] 23a-b; purgatory, xx [3496] 83c-84a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part iv, 267c-268b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii,
73b-  76b;  part  iv,  154b-155b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk v,
19a-21d;  23a-25c;  bk  vii, 44a-48a; bk xiii, 96c; bk xx, 146b-147d; bk
xxi,  153c-d; 154b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 325d; 327c-328a; 365c-366b /
Political Economy , 375b-d; 377b385a,c / Social Contract, bk ii, 405c-d;
bk hi, 411a-b; 415b-417c; 421c-d

[886b]
852  THE GREAT IDEAS 7 to 7c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 27b 31b;
33c-35c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 22b-23b; 88d-89d; 456d-457a,c;
498a-501d; 642a-c 43 Federalist: number 21, 79b-80a 44 Boswell: Johnson,
210d-211b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, additions, 143 139d-140a 49
Darwin: Descent of Man, 324a-d 50 Marx: Capital, 292d; 319b-321b lb. The
importance  of  the  arts and sciences in political life 5 Aristophanes:
Acharnians
[497-508]
460d461a; [628-658] 462b-d / Wasps [1009-1059] 519d-520c / Birds
[904-1057]
554a-555d / Frogs 564a-582a,c esp
[1008-1098]
576b577c,   [1411-1533]   581a-582a,c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii-iii,
320c-339a;  bk  iv,  344b-345a;  bk  vii  388a-401d; bk x 427c441a,c esp
432d-434c  /  Statesman,  604c-608d  /  Laws,  bk  11  653a-663d; bk hi,
675c-676b;  bk vii, 713c-730d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk viii 542a-548a,c
14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 43b-44b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 31-33
147d-149a;  bk  ii,  ch  8-14  153d-157c;  bk  iv,  ch 26-27 202a-203c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk ii, ch 25 649b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
164c  30  Bacon:  New  Atlantis  199a-214d  esp  210d214d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5,  453a-b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
104b-107a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk iv, 17b18d; bk xxiii,
191a-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 365d-366b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk i, 5d-6a; bk v, 308c-309a,c; 337d-339c; 347b-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  23b-24a,c;  88d;  158d-159a;  633b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
298a-300c;  326b-328a,c esp 327d-328a,c; 451d; 527d528a,c 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 253c / Judgement, 586a-587a 43 Constitution
of  the  U.S.: article i, sect 8 [214-217] 13b 43 Federalist: number 43,
139d-140a  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  180d-181a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of
History,  intro,  185a186a;  part i, 217c-218a; part ii, 277d-278a; part
iv,  346c-348a  54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, !!%&.- 779d
7c. The state's concern with religion and morals: the cultivation of the
virtues 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 232d-233d; bk ix, 294a-c

[887a]
7c  to  Id Chapter 90: STATE 853 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i,
370a-c;  bk  ii,  396b-d;  399a  7  Plato: Apology, 206a-207b / Gorgias,
287c290b  /  Republic,  bk  ii-iv,  316a-356a__/  Timaeus,  442b-443b  /
Critias,  485b-c / Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk hi, 669b-670c; bk iv,
682c-683d;  bk  v,  687d-688a;  bk  viii,  731d-732c;  735b-738c;  bk  x
757d-771b;  bk  xii,  794a-799a,c  /  Seventh  Letter, 801 b-c; 806b-c 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 2
[ii3ob i8-29]
378a-b; bk x, ch 9 [u79a33-i 180*13] 434a-d / Politics, bk 11, ch 5
[i263b36-i264a i] 459a;
[1264*26-32]
459c; ch 7
[1266^7-1267*17]
462b-d;  [i267a36-b9]  463b; bk v, ch 9 [1310s 13-36] 512b-c; bk vii, ch
1-3  527a-530a; ch 8 532c-533a; bk vii, ch 13-BK vm, ch 7 536b-548a,c 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  44d-45c  / Numa Pompilius 49a-61d esp
52d-53a  /  Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  / Solon 64b,d-77a,c / Marcellus,
247c-248b  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 60d-61a 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  i-v  129a-230a,c;  bk  xix,  ch  23-24  525c-528c  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 92, aa 1-2 213c-215a,c; q 95, a i 226c-227c; q
96, aa 2-3 231c-233a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, vi
[58151] 61b-62c; xvi [52-129] 77b-78a; paradise,
xv  [97]-xvi [154] 129b-132a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 154b-155c 30
Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 74b-c 35 Locke: Toleration, 15d / Human
Understanding,  BK I, CH II, SECT 6 105b-C 35 Hume: Human Understanding,
sect  xi, div 113-114, 502d-503b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, xxiia-d;
bkiii,  9b-lld; bk iv-v, 13b,d-19d; bk v, 21b-23b; bk vi, 40a-b; bk xix,
135d-142a;  bk  xxiii,  196c-197c;  bk  xxiv  200a-208a,c  38  Rousseau:
Inequality,  327a-328a / Political Economy, 372a-377b / Social Contract,
bk iv, 435a-439c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 337d-338c; 346c-347d
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  lOOc-lOlb;  291d292d;  601b-d 42 Kant:
Judgement,  509d-510a  43  Constitution  of  the U.S.: amendments, xviii
19c-d;  xxi  20b  43  Mill: Liberty, 302d-323a,c passim / Representative
Government, 332d-341d passim 44 Boswell: Johnson, 178b-c; 182c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  175c177b;  part 1, 228d-229b; part ii,
279d281b;  part  iv, 346a-c; 350b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 325b-327b
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  28d32a;  bk v, 127b-137c
passim; bk vi, 164a170d passim

[887b]
Id.  The  educational  task ofthe state: the trained intelligence of the
citizens 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b;
[857-917] 266a-b
5 Aristophanes: Frogs [1008-1098] 576b-577c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  370a-c; bk 11, 397b-c 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43a-47c / Crito
213a219a,c  /  Republic,  bk  ii-iv,  316a-356a;  bk  v,  366a-c; bk vi,
380d-381a;  bk  vi-vii,  383b401d / Statesman, 607b-608d / Laws, bk i-ii
640a-663d  esp  bk  i,  644b-645c; bk hi, 675c676b; bk vii 713c-731d; bk
viii, 732b-735a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 2
[io94
,428-bn] 339c-d; ch 9 [i099b29-32] 345b; bk v, ch 2
[ii30b i8-29] 378a-b; bk x, ch 9 434a-436a,c
esp [1179*33-1180*13] 434a-d / Politics, bk ii, ch 5
[1263^6-1264*1]
459a;
[1264*26-32]
459c; ch 6
[1 264^7-39] 460b; ch 7 [1266^735] 462b-c; bk hi, ch 4 [i277*i4-b29] 474a475a; bk iv, ch 9 [i294b i9~24] 494c; bk v, ch
9  [1310*12-35] 512b-c; bk vii, ch 13-BK vm, ch 7 536b-548a,c / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  42  572b-d  14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 33c-34a; 39a-45b /
Lycurgus-Numa   61b,d-64a,c  /  Solon  64b,d77a,c  passim  /  Agesilaus,
480b,d-481a  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, viii [115148] 118b-c 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  114b-115a; 150c151a; 153a-155c; part iv,
273a-c  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 66a; bk ii, 81d-83b
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  60c-62a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 23a;
79c80a  32  Milton:  Areopagitica,  384b-385b;  398a-b  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  i,  div  5,  453a-b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part ii,
76b-80b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk iv 13b,d18d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  365d-366b / Political Economy, 372a-377b / Social Contract,
bk  ii,  402b-403a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  303b-305c;
337d-338c;  340c-343d; 347c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 6b; 669a-670b
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 347a,c 42 Kant: Judgement, 586a-587a 43
Federalist:  number  27,  95c-d;  number 84, 253d-254b 43 Mill: Liberty,
283a-c;  317d-323a,c  /  Representative  Government,  330a-b;  332d-341d
passim,  esp  339a-340c;  349a-350a;  381b-387d  passim; 418b-d; 420b-d;
424b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 187 65a-c; par 239
76d;  par  315  104c;  additions,  98  133a;  147  140c; 166 145b-c; 183
148d-149a / Philosophy of History, part ii, 271d-272d

[888a]
7.  Factors affecting the quality of states. Id. The educational task of
the state: the trained intelligence of the citizens.} 49 Darwin: Descent
of   Man,   328c-d   50   Marx:  Capital,  237d-240d  54  Freud:  Sexual
Enlightenment  of  Children, 122c the statesman, king, or 8. The offices
of   state:   prince   8a.   The   duties   of  public  office  and  the
responsibilities  of  office  holders:  the relation of the statesman or
king  to the people he represents or rules Old Testament: Genesis, 41:44
/  Deuteronomy,  17:14-20  / / Samuel, 8:11-18— (D) / Kings, 8:11-18 / /
Kings,  3:7-9—  (D)  ///  Kings,  3:7-9  / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II
Paralipomenon,  1:7-12  /  Psalms,  72—  (D),  Psalms,  71  /  Proverbs,
16:12-15;  25:2;  28:15;  29  :2  >4>  I2  > I 4 / Isaiah, 22:20-22— (D)
Isaias,  22:20-22  / Jeremiah, 23:3-6— (D) Jeremias, 23:3-6 Apocrypha: /
Maccabees,  14—  (D)  OT, / Machabees, 14 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[354-523]  5b7c  /  Seven  Against  Thebes  [1-77]  27a-28a 5 Sophocles:
Oedipus the King
[572-630]
104c-105a  /  Antigone [162-210] 132c-d; [633765] 136c-137d 5 Euripides:
Suppliants  [286-358]  260d-261c  5  Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a,c 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 397b-c; 402a-404d; bk hi, 427a-c;
bk  vi,  513a  7  Plato: Republic, bk i, 301b-306b; bk hi, 339b-341d; bk
vii,  390b-391b;  401a-b  / Statesman, 604c-608d / Laws, bk vi, 697a705c
passim;  bk  xii,  794a-799a,c  /  Seventh  Letter,  806d-807b; 814b-c 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch ii
[i259a23~36]
453c-d; bk hi, ch 4 [i277ai4-b33] 474a-475a; ch 6
[i278b30-i279a2i] 476a-c; ch
17   486c487a;   bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29i  a34-b7]  490c-d;  bk  vi,  ch  4
[I3i8b39-i3i9a 4] 522c; ch 8 525b-526d; bk vii, ch 2 528a-529a; ch 4
[i326b i3-i5]
530d;  ch 9 [1329*3-39] 533b-d; ch 14 [i332b i3-i333a i7] 537b-538a * 14
Plutarch:  Numa  Pompilius, 51c-52c / Marcus Cato 276b,d-290d / Crassus-
Nicias,  455d456d  / Agesilaus, 486d-487b / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c
esp  626d-627b, 632b-c / Agis, 648b,d-649b / Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d /
Demosthenes?  699c-700a  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 57b-58d; 61c-62a; bk
xii,  112a-c  18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 6 514b515a; ch 15-16
521a-522a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 3, ans 207a-c
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-129] 77b-78a
23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xiv-xix 21b-30a

[888b]
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 153a-159c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 7a-d;
24a-25c;  315c-d; 327d-329d; 381a-388c passim; 436c-438b 26 Shakespeare:
2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v 494b-496d / Henry V, act i, sc i 533a- d; act
iv,  sc  1  [87-215]  552c-553d 27 Shakespeare: King Lear, act hi, sc iv
[2636]  264c  /  Coriolanus,  act  ii,  sc hi 366a369a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii, 340b348c; 352b-356d; 360d-364a 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, 74d-75a / New Atlantis, 208a-c 32 Milton: Sr Henry Vane 69b
/  Paradise  Lost,  bk 11 [430-456] 120b-121a 35 Locke: Toleration, 3a /
Civil  Government,  ch  vii,  sect  90-94  44d-46c;  ch  vm, SECT105-112
48c-51b; ch xiv 62b-64c; ch xix, sect 221222 75d-76c 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  iv, 157b-158a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 40a-b; 43c-d;
bk  xii,  93d-94a;  94c-95b  38  Rousseau: Political Economy, 367a-368c;
372c-373c  / Social Contract, bk i, 388a; bk hi, 412c-414d; bk iv, 427b;
427d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv, 194b-c; 199c-d; 284d 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 26d-27a; 50a; 243a-245b; 288b-289a; 338d-339c; 342a-c;
343b-c;  437b-438a;  577a-578c;  639d-644a passim 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  95a-c;  102d-103a; 320d-321b; 505a; 563d-564b; 586c-587b 42 Kant:
Science  of  Right,  434a;  444c-445a  43  Declaration  of Independence:
[25-98]  lb3a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i-iii lla-16a passim;
article  iv,  sect  3  16b;  article  v  16c;  amendments, xvii 19b-c 43
Federalist: number 19, 74a-c; number 20, 76b-d; number 22, 83b-d; number
35,  113a114c;  number  53,  168b-169d  passim;  number 56-57 174d-179b;
number  64,  196d;  number  70, 212c-214a; number 71, 214d-215a 43 Mill:
Liberty, 298d-299a; 302b-c / Representative Government, 341d-344d; 353b;
398d399d;  401a-406a  passim;  410d-411b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 86a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 295 98d-99a; par 297 99b; par
303  101c-102a; par 305-311 102b-104a; additions, 175 147b-c; 181 148b-c
/  Philosophy  of History, Intro, 173a-c; part iv, 361d-362a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  9c-10d;  bk x, 465c-467a; bk xi, 507a; bk xiv,
611a-c  8b. The qualities or virtues necessary for the good statesman or
king Old Testament: Genesis, 41:33,39-40 / Exodus, 18:21-26 / Leviticus,
19:15  /  Deuteronomy, 1:13; 16:18; 17:14-20 / / Samuel, 15:10-35— (D) I
Kings, 15:10-35 / // Samuel, 23:3—

[889a]
u  Chapter  90:  STATE  855  (D)  II Kings, 23 13 / I Kings, 3 15-28 ; 4
129-34—  (D)  III Kings, 3:5-28; 4:29-34 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II
Paralipomenon,  1:7-12 / Psalms, 72— (D) Psalms, 71 / Proverbs, 8:15-16;
16:10,12-13;  17:7;  20:26-28;  24:5-6;  25^-5;  28:15-16; 29:2,4,12,14;
31:4-5  / Ecclesiastes, 10:16-17/ Isaiah, 16:5; 32:1 — (D) Isaias, 16:5;
32  :i  /  Jeremiah, 23 g -6— (D) Jeremias, 23 :3-6 / Ezekiel, 45:9— (D)
Ezechiel, 45:9 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:1; 6; 9— (D) OT, #00/^ of
Wisdom,  1  :i  ;  6;  9  /  Ecclesiasticus,  10:1-3;  41:17-18— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  10:  1-3;  41:21-22  /  /  Maccabees,  14—  (D)  OT,  /
Machabees, 14 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[623-680]
21c 22a;
[852-908]
24b-d  5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [162-210]  132c-d;  [633765] 136c-137d 5
Aristophanes:   Knights  470a-487a,c  esp  [147222]  471d-472c  /  Peace
[601-692] 532d-534a / Ecclesiazusae
[173-247]
617a-d;
[441-459]
619d-620a   6   Herodotus:   History,  bk  v,  164d-165a  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 383d384a; bk ii, 404a-d; bk hi, 425a-c; bk vi,
513a-514b  7  Plato: Gorgias, 285a-292a / Republic, bk ii, 319c-320c; bk
hi, 339b-340b; bk v-vi, 368c383c / Timaeus, 442b-d / Statesman, 604c608d
/  Laws,  bk  iv, 679c-682c; bk xii, 796b-d / Seventh Letter, 801b-802c;
804b805a; 806b-c; 807a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 5
[ii40b4-n]
389b; ch 8
[ii4i b23-ii42 an]
390d-391a  /  Politics,  bk 1, ch 1 [1252^-17] 445a-b; ch 13 454a-455a,c
esp
[i259b33-i26oa2o]
454b-d;  bk  11,  ch  5  [i264b7~25]  459d-460a;  ch 9 [i27ob 7-1271*18]
466d-467b; ch ii
[i273a2i-b i6]
469d-470b;  bk  hi, ch 4 473c-475a; ch 12-13 480c-483a; ch 17 486c-487a;
bk iv, ch 4
[i29i a34-b7]
490c-d; bk v, ch 9
[i309a33b i4]
511c-d; bk vii, ch 2 528a-529a; ch 9
[1329^-17] 533b-c; ch
14
[i33 2l>I 3-i333a i7]
537b-538a  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i 253a-256d; bk hi, sect 5 261a;
bk vi, sect 30 276d277a 14 Plutarch : Lycurgus, 45c-46a / Numa Pompilius
49a-61d  esp  60a-b  /  Pericles  121a-141a,c  / Coriolanus, 180d-181b /
Alcibiades-Coriolanus   193a-195a,c   /   Aristides   262b,d-276a,c  esp
263d-267a,  273d-275c  /  Marcus  Cato  276b,d-290d  esp  279c,  282a  /
AristidesMarcus   Cato   290b,d-292d  /  Lysander-  Sulla,  387d-388a  /
Lucullus,  419a-b  /  Nicias,  423d430d  /  Crassus-Nicias 455b,d-457d /
Phocion 604b,d-619d / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c / Cleomenes, 661a-d /
Cicero,  706c;  IVl^-h / Dion 781b,d-802a,c / Aratus, 829b-d 15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk ii, 215c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xiv, ch 28 397a-d;
bk xix, ch 16 521d-522a

[889b]
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xii
[100-139]
17b-d; xxvii
[55-132] 40a-41a; purgatory,
vi
[58-151]
61b-62c; vn
[61-136]
63a-64a; viii
[109-139]
65c-d; x
[70-93]
68a-b; xvi
[85-129] 77d-78a; xx
[34-96] 83c-84a; paradise, xiii [91-108] 126b-c; xviii [7o]-xx
[78]
134b-137c  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xv-xviii  22b-26a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  132a  133b  25  Montaigne: Essays,
381a-388c; 436c-438b; 451d-453b 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act ii, sc i
327c331a; act hi, sc iv [29-66] 340c-d / 1st Henry IV, act in, sc ii
[39-161] 453b-454c
/  2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v 494b-496d / Henry V, act 1, sc i 533a-d 27
Shakespeare:  Measure for Measure, act i, sc i-iii 174a-177d; act hi, sc
ii
[275-296]
192b  /  Macbeth,  act iv, sc 111 303b-306b / Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp
act hi, sc ii
[i-92]373c-374c, act iv, sc vii [28-57] 384c-d
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 331a-336a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  lb-2c;  4c7c;  20d-25c; 94b-95b 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Cromwell
69a-b / Sr Henry Vane 69b / Paradise Lost, bk ii
[430456] 'l20b-121a
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect 105112 48c-51b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part i, 28b-29b; part hi, 112a-113b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws, bk v, 22a-b; bk vi, 40a-b; bk xxi, 170a; bk xxviii, 259b; bk xxix,
262a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 327a / Social Contract, bk in, 414c-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  31d-32c;  61d-64c  passim;  74a-b; 142b-c;
255b,d-257a passim; 284a-b; 338d-344a,c esp 338d-339c, 343c344a; 430a-d;
448c-449c;  534c; 577a-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 67d-68b; 103d104c;
504c-505a;  577d-579a  42 Kant: Judgement, 504a-b 43 Constitution of the
U.S.: article i, sect 2
[11-16] lib; sect 3
[67-72] 12a; article
ii,  sect  1  [375-382] 14d 43 Federalist: number 2, 32b-33b; number 52,
165c;  number  57,  176d-177a;  number 62, 188d-189a; number 68, 206b-c;
number  72,  217d; number 75, 223c-d 43 Mill: Representative Government,
336c-338c  passim;  341d-344d;  353b-354b;  363b-366a;  398d-399d; 406d;
407d-408d  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 178a-b; 374a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part hi, par 292 98a / Philosophy of History, part ii, 275d276d;
281c-282d;  part  iv,  360b-c; 361d-362a; 366b; 368b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  9c-10d;  bk  x,  465c-467a;  bk xiv, 611a-c; epilogue i,
645a-646c

[890a]
856  The  offices of state: the statesman, king, or prince.) (8. 8c. The
education  or  training of the statesman or prince 7 Plato: Republic, bk
ii-iii,  320c-341d; bk v, 366a-c; bk vi-vii, 383b-401d / Timaeus, 442c-d
/  Laws,  bk  hi,  672d-676b;  bk  xii,  794a-799a,c  /  Seventh Letter,
801c-802d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[u8ob29n8i b25] 435d-436a,c
/ Politics, bk hi, ch 4
[1277^4^33]
474a-475a; ch 18
[i288 a34~b
3]  487a,c;  bk  vii, ch 14 [i332b i3-i333 a i7] 537b538a; bk viii, ch 4
[i338b25~38]   544a-b  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d  14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  122d-123c  /  Alcibiades,  156c-158b  / Agesilaus,
480b,d-481a  / Alexander, 542d-544a / Cato the Younger, 625b626a / Dion,
781b,d-788b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  ii, 34c-d; bk xii, Hid; bk xiii,
125d-126a;  bk  xiv,  153d-155a / Histories, bk iv, 267c 23 Machiavelli:
Prince la-37d esp ch xiv-xix 21b-30a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47b-d;
part  ii,  164a,c  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 18b-19d;
26d-30c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 437b-c 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act
i, sc ii
[119-240] 436c-437d; act
hi, sc ii
[93-161]
453d-454c/  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  i  [22-68]  533b-c 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  332c336a;  362a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
4c-7c;  23a-b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 73a-76b 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  hi,  414b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 32a; 62a-c; 86c;
245b-c;  260a-b;  275c-276a;  284a-c; 430a; 534a-c; 669b Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  15b-c;  508c-509d  Federalist:  number 27, 95c-d; number 35,
114b-c;  number  53,  168b-169d passim; number 56, 175d-176d; number 62,
190b-d  Mill: Representative Government, 356b-359a; 407d-408d; 415a-417c
passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 296 41 43 43 99a-b;
additions,  169 145d; 171 146b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 155b-d;
part  i, 212d-213d; 243b-c; part ii, 281d; part iv, 368b Sd. Statecraft:
the  art  or  science  of  governing;  political  prudence  5 Aeschylus:
Persians
[623-680]
21c-22a;
[852-908] 24b-d
5  Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a,c esp [147222] 471d-472c / Lysistrata
583a-599a,c esp
[486-590]
589a-590d  /  Ecclesiazusae  615a628d  esp  [173-247]  617a-d  7  Plato:
Euthydemus,  75c-76b / Meno, 188b190a,c / Republic, bk vi-vii, 383b-401d
/

[890b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS Scto Sd(\) Statesman 580a-608d esp 585c-d, 6042-608d /
Laws,  bk iv, 679a-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d; bk vi, ch
7 [1141*20-33] 390a-b; ch 8
[ii4i b23~
28] 390d / Politics, bk ii, ch 12 470b-471d; bk in, ch 11
[i28i a39-i282 a4i] 479b-480b;
bk  iv, ch 1 487a-488b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c 14
Plutarch: Romulus-Theseus, 30c-d / Poplicola, 80d-82a / Poplicola-Solon,
87b-d  / Camillus, 102b,d / Pericles 121a-141a,c esp 137b-138b / Fabius,
143b-d;  145d-146a  /  Alcibiades  155b,d-174d  passim,  esp 167c-168a I
Aristides  262b,d-276a,c  esp  263d-267a, 273d275c / Agesilaus, 482a-c /
Phocion,  604b,d605d / Cato the Younger, 625b-627b / Agis, 648b,d-649b /
Caius  and Tiberius GracchusAgis and Cleomenes 689b,d-691a,c 15 Tacitus:
Annals, bk iv, 72a-b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch 12, 217d218a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  104, a 4, ans 306d-307c 23
Machiavelli:   Prince  la-37d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  112d;
128d-129b; 158c-d; 164c 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act hi, sc iv
[29-66] 340c-d
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  4c -7c; 81 d95b passim 35 Locke:
Toleration,  9b  36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 78a-b; part hi, 112a-115b;
part  iv, 157a-158a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 40a-b; 43c-d;
bk  xii, 93c-95b; bk xix, 137c-139c; bk xxix, 262a-b 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  hi,  413a  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 48a; 142c-144a;
155a-d;  157c;  284a-c; 288b-289a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 176c-177c
43   Mill:   Representative  Government,  331b-c;  356b-359a  46  Hegel:
Philosophy of History, part ii, 275d276a; part iv, 361d-362a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  ii, 65d-66d; bk vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a 53 James:
Psychology,  201a Sd{\) The employment of the military arts 5 Aeschylus:
Persians  [652-680]  21d-22a;  [8521076]  24b-26d / Seven Against Thebes
[1-77]  27a-28a  5  Euripides  :  Suppliants [723-730] 264d 6 Herodotus:
History, bk i, 6a-b; 41c-42b; 46a-48a; bk iv, 141b-c; bk vii, 225a-226b;
244a-245a;    257d-258d;   bk   viii   260a-287d   passim   6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  369a-370d;  371b-372d;  384d-386b;  bk  ii,
389d-391b;  bk  vi,  514d-516a;  517d-520d;  528b-c; bk viii 564a-593a,c
passim

[891a]
Chapter  90: STATE 8</(2) to Se Plato: Republic, bk ii, 319a-c; bk 367b7
368c / Statesman, 605a-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 7
[ii77b2-25]
432a-c / Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[1271*38-41]
467c; bk iv, ch 4 [1291*7-33] 490b-c; bk yJ ch 9 [i309a33-b8] 511c-d; bk
vii,  cH^fi^*  24-1325*15]  528b-529a; ch 5 [i326b38-i 327*7] 531a; ch 9
[1329^-39]   533b-d;  ch  14  [1333*  29-1334*11]  538a-d  14  Plutarch:
Themistocles  88a-102a,c  / Pericles, 130d-141a,c / Fabius 141a-154a,c /
Aemilius Paulus, 214d / Caius Uarius 332b,d-354a,c / Cimon 389b,d-399d /
Lucullus  400a-421a,c  /  Pompey  499a-538a,c  / Alexander 540b,d-576d /
Caesar  577a-604d / Phocion, 607b-d / Antony 748a- 7 79d 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  iii-viii 3c-14c pas- , sim; ch x 16a-d; ch xii-xiv 17d-22a;
ch  xx  30a 31c; ch xxvi, 37a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 159a-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  327d-329d  36  Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 77a-78b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk 3ld32b; bk x, 65d-68a; bk xi, 74b-d; 1
XIII,  lOOd-lOla 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 380a-d 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  v 305c309a,c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 4b-5c; 42b,d
43b;  47c-d; 50b-c; 56a; 63a-64b; 86a-d; 118d119a; 168b-171b esp 170c-d;
245d-248d;  284a-c;  365b-378d esp 373c-374a; 563a-567a; 639a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  126d-131d esp 128a; 311d-312a; 321b-323a; 509a-d 42
Kant: Science of Right, 453d-454c / Judgement, 504a-b 43 Constitution of
the  U.S.:  article  ii,  sect 2 [409-413] 15a 43 Federalist: number 20,
76b-d;  number  29,  99b-100a; number 74, 221c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  ii,  281d282d; part iv, 359a-b; 366b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk ii, 81c-93d; bk hi, 138d; 144c; 146d; 153d-155a; bk v, 209a-c;
bk ix, 342a-355c; bk x, 389a-391c; 404a-b; 430b-432c; 444a-450a; bk xii,
533a537b  esp  535d-537b;  bk xiii, 563a-575a; bk xiv, 610d-611a; bk xv,
626d-630a &d(2) The occasions and uses of rhetoric 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii
[278-393]  12d-13d 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-425] 261d-262a / Orestes
[852-956]   402d-403d   5  Aristophanes:  Peace  [601-656]  532d-533c  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  v,  180c-d;  bk  viii,  264a-c  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 384c386c; bk 11, 395d-399a; 402b-404a; bk hi,
425a-d;  427a-c; bk vi, 511b-516a; 517d-520d; bk vii, 559d-560b 7 Plato:
Phaedrus, 129d-130c / Gorgias, 288b-

[891b]
857  292b  /  Statesman,  604d-605a  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  684c-686b; bk x,
760a-761a  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 9 [n8ob28-n8i* 18] 435d-436a /
Politics,  bk iv, ch 4 [1292*4-38] 491b-d passim; bk v, ch 5 [1305*7-15]
506d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[i354b23~34] 593d-594a;
ch 3-8 598b-608c; bk ii, ch i
[i377b i4~
1378*19] 622b,d-623a; bk hi, ch 16 [i4i7b i317] 671d; ch 17
[i4i7b35-i4i8b23]
672b673b  14  Plutarch:  Pericles,  129b-130b  /  Alcibiades,  159a-b  /
Phocion,  605a-d  / Cato the Younger, 621c / Demosthenes 691b,d-704a,c /
Cicero  704a-723d  / Demosthenes-Cicero 724a-725d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
i,  10d-llb;  12c-13d;  bk  xiii,  126a-b  / Histories, bk iv, 290a-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  106a-b;  127d128b; 128d; 129b-d; 157c-d;
158d-159a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 147b-148a 26 Shakespeare: Julius Caesar,
act hi, sc i
[226-253] 582d-583a; sc
11 583c-586c 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act hi, sc ii
[51-92] 374a-c
30   Bacon:   Advancement   of   Learning,   ld-2b;  23a26a  32  Milton:
Areopagitica,  383a  36  Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 290a-b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk xii, 89c90c; bk xxix, 266b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  64a-c;  284b; 343a-b; 384d-385b 43 Federalist: number 1, 29d-30c;
number   26,   93d-94a;   number  58,  181b-c  43  Mill:  Representative
Government,  361b-362c  44 Boswell: Johnson, 374a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  History,  intro,  153d154a;  part  ii,  273d-274a 8</(3) The role or
function  of  experts  in  the service of the state 7 Plato: Protagoras,
43b-d  / Gorgias, 287d288a / Republic, bk ii, 316c-319c; bk v, 369c370a;
bk  vi, 373c-375b; bk vii, 390b-391b / Statesman, 598b-608d 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk hi, ch ii
[1281*391282*41] 479b-480b; bk v, ch 9 [i309*33-b8]
511c-d  43 Federalist: number 36, 115a-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 320c-323a,c /
Representative  Government,  355b-362c;  363b-366a;  408a417c  passim 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 289297 97b-99b passim; par 301
lOOb-lOla;  additions,  135  138c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  1,
213b-214d  8e.  The  advantages  and  disadvantages  of participation in
political  life  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 23b-d 7 Plato: Apology,
207b-208a  /  Republic,  bk  i,  305d-306b;  bk  vi,  379d-380b; bk vii,
390b391b

[892a]
(8.  The  offices  of  state:  the  statesman,  king, or prince. 8e. The
advantages  and  disadvantages  of  participation  in political life.) 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  y  431d-432c  /  Politics,  bk  i, ch 2
[i252b27-i253  a39] 446a-d; bk in, ch 6 [i278b i5-29] 475d-476a; bk vii,
ch 1-3 527a-530a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[59-86]
30d-31b;
[995-1002]
42d-43a; bk v
[1117-
»35]75d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk i, ch 19 125b126c; bk hi, ch 22
195a-201a  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 22 272b; bk xi, sect 21
305d-306a  14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 50a-52c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, viii
[91148] 117d-118c
23  Hobbes  :  Leviathan, part i, 77a; 84c-86b; 86d87b; part 11, 104b-d;
112b-c;  part  iv,  267c-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 46d; 107a-112d; 354a-b;
381a-388c; 480b-482b; 486b-497b esp 486b489b 26 Shakespeare: As You Like
It,  act  ii,  sc  i  603c-604b  27 Shakespeare: Timon of Athens, act iv
409c416d  esp sc 1 409c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 73 446c-447a
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  6 173a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 15
28c;  ch  vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch ix 53c-54d passim; ch xv, sect 171
65a-b  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-366d / Political Economy, 381c-382b
/  Social  Contract, bk i, 391b-394d esp 393b-c; bk ii, 398a-b 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 309a-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 521d 43
Declaration of Independence: [7-23] la-b 43 Federalist: number 37, 119a;
number  51,  164c-d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  460a-461c  44 Boswell :
Johnson,  261c-d 48 Melville: Moby Dick, 237a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk   v,   206d-207b;   216a;  bk  vi,  238c-243d;  260a-262a  54  Freud:
Civilization   and   Its   Discontents,   780b781  d;  788d-789b  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  853a-b 9. The relation of states to one another
9a.  Commerce  and  trade between states: commercial rivalries and trade
agreements; free trade and tariffs 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[719-999]
463c466d   6   Herodotus:   History,   bk  iv,  158b-c  6  Thucydides  :
Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 350d351a; 365b; 384b 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii,
316c-318a / Laws, bk xii, 788d-789a

[892b]
858  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9  to  9b  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i, ch 9
[1257*17-40] 451a-b; bk hi, ch 9 [i28oa36-b 3] 478a; bk vii, ch 6 531b-d
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 4 [i36oai2-i8] 600b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  119d-120b;  124c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiii, 98b99b;
bk  xix,  143c-144c;  bk  xx,  146a-150b; bk xx-xxi, 152a-173d; bk xxii,
177b-181a  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 404a-b 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations, bk hi, 173b-175b; bk iv, 182b-192c; 197b-200a; 201b,d-204c;
209a-213d;  231d-232b;  233d-236a;  256a266d;  bk  v,  319b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 21c-23b; 151d; 656a-658b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
314c-315b;  342c343a;  355c-d;  427c-d  42  Kant:  Judgement,  504a-b 43
Articles of Confederation: iv
[24-36]
5b-c;  vi  [100-106] 6b; ix [173-185] 7a; [275285] 8a 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: article i, sect 8 [201-203] 13b; sect 9 [276-282] 13d; sect 10
[304-313]  14a 43 Federalist: number 4, 35c-36a; number 5, 38b-c; number
7,  42d-43c;  number  ii  53b56b  passim; number 22, 80d-81c; number 35,
112a-113a; number 41, 135b-c; number 42, 137d-138c; number 44, 145b-c 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  281b-c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
246247  78a-b;  par 339 110b / Philosophy of History, part 1, 243d-244c;
part   iv,  368c  50  Marx:  Capital,  66c-68a,c;  218d-219a;  221d223a;
372c-375c  passim  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 420a-b; 421a-c;
428a-b  9b.  Social and cultural barriers between states: the antagonism
of diverse customs and ideas 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[911-965]
12c-13b 5 Euripides: Suppliants [399-597] 261d-263c / Iphigenia at Aulis
[1399-1401]  437d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2a;  12d-13b; bk ii,
57d-58a;  bk  iv, 137a-138c; 140d-141a; bk v, 163d-164a; bk vii, 216b-d;
232d-233d;   253b-254a;   bk  viii,  264c;  287a-d;  bk  ix,  291c-292a;
298a-302c;  305d-306a;  308d-310c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
350b-d;  366b-c;  370a-c; bk viii, 589d-590a 7 Plato: Cratylus, 106b-c /
Republic,  bk v, 357d-358a; 367b-368c / Statesman, 582d583b 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 2
[i252b5-9]
445d; ch 6
[1255*28-37] 448d-449a; bk
hi, ch 14
[1285^7-29]
483b-c; bk vii, ch 7
[1327^9-38] 531d-532a
10 Hippocrates: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23 18a-c

[893a]
9c  to  9d  Chapter  90:  STATE  859  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  46b-c  /
Themistocles,  99a-c  /  Marcellus, 254c-256b / Marcus Cato, 287d-288c /
Flamininus,  303a-310d  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 23d-24a 18 Augustine:
City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch 7 515a-c / Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 14
663*^  22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Man of Law [4638-4644] 238a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  44b-c;  46b-47a; 91d98b; 477d-478a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv,
149b-150b   38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  xv,  HOa-c;  bk  xix,
139c-140a;  bk  xxiv,  207a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 355b-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 224b; 423d-424a 43 Federalist: number ii, 55d-56b 43
Mill:  Liberty,  300a-302c passim / Representative Government, 424c-428a
passim; 436b-439c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 351 112a-b
/  Philosophy  of  History, part ii, 277d279b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
317c-d  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  hi,  150d-151b;  bk  iv,  170d-171c;  bk  ix,  362a-363a  52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 115a-116b 54 Freud: War and Death,
755c-757a;  761a-c;  766c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 788b-c 9c.
Honor  and  justice  among  states  Old Testament: // Samuel, 10— (D) II
Kings,  10  /  I  Chronicles,  19—  (D) / Paralipomenon, 19 5 Aeschylus:
Suppliant Maidens [911-965] 12c13b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, la-2b; bk
v,  177d180a; bk vi, 201c-d; bk vii, 237d-239a; 242c-d; bk viii, 287a-d;
bk  ix,  289a-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 355b-c; 358b-360c;
368a-d;  378c-380a;  386b-c;  bk ii, 396b-399a passim; 403c-404a; bk in,
426b-428d;  429b-434c;  bk  iv, 461d462a; 468a-469b; bk v, 504c-508a; bk
vii, 542b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk v, 367b-368c / Laws, bk xii, 788d-789a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 4 [1157*25-30] 409a; bk x, ch 7
[1177^-25]
432a-c  /  Politics,  bk  in,  ch  9  [i28oa34-b  i2]  477d-478b;  ch 13
[i284a38-b3]  482c;  bk  vii,  ch 2 [i324b21325^5] 528c-529a 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  ii,  44d  /  Histories,  bk  iv,  290a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 95, a 4 229b-230c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  159c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 54a-56b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 95d-97a; 381a-b; 387c388c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and
Cressida, act ii, sc 11
[1 13-213] 114d-115d

[893b]
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i,  ch ii, sect 10 106d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  ii,  76b-78b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk x, 61b,
d65c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c  / Political Economy, 369a-b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 48a; 404a-b; 535d536b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  532d-533a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 452c-455c 43 Constitution of
the  U.S.: article i, sect 8 [220-222] 13b; article in, sect 2 [469-492]
15c-d  43  Federalist:  number  3,  34d-35a; number 7, 44a-b; number 15,
63b-d;  number  22,  84b;  number  30,  102c-d;  number  43,  142d-143a;
143d-144a;  number  62, 190d-191a; number 80, 235b-c; number 81, 240b-c;
number  83, 248b-c 43 Mill: Representative Government, 434c-43 5c passim
44  Boswell:  Johnson, 86c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
336  109d;  par  338 HOa-b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 292a-295a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk v, 228c-d; 230b; 232a-233b 54 Freud: War and Death,
756c-757c  9d.  The  sovereignty  of independent states: the distinction
between  the  sovereignty  of the state at home and abroad; internal and
external sovereignty 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86a; part ii, 114b-c;
121b-c;  159c  27  Shakespeare:  Cymbeline, act hi, sc 1 463c-464c; sc v
[1-27]  468d-469b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 14 28b-c; ch
xii,  sect  145-148  58d-59b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xxvi,
223c-224a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 355b-c / Political Economy, 368c-d;
369a-b  / Social Contract, bk 1, 392a-393d; bk hi, 406b,d409a 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 427b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 435a-b; 452a-458a,c
passim 43 Declaration of Independence:
[1-6]
la;
[109-119] 3a-b
43   Articles  of  Confederation:  ii  5a-b  43  Federalist:  number  32
105c-107b; number 39, 126b-128b; number 75, 223b-c; number 81, 240d-241a
43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 344d; 355b-d; 428b-433b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 275279 92a-94d; par 321-322 106c-107a;
par  329331  108c-109a;  additions,  153  141d; 191 150a-c; 194 150c-d /
Philosophy of History, part iv, 364d-365a

[894a]
860  9e.  War and peace between states 9e{\) The military problem of the
state:  preparation  for  conquest or defense 5 Aeschylus: Seven Against
Thebes  [1-77] 27a28a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 41c-d; 46a-48a; bk iv,
132a-b;  144b-148d;  158d-159d;  bk vi, 206d-208d; bk vii-ix 214a-314a,c
passim  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i 349a386d passim; bk ii,
389a-c;  396d-397a;  402b404d;  bk  iv,  469d-471a;  bk  vi,  518a-520d;
529b-534d  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii, 318c-319c; bk iv, 343b-d; bk v,
357d-358b;  366a-368d  / Laws, bk 1, 640d-641a; bk iv, 677d-678c; bk vi,
701b-702a;  bk viii, 732b-735a; bk xii, 784d786b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
x, ch 7
[ii77b4~25]
432a-c / Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1265*19-27]
460c;  ch  7  [1267*17-36] 462d-463a; bk iv, ch 4 [1291*7-33] 490b-c; bk
vi, ch 7 [1321*5-27] 524c-525a; bk vii, ch 2
[i324b2-i325*i5]
528c-529a; ch 4
[1326*23-24]
530b; ch 5
[i326b38]-cH
6
[i327b i7]
531a-d;  ch ii 535a-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4 [1359^3-1360* 12] 600a-b 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d  esp  41a-45c  / Nutna Pompilius, 59d-60b /
Themistocles 88a102a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 16b-21b; bk ii, 23d29d;
bk  in,  49d-50a;  52d-53d;  54b-56c;  62d63b;  bk iv, 64d-65a; 69d-70c;
76a-77c; 82d83b; bk vi, 94d-96b; 97a-98a; bk xi, 102b103a; 104a-105c; bk
xii,  112a-125c passim; bk xiii, 134a-136c; 139c-141a; bk xiv, 147b148b;
148d-151b;  bk xv, 157d-162a; 163c165a / Histories, bk hi, 253c-254c; bk
iv, 269b-278c; 283b-292b; bk v, 294c-d; 297a302a 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch  xii-xiv  17d-22a;  ch  xx  30a-31c; ch xxi, 32a-d; ch xxiv 34c35a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 76d; 86a; part ii, 103b-c; 114b-c; 159c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk hi, 127b,d-130a 25 Montaigne:
Essays, 299d-300c; 330b-331a 26 Shakespeare: Henry V 532a-567a,c esp act
1, sc 11
[234-310] 536b-537b, act
ii, sc iv 541d-543b, act hi, sc hi 545d-546b, act iv 551a-561d 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch xii, sect 145148 58d-59b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part
ii,  77b-78b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk viii, 52d53a; bk ix-x,
58b,d-62b;  bk  xiii,  lOOd-lOla  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 324c; 355c /
Political  Economy,  380a-  d / Social Contract, bk i, 389d-390d; bk ii,
403c-404a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  187c-190b;  bk  v,
301a-309a,c; 342c-343c

[894b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS 9e to 9<?(2) 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 4b-8b esp 4b;
42b,d;  86b-d; 245d-248b: 495a-497a; 558a560d; 633b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 212c; 321b-325a; 509a-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 452b-458a,c
passim / Judgement, 586c-d 43 Declaration of Independence:
[109-121]
3a-b 43 Articles of Confederation: hi 5b; vi-ix 6a-9a 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: preamble lla,c; article i, sect 8
[192-196]
13a;
[220-253]
13b-c;  sect  10  14a-b;  amendments, ii-iii 17b; v 17b-c 43 Federalist:
number 2, 31d-32a; number 4, 35d-37a; number 8 44c-47a; number ii 53b56b
passim;  number  22,  81c-d; number 2329 85a-101a; number 30, 102d-103a;
number 31, 104b; number 34, HOa-110b; number 41 132a-136b passim; number
43,  141d;  number  44, 144a-b 43 Mill: Representative Government, 330b;
425c426b;  428b-431a  passim; 435b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par 326 107d-108a; par 334 109c; par 338 HOa-b; additions, 163 144c
/ Philosophy of History, part 1, 242d-243b; part hi, 297a-300a; part iv,
325a-b;  343d-344a;  355d-356a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk 1, 33d-34c;
bk  viii,  308b-309c;  bk  ix,  344b-355c;  bk  xiv,  588a-589c;  bk xv,
629b-630a   9e{2)   Treaties   between   states:   alliances,   leagues,
confederacies,  or  hegemonies  Old  Testament  '.Joshua, g—(D) Josue, 9
Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees,  8  esp  8:17-32—  (D)  OT, / Machabees, 8 esp
8:17-32 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[61-173]
455d457b / Lysistrata [980-1321] 595c-599a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
6a-b;  15d-16a;  bk iv, 144b-146a; bk v, 175b-c; 180c-d; bk vi, 193b; bk
vii, 239a-242d; 243c-245b; 247a-c; bk viii, 286b-287d; bk ix, 289a-290b;
310d311a  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,353a-b; 353d; 356d-360d;
366d-371a;  373b-374a; bk ii, 394c-395a; bk hi, 418d-420c; 430c; 432c-d;
bk  iv,  461b-462d;  468a-469b; 476a477a; bk v, 486d-496d; 502d-504b; bk
vi,  529a-534c;  bk  viii,  568a-c;  572c-d;  578b579a 7 Plato: Critias,
485a-b  /  Laws,  bk  hi,  667c668d  9  Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 9
[i28o*34-b  i2]  478a-b;  ch  13  [1284*38^3] 482c 14 Plutarch: Romulus,
21a-24d  /  Pericles,  130d131a  /  Nicias,  427b-428c / Aratus, 834d 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxi, 32a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 121b-c
24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 36d-38a

[895a]
9fto 10a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act i, sc i
[1-103] 33b,d-34d
/  Henry  V,  act v, sc ii 563b-567a,c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v,
sect  45  34d35a; ch xii, sect 145-146 58d-59a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  ixr~58"b360a;  bk  x,  63d-64a;  bk xxvi, 223c-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,   325c-d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  103c-d;  119a-c;
150d-152c  esp  151d-152c;  378b-381a;  491d492b  41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  48d-49c;  428a-d;  503ac  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  452c-d;
454d-455b  43  Articles of Confederation: 5a-9d esp m 5b 43 Constitution
of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect  10  [296-297] 14a; article ii, sect 2
[421-425]  15b  43 Federalist: number 5, 38b-d; number 6, 41c; number 7,
44b-c;  number  15,  64c-65a;  number  16  66c-68d  passim; number 18-20
71a-78b  passim;  number  43,  143b-d;  number  44,  144a-b;  number  64
195b-198a;   number  75,  223b-c  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,
428b-431a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 332333 109a-c; par
336-337  109d-110a;  additions,  153  141d;  188  149b-c / Philosophy of
History,  part  11,  278c-279b; part iv, 357c-358b; 359c360a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, bk ii, 85c-86a; bk v, 208d-209a; 230b; 234a,c; bk viii,
309b;  bk  ix,  346a-355c 9j. Colonization and imperialism: the economic
and  political factors in empire 5 Aeschylus: Persians [852-908] 24b-d 5
Aristophanes:  Wasps  [655-724]  515c-516d / Peace [601-656] 532d-533c /
Lysistrata
[572586] 590c-d
6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 22d-23a; bk hi, 114b-c; bk iv, 150b-152c; bk
vi,  189d; 193b194c; bk vii, 215c-216d 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War,
bk  i,  355d356a;  358a; 359b-360a; 363a-b; 368a-d; bk ii, 403b-c; bk hi
417a-446a,c  passim; bk v, 504c508a; bk vi, 511c-516b; 529b-d; 530d-531b
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  318c-319a  /  Laws,  bk  iv 677a-686c esp
678c-679a;  bk v, 693c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 10 [i27i b20-38]
468a; [1272^7-20] 469a; bk hi, ch 13 [1284s 38^3] 482c; bk vii, ch 2
[i324b2-i325ai5]
528c-529a;  ch  7  [i327bi9-32]  531d-532a  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  vi
[847-853]  233b-234a  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i, 191d-192a; bk iv,
290a-d  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  hi,  ch  10  172d173c; ch 14
175b-176d;  bk v, ch 12, 216d218a; bk xix, ch 7 515a-c; ch 21, 524c-d 23
Machiavelli: Prince, ch iii-v 3c-8c; ch viii, 14b-c

[895b]
Chapter 90: STATE 861 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 119ac; 126d 127a 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk hi, 131b,d-133b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  330b-331a; 440b-443d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi 65d-70c
passim   36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  23a-25b;  part  ii,  75a-b  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x, 61b,d68d; bk xi, 83c-84c; bk xv,
HOa-d;  bk  xix,  143c-144c;  bk xxi, 170b-173d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
324a  /  Political  Economy,  380a-b  / Social Contract, bk i, 389d390d;
394a-b;  bk  ii, 403c-404a; bk iv, 435a436a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  iv,  239a-279b;  288bc  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 14d-15c; 18a;
20b23d  passim;  134d-135b; 420b-d; 522c-523a,c; 632d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  216c-d  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  413d;  456c-457a  43
Declaration  of  Independence: la-3b 43 Federalist: number 4, 35b-36a 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  353c;  431d432b; 433b-442d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 248 78b-c; additions, 150 141a-b /
Philosophy  of History, part i, 242d-243d; part ii, 261b-d; 263b-d; part
hi,  297a-300a  50 Marx: Capital, 77a-b; 221d-222b; 372c-374a; 379a-383d
51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk viii, 308b-c 10. Historic formations of
the  state:  the  rise and decline of different types of states \0a. The
city-state   6   Herodotus:   History,   bk  i,  lld-15c  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 349b353d; bk 11, 391c-392a; 395d-399a; bk vi,
509a-510c  7  Plato: Laws, bk hi 663d-677a passim 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk  ii,  ch 9-12 465b-471d / Athenian Constitution, ch 1-41 553a-572a 14
Plutarch:  Theseus, 9a-d; 13a-14c / Lycurgus 32a-48d / Solon 64b,d-77a,c
/ Flamininus, 303a-308a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk v, 294c-295c 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xvi
[64-78]
23a-b; purgatory, xiv
[16-126]
73d-75a;  paradise,  xv  [97]-xvi [154] 129b-132a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws, bk hi, 10b-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 418c-d
[fn.2]
40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 13d-15c passim; 64d-68a,c passim; 567a-d;
630b,d-631b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 427b-428a; 562b565a; 570d-571a
43  Federalist:  number  i8  71a-73c 43 Mill: Representative Government,
330a-b

[896a]
862  Historicformations  of  the  state:  the  rise  and (10. decline of
different  types  of  states. 10a. The city-state.) Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part i, 240a46 d; part ii, 273d-274a; 275b-281b; 282d284a,c The
imperial  state  10*. Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d Herodotus: History, bk
i,  16c-20b; 30b-31a; bk in, 109b-110b Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
i,  371b5  6  6  373c;  bk  ii, 403b-c Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 13
[i284a38-b 9 3] 482c Virgil: Aeneid, bk 1
[254-296]
HOa-110a;  bk  vi  [845-853]  233b-234a;  bk  viii  [608-731]  275a-278b
Plutarch:  Pericles  121a-141a,c  /  Alcibiades  155b,d-174d / Lysander,
359c-360d   /  Nicias  423a-438d  /  Agesilaus  480b,d-499a,c  /  Pompey
499a-538a,c  /  Alexander  540b,d-576d / Caesar 577a-604d / Antony 748a-
779d  /  Galba  859a-869d  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk i, la-2a; bk xi, 106b-d
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iv  188b,  d13 14 207a,c; bk v, ch 12-26
216d-230a,c Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii
[10-27] 2d;
paradise, vi [i-nil 113c-114d Shakespeare: Antony and Cleopatra 311a350d
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk x, 65d68a Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
v,  305d-308a  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall esp la-34a,c, 79b-d, 523a-524a,
571a,c,  630a-633a  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall  esp  35b-40a, 161a163d,
209d-220a,c,    305b-310d,    312b-313c,    367b,d-377c,   479b,d-510a,c
Federalist:   number   19,   73c-75c  Mill:  Representative  Government,
433b-442d  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 242b258d; part 11,
281b-282d; part hi, 285a303c; 311d-314a,c; part iv, 321d-326c The feudal
state  10c.  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xxx-xxxi 269a-315d passim
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  hi, 165b173a Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
83b-d;  619b-624c  38 39 40 passim, esp 619c-d Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
217d-220a,c   esp   41   218c-219a;   403b-404d;  452d-453a,c;  570d571a
Federalist:  number  17,  70a-d;  number  19, 73d-74a; number 45, 148c-d
Mill:  Representative  Government, 351d-352b Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 273, 43 43 46

[896b]
b  THE GREAT IDEAS 10bto 10/ 91c-d; additions, 174, 147a / Philosophy of
History, part iv, 316c-d; 324b-326c; 327c330a; 334d-335a 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto,  419d420d 10d. The national state 39 Smith: Wealth
of Nations, bk hi, 170c-173a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 103c-d 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 435a-b 43 Federalist: number 37-40 117d-132a passim 43
Mill:   Representative   Government,   351d-352b;  424c-428b  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 35 21a-b; part hi, par 181 63c-d; par
322  106d107a; par 331 108d-109a; par 344-360 111a114a,c / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  177d178a; part iv, 342a-345c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  421c-d  54  Freud: War and Death, 755b-757c lOe. The federal
state: confederacies and federal unions 14 Plutarch: Philopoemen, 296a-b
/  Cleomenes, 658a-666a / Aratus, 834c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  ix, 58b, d60a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 103c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall, 218c-219a 43 Articles of Confederation: 5a-9d 43 Constitution
of  the  U.S.: lla-20d 43 Federalist: number i, 29a-b; number 2 31a-33b;
number  9,  49b-c;  number  i4,62a-d; number 18-20 71a-78b; number 37-40
117d132a;  number  43,  143b-144a;  number  45,  147d-148c;  number  85,
258d-259a,c  43 Mill: Representative Government, 428b433b 10/. The ideal
of a world state 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 9, 114c-d; bk 11, ch
10,  148c-d;  bk in, ch 24, 204a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bkiii, sect
ii  262a-b;  bk  iv,  sect  3-4  263b-264a;  bk  vi,  sect  44 278b-c 18
Augustine:  City  of God,  bk xix, ch 7 515a-c; ch 17, 522d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  471a-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 34a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  355b-c  / Political Economy, 369a42 Kant: Science of Right,
455c-456a;  457a458a,c  /  Judgement,  586a-587a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  333  109b-c  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vi,
244d-245d  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim; bk
vi, 158b-159a; 166c167b

[897a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other  discussions  bearing on the comparison of
human  and animal societies, see Animal id; Language i ; Mind 9c -~-—~~^
Other  treatments  of  the  differences and relations between family and
state,  see  Education  Discussions relevant to the analogy of state and
soul,  to  the  conception  of  the  state as a divine idea, see History
43(3);  Law  71;  Progress 4b. The consideration of the various economic
systems  which  are  involved  in  the organization of states, see Labor
5~5d;  Wealth 6a. The consideration of the political institutions of the
state,  the  nature  of  government,  the 7a; Monarchy i-ib(2), 4-46(4);
Oligarchy  1-2,  4-5;  Tyranny  1-5.  The  consideration of the relation
between  church  and state, and the relation between the city of God and
the city of man, see Citizen 7; History 5b; Religion 4-4^ The problem of
the  natural  and  the  conventional  in  the formation of the political
com5c; War and Peace i. The theory of the social contract in relation to
the  idea  of  a  constitution,  see  Constitution 6. The problem of the
identity  and  continuity of the state, see Revolution 2a, 2c, 6b. Other
discussions   of  the  physical  foundations  of  society,  and  of  its
geographical  or territorial conditions, see Democracy 5a; History 43(2)
;  Man  7b;  Monarchy  4c.  The motives or impulses underlying political
association,  see Emotion 5a; Government ic; Citizen i;Duty 10; Good and
Evil 5d; Happiness 5-5^ Law ia; Liberty ie. The political classification
of men as citizens, subjects, and slaves, see Citizen 2b; Democracy 11c;
Wealth 4g.

[897b]
Chapter 90: STATE 863

[898a]
864  THE GREAT IDEAS I. Tacitus. Germania Dante. Convivio {The Banquet),
fourth treatise, ch 4-10 . On World-Government or De Monarchia F. Bacon.
"Of  Faction,"  in  Essays  Hobbes.  Philosophical  Rudiments Concerning
Government  and  Society,  ch  1  , 5 . The Elements of Law, Natural and
Politic  Spinoza.  Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (Theological-Political
Treatise),  ch  16-19  Montesquieu.  Considerations on the Causes of the
Grandeur  and  Decadence of the Romans Engels. The Origin of the Family,
Private  Property  and  the State II. John of Salisbury. The Statesman's
Boo\  Volsung  Saga Njalssaga Marsilius of Padua. Defensor Pads T. More.
Utopia  Luther. Secular Authority Bodin. The Six Bootes of a Commonweale
Hooker.  Of  the  Laws  of  Ecclesiastical  Polity  Althusius.  Politica
Methodice   Digesta   Atque   Exemplis  Sacris  et  Profanis  Illustrata
Campanella.  The  City of the Sun Penn. An Essay Towards the Present and
Future  Peace of Europe Defoe. Robinson Crusoe Burlamaqui. Principles of
Natural  and  Politic  Law Vattel. The Law of Nations Voltaire. "States-
Governments,"   in   A   Philosophical  Dictionary  Godwin.  An  Enquiry
Concerning Political Justice

[898b]
For:  The  special  relation of an imperial state to colonies or subject
peoples,  see  Democracy  7b;  Government 5b; Liberty 6c; Monarchy 5—5b;
Slavery  6d;  Tyranny 6. The general theory of sovereignty as it applies
to  the  state  in  its  external relations with other states, and as it
applies  to  a  state, or its government, in relation to its own people,
see  Democracy  4b;  Government  id,  ig-ig(3),  5;  Law 6b; Liberty ib;
Monarchy ia(2), 4e(3); One and Many 5e; Tyranny 5c. Other discussions of
confederacies and federal unions, see Government 5d; One and Many 5d~5e;
Revolution 6b; and for discussions bearing on the possibility of a world
state,  see  Citizen 8; Love 4c; War and Peace i id. ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed  below are works not included in Great Boo^s ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are divided into two groups: II. Works by authors not represented
in  this collection. For the date, place, and other facts concerning the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings  which  follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. Bentham. A
Fragment  on  Government, ch i (1-21, 36-48) . The Theory of Legislation
J.  G.  Fichte. Addresses to the German Nation, iv-viii . The Science of
Rights  Fourier.  Traite  de  Vassociation  domestique-agricole  Lieber.
Manual  of Political Ethics Whewell. The Elements of Morality, bk ii, ch
20;  bk  v,  ch  1-6,  10-17  Calhoun.  A Disquisition on Government . A
Discourse  on  the  Constitution  and  Government  of  the United States
Thoreau.  Civil  Disobedience  Hawthorne.  The Blithedale Romance Comte.
System  of  Positive  Polity,  vol  ii,  Social  Statics,  ch  5  Lotze.
Microcosmos,  bk  viii,  ch  5 Freeman. History of Federal Government in
Greece  and  Italy  Bagehot.  Physics and Politics Burckhardt. Force and
Freedom, ch 2-3 S. Butler. Erewhon Ruskin. Munera Pulveris J. H. Newman.
A  Letter  to  the  Duke  of Norfolk L. H. Morgan. Ancient Society T. H.
Green.  The  Principles of Political Obligation, Spencer. The Man Versus
the State Tonnies. Fundamental Concepts of Sociology Nietzsche. The Will
to  Power, bk hi (3) W. Wilson. The State Frazer. The Golden Bough, part
i,  ch 6 Treitschke. Politics Bosanquet. The Philosophical Theory of the
State  Kropotkin.  Mutual  Aid,  a  Factor of Evolution . The State, Its
Historic Role

[899a]
Santayana.  Reason  in Society, ch 8 Oppenheimer. The State, Its History
and  Development Viewed Sociologically Dewey and Tufts. Ethics, part hi,
ch 20-21 Sorel. Reflexions on Violence Pirandello. The Old and the Young
Belloc.  The  Servile  State Duguit. Law in the Modern State Wallas. The
Great  Society  Pareto.  The  Mind  and  Society,  vol  iv Hobhouse. The
Metaphysical  Theory  of  the  State  Lenin. The State and Revolution T.
Veelen.  The Vested Interests and the State of the Industrial Arts, ch 6
Weber.  Essays in Sociology, part ii . Politics as a Vocation Hauptmann.
The  Island  of  the  Great  Mother  Hocking.  Man  and the State Croce.
Politics  and  Morals  Dewey.  Reconstruction  in Philosophy, ch 8 . The
Public and Its Problems

[899b]
Chapter 90: STATE 865 Hsiao. Political Pluralism M. R. Cohen. Reason and
Nature,  bk  hi,  ch  3  A.  Huxley. Brave New World Laski. The State in
Theory and Practice Sturzo. The Inner Laws of Society . Church and State
Maritain.  The  Things That Are Not Caesar's, . Ransoming the Time, ch 2
Borgese.  Common  Cause Kohn. The Idea of Nationalism Cassirer. The Myth
of  the  State,  part  ii  Kelsen. Der soziologische und der juristische
Staats-  .  General Theory of Law and State Merriam. Systematic Politics
Ewing.  The  Individual,  the  State and World Government A. J. Toynbee.
Civilization  on  Trial,  ch  5, 7 Borgese et al. Preliminary Draft of a
World Con-

[900a]
INTRODUCTION  MOST outstanding figures in history, most heroes of legend
or  fiction, are men of strong passions, of ambition, and of pride. They
are  driven  by  desires  which  tend  to  be  limitless.  Few exemplify
moderation.  Few  stop  short  of  excess  in anger or love, or in their
striving  for  power  and pleasure. They may curb their appetites in one
direction,  only  to  indulge  them without rein in another. They do not
follow  in  all  things  the  counsels  of  temperance, expressed by the
ancient  maxim  "Nothing  overmuch."  Achilles  is  not temperate in his
wrath,  nor  does Odysseus, for all his craft and cunning, exhibit self-
control  when  his  vanity  or  curiosity  is at stake. The tragedies of
Euripides,  more  perhaps  than those of Sophocles and Aeschylus, embody
the  hubris,  or  pride,  which  is common to all tragic figures in some
particular  form of intemperance, such as the boundless hate of Medea or
the abstemiousness of Hippolytus. One play especially, Bacchantes, takes
intemperance  for  its  central  theme  and  sets  the  disciples of the
dionysiac  spirit  in  mortal  conflict  with  the  puritans  and  their
prohibitions. Comedy as well as tragedy flows from intemperance, as when
we  smile  at  the  exaggerated  sentimentality  of  the romantic lovers
described  by  Cervantes  and Fielding, Chaucer and Shakespeare, or find
merriment  in  the  indulgences  of  Sir  John  Falstaff, Pantagruel and
Panurge,  or  Tristram  Shandy.  The  great  books  of history add their
evidence. They make fiction seem pale by comparison with the excesses of
cruelty  and sensuality which, if they were not presented as fact, might
be  dismissed  as  unimaginable.  Page  after page of Tacitus and Gibbon
often describe, in an unrelieved sequence, human debauchery, brutalities
and revelries ingeniously designed to reach some new extreme in order to
procure, through novelty, satisfaction for appetites al-

[900b]
Chapter  91:  TEMPERANCE  ready  over-indulged  and  weary  of  familiar
pleasures.  Nor  is  the historian's panorama of intemperance limited to
the  uncontrolled indulgences of the few— the oriental despots described
by Herodotus, or the Caesars and their retinues in the imperial court of
Rome.  Armies  in  the field and the mob-formations of civilian life are
depicted  in wanton and riotous behavior. Whole peoples are described as
being  given  to  luxurious  living or as wanting in standards of public
decency.  The  few exceptions in antiquity, such as Spartan rigor or the
chastity, if not the sobriety, of the primitive Germans, only accentuate
by  contrast  the  immoderate  tenor  of life in most ancient societies.
Darwin  seems  to  think  that  a  much  greater  degree of self-control
characterizes  modern  life, both public and private, though his opinion
on  this score may give undue weight to the conventions so much insisted
upon in England under Queen Victoria. Temperance, according to him, is a
virtue  peculiar  to  civilized  life.  "The  greatest intemperance," he
writes,  "is  no  reproach with savages." Darwin places temperance along
with  prudence among the "so-called self-regarding virtues, which do not
obviously,  though they may really, affect the welfare of the tribe" and
which   "have   never  been  esteemed  by  savages,  though  now  highly
appreciated  by  civilized  nations."  That Darwin has modern society in
mind  when  he  speaks  of "civilized nations," may be inferred from his
remarks  about  the sensuality ofthe Greeks and Romans. This seems to be
confirmed  by his statement that "the hatred of indecency . . . which is
so  valuable  an  aid  to  chastity,  is  a  modern virtue, appertaining
exclusively  ...  to  civilized  life."  What  may  be  noted  here  and
questioned 866

[901a]
in addition to the validity of Darwin's comparison of modern and ancient
culture—  is  the  tendency  to identify temperance with chastity, or at
least  with  restraint,  if  not abstinence,Jn_the^ sphere of the sexual
impulses.  In  our day, the general notion of virtue is often restricted
to  the virtue of chastity, as when we use the words "virtuous woman" to
signify  one who is chaste, or "woman of easy virtue" to signify one who
is not. But spectacles of gluttony and drunkenness, of avarice or greed,
are  ever  present to remind us that man can be intemperate in more ways
than  one.  Darwin's implication of progress from licentious to moderate
living  may have less justification when we consider all the forms which
intemperance can take. Darwin, furthermore, seems to distinguish between
courage   and   temperance  in  relation  to  the  level  or  degree  of
civilization.  Unlike  temperance,  courage,  he  thinks, is demanded by
primitive  as  well as civilized life because it concerns the welfare of
society as much as the wellbeing of the individual. Since "no man can be
useful or faithful to his tribe without courage, this quality," he says,
"has  universally been placed in the highest rank." On the point of this
comparison between the two virtues, Freud appears to disagree. Though he
too  considers  temperance  or self-control largely in the sphere of the
sexual  instincts,  he  seems to think that any form of organized social
life,  whether  regarded  as  primitive  or  civilized,  exacts  certain
restraints  from  the  individual  for  the  sake  of  the  common good.
Temperance  no  less  than  courage  serves  the  tribe  or  the  state.
"Civilization  has been built up, " Freud writes, "under the pressure of
the  struggle  for  existence,  by  sacrifices  in  gratification of the
primitive  impulses,  and  that  is  to a great extent forever being re-
created  as each individual, successively joining the community, repeats
the  sacrifice  of  his  instinctive  pleasures for the common good. The
sexual  are  amongst  the  most important of the instinctive forces thus
utilized;  they are in this way sublimated, that is to say, their energy
is turned aside from its sexual goal and diverted towards other ends, no
longer  sexual,  and  socially more valuable." Society may depend on the
temperance  of  its  members without being able to exact temperance from
them. Writers like J. S. Mill, for

[901b]
Chapter  91  :  TEMPERANCE 867 example, question the right of society to
enforce  temperance upon its members by the enactment of sumptuary laws,
especially  with  regard  to food and drink. The supposition seems to be
that  the  intemperate  man  injures  only  himself—  to do which is the
prerogative  of  his  personal  liberty—whereas  the  unjust man injures
others.  We shall return to the consideration of this isrue later, after
we  have  examined  the  nature  of temperance and its relation to other
virtues,  such as justice, courage, and wisdom or prudence. If the poets
and  the  historians  describe  the  prevalence  and  the range of man's
intemperance,  the  moralists tend to be unanimous in recommending self-
control   or   moderation.   There   is  hardly  any  variety  of  moral
theory—whether  developed  in  terms  of  law  and  duty  or in terms of
happiness  and  virtue,  whether  appealing to a priori principles or to
criteria  of  utility  empirically  applied—which does not recommend the
discipline  of  desire  by reason and which does not condemn sensuality,
self-indulgence,  unchecked  appetites,  or  passions run wild. The word
"temperance"  itself  is not always used, nor is the technical notion of
virtue always implied, by those who advocate what Milton calls "the rule
of  not  too much, by temperance taught." For some writers, on the other
hand, temperance and virtue are almost identical. They think the essence
of temperance is moderation and the virtuous life is the reasonable one.
It  is one in which reason moderates the passions and limits the pursuit
of  pleasure.  For example, Freud's theory of the realityprinciple seems
to  reflect traditional notions of temperance. A person dominated by the
pleasure-principle  is  infantile in character. "The transition from the
pleasure-principle  to the reality-principle," he points out, "is one of
the  most  important  advances in the development of the ego." When "the
ego  learns  that  it must inevitably go without immediate satisfaction,
postpone gratification, learn to endure a degree of pain, and altogether
renounce  certain  sources of pleasure," it "becomes 'reasonable,' is no
longer  controlled  by  the pleasure-principle, but follows the reality-
principle," which seeks "a delayed and diminished pleasure, one which is
assured by its realization of fact, its relation to reality."

[902a]
868  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  So,  too,  Spinoza's doctrine that human bondage
consists  in being subject to the tyranny of the passions, whereas human
freedom  stems  from the rule of reason, can be read as an apostrophe to
temperance.  Descartes'  maxim,  "to try always to conquer myself rather
than  fortune,  and  to alter my desires rather than change the order of
the  world,"  is  still  another expression of the insight that peace of
mind  comes  from  self-control.  Though  Kant does not think temperance
deserves  "to be called good without qualification," he does affirm that
"moderation  in  the  affections  and  passions,  self-control  and calm
deliberation,  are  not  only  good  in  many respects, but even seem to
constitute  part  of the intrinsic worth of the person." It is Montaigne
who  magnifies temperance beyond virtue, and makes it the measure of the
sound  pursuit  of  every  sort  of  good,  even  virtue itself. Without
temperance,  he  writes  in  his  essay "Of Moderation," we can "corrupt
things  that in themselves are laudable and good; we may grasp virtue so
that  it  becomes vicious, if we embrace it too stringently and with too
violent  a  desire." Montaigne opposes "those who say there is never any
excess  in  virtue."  On the contrary, he thinks that "a man may both be
too  much  in  love with virtue, and be excessive in a just action ... I
love  temperate  and  moderate natures. An immoderate zeal, even to that
which  is good, though it does not offend, astonishes me, and puts me to
study  what  name  to  give  it."  As  with  virtue,  so  with wisdom or
philosophy.  He quotes Holy Writ to the effect that we should be soberly
wise,  not  try to be wiser than befits our natures. We should not "dive
into  philosophy  beyond  the  limits of profit; taken moderately, it is
pleasant  and  useful."  There  is,  in  short, "no pleasure so just and
lawful,  where  intemperance  and  excess  are  not  to  be  condemned."
Montaigne sees temperance as augmenting the pleasure of life rather than
diminishing it. He subscribes to Plato's statement in the Laws that "the
temperate  life  is in all things gentle, having gentle pains and gentle
pleasures;  whereas  the  intemperate  life  . . . has violent pains and
pleasures,  and vehement and stinging desires, and loves utterly insane;
and in the tem-

[902b]
perate  life the pleasures exceed the pains, but in the intemperate life
the  pains  exceed the pleasures in greatness and number and frequency."
To  overlook this, Montaigne elsewhere suggests, is to suppose that "the
regimen  which  stops  the  toper before he has drunk himself drunk, the
glutton  before  he has eaten to a surfeit, and the lecher before he has
got  the  pox,  is an enemy to pleasure." Yet, in his love of "temperate
and  moderate  natures," Montaigne repeatedly counsels us to avoid being
overzealous  even  about temperance itself. The maxim "Nothing overmuch"
applies  to  virtue as well as to the pleasure-seeking that virtue tries
to control. Considered in terms of Aristotle's theory that all the moral
virtues  consist in a mean between excess and defect, Montaigne seems to
be  identifying  moderation  with  the  observance  of the mean, so that
moderation  becomes  an  aspect  of  every  virtue, including temperance
itself  as  one  virtue among others. Thus the courageous man is one who
fears  neither  too much nor too little, but is moderate with respect to
peril  and  pain.  Accordingly, a man cannot be too courageous, but only
too  fearless,  and so rash or foolhardy. But it may be supposed that if
moderation  enters  into all the virtues, such virtues as temperance and
courage  are  not distinct. Holding them to be distinct in regard to the
objects  with  which  they  deal,  Aquinas admits that each of the major
virtues  can  be "taken to denote certain general conditions of virtue,"
so  that  in  a  sense  "they  overflow  into  one  another." He defines
temperance  as  "a  disposition  of the soul, moderating any passions or
acts, so as to keep them within bounds," and fortitude as "a disposition
whereby  the  soul  is  strengthened  for  that  which is in accord with
reason, against any assaults of the passions or the toil involved in any
work to be done." So conceived, Aquinas thinks it is possible to see how
temperance and fortitude are in some sense one. The man who can curb his
desires  for  the pleasures of touch is more able to check his daring in
the  face  of  danger,  "and  in  this  sense  fortitude  is  said to be
temperate."  The  man  who  is able to stand firm against the dangers of
death  is  more  able to remain firm against the onslaught of pleasures,
and so "temperance can be

[903a]
said to be brave." Thus temperance enters into other virtues, insofar as
it  leads  men  to  "observe  the mean in all things," just as fortitude
enters   into  temperance  because  it  strengthens,  men  against  "the
enticements  of  pleasure"  as  well  as  against  the fear of pain. The
general  theory  of  virtue,  in  terms of which the several virtues are
distinguished  and their connections traced, is discussed in the chapter
on  Virtue  and  Vice;  and  the  special virtues to which temperance is
related  are  considered  in  the  chapters  on  Courage,  Justice,  and
Prudence.  Here  we  must  be  concerned  to  observe  how  the  general
conception  of  virtue  is  exemplified in the definitions of temperance
given  by  those who, like Plato, Aristotle, and Aquinas, consider it to
be,  not  the whole of virtue, but one of the major virtues and distinct
from  the  others.  Though Plato and Aristotle do not conceive virtue in
the  same  way, and though they diverge in analyzing particular virtues,
such  as justice or wisdom, and in describing how particular virtues are
related  to one another, they nevertheless seem to concur on a number of
points  in  their  treatment  of  temperance.  In the Gorgias, Callicles
asserts  that  only  those  who  are  unable to satisfy their desire for
pleasures  praise  temperance, and call intemperance base. But, he asks,
"what  could  be  more truly base or evil than temperance to a man . . .
who  might  freely be enjoying every good and has no one to stand in his
way?"  And  he  concludes  by  saying  that "luxury and intemperance and
license,  if  they be provided with means, are virtue and happiness." In
reply,  Socrates  tries  to  persuade  Callicles  that  "instead  of the
intemperate  and  insatiate  life,"  one  should  "choose  that which is
orderly  and  sufficient  and  has  a due provision for daily needs." He
compares  the intemperate man "to a vessel full of holes, because it can
never  be  satisfied."  By  analogy with the sound and the leaky vessel,
Socrates  describes  the  temperate  man  as able to satisfy his limited
desires,  whereas  the  intemperate  man, of boundless desire, can never
pause  in  his search for pleasure. "If he pauses for a moment, he is in
an  agony  of  pain. Such are their respective lives," he adds, "and now
would you say that the life of the intem-

[903b]
Chapter 91 : TEMPERANCE 869 perate is happier than that of the temperate
?"  Callicles  claims  to be unconvinced, but later Socrates gets him to
admit  that  in all things in a house or a ship, in the body or the soul
order  is  good,  and  disorder evil. He then proceeds to point out that
order  is  the  principle of health in the body and of temperance in the
soul.  It  is  in  these  terms  that Socrates defines temperance in the
Republics   "the  ordering  or  controlling  of  certain  pleasures  and
desires."  In the human soul, he explains, "there is a better and also a
worse principle; and when the better has the worse under control, then a
man  is said to be master of himself." The words "temperance" and "self-
mastery"  are  almost  interchangeable;  both  signify  "the rule of the
better  part  over  the worse." Just as the courageous man is one "whose
spirit retains in pleasure and in pain the commands of reason about what
he  ought or ought not to fear," so the temperate man is one in whom the
"ruling  principle  of  reason  and  the  two subject ones of spirit and
desire  are  equally  agreed  that  reason  ought  to rule." In somewhat
similar  terms, Aristotle defines temperance and courage by reference to
pleasure  and  pain.  "The  man  who  abstains from bodily pleasures and
delights in this very fact is temperate, while the man who is annoyed at
it  is  self-indulgent; and he who stands his ground against things that
are  terrible  and  delights in this or at least is not pained is brave,
while  the  man  who is pained is a coward." Like Plato, Aristotle makes
the  rational  principle  the  source of these virtues. It is reason, or
more  precisely  one of reason's virtues, prudence, which determines the
mean  between  excess  and  defect  with regard to pleasure and pain, or
fear, anger, and the other passions. Like Freud, Aristotle regards self-
indulgence as infantile or childish. Children "live at the beck and call
of  appetite,  and it is in them that the desire for what is pleasant is
strongest."  When such desire is not regulated by reason, "it will go to
great  lengths;  for  in  an irrational being the desire for pleasure is
insatiable  even if it tries every source of gratification." Where Freud
speaks  of  the  pleasure-principle submitting to the reality-principle,
Aristotle  says, "as the child should live according to the direction of
his tutor, so the appetitive element

[904a]
870 THE GREAT IDEAS should live according to the rational principle. The
appetitive element in a temperate man should harmonize with the rational
principle." According to Aristotle, temperance is concerned not with all
pleasures,  but "with the kind of pleasures that other animals share in,
which  therefore appear slavish and brutish; these are touch and taste."
Self-indulgence  is  a matter of reproach "because it attaches to us not
as  men but as animals. To delight in such things and to love them above
all  others  is brutish." The endurance of pain, which is central to the
nature  of  courage,  enters  into  temperance  incidentally.  The self-
indulgent  man  "is  pained  more  than he ought at not getting pleasant
things," whereas the temperate man "is not pained at the absence of what
is  pleasant  or at his abstinence from it." But total abstinence is not
temperance,  any  more  than  over-indulgence  is.  "The  temperate  man
occupies a middle position" between those who have an insatiable craving
for  pleasure  and  those  "who  fall short with regard to pleasures and
delight  in  them  less than they should." Such insensibility, Aristotle
declares,  is  not human either. When reason curbs the desire for bodily
pleasures,  "it  is  not  to lessen sensual pleasure," in the opinion of
Aquinas,  "but to prevent the force of concupiscence from cleaving to it
immoderately.  By  immoderately"  he  explains, "I mean going beyond the
bounds  of reason, as a sober person does not take less pleasure in food
eaten in moderation than the glutton, but his concupiscence lingers less
in  such  pleasures."  Though  Aquinas agrees with Aristotle in defining
temperance strictly as moderation with respect to the pleasures of taste
and touch, "such as the pleasures of the table or of sex," he associates
with  temperance  those virtues which involve moderation with respect to
other  pleasures. For example, there is liberality with respect to money
as  an object of love or pleasure. Neither the spendthrift nor the miser
is  temperate.  Friendliness  or  affability  and  gentleness  represent
temperance  in the relation of a man to the pleasures of fellowship; and
the  virtue  which Aristotle calls eutrapelia is similarly classified by
Aquinas,  as being a moderate indulgence in the pleasures of recreation,
of sport

[904b]
and  games,  the opposites of which, in excess and defect, can be called
"buffoonery"  and  "boorishness."  Even the pleasures of learning can be
pursued  intemperately,  so  that an undue craving for knowledge— beyond
the  proper  limits and for the wrong reasons— is, according to Aquinas,
the  vice of curiosity. The notions of abstinence and continence seem to
be  closely  related to the idea of temperance. The words are often used
interchangeably.  But as we have seen, according to the theory of virtue
as  a mean between extremes of excess and defect, temperance calls for a
moderate  indulgence  in  pleasures,  not abstinence from them entirely.
This  raises  the  question whether the asceticism of the religious life
violates  the  rule  of  reason  by a kind of immoderate withdrawal from
ordinary pleasures. What to the psychoanalyst may look like pathological
selfdenial,  or to the philosopher like a violation of nature, takes, in
the  eyes  of the Christian theologian, the form of heroic temperance, a
supernatural  perfection of the virtue. When in the religious life a man
does  "his utmost to strive onward to divine things," then, according to
Aquinas,  in  those  who  are  "tending  towards the divine similitude,"
temperance  is  a  perfecting  virtue.  "So  far  as  nature allows," it
"neglects the needs of the body." In those "who have already attained to
the  divine  likeness,  the  perfect virture of temperance" is one which
"knows  no earthly desires." Since "use of sexual union hinders the mind
from  giving itself wholly to the service of God," and since "the use of
venery  withdraws  the  mind  from that perfect intentness on tending to
God,"  the  perpetual  continence  of  the celibate life, as well as the
voluntary  poverty  of the monastic life, seem to Aquinas "requisite for
religious  perfection." Augustine, in his Confessions, tells of the time
when  "I thought I should be impossibly miserable if I had to forego the
embraces  of  a  woman;  and  I did not think of Your mercy as a healing
medicine for that weakness, because I had never tried it. I thought that
continency  was  a matter of our own strength, and I knew that I had not
the  strength;  for  in  my utter foolishness I did not know the word of
Your Scripture that none can be continent unless you give it."

[905a]
Though  he separated from his mistress in order to prepare for marriage,
he  discovered  that  "it  was  not really marriage that I wanted. I was
simply a slave to lust." He recounis-the struggles which finally enabled
him  to  turn  in  the other direction and to "see the austere beauty of
Continence,  serene  and  indeed  joyous"; and with her, he adds, "I saw
such  hosts of young men and women . . . gray widows and women grown old
in  virginity,  and  in  them all Continence herself, not barren but the
fruitful  mother  of  children, her joys, by You, Lord, her Spouse." But
there  is  another  meaning  of  continence  according  to  which  it is
condemned  by  the  philosopher  who  conceives  temperance as a natural
virtue.  The  reason  for Aristotle's condemnation of continence differs
from   the   reason   he   gives  for  his  disapproval  of  abstinence.
Abstinence—at  least  on  the  natural plane— is an immoderate denial of
pleasure.   Continence  is  opposed  to  temperance  because  it  merely
represents  reason's  inhibition  of  the  act  prompted by a licentious
desire  for pleasure. It is not an habitual moderation of desire itself.
Aristotle's  emphasis  on habit, therefore, leads him to insist upon the
distinction  between  temperance  and continence. "We group together the
incontinent  and  the  self-indulgent,  the  continent and the temperate
man,"  Aristotle  writes,  "because  they are concerned somehow with the
same  pleasures  and  pain;  but though they are concerned with the same
objects, they are not similarly related to them." The difference lies in
the  fact that a man acts continently in a particular situation when his
reason  is  able  to  overcome  an  immoderate  desire for pleasure, and
incontinently when the force of his desire brushes reason aside; whereas
a man not only acts temperately, but is temperate in character, when his
desires are themselves habitually moderated to be in accord with reason.
The  temperate  man,  therefore,  has no need for continence. Nor is the
incontinent  man  to be confused with the intemperate, for the latter is
not  convinced that his desires are inordinate. The continent man is one
who,  when acting against reason, knows that he is doing so. Though both
the  continent  and the temperate man do nothing contrary to the rule of
reason for the

[905b]
Chapter 91 : TEMPERANCE 871 sake of bodily pleasures, the one, according
to  Aristotle,  has  bad  appetites,  the  other  is free from them. The
continent man is not the only one who gives the appearance of temperance
without  being  really temperate in character. Some men, says Aristotle,
are  moderate by nature— "from the very moment of birth fitted for self-
control."  What  appears to be temperance in them, therefore, is not, in
his  opinion,  a  virtuous  habit  acquired  by  good acts, but simply a
natural   capacity   to   control   their  desires  or  a  temperamental
constitution which happens not to be ridden by very strong desires. They
do not deserve to be praised for their apparent self-control; neither do
those  who  manage  to  be  moderate  about  certain  pleasures but give
themselves free rein with respect to other desires. The miser who limits
his  bodily  comforts  in  order  to  amass  a  pile  of  gold is hardly
temperate.   Gibbon  writes  of  the  Emperor  Julian  that  he  "seldom
recollected  the  fundamental  maxim  of  Aristotle, that true virtue is
placed  at  an equal distance between the opposite vices." Julian's lack
of  temperance  appears,  however, not merely in the opposite extreme to
which he went to express his contempt for luxury, sleeping on the ground
and  renouncing the decencies of dress and cleanliness. Though genuinely
moderate  in some things, such as his diet, he went to excess in others,
overdoing   his   preoccupation   with  affairs  of  state  and  working
incessantly for long hours day after day. He "considered every moment as
lost  that  was  not  devoted  to  the  advantage  of  the public or the
improvement  of his own mind. By this avarice of time," Gibbon observes,
"he seemed to protract the short duration of his reign." Temperance in a
particular  respect  is  sometimes  praised  as  a  virtue relative to a
specific and limited goal. Considering the wealth of nations, Adam Smith
looks  upon  prodigality  as  a  major vice, and regards parsimony as an
indispensable  virtue. "Capitals are increased by parsimony," he writes,
"and  diminished  by prodigality and misconduct . . . Parsimony, and not
industry,  is  the  immediate  cause of the increase of capital . . . By
what  a frugal man annually saves, he not only affords maintenance to an
additional number of productive hands, for that

[906a]
872  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  or  the ensuing year, but, like the founder of a
public  workhouse,  he  establishes  as it were a perpetual fund for the
maintenance  of an equal number in all times to come." Capital funds are
perverted  by  the  prodigal.  "By not confining his expenses within his
income,"  Smith  declares,  "he  encroaches  upon  his  capital  ...  By
diminishing  the  funds designed for the employment of productive labor,
he  necessarily diminishes . . . the quantity of that labor which adds a
value  to  the subject upon which it is bestowed, and, consequently, the
value of the annual produce of the land and labour of the whole country.
...  If  the prodigality of some was not compensated by the frugality of
others,  the  conduct  of  every  prodigal, by feeding the idle with the
bread  of  the  industrious,  tends  not  only to beggar himself, but to
impoverish  his  country."  From the point of view of augmenting wealth,
Smith  may  be right in calling every prodigal "a public enemy and every
frugal  man  a  public  benefactor."  Marx, however, raises the question
whether  thrift  or  parsimony represents moral virtue in the capitalist
himself. He mocks the classical, or what he calls the "vulgar," economic
theory which tends to identify capital with abstinence, and, taking Adam
Smith's  statement  that  "industry  furnishes the material which saving
accumulates,"  he  interprets  saving  to  mean  the reconversion of the
greatest  possible  portion  of  surplus-value  or  surplus-product into
capital.  For  Marx  the  question  is, in addition to being economic, a
moral  and  psychological  one. He describes the capitalist as suffering
from  "a  Faustian conflict between the passion for accumulation and the
desire  for  enjoyment."  His  parsimony,  or  abstinence  from  certain
pleasures,  hardly signifies genuine temperance; for, according to Marx,
the  capitalist  is like the hoarder who "makes a sacrifice of the lusts
of  the flesh to his gold fetish." Elsewhere he says that the "boundless
greed  after  riches .... is common to the capitalist and the miser; but
while  the  miser  is  merely a capitalist gone mad, the capitalist is a
rational  miser."  In Marx's opinion the capitalist cannot even boast of
personal thrift to any great extent. "The capitalist gets rich, not like
the miser, in proportion to his personal labor and restricted

[906b]
consumption,  but at the same rate as he squeezes out the labor-power of
others,   and  enforces  on  the  laborer  abstinence  from  all  life's
enjoyments." These considerations of political economy lead us naturally
back  to  the  issue  raised  earlier,  concerning  the  significance of
temperance  for  society,  or  the effect of private intemperance on the
public  welfare.  What  is the relation between temperance and justice ?
Aristotle  answers  this  question in terms of his conception of general
justice  as  including the social aspect of all the other moral virtues.
To  the  extent  that his courage or temperance can affect others or the
common  good, a man is required by justice to be temperate and brave. It
is  proper  for the law, he says, to bid us do "both the acts of a brave
man  (e.g.,  not  to  desert our post nor take flight nor throw away our
arms)  and those of a temperate man {e.g., not to commit adultery nor to
gratify  one's  lust)."  Though he accepts Aristotle's notion of general
justice,  Aquinas  puts a limitation on the extent to which the positive
law  of  the  state  can  regulate  or enforce the acts of a virtue like
temperance.  Because  it is "framed for a multitude of human beings, the
majority  of  whom  are  not  perfect  in virtue . . . human laws do not
forbid  all  vices,  from  which the virtuous abstain, but only the more
grievous  vices,  from which it is possible for the majority to abstain;
and  chiefly those that are injurious to others, without the prohibition
of  which  human society could not be maintained." The point is not that
some acts of temperance cannot be prescribed by law, but rather that the
human  law  does  not  command  every  act of temperance, but only those
"which  are  ordainable  to the common good." The principle being clear,
the  problem  remains  extremely  difficult  when the question is one of
regulating  certain types of behavior, such as insobriety, extravagance,
or  adultery.  Montesquieu  discusses the difficulties of administering,
under  the  Julian  law,  the "punishments decreed by the Roman emperors
against  the  incontinence  of  women."  He considers the advantages and
disadvantages,  relative  to different forms of government, of sumptuary
laws directed at maintaining frugality and avoiding

[907a]
luxury;  as,  for  example, in Venice, where the would vanish if alcohol
were  taken  away." To rich were "compelled by laws to moderation" still
others,  like Mill, such sumptuary laws are and were thus so "habituated
to parsimony that wrong in principle because consumption, which none but
courtesans  could make them paitjmxh^ they try to regulate, is a private
matter,  their  money."  As for sobriety, he seems to If an individual's
intemperance  injures  only  think  that  the  problem  varies  with the
climate,  himself, he may be morally reprobated, but, the Mohammedan law
against  the  drinking  of  Mill holds, he ought not to be prosecuted by
wine  being  "improper for cold countries where law. A man who, "through
intemperance  or  exthe  climate  seems  to  force  them  to  a  kind of
travagance,  becomes  unable  to  pay his debts," national intemperance,
very  different  from  peror becomes incapable of supporting his family,
sonal  inebriety. ... A German drinks through "might be justly punished;
but  it  is for the custom, and a Spaniard by choice." breach of duty to
his family or creditors, not The reasons which have been offered against
for  the  extravagance." Again Mill writes: "No the legal prohibition of
intoxicants  are  many  person ought to be punished simply for being and
various.  To  those  who  hold that temperance drunk; but a soldier or a
policeman   should   be   consists   in   moderation,   not  abstinence,
"ternpunished  for  being  drunk  on  duty.  Whenever, perance laws" are
misguided  as  well  as  misin  short,  there is a definite damage, or a
definite  named.  To  others,  like William James, "drunkrisk of damage,
either  to another individual or enness ... as teetotalers use the word,
is  one  of  to the public, the case is taken out of the provthe deepest
functions  of  human nature. Half of ince of liberty, and placed in that
of  morality  both the poetry and tragedy of human life or law." OUTLINE
OF  TOPICS  i.  The  nature  of  temperance  874  1  a.  The relation of
temperance  to  virtue  generally,  and  to  the  virtues of courage and
justice  \b.  The  relation of temperance to knowledge and prudence: the
determination  of  \c.  Temperance  and  continence: the counterfeits of
temperance  2.  The  varieties  of  intemperance:  the  related vices of
sensuality,  abstemiousness,  cruelty, 3. Temperance in relation to duty
or  happiness  877  4.  The cultivation of temperance: the training of a
temperate  character  5.  The  social  aspects of temperance 878 50. The
temperance  of  rulers  and citizens: intemperate conduct as inimical to
the  common  good $b. The temperance of a people: luxurious indulgences;
the  intemperance  of the mob 5c. Laws concerning temperance: the extent
to  which the sphere of temperance can 6. The extremes of temperance and
intemperance 6a. Asceticism: heroic temperance

[907b]
Chapter 91 : TEMPERANCE 873 PAGE the mean of temperance 875 be regulated
by law 879

[908a]
874  THE  GREAT IDEAS sage is in section d of page 12. tain cases; e.g.,
Iliad,  bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently rather than continuously in the work
or  passage cited. 1. The nature of temperance 7 Plato: Charmides la-13d
esp  7b-c/  Protagoras, 55a / Phaedrus, 120b-c / Phaedo, 225d / Gorgias,
275b-284d  /  Republic, bk hi, 326c; 334a; bk iv, 347d-355a / Statesman,
605d608d  /  Philebus,  627c-628a  /  Laws,  bk  i,  645d-652d;  bk  hi,
673d-674b; bk v, 689d690c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
[no4b4-i3]
350a;  ch 7 [uo7b3-8] 353a; ch 8 354a-d; bk hi, ch 10-12 364b-366a,c; bk
vii, ch 7 [1150s 9-23] 400d-401a; ch ii
[ii52b i5-i7] 403d;
ch 12
[1153*27-35] 404c-d
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9 [1366^4-15] 609a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii,
ch  17  158d161a;  bk iv, ch 4 225a-228a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i,
sect  16 254d255d; bk vii, sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect 39 288c; bk ix,
sect  7  292b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch i, 6c; ch 3, 7c-d; ch
6-7,  9c-10a  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix, ch 4, 511d512a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 59, a 4, rep 3 309a-310a; part
i-ii, q 34, a i, rep 2 768c-769d; q 35, a 6, rep 3 777b-778c 20 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 60,

[908b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
pasPage  Sections: When the text is printed in one column, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in
53  James  : Psychology, 116a-119b. the passage begins in the upper half
of  page  116  and  ends in the lower half of page 119. When the text is
printed in two columns, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  lefthand  side  of the page, the letters c and d to the
upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side of the page. For example,
in  7  Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in the lower half
of  the  left-hand  side  of  page 163 and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164. Author's Divisions: One or more of the main
divisions  of a work (such as part, bk, ch, sect) are sometimes included
in  the  reference;  line  numbers,  in  brackets, are given in cerBible
References:  The  references  are  to book, chapter, and verse. When the
King  James  and  Douay  versions  differ  in  title  of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  II  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermitFor   additional   information   concerning  the  style  of  the
references, see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance
in  the  use  of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. a 2 50d-51b; a 4,
ans and rep 3 52b-53a; a 5, ans and rep 4 53a-54d; q 61, aa 2-5 55c-59d;
q  63, a 4, ans and rep 2 65d-66c; q 65, a i, ans 70b-72a; part ii-ii, q
180,  a  2,  rep 3 608c-609c; q 186, a i, ans 650c-651d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[82-139] 79b-d
22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 72-73 535b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 89b-91b;
165c-166a;  354a-b;  489b-490c;  540b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
78a-b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 61 443a-b; appendix, in 447b 32
Milton:   Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [527-551]  310b311a  /  Areopagitica,
390b-391a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  69-71  180b-181a  42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256b  /  Pref  Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
378d379a  / Judgement, 586d-587a 43 Mill: Liberty, 305c-307a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  92c  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 313d-314b la. The relation of
temperance  to  virtue  generally,  and  to  the  virtues of courage and
justice 5 Euripides: Suppliants [838-917] 265d-266b / Iphigenia at Aulis
[543-589] 429d-430a

[909a]
Chapter  91  :  TEMPERANCE  lb  to  \c  Aristophanes  502a 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370a-c Clouds
[955-1104]
500a5  7 Plato: Charmides la-13d / Gorgias, 284a-285a / Republic, bk ii,
311c-312b; bk iv, 346a^355a; bk viii, 407a-408a / Statesman, 605d-608d /
Laws,  bk  1,  643a;  644b-645c;  bk  hi,  673d674b;  bk  v, 689d-690c 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2
[ii7a26-b2]
164a; bk vi, ch 13 [150*1-15] 204c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1103*3-10]
348c-d; bk ii, ch 2
[iio4s io]-ch 3 [uo4b i3]
349c-350a; ch 6 351c-352d; ch 7
[1 107*33^8]
353a; ch 8 354a-d; bk hi, ch 12
[11 19*22-33]
365d-366a; bk v, ch i
[1 129^2-24]
377a; bk ix, ch 8 [n68b23-n69a ii] 422b-d; bk x, ch 8 432d-434a passim /
Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1265*28-37]
460c-d; bk vii, ch 15
[i334an-b7]
539a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[i366a33-b22] 608d-609a; bk ii, ch 4 [1381*2425] 627a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk hi, sect 6 261a-c; bk v, sect 12 271a; bk
viii,  sect 39 288c; BK xi, sect 10 303b-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
ii,  ch 3, 7c-d; ch 6-7, 9c-10a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 4,
511d512a;  ch 20 523d-524a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 59, a
4,  rep  3  309a-310a; part i-ii, q 35, a 6, rep 3 777b-778c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, qq 60-61 49d-59d; q 65, aa 1-3 70b-73d; q
66,  a  1  75b-76b;  a  4 78c-79b; part hi suppl, q 96, a 6, rep 3-4,8-9
1058a-1061b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  89b-d  27 Shakespeare: Measure for
Measure, act i, sc iv
[48-61] 178b-c; act
ii, sc ii
[162-187]
183d-184a;  sc  iv [1-17] 184c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 72b;
80c81a  32  Milton:  Comus  [331-489] 40b-44a / Samson Agonistes [38-59]
340b;  [541-576]  351b-352a  / Areopagitica, 390a-b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b  / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
378d-379a  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  315b-316a lb. The relation of
temperance  to  knowledge and prudence: the determination of the mean of
temperance  Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 8:5-7— (^) OT, Boo{ of Wisdom,
8  15-7  7  Plato:  Charmides  la-13desp7a-c  /  Protagoras,  61c-62a  /
Cratylus,  99c  / Meno, 183d-184c / Phaedo, 225d-226c / Republic, bk hi,
338a339a  /  Sophist,  557b-d  /  Laws,  bk iv, 679c-d / Seventh Letter,
808d-809a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1103*3-10]
348c-d; bk ii, ch 2 [1104*10-26] 349c-d; ch 6-9 351c-355a,c esp ch 6
[uo6b36-i 107*2]

[909b]
875 352c; bk v, ch 9 [1137*5-26] 385b-c; bk vi, ch 1
[ii38b i6-34] 387a-b; ch
5
[ii40b u-i9]
389b-c; ch 9
[1 142^7-34] 391d-392b; ch
13  394b-d;  bk vii, ch 6 [ii49b24-i 150*1] 400b-c; ch 8-9 401c-403a; ch
ii
[ii52b i5-i7] 403d;
ch 12 [1153*27-35] 404c-d; bk x, ch 8 [1178* 16-19] 432d; ch 9
[1 179^-30] 434b-c
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk i, 826d-827a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
31a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 6-7, 9c10a 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk xix, ch 4, 511d512a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
113,  a 1, rep 2 576a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, a
2, rep 2 30c-31a; q 57, a 5 39a-40a; q 58, a 2 42a-43a; a 4 44a-d; q 63,
a  4, ans and rep 2 65d-66c; q 64, a 2 67d-68b; q 65, a 1 70b-72a; q 66,
a  1 75b-76b; part ii-ii, q 180, a 2 608c-609c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk xi [527-543] 310b311a / Samson Agonistes
[38-59]
340b  /  Areopagitica, 390a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 69-71 180b-181a; 382-383
238b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxviii, 259b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk v, 346c-347a 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
376d-377b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 309a-c; 404b-405c 53 James: Psychology,
14b-15a  lc. Temperance and continence: the counterfeits of temperance 7
Plato:  Protagoras,  59c-60a  / Phaedo, 225d226a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk
vi, ch 8
[1 46^4-28]
200d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13 [1102^3-28] 348a-c; bk hi, ch 12
[ui9*35-b i9]
366a,c; bk vi, ch 9
[ii42b i7~34] 391d-392b; ch
13
[ii44b i-29] 394b-c; bk vii, ch 1-4 395a-399a
esp ch 2
[1146*9-17] 396a, ch 4
[1148*4-22]
398b-c; ch 5 [1149*5-24] 399c-d; ch 6 [1149 15 24-1150*1] 400b-c; ch 7-9
400d-403a esp ch 9
[1 i5i b23-i 152*6] 402d-403a; ch 10 [1152*7-24]
403a-b  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi, par 20 41b-c; bk viii, par
26-27  60b-c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 98, a 2, rep 3
517d-519a  20  Aquinas  :  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 58, a 3, rep 2
43b-44a;  q  63,  a  1 63a-64a; q 77, aa 2-3 145d-148b; q 109, a 10, ans
347a-d;  PART  III,  Q 7, A 2, REP 3 746c-747bj PART III suppl, q 96, aa
3-4  1053c-1055c  22  Chaucer:  Parson's Tale, par 72-73 535b; par 77-83
540b-542b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv, 272d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
89b-91b; 394d-395b

[910a]
876  THE GREAT IDEAS 2. The varieties of intemperance: the related vices
of sensuality, abstemiousness, cruelty, curiosity, inordinate desire Old
Testament:   Proverbs,  11:17;  12:10;  25:28;  31:4-5  /  Ecclesiastes,
5:10-6:12— (D) Ecclesiastes, 5:9-6:11 / Isaiah., 3:16-17; 5:11-14,22-23;
28:7-8—  (D)  Isaias,  3:16-17;  5:11-14,22-23;  28:7-8  /  Haba{{u{,  2
14-5,15-17-(D)  Habacuc, 2:4-5,15-17 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 14:5-10;
19:2;  26:8;  31:25-31 — (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 14:5-10; 19:2-3; 26:11;
31:30-42  New  Testament:  Romans,  1:18-32  /  /  Corinthians, 5:9-10 /
Galatians,  5:16-21  /  Philippians,  3:18-19  /  Colossians, 3:5,8 / //
Timothy,  3:1-7 / Titus, 3:3 I James, 4:1-6 1 1 Peter, 4:1-5 / // Peter,
2:9-22  / I John, 2:16 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk i [366-423] 186d-187c; bk 11
[35-79] 188b-d; bk ix
[39-61] 229b-d;
[231-419]
231c-233c; bk x
[210-465]
238b240d; bk xxii [35-67] 306b-d 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens la-14a,c
esp
[980-1073] 13b-14a,c
/ Seven Against Thebes
[653-791] 34b-35d / Eumenides [490-565] 86b87a
5 Euripides: Medea 212a-224a,c esp [627-642] 217c / Hippolytus 225a-236d
/  Electro  [10601099] 336d-337a / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Iphigenia at
Aulis  [543-589] 429d-430a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [882-1104] 499b-502a 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  2d-3d; 46c-d; 47c; bk in, 95a-98a; bk vii,
222c-d;   bk   ix,  311b312d  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  hi,
436c-438b; bk vi, 513b 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 120b-c / Symposium, 153b155c /
Gorgias,  276b-277b  /  Republic,  bk  hi,  326c-328a; 334a-c / Timaeus,
474b-d  /  Laws,  bk  ix,  751b-d  /  Seventh  Letter,  801  b-c; 806a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 7-8 352d-354d; bk in, ch 10-12 364b-366a,c;
bk v, ch i
[ii29b i2-24] 377a; bk
vii, ch 4 398a-399a; ch 5
[1149^-22]
399c-d; ch 7
[1150*9-23]
400d-401a;  ch  8  401c-402a  /  Politics, bk i, ch 9 [i257b40-i258 ai4]
452a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[10031010] 43a; [1076-1084] 44a; bk iv [1058-1120]
57d-58d  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 10, 149d; ch 18 161a-162b;
bk  iv, ch 5 228a-230b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 10 257d258a
14 Plutarch: Lucullus, 419b-420b / Dion, 783c784a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
hi,  57b-58d;  bk vi, 86a-b; bk xv, 166b-c / Histories, bk ii, 230d231a;
bk  hi,  264b-265d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 16 17c-d; bk v,
par  4 27d-28a; bk vi, par 18-26 40d43a; bk viii, par 26-27 60b-c; bk x,
par 4o-6o

[910b]
81c-86d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  18-22 664d-666c esp ch 21
665d-666b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  98, a 2, rep 3
517d-519a  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 72, a 9 118d-119b;
q  73,  a  5,  rep  1-3  123a-d; q 76, a 4, rep 2,4 143d-144d; q 77, a 5
149a-150a;  q 88, a 5 196d-198a; q 100, a 4, ans 253d255a; part ii-ii, q
46  603c-605a,c  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, v-vii 7a-10d; xi [70-90]
15d-16a;  purgatory,  xvii [82-139] 79b-d; xix-xxvii 81c-96a 22 Chaucer:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  iv,  stanza 32-49 92b-95a / Pardoner's Tale
374a-382b   esp   [12,397-593]   374a-377b,  [12,829-839]  381b  /  Tale
of Melibeus,  par  4-7  401b-402b  / Parson's Tale, par 27 512a-514b; par
70-71  534b535a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 62d-63a passim; 95c 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  186d-193c; 195c-196b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  89b-91b;  162c- 167a; 238c-d; 244d-246a; 270b-271a;
350d-354b; 503b-d; 517b-519a; 534a-c; 538a-d; 541d543a,c 26 Shakespeare:
Titus Andronicus, act ii, sc hi
[89-191]
178d-179d / Romeo and Juliet, act ii, sc vi [1-15] 300c / King John, act
ii,  sc  1  [561-598]  385c-386a  /  1st  Henry IV, act i, sc ii [1-116]
435c-436c;  act  ii,  sc iv [438-527] 448b-449b; act hi, sc hi [172-190]
456b-c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc v
[42-91]
37b-d  /  Measure for Measure, act i, sc ii [128134] 176c / Othello, act
v, sc ii 238d-243a,c / Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[66-100] 304a-c
/ Antony and Cleopatra 311a-350d esp act ii, sc ii [175-245] 320c-321b /
Pericles, act i, sc i
[64-142] 422c-423b
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 120b-137d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  ii  [629-870]  125a130a;  bk  v  [443-450]  185a;  bk viii [500-617]
243a-245b; bk ix [990-1133] 269a-272a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 521a-b
38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xvi,117c-d; 119a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk iv, 189d-190a; bk v, 346c-347d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
38a-b;  70c-71a;  90a-c; 138d-139b; 256c-257a; 340b-c; 389b-c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  67c-d;  166a-167c  passim;  169a-b  42  Kant:  Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368d-369a / Judgement, 586d-587a 43
Mill:  Liberty, 303d-307a passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
198b199b;  part  1,  233b-c;  part  iv,  323a-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[2073-2336] 49a-56a;
[2605-4612] 63b-114b; part
ii  [10,039-11,383]  245a-276b  49  Darwin:  Descent of Man, 315c-316a 50
Marx: Capital, 62b; 72c: 293c-294a

[911a]
I  to  4  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 15b-16a; bk v, 201a-c; bk vi,
248b-250a;  bk  vii,  284a-285a;  bk  viii, 321d-322d; bk ix, 349d-350d;
epilogue  i, 655c-656b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, BKij_4aid;- bk
ii,  38d-39a;  bk  hi,  50c-62a;  69c-70a;  bk  v,  122d-125c;  bk  viii
191b,d-235d;  bk  xii, 370b-d; 372c-373a 53 James: Psychology, 800a-805b
esp  802b-805b  3.  Temperance  in  relation  to  duty  or happiness Old
Testament: Proverbs, 5; 6:23-35; 7; 12:11; 20:1; 21:17; 23:20-21,27-35 /
Jeremiah,  35—  (D)  Jeremias,  35  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 18:30-32;
19:1-3;  31:12-31;  37:26-31—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18:30-32; 19:1-3;
31:12-42;  37:29-34  New  Testament:  / Corinthians, 6:9-10 / / Timothy,
3:1-13 / Titus, 1:5-9; 2 passim / Hebrews, 13:4 / James, 1:12-15; 4:1-10
/  /  Peter, 1:13-14; 2:11; 5:8-9 / // Peter, 2:9-22 / I John, 2:15-17 5
Kuripides: Hippolytus 225a-236d esp
[373430] 228b-d
/ Bacchantes [370-433] 343a-b / Iphigenia at Aulis [543-589] 429d-430a 7
Plato:  Charmides,  7b-c  /  Symposium,  156d157a / Gorgias, 275b-284d /
Republic,  bk  ix  416a-427b  passim  /  Laws, bk v, 689c-690c / Seventh
Letter,  806a;  807a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x,  ch  7 [u77a23-b 4]
431d-432a;  ch  8  432d-434a  passim / Politics, bk 11, ch 6 [1265^8-37]
460c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d; bk v
[1113-1135]
75c-d;
[1412-1435]
79b-d  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  hi,  par  16 17c-d; bk v, par 4
27d-28a;  bk  vi,  par 18-20 40d41c; bk viii, par 26-27 60b-c; bk x, par
40-60 81c-86d / City of God, bk hi, ch 10, 172d; bk xix, ch 4, 511d-513c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 98, a 2, rep 3 517d-519a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 63, a 4, ans and rep 2 65d-66c;
q  77,  a  5  149a150a; q 100, a 4, ans 253d-255a; part ii-ii, q 46, a 2
604b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[82-139] 79b-d
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 163d-164a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 71a-72a;
165c-167a;  353c-354b;  382b-383d;  540b-543a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement
of Learning, 73c-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi [523-543] 310b311a; bk
xii
[583-587] 332a
/  Areopagitica, 390a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 18d-19c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  192b  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  256a-b  / Practical Reason, 327a-d / Pref Metaphysical Elements
of  Ethics, 366d-367a / Judgement, 586d-587a 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-312a
passim

[911b]
Chapter 91 : TEMPERANCE 877 577d-578a; 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii
bk xiv, 605b-d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 164b-d; bk xii,
370b-d  54  Freud:  Origin  and  Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 20c-d /
General  Introduction,  587d; 599b-d / Civilization and Its Discontents,
772c773d;  793a-  794a;  800c-801a 4. The cultivation of temperance: the
training  of  a temperate character Old Testament: Job, 31:1 / Proverbs,
6:23-26;  23:20,31525:16  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon, 8:5-7— (D) OT,
Bool{  of  Wisdom,  8:5-7  / Ecclesiasticus passim, esp 9:3-9, 18:30-32,
19:5,  23:5-6,  25:21,  31:12-31,  37:29-31  —  (£))  OT, Ecclesiasticus
passim,  esp  9:3-13, 18:30-32, 19:5, 23:5-6, 25:28, 31:12-42, 37 :32-34
New  Testament: Lul^e, 21:34 / Romans, 6:1213; 13:13-14 / / Corinthians,
5:9-13;  6:18;  7:1-9;  9:24-27 / Galatians, 15:13,16,22-23 / Ephesians,
5:18  /  Colossians,  3:2-8 / / Thessalonians, 4:3-5; 5:5-8 / / Timothy,
6:8-11  / // Timothy, 2:22 / Titus, 2 esp 2:11-15; 3:3-6 / James, 4:5-10
/  /  Peter,  1:13-14;  2:11;  4:7; 5:8-9 / I John, 2:15-17 5 Euripides:
Iphigenia  at Aulis [543-589] 429d430a 5 Aristophanes: Frogs [1008-1098]
576b-577c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  hi,  326c-339a  passim / Statesman,
605d-608d  /  Laws,  bk  i-ii, 645d663d passim; bk hi, 672d-674d; bk vi,
712b;  bk  vii,  715b-716a;  bk  viii, 737c-738c 9 Aristotle: History of
Animals, bk vii, ch i
[58i b
i  1-22] 107b / Ethics, bk ii, ch 1-4 348b,d351b; bk in, ch 12 [ui9a35-b
i9]  366a,c;  bk v, ch 1 [ii29b i2-24] 377a; bk x, ch 9 [ii79b4~ n8oa33]
434b-435a / Politics, bk 11, ch 9
[i269b i3-i270a i4] 465d-466b; bk
vii, ch 17
[i336a23-b24] 541b-d; bk viii, ch 5 [1340^4b i9] 545c-546a
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 18 161a162b; bk in, ch 1 175a-177c;
ch  3  178d180a;  ch  12  187b-188b;  ch  24-25,  208b210d  12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  1,  sect  16 254d255d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 38a-45c /
LycurgusNuma,   61b,d-62c   /   Coriolanus,  174b,d-175a  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vi, par 20 41b-c; bk viii, par 26-27 60b-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  95,  a  1 226c-227c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  purgatory,  xvi [52114] 77b- 78a 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par
72-73  535b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 69d-75a passim; 534a-d 26 Shakespeare:
Henry V, act i, sc i
[22-37]
533b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 69d-70a; 78a-d;79c-80a

[912a]
(4.   The  cultivation  of  temperance:  the  training  of  a  temperate
character.)  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [527-551]  310b311a /
Areopagitica,  385a  -b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 346c-347d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 32a-b; 338d-339c; 449a-c 42 Kant: Practical
Reason,  356a-360d  /  Pre/.  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 365b-d /
judgement,  586d-587a  43  Mill:  Liberty, 305b-307a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  201a-c;  bk  vi, 248b-250a; bk xiii, 577a-578b 54 Freud:
Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis, 16c / Narcissism, 407b-c /
General  Introduction,  573c-d;  592b-593b  / New Introductory Lectures,
870a-b  5. The social aspects of temperance 5a. The temperance of rulers
and  citizens:  intemperate  conduct  as inimical to the common good Old
Testament:  Leviticus,  10:8-11  /  Deuteronomy,  17:15-17;  21:18-21  /
Proverbs,  31:4-5  /  Ecclesiastes,  10:16-17 / Isaiah, 5:22-23; 28:1-9;
56:9-12—  (D)  Isaias,  5:22-23;  28:1-9;  56:9-12  / Amos, 6 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,   47:19-21   —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  47:21-23  New
Testament:  /  Timothy,  3  :i—  13  /James,  4  :i-3  5 Sophocles: Ajax
[1052-1070]   152a-b  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [838-917]  265d-266b  /
Phoenician Maidens
[452-593]
382a-383a  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-589]  429d-430a 5 Aristophanes:
Clouds [882-1104] 499b-502a / Frogs
[1 008-1 098]
576b-577c / Lysistrata
[387-425] 588a-b
6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 2d-3d; bk hi, 95a98a; bk vii, 222c-d; bk ix,
311b-312d  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk vi, 513a-d; 516c 7 Plato:
Republic, bk ii, 318a-319a; bk hi, 326c-339a; bk iv, 346a-355a; bk viii,
407a408a;  409d-411d;  bk  ix,  416a-418c  /  Critias,  481a;  485b-c  /
Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk in, 669b-671a; 672d-676c; bk iv, 679c-d;
bk  viii,  733b-d;  bk ix, 751b-d / Seventh Letter, 801 b-c; 806d-807a 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch 8
[ii68b23~
n69an] 422b-d / Politics, bk i, ch 13 454a455a,c; bk ii, ch 5
[i263b7-i4] 458d; ch
6
[1265*28-37] 460c-d; ch 9
[i269b i3-i270a i4]
465d-466b; bk hi, ch 4
[i277b i6-29] 474d475a; bk
vii, ch 5
[1326^6-37] 530d-531a;
ch 15 [i334au-36] 539a-b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9 [i366a33-b i5] 608d-609a
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 10, 149c-d; bk in, ch 7, 184a 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 16 254d255d

[912b]
878  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 5 to 5b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d csp 48b-c /
Lysander,  361  b-d / Agesilaus, 489d-490b / Alexander, 549d-551c / Cato
the  Younger,  621c622b / Cleomenes, 661a-d / Demosthenes, 699c- 700a 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57b-58d;  bk  vi,  86a-b;  bk  xv,  166b-c /
Histories,  bk  11, 230d231a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xix 26d-28b;
purgatory,  xix-xx 81c-85a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi,
133b-140b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 436c-438b 26 Shakespeare: Richard HI,
act hi, sc vii
[1-80] 129d-130c /
1st Henry IV, act i, sc in
[1-21] 437d-438a; act hi, sc
ii [11-161] 453a454c / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v
[97-184]
495b-496b; act v, sc ii
[122-145] 499b
/  Henry  V,  act  i,  sc  i  [24-69] 533b-c 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and
Cressida, act v, sc 1 133b-134c; sc 11
[190-197] 136d-137a
/ Measure for Measure, act i, sc iv
[31-54]
178b-c; act ii, sc ii [162-187] 183d-184a; sc iv
[1-17]
184c-d;
[m-187]
185d-186c; act hi, sc 11 [275-296] 192b / Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[1-139] 303b-304d / Pericles, act
i,  sc  i-ii 421d-425a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 8d-9a,c; bk
hi,  10a;  10c-lla;  bk  v,  18d-19d;  23a-b;  bk  vi, 37d-38b; bk viii,
51a-53a;  bk  xii, 94d-95b; bk xxix, 262a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  ii,  146a-148c;  149d-150a;  bk  v, 346c-347d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  35a-39c  passim;  55c-56a; 138d-140c passim; 256c-257a; 338d340c;
448c-449b  43 Federalist: number i, 29d-30c; number 37, 118a; number 62,
190b;  number  63, 192c-d 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-312a passim 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 393a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 185 64b-d 49
Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  315c-316a; 325b327a passim 54 Freud: General
Introduction,  452c-d;  573c  5b.  The temperance of a people: luxurious
indulgences; the intemperance of the mob Old Testament: Exodus, 16:1-3 /
Numbers,  11  / Isaiah, 3:16-26— (D) Isaias, 3:16-26 / Ezekjel, 7:17-27—
(D) Ezechiel, 7:17-27 / Amos, 6 5 Euripides: Orestes
[682-716]
400d-401a;
[866-956] 402d-403d
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  46c-d;  47c; bk ix, 305d-306a; 314a,c 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 370a-c; bk 11, 400c-401a; bk hi,
436c-438b  7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 318a-319a; bk hi, 326c-328b; bk iv,
342a-d; bk viii, 408b-411d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[i269b i31270*14] 465d-466b

[913a]
5c  to  6a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus  32a-48d esp 36b-37b / Lycurgus-Numa
61b,d-64a,c  esp  62a-b  /  Agis, 648b,d-649b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi,
57b-58d   /  Histories,  bk  i,  197d-199b;  204b-d;  206b;  2I0d-2i2t>r
213d-214b;  bk ii, 222b-c; 232d-233a; 238d239c; bk in, 264b-265d; bk iv,
277c-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch 30-33 147b-149a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  54b-d  26  Shakespeare: 2nd Henry VI, act iv 56a64d / 2nd Henry
IV, act i, sc hi
[85-110]
473d-474a  27  Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act i, sc i [1-225] 351a-353d 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 10a; bk v, 18d-19d; bk vii, 44a-47a;
bk  viii,  51a52c;  bk  xvi,  118a-b  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
346c-347d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 90a-c; 92c-d; 216a-c; 509b-510d
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  94d;  397c-398a;  551b-552d  43  Mill:
Representative  Government,  329c  44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson, 210d-211b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  198b199b;  part  iv, 316c-d 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk vi, 164b-165c 53 James: Psychology,
719a-720a  54  Freud:-  Group  Psychology, 666a-668c passim; 670d-671c /
Civilization  and  Its Discontents, 787b 5c. Laws concerning temperance:
the extent to which the sphere of temperance can be regulated by law Old
Testament:   Exodus,   20:14,17   /   Leviticus,   10:8-11;  18:22-23  /
Deuteronomy,  5:18,21; 21:18-21; 23:17 New Testament: Matthew, 5:27-28 5
Euripides:  Bacchantes [215-369] 341d-343a 7 Plato: Gorgias, 283a-285a /
Republic, bk iv, 348a-d / Laws, bk i-ii, 643a-663d esp bk ii, 663b-d; bk
hi,  675c-676b;  bk  vi,  708c-709a;  712b;  bk vii, 713c-716b esp 713c;
718c-720d;  bk  viii,  731d-738c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  ii,  ch  i
348b,d-349b passim, esp
[ii03b2-6]
349a; bk v, ch i
[ii29bi2-24]377a; bkx, CH9 [ii79b4-i 180*33]
434b-435a / Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[i269b i31270*14] 465d-466b; bk vii, ch 17 [1336*23b24] 541b-d
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 36b-37b / Lycurgus-Numa, 61b,d-62c /
Lysander,  361c-d  15  Tacitus : Annals, bk ii, 31a-b; bk hi, 57b-58d 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 96, aa 2-3 231c-233a; q 100, aa
2-7  252b-259c;  a  11,  ans  and  rep  3  263c-264d;  q 108, a 3, rep 1
334a-336b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[85-114] 77d-78a

[913b]
s  Chapter  91  :  TEMPERANCE  879  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 131b-132a 27
Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act ii, sc 1 [225-270] 181a-c; act hi,
sc ii
[91-128]
190c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 54a-b 32 Milton: Areopagitica,
390a-b;  393a-395b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 18b, d19d; bk
vii,  44d-48a; 49a-50c; bk xii, 86b; 87c-88a; bk xiv, 105c-106b; bk xvi,
119d  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 434b-435a 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk ii, 150a; bk iv, 211a-b; bk v, 346c-347d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, lOOc-lOlb 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93d-94a 42 Kant: Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a-  b;  389a-b  43 Constitution of the U.S.:
amendments,  xviii 19c; xxi 20b 43 Federalist: number 12, 58b-c 43 Mill:
Liberty,  292b-293b;  302d-312a passim, esp 309d-310c; 314a-316b 44 Bosw
ell:  Johnson, 301c-d 54 Freud: Group Psychology, 690b-c 6. The extremes
of  temperance  and  intemperance  6a. Asceticism: heroic temperance Old
Testament:  Genesis,  39:7-21  /  Exodus, 24:18; 34:28 / Numbers, 6:1-21
/Judges,  13: 1-7 / / Kings, 19:4-8— (D) HI Kings, 19:4-8 New Testament:
Matthew, 4:1-11; 19:12 / Mar\, 1 :i2-i3 / Luke, 1 ^-17 esp 1 :i5; 4:1-13
/  Timothy,  /  Corinthians,  7:36-38;  9:24-27  / / 4:1-10 5 Euripides:
Hippolytus  225a-236d  7  Plato:  Laws, bk viii, 737c-738c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  hi,  ch  191a 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch ch 7
9c-10a;  tr  iv,  ch  14  18a-c; tr 15 190a5 8c-9a; TR VI, CH 6 24a-c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  ii, par 3 9b-c; bk viii, par 26-27 60b-c /
City  of God, bk i, ch 16-18 139c-140d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 24
630c-631a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 64, a 1, rep 3
66d-67c;  part ii-ii, q 184, a 3 630d-632c; a 6 634c-636a; q 186, aa 1-4
650c-656b;  aa  7-8  658d-660a;  part hi suppl, q 96, a 5 1055c-1058a 22
Chaucer:   Second  Nun's  Tale  463b-471b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  152a-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 110a-b; 120d-121d;
165c167a;   350d-351b;   353c-354b;  425c-426b  26  Shakespeare:  Love's
Labour's Lost, act i, sc 1
[1-162] 254a-256a
/  Midsummer-Night'  Dream, act i, sc 1 [67-78] 353a-b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote, part i, 81b-91d 32 Milton: Comus 33a-56b esp
[659-813] 48a51b

[914a]
(6.  The extremes of temperance and intemperance. 6a. Asceticism: heroic
temperance.)  33  Pascal:  Provincial  letters,  64b-65b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk v, 19a; bk vi, 38b; bk xxv, 210a-b 39 Smith: Wealth
of Nations, bk v, 347a-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 191d-193c; 338d340c
passim;  593b,d-599a  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  327a-d  44 Boswell:
Johnson,  283a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part i, 224b-d; 228b;
part  iv,  340d-341a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk iv, 85a87b 54
Freud:  General Introduction, 624a-c / Civilization and Its Discontents,
773c  6b.  The  dionysiac  spirit:  the  cult of pleasure Old Testament:
Ecclesiastes,  8:15  /  Isaiah,  22:13—  (D) Isaias, 22:13 / Amos, 6:3-6
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon, 2 esp 2:1-9 (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 2 esp
2:1-9 4 Homer: Odyssey, bk x
[210-465]
238b240d 5 Euripides: Alcestis
[782-802]
244a / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Cyclops [139-174] 441c-d;
[495-589] 444d-445d
5 Aristophanes: Acharnians [241-279] 458a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
77a-b  6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 400d401a 7 Plato: Seventh
Letter, 801 b-c CROSS-REFERENCES

[914b]
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 5
[ic>95b i4-2i]
340d;  bk  in,  ch  12  [ui9a35-b  i9] 366a,c; bk vii, ch 14 [ii54b2-i5]
405d-406a  14  Plutarch:  Alcibiades,  161d-162b / Lucullus, 419b-420b /
Alexander,  572b-d  /  Demetrius, 732d-733a; 747b / Antony 748a-779d esp
751b-c,   755d-756c,   757c-758c  /  Antony-Demetrius,  780c-d  /  Dion,
783c-784a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 57b-58d; 86a-b; bk xi, 103b-c;
107b-c; 108b-c; 145a-d; bk xv, 166b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  18,  a  BK  VI,  BK  xiv,  2,  rep  2 105c-106b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  179,  a  2,  rep  1,3  607a-c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  7a-8c; 60c-66b; bk iv, 234a-235a 25
Montaigne: Essays, 28b-d; 406a-408b 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act i,
sc ii
[i116] 435c-436c; act
ii,  sc  iv  [438-527]  448b449b / 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc ii [200-234]
485d-486a;  [321-359]  486d-487a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 38a-b;
60a-c;  649d-650b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 174c-175c 42 Kant: Intro.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  387b-388a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 447b-449c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 228b-c 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[3835-4222]  93b-103a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk viii, 321d-322d;
334d-335a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  4a-d;  bk hi 46a-82a,c
passim  bk  i,  nature of temperance, see Desire 6a; Emotion 4b(i); Mind
9D-9C; Pleasure and Pain 8a; Virtue and Vice i, ic, 5a~5c. Temperance in
relation  to knowledge and to other virtues, see Courage 4; Prudence 3b,
3d;   Virtue   and  Vice  ib-ic,  2a(i),  3a~3b.  Other  discussions  of
continence,  see  Prudence  3d; Virtue and Vice ie. The consideration of
extreme forms of intemperance, see Desire 73-73(3); Infinity 6a; Sin 4c;
Wealth  ioe(3).  Other discussions which show the relation of temperance
to  duty and happiness, see Happiness 2b(3); Virtue and Vice id, 6a. The
problems  involved  in  training  a  temperate  character, see Education
4a~4d;  Punishment  3a;  Virtue and Vice 4a~4d(4); and for the extent to
which  temperance can be regulated by law, see Law 6d; Pleasure and Pain
9;  Virtue  and  Vice  4d(3).  The issue concerning asceticism and self-
denial,  see  Desire  6b;  Pleasure and Pain 7b; Religion 3d; Virtue and
Vice  8f-8g;  Wealth  ioe(2).  Another consideration of the dionysiac or
bacchic spirit, see Pleasure and Pain 4d, 7b.

[915a]
ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not includecT in Great BooJ^s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I. Plutarch. "Of Curiosity, or an Over-Busy Inquisitiveness into
Things  Impertinent," in Moralia Augustine. Of Continence Aquinas. Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  qq  141  —  170  A. Smith. The Theory of Moral
Sentiments, part vi, sect in II. Cicero. De Ojficiis (On Duties) Horace.
Satires,  bk  ii  (2)  Bernard  of  Clairvaux.  On Consideration Calvin.
Institutes  of  the Christian Religion, bk hi, ch 10 Spenser. The Faerie
Queene, bk ii

[915b]
Chapter  91:  TEMPERANCE  881 H. More. An Account of Virtue (Enchiridion
EthiCUm),  BK  II,  CH  7,  9;  BK  III,  CH  8  Bossuet.  Traite  de la
concupiscence  Mandeville.  The  Fable  of  the  Bees J. Butler. Fifteen
Sermons   upon   Human   Nature   Franklin.   Poor   Richard's  Almanac^
Schopenhauer.  The  World  as  Will  and Idea, vol i, bk IV T. H. Green.
Prolegomena  to  Ethics, bk hi, ch 5 Nietzsche. Thus Spake Zarathustra .
The  Genealogy  of Morals, in Weber. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit
of  Capitalism,  ch  4-5  Hildebrand. In Defense of Purity Mersch. Love,
Marriage  and  Chastity  Vann. On Being Human Huizinga. In the Shadow of
Tomorrow

[916a]
has seldom been disputed that the quesIT tions with which theology deals
are  of  critical significance for all the rest of human knowledge. Even
those  who deny that theology is or can be a science might be willing to
concede that, if it were, it would deserve its traditional title, "queen
of  the sciences." It has been said that the great questions of theology
are   unanswerable.  It  has  been  said  that  theological  dispute  or
controversy is futile because the issues are not resolvable by argument.
But it has rarely been asserted, or even implied, that our outlook would
be unaltered and our actions unaffected if we could know, in any degree,
the  answers  to  questions concerning the existence of the supernatural
and  its relation to the visible world of nature. To Plato it is of such
importance  that  he  asks:  "Who  can be calm when he is called upon to
prove  the  existence  of  the  gods?" The main controversy, not in, but
about,  theology  turns  on  the  use  of  such words as "knowledge" and
"science"  for  a discipline which, both in method and conclusion, seems
compelled to go beyond experience and to push reason to (or even beyond)
the  limit  of  its powers. In the minds of many, especially in our day,
theology  is  associated  with religion and is opposed to science or, if
not  opposed,  at  least  it  is  set  apart  from  science  as entirely
different.  Those  who  conceive  science  as  limited  by its empirical
methods  to  the investigation of observable phenomena might not quarrel
with  the  allocation  oftheology to philosophy, but whether or not they
did  would  in  turn  depend  on  their conception of philosophy. As the
chapters  on  Science  and  Philosophy  indicate,  these  two  terms are
identified  through  a  large part of the western tradition. The various
sciences  are  regarded  as  branches  of philosophy. But we also find a
distinction being made

[916b]
Chapter  ^-l:  THEOLOGY  INTRODUCTION  in  the  18th century between the
empirical  and  rational or philosophical sciences; and in our day those
who  regard philosophy as mere speculation or opinion contrast it to the
experimental  disciplines  which  are thought to be the only established
bodies of knowledge, that is, sciences. The question whether theology is
a  science  may, therefore, embrace a number of alternatives. That it is
an empirical or experimental science has seldom been proposed. It may be
treated  as  a  science,  however, by those who consider it as a part of
philosophy;  or it may be denied that honor precisely because it belongs
to  philosophy.  A  third  alternative remains that theology is separate
from  philosophy, that it is a science as distinct in character from the
philosophical sciences as they are from the experimental disciplines. In
this  third  alternative,  the  association of theology with religion or
religious faith seems to determine the character of theology. It is this
third  alternative which Hume seems to have in mind at the conclusion of
his  Enquiry.  "Divinity  or  Theology,  as it proves the existence of a
Deity  and the immortality of souls . . . has," he writes, "a foundation
in  reason,  so  far  as it is supported by experience. But its best and
most  solid foundation isfaith or divine revelation." To the extent that
its  principles come from religious faith, theology does not seem to fit
perfectly  into Hume's twofold division of the sciences into those which
involve  "abstract  reasoning  concerning  quantity or number" and those
which  involve  "experimental  reasoning  concerning  matter of fact and
existence."  When he says that he would commit to the flames "any volume
of divinity or school metaphysics which does not contain either of these
two  kinds  of reasoning"—for then "it can contain nothing but sophistry
and illusion"—he can hardly be condemning the theology he has 882

[917a]
himself  described  as  resting primarily on faith or divine revelation,
though  it  may  also have some foundation in reasoning from experience.
The  discussion  of the nature and scope of theology, its principles and
methods,  may refer either to the theology which is a part of philosophy
or  to  the  theology  which  is  sometimes called "dogmatic" because it
expounds  and  explains  the  dogmas  of a religious faith. Furthermore,
those  who  make the distinction between the two kinds of theology raise
questions  concerning  their  relation  to one another. In so doing they
enter  into  the larger problem of the relation of faith and reason, and
the  limited part which reason can play in the development of a theology
which rests on faith. The distinction itself is made by many writers and
in  diverse  ways.  The  theology  which  is  entirely philosophical and
independent of any religious faith is usually called "natural theology."
The  name  "sacred  theology" is given to a body of doctrine which finds
its  fundamental  principles  in  the articles of a religious faith. The
ultimate  source  of  these  articles of faith in Jewish, Christian, and
Mohammedan theology is the truth revealed in a sacred scripture— the Old
and  New  Testament  or  the  Koran—from  which,  by interpretation, the
articles  of  faith  are  drawn.  Bacon,  for  example,  defines "divine
philosophy  or  natural  theology"  as  "that  knowledge  or rudiment of
knowledge  concerning God, which may be obtained by the contemplation of
his  creatures; which knowledge may be truly termed divine in respect of
the  object,  and  natural  in  respect of the light. The bounds of this
knowledge  are  that  it suffices to convince atheism, but not to inform
religion."  In  contrast, "inspired theology" or "sacred theology (which
in our idiom we call divinity) is grounded only upon the word and oracle
of  God,  and  not  upon  the  light  of  nature."  Kant makes a similar
distinction  when he says that theology is based either "on reason alone
{theologia rationales) or upon revelation (theologia revelata)." But for
Kant  "natural  theology" designates only one kind of rational theology.
Another  kind is "transcendental theology," which differs from the first
in the method which reason employs. He also differentiates be-

[917b]
Chapter  92:  THEOLOGY  883 tween speculative and moral theology. Though
both  fall  within  the  sphere  of  reason, one is the work of the pure
theoretic reason, the other of the pure practical reason. In the opening
question  of  the  Summa  Theologica,  Aquinas  tries to explain why, in
addition  to the "philosophical science built up by reason, there should
be  a  sacred science learned through revelation." To an objection which
claims  that  "there  is  no  need  ofany  further  knowledge,"  because
philosophical  science  can  attain to knowledge even of God Himself, he
replies  that  "there  is no reason why those things which may be learnt
from  philosophical  science,  so  far  as  they can be known by natural
reason, may not also be taught us by another science so far as they fall
within revelation." Though they may deal with the same object, "sciences
are   differentiated  according  to  the  various  means  through  which
knowledge  is  obtained.  .  .  .  Hence the theology included in sacred
doctrine   differs   in  kind  from  that  theology  which  is  part  of
philosophy."  In  another  place,  Aquinas  refers  to  the  theological
conclusions  which  the  philosopher  thinks  he  can  demonstrate— "the
existence  of God  and  other like truths about God which can be known by
natural  reason." Of these he says that they "are not articles of faith,
but  are preambles to the articles. . . . Nevertheless," he adds, "there
is  nothing  to  prevent a man, who cannot grasp a proof, accepting as a
matter  of  faith,  something  which  in  itself  is  capable  of  being
scientifically  known  and  demonstrated."  But such propositions, which
belong  to  both  reason and faith, are only part of sacred doctrine. In
addition, there are the propositions which belong to faith alone. "It is
impossible,"  Aquinas writes, "to attain to the knowledge of the Trinity
by  natural  reason."  The  triune  nature  of  the  Godhead  cannot  be
demonstrated philosophically; nor can the dogma be fully comprehended by
human  understanding.  In  Purgatory,  Dante  learns that "Mad is he who
hopes  that our reason can traverse the infinite way which One Substance
in  Three  Persons holds." Though it is not a theological mystery in the
same sense, another example of a dogma not demonstrable by reason is the
proposition that the world began to be. "That the world did not

[918a]
884  THE  GREAT IDEAS always exist," Aquinas declares, "we hold by faith
alone; it cannot be proved demonstratively; which is what was said above
of the mystery of the Trinity." We find in Sacred Scripture the words In
the  beginning God created heaven and earth, "in which words the newness
of  the  world is stated" and so "the newness of the world is known only
by revelation." With respect to such matters as belong to faith alone, a
theologian  like  Aquinas  cautions  against the misuse of reason. "When
anyone  in  the  endeavor to prove what belongs to faith, brings forward
arguments  which  are  not  cogent,  he  falls under the ridicule of the
unbelievers;  since  they  suppose  that  we  base  ourselves  upon such
arguments,  and that we believe on their account. Therefore, we must not
attempt  to  establish  what is of faith, except by authority alone" and
only  "to  those  who accept the authority." For those who do not accept
the  authority  of  Scripture,  the  most  that reason can do concerning
propositions  peculiar  to faith is "to prove that what faith teaches is
not  impossible."  Elsewhere  Aquinas  points  out  that  "although  the
argument  from  authority  based on human reason is the weakest, yet the
argument  from  authority  based on divine revelation is the strongest."
The  foregoing  throws  some  light  on Montaigne's defense of a book by
Raimond  de Sebonde, bearing the title La theologie naturelle. Though he
calls  his  work "natural theology," de Sebonde, according to Montaigne,
"undertakes  by  human  and  natural  reasons to establish and make good
against  the  atheists all the articles of the Christian religion." What
his  opponents "reprehend in his work is that Christians are to blame to
repose upon human reasons their belief, which is only conceived by faith
and  the  particular inspiration of divine grace." Montaigne agrees that
it  is  "faith  alone  that  vividly  and certainly comprehends the deep
mysteries  of  our religion." But he also thinks that it is "a brave and
very  laudable attempt to accommodate the natural and human capabilities
that  God  has endowed us with to the service of our faith. It is not to
be doubted," he says, "that it is the most noble use we can put them to,
and that there is no design or occupation

[918b]
more worthy of a Christian man than to make it the aim and end of all of
his  thoughts and studies to embellish, extend, and amplify the truth of
his  belief." The conception of natural theology which Montaigne appears
to  entertain  in  his "Apology for Raimond de Sebonde" does not seem to
differentiate it from sacred theology, insofar as all its principles are
articles  of  faith. Quite apart from de Sebonde, Montaigne himself does
not  think  that the existence of God or the immortality of the soul can
be  demonstrated  by  reason.  Montaigne  observes  "how  short the most
constant  and  firm maintainers of this just and clear persuasion of the
immortality  of  the  soul  fall, and how weak their arguments are, when
they  go  about  to  prove  it by human reason. . . . Let us ingenuously
confess  that God alone has dictated it to us, and faith; 'tis no lesson
of  nature and our own reason." Though the denial of God's existence is,
according   to   Montaigne,  "a  proposition  unnatural  and  monstrous,
difficult  also  and  hard  to establish in the human understanding," he
thinks  the affirmation to be no less beyond reason's power to establish
with  certitude,  for  "all  things  produced  by  our own reasoning and
understanding,  whether  true  or  false, are subject to incertitude and
controversy." In this, Montaigne differs not only from a theologian like
Aquinas,  who  assigns  certain truths to natural theology as capable of
being  demonstrated  by  reason  without the aid of faith, but also from
such philosophers as Descartes, Spinoza, and Locke, who hold that we can
know  God by reason with more certainty, and even (according to Spinoza)
more  adequately,  than  we  can  know most other things. "I have always
considered,"  Descartes  writes,  "that the two questions respecting God
and  the  Soul  were the chief of those that ought to be demonstrated by
philosophical rather than theological argument. For although it is quite
enough  for  us  faithful ones to accept by means of faith the fact that
the  human  soul  does not perish with the body, and that God exists, it
certainly  does  not  seem  possible  ever  to  persuade infidels of any
religion  . . . unless, to begin with, we prove these two facts by means
of the natural reason." Descartes, it appears, reserves the use of the

[919a]
word  "theology"  for  sacred  doctrine.  What  others, like Bacon, call
"natural theology," he treats simply as philosophy, or that branch of it
which he calls "metaphysics." Dedicatinghis Meditations to "the dean and
doctors  of  the  sacred faculty of theology in Paris," he says: "I have
noticed  that  you,  along with all the theologians, did not only affirm
that  the existence of God may be proved by the natural reason, but also
that  it may be inferred from the Holy Scriptures, that knowledge of Him
is  much clearer than that which we have of many created things, and, as
a  matter  of fact, is so easy to acquire that those who have it not are
culpable  in  their  ignorance."  But  Descartes  wishes  to confess the
limitations  of the mere philosopher's knowledge of God. When he came to
inquire  "how God may be more easily and certainly known than the things
of  this world," no matter how much "certainty and evidence I find in my
reasons," he could not persuade himself, he says, that "all the world is
capable  of understanding them. . . . There are not so many in the world
who  are  fitted for metaphysical speculations as there are for those of
geometry."  Answering  a critic who quotes Aquinas against him, he later
writes:  "I  admit  along  with  all  theologians  that  God  cannot  be
comprehended  by  the  human mind, and also that He cannot be distinctly
known  by those who try mentally to grasp Him at once in His entirety. .
. . Wherever I have said that God can be clearly and distinctly known, I
have  understood  this  to  apply only to this finite cognition of ours,
which  is proportionate to the diminutive capacity of our minds." So far
we   have   considered   the  distinction  between  natural  and  sacred
theology—or  between  philosophy  and  theology—as  it  is  made  in the
Christian tradition by writers conscious of the difference between faith
and  reason,  or revelation and demonstration. In pagan antiquity, there
seems  to  be  no  equivalent  of sacred theology. "The various modes of
worship, which prevailed in the Roman world," Gibbon tells us, "were all
considered  by the people as equally true; by the philosopher as equally
false;  and  by the magistrate as equally useful. . . . The superstition
of the people was

[919b]
Chapter  92: THEOLOGY 885 not embittered by theological rancour; nor was
it  confined  by  the  chains  of  any  speculative system." It was "the
elegant  mythology  of  Homer,"  he  says,  not reasoning, which "gave a
beautiful,  and  almost  a regular form to the polytheism of the ancient
world."  Of  the Greek philosophers, Gibbon remarks that "they meditated
on  the  Divine Nature as a very curious and important speculation," but
only  the Stoics and the Platonists "endeavored to reconcile the jarring
interests  of  reason  and piety." Plato's criticism of the poets in the
Republic  for  their  impiety,  and his rational defense of piety in the
Laws,  accompanied  by a demonstration of the existence of the gods, may
be taken as examples of ancient theological discourse within a religious
context.  Another  example,  and  from  quite  another point of view, is
Cicero's De Natura Deorum, which Gibbon praises as the best guide to the
opinions of the philosophers concerning the tenets of polytheBut neither
Cicero  nor  Plato treats theology as a science. The ancient philosopher
who  does  and  who,  moreover,  regards  theology as the highest of the
speculative  sciences,  seems to proceed without reference to or benefit
of  prevailing  religious  beliefs.  Aristotle  dismisses "the school of
Hesiod  and all the theologians [who] thought only of what was plausible
to  themselves."  He  refers  to  the  legends  of  the  gods which "our
forefathers  in the most remote ages have handed down to their posterity
...  in  the  form  of a myth . . . with a view to the persuasion of the
multitude  and to its legal and utilitarian expediency." But the highest
science,  which  Aristotle  sometimes  calls "first philosophy," he also
calls  "theology."  It deals with the immaterial and the insensible, the
immovable  and  eternal. We may call it "theology," he writes, "since it
is  obvious  that  if  the  divine is present anywhere, it is present in
things  of  this sort." In another place he says, "there are three kinds
of  theoretical  sciences—physics,  mathematics,  theology  . . . and of
these  the last named is best, for it deals with the highest of existing
things."  At  the  beginning of the Metaphysics, Aristotle gives another
reason  for  thinking  that theology is a divine science: not that it is
divinely inspired, but that, having the divine for

[920a]
886  THE GREAT IDEAS its object, it is the science "most meet for God to
have.  .  . . Such a science either God alone can have, or God above all
others." The title given the book in which Aristotle attempts to develop
this  science  comes  in  the  later  tradition  to be the name given to
speculation   concerning  immaterial  and  insensible  substances.  What
Aristotle   calls   "theology,"   Descartes,  as  we  have  seen,  calls
"metaphysics"  in  order  to  distinguish  it from the theology based on
revelation. Whether the theology of a pagan philosopher is commensurable
with  the theology of Jewish or Christian thinkers, even when the latter
attempt to be purely philosophical or natural theologians, is a question
which  deeply  probes  the  relation  of  reason to faith. For even when
reason tries to proceed independently of faith, the religious faith of a
community  may  tinge  the  concepts the philosopher uses and define the
problems  he  undertakes  to  solve.  It  may  be one thing to prove the
existence of a Prime Mover, and another to know by reason the nature and
existence  of the God who in the beginning created heaven and earth— the
God of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, the God of the Christians, whom Pascal
distinguishes  from  the God of the philosophers. Augustine explains his
attitude  as  a  theologian  toward  the  theories  of  the philosophers
touching  divine  matters.  "I have not undertaken," he says, "to refute
all  the  vain theological opinions of all the philosophers, but only of
such  of  them as, agreeing in the belief that there is a divine nature,
and  that  this  divine  nature  is  concerned  about  human affairs, do
nevertheless  deny  that  the  worship  of  the  one unchangeable God is
sufficient  for  the obtaining of a blessed life after death, as well as
at  the  present  time."  Since  "Plato  defined the wise man as one who
imitates, knows, and loves this God, and who is rendered blessed through
fellowship  with  Him in His own blessedness, why discuss with the other
philosophers?  It  is  evident  that  none  come  nearer  to us than the
Platonists."  Plato, according to Augustine, "is justly preferred to all
the  other  philosophers of the Gentiles"; those among his followers who
show  "the  greatest acuteness in understanding him . . . entertain such
an  idea  of  God  as  to admit that in Him are to be found the cause of
existence, the

[920b]
ultimate reason for the understanding, and the end in reference to which
the  whole  life  is  to be regulated." So amazing, to his mind, are the
parallels  between certain insights expressed by Plato and the wisdom of
Sacred  Scripture,  that  Augustine  is  almost inclined to believe that
"Plato  was  not  ignorant  of those writings." But he does not think it
necessary  to determine whether Plato had acquaintance with the writings
of  Moses  and  the  prophets,  because certain basic truths, which were
revealed  to  the  Hebrews,  were made known to the gentiles through the
light  of  nature  and reason. "That which is known of God," the apostle
had said, "has been manifested among them, for God hath manifested it to
them."  Therefore  Augustine  feels  justified  in taking any truth from
Plato  which is consistent with Christian faith. Aquinas, borrowing much
from  Aristotle,  explains  that  "sacred  doctrine  makes  use  of  the
authority  of philosophers in those questions in which they were able to
know the truth by natural reason." Sacred theology uses the doctrines of
the  philosophers, he adds, "not as though it stood in need of them, but
only  in  order  to make its teaching clearer." It is in this sense that
Aquinas calls philosophy the handmaiden of theology. Others seem to take
a  different  view  of  this  relationship. Montaigne wonders whether it
would  not be better if "the divine doctrine, as queen and regent of the
rest,"  kept  herself  apart, and he quotes St. Chrysostom to the effect
that  philosophy  has  "long  been  banished  from the holy schools as a
handmaid  altogether  useless."  Hobbes  goes  further. He describes the
traditional  theology  as  a  mingling  of  Aristotle's metaphysics with
Scripture,  and claims that the "bringing of the philosophy and doctrine
of   Aristotle   into  religion  by  the  Schoolmen"  caused  the  "many
contradictions  and  absurdities"  which  "brought  the  clergy  into  a
reputation  both  of ignorance and of fraudulent intention, and inclined
people  to  revolt  from  them." Hegel, however, dismisses the criticism
that  is  often made concerning the dependence of Christian theology, at
least  in its formative period, on pagan philosophy. "The Fathers of the
Church and the Councils," he writes, "constituted the dogma; but a chief
element in this constitution was supplied by the previous de-

[921a]
velopment  of  philosophy." That certain dogmas were introduced into the
Christian  religion  through "the instrumentality of philosophy . . . is
not   sufficient   ground   for  asserting  thatjheyi  were  foreign  to
Christianity  and  had  nothing to do with it. It is a matter of perfect
indifference  where  a  thing  originated;  the  only  question,"  Hegel
insists,  "is,  'Is  it  true  in  and  for  itself?' Many think that by
pronouncing  the  doctrine  to  be  Neo-Platonic,  they  have ipso facto
banished  it  from  Christianity.  Whether  a  Christian doctrine stands
exactly  thus  and  thus  in the Bible ... is not the only question. The
Letter  kills,  the  Spirit makes alive." Compared with sacred theology,
the  subject  matter  of  natural theology and the scope of its problems
seem  to  be extremely narrow. At most, it is only a part of philosophy,
and some writers treat it as no more than one part of metaphysics. Kant,
for  example, divides metaphysics into three parts— theology, cosmology,
and psychology—according to his conception of metaphysics as having "for
the proper object of its inquiries only three grand ideas: God, Freedom,
and Immortality." As a branch of transcendental speculation, theology is
concerned  primarily  with  the  problem  of God's existence. Similarly,
Aristotle's  metaphysical  inquiries include more than his theology. His
theology  begins  only  after  he  has discussed the nature and being of
sensible  substances. It is stated mainly in Book XII of the Metaphysics
where he considers the existence and character of immaterial substances,
and  of  the one purely actual being which is God. Descartes' conception
seems  to be broader, for he regards the immortality of the soul as well
as   the  existence  and  nature  of  God  as  being  characteristically
theological  problems  even  when they are treated in metaphysics and by
the  methods  of  the  philosopher.  Because  these two problems concern
spiritual  beings,  Adam  Smith also groups them together under the name
"pneumatics"  or  "pneumatology,"  which he identifies with metaphysics—
that  part  of philosophy most emphasized "in the universities of Europe
where  philosophy  was  taught  only  as subservient to theology." Bacon
alone seems to separate natural theology entirely

[921b]
Chapter 92: THEOLOGY 887 from metaphysics, which, along with physics, is
for  him  a part of natural rather than divine philosophy. But though he
would limit natural theology to that knowledge of God which can be drawn
from  nature, and excludes attempts to induce from nature "any verity or
persuasion  concerning  the  points of faith," he grants that natural as
well as divine theology may treat of "the nature of angels and spirits,"
as  "neither  inscrutable nor interdicted." The subject matter of sacred
theology, or what he calls "divinity," is, according to Bacon's account,
much  more  extensive.  He  first divides it into "matter of belief" and
"matter  of service and adoration"; and from these two derives the "four
main branches of divinity: faith, manners, liturgy, and government." The
matter  of  faith  contains  "the  doctrine of the nature of God, of the
attributes  of God, and of the works of God." Under manners, Bacon lists
the  consideration  of  divine  law and the breach of it by sin: liturgy
concerns  the  sacraments  and  rituals  of  religion;  government,  the
organization,  offices,  and  jurisdictions  of the church. As its title
indicates,  the  Summa  Theologica of Aquinas endeavors to set forth the
sum  of  theological  knowledge.  In addition to the topics and problems
peculiar  to  sacred  doctrine, the subject matters treated in the Summa
seem  to  represent the whole range of human inquiry almost co-extensive
with  the scope of the natural sciences and philosophy, both speculative
and  moral.  Aquinas explains the encyclopedic character of the Summa by
pointing  out  that  to have God as the subject matter of theology means
that  sacred doctrine treats "all things under the aspect of God, either
because  they  are  God  Himself,  or because they refer to God as their
beginning  and  end."  The  unity  of  theology  in  covering  so wide a
diversity  of  matters consists in the single formality under which they
are  considered—  the  formality of being divinely revealed. That is why
"objects  which  are  the  subject  matter  of  different  philosophical
sciences  can yet be treated by this one single sacred science under one
aspect,  namely,  insofar  as they can be included in revelation." Thus,
for  example,  in  the  preamble to his Treatise on Man, Aquinas writes:
"The theologian considers the nature of man in relation to

[922a]
the  soul;  but  not in relation to the body, except insofar as the body
has  relation to the soul." This emphasis is dictated by the articles of
Christian  faith  which  concern  man, in both body and soul. Similarly,
with  respect  to  moral  matters,  Aquinas explains that the theologian
"considers human acts inasmuch as man is thereby directed to happiness,"
and he takes account of the circumstances of human acts because they may
excuse from sin, "the consideration of which belongs to the theologian."
It  belongs  to the theologian only when sin is conceived "as an offense
against  God,"  but  to  the moral philosophers when it is conceived "as
something contrary to reason." It appears from the foregoing that sacred
theology is both speculative and practical (or moral). It deals with the
nature of divine things and with human acts, but with the latter only so
far  as  they  have  God  for  their  rule  or  end. "Although among the
philosophical  sciences,"  Aquinas  writes,  "some  are  speculative and
others practical, sacred doctrine includes both." Even though it is made
on  the  level of the philosophical sciences, Kant's distinction between
speculative  and  moral  theology  seems  to  be  based  on  a different
principle.  For  Aquinas  the  speculative  and  the  practical parts of
theology  deal  with  different  problems,  such  as  God,  the Trinity,
creation,  and  the  angels on the one hand, and beatitude, the virtues,
divine  law,  sin, grace, and sacraments on the other. But for Kant both
speculative and moral theology deal with the problem of God's existence.
They  differ only according to the manner in which the theoretic and the
practical  reason  undertake  to  solve  this  problem. "All attempts of
reason  to  establish  a  theology  by  the aid of speculation alone are
fruitless,"  writes Kant. Consequently, "a rational theology can have no
existence  unless  it  is  founded  upon  the  laws  of  morality."  The
postulates  of  pure practical reason—of immortality, free will, and the
existence  of God— "all proceed from the principle of morality, which is
not a postulate but a law by which reason determines the will directly."
The  moral law involves, as a necessary condition, "the existence of the
summum bonum" and that in turn in-

[922b]
volves  "the  supposition  of the supreme independent good, that is, the
existence  of  God."  According  to  Kant,  a  Supreme Being is "for the
speculative  reason,  a  mere ideal, though a faultless one—a conception
which  perfects  and  crowns  the  system  of  human  cognition, but the
objective  reality  of which can neither be proved nor disproved by pure
reason."  It  is  this  defect  which  moral theology remedies. "We must
assume," he says, "a moral world-cause, that is, an Author of the world,
if we are to set before ourselves a final end in conformity to the moral
law."  But,  he  adds, "this moral argument is not intended to supply an
objectively  valid  proof  of  the  existence of God. It is not meant to
demonstrate  to  the skeptic that there is a God, but that he must adopt
the  assumption  of this proposition as a maxim of his practical reason,
if he wishes to think in a manner consistent with morality." The problem
of  the  proof  of  God's existence, though central in theology, is more
fully  discussed  in  the chapter on God. Here we are concerned with the
nature  of theology itself as a branch of learning or inquiry. Since the
chapter   on   Metaphysics   necessarily   touches   on  theology  as  a
philosophical discipline, it seems advisable to devote attention here to
some  of the things which are peculiarly the concern of sacred theology.
Heresy is one of these. A scientist or philosopher may be criticized for
his  errors,  but  only  a theologian, only the man who tries to explain
some  article  of  faith, can be called a heretic in the strict sense of
that  word.  According  to  his  view of the relation between church and
state,  Hobbes  defines  heresy in political terms. "Heresy," he writes,
"is nothing else but a private opinion, obstinately maintained, contrary
to  the  opinion  which  the  Public Person" — i.e., the Sovereign— "has
commanded  to  be  taught."  But, according to Pascal, "none but God was
able  to  instruct  the  Church  in  the faith," and so "it is heresy to
resist  the  decisions of the faith, because this amounts to an opposing
of our own spirit to the Spirit of God." But, he adds, "it is no heresy,
though it may be an act of presumption, to disbelieve certain particular
facts,  because  this  is  no  more  than  opposing  reason—  it  may be
enlightened reason

[923a]
to  an  authority  which  is  great  indeed,  but  in this matter is not
infallible."  The  aspect of choice, of obstinately preferring one's own
opinion  against  a superior authority, is emphasized by Aquinas, but he
adds the specification that heresy is a corruption of Christian faith, a
species  of  unbelief  in  which the heretic defies the authority of the
Church,  choosing "not what Christ really taught, but the suggestions of
his  own  mind."  He  quotes a statement by Augustine that we should not
accuse  of  heresy  "those who, however false and perverse their opinion
may be, defend it without obstinate fervor" and are "ready to mend their
opinion when they have found the truth because they do not make a choice
in  contradiction  to the doctrine of the Church." It is not the falsity
of  the  opinion which makes it heresy, for until the point of faith has
been defined by the authority of the Church, theologians may differ, and
even  be  in  error, without being heretical. The inference may be drawn
that  progress  is  made  in the refinement and precision of theological
doctrine  as the dogmas of a religion are more fully stated and the line
between  orthodoxy  and  heresy becomes more clearly defined. Augustine,
who is one of the great formative theologians for the Protestant as well
as  the  Catholic  tradition, devotes a large part of his writing to the
criticism  of  heresies—  the great Arian heresy concerning the Trinity,
the  Nestorian  or  Monophysite  heresy  concerning the Incarnation, the
Manichean  heresy  concerning  the  existence  of evil, and the Pelagian
heresy  concerning  grace and good works. "While the hot restlessness of
heretics," Augustine writes, "stirs questions about many articles of the
catholic  faith,  the  necessity  of  defending  them  forces  us ... to
investigate  them  more accurately, to understand them more clearly, and
to  proclaim  them  more  earnestly";  and  the  question  mooted  by an
adversary  becomes  the  occasion  of instruction. According to Aquinas,
"the profit that ensues from heresy is beside the intention of heretics,
for  it  consists in the constancy of the faithful being put to the test
and  makes  us shake off our sluggishness and search the Scriptures more
carefully." To Augustine and Aquinas, theological argu-

[923b]
Chapter  92: THEOLOGY 889 ment and controversy seem to be serviceable in
the  propagation  and  defense  of  the  faith.  Aquinas,  for  example,
distinguishes  the  various  types  of  dispute  in  which  a  Christian
theologian  can  engage—with heretics, with Jews, with infidels. "We can
argue  with  heretics  from  texts  in  Holy Scripture," he writes, "and
against  those  who deny one article of faith we can argue from another.
If  our  opponent  believes  nothing  of  divine revelation, there is no
longer  any means of proving the articles of faith by argument, but only
of  answering  his  objections—  if he has any—against faith." But it is
necessary  to  add the qualification that the reasons employed "to prove
things  that  are  of  faith  are  not  demonstrations;  they are either
persuasive  arguments  showing  that  what  is  proposed by faith is not
impossible;  or else they are proofs drawn from the principles of faith,
i.e.,  from the authority of Holy Writ. . . . Whatever is based on these
principles  is  as  well-proved  in  the  eyes  of  the  faithful,  as a
conclusion  drawn  from  self-evident principles is in the eyes of all."
Furthermore,  Aquinas  points  out,  "since  faith rests upon infallible
truth,  and  since the contrary of a truth can never be demonstrated, it
is  clear  that the proofs brought against faith are not demonstrations,
but  arguments  that can be answered." Descartes seems to hold a similar
view.  Defending  his opinions in a letter to Father Dinet, he declares:
"As to theology, as one truth can never be contrary to another, it would
be  a  kind  of impiety to fear that the truths discovered in philosophy
were  contrary  to those of the true Faith." A somewhat contrary view of
the  relation  of faith and reason seems to be taken by Locke. "Whatever
God hath revealed," he says, "is certainly true; no doubt can be made of
it.  This  is  the  proper  object  of faith; but whether it be a divine
revelation,  or  no,  reason  must  judge."  Reason,  not  faith, is the
ultimate  test  of  truth, in theology as in philosophy. "Reason must be
our  last  judge and guide in everything." If reason finds something "to
be  revealed  from  God, reason then declares for it, as much as for any
other  truth,  and  makes it one of her dicIn many of the great books we
find a less

[924a]
890  THE  GREAT IDEAS tween reason and faith physics, natural philosophy
the  practical  reason  4.  Sacred theology: faith seeking understanding
ences  cal  argument  and proof ^d. Sacred theology as a speculative and
practical science 4^. The nature and forms of theological heresy

[924b]
favorable  view  of  the merit or profit in theologProtestant reformers,
like  Luther,  later  attack  ical  controversy. Its excesses and mumbo-
jumtheology itself as detrimental to the purity of bo are travestied and
caricatured  by  Rabelais Christian faith and the spirit of religion. It
is  in and Sterne; its futility and folly are the subject this vein also
that  Bacon deplores the "unprofof bitter complaint by Hobbes and Bacon;
its  itable  subtility  or  curiosity" and the "fruitless intolerance is
condemned  by  Locke  and Mill. speculation or controversy" in divinity,
and  Gibbon, who reports the disputes which raged speaks of the "extreme
prejudice  which  both  through  ten  centuries  of  Christendom, seldom
religion  and  philosophy  have  received  and  may speaks kindly of the
disputants.  He  refers  to  receive  by  being commixed together." "the
exquisite rancor of theological hatred"; When the Student in Faust says,
"I'm now and in describing the fury of the conflict bealmost inclined to
try  Theology,"  Mephistophtween  the  Arians  and  the defenders of the
Nieles  replies:  like  Peter  Damiani  or  Bernard  of Clairvaux, That,
however, is the voice of the devil; and attack as impious or irreligious
the  kind  of  thefrom the point of view of those who see no ology which
borrows  from  the philosophers and conflict between faith and reason or
between makes use of the liberal arts, especially the piety and inquiry,
the  attempt  to separate relitechniques of the dialectician. In similar
vein  gion  from theology often looks diabolical. OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE
i.  The  subject matter of theology: the scope of its inquiry; the range
of  its  problems  891 3. Theology as a philosophical discipline 892 3#.
Natural  theology  in relation toother parts of philosophy : philosophia
prima,  meta3^.  The distinction between speculative and moral theology:
theology as a work of 4#. The relation of sacred theology to philosophy:
theology  as  the queen of the sci4#. The principles of sacred theology:
revealed  truth;  articles  of faith; interpretation of Scripture 893 4c
The roles of reason and authority in the development of sacred doctrine:
theologilogical controversy 894

[925a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James . Psychology, \l6a-\\9h,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the upper and lower halves of the lefthand sideof the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. The subject matter of theology:
the  scope  of its inquiry; the range of its problems 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  vii,  388a-398c  esp  389b391b,  397a-398c  / Laws, bk x 757d-771b 8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i, ch 2 [o82b28983*11] 501a-b; bk vi, ch i
547b,d-548c esp
[1026*6-33] 548a-c; bk xi, ch 7 [io64a28-b i3]
592d-593a  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk vii, par 13-27 47c-52c / City
of God,  bk  viii,  ch  1-12  264b,d273a;  bk xi, ch 2 323a-c / Christian
Doctrine, bk 11, ch 40 655b-656a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
i  3a-10c; q 75, preamble 378a-b; q 84, preamble 440b-d; part i-ii, q 7,
a  2, ans and rep 3 652d-653c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
71,  a 6, rep 5 HOb-110b; q iii, a 4, ans 354c355d 30 Bacon: Advancement
of  Learning,  41b-42a; 95d-101c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c 33
Pascal:  Vacuum,  355b-356b  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div
132,  509c  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 336b-337a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 33a-d; 119a-c; 176a-c;

[925b]
Chapter  92:  THEOLOGY  891  190a-c; 236b-240b esp 239a-240b / Practical
Reason,  349a-352c  esp  350c-351a  /  Judgement, 578a-b The distinction
between  natural  and  sacred  theology: its relation to the distinction
between  reason  and  faith 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 13-27
47c-52c  / City of God, bk viii, ch 1-12 264b,d273a; bk xi, ch 2 323a-c /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  11,  ch 40 655b-656a; ch 42 656c-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q i, aa 1-2 3b-4c; aa 4-6 5a-7a; q 2, a 2, rep
i  lld-12c;  q  12, aa 12-13 60d-62b; q 32, a 1 175d-178a; a 4 180b-d; q
46,  a  2  253a-255a;  q 84, a 5 446c-447c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part ii-ii, q i, a 5 383b-384b; q 2, aa 3-4 392d-394b; a 10 399b-400b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  66a-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 208a-209c;
212a-d;  238d-239c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 19b-c; 39d40c;
41b-42a;  95d-101c  esp  96c-97c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c 31
Descartes:  Rules,  in,  4d-5a  /  Discourse, part 1, 43c / Meditations,
69a-71a,c / Objections and Replies, 125b-126a; 168b-169a; 284d

[926a]
(2. The distinction between natural and sacred theology: its relation to
the  distinction  between reason andfaith.} 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
xii  [552-587]  331a332a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 245 218b; 265-290 221b225a;
543 266a; 561-563 272b-273a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch ix,
sect  23  291b-c;  bk iv, ch xvii, sect 23-24 380b-d; ch xviii 380d-384b
passim;  ch  xix,  sect  14 387d-388a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
xii, div 132, 509c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307a-309d esp 308c-309a;
346bc  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason, 346b-347a; 349a-352c esp 350c-351a;
353a-354d  / Judgement, 599d600a; 603b-d; 604d-606d esp 606a-d; 607d609b
43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  455a-c  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk v,
196a-197c 3. Theology as a philosophical discipline 5a. Natural theology
in   relation   to   other   parts  of  philosophy:  philosophia  prima,
metaphysics, natural philosophy 7 Plato: Republic, bk vii, 388a-398c esp
389b391b,  397a-398c  /  Timaeus  442a-477a,c  esp 447a-453c, 455a-457b,
475d-477a,c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92*33~b2]
268c-d; bk ii, ch 2 [i94b9~i5] 271a; ch 7 [198* 22-31] 275b-c / Heavens,
bk  hi,  ch  i [298b i3~ 24] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2 499a501c
esp  ch  2 [982^8-983*11] 501a-b; bk vi, ch 1 [1026*6-33] 548a-c; bk xi,
ch  7  [1064*28b  i3]  592d-593a  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest, bk i, 5a-6a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  i,  a 8, ans 7c-8d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  iv,  269b-c  30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c;
15d16b; 39d-40c; 41b-42a; 43a-46a esp 44c-45a / Novum Organum, bk i, aph
65 114b-c 31 Descartes: Meditations, 69a-71a,c / Objections and Replies,
283d-284d  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  77  186a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 33a-d;
119a-c;  176a-c;  190ac;  236b-240b  esp  239a-240b  / Practical Reason,
349a-352c esp 350c-352c / Judgement, 603d-613a,c esp 606d-607c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History, part iv, 368d369a,c 3b. The distinction between
speculative  and  moral  theology:  theology  as a work of the practical
reason 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 236b-240b esp 239a-240b / Practical Reason,
291a-296d; 349a-352c esp 350c-351a / Judgement, 588a-613a,c esp 588a-

[926b]
892  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  3  to  4a  592d, 593d-595c, 607d-609b 596c-598b,
604d-606d,  3c.  The  limitations of speculative theology: the insoluble
mysteries   or   antinomies   8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2
[982b28983*11]  501a-b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 6-8 36c37c;
bk  vii,  par 13-27 47c-52c / City of God, bk viii, ch 1-12 264b,d-273a;
bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, aa 1-2
10d-12c; q 12, a 12 60d-61c; q 13 62b75b; Q 32, a 1 175d-178a; q 46, a 2
253a-255a;  q  88,  a  3  472c-473a; q 94, a i, rep 3 501d503a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[1645] 56a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  163a-b;  part  hi,  165b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  41b-d;  96d97b  31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  112a-114c: 123a; 127a-d; 168d-169a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 185-195
205a-210b; 221-241 212a-217b; 243-253 218a-220a; 543 266a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  viii,  div  81  487a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
12d-13a;  159a-d;  186a-d;  308c-d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  143a-145c;
152a-153c;   174b-177b;  187a-192d  esp  190a-c;  200c-209d;  218d-223d;
234c-240b  esp  239a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  291a-292a;  344a-349b esp
344a-c, 348b-349b; 351b-352c / Judgement, 547d; 588a-607c esp 588a-591b,
593d-596c,  599d600a,  600d-601c,  603b-d, 606d-607c 4. Sacred theology:
faith  seeking  understanding  Aa.  The  relation  of sacred theology to
philosophy:  theology  as  the  queen  of  the  sciences  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii, par 13-27 47c-52c / City of God, bk viii, ch 1-12
264b,d-273a;  bk  xi,  ch  2  323a-c  / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40
655b-656a;  ch  42  656c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, aa
5-6  5c-7a; q 84, a 5 446c-447c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  71,  a 6, rep 5 HOb-110b; q in, a 4, ans 354c355d; part ii-ii, q 2, a
10  399b-400b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 65b-66c; 70c; 83b; part hi,
165b; part iv, 247d; 260b-c; 267ac; 269b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 155a-c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  17b-20a;  39d-40c; 41b-d; 95d-101d /
Novum Organum, bk 1, aph 65 114b-c; aph 89 124a-d

[927a]
Chapter  92:  THEOLOGY  4£  to 4e 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c /
Meditations,  69a-71a,c  /  Objections and Replies, 125b126a; 162c-165d;
283d-284d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v, 336b-337a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 307a-309p_^^ 670b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  158c160b;  part  in,  308c-309d  4b.  The  principles  of sacred
theology: revealed truth; articles of faith; interpretation of Scripture
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk hi, par 9 15a-b; bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c;
bk  vii,  par 13-27 47c-52c / Christian Doctrine 621a-698a,c 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a-10c; q 3, a i, rep 1-5 14b-15b; q 29, a
3,  rep  1  164c-165c;  q  32,  a  1  175d-178a;  a  4 180b-d; q 46, a 2
253a-255a;  q 51, a 2, rep i 276b-277a; q 68, a i, ans 354a-355c; q 102,
a  1,  ans  and rep 4 523d-525a; q 113, a 7, rep 1 580b-581a 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 102, a 2 271b-272a; part ii-ii, q i, aa
5-10  383b-390d; q 2, a 10 399b-400b 21 Dante : Divine Comedy, paradise,
xxiv  142d144b  esp  [61-81]  143b-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,
137b-138b;  160b-c; part in, 167a-b; 181a-182d; 241a244d; 246c 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 95d-96c / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 65 114b-c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  i,  43c 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 78b
80b;  163a-164b  /  Pensees,  570-579  273b-276a;  642-692 290b301a; 775
323b-324a  /  Vacuum, 355b / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk hi, ch ix, sect 9, 287b; sect 23 291b-c; ch x,
sect  12  294b-c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 333d; 362d 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  307d-308a;  346b-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 230a-b 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  173b-174a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi,
308c309d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 696a-c 4c. The roles of
reason  and authority in the development of sacred doctrine: theological
argument  and  proof 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1 la-b; bk vi,
par  5-7 36b-37b; bk vii, par 13-27 47c52c; bk xii, par 32-36 107a-108c;
par  41-43 HOa-d; bk xiii, par 36 120c-d / City of God, bk viii, ch 1-12
264b,d-273a;  bk  xx,  ch  i, 530a-b; ch 30, 560a,c / Christian Doctrine
621a-698a,c  passim 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i, q i 3a-10c; q
2, a 2 lld-12c; q 3, a 5, ans 17c-

[927b]
893 18b; q 12, a 12 60d-61c; q 29. 164c-165c; q 32, a 1 175d-178a; q 46,
a  2 253a-255a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 2, A 3, REP I
i  4  180b-d;  Aio399b-400b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, xxiv
142d144b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 66a-c; 83b; part ii, 137b-c;
149c-d; 163a-b; part hi, 165a-c; 167a-b; 241c-242a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
208a-294b  passim  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 122b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 12c-13c; 41b-d; 95d-96c; 97b-c / Novum Organum,
bk  1, aph 65 114b-c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c / Meditations,
69a-71a,c  /  Objections  and  Replies,  125b126b;  127c-d; 162c-165d 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk xii [552-589] 331a332a 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  163a-166a  / Pensees, 226 212b-213a; 242-253 217b-220a; 265290
221b-225a; 557-567 272b-273b; 775 323b324a; 862-866 342b-343b 5903348a /
Vacuum,  355b-356b  35 Locke: Toleration, 5a-b / Human Understanding, bk
in,  ch  ix,  sect  23 291 b-c; bk iv, ch xvii, sect 24 380c-d; ch xviii
380d-384b   passim;   ch   xix,   sect   14  387d-388a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  xi  497b503c  passim,  esp div 102 497b-d, div 104
498b-c,  div  107  499c-500b; sect xii, div 132, 509c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 206a-b; 307a-314a esp 308d-309d, 310b-312a, 313d-314a; 348c-d;
438b-442a;  670b-c  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134a-151c esp 136d140d,
143c-145d; 198a-c; 462d-463a; 520b521c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 173b-174a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 158c160b; part hi, 308c-309d; part
iv,  360c361a 4d. Sacred theology as a speculative and practical science
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part 1, q 1, a 4 5a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 45, a 3 600c-601a 4e. The nature and forms of
theological  heresy 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10-12 15b-16b;
par 18 18b; bk vii, par 25 51a-c / City of God, bk xvi, ch 2, 422b-d; bk
xviii,  ch  51  502d-503d  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk hi, ch 33 670bc 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 28, A I, CONTRARY 157c-158d; A 3,
CONTRARY 160ac; q 31, a 2, ans 172b-173c; q 32, a 4 180b-d

[928a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  of  philosophy,  see  Metaphysics  3a;  Philosophy ia;
Religion 6f-6g. Sign and Symbol 5c

[928b]
894  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4<?  to  5  (4.  Sacred  theology: faith seeking
understanding.  5.  Criticisms  of theology: the dogmatic, sophis4e. The
nature  and forms of theological tical, or over-dialectical character of
heresy?)  theological  controversy  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  64,  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 51d-52b; 54b-c; a 4, rep 3
69b-70a; o 81, a i, ans 163a-164d; 71a-b; 84a; part ii, 163a-b; part hi,
165b;  part  ii-ii, q 10, aa 5-6 429c-431b; q ii 438apart iv, 247d-248a;
269b-271c;  274a-c  442b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ix [io6]-xi
[9]
9b;  21c-24a;  bk  ii,  78b-80d;  101b-106a;  bk 13b-15b; paradise, xiii
[112-142]  126c-d in, 172d-173c; 186d-188c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
78a-b;  part hi, 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 213d-214b;
238b-239b;  part  iv,  248c-d  62,  478c;  sect xi, div 107 499c-500b 25
Montaigne:  Essays, 154c-d 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 22b-23a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, lOla-b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 222a-224a;
366a33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 128b-137b; 141a376a; 421b-422b 166b /
Pensees,  862-865 342b-343b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 336b-337a
35  Locke:  Toleration,  ld-2a;  21c-22d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall,
312b-313b;  345d38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk iv, 438d-439c 346b;
347a;  439a;  441a-d;  670b-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 182d-184b;
308a-b;  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 134a; 143c-145d 310b-313d passim,
esp  312b-313b  esp  145b-c;  148a-b;  149c-d;  156a; 328a-b; 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  134a-138a;  143c422a-d;  476b-477a  145d; 149b-152c
passim; 198a-c; 422a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part m,313b-c; 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  part  iv, 360c-d 127b-137c 47
Goethe: Faust, part i [1982-2000] 47a-b For: The consideration of topics
or  problems  which  fall within the scope of theology, see Astronomy 6;
Beauty 7a; Cause 7~7d; Desire 7b; Eternity 3, 4d; God 2b, 2d, 4-51; Good
and Evil 2-2b; Happiness 7~7d; History 5a~5b; Honor 6-6b; Immortality 2,
3a; Infinity 7a~7d; Justice 11-nb; Liberty 5a~5d; Love 5a~5c; Matter 3d;
Mind   iog;  One  and  Many  ib,  6a-6c;  Opposition  2d-2e;  Punishment
5e(i)~5e(2);  Relation  2-3;  Religion  2c;  Same and Other 6; Sin 3~3e,
6a-6e;  Soul  4D-4C;  Time  2b-2c; Virtue and Vice 8d-8d(3); Will 4a~4b,
7e~7e(2);  Wisdom  id;  World  33-46(3),  8.  Other  discussions  of the
relation  of  reason  and  faith,  or  of  the  relation  of theology to
religion,  see  Knowledge  6c(5);  Logic  4f; Opinion 4a; Philosophy 6c;
Religion  ia,  ib(i),  6b,  6g\  Truth  4a;  Wisdom  ic. The relation of
philosophy  to theology, and for the conception of natural theology as a
part  Discussions  bearing  on  sacred theology as a science, and on its
principles  and methods, see Logic 4f; Reasoning 6a; Religion 6b, 6c(i);
Science  2a.  Discussions  bearing  on the nature and extent of revealed
truth  and  on the articles of religious faith, see Angel 3-4; Evolution
7a;  God  2a,  7~of;  Immortality  3b;  Man ab(i)-ob(3), na-nc; Prophecy
4a~4d;  Sin  3~3e;  Soul  401(3);  Virtue  and Vice 8e; World 4e(3). The
problems  of  interpreting  the  Word  of  God  or Sacred Scripture, see
Language  12;  Considerations  relevant  to  the relation of theology to
jurisprudence,   see   Law   33-3^2).  Various  attacks  on  theological
doctrines,  and  for criticisms directed against the kind of speculation
which  is  theological,  see  Dialectic  3c;  God  10-13; Immortality 2;
Knowledge  5c;  Metaphysics  2d, 4a; Opinion 4b; Philosophy 6b; Religion
6f-6g; Soul 3d; Will 5c; World 4a.

[929a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Augustine.  On  the Profit of Believing . On Faith in Things
Unseen  Aquinas.  On  the  Trinity  of  Boethius,  qq 1-3 . Summa Contra
Gentiles,  bk  i,  ch  1-9  .  Compendium of Theology Spinoza. Tractatus
Theologico-Politicus  {Theological-Political  Treatise),  ch 14-15 Kant.
Untersuchung  iiber  die  Deutlichkeit  der  Grundsatze  der naturlichen
Theologie  und  der  Moral  J.  S.  Mill.  "Theism,"  in Three Essays on
Religion  II.  Cicero.  De Natura Deorum (On the Nature of the Gods), 11
Proclus.  The  Elements of Theology Saadia Gaon. The Boo\ of Beliefs and
Opinions,  INTRODUCTORY  TREATISE  Abailard.  Introductio  ad Theologiam
Maimonides.  The  Guide  for  the  Perplexed,  intro Bonaventura. On the
Reduction  of  the  Arts  to  Theology  .  Breviloquium,  part  i  (i) .
Itinerarium  Mentis in Deum (The Itinerary of the Mind to God) R. Bacon.
Opus  Majus,  part  ii  Albertus  Magnus.  Summa Theologiae, part i Duns
Scotus.  Opus  Oxoniense,  prologium Albo. The Boo\ of Principles (Sefer
ha-I%arim)  Calvin. Institutes of the Christian Religion Boehme. The Way
from Darkness to True Illumination

[929b]
Chapter 92: THEOLOGY 895 H. More. The Antidote Against Atheism, bk i, ch
1-10  R.  Barclay.  An Apology for the True Christian Divinity Cudworth.
The  True  Intellectual System of the Universe Malebranche. Dialogues on
Metaphysics  and  Religion,  II,  VIII Leibnitz. Theodicy J. Butler. The
Analogy  of  Religion Voltaire. "Figure in Theology," "Theologian," in A
Philosophical Dictionary Paley. Natural Theology Comte. The Catechism of
Positive  Religion  J.  H.  Newman.  An  Essay  on  the  Dei'elopment of
Christian  Doctrine  .  The  Idea  of a University, discourse ii-iv . An
Essay  in  Aid  of a Grammar of Assent L. Stephen. An Agnostic's Apology
Harnack.   History  of Dogma  Stirling.  Philosophy  and  Theology  Ward.
Naturalism  and Agnosticism A. E. Taylor. The Faith ofa Moralist, series
i  (i)  J. S. Haldane. The Sciences and Philosophy, lect xvii Penido. Le
role  de  Vanalogie  en  theologie  dogmatique  Whitehead. Adventures of
Ideas,  ch  10 Maritain. Science and Wisdom, pp 70-136 Gilson. The Unity
of  Philosophical Experience, ch 2 . Reason and Revelation in the Middle
Ages  Fenton.  The  Concept  of  Sacred  Theology  Jaeger.  Humanism and
Theology Barth. Dogmatics in Outline

[930a]
:  INTRODUCTION  DEVOURING  Time," "wasteful Time," "this bloody tyrant,
Time"—Time  is  the  predatory villain with whom not only the lover, but
all  men  must  contend. The sonnets of Shakespeare make war upon Time's
tyranny  to  stay  "Time's scythe," to preserve whatever of value can be
kept  from  "the  wastes  of time," and to prove that "Love's not Time's
fool"  entirely. Yet, viewing the almost universal depredations of Time,
the poet fears that love may not escape Time's ruin. When I have seen by
Time's fell hand defaced The rich-proud cost of outworn buried age; When
sometime  lofty  towers  I  see  down-razed,  And brass eternal slave to
mortal  rage;  When  I  have seen the hungry ocean gain Advantage on the
kingdom  of  the  shore,  And  the  firm  soil  win  of the watery main,
Increasing  store  with  loss and loss with store; When I have seen such
interchange  of  state,  Or  state itself confounded to decay; Ruin hath
taught  me  thus to ruminate, That Time will come and take my love away.
This  thought  is  as a death, which cannot choose But weep to have that
which  it  fears  to  lose. The lover knows that he cannot save his love
from  change  and  her  beauty from decay. Time is too much for him. But
when  the lover is also a poet he may hope to defeat Time, not by making
his  love last forever, but by making the memory of it immortal. "Do thy
worst,  old  Time,"  he can say, "despite thy wrong, My love shall in my
verse  ever live young." Or again Since brass, nor stone, nor earth, nor
boundless  sea,  But sad mortality o'er-sways their power, How with this
rage  shall  beauty  hold  a  plea,  Whose  action is no stronger than a
flower? O, how shall summer's honey breath hold out Against the wreckful
siege  of  battering  days, When rocks impregnable are not so stout, Nor
gates of steel so strong, but Time decays?

[930b]
Chapter  93:  TIME O fearful meditation! where, alack, Shall Time's best
jewel  from Time's chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his swift
foot  back?  Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid? O, none, unless this
miracle  have  might,  That in black ink my love may still shine bright.
But  the  poet may have the cast of a theologian rather than a lover. He
may,  as  Milton does, stand not in awe or fear but in contempt of Time,
willing  to  wait  while  Time runs out its race. Milton bids Time . . .
glut  thyself  with what thy womb devours, Which is no more than what is
false  and  vain,  And  merely  mortal  dross; So little is our loss, So
little  is  thy gain. For when as each thing bad thou hast entomb'd, And
last of all thy greedy self consum'd, Then long Eternity shall greet our
bliss  With  an  individual  kiss  . . . Then all this Earthly grossness
quit,  Attir'd  with Stars, we shall forever sit, Triumphing over Death,
and  Chance, and thee O Time. A philosopher like Marcus Aurelius neither
defies nor despises time. He enjoins himself to accept the mutability of
all things as fitting and "suitable to universal nature. . . . Dost thou
not  see," he asks himself, "that for thyself also to change is just the
same,  and  equally necessary for the universal nature?" To him it seems
"no evil for things to undergo change"; nor is he oppressed by the image
of  Time  as  "a river made up of the events which happen, and a violent
stream;  for  as  soon as a thing has been seen, it is carried away, and
another  comes in its place, and this will be carried away too." For man
to  resign himself to time's passage, Pascal thinks, requires no special
effort.  "Our  nature  consists  in  motion," he says; "complete rest is
death."  Time  fits  our  nature,  not only because it "heals griefs and
quarrels," but because time's perpetual flow washes away the 896

[931a]
desperate  ennui  men suffer when they feel themselves imprisoned in the
present. Just as we seek and multiply diversions as means to escape from
ourselves,  so,  according^ to Pascal, when we are dissatisfied with the
present,  "we  anticipate  the  future  as  too slow in coming ... or we
recall  the past, to stop its too rapid flight. . . . For the present is
generally  painful  to us. ... Let each one examine his thoughts, and he
will find them all occupied with the past and the future. . . . The past
and  present  are  our  means;  the future alone is our end. So we never
live,  but we hope to live; and, as we are always preparing to be happy,
it  is  inevitable  we  should  never be so." These are only some of the
conflicting  attitudes  toward  time  and mutability which express man's
desire  for  permanence, for the eternity of a now that stands still, or
his  restless  weariness,  his  avidity  for the novelties time holds in
store. Wherever in the great books of poetry, philosophy, or history men
reflect  upon  their  loves  and  aspirations, their knowledge and their
institutions,  they  face man's temporality. It is not that man alone of
earthly  things  has  a  time-ridden  existence, but that his memory and
imagination  enable  him  to  encompass time, and so save him from being
merely  rooted  in  it. Man not only reaches out to the past and future,
but  he  also  sometimes  lifts  himself  above  the  whole  of  time by
conceiving the eternal and the immutable. Man's apprehension of the past
and  future  is  discussed in the chapter on Memory and Imagination. The
bent of his mind or his striving toward the unchanging, the everlasting,
the  eternal,  is  considered  in  the  chapter  on  Change. Here we are
concerned  with  his examination of time itself. Though the idea of time
is  traditionally  linked  with  that of space, it seems to be much more
difficult  to grasp. In addition to provoking opposite emotions from the
poets,  it  seems  to  engage  the  philosophers  in a dispute about its
intelligibility.  This  goes  deeper  than  conflicting  definitions  or
analyses,  such  as  occur  in  the  discussion  of both space and time.
Whereas  time seems no less clear than space to some thinkers, to others
it  is  irremediably  obscure.  Struggling  to say what it is and how it
exists,

[931b]
Chapter  93:  TIME  897  they  are  exasperated by its evanescence as an
object  of thought. Aristotle indicates some initial difficulties in the
consideration  of  time.  It is not itself a movement, yet "neither does
time  exist  without  change.  .  .  .  Time  is  neither  movement  nor
independent of movement." Furthermore, according to Aristotle, time is a
continuous   quantity.   "Time,  past,  present,  and  future,  forms  a
continuous whole." But the very nature of a continuous quantity is to be
divisible.  The present moment, however— the 'now' which is "the link of
time"  and  the  dividing  line  between  past and future—seems to be an
indivisible  If  the  present had an extended duration, Aristotle points
out,  it  would  have  to include parts, some of which would be past and
some future. Hence though the present seems to be a part of time, it is,
unlike  the  rest of time, indivisible; and though it separates past and
future,  yet  it  must  also  somehow belong to both, for otherwise time
would  not  be continuous. "The 'now' is an end and a beginning of time,
not  of the same time however, but the end of that which is past and the
beginning  of  that  which is to come." "If we conceive of some point of
time  which  cannot be divided into even the minutest parts of moments,"
Augustine  writes,  "that  is  the  only  point  that  can be called the
present;  and that point flees at such lightning speed from being future
to being past, that it has no extent of duration at all." Only past time
and  future  time  can be called long or short. Only they have duration.
"But  in  what sense," Augustine asks, "can that which does not exist be
long  or short ? The past no longer is; the future is not yet." The past
and  future,  it  seems,  have  duration,  or  at  least  extent, but no
existence.  The present exists but does not endure. "What then is time ?
If  no one asks me," Augustine says, "I know; if I want to explain it to
a  questioner, I do not know." All the words with which we speak of time
and  times  "are the plainest and commonest of words, yet again they are
profoundly   obscure  and  their  meaning  remains  to  be  discovered."
Augustine  returns again and again to the point that "we measure time in
its passing." But, he says, "if you ask me how I know this, my answer is
that I know it because we measure

[932a]
898 THE GREAT IDEAS time, and we cannot measure what does not exist, and
the  past  and  future do not exist. But how do we measure time present,
since it has no extent"; and "where does time come from, and by what way
does  it pass, and where does it go to, while we are measuring it? Where
is it from?—obviously from the future. By what way does it pass?— by the
present.  Where  does  it  go?— into the past. In other words, it passes
from  that  which  does not exist, by way of that which lacks extension,
into  that  which  is  no  longer." The more he reflects on time and its
measurement,  the  more Augustine is perplexed, the more he is forced to
say,  "I  still  do not know what time is." He realizes that he has been
"talking of time for a long time, and this long time would not be a long
time unless time has passed. But how do I know this, since I do not know
what  time  is?"  It  seems to him true that we measure time, and yet he
must  say,  "I  do  not  know what I am measuring." It seems to him that
"time  is  certainly extendedness but," he must add, "I do not know what
it  is  extendedness  of."  Berkeley  suggests  that the difficulties in
understanding  time may be of our own making. "Bid your servant meet you
at such a time in such a place, and he shall never stay to deliberate on
the  meaning of those words. . . . But if time be taken exclusive of all
those  particular  actions  and ideas that diversify the day, merely for
the  continuation of existence or duration in the abstract, then it will
perhaps  gravel  even a philosopher to comprehend it. "For my own part,"
Berkeley  goes  on to say, "whenever I attempt to frame a simple idea of
time,  abstracted  from  the  succession  of ideas in my own mind, which
flows  uniformly  and  is  participated  by  all  beings,  I am lost and
embrangled in inextricable difficulties. I have no notion of it at all."
To  those who conceive time as a mathematical magnitude or as a physical
dimension,  there  seems  to  be no difficulty about its definition or a
precise  statement  of its properties. So considered, time appears to be
no  less  intelligible  than  space,  for when it is so considered it is
being  treated  exactly  like  space—not as a property of things, not as
relative to bodies or their

[932b]
motions,  but  as  an  extensive  manifold  capable of being occupied by
things, and in which they exist and move. As in what Einstein calls "the
four-dimensional  space-time  continuum"  (which  comprises  three space
coordinates  and one time coordinate) time is merely one dimension among
others,  so  in  Newton's  theory time and space are also given parallel
treatment.  "Times  and  spaces,"  Newton  writes,  "are as it were, the
places  as  well  of  themselves  as of all other things. All things are
placed  in  time  as to order of succession; and in space as to order of
situation."  Einstein  criticizes  Newtonian mechanics for its "habit of
treating  time  as  an  independent  continuum," yet Newton no less than
Einstein appears to conceive time and space alike as dimensions, even if
he  conceives them in separation from one another. But if time and space
are  something  to be occupied or filled, they can also be thought of as
unoccupied  or empty. The opposition, discussed in the chapter on Space,
between  those who think of space in itself as empty, and those who deny
a  void  or  vacuum, seems to be paralleled here by the issue concerning
empty  time—  time  apart  from  all  change  or motion, time in itself.
Waiving  for the moment the question whether such time exists or is only
a  mathematical  abstraction,  we  can  see  that  this time may be more
susceptible  to  analysis than the time of ordinary experience, the time
which,  according  to Lucretius, no one feels "by itself abstracted from
the  motion  and  calm rest of things." Newton explains that he does not
define  time,  space, place, and motion, because they are "well known to
all." But he observes that men commonly "conceive these quantities under
no  other  notions but from the relation they bear to sensible objects."
He  finds  it  necessary,  therefore,  to distinguish each of them "into
absolute  and  relative, true and apparent, mathematical and common." By
"absolute,  true,  and  mathematical  time," Newton means that which "of
itself,  and  from  its  own  nature,  flows equably without relation to
anything external, and by another name is called duration." In contrast,
"relative,  apparent,  and  common  time,  is some sensible and external
(whether  accurate  or  unequable)  measure  of duration by the means of
motion, which

[933a]
is  commonly used instead of true time, such as an hour, a day, a month,
a   year."   In   astronomy,   Newton  points  out,  absolute  time  "is
distinguished  from  relative,  by  the equation o^jcor-- rection of the
apparent  time.  For the natural days are truly unequal, though they are
commonly   considered  as  equal,  and  used  for  measures  of  time  ;
astronomers  correct this inequality that they may measure the celestial
motions  by  a  more accurate time." Newton seems to be saying that time
measures  motion  and also that it is measured by it. If his distinction
between  absolute  and relative time is ignored, his theory of time does
not  appear  to be very different from that of Aristotle, who says, "not
only  do  we  measure the movement by the time, but also the time by the
movement."  Insofar  as  movement or change involves a sequence in which
one  part comes after another, time measures it by numbering the befores
and  afters.  But  we also judge the length of the time according to the
duration  of the movement, and in this sense the movement measures time.
As both Aristotle and Augustine point out, time measures rest as well as
motion,  for,  in Aristotle's words, "all rest is in time. . . . Time is
not motion, but the 'number of motion' and what is at rest can be in the
number of motion. Not everything that is not in motion can be said to be
'at  rest'—  but only that which can be moved, though it actually is not
moved."  But  where Aristotle, in defining time as the measure of motion
or  rest,  makes  time an attribute of movement, Newton regards absolute
time  as  the  perfect measure of motion precisely because its nature is
independent  of  all  physical  change.  Only  relative  time depends on
motion,  and  that  is  the  time  which  is measured by motion, not the
measure  of it. Those "who confound real quantities with their relations
and   sensible   measures,"  Newton  declares,  "defile  the  purity  of
mathematical  and philosophical truths." Distinguishing between duration
and  time,  Locke expresses in another way the difference between Newton
and Aristotle. Time for Locke is that portion of duration which consists
of  definite  periods and is measured by the motion of bodies. "We must,
therefore, carefully distinguish betwixt duration itself, and the meas-

[933b]
Chapter  93:  TIME 899 ures we make use of to judge its length. Duration
in itself is to be considered as going on in one constant, equal uniform
course;  but  none of the measures which we make use of, can be known to
do  so." It seems wrong to Locke to define time as the measure of motion
when,  on  the  contrary,  it  is  motion—  "the motion of the great and
visible  bodies  of  the  world"—which  measures  time. What Locke calls
"duration"  seems  to be the same as Newton's absolute time. It is in no
way  relative to the existence of bodies or motion. Just as space or, as
he  calls  it, "expansion," is not limited by matter, so duration is not
limited  by motion. As place is that portion of infinite space "which is
possessed  by and comprehended within the material world, and is thereby
distinguished  from  the  rest  of  expansion,"  so  time is "so much of
infinite duration, as is measured by, and coexistent with, the existence
and motions of the great bodies of the universe." Many issues are raised
by  absolute  time  or infinite duration conceived as independent of all
bodily  motions.  Einstein, for example, challenges the classical notion
of  simultaneity,  according  to  which  two events taking place a great
distance  from  one another are said to occur at the same time, that is,
at  the  same moment in the absolute flow of time. "Before the advent of
the  theory  of  relativity,"  he  writes,  "it  had always been tacitly
assumed   in  physics  that  the  statement  of  time  had  an  absolute
significance, i.e., that it is independent of the state of motion of the
body  of  reference."  But  if  the  world of physical events is a four-
dimensional  manifold  in which the time coordinate is always associated
with  the  space  coordinates  for any reference-body under observation,
then  "every  reference-body  (coordinate system) has its own particular
time";  and,  Einstein  adds,  "unless we are told the reference-body to
which  the  statement of time refers, there is no meaning in a statement
of  the  time  of an event." There is also the issue of the emptiness of
that  part  of  absolute time or infinite duration which comes before or
after the existence of the world, comparable to the issue concerning the
void  or  empty space beyond the borders of the material universe. Those
who regard time as

[934a]
900  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  relative to and inseparable from motion deny the
possibility  of such empty time. For Plato, as for Christian theologians
like  Augustine and Aquinas, time itself is created with the creation of
the  heavenly  bodies  and  their  motions.  As the story of the world's
becoming  is  told  in the Timaeus, the maker "resolved to have a moving
image  of  eternity,  and  when he set in order the heaven, he made this
image  eternal  but  moving  according  to number, while eternity itself
rests  in  unity; and this image we call time. . . . Time, then, and the
heaven  came  into  being  at the same instant." Augustine undertakes to
answer  "those  who agree that God is the Creator of the world, but have
difficulties  about the time of its creation." He asserts that "there is
no  time  before  the  world.  For  if  eternity  and  time  are rightly
distinguished  by  this,  that time does not exist without some movement
and  transition,  while in eternity there is no change, who does not see
that  there  could  have  been  no time had not some creature been made,
which  by  some  motion  could  give birth to change. ... I do not see,"
Augustine  continues,  "how  God  can  be said to have created the world
after  spaces  of  time had elapsed, unless it be said that prior to the
world  there  was  some creature by whose movement time could pass." But
the  existence  of  a  creature  prior  to creation is impossible. Hence
Augustine  concludes  that "if in the world's creation change and motion
were  created,"  then  "the world and time were simultaneously created."
Though  the  existence of a creature prior to creation is impossible, it
is  not  impossible,  according  to Aquinas, for the created world to be
coeval  with  its  Creator.  While  he  rejects the opinion of those who
assert  that the world now exists without any dependence on God, and who
deny  that it was ever made by God, he entertains, as possible, the view
that  "the  world  has a beginning, not of time, but of creation." Those
who  hold  this  view, he explains, mean that "it was always made. . . .
For  just  as,  if  a  foot were always in the dust from eternity, there
would  always  be  a footprint which without doubt was caused by him who
trod  on  it,  so  also  the  world always was, because its Maker always
existed." It does not necessarily follow, Aquinas ad-

[934b]
mits, that "if God is the active cause of the world, He must be prior to
the world in duration, because creation, by which He produced the world,
is  not  a  successive  change."  But  Aquinas  does  not think that the
question  whether  the  world and time began with creation or has always
co-existed  with its Creator, can be resolved by reason. "The newness of
the  world," he says, "is known only by revelation. . . . That the world
did  not  always  exist  we  hold  by  faith  alone; it cannot be proved
demonstratively."  In  saying this, he is not unmindful of the fact that
Aristotle  advances  arguments to show that there can be no beginning to
either time or motion. "Since time cannot exist and is unthinkable apart
from the moment, and the moment is a kind of middle point, uniting as it
does  in  itself  both ... a beginning of future time and an end of past
time,  it  follows  that there must always be time. . . . But if this is
true  of  time,  it is evident that it must also be true of motion, time
being an attribute of motion." With one exception, all his predecessors,
according  to  Aristotle,  are  in agreement that time is uncreated. "In
fact,"  he  says,  "it is just this that enables Democritus to show that
all  things  cannot  have  had a becoming. . . . Plato alone asserts the
creation  of  time,  saying  that  it  had  a becoming together with the
universe."  But  Aristotle's  own arguments for the eternity of time and
motion  do not seem to Aquinas to be "absolutely demonstrative, but only
relatively so—viz., as against the arguments of some of the ancients who
asserted  that  the world began to be in some actually impossible ways."
As  for  the  present  moment,  or  the  now  of  time, always requiring
something which comes before as well as after, Aquinas admits that "time
cannot be made except according to some now,'" yet "not because there is
time in the first now, but because from it time begins." The position of
Aquinas,  that  arguments  for the initiation or the endlessness of time
are   only   dialectical,   seems  to  be  confirmed  by  Kant.  In  the
Transcendental Dialectic of the Critique of Pure Reason, Kant sets forth
as  one  of  the  cosmological  antinomies the opposed arguments for the
beginning  of the world and for a world without beginning. The reasoning
on either side being equal in its appearance of cogency, nei-

[935a]
ther conclusion, according to Kant, is genuinely demonstrated. But those
who,  like Newton and Locke, separate absolute time or infinite duration
from  the  existence  of  a  world  in  motion, seem to be unaffected by
arguments  which  concern  only the time of the material world, the time
that  is  relative  to  motion.  For  them, absolute or infinite time is
eternity.  It  may  be  empty  of  motion,  but  it is filled with God's
everlasting  being.  "Though we make duration boundless, as certainly it
is," Locke writes, "we cannot yet extend it beyond all being. God, every
one  easily  allows,  fills eternity." God is not eternity, says Newton,
but  He is eternal. "His duration reaches from eternity to eternity. ...
He  endures  forever, and is everywhere present; and, by existing always
and  everywhere,  He constitutes duration and space." The issue is again
brought  into  focus by the denial that God's eternity can be identified
with  infinite  or  absolute time. "Even supposing that the world always
was,"  Aquinas writes, it would not be eternal in the sense in which God
is,   "for   the  divine  being  is  all  being  simultaneously  without
succession." He distinguishes "the now that stands still" as the eternal
present  from the continually shifting now in the flow of time's passing
moments. For him God's everlasting being does not endure through endless
time,  but rather exists unchanging in the eternal present. "As eternity
is  the  proper  measure  of  being,  so  time  is the proper measure of
movement;  and  hence,"  Aquinas writes, "according as any being recedes
from  permanence  in  being,  and  is subject to change, it recedes from
eternity  and is subject to time." The two meanings of eternity—infinite
time  and  utter  timelessness—are discussed in the chapter on Eternity.
The  distinction  between  time  and  eternity, which is considered both
there and here, seems to be understood differently by those who contrast
timelessness  with  temporality  and  by  those who equate eternity with
endless  time.  For the latter, the point of difference between eternity
and  time  seems  to  be  only  one  of  infinite  as opposed to limited
duration.  Yet,  as we have just observed, writers like Newton and Locke
also distinguish absolute or infinite time (which they tend to iden-

[935b]
Chapter  93:  TIME  901  tify  with  eternity)  from definite periods or
limited  spans  of  time,  by  making  the one independent of, the other
relative  to  and measured The question remains whether absolute time is
real  time  or  only a mathematical abstraction, whether it exists apart
from  perceived  time  the experienced duration of observable motions or
the  elapsed  time  of  events in succession. Considering this question,
Kant  says  that  "those  who  maintain the absolute reality of time and
space,   whether   as  essentially  subsisting,  or  only  inhering,  as
modifications in things, must find themselves at utter variance with the
principles of experience itself. For, if they decide for the first view,
and  make  space  and time into substances, this being the side taken by
mathematical  natural  philosophers, they must admit two self-subsisting
nonentities,  infinite and eternal, which exist (yet without their being
anything  real)  for  the purpose of containing in themselves everything
that  is  real.  If  they  adopt  the second view of inherence, which is
preferred  by  some  metaphysical natural philosophers, and regard space
and  time  as relations . . . abstracted from experience . . . they find
themselves   in   that   case  necessitated  to  deny  the  validity  of
mathematical  doctrine  a priori in reference to real things." On Kant's
own  view, the synthetic judgments of mathematics can have the apodictic
certainty of a priori propositions only if space and time are themselves
a  priori  forms  of  intuition.  As  the  a  priori form of space makes
possible  the  pure  science  of  geometry,  according to Kant, so the a
priori  form  of  time makes possible the pure science of numbers, i.e.,
arithmetic.  But  whereas "space, as the pure form of external intuition
is  limited  ... to external phenomena alone," time, as "the form of the
internal  sense,"  is  for  Kant  "the  formal condition a priori of all
phenomena  whatsoever."  Without sharing Kant's theory of a priori forms
of  intuition,  or of the foundations of pure mathematics, other writers
appear to agree to some extent with his denial of independent reality to
time. Aristotle raises the question "whether if soul did not exist, time
would  exist or not." He thinks the question may be fairly asked because
"if  there cannot be someone to count, there cannot be anything that can
be

[936a]
902  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  counted,  so  that  evidently  there  cannot  be
number"—for  number is the counted or the countable. "But if nothing but
soul,  or in soul reason, is qualified to count, there would not be time
unless there were soul." Yet Aristotle qualifies this somewhat by adding
that  "if  movement can exist without soul, and the before and after are
attributes  of  movement,"  time  may  exist  as  "these qua numerable."
Augustine  takes  a less qualified position. Asking what it is that time
is  the  "extendedness  of,"  he answers: "Probably of the mind itself."
Insisting  that  neither  future  nor  past time can be measured because
neither  exists, Augustine concludes that it is only passing time we can
measure,  and  that we can measure it only in the mind. "It is in you, O
my  mind,"  he  says,  "that I measure time. . . . What I measure is the
impress  produced  in you by things as they pass and abiding in you when
they  have  passed  .  .  . I do not measure the things themselves whose
passage  produced  the  impress; it is the impress that I measure when I
measure time." Yet William James, while giving a similar analysis of our
experience   of  time,  insists  that  time  is  objective  as  well  as
subjective.  Time  and  space  relations, he writes, "are impressed from
without."  The time and space in which the objects of our thought exist,
exist  as independently of the mind as do those objects themselves. "The
time-  and  space-relations between things do stamp copies within '; as,
for  example, when "things sequent in time impress their sequence on our
memory."  William  James  proposes a solution of the mystery of how time
exists—at  least  how  it exists in experience. So far as our experience
goes,  past  and future can exist only in the present. But how can these
extended  parts  of  time  exist  in the present if the present is but a
fleeting  moment, without any extent of duration, "gone," as James says,
"in  the  instant  of  becoming"? His answer is in terms of something he
calls  "the  specious  present."  Unlike  the real present, the specious
present  is  "no knife-edge but a saddle-back, with a certain breadth of
its  own  on  which  we  sit  perched,  and  from  which  we look in two
directions  into time. The unit of composition of our perception of time
is a duration, with a bow and a

[936b]
stern,  as  it  were—a rearward- and a forwardlooking end. It is only as
parts  of this durationblock^ that the relation of succession of one end
to  the other is perceived." On the basis of some experimental evidence,
James estimates that the specious present may vary in length "from a few
seconds to probably not more than a minute." It has "a vaguely vanishing
backward  and  forward  fringe;  but  its  nucleus is probably the dozen
seconds  or less that have just elapsed." The irreversible flow of time—
the  succession  of  moments  which  constitute the motion of the future
through the present into the past—occurs in the specious present, though
not,  according  to  James,  without  the  accompaniment  of observed or
experienced change. "Awareness of change is . . . the condition on which
our  perception  of  time's  flow depends." But that awareness must take
place  in the specious present "with its content perceived as having one
part  earlier and the other part later." In consequence, James considers
the  specious  present to be, not only "the original intuition of time,"
but  also  "the  original paragon prototype of all conceived times." The
problems  of  time, its own process and being as well as its relation to
all other existence and change, its character as an aspect of experience
and  as an object of thought, seem to belong to many subject matters— to
psychology   and   to  experimental  or  mathematical  physics,  to  the
philosophy  of  nature,  metaphysics, and theology. For some thinkers—in
our own time notably Bergson, Whitehead, and Dewey— the concept of time,
of the burgeoning future, of the continuum of events, seems to determine
a  whole philosophical outlook. If it is not equally decisive throughout
the   tradition  of  the  great  books,  it  is  at  least  of  critical
significance  in  speculations about the origin and end of the world, in
the  contrast  between  physical  and  spiritual  modes of being, in the
consideration of the processes of life, thought, and feeling, and in the
analysis of more inclusive concepts, such as that of order. The temporal
relationships  of  succession  and simultaneity, for example, may be the
source from which we derive the notions of prior, pos-

[937a]
terior,   and   simultaneous,  but  they  are  traditionally  viewed  as
exemplifying rather than exhausting these types of order. When Augustine
deals  with  the  perplexing  theological  question^  of the priority of
eternity  to  time,  he  finds  it necessary to distinguish "priority in
eternity,  priority  in  time,  priority in choice, priority in origin."
When Aristotle deals with metaphysical questions concerning the order of
cause  and  effect,  of  potentiality  and  actuality,  of  essence  and
accident,  he  differentiates between temporal and logical priority, and
between priority in thought and priority in nature. When Harvey tries to
solve  the  familiar biological riddle (which came first, the chicken or
the  egg?),  he  also  finds his solution in a distinction. "The fowl is
prior  by  nature," he writes, "but the egg is prior in time." Space and
spatial relationships, no less than time and the temporal, figure in the
general  analysis  of  order  or relatedness and have a bearing on other
problems  in  physics  and  philosophy. But in addition to time's having
more  significance than space for the theologian, time also has peculiar
importance  for  one  subject  matter  in  which  space  is of much less
concern,  namely,  history  and  the  philosophy of history. Besides the
general  view which the historian takes of time as the locus of history,
or  the  medium  in  which the pattern of history unfolds, the writer of
history  usually employs certain conventional time divisions to mark the
major phases or epochs of the story he has to tell. Clocks and calendars
record or represent the passage of time in conventional units, but these
conventions  have  some  natural  basis  in  astronomical time, solar or
sidereal.  In contrast, the distinction between historic and prehistoric
time,  or  the  division  of  history  into  such  periods  as  ancient,
mediaeval, and modern, seems to be purely a matter of social or cultural
convention.  With  Hegel,  however, the division of the whole of history
into  three  epochs, and of each epoch again into three periods, follows
from the dialectical triad of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis which is
the  indwelling  form  of history's development. The division of each of
the three phases ofworld-history— the Oriental, the Grae-

[937b]
Chapter  93:  TIME  903  co-Roman,  and  the German worlds—into a first,
second,  and  third  period  produces  in  each case the same pattern of
origin,  conflict,  and  ^resolution.  For the most part, Hegel does not
identify  these three periods with ancient, mediaeval, and modern times;
yet  in  one case, that of the German world, he does refer to the second
period  as  "the  middle  ages" and the third as "the modern time." Such
words  as "ancient" and "modern" have conventional significance for most
historians.  Furthermore,  the  meanings  of modernity and antiquity are
themselves  subject  to  historical  relativity. In the tradition of the
great  books,  this  appears  most  plainly  in  the  references made to
ancients  and  moderns  by writers whom we today classify as ancient and
mediaeval.   Thucydides,   for   example,  begins  his  history  with  a
description of what is for him the antiquity of Greece. Nicomachus opens
his  Introduction  to  Arithmetic with a remark about "the ancients, who
under  the  leadership  of  Pythagoras  first  made  science systematic,
defined  philosophy as the love of wisdom." Mathematics, Aristotle says,
"has  come  to  be  identical  with  philosophy for modern thinkers." In
another  place,  Aristotle  contrasts  "the thinkers of the present day"
with  "the  thinkers of old"; and in still another he speaks of "ancient
and  truly  traditional  theories."  Like  Aristotle  in  the  sphere of
thought,  so  Tacitus  in  the  sphere  of  politics frequently compares
ancient  and  modern  institutions  or  practices.  In  the Middle Ages,
Aquinas  speaks  of  the  "teachings  of the early philosophers" and, as
frequently  as  Aristotle, he refers to ancient and modern doctrines. In
the  Renaissance,  Kepler treats as ancient a scientist who, in point of
time,  comes  much  later  than  those  whom  Aristotle and Aquinas call
modern.   Classifying   three   schools   of  astronomical  thought,  he
distinguishes  an  ancient  one,  which had "Ptolemy as its coryphaeus,"
from  two  modern ones, respectively headed by Copernicus and Tycho Such
references,  which  have  occurred  in  all three periods of the western
tradition,  suggest  the  probability that at some future date the whole
tradition  with  which  we are now acquainted will be referred to as the
thought and culture of ancient times.

[938a]
904  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  quantity;  absolute  and  relative time from the
eternity   of   timelessness   and   immutability   2a.  Aeviternity  as
intermediate  between  time  and eternity world after the end of time 3.
The  mode  of existence of time 3#. The parts of time: its division into
past,  present,  and  future  y.  The  extent  of  the  present  moment:
instantaneity  4.  The  measurement  of  time: sun, stars, and clocks 5.
Temporal  relationships: time as a means of ordering sion, knowledge and
object  known  potentiality  and  actuality in thought, by nature, or in
origin  6. The knowledge of time and the experience of duration ence and
memory of time intervals verb physical traces or remnants probability of
predictions  8.  Historical  time 8a. Prehistoric and historic time: the
antiquity of man

[938b]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  i.  The  nature of time: time as duration or as the
measure  of motion; time as a continuous 2. The distinction between time
and  eternity:  the eternity of endless time distinguished ib. Arguments
concerning  the infinity of time and the eternity of motion or the world
2c.  The  creation  of  time:  the  priority  of  eternity  to time; the
immutability  of  the  $b.  The  reality  of  the past and the future in
relation   to   the   existence  of  the  present  5#.  Simultaneity  or
coexistence:  the  simultaneity  of  cause and effect, action and pas5b.
Succession or priority and posteriority: the temporal order of cause and
effect,  5^.  Comparison  of temporal with non-temporal simultaneity and
succession: the prior 6a. The perception of time by the interior senses:
the difference between the experi6b. Factors influencing the estimate of
time   elapsed:   empty  and  filled  time;  illusions  6c.  Time  as  a
transcendental   form   of   intuition:  the  a  priori  foundations  of
arithmetic; 6d. The signifying of time: the distinction between noun and
verb;  the  tenses  of  the 6e. Knowledge of the past: the storehouse of
memory;  the  evidences  of the past in 6f. Knowledge of the future: the
truth  of  propositions  about  future  contingents; the 7. The temporal
course of the passions: emotional attitudes toward time and mutability

[939a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283! 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference:  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1. The nature of time: time as
duration  or  as  the  measure of motion; time as a continuous quantity;
absolute  and  relative  time  7  Plato: Timaeus, 450c-451d 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 6
[5*6—14] 9b-c
/  Physics,  bk  iv,  ch  10-14  297c-304a,c; bk vi 312b,d-325d passim /
Generation   and   Corruption,   bk  ii,  ch  10  [337*22-34]  439b-c  /
Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch 13 [1020*25-33] 541c; bk xii, ch 6 [io7i b6-i2]
601b  17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 8-13 123b-129a / Sixth
Ennead,  tr  i, ch 5, 254c-d; ch 16 260d-261c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk xi, par 17-40 93b-99a; bk xii, par 8, 101b / City of God, bk xi, ch 6
325c-d;  bk  xii, ch 15 351b352d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
7,  a  3,  rep  4 32c-33c; q 10, a i, ans 40d-41d; a 4 43b-44b; a 6, ans
45c-46d;  q 53, a 3 283b284d; q 57, a 3, rep 2 297b-298a; q 63, a 5, ans
329a-330c;  a 6, rep 4 330c-331c; q 66, a 4, rep 4 348d-349d; part i-ii,
q  31,  a  2, ans and rep 1 753c-754a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q

[939b]
Chapter  93: TIME 905 113, a 7, rep 5 366a-367c; part hi suppl, q 84 a 3
985d-989b  28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences,  third  day,  201a-202a  31
Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies, 213b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
def  8 355c; prop 21 364a-c; part ii, def 5 373b-c; prop 45, schol 390b;
part  in,  prop  8  399b;  part v, prop 23 458b-d 33 Pascal: Geometrical
Demonstration,  432b435b  34 Newton: Principles, definitions, schol, 8b;
9b-10a;   12a-b;   bk  i,  lemma  ii,  schol,  31b32a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv 155b-162a esp sect 21-22, 159b-d; ch xv
162b-165c  passim  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 97-98 431d-432a 35
Hume:  Human Understanding, sect xii, div 124-125 506a-507a esp div 125,
506d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 292a 293a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 26b-33d
esp  26d,  28a-b;  74b-76c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,
188c189b; 206c 53 James: Psychology, 399a-b; 407a

[940a]
2.  The  distinction  between time and eternity: the eternity of endless
time  distinguished  from  the eternity of timelessness and immutability
Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 1:2; 18:10— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:2; 18:8
7 Plato: Timaeus, 450b-451d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 12
[221*19]-
ch 13 [222b29] 301a-302c; bk vi, ch 2 [233*13b i6] 315a-c; ch 7
[237b23-238 a ioJ
321a-c;  ch  10  [24i  bn-2o]  325d;  bk  viii,  ch  1-2  334a337b; ch 6
344b-346b;  ch  8  348b-352a  /  Heavens,  bk  i,  ch  12  372d-375d esp
[282*22283*2] 373d-374c, [283V22] 375c-d; bk ii, ch 3 [286*8-13] 3 77c /
Generation and Corruption, bk 11, ch 9
[335*33-b
2l 436d-437a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 5 [ioi5b9-i6] 536a; bk ix, ch 8
[io5ob6-27] 576b-d; bk
xi, ch 10
[1067*33-38] 596a; bk
xii, ch 6
[io7i b2-n]
601b; ch 7
[1072*18-23] 602a-b;
[1073*3-11]
603a-b; bk xiv, ch 2
[io88b i4-28]
620d621a  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 15 275a-b; sect 36 277c
16  Kepler:  Harmonies of the World, 1071b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr
v,  ch  7 20a-c / Third Ennead, tr vii 119b-129a / Fourth Ennead, tr iv,
ch  7-8 161d-162d; ch 15-16 165c-166b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii,
par 21 49d50a; bk xi 89b-99b esp par 8-17 91b-93c, par 39-41 98c-99b; bk
xii,  par  13-20 102a103d; par 40 109b-110a; bk xiii, par 44 122d / City
of  God,  bk  xi,  ch  5-6  324d-325d;  ch  21  333a-d; bk xii, ch 12-19
349b-355a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, aa 1-5 40d-45c esp
a  1, rep 5 40d-41d, a 2, rep 2 41d-42c, a 3, rep 2 42c-43b, a 4 43b44b;
q  14,  a  9, ans 83b-d; a 13, ans and rep 3 86d-88c; q 42, a 2, rep 2-4
225d-227a;  q  46,  a  2, rep 5 253a-255a; q 79, a 8, rep 2 421c-422b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xi
[106-108] 69d; paradise, xxix [10-45] 150b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part iv, 271b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 292d-294a 29
Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 366d367a 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i,
aph  48  HOd111a  31  Descartes:  Objections  and  Replies, 216d-217a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, def 8 355c; prop 20, corol 1-2 364a; part ii,
prop  44,  corol  2  and  demonst 390a; part v, prop 23 458b-d; prop 29,
demonst  459c;  prop  34, schol 460d 32 Milton: On Time 12a-b / Paradise
Lost,  bk  vii  [70-98]  218b-219a;  bk  xii  [553-556]  331a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  121  195a;  205-206  211a  34 Newton: Principles, definitions,
schol, 8b

[940b]
906  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2 to 2b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xiv,  sect  26-27  160c-161a;  sect  30-31  161c-162a;  ch  xv, sect 3-8
162d-164b;  sect  11-12  165a-c;  ch  xvii  167d-174a passim, esp sect 5
168d-169a,  sect  10  170b-c,  sect  16 172a-b; ch xxix, sect 15 237a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason, 26d; 130b-133c; 135a137a,c; 152c; 160b-161d; 185a-b
46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 190a-b; 206c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vii, 295b-c 2a. Aeviternity as intermediate between time and
eternity  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xii, par 9 101 b-c; par 12-15
101d-102c; par 18-22 103b-104b / City of God, bk xii, ch 15 351b-352d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 2, rep 1-2 41d-42c; a 3, ans
42c-43b;  aa  5-6  44b-46d 2b. Arguments concerning the infinity of time
and  the eternity of motion or the world Old Testament: Genesis, 1:1-2 /
Nehemiah, 9 :6-(D) // Esdras, 9:6 / Job, 38:1-13 / Psalms, 90:2; 95:4-5;
102:25-26;  104:5-6  119:90-91;  136:5-9;  148:1-6—  (D)  Psalms,  89 2;
94:4-5; 101:26-27; 103:5-6; 118:90-91 135:5-9; 148:1-6 / Proverbs, 3:19;
8:22-29  /  Isaiah,  45:12,18;  48:13;  65:17-25—  (D) Isaias, 45:12,18;
48:13;  65:17-25 /Jeremiah, 51:15— (D) Jeremias, 51:15 Apocrypha: Wisdom
of  Solomon,  7:17-18—  (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 7:17-18 / Ecclesiasticus,
23:19-20;  24:9—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  23:  28-29;  2  4  :i 4 / H
Maccabees,  7:23—  (D)  OT,  // Machabees, 7 :23 New Testament: Matthew,
13:24-30,36-43,49- :3-35 / Mark !3 :3-33 / Lufc 2i: 5"33 5°; 2 4 / John,
1:1-3  /  Colossians,  1:16-17  /  Hebrews, 1:10-12 / II Peter, 3:3-13 /
Revelation,  10:56—  (D)  Apocalypse, 10:5-6 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-c /
Timaeus, 447b-c; 450c-451a; 460c-d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii
[i04b i3-i8]
148a-b / Physics, bk iv, ch 13
[222*29-b8]
302b;  bk  vi, ch 10 [241*27^20] 325b-d; bk viii, ch 1-2 334a-337b; ch 6
344b-346b; ch 8 348b-352a / Heavens, bk i, ch 2 [269^-10] 360c-d; ch 3
[27obi-26]
361c-362a; ch 9
[279*i2]-ch 12 [283^3] 370b-375d; bk
ii,  ch  6 [288*23-25] 379d / Generation and Corruption, bk 11, ch io-ii
437d-441a,c  /  Meteorology,  bk  1,  ch 14 [352*16-353*27] 458b-459a,c;
bkii,  CH3  [356  b2-357*4]462b-d/ Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 8 [i050b20-28]
576c-d; bk xi, ch 6
[1063*13-16] 591b; ch 10 [1067*33-38] 596a; bk
xii, ch 6-8 601b-605a esp ch 7 [i072*i9-b i4] 602a-d, [1073*5-11] 603b 9
Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  4  [699^5700*6]  234d-235a;  ch  6
[7oob29-70i*7] 236a-b

[941a]
Chapter 93: TIME 2c to 3a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [146-264]
2d-4b;
[483-634]
7a-8d;
[951-1051]
12d-14a esp
[988-1007]
13b; bk ii
[89-141]
16a-d; 28b-c;
[1105-1174]
29a-30a,c; bk v
[i-j&i]—
[294-307] 18d-19a; [569-580] 22b; [1048-1063]
61a-66d esp [55-70] 61d-62a, [235-246] 64a-b,
[351-379] 65d-66a; bk vi [535-607] 87c-88b
12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk v, sect 13 271b; sect 23 272b; bk vi, sect
15  275a-b;  bk ix, sect 28 293d-294a; bk x, sect 7 297b-c; sect 27 299d
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  xiii,  429a-b  16  Kepler:  Epitome, bk iv,
847b-848b;  888b891a 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i 35a-39d esp ch 1-5
35a-37c; tr ix, ch 7-8 69c-70d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 21
49d50a;  bk  xi  89b-99b esp par 12-17 92b-93c, par 40 98d-99a / City of
God,  bk  xi,  ch  4-6 324a-325d; bk xii, ch 10-20 348b-357a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 10, a 2, rep 2 41d-42c; a 4, ans 43b-44b; q
14,  a  12,  ans  85d-86d;  q  46  250a-255d esp a i 250a252d; q 61, a 2
315c-316a;  q  66,  a 4 348d349d; Q 75, a 1, rep 1 378b-379c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part hi suppl, q 77, a 2, ans and rep i 945a-946b; q
91,  a 2 1017c-1020c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 50a; part ii, 162b 28
Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, third day, 224d 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk
ii,  aph  35, 163a; aph 48, 186b-d 31 Descartes: Objections and Replies,
228a-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [6-10] 93b; bk v
[577-599]
187b-188a; bk vii
[70-97]
218b219a   33   Pascal:   Pensees,   121  195a  34  Newton:  Principles,
definitions,  schol,  8b; law 1 14a / Optics, bk in, 540a-541b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch xiv, sect 26 160c-d; ch xxix, sect 15
237a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 20a; 26d; 130b-133c; 135a-137a,c; 152a-d;
160b-161d  /  Practical  Reason,  334b-335c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  693c694a  passim  53  James  :  Psychology,  882a 2c. The
creation  of time: the priority of eternity to time; the immutability of
the  world  after the end of time Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 7:17-18—
(D)  OT,  Boo/{  of  Wisdom,  7:17-18  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  450c-451a 17
Plotinus:  Third Ennead, tr vii, ch i 119b-c; ch 6, 122c-d; ch ii, 126a;
ch  13,  128c  /  Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 15-16 165c-166b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  21 49d50a; bk xi, par 12-16 92b-93a; par 40
98d99a; bk xii, par 40 109b-110a / City of God,

[941b]
907 bk xi, ch 4-6 324a-325d; bk xii, ch 12 349b350a; ch 15-17 351b-354a;
bk  xxii, ch 30, 618a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 22, a 1,
rep  2  127d-128d; q 46 250a-255d; q 61, a 2 315c-316a; q 66, a 3, rep i
347b-348d;  a 4 348d-349d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q
84,  a 3, rep 5 985d-989b; q 91, a 2 1017c1020c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  xxix  [1045]  150bc  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v [577-594]
187b188a;  bk  vii [70-108] 218b-219b 3. The mode of existence of time 7
Plato:  Timaeus, 450c-451a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 4 [^25-26] 5d; ch
6  [5*6-7]  9b  /  Physics,  bk iv, ch 10 [2i7b29~ 2i8 a8] 297c-d; ch 14
[223*21-29] 303a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [449-482] 6c-7a 17
Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch  11-13  126a-129a  18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk xi, par 12-40 92b-99a / City of God, bk xi, ch 6 325c-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 1, rep 5 40d-41d; aa 4-5
43b-45c   25   Montaigne:   Essays,  293d-294a  34  Newton:  Principles,
definitions,  schol,  8b  35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv,
sect  1-5  155b-156b 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 98 432a 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 26b-33d esp 28a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions,
25  121a  / Philosophy of History, intro, 186d-190b 53 James: Psychology,
398a-399b  5a.  The  parts of time: its division into past, present, and
future  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  450c-451a  /  Parmenides, 494c-495b; 502a 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 6
[5*26-29] 9c
/ Physics, bk iv, ch ii
[2i9aio-b2] 298d-299b;
ch  12  [22ob5-8]  300b;  [221*14-19]  300d-301a;  ch  14 [222^0-223*15]
302d-303a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk ii, sect 14 258d 17 Plotinus :
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  1, ch 13 259d-260b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi,
par 17-38 93b-98c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 2, rep 4
41d-42c;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  2 43b44b; a 5, ans 44b-45c 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  in,  87c-d / Objections and Replies, axiom ii 131d; 213b-c
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xv, sect 9 164b-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  26b-d; 131a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 153a156d 53
James: Psychology, 398a-399a passim; 413a

[942a]
908  (3. The mode of existence of time?) 3b. The reality of the past and
the  future  in  relation  to  the existence of the present 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk iv, ch io [2iyh2g-2iS& 8] 297c-d; ch 12 [221*53-222*3] 301d;
ch 14
[223*21-29] 303a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 2
[ii39bio-n]
388b  12  Aurelils:  Meditations,  bk  11,  sect  14  258d 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk xi, par 17-38 93b-98c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q 10, a 4, ans 43b-44b; a 5, ans and rep 3 44b-45c; q 25, a 4 147a-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 53c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 293d-294a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 190a-b 53 James: Psychology, 219b;
398a-b; 413a; 421a 3c. The extent of the present moment: instantaneity 7
Plato: Parmenides, 505a-c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch 10
[218*4-29]
297d-298a; ch ii
[2i9b9-22°a2
4] 299b-300a; ch 13
[222*10-23]
301d-302a;
[222b i-i4]
302b-c; bk vi, ch 3
[233^3-234*23] 315d316b; bk
viii, ch 1
[25^16-28] 335b; ch 8
[263b26-264a6] 350c-d / Metaphysics, bk hi,
ch 5 [ioo2b5-8] 521b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 17 93b-c; par
19-20  93d-94b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 8, a 2, rep 2
35c-36b;  q  10,  a  i,  rep  5  40d-41d;  q 42, a 2, rep 4 225d-227a 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  293d-294a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xiv, sect 10 157a; ch xv, sect 9 164b-d 53 James: Psychology, 398a-399a;
420a-b 4. The measurement of time: sun, stars, and clocks Old Testament:
Genesis,   1:3-5,14-18   /   Psalms,  104:19-20;  136:8-9—  (D)  Psalms,
103:19-20;  135:8-9  Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 43:1-10 esp 43:6-8— {D)
OT, Ecclesiasticus, 43:1-11 esp 43:6-9 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[454-461]
44c-d  5  Aristophanes: Clouds [606-626] 496a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk
ii,  49d-50a;  70c;  79c  6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk v, 487d 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  vn,394d-396b  /  Timaeus,  450c-451d 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk iv, ch 12 [22ob i5-3i] 300c-d; ch 14 [223b i 2-224*1] 303c-d
/   Metaphysics,  bk  x,  ch  1  [1052^4-1053*12]  579b-c  9  Aristotle:
Generation  of Animals, bk iv, ch 10 [777 bi6-24] 319d-320a 14 Plutarch:
Numa Pompilius, 58d-59a / Solon, 74a / Caesar, 599d-600a

[942b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 3>b to 5a 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk ii, 34b-38a; bk hi,
77a-86b;  104b-107a  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres,
bk  i,  510b;  bk ii, 568a-576a; bk hi, 646a-652b;672a-674b 17 Plotinus:
Third  Ennead,  tr vii, ch 7-8 122d124c; ch n-13 126a-129a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk xi, par 18-21 93c-94b; par 27-38 95b-98c / City of God,
bk  xi,  ch  6  325c-d;  bk  xii,  ch  15,  351d-352a  19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  10,  a  6,  ans and rep 3-4 45c-46d; q 67, a 4
352a354a;  q  70,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3,5 364b-365a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part hi suppl, q 91, a 2, rep 3 1017c-1020c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy,  hell, i [37-45] lb-c; purgatory, ii [1-9] 54c; xv [1-15] 75b-c;
xxv
[1-9] 91b-c; xxvii [1-6] 94c; paradise, x [2833] 120c; xxvii [106-120] 148b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  267a-b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  69b,d-70a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 497b-c 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences, first day, 148b149c; 167a-168a; third day, 208b-c 30
Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  ii,  aph 46 177c179a 32 Milton: Song on May
Morning 15b / Comus
[111—118] 35b-36a / Paradise Lost, bk hi [555587] 147b-148a;
[726-732]
151a; bk v
[166170] 179a; bk viii [66-69] 233b
34  Newton:  Principles,  definitions,  schol, 8b; 9b-10a; 12a-b; bk hi,
prop  20  291b-294b  34  Huygens: Light, ch i, 554b-557b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiv, sect 17-31 158a-162a passim; ch xv, sect
5-10  163b-165a  passim;  ch  xxvi,  sect  3 217d218a 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  98  432a  36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 169a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy,  229a  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 376a-b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  219a-b; 251a-b 53 James: Psychology,
400a;  407a-408a  5. Temporal relationships: time as a means of ordering
5a.  Simultaneity  or coexistence: the simultaneity of cause and effect,
action  and  passion,  knowledge  and  object known 7 Plato: Theaetetus,
519d-520b; 533b-c b i5-8*i2] 12b8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 7
[7
13a;  ch  13  20b-d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  ii,  ch 12 [95*10-23]
129d-130a;  ch  16  [98*35^24] 134b-c / Physics, bk iv, ch 10 [218*8-29]
297d298a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch 2 [1014*20-25] 534b-c; bk ix, ch 9
[1051*4-13]  577a;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070*21-24] 599c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 12, a 10 59a-d; q 46, a 2, rep i 253a-255a

[943a]
5b  to  6a  Chapter  93: TIME 909 34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 379a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason, 26b-d; 32a-b; 83b-84d / Practical Reason, 312ac; 339a-b 53
James: Psychology, 862b-863b
[fn 2]
5b. Succession or priority and posteriorityrtne^ temporal order of cause
and  effect,  potentiality  and  actuality  b  i5-8 ai2] 12b8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 7
[7
13a; ch 12 19d-20b / Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch 12 129d-131b; ch 16
[98b i6-24J
134c / Physics, bk 11, ch 6
[198*5-13] 275a; bk
iv,  ch  14  [223^-14]  302d-303a / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 2 [1014*20-25]
534b-c;  ch  11 [ioi8b i5-i9] 539c; bk vii, ch 3 [1029*5-6] 551c; bk ix,
ch 8
[i049b i8-io50*3]
575b-d;
[io50b2-6]
576b;  ch  9  577a-c;  bk  xii,  ch  3  [1070*21-24] 599c; bk xiii, ch 2
[1077*14-19]  608b-c; [1077*2430] 608c 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk
ii, ch i
[646*25-^0] 170b-c / Generation of Animals,
bk 11, ch 6 [742*i6-b i7] 283b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a i, ans 14b-15b; q 46, a 2, rep i 253a-255a; q 85, a 3 455b-457a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 2, rep 3 7c-8a 28 Galileo:
Two  New  Sciences, first day, 135c136b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
390c; 445c; 447a-b 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 87c-d / Objections and
Replies,   159c-d   34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  i,  379a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect vii 470d478a esp div 60 477a-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
26b-d; 32a-b; 63b; 67d68b
[fn
1]; 76c-83b; 95a-d; 214b,d
[fn
1] / Practical Reason,3l\&-3\4d;33lc-333aL;339eL'b 53 James: Psychology,
399a  5c.  Succession and simultaneity in relation to the association of
ideas 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 18, schol 382a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ix,  sect  9-10  139d-140b  35  Hume: Human
Understanding, sect hi, div 19, 457d 53 James: Psychology, 361b-364a esp
362b-363b;  367a-370b  esp  367a,  369a-b;  559a-560a;  559b561b [fn 2];
852b-853a;  860b-861a  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  74a-b  / Interpretation of
Dreams, 352b-c 5d. Comparison of temporal with non-temporal simultaneity
and  succession:  the  prior  in  thought,  by  nature,  or  in origin 8
Aristotle:   Categories,  ch  12-13  19d-20d  /  Interpretation,  ch  13
[23*18-26]  35b-c / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2 [7^33-72*5] 98bc; ch
27 119b / Topics, bk iv, ch 2 [123*13-19]

[943b]
171c; bk vi, ch 4 194c-196a / Metaphysics, bk in, ch 3
[999*6-14] 517d; bk
v,  ch ii 539c-540a; bk ix, ch 8 575b-577a; bk xiii, ch 2 [i077*i4-b i4]
608b-609a — 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch i
[646*25^10] 170b-c / Generation of Animals,
bk  11, ch 6 [742*1 6-b i 8] 283b-d / Politics, bk in, ch 1 [i275*35-b2]
472b  11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 813a-d 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  xi,  par  8  91b-c;  par  11-12  92a-b; par 14 92c-d; bk xii, par 20
103c-d;  par  40 109b-110a / City of God, bk x, ch 31 319b-d 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  3, a i, ans 14b-15b; a 6, ans and rep 2
18c-19a;  q  16,  a  4  97a-c; q 45, a 3, rep 3 244a-d; q 46, a 2, rep 1
253a-255a;  q 66, a 4, rep 4 348d349d; q 85, a 3, rep 1 455b-457a; q 94,
a  3,  ans 504a-505a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 2,
rep  3  7c-8a;  q ho, a 4, rep 4 350d-351d 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
first  day, 135c136b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation, 390c; 445c; 447a-b
31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 228a-b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop i 355d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 32-33 20a-d 6. The
knowledge  of  time and the experience of duration 6a. The perception of
time  by  the interior senses: the difference between the experience and
memory of time intervals 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch ii
[219*4-9]
298d;  [219^3-31]  299c-d  /  Sense and the Sensible, ch 7 [448*20-b i6]
687a-d/ Memory and Reminiscence, ch 2
[452^-453*4] 694b-695a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of Things, bk i [459-463] 6d 17 Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead, tr iv, ch 8 161d162d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi, par 12-40
92b-99a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 2, rep 1 41d-42c;
q 79, a 6, ans and rep 2 419b-420d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 62,
schol  443c-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch vii, sect 9 133a;
ch  xiv,  sect  1-16  155b-158a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 97-98
431d-432a  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 292a-293a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
26b-29d; 74b-76c 53 James: Psychology, 130a-b; 131b; 396a-420b esp 396a,
399a-400b,  405b-407a,  409a-b,  411b-418a,  420a-b 54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure Principle, 648a-b / New Introductory Lectures, 83 7c; 838b

[944a]
910  The  knowledge  of  time  and  the experience of (6. duration.) 6b.
Factors influencing the estimate of time elapsed: empty and filled time;
illusions of time perception; the variability of experienced durations 6
Herodotus: History, bk ii, 77a-b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk iv, ch ii
[2i8b2i2i9a i] 298c-d
18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk xi, par 36, 98a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, iv
[i18] 57c
26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act i, sc hi [258261] 326b / As You Like It,
act hi, sc n
[319-351] 612c-d
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xiv, sect 4 155d-156a; sect
7-12  156c-157c  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  292a-293a  53  James  :
Psychology, 264b-268a esp 268b-269b
[fn
2];   400a-411a   esp  408a-411a;  417a-420a  esp  418a-420a  54  Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  147d-148a;  164c;  335b-336d  6c. Time as a
transcendental   form   of   intuition:  the  a  priori  foundations  of
arithmetic;  the issue concerning innate and acquired time perception 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv, sect 2-4 155b-156a; sect 31
161d-162a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 26b-29d; 61a-62d; 68a69c esp 68c-69a;
94b-95d;  lOOd-lOlb;  213d215a  / Practical Reason, 307d-308b; 313a-d 53
James:  Psychology,  420a-b;  852b-853a;  860b861a  54 Freud: Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  648a-b  / New Introductory Lectures, 83 7c 6d. The
signifying of time: the distinction between noun and verb; the tenses of
the  verb  7  Plato:  Timaeus,  450c-451a  / Parmenides, 495a / Sophist,
575d-576b  8  Aristotle:  Interpretation,  ch  2  [16*19-20]  25b;  ch 3
[i6b6-i9]  25d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part 1, q 13, a 11, ans
73c-74b;  q  14,  a 15, rep 3 89b90b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 293d-294a 6e.
Knowledge  of  the  past: the storehouse of memory; the evidences of the
past  in physical traces or remnants 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, la-2b 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 349a355a passim 7 Plato: Laches,
36c  /  Critias,  479d  /  Theaetetus, 538d-544a 8 Aristotle: Memory and
Reminiscence 690a695d esp ch i [449*3-29] 690a-c

[944b]
7 THE GREAT IDEAS 6b to 6f 9 Aristotle: Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 19
[1392*1434] 640b-c
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [449-482] 6c-7a 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk  ii,  38d-39a  17  Plotinus:  Fourth  Ennead, tr vi, ch 3 190b191c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk x, par 12-36 74b-80d esp par 23-25 77a-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 78, a 4, ans 411d-413d; q 79, a 6,
ans  and  rep 2 419b-420d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 12, a
1,  rep  3  776c-777b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 53c; 54a; 65b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  41c-d; 439c-440a; 483b484b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  32d;  61d62c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, def 6 424b; part v,
prop  21  458a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xv, sect 12
165b-c; bk iv, ch xi, sect ii 357bc 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 79a-80a
38  Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk iv, 428a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
88a-d;  96b,d;  413b-d  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  337c  42 Kant:
Judgement,  579d-580a;  583d-584c  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 151c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  153a156d;  181b-182c;  190a-b; part i,
237a-b;  239c-241a;  247b-c  47  Goethe:  Faust, part i [570-585] 16a 49
Darwin:  Origin of Species, 13c-14a; 42a; 152a180d passim, esp 153a-156a,
160d-162a,   165d166a,c,   179b-180d;   217b-229a,c  passim,  esp  229c;
231d-233b;  238b-239a; 242c-243a / Descent of Man, 255a-265d esp 255a-b,
265a-d; 332b-335a esp 332bc, 335a; 336c337a; 348d-349d 50 Marx: Capital,
86c  53  James:  Psychology,  145a; 396a-397a; 421a427a esp 424b-425b 54
Freud:   Origin  and  Development  of  PsychoAnalysis,  4a-b  /  General
Introduction,  526c527c;  599a-b  / War and Death, 760a-b / Civilization
and  Its  Discontents, 769a70c 6f. Knowledge of the future: the truth of
propositions  about future contingents; the probability of predictions 5
Sophocles:   Oedipus  the  King  [463-512]  103c-d  5  Euripides:  Medea
[1415-1419] 224c / Alcestis
[1159-1163] 247c
/ Helen [1688-1692] 314c / Andromache
[1284-1288]
326c / Bacchantes
[1388-1392] 352a,c
6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  354c 7 Plato: Laches, 36c /
Theaetetus, 531a-532a 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 9 28a-29d

[945a]
9  Aristotle:  Rhetoric,  bk  ii, ch 19 [1393*1-8] 640c 10 Hippocrates :
Prognostics,  par  1  19a-b / Epidemics, bk in, sect in, par 16 59b-c 16
Copernicus:  Revolutions  of  the  Heavenly.—^-  Spheres,  505a-506a  18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xi, par 23-25 94c-95a / Christian Doctrine,
bk  ii,  ch  30  651c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 13
86d-88c;  q  57,  a  3  297b-298a; q 86, a 4 463d-464d; q 89, a 3, rep 3
475d-476c; a 7, rep 3 478d-479c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q
12,  a 1, rep 3 776c-777b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xvii [1345]
132b-c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 53c-d; 65b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii, prop 30-31 385a-c; part iv, def 6 424b; prop 62, schol 443c-d;
PROP 66, demonst 444c 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk hi, rule iv 271b;
general  schol,  371b-372a  34Huygens:  Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xv, sect 12 165bc 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,   sect   44   420d421a;   sect  105  433b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect iv-vii 458a-478a passim, esp sect iv, div 21 458b-c,
sect vi 469d-470d 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 277c 45 Fourier: Theory of Heat,
177a-b;  184a  47  Goethe:  Faust, part ii [8591-8603] 209b 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic\,  366b  49  Darwin:  Origin  of  Species,  59d-60a; 243b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk xiii, 584d-585b; epilogue 11, 685a 53 James:
Psychology,  852b;  883a-884b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 387a,c
7.  The temporal course of the passions: emotional attitudes toward time
and mutability 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[607-623]
120a;  [1211-1248]  125b-c  5 Euripides: Trojan Women [643-683] 275c-d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 7b-8a; bk vii, 224d-225a 7 Plato: Symposium,
154d-155a;  165b-166a / Republic, bk i, 295d-296c / Theaetetus, 528c529a
/ Laws, bk vii, 717d-718d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2
[117*26-34]
164a  9  Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk hi, ch 6 ai8-2o] 197c / Ethics,
bk i, ch 3
[1 094^8io95 ai2] 340a-b;cH9[io99b32-nooa
[669
9] 345b-c; bk iv, ch 9
[ii28b i5-2i] 376a; bk
vi, ch 8
[1142*12-19]
391b; ch 11
[ii43b6-i4]
393a; bk vii, ch 3 [1147*18-24] 397b-c; ch 14 [ii54b 8-15] 406a;
[11 54^0-30] 406c; bk viii, ch 3

[945b]
Chapter 93: TIME 911
[ii56a22-b
5] 407d-408a; ch 6 [1158*1-9] 409d / Rhetoric, bk ii, ch 3
[i38ob5-7] 626a; ch
12-14   636a-638a  10  Hippocrates  :  Fractures,  par  1  74b,d-75a  12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[11051174]
29a-30a,c; bk hi
[912-977]
41d-42c;
[1053-1094] 43c-44a,c; bk iv [1058-1072] 57d58a; bk v [170-173] 63b
12   Aurelius:   Meditations,   bk   ii,   sect   3   257a-b;   sect  12
258b-c;sECTi4258d;  sect  17  259b-d; bk in, sect 14 262c; bk iv, sect 3
263b-264a;  sect  5 264b; sect 32-33 266b-d; sect 35-36 266d; sect 42-43
267b; bk v, sect 10 270c-d; bk vi, sect 15 275a-b; bk vii, sect 18 281a:
sect  35  282a;  bk viii, sect 6 285d-286a; bk ix, sect 19 293b; sect 21
293b-c;  bk  x,  sect  7  297b-c;  sect  27 299d; bk xi, sect 27 306b 13
Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[441-462]
115a-b esp
[462] 115b
14  Plutarch: Aemilius Paulus, 225b-c; 229a-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  iv, ch 4, 14c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 10 21c-d; par 13
22c-d;  bk viii, par 18 57d-58a; par 25-26 60a-b; bk ix, par 32-34 70a-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 40, a 6 796c-797a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
10b-c;  xiv  [94-120]  20c-d;  xv  [22-99] 21b-22a; xxvi [90-142] 39a-c;
purgatory, xi [73-117] 69c-70a; xiv
[91-126]
74c-75a; xxvm
[134144] 97c; paradise, xv-xvi 128b-132a; xxvn
[121-148] 148c-d
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and Cressida, bk hi, stanza 122-124 70b / Wife of
Bath's  Prologue [55836410] 256a-269b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 63d;
79c-d;  part ii, 150c; 154bc; part iv, 271d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 6d-7a;
33b-36a;  292d294b; 394a-395b; 403d-404b; 458b-c; 478c479c; 540d-541c 26
Shakespeare: Richard II, act i, sc hi [258261] 326b; act v, sc v
[41-66] 350a-b /
1st  Henry  IV, act v, sc iv [77-86] 465a-b / 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc i
[45-56] 483b / Henry V, act 1, sc 1 [22-69] 533b c / As You Like It, act
in,  sc 11 [319-351] 612c-d 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc ii [68-73]
32b; act in, sc 11
[196-223] 51a-b; act
iv,  sc  vii  [111-124] 63c-d; act v, sc i [202-240] 66c-d / Troilus and
Cressida, act hi, sc hi
[145-174] 124a-b; act iv, sc iv [26-50] 128c;
sc v [221-226] 132c / Othello, act ii, sc hi
[376-387] 220d / Macbeth, act v, sc v [15-28]
308d-309a / Winter's Tale, act iv, sc i 505c-d / Tempest, act iv, sc i
[148-158]
543b  / Sonnets, i-xix 586a-589a; xxv 590a; xlix 593d; lv 594c-d; lix-lx
595bc;  lxiii-lxv  595d-596b;  cxv-cxvi  603d-604a;  cxxm 605a 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 15c-d

[946a]
(7. The temporal course of the passions: emotional attitudes toward time
and  mutability.}  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 9-13 426d428a; prop
16-17  428b-d;  prop  62,  schol  443c-d; prop 66 444c-d; part v, prop 7
454b-c 32 Milton: On Time 12a-b / Sonnets, vn 63b / Paradise Lost, bk xi
[527-543]  310b-311a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 122-123 195a; 129-131 195b; 135
196a; 139-143 196b-200a; 164-172 202b203b; 181 204b; 205-208 211a-b; 210
211b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxxiii, sect 13 250a-b 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy, 536a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 35a-c; 401a-b 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  335c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 339c 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  449c-450a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 102a-b; 254b-c; 350d351b
46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 178a-c; part 1, 258b 47 Goethe:
Faust, dedication la-b; part ii
[4613-4678]
115a-116b;
[11,573-586]
281b282a  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 302b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
v,  221b-d;  bk  vi,  262c;  267c; bk viii, 305b-d; bk ix, 356b-d; bk x,
394d;  bk xii, 559d; bk xv, 639c 53 James: Psychology, 324a; 433a; 711b;
759a760b  54  Freud: Origin and Development of Psycho - Analysis, 16b-c;
17b-18a  /  Interpretation  of Dreams, 379c-380a / General Introduction,
579b-581b  / Ego and Id, 704d-706d / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety,
740b-c;  743a744a / War and Death, 758a-d; 760a-b / Civilization and Its
Discontents,  768b-770c / New Introductory Lectures, 83 7c 8. Historical
time   8a.   Prehistoric  and  historic  time:  the  antiquity  ofman  5
Aristophanes:  Birds  [466-492]  548a-c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk ii,
49a-52a;  bk  iv, 124d-132b; bk v, 161b 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  i, 349a354b 7 Plato: Critias, 480a-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk v
[7831160] 71b-76b
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  88a-d;  413b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  intro,  164b-c; 179d-182c; 188c; part i, 209b; 235d-236a; part
11, 260b-262c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 171b 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
13c; 153a-155b / Descent of Man, 336a-337a; 343ac; 349a-d; 589a 54 Freud
: New Introductory Lectures, 881a

[946b]
912  THE GREAT IDEAS 8/0 Sb 8b. The epochs of history: myths of a golden
age;  the  relativity  of  modernity 7 Plato: Cratylus, 92b-d / Timaeus,
444a446d  /  Critias  478a-485d passim / Statesman, 586c-589c / Laws, bk
iv, 681b-d 8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i6-i84b 8] 253a-d / Heavens, bk
i, ch 3
[270b i2-26]
361d-362a; ch 9
[279*23-33]
370c; bk 11, ch 1 375b,d-376a; bk iv, ch 2
[3o8b29-32] 400b
/ Meteorology, bk ii, ch i
[354*27-32] 460b
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9
[992*29-34]
510c; bk xii, ch 1
[1069*25-29]
598b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[640b5-7] 163a
10  Hippocrates:  Ancient  Medicine,  par  12  4b-c  /  Regimen in Acute
Diseases,  par  1, 26b-c 10 Galen: Natural Faculties, bk ii, ch 8, 193c;
ch 9, 196b; bk in, ch 10 207b-d 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [324-337] 65bc 13 Virgil: Eclogues, iv
14a-15b / Georgics, 1
[11 8-1 46] 40a-41a
/ Aeneid, bk i
[254-296]
HOa-110a;  bk  viii  [306-336] 267a-268a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b;
58c-d; bk iv, 72a-b; bk xi, 106b-d; bk xiv, 146b-147a; 151d / Histories,
bk ii, 232d-233a; bk hi, 255bc 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 7a 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  909a  18  Augustine:  Confessions, bk xiii, par 49-51
124a-d  /  City  of  God, bk x, ch 14 307c-308a; ch 25 313c-314c; bk xv-
xviii  397b,d-507a,c  esp  bk xv, ch 1-3 397b,d-399c, ch 21 415b416a, bk
xvi,  ch  26  438c-439a,  ch  37 444b445a, bk xvii, ch 1-4 449a-455c, bk
xviii,  ch  11  477c-d;  bk  xxii,  ch  30,  618c-d  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 14, a 15, rep 3 89b-90b; q 75, a i, ans 378b379c
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 97, a 1, ans 236a-d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xiv
[94-120]
20c-d; purgatory, xxii
[130-154] 87d-88a;
xxvi  [91-114] 93d-94a; xxvm [136-148] 97c; paradise, xvi [16-39] 130a-c
22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  bk  ii,  stanza  4 22a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part iv, 267c-d; conclusion, 282d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk ii, 81d-82b; bk hi, 143b-d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 215b 29
Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 27b-28a; part 11, 208a-c 30 Bacon: Novum
Organum, bk i, aph 78 119b-c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi
[334]-bk
xii
[605] 306b-332a
33 Pascal: Pensees, 655 292b; 699 302b / Vacuum, 357b-358a

[947a]
Sb Chapter 93: TIME 913 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 182c;
186c-d;  188c;  part i, 209b-c; 231b107 499c-500b 232a; 241b-d; part ii,
259c-d;  274a-275a;  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  hi,  118a-119a 278a-b;
282d-284a,c;  part  hi,  286c-287a;  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 79b-c;
900a,c part iv, 315b-317d; 348a-b
[n 163-164]
50   Marx:  Capital,  86d  [fn  4]  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,
intro.-tSOc^  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 265b CROSS-REFERENCES
For: Other discussions of time as a quantity and its relation to motion,
see  Change  5a  ;  Mechanics  Discussions  relevant  to the distinction
between  time  and  eternity, and to the problem of the infinity of time
and  the eternity of the world, see Astronomy 8c(i); Change 13; Eternity
1-2; Infinity 3e; World 4a, 8. Time in relation to theories of creation,
see  Eternity  ia;  World  4e(2).  Another treatment of the relations of
succession  and  simultaneity,  see  Relation 5a; and actuality, and the
various  acts of the mind, see Being 7c(i); Cause ib; Education 5d; Idea
5d~5e;  Relation  4f. The analysis of memory and imagination as interior
senses,  see  Memory and Imagination i ; Sense 3b, 3d(2). Considerations
relevant to the conception of time as a transcendental form of intuition
and  to  the  related problem of the foundations of arithmetic, see Form
ic;  Mathematics  ic;  Memory  and Imagination 6c(2); Mind ie(i), 4^(3);
Space  4a.  The general theory of the parts of speech which involves the
distinction   between   noun   and   verb,  see  Language  4a.  .  Other
considerations  of our knowledge of the past and the future, see History
3a;  Knowlia-ib; Truth 3H2). The influence of time on human development,
see  Experience 6a; Life and Death 6b-6c; Man 6c; and for man's attitude
toward  time and change, see Change 12b; Progress 5. Other treatments of
the problem of time and free will in relation to God's foreknowledge and
foreordination,  see  God  7b,  7f;  History 5a; Liberty 5a~5b; Will 7c.
Other  discussions  of  historical  time  and  the antiquity of man, see
Evolution  7c;  History  43(3),  4c;  Man 9c. ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed
below  are  works  not  included in Great Boo\s ofthe Western World, but
relevant  to  the  idea  and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are  divided  into two groups: I. Works by authors represented in
this   collection.   II.  Works  by  authors  not  represented  in  this
collection.  For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the
publication  of  the works cited, consult the Bibliography of Additional
Readings   which  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  .
Metaphysical  Foundations  of Natural Science, Augustine. On Music div i
Aquinas.  De  Aeternitate  Mundi  Hobbes. Concerning Body, part ii, ch 7
Spinoza.  Cogita  Metaphysica,  part 1, ch 4; part ii, Sextus Empiricus.
Against  the  Physicists,  bk ii, ch 3 ch 1 . Outlines of Pyrrhonism, bk
hi, ch 1-20 Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, bk i, part ii Proclus. The
Elements of Theology, (f)

[947b]
Kant. De Mundi Sensibilis (Inaugural Dissertation) A * A •

[948a]
914 THE GREAT IDEAS Maimonides. The Guide for the Perplexed, part ii, ch
13   Crescas.   Or   Adonai,   proposition   15  Si'arez.  Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xv  (3),  xxxix,  xl  (9), L John of Saint Thomas. Cursus
Philosophicus Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis, part i, q 18 Leibnitz.
New  Essays  Concerning Human Understanding BK II, CH I4-I5 Whewell. The
Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences, VOL I, BK II, CH 7-IO Hodgson.
Time and Space Lotze. Metaphysics, bk ii, ch 3 Frazer. The Golden Bough,
part iv, bk hi, ch 2 Bradley. Appearance and Reality, bk 1, ch 4; bk ii,
ch  18  Bosanquet.  Science  and  Philosophy, 7 Royce. The World and the
Individual,  series  ii (3) Poincare. The Value of Science, part i, ch 2
Meyerson.  Identity  and Reality, ch 6 Cassirer. Substance and Function,
sup  v  Robb.  A  Theory  of  Time  and Space Weyl. Space—Time—Matter S.
Alexander. Space, Time, and Deity Proust. Remembrance of Things Past

[948b]
Whitehead. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of Natural Knowledge, ch
6  .  The  Concept of Nature, ch 3 Einstein. Relativity: The Special and
the  General  Theory  .  Sidelights  on  Relativity  Maritain.  Theonas,
Conversations  of  a  Sage, vi McTaggart. The Nature of Existence, ch 33
Bergson.   Time   and   Free  Will  .  Creative  Evolution  .  Duree  et
simultaneity,  a propos de la theorie d'Einstein, ch 1-5 Mann. The Magic
Mountain  Dewey.  Experience  and  Nature, ch 1-3, 7, 9 G. N. Lewis. The
Anatomy  of Science, essay hi Heidegger. Sein und Zeit Eddington. Space,
Time,  and  Gravitation  .  The Nature of the Physical World, ch 3 Mead.
Philosophy  of  the Present Santayana. The Realm of Matter, ch 4 Boring.
The  Physical Dimensions of Conscio ness, ch 5 Weiss, Reality, bk ii, ch
6  B.  Russell.  The  Analysis  of  Matter,  ch  28-29,  32,  36 . Human
Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, PART III, CH 5; PART IV, CH 5, 7

[949a]
Chapter   94  TRUTR  INTRODUCTION  NOT  everyone  knows  Josiah  Royce's
definition  of  a  liar as a man who willfully misplaces his ontological
predicates,  but  everyone  who  has  ever told a lie will recognize its
accuracy.  To  restate  the definition less elegantly, lying consists in
saying  the contrary of what one thinks or believes. To speak truthfully
we  must  make  our  speech  conform  to  our  thought, we must say that
something  is the case if we think it is, or that it is not, if we think
it  is not. If we deliberately say "is" when we think is not, or say "is
not"  when we think is, we lie. Of course, the man who speaks truthfully
may  in  fact  say  what  is  false,  just as the man whose intent is to
falsify  may inadvertently speak the truth. The intention to speak one's
mind  does  not  guarantee  that  one's  mind  is  free from error or in
possession of the truth. Herein lies the traditional distinction between
truth  as a social and as an intellectual matter. What Dr. Johnson calls
moral  truth consists in the obligation to say what we mean. In contrast
what  he calls physical truth depends not on the veracity of what we say
but  on  the  validity  of  what  we  mean.  The  theory of truth in the
tradition  of  the  great  books  deals  largely with the latter kind of
truth. The great issues concern whether we can know the truth and how we
can   ever   tell  whether  something  is  true  or  false.  Though  the
philosophers and scientists, from Plato to Freud, seem to stand together
against the extreme sophistry or skepticism which denies the distinction
between  true  and  false or puts truth utterly beyond the reach of man,
they do not all agree on the extent to which truth is attainable by men,
on  its  immutability  or  variability,  on  the signs by which men tell
whether  they  have  the truth or not, or on the causes of error and the
means for avoiding falsity. Much that Plato thinks is true Freud rejects
915

[949b]
as  false.  Freud  searches  for  truth  in  other quarters and by other
methods.  But the ancient controversy in which Socrates engages with the
sophists  of his day, who were willing to regard as true whatever anyone
wished  to  think,  seems to differ not at all from Freud's quarrel with
those  whom  he calls "intellectual nihilists." They are the persons who
say  there  is  no such thing as truth or that it is only the product of
our  own  needs and desires. They make it "absolutely immaterial," Freud
writes,  "what  views we accept. All of them are equally true and false.
And  no  one  has  a  right  to accuse anyone else of error." Across the
centuries  the arguments against the skeptic seem to be the same. If the
skeptic  does not mind contradicting himself when he tries to defend the
truth  of  the  proposition  that  all  propositions are equally true or
false,  he  can  perhaps  be challenged by the fact that he does not act
according  to  his view. If all opinions are equally true or false, then
why,  Aristotle  asks, does not the denier of truth walk "into a well or
over  a precipice" instead of avoiding such things. "If it were really a
matter  of indifference what we believed," Freud similarly argues, "then
we  might  just  as  well build our bridges of cardboard as of stone, or
inject  a  tenth  of  a  gramme  of  morphia into a patient instead of a
hundredth,  or  take  tear-gas  as a narcotic instead of ether. But," he
adds,  "the  intellectual anarchists themselves would strongly repudiate
such practical applications of their theory." Whether the skeptic can be
refuted or merely silenced may depend on a further step in the argument,
in  which the skeptic substitutes probability for truth, both as a basis
for  action and as the quality of all our opinions about the real world.
The  argument  takes  different forms according to the different ways in
which probability is distinguished from truth or according

[950a]
916  THE  GREAT  IDEAS to the distinction between a complete and limited
skepticism.  Montaigne,  for  example,  seems to think that the complete
skeptic cannot even acknowledge degrees of probability to be objectively
ascertainable  without  admitting  the criterion of truth, whereas Hume,
defending  a  mitigated  skepticism,  offers  criteria for measuring the
probability  of  judgments  about  matters  of fact. The position of the
skeptic,  in  its  bearing on truth and probability, is discussed in the
chapters  on  Knowledge  and  Opinion.  Here  we  shall proceed to other
controversial questions concerning truth. But we must first observe that
there  is  one major question which does not seem to cause much dispute.
Not  only do the great authors (with the possible exception of Montaigne
and  Hume)  seem to be unanimous in their conviction that men can attain
and  share  the truth—at least some truths— but they also appear to give
the  same  answer  to  the  question,  What  is  truth  ? The apparently
unanimous  agreement  on  the nature of truth may seem remarkable in the
context of the manifold disagreements in the great books concerning what
is  true. As already indicated, some of these disagreements occur in the
theory  of  truth itself— in divergent analyses of the sources of error,
or  in  conflicting  formulations  of the signs of truth. But even these
differences  do not affect the agreement on the nature of truth. Just as
everyone  knows  what  a  liar is, but not as readily whether someone is
telling  a  lie,  so  the  great philosophers seem able to agree on what
truth  is,  but  not as readily on what is true. That the definitions—of
lying  and  of  truth—are intimately connected will be seen from Plato's
conception  of  the  nature of truth as a correspondence between thought
and reality. If truthfulness, viewed socially, requires a man's words to
be  a  faithful representation of his mind, truth in the mind itself (or
in  the statements which express thought) depends on their conformity to
reality.  A false proposition, according to Plato, is "one which asserts
the non-existence of things which are, and the existence of things which
are  not." Since "false opinion is that form of opinion which thinks the
opposite of the truth," it necessarily follows, as Aristotle points

[950b]
out,  that  "to say of what is that it is, and of what is not that it is
not, is true," just as it is false "to say of what is that it is not, or
of  what  is  not that it is." In one sense, the relation between a true
statement and the fact it states is reciprocal. "If a man is," Aristotle
declares,  then "the proposition in which we allege that he is, is true;
and  conversely,  if  the  proposition  wherein we allege that he is, is
true,  then  he is." But the true proposition "is in no way the cause of
the  being  of  the man," whereas "the fact of the man's being does seem
somehow  to  be the cause of the truth of the proposition, for the truth
or  falsity of the proposition depends on the fact of the man's being or
not  being." This simple statement about the nature of truth is repeated
again  and  again  in  the subsequent tradition of western thought. What
variation  there is from writer to writer seems to be in phrasing alone,
though   the   common  insight  concerning  truth  as  an  agreement  or
correspondence  between the mind and reality may occur in the context of
widely  varying  conceptions  concerning  the  nature of the mind and of
reality or being. Plotinus may be an exception, insofar as his theory of
knowledge   involves   a  relation  of  identity  rather  than  of  mere
correspondence.  "The  object known," he writes, "must be identical with
the  knowing act ... If this identity does not exist, neither does truth
.  .  . Truth cannot apply to something conflicting with itself; what it
affirms   it  must  also  be."  But  others,  like  Augustine,  Aquinas,
Descartes,  and  Spinoza,  adopt the conception of truth as an agreement
between  the  mind  and  reality. Falsehood occurs, says Augustine, when
"something  is  thought  to be which is not." According to Aquinas, "any
intellect  which  understands  a  thing  to  be otherwise than it is, is
false."  Truth in the human intellect consists "in the conformity of the
intellect  with  the  thing."  The  same  point is implied, at least, in
Descartes' remark that if we do not relate our ideas "to anything beyond
themselves,  they cannot properly speaking be false." Error or, for that
matter,  truth can only arise in "my judging that the ideas which are in
me are similar or conformable to the things which are out-

[951a]
side me." Spinoza states it as an axiom rather than a definition that "a
true  idea  must  agree  with  that  of  which it is the idea." Making a
distinction  between  verbal  and  real truth, Locke writes: "Though our
words  signify  nothing  but  our  ideas,  yet being designed by them to
signify things, the truth they contain, when put into propositions, will
be  only  verbal, when they stand for ideas in the mind that have not an
agreement  with  the  reality of things." Precisely because he considers
truth  to  consist  "in  the accordance of a cognition with its object,"
Kant  holds  that,  so  far as the content (as opposed to the form) of a
cognition  is  concerned,  it  is  impossible  to  discover  a universal
criterion  of  truth.  We  shall  return to Kant's point in a subsequent
discussion  of  the  signs  of  truth, as also we shall have occasion to
return  to  Locke's  distinction  between real and verbal truth. Neither
affects  the  insight  that  truth  consists  in  the  agreement  of our
propositions  or  judgments with the facts they attempt to state, unless
it  is  the  qualification that truth so defined is real, not verbal. In
his  Preface  to  The Meaning of Truth, James comments on the excitement
caused  by  his  earlier  lectures on pragmatism, in which, offering the
pragmatist's  conception  of  truth, he had spoken of an idea's "working
successfully"  as  the sign of its truth. He warns his critics that this
is  not  a  new  definition  of  the  nature  of  truth,  but only a new
interpretation  of  what  it  means  to  say that the truth of our ideas
consists  in "their agreement, as falsity means their disagreement, with
reality.  Pragmatists  and intellectualists," he adds, "both accept this
definition  as  a  matter  of course. "To agree in the widest sense with
reality,"  James  then  explains,  "can  only  mean  to be guided either
straight  up  to  it  or  into  its surroundings, or to be put into such
working touch with it as to handle either it or something connected with
it  better  than  if  we  disagreed.  Better  either  intellectually  or
practically . . . Any idea that helps us to deal, whether practically or
intellectually,  with  either  the  reality or its belongings . . . that
fits,  in fact, and adapts our life to the reality's whole setting, will
agree  sufficiently  to  meet  the  requirement. It will be true of that
reality."

[951b]
Chapter  94:  TRUTH  917 Without enlarging on its meaning as James does,
Freud affirms that the ordinary man's conception of truth is that of the
scientist  also.  ^Science,  he  says, aims "to arrive at correspondence
with  reality,  that  is  to  say  with  what  exists  outside of us and
independently  of  us.  . . . This correspondence with the real external
world  we  call  truth.  It is the aim of scientific work, even when the
practical  value  of  that  work does not The definition of truth as the
agreement of the mind with reality leaves many problems to be solved and
further  explanations  to  be  given  by  those  who accept it. As James
indicates,  the  theory  of  truth  begins  rather  than  ends  with its
definition.   How   do   we   know  when  our  ideas—our  statements  or
judgments—correspond  with  reality?  By what signs or criteria shall we
discover  their  truth or falsity? To this question the great books give
various  answers  which  we  shall  presently  consider. There are other
problems  about  the  nature of truth which deserve attention first. For
example,  one  consequence of the definition seems to be that truth is a
property  of ideas rather than of things. Aristotle says that "it is not
as  if  the  good  were  true  and  the bad were in itself false"; hence
"falsity  and truth are not in things . . . but in thought." Yet he also
applies  the  word  "false"  to  non-existent  things or to things whose
appearance  somehow  belies  their  nature.  Aquinas  goes  further.  He
distinguishes between the sense in which truth and falsity are primarily
in  the  intellect  and  secondarily  in  things.  The  equation between
intellect  and  thing,  he  points  out,  can  be looked at in two ways,
depending  on  whether the intellect is the cause of the thing's nature,
or  the  nature of the thing is the cause of knowledge in the intellect.
When  "things  are the measure and rule of the intellect, truth consists
in  the  equation  of  the  intellect  to  the thing. . . . But when the
intellect  is  the  rule  or  measure  of  things, truth consists in the
equation of things to the intellect" —as the product of human art may be
said  to  be  true  when it accords with the artist's plan or intention.
Thus  "a house is said to be true that fulfills the likeness of the form
in the architect's mind."

[952a]
918  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  But,  according  to Aquinas, not only artificial
things,  but natural things as well, can have truth when they are viewed
in  relation to the intellect on which they depend. The divine intellect
which  is  the creative cause of natural things measures their truth, as
the  human  intellect  measures the truth of artificial things. "Natural
things  are said to be true," Aquinas writes, "in so far as they express
the  likeness  of  the ideas that are in the divine mind; for a stone is
called  true, which possesses the nature proper to a stone, according to
the  preconception  in  the divine intellect." Aquinas' conclusion— that
"truth  resides  primarily  in  the  intellect and secondarily in things
according  as they are related to the intellect as their source"—at once
suggests  the profound difference between truth in the divine and in the
human  intellect.  The difference is more than that between infinite and
finite  truth.  The  distinction  between  uncreated  and  created truth
affects  the  definition  of truth itself. The definition of truth as an
equation of thought to thing, or thing to thought, does not seem to hold
for  the  divine  intellect. The notion of "conformity with its source,"
Aquinas  acknowledges,  "cannot  be  said,  properly speaking, of divine
truth."  Divine  truth  has no source. It is not truth by correspondence
with anything else. Rather it is, in the language of the theologian, the
"primal truth." "God Himself, Who is the primal truth ... is the rule of
all  truth,"  and  "the principle and source of all truth." In the human
sphere,  the  definition  of  truth  seems to be differently interpreted
according  as  truth is made a property of words or of ideas. "To form a
clear  notion of truth," Locke writes, "it is very necessary to consider
truth  of  thought  and truth of words distinctly from one another." The
truth of signs, or what is sometimes called "truth of signification," is
"nothing  but  the joining or separating of words in propositions as the
ideas  they  stand for agree or disagree in men's minds." In contrast to
such verbal truth, what Locke calls mental truth consists in the joining
or  separating  of  our  ideas themselves in a manner to accord with the
realities they represent.

[952b]
For  Locke,  verbal truth is "chimerical" or "barely nominal" because it
can  exist  without  any regard to "whether our ideas are such as really
have,  or  are  capable of having, an existence in nature." The signs we
use  may  truly represent our thought even though what we think or state
in  words is false in fact. Hobbes takes a somewhat contrary view. "True
and  false,'"  he  writes, "are attributes of speech, not of things. And
where  speech is not, there is neither truth nor falsehood." What is the
cause  of  truth  in speech ? Hobbes replies that, since it consists "in
the  right  ordering of names in our affirmations," a man needs only "to
remember  what  every  name  he  uses  stands  for."  If  men begin with
definitions or "the settling of significations," and then abide by their
definitions  in  subsequent  discourse, their discourse will have truth.
From  want of definitions or from wrong definitions arise "all false and
senseless  tenets."  Agreement with reality would seem to be the measure
of  truth for Hobbes only to the extent that definitions can be right or
wrong by reference to the objects defined. If definitions themselves are
merely  nominal  and  have  Tightness  so  far  as they may be free from
contradiction,  then  truth  tends  to  become,  more than a property of
speech,  almost  purely logistical a matter of playing the game of words
according  to  the  rules.  Reasoning is reckoning with words. It begins
with  definitions  and  if  it  proceeds  rightly, it produces "general,
eternal and immutable truth. . . . For he that reasoneth aright in words
he  understandeth,  can never conclude in error." Hobbes' position seems
to  have  a  bearing  not  only  on the issue concerning verbal and real
truth,  but  also  on  the  question  whether  the  logical  validity of
reasoning makes the conclusion it reaches true as a matter of fact. Some
writers,  like  Kant,  distinguish between the truth which a proposition
has  when  it conforms to the rules of thought and the truth it has when
it  represents  nature.  Valid  reasoning  alone cannot guarantee that a
conclusion   is  true  in  fact.  That  depends  on  the  truth  of  the
premises—upon  their  being  true  of  the  nature  of things. Aristotle
criticizes  those  who, accepting certain principles as true, "are ready
to accept any consequence of their application.

[953a]
As  though some principles," he continues, "did not require to be judged
from  their  results,  and particularly from their final issue. And that
issue  ...  in  the knowledge of nature is the unimpeachable evidence of
the  senseTlur  to each fact." But not all truth may require or admit of
such  certification.  The  truths  of  mathematics may be different from
those  of  physics  or  metaphysics, and those of philosophy or religion
from  those of the empirical natural sciences. It is sometimes supposed,
for example, that the truths of mathematics are purely formal or without
reference to real existence. That seems to be the position of Hobbes and
Hume,  both  of  whom  take  geometry  as  the  model of truth. For them
statements  of  fact about real existence are at best probable opinions.
For  others, like James, there can be truth in the natural sciences, but
such  empirical  truth  is  distinct  in  type  from  what  he calls the
"necessary"  or  "<z  priori'' truths of mathematics and logic. Does the
definition  of  truth  as  agreement  with reality apply to all kinds of
truth, or only to truths about the realm of nature ? The question has in
mind  more  than  the distinction between mathematics and physics. It is
concerned  with the difference between the study of nature and the moral
sciences,  or  between  the theoretic and the practical disciplines. "As
regards  nature," writes Kant, "experience presents us with rules and is
the  source  of  truth,"  but  not  so in ethical matters or morality. A
theoretic  proposition  asserts  that  something exists or has a certain
property,  and so its truth depends on the existence of the thing or its
real  possession  of  an  attribute;  but  a practical or moral judgment
states,  not  what  is,  but  what  should  occur or ought to be. Such a
judgment  cannot  be true by correspondence with the way things are. Its
truth,  according  to  Aristotle, must consist rather "in agreement with
right  desire."  On  this theory, all that remains common to speculative
and  practical  truth  is  the  conformity of the intellect to something
outside  itself  to  an  existing thing or to desire, will, or appetite.
Stressing  the  difference, Aquinas declares that "truth is not the same
for the practical as for the speculative intellect." The "conformity

[953b]
Chapter  94:  TRUTH  919 with right appetite" upon which practical truth
depends,  he  goes  on to say, "has no place in necessary matters, which
are not effected by the human will, but only in contingent matters which
can be effected by us, whether they be matters of interior action or the
products of external work." In consequence, "in matters of action, truth
or practical rectitude is not the same for all as to what is particular,
but  only  as to the common principles"; whereas in speculative matters,
concerned chiefly with necessary things, "truth is the same for all men,
both  as  to  principles  and  as  to  conclusions."  The problem of the
criteria  or  signs of truth does not seem to be of equal concern to all
who  discuss  the  nature of truth. For the ancients, at one extreme, it
seems  to  be  hardly  a problem at all. For William James, at the other
extreme, it seems to be the central problem. In the controversy over the
pragmatic  theory  of  truth,  in  which  James engages with Bradley and
Russell,  some confusion tends to result from the fact that James seldom
discusses  what  truth  is  except in terms of how we know what is true,
while  his  opponents  often ignore the signs of truth in discussing its
nature.  The  important  point  for  James is not that truth consists in
agreement   with  reality,  but  that  "true  ideas  are  those  we  can
assimilate,   validate,   corroborate,   and  verify."  Whether  we  can
assimilate  or  validate  or  verify  an  idea  in turn depends upon its
consequences, either for thought or action, or what James calls "truth's
cash-value  in  experiential  In  his Psychology, James suggests another
aspect  of  his  theory of the expediency of a true idea, which he later
developed  in  Pragmatism.  Not only must our conceptions or theories be
"able  to  account satisfactorily for our sensible experience," but they
are  also  to  be weighed for their appeal "to our aesthetic, emotional,
and  active  needs."  Apart  from this added criterion, which became the
subject of much dispute, the pragmatic theory of truth represents one of
the  traditional  solutions  of  the  problem  of  how  to  tell whether
something  is  true  or false. It looks mainly to extrinsic signs—not to
some  feature of the idea or thought itself, but to its conse- "The test
of real and vigorous thinking,"

[954a]
920  THE  GREAT  IDEAS writes J. S. Mill, "the thinking which ascertains
truths  instead  of dreaming, is successful application to practice." In
similar  vein,  Bacon  says  that  "of  all the signs there is none more
certain  or  worthy than that of the fruits produced, for the fruits and
effects  are  the  sureties  and  vouchers, as it were, for the truth of
philosophy."  The  man  who  supposes  that  the end of learning lies in
contemplation  of  the  truth  will  "propose  to himself as the test of
truth,  the satisfaction of his mind and understanding, as to the causes
of things long since known." Only those who recognize that "the real and
legitimate  goal of the sciences is the endowment of human life with new
inventions and riches," will submit truth to the test of its leading "to
some  new earnest of effects." To take effects as "pledges of truth" is,
for Bacon, equivalent to declaring that truth and utility are "perfectly
identical."  Verification by appeal to observation or sensible evidences
may  be  regarded as one way of testing the truth of thought in terms of
its consequences, but it also involves the principle of contradiction as
a  criterion  of  truth. When Aristotle recommends, for example, that we
should accept theories as true "only if what they affirm agrees with the
observed  facts,"  he  is  saying  that  when  the truth of a particular
perception  is  indisputable,  because the observed fact is evident, the
general or theoretical statement which it contradicts must be false. But
the principle of contradiction as a criterion of truth goes further than
testing  theories  by  their  consistency  with  observation. One of two
contradictory  statements  must  be false and the other must be true "if
that  which  it is true to affirm is nothing other than that which it is
false  to  deny." Even a single statement may show itself false by being
self-contradictory,  and  in  consequence its opposite can be seen to be
true.  What  Aristotle  calls  axioms,  or self-evident and indisputable
truths,  are  those  propositions  immediately  known  to  be  true, and
necessarily   true,   because   their   contradictories,   being   self-
contradicatory,  are  impossible  statements,  or necessarily false. The
truth  of  any proposition which is neither a self-evident axiom nor the
statement  ofan  evident,  perceived  fact,  is tested, according to the
principle   of   contradiction,   by  its  consistency  with  axioms  or
perceptions.

[954b]
As opposed to consequences or effects, contradiction or consistency as a
sign  of truth seems to be an intrinsic criterion. But this criterion is
not universally accepted. "Contradiction," writes Pascal, "is not a sign
of  falsity,  nor  the want of contradiction a sign of truth." Nor, even
when accepted, is it always judged adequate to solve the problem. It is,
for  Kant,  a "merely logical criterion of truth . . . the conditio sine
qua  non,  or  negative  condition of all truth. Farther than this logic
cannot  go,  and  the  error  which  depends not on the form, but on the
content  of  the  cognition,  it has no test to discover." Some thinkers
seem  to  rely upon an intrinsic mark by which each idea reveals its own
truth or falsity. Augustine, for example, considers by what criterion he
would  know whether what Moses said was true. "And if I did know it," he
asks, "would it be from him that I knew it? No," he replies, "but within
me,  in the inner retreat of my mind, the Truth, which is neither Hebrew
nor  Greek,  nor  Latin  nor  Barbarian,  would tell me, without lips or
tongue  or sounded syllables: 'He speaks truth.' " For Augustine, God is
the  warranty  of the inner voice which plainly signifies the truth. For
Spinoza,  the truth of an idea depends upon its relation to God. Because
"a  true idea in us is that which in God is adequate, in so far as He is
manifested  by  the  nature of the human mind," it follows, according to
Spinoza, that "he who has a true idea knows at the same time that he has
a true idea, nor can he doubt the truth of the thing"; for "he who knows
a  thing  truly  must  at  the same time have an adequate idea or a true
knowledge  of his knowledge, that is to say (as is self-evident) he must
be  certain."  It  is impossible, Spinoza maintains, to have a true idea
without  at the same time knowing that it is true. To the question, "How
can a man know that he has an idea which agrees with that of which it is
the  idea?"  he replies that "he knows it simply because fie has an idea
which  agrees with that of which it is the idea, that is to say, because
truth  is  its own standard." For what can be clearer, Spinoza asks, "or
more  certain  than a true idea as the standard of truth ? Just as light
reveals both itself and the darkness, so truth is the standard of itself
and of the false."

[955a]
Spinoza  defines  an  adequate  idea  as  one which, "in so far as it is
considered  in  itself,  without  reference  to  the object, has all the
properties  or  internal  signs  of a true idea." He explains, moreover,
that  by  "internaT^lie means to exclude even "the agreement of the idea
with  its  object." This, he thinks, meets the objection that "if a true
idea  is distinguished from a false idea only in so far as it is said to
agree  with  that of which it is the idea, the true idea [would have] no
reality or perfection above the false idea (since they are distinguished
by  an external sign alone), and consequently the man who has true ideas
will  have  no greater reality or perfection than he who has false ideas
only."  Although  Descartes and Locke also employ an intrinsic criterion
of  truth— not the adequacy, but the clarity and distinctness, of ideas—
they do not seem to mean, as Spinoza does, that a single idea, in and of
itself,  can be true or false. Like Aristotle before them or Kant later,
they regard a simple idea or concept as, strictly speaking, incapable of
being either true or false. "Truth and falsity," writes Locke, "belong .
.  .  only to propositions"— to affirmations or denials which involve at
least two ideas; or, as Kant says, "truth and error . . . are only to be
found  in  a  judgement," which explains why "the senses do not err, not
because  they  always  judge  correctly, but because they do notjudge at
aiir  Nevertheless,  for Locke the clarity and distinctness of the ideas
which  enter into the formation of propositions enable the mind to judge
intuitively  and  certainly  of  their  truth.  When ideas are clear and
distinct, "the mind perceives the agreement or disagreement of two ideas
immediately  by themselves. . . . Such kind of truths the mind perceives
at  the  first  sight  of the ideas together by bare intuition . . . and
this  kind  of  knowledge  is  the  clearest and most certain that human
frailty  is  capable  of."  The  problem  of  the  criterion of truth is
sometimes  closely  connected  with  the problem of the causes of error.
Descartes  seems  to pass by natural steps from one to the other. Having
decided  that  "the things which we conceive very clearly and distinctly
are all true," he reminds

[955b]
Chapter  94:  TRUTH  921  himself  that there may be "some difficulty in
ascertaining  which  are those that we distinctly conceive." The mystery
of  error  looms  large  for  Descartes because it seems to him that the
human  intellect,  being  created  by  God,  must have a kind of natural
infallibility,  the  infallibility  of an instrument designed by God for
knowing  the  truth,  not  for ignorance or error. "If we did not know,"
Descartes  reflects,  "that  all  that  is  in  us  of reality and truth
proceeds  from  a perfect and infinite being, however clear and distinct
were  our  ideas, we should not have any reason to assure ourselves that
they  had  the  perfection  of being true." But once we have "recognized
that  there  is  a  God . . . and also recognized that all things depend
upon  Him, and that He is not a deceiver," we can infer that whatever we
"perceive clearly and distinctly cannot fail to be true." What, then, is
the  source  of  our  errors?  "I  answer," writes Descartes, "that they
depend  on  a  combination  of  two  causes,  to  wit, on the faculty of
knowledge  that  rests  in me, and on the power of choice or free will."
Each  perfect  in its own sphere, neither the will nor the understanding
by  itself causes us to fall into error. "Since I understand nothing but
by  the  power  which  God  has  given me for understanding, there is no
doubt," Descartes declares, "that all that I understand, I understand as
I ought, and it is not possible that I err in this." The trouble lies in
the relation of the will to the intellect. "Since the will is much wider
in  its  range  and compass than the understanding, I do not restrain it
within  the  same  bounds,  but  extend it also to things which I do not
understand."  It is not God's fault, says Descartes, if, in the exercise
of  my  freedom,  I  do not "withold my assent from certain things as to
which   He  has  not  placed  a  clear  and  distinct  knowledge  in  my
understanding."  But as long as "I so restrain my will within the limits
of  knowledge  that  it  forms  no  judgment except on matters which are
clearly  and  distinctly  represented  to it by the understanding, I can
never  be  deceived."  There are other accounts of error, less elaborate
than  Descartes',  which  are  similar to the extent that they place the
cause in some combination of human faculties rather than in their simple
and  separate  operation.  Socrates  explains  to  Theaetetus that false
opinions arise when the

[956a]
922  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  senses  and  the mind do not cooperate properly.
Aristotle  suggests that it is the imagination which frequently misleads
the  mind.  Looking  at  the  problem  from  the  point  of  view of the
theologian,  Aquinas  holds  that Adam, in his state of innocence before
the  fall,  could  not  be deceived. "While the soul remained subject to
God,"  he  writes,  "the lower powers in man were subject to the higher,
and  were  no  impediment  to  their action." But man born in sin can be
deceived,  not  because the intellect itself ever fails, but as a result
of  the  wayward influence "of some lower power, such as the imagination
or  the  like."  Lucretius,  for  whom  sense,  not mind, is infallible,
attributes  error  to  the  fault  of  reason,  which  misinterprets the
veridical  impressions  of the senses. "What surer test can we have than
the senses," he asks, "whereby to note truth and falsehood?" He explains
that  the  mind,  not  the  senses,  is  responsible  for  illusions and
hallucinations.  "Do  not  then fasten upon the eyes this frailty of the
mind."  Other  writers, like Descartes, take the opposite view, that the
senses  are much less trustworthy than the intellect. Still others, like
i.  The  nature  of truth \a. The signs or criteria of truth: methods of
verification  i  b.  The relation between truth and being or reality ic.
The  relation  of  truth, goodness, and beauty 2. The modes of truth and
falsity  ontological  truth  tion  between  real  and  verbal  truth and
conformity  to  right  desire  tween  knowledge and opinion 3. Truth and
error  in  relation  to  human  knowing  and  learning  30. Truth in the
apprehensions  of  the  sensitive  faculty  (1) The truth of sensations:
judgments of perception (2) Truth in the memory and imagination

[956b]
Montaigne,  seem to find that error and fallacy, rather than any sort of
infallibility, are quite natural to all human faculties, and beset sense
and  reason  alike.  "Man,"  says Pascal, is "full of error, natural and
ineffaceable,  without  grace.  Nothing  shows him the truth. Everything
deceives him. Those two sources of truth, reason and the senses, besides
being   both   wanting  in  sincerity,  deceive  each  other  in  turn."
Considering  the  extremes  to which men have gone in their appraisal of
human  prowess  or  frailty, Locke's moderate statement of the matter is
worth  pondering.  "Notwithstanding  the  great  noise made in the world
about errors and opinions," he writes, "I must do mankind that right, as
to  say,  there  are  not so many men in errors and wrong opinions as is
commonly supposed. Not that I think they embrace the truth; but, indeed,
because  concerning  these  doctrines  they keep such a stir about, they
have no thought, no opinion at all. . . . And though one cannot say that
there are fewer improbable or erroneous opinions in the world than there
are,  yet this is certain, there are fewer that actually assent to them,
and  mistake  them for truths, than is imagined." OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE
924  925  926  ia. The distinction between truth and falsity in the mind
and  in  things:  logical  and  ib.  The  distinction  between  truth of
statement  and  truth  of  signification: the distincic. The distinction
between theoretical and practical truth: conformity to existence id. The
comparison  of  human  and  divine truth: finite truths and the infinite
truth ie. The distinction between truth and probability: its relation to
the distinction be927 928

[957a]
$b.  Truth  in the acts of the mind 928 (1) The truth of ideas: concepts
and  definitions  (2)  The  truth of propositions: thespgcial problem of
judgments  about  future contingencies (3) Truth in reasoning: the truth
of  premises  in  relation  to  the  truth of conclu3c. The principle of
contradiction  as  the  foundation of truth in judgment and in reasoning
$d.  The  nature and causes of error (1) The infallibility of the senses
and  the mind: the respects in which they are incapable of error (2) The
nature  and  sources of error in human perception and thought: the dis4.
Comparison of the various disciplines with respect to truth 40. Truth in
science  and  religion:  the  truth of reason and the truth of faith 4^.
Truth  in science and poetry: the truth of fact and the truth of fiction
932  4c.  Truth in metaphysics, mathematics, and the empirical sciences:
the  truth  of  principles,  hypotheses,  and conclusions in the several
speculative  disciplines  4*/.  Truth  and  probability  in rhetoric and
dialectic 5. The eternal verities and the mutability of truth 933 6. The
accumulation  or accretion of truth, and the correction of error, in the
progress  of human learning 7. The skeptical denial of truth 934 ya. The
impossibility  of  knowing  the  truth:  the  restriction  of  all human
judgments  to  stration  jb. The defense of truth against the skeptic 8.
The  moral  and political aspect of truth &a. Prevarication and perjury:
the  injustice  of  lying or bearing false witness 8b. The expediency of
the  political lie 935 8r. Truth in relation to love and friendship: the
pleasant  and  the unpleasant truth Sd. Civil liberty as a condition for
discovering  the  truth: freedom of thought and disSe. The love of truth
and  the  duty to seek it: the moral distinction between the sophist and
the philosopher; martyrdom to the truth

[957b]
Chapter  94:  TRUTH  923  PAGE  sions;  logical validity and truth about
reality 929 tinction between error and ignorance 930

[958a]
924 THE GREAT IDEAS tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d. tently
rather  than  continuously  in  the work or passage cited. The nature of
truth  7  Plato:  Euthydemus,  71c-72a  /  Cratylus, 85a89b 8 Aristotle:
Categories,  ch  5  [4  a2i-b i3] 8c-9a / Interpretation, ch i [16*9-18]
25a-b; ch 4 [17*14] 26b / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 7 [101 ^25-29] 531c;
[ioi2a i-i7]
531d-532a; bk vi, ch 4
[io27b i7-22] 550a; bk ix, ch 10 [i05i a34-b
5]  577c-d  17  Plotinus:  Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 5, 218b 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk vii, par 21 49d50a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q 13, a 12, ans and rep 3 74c-75b; q 16 94b-100d esp a 1, ans 94b-95c, a
2, ans 95c-96b; q 17, a 4 103c-104b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  in,  83a;  iv  89a-93a passim / Objections and
Replies, 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part 1, axiom 6 355d; part ii, def 4
373b;  prop  32  385c;  prop  43,  schol  388d-389b  35  Locke  :  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxxii, sect 1-3 243c-244a; sect 19 247a-b; bk
iv,  ch  v  329a-331b  esp  sect  2  329a, sect 9 330d331a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 36a-37b; 77b-d; 94a; 193a-b

[958b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions  :  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, intro, par 23 17d; part in, par 280 94d-95a
54  Freud:  New Introductory Lectures, 879c la. The signs or criteria of
truth:  methods  of verification 7 Plato: Euthydemus, 71c-74a / Gorgias,
266b / Republic, bk ix, 421a-422b / Timaeus, 447a-d / Sophist, 556c-559a
8  Aristotle:  Prior Analytics, bk i, ch 32 [47*49] 65a / Heavens, bk i,
ch  3 [270^-13] 361c-d; bk in, ch 7 [3o6ai-i8] 397b-c / Soul, bk i, ch 1
[402b  i5-403  a2]631d-632a  9  Aristotle:  Parts of Animals, bk hi, ch 4
[666a  7-10] 193d / Motion of Animals, ch i [698*1 o15] 233a / Generation
of Animals, bk hi, ch 10
[760^7-35] 301d-302a
/ Ethics, bk i, ch 7
[io98a35]-cH
8
[io98b i2] 343d-344a;
bk ii, ch 7
[uo7a27~32] 352d-353a;
bk x, ch i
[ii72a34-b7] 426b; ch
8
[1179*17-22] 433d434a
/ Politics, bk vii, ch i
[i323 a33-b
7]  527b  10  Hippocrates: Ancient Medicine, par 1, lb 10 Galen: Natural
Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  13,  173d  12 Lucretius : Nature of Things, bk i
[690-700] 9c; bk iv [469-499] 50b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par
17-20 75c76c; bk xi, par 5 90b-c / City of God, bk xi, ch 2 323a-c

[959a]
la  to  \c Chapter 94: TRUTH 925 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
32,  a  1,  rep  2 175d-178a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b; part hi,
165a;  conclusion,  282c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  260c-261c; 285c-288a;
292c-d  ^  28  Galileo:  Two  New Sciences, third day, 200a-b 28 Harvey:
Motion of the Heart, 268d; 286b-c; 295d-296a / Circulation of the Blood,
322d323d;  324c-d  /  On  Animal  Generation,  331b332a;  357b 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 16a; 43d44c; 57d-58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph
14-17  107d-108a; aph 50 111b; aph 70 116b117a; aph 73 117d-118a; aph 81
120b-c;  aph  106  128c;  bk 11 137a-195d passim 31 Descartes: Rules, 11
2a-3b  /  Discourse,  part I, 43d-44b; part ii, 47a-48a; part iv51b-54b;
part  vi,  61d-62c; 65d-66b / Meditations, 72b,d; 73d-74a; 1-11 75a-81d;
m,  82a-d;  85b86d;  iv 89a-93a passim; v, 93a-94a; 95d-96a; vi, 99a-c /
Objections    and    Replies,    123d-125b;    postulate    vii    131c;
153ac;157b-158a;168b-c;  206c-207a;  210b-c; 226d; 237b-238b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i,  axiom 6 355d; part II, def 4 373b; prop 32-34 385c-d;
prop  38-43  386c-389b; part iv, prop i 424c-425a; part v, prop 4, schol
453b-d   33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  365b-366a  /  Geometrical  Demonstration,
435b-436b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk hi, rule iv 271b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, intro, sect 2-3 93b-94a; bk ii, ch xxx, sect 2 238b-c; bk
in,  ch  xi,  sect 24 305b-d; bk iv, ch iv, sect 1-12 323d-326d esp sect
3-4  324b-c;  ch  xii, sect 13 362c-d 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
129  438d-439a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect ix, div 82 487bc; sect
x,  div  86-91  488d-491c  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  13b  38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 348a,c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36b-37b; 64d-65c; 77b-d 85b-87c
esp 86b-87c; 91d-93b; 114d-115a 146a-149d esp 146d; 153a-c; 157d; 193a-b
211c-218d;   231b-c   43   Federalist:   number   20,   78a-b  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  446d-447a; 461c-d; 463c-d 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 129a 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of Chemistry, pref, lb-c 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  467a-b; 774d-775a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 2b;
part  hi,  par  227  74b-d  /  Philosophy of History, part iv, 350a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  684a  53  James:  Psychology,
141a-142a;  176a-b; 456a; 636a-660b esp 636a-b, 638b-640a, 643a, 645a-b,
646b-648b, 654a-655a; 863a; 864a865a; 881a-b

[959b]
;  54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 81 9d 820a 879c lb. The relation
between  truth  and  being  or  reality  7 Plato: Euthydemus, 71c- 74a /
Cratylus,  85a89b  / Phaedrus, 124c-126c / Republic, bk v, 368c-373c; bk
vi, 383d-388a esp 387a; bk ix, 423b-424a / Timaeus, 447a-d / Parmenides,
507c-509a  /  Theaetetus,  534d-536a;  537a-c  /  Sophist,  561d-577b  /
Philebus,  625a  8  Aristotle:  Categories,  ch  12  [i4b  io-21]  20b /
Interpretation, ch 3
[1 6^9-26] 25d-26a; ch 9
[i8b i-4] 28b-c / Prior Analytics, bk
i,  ch  36  a40-b 9] 66d; bk ii, ch 2 [53^1-26] 72d73a / Metaphysics, bk
ii, ch i
[993
[48
b  i9-3i]  512a-b;  bk v, ch 7 [1017*31-34] 538a; bk vi, ch 4 550a,c; bk
ix,  ch  10  577c-578a,c 17 Plotinus: Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 5, 218b 18
Augustine:  Confessions, bk hi, par 10 15b-d; bk v, par 5 28b-c; bk vii,
par  16-23  48c-50c  /  City  of  God,  bk xi, ch 10, 328c-d / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 34 634b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i,
a  1,  rep 2 3b-4a; q 3, a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; q 14, a 8, rep 3 82c-83b; q
16, a i, rep 3 94b-95c; a 3 96b-d; a 8, rep 2 99d-100d; q 18, a 4, rep 3
107d-108c;  q 44, a i, ans 238b-239a; q 87, a 3, rep i 467b-468a; q 119,
a  1,  ans  604c-607b; part i-ii, q 2, a 3, ans 617b-618a; q 3, a 7, ans
628a-d;  q  22,  a  2, ans 721c-722c; q 29, a 5, ans 747c-748b 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, paradise, iv
[124126] 112a; xxxiii [49-54] 156d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 56b 31 Descartes: Meditations, 1, 76c /
Objections and Replies, 226d-227a; 229c-d; 261a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,  axiom  6  355d;  part  ii, def 4 373b; prop 7 375a-c; prop 10, schol
376d-377a;  prop  24-34  383c-385d;  prop  43, schol 388d-389b; prop 44,
demonst  389b-c; COROL 2, DEMONST 390a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
iv,  ch  v,  sect  7-8  330b-d  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 36a-37b esp 36b-c;
91d93b; 102c-103a; 114d-115a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
360  113d-114a,c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 156d-157b; part i,
237d-238a;  part  iv,  349b350b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 217c 53
James: Psychology, 636a; 638a-643a esp 641a643a; 852a; 880b-882a lc. The
relation  of  truth, goodness, and beauty 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 124c-129d /
Symposium, 167a-d / Republic, bk vi, 383d-388a / Theaetetus, 525c-526a /
Sophist,  556c-559a;  561b-d / Philebus, 630d-631d; 637c-638a / Laws, bk
ii,  654a-662a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v, ch i [1013*2024] 533b; bk
xii, ch 7 [i072a25-b 4] 602b-c /

[960a]
(  1.  The  nature  of  truth.  \c. The relation oj truth, goodness, and
beauty.}  Soul, bk in, ch 7 663c-664b esp [431*13-19] 663d 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  2,  141a;  bk  iv,  ch 11, 241a-b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk iv, sect 20 265a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch
1-2 10a-d; tr vi, ch 3-9 22b-26a esp ch 4, 23a / Sixth Ennead, tr vn, ch
31-33  336d-338b  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vii, par 23 50b-c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 5, a 4, rep 1 25d-26c; q 16, a i,
ans 94b-95c; a 3, ans 96b-d; a 4 97a-c; q 17, a 4, rep 2 103c104b; q 54,
a  2,  ans  285d-286c;  q  79,  a  ii, rep 2 424d-425b; q 82, a 3, rep i
433c-434c; a 4, rep 1 434c-435c; part i-ii, q 3, a 5, rep 2 626b-627a; q
9,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  2-3  657d658d;  q  19,  a 1 703b-d; a 3, rep i
704c-705a;  q  22,  a 2, ans 721c-722c; q 27, a i, rep 3 737bd; a 2, ans
737d-738c; q 29, a 5 747c-748b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
q  180,  a 2, rep 3 608c-609c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 26c-27a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 20 319b-c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 132, 46b / Philosophy of History, part
ii, 278a-c; part iv, 346d-347a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
153b-d  54  Freud: New Introductory Lectures, 880b 2. The modes of truth
and  falsity  2a.  The distinction between truth and falsity in the mind
and  in  things: logical and ontological truth 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk v, ch 29 [io24b 18-26] 546c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
16,  a  1  94b-95c; a 7, rep 4 99a-d; q 17, a 1 lOOdlOld; q 21, a 2, ans
125c-d  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 126b-127c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxxii, sect 2 243d; bk iv, ch v, sect ii 331b
2b.   The   distinction   between   truth  of  statement  and  truth  of
signification:   the   distinction  between  real  and  verbal  truth  8
Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  iv,  ch  4 [ioo6ai229] 525b-c; bk xi, ch 5
[1062*5-19]  590b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 16, a 8, rep
3  99d-100d  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  47,  schol  390c391a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch
xxxii, sect 4-25 244a-248a passim, esp sect 5 244a-b; bk iv, ch iv, sect
1-12  323d-326d  passim,  esp  sect i 323d-324a; sect 18 328d329a; ch v,
sect 6-8, 330b-d 53 James: Psychology, 880b-882a

[960b]
926  THE GREAT IDEAS 2 to 2d 2c. The distinction between theoretical and
practical  truth: conformity to existence and conformity to right desire
b  i98  Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ii, ch i [993 31] 512a-b 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; ch 7
[1098*25-35]
343d; bk ii, ch 2
[uo3b261104*9] 349b-c; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b; bk x,
ch  1  [ii72 a34-b8]426b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 85, a
6,  rep  1 458d-459c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 5,
rep  3  39a-40a;  q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
78b-c  31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 126a-b; 206c-207a;237b-c 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch v, sect ii 331b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, 114d-115a; 190c-191a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253b-c;
264b-d;  271ac;  283d-287d  esp 283d-284d / Practical Reason, 291a-297c;
310a-b;  319c321b; 329a-337a,c esp 329b-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
388a-d  /  Judgement, 596c598b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 461c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  pref,  2d-3b  /  Philosophy of History, part iv,
360d-361a  53  James:  Psychology, 643a-645b; 655a-659a; 865b; 886a-888a
2d.  The  comparison  of  human  and divine truth: finite truths and the
infinite  truth  Old  Testament: Exodus, 34:6 / Numbers, 23:19 / Psalms,
31:5;  86:15; 96:13; 100:5; 117:2; 119:142,160; 146:6— (D) Psalms, 30:6;
85:15;  95:13;  99:5; 116:2; 118:142,160; 145:6-7 / Proverbs, 30:5-6 New
Testament:  John,  3:33;  7:14-18; 8:12-59; 14:6,16-17; 15:26; 16:13-14;
17:17; 18:37-38 / Romans, 1:18-25; 2:2,8-9,20 / / Corinthians, 1:17-2:16
/  // Corinthians, 13:8 / Ephesians, 4:21-24 / II Thessalonians, 2:10-14
/  I Timothy, 2:3-4; 3:15 / // Timothy, 2:25-26 / Hebrews, 6:18; 10:26 /
James, 5:19-20 / I John, 1:5-10; 2:4,21-22; 3:18-19; 5:5-12 esp 5:6 / //
John,  2-4  /  III  John, 3-4,8 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 10
15b-d;  bk  v,  par 5 28b-c; bk xi, par 5 90b-c / City of God, bk xi, ch
10,  328c-d  /  Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 9-10 627a-b; ch 34 634bc 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 1, rep 3 10d-lld; q 16, aa 5-8
97c-100d;  q  21, a 2, ans 125c-d; q 106, a 1, rep 3 545d546d; q 107, aa
2-3  550b-551c;  part  i-ii,  q  3,  a  7,  ans 628a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, a 2, ans 216c-217b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, ii [19-148] 108a-109b passim; iv
[irjfl-v [12] 110d-112b;
xix  [22-66]  135b-d; xxi [73-105] 139a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82b;
208d-209c; 213c-d; 267c-268a; 272d-273b

[961a]
2eto3a(\)  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, prop 32-34 385c-d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk vii [109-130] 219b220a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
PARTin,308a-b;  part iv, 349b-350a ^- ^ 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
216d-218b  esp  217c-d  53  James:  Psychology,  671b  [fn  1]  2e.  The
distinction   between   truth  and  probability:  its  relation  to  the
distinction  between  knowledge  and  opinion  7  Plato: Republic, bk v,
370d-373c  esp  373b-c; bk vi, 386d-388a / Timaeus, 447b-d / Theaetetus,
517b-d;   527b-d;   531b-532a   /   Philebus,   633a-635b  8  Aristotle:
Interpretation,  ch 9 28a-29d / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 2 97d-99a;
ch  6 102b-103c; ch 8 104a-b; ch 30 119d; ch 33 121b-122a,c / Topics, bk
i, ch i
[iooa25-b26]
143a-b / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4-6 525a531c; bk vii, ch 15
[i039b3i-i040a8] 563d564a; bk ix, ch 10 [io5i b i3-i8] 577d; bk xi,
ch 6 590d-592b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b n-28]
339d-340a; ch 7
[1098^5-35] 343d;
bk  11,  ch 2 [1104*1-9] 349b-c; bk vi, ch 9 [ii42b515] 391d / Rhetoric,
bk i, ch i
[1355*4-18]
594b; ch 2
[1 357*23^21] 596d-597c; bk
ii,  ch  25 [i402b i3-i403 a i7] 652b-653a 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of
the  Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
12,  a 7, ans 56a-57b; q 16, a 8 99d-100d; q 32, a 1, rep 2 175d-178a; q
79,  a  9,  rep 3-4 422b-423d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
57,  a  2,  rep 3 36a-37b; q 94, a 4, ans 223d224d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i, 60c-61a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 271b-273b 31 Descartes: Rules, 11
2a-3b;  111,  3d  4a  /  Discourse, part 1, 43d; 44a-b; part iv, 51b-d /
Meditations,  1-11,  75a-78b;  v,  95b-96a  /  Objections  and  Replies,
124b-125b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 35, demonst 385d-386a; prop
40,  schol  2 388a-b; prop 41-44 388c-390a; prop 49, schol, 391d-392a 32
Milton:  Areopagitica,  406a-b  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  184-241 205a-217b
passim,  esp  233-241 213b-217b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch
hi,  sect  14 316b-d; sect 29 322c-323a; ch iv, sect 6-8 325a-c; sect 18
328d-329a;  ch  vi  331b-336d  esp  sect  13 335c-d, sect 16 336d; ch xv
365a-366c; ch xvii, sect 2 371d-372b; sect 14-17 378c-379c; ch xix, sect
i  384c-d  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c;  108a; 228c-d; 240b-243c /
Judgement,  600d-604b  esp  601d,  603a-b,  603d-604b  43 Mill: Liberty,
274b-293b  passim  45  Faraday:  Researches  in  Electricity, 391 b-c 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 132,

[961b]
Chapter  94:  TRUTH  927 46b-c; par 140 49b-54a; part hi, par 268 84c-d;
additions,  91  131a-d 54 Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 661c662a
3.  Truth  and error in relation to human knowing and learning 3a. Truth
in  the  apprehensions  of  the  sensitive  faculty  3*(1)  The truth of
sensations:  judgments of perception 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224a-b / Republic,
bk  vi,  386d-388a;  bk  vii,  392b-393b;  bk  x,  431b-c  / Theaetetus,
538d-541a  /  Sophist,  575d-577b  esp  577a-b  /  Philebus, 622d-626a 8
Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5 [ioiob i29] 530a-c; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b33-io63a
9] 591a-b / Soul, bk ii, ch 6 [418^-18] 648d649a; bk hi, ch 3
[427b6-i5]
659d-660a;
[428*11-18] 660b; ch 6 [430^6-30] 663b-c /
Sense and the Sensible, ch 4
[442*^4-9] 680a-b
9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk ii, ch 2
[648b i5-2o] 173a
12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  i [693-700] 9c; bk iv [379-521]
49a-51a  18  Augustine: City of God, bkxix,ch 18 523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  17,  a  2  102a-d; q 85, a 6, ans 458d-459c 25
Montaigne: Essays, 285c-286a 28 Harvey: Circulation of the Blood, 320b /
On Animal Generation, 333c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 51c-d; 58b
/  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 16 108a; aph 41 109c-d; aph 50 111b / New
Atlantis,  213d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  vin,  13a-b;  xn, 18c; 22c23a /
Discourse,  part  iv,  53b  /  Meditations,  1 75a-77c; in, 83d-84a; vi,
101d-103d  /  Objections and Replies, 124d; postulate i 130d; 206c-207a;
229d-230d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, prop 24-28 383c384c; prop 40,
schol  2-prop  41  388a-c  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  9 173b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxx, sect 2 238b-c; ch xxxi, sect 2 239b-d; ch
xxxii,  sect  14-16  245c-246b; bk iv, ch iv, sect 4 324c; ch xi, sect 3
355a-b;  sect  ii  357b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro, sect i
405a-b;  sect  14-15  415c-416a;  sect  40 420b; sect 86-88 429c-430b 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  xii, div 1 17-123 504a-506a 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  108a-109c  esp  108a-d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 461c-d 53
James:  Psychology,  460a-471a  esp  468b-469a; 475a-478b; 508a-520a esp
508a,   519b;  521a522a;  565a-b;  593a-626a  esp  593a-595a,  601a602a,
606b-625a; 648b
[fn
1];  780a-785a; 851b-852a 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 148d-149a;
337a-c / Unconscious, 430b-c

[962a]
928  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (3a. Truth in the apprehensions of the sensitive
faculty.) 3a(2) Truth in the memory and imagination 7 Plato: Theaetetus,
538d-541a  /  Philebus,  623d-624c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5
[ioiob  i12]  530a-b; bk v, ch 29 [102^17-27] 546c-d / Soul, bk in, ch 3
[428  an-i8]  660b  /  Memory  and Reminiscence, ch i [451*8-12] 692a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 17, a 2, rep 2 102a-d; q 54, a 5,
ans  288a-d  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote esp part i, ld-2b, 4bc, 18d-22a,
44b,  50b-52d 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 22c-23a / Discourse, part iv, 53b
/  Meditations,  1,  75c-77c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 17, schol
381b-d;  prop 35, schol 386a-b; prop 40, schol i-prop 41 387b-388c; prop
44,  corol  1 and schol 389c-390a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 82-88 186b-189b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xi, sect 11 357b-c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  ii,  div  ii,  455b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
88c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 173b-174a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vii,
294b295a 53 James: Psychology, 240a-241b; 480a-484a esp 483b; 498a-499a;
527a-538b;   662a-663a  [fn  1]  54  Freud:  Interpretation  of  Dreams,
341b-343c  esp  342d-343b / General Introduction, 597b599b / Ego and Id,
700c;  701d  3b. Truth in the acts of the mind 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi,
386d-388a  /  Theaetetus,  536c-544a  8  Aristotle:  Soul,  bk  hi, ch 6
662d-663c;  ch  10 [433^1-28] 665d-666a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 2
[1139*27-30]   387d-388a;   ch   3  [ii39b  i4-i8]  388b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  x, par 19 76a-b / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c /
Christian Doctrine, bki, cH9627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
16,  aa 1-2 94b-96b; q 17, a 3 102d-103c; q 58, a 5 303c-304c; q 85, a 6
458d-459c;  q  94, a 4 505a-506a; q 106, a i, ans 545d-546d; q 107, a 2,
ans 550b-551a; part i-ii, q 17, a 6, ans 690b-d 31 Descartes: Rules, wm,
13a-b;  xn,  18c;  22c23c / Meditations, in, 82a-86d esp 85c; iv 89a-93a
esp  90b-91b  /  Objections  and  Replies, 123d-125b; 141a; 229d-230d 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  44, demonst 389b-c; corol 2, demonst
39Ca;  prop  48  391ac;  prop  49, schol 391d-394d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
36b-37d;  108a-109c;  110d-112d;  115d-119a  esp  118ac; 174b-d; 193a-b;
233d-234b 53 James: Psychology, 867a-868b

[962b]
3a(2)  to  3b(2)  3b(l)  The  truth of ideas: concepts and definitions 7
Plato:  Cratylus  85a-114a,c passim, esp 85a89a, 104b-114a,c / Republic,
bk  ii,  323c-324c;  bk  vi,  386d-388a  /  Seventh  Letter, 809c-810d 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 4 [2*4-10] 6a / Interpretation, ch 1 [16*9-18]
25a-b / Topics, bk vi, ch 1
[i39a24-b2] 192a-b; bk
vi,  ch  4-BK  vii,  ch  5 194c-211a,c passim / Metaphysics, bk v, ch 29
[1024^7-38] 546d-547a; bk vi, ch 4 [1027^7-28] 550a; bk ix, ch 10
[io5i b i833] 577d-578a / Soul, bk hi, ch 6 [43oa26-b
5]  662d-663a; [430^6-30] 663b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 19
76a-b  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii,  ch  35 653b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 2, a 1, rep 2 10d-lld; q 16, a 2 95c-96b; q 17, a
3  102d-103c;  q  58,  a  5  303c-304c;  q 85, a 1, rep 1 451c-453c; a 6
458d-459c;  q 94, a 4, ans 505a-506a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-d
28  Galileo:  Two  New  Sciences, third day, 200a-b 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  333b-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  57d-58b  31
Descartes:  Rules,  xn, 21d-22a / Meditations, in, 82a-86d esp 83a, 85c;
iv,  90bc  /  Objections and Replies, def hi 130b; axiom iv-v 131d-132a;
156d-158a  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, axiom 6 355d; prop 8, schol 2,
357b-d;  part  ii,  def  4 373b; prop 32-43 385c-389b 33 Pascal: Vacuum,
373a-b   /   Geometrical   Demonstration,   430b-431b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxx-xxxii  238a-248b  passim,  esp ch xxxii
243c-248b;  bk hi, ch vi, sect 43-47 280c282b passim 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  234b-236b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  36bc;  77b-d;  85b-87c esp
86b-87c;   91d-93b;  179d-182b;  193a-c;  215d-217a;  233d-234b  /  Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  367d-368a / Judgement, 570b-572d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, intro, par 1-2 9a-10a 53 James: Psychology,
299a-302a esp 299b, 302b
[fn
1];  305a-312a  esp 307a-308a; 669a-671a esp 671b [fn 1] 3&(2) The truth
of   propositions:   the  special  problem  of  judgments  about  future
contingencies  7 Plato: Euthydemus, 71c-74a / Cratylus, 85a86b; 109a-b /
Sophist, 561d-577b esp 575a577b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 4
[2*4-10]
6a; ch 5
[4
aio-b i9] 8b-9a / Interpretation, ch i
[16*9-18] 25a-b; ch 4-14 26a-36d passim, esp
ch 4
[17*1-4] 26b, ch 7 26d-27d, ch 9 28a29d, ch
14 35c-36d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 7
[iou b25-29]
531c;
[1012*1-17]
531d-

[963a]
2>b(l) to 3d(l) b22] 532b-d; bk vi, ch 532a; ch 8
[1012*29
10
[io5i a34-b i8] 577c-d
4 550a,c; bk ix, ch / Soul, bk in, ch 3
[427b i6-25] 660a; ch 6
[43oa26-b5] 662d-663a; [430^6-3 1] 663b-c
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 7
[1107*27-32]
352d-353a; bk vi, ch 2
[1139*2 1-3?T387d388a
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, rep 2 16d-17c; q 13, a
12,  ans  and  rep  3  74c75b; q 14, a 13 esp rep 3 86d-88c; a 15, rep 3
89b-90b;  q  16, a 2 95c-96b; aa 7-8 99a-100d; q 17, aa 3-4 102d-104b; q
57,  a  3  297b-298a;  q  58,  a  4,  rep  2 302d-303c; q 85, a i, rep i
451c-453c;  a  5,  rep 3 457d-458d; a 6 458d459c; q 86, a 4 463d-464d; q
94,  a  4,  ans  and  rep 5 505a-506a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 57, a 5, rep 3 39a-40a 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv,
stanza  147-154  107b-108b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 56b; 57c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 54c-55a; 57d-58b 31 Descartes: Rules,
xn,  22c-23b  / Discourse, part iv, 52a / Meditations, in, 83a; 85c; iv,
90b-91b  /  Objections  and  Replies, 123d-125c; def ix 130d; 156d-157c;
215d-216c;  229d230d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  h,  prop  49,  schol,
392a-394a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxxii, sect 1-3
243c-244a;  sect 19-26 247a248b; bk hi, ch vii, sect i 283a-b; bk iv, ch
v  329a-331b;  ch  vi,  sect  3  331c-d;  sect  16  336d  35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  iv,  div 21 458b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 99a-100a;
108a-d;  193a-c  53 James: Psychology, 638b; 640b; 671a-672a; 884b-885a;
889b-890a 3^(3) Truth in reasoning: the truth of premises in relation to
the  truth  of  conclusions;  logical validity and truth about reality 7
Plato:  Euthydemus  65a-84a,c esp 67b-68d, 71b-72c / Phaedo, 236c-238a 8
Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 2-4 72d-77a / Posterior Analytics,
bk i, ch 2
[7ibi6-26]
98a-b;
[72*6-9]
98c;
[72*14-19]
98c-d; ch 10 104d-105d; ch 12
[77
b i6-34] 106d-107a / Physics, bk i, ch 2
[185*5-12]
259d; ch 3
[186*4-9]
260d-261a;  bk viii, ch 1 [252*1 9-b7] 335d-336b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 3
[i094bn-28]
339d-340a; ch 8
[io98b9-i2]
344a; bk vi, ch 9
[ii42b8-i5]
391d;
[ii42b22-26]
392a;  bk  vii,  ch  2  [1146*23-30]  396b / Poetics, ch 24 [1460*19-25]
696b-c  10  Galen:  Natural Faculties, bk i, ch 14, 178c-d 12 Epictetus:
Discourses, bk i, ch 7 112b113d

[963b]
Chapter  94:  TRUTH 929 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 3134
651d-653b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  84, a 3, rep 3
443d-444d;  q 85, a 6, ans 458d459c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56b-d;
58d-59a;  65c-d;  part  iv,  267b-c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
57b-58a;  59c-60b  / Novum Organum, bk 1, aph 14 107d-108a 31 Descartes:
Rules, in, 4a-d; x, 16d-17a; xn, 23b / Objections and Replies, 126b-127c
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  40, demonst 387a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xi,  sect  13  146bc  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
36a-37d;  64d-65c;  109b-c;  HOd-110c;  180c-182b;  193a-b; 211c-218d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  134c-d  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue ii,
683d-684a  53  James:  Psychology,  295a-b;  526b  [fn  1]; 867a882a esp
869a-870a,  871b-872b,  878b-880b  3c. The principle of contradiction as
the   foundation  of  truth  in  judgment  and  in  reasoning  7  Plato:
Protagoras,  53a  /  Euthydemus,  72d73b  / Republic, bk iv, 350d-351b /
Theaetetus, 527a-528a / Sophist, 558b-d 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 10
[i3b i~35] 19a-c
/  Prior Analytics, bk ii, ch 17 86b-87a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
ii 105d-106b / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 2
[996*^26-30] 515b;
bk  iv,  ch  3-6  524b-531c;  ch  8  [ioi2*29-b22] 532b-d; bk xi, ch 5-6
590a-592b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  58, a 4, rep 2
302d-303c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 94, a 2, ans
221d-223a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  59c-60a 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  in,  82b-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part ii, prop 49, schol,
393c-d  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 16 99b-c; sect
19-20  lOOb-d; ch in, sect 3 113a-b; bk iv, ch ii, sect i 309b-d; ch vn,
sect  4  337b-338b;  sect  8-1  i  338d342d passim 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
17d-18d;  36b-37b; 64d65c; 97a-b; 174b-d 53 James: Psychology, 639a-641a
3d.  The  nature  and  causes  of  error 3</(l) The infallibility of the
senses and the mind: the respects in which they are incapable of error 7
Plato:  Phaedo,  224a-c / Theaetetus, 539a540a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk iv, ch 5
[ioiob
15-29] 530b-c; bk ix, ch 10
[io5i b25-33]

[964a]
(3d  The  nature  and  causes  of  error. 3d(l) The infallibility of the
senses and the mind: the respects in which they are incapable of error.)
578a / Soul, bk ii, ch 6
[418*6-18]
648d649a; bk hi, ch 3
[427^-15]
659d-660a;
[428 a5-429a2]
660b-661a; ch 6
[430
5] 662d-663a; [430^6-30] 663b-c; ch 10
[433
21-28]  665d-666a  /  Sense  and  the Sensible, ch 4 [442b4-9] 680a-b 12
Lucretius:  Nature of Things, bk i [693-700] 9c; bk iv [379-521] 49a-51a
18  Augustine:  City  of God,  bk  xix,  ch  18  523a-b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 17, aa 2-3 102a-103c; q 85, a i, rep i 451c-453c;
a  6  458d-459c; q 94, a 4 505a-506a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i—ii,  q  94,  a  4,  ans 223d-224d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56d 30
Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 16 108a 31 Descartes: Rules, xn, 22c-23b
/ Meditations, 11, 77d-78b; m, 83a; iv 89a-93a / Objections and Replies,
124b-d;  215b-216c;  229d-230d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 43-47
388c391a;  prop 49, schol 391d-394d passim 33 Pascal: Pensees, 9 173b 35
Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi, sect 3 144c-d; ch xxx, sect 2
238b-c;  ch  xxxi,  sect  2  239b-d;  ch  xxxii, sect 14-17 245c-246c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 40 420b; sect 88 430a-b 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  52,  473a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 108a-d;
193a-b;  233d234b  53  James:  Psychology,  125a-126a; 361a-b 3</(2) The
nature  and  sources  of  error  in  human  perception  and thought: the
distinction  between  error  and  ignorance 7 Plato: Meno, 180b-182a esp
181d-182a  /  Phaedo,  224a-225a  /  Republic,  bk  ii, 323c324c; bk in,
339b-340a  /  Theaetetus,  520c522b;  536c-544a  /  Sophist,  557b-558d;
575d577b  /  Philebus,  622d-626a 8 Aristotle: Prior Analytics, bk i, ch
34-35  66b-d;  bk ii, ch 16-21 85c-89b / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 5
101b-102b;  ch  12 [77 34] 106d-107a; ch 16-18 109b-110c / Topics, bk 1,
ch 1
[101*5-17]
143c-d; bk v, ch 3
[13^19-36] 182b-c; bk vi, ch 9 [i48 a2-9] 202a;
bk  viii,  ch  12-13  220c-221d  /  Sophistical  Refutations 227a-253d /
Physics, bk i, ch 2
[185*5-12] 259d / Heavens, bk
i, ch 5 [27ib i18] 362c-d / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5
[1009s
i5-ioioa i4] 528c-529d; ch 6 [101^3-13] 530d; ch 7
[ioi2a i8-22] 532a; bk ix, ch 10
[io5i b
4] 577d-578a,c; bk xi, ch 6
[io62b
i8-io52a 12-24] 590d-591a / Soul, bk hi, ch i [425^0b ai6-b6] 659c-d; ch
6 4] 657c; ch 3
[427

[964b]
930 THE GREAT IDEAS 3d(2)
[43oa26-b
5] 662d-663a; ch 10
[433^1-28]
665d-666a / Sense and the Sensible, ch 4
[442^-9] 680a-b / Memory and Reminiscence,
ch 1
[45i a8-i2] 692a / Dreams 702a-706d
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi, ch i [niob i7-iiii a 20] 356b-357a; ch 4
359a-c;  bk vi, ch 9 391c392b / Rhetoric, bk hi, ch 7 [i4o8 a20-25] 659b
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv
[379521] 49a-51a; [1141-1191] 59a-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  7 112b-113d 14 Plutarch: Marcus
Brutus,  816d-817c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 2, 323c; bk xix,
ch  6  514b-515a;  ch 18 523a-b / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 9 627a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 17 100d-104b; q 84, a 8 450b-451b;
q  85,  a i, rep 1 451c-453c; a 6 458d-459c; q 89, a 5, ans 477a-478b; q
94,  a  4  505a-506a;  part  i-ii, q 5, a 8, rep 3 642d-643d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  53,  a  1  19d-21a;  q  72, a 5, ans
115a-116b;  q  88,  a  1,  ans  193a-194b; part hi suppl, q 82, a 3, ans
971a-972d  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xiii [112120] 126c 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 51b-52b; 56b-d; 57c-d; 58d-60a; 78a-79b; part
ii,  139c;  part  hi,  172b-d;  part  iv,  258b-d  25 Montaigne: Essays,
269d-294b  esp  270c276a,  285c-292d;  497c-d; 517d-518b 27 Shakespeare:
Sonnets,  cxlviii 608d-609a 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 105c 28 Harvey:
Motion  of  the  Heart,  268a-c  / On Animal Generation, 333b-d; 335a-c;
364a365a  esp  365a;  411c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 13c-15a;
16a;  43d-44c;  51b-d; 60b-61c esp 61b-c; 66c-d; 98c / Novum Organum, bk
i, aph 12 107d; aph 14-17 107d-108a; aph 20 108b; aph 30 109a; aph 38-70
109c-117a;  aph 78-92 119b-125d; aph 104-106 128a-c / New Atlantis, 213d
31  Descartes: Rules, 11, 2d-3a; xn, 22c-23b / Meditations, 1-11 75a-81d
passim;  in,  83a;  iv  89a-93a  esp 91b; vi, 100a-103d / Objections and
Replies,  123d-126a; 141a; 142c; 215b216c; 229d-230d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii, prop 17, schol 381b-d; prop 33 385c-d; prop 35 385d-386b; prop
40-41  387a-388c;  prop  47,  schol  390c391a;  prop 49, schol 391d-394d
passim;  part iv, prop 1 424c-425a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 82-88 186b-189b /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 441a-b 34 Newton: Optics, bk i, 384b-385b 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch xxi, sect 58-70 193d-197b; ch
xxxii, sect 19 247a-b; ch xxxiii 248b-251d esp sect 18 251a-c; bk hi, ch
ix,  sect  21-23  290c-291c; ch x 291d-300a passim, esp sect 9 293d294a,
sect 16 295d, sect 34 299d-300a; ch xi, sect 1-7 300a-301c; bk iv, ch v,
sect

[965a]
3d(3)  to  4a Chapter 94: TRUTH 931 9 330d-331a; ch vi, sect i6 336d; ch
vii,  sect  12-20  342d-344d  passim;  ch xvii, sect 12-13 378b-c; ch xx
388d-394c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro 405a412a,c passim, esp
sect  1-4  405a-d,  secjtjj-^ 25 409d-412a,c; sect 86-88 429c-430lf~~ 35
Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect i, div 6-7, 453c-454a; sect v, div 45
469c;  sect  vii, div 48 470d-471c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 234b-236b
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  la-4a,c;  109b-c; 133c134d; 193a-b; 200c-209d;
219a-220b;  224a227a esp 224a-c, 226b-d; 229b-c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals, 260d-261b / Practical Reason, 294c-295d; 302a-d; 348d-349a /
judgement,   575b-c   43  Federalist:  number  i,  29d-30a;  number  31,
103c-104a;  number  38,  122a-b  43  Mill:  Liberty. 274b-293b passim 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 106d; 126b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 313a-b 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk xiii, 585b 53 James: Psychology, 240a-241b; 264b-268a;
460a-469a   esp   462b-464a,   468b-469a;  506a520a  passim,  esp  508a;
533a-538b;   610b-625a   passim,   esp   618b-621a,   625a   54   Freud:
Interpretation  of  Dreams,  148d-149a;  210c-d;  337a-d;  353d-355b esp
354c-355a;  379b-d  /  General  Introduction, 472a-c / Ego and Id, 700c;
701d  /  War  and  Death,  760d761a  / New Introductory Lectures, 819b-c
3</(3)  Rules  for  the  correction  or prevention of error in thought 7
Plato: Sophist, 557b-558d / Statesman, 582 d584a / Philebus, 610d-613a 8
Aristotle:  Topics  143a-223a,c  /  Sophistical Refutations 227a-253d 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 7 112b113d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
56b-d;  58d-60c  28  Harvey:  Motion  of  the  Heart, 268a-c / On Animal
Generation, 331b-332a; 333b-d; 335a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
lla-17b  esp  13a-c,  14c-15a,  16b-c;  33d-34b; 43d-44c; 47d49b; 51b-d;
60a-61d;  64a-66a  esp  64d-65a  / Novum Organum 105a-195d esp bk i, aph
11-26  107d-108d,  aph  39-69  109c-116b, aph 103-106 127d-128c, aph 124
133c-d  /  New  Atlantis,  213d  31  Descartes:  Rules,  ii-xii 2a-25a /
Discourse  41a-67a,c esp part ii, 47a-48a, part iv, 51b52a, part vi, 64d
/ Meditations, 1 75a-77c; vi, 103a-d / Objections and Replies, 206a-c 32
Milton:   Areopagitica,   389b-390a   33  Pascal:  Vacuum,  365b-366a  /
Geometrical  Demonstration,  430a-434a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
hi,  ch  xi  300a-306d  35  Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, intro 405a412a,c
passim, esp sect 1-4 405a-d, sect 2125 411b-412a,c

[965b]
35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect i, div 7 453c-454a; div 10, 455b;
sect  xii, div 116, 503d-504a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 299b 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 5a-13d; lOlb-d; 129c130a; 209b-211c; 218d-227a; 248d-250a,c
esp  250a,c  /  Practical  Reason,  293c-294b  esp  293d  [fn 3]; 335bc;
336d-337a,c  / Judgement, 575b-c; 600d-603d 43 Mill: Liberty, 276b-277a;
283a-288c  passim  45  Faraday:  Researches in Electricity, 774d-775a 4.
Comparison of the various disciplines with respect to truth 4a. Truth in
science  and  religion:  the  truth  of reason and the truth of faith 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q i, aa 1-2 3b-4c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  109,  a  1  338b-339c; part ii-ii, q i, a i
380b381a; aa 3-5 381d-384b; q 2, aa 3-4 392d394b; a 10 399b-400b; Q 4, a
1 402a-403d; a 8 409a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, hi
[1645]
56a-b; paradise, ii
[25-148]
108a-109b  passim  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 83b; part iv, 274c-d;
conclusion,  282c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82b; 208c-209c; 212a-215a;
238c-239d;  267c-268a;  272d-273b;  291b-294b  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  33c-d; 55b-d; 95d-101c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c /
Objections  and  Replies, 12 5c- 126a; 284d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
xii
[552-587]
331a-332a  33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 147b-148b; 163a166a / Pensees,
434  248a-250a;  846  339a-b;  857-858 342a; 862-865 342b-343b / Vacuum,
355b-356b; 365b-366a / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  11,  340bc; ch xvii, sect 23-24
380b-d; ch xviii 380d-384b passim, esp sect 2 381ab, sect 8-9 383b-d; ch
xix,  sect  4 385b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xi, div 102 497b-d
38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 333d-334a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 190c-d
42  Kant: Judgement, 601d-607c esp 601d-602a, 603a-b, 604d-606d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  455a-c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 360
113d-114a,c   /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  158c-160b;  part  iv,
349b-350b 48 Melville: Moby Dicl(, 276a-b; 360b-361a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace, bk v, 196a-197c; epilogue 11, 695d-696d

[966a]
(4.  Comparison  of  the  various disciplines with respect to truth. 4a.
Truth  in  science  and  religion:  the  truth  of  reason and the truth
offaith.)   53  James:  Psychology,  864a  54  Freud:  New  Introductory
Lectures,  881c  esp 874d-875a, 878b-880d, 881c 4b. Truth in science and
poetry:  the  truth  of  fact  and  the  truth  of fiction 6 Herodotus :
History,  bk  ii,  71a-73b  esp  72a-b;  bk  iv,  127a-b  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 354b 7 Plato: Protagoras, 52d-57c / Gorgias,
281d282a / Republic, bk ii, 320d-324c; bk x, 427c431b / Sophist, 561b-d;
577d-579d / Laws, bk ii, 660b-662a 9 Aristotle: Poetics, ch 25 696d-698c
14  Plutarch: Cimon, 390b-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xvi [106-136]
23c-d; xxv
[34-48]
36d; xxviii
[1 12-126]
42c  d 22 Chaucer: Troilus andoCressida, bk ii, stanza 147-149 40b-41a /
Prelogue  [715-746]  171b172a  /  Miller's  Prologu [3167-3186] 212a-b /
Prologue  to  Melibeus  400b-401a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 67b-c 25
Montaigne:   Essays,   41b-42a;  199a-200d;  258c-259a  26  Shakespeare:
Midsummer-Night's  Dream,  act  v, sc 1 [1-27] 370d-371a 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet,  act  hi,  sc  11  [18-42] 49a-b 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart,
268a-b  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 183d-193a esp 184b-d, 186b-d;
part ii, 212a-215b esp 213b-c, 214c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
38d-39b  31  Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43a-b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
19a-20a;  49b-50c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 88a-d; 186c-d; 345c;
471c-d  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 40d-41a; 337c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
173b-174a  44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 98d-99a; 282c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  hi,  285d286a  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part  ii [7428-7433]
181b-182a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 134a-c; bk ix, 366d-367b; bk
x, 405b-406c 53 James: Psychology, 641a-643a 54 Freud: Group Psychology,
692c-693a  4c.  Truth  in  metaphysics,  mathematics,  and the empirical
sciences:  the  truth  of principles, hypotheses, and conclusions in the
several  speculative disciplines 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi, 383d-388a; bk
vii,  391b-398c  /  Timaeus,  447b-d  / Philebus, 633a-635a 8 Aristotle:
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 32 120c-121b / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 9
[1051*

[966b]
932 THE GREAT IDEAS 4£ to 4d 22-34] 577bc; bk xiii, ch 2
[i077bn]-cH 3
[1078^1] 609a-d
9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals, bk ii, ch 6 [742b i8-35] 283d-284a /
Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[i094b23-28]
339d-340a; ch 7
[1098*25-35]
343d 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk xiii, 429a-b 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of
the  Heavenly Spheres, 505a-506a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 888b-890a 17
Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 94, a 4, ans 223d-224d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 59b-c; part
iv, 269b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 48b-49a 31 Descartes: Rules,
11,  2d-3b  / Discourse, part ii, 47b-48a; part vi, 66a-b / Meditations,
1,  76c / Objections and Replies, 218b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop
37-39  386b387a  34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi,  543a-b  35  Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 9-30 315c-323c passim 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  348a,c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  15c-16c; 17d-19a; 194b-c;
217a-c;  245c-248d  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d / Practical
Reason,  311d-313d;  330d-331a; 351b-352c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
388a-c / Science of Right, 398c-399c 43 Federalist: number 31, 103c-104a
43   Mill:   Liberty,  283d-284b  /  Utilitarianism,  445b-c  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, additions, i 115a-d 49 Darwin: Origin of Species,
239c  /  Descent  of  Man,  590a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii,
690a-b  53  James: Psychology, 862a-866a esp 863a-865a, 866a; 870a-878a;
882a-886a  esp  883a,  884a-b  54  Freud: Beyond the Pleasure Principle,
661c662b / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 722a-b / New Introductory
Lectures,  873d-875b 4d. Truth and probability in rhetoric and dialectic
5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[469-472]
382a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds [889-901] 499b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War, bk hi, 425c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 39d-42c / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c /
Phaedrus, 131b-141a,c / Apology, 200a-c / Gorgias 252a-294d esp 258b-d /
Republic,  bk  vi, 386d-388a / Sophist, 578d579d / Philebus, 634b-635a /
Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch i
[iooai8-b3i]
143a-c; ch 2
[ioi a34~b4] 144a / Metaphysics,
bk iv, ch 2 [ioo4bi5-27] 523d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 1, ch 3
[i094b i8-28]
339d-340a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch i
[1355*4-40]
594b-d; ch 2
[i356a36-i357b2i]
596a-597c;

[967a]
d  5  to  6  Chapter 94 bk ii, ch 23 [i397b i2-27] 645d-646a; [1400*514]
648d;  ch 25 [i402b i3-i403ai7] 652b-653a; bk in, ch 7 [1408*20-23] 659b
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv,  par  2  19d; bk v, par 10 29b-d /
Christian Doctrine^&j^ii^ ch 36 653d; bk iv, ch 5 677a-d; ch 12 683d684c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 67c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
12a-c  31  Descartes:  Rules,  x,  16d-17a  /  Discourse, part vi, 63c32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk h
[108-118] 113b
/  Areopagitica,  382a-383a  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch x,
sect  34  299d-300a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 108a-109d 43 Mill: Liberty,
292b-293b  5.  The  eternal  verities  and  the  mutability of truth Old
Testament:  Psalms,  100:5;  117:2;  119:160;  146:6—  (D) Psalms, 99:5;
116:2;  118:160;  145:6-7  /  Proverbs,  8:22-30  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of
Solomon,  7:24-26—  (D)  OT,  Bool^of  Wisdom, 7:24-26 / Ecclesiasticus,
24:9—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 24:14 New Testament: II John, 2 7 Plato:
Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Phaedrus,  125a-b  / Meno, 184d / Theaetetus,
528b-c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[4
aio-b  i2]  8b9a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 8 104a-b / Metaphysics,
bk ii, ch i
[993^9-31] 512a-b;
bk ix, ch 10 [io5i b33-io52a i2] 578a,c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk 1,
par 6 2b-c; par 9 3a-b; bk xi, par 9-1 1 91c-92b / City of God, bk viii,
ch  7 269c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk 1, ch 8-10 626c-627b; bk ii, ch 38
654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a 3, rep 3 42c-43b; q
14,  a  15,  rep  3  89b-90b;  q  16,  aa 7-8 99a-100d; q 84, a i, rep 3
440d442a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, a 2 216c-217b;
part  ii-ii, q i, a i, contrary 380b-381a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv,
267b  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 27d-28c / Novum Organum, bk i,
aph  56  112a  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  v, 93b-94c / Objections and
Replies,  216d-217b; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 8 355c; prop
8,  schol 2 356d-357d; prop 17, schol, 363a-b; prop 19, schol 363d; prop
20,  corol i 364a 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358b 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect 9 308c-309b; ch hi, sect 31 323c-d; ch xi, sect 14
358b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
pref,  ld-2a;  6a7c;  part  hi,  par  270,  85c;  additions,  i 115a-d /
Philosophy  of  History, intro, 156d-157b; 176b-c; part iv, 349b-350a 47
Goethe:  Faust, prelude [73-74] 3a 50 Marx-Engels : Communist Manifesto,
428b-d

[967b]
:  TRUTH  933  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk v, 216d-218b esp 217c 53
James: Psychology, 879b-882a; 889a-890a 6. The accumulation or accretion
of truth, and the correction of error, in the progress of human learning
8 Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 34
[i83b i6-i84b8] 253a-d / Heavens, bk
1, ch 10
[279V12] 370d; bk
iv,  ch  1  [307^8-308^]  399a-b  / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3 [983 a33~b6]
501c-d; ch 7 506b-d; ch 10 511c-d; bk ii, ch 1 511b,d-512b; bk hi, ch i
[995
a23~b 4] 513b, d; bk xii, ch 10
[1075^5-1076^]
606a-d; bk xiii, ch i
[1076^-17]
607a  / Soul, bk 1 ch 2 [403^0-23] 633a 9 Aristotle: History of Animals,
bk hi, ch 3 a 7_I 4] 36c-d / Parts of Animals, bk i, ch
[5 x 3
1
[642^5-30]
165b-c / Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[i096au-i6] 341b / Rhetoric, bk i, ch
i  [1355s  34-39]  594d 10 Hippocrates: Regimen in Acute Diseases, par 1
26a-c  10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  14,  178d179a; ch 16
180c-182b;  bk  ii,  ch  8, 192a-b; ch 9, 199a,c; bk hi, ch 10 207b-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi, 49c 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i, 6b 16 Kepler:
Epitome,  bk  iv,  846a-850a  /  Harmonies  of the World, 1009b-1010a 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 13-15 47c48c / City of God, bk viii,
ch  5  267d-268d;  ch io-ii 271a-272c / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 40
655b-656a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 97, a 1, ans
236a-d;  part  ii-ii,  q  1,  a 7 385c387a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
56b-d;   part   ii,   114d-115a;  164a,c;  part  iv,  267c-269b  passim;
conclusion,   282b-d   25   Montaigne:   Essays,  271a-c;  276b-278a  27
Shakespeare:  Coriolanus,  act  ii,  sc  hi  [119128]  367b  28 Gilbert:
Loadstone,  pref,  2b-d  28  Harvey:  Motion  of the Heart, 267b,d-269a;
274a-b; 279d-280c; 293b-d / Circulation of the Blood, 306a-c / On Animal
Generation,  331a-332a;  336d-337a,c;  364a-365a;  377a-c; 433c; 457b 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  14c-l5d;  16c; 32a; 47d-48d; 64a-b /
Novum  Organum,  bk  1, aph 56 112a; aph 84 121b-d; aph 92-115 125b-130d
passim  31  Descartes: Discourse 41a-67a,c esp part i, 42b-44c, part 11,
46c-48a,  part  hi,  49d-50b,  part vi 60d-67a,c 32 Milton: Areopagitica
381a-412b  esp  384b389a, 398a-b, 404a-b 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 357a-358a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  85a-c; 89a-b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part hi,
118a-119a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 224b-225a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
330a-d; 346d-347a

[968a]
934  The  accumulation  or accretion of truth, and (6. the correction of
error,  in the progress of human learning.) 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
23d-24a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 274a-d; 298a-300b 42 Kant: Pure
Reason, ld-2b
[fn
2];  5d-6c;  220b-221b;  248d-250a,c  /  Practical Reason, 336d-337a,c /
Judgement,  513d-514b  43  Mill:  Liberty, 274b-293b passim, esp 280a-c,
288d-290a 44 Bos\vELL:/o/j/2.>-0fl, 129a; 222a 45 Faraday: Researches in
Electricity,  332a-b; 391b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 590a 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk v, 196a-b; bk ix, 342b-343a 53 James: Psychology, 37b;
125b-126a   54  Freud:  Psycho-Analytic  Therapy,  125d-126a  /  General
Introduction,  550d-551a  /  New Introductory Lectures, 880d-881c 7. The
skeptical  denial  of  truth la. The impossibility of knowing the truth:
the  restriction  of  all human judgments to degrees of probability; the
denial  of  axioms  and  of  the  possibility  of demonstration 7 Plato:
Euthydemus, 72 d- 73a / Cratylus, 86a-d; 107d-109a / Phaedo, 236c-238a /
Theaetetus,  517b-532c  passim, esp 517b-c, 522b, 525a-526c, 531b-532a 8
Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 3
[72b5-33] 99b-c / Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 3-8
524b-532d; bk x, ch i
[io53 a3i-b
3J  580a;  ch  6  [1057*7-11] 584b; bk xi, ch 5-6 590a592b 12 Lucretius:
Nature of Things, bk iv
[469477) 50b
12   Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  20  164c-166c  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  v, par 19 32b-c / City of God, bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 16, a 1, rep 2 94b-95c; q 84, a i,
ans  440d-442a;  q 85, a 2, ans 453d-455b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 80b-82b;
208a-294b   esp  240c-246a,  257d-264a,  270a-279c,  285c-294b;  308c-d;
318a-319b;  439c-440a;  497d-502c;  517b-519a  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  57d-58b / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 67 115d-116a 31 Descartes:
Objections  and  Replies, 272a-273a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b esp
182b;  381385  238b-239a  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 1-2
405a-b;  sect  86-88  429c-430b;  sect  ioi102  432c-433a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sectiv,  div  26  460b-c; sect iv, div 28-sect v, div 38
460d466c esp sect v, div 34 463d-464b; sect vii, div 60 477a-c; sect xii
503c-509d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 129c-130a; 218d-222b;

[968b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7  to  Sa 224a-227a / Practical Reason, 294c-295d; 31
ld313d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 2b-c; 3b5c; 7a; part i, par
44  23c; part hi, par 270, 86bc / Philosophy of History, intro, 159bc 47
Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-429]
lla-12b;
[656-675]
17b-18a;
[1064-1067]
26b;
[19081945] 45b-46a
50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 427a-b; 428b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  194b-195a  53 James: Psychology, 884b-886a 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures,  881d-882a  lb. The defense of truth against the
skeptic  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  86b-d;  113c-114a,c / Meno, 179b-183b esp
179d-180b,  182c-183b / Theaetetus, 517b-532c esp 527b-528c 8 Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 4-8 525a532d; bk xi, ch 6 590d-592b 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things, bk iv [469-521] 50b-51a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
ii,  ch  20 164c-166c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 18 523a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 2, a 1, rep 3 10d-lld; q 16, a 1,
rep  2  94b-95c;  q  85,  a  2,  ans  453d-455b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  13a-c;  57d58b  /  Novum  Organum,  bk  i, aph 67 115d116a 31
Descartes:  Meditations, v, 95d-96a / Objections and Replies, 206c-207a;
272a-273a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  378  238a; 912-922 349b-351b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  intro,  sect  4-7  94a-95c  esp  sect  7 95a-c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, pref, 404a; intro, sect 1-5 405a-d; sect 40
420b;  sect  85-91 429c-431a; sect 101-102 432c-433a; sect 133 439c-440a
35 Hume : Human Understanding, sect i, div 8-9, 454b-455a; sect xii, div
126-128  507a-508a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  129c-130a; 200c; 218d222b;
224a-227a  / Practical Reason, 294c295d; 311d-313d 44 Boswell : Johnson,
121c-d;  126b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 3b-5c; 7a; part hi,
par  272, 90a 53 James: Psychology, 671a-672a 54 Freud: New Introductory
Lectures,  881d-882b  8.  The  moral  and  political aspect of truth Sa.
Prevarication  and  perjury:  the  injustice  of  lying or bearing false
witness  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  4:8-10; 27; 39:7-20 / Exodus, 20:16;
23:1,7  / Leviticus, 6:2-7; I 9 : -12 / Deuteronomy, 5:20; 19:15-21 / //
Chronicles,  18—  (D) II Paralipomenon, 18 / Job, 8:11-18; 27:3-4,8-10 /
Psalms,  5:6;  15:150:16-21;  20:1-3— 2; 24:3-4; 31:18; 34:11-13; 43 ; i
52:1-5;  55:23;  101:7;  119:29-30  (D)  Psalms,  5:7;  14:1-3;  23:3-4;
30:19:33:12-

[969a]
$a  to 8c Chapter 94: TRUTH 935 14; 42:1; 49:16-21; 51:1-7; 54:24; 1007;
118:  29-30;  119:1-3  /  Proverbs,  3:3; 6:16-19; 8:7-9; 10:18; 11:1,9;
12:17-22; 13:5; 14:5,25; 17:4,7; 19:5,9,22; 20:17,23; 21:6,28; 24:24,26;
25:18;  26:18-28;  30:5-9  /  Isaiah,  9:13-17;  28^4=1$^ 59 passim— (D)
Isaias,  9:13-17; 28:14-18; 59 passim /Jeremiah, 5:1-5; 9:1-9; 14:10-16;
23: 16-40— (D) Jeremias, 5:1-5; 9:1-9; 14:10-16; 23:16-40 / Nahum, 3:1 /
Zechariah,  8:16-19— (D) Zacharias, 8:16-19 / Malachi, 2:1-9; 3:518— (D)
Malachias,  2:1-9;  3:5-18  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 1:11— (D) OT,
BooJ{  of  Wisdom,  1:11 / Ecclesiasticus, 1:28-30; 4:25; 7:12-13; 15:8;
19:26-28;  20:  18,24-26;  25:2;  27:9;  34:4;  41-17;  5i :i~3— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  1  ^7-40;  4:30;  7:13-14; 15:8; 19:23-26; 20:20,26-28;
25:3-4;  27:10;  34:4;  41:21;  51:1-5 / Susanna— (D) OT, Daniel, 13 New
Testament:  Matthew,  5:33-37;  19:17-18;  26:55-75;  28:11-15  /  Marl^
14:48-72  /  Luke,  3:14; 22:54-62 /John, 8:44; 18:15-27 / Acts, 5:1-10;
6:11-15  /  Romans,  9:1 / // Corinthians, 4:2 / Ephesians, 4:14-15,25 /
Colossians, 3:810 / / Timothy, 2:7; 4:1-3 / Titus, 2:3 /James, 3:14-17 /
/   Peter,  2:1  /  Revelation,  21:6-8,27;  22:13-15—  (D)  Apocalypse,
21:6-8,27;  22:1315  5  Sophocles: Oedipus the King [216-462] 101a103c /
Trachiniae
[335-496]
173a-174c / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp [50-134] 182d-183c,
[895-962] 190a-d
5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[861-961]
385d-386d 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 105c-d; bk vi, 201d-202c; bk vii,
217d  7  Plato:  Euthyphro,  192a-193b  / Apology, 208c210d esp 209a-b /
Laws, bk xi, 783c-784b 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk viii, ch i
[25i a28-b i]
334d-335a  /  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  29  [1025*112] 547a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk iv, ch 7 374b-375a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 14 [1375*8-13] 619c;
ch 15
[i377a8-b i2] 621d-622d
12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk ix, sect 1, 291a-b 18 Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch 36 634d-635b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
21,  a 2, rep 2 125c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, a
5,  ans and rep 5 255a-257c; a 6, ans 257c-258c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, xi
[16-66]
15b-d; xvii
[1-33]
23d-24a; xxm
[58-148]
33c-34c esp
[142-144]
34c; xxix
[37]-xxx
[148] 43c-46a; paradise, xxix [82-126] 151a-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  101c  25 Montaigne: Essays, 16a-17c;
314d-316a;  323c 324b; 381d-382b; 383b-384b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
iv
[1 14-125] 155a
33  Pascal: Provincial Letters, 67b-69a; 117b-127a 35 Locke: Toleration,
14a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 146b

[969b]
37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 40b-41a; 66c-d; 130d131a; 295b; 318d-319a; 382b
40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  215b-216a;  296b-c  42 KantFund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260a-c;  267d-268a; 269a-c; 272c-d / Science of
Right, 432c-433c 43 Mill: Liberty, 280d-281c / Utilitarianism, 455c-456a
44  Bosw ell: Johnson, 2d-3a; 99a; 124a; 157c-d; 372c-373a; 377b; 542a-c
46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 140 49b-54a 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  hi, 134a-c; bk viii, 304c-305a; bk ix, 366d-367b; bk x,
441a-b 8b. The expediency of the political lie 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xiv
[301-360]
lOlb-d / Odyssey, bk xiii [250-310] 257d-258b 5 Sophocles: Trachiniae
[335-496]
173a-174c / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp
[50-134]
182d183c  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi, 105c-d; bk vi, 186b-c; bk viii,
264a-c  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 427bc 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  ii,  323c-324a;  bk  hi,  326b-c; 340b-341a / Laws, bk ii, 658a-c 13
Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  [1-246]  124a-131a  14  Plutarch:  Alcibiades,
160b-161b  /  Lysander,  357a-b; 365a-366a 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk hi,
256a-b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xxvi-xxvii 38a-41b 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch  xviii 25a-26a 25 Montaigne: Essays, llb-13c;16a-17c;306a-d;
314d-316a;  381a-388c; 487d-488a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xii,
94c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  48a 43 Mill: Liberty, 277b-278a /
Utilitarianism,  455c-456a  44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson,  212a-d  49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man, 315a-b 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 197c-d / War
and  Death,  757b  8c.  Truth  in  relation  to love and friendship: the
pleasant  and  the unpleasant truth Old Testament: Proverbs, 11:9-13 New
Testament:  / Corinthians, 13:6 / Galatians, 4:16 / Ephesians, 4:15,25 /
I John, 3:18-19 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c / Trachiniae
[335-496]
173a-174c  /  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c esp [895-962] 190a-d 5 Euripides:
Phoenician Maidens
[861-961]
385d-386d  7  Plato:  Symposium,  161b-d  /  Apology, 201d203c / Phaedo,
234c-235a  /  Republic,  bk  i,  297b-c;  bk  v, 356d-357b; bk x, 427c /
Philebus, 622d-631d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[1096*11-16]
341b; bk iv, ch 3
[ii24b26~3o] 371d; ch 7
374b-375a

[970a]
(8.  The  moral  and political aspect of truth. 8c. Truth in relation to
love  and  friendship:  the  pleasant  and  the  unpleasant  truth.)  12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  i  213a-223d  passim  12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk vi, sect 21 276a 14 Plutarch: Cimon, 390b-d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  ii,  26b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 38, a 4
788d-789b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 100, a 5, rep 5
255a-257c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[16-66]
15b-d passim; xvm 25b-26d; xxm
[58-148]
33c-34c; xxvi-xxvii 38a-41b; xxix [37]-xxx
[148] 43c-46a; paradise, xvn [103-142] 133b-c
22 Chaucer: Nun's Priest's Tale
[15,288-452]
457b-460b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  307a; 320c-321a; 323c324b; 522b-d 26
Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, act i, sc i [60135] 468d-469c 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  hi, sc 11 [165-212] 121d-122b / Antony and
Cleopatra,  act 1, sc 11 [99-115] 313b-c / Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp
act  i,  sc ii [220-234] 399c-d, act iv, sc in [197-218] 413a / Sonnets,
cxxxvii-clii  607a-609c  28  Harvey:  On Animal Generation, 331c-332a 31
Descartes:  Rules,  1,  Id  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  100-101  191a-192b  /
Geometrical  Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke : Human Understanding, 87a-b
44  Boswell:/o/2^o/z, 94b; 106d; 299b-d; 393c; 402a-c; 542a-c 49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man,  315b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vi, 247d-248a; bk
viii,  310c-d;  319c-d;  333b-334c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
ii,  20a-b  54  Freud: General Introduction, 453a Sd. Civil liberty as a
condition for discovering the truth: freedom of thought and discussion 5
Sophocles:  Antigone  [499-511]  135b-c;  [683739]  137a-c  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  vii,  216d-217a  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk ii,
397b-c;  bk  111, 427a-c 7 Plato: Apology, 200a-210b passim / Statesman,
601c-602c 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 189a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  102d-103a  31  Descartes: Objections and Replies, 283c-d 32 Milton:
Areopagitica   381a-412b   esp   383b384a,392a-393a,   401b-402a,404a-b,
409b-410a  35  Locke:  Toleration  la-22d  esp  4a,  9a-10a, 15c / Human
Understanding,   bk   iv,   ch   hi,  sect  20  319b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding, sect xi, div 102 497b-d; div 114 503a-b

[970b]
936  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  &d to Se 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xix,
146c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 669a-671b passim 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  300a-b;  523a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 220b-221b; 223a-c 43
Constitution  of the U.S.: amendments, i 17a 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b-293b
passim; 293d; 297b298b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 221d-224a; 300c-301a; 512c-d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 314315 104bc 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures,  879b-880b 8e. The love of truth and the duty to
seek  it: the moral distinction between the sophist and the philosopher;
martyrdom  to  the  truth  Old  Testament: Psalms, 15:1-2; 25:4-5; 43:3;
51:6; 119:30— (D) Psalms, 14:1-3; 24:4-5; 42:3; 50:8; 118:30 / Proverbs,
23:23   Apocrypha:  //  Maccabees,  6:18-7:42—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,
6:18-7:42  New  Testament:  Matthew,  28:19-20  / Mar\, 16:14-20 / Lu\e,
24:46-48  /  John,  8:31-32;  14:6;  16:13; 18:37 / Acts, 6:8-7:60— (£>)
Acts,  6:8-7:59  /  //  Corinthians,  13:7-8  / Ephesians, 6:14 / James,
3:13-18  / / Peter, 2:1-2 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 239a-c; 242c-d 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bku,  397  b-c 7 Plato: Lysis, 22b-c /
Protagoras, 54c-55a / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Phaedrus, 124c-127c / Meno,
179d-180b;  182c-183b / Euthyphro, 198d-199a,c / Apology 200a-212a,c esp
201d203a,  206b-d, 207d-208a, 210a-b / Phaedo, 223b-225a; 234c-235a; 251
b-d  /  Gorgias,  271a-b  /  Republic, bk ii, 319c-320c; 323c324a; bk v,
370b-373c;  bk  vi, 377a-379c; bk x, 427c / Theaetetus, 518d-519a; 524b;
525a;  528c-531a  /  Sophist  551a-579d esp 571 b-c / Philebus, 610c-d /
Seventh  Letter,  808c-809a  8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch2 [ioo4b
i7~  27] 523d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk 1, ch 5 [644b 21-645*25]
168c-169a / Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[io96an-i6] 341b; bk
iv, ch 7
[ii27a33-b8]
374c-d;  bk  vii, ch 2 [1146*23-27] 396b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i,
ch  2,  107d-108b;  ch  8  113d-114c;  ch  9,  115c-116a;  bk  ii, ch 6,
144d-145b;  ch 17, 160a-161a; ch 22, 169d170a; bk in, ch 2 177c-178d; ch
10,  186b187a;  ch 15, 190c-d; ch 21-22, 193d-198b; ch 24, 207d-210a; bk
iv,  ch i 213a-223d passim, esp 215c-217b, 220b-223d; ch 5, 228a-b; ch 8
235b-237d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk i, sect 14 254b-c; bk in, sect 6
261a-c;  sect  12 262b-c; bk v, sect 9 270b-c; bk vi, sect 12 274c; sect
21 276a 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1009b1010b

[971a]
Se  Chapter 94: TRUTH 937 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par i lab; bk
33 Pascal: Pensees, 261 221a; 582-583 276b; 864 in, par 6-10 14b-15d; bk
v,  par  12-13 30a-c; 343b par 23-25 33c-34c; bk vi, par 7-8 36d-37c; 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  87a-b;  bk ii, bk vii, par 24 50d-51a; bk
viii,  par 29-30 ch xxi, sect 74, 199c-d; bk hi, ch x, sect 34, 60d-61c;
bk  x,  par  33-34  79d-80c /jQky-of^ 300a; bk iv, ch xix, sect r 384c-d
God,  bk  viii,  ch  27  284d-285d  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii,
395d-396a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 82, 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  217a-220desp  219ca 3, rep 1 433c-434c; part i-ii, q 29, a 5
220d;  327d-328b  747c-748b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 499c; 526c-d 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187c-188b;
221c-222b  / 100, a 5, rep 5 255a-257c; part hi suppl, Practical Reason,
299d;  335bc;  337c-338b / q 96, a 6, rep 10 1058a-1061b; a 7 1061bPref.
Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365b 1062a; a ii, ans 1063d-1064d
[fn
1]  /Judgement, 551d-552a 22 Chaucer: Prologue [285-308] 164a-b / Second
43  Mill:  Liberty,  278c-283c Nun's Tate 463b-471b 44 Boswell: Johnson,
4b-c;  151b-c;  221d-224a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  446d-450a  46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, pref, ld-2a; 28 Harvey: Motion of the Heart, 268a-d
/  Cir4b-5c  /  Philosophy of History, intro, 158cculation of the Blood,
313a-b   /  On  Animal  160b;  part  ii,  276a-d;  279d-281a;  part  hi,
Generation, 331c-332a; 457b 308b-c 30 Bacon: Novum Organum, bk i, aph 71
117a-c  47  Goethe:  Faust,  part i [586-593] 16a-b 31 Descartes: Rules,
viii,  13d-14a  / Discourse, 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 35b-36a; 78a-b part
1, 41d-42a; part hi, 51b 54 Freud: Psycho -Analytic Therapy, 125d-127a,c
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vi
[29-43] 197a;
esp 127a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 874dbk xii [552-573] 331a-b 875a
CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other discussions bearing on the nature of truth
and its relation to being, goodness, and Knowledge 6e(i); Philosophy 2a;
Prudence  2a;  Science 3a; Wisdom ib. Discussions of what is involved in
the  comparison  of  human  and  divine  truth,  see God 5f Infinity 7d;
Knowledge 7a; Wisdom id.

[971b]
;

[972a]
1  938  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  id;  Philosophy  6a;  Wisdom 3. I. Augustine.
Concerning  the  Teacher  .  On  Free  Will,  bk ii Aquinas. Quaestiones
Disputatae,  De Veritate, q i F. Bacon. "Of Truth," in Essays Descartes.
The  Principles  of  Philosophy, part i, 1-5, 29-38, 42-44, 48-50, 70-76
Hobbes.  Concerning  Body,  part i, ch 5 Spinoza. Correspondence, n . Of
the  Improvement  of  the  Understanding Kant. Introduction to Logic, vn
Hegel. Science of Logic, vol ii, sect hi, ch 2 (a) W. James. Pragmatism,
lect  vi-vii  .  The  Meaning  of  Truth  II.  Cicero.  Academics Sextus
Empiricus.  Against  the  Logicians,  bk  i  (Does  a Criterion of Truth
Exist?,  Concerning the Criterion, Concerning Truth); bk ii, ch i Anselm
of  Canterbury.  Dialogue  on Truth Grosseteste. On Truth R. Bacon. Opus
Majus,  part  i  Duns Scotus. Oxford Commentary, bk i, dist 3, q 4 Albo.
The  Boo\ of Principles (Sefer ha-I%arim), bk ii, ch 27 Nicolas of Cusa.
De Docta Ignorantia, bk i, ch 3 Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, 111,
viii-ix,  x (1), xxxi (12) Campanella. The Defense of Galileo Herbert of
Cherbury.  De Veritate {Of Truth) Corneille. Polyeucte Moliere. Tartuffe
Malebranche.  De  la recherche de la verite, bk 1, ch 3-9, 11, 15-17; bk
in  (11), ch 9-1 . Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, 1-11 Leibnitz.
Philosophical  Worlds,  ch  3 {Thoughts on Knowledge, Truth and Ideas) .
New  Essays  Concerning Human Understanding, BK II, CH 29, 32; BK IV, CH
5,  20  .  Monadology,  par  33-37  Voltaire.  "Falsity,"  "Truth," in A
Philosophical Dictionary

[972b]
1  For: Another consideration of truth as a source of moral or spiritual
freedom,  see Liberty 3b; and for freedom of thought and discussion as a
condition  of  discovering  the  truth, see Knowledge 9b; Liberty 2a-2b;
Opinion  5b;  Progress  6e.  The  love  of  truth and its pursuit as the
distinguishing  marks  of  the philosopher, see Love ADDITIONAL READINGS
Listed below are works not included in Great Bool^s ofthe Western World,
but relevant to the idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These
works  are divided into two groups: For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  Voltaire. The Ignorant Philosopher, ch 33 T. Reid. Essays on the
Intellectual  Powers  of  Man,  vi,  ch  5-6, 8 W. Hamilton. Lectures on
Metaphysics  and  Logic,  vol  11  (27-31)  Emerson. "Truth," in English
Traits   Whewell.   On   the  Philosophy  of  Discovery,  ch  29  Lotze.
Microcosmos, bk viii, ch i . Logic, bk in, ch 5 Clifford. "The Ethics of
Belief,"  in  vol  ii,  Lectures and Essays BOSANQUET. Logic, VOL II, CH
9~10  C.  S.  Peirce.  Collected  Papers,  vol  v, par 358-410, 464-496,
538-604  Frazer.  The Golden Bough, part vii, ch 13 Royce. The World and
the  Individual,  series  i  (6)  Dewey. "The Intellectual Criterion for
Truth," "A Short Catechism Concerning Truth," in The Influence of Darwin
on  Philosophy  Joachim.  The Nature of Truth Bradley. The Principles of
Logic,  bk  hi,  part ii, ch 3-4; Terminal Essays, viii . Appearance and
Reality, bk ii, ch 16, 24 . Essays on Truth and Reality, ch 4-5, 7-9, 11
Peguy. Basic Verities (The Search for Truth) Bergson. The Creative Mind,
ch  1,  8  McTaggart.  The  Nature  of Existence, ch 44-45 Wittgenstein.
Tractatus  Logico-Philosophicus  Croce.  "On  Telling the Truth," in The
Conduct  of Life Whitehead. Religion in the Maying, ch 4 . Adventures of
Ideas,  ch  16,  18  Santayana. Scepticism and Animal Faith, ch 25 . The
Realm  of Truth Blanshard. The Nature of Thought, ch 25-27 Cassirer. The
Myth of the State, part i (4), in (18) B. Russell. Philosophical Essays,
ch  5-7  .  The Problems of Philosophy, ch 12-13 . The Analysis of Mind,
lect  i  3  . An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, ch 16-17, 21-23 . Human
Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part ii, ch 8-1

[973a]
Chapter  yy.  TYRANNY  INTRODUCTION  IF any point in political theory is
indisputable,  it  would seem to be that tyranny is the worst corruption
ofgovernment—a  vicious misuse of power and a violent abuse of the human
beings who are subject to it. Aristotle's remark that "no freeman, if he
can  escape from it, will endure such government," would seem to express
the  sentiments  of  all  who, loving liberty and abhoring slavery, look
upon tyranny as destroying the one and establishing the other. Certainly
the  word  "tyranny" is seldom if ever used eulogistically. Such phrases
as  "a  just tyranny" or "a good tyrant" are at once seen to be as self-
contradictory  as  "a round square." The great books of history give the
impression  that  tyrants and despots, who vastly outnumber good rulers,
are  always  objects  of hate and fear, never of love and admiration. If
there  are  exceptions,  if there are peoples who willingly submit to or
even  deserve  the  yoke  of  despotism  and  tyranny,  they are, in the
judgment  of  ancients  and  moderns  alike,  politically primitive. The
traditional  association of the word "despotism" with "tyranny" requires
us  to consider whether our understanding of these terms is as uniformly
clear as the denunciation of what they denote seems to be universal. Are
despotism  and  tyranny the same? It may be thought that the tyrant must
always  have  despotic power at his disposal, power unlimited by law, so
that  the  lawless ruler is at once both despot and tyrant. But need the
despot,  the  absolute  ruler,  always  rule  tyrannically? The familiar
phrase,  "benevolent  despotism,"  at once suggests the negative answer,
and also some line of distinction between despotism and tyranny. Tyranny
can never be benevolent. But despotism may be no worse than paternalism.
While  its  injustice  may  consist  in  treating adults, able to govern
themselves,  as  if  they  were  children,  it may also derive an air of
jus939

[973b]
tice  from the fact that the despot, like the father, rules his subjects
for  their own good. If he treats them like slaves rather than children,
exploiting  them to serve his own interests, then he is not a benevolent
but   a   tyrannical  despot.  This  understanding  of  the  meaning  of
"despotism"  and  "tyranny"  seems  to be only partly supported by their
etymology.  The  Greek word from which "despot" comes signifies the head
of  a  household,  the paterfamilias (as he is called by the Romans) who
exercises the absolute authority of a master over chattel slaves, and of
a  parent over his children. In contrast, the Greek word tyrannos refers
to  the  ruler of a state rather than a family, and is sometimes used as
if  it  were  equivalent  in meaning to "king." Yet both words carry the
connotation  of absolute power, and when, in addition, the subjects of a
tyrant are considered to be no better off than slaves, the difference in
the  meaning  of  the  two  words  almost  disappears. The difficulty of
grasping  what is essential to the nature of tyranny and despotism seems
to  be  complicated  by  certain  criteria,  originally  proposed by the
Greeks, for distinguishing between king and tyrant, or between royal and
despotic  rule.  Both  Plato  and  Aristotle speak of the king as a good
monarch  and the tyrant as a bad one. Both say that monarchy, or rule by
a  single  man,  is  royal  when  it is for the welfare of the ruled and
tyrannical  when  it  serves  only the interests of the ruler. Both make
lawlessness—  either  a  violation  of  existing  laws  or government by
personal fiat without settled laws—a mark of tyranny. Yet, for Aristotle
at  least,  some  of these criteria also apply to despotism, and even to
royal  government,  insofar as these are distinguished from political or
constitutional   government  government  by  law  rather  than  by  men.
Furthermore, the association of either tyranny or

[974a]
940  THE  GREAT  IDEAS despotism with monarchy— rule by one man, whether
just  or unjust—seems to be counterbalanced by Aristotle's discussion of
the  tyranny of thefew and of the many. In a monarchy, the king can turn
tyrant;  but  so can the wealthy become despotic in an oligarchy, or the
poor in a lawless democracy. The nature of tyranny thus seems to be more
difficult to define precisely than would at first appear from the almost
universal  condemnation  of it as the worst perversion of government. To
some  extent, the difficulties may be verbal. The word "tyranny" is used
with many meanings, not only by the Greeks, but throughout the tradition
of  the  great  books. Some writers identify tyranny and despotism; some
distinguish the two sharply. Some writers consider tyranny and despotism
only in connection with monarchy; some extend the consideration to other
forms of government. The words are sometimes used descriptively, without
the  connotation of good or evil; and sometimes they are more derogatory
than  descriptive.  Even  when  the  necessary verbal clarifications are
achieved, genuine issues still remain. Conflicting accounts are given of
the  causes  of  tyranny  or  the  circumstances from which it develops.
Concerning  despotism,  some  writers  take  the position that it may be
justified  by  conquest,  or  by  the  need  of  a  people  for absolute
government,  or,  in  the form of a temporary dictatorship, by emergency
conditions.  Not even the condemnation of tyranny seems to be unanimous,
if  the  views  of  Hobbes are to be reckoned with; nor, among those who
condemn tyranny, is the fairly general approval of tyrannicide free from
the  strong  dissenting  voice  of Kant. The foregoing indicates how the
notions  of tyranny and despotism are involved in other chapters dealing
with  the various forms of government and, in addition, such chapters as
Justice,  Liberty,  and  Slavery.  The distinction, for example, between
domestic  and  political  slavery  bears  on  one  of  the ways in which
despotism  and  tyranny  are  distinguished;  and  the discussion in the
chapters  on  Monarchy  and Constitution concerning absolute and limited
government raises a question which must also be considered here, namely,
whether absolute

[974b]
monarchy  can  be  distinguished  from  despotism  and whether it has an
inveterate   tendency  to  become  tyrannical.  That  question  deserves
immediate  attention,  because  its  answers  are connected with opposed
views  of  the  justice or defensibility of tyranny and despotism. Plato
and  Aristotle, for example, treat tyranny as the prototype of political
injustice,  and  the  tyrant as the extreme case of the vicious man; yet
there  are  passages which appear to have a contrary tenor. In the Laws,
the  Athenian  Stranger  proposes  a  good  tyrant as the best means for
establishing  the  laws. To the question, "What are the conditions which
you  require  in  a  state  before  you  can organize it?" he thinks the
legislator's  answer  should be: "Give me a state which is governed by a
tyrant,  and  let the tyrant be young and have a good memory; let him be
quick  at  learning and of a courageous and noble nature"— in short, let
him  have temperance and every other virtue. More readily than monarchy,
democracy,  or  oligarchy,  tyranny  is  the  stepping stone to the best
state,  according  to  the  Athenian  Stranger,  because it involves the
greatest  power  concentrated in a single man. The combination of virtue
and  power may rarely be found, but, he says, "when the supreme power in
man  coincides  with  the  greatest wisdom and temperance, then the best
laws  and  the  best constitution come into being, and in no other way."
Aristotle's  classification  of  the  types of kingship, or the forms of
royal  government, seems to include tyranny among them. He refers to the
kind  of  monarchy  which prevails among the barbarians who, "being more
servile  in  character than Hellenes ... do not rebel against a despotic
government.  Such  royalties," he goes on, "have the nature of tyrannies
because the people are by nature slaves, but there is no danger of their
being  overthrown,  for  they  are hereditary and legal." Even among the
Hellenes  in  ancient  times,  Aristotle points out, there was a form of
monarchy  or "dictatorship" that may be defined "as an elective tyranny,
which  like the barbarian monarchy, is legal, but differs from it in not
being hereditary." These two forms of tyranny, Aristotle says elsewhere,
"are both according to law, and therefore easily pass into royalty." The
line be-

[975a]
tween king and tyrant is not, however, as shadowy as might first appear.
"Kings  rule  according to law over voluntary subjects, but tyrants over
involuntary;  and  the  one  are  guarded_by_ their fellow citizens, the
others  are guarded against them." The forms of monarchy which Aristotle
also  calls "tyrannies" seem to him to have a mixed character. "They are
royal,"  he  says, "in so far as the monarch rules according to law over
willing  subjects;  but  they are tyrannical in so far as he is despotic
and  rules  according  to  his  own  fancy." But there is also a kind of
tyranny  which,  being unmixed, is "the counterpart of perfect monarchy.
This  tyranny  is  just  that  arbitrary power of an individual which is
responsible  to no one, and governs all alike, whether equals or better,
with  a  view  to  its  own  advantage, not to that of its subjects, and
therefore  against  their  will."  Aristotle explains his association of
tyranny  with  monarchy  on  the  ground that "both are forms of one-man
rule, but," he adds, "there is the greatest difference between them; the
tyrant  looks  to  his own advantage, the king to that of his subjects."
Tyrannical  government is "monarchy exercising the rule of a master over
political  society,"  and  therefore deserves to be called "despotic" as
well  as tyrannical. When it has no admixture of royalty, tyranny is not
only  self-serving  but  lawless  rule.  It  is  "the  very reverse of a
constitution," or rule by law. Except for the hypothetical case in which
the  truly superior, the almost god-like man is king, Aristotle seems to
identify   absolute   or  unconstitutional  monarchy  with  tyranny  and
despotism,  and  he  condemns  both for violating the very nature of the
state  conceived as "a community of free men." The line between king and
tyrant  is  similarly  drawn  by  Plato.  Monarchy for him "divides into
royalty  and  tyranny"  according  as one man rules by law or lawlessly,
over  voluntary  or involuntary subjects. If the one man were like a god
in  relation to other men, it would be fitting for him to rule the state
by  his  wisdom or science and without recourse to laws. "If there could
be such a despot," the Eleatic Stranger says in the Statesman, "he alone
would  be  the  happy  ruler  of a true and perfect state," but men "can
never be made to believe that

[975b]
Chapter  95:  TYRANNY  941  any  one  can  be worthy of such authority."
(History  suggests  the  contrary in such cases as Caesar, Napoleon, and
Hitler.)  Giving  the  name  of  "king" to the monarch who abides by and
maintains established laws, the Stranger gets Socrates to agree that the
ruler should be called a "tyrant" when he "governs neither by law nor by
custom,  but,  imitating  the  true man of science, pretends that he can
only  act  for the best by violating the laws, while in reality appetite
and  ignorance  are  the  motives  of  the  imitation." In the Republic,
Socrates  refers  to  Euripides'  praise  of  "tyranny as god-like," and
gives,  as  another  reason  for excluding the poets from the state, the
fact  that "they are the eulogists of tyranny." Far from being god-like,
the  tyrannical  man  is  described  by  Socrates  as "drunken, lustful,
passionate."  Tyrants  "are  always  either  the masters or servants and
never the friends of anybody; the tyrant never tastes of true freedom or
friendship."  Oriental  despotism,  Hegel  later writes, appears to give
freedom  to  one  man,  but  "the  freedom  of that one is only caprice,
ferocity—  brutal  recklessness  of passion. . . . That one is therefore
only  a despot; not a free man." According to Plato, tyranny is not only
the  greatest  evil  a  state  can  suffer,  but  the tyrant is also the
unhappiest of men. "Will not he who has been shown to be the wickedest,"
Socrates  asks,  "be  also  the  most miserable?" Polus, in the Gorgias,
tries  to  prove that, like the successful criminal who goes unpunished,
the  tyrant  who does injustice to everybody, but suffers none, achieves
more happiness than other men. But Socrates, taking the position that it
is  better  to  suffer than to do injustice, argues to the contrary that
the  tyrant  is  more miserable than those whom he oppresses. If this is
true, the confirmed tyrant is probably the man least able to perceive or
acknowledge it. Plutarch reports the story of Plato's first meeting with
Dionysius, the tyrant of Syracuse. When Plato tried to prove to him that
"tyrants, of all men, had the least pretence to virtue," and that, since
they  lacked  justice,  they  suffered  "the  miserable condition of the
unjust,"  Dionysius  would  not  hear  the  argument  out. "He asked the
philosopher in a rage," Plutarch relates, "what business he had in Sic-

[976a]
942  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ily.  To which Plato answered, 'I come to seek a
virtuous  man.' 'It seems, then,' replied Dionysius, 'you have lost your
labor.'"  According to Plutarch, Dionysius tried to have Plato killed on
his  return  voyage  to  Greece;  or failing that, to have him sold into
slavery.  He  would  not be harmed by that, Dionysius reasoned, because,
"being the same just man as before, he would enjoy his happiness, though
he  lost  his  liberty."  On  the  whole,  then, Aristotle's and Plato's
disapproval of tyrants and tyranny seems to be unequivocal. The passages
which  might cause this to be questioned can perhaps be accounted for by
the  ancient  tendency  to use the word "tyrant" descriptively to denote
the  possessor of absolute power. Yet even in the Laws, where such usage
occurs,  Plato observes that kings, unable "to sustain the temptation of
arbitrary power," tend to overthrow the laws and so become tyrannical in
the invidious sense of the word. With the exception of Hobbes, mediaeval
and   modern  writers  are  no  less  disapproving  than  the  ancients.
"Tyrannical  government,"  according to Aquinas, "is altogether corrupt"
and  completely lawless. It is the tyrant himself, rather than those who
may  rebel against a government so lacking in justice, who is "guilty of
sedition,  since  he encourages discord and sedition among his subjects,
that  he  may  lord over them more securely." When a king, by becoming a
tyrant,  "has  dethroned  himself and put himself in a state of war with
his  people,  what  shall hinder them" asks Locke, "from prosecuting him
who  is  no  king,  as they would any other man who has put himself in a
state  of war with them?" In Locke's view, it is a mistake to think that
the  fault  of  tyranny  "is proper only to monarchies. For wherever the
power  that is put in any hands for the government of the people and the
preservation  of their properties is applied to other ends, and made use
of  to  impoverish,  harass,  or  subdue them to the arbitrary irregular
commands  of  those  that  have  it, there it presently becomes tyranny,
whether those that thus use it are one or many. . . . Wherever law ends,
tyranny  begins,  if the law be transgressed to another's harm." Tyranny
is thus defined by Locke as "the

[976b]
exercise  of power beyond right, which nobody can have a right to." Such
"absolute  arbitrary  power, or governing without settled standing laws,
can  neither  of  them consist with the ends of society and government."
Tyranny  so  defined may not be limited to monarchies; but, according to
Locke,  absolute  monarchy is always tyrannical. For that very reason it
is,  he  writes, "inconsistent with civil society, and so can be no form
of  civil  government  at  all."  What Locke calls "tyranny" or, without
change of meaning, "absolute monarchy," Kant calls "autocracy." But Kant
distinguishes  the monarch "who has the highest power" from the autocrat
"who  has  all  power."  Hegel  calls "despotism" that "state of affairs
where law has disappeared and where the particular will as such, whether
of  a monarch or a mob, counts as law or rather takes the place of law."
The  writers  of  the Federalist use the words "tyranny" and "despotism"
interchangeably,  but  do not vary from the definition which Montesquieu
gives  of  despotic government as "that in which a single person directs
everything  by his own will and caprice." In all other governments, even
in  monarchy  when  it  is constitutional, the separation of powers puts
some  limitation  on  the  power  entrusted  to  the  offices  of state.
Following Montesquieu's doctrine, Madison declares: "The accumulation of
all  powers,  legislative,  executive, and judiciary, in the same hands,
whether  of one, a few, or many, and whether hereditary, self-appointed,
or  elective,  may justly be pronounced the very definition of tyranny."
He reinforces his point by quoting Jefferson's dictum that concentrating
"all  the  powers  of government ... in the same hands, is precisely the
definition of despotic government." Hobbes seems to be the one exception
in  the  great  books to this variously expressed opinion of the evil of
absolute  power.  Locke  may have him in mind when he says that absolute
monarchy  is  "by  some  men  .  .  . counted the only government in the
world."  Certainly  Hobbes would not repudiate the charge that he thinks
none  but  absolute  government  feasible;  nor  is  he  dismayed by the
tendency of other writers

[977a]
to call absolute government "tyrannical" or "despotic." On the contrary,
he  dismisses  this  as  so  much  empty  name-calling. In every form of
government,  according  to Hobbes, the sovereign power must be arjsolute
to  be  effective.  "Though  of so unlimited a power, men may fancy many
evil  consequences,  yet  the  consequences  of the want of it, which is
perpetual  war  of  every  man  against  his  neighbor, are much worse."
Describing  the  absolute  dominion of the father over his children, and
the equally absolute dominion of the master over his slaves, Hobbes says
that  "the  rights  and  consequences  of  both  paternal and despotical
dominion  are  the  very same with those of a sovereign by institution,"
for  unless  the sovereign is also absolute, "there is no sovereignty at
all."  To  the  cry "Tyranny," Hobbes replies that just as men who "find
themselves grieved under a Democracy, call it Anarchy" or those who "are
displeased  with  Aristocracy,  call  it  Oligarchy"  so  "they that are
discontented  under  Monarchy,  call  it  Tyranny"  He holds Aristotle's
Politics  responsible  for  spreading  the fallacy of regarding anything
except  popular  government  as tyrannical; and in general he blames the
Greek and Roman writers for fomenting sedition against kings by treating
tyrannicide  as  lawful.  Hobbes offers an historical explanation of the
origin  of these confusions. "A Tyrant" he writes, "originally signified
no  more  simply,  but  a  Monarch. But when afterwards in most parts of
Greece that kind of government was abolished, the name began to signify,
not  only  the  thing  it  did  before, but with it the hatred which the
popular  states  bore towards it; as also the name of King became odious
after  the deposing of the Kings of Rome." A word like "tyranny" carries
only emotional force. Used descriptively, Hobbes declares, "it signifies
nothing  more  nor  less  than the name of Sovereignty, saving that they
that  use the former word are understood to be angry with them they call
Tyrants."  He  is  willing  to  make himself the object of that anger by
identifying "a professed hatred of Tyranny" with "hatred to Commonwealth
in  general,"  and  by regarding the toleration of both hatreds alike as
evil seeds of sedition.

[977b]
Chapter 95: TYRANNY 943 In one negative respect, Rousseau seems to agree
with   Hobbes.   Not  that  the  man  who  holds  that  only  republican
institutions  are  legitimate,  in any way accepts the identification of
either  prince  or popular government with sovereign power. But he, like
Hobbes,  rejects Aristotle's distinction between the king and the tyrant
as  good  and  bad  monarchs,  the  one  governing  for  the good of his
subjects, the other in his own interest. Rousseau contends not only that
most  Greek authors used "the word tyrant in a different sense . . . but
also," he adds, "it would follow from Aristotle's distinction that, from
the  very beginning of the world, there has not yet been a single king."
It  is only according to a vulgar usage that a tyrant is conceived as "a
king  who  governs violently and without regard for justice or law." The
more  precise  conception,  Rousseau  insists, defines the tyrant as "an
individual who arrogates to himself the royal authority without having a
right  to it. This is how the Greeks understood the word 'tyrant' ; they
applied it indifferently to good and bad princes whose authority was not
legitimate. Tyrant and usurper are thus perfectly synonymous terms." The
usurpation  of power is, according to Rousseau, the root of both tyranny
and  despotism, but they are not for that reason to be confused. "I call
him  who usurps the royal authority a tyrant," Rousseau writes, "and him
who  usurps  the  sovereign power a despot. The tyrant is he who thrusts
himself  in  contrary to the laws to govern in accordance with the laws;
the  despot  is  he who sets himself above the laws themselves. Thus the
tyrant  cannot  be  a  despot, but the despot is always a tyrant." Other
writers   distinguish   between   tyranny  and  despotism  on  different
principles. They accept, where Rousseau rejects, the notion that tyranny
is not merely a usurpation of power, but always a self-serving or unjust
use  of  that  power.  They reject Rousseau's conception of despotism as
inseparable  from  usurpation.  Absolute power can be gained and held in
other Locke, for example, conceives despotical dominion as the rule of a
master  over  slaves,  or the government of a vanquished people by their
conquerors  in  a  just  war. "Despotical power," in his opinion, "is an
absolute arbitrary power

[978a]
944  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  one  man  has over another to take away his life
whenever  he  pleases."  Unlike tyranny, it is not "power beyond right,"
for "the conqueror, if he have a just cause, has a despotical right over
the  persons of all that actually aided and concurred in the war against
him."  Since,  in  Locke's  view, "a usurper can never have right on his
side," despotic dominion, when justified, is not achieved by usurpation.
For  Montesquieu,  despotisms constitute one of the three major forms of
government,  the  other two being republics (aristocratic or democratic)
and  monarchies. Though he regards despotism as an intrinsically corrupt
form of government, in which the rulers wield personal power without the
restraint  of  law,  he  also judges it to be appropriate to the servile
natures   or   temperaments  of  certain  peoples.  Like  Aristotle  and
Hippocrates  before him, he attributes to the climate and disposition of
the  Asiatic  peoples  their  submissiveness  to  the  worst excesses of
despotism. Montesquieu does not so much condemn despotism as he deplores
the  conditions which seem to render it necessary or natural for a large
part  of  mankind.  He  does  not  suggest,  as Mill does, that despotic
government  can  and  should  serve  to  civilize  those  who are as yet
unprepared  for  self-government.  Despotism is benevolent, according to
Mill,  only  if  it  prepares  a  people  for  freedom;  if  it tries to
perpetuate  itself, it is tyrannical or enslaving. Though Mill holds the
view  that,  relative to a free society, there cannot be a "good despot"
no matter how benevolent his intentions, he also thinks that, in dealing
with  barbarians,  "despotism  is  a legitimate mode of government . . .
provided  the  end  be  their  improvement,  and  the means justified by
actually effecting that end. Liberty, as a principle, has no application
to  any  state  of  things  anterior to the time when mankind has become
capable  of  being  improved  by  free and equal discussion. Until then,
there  is  nothing  for  them  but  implicit  obedience to an Akbar or a
Charlemagne,  if  they  are  so fortunate as to find one." Under certain
"conditions of society ... a vigorous despotism," according to Mill, "is
in itself the best mode of government for training the people in what is
specifically wanting to render them capable of a higher civilization."

[978b]
In his opinion, still other conditions justify despotism. "I am far from
condemning," he writes, "in cases of extreme exigency, the assumption of
absolute  power  in  the  form  of a temporary dictatorship." In another
place,  he  savs that "the establishment of the despotism of the Caesars
was  a  great  benefit  to the entire generation in which it took place"
because  "it  put  a  stop  to  civil  war,  and abated a vast amount of
malversation  and  tyranny  by praetors and proconsuls. But in all these
cases the essential point is that the despotic rule should be temporary.
Mill  applies  the  same  criterion to the despotism which occurs in the
government  of colonial dependencies. It should aim to benefit a subject
people  by  training  them  in the arts of government, and it should not
seek to outlast the conferring of this benefit. "The ruling country," he
thinks,  "ought to be able to do for its subjects all that could be done
by  a  succession of absolute monarchs, guaranteed by irresistible force
against the precariousness of tenure of barbarian despotisms. . . . Such
is  the  ideal  rule of a free people over a barbarous or semi-barbarous
one."  This  may be the ideal, but critics of imperialism, like Swift or
Marx,  think  that  colonial policies are in fact otherwise motivated—by
land-grabbing,  by  the  desire  for national aggrandizement, and by the
profits to be made from the economic exploitation of colonies or subject
peoples.  Throughout  the pages of Thucydides and Tacitus, the spokesmen
for  empire  dwell  upon  the  blessings  which  Athenian  or Roman rule
bestows,  only  to  be  answered by the protests of the colonists or the
conquered,  who  seem  to  prefer  the insecurities and uncertainties of
liberty  to  the  mixed  motives  of  even  the  best despot. As already
indicated,  the  political  significance  of  tyranny  and  despotism is
broader  than  the  conception of the tyrant as an unjust king or of the
despot as an absolute monarch. The reign of the Thirty Tyrants at Athens
and  of  the  Decemviri  at  Rome are classical examples of oligarchical
tyranny.  Advocates  of  republican or democratic institutions, like the
writers  of  the  Federalist  or  J.  S.  Mill, are as much concerned to
safeguard  constitutional  or representative government from the tyranny
of special interests—whether of a dominant majority or

[979a]
of  concentrated  wealth—as they are to protect the rule of law from the
encroachments  of  despotism  which  begin  with usurpations of power by
elected   officials.   ^^___   Moderns   and  ancients  alike  fear  the
susceptibility  of the mob to the wiles of the demagogue, who encourages
their  lawlessness  in  order  to  take the law into his own hands. Both
Hegel  and Plato see in the alliance between a scheming demagogue and an
unruly  populace  the  step  by  which  a corrupt democracy turns into a
tyranny.  Though Aristotle disagrees with what he takes to be the theory
of Socrates in the Republic, that tyranny normally arises from democracy
in  the  progressive degeneration of the state, his own opinion seems to
be  that "tyranny is a compound of oligarchy and democracy in their most
extreme  forms"  and  that  "almost all tyrants have been demagogues who
gained  the  favor  of  the people by their accusation of the notables."
These  aspects of tyranny are discussed in the chapters on Democracy and
Oligarchy.  The  traditional  emphasis,  however,  is  on the individual
tyrant,  whether  he  is an hereditary prince who misuses his autocratic
power,  the usurper of an established throne, or the demagogue who makes
himself  dictator.  However  tyranny  arises,  monarchy  is  the form it
usually  takes  in the pages of history or poetry— the domination of the
state  by  one  man.  But  while  the great political philosophers offer
conflicting  theories  of  the  origin  of  tyranny,  there  seems to be
remarkable  agreement concerning the methods the tyrant uses to maintain
himself  in  power.  Other political practices may vary greatly from one
historical  epoch  to another, but the devices of tyranny seem to have a
certain  timelessness.  When  they  are  describing  the  actions of the
tyrant,  Herodotus,  Plutarch,  Tacitus,  and  Gibbon  tell  stories  of
iniquity,  of cruelty, of cowardly and unscrupulous stratagems, so alike
in detail that the reader loses all sense of time and place. Nor need he
exert  any  effort of imagination to place the figure of the tyrant thus
delineated  in  the setting of contemporary events. The past also speaks
with  contemporary  relevance  in  Plato's  enumeration  of the tyrant's
desperate measures, his stirring up of foreign

[979b]
Chapter   95:   TYRANNY  945  wars  to  smother  domestic  discord,  his
assassination  of  enemies, his purging of friends or followers, and his
confiscation  of property as well as his generally indiscriminate blood-
letting.  The  resort to unwarranted searches and seizures, the creation
of  ex post facto crimes, the arrest and punishment of men without trial
"have  been,"  writes  Hamilton,  "in  all  ages  the  favorite and most
formidable  instruments  of  tyranny." So, too, in all ages, the tyrant,
fearing  reprisal and revenge, lives in a state of war, turns his palace
into an armed camp, and goes nowhere without a numerous bodyguard which,
as  both  Aristotle  and Machiavelli suggest, functions most efficiently
when  composed of hirelings or merceThe great books contain not only the
record  of  tyrannical perfidy and violence, but also recommendations to
the would-be tyrant of the best means to use for his nefarious purposes.
Though   Rousseau  refers  to  Machiavelli's  Prince  as  "the  book  of
Republicans," and thinks that "the choice of his detestable hero, Caesar
Borgia,   clearly   enough  shows  his  hidden  aim,"  the  rules  which
Machiavelli  formulates for the prince seem, on the surface at least, to
be  essentially  similar  to  the advice Aristotle gives The end in both
cases  is  the  same—success  in  the effort to gain and keep power. The
means,  in  general,  are force and fraud or, as Machiavelli phrases it,
the methods of the lion and the fox. Machiavelli counsels the prince "to
inspire  fear  in  such  a  way that, if he does not win love, he avoids
hatred."  He  tells  him  that  he  should  appear to keep faith without
hesitating  to  break  his promises, that he should avoid flatterers and
sycophants,  and  that  he  should  acquire  a reputation for liberality
without cost to himself. Not very different is Aristotle's advice to the
tyrant— to lop off the heads of those who are too high and to humble all
the rest, to sow discord among his subjects, to impoverish the people by
multiplying taxes, to employ informers, and to encourage the betrayal of
one  faction by another. But in his suggestion of another course for the
tyrant  to  take—  the  policy of not merely pretending, but of actually
trying,  to  conduct himself like a just king—Aristotle seems to deviate
from the spirit of Machiavelli's maxim that

[980a]
946  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  \a.  The  lawlessness  of tyrannical rule: might
without  right  ic.  Usurpation:  the  unauthorized  seizure of power 2.
Tyranny  as  the  corruption  of  other  forms  of  government  ia.  The
perversion of monarchy: the tyrannical king rise of the demagogue 3. The
choice  between  tyranny or despotism and anarchy rule by the incapacity
of  the  ruled  for self-government equality: the rights of the governed
ereign  person, the sovereign office, the sovereign people the soul: the
tyranny  of the passions 7. The ways of tyrants or despots to attain and
maintain power

[980b]
the  appearance  of  virtue  is  profitable  so  long  as  authors. Both
Aristotle and Machiavelli draw it does not interfere with doing whatever
is  exone  striking  conclusion  from  the  history  of pedient, however
vicious.  Yet even here Aristhose— call them princes or tyrants—who have
totle  says  that  "the  tyrant  must be careful . . . tried to put such
rules  into  practice.  Whether  to  keep  power enough to rule over his
subjects,  its  collapse is due to the inherent weakness of whether they
like  him  or  not,  for  if  he  once might without right, as Aristotle
suggests,  or,  gives this up he gives up his tyranny." in Machiavelli's
terms,   to   the   unforeseeable   The   best   commentary   on   these
recommendamishaps of fortune, tyranny, of all forms of OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGE  i.  The  nature  and  origin  of  tyranny 047 ib. The injustice of
tyrannical  government:  rule for self-interest 948 id. The character of
the  tyrannical  man: the friends of the tyrant 949 ib. The degeneration
of  oligarchy:  the  tyranny  of  the  wealthy 950 ic. The corruption of
democracy:  the  tyranny  of  the  masses or of the majority; the 4. The
nature  and  effects  of  despotism 951 \a. The relation of despotism to
tyranny  and  monarchy: the benevolence of despots 4^. The comparison of
paternal  and  despotic  dominion:  the  justification  of  absolute and
government  by  laws 952 5a. Despotic and constitutional government with
respect  to  political  liberty  and  5<£.  Despotic  and constitutional
government  with respect to juridical defenses against misgovernment, or
redress  for grievances through due process of law 953 5<r. The location
of sovereignty in despotic and constitutional government: the sov5^. The
analogues  of  despotic  and  constitutional rule in the relation of the
powers of quered peoples or colonies 954 tyrannicide 955

[981a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. The nature and origin of tyranny 5
Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [863-910]  107b-c  /  Antigone [640-745]
136d-137c 5 Euripides: Suppliants [429-456] 262a-b 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  i,  12b-14a;  bk  v, 178a-180a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
352c-d;  353b;  bk  vi, 523b-524d 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-270c esp 263d /
Republic,  bk  1,  301b-309b  esp  304b-c;  bk viii, 402b-c; bk viii-ix,
411d-420d / Sophist, 554c / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk iv, 682a-c 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii, ch io-ii 412c413d / Politics, bk hi, ch 8
[i279b  i6-i7]  477a;  bk  iv,  ch  10  495a-b;  bk  v, ch 5 [1305*8-28]
506d-507a;  ch  10  [1310*39-1311*28]  512d-513c  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[i365b39-i366a6]  608b  14  Plutarch:  Timoleon,  196c-197b / Alexander,
566a-b  / Dion, 782d / Aratus, 835b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 36b; bk
iv,  72a-b  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 1, rep 5
307d-309d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xii
[100-139]
17b-d 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 67, 531b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii, 105a; part iv, 273a-c; conclusion, 280d

[981b]
Chapter 95: TYRANNY 947 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[37U4]303d-304c
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[1-104] 319a321b
33  Pascal:  Pensees,  15  174a;  332  232a-b;87i  344b  35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  xvi-xix 65d-81d passim, esp ch xvii, sect 197 70c-d, ch
xviii,  sect  199  71a,  ch xix, sect 239 80d-81b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws,  bk  xi,  70a-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 356b-358b / Political
Economy,  370a-b  / Social Contract, bk i, 388b-c; bk hi, 419b-c; bk iv,
438c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 32d-34a,c; Hid 42 Kant: Science of
Right,   450b-d   43   Declaration  of  Independence:  [25-98]  lb3a  43
Federalist:  number  20,  77b-c;  number  47,  153c-d  43 Mill: Liberty,
267d-268a; 274b,d [fn 1] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 278
92c-93a  la.  The  lawlessness of tyrannical rule: might without right 5
Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[399-414]
44a-b  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  [429-456] 262a-b 5 Aristophanes: Wasps
[463-507] 512d-513c

[982a]
d  d  948  THE GREAT IDEAS (1. The nature and origin of tyranny, la. The
lawlessness  of  tyrannical  rule:  might  without  right.) 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  hi, 107c-d 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 432b-c;
bk  v, 504c-508a,c 7 Plato: Gorgias, 263d-264a / Republic, bk i, 301c-d;
bk  viii,  411d-416a  /  Statesman, 603b; 604a-b / Seventh Letter, 805 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  io  [i28i  a i9-28] 478d-479a; ch 17
[i28yb37-i288 a 5] 486c; bk iv, ch 10
[1295*9-23] 495a-b; bk
v, ch 10
[1313*8-18] 515c-d; ch ii [1314*35-37] 517a-b;
bk  vii, ch 2 [i324b23~4i] 528d-529a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv, ch
7, 232c-d 14 Plutarch: Timoleon, 196c-197b / Caius Marius, 344c-354a,c /
Sulla,  382a-387a,c  /  Lysander-Sulla,  387b,d  /  Alexander,  566a-b /
Caesar,  591  d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 36b / Histories, bk ii, 233d;
bk  hi, 265a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 92, a 1, rep 4
213c-214c;  q  95,  a  4, ans 229b230c; q 96, a 4, ans 233a-d 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  332  232a-b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch vii, sect 90-94
44d-46c;  ch  xi,  sect  136-137  56c-57b; ch xiii, sect 155 60d-61a; ch
xvii,  sect  197 70c-d; ch xviii 71a-73c; ch xix, sect 222 75d-76c; sect
232-233   78c-79c   38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  323d-324a;  361c-362a  /
Political  Economy, 370d-371a / Social Contract, bk 1, 388d-389a; bk hi,
419ac  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 40c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
74c42 Kant: Science of Right, 450b-d 43 Declaration of Independence:
[7-98] la3a
43  Federalist:  number 57, 177d-178a 43 Mill: Liberty, 274b,d [fn 1] 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  278 92c-93a / Philosophy
of History,  part  hi,  301c302a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 8d-10d;
epilogue  1,  647b-649d lb. The injustice of tyrannical government: rule
for  self-interest Old Testament: / Kings, 12:1-15— (D) ^ Kings, 12:1-15
/  //  Chronicles,  10—  (D)  II  Para lipomenon, 10 / Psalms, 72:4— (D)
Psalms, 71:4 / Proverbs, 28:15-16; 29:4 / Isaiah, 1:23; 3:14-15; 10:1-3;
14556:9-12—  (D)  Isaias,  1:23; 3:14-15; 10:1-3; 14; 56:9-12 / Ezetyel,
22:27;  45:8-9;  46:18—  (D)  Ezechiel,  22:27;  45 :8—9; 46:18 / Micah,
3:1-3—   (D)  Micheas,  3:1-3  /  Zephaniah,  3:3—  (D)  Sophonias,  3:3
Apocrypha:  Judith, 2:1-3— (D) OT,Judith, 2:1-6 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the
King  [616-630]  104d105a;  [863-910]  107b-c  /  Antigone 131a-142d esp
[640-745] 136d-137c

[982b]
\b  to  \c  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 353b; bk v, 506b-c 7
Plato: Gorgias, 262d-270a / Republic, bk i, 304a-c; bk viii, 413d-416a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v,  ch  6 [n 34 a35-b8] 382b; bk viii, ch io-ii
412c-413d / Politics, bk 11, ch 7 [i267a3-i7] 462c-d; bk iii, ch 6
[1279*17-22]
476c; ch 7
[i279a28-32]
476d;
[i279b4-io] 476d-477a; ch 17 [i287b37-i288 a
5] 486c; bk iv, ch 10
[1295^8-23] 495a-b;
bk v, ch 10
[i3iob39-i3ii a8] 513b; bk
vii,  ch  2  [1324^3-41]  528d-529a;  ch  14  U333  11366^-6]  5] 537d /
Rhetoric,  bk i, ch 8 608b 14 Plutarch: Demetrius, 742c-743b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk vi, 90d-91a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,q 105, a
1,  rep  2,5  307d-309d;  part  ii-ii, q 42, a 2, rep 3 584b-d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, xii
[100-139]
17b-d;  purgatory,  vi  [112-151]  62a-c  27  Shakespeare:  Measure  for
Measure, act ii, sc iv
[151-187]
186b-c  /  Macbeth, act iv, sc in [37-114] 303d-304c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xii [63-110] 320b321b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect
13  28a-b;  ch  vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch xii, sect 143 58c-d; ch xiv,
sect 162-163 63a-b; ch xviii, sect 199-202 71a-72a; ch xix, sect 232-233
78c-79c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 357a-b; 361c-362a / Political Economy,
368a-b;  370a-b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  419b,d [fn 1] 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 35a-39d passim, esp 38a-b; 55d; 59b-61a passim; 167a-c
41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 39b-d 43 Federalist: number 4, 35b; number
84,  251d-252a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 366a-370a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, bk i, 8d-10d; epilogue 1, 647b-649d \c. Usurpation: the
unauthorized  seizure  of  power Old Testament: // Samuel, 15-18— (D) II
Kings,  15-18  /  /  Kings,  16:8-20— (D) III Kings, 16:8-20 / // Kings,
8:7-15;  12:19-21;  14:17-21; 15:13-14,23-25,30; 21:18-26— (D) IV Kings,
8:7-15;  12:19-21;  14:17-21;  15:1314,23-25,30;  21:18-26  5 Aeschylus:
Prometheus Bound
[399-414]
44a-b / Agamemnon [1612-1673] 69a-d 5 Euripides: Heracles Mad
[140-274]
366b367c 5 Aristophanes: Wasps [463-507] 512d-513c 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  i,  12b-14a;  bk  hi,  102d-106c;  bk  vii,  243bc 7 Plato: Gorgias,
264c-265d v, ch 10 li3io u i4-3i 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk BK VII, CH 14
[l333
513a; [i3i3a8-io] 515c; l 28-38] 538c-d

[983a]
Id  to 2a Chapter 95: TYRANNY 949 14 Plutarch: Caius Marius, 344c-354a,c
/   Sulla,  369a-374a;  382a-387a,c  /  Sertorius,  469a-470d  /  Pompey
499a-538a,c  esp  524b-c  /  Caesar  577a-604d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
lb-2a;  4b-d;  bkjv  32d-33c  /  Histories, bk i, 195a-201c esp 197ac 26
Shakespeare: 3rd Henry VI, act hi, sc ii
[124-195] 87c-88a
/  Richard  III  105a-148a,c esp act v, sc in [237-270] 146b-c 35 Locke:
Civil  Government, ch xvi, sect 176 66a-b; ch xvii 70c-71a; ch xix, sect
212-220  74a-75d  passim  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 77a-b;
78d-79b  38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 408b-c; 419a-c; 424a-d; bk
iv,  432c-433a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b esp 24d25a, 27b-d;
43b-44b; 69a-71a; 110b-113a esp Hid; 386a-387d; 436a-438a esp 436c-437b;
489d-491a;  515b-518a passim 43 Federalist: number 16, 68b-c; number 17,
70a-c;  number 21, 78d-79b; number 26, 94a-d; number 28, 97c-98b; number
31,  104d-105c;  number  33,  108d-109a;  number  41, 133a-b; number 44,
146c-d;  number  45,  148b-d; number 78, 230a-232c; number 81, 239a-c 43
Mill: Representative Government, 350d-351c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
i,  8d-10d; epilogue 1, 647b-649d; epilogue ii, 681a-d Id. The character
of the tyrannical man: the friends of the tyrant Old Testament: / Kings,
21 — (D) /// Kings, 21 / Proverbs, 28:15-16 / Ecclesiastes, 10:5-7,16-17
5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[196-243]
42b-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[863-910]
107bc  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-d 7 Plato: Gorgias, 262a-270c;
285d-287c / Republic, bk 1, 308c-309a; bk ii, 311c-312d; bk ix 416a-427b
/ Laws, bk hi, 671c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch ii
[1161*30b io] 413c-d; bk x, ch 6 [ii76b9-23] 431a-b /
Politics, bk 11, ch 7
[1267*3-17] 462c-d; bk
iv,  ch  4  [1292*15-17]  491c; bk v, ch 11 [i3i3b 30-1314*12] 516c-d 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk 1, ch 19 125b-126c; bk iv, ch 1, 215b-d; ch 5,
229a-b  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk viii [481-495] 272a 14 Plutarch: Timoleon,
201b-202c  / Pelopidas, 242b-243c / Lysander, 362b-365a / Sulla, 384ac /
Lysander- Sulla, 387b,d-388c / Lucullus, 409d-410d / Demetrius 726a-747d
esp 742c-743b / Antony-Demetrius 780a-781a,c / Dion, 782b-788b / Aratus,
835b-836d  /  Artaxerxes  846a-858d  esp 856bc 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
20b-c;  bk  iv, 63d64c; 65c-67a; 79bc; bk vi, 87b-88b; bk xi, 102d-103a;
bk  xiv,  145a-d; 153d-154d; bk xv, 172c-173a / Histories, bk i, 195a-c;
197a-b;

[983b]
bk  11,  224c-d;  233d;  238d-240b;  bk  hi, 256d-257d; bk iv, 268b-c 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 1, rep 2,4-5 307d-309d 22
Chaucer:  Physician's  Tale  366a-371a  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch viii,
13ac;  ch  xvxix  22b-30a; ch xxiii 33d-34b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 3a-5a;
126bl31a      passim;      337bc;      351b-353c     26     Shakespeare:
/?/c/(ar^///105a-148a,cespACT   in,  sc  1  [151-200]  124c-125a,  sc  v
128b-129c,  act  iv,  sc  11  133d-135b,  act  v, sc i 142d143a / Julius
Caesar, act i, sc ii
[94-214]
570b-571c; act hi, sc i
[31-73] 580d-581b
27  Shakespeare: Measure for Measure, act ii, sc iv 184c-186c / Macbeth,
act iv, sc hi [50114] 304a-c / Pericles, act i, sc i
[92-104]
422d  / Winter's Tale, act hi, sc ii 501b-504a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost,
bk  iv  [366-394]  160b161a  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  24b-25a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality, 364a-b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 29b; 32d-33a;
34d39d esp 35b, 37a; 53c-56d; 59b-61a; 70c71a; 76a; 167a-d; 388d-389c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 113c-114a; 166a167c; 173b-174a; 189b-193c 48
Melville:  Moby Dic\, 107a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 8d-10d; bk
x,  465c-467a;  epilogue  i,  647b-649d  2. Tyranny as the corruption of
other forms of government 2a. The perversion of monarchy: the tyrannical
king  5  Sophocles:  Oedipus  the  King  [616-630]  104d105a  / Antigone
[640-745] 136d-137c 5 Euripides: Heracles Mad
[140-274]
366b367c   6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  107c-108c  6  Thucydides  :
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  352c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ix, 418d-419a/
Statesman,  590c-d;  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk  hi, 672d-674d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk viii, ch 10 [1160*31b8] 412c-d;
[1 160^3-33] 413a
/  Politics,  bk hi, ch 7 [1279^-10] 476d-477a; ch 8 [i279b 16-17] 477a;
ch 14
[1285*17-29] 483b-c; ch
17  [i287b38-i288*5]  486c;  bk  iv,  ch  2  [1289* 26-b 4] 488b-c; ch 4
[1292*15-19] 491c; ch 10
[1295*9-23]
495a-b; bk v, ch 10
[1310*391311*28]
512d-513c;
[i3i2*40-b
9] 514d-515a;
[I3i2b37-i3i3*i6]
515c-d; ch ii
[1314*37I3i5bn]
517b-518c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 8
[1365^9-1366*2] 608b
14 Plutarch: Romulus-Theseus, 30c-d / Demetrius, 742c-743b 18 Augustine:
City of God, bk ii, ch 21, 162a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  105,  a  1,  rep 2,4-5 307d-309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 105a;
150c-151a; part iv, 273a-b

[984a]
(2.  Tyranny  as  the  corruption  of other forms of government. 2a. The
perversion  of  monarchy:  the tyrannical king.) 26 Shakespeare: Richard
III, act v, sc hi
[237-270] 146b-c
27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[31114] 303d-304c
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 27a-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 15 174a 35
Locke  :  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect 13 28a-b; ch vii, sect 90-94
44d-46c; ch viii, sect 106-111 49a-51a passim; ch xiv 62b-64c passim; ch
xviii  71a-73c  esp  sect  200  71a-c;  ch  xix 73d-81d passim, esp sect
231-239 78c-81b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws,  bk viii, 53a-c; bk xi, 75d; 77c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 357b-c
/  Social  Contract, bk in, 412d-413a; 414c-d; 419b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  31b;  32c-33a; 34d39d passim; 255b,d-257a 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  39bc  43  Federalist:  number  48,  157b-c 43 Mill: Liberty,
267d-268b  /  Representative  Government,  366a-c  44  Boswell: Johnson,
195c-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 286 96c-97a /
Philosophy  of History, intro, 173c-d 2b. The degeneration of oligarchy:
the tyranny of the wealthy 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 352c 7
Plato: Laws, bk iv, 681b-682c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 10
[i28i a2i28] 478d-479a; ch 15 [i286b8-22] 484d-485a;
bk iv, ch 6
[i293a i2-34J 492d-493a; ch
ii
[i296a22-b2] 496bc; bk v, ch 8
[1 308^4-24]
510b; ch 9
[i309b i4-i3ioa i2]
511d-512b  / Athenian Constitution, ch 2 553a-c 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus,
180c-d  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21, 162a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  iv,  273a-b  27  Shakespeare:  Coriolanus, act i, sc i
351a354d  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xviii,  sect  201  71c  38
Montesquieu:   Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  23a-25a  passim  38  Rousseau:
Inequality, 359b-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 450c 43 Federalist: number
57  176d-179b  passim  43  Mill: Representative Government, 393d-394d 50
Marx-Engels:   Communist   Manifesto,   420b-d  2c.  The  corruption  of
democracy: the tyranny of the masses or of the majority; the rise of the
demagogue  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [399-425] 261d-262a 5 Aristophanes:
Knights 470a-487a,c esp
[uu-1150]
483d-484b / Wasps
[463-507]

[984b]
950 THE GREAT IDEAS 2b to 3 512d-513c;
[650-724]
515c-516d / Lysistrata
[608-635] 591 b-c / Plutus [567-571] 636a
6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War,
bk  vi,  516b-517a;  523bc; 524d-525d; 533ac 7 Plato: Republic, bk viii,
411d-413a;  bk  ix,  416c-417b  /  Statesman,  603d-604b  / Laws, bk hi,
675c-676b; bk iv, 681b-682c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12
[i273b35~
1274^2] 470c-d; bk hi, ch 7
[i279b4-io]
476d-477a; ch 10
[i28i an-23]
478d-479a;  bk  iv, ch 4 [1292^-37] 491 b-d; ch 6 [1293s !- 10] 492c; ch
14 [1298^9-34] 498d; bk v, ch 5
[1305^-28] 506d-507a; ch
8
[i3o8 a i4-2 4 ]
510b; ch 9
[i309b i4-i3ioa i2]
511d-512b;
[1310^5-36] 512c; ch 10 [i3ioa39-b i8] 512d513a;
[i3i2a4o-b8]
514d-515a; ch ii
[i 3 i3b
38-1314*1] 516c; bk vi, ch 4
[i3i9b26-32]
523b 14 Plutarch: Agis, 648b,d-649b 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk hi, 265a-b
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  ii,  ch  21,  162a  27  Shakespeare:
Coriolanus, act i, sc i [1-225] 351a-353d; act ii, sc i
[1-106]
361a-362a;  act  in,  sc  1  [140-161] 370d-371a; act iv, sc vi [74-156]
383a-384a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 10a; bk viii, 51a-52c
38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 411a-b; 419b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  14b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b-c; 94d 43 Federalist: number
i, 30b; number 8-9, 45a-47c passim; number 10 49c-53a passim; number 22,
84c-d;  number  43,  141d-142c;  number  48 156d-159a passim; number 51,
164a-165a; number 58, 181b-182a; number 63, 192c-193a; number 78, 232a-d
43  Mill:  Liberty,  268d-274a; 298b-299a;302bc; 309a-b / Representative
Government,  330a;  366c-389b  passim,  esp  377b, 380c-381d; 406c -d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  260b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 180
148b  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  273d274a;  277d;  part hi,
295d-296b;  300a-b;  part iv, 365c-366b 3. The choice between tyranny or
despotism  and  anarchy 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 23b-24a 14 Plutarch:
Solon,  68d-70d / Pompey, 525a526d / Caesar, 588c-591d; 598d-599a / Cato
the  Younger, 638b-639a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, lb-c; bk hi, 51b-52a /
Histories,  bk iv, 290a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 104b-d; 112b-d;
part  iv,  273a-b  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch ii, sect 13 28a-b; ch
vii, sect 90-93 44d-46a; ch xi, sect 137 56d-57b; ch xviii, sect 203-210
72a-73c; ch xix, sect 224-229 76d-78a

[985a]
d  4  to  4b  Chapter  95:  TYRANNY 951 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 356b-c;
359b-c  /  Social  Contract, bk i, 389b; bk iv, 433a-434b 43 Federalist:
number  8-9,  45a-47c passim; number 16-20 66c-78b passim, esp number 16
66c-68d;  number  70, 210c-d 43 Mill: Representative Government, Z44c^t]
350b-355b  passim,  esp  351c-d;  367b-c  4.  The  nature and effects of
despotism  7 Plato: Statesman, 590c-d; 598b-604b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
viii, ch ii
[u6i an22] 413b-c
/ Politics, bk i, ch 5 447d-448c; bk in, ch 13
[i284a3-b34] 482a-483a; ch
14
[i285a i7-b34] 483b-484a; bk
iv,  ch  10  [1295  s  9-23]  495a-b  15  Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d; part
i-ii,  q  17, a 7, ans 690d-692a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch hi, sect
17-18 28d-29b; ch iv 29d-30b; ch vii, sect 85 43c-d; ch xv, sect 172-174
65b-d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  ii,  4a; 8d-9a,c; bk hi,
12a-13c;  bk iv, 15a-c; bk v, 26a-30a; bk vi, 33d-35a; 39d-40d; bk viii,
54a-b;  57b-58d; bk ix, 60a-b; bk x, 68b-d; bk xv, 109a; bk xviii, 128d;
bk  xix,  137c140c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk i, 387b,d391b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  50a-b;  91a; 154b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  81c-d; 320d-321b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 438a- b; 450c43 Mill:
Liberty,  297a-b  / Representative Government, 341d-344d; 367b-c; 382b-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 270, 89b; par 286, 96c-d;
par  355  112d-113a; additions, 180 148b / Philosophy of History, Intro,
161a-c; part i, 213b-214d; 222a-c; 230a-c; part hi, 285d; 302a-d 4a. The
relation  of  despotism  to  tyranny  and  monarchy:  the benevolence of
despots  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War, bk vi, 523b-524d 7 Plato:
Statesman,  590c-d; 598b-604b / Laws, bk in, 672d-674d; bk iv, 681 b-d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk viii, ch 10
[ii6ob23~
32]  413a;  ch  ii  413b-d  /  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch 14 [i285 a i7-b34]
483b-484a;  ch  17 [1287^71288*7] 486c; bk iv, ch 10 [1295*9-23] 495a-b;
bk v, ch 10
[i3iob i4-32] 513a; ch
ii
[1314s
3o-i3i5b n] 517a-518c / Athenian Constitution, ch 15 559b-c 14 Plutarch:
Theseus,  9a-d  /  Romulus-Theseus,  30c-d / Solon, 75c-76d / Poplicola,
80d-82a  /  Alexander  540b,d-576d  passim 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q 81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, HOb-
110a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi, 131b,d-133b

[985b]
35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch vii, sect 90-94 44d-46c; ch viii, sect
107  49b-d;  ch  xix,  sect 231-239 78c-81b 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii,
74a-76b;  part  hi,  120a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk ii, 4a;
7c9a,c;  bk  in,  12a-13c; bk iv, 15a-c; bk v, 25d26c; 30a-31b; bk v-vi,
32b-35a;  bk  vi,  36a-b;  37a-38b; 43c; bk vii, 46a; 47d-48a; 50a-b; bk
viii,  56d-57c;  bk  ix,  60a-61a;  bk xi, 75a-b; 75d; bk xii, 90b-c; bk
xiii,  97a-b; 98d-100b; 102a,c; bk xv, 109a; bk xxv, 211c-d 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  357a-c  / Social Contract, bk in, 419b-c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  24b;  32c-33a; 40d41d; 50a; 255b,d-257a; 338d-344a,c passim;
389c-390c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  39b-40b  43  Mill: Liberty,
267d-268c  /  Representative Government, 339a-340d; 341d-344d; 348d349a;
351a-354b passim 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 286 96c-97a
4b.  The comparison of paternal and despotic dominion: the justification
of  absolute  rule  by the incapacity of the ruled for self-government 5
Sophocles:   Antigone   [640-676]   136d-137a  5  Euripides:  Suppliants
[399-425] 261d-262a 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 35c-d; bk hi, 107c-108c;
120b-c  7  Plato:  Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk hi, 670c-671a; bk iv,
679c-680d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34b8-i8]
382b-c; bk viii, ch 10
[u6ob23-32]
413a; ch 11 413b-d / Politics, bk i, ch 5 447d-448c; ch 8
[1256^2-25]
450c;  ch 12-13 453d455a,c; bk hi, ch 13 [i284a3-b34] 482a-483a; bk vii,
ch  2  [1324^3-41] 528d-529a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b / Histories,
bk  i, 191d-192a; 193c-194a; bk iv, 290a-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk
ii,  ch 21 161b162d; bk xix, ch 21, 524c-525a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii, 104b-d; 109b112d; part iv, 273ac 32 Milton: Samson Agonistes
[1 01 0-1060] 361b362b
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch vi 36a-42a passim; ch vii, sect 84-86
43c-44a;  ch  viii,  sect  105-110 48c-50d; ch xv, sect 170 64d65a; sect
172-174   65b-d   37   Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  100b-102a;  359b-362c  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk i, 3b; bk v, 22d-23a; bk viii, 57b; bk
xv,  HOa-110c;  bk xvi, 116a-120a; bk xvii, 122a-123b; 124c-d; bk xviii,
128d; bk xxiii, 189b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324a-b; 357a-b / Political
Economy,  367a-368c  passim  / Social Contract, bk ii, 402d-403a; bk hi,
414c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 32bc; 513b-c

[986a]
(4.  The nature and effects of despotism. 4b. The comparison of paternal
and  despotic  dominion:  the  justification  of  absolute  rule  by the
incapacity  of the ruledfor self-government.} 42 Kant: Science of Right,
404d;  420b-422d;  436d-437c;  445c-446a 43 Federalist: number 9, 47b-c;
number   55,   174c-d   43   Mill:   Liberty,   271d-272a;  317c-318a  /
Representative  Government,  329c; 339a-341c; 344c; 351c-354b; 436b-437a
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part i, par 93 36a-b / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  174a-c;  198b-199c;  part hi, 300c-301c 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c 5. The contrast between despotic and
constitutional  government:  government  by men and government by laws 5
Aeschylus: Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[904-931]
122d-123a  5  Euripides:  Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b 5 Aristophanes:
Wasps  [463-507] 512d-513c 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 107c-108c; bk v,
175b;  bk  vii,  233a-d 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 368c-d; bk
hi,  425a-c;  438a-b  7  Plato:  Statesman,  598b-604b  /  Laws,  bk hi,
667c-676b;  bk iv, 681b-682c; bk viii, 733d734a; bk ix, 754a-b / Seventh
Letter, 805d; 807b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 6
[ii34a24-b8]
382a-b;  bk  x,  ch  9  [u8oa  i4-24]  434d-435a  / Politics, bk 1, ch i
[1252*13-17]  445a-b; ch 5 [i254a34-b 9] 448a; ch 7 [1255^6-20] 449b; ch
12 453d-454a; bk ii, ch 10 [i272a35-b io] 468d-469a; bk hi, ch 6
[i278b3o-i279*22]
476a-c;  ch  10  [1281*29-39]  479a;  ch  h [i282b 1-13] 480bc; ch 15-17
484b-487a; bk iv, ch 6 492b-493a passim; ch 8
[1 293^2-27] 493c;
ch  10  [1295*9-23] 495a-b 14 Plutarch: Caesar, 591d / Cato the Younger,
638b-639a  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  la-2b; bk hi, 51bc; 61c-62a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 1, rep 2 226c-227c; q 96,
a 5, rep 3 233d-234d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 114b-115a; 131d132a;
149d-150a  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 21 29d; ch vii, sect
87-94  44a-46c;  ch xi 55b-58b passim; ch xviii 71a-73c 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones, 268c-269b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a; 8b-d; bk in,
12a-d; bk v, 25d-26c; 30a-c; bk vi, 33a-35a; 36a-37a; bk viii, 54a-b; bk
xix, 137c-d; bk xxv, 211c-d; bk xxvi, 223c-d

[986b]
952  THE GREAT IDEAS 5 to 5a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 323d-324a; 357b-c;
358b-d; 361c-362a / Political Economy, 370b371a / Social Contract, bk i,
387b,d-391b;  bk  ii,  400a;  bk  hi,  408c; 419a-c; bk iv, 433a-434b 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b passim; 51c-d; 154a-c; 342a-c; 592a
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  73d-75a; 96d; 125a 42 Kant: Science of
Right,   450b-d   43   Declaration  of  Independence:  la-3b  passim  43
Federalist:   number  47,  153c-154d;  number  55,  174c-d;  number  57,
177d-178a; number 78, 230d-232a 43 Mill: Liberty, 267d-268b; 274b,d
[fn
1]  /  Representative  Government,  338d-341d;  341  d350a esp 346a-b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 278 92c-93a; par 286 96c-97a;
additions,  171 146b-c / Philosophy of History, intro, 198b199c; part 1,
208b-c;  part  ii, 262a-c; part hi, 301c-302d; part iv, 342a-d 54 Freud:
Civilization and Its Discontents, 780b-d 5a. Despotic and constitutional
government with respect to political liberty and equality: the rights of
the governed 5 Sophocles: Oedipus at Colonus
[907-931]
122d-123a 5 Euripides: Suppliants [429-456] 262a-b 6 Herodotus: History,
bk  hi,  107c-d; bk vii, 233c-d 7 Plato: Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, bk
hi,  672d-674d;  bk  iv,  681b-682b  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  v, ch 6
[ii34*24-b i7] 382a-c passim; bk viii, ch ii
[u6i*30-b io]
413c-d / Politics, bk i, ch 7
[i255b i6-2o]
449b;  bk  in, ch 6 [i278b3o-i279*22] 476a-c; ch 16-17 485b-487a; bk iv,
ch  4  [1292*4-37]  491b-d;  ch  10  [1295*9-23]  495a-b;  bk  v,  ch  9
[1310*25-36]  512c  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk i, sect 14 254b-c 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 61c-62a / Histories, bk 1, 189a-b; bk iv, 290a-d
19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3, rep 2 430c-431d; part
i-ii,  q  17, a 7, ans 690d-692a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 383c-d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk v [769-799] 192a-b 35 Locke: Toleration, 19a-d / Civil
Government,  ch  iv  29d-30b; ch vi, sect 61-63 38ac; ch vii, sect 87-94
44a-46c;  ch  ix, sect 131 54d; ch xi, sect 135-139 55d-58a; ch xv, sect
171-cH  xvi,  sect  196  65a-70c  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi,
12b13c;  bk  vi,  33a-35a; bk xii, 85a-c; bk xv, 109a-b; 112c-d; bk xix,
142a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 323d-324a; 356b358b; 359b-d; 361c-362a /
Political   Economy,   370d-371a;   375b-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,
387b,d-391b;  bk iv, 438c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 14a-c; 33a-34a,c;
91a; 522c-524a

[987a]
5b  to  5d  Chapter  95:  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 81c 82a; 96a-d;
161c-162a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 436d; 451 b-c 43 Declaration of
Independence:  la-3b  passim  43 Federalist: number 8-9, 45a-47c passim;
number   84,   251b-253d   43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-268c;  274b-275a  /
Representative  Government,  339d-340c;  341  d344d; 348c-350a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part hi, par 215 71c-d; par 286 96c-97a; par 297
99b; additions, 180 148b / Philosophy of History, Intro, 161a-c; part i,
213b-214d;  230a-c;  part  11,  271d-272d;  part hi, 301c-302a; part iv,
342b-d  5b.  Despotic  and  constitutional  government  with  respect to
juridical  defenses  against  misgovernment,  or  redress for grievances
through due process of law 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vn, sect 87-94
44a-46c;  ch  xii,  sect  143  58c-d;  ch xviii, sect 202-207 71d-73a 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 33a-35a; 36a-b; 37a-c; bk xi, 69d-75a
passim;  bk  xii,  85a-c 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 407d-408a;
424a-d;  bk  iv,  432b-433a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 93ac; 94c-95c;
96c-d;  173c-d  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  436d  43  Declaration of
Independence: [52-55] 2a;
[66-67] [70-71] 2b; [95-i
5] 3a 43 Constitution of the U.S.: preamble Ila,c; article 1, sect 6
[143-151]
12c-d; sect 9
[267-272] 13d; sect 9 [289]-sect 10 [303] 14a;
ARTICLE II, SECT 4, ARTICLE III, SECT I
[463468] 15c; article in, sect 3
[507-511]
16a;  amendments,  i-x  17a-d; xiv, sect i 18c 43 Federalist: number 44,
144d-145a;  number  47-50  153c-162c;  number  51, 164a-165a; number 53,
167b-168b;  number  57, 177d-178a; number 78 229d-233c passim; number 83
244b-251a  passim, esp 245d-246b; number 84, 251b-253d 43 Mill: Liberty,
267d-268b;  269ac  /  Representative  Government, 401d-402b 44 Boswell :
Johnson,  195c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 286 96c-97a
5c.   The   location  of  sovereignty  in  despotic  and  constitutional
government:  the  sovereign  person, the sovereign office, the sovereign
people  Old  Testament:  Judges,  21:24  / / Samuel, 8:420— (D) I Kings,
8:4-20 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[429-456]
262a-b  /  Andromache  [464-492]  319b-c  6  Herodotus:  History, bk hi,
107c-108c 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi, 672c-676c

[987b]
TYRANNY 953 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 2
[i26i a23-b6]
456a-b; bk hi, ch i [1275*22^21] 472a-c; ch 10
[i28i a29]-CH
11
[i282b i4] 479a-480c; ch
17  486c-487a  14  Plutarch: Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 90, a 3 207a-c; q 96, a 5, rep 3 233d-234d; q
105,  a  1,  ans 307d-309d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 97c-d; part ii,
lOOc-lOlb;  104d-106d  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch vii, sect 87-94
44a-46c;  ch  ix, sect 127-CH x, sect 132 54a55b; ch xiv 62b-64c passim;
ch  xv,  sect  171174  65a-d  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk ii, 4a;
7c9a,c; bk v, 30a-c; bk xi, 69d-75a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii,
395a-396a;  bk  in, 408b-c; 412c-413a; 419a-c; 423a-c; 424a-d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-28b  esp  25a,  26d-27c; 51a-d; lOOd; 241b 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 74b-d; 320d-321a 42 Kant: Science of Right,
436c;  437c-d;  439a-c; 450ac; 451c-452a 43 Declaration of Independence:
la-3b esp
[43-47] 2a
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: preamble lla,c; amendments, ix-x 17d 43
Federalist:  number  22,  84d-85a;  number 33, 108bc; number 39, 125c-d;
number  46,  150b-c;  number  49,  159c; number 51, 164a165a; number 53,
167d-168b  43  Mill:  Liberty,  267d-269c  /  Representative Government,
341d-350a  passim; 355b-356b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
275 92a-b; par 279 93a-94d; additions, 167 145c / Philosophy of History,
part  ii,  272b-273a;  part  in,  300a-301c;  part  iv,  342b-d; 355c-d;
365c-366b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue ii, 680b684a 5d. The
analogues  of  despotic  and  constitutional rule in the relation of the
powers  of  the  soul:  the  tyranny  of the passions 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
120b-c  /  Republic,  bk  i,  296b-c;  bk  ix,  416a-418c;  419b-421a  9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk 1, ch 13 [1102^7-1103* 3] 347d-348c / Politics, bk
i,  ch  5  [1254*33b26]  448a-b;  ch  13  [1260^-8]  454c  12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  iv, ch i, 213d; 218ac; ch 5, 229a-b 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk  vi,  87b-c 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch 15, 304c-d; tr viii,
ch  1,  343a-b  18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch 3, 190c; bk xiv, ch
ii,  386b;  bk xix, ch 15 521a-c; ch 21, 524c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk
i,  ch 24 630c-631a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 81, a 3, rep
2 430c-431d; part i-ii, q 9, a 2, rep 3 658d-659c; q 17, a 7 690d-692a

[988a]
(5.   The  contrast  between  despotic  and  constitutional  government:
government  by men and government by laws. 5d. The analogues of despotic
and  constitutional  rule in the relation of the powers of the soul: the
tyranny  of  the passions.} 25 Montaigne: Essays, 184b-d 27 Shakespeare:
Measure for Measure, act iv, sc ii
[82-88] 194b / Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[32-114] 303d-304c
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[79-101]
321a-b  esp  [90-95]  321a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  54  192b-c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract,  bk i, 393c 42 Kant :
judgement,  586d-587a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, part i, 233b-c;
part  iv,  346a-c  54  Freud:  Ego  and  Id,  715a-b;  715d-716a  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  838d-839b  6. Imperial rule as despotic, and as
tyrannical  or  benevolent:  the  government  of  conquered  peoples  or
colonies  Old  Testament: Exodus, 1:8-14; 5 / Judges, 6:1-6 Apocrypha: /
Maccabees,  1:41-64—  (D)  OT,  /  Machabees,  1:43-67  /  // Maccabees,
5:217:42—  (D)  OT,  II Machabees, 5:21-7:42 6 Herodotus: History, bk i,
30b-31a;  35c36a;  38b-c;  bk  v,  184a-d;  bk vi, 189d; 191b-c; bk vii,
222b-c;  225d-226b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 368b370d
passim;  379b-c; bk ii, 403b-404a; bk hi, 424d-429b; bk v, 504c-507c; bk
vi,  529b533a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 8 [1256^2-25] 450c; bk hi,
ch 13
[i284a26-b2] 482b-c; bk
vii,  ch  2  [1324^3-41]  528d-529a;  ch  14  [i333b  38-1334-2] 538d 14
Plutarch:  Lucullus,  409b-410b  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 17c-d; bk iv,
76a;  82d-83a;  bk  xii,  117c-d;  bk  xiv,  149a-b  / Histories, bk iv,
286c-287a; 290a-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 15 521a-c; ch 21
524a-525b  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch iii-v 3c-8c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part   ii,   lOlb-110a;  conclusion,  280b-281a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
440b-443d 35 Locke: Toleration, 13c-d / Civil Government, ch xvi 65d-70c
36  Swift: Gulliver, part i, 24b-25a; part iv, 182b-183a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk viii, 56d57c; bk x, 62b-63a; bk xi, 83c-84c; bk xiii,
96d-97a;  bk xv, 110a-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359b / Social Contract,
bk  1,  389d-390d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 14d-15a; 18a; 23c-d;
33d-34a,c; 147a-b; 420b-d; 522c-

[988b]
954  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6  to  7  523a,c;  550d-551b; 608b,d-609a; 620a;
632d633a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 51a-53b passim; 216c-217a; 307a-c;
420c;  505a-c  42 Kant: Science of Right, 413d; 454d-455a 43 Declaration
of   Independence:  la-3b  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  353c;
436b437a  44  Boswell: Johnson, 179c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
hi,  par 351 112a-b; additions, 172 146c-d / Philosophy of History, part
hi,  298a-299c;  301c302a  50  Marx:  Capital,  372c-374a 7. The ways of
tyrants  or  despots to attain and maintain power Old Testament: Daniel,
3:1-12  Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees, 1:41-64; 10:22-46 (D) OT, / Machabees,
1:43-67; 10:22-46 5 Aeschylus: Prometheus Bound
[196-243]
42b-c 5 Aristophanes: Wasps [650-724] 515c-516d 6 Herodotus: History, bk
i,  12b-14a;  21b  23a-24b;  25c-29b;  35c-36a;  bk hi, 99a-c 102d-106c;
114c-115a;  123c;  bk  iv,  148a-b  bk  v,  164a-c;  166c-d;  172c-174b;
179c-180a  bk  vi,  187b-c; 191a-b; 192c-d; bk vii, 243b-c 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 380d382b; bk hi, 425a-426d; bk vi, 524c-d; bk
viii,  579c-590c  7  Plato:  Gorgias,  264c-265a  /  Republic,  bk viii,
411d-415c  /  Seventh Letter, 803a-b; 811b813d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
hi, ch 13
[1284*3b
3] 482a-c; bk v, ch 10
[1310*39-131 i a28]
512d-513c;
[i3i2b9-i3i3a i7]
515a-d; ch ii
[i3i3a34]-CH
12
[i3i5b39] 516a-518d; bk
vi, ch 4 [i3i9b26-32] 523b/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i357b3o-i358 a i] 597c-d
12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv, ch 13, 244a-b 14 Plutarch: Romulus,
27c-28d  /  Solon,  75c76d  /  Poplicola  77a-86a,c  passim  / Camillus,
117c-121a,c / Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Caius Marius, 344c-354a,c / Sulla,
382a-387a,c  /  Agesilaus,  482a-484a; 489b-c; 495a-b / Pompey, 521a-b /
Caesar,  580b  /  Cato the Younger, 636c-d / Agis 648b,d-656d / Tiberius
Gracchus  671b,d-681a,c  /  Marcus Brutus, 809b811a esp 810b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  i,  lb-2a;  2c-4d;  14a-b;  21b-22b;  23c;  bk ii, 29d-30d;
31d-32a;  32d34a;  35c-d;  38c-d;  40a-b;  42b;  bk  hi,  58d59a; bk iv,
68b-69c; 82a-b; bk xiv, 155b-156a; bk xv, 168a-c; 170c-176b / Histories,
bk  i,  195a-196c;  198c-199c;  200c-d; 208b-c; 209d210b 23 Machiavelli:
Prince  la-37d esp ch hi, 3c5a, ch v 8a-c, ch vi, 9b-10a, ch vii, llb-c,
ch viii, 14a-c, ch xv-xx 22b-31c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 51a-55d

[989a]
26  Shakespeare: Richard III 105a-148a,c / King John 376a-405a,c esp act
hi,  sc  iv [131— 159] 392bc 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 93
45d-46a;  ch  xviii,  sect  210 73b-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 37a-b;
part  hi,  102b103a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk x, 68b-d; bk xii,
95b-96a,c;  bk  xix,  137c-139c;  140a-c;  bk  xxv,  212a-b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  358d-359a;  360a-b;  361c-362a; 364a-b / Political Economy,
380b-c  /  Social  Contract,  bk hi, 412d-413a; 417b-c; bk iv, 432c-d 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  24b,d-30a  esp 28b, 29b-c, 30a; 42b,d-43b;
50a-51b;  53c-59b  esp  54c-55b,  56a;  153c-155b;  171d;  525d-526c  43
Federalist: number i, 30b; number 8, 45a-47a passim; number 16, 66d-67a;
number  25,  90d; number 29, lOOd-lOla; number 60, 186c-187a; number 84,
251d-252a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  366a-c 8. The fate of
tyrants:  revolutions  for  liberty  and  justice  against  tyranny  and
despotism;  tyrannicide Old Testament: Judges, 3:14-4:24; 6-7; 9:111:33;
13:1-5,24-25;  14-16  /  /  Kings, 12:1-25 — (D) III Kings, 12:1-25 / II
Kings,  9:1-10:11; 11; 21:18-26— (D) IV Kings, 9:1-10:11; 11; 21:18-26 /
// Chronicles, 10; 23— (D) 11 Paralipomenon, 10; 23 / Jeremiah, 41 — (D)
Jeremias,  41  Apocrypha:  / Maccabees, 1-9 passim— (D) OT, / Machabees,
1-9  passim  /  //  Maccabees, 1-13 passim, esp 6— (D) OT, // Machabees,
1-13  passim,  esp  6 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 12b-14a; bk ii, 84a-d;
85b-c;  bk  v  160a-185a,c  passim,  esp  166c-167b,  171c-172c;  bk vi,
208d-209b  6Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  387a-389b; bk vi,
523c-524c;  bk  viii,  579c590c  7 Plato: Gorgias, 264c-266b; 285d-286b;
293bc  / Republic, bk ix, 418c-420d; bk x, 438a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk v, ch 4 [1304*31-38] 506a; ch 10 [i3ii a28-i3i2b33] 513c-515b; ch 12
[i3i5b i2-39] 518c-d
/  Athenian  Constitution, ch 14-19 558d-561d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk viii
[481-496]  272a  14  Plutarch:  Poplicola  77a-86a,c  passim  / Timoleon
195a-213d  passim  /  Pelopidas  232a246a,c  passim / Lysander, 366b-c /
Caesar,  CROSS-REFER  ENCES For: Other discussions bearing on the nature
and  injustice  of  tyranny,  see  Government id-if; Justice 9c; Law 7d;
Slavery  6a.  The  relation of tyranny to other forms of government, see
Aristocracy 2e; Democracy 2a; Monarchy 4b; Oligarchy 3a.

[989b]
Chapter  95: TYRANNY 955 598d-604d / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c passim
/  Agis  648b,d-656d  passim  /  Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c / Caius
Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c  /  Demetrius,  728b-729d / Dion 781b,d-802a,c /
Marcus  Brutus  802b, d824a,c / Aratus 826a-846a,c passim / Galba, 859ac
15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  9d-15a;  17c-d;  18c20b;  bk iv, 76a-77c;
82d-83b;  bk  xi,  102d103a;  bk  xii,  112a-114a;  bk  xv,  169a-176b /
Histories,  bk  ii-iii,  234b-265d esp bk ii, 234b235a; bk iv, 269b-277d
esp  269d-270b; 283b-292b; bk v, 298c-302a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part ii-ii, q 42, a 2, rep 3 584b-d 23 Machiavelli : Prince, ch v 8ac 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  150c-151a  26  Shakespeare:  Richard 111
105a-148a,c esp act v, sc in [237-270] 146b-c / Julius Caesar, act 1, sc
11  [90-161]  570b-571a;  sc  111  [72-130] 573b-d; act ii, sc i [10-34]
574c-d;
[1 12-183]
575d-576b;  act hi, sc ii [13-44] 583d-584a 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act
iv,  sc  hi  [159240]  305a-306b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch hi, sect
17-18  28d-29b;  ch  xiv,  sect 166-168 63d-64c; ch xvi, sect 176 66a-b;
sect 190-196 69b-70c passim; ch xviii, sect 202 71d-72a; sect 210 73b-c;
ch  xix 73d-81d esp sect 223-228 76c-78a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk v, 25d26c; 28b-29a; bk viii, 54bc; bk xiv, 107b-d passim 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  361c-362a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  11,  402c-d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  29c-d; 37a-38a; 39c-40d; 44b-c; 56b-c; 61a; 71b-76a
esp  71c-d,  73b-74a;  144a-d; 246a; 420b-d; 449d450a; 521a-b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 51 a-54b; 114a116a; 166a-167d; 216d-217b; 443b-444a;
574b-577b;  587b-588a  42  Kant: Science of Right, 441 b-c; 450d-451a 43
Declaration of Independence:
[1-23]
la-b;  [99-121]  3a-b 43 Federalist: number 14, 62c-d; number 16, 68c-d;
number  28, 97c-98b; number 45, 147d-148a; number 46, 152b-153b 43 Mill:
Liberty, 267d-268c; 274b,d [fn 1] 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 195c-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  295d296c;  part  iv,  345a-b; 359a;
363d-367a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 424d425b

[990a]
956  THE GREAT IDEAS tion 3a~3b, 3c(3), 4a, 5b; Slavery 3c. I. Schiller.
William  Tell  Machiavelli. The Discourses Shelley. Prometheus Unbound .
Castruccio  Castracani  Pushkin.  Boris  Godunov  Milton. The Readie and
Easie Way to Establish a Dickens. A Tale of Two Cities Free Commonwealth
Mazzini.  From  the  Council  to God Dostoevsky. The Possessed Ibsen. An
Enemy  of  the People Bryce. Address on Colonial Policy H. T. Hardy. The
Dynasts Luther. Whether Soldiers, Too, Can Be Saved ism La Boetie. Anti-
Dictator,  the  Discours  de  la serviKelsen. Sozialismus und Staat tude
volontaire  Trotsky.  The  Defense of Terrorism Marlowe. Tamburlaine the
Great  Ure.  The  Origin  of  Tyranny Ben Jonson. Sejanus Sholokhov. The
Silent   Don   Voltaire.   "Tyranny,"   "Tyrant,"  in  A  PhilosophKohn.
Revolutions  and  Dictatorships  Godwin. An Enquiry Concerning Political
justice, potism bk iv, ch 3 Strauss. On Tyranny

[990b]
For:  The  distinction  between  tyranny  and  despotism in terms of the
distinction  between  slavery and subjection, see Slavery 6a-6b; and for
the relation of despotism to absolute monarchy, .^Monarchy 4a~4b, 4e(i).
Other  statements  of  the  justification  of benevolent despotism or of
absolute  monarchy  relative  to  certain  conditions, see Democracy 4d;
Government  2c;  Monarchy  4e(2);  Slavery  6c;  and  for comparisons of
domestic   and   political   government   which  are  relevant  to  this
justification of despotism, see Family 2a; Monarchy 4a, 4e(i); State ib.
The distinction between despotism and constitutional government in terms
of  the  distinction between subjection and citizenship, see Citizen 2b;
Justice  od;  Law  7b;  Liberty  id; Slavery 6b. The distinction between
government  by  men  and government by law, see Constitution i ; Law 7a;
Monarchy  ia(i); and for the political significance of this distinction,
see  Constitution  7b;  Democracy  4b;  Government  ig(0_ ig(3); Law 7b;
Liberty id; Monarchy 4e(3). The analogies of despotic and constitutional
rule  in  the  relations  of reason and the passions, see Liberty 3a~3b;
Slavery  7. The analogies in the economic order of political tyranny and
despotism,  see  Justice 8c-8c(i) ; Labor 5a~5d, 7f; Slavery 4a~4C Other
discussions  of  imperialism,  see Democracy 7b; Government 5b; Monarchy
5-5^ Revolution 7; Slavery 6d; State 10b; War and Peace 6a. The struggle
for  power  and for liberty as between tyrants or despots and the people
they  oppress, see Labor 7c~7c(3); Liberty 6b-6c; Oligarchy 5c; Progress
3b;  RevoluADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed  below are works not included in
Great  Boofe  ofthe  Western  World, but relevant to the idea and topics
with  which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups:
For  the  date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the
works  cited,  consult  the  Bibliography  of  Additional Readings which
follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  Marsilius of Padua.
Defensor  Pads  Lenin.  Imperialism,  the  Highest Stage of Capital ical
Dictionary Merriam. The New Democracy and the New Des-

[991a]
Chapter  $6:  UNIVERSAL  AND PARTICULAR INTRODUCTION ON such speculative
problems  as  the  existence  of  God,  the immortality of the soul, the
infinity  of  time  and  space,  or  the  limits of human knowledge, the
conversation of philosophers seems to make contact with the discourse of
scientists,  the  language of poets, and the speech of ordinary men. The
philosophers  usually  begin  at  least  by  propounding questions which
correspond  to those asked by men who do not profess to be philosophers.
But  throughout  the  tradition  of  western thought, the problem of the
universal,  unlike  these  others,  seems  to  have  the  character of a
professional  secret.  The  various  solutions  of  the  problem  of the
universal  are  so  many esoteric doctrines, each with its own sectarian
name. The initiated can distinguish themselves from the novices by their
proficiency  in this area; and the outsider who overhears the discussion
of  professionals may be completely left behind, wondering as much about
how  the question arose as about the meaning of the conflicting answers.
No genuine philosophical problem, it seems reasonable to suppose, can be
so remote from questions intelligible to common sense. If it is not just
a  specious  riddle  to amuse the experts, the problem of the universal,
despite  its  technical  appearance,  should raise issues from which, in
some  form  or other, no one can escape.Whether or not this is so can be
tested  by  considering  the various ways in which the problem occurs in
other  chapters under different guises and in different contexts. In the
chapter  on Same and Other, we find the question how two individuals can
be  the  same  in some particular respect—how in spite of their separate
existence  they  can  share  in  the  possession  of  a common nature or
attribute. Anyone who classifies things or tries to make definitions may
be led to wonder whether clas957

[991b]
sifications are entirely verbal and definitions fictions of the mind, or
whether  things  themselves belong together in some real community based
upon an inherent sameness or similarity. In the chapter on One and Many,
the  question takes the form of asking how two or more things can be one
in  any way. Again, both science and common sense seem able to deal with
an  infinite  number of individuals by applying a single name to them or
apprehending  them  all  under a single concept or notion. But it may be
asked  what  justifies the denomination of many things by one name. What
unity  in  the  things  verifies  the  tendency of thought to unify them
conceptually  ?  Does  a  real unity exist in things, by virtue of their
being  somehow  one  as well as many, or as a result of the many somehow
participating  in  a  one  which  exists  separately  from  them? In the
chapters  on  Definition  and  Sign and Symbol the same questions are at
least  implicit.  In connection with the object of definition, one issue
is  whether  what Aristotle calls "the formulable essence" exists as the
common  nature  of  many  individuals,  or  whether,  as Locke suggests,
definitions  formulate  only  the  nominal,  not  the  real, essences of
things.  As  that  and related issues are faced, anyone who acknowledges
the  familiar  distinction  between  proper  and common names may become
involved  in  questioning  what  common or general names signify and how
they  get  the  meanings with which they are used in everyday discourse.
The  problem  of  the  sameness of things distinct from one another, the
problem  of  the one in the many or the one and the many, the problem of
essences  and  common  names, are other statements of the problem of the
universal and the particular. Attention to the words themselves confirms
this.  The  word "wi/versal" connotes a unity— the one as opposed to the
many,

[992a]
958  THE GREAT IDEAS the common as opposed to the unique or special. The
word  "/w/icular"  connotes  participation—  the  part as opposed to the
whole, the member as opposed to the class. As the reference already made
to  essence  and  individual  indicates, these are not the only pairs of
terms   which  somehow  correspond  in  significance  to  universal  and
particular,  but  others,  like  model  and  imitation, form and matter,
abstract  and  concrete,  are more obscure in meaning. The discussion of
universal  and particular throws light on them rather than gains clarity
from  them.  The reader of the great books can witness the origin of the
problem  of the universal and particular as it occurs in a conversation,
not  between  technical  philosophers,  but  between  Socrates  and  his
friends.  In  the  Meno,  Socrates and Meno get into a discussion of how
virtue  is  acquired.  Socrates  thinks it is necessary to inquire first
what  virtue  is.  Meno  responds  by enumerating different virtues, but
Socrates  is  not  satisfied. He wants a definition which will cover all
the  virtues. Even if Meno could say what justice or temperance is, that
would  not  do,  for  each  of these is, as Socrates says, a virtue, not
virtue—a particular virtue or a part of virtue, not the whole of it. "In
searching  after one virtue," Socrates tells Meno, "we have found many .
. . but we have been unable to find the common virtue which runs through
them all." To help Meno, who claims he is not able to follow Socrates in
his "attempt to get at one common notion of virtue," Socrates shifts the
discussion  to  colors  and  figures. He warns Meno that color cannot be
defined  by naming colors, and that, even if he could define a square, a
circle, and all other figures, he would not be saying what figure is. To
proceed  in  this  way is to be "landed in particulars." "Tell me then,"
Socrates  says, "since you call them by a common name, and say that they
are  all  figures, even when opposed to one another, what is that common
nature  which you designate as figure?" If Meno were to reply, "I do not
know  what  vou  want,"  not much further explanation could be given. To
someone  who  remained  perplexed  at  this  point,  we  could only say,
Socrates sug-

[992b]
gests,  "Do  you  not understand that we are looking for the same in the
many?"  Or,  put  in  another form, we might ask, he says, "What is that
[one  in  many]  which  you call figure, and which includes not only the
round  and  straight  figures, but all?" Thus stated, the problem of the
universal  seems  inescapable—a  problem  for  everyone,  not  just  for
philosophers. But the philosophers complicate the problem almost as soon
as  it  is  stated.  Giving  his  version  of the history of philosophy,
Aristotle  offers  an  explanation of how the problem shifted to another
level.  Socrates, he writes, "was busying himself about ethical matters"
and, "seeking the universal in these ethical matters, [he] fixed thought
for the first time on definitions. Plato accepted his teaching, but held
that  the  problem  applied  not  to sensible things, but to entities of
another kind— for this reason, that the common definition could not be a
definition  of  any sensible thing, as they were always changing. Things
of  this  other sort he called Ideas, and sensible things, he said, were
all  named  after  these,  and in virtue of a relation to these; for the
many  existed  by  participation in the Ideas that have the same name as
they."  It  is  at  this  point,  according to Aristotle, that the great
philosophical  controversy  begins.  Whereas "the thinkers of old ranked
particular  things  as  substances,  e.g.,  fire  and earth, not what is
common to both, body," the Platonists or idealists— "the thinkers of the
present  day"  —  "tend  to rank universal as substances, for genera are
universal."  Aristotle  repeatedly  tries  to  distinguish  between  the
Socratic inquiry and what he regards as the Platonic doctrine the theory
of  Ideas.  "The  first to raise the problem of universal definition ...
Socrates,"  he  writes,  "did not make the universals or the definitions
exist  apart;  they,  however,"  —  the  Platonists— "gave them separate
existence, and this was the kind of thing they called Ideas." As between
Socrates  and  his  disciple, Aristotle does not hesitate to take sides.
"Socrates  gave the impulse to this theory of ideas . . . but he did not
separate  universals  from  individuals;  and  in  not separating them,"
Aristotle  adds,  "he  thought rightly." The issue between Aristotle and
his own teacher, Plato, cannot, how-

[993a]
ever,  be  stated by so simple an affirmation and denial. On Aristotle's
side,  it  involves  the  fundamental  principles  of  his  metaphysics,
especially  his  doctrine of substance, as well as his theoTyof what and
how  the  intellect  knows,  as  contrasted  with the perceptions of the
senses.  On  Plato's  side,  it  involves  many questions concerning the
intelligible  and  the  sensible,  being  and  becoming, the one and the
many—questions  the  Aristotelian  answers  to  which  would not satisfy
Plato. Wherever the truth lies, Aristotle recognizes that on this issue,
perhaps  more than on any other, he is most sharply opposed to Plato. It
is  the  one  matter wherein he feels a conflict between devotion to his
teacher  and  to  the  truth  as  he  sees  it. The consideration of the
universal  good,  he  declares  in the Ethics, is made difficult "by the
fact  that  the  Forms  have been introduced by friends of our own," but
"while  both  are  dear,  piety  requires  us  to  honor truth above our
friends."  The  historians  of  philosophy,  beginning  with  Aristotle,
attribute  one  solution  of  the  problem  of universals to Plato. That
solution comes to be called "realism" because it affirms the independent
reality of universals as separately existing Ideas or Forms. But all the
commentators  do  not, like Aristotle, dissent from Plato's solution. In
our  own  time, for example, Bertrand Russell, treating of "the world of
universals" in the Problems of Philosophy, says, "the problem with which
we  are  now  concerned  is  a  very  old one, since it was brought into
philosophy  by  Plato.  Plato's 'theory of ideas' is an attempt to solve
this  very  problem,  and in my opinion it is one of the most successful
attempts  hitherto  made.  The theory to be advocated in what follows is
largely  Plato's, with merely such modifications as time has shown to be
necessary."  For one thing, Russell thinks "the word 'idea' has acquired
in  the course of time many associations which are quite misleading when
applied  to  Plato's  'ideas.' We shall, therefore," he writes, "use the
word  'universal'  instead  of  the  word  'idea' to describe what Plato
meant.  .  .  .  We  speak  of  whatever  is given in sensation ... as a
particular; by opposition to this, a

[993b]
Chapter  96:  UNIVERSAL  AND  PARTICULAR  959 universal will be anything
which  may be shared by many particulars. . . . Broadly speaking, proper
names  stand  for  particulars,  while  other  substantives, adjectives,
prepositions,  and  verbs  stand  for  universals."  Russell  here calls
attention to another point which he thinks has too seldom been observed,
namely,  that  universals  are not exclusively signified by common nouns
and  adjectives,  but that, in addition, there are relational universals
signified  by  prepositions and verbs. This sort of universal, according
to  him,  most  readily  shows  that  universals  have  being apart from
particulars.  It  can also be shown, he argues, "that their being is not
merely  mental  . . . that whatever being belongs to them is independent
of  their  being  thought of or in any way apprehended by minds." If the
word  "existence"  implies  definite  location  in time and space, then,
Russell  concludes,  in the sense in which "thoughts and feelings, minds
and  physical  objects  exist. . . universals do not exist." We must say
instead  that  "they  subsist or have being, where 'being' is opposed to
'existence'  as  being timeless. The world of universals, therefore, may
also  be  described  as  the  world  of  being.  The  world  of being is
unchangeable.  . . . The world of existence is fleeting. . . . According
to our temperaments, we shall prefer the contemplation of the one or the
other.  The  one we do not prefer will probably seem to us a pale shadow
of  the  one we prefer, and hardly worthy to be regarded as in any sense
real.  But  the  truth is that both have the same claim on our impartial
attention,  both  are real, and both are important to the metaphysician.
Indeed  no  sooner  have we distinguished the two worlds than it becomes
necessary  to  consider their relations." It is this consideration which
seems  to  be  for  Plato  the  problem  of  the  universal— the central
difficulty in the theory of Ideas or separate Forms. As indicated in the
chapters  on  Form  and  Idea,  the  separation  of  the two worlds— the
sensible  world  of  becoming and the intelligible world of being—always
calls  for  some  explanation  of  their resemblance. Socrates sometimes
refers  to  the  doctrine of Ideas as if its truth could be assumed, and
sometimes argues the necessity of a realm of immu-

[994a]
960  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  table  and  intelligible  being as the object of
thought,   comparable   to  sensible,  changing  things  as  the  object
ofperception.  In  the  Phaedo, for example, he gets Cebes to admit that
the  ideas,  "which  in the dialectical process we define as essences or
true  existences,"  are not subject to change, but that they are "always
what  they  are,  having  the  same  simple self-existent and unchanging
forms."  In  contrast to absolute beauty or goodness, the many beautiful
or  good things "are always in a state of change." These, Socrates says,
"you  can touch and see and perceive with the senses, but the unchanging
things  you  can  only  perceive with the mind. Let us suppose then," he
adds,  "that  there  are  two  sorts  of  existences—one seen, the other
unseen."  Later  in  the  same dialogue, Socrates repeats the assumption
that  "there  is  an  absolute beauty and goodness and greatness and the
like."  No  other  assumption seems to him to provide as satisfactory an
explanation  of  how  particular things can be beautiful or good or have
any  other  characteristics.  "Nothing  makes  a  thing  beautiful,"  he
declares,  "but the presence and participation of beauty in whatever way
or  manner  obtained; for as to the manner I am uncertain, but I stoutly
contend  that by beauty all beautiful things become beautiful." In later
Platonic dialogues, the question of the manner comes to the fore. Though
the  Eleatic  Stranger  in  the  Sophist refers to the "endless conflict
raging"  between  the  materialists  and  the  idealists  concerning the
existence  of the unseen world of ideas, he himself seems to be doubtful
only on the point of how the changing things of sense participate in the
immutable  forms.  One  answer is suggested in the Timaeus. According to
the  story  of  creation which Timaeus tells, the artificer of the world
made  its sensible particulars copy an eternal pattern. When many things
seem  to  be  of one nature or to share the same quality, they are so by
virtue  of  imitating  the  eternal  forms,  which are not only absolute
essences in themselves, but are also the models for created or generated
things.  But  in the Parmenides Socrates seems unable to defend the view
that  "the  ideas  are,  as it were, patterns fixed in nature, and other
things are like them, and resemblances of them— for what is meant by the
participation of other

[994b]
things  in  the  ideas, is really assimilation to them." Nor can he meet
other  objections which Parmenides raises, such as the difficulty of two
or more individuals participating in one idea; for if the idea is wholly
in  one  individual,  it  cannot  be in another, and if each of the many
partake  of  the  idea  only  in  part,  then the idea cannot be one and
indivisible.  "In what way, Socrates," Parmenides asks, "will all things
participate in ideas, if they are unable to participate in them as parts
or  wholes?" In the course of the discussion Parmenides rebukes Socrates
for being squeamish about positing absolute essences for "such things as
hair,  mud, dirt, or anything else which is vile and paltry," as well as
for things which are beautiful and good. But his main intention seems to
be  to  leave  Socrates with an unresolved dilemma. On the one hand, the
difficulties  with the theory of Ideas make the denial of their separate
existence  reasonable; on the other, the denial of their existence seems
to  make  thought and reasoning impossible, because it deprives the mind
of  its  proper  objects.  Some  of  Aristotle's  arguments  against the
separate  existence  of  universals  repeat  the  objections  raised  by
Parmenides, to which no answer is given in the dialogues of Plato. If it
were  not  for  the  fact that Aristotle attributes to Plato himself the
theory  he  criticizes, the dialogues would leave us in some doubt as to
whether  it  is  Plato  or  his followers, the Platonists, who hold that
theory.  But  whether  or  not Aristotle's criticisms apply to Plato—and
even  if  they  involve  some  misunderstanding  of  his  doctrine—  the
objections  Aristotle  raises  help define his own position. To say that
the  Forms "are patterns and that other things share in them," Aristotle
writes,  "is  to  use  empty words and poetical metaphors." In his view,
"the  most  paradoxical  thing  of  all  is the statement that there are
certain  things  besides  those in the material universe, and that these
are  the  same as sensible things except that they are eternal while the
latter  are  perishable."  To  posit  the separate being of the forms of
things  seems to him a useless multiplication of existences. To say that
"there must be Ideas of all things that are spoken of universally" is to
make substances of ideas.

[995a]
Those  who  say  the Forms exist would be right, Aristotle concedes, "if
they  are  substances."  He does not think it is impossible to establish
the  existence  of  imperishable  and  insensible  substances,  but such
substances,  rffKey  exist,  would  not  stand  in  relation to sensible
substances  as universal to particular, or as one to many. His objection
to  the  theory  of  Ideas  is  that,  in  speaking ofabsolute beauty or
beautyitself,  of  the idea Man or man-itself, the Platonists do no more
than  add  words  like  "absolute"  or "itself" to the names of sensible
things, and posit the existence of these absolutes or universal over and
above  the  existence  of the sensible particulars having the same name.
Aristotle's  own  position  seems  to be that only individual substances
exist, whether they are sensible or intelligible, perishable or eternal,
and that "no universal can be a substance" or exist separately in and of
itself.  He  does  not thereby deny the reality of the universal. On the
contrary, he holds that "without the universal it is not possible to get
knowledge,"  i.e.,  scientific knowledge in distinction from mere sense-
perception.  "All  knowledge is of the universal and of the 'such,' " he
writes;  yet in adding that "substance is not a universal, but is rather
a  'this,'  " Aristotle indicates what is for him the central problem of
the  universal.  Aristotle's  theory  that  the mind abstracts universal
concepts from the particulars of senseexperience, and that such concepts
are  the  terms  of  the  universal propositions constituting scientific
knowledge,  leaves  a  question  concerning  the  object  of science. If
science  is knowledge of real existence, not of our own concepts, and if
only  individual things really exist, then how can the object of science
be the universal, not the individual ? What is the object apprehended by
the  universal concept 'man' or 'horse' ? Aristotle's answer seems to be
that  if  the  universal  term  'man'  can  be  truly  predicated  of an
indefinite  number  of  individuals, it must signify something common to
them  all.  The  common  nature  or  properties  shared  by  a number of
individuals cannot be actually universal, however, since, in Aristotle's
opinion,  whatever  exists  in  the  individual— the form as well as the
matter  of  the  concrete  substance—  is itself individual. He finds it
necessary  to say, therefore, that the universal exists potentially, not
actual-

[995b]
Chapter  96:  UNIVERSAL  AND  PARTICULAR  961  ly,  whenever a number of
individuals  have  something in common. The form which constitutes human
nature,  for example, is an individual form in Socrates and Callias; but
it  has  the potentiality of being universal insofar as it is capable of
being  separated  from  the  individual  matter  of these two men by the
abstractive  power  of  the  mind.  When the abstraction takes place and
results  in  the  universal concept 'man,' the form thus received in the
mind  becomes  actually  universal and enables the mind to apprehend the
nature  common  to  all  individual  men.  Aristotle's doctrine that the
universal  exists  potentially  in individual things and actually in the
abstract  concepts  of  the  mind,  later  comes  to be called "moderate
realism,"  in  contrast  to  the  extreme  realism of the position which
asserts  the  actual subsistence of universals, outside of minds as well
as  apart from individual things. It affirms that the universal has what
Russell  calls "extra-mental reality," even though it severely qualifies
the real being of the universal by saying it is neither actual nor subAs
Aristotle  denies  unqualified reality to universals, later philosophers
deny  that  they have any reality at all. Those who are sometimes called
"conceptualists"  admit  the  existence  of  universals only as abstract
ideas  in  the  mind.  The  "nominalist"  position,  taken by Hobbes and
Berkeley,  goes  further  and  even  denies  abstract ideas or universal
notions  in  the mind. It holds that universality is a property of words
alone, which manifests itself in the meaning of general or common names.
In the progressive complication of the controversy, each of the theories
which  has  acquired a traditional title undergoes modification as it is
reformulated  in  different contexts. This is especially true of the two
middle  positions  which  tend  to  lean  toward one or the other of the
extremes.  Locke,  for example, may be called a conceptualist because he
thinks  that  general names derive their universal significance from the
abstract  ideas  they signify. But though he denies that by means of our
universal  notions  or  abstract  ideas we can know the real essences of
things, he does not deny real essences. To this

[996a]
962  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  extent, he may lean toward moderate realism more
than  a  philosopher  like  William  of  Ockham,  or a psychologist like
William  James  who says, " We must decide infavor ofthe conceptualists,
and  affirm  that  the power to think things, qualities, relations . . .
isolated  and abstracted from the total experience in which they appear,
is  the  most  indisputable  function  of  our  thought." Similarly, the
development  which Aquinas gives to Aristotle's views, especially in the
point  he  adds  concerning  ideas  in  the  mind  of  God— the "eternal
exemplars"—may   be   a  form  of  moderate  realism  which,  more  than
Aristotle's,  has some affinity with the theory of self-subsistent ideas
as the eternal archetypes for sensible particulars. Aquinas presents his
own  theory  in  the  context  of stating his understanding of the issue
between  Plato  and  Aristotle. "Plato supposed," he declares, "that the
forms  of  natural  things subsisted apart from matter, and consequently
that  they  are  intelligible, for a thing is actually intelligible from
the very fact that it is immaterial. And he called such forms species or
ideas. From a participation in these, he said that even corporeal matter
was  formed, in order that individuals might be naturally established in
their proper genera and species. . . . But since Aristotle did not allow
that  the  forms  of  natural  things exist apart from matter, and since
forms  existing in matter are not actually intelligible, it follows that
the  natures or forms of the sensible things which we understand are not
actually intelligible." Aquinas speaks of the forms (which exist only in
union  with  matter  in  individual  things)  as "universal forms," even
though  they are not actually intelligible. "We abstract universal forms
from  their  particular  conditions,"  he says, and by doing so we "make
them  actually  intelligible."  The  Platonic  error,  in  his  opinion,
consists  in  thinking  that "the form of the thing known must be in the
knower  in  the  same  manner as in the thing known." From the fact that
"the  form  of the thing understood is in the intellect under conditions
of   universality,  immateriality,  and  immobility,"  Plato  concluded,
erroneously,  according to Aquinas, "that the things which we understand
must  subsist  in  themselves under the same conditions of immateriality
and immobility."

[996b]
As  Aquinas  states  what  he takes to be Aristotle's correction of this
error, it consists in distinguishing two ways in which the universal can
be  considered.  "First, the universal nature may be considered together
with   the  intention  of  universality.  And  since  the  intention  of
universality—£72:.,  the relation of one and the same to many— is due to
intellectual  abstraction,  the universal thus considered is subsequent,
in  our  knowledge.  .  .  .  Secondly,  the universal can be considered
according  to the nature itself (for instance, animality or humanity) as
existing  in  the  individual." In the order of generation and time, the
potential   universal  precedes  the  actual  universal;  that  is,  the
universal  form  or  common  nature  exists  in  individual things under
conditions  of  particularity  before  it exists in the human mind under
conditions  of  abstraction.  Even as forms exist in things (though they
are  not  actually  universal  prior  to  their  existence  as universal
concepts  of  the  mind),  so  they  have a mode of being prior to their
existence in things. Here Aquinas attributes to Augustine the correction
of  a  pagan  error  and  the  substitution for it of a Christian truth.
"Whenever   Augustine,   who  was  imbued  with  the  doctrines  of  the
Platonists,"  he  writes,  "found  in their teaching anything consistent
with  the faith, he adopted it; and those things which he found contrary
to  faith,  he amended." Plato, positing "the forms of things subsisting
of  themselves apart from matter," had supposed that, "just as corporeal
matter,  by  participating in the Idea of stone, becomes a stone, so our
intellect,  by  participating  in  the  same  Idea, has knowledge of the
stone."  But, according to Aquinas, "it seems contrary to faith that the
forms  of things should subsist of themselves without matter outside the
things  themselves.  .  . . Therefore, in place of the Ideas defended by
Plato, Augustine said that the exemplars of all creatures existed in the
divine  mind.  It  is  according to these that all things are formed, as
well  as  that  the  human  soul  knows all things." The solution to the
problem  of  universals  which  Aquinas  proposes  seems  to  involve  a
threefold  distinction  with respect to the being of forms: they are (i)
in the human mind by

[997a]
abstraction   from  our  experience  of  sensible  particulars;  (2)  in
individual  things;  and (3), prior to their existence in things, in the
divine  mind.  But  Aquinas  himself  says  that  in  God  there  is  no
distinction  between  universal  and-par=  ticular;  nor  does knowledge
"exist in God after the mode of created knowledge, so as to be universal
or particular." The divine ideas, whether considered as the exemplars by
which God creates things or as the types and likeness by which God knows
them,  are  not  abstractions  and  so  do  not  have  the  universality
characteristic of human concepts. Whereas our abstract universals do not
give  us knowledge of individual things in their singularity, the divine
ideas,  according  to  Aquinas,  are  the principles whereby God at once
knows the singular and the universal. If the universal as such is not in
the  divine  mind, neither, in Ockham's opinion, is it really in things—
not  even potentially. Everything that exists in an individual— its form
and  matter,  all  its  parts and properties— is the unique and singular
possession  of  that  individual.  If there were something common to two
things,  it  would have to be one and two at the same time. As common to
both,  it  would  have  to  be  somehow one and the same in both, yet as
existing in each, it would have to be distinct in each; it would have to
be as singular in each as each individual thing in which it existed. But
since Ockham regards this as impossible, he concludes that "no universal
really  exists outside the soul in an individual substance; nor is it of
the  substance or the being of things, but is only in the soul." The old
riddle  thus  returns  in  another form. If abstract concepts are in the
mind—or  if,  as  Ockham suggests, the logical "terms 'animal' and 'man'
are  universals  because predicable of many, not through themselves, but
for  the  things  they  signify"—  then  what  in  reality is the object
signified by the universal term or concept? It cannot be the many unless
the  numerically  distinct individuals are also alike as men or animals;
and  how  can they be really alike, as opposed to being merely conceived
as  such,  unless  they  have  a  common nature or attribute and to that
extent  are  one  and  the  same  ? Locke puts the question another way.
"Since

[997b]
Chapter   96:   UNIVERSAL   AND  PARTICULAR  963  all  things  are  only
particulars,"  he  asks, "how come we by general terms, or where find we
those  general  natures they are supposed to stand for?" He answers that
"words  become  general,  by  being made the signs of general ideas; and
ideas  become  general by separating from them the circumstances of time
and  place,  and  other  ideas  that  may determine them to this or that
particular  existence. By this way of abstraction, they are made capable
of  representing more individuals than one; each of which having in it a
conformity  to  that abstract idea is (as we call it) of that sort." But
if, as Locke goes on to say, general natures (or genera and species) are
"nothing else but abstract ideas, more or less comprehensive, with names
annexed  to  them," then in what way do the many individuals represented
by  one abstract idea have in them "a conformity to that abstract idea"?
Locke's  position  seems  to  avoid  this  problem. "Abstract ideas," he
writes,  give  us  "no  knowledge  of existence at all." Only particular
propositions  are  about  real  existences.  "Universal propositions, of
whose  truth  or  falsehood  we  can have certain knowledge, concern not
existence."  Such  propositions  express  nothing  but "the agreement or
disagreement  of  our  abstract  ideas."  In  addition  to denying their
reference  to  reality,  Locke  regards  abstract  ideas as "fictions or
contrivances  of  the mind," which are imperfect precisely to the extent
that  they  succeed in being universal. The general idea of triangle, he
observes,  must be neither equilateral, isosceles, nor scalene, "but all
and  none  of  these at once. In effect, it is something imperfect, that
cannot  exist."  Where  Locke  seems  to  mean only that there can be no
counterpart  in  reality  to  our general ideas, Berkeley, observing the
same  "imperfection"  in  what are supposed to be abstract ideas, denies
that  they  can exist even in the mind. "I deny," he writes, "that I can
abstract from one another, or conceive separately, those qualities which
it  is  impossible  should  exist  so  separated,  or that I can frame a
general notion by abstracting from particulars." Berkeley admits that "a
man may consider a figure merely as triangular, without attending to the
particular  qualities of the angles or relations of the sides. So far he
may abstract; but

[998a]
964 THE GREAT IDEAS this will never prove that he can frame an abstract,
general,  inconsistent  idea of a triangle." He recognizes also that all
our  common  names  have  general  significance,  but he rejects Locke's
explanation of their general meaning. "A word becomes general," he says,
"by being made the sign, not of an abstract general idea, but of several
particular  ideas,  any  one  of  which it indifferently suggests to the
mind."  Does  a  nominalist  like Berkeley escape the persistent riddle?
Does  it not reappear in the question which must be asked: what is there
in  this  set  of  particular ideas, as opposed to some other set, which
makes  it  possible  for  a  general  name  to  signify  any one of them
indifferently  ?  If each particular idea were absolutely unique and had
nothing  in  common  with  any other, would the universal have any truth
even  on  the  level of names ? James thinks the nominalists are somehow
forced  to  "admit  a quasi-universal, something which we think as if it
were  universal,  though  it is not; and in all that they say about this
something  which  they explain to be 'an indefinite number of particular
ideas,' the same vacillation between the subjective and objective points
of  view  appears. The reader never can tell," James continues, "whether
an  'idea'  spoken of is supposed to be a knower or a known. The authors
themselves  do  not  distinguish. They want to get something in the mind
which  shall resemble what is out of the mind, however vaguely, and they
think  that when that fact is accomplished, no farther questions will be
asked."  Some  philosophers  deal with the universal and particular in a
manner  which  leads away from rather than into the traditional problem.
To  Spinoza,  for  example,  universal  terms,  such as man, horse, dog,
represent  confused  images drawn from sense-experience. They provide us
with  an  inadequate  knowledge  of things. To know things adequately we
must  proceed  "from  an  adequate idea of the formal essence of certain
attributes  of  God to the adequate knowledge of the essence of things."
Quite  opposite  to  the abstract universal (or indeterminate image from
experience),  the  adequate  idea  is universal in the totally different
sense of comprehending an infinite whole.

[998b]
Hegel   also  distinguishes  between  abstract  universality  and  "true
infinity   or   concrete   universality."   The   former  is  "something
determinate;  i.e., being abstraction from all determinacy, it is itself
not   without  determinacy;  to  be  something  abstract  and  one-sided
constitutes  its  determinacy,  its  defectiveness,  its  finitude." The
antithesis  of the abstract universal is the particular, the determinate
content  implicitly contained in an abstract universal. The synthesis is
the   individual;  not  the  particular  individual,  but  the  infinite
individual  which  is  the concrete universal. The concrete universal is
neither  "the  universal  as  a  common characteristic, nor the abstract
universality  which  stands outside and over against the individual, the
abstract  identity  of the Understanding." It is "the universality which
has  the  particular  as  its  opposite, but the particular which by its
reflection into itself has been equalized with the universal. This unity
is individuality, not individuality in its immediacy as a unit . . . but
individuality  in  accordance with its concept." For Hegel, the concrete
universal  is  the  immanent Idea itself. It is the manifestation of the
Absolute  Spirit  or God. However it is formulated and whether or not it
is  or  can  be  solved,  the  problem  of the universal seems to have a
critical bearing on the discussion ofmany other great ideas. In addition
to  the  chapters  enumerated  at the beginning, we can now see that the
universal,  the  particular,  and  the  individual are implicated in the
consideration  of  Being  and  Infinity, Form and Idea, Matter and Mind,
Experience,  Induction,  Judgment, and Science. These chapters, in turn,
do  more  than  throw  light  on  the  various solutions proposed to the
problem  of the universal. They help us understand the importance of the
problem—  certainly  to the philosophers of the western tradition. If in
the broader context of connected issues, it is discovered that the proof
of man's distinctive rationality, or even the possibility of an immortal
soul, may depend on the affirmation or denial of universals, at least as
concepts  in the mind, then, perhaps, some tolerance and patience may be
won for the burdensome technicalities of the problem.

[999a]
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS i. The distinction and relation between^mtversal and
particular:  essence and individual, 2. The problem of the universal 967
2a. The reality of universals: their actual existence as separate forms,
or  their  potential  existence in the forms of things 2b. Universals as
abstractions  or  concepts  in  the  human  mind  2c.  The  reduction of
universals  or  abstractions  to the meaning of general or common 3. The
problem  of the individual: the principle of individuality; the concrete
universal  4.  Universals  and particulars in the order of knowledge 40.
Universals   as   objects  of  knowledge:  the  intuitive  or  reflexive
apprehension  of  universals  4#.  Universals in relation to the angelic
intellect and the divine mind \d. The distinction between particular and
universal in relation to the distinction between percept and concept, or
between   image  and  idea  \e.  The  inadequacy  of  our  knowledge  of
individuals:  their  indefinability  &if. The generality of science: the
universality  of  its principles 5. Universal and particular in relation
to  grammar  and logic 970 5#. The distinction between proper and common
names   5^.  The  classification  of  universals:  their  intension  and
extension; their degrees of generality 5f. Particulars and universals in
predications  or judgments: the quantity of propositions; the universal,
the  particular,  and  the  singular  judgment <^d. Rules concerning the
universality   and  particularity  of  premises  in  reasoning:  the  6.
Applications  of  the  distinction  between universal and particular 6a.
Particular  and  universal  in  the  analysis  of  matter  and  form 6b.
Universal  and  particular  causes  6c.  The  universality  of  law  and
particular  dispensations of equity 7. Universality and particularity in
relation  to  the  distinction between the objective and the subjective,
the  absolute and the relative ja. The issue concerning the universality
of  truth  yc.  The  issue  concerning  the  universality  of  aesthetic
standards: the subjective universal

[999b]
Chapter 96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 965 PAGE names 968

[1000a]
5  966  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
tently  rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. 1. The
distinction  and  relation between universal and particular: essence and
individual,  whole  and  part,  class and member, one and many, same and
other,  the  common  and the unique 7 Plato: Laches, 32c-33a / Cratylus,
113c-114a,c  /  Meno,  174a-179b / Euthyphro, 193c / Phaedo, 242c-243c /
Republic,  bk  hi,  333b-d;  bk  vi,  383d-388a;  bk  vii,  392a-394a  /
Parmenides,  486d-489a  /  Theaetetus,  514b-515d;  534d536b  / Sophist,
559a-c; 569d-574c / Philebus, 610d-613a 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[i a20-b9] 5b-c /
Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  ii [77*5-9] 105d106a; ch 24 [85*31^3]
116c-d;  [8 / Heavens, bk i, ch 9 [277b26-278b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
505b-506b; ch 7
[988 a34-b
5] 506c; bk hi, ch 3
[998
a2o]-cH 4
[ioooa
4]  517a-518d;  ch 4 [iooi a i8-b6] 520a-b; bk v, ch 3 [ioi4b3-i3] 534d;
ch 6 [ioi6b i73] 537b-c; ch 25
[1023^7-19]
545b-c; ch 25
[io23b22]-cH
26
[io23b32]
545c; BK ioi7a vii, ch 10
[io34b35-io36a25] 558b-559d; ch
13  562a-563a;  ch  15  563c-564c;  bk  x,  ch  1-2 578b,d-580d esp ch i
[1052^8-37] 578d; bk xii, ch 1
[io69ai8-25]
598a; ch 4-5 599d601a; ch 8 [1074^2-39] 604d; bk xiii, ch 10

[1000b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c  and  d to the upper and lower halvesof theright-
handsideof  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance  in  the  use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface.
618c-619a,c / Soul, bk hi, ch 5
[43oaio-i7J
662c 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2 142a143b; tr ix 205a-207a,c
18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 34, 670c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  3,  a  2, rep 3 15c-16a; a 3 16a-d; a 4, rep i
16d17c; a 5, ans 17c-18b; q 4, a i, rep 3 20d-21b; q 11, a 3, ans 49a-c;
q 13, a 9, ans and rep 2 71b-72c; q 14, a 6, ans 80a-81c; q 16, a 4, rep
1  97a-c;  q  30, a 3, ans and rep i 169b170c; a 4 170c-171b; q 42, a 4,
rep  3 227d228d; q 77, a 1, rep 1 399c-401b; q 79, a 5, rep 2 418c-419b;
q  85, a 3 455b-457a; part i-ii, q 2, a 5, rep 2-3 618d-619c; q 10, a i,
rep  3  662d-663d; q 46, a i, ans 813b814a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 81, a 1, ans 163a-164d; part hi, q 2, a i, ans 710a-711c; a
2,  ans 711d-712d; a 5, rep 2 715a-716b; q 7, a 13, rep 3 755c756c; part
in  suppl, q 92, a i, ans 1025c1032b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 55b-c
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  332a-333b  31 Descartes: Rules, vi
8a-10a / Objections and Replies, 123a

[1001a]
5  Chapter 96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 2 to 2b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  37-40  386b388b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xi,
sect 9 145b-c; ch xxxii, sect 6-8 244b-d; bk in, ch 1, sect 3 251d-252a;
ch  hi  254d260a; ch vi 268b- 283a passim, esp sej 277c-278b, sect 36-37
279a-b; bk iv, ch vii, sect 9 338d-339b; ch ix, sect i 349a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 6-19 405d-410c esp sect 12-16 408a-409d;
sect  126-128  438b-d  35  Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div 125,
507b  [fn  1]  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
115b-c;   193a-200c  esp  197b-198a,  199b-c;  211c-218d  45  Lavoisier:
Elements  of Chemistry, pref, 4b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro,
par  24  17d-18a;  part  hi, par 184 64b; par 353 112b-c / Philosophy of
History, intro, 165a-b; 182d183c 53 James: Psychology, 166a-b; 308a-312a
2.  The  problem  of  the universal 2a. The reality of universals: their
actual  existence as separate forms, or their potential existence in the
forms  of  things  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  87d-89a;  113c-114a,c / Phaedo,
224a-225a;  228d-230c; 231c-232a; 240b-246c esp 242c-244b / Republic, bk
vi,   383d-388a;   bk  ix-x,  426d-429b  /  Timaeus,  447a-d;  457c-d  /
Parmenides,  487c-491a  /  Theaetetus,  535a-536b / Sophist, 561d-574c /
Philebus,  610d-613a  /  Seventh Letter, 809c810b 8 Aristotle: Posterior
Analytics, bk i, ch ii
[77V9] 105d-106a; ch 24
[85
a3i-b  3J  116c-d;  b  1  5-21]  117a  /  Sophistical Refutations, ch 22
[i78b37~39] 246c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6 505b-506b; ch 9 508c-511c; bk
hi, ch i
[8
b i3-i8] 514a; [995 b3i-996a io] 514b-c; ch
[995
a i9] 516a-d; ch 4
[999^4ioooa
a34-998 2
[997
4] 518a-d; [iooi a4-b25] 519d-520c; ch 6
[ioo2b n-3i] 521b-d; bk
vii, ch 8
[io33b i9~
1034^] 556d-557b; ch 10 [1035^8-32] 559b; ch 11
[1037^-9] 560c; ch
13-14 562a-563c; ch 15
[i040a8-b4]
564a-c; ch 16
[ic>4ob28104^4] 564d-565a; bk
viii, ch 6 569d-570d esp [i045 a i4-i9] 569d-570a, [i045 b 8-25] 570c-d;
bk ix, ch 8
[io5ob35-io5i a2] 576d577a;
bk  x,  ch  2 580b-d; ch 10 586c-d; bk xi, ch 1 [io59a39-b 8] 587b-c; bk
xii, ch i
[1069^7-37] 598b; ch 3 [1070^-30] 599b-d;
ch 5
[io7i ai7-3o] 600d-601a; bk
xiii,  ch  i  607a-c;  ch  4-5  610a-611d; ch 9 [io86a29-b i2] 618b-c 17
Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr v, ch 5-8 307a308c 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  i,  par  9,  3a;  bk  x,  par 19 76a-b / City of God, bk viii, ch 6,
269b-c; bk xi, ch 27, 337d-338a

[1001b]
967 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 3, ans 16a-d; q 8, a 4,
rep i 37c-38c; q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; q 15, a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 16, a
7,  rep 2 99a-d; q 29, a 2, rep 4 163b164b; q 30, a 4 170c-171b; q 76, a
2,  rep  4  388c-391a; q 79, a 3 416a-417a; a 5 418c419b; q 84, a 1, ans
440d-442a;  a  4,  ans  and  rep  1-2 444d-446b; a 5 446c-447c; a 6, ans
447c-449a;  a  7,  ans  and  rep i 449b-450b; q 85, a 1, ans and rep 1-2
451c-453c; a 2, rep 2 453d-455b; a 3, rep 1,4 455b-457a; part 1—n, q 29,
a  6,  ans and rep 1,3 748b749a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q
2,  a  5,  rep 2 715a-716b; part hi suppl, q 92, a 1, ans 1025c-1032b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  59d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
43d-44c  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch hi, sect 11 257a-b; ch
vi,  sect 26-27 274d-276a; sect 30, 277a-b 42 Kant: judgement, 551a-552c
53  James:  Psychology,  309a-311a  passim;  873a-b  2b.  Universals  as
abstractions or concepts in the human mind 7 Plato: Parmenides, 489b-c 8
Aristotle:  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  ii a5-9] 105d-106a; ch 24
116b-118a / Physics, bk vii, ch 3 [247b i-7] 330b / Soul, bk i, ch
[77
1
[402b5-9] 631c-d; bk
ii, ch 5
[4i7b i7-24]
648b-c;  bk hi, ch 4 [429 a i8-29] 661c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x,
par  19  76a-b  /  City  of  God, bk viii, ch 6-7, 269b-d; bk xi, ch 27,
337d-338a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c;
q  16,  a 7, rep 2 99a-d; q 75, a 5, ans and rep 1 382a-383b; q 76, a 2,
ans and rep 3-4 388c-391a; q 79, a 3 416a-417a; q 84, a 1, ans and rep 1
440d-442a;  a  2,  ans  442b-443c;  a  3  443d-444d;  a 4, ans and rep 1
444d-446b; q 85, a 2, rep 2 453d-455b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi, q 2, a 5, rep 2 715a-716b; part hi suppl, q 92, a 1, ans 1025c-1032b
28 Harvey : On Animal Generation, 332a-333b 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies, 136d137a; 216d-217d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40, schol
i  387b-388a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15 98d-99a;
bk  ii, ch xi, sect 9 145b-c; ch xii, sect 1, 147b-c; ch xxxii, sect 6-8
244b-d;  bk  hi,  ch i, sect 3 251d-252a; ch in, sect 6-20 255c-260a; ch
v-vi  263d-283a  passim, esp ch v, sect 1-3 263d-264a, ch vi, sect 26-51
274d-283a;  bk  iv,  ch  hi, sect 31 323c-d; ch vi, sect 4 331d-332b esp
332b;  ch  vii,  sect  9  338d-339b  esp  339a-b;  ch ix, sect i 349a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 6-19 405d-410c passim; sect 126
438b-c

[1002a]
(2.  The  problem  of  the  universal. 2b. UrnversaIs as abstractions or
concepts in the human mind.) 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect xii, div
122  505c-d  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  intro,  par  24  17d-18a 53 James: Psychology, 305a-311a 2c. The
reduction  of  universals  or  abstractions to the meaning of general or
common  names  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  55b-56a  31 Descartes:
Objections  and Replies, 136d-137a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40,
schol  i 387b-388a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 32,
278a-b  35  Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 11-12 407b-408b; sect
15   409a-b;   sect  18-19  410a-c;  sect  122  437b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  125,  507b [fn 1] 53 James: Psychology,
309a-311a   3.   The   problem  of  the  individual:  the  principle  of
individuality; the concrete universal 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[i a2o-b
9] 5b-c / Metaphysics, bk hi, ch 4
[999
b24-ioooa  4] 518c-d; ch 6 [1003*5-16] 521d-522a,c; bk v, ch 6 536a-537c
passim; bk vii, ch 10 [i035b 28-32] 559b; ch 11
[1037*5-9]
560c; ch 15
[io39b27-3i] 563d; bk
x, ch i
[1052*28-37]
578d;  bk  xiii, ch 9 [io86*29]-ch 10 [1087*25] 618b-619a,c 17 Plotinus:
Fifth  Ennead,  tr vii 238a-239b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
3,  a  2,  rep 3 15c-16a; q 7, a 1, ans 31a-d; q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; q
14,  a  ii, ans and rep 1,3 84c-85c; q 15, a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 29, a 1
162a-163b;  q  47,  a  2,  ans  257b-258c;  q  50,  a 4, ans and rep 3-4
273b-274b;  q  56,  a  i,  rep  2  292a-d;  q  57,  a 2, ans and rep 2-3
295d-297a;  q 65, a 3, ans 341c-342b; q 75, a 4, ans 381b-382a; a 5, ans
382a-383b;  a  7,  ans  384d-385c;  q  76, a 2 388c-391a; q 84, a 2, ans
442b-443c; q 85, a i, ans and rep 1-2 451c-453c; a 5, rep 3 457d-458d; a
7,  rep 3 459c-460b; q 89, a 4, ans 476c-477a; q 115, a 1, ans and rep 3
585d-587c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q  2,  a  2, ans
711d-712d;  a  3,  rep  3  713a-714c;  PART  III  SUPPL,  Q 92, A I, ANS
1025c-1032b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii, def 7 373c 35 Locke: Human
Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvii 218d-228c passim, esp sect 3 219d-220a 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a- 7a; intro, par 5-9 13a-14d; par 21
17a-c; par 24 17d-18a; par 26 18b-c; par 31-32 19c-20b;

[1002b]
968  THE  GREAT IDEAS 2c to *<b part in, par 207 69b-c; par 229 75b; par
352353  112b-c;  par  360  113d-114a,c;  additions, 2 115d; 7 117b-c; 19
119c-d  /  Philosophy  of History, intro, 156d-157b; 158a-159b; 160b178a
esp 165a-b, 176b-c; 179c-d; 182d-183c; part in, 285b-d 4. Universals and
particulars  in  the  order  of  knowledge  4a. Universals as objects of
knowledge:  the  intuitive  or  reflexive  apprehension  of universals 7
Plato:   Cratylus,  113c-114a,c  /  Meno,  179c183a  /  Phaedo,  224a-c;
228a-230c; 231c- 232a / Republic, bk hi, 333b-d; bk v, 370d-373c; bk vi,
383d-388a  /  Parmenides,  489d-491a  / Theaetetus, 535b-536a / Sophist,
570a-574c  / Seventh Letter, 809c-810b 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics,
bk 1, ch ii a5-9] 105d-106a / Physics, bk i, ch 5
[188^6-189*9] 264b-c; bk vii, ch 3 [247b i~7]
330b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6
[987*29^7]
505b-c;  ch  9  [990^-28]  508d-509a;  bk hi, ch 4 [999*24^5] 518a-b; bk
xiii,  ch 9 [1086* 29-b i2] 618b-c / Soul, bk 11, ch 5 [4i7bi7~23] 648bc
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[ii39b25~34]
388c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 19 76a-b
[77
/  City  of  God,  bk  viii,  ch  6-7, 269b-d; bk xi, ch 27, 337d-338a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  ii, ch 38 654b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i, q 14, a ii, rep 1 84c-85c; q 55, a 3, rep 1-2 291a-d; q 76, a 2,
rep  3-4  388c-391a;  q  84,  a  i,  ans 440d-442a; a 4, ans and rep 1-2
444d-446b;  a  5  446c-447c;  a  6,  ans  447c-449a;  a 7, ans and rep 1
449b-450b;  q 85, a i, ans and rep 1-2 451c-453c; a 2 453d-455b; q 86, a
1,  ans  and rep 4 461c-462a; a 2, rep 4 462a-463a; part i-ii, q 1, a 2,
rep  3  610b-611b;  q  2, a 6, ans 619d-620d; q 29, a 6, ans and rep 1,3
748b-749a; q 30, a 4, rep 2 751c-752b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
hi,  q  10,  a  3,  rep  2  769d-771b;  part  hi  suppl,  q 92, a 1, ans
1025c-1032b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch hi, sect 31 323c-d
53  James  :  Psychology, 308a-314a passim 4b. Universals in relation to
the  angelic intellect and the divine mind 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 14, a 1, rep 3 75d-76c; a ii 84c-85c; q 16, a 7, rep 2 99a-d;
q  22,  a  2,  ans  128d-130d;  q 55, aa 2-3 289d-291d; q 57, a i, rep 3
295a-d;  a  2  295d-297a;  q 84, a 2, ans 442b-443c; aa 4-5 444d-447c; q
105,  a  i,  rep 2 538d-539c; q 106, a 1, ans 545d-546d; q 108, a i, ans
552c-553c

[1003a]
i 4<r to 4/ Chapter 96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 969 4c. The abstraction
of  universal  concepts from the particulars of sense 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 21 87d89b / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[7i a i6-b8]
97b-d;  ch ii [77*5-9] 105d-106a; bk Hj^ch-h^ b20-ioob 3J 136a-d / Soul,
bk in, ch 4
[429*18-29] 661c; ch 7 [43i ai4]-CH 8 [432
[99
a  i4]  663d-664d  / Memory and Reminiscence, ch i b30-45oa io] 690c-d 9
Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 8
[1142*13-19]
391b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; o 14,
a  ii, rep i 84c-85c; q 16, a 7, rep 2 99a-d; q 40, a 3, ans 215c216d; q
55,  a  3 291a-d; q 57, a 2, rep 1,3 295d-297a; q 75, a 5, ans and rep i
382a383b; q 76, a 2, ans and rep 3-4 388c-391a; q
[449
79, aa 3-5 416a-419b; o 84 440b-451b; q 85, aa 1-4 451c-457d; q 86, a i,
ans  and rep 4 461c-462a; a 2, ans and rep 2,4 462a-463a; q 89, a 4, ans
and  rep 1 476c-477a; part i-ii, q 29, a 6, ans and rep 1,3 748b-749a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi, q 2, a 5, rep 2 715a-716b; part hi
suppl,  q  92,  a  1,  ans  1025c-1032b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
332a-334d  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  iv,  53b  /  Objections and
Replies, 167c-d; 215b-c; 216d-217d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 40,
schol  1-2  387b-388b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch i, sect 15
98d-99a;  bk ii, ch xi, sect 9 145b-c; ch xii, sect 1, 147b-c; bk hi, ch
hi, sect 6-9 255c-256c; ch iv, sect 16 263b-c; ch vi, sect 32 277c-278b;
bk  iv,  ch  vii,  sect  9  338d-339b  esp 339a-b; ch ix, sect i 349a 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, intro, sect 6-16 405d-409d passim, esp sect
12-16  408a409d;  sect  5  414a-b;  sect 97-100 431d-432c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  122  505c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,
341b-342b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 45d-46a; 115bc 53 James: Psychology,
308a-311a  4d.  The  distinction  between  particular  and  universal in
relation  to  the  distinction  between  percept and concept, or between
image  and  idea  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  113c-114a,c / Phaedrus, 126b-c /
Republic,  bk  hi,  333b-d;  bk  vi, 386d-388a / Theaetetus, 534d-536b /
Seventh  Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 18
b33ioob5]  136b-d  / Physics, bk i, ch 5 [189*5-9] 264b-c / Metaphysics,
bk i, ch i [980*28-98 110b-c; ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 19
[99
b 13] 499a-500a; bk hi, ch 4 [999*24^5] 518a-b; bk vii, ch 10
[io35b35-io36*i2]
559b-c / Soul, bk 11, ch 5 [417^7-28] 648b-c

[1003b]
b3-6] 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[
397d  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  x, par 16-19 75b-76b 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 57, a 2 295d-297a; q 81, a 3, ans 430c-431d;
q  84, aa 1-2 440d-443c; aa 6-8 447c-451b; q 85, a 1 451c-453c; a 3, ans
455b-457a; q 86, a i, ans 461c-462a; part i-ii, q 17, a 7, ans 690d692a;
q  29,  a  6,  ans  and rep 1,3 748b-749a 31 Descartes: Meditations, vi,
96d-97a  /  Objec47  tions  and Replies, 136d-137a; 138d-139a; 218c-d 31
Spinoza:   Ethics,   part   ii,   prop  44  389b-390a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xi, sect 8-9 145b-c; bk iv, ch vii, sect 9,
339a-b  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, intro, sect 6-19 405d-410c passim,
esp  sect  12-16  408a409d; sect 126-128 438b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
341d-342a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 23a-24a; 115b-c 53 James: Psychology,
307b-311a  esp  307b-308b, 311b-312b [fn 1]; 480b-484a esp 482b-483b 4e.
The  inadequacy  of our knowledge of individuals: their indefinability 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 5
[2b6~37] 6c-7a /
Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 31 120a-c / Physics, bk 1, ch 5
[1 88^6-189*9] 264b-c; bk
vii, ch 3
[247b i-7] 330b
/  Metaphysics,  bk  hi,  ch  4  [999*24-b  5]  518a-b; ch 6 [1003*5-17]
521d-522a,c; bk vii, ch 10 [io35b33-io36*i2] 559b-c; ch 15 563c-564c; bk
xi,  ch  2  [io6ob  20-23] 588d; bk xiii, ch 10 618c-619a,c 9 Aristotle:
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch 2 [1356^8-35] 596b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  3, a 3, ans 16a-d; q 12, a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 13, a 9, ans
71b-72c;  q 14, a ii 84c-85c; q 15, a 3, rep 4 93b-94a; q 29, a i, rep i
162a-163b;  q  56,  a  1,  rep  2 292a-d; q 57, a 2 295d-297a; q 86, a 1
461c-462a;  Q 89, a 4 476c-477a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q
ii,  a  1, rep 3 772b-773a 53 James: Psychology, 312a 4f. The generality
of science: the universality of its principles 7 Plato: Republic, bk vi,
383d-388a;  bk vii, 391b-398c 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch
4-5 100a-102b; ch ii
[77*5-9] 105d-106a; ch 1314 107c-109a; ch 18 110b-c; ch 24 116b-118a;
ch 31 120a-c; bk ii, ch 18-19 135d-137a,c / Physics, bk 1, ch 1 259a-b /
Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1 499a-500b; ch 2
[982*21-25] 500c; bk
vi, ch 1
[1026*23-33] 548b-c; bk
vii,  ch  15  563c-564c;  bk xi, ch 7 [io64b6-i3] 592d-593a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk vi, ch 3
[1 139^5-34]
388c; bk x, ch 9 [n8ob i3-23] 435b-c / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 2 [i356b28-35]
596b-c

[1004a]
(4.  Universals  and  particulars  in  the  order  of knowledge. 4f. The
generality  of science: the universality of its principles.} 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 84, a 1, ans 440d-442a 28 Harvey: On Animal
Generation,  332a-334d esp 334c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 98c
/  Novum  Organum, bk i, aph 17-25 108a-d; aph 103-106 127d-128c; bk ii,
aph  5 138b139a; aph 33 161b-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part ii, 47c-d /
Objections  and  Replies,  167c-d  33  Pascal: Vacuum, 358a-b 34 Newton:
Principles,  la-2a;  bk  hi, rules 270a-271b / Optics, bk hi, 541b-542a;
543a-b 34 Huygens: Light, pref, 551b-552a 35 Locke: Human Understanding,
bk  iv,  ch  i,  sect  9,  308d-309b;  ch hi, sect 14 316b-d; sect 28-29
322a-323a;  sect  31  323c-d;  ch  vi,  sect  4-16  331d-336d  passim 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge,  intro,  sect 12 408a-b; sect 15-16 409a-d;
sect 62-66 425a-426a; sect 103-109 433a-434b passim; sect 126-128 438b-d
35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect i, div 9 454c-455a; sect iv, div 26
460b-c; sect xii, div 132, 509c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 14c-15a; 195d-198a
esp  197b-198a;  211c-218d  / Judgement, 562d-563b 45 Fourier: Theory of
Heat,  169a-b; 177a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 120 136b-c
/  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  182d183c; part iv, 361a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  671a-672a;  861b-886a  passim,  esp  862a-863a,  865b-866a,
869a-871b,  873a-874a, 882a-884b 5. Universal and particular in relation
to grammar and logic 5a. The distinction between proper and common names
8   Aristotle:   Interpretation,  ch  7  [17*37-40]  26d  /  Sophistical
Refutations, ch 22
[i78b38-i79*
10] 246c / Metaphysics, bk vii, ch 10 [i035b 28-32] 559b; ch 11
[1037*5-9]
560c; ch 15
[1040*8-14] 564a
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 9 71b-72c; a ir 73c-74b; q
30,  a  4,  ans  170c171b;  q  33,  aa  2-3  181c-183c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-h,  q  9, a 2, ans 424b-425a 23 Hobbes* Leviathan,
part  i,  55b-c  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch i, sect 15
98d-99a;  bk ii, ch xi, sect 9 145b-c; bk hi, ch 1, sect 3 251d-252a; ch
hi, sect 1-9 254d-256c, sect 12 257bc; ch vi, sect 42 280bc 35 Berkeley:
Human Knowledge, intro, sect 11-12 407b-408b; sect 18-19 410a-c

[1004b]
970  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5  to  5c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 341b-342b 45
Lavoisier:  Elements  of  Chemistry,  pref,  4b-c  53 James: Psychology,
310a-311a;   447b-448a  5b.  The  classification  of  universals:  their
intension   and   extension;   their  degrees  of  generality  7  Plato:
Theaetetus, 535c / Sophist, 569d-574c 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 2
[i a20-b2]
5b-c; ch 3
[i b io]-CH 5 [3^4] 5d-8a / Prior Analytics,
bk  1,  ch  27  [43*25-44]  60c-d  /  Posterior  Analytics,  bk  1, ch 4
100a-101b; ch 19-22 110c-115b; bk 11, ch 13 131b-133c / Topics, bk i, ch
4-9 144b-147b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 9 [991*2732] 509c; [992^-13] 510d;
bk hi, ch i
[995
b 27-31] 514b; ch 3
[998b
i 4-999*23] 517b518a; bk v, ch 3
[ioi4b3-i3] 534d; ch 25
[io23b22-25]
545c; bk vii, ch 12
[1038*5]-
ch 13
[1039*23]
561c-563a; bk x, ch 2
[io53b i6-23] 580b-c; bk
xi, ch i
[1059^11060*1] 587d-588a
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 4, rep 1 16d-17c; a 5, ans
17c-18b; q 30, a 4, ans and rep 3 170c-171b; q 40, a 3, ans 215c-216d; q
50,  a  2, rep 1 270a-272a; q 66, a 2, rep 2 345d-347b; q 76, a 3, rep 4
391a-393a;  a  6,  rep  1-2  396a-d;  q 77, a 4, rep i 403a-d; q 85, a 1
451c-453c;  a 3, rep 4 455b-457a; a 5, rep 3 457d-458d; q 86, a 2, rep 4
462a-463a;  q  88,  a  2,  rep  4  471c-472c;  part i-ii, q 18, aa 5-1 1
697a-703a  passim;  q 30, a 4, rep 2 751c-752b; q 35, a 8, ans and rep 3
779c-780c;  q 46, a 1 813b-814a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 61, a 1, rep 1 54d-55c; part hi, q 10, a 3, rep 2 769d-771b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 55b-c 35 Locke : Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xvi,
sect  1 165c-d; bk hi, ch hi, sect 8-9 256a-c; ch iv, sect 16 263b-c; ch
vi, sect 32-33 277c-278c 53 James: Psychology, 870b-871a 5c. Particulars
and   universals   in   predications   or  judgments:  the  quantity  of
propositions; the universal, the particular, and the singular judgment 8
Aristotle: Categories, ch 1-3 5a-d; ch 5
[2*u-3b23] 6a-8a / Interpretation, ch 7 [17*37b i6]
26d-27a / Prior Analytics, bk i, ch i
[24*16-21] 39a / Posterior Analytics, bk i, ch 10
[77*3-4] 105d / Soul, bk in, ch 11 [434*16-22]
667a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 7
[1107*27-31]
352d-353a; bk hi, ch i
[mob28-i 111*2]
356c-d; bk vii, ch 3 [ii46b35-i 147*9] 397a-b;
[u 47*25-b i8] 397c-398a
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 13, a 9, ans 71b-72c; q 30, a 4,
ans  and  rep  3 170c-171b; q 85, a 5, rep 3 457d-458d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 76, a 1, ans 141a-c; q 77, a 2 145d-147c

[1005a]
Chapter   96:  UNIVERSAL  AND  PARTICULAR  5d  to  la  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding, bk iv, ch v, sect 10 331a; ch vi 331b-336d; ch ix, sect i
349a;  ch xi, sect 13-14 357d-358c; ch xvii, sect 8 377b-d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  14c-15c;  39c-41c  esp 39d40a; 51d-52b 5d. Rules concerning the
universality and particularity of premises in reasoning: the quantity of
the  conclusion in relation to the quantity of the premises 8 Aristotle:
Prior  Analytics,  bk  i,  ch  4-7  40d45b; ch 24 58b-d; ch 26 59d-60b /
Posterior  Analytics, bk i, ch 14 108d-109a; ch 24 116b118a 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk vii, ch 3
[ii46b35H47b i8]
397a-398a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 2
[i357a23-b2 4 ] 596d-597c
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 86, a 1, rep 2 461c-462a 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 76, a 1, ans 141a-c; q 77, a 2
145d-147c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch xvii, SECT8 377b-d 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 110d-112d esp HOd-110c; 118a-c /Judgement, 540a-b esp
540b  [fn  1]  6.  Applications of the distinction between universal and
particular  6a.  Particular  and universal in the analysis of matter and
form  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  v,  ch  28  546b-c; bk vii, ch 10
[io35b28-32]  559b; ch ii [io37a 5-9] 560c; bk xii, ch 4-5 599d-601a; bk
xiii, ch 10 618c-619a,c esp [io87a io-25]619c / Soul, bk 11, ch 1
[412*6-8]
642a; bk hi, ch 5
[430*10-17] 662c
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead, tr iv 50a-57c / Sixth Ennead, tr hi, ch 3
282a  c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 2, rep 3 15c-16a; a
3,  ans 16a-d; q 4, a 1, rep 3 20d-21b; q 7, a 1, ans 31a-d; q 14, a ii,
ans  84c-85c; q 19, a 6, ans 113c-114d; q 29, a 1, rep 4 162a-163b; a 2,
rep  3 163b-164b; a 3, rep 4 164c-165c; q 47, a 2, ans 257b258c; q 65, a
3,  ans  341c-342b;  q 75, a 4, ans 381b-382a; q 76, a 2 388c-391a; a 3,
rep 2 391a-393a; q 84, a 2, ans 442b-443c; q 85, a 1, rep 2 451c-453c; a
5,  rep  3  457d-458d; a 7, rep 3 459c-460b; q 115, a i, ans and rep 1-3
585d-587c; q 119, a i, ans 604c-607b; part i-ii, q 2, a 6, ans 619d-620d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi,  q 2, a 2, ans 711d-712d 6b.
Universal  and particular causes 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk i,
ch 2
[7i b33-72a6] 98b-c / Physics, bk
i,  ch  5 [i88b 26-189*9] 264b-c / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 6 505b-506b; bk
v, ch 2 [1014*15-25] 534b-c; bk xii, ch 4-5 599d-601a

[1005b]
971  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, a 2 24b-25a; q 14, a ii,
ans  84c-85c;  q 19, a 6, ans and rep 3 113c-114d; q 22, a 2 128d130d; q
55,  a  3,  rep  3  291a-d;  q  57,  a  2, ans 295d-297a; q 65, a 3, ans
341c-342b;  q  84,  a  2,  ans  and  rep  3  442b-443c;  q 115, a 2, ans
587c-588c;  part i-ii, q 1, a 2, rep 3 610b-611b; q 9, a 6 662a-d; q 46,
a  i, ans 813b-814a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi, q 4, a 4, rep
1  733a-734a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, prop 16 362a; prop 28 365c-366a
6c.  The  universality  of  law and particular dispensations of equity 7
Plato:  Laws, bk vi, 699d-700b; bk ix, 754a-d; bk xi, 777d-778b; bk xii,
785c-786a  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 7 382c-383a; ch 10 385c-386b /
Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  16  485b486c;  bk iv, ch 4 [1292*19-37] 491c-d /
Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 1
[i354*26-b i6] 593b-d; ch 13
[i373b i-i7] 617c-d; [i374*i7-b24] 618c-619a
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 1, rep 2 205b-206b; q
96, a 6 235a-d; q 97, a 4 238b-239b; q 100, a 8, ans and rep i 259d-261a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 94d; part ii, 133d-135d; 144c; 156b-c 35
Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  ii,  sect  6  26b-c; ch xi, sect 135-139
55d-58a; sect 142 58b; ch xiv, sect 159 62b-c; ch xvi, sect 195 70a-b 36
Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 152b-154a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i,
3c  38  Rousseau:  Social  Contract, bk ii, 397a-d; 399b-400c 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  73d-74b; 77d-78a; 88c-89d; 91b-c; 96d 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  60a-c  /  Practical  Reason,  305d-307d  /  Science  of  Right,
399c-400a  43  Federalist:  number 78, 232c-d; number 80, 237a-b; number
83,  244b-245c  passim; 248d249a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  209  69d;  par  214  71a-c;  par  216 71d-72a; par 219 72d-73a; par
223-229  73c-75b;  additions,  132  137d-138b;  134  138bc;  141  139c /
Philosophy   of   History,   part  iv,  364d-365a  7.  Universality  and
particularity  in  relation to the distinction between the objective and
the  subjective,  the absolute and the relative la. The issue concerning
the  universality  of  truth  7  Plato:  Cratylus,  86a-d  / Theaetetus,
517b532a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk iv, ch 5-6 528c531c; bk x, ch 1
[io53*3i-b3] 580a; bk
xi, ch 6 590d-592b

[1006a]
(7.  Universality  and  particularity  in  relation  to  the distinction
between the objective and the subjective, the absolute and the relative,
la.  The  issue  concerning  the  universality  of truth.) 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of  Things, bk iv [469-521] 50b-51a 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
ii,  ch  20  164c-166c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,ch 18 523a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 2, a 1, rep 3 10d-lld; q 16, a 1,
rep  2  94b-95c;  a  7, rep 2 99a-d; q 85, a 2, ans 453d-455b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  56b;  65c;  part  iv,  267b  25 Montaigne: Essays,
209c-212a;   240c-246a;   251d-253c;   259c-261c;   267c-d;   271b-272d;
318a-319b;  439c-440a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 13a-c; 57d58b /
Novum  Organum,  bk i, aph 67 115d116a 31 Descartes: Rules, 1-11 la-3b /
Discourse,  part  11,  46b-c  / Meditations, v, 95b-96a / Objections and
Replies, 2 7 2a- 2 73a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 72 181a-184b esp 182b; 381385
238b-239a  / Vacuum, 358b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, intro, sect 4-7
94a-95c  esp  sect  7  95a-c;  bk  iv,  ch  xi,  sect 13-14 357d-358c 35
Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, pref, 404a; intro, sect 1-5 405a-d; sect 40
420b;  sect  101-102  432c-433a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, secti, div
8-9,  454b-455a esp div 9, 455a; sect xii, div 126128 507a-508a 42 Kant:
Pure   Reason,   36a-37b;   129c-130a;   194b-c;  202b-203c;  218d-222b;
224a-227a;  240b-243c  /  Practical  Reason, 311d-313d 43 Mill: Liberty,
274b-293b  passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of History, intro, 160b178a 53
James:   Psychology,  639a-646a;  671a-672a;  880b-881a  7b.  The  issue
concerning  the universality of moral principles 5 Euripides: Phoenician
Maidens
[499-502]
382b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 97d-98a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 58a-62d /
Cratylus,  86a-d  /  Meno,  183b-184c;  187d-190a,c / Gorgias, 271b-277c
passim / Republic, bk vi, 383d-386c / Theaetetus, 525c-526a; 528b-532a /
Laws, bk x, 760c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3 339d-340b; ch 7
[io98a25-b8] 343d-344a;
bk ii, ch 2
[1104*1-9] 349b-c; bk hi, ch 4 359a-c; bk v,
ch 7 382c-383a; bk vii, ch ii [11 52^-3] 403c; ch 12
[ii52b25~33] 403d-404a; bk
x, ch 5
[1176*3-29] 430c-d / Politics, bk
i,  ch 6 [1255* 32-37] 449a; bk vii, ch i [1323*34-36] 527b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk iv, sect 4 264a

[1006b]
972  THE  GREAT  IDEAS lb to 1c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 13
16c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  hi,  ch  14 663c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  i,  a  7,  ans  614c-615a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  77,  a  2 145d-147c; q 94, a 4 223d-224d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  parti, 57d-58a; 61d-62a; 91a-92b; 95d-96b; part ii,
140b;  part  iv,  272c  25  Montaigne: Essays, 46b-47c; 93b-c; 115b119d;
124c-125a;  146b-c; 209c-212a; 28Ia-284c 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii,
sc ii [254-257] 43b / Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii [51-60] 114a-b
31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  ii,  46b-c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
appendix,  371b372d;  part  iv, pref 422b,d-424a; prop 8 426b-c; prop 64
444b  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 29b-44a / Pensees, 309 228b; 312
229a; 325 230b-231a; 381-385 238b-239a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
i,  ch  ii,  sect  1-21  103d-110a  passim;  bk  ii,  ch xxi, sect 55-56
192c-193b  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding, sect xii, div 132, 509c-d 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 330d-331c; 343d-345c; 362a-b / Political 'Economy,
369a-370a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,  434c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,
173b-174a;  239a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  253d-254d;
260a-261d;   264b-d;   265c-266d;   270d-271a;   273d-287d  esp  275b-d,
277d-279d,  281c-283d / Practical Reason, 294c-295d; 297a-314d esp 301a,
307d-314d;  317a-b  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 372 b-d;
377c-d  /  Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 388b-c; 390b,d-391c; 392b-393a /
Science  of  Right,  397a-398b  / Judgement, 478a-479d 43 Mill: Liberty,
269c-270c;  274b-293b  passim  /  Utilitarianism,  445c-446d; 461c-464d;
471b476a,c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 89 35c-d; part 11,
par  107  40b-c;  par 112 41c-d; par 135 47b-d; additions, 71 127b-c; 86
129c;  131  137d  /  Philosophy of History, part ii, 280b-281b 49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man,  314c-316a 50 Marx-Engels : Communist Manifesto, 427a-b;
428b-d  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 194a-195a; 213a-216c; bk xiv,
611a-c;  epilogue  i,  645a646c 53 James : Psychology, 886b-888a 7c. The
issue concerning the universality of aesthetic standards: the subjective
universal  7  Plato:  Ion  142a-148a,c  / Symposium, 167a-d / Statesman,
593d-595a  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  653c656b;  660a-662a;  bk hi, 675c-676b 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 20 265a-b

[1007a]
Ic  Chapter  96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 973 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  vi, ch 2-3 21d31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 371 b-372d 23a /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  ii,  287b-c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 105 193a 18
Augustine:   Confessions,   bk   iv,   par   20  24b-c  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  xii, div / City of God, bk viii, ch 6, 269b-c 132,
509c-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 5, 42 Kant: Pare Reason,
23d
[fn
1]  /  Judgement, a 4, rep 1 25d-26c; part i-ii, q 27, a i^ep-j476a-479d
esp  479a-d;  480d-482b;  488a-492a  737b-d  esp  488a-491c;  513b-516b;
516d-517c; 524d20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, 525a; 540b-542a
q  180,  a  2,  rep  3  608c-609c  44  Boswell: Johnson, 202b; 362b-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  230b-231c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro,
185c-d  26  Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act v, 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  95a-d  /  Descent  of  sc  1  [89-110]  431d  Man,  301c-302a;
462d-463a;  569c;  571c-577d  27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet,  act  ii,  sc ii
[454-471]  esp 573b-c, 575d, 577b-c; 595d-596a 45a 53 James: Psychology,
755a-757b;  886b-888a CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other general discussions of
the  distinction  between  the  universal  and  the particular, see Idea
40(2);  One  and  Many  ic.  The  problem of the reality or existence of
universals,  see  Being  7d(2);  Form  2a,  3b;  Same  and Other 2a. The
character  and  conditions  of individual existence, see Idea if; Matter
ic;  and  for  the problem of our knowledge of individuals, see Form 3b;
Knowledge  5a(4) Discussions relevant to the consideration of universals
as  objects of knowledge, see Form ia; Idea ia; Knowledge 6a(3). Various
statements  of  the theory of abstraction and of the distinction between
sensory  images  the  abstraction  of  universal concepts in relation to
inductive   generalization,   see   Experience  2b;  Induction  ia.  The
universality  of  scientific laws, see Science ^d. Another discussion of
proper  and  common  names,  see  Sign  and  Symbol  2d. The ordering of
universal  concepts  according  to their degrees of generality, see Idea
4M3), 5d; Relation 53(4); Same and Other 3a(i). Universal and particular
in  the  logical  theory  of  judgment  and  reasoning, see Judgment 6a;
Reasoning  2a(2). Other discussions of the good in general and the order
of  goods,  see Being 3~3b; Good and Evil 5a~5d; Happiness 2b-2b(y). The
conception  of  equity  as  rectifying  the  imperfection  of laws which
results  from  their  universality,  see  Justice  iod;  Law  5h.  Other
comparisons   of   history,  poetry,  and  philosophy,  see  History  1;
Philosophy  id;  Poetry 5b; Truth 4b. Other discussions of the true, the
good, and the beautiful as objective or subjective, absolute

[1007b]

[1008a]
974  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  I.  Aquinas.  On  Being and Essence, ch iii-iv .
Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De  Anima,  a  4  Descartes. The Principles of
Philosophy,  part i, 58-59 Hegel. Science of Logic, vol ii, sect i, ch i
I.  S.  Mill.  A  System  of Logic, bk 1, ch 2; bk ii, ch 3 II. Porphyry.
Introduction  to Aristotle's Predicaments Boethius. In Isagogem Porphyri
Commenta  Abailard.  Glosses on Porphyry John of Salisbury. Metalogicon,
bk  ii,  ch  17  Albertus Magnus. On the Intellect and the Intelligible,
TREATISE  I—II Duns Scotus. Reportata Parisiensia, bk i-ii Ockham. Summa
Totius  Logicae . Expositio Aurea et Admodum Utilis Super Artem Veterem,
part   i-ii  Cajetan.  In  De  Ente  et  Essentia  D.  Thomae  Aquinatis
Commentaria Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, iv (4-8), v-vi, XXV John
of  Saint Thomas. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, part ii,
qq 3-12

[1008b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The Great Ideas. T. Reid. Essays on the Intellectual Powers
of  Man,  v Brown. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, vol 11,
pp 458-497 W. Hamilton. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, vol 1 (34-36)
Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual,  series i (9-10) Whitehead and
Russell.  Principia  Mathematica,  PART I, SECT C, D, E; PART II, SECT A
Bradley.  The  Principles of Logic, Terminal Essays, v . Essays on Truth
and  Reality, ch 3 W. E. Johnson. Logic, part i, ch 8, 11 McTaggart. The
Nature of Existence, bk hi Whitehead. An Introduction to Mathematics, ch
2 . Science and the Modern World, ch 10 Santayana. The Realm of Essence,
ch  i-ii  Dewey.  Logic,  the Theory of Inquiry, ch 13-14 Blanshard. The
Nature  of  Thought,  ch 16-17 B. Russell. Principles of Mathematics, ch
4-8 . The Problems of Philosophy, ch 9-10 . Introduction to Mathematical
Philosophy, ch . The Analysis of Mind, lect ii . The Analysis of Matter,
ch  27  . Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, part ii, ch 3, 10; PART
IV, ch 8

[1009a]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE  INTRODUCTION  their  currently  popular
connotations,  the  IN  words "virtue" and "vice" have extremely limited
significance.  Virtue  tends  to be identified with chastity or at least
with  conformity  to  the  prevailing  standards of sexual behavior. The
popular notion of vice retains a little more of the traditional meaning,
insofar  as  it  implies injury to a person's character or health as the
result of strong habitual addictions. But, as in the case of virtue, the
things  which  are  popularly  called "vices" are largely concerned with
pleasures  or  sensual indulgences. In the tradition of the great books,
however, the scope of these terms and the range of the problems in which
they  are  involved  seem to be co-extensive with morality; or, in other
words,  with  the broadest consideration of good and evil in human life,
with what is right and wrong for man not only to do, but also to wish or
desire,  and  even  to  think. For some of the great moral philosophers,
other  terms—such  as duty for Marcus Aurelius and Kant, or pleasure and
utility  for Mill—seem to be more central. But for Plato, Aristotle, and
Aquinas  virtue  is  a  basic  moral  principle. By reference to it they
define  the  good man, the good life, and the good society. Yet even for
them  it is not the first principle of ethics. They define virtue itself
by  reference  to  a more ultimate good— happiness. For them the virtues
are  ordered to happiness as means to an end. The ancient enumeration of
particular  virtues  may show the range of things comprehended under the
notion  of  virtue  generally.  It may also further sharpen the contrast
with  the  contemporary tendency to use the words "virtue" and "vice" as
if  they  applied only to matters which fall within the sphere of one of
the  virtues. That one is the virtue which both Plato and Aristotle call
"temperance," and which they 975

[1009b]
conceive  as  concerned chiefly with the bodily appetites and pleasures.
Plato  and  Aristotle  give somewhat different enumerations, but courage
and  justice are as fundamental for them as temperance; and when certain
virtues  come  later  to  be  classified  as  the  cardinal or principal
virtues,  these three are always named together. In that classification,
there  is  a  fourth—prudence  or, as it is sometimes called, "practical
wisdom."  Plato's  enumeration  of the virtues in the Republic also adds
wisdom  to temperance, courage, and justice. This indicates at once that
the  ancient conception of virtue as the quality which makes a man good,
extends  to  his  mind  as  well  as  to his character— to the sphere of
thinking  and  knowing  as  well  as  to  desire,  emotion,  and action.
Aristotle makes this explicit by dividing all the virtues into moral and
intellectual,  or  excellences  of  character  and ofmind. He names five
intellectual  virtues:  in  addition  to  wisdom  and prudence (which he
distinguishes  as  speculative  and  practical  wisdom),  he  lists art,
science, and what he calls "intuitive reason," which Aquinas later calls
"understandThe  division  of  the  virtues  into  moral and intellectual
leads, in Aristotle's analysis, to the further distinction between those
intellectual virtues— understanding, science, wisdom which represent the
possession  of speculative insight or theoretic knowledge, and those—art
and  prudence—which  represent  skill  in  practical  thinking or in the
application  of knowledge to production and action respectively. Because
it is concerned with action, or moral conduct, the virtue of prudence is
most  closely associated with the moral virtues of justice, courage, and
temperance.  The  grouping  together  by  Aquinas  of  these four as the
cardinal  virtues carries the implication that the remaining four {i.e.,
art and the three virtues of the speculative rea-

[1010a]
976  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  son)  play  a secondary role. The implication is
simply  that  a man may be made good as a scientist or good as an artist
by the acquisition of these virtues, but he is not made good as a man by
these  virtues,  nor  do they enable him to lead a good life and achieve
happiness, as do the moral virtues accompanied by prudence. In line with
the  principle  by  which  he  regards  certain  virtues  as cardinal or
indispensable  for  human  rectitude and welfare, the Christian moralist
goes  further  than  the  moral  philosopher in developing the theory of
virtue.  Considering  man's  limitations and his fallen nature, he holds
that  more than all the natural virtues (i.e., the virtues which men can
attain   by  their  own  effort)  is  required  for  salvation  for  the
supernatural  end  of  eternal  happiness.  Faith,  hope,  and  charity,
according  to St. Paul, are indispensable to lift man's life to a plane,
and  direct  it to a goal, which exceed his nature. These gifts of God's
grace  are  subsequently  treated  by  Augustine  and Aquinas as virtues
supernatural,  not  natural  virtues.  Aquinas  specifically  calls them
"theological  virtues"  to  distinguish  them  from  other  supernatural
endowments,  such as the infused moral virtues and the gifts of the Holy
Ghost. The reader may observe that of all the virtues so far named, only
the  three  theological virtues are not the subject of separate chapters
in  this  collection  of  great ideas. The chapters on Courage, Justice,
Temperance,  Prudence, Wisdom may include discussions of these qualities
which  do not specifically treat them as virtues. Certainly that is true
of  the  chapters  on  Art  and  Science,  and the chapter on Principle,
wherein  the  virtue  of  intuitive reason or the understanding of first
principles  is  considered.  Nevertheless,  that  all  but  one of these
chapters bear the name of the traditionally recognized virtues indicates
how widely and variously they make their appearance throughout the great
books—by  example  and  comment  in  poetry  and  history  as well as by
definition  and  analysis  in  the  ethical  and political treatises. In
contrast,  the  theological  virtues appear only in Christian, not pagan
literature, and then mainly in religious rather than secular writing. It
is  also  of  interest  to note the relation which this chapter bears to
those dealing with other

[1010b]
fundamental  concepts of moral philosophy or theology. Some of the terms
mentioned   in   the  foregoing  paragraphs—duty,  pleasure,  happiness,
good—name  chapters which are co-implicated with this one in the problem
of  how men should live and what they should seek. The Outline of Topics
will  reveal  still  othersknowledge,  desire,  emotion,  reason,  will,
wealth,  honor,  friendship, teaching, family, state, citizen, law, sin,
and  grace—each  of  which is (or indicates) the title of a chapter that
treats  of  matters  related  to  virtue  as  cause  or  consequence, as
psychological   factor  or  external  condition.  One  chapter  not  yet
mentioned  has  maximum relevance for most of the authors who offer some
analysis  of virtue. The chapter on Habit treats an idea that is crucial
to  the  definition  of  virtue.  Aquinas,  for  example,  allocates the
discussion  of  virtue  and  vice  to his Treatise on Habit in the Summa
Theologica. He divides this treatise into questions concerning habits in
general  and  questions  concerning  good and evil habits—or virtues and
vices—in particular. But the notion that virtue combines the elements of
habit  and  goodness  is  not  peculiarly  his.  With varying degrees of
emphasis  and  explicitness,  it  appears  in  Plato  and  Aristotle, in
Augustine,  Bacon,  Hegel,  and  James.  Kant  alone expressly dissents,
declaring  that  virtue  "is  not  to  be defined and esteemed merely as
habit, and ... as a long custom acquired by the practice of morally good
actions."  The discussion of virtue originates in the dialogues of Plato
and  the  Ethics of Aristotle with a number of related questions. Meno's
opening  question—"Can you tell me, Socrates, whether virtue is acquired
by teaching or by practice; or if by neither teaching nor practice, then
whether  it comes to man by nature, or in some other way?"— requires, in
the  opinion  of  Socrates, other questions to be faced: what virtue is,
how  virtue  is related to knowledge, whether virtue is one or many, and
if  many, how the several particular virtues are related to one another.
In  the  course of the dialogue, each of the alternatives is considered.
If  virtue were identical with knowledge, it could be taught and learned
just as geometry is. If virtue were simply a hab-

[1011a]
it,  it  could  be  acquired  by practice, that is, by the repetition of
similar  acts.  But  neither  practice  nor  teaching seems by itself to
explain  how  men come by virtue, and even less whjt-vk 5— tuous fathers
should  so often fail to produce virtue in their sons. Yet Socrates does
not completely dismiss these possibilities or the possibility considered
at the end, that "virtue comes to the virtuous by the gift of God." What
truth there is in each of them, he concludes, cannot be determined until
we  know  precisely  what  virtue  is. Another dialogue, the Protagoras,
pursues  a  similar inquiry and seems to reach a similarly indeterminate
conclusion.  The  relation  of  virtue  to  knowledge  here leads to the
question  whether  "wisdom  and  temperance  and courage and justice and
holiness"  are  "five  names of the same thing." To the extent that each
depends on knowledge of what is good and evil, they would seem to be, if
not   identical,  at  least  inseparable  aspects  of  the  same  thing.
Protagoras  objects on the score that a man may be courageous and at the
same  time  "utterly  unrighteous,  unholy,  intemperate, ignorant." But
Socrates  finally gets him to admit reluctantly that courage consists in
knowledge,  and cowardice in ignorance, of what is and is not dangerous.
It  was  Protagoras,  however, who originally contended against Socrates
that virtue can be taught. The reduction of all the virtues to some form
of  knowledge  would therefore seem to confirm his opinion. Socrates, in
winning  the argument about virtue and knowledge, seems to overthrow his
own  view  that virtue cannot be taught. "The result of our discussion,"
Socrates  says  at  the  end,  "appears to me to be singular. For if the
argument had a human voice, that voice would be heard laughing at us and
saying: 'Protagoras and Socrates, you are strange beings; there are you,
Socrates,  who  were  saying that virtue cannot be taught, contradicting
yourself  now  by  your  attempt to prove that all things are knowledge,
including  justice  and  temperance and courage—which tends to show that
virtue can certainly be taught. . . . Protagoras, on the other hand, who
started  by  saying that it might be taught, is now eager to prove it to
be  anything  rather  than  knowledge.'  "  The  only way "this terrible
confusion of our

[1011b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE 977 ideas" might be cleared up, Socrates
suggests,  is  for  the  conversation  to go on "until we ascertain what
virtue  is." But that particular conversation does not go on; nor do the
definitions  of  virtue  which  are proposed in other Platonic dialogues
seem  to be decisive on the point whether virtue is knowledge or whether
it  can  be  taught.  In  the  Laws, for example, the Athenian Stranger,
saying that "harmony of the soul, taken as a whole, is virtue," proposes
that education should consist in training "the first instincts of virtue
in children" by producing suitable habits in them. But his training does
not seem to be, like ordinary teaching, the inculcation of knowledge. It
is  "training  in  respect  of pleasure and pain," whereby we are led to
hate  what  we  ought  to  hate  and love what we ought In the Republic,
Socrates  compares  the  harmony produced by virtue in the soul with the
harmony of the parts in a healthy body. "Virtue is the health and beauty
and  well-being  of  the  soul,"  he declares, "and vice the disease and
weakness  and deformity of the same." Though wisdom consists in the rule
of  the  other parts of the soul by reason in the light of "knowledge of
what is for the interest of each of the parts and of the whole," it does
not  seem  to be the whole of virtue, nor does Socrates suggest that men
become  virtuous  simply by becoming wise. On the contrary, he intimates
that  "good  practices  lead to virtue, and evil practices to vice," and
that,  like certain bodily qualities, the "virtues of the soul . . . can
be  implanted  by  habit  and  exercise."  It is sometimes supposed that
Aristotle  differs  from  Plato  on  fundamental points in the theory of
virtue.  The  fact that Aristotle criticizes Socrates for "thinking that
all  the  virtues are forms of practical wisdom," seems to imply a basic
disagreement  on the relation of virtue to knowledge. But Aristotle also
remarks  that  Socrates  was  right  "in  saying  they implied practical
wisdom." His own view that the moral virtues of courage, temperance, and
justice  are  inseparable  from the intellectual virtue of prudence does
not  seem  to  differ substantially from the statements of Socrates that
"virtue must be a sort of wisdom or prudence" and that "virtue is either
wholly or partly wisdom." Such differ-

[1012a]
978  THE  GREAT IDEAS ence as there is appears to be not so much in what
is  being affirmed or denied as in the' manner of statement or analysis,
and  beyond  that,  perhaps,  in  a  method  of exposition which permits
Aristotle  to give definite answers to questions Plato's dialogues often
leave unanswered. Aristotle's analysis, of course, sometimes changes the
questions themselves to make them answerable, but this is not always so.
His  summary  of existing opinions concerning the acquisition of virtue—
that  "some  think  we  are  made good by nature, others by habituation,
others  by  teaching"—  is  nearly  equivalent, as an enumeration of the
possibilities,  to  Meno's  opening  question.  But  where  Socrates  in
answering  Meno  contents himself with suggesting that there may be some
truth  in  each  possibility as against the others, Aristotle definitely
affirms  that  the  whole  truth  about  the  matter  combines all three
factors.  "There  are three things," he writes, "which make men good and
virtuous:  these  are nature, habit, rational principle." Even Socrates'
final  point,  that virtue may be a gift of God, seems to be affirmed by
Aristotle's  comment that, in effecting virtue, "nature's part evidently
does  not depend on us, but as a result of some divine causes is present
in  those  who  are  truly  fortunate."  But in the case of two Platonic
questions—  the  one  about  the relation of virtue to knowledge and the
other  about  the  unity  of  virtue Aristotle's analysis transforms the
problem.  His  basic  distinction  between moral and intellectual virtue
turns  the  question  about virtue and knowledge into one concerning the
role which one very special kind of knowledge, represented by the virtue
of  prudence, plays in the formation and operation of good moral habits—
habits  in  the  sphere  of  action  and passion, or of the will and the
emotions.  By substituting a number of distinct intellectual virtues for
the  single  term  'knowledge,' Aristotle can definitely answer both Yes
and  No  to  the question. Not all the intellectual virtues, not art and
science, or even speculative wisdom, are needed for courage, temperance,
and  justice; but if by "knowledge" is meant nothing more than prudence,
then  Aristotle  affirms  these  moral virtues to involve knowledge of a
sort. The distinction between moral and intellectual virtue also enables
Aristotle to reformulate

[1012b]
the  problem  of the unity of virtue. Instead of asking whether there is
only  one  virtue,  having  many  aspects,  or many distinct virtues, he
considers   which   virtues  are  interdependent  and  which  can  exist
separately  from  one another. Virtue has unity in the inseparability of
the  moral  virtues  from  one another and from prudence. The sailor who
appears  to  be  courageous  without  being  temperate, or the thief who
appears  to  be  prudent  without being just, has only the appearance of
these  virtues. But though Aristotle uses the phrase "perfect virtue" to
signify both the integration of these virtues and the perfection of each
when  it  is  integrated  with  the  others, he does not include all the
particular  virtues  in the unity of virtue. Some, like art and science,
can exist apart from prudence or the moral virtues, and they from it. By
showing  how  all of the moral virtues depend upon prudence or practical
wisdom,  Aristotle  thinks he is able to "refute the argument . . . that
the  virtues  exist in separation from each other." But he does not find
any   greater   unity   of   the  virtues  than  is  involved  in  their
inseparability  as  a  result  of  their  common dependence on prudence.
Following Aristotle, Aquinas criticizes those who assert a more profound
unity  by  claiming  that  prudence,  temperance, fortitude, and justice
signify  "only  certain  general  conditions  ... to be found in all the
virtues." This, according to Aquinas, is tantamount to denying that they
are  distinct habits. Insisting that they are really distinct as habits,
Aquinas  nevertheless  suggests  that  "these  four  virtues qualify one
another  by  a  kind  of  overflow. For," he explains, "the qualities of
prudence  overflow into the other virtues in so far as they are directed
by  prudence.  And  each  of the others overflows into the rest, for the
reason  that  whoever can do what is more difficult, can do what is less
difficult."  The  man  who  "can  curb  his desires for the pleasures of
touch,  which  is  a very hard thing to do ... is more able to check his
daring  in dangers of death . . . which is much easier"; the man who can
withstand  the "dangers of death, which is a matter of great difficulty,
is  more able to remain firm against the onslaught of pleasures." As for
justice,  Aquinas  holds  that  legal  justice, "by commanding the other
virtues . . . draws

[1013a]
them  all  into  the  service  of the commonweal." Aristotle also sees a
certain  unification  of the virtues, at least all the moral virtues, in
terms  of justice— the kind of justice he calls "general^ to distinguish
it  from  the special virtue of justice. He conceives general justice as
comprising  all the moral virtues, including special justice, insofar as
all  these  virtues  are  directed toward the welfare of society and the
good of other men. "Justice in this sense," he writes, "is not a part of
virtue,  but  virtue  entire."  Holding that it "is complete virtue, not
absolutely,  but  in relation to our neighbor," he also adds that "it is
complete because he who possesses it can exercise his virtue not only in
himself,  but  towards  his  neighbor as well." Some writers tend in the
opposite  direction toward a greater separation of the virtues. Justice,
according  to  Marcus  Aurelius,  is prior to the other virtues, for "in
justice  the  other virtues have their foundation." In suggesting that a
man  can secure "a favorable and commodious interpretation of his vices"
by  coloring them in the light of his virtues, Bacon seems to accept the
conjunction  of  virtue  with  vice  which  is expressed in the familiar
phrase  "the  defects of one's virtues." That a gentleman may with honor
be  permitted  certain  failings  is  similarly implied by Dr. Johnson's
reference  to  "the genteel vices." This comfortable doctrine that a man
can  be  truly  virtuous  in  some aspects of character while vicious in
others  seems, however, to be rejected by Montaigne and Kant, as well as
by  Plato  and  Aristotle. The standard of Christian virtue is even more
stringent.  What  may  appear to be virtues are, according to Augustine,
"rather  vices  than  virtues so long as there is no reference to God in
the  matter.  For  although  some  suppose  that  virtues  which  have a
reference only to themselves, and are desired only on their own account,
are  yet  true  and  genuine  virtues,  the  fact  is that even they are
inflated  with  pride,  and  are  therefore  to  be reckoned vices." The
theological  virtue  of  charity—  the  love  of  God—  is  held  by the
theologians  to  be  indispensable  to  the  perfection of all the other
virtues  in  a  Christian life. Not only, according to Aquinas, do faith
and hope lack "the perfect character of virtue without charity," but all

[1013b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE AND VICE 979 the other virtues are imperfect in its
absence.  "It  is  possible  by  means  of  human works," he writes, "to
acquire  the moral virtues in so far as they produce good works that are
directed  to  an end not surpassing the natural ability of man. And when
they  are  acquired thus, they can be without charity, even as they were
in  many  of  the  pagans.  But  in so far as they produce good works in
relation  to  a  supernatural  last end, thus they have the character of
virtue  truly  and  perfectly, and cannot be acquired by human acts, but
are  infused by God. Such moral virtues cannot be without charity. . . .
Only  the  infused virtues are perfect, and deserve to be called virtues
absolutely.  .  . . The other virtues, those, namely, that are acquired,
are  virtues  in  a restricted sense." That virtue is good and vice evil
seems  to  go  undisputed  in  the tradition of the great books, even by
Machiavelli  who bemoans the "necessity" of vice in a successful prince.
But  unanimity  on  this point does not preclude a variety of answers to
the  question, What is the good of virtue ? Is it an end in itself, or a
means,  and  if  a means, what end does it serve ? Moreover, what is the
principle of goodness in the virtues? Does it lie in the rule of reason,
in  conformity  to  nature,  in  obedience  to  the  moral  law  and the
imperative of duty, in submission to God's will? Or are the virtues good
only  to  the  extent  that  they  are  useful  and  profitable?  To the
individual  alone  or  to  society  as  well  ?  As  these questions are
differently  answered,  different  conceptions  of virtue appear. Marcus
Aurelius  gives the simplest and most familiar answer. Virtue is its own
reward. "What more dost thou want," the Stoic asks, "when thou hast done
a  man  a  service?  Art  thou not content that thou hast done something
conformable  to  thy  nature, and dost thou seek to be paid for it?" The
virtues  are  not  only  self-rewarding  but they are the only things in
which  a  good  man  can  take  delight.  "When  thou wishest to delight
thyself,"  Aurelius  says,  "think of the virtues of those who live with
thee . . . For nothing delights so much as the examples of the virtues."
Locke  seems  to  make  profit  or utility the source of goodness in the
virtues. "God, hav-

[1014a]
980  THE GREAT IDEAS ing, by an inseparable connexion, joined virtue and
public happiness together," Locke writes, "and made the practice thereof
necessary  to the preservation of society, and visibly beneficial to all
with  whom  the  virtuous  man  has to do, it is no wonder that everyone
should  not only allow, but recommend and magnify those rules to others,
from  whose observance of them he is sure to reap advantage to himself."
The  virtues  seem  to  become  conventional  in  Locke's view. They are
whatever  the members of a particular society deem advantageous. "Virtue
and  vice  are  names  pretended,  and supposed, everywhere to stand for
actions  in their nature, right and wrong; and as far as they are really
so  applied,  they  are  so far coincident with the divine law . . . But
yet,  whatever  is  pretended," Locke adds, "this is visible, that these
names,   virtue   and   vice,  in  the  particular  instances  of  their
application,  through  the  several  nations and societies of men in the
world,  are  constantly  attributed  only  to  such  actions as, in each
country  and  society,  are  in reputation or discredit. . . . Thus, the
measure  of  what  is everywhere called and esteemed virtue and vice, is
the  approbation  or dislike, praise or blame," which establishes itself
in  a  society  "according  to  the judgment, maxims, or fashion of that
place.  .  .  . That this is the common measure of virtue and vice, will
appear," Locke thinks, "to anyone who considers, that though that passes
for  vice  in  one country, which is counted a virtue, or at least not a
vice,  in another; yet everywhere, virtue and praise, vice and blame, go
together."  Hobbes  also regards the names of the virtues as "inconstant
names" varying according to "the nature, disposition and interest of the
speaker  ...  for one man calleth wisdom, what another calleth fear, and
one   cruelty,   what  anotherjustice;  one  prodigality,  what  another
magnanimity."  Yet this does not prevent Hobbes from proposing a list of
virtues which derive their goodness from the natural law. "All men agree
on this," he writes, "that peace is good; and therefore also the ways or
means  of  peace,  which  . . . are justice, gratitude, modesty, equity,
mercy,  and  the  rest  of the Laws of Nature, are good; that is to say,
Moral  Virtues;  and  their  contrary  Vices,  evil."  Moral philosophy,
according to Hobbes, is

[1014b]
"the science of Virtue and Vice" and "therefore the true doctrine of the
Laws  of  Nature  is the true moral philosophy." Though other writers of
moral philosophy "acknowledge the same virtues and vices," Hobbes thinks
they do not see "wherein consisted their goodness; nor that they come to
be praised as the means of peaceable, sociable, and comfortable living."
Like Kant, he criticizes Aristotle's doctrine of the mean; or, as Hobbes
refers  to  it,  the notion that virtue consists in "a mediocrity of the
passions;  as if not the cause, but the degree of daring, madefortitude;
or not the cause, but the quantity of a gift, made liberality" The cause
of virtue, according to Hobbes, is the natural law, commanding men to do
whatever  is  required  for  peace  and self-preservation. In terms of a
quite  different  conception  of  law and duty, Kant also says that "the
difference  between  virtue  and  vice cannot be sought in the degree in
which  certain  maxims are followed, but only in the specific quality of
the  maxims.  In  other  words, the vaunted principle of Aristotle, that
virtue  is  the  mean  between  two vices, is false." It is not Kant but
Spinoza who seems to bear an affinity to Hobbes in the theory of virtue.
Both  make  self-preservation  the end which determines the direction of
virtuous  conduct.  Both  consider  civil peace or the good of others in
relation  to  self.  Both  draw  up  lists  of  moral virtues from their
enumeration of the passions, Hobbes by reference to natural law, Spinoza
in  terms  of  adequate ideas of God's nature. Spinoza identifies virtue
with  power  and holds that "the more each person strives and is able to
seek his own profit, that is to say, to preserve his own being, the more
virtue  does  he  possess."  But  though  he  makes  "the endeavor after
selfpreservation  .  .  . the primary and only foundation of virtue," he
conceives  self-preservation  itself to have its foundation in knowledge
of  God.  "To  act in conformity with virtue," Spinoza maintains, "is to
act  according to the guidance of reason, and every effort which we make
through  reason  is  an  effort to understand, and therefore the highest
good of those who follow after virtue is to know God, that is to say, it
is  a  good  which is common to all men, and can be equally possessed by
all in so far as they are of the same nature." In direct consequence, he

[1015a]
declares that "the good which everyone who When the virtues are defined,
Glaucon  admits follows after virtue seeks for himself, he will that the
question  he  originally  asked  "has  now desire for other men; and his
desire on their bebecome ridiculous." half will be greater in proportion
as  hejias—  The  answer  to  the  question  is  evident as soon greater
knowledge of God." All those who relate virtue to happiness do not do so
in  the  same  way. "The multiplication of happiness," writes Mill, "is,
according   to  the  utilitarian  ethics,  the  object  of  virtue."  He
attributes  to  "a very imperfect state of the world's arrangements" the
fact that "anyone can best serve the happiness of others by the absolute
sacrifice  of  his  own;  yet  so long as the world is in that imperfect
state,"  he  goes  on to say, "the readiness to make such a sacrifice is
the  highest  virtue  which  can  be  found in man." But Mill repeatedly
insists that only an increase of happiness justifies sacrifice, and only
its  contribution  to  happiness  makes  virtue  good. He criticizes the
Stoics  for  striving  "to  raise  themselves  above  all  concern about
anything  but  virtue"  and  for  supposing  that  "he  who has that has
everything.  . . . No claim of this description is made for the virtuous
man  by  the utilitarian doctrine." While admitting that virtue may come
to be desired disinterestedly, as an ingredient of happiness rather than
as a means to it, Mill does not regard virtue as a natural and necessary
condition  of happiness. "Virtue, according to the utilitarian doctrine,
is  not  naturally  and originally part of the end, but it is capable of
becoming so." If there are some who do not desire virtue, either because
it gives them no pleasure or because the lack of it causes them no pain,
they  can  be  happy  without  it. The view taken by Plato and Aristotle
seems  to  be directly contrary. All things which have ends appointed by
their  nature,  Socrates  argues  at the beginning of the Republic, must
also be capable of virtues or excellences whereby to achieve their ends.
If  happiness is the end of the soul or of human life, then we must look
to  such  excellences as the virtue of justice and temperance to provide
the  means.  When Glaucon and Adeimantus ask Socrates to prove that only
the  virtuous  man  can be happy, he undertakes the long analysis of the
parts  of  the  soul  and the parts of the state to discover the virtues
appropriate to each and to the whole.

[1015b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE AND VICE 981 as virtue and happiness are seen to be
reciprocal notions, like cause and effect. Yet Aristotle's definition of
moral  virtue as a habit of choice, consisting in a mean—a mean relative
to ourselves, determined by reason or as the prudent man would determine
it—does  not  immediately  explain  why  happiness  is  defined  as "the
realization  and  perfect  exercise  of  virtue." The connection between
virtue  as  means and happiness as end becomes apparent only in terms of
the  conception  that  happiness is the ultimate end because it includes
all  good  things  and  leaves  nothing  to  be desired. As an object of
desire,  as something worth having in itself, virtue is only one type of
good.   It  does  not  constitute  happiness.  Happiness,  according  to
Aristotle, includes as well such bodily and external goods as health and
pleasure,  friendship  and  wealth.  But  unlike  these other goods, the
virtues alone are capable of producing happiness because, in Aristotle's
view,  they  are the causes of our thinking and acting well with respect
to all other goods. "We do not acquire or preserve virtue by the help of
external  goods,"  Aristotle  says,  "but  external goods by the help of
virtue."  This  applies  to health and pleasures, no less than to wealth
and  friends.  Because the moral virtues, together with prudence, direct
our desires, determine our choices, and govern our actions in accordance
with  reason's  discrimination  between  real  and  apparent  goods, the
exercise  of these habits results in happiness or living well. But since
external goods are goods of fortune and not entirely within our control,
Aristotle  finds it necessary to qualify the definition of happiness. To
the  statement  that  the  happy man is one "who is active in accordance
with  complete  virtue,"  he  adds  that  he is one "who is sufficiently
equipped with external goods, not for some chance period, but throughout
a  complete  life."  According  to  Kant,  "the  connexion of virtue and
happiness  may  be  understood  in  two  ways: either the endeavor to be
virtuous  and  the  rational  pursuit  of happiness are not two distinct
actions, but absolutely identical ... or the con-

[1016a]
982  THE  GRE nexion consists in this, that virtue produces happiness as
something distinct from the consciousness of virtue, as a cause produces
an  effect."  Kant  thinks  that  both the Stoic and Epicurean doctrines
choose  the first of these alternatives. They differ from each other, in
his  opinion,  only  in the way they conceive the identity of virtue and
happiness.  "The  Epicurean  notion  of virtue," he writes, "was already
involved  in the maxim: to promote one's own happiness. According to the
Stoics,  on  the  other  hand,  the  feeling  of  happiness  was already
contained in the consciousness of virtue." Kant's own resolution of what
he  calls  "the  antinomy  of  practical  reason" seems to depend on his
conception of the summum bonum. For him it is not happiness; it consists
rather   in   being  worthy  of  happiness  through  doing  one's  duty.
"Morality,"  he  says,  "is not properly the doctrine how we should ma^e
ourselves  happy,  but  how we should become worthy of happiness." Under
the  moral law, to be happy is not a duty, but to be worthy of happiness
is.  In  Kant's  view, therefore, virtue is related to happiness through
the  medium  of  duty.  Virtue,  he  declares,  is "a coincidence of the
rational  will  with  every duty firmly settled in the character." It is
"the  moral  strength  of  a  man's  will  in his obedience to duty." in
overcoming  obstacles—"the  natural  inclinaBut in addition to being the
will's  strength  tions  which  may  come  into  conflict with the moral
purpose"—virtue,  or  rather "the imperative, which commands the duty of
virtue,"  includes  "besides  the notion of constraint, that of an end."
Not an end that we have, Kant explains, but one that "we ought to have,"
an  end  "which,  therefore,  pure practical reason has in itself, whose
highest,  unconditional  end  (which,  however,  continues to be a duty)
consists  in  this: that virtue is its own end, and by deserving well of
men  is  also  its  own  reward."  The  issue between Kant and Aristotle
concerning  the good of virtue, as a means or an end, involves the whole
of their moral philosophy. It goes to the central conflict between their
fundamental  principles,  which is discussed in the chapters on Duty and
Happiness.  Fundamental  differences  in political philosophy also arise
from different views of virtue in relation to the

[1016b]
AT  IDEAS  forms  of government and the ends of the state. The ancients,
for  example,  define  aristocracy  in terms of virtue. The point is not
only  that  aristocracy is a form of government in which the few who are
most  virtuous rule; it is also that form of government the principle of
which  is virtue, as liberty is the principle ofdemocracy, and wealth of
oligarchy.   Montesquieu   makes  virtue  the  principle  in  republican
government, in contrast to honor as the principle in monarchies and fear
in despotism. "What I distinguish by the name of virtue, in a republic,"
he  explains,  "is  the  love  of  one's  country—  that is, the love of
equality.  It  is  not a moral, nor a Christian, but a political virtue;
and  it  is  the  spring  which sets republican government in motion, as
honor  is  the  spring  which  gives  motion  to  monarchy."  Since  for
Montesquieu  both  democracy  and  aristocracy  are  forms of republican
government,  the  former rests on virtue as much as the latter. Agreeing
that  the  conditions  Montesquieu sets for republican government "could
not  exist  without  virtue," Rousseau criticizes him for failing to see
that,  "the  sovereign  authority  being  everywhere  the same, the same
principle  should be found in every well-constituted state, in a greater
or less degree, it is true, according to the form of government." So for
Mill,  virtue defines the aim of good government itself, without respect
to  particular  forms. "The most important point of excellence which any
form  of  government  can possess," he writes, "is to promote the virtue
and  intelligence  of  the  people  themselves."  The  virtues  which  a
government  promotes,  however,  may be those of the good citizen rather
than  the  good  man.  This  distinction  between civic and moral virtue
occupies  the  ancients, related as it is to the problem of the virtuous
man  living in a bad society—a problem which Socrates actually faces, as
well  as  discusses,  in  the  Apology and the Crito. "The virtue of the
citizen," Aristotle writes, "must be relative to the constitution of the
state  of  which he is a member. . . . Hence it is evident that the good
citizen  need  not  of  necessity  possess the virtue which makes a good
man."  Yet  "in  some  states, the good man and the good citizen are the
same."

[1017a]
In  this  vein Aquinas, considering whether that particular government."
But  Aquinas  also  the  laws  should  try  to  make men good, says of a
contemplates  the  need  for disobeying a civil tyrannical or unjust law
that  "in so far as it has ordinance if it demands too great a sacrifice
of  something of the nature of law, its aim is that jvirtue by requiring
the  citizen  to  violate  the  the citizens be good." At least "it aims
atrbeing^  natural  or the divine law. As Rousseau later obeyed by them;
and  this,"  he  adds, "is to make says, "a man's duty" takes precedence
over them good, not absolutely, but with respect to "that of a citizen."
OUTLINE  OF TOPICS 1. Diverse conceptions of virtue 985 lb. The unity of
virtue and the plurality of virtues ic. The doctrine of virtue as a mean
between  the  extremes  of vice 987 id. Virtue as an intrinsic good: its
relation to happiness le. The distinction between virtue and continence:
the  consequences of the theory of 2. The classification of the virtues:
the correlative vices ia. The division of virtues according to the parts
or  powers  of the soul: the distinc- (1) Enumeration and description of
the  moral  virtues  (2) Enumeration and description of the intellectual
virtues lb. The distinction between natural and supernatural virtues 989
2C.  The  appearances  of  virtue: imperfect or conditional virtues; the
counterfeits  of  virtue;  natural  or  temperamental dispositions which
simulate  virtue  3.  The  order  and  connection of the virtues 3#. The
equality  and inequality of the virtues: the hierarchy of virtue and the
degrees  of  vice $b. The independence or interdependence of the virtues
4.  The  natural  causes  or  conditions  of  virtue  990  4<z.  Natural
endowments:  temperamental dispositions toward virtue or vice; the seeds
or nurseries of virtue /\b. The role of teaching in the spheres of moral
and  intellectual  virtue 4c. Training or practice as cause of virtue or
vice:  the process of habit formation 991 4^. The role of the family and
the  state  in  the  development  of  moral  virtue (1) The influence of
parental  authority  on  the formation of character (2) The moral use of
rewards  and  punishments:  the  role  of  precept  and counsel, (3) The
guidance of laws and customs: the limits of positive law with respect to
commanding  virtue  and  prohibiting  vice  (4)  The  influence on moral
character of poetry, music, and other arts: the

[1017b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND VICE 983 PAGE praise and blame 992 guidance of
history and example 993

[1018a]
984 THE GREAT IDEAS (3) Circumstances as affecting the morality of human
acts  appetite  6. Virtue in relation to other moral goods or principles
6a. Duty and virtue 6b. The relation of virtue to pleasure 6e. Virtue in
relation  to friendship and love ja. The cultivation of virtue as an end
of  government  and  the  state man with the possession of power $a. The
moral consequences of original sin for the acquisition of natural virtue
by  fallen  man  (1) Faith and disbelief (3) Charity and the disorder of
love 9. The advance or decline of human morality

[1018b]
PAGE 4^. The moral quality of human acts 902 (1) The distinction between
human or moral acts and the nonvoluntary or reflex acts of a man (2) The
criteria of goodness and evil in human acts 994 5. Psychological factors
in  the formation of moral virtue 99c 5 a. The emotions and pleasure and
pain  as  the  matter of virtue: the role of desire or 5c. Intention and
choice as conditions of virtue: the role of will 996 6c. The relation of
virtue  to  wealth 997 6d. Virtue and honor 998 7. The role of virtue in
political  theory  999  yb. Civic virtue: the virtue of the good citizen
compared  with  the  virtue  of the good yc. The aristocratic principle:
virtue  as  a  condition  of  citizenship  or public office 1000 yd. The
virtues  which  constitute  the  good  or  successful  ruler:  the vices
associated  8.  The  religious  aspects  of virtue and vice 1002 %b. The
influence of religion on moral character: the indispensability of divine
grace  8c.  The divine reward of virtue and punishment of vice: here and
hereafter  1003 Sd. The theory of the theological virtues 1 004 (2) Hope
and  despair 1005 Se. The infused virtues and the moral and intellectual
gifts  1006  8g. The vows and practices of the monastic life in relation
to virtue 1007

[1019a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 1. Diverse conceptions of virtue 5
Euripides: Electra [367-395] 330c-d / Hecuba
[582-603]
357d-358a / Phoenician Maidens
[452-585] 382a-383a / Iphigenia at Aulis [543572] 429d-430a
7  Plato:  Cratylus,  lOla-c  /  Meno  174a-190a,c / Gorgias, 275b-276b;
282b-284b  /  Republic,  bk  vii,  390a  / Theaetetus, 530b-d / Sophist,
557b-d / Laws, bk i, 650a-b; bk ii, 653a-c; bk v, 686d-690c 8 Aristotle:
Categories, ch 8
[8b26-34] 13d /
Physics,  bk  vii, ch 3 [246*10-248*8] 329c-330d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i,  ch  13-BK  11,  ch i 347b-349b; bk ii, ch 3 [no4b24-27] 350b; ch 5-6
351b-352d; bk hi, ch 5 [ui4b26-3o] 360d-361a; bk vi 387a-394d; bk ix, ch
8
[1169*6-11]
422c-d / Politics, bk i, ch 13
[1260*20-28]
454d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
[1366*33-^4] 608d-609b
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4 108d-110a; bk 11, ch 6 144a-145b 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk ii, sect 16 259a; bk iv, sect 29 266a; bk v,
sect  8  269d-270b; bk vi, sect 16 275b-d; sect 40-46 277d278d; bk viii,
sect  i 285a-b; sect 39 288c; bk ix, sect 1 291a-c; sect 16 293a; bk xi,
sect io303b-c

[1019b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE AND VICE 985 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 174b,d-175a /
Artstides,  265c-d  / Demetrius, 726a-b 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii
6b-10a;  tr  vi,  ch 6 24a-c; tr viii, ch 8, 31c; ch 10 32a-33a / Second
Ennead,  tr  ix,  ch  15 74d-75b / Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 2 107a-108a /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii, ch 5-6 344d-345d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
hi,  par  13-17 16c18a / City of God, bk xiv, ch 6-9 380b-385b esp ch 9,
383d;  bk  xv,  ch  22  416a-c;  bk xix, ch 4, 511d; ch 10 516c-d; ch 12
517b-519a;  ch  25  528c-d  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 27 631d 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 95, a 3, ans 508a-509b 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 54, a 3 24c-25b; q 55 26a-29d; q 56, a 6
34b-35a;  q 63, a 2 64b-65a; q 71, aa 1-3 105d-108b; part ii-ii, q 31, a
3,  ans  538b539c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 62c-63d; 66c-68b passim;
92c-d;  96a-b  25  Montaigne: Essays, 28a-d; 71a-72b; 183a-c; 200d-205b;
389c-390b; 391b-c 26 Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, act ii, sc hi
[1-30] 296b-c
30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 78d-79a; 80b-81a

[1020a]
(1. Diverse conceptions of virtue?) 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, 395a-d;
part  iv 422b,d-450d esp def 8 424b-c, prop i8, schol 429a-d, prop 22-25
430b-431a, prop 36-37 434a-436a; part v, prop 42 463b-d 32 Milton: Comus
33a-56b  esp [589-609] 46b47a / Areopagitica, 390a-b 33 Pascal: Pensees,
352-360  234b-235a;  502 260b-261a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, 90a-d;
bk  i,  ch  11,  sect 5-6 105a-c; sect 18 109c-d; bk ii, ch xxviii, sect
10-12  230b-231c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 165a-166a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  38c-39c;  316a-c  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 173b-174a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b; 257c-d; 270d271a esp 271b
[fn
1]; 273d-277b esp 275b / Practical Reason, 303b-304d esp 304a; 326b327c;
339b-d; 358c / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 366d-369a esp 368d;
371c372a;  373b-d;  376c-379b  esp  377bc  43 Mill: Liberty, 303b-305b /
Utilitarianism,  462a-463b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
150 56c-57a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 198b-203a esp 200c, 202d 53
James: Psychology, 81b-83b la. The relation between knowledge and virtue
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  3  /  Proverbs,  1 :20-2 :22; 8:1-15,20; 9:9;
10:31;  11:12;  14:16-18,22,29; 1 5 :2i ; 28 7 ; 29 :8 / Ecclesiastes, 2
:26  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  1:1-7  esP  i:4» 6; 8; 9:9-10:14;
14:22-27— (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 1:1-7 esp 1:4; 6; 8; 9:9-10:14; 14:2227
/   Ecclesiasticus,   19:22-24;   39:1-11;   43:33;  50:28-29—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  19:19-21; 39:1-15; 43:37; 50:30-31 New Testament: Luke,
23:34  I  John, 3:17-21 / Romans, 2:17-23; 7:15-25; 16:19 / Philippians,
1:9-11  /  Colossians,  1:9-11 / Titus, 1:16 / James, 4:17 / // Peter, 1
:i-ii   5   Euripides:   Hippolytus   [373-387]   228b-c   6  Thucydives
:Peloponnesian  War, BKii,397b-c; 403b 7 Plato: Charmides, 7b-c; 12a-13c
/  Laches,  31a-b;  33a-37d  /  Protagoras  38a-64d  esp  56b, 57d-64d /
Euthydemus,  66d-67a;  69a-71a;  74b-  76b  /  Cratylus,  86c-d  /  Meno
174a-190a,c esp 183b-190a,c / Phaedo, 225d-226c; 230d234c / Republic, bk
i,  306c-308a;  bk  hi,  337b-d;  bk iv, 354d-355a; bk vii 388a-401d esp
389d-390b; bk viii, 409d; bk x, 439b441a,c / Timaeus, 454a / Theaetetus,
530b531a / Laws, bk i, 643c-d; bk hi, 669a-670c; bk v, 689d-690c; bk ix,
754a-b; bk xii, 789a / Seventh Letter, 806a-c; 810c-d 8 Aristotle: Prior
Analytics, bk ii, ch 25
[69^0-28] 91a / Topics, bk ii, ch 9 [ii4b6-i3]
160b; bk in, ch 6 [120*26-31] 168a

[1020b]
986 THE GREAT IDEAS la to lb 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 4 [uo5 a3o-b
4]  350d-351a;  bk  hi,  ch  1-5  355b,d-361a  passim;  bk  vi, ch 12-13
393b-394d; bk vii, ch i
[ii45b8]-CH 3 [ii47b i9] 395b-398a; bk x, ch 8
[1178^6-18]
432d; ch 9
[1179V1 180*13]
434b-d  12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4-5 108d110c; ch 17, 123b; ch
26,  131c-d;  ch 28, 133c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 62-63
283d-284a;  bk xii, sect 12 308bc 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par
27  51d52c;  bk  viii,  par  10-11  55c-56b / City of God, bk viii, ch 3
266a-d;  ch 10 271a-d; bk xix, ch 20, 524a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q i, a 6, rep 3 6b-7a 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  56,  a 2, rep 2-3 30c-31a; q 57, a 5, ans 39a-40a; q 58, a 2 42a-43a;
aa  4-5  44a-45d;  part ii-ii, q 180, A2 608c-609c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
70d-72a;  208a;  480a-c 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i, sc ii
[11-22]  408b-c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 17d-18a; 26c-27a 31
Descartes:  Discourse, part i, 43c; part hi, 49d-50b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  14-17 428a-d; prop 18, schol 429a-d; prop 23-24 430c-d;
prop  26  431a-b;  part  v, prop 10 454d-456a 32 Milton: Comus [373-385]
41b-42a  /  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [505-535] 163b-164a; bk ix [679779]
262a-264a / Areopagitica, 390b-391a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i,
ch  hi,  sect 16, 117a; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 35 186b-d 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge,  sect  100  432bc 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div i
451a-b;  div  3 451d; div 4, 452a-c 36 Swift: Gulliver, part i, 28b-29a;
part  iv,  160a;  165a-166a  37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 182a-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  345a-c  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 149d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  260d-261d;  282b-283d  /  Practical  Reason,  358c  /  Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368c-369a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part ii, par 139140 48d-54a passim / Philosophy of History, part
11,  280b-281b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 195c-201c esp 200a-201c;
bk  vi,  244d-245c;  248b-250a 53 James: Psychology, 82a-b; 806a-808a 54
Freud:  General  Introduction,  560c-d  lb.  The unity of virtue and the
plurality  of  virtues  7  Plato: Laches, 32a-37b / Protagoras, 48a-50d;
58a-64d  /  Meno  174a-190a,c  esp 175a-d / Republic, bk iv, 346a-355a /
Statesman, 605d607a / Laws, bk i, 643b-d; bk xii, 795c-797b

[1021a]
ic to \d ch 13 347b-348d; bk v, ch i
[ii29b i2]-cH
2
[ii3ob29] 377a378b;BKvi,CH 13 394b-d esp [1 144^0-1 i45 a6]
394c-d  /  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27i  b  i-9]  467d;  bk in, ch 4
[i276b29~34]  473d;  ch 7 [1279*40-^ b2] 476d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 12
Aurelius:  Meditations, bk xi, sect 10 303b-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  ii,  ch  7  9c-10a; tr in, ch 6 lld-12b / Second Ennead, tr ix, CHi5
74d-75b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk iv, par 24 25b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 60, a 1 49d-50c; q 61, aa 3-4 56b-58b; q 65, a
i, ans 70b-72a; q 68, a 5 92c-93c; q 73, a i 119c120c; part ii-ii, q 23,
a  8  488d-489c  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 204c-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 80b-81a 33 Pascal: Pensees, 20 175a 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 368c-d; 373b-d; 377d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 469a-b
46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 96 36c-37a lc. The doctrine
of  virtue as a mean between the extremes of vice 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides
[490-565]  86b-87a  7 Plato: Charmides, 7a-c / Laches, 35c-d / Republic,
bk hi, 338a-339a; bk x, 439b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 2
[1104*10-26]
349c-d;  ch 6-9 351c-355a,C; bk hi, ch 5 [ui3b 3-6] 359c; bk in, ch 6-bk
v, ch 11 361a387a,c; bk vi, ch i
[ii38b i6-34] 387a-b
/ Politics, bk iv, ch 11
[1295*35-38]
495c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9  [i367a36-b  7]  610a-b 11 Nicomachus:
Arithmetic, bk i, 820a; 826d827a 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 174b,d-175a 17
Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr ii, ch 2 7b-c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 64 66c-70a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[1-66] 9c10b; purgatory, xxn [19-54] 86c-87a
22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 99 14a / Tale of Melibeus,
par  52,  424a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 96b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
89b-d  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part ii, 256d; 291d; 362b 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  79b-81a  31  Descartes:  Discourse, part hi,
48b-49d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 42-44 437b438a 33 Pascal:
Pensees,  350-360 234a-235a; 378 238a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xxix,   262a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  340b-c  42  Kant:  Pref.
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  376d-377b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part hi, par 150, 56d-57a

[1021b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE 987 \d. Virtue as an intrinsic good: its
relation  to  happiness  7  Plato:  Gorgias, 275b-284d / Republic, bk i,
309b-310b; bk ix, 418d-421a; bk x, 436c437c; 439b-d / Theaetetus, 530b-d
/  Laws, bk v, 689d-690c / Seventh Letter, 806bc 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i,  ch  7-9  342c-345c; ch 13 347b-348d; bk ix, ch 9 423a-424b; bk x, ch
6-8 430d-434a / Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[i27i b i-9] 467d;
bk iv, ch ii
[1295*35-38]
495c;  bk  vii,  ch  1-3  527a-530a;  ch  8  [1328*  37-b2]  532d;  ch 9
[1328^5-36] 533b; ch 13
[i33ib24-i332a28] 536b-537a / Rhetoric, bk
i, ch 5 [1360^-30] 600d-601b; ch 6 [i362b i~5]
[1362^0-14] 603b; ch 9 [i366a33-b34] 608d609b
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 4 108d-110a; bk 11, ch 10, 149c-150a;
bk hi, ch 24, 206c210a; bk iv, ch 7, 233a-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
hi,  262b-c;  bk  v,  sect  34  273c;  bk 1 292a; sect 42 295c-296a,c 14
Plutarch:  Aristides, 265c-d 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch tr iv,
ch  9  16c-17a / Second Ennead, ch 15 74d-75b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  viii,  ch  8-9 270a-271a; bk xix, ch 1-4 507a-513c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, SECT 12
[X, SECT 4
4  7c-8c; TR IX, a 2 616d-617b; a 4 618a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q 55 26a-29d; part ii-ii, q 180, a 2 608c609c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  28a-d;  71a-72b; 301d302d; 389c-390b 27 Shakespeare: All's Well
That  Ends  Well,  act  11,  sc in [124-153] 152d-153a 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  11,  222b-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 19-28
429d431c;  part  v,  prop  42  463b-d 32 Milton: Comus 33a-56b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 5-6 105a-c 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  538b  37  Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  316a-c  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
234c-240b  esp  235a-b,  238c-239a  /  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals
253a-287d  esp  256c-257d,  258d, 261c-264a, 267b-d, 282b-283d, 286a-c /
Practical  Reason  291a-361d esp 297a-314d, 325a-327d, 329a331a, 339a-d,
340a-342d,  344c-347d  /  Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics 365a-379d
esp   365b-366d,  369c-373b,  374a-c  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
387b-388c / Judgement, 478a-479d; 584d-587a; 588b
[fn
2]; 591b592a; 594c-596c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 445a-464d esp 452c453a,
461c-464d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 316a-317a; 592d593a 51 Tolstoy: War
and Peace, bk v, 214c-215b

[1022a]
988  THE GREAT IDEAS ( 1 . Diverse conceptions of virtue. 1 d. Virtue as
an  intrinsic  good: its relation to happiness.) 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  ii, 26a27d; bk vi 146b,d-170d 54 Freud: Civilization and
Its  Discontents,  793a794a  le.  The  distinction  between  virtue  and
continence: the consequences of the theory of virtue as habit Topics, BK
IV,  CH  -28]  8  Aristotle:  174d-175a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
348b,d-349b;  ii28b34-35] 376c; bk vii, ch i-io bk iv, ch 9 395a-403c 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  a  3,  rep  4  508a-509b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  55  PART I, Q 95, 26a-29d; q 58, a 3, rep 2
43b-44a;  q  109, a 10, ans 347a-d; part hi, q 7, a 2, rep 3 746c747b 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi  [79-90] 15d16a 25 Montaigne: Essays,
200d-204d esp 203a-b; 494d-495a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc iv
[160170] 56b
37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 122d-123a 42 Kant: Pre/. Metaphysical Elements
of  Ethics,  368d;  378a-b  43  Mill: Utilitarianism, 464b-c 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 375b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 311c 53 James: Psychology, 81
b-83b  2.  The  classification  of  the virtues: the correlative vices 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-355c  /  Laws,  bk 1, 643c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 3-bk 11, 347b-355a,c; bk hi, ch 5 a 3l- ;
[1145*14] 361a-394d
17  Plotinus:  First Ennead, tr ii, ch 2-3 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i57-62  35a-63a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy  esp hell, xi 15a-16b,
PURGATORY, XVII
[82-139] 79b"d, PARADISE,
iv  [28-63]  Ula-b  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 62c-63d 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop  41-73  437a447a  2a.  The  division of virtues
according  to  the  parts or powers of the soul: the distinction between
moral  and  intellectual  virtue;  the  theory of the cardinal virtues 7
Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-355a; bk vii, 390a / Laws, bk i, 643c 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246*10248a8] 329c-330d

[1022b]
\e to 2a{2) 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk 1, ch 13 347b-348d;
[ii03 a i4-i8] 348b; bk
vi, ch 1-2 ch 12
[1144*1-11] 393c-d; ch
13  x,  ch 8 [u 7 8 a8-b8] 432d-433b / bk 11, ch 1 387a-388b; 394b-d; bk
ch 15 Politics, bk vii, ch 14 [i333ai6-3o] 538a:
[i334b8-28] 539b-d; bk viii, ch 2 [i337a33-b i]
542bc  17  Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch 2-3 7b-8a; tr hi, ch 6
lld-12b  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk v, ch 20 225b226a; bk xix, ch 4
511a-513c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 113, a 1, rep 2 576a-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 3 14b-15a; q 53, a i,
ans and rep 3 19d-21a; q 56 29d-35a; q 58 41a-45c; q 61 54d-59d; q 65, a
1  70b-72a;  q  68,  a  8  95c-96c;  part  ii-ii,  prologue 379a-b 2a(l)
Enumeration  and  description of the moral virtues 8 Aristotle : Physics
bk vii, ch 3
[246^0ai9] 330a-b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[1103^-10]
348c-d; bk ii, ch 7-8 352d-354d; bk hi, ch 5
[ui5 a3]-BK
v, ch ii
[ii38b i5] 361a-387a,c /
247 Politics, bk 1, ch 13
[1260*20-28]
454d  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  9  [1366^1-22]  608d-609a  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect 6 261a-c; sect ii 262a-b; bk v, sect 5 269b;
sect 12 271a; bk viii, sect 39 288c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch
6-7,  9b-10a  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xix, ch 4 511a-513c; ch 20
523d-524a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 113, a 1, rep 2 576a-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 60 49d-54d; q 64, aa 1-2
66d-68b 27 Shakespeare: Macbeth, act iv, sc hi
[91100] 304b-c
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 41-72 437a446c 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part  iv,  165b-166a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  368b-369a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,   bk   v,   200c-d  2a{2)  Enumeration  and  description  of  the
intellectual virtues 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[247bi2 4 8 a8] 330b-d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[no3 a3-io]
348c-d; bk vi 387a-394d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 1,
rep 2 75d-76c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 4 9a-10b;
q 57 35a-41a; q 64, a 3 68b-69b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 66c-71b 31
Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 25-28 430d431c

[1023a]
lb  to  lb  Chapter  97: VIRTUE AND VICE 989 2b. The distinction between
natural  and  supernatural virtues 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch
4,  513b-c  ^____  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 4
15a-d;  q  55, a 4, ans and rep 6 28c-29d; q 62, aa 1-2 60a-61b; q 63, a
2,  ans  and  rep  2 64b-65a; a a 3-4 65a-66c; q 68, aa 1-2 87c-90c; a 8
95c-96c;  part  ii-ii,  prologue  379a-b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
149c-d  2c. The appearances of virtue: imperfect or conditional virtues;
the  counterfeits of virtue; natural or temperamental dispositions which
simulate  virtue 6 Herodotus: History, bk ix, 303c-304a 7 Plato: Phaedo,
225d-226c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 9 375d-376a,c; bk vi, ch 12
[ii44an]-CH
13
[1145*2] 393d394d;
bk vn, ch 10
[1152*8-24]
403a-b  /  Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 9 [i367*36-b 7J 610a-b 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 51, a 1, ans 12b-13c; q 63, a 1 63a-64a; q 65,
a  i,  rep  1  70b-72a;  part  ii-ii, q 23, a 7, ans 487d488d 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  68a  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 103c-104d; 160c-161a;
200d-204d  esp  203a-b;  336c;  394a-395b;  494d-495a  29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  ii,  391b-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 435b-d; 534c 42
Kant: Pure Reason, 169b
[fn
1]  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b; 258b-c / Practical
Reason,  325c-327a  / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 368d-369a 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  126a-b  54 Freud: War and Death, 759b-c 3. The order
and  connection  of  the  virtues 3a. The equality and inequality of the
virtues:  the  hierarchy  of  virtue  and  the  degrees of vice 7 Plato:
Protagoras,  48a-50d / Republic, bk iv, 346a-355a / Statesman, 605d-608d
/  Laws,  bk 1, 643a-652d esp 643b-d; bk hi, 674a-b; bk xii, 795c-796b 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2
[117*26^2]
164a; [118*16-17] 165a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 3
[ii23b281124*4] 370d; bk
v, ch 1
[ii29b25-i 130*13]
377b-c;  bk  vi,  ch  7  390a-d passim; ch 12-13 393b-394d; bk x, ch 6-8
430d-434a / Politics, bk 11, ch 9
[i27i b i-9]
467d; bk hi, ch 7
[i279*40-b2] 476d
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk viii, sect 39 288c; bk xi, sect 10 303b-c
17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr ii, ch 2-3 7b-8a; ch 7 9c-10a; tr hi, ch 6
lld-12b

[1023b]
s  18  Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 20, 524a / Christian Doctrine,
bk hi, ch 10, 662a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 61, aa 3-4
56b-58b; q 62, a 4 62b-63a; q 66 75b-81b; q 68, aa 7-8 94c-96c; part ii-
ii,  q  4,  a  7 407d-409a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy esp hell, xi 15a-16b,
PURGATORY, XVII
[82-139] 79b-d, PARADISE,
iv  [28-63]  Ula-b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 162c-163a; 183a-c; 200d205b 27
Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act ii, sc ii
[8691] 365a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv, prop 19-28 429d431c esp prop 22 430b-c,
prop  28  431c  33  Pascal: Pensees, 102 192b 42 Kant: Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  368c-d  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism, 473c-476a,c 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 251a 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 314c-316a 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, bk v, 200c; 202d; bk vi, 246a-d 3b. The independence or
interdependence  of  the  virtues  Old Testament: Proverbs, 8:20; 10:31;
15:21; 28:1 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:4-6— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom,
1  :4-6  New  Testament:  Galatians,  5:22-23 / // Peter, i:3-9 7 Plato:
Protagoras,  48b-50b  /  Meno,  183d184c  / Republic, bk iv, 350a-355a /
Statesman,  605d-608d  /  Laws,  bk i, 642c-646a; bk hi, 674a-b; bk xii,
795c-796b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch 3
[ii23b281124*4] 370d; bk vi, ch 5 389a-c; ch 7 390a-d
passim;  ch  13  394b-d;  bk  vii,  ch  10  [1152*7-8] 403a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations, bk ix, sect i 291a-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 6
lld-12b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 20, 524a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 56, a 2, rep 2-3 30c-31a; q 57, a 5 39a-40a; q
58,  a  2,  rep  2-3  42a-43a;  aa  4-5 44a-45d; q 65 70a-75a; q 68, a 5
92c-93c;  part  ii-ii, q 181, a 2 617d-618c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 204c-d
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part ii, 256c-d; 291d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  19-24  429d430d  32  Milton:  Comus [331-489] 40b-44a /
Paradise Lost, bk ix [335-339] 254b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 534c 42
Kant:  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethic  y 368c-d; 377d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism, 469a-b 44 Boswell: Johnson, 160b; 251a

[1024a]
4.  The  natural  causes or conditions of virtue 4a. Natural endowments:
temperamental dispositions toward virtue or vice; the seeds or nurseries
of virtue 5 Euripides: Hecuba
[582-603]
357d-358a  /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-572]  429d-430a  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 396d-397a 7 Plato: Protagoras, 46d-47b; 59a /
Meno  174a-190a,c  esp  184b-c,  190a,c  / Republic, bk vii, 389d-390b /
Timaeus, 474c-d / Statesman, 607b-608d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[no3 ai4-b2]
348b,d-349a; bk vi, ch ii
[ii43b7-i3] 393a;
ch 13
[ii44b i-ii45 a2] 394b-d;
bk x, ch 9
[ii79a33-b26] 434a-c
/ Politics, bk ii, ch 5 458a-460a esp
[i263 a38-b26] 458c-d; bk
vii, ch 13
[i332 a39-b io] 537a-b; ch
15  [1334^-  28]  539b-d  14  Plutarch: Alcibiades, 156c-d / Coriolanus,
174b,d-175a  /  Demetrius, 726c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch 1-3
10a-lla  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, a 1 12b-13c; q
63, a 1 63a-64a; a 2, rep 3 64b-65a; a 3, ans and rep 3 65a-d; q 94, a 3
223a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, vii
[1 12-123] 63d-64a; xvn
[91-105] 79b-c; xxx
[109-145]
lOOc-d; paradise, viii
[91-148]
117d-118c 22 Chaucer: Tale of Wife of Bath
[6691-6788]
274b-276a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86b; 96a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
43a-c;  200d-204d;  264b265a;  307c-308a;  337b-c;  381b-c; 391c-392a 27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act i, sc iv
[23-37]
36a-b / All's Well That Ends Well, act i, sc i
[70-81] 143a; act 11, sc 111 [124-151] 152d-153a
28  Harvey:  On  Animal  Generation,  455d-456a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  69d-70a;  76d-78d  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part v, prop 4, schol
453b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 330d-331c; 333c-d; 337d-338c; 343a-345c;
362a-d  / Political Economy, 375d-376b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 192b
42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 263d-264a / Practical Reason,
303b-304b  /  Judgement,  521c-523c  43 Mill: Representative Government,
367d-368a  /  Utilitarianism, 459c-460a; 469b-470c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
413a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  150 56c-57a;
additions,  96  132c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of  Man,  310a-d;  318a-c 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 19d20b; 38d-40c; bk hi, 53b-54b
53  James:  Psychology,  886b-888a  54  Freud: War and Death, 757d-758a;
758d759a

[1024b]
4b. The role of teaching in the spheres of moral and intellectual virtue
Old  Testament: Proverbs, 4:1-4,10-11; 5:7-13; 6:23; 10:17; *3 :i; *5 :5
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  7:23;  30:3—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:25;
30:3  New  Testament:  //  Timothy,  3:16  / Titus, 2:13 :2 5 Euripides:
Suppliants
[838-917]
265d-266b  /  Hecuba  [582-603] 357d-358a / Iphigenia at Aulis [543-572I
429d-430a 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[8821104] 499b-502a
7  Plato:  Laches  26a-37d  esp  30a-b / Protagoras 38a-64d esp 43a-47c,
64a-d  /  Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Symposium, 169c-170a / Meno 174a-190a,c
esp  183b-190a,c  /  Gorgias,  258b259c; 290b-291a / Republic, bk ii-iv,
320c355a;  bk  vii  388a-401d esp 389d-398c / Timaeus, 474c-d / Sophist,
556c-558d / Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk i, 649b-d; bk 11, 657c-658b;
bk v, 688c-689c; bk xii, 796b-799a / Seventh Letter, 801c-802d; 809c810d
esp 810c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[i095b4~i3]
340c-d;  ch  9 345a-c; bk ii, ch 1 [1103*14-17] 348b; ch 4 350d-351b; bk
x, ch 9 [1179*33n8ob24] 434a-435c / Politics, bk ii, ch 7
[i266b27-36] 462b-c; bk
iv, ch ii
[i295b i4~
18] 495d; bk vii, ch 13 [i332a39-b io] 537a-b; ch 15
[1334^-28]
539b-d;  bk viii 542a548a,c esp ch 2 542b-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk
i, ch 4 108d110a; bk in, ch 1 175a-177c 14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122b
/  Alcibiades,  156c-158b  /  Coriolanus, 174d-175a / Timoleon, 195a-b /
Cato  the  Younger,  623a-b  /  Demetrius,  726a-d  / Dion, 782c-788b 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  2  10d  18  Augustine: Christian
Doctrine,  bk  iv, ch 27-30 696a-697d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii, q 95, a 1, ans 226c-227c; a 3 228c-229b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  66c-d; 68b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 43a-c; 55d-62a esp 60c61c; 69d-72b;
321a-c; 391c-392a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 69d-70a 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part iv, appendix, ix 448a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 250b-251a
38  Rousseau: Inequality, 326c-d; 345b-c / Political Economy, 373c-374a;
375d-376b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 34d; 338d-339a; 435b-d 42 Kant:
Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 260d-261d; 263a-b; 264b
[fn
1];  278a-b  /  Practical  Reason, 327a-d; 356c-360d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 365b-d; 377a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387d388a
/ Judgement, 513d-514b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 456a-b; 457c-461c passim
44 Boswell: Johnson, 413a-b

[1025a]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE 4cto*d{\) 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  87  65a-c; additions, 97 132c-133a 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  593a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 47b-48d; bk vi, 244d-245d
^___52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk iv, 83a-88a passim; epilogue,
411b-412d 53 James: Psychology, 274b-275a 54 Freud: Sexual Enlightenment
of  Children,  122a,c  /  General Introduction, 573c-574b; 592 b-c / New
Introductory  Lectures,  870a-c  4c.  Training  or  practice as cause of
virtue  or vice: the process of habit formation Old Testament: Proverbs,
22:6  / Jeremiah, 13: 27>— (D)Jeremias, 13:23 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
30:8— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30:8 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[838-917]
265d-266b / Electra [367-395] 330c-d / Iphigenia at Aulis
[543-572] 429d-430a
7  Plato:  Meno 174a-190a,c esp 174a, 190a / Republic, bk hi, 329c-331c;
bk vii, 389d390b; 391c-d / Timaeus, 474d-475d / Theaetetus, 518b / Laws,
bk i, 649b-d; bk ii, 653a-c; 657c-658b 8 Aristotle: Categories, ch 10
[i3 a i6-3i] 18d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[i095b4-i3]
340c-d; ch 9 345a-c; bk ii, ch i 348b, d349b; ch 2
[no4a26-b
3] 349d-350a; ch 4 350d-351b; bk vi, ch 5
[ii40b n-i9] 389b-c;
ch 11
[ii43b7-i3] 393a; bk
vii, ch 10
[1152 s
25-33] 403b; bk ix, ch 9
[1170*4-12] 423d;
bk x, ch 9
[1 179*33-1 i8ob24]
434a-435c / Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[i332 a39~b io] 537a-b;
ch 15
[1334^-28]
539b-d; bk viii, ch i
[1337*19-21] 542b
12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 2 106d-108b; bk 11, ch 18 161a-162b;
bk  hi, ch 12 187b188b; bk iv, ch 9, 238c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
v,  sect 16 271c-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 51, aa 2-3
13c-15a;  q  63,  a  2  64b-65a;  q  71,  a  4, ans 108b-109a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  i,  66c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  43a-c;  176c-177a;
200d205b esp 202d-203a; 390b-393a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc iv
[140170] 56a-b
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  332c  30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 69d-70a; 78d-81c 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  71 197b-198a 42 Kant: Practical Reason, 327a-d / Pref Metaphysical
Elements  of Ethics, 368d; 374c / Judgement, 513d-514b 43 Mill: Liberty,
294d-295a  /  Utilitarianism,  449c-450a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
56c-57b; additions part hi, par 96-97 132c150-152 133a

[1025b]
991 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 313d-314a; 318a; 322a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk i, 305a; 311c-d; 47b-48d; bk ix, 369c-d 53 James: Psychology,
78b-83b esp 81b-83b; 433a-434a; 711b-712a; 751b-752a 4d. The role of the
family  and  the  state  in  the  development  of moral virtue 4d(l) The
influence  of  parental  authority  on  the  formation  of character Old
Testament:  Exodus,  12:24-27  /  Deuteronomy, 4:9-10; 6:6-7; 11:18-19 /
Proverbs,  1:8-9;  3:12;  4:1-13;  6:20-24; 13:1,24; 15:5; 19:18; 22:15;
23:13-24:34; 29:15,17 Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:1-19— (D) OT, Tobias, 4:1-20 /
Ecclesiasticus,  7  =23-24;  30:1-13  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 7 ^5-26;
30:1-13   New   Testament:   Ephesians,  6:4  /  Colossians,  3:21  /  /
Thessalonians,  2:11 / Hebrews, 12:7-9 5 Euripides: Suppliants [838-917]
265d-266b  7  Plato:  Laches,  26a-30c  /  Protagoras,  45d-47a  / Meno,
186a-187b  /  Republic,  bk  v,  366ac  /  Laws, bk v, 687d-688a; bk ix,
745d-746a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  x, ch 9 [u8oai4-b i2] 434d-435b /
Politics, bk 1, ch 13 454a-455a,c passim, esp
[1260^-19]
455c; bk iv, ch ii
[i295b i4-i8] 495d; bk vii, ch 17 [i336a23-b
3]  541bc  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d  esp  sect  7-9
253b-254a,  sect  ii  254b,  sect 1416 254b-255d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk v
[701-748]  205b-206b  14  Plutarch: Marcus Cato, 286c-287b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  i,  par  14-15 4c5a; bk 11, par 2-8 9b-10d; bk hi, par
19-20 18b-19a; bk ix, par 19-22 67a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  95,  a  1, ans 226c-227c; q 105, a 4, ans 318b321a 22 Chaucer:
Physician's  Tale  [12,006-036]  367b368a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 16c-d;
43a-c;  63d-64d;  66c-67a;  184a-187d; 414a-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  ii,  251b  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part hi, prop 55, schol 413b-d; def
27,  expl  419a-b  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 55-69 36c-40b
passim   36   Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i,  29b-31a;  part  iv,  166b  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  iv, 15c; bk v, 22d-23a 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  326c-d;  327c-328a / Political Economy, 376b-377a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations, bk v, 337c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right, 420b-421c 44
BoswELL:/o/^ofl,  199d-200d; 314b-d; 372c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part hi, par 173175 61a-d; par 239 76d; additions, hi 134d135a; 147 140c

[1026a]
(4d.  The  role  of  thefamily and the state in the development of moral
virtue.  4d(l)  The  influence of parental authority on the formation of
character.) 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk xii, 369a-373c passim;
395a-398d  passim  54  Freud:  Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis,
17d-18a  /  Narcissism,  408b / Ego and Id, 704d-707d / Civilization and
Its Discontents, 794c- 795a esp 795b
[fn
2] / New Introductory Lectures, 834b-c; 844b-c; 876c 4d(2) The moral use
of  rewards and punishments: the role of precept and counsel, praise and
blame  Old  Testament:  Psalms, 94:10-13; 141:5— (D) Psalms, 93 :io-i3 ;
140  :$  / Proverbs, 1 $-9,20-33 3:12; 4:1-4; 57-13; 6:23; 9:7-8; 10:17;
13:1,  18,24;  15:5,10,12,31-32;  17:10;  19:18,25;  20:30; 22:15; 23 :i
3-14;  25:12; 29:15,17 / Isaiah, 28:7-13— (D) Isaias, 28:7-13 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of Solomon,  12:25-26—  (D)  OT,  BooJ{  of  Wisdom,  12:25-26  /
Ecclesiasticus,  7:23;  19:13-14; 30:1-13— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:25;
19:13-14;  30:1-13  New  Testament:  Luke,  17:3 / Ephesians, 5:1113 / /
Thcssalonians, 2:11-15/1 Timothy, 4:13; 5:1-2,20 / II Timothy, 3:16; 4:2
/ Titus, 2 / Hebrews, 3:13; 10:24-25; 12:5-11 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides
[490-565]
86b-87a;
[681-710] 88b-c
5   Sophocles:   Antigone   [1348-1353]   142d  5  Aristophanes:  Clouds
[1303-1464]  504b-506c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk ii, 399a;
400d-401a  7 Plato: Protagoras, 45b-d / Gorgias, 283b285a / Republic, bk
ii,  313b-d; bk ix, 426d427a / Laws, bk i, 643d; bk v, 688c-689a; bk ix,
745a-746a; bk x, 760d-761b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
[ii04b i4-i8]
350a;  bk hi, ch 5 [iii3b2i-ui4a2] 359d-360a; bk x, ch 9 [ii79b4-n8oa24]
434b-435a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  41a-42b;  45c  /  Lysander, 354d 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  hi,  57d-58b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par
14-16 4c5b; par 19-23 5d-7a / City of God, bk xix, ch 15-16 521a-522a 19
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i, q 48, a 6, contrary and rep 1 264a-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 87, a 2, rep 1 186c-187b; q
92,  a  2,  rep  4  214d215a,c;  q 95, a 1 226c-227c 22 Chaucer: Tale of
Melibeus  401a-432a  esp  par 62-68 427b-429a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  141a  b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 16c-d; 43a-c; 66c; 73c74a; 181d-183a;
184d-185d;  300c-306d  esp  306a-c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning,
69d-70a; 79bc

[1026b]
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  hi,  def  27,  expl  419a-b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  i, ch ii, sect 5-6 105a-c; sect 13 107d-108c; bk ii,
ch  xxviii,  sect  5-12  229c-231c  passim,  esp  sect  6 229d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i,  28b  37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 41a-c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws, bk vi, 37d38b; 39c-40c; bk vii, 47c-d; bk xii, 86b; bk
xix,  139c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  360b-361a  /  Political Economy,
372b-373b;  376c-377a  /  Social  Contract,  bk iv, 434b-435a 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 92a-b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264b
[fn 1]; 270d-271a / Practical Reason, 325d-327d
/  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  383a-b  /  Judgement,  513d-514b  43
Federalist:  number  72,  217a-b 43 Mill: Liberty, 302d-312a passim, esp
306c307a  /  Utilitarianism,  457c-461c  passim,  esp  458a-b; 464b-c 44
Boswell  -.Johnson,  199d-200d  ;  314b-d ; 363a-b 49 Darwin: Descent of
Man,  305a;  310c-d;  322a-c;  592d;  593b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace,
epilogue  i,  655c656b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 28d32a;
epilogue,  411b-412d  53 James : Psychology, 203a-204b 54 Freud: War and
Death,  757c; 758c-759b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 792b- 795b /
New  Introductory  Lectures,  876c-d  4d(3)  The  guidance  of  laws and
customs:  the  limits  of positive law with respect to commanding virtue
and prohibiting vice 5 Aeschylus: Eumenides
[490-565]
86b-87a;
[681-710] 88b-c
5 Euripides: Orestes [491-525] 399a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 3a; bk
vii,    232d233a    6    Thucydides:    Peloponnesian    War,   bk   ii,
396c-d;BKiv,478d-479b 7 Plato: Protagoras, 45b-47c / Gorgias, 271b272b /
Republic,  bk  ii,  314b-c;  bk  ii-iv,  320c-355a;  bk  vi, 377a-379c /
Statesman,  607b-608d / Laws, bk i, 642d-648c; 650a-b; bk 11, 653a-662a;
bk  vii, 724c-730d; bk viii, 735c-738c; bk xii, 792c-d / Seventh Letter,
800b-c; 806b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch i
[uo3b3-6]
349a; bk v, ch i
[1129^2-24]
377a; ch 2
[1130^-29]
378a-b / Politics, bk ii, ch 5 458a-460a passim, esp
[i263 a38-b26] 458c-d;
ch 7 [i266b i4-i267a i7] 462b-d; ch 9
[i269b
13-1270*14]  465d-466b;  bk  vii,  ch  13-17  536b-542a,c  14  Plutarch:
Lycurgus 32a-48d / LycurgusNuma 61b,d-64a,c / Solon, 70c-74b / Lysander,
361a-d / Cleomenes, 659d-660a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 57b-58d

[1027a]
4<*(4)  to  4<r(l)  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  vi,  par 2 35a-c /
Christian Doctrine, bk hi, ch 12 662c-663c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  92,  a  1  213c-214c;  a 2, rep 4 214d-215a,c; q 95, a 1
226c-227c;  q  96,  aa  2-3 231c-233au3_9V a 6, ans 244c-245b; q 99, a 2
246b-247a;  a 6 250a-251a; q 100, a 9 261b-262b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, vi
[58151]
61b-62c; xvi
[85-114]
77d-78a;  paradise,  xv  [97]-xvi  [154] 129b-132a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii, 131a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 131b-132a 27 Shakespeare: Measure
for  Measure,  act i, sc 11 [120-139] 176b-c; sc in 177b-d; act ii, sc 1
[225-270] 181a-c; act hi, sc 11
[91-128]
190c-d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 78d-81c 32 Milton: Paradise
Lost,  bk  xii [285-314] 325b326a / Areopagitica 381a-412b esp 383a-395b
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  90a-d; bk i, ch 11, sect 8 105d-106a;
sect  20  HOc-110a; bk 11, ch xxviii, sect 9-13 230b-231c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  viii, div 76, 485a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  iv, 13b, d17b; bk v, 18b,d-19d; 21d-25a; bk vii, 44d45c; 47c-50c; bk
xii,  87c-88a;  bk  xiv,  105a106b;  bk  xvi, 119d; bk xix, 137c-142d 38
Rousseau:  Political  Economy,  372a-373b  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,
434b-435a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 92c- d; lOOc-lOlb; 291d-292a 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  93c-94a;  389d 42 Kant: Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of Ethics, 366d; 367b-c; 373b-c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
383a-b; 387b; 387d-388a / Science of Right, 397c-398a 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: amendments, xviii 19c; xxi 20b 43 Federalist: number 12, 58b-c
43  Mill:  Liberty,  269b-271d;  272d-273d;  278a281c passim; 286b-287a;
295d-296b;  300a301c;  302d-323a,c  / Representative Government, 335a-b;
348c-350a  /  Utilitarianism,  456a-d;  457c-458b; 467b-468a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  197a-b;  222d-223b; 301c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
i,  par  38  21d;  part in, par 150 56c-57a; par 234 75d76a / Philosophy
of History,  intro, 166b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 317a-d 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  28d32a 53 James: Psychology, 190b-191a 54
Freud:  War  and Death, 758c-d 4d{4) The influence on moral character of
poetry,  music,  and  other  arts:  the  guidance of history and example
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon, 4:1-2— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 4:1-2 New
Testament:  /  Corinthians,  8:6-13;  10:5-11  /  Philippians, 3:17 / //
Thessalonians, 3:7-9 / /

[1027b]
Chapter 97: VIRTUE AND VICE 993 Timothy, 5:20 / Hebrews, 4:11 / / Peter,
2:2123  /  //  Peter,  2  :6 / Jude, 7 5 Euripides: Suppliants [881-887]
266a-b 5 Aristophanes: Clouds 488a-506d esp
[8821104] 499b-502a
/ Frogs
[1008-1098]
576b577c / Thesmophoriazusae 600a-614d esp
[330-567] 604b-606c
7  Plato:  Protagoras,  46b-c  /  Republic,  bk ii-iv, 320c-355a; bk vii
388a-401d  esp  389d-398c;  bk  viii,  409d;  bk x, 427c-434c / Timaeus,
455b-c  /  Laws,  bk ii, 653a-662a; bk hi, 675c676b; bk vii, 724c-730d 9
Aristotle:   Politics,   bk   viii,   ch  2-7  542b548a,c  12  Aurelius:
Meditations, bk xi, sect 26 306b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 33d-34a; 43b-d /
Solon,  76a / Pericles, 121a-122b / Timoleon, 195a-b / Demetrius, 726a-d
15  Tacitus: Annals, bk xiv, 146b-c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi, ch
1-2,  10c-d  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 20-27 6a7d; bk in, par
2-6  13c-14c;  bk  x,  par  49-53  83c-85a / City of God, bk i, ch 31-33
147d149a;  bk  ii, ch 8-14 153d-157c; bk iv, ch 2627 202a-203c 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xvii  [100142]  133a-c  22 Chaucer: L 'Envoi
550a-b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  197a-199c;  455d-456a  26  Shakespeare:
Merchant  of  Venice,  act  v,  sc  1  [66-110] 431b-d 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote  esp part i, xiiic-d, la-3b, 13b-16c, 183d-187c, 189d-191d, part
ii,  252a-b,  322a-c,  427a-429d  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,
38c-39d;  79c-80a;  85a-b  32 Milton: Areopagitica, 385a-386b 33 Pascal:
Pensees,   11   173b-174a  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  250b-251a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk iv, 17b-18d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  v,  337d-338c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 94a-b; 284a-b; 449a-b 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 225a-c; 311b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  263a-b; 266d [fn 2] / Practical Reason, 327a-d / Judgement,
513d-514b;  523a-c;  587a  44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 116b; 259b-c; 308b-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  155c-d  53 James : Psychology,
826b-827a  4e.  The  moral  quality  of human acts 4e(l) The distinction
between human or moral acts and the nonvoluntary or reflex acts of a man
7  Plato: Protagoras, 45b-c / Timaeus, 474b-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i,
ch 13
[1102*13-17]
347c;  [no2a34-b i3] 347d-348a; bk hi, ch i 355b,d-357b; ch 5 359c-361a;
ch 12 [1119^134] 365d-366a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10 [i368b712] 611d

[1028a]
994  (4e. The moral quality of human acts. 4e(l) The distinction between
human  or  moral  acts and the nonvoluntary or reflex acts of a man.) 12
Aurelius:   Meditations,   bk   xi,   sect  18  304b305b  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk i, par 19 5d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
i,  aa 1-3 609b-612a; q 6 644a-651c; qi 8, a 6, ans 697d-698c; q 21, a 2
718a-d  21  Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi [5281] 77b-c 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part i, 61a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act v, sc ii [236-255]
70b-c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, def 8 424b-c; prop 1-18 424c-429d 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 164b-c; 235c-d /
Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 282b-283d / Practical Reason, 304a-d /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  386d-387a,c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 311b-d; 592b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  epilogue ii, 688a690a 53 James: Psychology, 186b-187a;
807a-808a;  814b-819a  passim, esp 814b-815a, 818b 4e(2) The criteria of
goodness  and evil in human acts 7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 354d-355c; bk
x,  439b-d  /  Laws,  bk  ix,  747b-d  9  Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 4
350d-351b;  ch 6 351c-352d passim; bk vi, ch 12 [1144*1224] 393d-394a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk i, ch 6 110c-112b; ch 11 116d-118d; bk hi, ch
i  175a-177c; ch 3 178d-180a; ch 10 185d-187a; ch 20 192d193d; bk iv, ch
5-6  228a-232c  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii 258a-b; bk iv,
sect  24 265c-d; sect 39 267a; bk v, sect 12 271a; sect 14-16 271b-d; bk
vii, sect 20 281b; sect 55 283b-c; bk viii, sect i 285a-b; bk ix, sect i
291a-c;  sect 16 293a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par 15-17 17a18a
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq 18-21 693b,d-720a,c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy, hell, xi 15a-16b; purgatory, xvn [82-139] 79b-d;
xxvn  [124142]  95d-96a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,61d-62a;85d; 86b;
91b-92d;96a-b;PARTii,  149b-c;  parti  v,  272c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,
103c-104d;  159a-162c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 70d-71b 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  pref-def 2 422b, d424a; def 8 424b-c; prop
1-28  424c-431c  esp  prop  18-19  428d-429d, prop 22 430b-c; prop 45-46
438a-d;   prop   50-54  439b-440c;  prop  58-59  441d-442d;  prop  61-63
443a-444a; prop 65-66 444b-d

[1028b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4e(2) to 4(?(3) 33 Pascal: Pensees, 499 260b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, 90a-d; bk i, ch 11, sect 5-6 105a-c; bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  43  188d;  sect 55-56 192c-193b; ch xxviii, sect 4-17 229b-232d 36
Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  257a-268a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 38c-40a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  343a-345c  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk v,
346c-347d 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 114d-115a; 169b
[fn
1]  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 253d-254d; 262a-c; 270c-d /
Practical  Reason, 317b-318c; 321b-329a esp 325a-327d; 341c-342a; 358a /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 387b; 387d-388a; 389a-390a,c / Judgement,
595a-d  43  Mill: Liberty, 270a-271d; 286b-287a; 307b-d / Utilitarianism
445a-476a,c   esp  448a,  454a455a,  461c-464d,  467b-471b  44  Boswell:
Johnson,  112a-b;  145c-d;  310d311a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part
ii,  par  113  41d-42a; par 135 47b-d; par 140 49b-54a; part in, par 234
75d-76a;  additions,  56  125b-c; 67 126d; 86 129c; 91 131a-d 49 Darwin:
Descent  of  Man, 592d-593a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiv, 611a-c 53
James:  Psychology,  796a-798a  passim  54  Freud:  War and Death, 758a;
759a-c  /  Civilization and Its Discontents, 792 b-c 4e(3) Circumstances
as affecting the morality of human acts 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 3
[no4b24-27] 350b; bk in, ch 1
[iiiob28-uii a2o]
356c357a;  bk  iv,  ch  5  372d-373c 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  7  651d-655a;  q  18,  aa  io-ii  701b- 703a 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 73, a 7 124d-125c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i,
86b;  91a-b;  96a-b  25 Montaigne: Essays, 13d-14c; 103c-104d; 203a-c 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 76d-78d 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
19a-62a  passim  35  Locke:  Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 54
192b-c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  viii,  div  76 485a-c 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones,  271c-273a,c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  343a-d;
347d-348a;  362a-d;  363a-366d  / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  169c-170a  44 Boswell: Johnson, 283a; 429d-430b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy   of  Right,  part  ii,  par  115-117  42b-d;  additions,  74
127d-128a; 144 140a / Philosophy of History, intro, 165a166b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and Peace, bk i, 9c-10d; bk viii, 303a-305b; bk xiii, 578d-579a; bk
xv,  627b-c;  epilogue  i,  645a-646c;  epilogue ii, 686c-687a 54 Freud:
General Introduction, 531a- d

[1029a]
5  to 5b Chapter 97: VIRTUE AND VICE 995 5. Psychological factors in the
formation  of moral virtue 5a. The emotions and pleasure and pain as the
matter  of virtue: the role of desire—or appetite 7 Plato: Laches, 32c /
Protagoras,  59a-62d  /  Phaedrus,  120a-122a  /  Gorgias,  275d-285a  /
Republic,  bk  iv,  347a-348d;  350a-355a;  bk  vi,  374c; bk vn, 390b /
Timaeus,  466b;  474b-d  / Laws, bk i-ii, 644b-653c; bk v, 689c-690c; bk
vi,  712b;  bk vn, 714c-716a; bk viii, 735c738c 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk
vii, ch 3
[246^0247*19] 330a-b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13 uo} a ii] 348a-d; bk ii, ch 2
[ii04a i9]-CH
3
[no5 a i7]
349c-350c; ch 6
[uo6b8-i 107^8]
352a-d; ch 7 [no8a3o-b6] 353d-354a; ch 9
[1109^2^13] 355a,c; bk hi, ch
i  [uu  a22-b  II02b  I33]  357a-b;  ch  9-12  363d-366a,c;  bk iv, ch 5
372d-373c;  ch  8  375a-d;  bk  vii  395a-406a,c; bk x, ch 1-5 426a-430d
passim; ch 8
[1 178*822] 432d; ch 9
[1 179^-1180^4] 434b-435a /
Politics, bk 1, ch 13
[i26oa4-b8] 454c-455a,c;
bk vn, ch 7 531d-532c; ch 15
[i334b8-28]
539b-d;  bk  viii,  ch  5  544c-546a  passim  12 Epictetus : Discourses,
bkii,ch  i8l61a-162b;  bk in, ch 24, 208b-210a 12 Aurelius: Meditations,
bk  vii,  sect  55 283b-c; bk ix, sect i 291ac; sect 7 292b 14 Plutarch:
Antony,  753d-754a;  760d-761a;  761c; 772c / Dion, 798b-d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk viii, par 10-11 55c-56b; bk x, par 41-53 81c-85a / City
of God, bk xiv, ch 5-9 379c-385b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  24  727a-730a  esp  a  4  729c-730a;  q  34,  a 4 771c772b; o 39, a 2
790d-791b  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 3 8b-9a; q
56,  a  4  32b-33c; a 5, rep i 33c34b; qq 59-60 45d-54d; q 107, a 4, ans
329d330d; part ii-ii, q 15, a 3 453c-454c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
i-ii la-4a; purgatory 53a-105d esp xv
[4o]-xviii
[75]
75d-80c  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-63a; 68b-c; 85d; 96a-b; part
ii,  141a-b; part iv, 272c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 20d-22a passim; 89b91b;
118d-119d;  124c-125a;  159a-162c  passim;  200d-204d passim; 350d-354b;
540b-c  27 Shakespeare: Othello, act i, sc hi [322-337] 212b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement of Learning, 66c-d; 78a-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, def 8
424b-c;  prop  1-18  424c-429d esp prop 18, demonst 428d429a; prop 59-73
442b-447a  esp  prop  60 442d-443a 32 Milton: Areopagitica, 390b-391a 33
Pascal: Provincial Letters, 64b-67b / Pensees, 160 202a-b; 412-413 242a;
423 243b; 502 260b-261a

[1029b]
35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 35 186b-d; sect 46-48
189d-190d;  sect  52-56  191d-193b;  sect  71-72  197b-198c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  343a-b  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256b;
258d-259a;  282d-283d;  286a-c  /  Practical Reason, 298b-c; 341c-342a /
Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-366d; 368d369a; 375a-b /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385a-c  / Judgement, 586d-587a 43 Mill:
Liberty,  295b-d  /  Utilitarianism, 461c464d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
311a-314b passim; 316a-317a; 318d-319a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi,
245b-c;  248b250a  53  James:  Psychology, 799a-b; 808a-814b passim, esp
810a;  816a-817a 54 Freud: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 16c
/  General  Introduction,  501d-504b  /  War  and  Death,  758a-d  / New
Introductory  Lectures, 837d-838d; 844c 5b. Deliberation and judgment in
the  formation  of  virtue:  the  role of reason 5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[373-387]  228b-c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370a-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  iv,  350a-355a  /  Laws,  bk in, 669b-d / Seventh Letter,
810c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13
[ii02b i3~
uo3  a3] 348a-c; bk h, ch 6 351c-352d passim; bk in, ch 1-5 355b,d-361a;
ch 12 [1119*35b i9] 366a,c; bk vi, ch 1-2 387a-388b; ch 5 389ac; ch 9-13
391c-394d  passim;  bk  vii,  ch  7-10  400d-403c  passim;  bk  ix, ch 8
[u68b28u69an] 422b-d; bk x, ch 8
[1 178^6-24]
432d-433a; ch 9
[1 179^-1 180^3] 434b-d
/ Politics, bk vn, ch 13
[i332a39-b io] 537a-b;
ch  15 [1334^-28] 539b-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 5 257b-c;
bk  ix,  sect  7 292b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 4, 512a-b 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  45,  a 4, ans 812b-813a 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 56, a 3, ans 31a-32b 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part i, 64a-c; part ii, 141a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 21c-22a;
115b-119d;   124c-125a;   159a-162c;   200d-205b;  353c-354b  30  Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 66c-67b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 17,
schol  428c-d; prop 23-24 430c-d; prop 59-73 442b447a; part v, prop 1-20
452d-458a  32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix [335-375] 254b255b 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 381-383 238b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi> sect
46-54  189d-192c;  sect 69 196d-197a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a;
344d-345c  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256c257d; 263a-b;
266b-c / Practical Reason, 305d-

[1030a]
996  PsychologicalJactors  in  theformation  of  moral  (5  virtue. 5 b.
Deliberation  and  judgment  in  the  formation  of  virtue: the role of
reason) 306a; 321b-325c; 339b-d; 357c 360d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements
of Ethics,  374a-c  ;  378a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387d-388a 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 297b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 165c166b
49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c-d; 312a-313a; 593a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vi,  248b 250a 53 James: Psychology, 14b-15a; 202b; 886b888a
5c.  Intention  and  choice  as  conditions  of virtue: the role of will
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-20 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-21 BK
I, CH 13
[lI02b I39 Aristotle:
Ethics, no3 a 11, ch 6 351c-352d esp
[no6b36-i 107*9] 352c; bk hi, ch 1-5 355b, d4]
348a-c; bk 361a; ch 12
[1119*21-34] 365d-366a; bk
vi,  ch  1-2  387a-388b;  bk  vii,  ch  7-10  400d-403c;  bk viii, ch 13
[1163*21-24] 415d; BK IX, ch 8
[1168*28-1169*11]
421d-422d; bk x, ch 8
[ii78*34-b8] 433a-b
/ Politics, bk vii, ch 13
[1332*28-32] 537a
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 22 127c128c 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  xiv,  ch 5-6 379c380c; ch 13 387c-388c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 50, a 5 10b-d; q 55, a 1, rep 2 26b-27a; q 56, a 6 34b-35a;
q 60, aa 2-3 50d-52b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xviii
[40-75] 80b-c; xxvii [124-142] 95d-96a
23   Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  272c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  65c-66b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 13d-14c 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi, sect 51-54 191b-192c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b; 259a-b / Practical
Reason, 291b,d
[fn
1  J;  304a-  d; 309d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 378a-b 43
Mill:   Liberty,   295a-297b   /  Utilitarianism,  463a-464d  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, additions, 67 126d / Philosophy of History, intro,
165c166b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk vi, 248b- 250a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 20a-c; bk v, 129d-132b 53 James: Psychology,
186b-187a;   271b-275a  passim,  esp  272b-273a,  274a-275a;  806a-808a;
814b-819a passim, esp 818a-b; 825a-827a

[1030b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 5c to 6b 6. Virtue in relation to other moral goods or
principles  6a.  Duty and virtue 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk vi, sect 2
274a;  bk  vm,  sect  32  287d-288a  14 Plutarch: Pericles, 121a-122b 18
Augustine:  City  of God,  bk xix, ch 19 523b-d 21 Dante : Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xvii [82]- xviii
[75] 79b-80c; xxx-xxxi 99b-102b passim
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  300c-307a  esp  303a-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  74b-c  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369b-370a; 372b-373b /
Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
258d-259a; 262a-263c; 267b-d; 269b
[fn
1]  / Practical Reason, 305d-307d; 325a-329a esp 325c, 327d-329a / Pref.
Metaphysical  Elements  of Ethics, 366d-368d; 373b-d / Intro. Metaphysic
of  Morals,  383a-390a,c  esp  383a-384d,  389a-390a,c 43 Mill: Liberty,
290c-291a  /  Utilitarianism,  453c-454a;  457c-461c passim; 464d-476a,c
passim  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 135 47b-d; part hi,
par  150  56c-57a;  additions,  86  129c / Philosophy of History, intro,
165c166b  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 304a; 310d; 314a; 592c-593b passim
6b.  The  relation  of virtue to pleasure 7 Plato: Protagoras, 59a-62c /
Gorgias,  275d285a  / Republic, bk ii, 313d; bk ix, 421a-425b / Laws, bk
1, 649d-650b; bk ii, 656d-658b; bk in, 669b-d; bk v, 689c-690c / Seventh
Letter, 801b-c; 806a 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch 5
[i02b i4-2i]
145c; bk in, ch 3
[n8b27-36]
165d-166a / Physics, bk vii, ch 3
[246b20-247*i9] 330a-b
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[1098^01099*30]
344b-d; bk ii, ch 7
[1108*23-29]
353d;  bk  iv,  ch  8  375a-d;  bk  vii 395a-406a,c passim, esp ch 11-14
403c-406a,c;  bk  ix,  ch  9  423a-424b; bk x, ch 1-5 426a-430d passim /
Politics, bk 11, ch 7
[i266b27-i267*i7]
462b-d;  bk  vii,  ch  i  527a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch ii,
151a-b;  ch  19, 163b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 10 257d258a;
bk hi, sect 6 261a-c; bk vi, sect 16 275b-d; bk viii, sect 10 286b; sect
19  286d287a;  sect  28  287c;  sect  39  288c;  bk ix, sect 1 291a-c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10-11 55c-56b; bk x, par 41-53
81c-85a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 32, a 6 762d-763c; q
34, a 1 768c-769d; a 4 771c772b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 60, a 4, ans 52b-53a; a 5, ans 53a-54d

[1031a]
6c  Chapter  97: VIRTUE AND VICE 997 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
xxxxxxi 99b-102b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 65c-66b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  28a-d; 162c-167a^60d^^ 205b; 392a-b; 408a-b; 540b-d
30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71d-72b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
prop i-i8 424c-429d 33 Pascal: Pensees, 412-413 242a; 423 243b 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 35 186b-d; sect 71 197b-198a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  192b  42  Kant:  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  256c-257c  /  Practical  Reason, 298a-300a; 304a307d; 338c-355d
passim  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-366d / Intro.
Metaphysic   of Morals,   387b   388a  /  Judgement,  478a479d  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  447b-450b;  463a-464d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 116b; 393a-b
49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 316b-317a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
198b  6c.  The  relation  of  virtue  to  wealth  Old Testament: Exodus,
20:15,17;  23:3,6,8  /  Leviticus,  19:9-11,13,35-36;  25 / Deuteronomy,
5:19,21;  15:7-15;  17:16-17;  22:1-3; 24:10-22; 26:12-13 / Nehemiah, 5—
(D) II Esdras, 5 / Job, 29:12-17; 31:16-23 / Proverbs, 1:10-19; 3:27-28;
11:1,24-28;   15:16,27;  16:8;  17:23;  19:17,22;  20:10;  21:6-7,13,26;
22:9,16,22-23;  23  :4~5  ;  28  :27  ;  29 .7 ; 30 :8-9 / Ecclesiastes,
5:1020— (D) Ecclesiastes, 5:9-19 / Isaiah, 10:1-3; 33:15-17; 58:3-i2-(D)
Isaias,  10:1-3;  33:15x  75  58:3-12  / Jeremiah, 6:12-13; 8:10; 17:11;
22:13-17—  (D)  Jeremias,  6:12-13;  8:10;  17:11;  22:13-17  / Ezefyel,
22:12-16,24-31  —  (D) Ezechiel, 22:12-16,24-31 / Amos, 2:6-8 Apocrypha:
Tobit,  1  passim;  4:1-19  passim;  12:8-10—  (D) OT, Tobias, 1 passim;
4:1-20  passim;  12:8-10  /  Ecclesiasticus,  7:10;  8:2; 12:1-6; 14:13;
26:29—  (D)  OT, Ecclesiasticus, 7:10; 8:2-3; 12:1-7; I4 :i 35 26:28 New
Testament:   Matthew,   5:40,42;  6:1-4,1921,24-34;  i9-'i6-3o  /  Luke,
12:13-34   /   Acts,  20:33-34  /  //  Corinthians,  8-9  /  /  Timothy,
6:6-11,17-19 / Hebrews, 13:5 / James, 5:1-6 5 Aeschylus: Persians
[165-172]
17a / Agamemnon
[355-389] 55d-56b;
[750-781] 60a-b
5  Sophocles:  Antigone  [280-303]  133c-d  5 Euripides: Helen [903-908]
306d-307a  /  Electra  [367-395]  330c-d;  [938-944]  335c  / Phoenician
Maidens [528-567] 382c-d 5 Aristophanes: Plutus 629a-642d esp
[415618] 633d-636d
6  Herodotus: History, bk hi, 121b-c; bk v, 169d-170a; bk vi, 201d-202c;
bk  ix,  288b;  297b-d  6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk i, 379c-d 7
Plato:  Meno,  175b-178d esp 178c-d / Republic, bk 1, 296c-297b; 304a-c;
bk ii, 312b-313a; bk iii-iv, 341c-343b; bk viii, 405c-408a; bk

[1031b]
x,  436c-437c  /  Critias,  485b-d  /  Laws,  bk  ii,  656d-658b;  bk v,
694a-695a;  bk viii, 733b734a; bk ix, 751c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii,
ch 7
[uo7b9-2i]
353a-b;  bk  iv,  ch  1-2  366b,d-370b;  bk  x,  ch 8 432d-434a passim /
Politics, bk ii, ch 5 458a-460a passim, esp
[i263a38-b26] 458c-d;
ch 7
[i266b27-i267a i7]
462b-d; ch ii
[i273 a22-b8] 469d-470a; bk vii, ch
i 527a-d; ch 8
[i328a2i-b
4] 532c-d; ch 13
[i33i b29~
1332*32]  536b-537a  /  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  16  638b-c 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  19,  163b;  bk iv, ch 6 230b-232c 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  viii,  sect  33  288a  14 Plutarch: Pericles, 130b-c /
Aristides-Marcus  Cato, 291b-292b / Lysander, 361a-d 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk  hi,  58a  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vi, par 16 40a-c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 60, a 5, ans 53a-54d; q 65, a i, rep i
70b-72a; q 84, a 1 174b-175a; part ii-ii, q 186, a 3, rep 4 652d-655b 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii [25-96] 9d10c; xix
[1-123]
26d-28a; purgatory, xix
[7o]-xx [123] 82b-84c
22   Chaucer:  Tale  of  Wife  of  Bath  [6691-6788]  274b-276a  /  Tale
of Melibeus, par 49-52 422a425b; par 77, 430b-431a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  133b-135b  25  Montaigne:  Essays, 109d-110c;
126b-131a  passim  27 Shakespeare: All's Well That Ends Well, act 11, sc
in [123-153I 152d-153a / Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp act iv, sc 111
[24-47]
410d-411a,   [382-462]  415a-d  29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,
221d222c;  338b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 7d-8b; 77d-78a; 86bc;
92a-b  33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters, 91a-94a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
178b-d;  283d-284a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 19a-d; bk vii,
44d-45c;  bk  xx, 146b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 327c-328a; 360b-361a /
Political  Economy,  375b-d  /  Social Contract, bk in, 411a-b 39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations, bk iv, 265d-266b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 22c 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b / Practical Reason,
330d-331a  /  Pref.  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics, 370b-d 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  335b-c / Utilitarianism, 463a-b 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 102d-103a; 413c-d; 491b; 492be; 493c; 494b 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  hi,  par 241 76d-77a 50 Marx: Capital, 61d; 77c-78b 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50b; bk v, 194d; 197b-c

[1032a]
998  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (6.  Virtue  in  relation  to  other moral goods
orprinciples.) 6d. Virtue and honor Old Testament: Proverbs, 10:7; 14:34
/  Isaiah,  14:20—  (D)  Isaias,  14:20  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon,
3:16-17;  4—  (D)  OT,  Boo{  of  Wisdom,  3:16-17;  4 / Ecclesiasticus,
10:19-31;  44:1-15; 46:11-12— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:23-34; 44:1-15;
46:1315  New  Testament:  Romans,  2:10  4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d esp bk i
3a-9a,c,  bk  iv  [401-418]  28a,  bk v [520-532] 35c, bk ix 57a-64a,c 5
Sophocles: Ajax 143a-155a,c esp
[393-480]
146c-147b / Electra
[1058-1097] 164d-165a /
Philoctetes
[1 408-1 444] 194d-195a,c
5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[373-430]
228b-d / Heracleidae
[297-332]
251a-b / Andromache
[319-332] 318a;
[693-705] 321a-b;
[768-801]
321d-322a   /  Iphigenia  at  Aulis  [543-572]  429d430a  6  Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 397d398c 7 Plato: Symposium, 152b-153b / Meno,
178c-d  /  Republic, bk ii, 310c-315c; bk viii, 403a-405c / Laws, bk hi,
673d-674c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ii, ch 5
[1105^9no6a
9]  351b-c; ch 7 [uo7b22-i 108*3] 353b-c; BK III, CH 5 b io-i3] 361d; bk
iv,  ch  3-4  ch  8  421d-423a  / Politics, 370b-372d; bk ix bk 11, ch 7
[i266b36-i267a2]  462c;  bk  vii,  ch  i  527a-d  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 9
608c-611c  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect ii 258a-b; bk vi, sect
16 275b-d; sect 51 279b-c; bk ix, sect 30 294b-c 14 Plutarch: Aristides,
265c-d  /  Lysander, 354d / Cato the Younger, 637b-c / Agis, 648b,d-649a
15   Tacitus:   Annals,   bkiii,  58a;  bkxv,  162d-163a  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  x,  par  59-64  86b87d  /  City of God, bk v, ch 12-20
216d-226a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, a 2 616d-617b 20
Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 25, a 1, rep 2 501b-502a; part
hi,  q 25, a i 839d-840d; part hi suppl, q 96, a 7, rep 3 1061b-1062a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv [67-147] 6a7a; purgatory, xi
[73-120] 69c-70a; paradise, vi [112-126] 114d-115a
22 Chaucer: Prologue
[43-78]
159b-160a / Knight's Tale 174a-211a / Franklin's Tale
[11,667-844]
361b-364b  /  Physician's  Tale  366a-371a esp [12,137-191] 369b-370b 23
Hobbes:   Leviathan,   part  i,  74c-'/5b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  65c-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  103c-105c;  112a-d;
126b127c;181d-183c;300c-307a;390a-391c;462b-c; 495d-496d

[1032b]
c 6d to 6e 26 Shakespeare: Richard II, act i, sc i
[165195] 322b-c /
1st  Henry  IV,  act  i,  sc ii [218240] 437c-d; sc m [160-208] 439b-d /
Julius Caesar, act v, sc v [68-75] 596a, 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act iv,
sc iv [39-66] 59b-c / All's Well That Ends Well, act ii, sc hi [124-153]
152d-153a  29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote esp part ii, 222c-d, 227d-228d 30
Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning,  92a-b  33 Pascal: Pensees, 404 241a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  90a-d;  bk  ii,  ch  xxviii,  sect  10-12
230b-231c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk hi, lla-d; bk iv, 13b,d-15a
38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  360b-361a;  362a-d / Social Contract, bk iv,
434b-435a  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v, 346c-347c; 354c-d 42 Kant:
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b; 258b-c 43 Federalist: number
57,  177b-c;  number  72, 217a-b 43 Mill: Liberty, 303d-304c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  124d-125d; 310d-311a; 412b-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 317a-d
passim;  322b-c;  592d-593a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xv, 619c-621b;
epilogue 1, 647b-649b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov 153d-157b BK VI,
6e.  Virtue in relation to friendship and love 5 Euripides: Iphigenia at
Aulis   [334-414]   427d428c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  258d  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 419a 7 Plato: Phaedrus, 128d-129a
/ Symposium, 152b-155c / Republic, bk i, 299b-c / Seventh Letter, 804c 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch i
[116^1-39]
162d  9  Aristotle : Ethics, bk viii-ix 406b,d-426a,c / Politics, bk 11,
ch 5
[i263a38-b26] 458c-d
/  Rhetoric,  bk  ii,  ch  4  [i38i  ai2-b38]  626d-627d  12  Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch  22  167d170a  passim; bk iv, ch 2 223d-224b 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  xi,  sect 9 303b; sect 13 303d 14 Plutarch:
Alcibiades,  156c-158b / Pelopidas, 233b-d / Cato the Younger, 623a-b 15
Tacitus: Histories, bk i, 208b-c 18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk i,
ch  27-30  631d-633b  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 23, aa
3-8  485a-489c; q 31, a i, rep 3 536d537c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xi  15a-16b;  purgatory, xvn [82]-xviii [75] 79b-80c 22 Chaucer: Troilus
and Cressida, bk ii, stanza 122-123 3 ?b; BK IH ' stanza 254-258 87b-

[1033a]
7  to lb Chapter 97: VIRTUE AND VICE 999 88a / Franklin's Tale 351b-366a
esp  [11,830928]  364b-366a  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii, 24b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 82b-88d; 390a-b 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii
[58-79]  49c-d  ^— 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 71 446a-b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv,  165b-166a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk v,
18d-19d   38   Rousseau:   Political   Economy,   373c-374a   43   Mill:
Utilitarianism,  454a-455a;  474b-c  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c-d;
592d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk ii, 40b-c 7. The role of
virtue  in  political  theory an end of la. The cultivation of virtue as
government  and  the  state  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk ii,
395d399a  7  Plato: Protagoras, 46b-d / Gorgias, 282d283a / Republic, bk
ii-vii  310c-401d / Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk i, 640d-652d; bk hi,
669b-670b;  bk  xii,  794a-799a,c  / Seventh Letter, 806b-c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk i, ch 9
[i099b25-32]
345b; ch 13
[1102*5-25] 347b-c; bk
ii, ch i
[no3b3-6] 349a; bk v, ch
i  [1129^2-24] 377a; ch 2 [ii3ob7-29] 378a-b; bk x, ch 9 [1179*33n8ob27]
434a-435c / Politics, bk i, ch 2
[1253*1-39] 446b-d; ch
13 Ji26ob8-i9] 455c; bk 11, ch 7
[i266b27-i267a i7] 462b-d; ch 9
[i269b i3-i27oa i4]
465d-466b; bk hi, ch 9 477c-478d; bk vii, ch 1-3 527a-530a; ch 8
[i328 a2i-b
4 ] 532c-d; ch 13-15 536b-539d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi
[847-853] 233b-234a;
bk  xii  [829-842]  376a-b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 36a, 48bc /
Lycurgus-Numa  61b,d-64a,c  /  Solon  64b,  d77a,c / Lysander, 361a-d 15
Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 57b-58d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q 92, a 1 213c-214c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-114] 77b-78a; paradise, xxvii
[121-148]
148c-d  25 Montaigne: Essays, 60c-61c; 306a-d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  ii,  353a  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of Learning, 54a-b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a; prop 73 446c-447a 35 Locke:
Toleration,  15d  /  Civil  Government,  ch  ix,  sect 128 54b-c / Human
Understanding,  bk  1,  ch  11,  sect  5-6 105a-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws, bk hi, 9b-lld; bk iv, 15c-17b; bk v, 18b,d-19d; 21d-25a; bk xvi,
119d  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 372a-377b / Social Contract, bk i,
393b-c;  bk  hi,  411a-c;  bk iv, 434b-435a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
lOOc-lOlb

[1033b]
41  Gibbon  :  Decline  and  Fall,  54d-55a 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
amendments,  xviii  19c;  xxi  20b  43  Mill: Representative Government,
334a-c;  336c-338d;  346c-350a  / Utilitarianism, 464d476a,c passim, esp
467b-468a, 474d-476a 44 Boswell: Johnson, 178b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right, part hi, par 241 76d-77a; par 257 80b; par 273, 91b-d; additions,
183  148d-149a  /  Philosophy of History, part iv, 365d-366a 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk vi, 244d-245d lb. Civic virtue: the virtue of the good
citizen  compared with the virtue of the good man Old Testament: Exodus,
22:28  /  Proverbs,  16:13;  20  :2  ;  23  :  1-3 ; 24 :2 1 ; 25 :6~7 /
Ecclesiastes,  8:2-3; 10:20 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 41:17-18— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  41:21-23  New  Testament:  Matthew,  22:16-22  /  Mark,
12:14-17 / Luke, 20:22-25 / Acts, 23:5 / Romans, 13:1-7 / Titus, 3:1 / I
Peter, 2:13-21 5 Sophocles: Antigone 131a-142d esp [633-765] 136c-137d 5
Aristophanes: Knights 470a-487a,c esp
[1316-1408] 486a-487a,c
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  v, 175b; bk vii, 233a-d; 258d 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,  370a-c; bk ii, 397d-398c; 402d-404a; bk hi,
425a-427c  passim;  bk  vi,  511c-d 7 Plato: Protagoras, 43b-47c / Meno,
174d176a  esp  175d-176a  /  Apology  200a-212a,c  / Crito 213a-219a,c /
Republic,  bk  i,  300b-306b;  bk iv, 346a-355a / Statesman, 605d-608d /
Laws,  bk  in,  669b-670c;  672d-674d; bk v, 686d-691b; bk vi, 706bc; bk
viii, 740d741a / Seventh Letter, 805d-806a; 806d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
i, ch 9
[i099b29-32]
345b; bk in, ch 8 [iu6ai5-b3] 362b-d; bk v, ch 1
[ii29b i2-ii3oa i3] 377a-c; ch 2 [ii3ob7~
29] 378a-b; bk vi, ch 8
[ii4i b23-ii42an]
390d-391a;   bk   x,   ch   9  434a-436a,c  /  Politics,  bk  1,  ch  13
[1259^3-1260*20] 454b-d; bk ii, ch 11
[i273a22-b8] 469d-470a; bk hi, ch 4-5
473c-475d; ch 9
[i28ob3-n] 478a-b; ch
13
[1283^4-1284^]
482a; ch 15
[i286a22-b
5]  484c-d;  ch  18  487a,c; bk iv, ch 7 [i293b2-7] 493a-b; bk vii, ch 2
[1324^4^6]  528b-c;  ch 3 529b-530a; ch 7 531d-532c; ch 9 [1328^31329*2]
533b;  ch 13-15 536b-539d; bk viii, ch 1 [1337*11-18] 542a 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch 10 148c150a; bk in, ch 7 182b-184a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  ii,  sect i 256b, d; bk in, sect 4-5 260b-261a; bk iv,
sect  4  264a;  sect 29 266a; bk v, sect 16 271c-d; sect 22 272b; bk vi,
sect  14  274d-275a; bk vii, sect 5 280a-b; sect 13 280c; sect 66 284bc;
bk ix, sect 23 293c; bk x, sect 6

[1034a]
(7. The role of virtue in political theory, lb. Civic virtue: the virtue
of  the  good citizen compared with the virtue of the good man.) 297a-b;
bk xi, sect 8 303a-b; sect 21 305d306a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 45b; 48b-c
/  Coriolanus,  174b,d-175a  /  Aristides,  263d  /  Lysander,  361a-d /
Agesilaus,  480b,d-481a / Cleomenes, 659d-660a / Demosthenes, 699c- 700a
15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk i, 191c-d; bk iv, 267c-d 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  ii 6b-10a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk ii, ch 21 161b162d;
bk  v,  ch 12-13 216d-220a; bk xix, ch 17 522b-523a; ch 21 524a-525a; ch
24-26  528b-529a  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i—ii, q 61, a 5
58b-59d;  q  92,  a i, rep 3 213c-214c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi
[58-75] 9a; xi
[1-66] 15a-d; xv [55-78] 21d; xvi
[64-78]
23a-b; xxxii
[7o]-xxxm
[90]
48c-50c passim; purgatory, vi
[58-151]
61b-62c; XVII
[91-123] 79b-d; paradise, xv
[97]-xvi
[154]
129b-132a  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 154b-155c; conclusion, 279a-c
25 Montaigne: Essays, 48a-b; 381a-388c esp 381c-d; 390c-391c; 480b-482b;
486b-489b;  490c-491d  26 Shakespeare :Julius Caesar, act v, sc v [6881]
596a,c  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 74b-c; 81d82a; 94b-95b 31
Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 48b-49a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop
73  446c-447a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  6 173a 35 Locke: Toleration, 15d /
Human Understanding, bk 1, ch 11, sect 5-6 105a-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  xxiia-d;  bk  hi,  9b-12a;  bk  iv, 13b,d-15a; 15c-17b; bk v,
18d-19d;  21b-23a;  31b-c;  bk  vii, 44d-45c; bk viii, 51a-53a; 55c-d 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 323a-328a,c; 360b,d
[fn
1];  366b-d / Political Economy, 369b-370a; 372a-377b / Social Contract,
bk  ii,  402b403a;  bk  hi,  411a-c;  412a-b;  bk  iv, 428a-432b passim;
434b-435a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk v, 337d-338c; 340c-343d;
346c-347d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 193c-194a; 630b,d631a; 644b-645c
43  Federalist:  number  55,  174c-d 43 Mill: Representative Government,
329b-330a;  334b;  336c-337b;  342d-343c; 346c-350a 44 Boswell: Johnson,
393a-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  268  84c-d /
Philosophy  of  History, intro, 171b-c; part 11, 272a-d; part iv, 365b-c
49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 314c-316a; 321b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  vi,  244d-245d;  260a-262a;  bk  xii,  537b-538a;  bk  xv, 634a635a;
epilogue i, 668a-669c; epilogue ii, 686c-687a

[1034b]
1000  THE GREAT IDEAS lb to Id 7c. The aristocratic principle: virtue as
a condition of citizenship or public office 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi,
107d-108a  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk hi, 425a-c 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  hi, 339b-341d; bk v, 369c-370a; bk vi, 373c-375b; bk vii,
390b391b  /  Statesman,  605d-608d  /  Laws, bk xii, 796b-799a / Seventh
Letter,  807a-b  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  ii [i273a22-b 7]
469d-470a; bk hi, ch 4-5 473c-475d; ch 7 476c-477a; ch 9
[i28i a2-8]
478c-d; ch 10 478d-479a esp
[128^29-34]
479a; ch ii
[i28i a39-b i5] 479b-c; ch 12-13 480c-483a; ch
15  [1286^14]  484b-485a; ch 16 [i287b i2-i4] 486a; ch 18 487a,c; bk iv,
ch 7 493a-b; bk v, ch 7
[1307^-15]
509a; ch 9
[i309a33-b i3]
511c-d;  bk  vii,  ch  9  [i328b22-i329a2] 533a-b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
45c-d  /  Lysander,  365a366a  /  Lysander-Sulla,  387d-388a 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk xi, 105d-107b 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp act
1, sc 1
[92-166] 352b-353a, act hi, sc
i
[142-161] 370d-371a
35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 94 46a-c; ch viii, sect 105-112
48c-51b  passim  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk hi, 10c-lla; bk v,
23a-25a;  bk viii, 52c-53a 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk hi, 411c412c
40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 61d-62a 43 Federalist: number 68, 206b-c 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  336c-338c;  363a-366a;  384a-387d 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  125c-d;  141a;  178b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  291295  97d-99a; additions, 169 145d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vi,  244d-245d  Id. The virtues which constitute the good or
successful  ruler: the vices associated with the possession of power Old
Testament:  Exodus,  18:21-26 / Deuteronomy, 1:13-18; 17:14-20 / Judges,
9:7-20 / / Samuel, 8:11-18; 15:22-23— (D) I Kings, 8:11-18; 15:22-23 / /
Kings,  3:16-28—  (D) /// Kings, 3:16-28 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II
Paralipomenon,  1:7-12  /  Psalms,  2; 72; 101— (D) Psalms, 2; 71; 100 /
Proverbs,   14:35;   16:12-15;   17:7;   20:26,28;  25:2,5;  28:2,15-16;
29:2,4,14;  31:4-5  /  Ecclesiastes,  10:5-7,16-17  /  Isaiah,  3:14-15;
10:1-3;  "  :*-5>  14:5-6;  16:5;  56:9-12— (D) Isaias, 3:14-15; 10:1-3;
11:1-5;   14:5-6;  16:5;  56:9-12  /Jeremiah,  23:1-6—  (D)  :9?  46:18—
Jeremias, 23:1-6 / Ezekjel, 22:27; 45 (D) Ezechiel, 22:27; 45 : 95 46:18
Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:1; 6; 9— (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 1:1; 6;
9 / Ecclesiasticus, 8:2; 10:1-3— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 8:2-3; 10:1-3 /
/ Maccabees, 14— (D) OT, / Machabees, 14

[1035a]
Id  Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE  1001  4 Homer: Iliad, bk ix [1-172]
57a-58d 5 Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d esp
[623-908]
21c-24d 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[863-910]
107b-c / Antigone 131a-142d esp
[162-210]
132c-d, [633-765] 136c-137d 5 Euripides: Medea
[1 15-130] 213b/ Suppliants
[286-358] 260d-261c / Iphigenia at Aulis [334375] 427d-428b
5   Aristophanes:  Knights  470a-487a,c  /  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c  esp
[486-586]  589a-590d  /  Ecclesiazusae  615a-628d esp [173-240] 617a-c 6
Herodotus:   History,   bk   hi,  107c-d;  bk  ix,  314a,c  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 404a-d; bk hi, 425a-c; 427a-c; bk vi, 513a-d 7
Plato:  Gorgias,  285a-294d  /  Republic,  bk  i,  300b-306b; bk ii-vii,
319c-401d  /  Timaeus,  442b-d  /  Statesman,  605d-608d  / Laws, bk iv,
679c-682c;  bk xii, 794a-799a,c / Seventh Letter, 804b-805a; 806d-807b 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 13
[i259b33~
1260*20] 454b-d; bk ii, ch 9 [i27i b i-9] 467d; bk hi, ch 4
[i277a5-b29]
474a-475a; ch 7
[i279a33-b
4] 476d; ch 13 481b-483a; ch 15
[i286b8~-22] 484d-485a; ch 17 [i287b4o]-CH 18
[i288b6] 486c-487a,c; bk v, ch 9 [i309a33-b i3]
511c-d; ch 11
[i3i4a30-i3i5b n]
517a-518c;  bk  vii,  ch  2-3 528a-530a; ch 14 [i332b i2]-cH 15 [i334b8]
537b-539c  12  Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 7 182b-184a 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  i  253a-256d;  bk  hi,  sect  5  261a;  bk vi, sect 30
276d-277a;  bk  vii,  sect 36 282b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 45c; 47a-48c /
Numa  Pompilius  49a-61d  esp 59c-60b / Pericles 121a141a,c / Coriolanus
174b,d-193a,c   esp   180d181b  /  Alcibiades-Coriolanus  193a-195a,c  /
Aristides   262b,d-276a,c   esp   263d-267a,   273d275c  /  Marcus  Cato
276b,d-290d  esp  282a  /  Aristides-Marcus  Cato  290b,d-292d / Pyrrhus
314b,d-332d esp 319b-321a / Lysander 354b, d368a,c esp 357a-b, 362b-365a
/  Sulla,  384a-c  /  Lysander-Sulla,  387b,d-388c  / Nicias, 423a430d /
Crassus-Nicias,  455d-456d  /  Agesilaus  480b,d-499a,c  esp 482d-484a /
Alexander   540b,d-576d  /  Caesar  577a-604d  esp  598d601b  /  Phocion
604b,d-619d   esp   604b,d-605d  /  Cato  the  Younger  620a-648a,c  esp
626d-627b,  637b-c  /  Agis, 648b,d-649b / Cleomenes, 661b-d / Caius and
Tiberius  Gracchus-Agis and Cleomenes 689b,d-691a,c / Demetrius 726a747d
esp  742c-743b  /  Dion  781b,d-802a,c esp 781 b,d, 800a-c / Brutus-Dion
824b,d-826a,c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk ii, 41c-d; bk vi, 86a-b; 87b-c;
90d-91a;  lOOa-b; bk xi, 102d-103a / Histories, bk i, 193c-194a; 197a-b;
198b-c; 208b-c; bk 11, 215c-d; 223a-b; 236d-237a; 238d-240b; bk hi, 254d
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch 19 523b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 92,

[1035b]
a  1,  rep  3  213c-214c;  q 105, a i, rep 2-3 307d309d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, xii 16b-17d esp
[103-112]
17c; xxvn
[55-136]
40a-41b; paradise, xiii [94-108] 126b-c; xvm [52]-xx
[148] 134a-138b passim
22 Chaucer: Physician's Tale 366a-371a 23 Machiavelli: Prince la-37d esp
ch viii 12d14c, ch xv-xix 22b-30a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk   i,  58a-60c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  314c-316a;  337bc;  350d354b;
386b-388c;  436c-438b;  452a-d 26 Shakespeare: Richard III 105a-148a,c /
Merchant  of  Venice, act iv, sc i [184-197] 427c / 1st Henry IV, act i,
sc ii
[218-240] 437c-d;
act in, sc 11 [93-161] 453d-454c/ 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc v 494b-496d /
Henry  V,  act i, sc 1 533a-d; act iv, sc i [103-301] 552d-554c / Julius
Caesar,  act  ii,  sc  i  [10-34]  574c-d;  act  hi,  sc ii 583c-586c 27
Shakespeare:  Measure  for Measure, act i, sc 1 174a-175b; sc in 177b-d;
act hi, sc ii
[275-296]
192b / King Lear, act hi, sc iv
[26-36] 264c / Macbeth, act iv, sc hi [1-139]
303b-304d / Coriolanus, act ii, sc hi
[162229] 367d-368c; act hi 369a-377a
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part ii, 332b336a; 340b-343a; 360d-361d 30
Bacon: Advancement of Learning, la-2c; 4c6c; 20d-25c; 74d-75a; 94b-95b /
New  Atlantis,  205d-207b 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-b / Sr Henry
Vane  69b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch xiv, sect 160166 62d-64a 36
Swift:  Gulliver,  parti, 28b-29b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi,
40a-b;  bk xii, 93c-95b; bk xxi, 170a; bk xxviii, 259b; bk xxix, 262a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  362a-d  /  Political Economy, 367a-377b passim /
Social  Contract,  bk in, 412d-413a; 414b-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
30c-32b  passim;  34a-39d;  61d-64c  passim;  142b-c; 255b,d257a passim;
284a-c; 338d-339c; 343c-344a,c; 430a-d; 448c-449d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  39b-40a;  67d-68b;  103d-104c;  113c-114a;  168b-177c passim, esp
176c-d;  504c-505a;  577d-579a  43 Federalist: number 3, 33d-34a; number
15,  65b-d;  number  22, 83c-d; number 55, 174c-d; number 57, 176d-177a;
number   75,  223c-d  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  363a-366a;
368b-369a  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 120a-c; 178b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part  ii,  275d276d;  281c-282d;  part  iv, 360b-362a; 366b 48
Melville:  Moby Dic\, 106a-107b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 9c-10d;
bk  v,  216a-d;  bk  x, 465c-467a; bk xiv, 611ac; epilogue 1, 645a-646c;
epilogue ii, 680c-d

[1036a]
8.  The  religious aspects of virtue and vice 8a. The moral consequences
of  original  sin  Old  Testament:  Genesis, 3:9-24; 6:5-13; 8:21 / Job,
15:14-16; 25:4-6 / Psalms, 14:1-3; 39:56,11; 51:2-5; 53:1-3— (D) Psalms,
13:1-3;  38:6-7,12;  50:4-7;  52:1-4  /  Proverbs,  20:9 / Ecclesiastes,
7:20,27-29; 9:3— (D) Ecclesiastes, 7:21,28-30; 9:3 / Jeremiah, 17:9— (D)
Jeremias,  17:9  Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23-24— (D) OT, Boo\ of
Wisdom,  2:23-25  New  Testament:  John,  8:3-8  /  Romans,  3:95:21 esp
5:12-21; 7; 8:20-21; 9:29 / / Corinthians, 15:21-22 / Galatians, 2:16; 3
esp  3:11,  3:22; 4:1-7; 5:19-21 / Ephesians, 2:1-5 / ^ /o/b, 2:15-17 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  i,  par  18 5c-d / City of God, bk xii, ch
21-22  357a-c;  bk  xiii, ch 1-15 360a-366d; bk xiii, ch 23-BK xiv, ch 5
372a-380b; bk xiv, ch 12-13 387a-388c; ch 15-27 388d-397a; bk xxi, ch 12
571a-c; ch 15 572c-573b; bk xxii, ch 22-23 606d609a; ch 30, 617c-618a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 97, a 1, rep 3 513c-514c; q 98, a 2
517d-519a;  part  i-ii,  q  17,  a 9, rep 3 692d-693d 20 Aquinas : Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii,  qq  81-83 162d-174b; q 85 178b-184a; q 91, a 6
212c-213c; q 94, a 6, rep 1-2 225d-226b; q 109, a 2, ans 339c-340b; a 3,
ans  340c-341b;  a 8, ans 344d-346a; part hi, q 8, a 5, rep i 760a-d; qq
14-15 784a-796a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, iv
[13-45]
5c-d; purgatory, in
[16-45] 56a-b; x
[121129]
68c-d; xxviii
[9i]-xxix
[36]
97a-98a;  xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, vii 115a-116c 22 Chaucer: Tale of
Man of Law [4778-4791] 240b-241a / Pardoner's Tale 374a-382b esp
[12,432-445] 375a,
[12,829-837] 381b
/  Parson's  Tale,  par  13  504b-505a;  par 18-19, 507b-508a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan,  part  ii,  112a-b; part hi, 191b-c; 192ac; 195d 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk ii, 81a-b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 213a-215b;
218c-219a; 233a-234a; 238b-239c; 250a-b; 294a-b 30 Bacon: Novum Organum,
bk  ii,  aph  52,  195c-d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk hi [167-216]
139a140a;
[274-304]
141b-142a; bk iv
[505-535]
163b-164a;  bk  ix  [780-1189]  264b-273a;  bk x 274a-298b esp [103-123]
276b-277a, [229-409] 279b-283a,
[585-640]
287a-288b,
[720-844]
290a-292b; bk xi
[84^98]
301a;
[162-180]
302b-303a;  [251-262]  304b-305a; bk xi [423]- bk xii [371] 308b-327a 33
Pascal:   Provincial  Letters,  82a  /  Pensees,  426427  244b;  430-431
245a-247b;  434-435  248a251a;  439-450 251a-253a; 560 272b 37 Fielding:
Tom Jones, 38d

[1036b]
1002  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  8/0  Sb  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 183b-c 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  482a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, additions, 14
118c-d  /  Philosophy  of History, part hi, 304d305b; part iv, 354a-c 50
Marx:  Capital,  354b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk vii, 275a 8b. The
influence of religion on moral character: the indispensability of divine
grace for the acquisition of natural virtue by fallen man Old Testament:
Proverbs,  21  :3  /  Isaiah,  1  : 16-20; 5 8:3-7— (D) isaias, 1:16-20;
58:3-7  /  Amos, 5:21-24 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:6; 14:2227— (D)
OT,  Boo\  of Wisdom, 9:6; 14:2227 / Ecclesiasticus, 15:1; 35:3— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,   15:1;  35:5  New  Testament:  Matthew,  3:8;  7:16-27;
22:3640;  23:1-33 / Mar{, 7:7-13 / LuJ^e, 3:8; 6:4649; 11:37-44; 12:33 /
John, 14:21; 15:10 / Acts, 26:20 / Romans, 2:17-29; 3:9-8:39 passim / //
Corinthians,  12:7-9 / Galatians, 5:34,16-26 / Ephesians, 2:1-9; 4 :i ~2
; 4:17-5:21; 6:10-17 / Colossians, 1:9-11 / // Timothy, 3:16-17 / Titus,
2-3  /  Hebrews, 10:23-27; 13:20-21 /James, 1:22-27; 2:14-26; 4:1-10 / /
Peter,  1:13-16; 4:1-6; 5:10 / II Peter, 1:2-10 / / John, 2:3-6; 3:23-24
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk ii, par 15 12b-c / City of God, bk iv, ch
3  190a-c;  bk  v,  ch  19-20 224b-226a; bk x, ch 3, 300c; bk xiii, ch 5
362b-c;  bk  xix, ch 4 511a-513c; ch 21 524a-525a; ch 25 528c-d; bk xxi,
ch  15-16  572c-574a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 39 635d-636a 20
Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 109 338a-347d; part hi, q 61
855a-858b;  q  65,  a  1  879c-881d  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, i-ii
la-4a; iv
[13-66]
5c-6a; purgatory, i 53a-54c; vii
[1-36] 62c-d; ix 65d-67b; xi
[1-30] 68d-69a;
xxx-xxxi 99b-102b; paradise, vii
[19-120]
115b-116b 22 Chaucer: Prologue [118-269] 161a-163b; [477528] 167b-168a /
Parson's  Prologue  493b-495a  /  Parson's  Tale  495a-550a esp par 1-15
495a506b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 209c-212a; 294a-b 32 Milton: Sonnets, xiv
66a  /  Paradise  Lost, bk ii [1030-1033] 133b; bk hi [56-415] 136b-144b
esp
[130-134]
138a,
[167-184]
139a-b,
[227238]
140b; bk xi
[1-21]
299a-b;
[251-262]
304b-305a; [355-364] 307a; bk xii [576-605] 331b-332a / Samson Agonistes
[652-666]  353b354a 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 29b / Pensees, 425427
243b-244b;  550  267a-b;  579  276a; 668 294b-295a 35 Locke: Toleration,
lb-c / Human Understanding, bk 1, ch 11, sect 5-6 105a-c

[1037a]
b 8r Chapter 97: VIRTUE AND VICE 1003 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
xi,  div 114, 503a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 255a-268a esp 257a268a 37
Fielding:  Tom  ]ones,  38d  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiv^OOa^
208a,c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  366c-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
191a-194a  esp  191a-d;  291d-292d; 297c-298b; 303a-d; 631d632a 42 Kant:
Pure Reason, 238a-b / Practical Reason, 327c-d / Judgement, 595d-596c 43
Mill:  Liberty,  290a-291d;  296b-d  /  Utilitarianism,  458a44 Boswell:
Johnson,  84d-85a;  151b-c;  256d;  295b; 482a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part i, 228d229b; part in, 312d-313a; part iv, 346a-c; 349c-d;
353c-354c  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 593b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
vi,  271c-274a,c; bk xi, 524c-527a; bk xii, 560a-562d; bk xiv, 606a-607a
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii,  28d32a;  33c-34b; bk iv,
83a-88a  passim;  bk  v,  127b-137c;  bk  vi  146b,d-170d passim; bk xi,
310d-317b  passim;  335c-336b;  337a-346a  passim  53 James: Psychology,
203a-204b  8c.  The divine reward of virtue and punishment of vice: here
and  hereafter  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  6-8;  18:20-19:25  /  Exodus,
22:22-24  /  Leviticus,  18:24-30  /  // Samuel, 22 esp 22:21-25— (D) II
Kings,  22  esp 22:21-25 / / Kings, 21:19-24— (D) /// Kings, 21 :i9-24 /
//  Kings,  9:7-10,30-37—  (D)  IV  Kings, 9:7-10,30-37 / // Chronicles,
6:23,30  —  (D)  //  Paralipomenon, 6:23,30 / Ezra, 9:13 — (D) / Esdras,
9:13  /  Job  esp 5, 8, 15:20-35, 18:1-21, 20:1-22:30, 24:1-25, 27:1-23,
33:134:37,  36:1-33  /  Psalms, 1; 7:8-17; 9; 11-12; 15; 18; 21; 34; 37;
58;  73;  84:11;  89:23-33; 94; 107:10-20; 112; 125; 140— (D) Psalms, 1;
7:9-18;  9:1-21;  10-11; 14; 17; 20; 33; 36; 57; 72; 83:12-13; 88:24-34;
93;  106:10-20;  in;  124;  139  1 Proverbs, 1:29-31; 2:7,21-22; 3:9-10,
31-35;   4:18-19;   5:21-23;   10:2-6,24-30;  11;  12:7,28;  13:9,21,25;
14:11-12,19,32; 15:29; 16:17; *7*5f?3J i9 :i6 ; 21:12-13,15-16,18,21,28;
22:8-9,22-23;  24:12,16,19-20;  25:21-22  / Ecclesiastes, 2:26; 3:16-17;
8:5,12-14; 9:1-2; 12:14 / Isaiah, 1:4-24; 2:10-4:1; 5; 9:13-10:6; 13:11;
14:4-6;  28;  32;  33:15-16;  47; 48:22; 58:3-12; 59; 65:6-7; 66:24— (D)
Jsaias,  1:424; 2:10-4:1; 5; 9:13-10:6; 13:11; 14:4-6; 28; 32; 33:15-16;
47;  48:22;  58:3-12; 59; 65:6-7; 66:24 /Jeremiah, 4:13-22; 5:7-9,25-29;
7:116; 9:1-9; 18:1-12; 21:14; 22:3*51*3^*9; 23:920; 25:12-14; 31:30— (D)
Jeremias, 4:13-22; 57-9>25-29; 7 :i ~l6 ; 9 :i ~9; 18:1-12; 21:14;

[1037b]
mttn-w  2  3 :972 <>; 25:12-14; 31:30 / Lamentations / Ezekjel, 3:17-21;
16; 18; 22-25; :7_I 9— XP) Ezechiel, 3:17-21; 16; 28:1-19; 33 18; 22-25;
28:1-19;  33  :7_I 9 / Daniel, 4:4-5:31 — (D) Daniel, 4-5 / Hosea esp 4,
7,  10:12-13—  (D) Osee esp 4, 7, 10:12-13 / Joe^ I dmos esp 1-2, 4:1-3,
5:11-20,  8:1-14 / Jonah— (D) Jonas 1 Micah esp 3, 6:10-7:7— (D) Micheas
esp  3,  6:10-7:7  / Nahum passim, esp 3 / Haba%u\, 2:4-17— (D) Habacuc,
2:4-17  / Zephaniah, 3:1-8— (D) Sophonias, 3:1-8 / Zechariah passim, esp
7:8-14—  (D)  Zacharias  passim,  esp  7:8-14 / Malachi, 3:5; 4:1-3— (D)
Malachias,  : 5; 4-1-3 Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:5-11 — (D) OT, Tobias, 4:6-12
/  Judith, 7:28— (D) OT, Judith, 7:17 / Wisdom of Solomon, 3-5 esp 5:15;
6:1-7;  11-12;  14:10-11,27-31;  16-17;  18:10-19:22—  (D)  OT,  Boof{of
Wisdom, 3-5 esp 5:15; 6:1-7; 11-12; 14:10-11,27-31; 16-17; 18:10-19:22 /
Ecclesiasticus,   5:1-8;   7:1-3,16-17;   11:16-17,26;   12:6;  16:4-14;
17:23-24;  21:2-3,9-10;  28:1; 35:12-20; 39:25-30; 40:9-15; 41:8-10— (D)
OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  5:1-10;  7:1-3,17-19;  11:1617,28;  12:4; 16:5-15;
17:19-20;  21:2-4,10-11;  28:1;  35:14-26; 39:30-36; 40:9-15; 41:11-13 /
Baruch,  1:22-2:9;  4:1  —  (D) OT, Baruch, 1:22-2:9; 4:1 / / Maccabees,
2:49-63—  (D) OT, / Machabees, 2:49-63 / // Maccabees, 6:13-15; 7:36-38;
9—  (D)  OT,  //  Machabees,  :36-38;  9 New Testament: Matthew, 5:1-30;
6:1-4;  7 :2 i6:13-15; 7 : 4 I -43>49-5°; 18:7-9; 19:16-22; 23:14-39 esp
23:33; 25:3146 / Mar{, 9:43-50; 16:16— (D) Mar{, 9:4227; 10:14-15,41-42;
11:20-24;  I 3 49; 16:16 / Luke, 10:25-37; 14:7-14; 16:19-26; 18:29-30 /
Acts,  12:20-23  / Romans, 2:1-10; 13:4 / / Corinthians, 3:8-17; 6:9-10;
7:9  /  //  Corinthians,  11:15  /  Galatians, 6:7-10 / Ephesians, 6:8 /
Colossians,   3:23-25   /   //   Thessalonians,  1:7-9;  2:1-15—  (D)  H
Thessalonians,  1:79; 2:1-14 / Hebrews, 2:2-3; 6:10; 10:26-31 / James, 1
:i2  / / Peter, 3:10-12; 5:2-6 / // Peter, 2 I Jude passim / Revelation,
2:7,17,26-28;   3:5,12,21;   18;   20:12-15;   21   :8—(D)   Apocalypse,
2:7,17,26-28;  3:5,12,21;  18;  20:12-15;  2I:8  4 Homer: Odyssey, bk xi
[568-600]  248d-249a  5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant Maidens [625-709] 9a10a /
Persians  15a-26d  esp [623-908] 21c-24d / Agamemnon [355-398] 55d-56b /
Eumenides  81a-91d  esp  [490-565] 86b-87a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King
[863-910] 107b-c / Antigone [582-626] 136b-c / Philoctetes [433452] 186a
5 Euripides: Ion
[1614-1622]
297c-d / Helen
[894-943] 306d-307b; [998-1031] 307d-308a
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 7a-b; bk ii, 76b77b; bk vi, 201d-202c; bk
vii,  237d-239a; bk viii, 278d-279a 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 313b-314d;
321d322d; bk x, 436c-441a,c / Seventh Lettery 806a

[1038a]
1004  THE  GREAT IDEAS (8. The religious aspects of virtue and vice. 8c.
The divine reward of virtue and punishment of vice: here and hereafter.}
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[9781023] 42d-43b
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [548-627] 225b-227b;
[722-751] 230a-231a
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  v, ch 15-16 220d-221b; bk xix, ch 13
519a-520a;  ch  28  529d-530a,c;  bk  xxi 560a-586a,c passim / Christian
Doctrine, bk i, ch 20-21 629b 19 Aquinas: Summa Thcologica, part i, q 21
124b-127c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  79,  aa 3-4
158a-159c; q 87, aa 3-5 187b-189c; part in suppl, qq 92-99 1025b-1085a,c
21 Dante: Divine Comedy passim 22 Chaucer: Physician's Tale [12,211-220]
370b371a  / Pardoner's Tale 374a-382b esp [12,397593] 374a-377b / Monf(s
Tale  434a-448b  / Parson's Tale, par 10 498b-502a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  160c-161a;  163d164a;  part hi, 193d-195d; part iv, 250c251b;
253b-255b  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk ii, 119b-122a 26
Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act  i, sc iv [4263] 115a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Hamlet, act i, sc v [9-22] 37a / Measure for Measure, act hi, sc i
[1 18-132]
188a  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 222c; 227d-228d 31 Descartes:
Meditations, 69b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[i]-bk
ii
[628]
93b-125a esp bk ii
[85-92]
113a,
[477-485]
121b; bk iv
[1-113] 152b-155a; bk
xii
[101120] 321b / Samson Agonistes [667-709] 354a355a;
[1156-1177]
364b-365a;
[1669-1707]
376a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i, ch ii, sect 5-6 105a-c; sect
12-13  107b-108c;  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect 62 194c-d; sect 72 198a-c; ch
xxviii,  sect  8  230a;  bk  iv,  ch  xiv,  sect  2  364c 35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  xi, div 108 500b-d; div 114, 503a 37 Fielding: Tom
Jones,  20b-21a  38  Rousseau: biequality, 366c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 198d-199a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233d-234d esp 234b 42 Kant:
Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264b
[fn
1]  /  judgement, 594d [fn 1] 43 Mill: Liberty, 290c-d / Utilitarianism,
458a-b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 363a-b; 482a-d; 514d515a 47 Goethe: Faust,
part ii
[11,934-941]
290b  48 Melville: Moby Dick,, 30a-36b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk vi,
272a-b; bk xiv, 606a-607a

[1038b]
SctoSd(l)  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  ii, 33c-34b; bk v,
127b-137c;  bk  vi 146b,d-170d passim; bk xi, 337a-346a passim 54 Freud:
New  Introductory  Lectures,  878a-b  8d.  The theory of the theological
virtues  New Testament: / Corinthians, 13:13 / / Thessalonians, i:y, 5:8
18 Augustine: Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 37-40 635b-636a,c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 58, a 3, rep 3 43b-44a; q 62 59d-63a; q
63,  a  3  65a-d;  q  64,  a  4 69b-70a; q 66, a 6 80c-81b; q 67, aa 3-6
83b-87c;  q  ho, a 3, rep i 350a-d; a 4, ans 350d-351d; part hi suppl, q
95,  a  5,  ans and rep 2 1048a-1049d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
xxiv
[i]-xxvi
[81] 142d-146c
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 240c-d 30 Bacon : Advancement of Learning,
2c-4c  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk xii [576-605] 331b332a 8d(l) Faith
and  disbelief  Old  Testament: Isaiah, 7:9— (D) Isaias, 7:9 / Habal^u\,
2:4—  (D) Habacuc, 2:4 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon, 3:9,14 (D) OT, Book
of Wisdom, 3:9,14 / Ecclesiasticus, 1:27; 25:12— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
1:34;   25:16  New  Testament:  Matthew,  17:14-21;  21:1722,31-32—  (D)
Matthew,  17:14-20;  21:1722,31-32  /  MarJ^,  5-36;  9:17-30  esp 9:23;
11:20-24;  16:16-18 (D) Mark, 5:36; 9:16-29 esp 9:22; 11:20-24; 16:16-18
/  Luke,  8:4-15;  170-6 / John, 1:7,12-13; 3:9-18,36; 4:48; 5:24,31-47;
6:35-36,40,47;  7:37-39;  8:24,4546; 10:24-28,37-38; 11:25-26; 12:36-46;
14:114;  16:8-9,27;  20:24-29,31  / Acts, 3:16; 10:43; 13:38-39; 15:7-9;
16:30-31  /  Romans  passim, esp 1:16-18, 3:21-5:2, 9:30-33, 10:8-17 / ^
Corinthians,  1:23;  2:4-5;  I3 :2»7» 13i J 6:i3 / // Corinthians, 1:24;
4:3-4;  4:13-5:9;  8:7; 13:5— (D) // Corinthians, 1:23; 4:3-4; 4:13-5:9;
8:7;  13:5  /  Galatians  passim,  esp 2:16, 2:20, 3:1-29, 5:5-6, 5:22 /
Ephesians,  2:8-9;  3:11-12,17;  6:16  /  Philippians,  1:27-29; 3:8-9 /
Colossians,  1:21-23;  2:5-7,12  /  /  Thessalonians,  2:13; 3; 5:8 / //
Thessalonians, 1:3-4; 2:11-12; 3:2 (D) II Thessalonians, 1:3-4; 2:10-11;
3:2  /  /  Timothy,  1:4-5; 2:15; 3:9; 4:1-2,10,12; 5:8,12; 6:10-12 / //
Timothy,   1:12-13;   2:22;   3:8-10,15;  4:7  /  Hebrews,  4:2-3;  6:1;
10:2223»38-39;  11:1-12:3;  13:7  / James, 1:3-7; 2:1,5,14-26 / / Peter,
1:7-9,21;  2:6-7;  5:8-9  /  //  Peter, 1:5 / / John, 3:23; 4:1-3,14-16;
5:1,4-5,9-10 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1 la-b; bk vi, par 5-8
36b-37c / City of God, bk xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk xvi, ch 23 436a-c; bk xxi,
ch 16 573b-574a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 37-40 635b-636a,c

[1039a]
8</(2)  to 8^(3) 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b 4a 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 62, aa 3-4 61c-63a; q 65, aa 4-5
73d-75a; q 66, a 6 80c-81b; q no, a 3, rep i 350a-d; a 4, ans 350d-351d;
part  ii-ii,  qq  1-16 380aA56d; part hi suppl, q 99, a 4, ans and rep 1
1083a1084a  21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxiv 142d144b 22 Chaucer:
Parson's  Tale,  par  61  529b-530a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83a-b;
part  hi,  241c-242a  25  Montaigne: Essays, 209a-215b passim; 238c239c;
293d-294b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 19b-c; 95d96c; 100b 32
Milton:  Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk xii [576-605] 331b-332a 33
Pascal:  Pensees, 248-252 219a-220a; 256 220a; 286-288 224a-b; 504 261a;
745  319b;  749  320a  35 Locke: Toleration, 3b-4a; 10c-d 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect x, div ioo-ioi 496d-497b; sect xii, div 132, 509c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  190d-191a 42 Kant: Judgement, 595d-596c 44
Boswell: Johnson, 395a-b; 482a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
349b350a  48  Melville: Moby Dic{, 30a-36b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
v,  196a-197b  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii, 26a27d; bk in,
64c-70c;  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim;  bk  \t  146b,d-170d passim; bk xi,
337a-346a   passim  Bd{2)  Hope  and  despair  Old  Testament:  Numbers,
13:16-14:10—  (D)  Numbers,  13:17-14:10  / Psalms, 22; 33:18-22; 38:15;
42:5-11;  43:5; 71 passim, esp 71:5, 71:14; 119:43,49,74,81,114,147,166;
130:5-7;  131:3;  146:5-10;  147:11  —  (D) Psalms, 21; 32:18-22; 37:16;
41:6-12;      42:5-6;      70      passim,      esp     70:5,     70:14;
118:43,49,74,81,114,147,166;   129:4-7;   130:3;   145:5-10;   146:11  /
Proverbs,   10:28   /  Jeremiah,  18:11-12—  (D)  Jeremias,  18:11-12  /
Lamentations,  3:24-26 Apocrypha: // Maccabees, 7:14,20; 15:7-9— (D) OT,
//  Machabees,  7:14,20;  15:7-9 New Testament: Matthew, 6:31-34 / Acts,
2:26;  24:14-15  /  Romans,  4:18;  5:1-5;  8:19-39;  12:12; 15:4,13 / I
Corinthians,  9:10;  13:7,13  /  //  Corinthians, 4:8 / Ephesians, 1:18;
2:11-12;  4:4  / Colossians, 1 ^3,27 / / Thessalonians, 1 :3; 4:13; 5:8—
(D)  /  Thessalonians,  1:3;  4:12;  5:8  /  Titus,  2 : 1 2-1 3 ; 3 7 /
Hebrews,  3:656  :9-2o  esp  6:11, 6:18 / I Peter, 1:3,21 53:15/ I John,
3:1-3  18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk xiii, par 14-15 114a-d / City of
God,  bk  xix,  ch  4  511a-513c  /  Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 37-40
635b636a,c

[1039b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE  1005 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  62,  aa  3-4  61c-63a;  part ii-ii, qq 17-22 456d482c; part in
suppl,  q  95,  a  5, ans and rep 2 1048a-1049d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, hi
[1-9]
4a; viii
[67]-ix
[105]
llc-13b; purgatory, hi
[103-145] 57a-c; paradise, xxv 144b-145d
22  Chaucer:  Parson's  Tale,  par 60-61 529b530a; par 101-103 549a-550a
8</(3)  Charity  and  the  disorder  of  love  Old Testament: Leviticus,
19:18,33-34  /  Deuteronomy,  6:5;  10:12,18-19; 11:1,13,22; 13:3; 19:9;
30:6,15-20  /  Joshua,  22:5;  23:11  —  (D) Josue, 22:5; 23:11 / Psalms
passim, esp 18:1, 31:23; 116:1, 119:132, 133:1-3— (D) Psalms passim, esp
17:2, 30:24, 114:1, 118:132, 132:13 / Proverbs, 10:12; 15:17; 25:21-22 /
Song  of  Solomon  esp  8:6-7—  (D)  Canticle  of  Canticles  esp 8 :6~7
Apocrypha:  Tobit,  4:13;  13:12-14—  (D)  OT,  Tobias, 4:14; 13:16-18 /
Wisdom  of  Solomon, 3:9; 6:17-18— (D) OT, Boo{of Wisdom, 3:9; 6:18-19 /
Ecclesiasticus,  2:15-16;  7:30;  10:19;  13:14-15;  24:18;  25:1,11-12;
27:17;  34:16;  47:8  —  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 2:18-19; 7:32; 10:23;
13:18-19;   24:24-25;  25:1-2,14-16;  27:18-19;  34:19-20;  47:9-10  New
Testament:  Matthew, 5:21-26,38-46; 19:16-21; 22:35-40 / Marf{, 12:28-34
/  Lu^e,  6:27-36;  10:25-37  /  John, 13:31-17:26 esp "3*34-35* M :i 5»
14:21, 14:23-24, 15:12-14, 15:17 / Romans, 8:35-39; 12:9-21; 13:8-10 / /
Corinthians,  8:1-3;  13:1-14:1;  16:14  /  H  Corinthians, 6:6; 8:7-8 /
Galatians,   5:6,13-15,  22  /  Ephesians,  1:4;  3:17-19;  4:1-2,15-16;
5:12,25-33  / Philippians, 1 :9,i5-i8; 2:1-4 / Colossians, 23; 3:14,19 /
/  Thessalonians,  3:12;  4:910;  5 :8 / // Thessalonians, 1 13 ; 3:5/ /
Timothy,  1:5;  4:12;  6:11  / // Timothy, 1:7,13; 2:22 / Titus, 2:2,4 /
Hebrews,  10:24; 13:1 /James, 2:8 / / Peter, 1 7-8,22; 2:17; 3:8; 4:8-10
/  // Peter, 1:7 / I John esp 2:5, 2:15, 3:10-23, 4:7-5:3 / II John, 5-6
18  Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  iv, par 7-20 20d24c; bk vii, par 23-24
50b-51a;  bk  x, par 40 81c; bk xiii, par 38-42 121b-122c / City of God,
bk  x,  ch  3  300b-301a; bk xiv, ch 7 380c-381c; bk xv, ch 22 416ac; bk
xxi,  ch 16 573b-574a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 22 629b-630a; ch 28
631d-632a;  ch  37-40  635b636a,c;  bk  ii,  ch  41 656a-c; bk hi, ch 10
661c-662a  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59, a 4, rep 3
309a-310a;  part i-ii, q 4, a 2, rep 3 630b-631a; q 26, a 3 735c-736b 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 62, aa 3-4 61c-63a; q 65, aa 2-3
72a-73d; q 66, a 6 80c-81b; q 67, a 6 87a-c; q 98, a 1 239b240c; q no, a
3,  rep  i  350a-d;  a  4,  ans  350d351d;Q  114,  A4 373a-d; A8 376a-d;
partii-h, q 4, aa 3-5 404c-407a; q 19, a 6 469a-d; a

[1040a]
1006  THE  GREAT IDEAS (8d. The theory of the theological virtues. 8d(3)
Charity  and  the  disorder of love.} 10 472b-d; qq 23-46 482c-605a,c; q
184,  a  i 629a-d; part hi suppl, q 93, a 3 1039d-1040c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy esp purgatory, xv
[40-81] 75d-76a, xvn [82]-xvni [75] 79b-80c,
xxx-xxxi 99b-102b, paradise, hi
[34-90]
109d-110b,  xxvi  [1-69] 145d-146c 22 Chaucer: Prologue [529-541] 168b /
Parson's  Tale,  par  30-31,  517a-518b;  par  68-69 533b534b; par 91-92
547a-b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning,  2c-4c; 80b81a 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk  xii [576-605] 331b332a / Areopagitica, 409b-410a 33
Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 663-670 293b-295b passim
35  Locke: Toleration, la-2c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 26a-27a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  392b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50a; bk hi, 127d-128d;
bk  v,  213a-216d;  bk  x, 465ac; bk xi, 525c-526b; bk xii, 560a-562d 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk ii, 26a27d; bk v, 117c-137c passim;
bk  vi  146b,d170d  passim  8e.  The  infused  virtues and the moral and
intellectual  gifts  Old  Testament:  /  Kings, 3:5-15; 4:29-34— (D) III
Kings,  3:5-15;  4:29-34  /  /  Chronicles, 22:12 — (D) / Paralipomenon,
22:12  / // Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II Paralipomenon, 1:7-12 / Job, 32:8
/       Psalms,      119:34-40,73,125,130,144,169—      (D)      Psalms,
118:34-40,73,125,130,144,169  /  Proverbs,  2 esp 2 :6 / Ecclesiastes, 2
:26  / Isaiah, 11 n-5— (D) Isaias, 11:1-5 / Daniel, 1 esp 1 :i7; 2:20-23
Apocrypha:  Wisdom of Solomon, 3:9; 7:7,24-25; 8:7,21; 9— (D) OT, Boo{ of
Wisdom,  3:9;  7:7,24-25;  8:7,21;  9 / Ecclesiasticus, 1:1,5,10; 11:15;
15:5;  24:24-28;  43:33; 50:29; 51:17— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1:1,5,10;
11:15;  15:5;  :37;  50:31;  51:22-23  New  Testament: Matthew, 6:33 / /
Corinthians,  24 :34-38; 43 1 :3o; 2 / Ephesians, 1:16-18 / Philippians,
3  :g / James, 1:5-7,17; 3:13-18 7 Plato: Meno, 189d-190a,c 9 Aristotle:
Ethics, bk x, ch 9
[ii79b20-23]
434c  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch  3 300b301a / Christian
Doctrine,  bk i, ch ii 627b-c; ch 34 634bc 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i,  q  113,  a  1, rep 2 576a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  51,  a 4, ans 15a-d; q 55, a 4, ans and rep 6 28c29d; q 63, aa
3-4  65a-66c;  q  68 87c-96c; q 71, a 4, ans 108b-109a; q 100, a 12, ans
and rep 3 264d-265d; q no, aa 3-4 350a-351d; part

[1040b]
Se  to  8/  ii-ii,  qq  8-9 416d-426c; q 19 465a-474d; q 45 598c-603c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  purgatory,  vii  [112123] 63d-64a; xxx [85-145]
lOOb-d; paradise, xii
[31-105] 124a-d; xx
[1 18-129] *38a; xxv
[67-78] 145a
22  Chaucer: Clerks Tale [8031-8037] 298a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
149c-d;  part  hi,  176d-177b;  185c-d;  209d;  part  iv, 270c-d 8/. The
qualities  which flow from charity: humility, mercy, chastity, obedience
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  2:15-17; 3; 22:1-18 / :7 / Leviticus, 20:10 /
NumExodus, 20:14; 24 bers, 12:3 / Deuteronomy, 5:18; 8:11-17 / I Samuel,
12:14-15;  15:22-23— (D) I Kings, 12:14-15; 15:22-23 / // Samuel, 15 esp
15:23;  22:26—  (D)  // Kings, 15 esp 15:23; 22:26 / Job, 22:29 /Psalms,
18:25;  22:26;  25:9;  37:11,  21,25-26;  131; 147:6; 149:4— (D) Psalms,
17:26;  21 =27; 24:9; 36:11,21,25-26; 130; 146:6; 149:4 / Proverbs, 3:3;
8:13;  11:2,17; 14:21,31; 15:25,33; 16:5-6,18-19; 18:12; 20:28; 21:4,21;
22:4;  25:27; 28:25-26; 29:23 / Ecclesiastes, 7:8— (D) Ecclesiastes, 7:9
/  Isaiah, 16:5— (D) Isaias, 16:5 / Jeremiah, 7:23— (D) Jeremias, 7:23 /
Rosea,  12:6— (D) Osee, 12:6 / Micah, 6:8 -(D) Micheas, 6:8 / Zephaniah,
2:3 -(D) Sophonias, 2 :3 Apocrypha: Tobit, 14:9— (D) OT, Tobias, 14:11 /
Wisdom   of   Solomon,   12:19—   (D)  OT,  Bool^  of  Wisdom,  12:19  /
Ecclesiasticus,    1:27;   3:1720;   7:17;   10:13-14,28-29—   (D)   OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  1:34;  3:19-21;  7:19;  10:15-17,31-32  New  Testament:
Matthew,  5:1-12,27-32;  6:10;  7:21;  9:13;  10:35-39; 11:29; 12:46-50;
16:2426;  18;  19:10-12,18;  20:20-28;  21:5;  23:23  /  Mar\,  9:33-37;
10:11,19—  (D)  Mar\,  9:32-36;  10:11,19  / LuJ{e, 6:36; 9:46-48,57-62;
14:7-14; 16:18; 18:1-14,20; 22:40-45 I John, 4:34; 5:30; 13:1-17 / Acts,
5:29-32;  11:27-30  / Romans, 5:19; 12:1-15:13 / / Corinthians, 3:18-21;
7:711,37-40;  13  /  // Corinthians, 6:1-10; 10-12 esp 10:1-2, 10:17-18,
12:6-11  /  Galatians,  5:22-23;  6:1-10  /  Ephesians, 4:1-2; 5:1-6:9 /
Philippians,   1:9-11;   2:1-16   /   Colossians,   2:18;   3:5-25  /  /
Thessalonians,  5  : 12-28 / // Timothy, 2 ^4-25 / Titus, 2-3 / Hebrews,
10:19-39  /  James  passim / / Peter passim, esp 1 : 13-14 18 Augustine:
Confessions, bk vii, par 13-14 47c-48b; bk viii, par 3-5 53b-54c; bk ix,
par  17-22 66a-67d / City of God, bk v, ch 24-26 227d-230a,c / Christian
Doctrine, bk ii, ch 41 656a-c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii,
qq 28-33 527b-558d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, ii
[43-119]
3a-d; purgatory, x
[22-102]
67c-68b; xv
[40-132] 75d-76d; xx [16-33] 83b-c
22  Chaucer:  Tale  of Man of Law 236b-255b / Tale of Melibeus 401a-432a
esp par 60-78

[1041a]
Sg  to 9 427b-432a / Second Nun's Tale 463b-471b / Parson's Tale, par 68
533b-534a  26  Shakespeare:  Merchant  of  Venice, act iv, sci [173-205]
427b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c 32 Milton: Comus 33a-56b
esp [385-480^-4^344a / Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, bk xii
[576-605] 331b 332a / Areopagitica, 409b-410a
33  Pascal:  Provincial Letters, 91a-94a / Pensees, 535-540 265a-266a 35
Locke:  Toleration,  la-2c  42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  325a-327d  48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  30a-36b  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk viii,
338b-339c;  bk  xv,  621b-622c 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk ii,
26a27d;  bk v, 117c-137c passim; bk vi 146b,d170d passim; bk ix, 269a-d;
bk  xi, 313c-314d; epilogue, 411b-412d Sg. The vows and practices of the
monastic  life in relation to virtue New Testament: Matthew, 19:10-12,21
/  Mar\, 10:21 / Luke, 12:22-36; 18:22 / / Corinthians, 7:1,7-8,25-40 20
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 64, a 1, rep 3 66d-67c; q 108, a
4  336b-337d; part 11—11, q 184, a 8, rep 6 637a-639b; q 185, a 8-q 186,
a 10 649b 663b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, hi
[i]-v
[87] 109b-113a; xi-xii 122a-125a
22 Chaucer: Prologue
[118-269]
161a-163b;
[477-528] 167b-168a; [623-714] 170a-171b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  iv,  272d-273a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel, bk ii, 126a-d CROSS-REFERENCES For: The issue concerning the
relation  between  knowledge and virtue, see Education 4a; Good and Evil
6a;  Knowledge  8b(i);  Wisdom  2b.  Another  discussion of the unity of
virtue,  see  One  and Many 5a. ia; Wisdom ic. The moral significance of
temperamental dispositions, see Emotion 4c; Man 6a. Justice id; Prudence
3~3a.

[1041b]
;  Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND  VICE  1007 25 Montaigne: Essays, 110a-b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  191a-194a;  533c-d;  593b,d-599a passim 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 232c-233c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 283a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of History,  part  1  v, 333b-d 340d-341c 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  vi,  273c-274a,c  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers Karamazov, bk i,
11a15a,c;  bk  iv,  83a-88a  passim;  bk  vi 146b, d170d passim; bk vii,
189a-191a,c  9.  The  advance  or  decline  of human morality 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk i
[254-296]
HOa-110a;  bk  viii [306-336] 267a-268a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 51b-c
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  i, 27b-28a 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 15a-b; 54a-b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xi
[334PBK xn
[605] 306b-332a
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  viii,  sect iio112 50c-51b 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i, 29a; part hi, 121a-b; 126a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xxi,  170a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 334c; 338b-c; 347d348a;
360b-361a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 633d-634a,c esp 634c 43 Mill:
Representative  Government,  335d-336a  46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,   182d184d   49   Darwin:   Descent   of  Man,  318d;  321b-323a;
330a,c;596d-597a,c

[1042a]
1008  THE  GREAT IDEAS Moralia . Tusculan Disputations, v Epictetus. The
Manual  .  De  Officiis  (On  Duties)  Augustine.  On  the Morals of the
Catholic  Church,  Horace.  Satires  ch  xv Pirke A both (Sayings of the
Fathers) . The Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love treatise v, x tutibus
Cardinalibus   ch   7-8   Spinoza.  Correspondence,  xliii  Bonaventura.
Breviloquium, part v Hume. A Treatise of Human Nature, bk 11, part 1, R.
Bacon.  Opus Majus, part vii sect vii; bk hi, part i, hi Langland. Piers
Plowman  A.  Smith.  The  Theory  of Moral Sentiments, part Spenser. The
Faerie Queene Hegel. The Phenomenology of Mind, v, b (2, c); Ben Jonson.
Volpone I. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk vi, ch 5 sect i, memb ii, sub-
sect ii Dostoevsky. The Idiot Corneille. Cinna

[1042b]
For:  Discussions  bearing  on  the  acquisition of virtue, see Art ioa;
Custom and Convention 5b; Education 4, 40-40!; Family 6d; Government 2d;
Habit 4a~4b; History 2; Law 6d; Nature 6b; Necessity and Contingency 5a;
Pleasure  and  Pain 10a; Poetry 9a; Punishment 3a; Sin 7; Will 3a~3a(2).
The role of the various faculties in the formation of virtue, see Desire
6a;  Emotion 4b(i); Mind 9c; Pleasure and Pain 8a; Prudence 3; Reasoning
5e~5e(3);  Will 5K4), 8c. The relation of virtue to other moral goods or
principles, see Duty 4, 5; Good and Evil 3b3b(2); Honor 2b; Law 4d; Love
2b(3),  3a; Pleasure and Pain 8a; Temperance 3; Wealth ioa, 10c; and for
the  issue in moral philosophy between the ethics of duty and the ethics
of  virtue  and  happiness,  see  Duty  2;  Happiness  3.  The political
consideration  of  virtue,  see  Aristocracy  6; Citizen 5; Monarchy 3a;
State  7c,  8b. The relation of virtue to sin and sanctity, see Religion
3d;  Sin 3c, 4d, 7; Temperance 6a. The doctrine of divine law and divine
rewards  and punishments, see Happiness 7c~7c(3); Immortality 5e~5f; Law
33-3^2);  Punishment  5d~5e(2);  Sin 6c-6e. The influence of religion on
the  moral  life,  and  for  the  moral virtues or qualities peculiar to
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Booths
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The  Great  Ideas.  I. II. . Of Continence Saadia Gaon. The
Bool{  of  Beliefs and Opinions, . Admonition and Grace Ibn Gabirol. The
Improvement   of  the  Moral  QualAquinas.  Quaestiones  Disputatae,  De
Virtutibus  in ities Communi; De Caritate, aa 2-5; De Spe; De VirBernard
of Clairvaux. On Consideration, bk 1, . Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq
155-156  Maimonides.  Eight  Chapters  on Ethics, ch 2-4 Dante. Convivio
(The  Banquet), fourth treatise, . The Guide for the Perplexed, part hi,
ch  ch  17-21  38~39>  42  Fielding. Joseph Andrews Thomas a Kempis. The
Imitation  of  Christ,  bk  i vi Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxx
(16),  Kant.  Lectures  on  Ethics,  pp 1 1 6-247 xliv vi, c Burton. The
Anatomy of Melancholy, part i,

[1043a]
J.  Taylor.  Ductor  Dubitantium,  bk  iv Moliere. Vecole des maris (The
School  for  Husbands)  .  Lecole  desfemmes  (The Schoolfor Wives) . Le
misanthrope (The Man- Hater) Baxter. Chapters from A Christian Directory
^~~~  Bunyan.  Pilgrim's  Progress  Mandeville.  The Fable of the Bees !
Shaftesbury.  Characteristics  of  Men,  Manners, Opinions, Times Defoe.
Moll Flanders J. Butler. Fifteen Sermons upon Human Nature, preface; hi,
x, xin Law. A Practical Treatise upon Christian Perfection Vauvenargues.
Introduction  a  la connaissance de V esprit humain Richardson. Pamela .
Clarissa  J.  Edwards.  Charity  and  Its Fruits . A Dissertation on the
Nature  of  True  Virtue  Goldsmith.  The  Vicar  of Wakefield Voltaire.
"Virtue,"  in  A Philosophical Dictionary . The Ignorant Philosopher, ch
46 R. Burns. Address to the Unco Guid Austen. Pride and Prejudice

[1043b]
Chapter  97:  VIRTUE  AND VICE 1009 Brown. Lectures on the Philosophy of
the  Human  Mind,  vol  in,  pp 473-563 Leopardi. Essays, Dialogues, and
Thoughts  Kierkegaard.  Either/Or  Whewell. The Elements of Morality, bk
ii,  en  1-4  Thackeray.  Vanity  Fair  Lotze.  Microcosmos,  bk v, ch 5
Flaubert.  Madame  Bovary  Meredith.  The  Ordeal  of Richard Feverel H.
Sidgwick.  The  Methods  of  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  2-3  T. H. Green. The
Principles of Political Obligation^ . Prolegomena to Ethics, bk hi, ch 4
(b),  5  Nietzsche.  Beyond  Good and Evil, ch v, vii . The Genealogy of
Morals  Frazer.  The Golden Bough, part ii, ch 3 Bonar. The Intellectual
Virtues  L.  Stephen.  Social  Rights  and  Duties Billot. De Virtutibus
Infusis A. E. Taylor. The Problem of Conduct Buber. Jewish Mysticism and
the Legends of Baalshem Gide. Strait Is the Gate Dewey. Human Nature and
Conduct N. Hartmann. Ethics, vol ii, Moral Values

[1044a]
INTRODUCTION THE twentieth century may go down in history as the century
of war and peace the first in which world wars were fought, the first in
which  men  established  world peace, and so, perhaps, the last in which
peace among nations was merely an armed truce, a breathing spell between
wars.  Even  if  world  peace  is not actually begun in our time, we may
prove  to  be the first generation of men on earth who, under the impact
of  world  wars,  have made a firm attempt to draw a decisive conclusion
from  all  the  accumulated  wisdom  concerning war and peace. It may be
thought  that antiquity anticipates, and that at all times the tradition
contains,  the  fundamental notions which have recently gained so wide a
currency.   Socrates   and   Epictetus,  for  example,  speak  of  world
citizenship.  Marcus  Aurelius  and  Zeno the Stoic even more explicitly
envision a world community. Alexander tries to conquer the world to make
it one; Virgil proclaims a peace which will be as universal as the Roman
empire  ;  and  Dante,  recasting  Virgil's  vision,  advocates  the re-
enactment  of  that  empire  and with it monarchy— by which he means one
government—  to  give  all  Christendom  political  as well as spiritual
unity.  To  neglect  these  anticipations  would be to overlook wisdom's
perennial  aspirations  for unity. But if, because of their significance
for  peace,  they  should  not  be  neglected here, neither should their
importance  be  exaggerated.  For  one  thing,  man  has always acted at
variance  with  his  wisdom,  nullifying  the hope of peace by preparing
always for the next war. For another thing, it is doubtful that peace by
conquest  or  by  empire— the only ways in which the past could conceive
the  world's  coming to the unity of peace—would be a peace perpetual as
well  as  universal.  The latter without the former is but a fraction of
the ideal.

[1044b]
Chapter  9& WAR AND PEACE Even when in modern times the ideal is at last
stated  in terms of peaceful methods for achieving peace— by law, not by
force; by consent, not by imposition—something less than the whole world
in  its  global reality is the object of consideration. William Penn and
Rousseau,  for  example,  state  the  indispensable legal conditions for
turning  Europe  from  a  continent  perpetually  wracked by wars into a
society  able  to perpetuate peace, but their historical location causes
them  to  limit  their  proposals  to Europe. Kant alone first makes the
generalization  which  lies dormant in their reasoning, and which almost
begs  to  be  inductively drawn from the conceptions of war and peace so
plainly  stated  by  Hobbes and Locke. He conceives the possibility of a
peace not only perpetual but truly world-wide. Yet for all the rightness
he  perceives  in  what he calls "the cosmopolitical ideal," it seems to
remain  for  him  an  ideal—not  attainable except by approximation. Yet
because  it is right, he holds that it must be pursued even though it is
impossible.  We  are  the first generation to argue for world peace as a
conclusion  on  the level of reality and to conclude that it is possible
because it is necessary. The argument is not yet won, nor the conclusion
enacted,  but  henceforth  the  problem  of  war and peace can hardly be
discussed  without stating the issue as a choice of world government and
peace,  or  of  world anarchy and war. If it does no more than seriously
face  that  choice  for  the  first  time, the twentieth century makes a
signal  advance in understanding one of the great ideas—an advance which
can  change  the  course  of  history  and the life of man more than the
discovery  of  atomic  fission,  which is only an instrument of war or a
tool  of  peace. But just as the release of heat and energy from nuclear
combustion  has  its  prototype  in  ordinary  fire,  which the ancients
associate with the beginning 1010

[1045a]
of  civilization,  so the insight which may exert a new civilizing force
has  its origin in the fundamental thinking man does about war and peace
as  soon  as  he  begins to think about society. In the tradition of the
great  books, war and peace are usually discussed in political terms, or
at least in terms of the relation of men to one another, individually or
in  groups.  But  the  psychologist,  the  moralist,  and the theologian
sometimes  use  the word "peace" in another sense to signify the absence
of  conflict  within the individual or to signify an inner harmony—peace
of  mind on earth or the heavenly rest of the blessed in the presence of
God.  In their spiritual meanings, war and peace are considered in other
chapters;  e.g.,  interior  conflict  is  a  topic  in  the  chapter  on
Opposition  and interior peace is discussed in the chapter on Happiness.
We  shall  not  treat  these matters here except in their bearing on the
social  or  political discussion; nor shall we consider civil war except
for  the  light it throws on the nature of war and peace in general. The
special  problem of discord and strife within a single community belongs
to  the  chapter  on  Revolution.  Certain  attitudes toward war between
states  seem  to recur in every century. In the face of the ever-present
fact  of  war,  men deplore its folly or find some benefit to compensate
for its devastation. But throughout most of the tradition, those who see
only  suffering,  no  less  than those who celebrate the martial spirit,
seem  to  accept  the necessity of war. Good or bad, or a mixture of the
glorious  and  the horrible, war seems, to most of those who write about
it,  an  inevitable  thing—as  ineradicable as disease and death for the
living  body,  as  inescapable  as tragedy. Only in recent times has the
inevitability  of  war  been  questioned, and the possibility of lasting
peace  proposed.  The two books which look most steadily and searchingly
on  the  face  of  war—Homer's Iliad and Tolstoy's War and Peace—seem to
behold  it as a mixed thing. Battle with sword and javelin on the plains
of  Troy or with musket and howitzer on the Russian steppes lets loose a
fury  which sweeps human nature to extremes of nobility and baseness, to
actions of heroic strength and cringing weakness. To both Homer and

[1045b]
Chapter  98:  WAR  AND PEACE 1011 Tolstoy, war is the realm of force and
chance,  and though both see in it occasions for courage and magnanimity
and  even  for  a  kind  of  charity  or  at least compassion, the whole
spectacle  is one of agony, pervaded by darkness and dismay, torn bodies
and  ruined  minds.  "Grievous  war"  is Homer's repeated epithet. "Pale
fear"  and  "black  death" are the colors of battle. They are everywhere
that  Ares  reigns,  "Ares,  blood stained baneofmortals," "stubborn god
ofwar."  To  the  poet  of  any  century,  Homer  or  Tolstoy, Virgil or
Shakespeare,  war's  human  features  appear to be unchanged even if its
mechanical  dress  and  physical lineaments are altered— its weapons and
armor, its organization of men and materials, its scope of operations in
space and time. The historian who measures the contestants and keeps the
score  of victories and defeats takes a different view. He dwells on all
the  differences  which mark progress in the art of war, or which enable
wealthier and more advanced societies to wage wars of greater magnitude.
To  Herodotus,  no  military undertaking ever assumed the proportions of
Xerxes'  army  on  the  march,  raising  a cloud of dust from horizon to
horizon.  Yet  Thucydides  says that before the Peloponnesian War "there
was  nothing on a great scale either in war or in other matThe historian
is   attentive  not  only  to  weights  and  numbers,  to  the  changing
accoutrement  of  war  and  its  mechanical  elaboration,  but  also  to
inventions  in  the  sphere  of  strategy  and  tactics. The Alexandrian
phalanx,   the  patience  of  Fabius,  the  forced  marches  of  Caesar,
Hannibal's outflanking and enveloping movements at the battle of Cannae,
the deployment in depth of the Roman legions on the Rhine— these are but
a  few of the inventions of military genius which, as Plutarch, Tacitus,
and  Gibbon  recognize,  have  an  effect  far beyond the advantage that
novelty  initially gives them. They become the classical models of war's
art  and  the  principles  of  its  science.  Tolstoy  may  scoff at the
historians  who  stand  in  awe of military genius. He may be right that
Kutuzov's  lack  of  plans  rather than Napoleon's air of outwitting all
contingencies  is the essence of great generalship. Nevertheless Tolstoy
magnifies  the campaign of 1 8 12 as beyond comparison the greatest mass
movement of humanity,

[1046a]
1012  THE GREAT IDEAS from west to east and then from east to west, just
as Herodotus apotheosizes the movement of the Persian horde from east to
west  and  Thucydides the rise of Athenian naval power. Writing from the
center  of  a  whole  continent  in arms a century later, Freud in 191 5
gives  his  impression  of what was yet to become the first world war. A
war  of  such  proportions  and ferocity was almost incredible before it
happened.  "Then  the war in which we had refused to believe broke out,"
and,  Freud writes, "not only is it more sanguinary and more destructive
than  any  war  of  other  days,  because  of  the  enormously increased
perfection  of  weapons  of  attack  and  defense; but it is at least as
cruel,  as  embittered,  as  implacable  as any that preceded it. ... It
tramples  in  blind  fury  on all that comes in its way, as though there
were  to  be no future and no goodwill among men after it has passed. It
rends  all  bonds  of  fellowship  between  the  contending peoples, and
threatens  to  leave  such  a  legacy  of  embitterment as will make any
renewal  of  such bonds impossible for a long time to come." The enemies
of  war  use  a  variety of weapons in their attack. The Trojan Women of
Euripides cries out with the bitterness of Andromache and Hecuba against
the  misery  of  war's  innocent victims— the women and children who are
left  to  mourn  the  vanquished  or  to  become  the  victors'  spoils.
Aristophanes  turns laughter rather than pity and fear against the waste
of  war. Such comedies as the Peace, the Acharnians, the Lysistrata make
light  of  the issues over which men fight, and give war the aspect of a
wearisome  business,  preposterous  in  its  motives  and  hollow in its
victories.  The genial satire of Rabelais exposes the impostures of war,
but  beneath the horseplay which deflates by its exaggerations, there is
the  earnest, serious note of Grangousier's resolution not to "undertake
war  until  I have first tried all the ways and means of peace." Swift's
satire  is not so amiable. In the eyes of the truly rational Houyhnhnms,
war appears to be as senseless and despicable as the Yahoos who wage it.
Gulliver tries to tell the Houyhnhnm who is his master about the wars of
Europe,   their  causes  and  their  cost.  "I  was  going  on  to  more
particulars," he relates, "when my master com-

[1046b]
manded  me  silence. He said whoever understood the nature of the Yahoos
might  easily  believe  it  possible for so vile an animal to be capable
ofevery action I had named, if their strength and cunning equalled their
malice.  .  . . When a creature pretending to reason could be capable of
such enormities, he dreaded lest the corruption of that faculty might be
worse than brutality itself. He seemed therefore confident that, instead
of   reason,   we   were  only  possessed  of  some  quality  fitted  to
increaseournatural  vices."  According  to  Augustine,  it  is not man's
nature but his sinfulness which degrades him below the beasts "devoid of
rational  will,"  who  "live  more securely and peaceably with their own
kind  than men. . . . For not even lions or dragons have ever waged with
their  kind  such  wars  as men have waged with one another." Calling it
"the greatest and most pompous of human actions," Montaigne asks whether
war  is  not  "the  testimony  of our weakness and imperfection; for, in
truth the science of undoing and killing one another, and of ruining and
destroying  our  own  kind,  has nothing in it so tempting as to make it
coveted  by  beasts  who  have  it  not."  But in his essay Of III Means
Employed  to a Good End, Montaigne also quotes Juvenal's remark that "we
suffer the ills of a long peace; luxury is more pernicious than war." He
seems  to approve the Roman policy of maintaining wars "not only to keep
their  own  men  in  action,  for  fear  lest  idleness,  the  mother of
corruption, should bring upon them some worse inconvenience; but also to
serve  for  a  bloodletting to their Republic, and a little to evaporate
the  too vehement heat of their youth." War as a purgative is a familiar
theme.  Hobbes, like Malthus later, suggests that "when all the world is
overcharged  with inhabitants, then the last remedy of all is war; which
provideth  for  every man, by victory or death." Many writers seem to be
ambivalent about war. Plato, for example, seems to see both sides of the
question  though  he  does  not give them equal weight. In the Republic,
Socrates  proclaims the discovery that war is "derived from causes which
are  also  the causes of almost all the evils in states, private as well
as  public."  In  the Laws, the Athenian Stranger admits to Cleinias the
Cretan that the laws of his city, devised

[1047a]
primarily  with  a  view to war, can be justified insofar as they aim at
courage;  but he reminds him later that insofar as such laws "regarded a
part  only, and not the whole of virtue, I disapproved of them." That he
regards permanent peace as the ideal toward which the moral law commands
us  to strive, does not prevent Kant from saying that "a prolonged peace
favours  the  predominance  of  a  mere commercial spirit, and with it a
debasing  self-interest, cowardice, and effeminacy, and tends to degrade
the  character  of  the  nation." Nor is war to be absolutely condemned.
"Provided it is conducted with order and a sacred respect for the rights
of  civilians,"  war itself, says Kant, "has something sublime about it,
and gives nations that carry it on in such a manner a stamp of mind only
the  more  sublime  the  more  numerous  the  dangers  to which they are
exposed, and which they are able to meet with fortitude." Yet even while
thinking that war can be a "spur for developing to the highest pitch all
talents  that  minister  to  culture," Kant reflects that the underlying
purpose  of  war  may be "to prepare the way for a rule of law governing
the  freedom  of  states,  and  thus bring about their unity in a system
established  on  a moral basis." Hegel alone is not ambivalent. Not only
is war not "to be regarded as an absolute evil," but it is, according to
Hegel, a necessary corrective for the corrosive influence of peace. "War
is  a  state  of  affairs,"  he writes, "which deals in earnest with the
vanity of temporal goods and concerns—a vanity at other times the common
theme  of  edifying  sermonizing.  . . . War has the higher significance
that by its agency, as I have remarked elsewhere, 'the ethical health of
peoples  is  preserved  in  their  indifference  to the stabilization of
finite  institutions; just as the blowing of the winds preserves the sea
from foulness which would be the result of a prolonged calm, so also the
corruption  in  nations  would  be  the  product of prolonged, let alone
"perpetual,"   peace.'"  Far  from  agreeing  with  those  who  advocate
"perpetual  peace ... as an ideal towards which humanity should strive,"
Hegel  points out that "in peace civil life continually expands; all its
departments wall themselves in, and in the long run men stagnate. ... As
a result of war, na-

[1047b]
Chapter  98:  WAR  AND  PEACE  1013  tions  are strengthened, and people
involved  in civil strife also acquire peace at home through making wars
abroad." To Prince Andrew in War and Peace who says that "the aim of war
is  murder;  the  methods  of  war  are  spying,  treachery,  and  their
encouragement";  or  to  Freud  who says that "the warring state permits
itself every such misdeed, every such act of violence, as would disgrace
the  individual  man,"  Hegel  has  an  answer.  "States are not private
persons,"  he says, "but completely autonomous totalities in themselves,
and  so  the  relation  between them differs from a moral relation and a
relation  involving private rights. . . . The relation between states is
a  relation  between autonomous entities which make mutual stipulations,
but  which  at  the same time are superior to these stipulations." Self-
interest, or "a will for its own welfare pure and simple," is, according
to  Hegel,  "the  highest  law  governing  the  relation of one state to
another."  Therefore, "when politics is alleged to clash with morals . .
. the doctrine propounded rests on superficial ideas about morality, the
nature  of  the  state,  and  the state's relation to the moral point of
view."  In  Hegel's  view,  "wars  occur  when the necessity of the case
requires."  He  is  not alone in thinking war inevitable, but others who
think  the  same do not do so in the same mood, or with the same opinion
of the reason for its inevitability. "Drain the blood from men's veins,"
declares  Prince  Andrew's father, "and put in water instead, then there
will  be  no more war!" It is an illusion, Freud thinks, to suppose that
civilization so transforms human nature as to lift it above the impulses
of war. In war, he says, "our fellow-citizens have not sunk so low as we
feared,  because  they have never risen so high as we believed." The sad
fact,  he concludes, is that "war is not to be abolished; so long as the
conditions  of  existence  among  the  nations  are  so  varied, and the
repulsions  between  peoples  so  intense, there will be, there must be,
wars." William James finds the human race as bellicose as its individual
members  are  instinctively pugnacious; and Alexander Hamilton says that
if  we  "judge  from  the  history  of mankind, we shall be compelled to
conclude that the fiery

[1048a]
1014  THE GREAT IDEAS and destructive passions of war reign in the human
breast  with  much  more  powerful  sway  than  the  mild and beneficent
sentiments  of  peace;  and  that  to  model  our political systems upon
speculations  of  lasting  tranquility,  is  to  calculate on the weaker
springs  of  human character." To the extent that even those who deplore
war  despair  of  lasting  peace,  Machiavelli  may not be too cynical a
realist  when  he advises the prince that he "ought to have no other aim
or  thought,  nor  select  anything else for his study, than war and its
rules  and discipline. . . . When princes have thought more of ease than
of  arms,  they  have  lost  their  states."  The  prince  "ought never,
therefore, to have out of his thoughts this subject of war, and in peace
he  should  addict himself more to its exercise than in war." The prince
who  delays  in  order to save himself from war makes a serious mistake.
War,  Machiavelli tells him, "is not to be avoided, but is only deferred
to  your disadvantage." Like Machiavelli, Cleinias the Cretan in Plato's
Laws justifies his city's constant preoccupation with war or preparation
for war. The world is foolish, he thinks, "in not understanding that all
men  are  always  at war with one another. . . . For what men in general
term peace
[is] only a name; in reality every city
is  in a natural state of war with every other, not indeed proclaimed by
heralds,  but  everlasting." Both Plato and Aristotle seem to agree that
war is somehow rooted in the nature of things — in the nature of men and
the nature of cities. Yet both also look upon war as transitory, even if
recurrent. "No one can be a true statesman," the Athenian Stranger tells
Cleinias,  "who  looks  only,  or first of all, to external warfare; nor
will he ever be a sound legislator who orders peace for the sake of war,
and  not  war  for  the  sake of peace." The whole of life, according to
Aristotle,  is  "divided  into  two parts, business and leisure, war and
peace.  .  . . There must be war for the sake of peace, business for the
sake  of  leisure,  things  useful  and necessary for the sake of things
honorable.  .  . . Men must be able to engage in business and go to war,
but  leisure  and  peace  are better; they must do what is necessary and
indeed  what  is  useful, but what is honorable is better." But how does
war produce peace? One an-

[1048b]
swer  may  be  Tristram  Shandy's,  that "as war begets poverty, poverty
peace." Another may be Virgil's. In the opening book of his Aeneid, Jove
predicts  the  coming  of  a  Caesar  "destined  to bound with ocean his
domain,  as  with  the stars his glory." When at last Rome has conquered
the  world,  the  golden  age  of  peace—or at least the pax Romana—will
supplant war's age of iron. "Then war shall be laid aside, and the harsh
world  soften  to peace . . . the accursed gates of Battle shall be shut
with  iron  bar  and clenching bolt; and godless Frenzy shall sit within
upon  the  weapons  of  savagery."  In  accordance with this heaven-laid
destiny, Anchises bids his son Aeneas to make war for the sake of peace.
"Roman,  be  this  thy  care these thine arts— to bear dominion over the
nations  and to impose the law of peace, to spare the humbled and to war
down  the  proud!"  But  some of the proud who are subj ugated by Rome's
legions  take  a different view of the peace that is imposed by force of
arms.  Tacitus  reports the speech of the British chieftain Galgacus, in
which  he refers to those "terrible Romans, from whose oppression escape
is  vainly  sought  by  obedience  and  submission.  .  .  .To  robbery,
slaughter,  plunder,  they  give the lying name of empire; they create a
wilderness  and  call  it peace." Augustine more soberly reflects on the
inevitable  frustration of the Roman kind of peace. "The imperial city,"
he  writes,  "has  endeavored  to impose on subject nations not only her
yoke,  but  her language, as a bond of peace. . . . How many great wars,
how  much  slaughter and bloodshed, have provided this unity. And though
these  are  past, the end of these miseries has not yet come. For though
there  have  never  been  wanting,  nor are yet wanting, hostile nations
beyond  the  empire,  against  whom  wars  have  been and are waged, yet
supposing  there  were  no  such  nations, the very extent of the empire
itself  has  produced  wars  of  a more obnoxious description—social and
civil  wars—and  with  these the whole race has been agitated, either by
the  actual  conflict  or  the  fear of a renewed outbreak." Despite his
perception  of  war's  failures, despite his enjoining the wise men, not
merely  to  wage,  but "to lament the necessity of just wars," Augustine
holds that it is "with the desire for

[1049a]
peace  that  wars  are waged. . . . Every man seeks peace by waging war,
but  no  man  seeks war by making peace. For even they who intentionally
interrupt the peace in which they are living have no hatred ofpeace, but
only  wish  it changecT^ into a peace that suits them better. . . . Even
those whom they make war against they wish to make their own, and impose
on  them  the  laws  of their own peace." Peace, according to Augustine,
consists  in  harmony  and  concord. "Peace between man and man is well-
ordered  concord.  Domestic  peace  is  the well-ordered concord between
those  of  the  family  who  rule  and  those who obey. Civil peace is a
similar concord among the citizens. . . . The peace of all things is the
tranquillity   of   order."  Without  disagreeing  essentially,  Aquinas
explains  that peace involves more than concord. "Wherever peace is," he
says,  "there  is  concord,  but  there  is  not peace wherever there is
concord, if we give peace its proper meaning." The peace between men may
consist  in  concord, "not indeed any kind of concord, but that which is
well-ordered,  through  one  man  agreeing  with  another  in respect of
something befitting to them both. For if one man agree with another, not
of  his  own  accord, but through being forced . . . such concord is not
really  peace."  For  men  to  be  at  peace  with  one another, Aquinas
believes, each must be at peace with himself, but "man's heart is not at
peace, so long as he has not what he wants, or if, having what he wants,
there  still  remains  something  for  him  to want." This, according to
Aquinas, explains why Augustine defined peace not simply as concord, but
as  the  tranquillity  of  order, for by "tranquillity" is meant all the
desires  of  each  individual  man "being set at rest together." It also
explains  why  "those  who  seek  war and dissension, desire nothing but
peace, which they deem themselves not to have. For," Aquinas reminds us,
"there  is  no peace when a man enters into concord with another counter
to  what he would prefer. Consequently men seek by means of war to break
this  concord,  because  it is a defective peace, in order that they may
obtain  peace,  where  nothing is contrary to their will. Hence all wars
are  waged  that  men may find a more perfect peace than that which they
had heretofore."

[1049b]
Chapter  98: WAR AND PEACE 1015 The fundamental insight here seems to be
that,  though charity or love produces the unity of peace, peace is also
"the  work  of justice" indirectly, as Aquinas says, "insofar as justice
removes  the  obstacles  to  peace."  Thucydides gives us an historian's
confirmation of the theologian's point. He tells us why he considers the
long  truce or armistice—a period of no actual fighting— to be a part of
the war. "Only a mistaken judgment," he writes, "can object to including
the  interval  of  treaty in the war. Looked at by the light of facts it
cannot,  it  will  be  found, be rationally considered a state of peace,
where  neither  party  either  gave or got back all that they had agreed
upon."  To  the  same effect is the speech of Hermocrates the Syracusan,
which  Thucydides  reports.  "That  war  is  an evil is a proposition so
familiar to everyone that it would be tedious to develop it. No one," he
declares,  "is forced to engage in it by ignorance, or kept out of it by
fear,  if he fancies there is anything to be gained by it. ... I suppose
that no one will dispute that we went to war at first, in order to serve
our  several  interests; that we are now, in view of the same interests,
debating  how  we can make peace; and that if we separate without having
as  we  think  our  rights,  we  shall  go  to  war  again." Thucydides'
observation  that periods of armistice or truce are part of war, and the
remark  of  Cleinias  in  Plato's  Laws that "every city is in a natural
state  of war with every other," may anticipate Hobbes, but full clarity
on  the  point  is  not  reached  until  Hobbes explicitly distinguishes
between war as battle and the state of war which always prevails between
men or nations when they do not live together under a common government.
"War  consisteth not in battle only," Hobbes explains, "or in the act of
fighting;  but in a tract of time, wherein the will to contend by battle
is  sufficiently  known;  and  therefore  the  notion  of  time is to be
considered  in the nature of war, as it is in the nature of weather. For
as  the nature of foul weather lyeth not in a shower or two of rain, but
in  an  inclination  thereto of many days together, so the nature of War
consisteth  not in actual fighting but in the known disposition thereto,
during all the time there

[1050a]
1016  THE GREAT IDEAS is no assurance to the contrary. All other time is
Peace."  Hobbes does not exclude from the condition of peace differences
between  men or even discord, but only fighting or the need to resort to
fighting  as a way of settling differences or resolving conflicts. He is
cognizant  of the distinction which Machiavelli paraphrases from Cicero.
"There are two ways of contesting," Machiavelli writes, "the one by law,
the  other  by  force;  the first method is proper to men, the second to
beasts."  Here  Machiavelli  adds the comment that "because the first is
frequently  not  sufficient,  it  is  necessary  to have recourse to the
second."  But  Hobbes  does  not  think it is always necessary. At least
there  is a cure for "the war of every man against every man." That cure
is  the  formation  of  a commonwealth and the institution of government
with  sufficient  coercive  force  to  maintain  law  and  secure peace.
"Anarchy and the condition of war," according to Hobbes, are one and the
same,  a condition in which each man, being a law unto himself and judge
in  his  own  case, must of necessity resort to force if he would impose
his  will upon, or resist the will of, another. Since men are everywhere
found  in societies, living under law and government, it might seem that
the  universal state of war to which Hobbes refers is now abolished. Not
so, according to Hobbes, for "though there had never been a time wherein
particular  men were in a condition of war one against another; yet," in
his  opinion,  "in  all times, kings and persons of sovereign authority,
because  of  their independency, are in continual jealousies, and in the
state  and  posture  of  gladiators;  having their weapons pointing, and
their  eyes  fixed  on one another; that is, their forts, garrisons, and
guns  upon  the  frontiers  of  their kingdoms, and continual spies upon
their neighbors; which is a posture of War." This notion that sovereigns
are  always in a state of war with one another— because being sovereigns
they  are autonomous, i.e., not subject to any superior government—seems
to  be  accepted  by  most of the great political writers who come after
Hobbes.  The  point  is  sometimes differently formulated, but the basic
insight  remains  essentially  the  same.  Locke,  for  example, makes a
threefold dis-

[1050b]
tinction  between  the  state  of  nature,  which is anarchy or complete
independence;  the  state  of  war,  in which force without authority is
resorted  to  by men to settle their differences; and the state of civil
society  which  provides  law  and  government  for  the  arbitration of
disputes. "Civil society," he writes, is "a state of peace amongst those
who  are  of  it, from whom the state of war is excluded by the umpirage
which  they  have  provided  in  their  legislative  for  the ending all
differences  that  may rise amongst any of them." Since Locke holds that
"want  of  a  common  judge  with  authority  puts all men in a state of
nature,"  it  follows  for  him that, though the state of nature and the
state  of  war may not be identical, the state of nature, unlike that of
civil society, inevitably lapses into the state of war. If in a state of
nature  men  fail to settle their differences by reason, they enter into
the  state  of  war which is the realm of force "or a declared design of
force  . . . where there is no common superior on earth to appeal to for
relief."  With  these  qualifications, Locke not only agrees with Hobbes
that  "all princes and rulers of independent governments all through the
world  are  in  a  state  of  nature," but also draws from this the same
implication for war and peace. Since "the whole community is one body in
the state of nature in respect of all other states or persons out of its
community,"  Locke  argues  that  the government of each state must have
"the  power  of  war  and  peace, leagues and alliances," in relation to
everything  external  to itself. Montesquieu and Rousseau slightly alter
Hobbes'  point  by attributing the origin of war itself to the existence
of separate societies. War, writes Rousseau, "is a relation, not between
man  and man, but between State and State." Because they are "in a state
of  nature among themselves," bodies politic experience, in his opinion,
"the  inconveniences  which  had  obliged individuals to forsake it. ...
Hence  arose  national wars, battles, murders and reprisals, which shock
nature  and  outrage  reason." Hegel's ultimate reason for thinking that
war is ineradicable seems to be not merely that sovereign states are "in
a  state of nature in relation to each other," but that they must always
re-

[1051a]
main  so.  "There is no Praetor to judge between states," he writes; "at
best there may be an arbitrator or a mediator, and even he exercises his
functions contingently only, i.e., in dependence on the particular wills
of the disputant^^ That is why Hegel dismisses Kant's idea "for securing
'perpetual  peace' by a League of Nations to adjust every dispute. . . .
This  idea,"  Hegel  writes, "presupposes an accord between states; this
would  rest  on moral and religious or other grounds and considerations,
but in any case would always depend ultimately on a particular sovereign
will and for that reason would remain infected with contingency." Hence,
he  concludes,  "if states disagree and their particular wills cannot be
harmonized, the matter can only be settled by war." Kant agrees that, in
the  absence  of what he calls a "cosmo-political constitution" or world
state,  "war is inevitable." In their external relations to one another,
states,   "like  lawless  savages,  are  naturally  in  a  non-juridical
condition,"  and  this,  according to Kant, "is a state of war, in which
the  right  of the stronger prevails; and although it may not in fact be
always  found as a state of actual war and incessant hostility . . . yet
the  condition is wrong in itself in the highest degree, and the nations
which  form  States  contiguous to each other are bound mutually to pass
out of it." How shall this be accomplished? Is Kant's idea the one Hegel
attributes  to him? Is the "alliance of nations," of which he speaks, to
be  a  "league  of  nations" or does he have something more than that in
mind  when  he says that "this mutual connection by alliance" must "take
the  form  of a Federation" ? On the one hand, he calls for "a universal
Union  of  States  analogous to that by which a Nation becomes a State,"
and  argues  that  "it  is only thus that a real state of Peace could be
established."  But  on  the  other,  he  explains  that he means "only a
voluntary  combination  of  different States that would be dissoluble at
any  time,  and  not such a union as is embodied in the United States of
America,   founded   upon   a   political  constitution,  and  therefore
indissoluble."  The arguments for the federal constitution of the United
States help to make this issue

[1051b]
Chapter  98:  WAR  AND PEACE 1017 clear. The authors of the Constitution
regard  it  as  providing  "a  more  perfect union" than the Articles of
Confederation  under  which  the  thirteen  separate colonies are banded
together  by  little  more than treaties or alliances. To the writers of
The  Federalist, who advocate the adoption of a federal union to replace
the  loose  confederacy  or  league of states, there is no middle ground
between  the  establishment  of  peace  through  federal  union  and the
continuation of the state of war between separate states. "A man must be
far gone in Utopian speculations," Hamilton declares, "who can seriously
doubt  that,  if these States should either be wholly disunited, or only
united  in partial confederacies, the subdivisions into which they might
be  thrown would have frequent and violent contests with each other. ...
To  look  for a continuation of harmony between a number of independent,
unconnected   sovereignties  in  the  same  neighborhood,  would  be  to
disregard  the  uniform  course  of  events,  and to set at defiance the
accumulated  experience of ages." In another paper, Hamilton admits that
"there  is  nothing  absurd  or impracticable in the idea of a league or
alliance  between  independent  nations  for  certain  defined  purposes
precisely  stated in a treaty," but he thinks that Europe has taught "an
instructive  but  afflicting lesson to mankind, how little dependence is
to  be  placed  on  treaties  which  have  no  other  sanction  than the
obligations   of  good  faith."  He  returns  therefore  to  attack  the
"visionary  or designing men, who stand ready to advocate the paradox of
perpetual  peace  between  the  States, though dismembered and alienated
from  each  other."  What  reason have we to expect, he asks, "peace and
cordiality  between the members of the present confederation, in a state
of  separation"?  It seems to him "an established truth that the several
states,  in  the  case  of  disunion  .  .  .  would be subject to those
vicissitudes of peace and war, of friendship and enmity with each other,
which have fallen to the lot of all neighboring nations not united under
one  government."  The  Federalists  do  not  seriously  recommend their
prescription  for  peace as a plan for the whole world. Yet they see the
generalization  that is implicit in all their reasoning. "Happy would it
be," Madison says, "if such a remedy

[1052a]
1018  THE  GREAT  IDEAS for its infirmities could be enjoyed by all free
governments;  ifa project equally effectual could be established for the
universal  peace  of  mankind!" John Stuart Mill, writing somewhat later
and  in  the  light  of the experience of American federation as a peace
plan, seems to be even less ready to propose world federal government as
the indispensable condition of world peace. He has no doubt that federal
union  "puts  an  end  to  war and diplomatic quarrels." But he does not
think  that  abrogating  the  distinction  between fellow countrymen and
foreigners  by  making  them  all  fellow  citizens  of  an encompassing
state—an  object  which is "one of the worthiest to which human endeavor
can  be  directed"—  can,  "in  the  present  state  of civilization, be
promoted  by keeping different nationalities of anything like equivalent
strength  under  the  same  government."  Not  only does Kant definitely
dismiss  the  notion  of  a world union formed along American lines, but
even  that  less  perfect union of states which would have the form of a
"Permanent  Congress  of Nations,"  seems to him an impracticable idea in
the  world  as it is at the end of the eighteenth century. "With the too
great extension of such a Union of States over vast regions," he writes,
"any government of it, and consequently the protection of its individual
members,  must  at  last become impossible; and thus a multitude of such
corporations would again bring round a state of war." Nevertheless, Kant
refuses  to  yield completely to this conclusion. "The morally practical
reason,"  he  affirms,  "utters  within  us its irrevocable Veto: 'There
shall  be  no  War.' . . . Hence the question no longer is as to whether
Perpetual Peace is a real thing or not a real thing, or as to whether we
may not be deceiving ourselves when we adopt the former alternative, but
we  must act on the supposition of its being real. We must work for what
may perhaps not be realized . . . and thus we may put an end to the evil
of wars, which have been the chief interest of the internal arrangements
of all States without exception." And in his Idea of a Universal History
on  a  Cosmo-Political  Plan, Kant does more than urge upon us our moral
duty to work for perpetual peace as prerequisite to "the highest

[1052b]
political  good." He engages in prophecy. He pictures the nations of the
world  "after  many devastations, overthrows, and even complete internal
exhaustion  of their powers" as "driven forward to the goal which Reason
might   well  have  impressed  upon  them,  even  without  so  much  sad
experience. This is none other than the advance out of the lawless state
of  savages and the entering into a Federation of Nations. . . . However
visionary  this  idea  may  appear  to  be  ...  it  is nevertheless the
inevitable issue of the necessity in which men involve one another." The
argument  for  world  government  as the means to world peace is nowhere
made  in  the  great  books  as  explicitly  as in Dante's De Monarchia.
"Wherever there can be contention," Dante writes, "there judgment should
exist;  otherwise  things  should  exist  imperfectly, without their own
means  of  adjustment  or correction. . . . Between any two governments,
neither  of which is in any way subordinate to the other, contention can
arise  either through their own fault or that of their subjects. This is
evident.  Therefore  there  should be judication between them. And since
neither  can  know  the affairs of the other, not being subordinate (for
among  equals  there  is  no authority), there must be a third and wider
power  which rules both within its own jurisdiction. "This third power,"
Dante continues,"is either the world-government, or it is not. If it is,
we  have  reached our conclusion; if it is not, it must in turn have its
equal outside its jurisdiction, and then it will need a third party as a
judge,  and so ad infinitum, which is impossible. So we must arrive at a
first  and  supreme  judge for whom all contentions are judicable either
directly  or  indirectly.  . . . Therefore, worldgovernment is necessary
for  the  world." Aristotle, according to Dante, "saw this argument when
he  said, 'Things hate to be in disorder, but a plurality of authorities
is disorder; therefore authority is single." But Aristotle certainly did
not  draw  the conclusion that a single government embracing all mankind
should  be  instituted  so  that "by common law it might lead all toward
peace."  Nor,  with  the  exception of Kant, does any other great author
argue to this conclusion. But, as we have seen, Kant, unlike

[1053a]
Dante,  reaches this conclusion only to qualify his acceptance of it and
his  advocacy  of  world  government. Nevertheless, several of the great
books  do  contain  the  nerve of the argument. It iTcori^ tained in one
fundamental  proposition  that  is  variously  enunciated  by Hobbes and
Locke,  Rousseau  and  the  Federalists. That proposition is: As anarchy
leads  to  war, government establishes peace, and just laws preserve it.
By  inductive  generalization,  it  seems to follow that, if local peace
depends  on  local  government, world peace depends on world government.
But  if,  except  for Dante and Kant, no one until the present made this
inference,  the  tradition of western thought does include, not only the
essential  premise  for  making  the inference, but also the controlling
vision  of a politically united humanity—all men as fellow citizens in a
single  political society embracing the earth. Kant speaks of "the right
of man as a citizen of the world to attempt to enter into communion with
all others." Epictetus says, "there is but one course open to men, to do
as  Socrates  did:  never to reply to one who asks his country, 'I am an
Athenian,'  or  'I  am  a  Corinthian,'  but  'I  am  a  citizen  of the
universe.'"  Reflecting  on  the fact that man's "nature is rational and
social,"  Marcus Aurelius declares: "My city and my country, so far as I
am Antoninus, is Rome, but so far as I am a man, it is the world." If we
look at "what value everything has with reference to the whole," we will
perceive  that man "is a citizen of the highest city, of which all other
cities  are  like  families."  The  reason  which  is  common to all men
dictates  a common law of human life. "If this is so," OUTLINE OF TOPICS
i.  War  as the reign of force: the state of war and the state of nature
2.   The  kinds  of  war  2a.  Civil  war  and  war  between  states  or
international war ib. Religious wars: the defense and propagation of the
faith ic. The class war: the conflict of economic groups

[1053b]
Chapter 98: WAR AND PEACE 1019 Aurelius argues, "we are fellow citizens;
if this is so, we are members of one political community; if this is so,
the  world is in a manner a Aristotle describes how the family is formed
by  the union of man and wife, parents and children; and from this first
of  all  social  units,  the  tribe  or  village is formed by a union of
families,  and  the  city  or  state by a union of villages. He does not
carry this series on to its natural terminus, but Augustine does. "After
the  state  or city," Augustine says, "comes the world, the third circle
of  human society— the first being the family, the second the city." Yet
Augustine,  who  orders  earthly  peace to the peace of heaven, does not
prophesy  a  single political community of all men living together under
one government. The heavenly city, he says, "while it sojourns on earth,
calls  citizens  out  of  all nations, and gathers together a society of
pilgrims  of  all  languages,  not  scrupling  about  diversities in the
manners,  laws,  and  institutions  whereby earthly peace is secured and
maintained,  but  recognizing  that, however various these are, they all
tend  to one and the same end of earthly peace." One and the same end of
earthly  peace  may  require one city of man as well as one city of God.
That, according to Dostoevsky, seems to be implied in the fact that "the
craving  for  universal  unity  is  the  third  and last anguish of men.
Mankind  as  a  whole,"  he  writes,  "has  always striven to organize a
universal   state.  There  have  been  many  great  nations  with  great
histories, but the more highly developed the more unhappy they were, for
they felt more acutely than other people the craving for world-wide PAGE
1 021 1022

[1054a]
1020  THE GREAT IDEAS conquest governing the conduct of warfare apparent
causes  on the welfare of women and children 6. The conception of war as
a   political  means  or  instrument  6a.  Conquest,  empire,  political
expansion  as  ends  of  war  7. The inevitability of war: the political
necessity  of military preparations 9. The folly and futility of war 10.
The  military  arts and the military profession: their role in the state
lof.  The  development of weapons: their kinds and uses 1 1. The nature,
causes,   and   conditions   of  peace  munity  as  the  unit  of  peace
strumentalities of international peace

[1054b]
PAGE  3.  The  rights of war i 02 ? $a. The distinction between just and
unjust  warfare:  wars of defense and wars of 3b. Justice and expediency
in  relation  to  the  initiation  and prosecution of a war: laws 4. The
causes  or  occasions  of  war 1024 40. The precipitation of war between
states:   remote   and  proximate  causes;  real  and  ^b.  The  factors
responsible  for  civil  strife  1025 5. The effects of war 1026 5a. The
moral  consequences  of  war: its effects on the happiness and virtue of
men  and  5<r. The economic consequences of war: the cost of war and the
by-products  of  war  1027 6b. Liberty, justice, honor, peace as ends of
war  1028  8.  The desirability of war: its moral and political benefits
1029  10a.  The  formation  of military policy: the relation between the
military  and  the  statesman  or  prince  1030  10b. Different types of
soldiery:  mercenaries,  volunteers,  conscripts, militia 1031 1 or. The
military  virtues:  the qualities of the professional soldier; education
for war lod. The principles of strategy and tactics: the military genius
1032  iO£.  The  rise  of  naval power and its role in war 1033 log. The
making  of  truces  or alliances as a military device 1034 1 \a. Law and
government  as  indispensable  conditions  of civil peace: the political
com-  \\b.  Justice and fraternity as principles of peace among men 1035
nr.  International law and international peace: treaties, alliances, and
leagues as in- \\d. World government and world peace 1036

[1055a]
REFERENCES  To find the passages cited, use the nufTrbersTrT heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116&-1 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to  the  upper  and  lower  halves of the lefthand sideof
thepage, the letters c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. War as the reign of force: the
state  of  war and the state of nature 4 Homer: 7//W3a-179d 5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon [437-444] 56d 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[784-800]
385a-b  6  Thucydides  :  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  v,  488d489b 7 Plato:
Protagoras, 44c-d / Laws, bk i, 640d641a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch
2
[1253*2-7]
446b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk  ii  124a-146b;  bk  vii-xii 236a-379b 18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk xix, ch 12, 517d-518c; ch 28 529d-530a,c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  a  3,  ans and rep 1
316a-318b; part ii-ii, q 29, a 2, rep 2 531a-d 22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[1981-2050]
192b193b  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch xviii, 25a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  76d-77a;  84c86b;  86d;  92a; part ii, 99a-100a; 102d; 104b-d;
114b-c; 153b; 159c-d

[1055b]
Chapter  98: WAR AND PEACE 1021 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act i, sc i
[1-13]  105b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc hi [75-137]
108d-109c  30  Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  iv,  prop  37,  schol  2  435b-436a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i
[622-662]   107a108a;   bk   xi  [634-707]  313a-314b  35  Locke:  Civil
Government, ch ii-iv 25d-30b esp ch hi, sect 19 29b-c; ch xii, sect 145—
146  58d-59a;  ch  xiii,  sect 155 60d-61a; ch xv, sect 172 65bc; ch xvi
65d-70c;  ch xviii, sect 207 72d-73a; ch xix, sect 231239 78c-81b passim
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  2b-3a;  bk  xxvi, 223c-d 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 335b-336a; 343a345c; 346b-d; 351b-352a; 353d-356a;
361c362a;  364a-b  /  Political  Economy,  370d / Social Contract, bk i,
389d-390d;  bk  ii,  398a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 237c-d 42 Kant:
Pure  Reason,  222b-c  / Science of Right, 434b-c; 435c-436b; 450d-451a;
452a-d; 454a455c

[1056a]
(1. War as the reign offorce: the state of war and the state of nature.}
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 93 36a-b; part hi, par
324-326 107a-108a; par 333-338 109b-110b / Philosophy of History, Intro,
171c-172b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace 53 James: Psychology, 717a-b 2. The
kinds of war 2a. Civil war and war between states or international war 5
Aeschylus:  Eumenidcs  [848-869]  89d-90a  6  Herodotus: History, bk hi,
102d-107c;  bk  v,  172c-174b; bk viii, 260bc 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  355a-b;  bk hi, 434c-438b; bk iv, 459a-c; 463a-465c; bk v,
482d-483a;  503d-504b;  bk viii, 575c-576c; 577b-d; 579c-583c; 585d586b;
587a-589a;  590a-c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  v, 367b-368c / Laws, bk I,
640d-643c / Seventh Letter, 806d-807b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 4
[i304ai8~39]
505d-506a   /  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  14-19  558d-561d;  ch  29-41
566b-572a 14 Plutarch: Pompey, 533a-c / Caesar, 598c-d / Otho, 875b-d 15
Tacitus:  Annals, bk i, 12d-13b / Histories, bk in, 248c-d; 261d-262a 18
Augustine:  City  of God, bk xix, ch 7 515a-c; ch 12, 517c-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part ii-ii, q 42 583c-584d 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch
xix,  26b-d;  ch  xx,  31b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b; part i,
68d-69a;  77c;  78b;  85d-86a; part ii, 99d100a; 104c; 114bc; 121b-122b;
147c;   150b151a;   153c;  159bc;  164a,c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  54bc  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  470a-b; 504c-506a 26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc ivact in, sc 1 llb-16b; act iv, sc
i [182-194] 21d / 2nd Henry VI 33a-68d esp act i, sc i
[180-259] 35c-36b
/  3rd  Henry  VI  69a-104d  esp  act  1,  sc  1 69b,d-72d / Richard III
105a148a,c esp act v, sc v [16-41] 148a,c / Richard II, act iv, sc 1
[1 10-149]
342c-343a  /  1st  Henry IV, act i, sc i 434b,d-435c esp [1-33] 434b,d /
Julius  Caesar,  act hi, sc i [262-275] 583b 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch xiii, sect 155 60d-61a; ch xix, sect 224-243 76d-81d esp sect 224-230
76d-78c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  361c-362a / Social Contract, bk ii,
402c-d;  bk  hi,  418b [fn 1] 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 35a; 48d-49a;
71b74c; 110b-113d esp 113b-d; 437d; 652d-655c

[1056b]
1022  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  2  to  2c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 474a;
570d-571a; 572c-d; 594b-595b 43 Declaration of Independence: la-3b esp
[80-94] 2b-3a
43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.: article iv, sect 4 16b-c 43 Federalist:
number  16  66c-68d;  number 28 96c-98b; number 29, 99b-101a; number 43,
141a-142d;  number  46,  152a-153a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part
in, 297a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[10,242-284] 249b250b
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 424d; 428a-b 2b. Religious wars:
the  defense  and  propagation  of  the faith Apocrypha: Judith— (D) OT,
Judith  / I Maccabees, 1-9; 14:29-37— (D) OT, I Machabees, 1-9; 14:29-37
/  //  Maccabees,  6-10—  (D)  OT,  // Machabees, 6-10 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part ii-ii, q 10, a 8 432b-433b; q 40, a 2, rep 4 579b-580c;
q  188,  a  3 677a-678b; part hi suppl, q 96, a 6, rep 11 1058a-1061b 24
Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk ii, 117c-d 26 Shakespeare: 1st
Henry  IV, act i, sc i [1-33] 434b,d 29 Cervantes: Dow Quixote, part ii,
290c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii
[485-551]
329b-331a  35  Locke:  Toleration,  lc-2c;  7b; 13c-d; 20c-21c 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i,  21a-23a; part iv, 149b-150b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
142bc  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, HOb-c 38 Rousseau: Social
Contract,  bk  iv,  435b-436a;  437c;  438c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
233c-234a,c; 310a328c passim, esp 324d-326b, 328b; 382a-d; 391a-c; 541b;
601d-604d  esp  602c-603a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 124c; 128d-129b;
134a-161a,c  passim, esp 134a-b, 138c-d, 145d147d; 199c-202a; 237c-243b;
253a-310d  esp  259b-261b,  288b,d, 305b; 323a-c; 331b-333b; 378b-453a,c
esp  381a-387c, 397c-398a, 406a409c, 422a-424a, 451c-452d; 531d-551b esp
531d-534a, 544b-545c; 583c-586a; 588a-589a 43 Articles of Confederation:
hi  5b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi,  313bc; part iv,
322c-323a;  337d-339d;  358b360a  2c.  The  class  war:  the conflict of
economic  groups  5  Euripides: Suppliants [229-245] 260b-c 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  vi,  202d-203a  6  Thucydides  : Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
423a-b; 436d-438b; bk iv, 458d-459c; 463a-

[1057a]
I  to  lb  465c; 466a-469b; 480a-c; bk v, 482d-483a; 502d; 503d-504b; bk
vi,  524d-525d;  533a-c;  bk  viii  564a-593a,c  passim,  esp 575c-576c,
577b-d, 579c-581c, 582a-583c, 585d-586b, 587a-589a, 590a-c ^- — 7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  iv, 342d-344a; bk viii, 405c-406b; 412d-415a 9 Aristotle:
Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[i265b6-i2]
461a; ch 7 461d-463c passim; ch 9 [1269*37b i3] 465c-d; bk iv, ch ii
[i295b2-i296b2]
495c-496c;  bk  v  502a-519d  passim,  esp  ch  5-6 506b-508c / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  2-5  553a-555a 14 Plutarch: Solon, 68d-70c / Tiberius
Gracchus   671b,d-681a,c  /  Caius  Gracchus  681  b,d689a,c  /  Cicero,
708a-713b  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  11,  224d-225a  23 Machiavelli:
Prince,   ch  ix,  14c-d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  156b-c  27
Shakespeare:  Coriolanus  351a-392a,c  esp  act 1, sc 1 [1-47] 351a-d 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xi, 78a80c 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
353d-356a  /  Political  Economy,  375b-d  /  Social  Contract,  bk  iv,
429c-431c  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 28a-d; bk v, 309a-311c esp
309a-c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 127a-c; 144a-c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  574b-582b passim, esp 575a-d, 579a-581a 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  History,  intro,  193b-c;  part  11,  275b-276a; part hi, 287d-288b;
295d-296c;  part  iv,  356c-357a  50  Marx: Capital, 7b-d; 8c-9b; 63b-c;
113c;  131a-b;  134c-146c  esp  145a;  209c-215a  esp  209c, 212a, 214a;
275a-b;  295a  50  Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto 415a434d esp 415c-d,
416c-d,  419b,d-420a,  423c425c, 434c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x,
410c-421c  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-166a 54 Freud:
New  Introductory  Lectures, 882c-884c esp 884a 3. The rights of war 3*.
The  distinction  between  just  and unjust warfare: wars of defense and
wars of conquest 5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens [333-479] 5a7a;
[825-953]
lld-13a / Persians
[739-831]
23a-24a  5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  esp [286358] 260d-261c,
[513-565]   262d-263b  /  Phoenician  Maidens  378a-393d  esp  [357-637]
381a383d 5 Aristophanes: Peace [601-692] 532d-534a 6 Herodotus: History,
bk i, la-2b; bk iv, 144b-d

[1057b]
Chapter  98:  WAR AND PEACE 1023 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk hi,
425d-426d; 430b-431b; 432a-434a; bk iv, 461b-d; 469d-470b; bk v, 505b-c;
506b-c  7  Plato: Republic, bk i, 307a-308c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i,
ch  8  [1256^0-26] 450c 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 55c-56a / Camillus,
108b-109a  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk iv, 272b-c; 290a-c 18 Augustine:
City of God, bk i, ch 21 142d143a; bk iv, ch 14-15 196b-197a; bk xix, ch
7  515a-c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 105, a 3, ans
316a-318b; part ii-ii, q 40, a i 578a579b; a 2, rep 2-3 579b-580c; q 41,
a  i,  rep  3  581d-582c;  q  42,  a  2, rep 1,3 584b-d 22 Chaucer: Tale
of Melibeus  401a-432a  esp par 12 404a-b, par 30-38 413b-418a, par 53-60
425b-427b   23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxvi,  36b-37a  24  Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  30d-32c;  35a-39b;  58a-59d; bk ii,
117c-d;   bk   in,   131b,d-133b  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  440b-442d  26
Shakespeare:  Richard  III, act v, sc hi [237270] 146b-c / 2nd Henry IV,
act iv, sc 1
[i]-scn[42]487b-490a
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part ii, 290c-d 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  ii—hi 25d-29d; ch xiii, sect 155 60d-61a; ch xiv, sect 167168 64a-c;
ch xv, sect 172 65b-c; ch xvi 65d70c; ch xviii, sect 203-210 72a-73c; ch
xix,  sect  223-243  76c-81d  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part  i, 23a-25b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  x, 61b, d63d 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  383c-384b  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 413d; 454a-b; 455b-c 43
Federalist:  number 3-4 33b-37a esp number 4, 35a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of Right, part in, par 326 107d-108a; par 351 112a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  12d-13a;  bk  ix,  344b-355c; bk x, 443a 3b. Justice and
expediency  in relation to the initiation and prosecution of a war: laws
governing the conduct of warfare Old Testament: Deuteronomy, 20 4 Homer:
Iliad,  bk  vi  [35-71]  40b-d 5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon [40-254] 52c-54d 5
Sophocles:  Philoctetes  182a-195a,c  5  Euripides  : Iphigenia at Aulis
425a-439d   6   Herodotus:  History,  bk  vii,  214d-220b;  243d-246c  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk i, 365c371b; 378a-380a; 384b-386d; bk
ii,  402c-d;  bk  in,  417a-420c;  429b-434c;  bk  v,  504c507c;  bk vi,
511c-516b;  518a-520d; 529b533a; bk vii, 556b-557b 7 Plato: Republic, bk
v, 367b-368c

[1058a]
(3.  The  rights  of war. 3 b. Justice and expediency in relation to the
initiation  and  prosecution  of  a  war:  laws governing the conduct of
warfare.) 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xi
[242-444] 334b-340a;
bk  xii  [1-53I  354a-355b  14 Plutarch: Themistocles, 96c-d / Camillus,
106b-107a; 108b-109a / Marcellus, 254c255b / Pyrrhus, 319b-d / Lysander,
357a-b  /  Cimon, 397c-398d / Nicias, 426a / Agesilaus, 484a-b; 491a-b /
Alexander,  549d-550c;  569a-b  /  Demetrius, 727d-728b / Marcus Brutus,
821b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 15b 18 Augustine: City of God, bk i, ch
1-7  129d133a  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 3, ans
and  rep 4 316a-318b; part ii-ii, q 40, aa 3-4 580d-581d 23 Machiavelli:
Prince,  ch xxi, 32a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 95a; part ii, 110b-
110a;   147c:  conclusion,  279d-281a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  llb-13c;
22d-23b; 95a97a; 334b-336c 26 Shakespeare: King John, act ii, sc i
[561598] 385c-386a; act hi, sc
i  [255-347] 388d389d / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc ii [52-123] 490b-491b /
Henry V, act i, sc ii
[1-233]
534a-536b; act hi, sc hi
[1-43] 545d-546a;
act  iv,  sc  vii [1-68] 558d-559b 27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act v, sc
111 [94171] 388a-d / Timon of Athens, act v, sc iv
[1-64] 419d-420c
35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch xi, sect 139 57c-58a; ch xvi 65d-70c 38
Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3a-b; bk x, 61b,d-63d; bk xv, 109b-c;
HOa-c;  bk  xxiv, 201b-c 38 P.ousseau: Social Contract, bk i, 389d-390d;
bk  11,  395d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 404a-b; 409b-d; 509b-c; 543c;
549d-550b  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 5d-6a; 7d-8a; 17d18c; 27b-28b;
130b-c;  373d-374d;  445a;  532d533a;  729a  [n  86] 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  434d; 452c-455c esp 454a-c / Judgement, 504a-b 43 Declaration of
Independence:
[84-94]
2b-3a 43 Articles of Confederation: vi
[124-146]
6c-d;  ix  [186-191]  7b  43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8
[220-225] 13b; sect 10 [296-298] 14a; [314320] 14b 43 Federalist: number
6,  40a-b;  number  ii,  54c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
338339  HOa-b;  additions,  193  150c  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix,
344b-355c; bk x, 442c-443b; bk xii, 547a-551c; bk xiv, 589a-c; 598b-599b
54 Freud: War and Death, 756c-757c

[1058b]
1024 THE GREAT IDEAS 3>b to 4a 4. The causes or occasions of war Aa. The
precipitation  of  war between states: remote and proximate causes; real
and apparent causes 4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii
[155-182]
llc-d; bk vii
[344-378] 49c-d; bk xiii [345-360] 91d-92a
5  Aeschylus:  Suppliant  Maidens  [333-479]  5a7a;  [825-953]  Hd-13a /
Agamemnon  [399-455]  56b-57a; [681-749] 59b-60a 5 Euripides: Suppliants
258a-269a,c esp [399597] 261d-263c / Phoenician Maidens
[357637] 381a-383d
/ Iphigenia at Aulis
[49-88]
425c-d 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[480-565]
460d461c / Peace [195-222] 528a-c; [601-692] 532d534a / Plutus [144-197]
630d-631b  6  Herodotus: History, bk i, la-2c; 10a; llb-c; 16b-c; bk 11,
71a-73b;  bk  hi,  89a-d;  99c100a;  118a-c;  119c-120b;  bk iv, 146a-b;
152b-c;  154a-b; bk v, 165a-166a; 174b-175b; 175d-177b; 180c-d; 182b; bk
vi,  202c-203d;  211a-b;  212a-c;  bk  vii,  214d-220b; bk viii, 280b-d;
283a-b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i  349a386d esp 349b-d,
353c-d,  354d-355a,  362d363a,  365a-b,  371b;  bk  in, 418d-419d; bk v,
491c-492b;  493c-496b;  497b;  bk  vi,  510c511a 7 Plato: Phaedo, 224d /
Republic,  bk  ii,  318c319a;  bk  viii, 413d-414d esp 414c / Statesman,
605d-608d 8 Aristotle: Posterior Analytics, bk ii, ch ii a36-b 8] 129a-b
[94
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vii 236a-258b 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 57d-60b
/  Camillus,  108b- 109c / Pericles, 130d-137c / Coriolanus, 179c-180b /
Pyrrhus,  319b-d  /  Lysander,  366b-c  /  Demetrius,  72 7d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  vi,  94a-d; bk xii, 122ac; bk xiii, 134a; bk xv, 157d-158b;
163c-164a / Histories, bk i, 207b-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk hi, ch
10  172d173c;  ch  13-14  174c-176d; bk v, ch 12, 216d218a; bk xix, ch 7
515a-c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q 29, a 2, rep 2
531a-d;  q 40, a i, ans 578a579b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxi, 31d-32d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76d-77a;  part  ii, 157a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 30d-32c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 299d-300c;
330b-331a 26 Shakespeare: King John, act hi, sc i 386a389d esp
[253-297] 388d-389b
/ Henry V, act 1 533a-537b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act ii,
sc  ii  113c-115d  29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part ii, 290a-d 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk xi [634-707] 313a314b

[1059a]
Ab  Chapter 98: WAR AND PEACE 1025 35 Locke: Toleration, 13c-d 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv,  150a-151b  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk x,
61b,d62a  38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 380a^/SaciaT^ Contract, bk ii,
403c-404b  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 95b; 98d 100c; lOlb-c; 103a-110c
passim;  119d;  148b 149d passim; 261c; 264d-265a; 558a-572a passim, esp
558a-c,  571b,d-572a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, la-2d passim; 46c47a;
380b-384b;  531d-534a  passim,  esp  531d532b;  539d-541c 43 Articles of
Confederation: hi 5b; vi
[124-146] 6c-d
43  Federalist:  number 3-7 33b-44c passim; number 18-20 71a-78b passim;
number  24,  88d  89a;  number 34, HOb-d; number 80, 235b-236a 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 334335 109c-d / Philosophy of History,
part  i,  232b-c;  part  ii,  262c-263a;  274a-275b;  278c281b; part iv,
357a-358b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 342a-355c; bk x, 389a-391c;
bk  xi,  469a-472b;  bk xiii, 563a-b; epilogue i, 645a-650c; epilogue ii
675a-696d  passim  54  Freud:  War  and  Death,  755c;  761a-c; 766b-d /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 788b-d 4b. The factors responsible for
civil  strife  5  Aeschylus:  Eumenides  [848-869]  89d 90a 6 Herodotus:
History, bk i, 29d-30b; bk iv, 124a-d; 126a-b 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  hi,  434c-438b;  bk  iv,  460c-d;  bk  v,  482d-483a; bk viii,
568d-569a  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  iv, 342d-344a; bk viii, 408b-409b /
Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk in, 668d-676b / Seventh Letter, 814b-c 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch  6  [i265b6-i2]  461a; ch 7 461d-463c
passim; ch 9
[1269
11 37~b i3] 465c-d; bk iv, ch ii
[i295b2-i296b2]
495c-496c; bk v 502a-519d passim 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[68—73]
31a  14  Plutarch:  Theseus,  13a-  14c  /  Solon,  68d69d  /  Camillus,
117c-121a,c / Pericles, 124a130b esp 126d-127a / Coriolanus, 176b-184c /
Sulla,  369a-374a  /  Caesar,  581d-582a / Agis 648b,d-656d / Cleomenes,
657a-663c  / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c esp 680b-d / Cuius Gracchus
681b,d-689a,c  /  Cicero,  708a713b  / Antony, 750a-b / Galba, 859a-c 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  4a-d;  10d-llb  / Histories, bk 1, 190a-191a;
195a-196b; 198d199c; 202c-205a; bk ii, 215d-216b; 224d225a 18 Augustine:
City of God, bk xix, ch 7 515a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi
[58-75]
9a; purgatory, xiv [16-126] 73d-75a

[1059b]
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  hi, 3c-5a; ch iv-v 7a-8c; ch vi, 9b-d; ch
viii-ix,  14a-16a;  ch  xvii  23d-24d;  ch  xix,  26a-27a; ch xx, 31a 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 77a; 78c-d; part ii, 102d-103a; 103c-104a;
114d-115a;  116c-d;  148c-153a; 157d-158a; 159a-c; part hi, 240a-b; part
iv, 247a-248d; 270c-d; 273a-c; 276c-277a; 278c; conclusion, 280c-281a 25
Montaigne: Essays, 48b-51a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c esp act
ii, sc iv-act in, sc 1 llb-16b, act iv, sc 1
[111-194] 21a-d
/  2nd Henry VI 33a-68d esp act 1, sc 1 33b,d-36b, act ii, sc ii 43c-44c
/  3rd  Henry  VI 69a-104d esp act v, sc vi-vii 103b-104d / Richard III,
act  v,  sc  hi  [237270] 146b-c / Richard II 320a-351d esp act i, sc hi
[123-138]  324d-325a,  act  iv, sc 1 [107157] 342c-343a / King John, act
iv, sc in
[i4o]-act
v, sc 1
[79] 399a-400a /
1st Henry /F434a-466d esp act iv, sc hi [41-113] 459d460b, act v, sc 1
[1-120] 460d-462a
/ 2nd Henry IV, act i, sc hi
[85-110] 473d-474a;
act iv, sc 1 [3o]-sc 11
[42] 487c-490a / Julius
Caesar 568a-596a,c esp act ii, sc 1
[1 12-183]
575d-576b,  act  hi, sc 1 [78-110] 581b-c, [253275] 583b 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc in [75-137] 108d-109c / Macbeth, act iv,
sc hi [1-135] 303b-304d / Antony and Cleopatra, act 1, sc in
[41-53] 315a-b; act
hi, sc iv 329b-d / Coriolanus, act i, sc i [1-226] 351a353d / Cymbeline.
act  hi,  sc  i 463c-464c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 7a 35 Locke:
Toleration,  7b;  18c-  19d;  20c-21c / Civil Government, ch xviii, sect
203-210  72a-73c;  ch  xix,  sect  224-243  76d-81d  36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy, 338a-339a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 28b-29a; bk viii,
54b-c;  bk  x,  65b; bk xv, 112d-113a; bk xix, 137c; 139b-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality, 361b-362a / Social Contract, bk hi, 411b-c; 417b-c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of Nations, bk iv, 269d-271a; bk v, 308b-c; 348a-352a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  35a;  48d-49a;  69a76a  esp  69a-b,  71c-d,  73b-c;
110b-112c passim, esp 112b; 113c; 116b-c; 127a-c; 159b,d178d passim, esp
159b,d;  267a-272a,c  passim;  324d-326b esp 326b; 330a-335c esp 334b-d;
420b-422d  esp  420c-d;  446b-447d;  449d450a;  453c-454c;  652d-654c 41
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 51a-53a; 113d115a; 466a-b 43 Declaration of
Independence:  la-3b  43  Federalist:  number  9-10  47a-53a;  number 16
66c-68d;  number  27,  95b-c; number 58, 181d-182a; number 60, 184b-d 43
Mill:  Liberty,  321b  / Representative Government, 425b-426b; 428b-431a
passim  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part hi, 295d296c; part iv,
345a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 7b; 377c-378d esp 378c

[1060a]
(4.  The causes or occasions of war. 4b. Thefactors responsiblefor civil
strife.) 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 416c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,   epilogue   ii,   680b683  b  54  Freud:  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  787c788d esp 787d-788a 5. The effects of war 5a. The moral
consequences  of war: its effects on the happiness and virtue of men and
on the welfare of women and children Old Testament: // Kings, 25— (D) IV
Kings,  25  / // Chronicles, 36:17-21 — (D) II Paralipomenon, 36:17-21 /
Jeremiah,  39-40;  52—  (D)  Jeremias, 39-40; 52 Apocrypha: / Maccabees.
1:20-64— (D) OT, I Machabees. 1:21-67 4 Homer: Iliad, bk yi
[369-502] 43d-45a: bk
xviii
[1-137]
130a-131c;  bk  xxiv  171a-179d  esp  [689-781]  178c-179c  5 Aeschylus:
Persians
[101-124]
16c-d;
[515—
597]  20c-21b  /  Seven  Against  Thebes  [78-368]  28a-31b  / Agamemnon
[183-257] 54a-d; [320350] 55c-d;
[399-474]
56b-57b;
[855-905]
61b-c 5 Sophocles: Ajax
[1 185-1222] 153b-c
5  Euripides:  Suppliants  258a-269a,c  /  Trojan  Women  270a-281a,c  /
Andromache
[91-116]
316a-b  / Hecuba 353a-364a,c 5 Aristophanes: Peace [601-656] 532d-533c /
Lxsistrata 583a-599a,c esp
[587-599]
590d591a   6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  20d-21a;  bk  hi,  121c-d  6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 392a-b: 398c-d: bk hi, 436d-438b;
bk  vii,  545d-546a; 559b-d; 562c-563a,c 7 Plato: Laws, bk i, 648b-c; bk
iv, 677d-678c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 15
[1 334*1 2-b
7]  539a-b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid,  bk ii [268-804] 131b-146b 14 Plutarch:
Caesar,  590d-591a; 592a-c: 598c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 12b-13b; 18ac
/  Histories,  bk  1,  202b-c;  bk 11, 217c-218a; 226c-d; 229b-c; bk hi,
248c-d;  250a-251a;  255b-c; 265a-b; bk iv, 266b-c 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  hi,  ch  13  174c175b;  bk  xix, ch 7 515a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  ii-ii,  q  40,  a  2,  ans 579b-580c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, vi
[58151] 61b-62c
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[859-1004]
174a176b  /  Tale  of Melibeus, par 12 404a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 140c-141c; 143a-144c 25 Montaigne: Essays, 95a-97a;
504c-509a  26  Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act iv, sc v-vii 23d-26a / 2nd
Henry VI, act v, sc ii [31-65]

[1060b]
1026  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  5  to  5b  67d-68a / 3rd Henry VI, act i, sc iv
74c-76b; act 11, sc v 81d-83a / Richard III, act v, sc v
[16-41]
148a,  c  /  Henry  V,  act  hi,  sc hi 545d-546b; act iv, sc i [95-246]
552c-554a;  act v, sc ii [24-67] 563c-564a / Julius Caesar, act in, sc 1
[262-275]  583b  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi, sect 180189 67b-69b
passim  36  Sterne:  Tristram Shandy, 448b-451a 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
355c;  364c-d  /  Political  Economy,  380a-d  / Social Contract, bk hi,
418a-b  [fn  1]  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations,  bk v, 301b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline   and   Fall,  35a;  112d-113a;  409b-d:  509b-510c;  511c-512a:
573b-574a;  627d-628a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 397c-398a; 437b440a,c
passim; 551d-553a 42 Kant : Science of Right, 454a-c / Judgement, 504a-b
43 Declaration of Independence:
[80-94]
2b-3a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 324 107a-d; additions,
193  150c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 12b-14b; 50d; 55c-59d; bk ii,
76a-b;  90c-91a;  102d-104a;  109d-110a,c;  bk hi, 128d-131c; 141d-142a;
155b-156d;  162b-164a,c;  bk  iv, 179b-180d; bk v, 221d-222b; 225c-228b;
232a-234a;  bk  vii, 275a-276b; bk ix, 342a; bk x, 410c-421c; 442c-443b;
467a-468a,c;  bk  xi,  475b-476c;  485a-496a: 497c-513d; 527b-532a,c; bk
xii,   537b-562d;   epilogue   ii,  675d-676a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  166c-167b  54  Freud:  War and Death, 756d-761a esp
756d757a,  757c,  760d-761a; 764c-d; 766c 5b. The political consequences
of  war:  its  effects  on different forms of government 5 Aristophanes:
Knights  [790-809]  479c-480a  /  Peace [601-656] 532d-533c 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  hi,  118a-c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  viii
564a-593a,c   esp   575c-576c,  577b-d,  579c581c,  582ac  9  Aristotle:
Politics, bk v, ch 3
[i303 a2-i2]
504b-c; ch 7
[i3o6b32-i307a2] 508d; ch
ii
[i3i3b28-29] 516c / Athenian Constitution, ch
29  566b-d  14 Plutarch: Camillus, 106b; 119a-120c / Coriolanus, 179c-d;
186d  /  Flamininus,  307d308a  /  Cuius  Marius  332b,d-354a,c  / Sulla
368a-387a,c / Caesar, 590d-591a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk 1, lb-c 35 Locke:
Civil  Government,  ch  xvi  65d-70c  esp sect 175 65d; ch xix, sect 211
73d-74a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk ix, 60b61a; 61bc; bk x,
64a-65b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 380a-d / Social Contract, bk ii,
403c-404a; bk hi, 418a-b
[fn*]

[1061a]
d  5c  to 6a Chapter 98: WAR AND PEACE 1027 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
452d-453a,c  43  Declaration of Independence: [8o-8i] 2b 43 Constitution
of the U.S.: article i, sect 18d-19a ^ 43 Federalist: number 8, 45a-47a;
number  9 [267-270] 13d; amendments, xiv, sect 2-4 16, 68d; number 18-20
71a-78b  passim;  number  41, 133b-d; number 58, 181d-182a 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures,  882  5c.  The economic consequences of war: the
cost of war and the by-products of war 5 Aristophanes: Peace
[601-656]
532d-533c;
[1 197-1264] 540a-d
6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 235c-236a; 249d 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i, 349b-d; 354d-355a; bk ii, 390c-391c; 399b401b; bk in, 420d;
bk vii, 551b-d; bk viii, 564a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk v, ch 7
[i3o6b321307*2] 508d
14   Plutarch:  Coriolanus,  179c-180b  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,
213d-214a; bk ii, 229b-c; 236d-237a; bk hi, 250b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays,
504c-509a  26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V, act v, sc ii [23-67] 563c-564a 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi, sect 180184 67b-68d 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  225a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk xiii, lOOd101a 38
Rousseau: Political Economy, 380a-d / Social Contract, bk hi, 418a-b [fn
1] 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi, 181a, c; bk iv, 262a-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 114a, c; 409c-d; 428b-d; 503d-504c; 510d-511c passim;
541d542a;  584d  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 2b-c; 133c-d; 437c-438c;
452d-453a,c 42 Kant: Judgement, 586c-d 43 Declaration of Independence:
[80-94]
2b-3a 43 Articles of Confederation: viii [155-167] 6d-7a 43 Constitution
of  the  U.S.:  amendments,  xiv,  sect  4 19a 43 Federalist: number ii,
54b-c;  number  25, 91a-b; number 30, 102d-103a; number 34, 110d-110b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xi,  490a;  500d502a;  bk xv, 634a-635a;
epilogue  ii,  675d676a 6. The conception of war as a political means or
instrument  6a. Conquest, empire, political expansion as ends of war Old
Testament: Joshua, 6-12— (D) Josue, 6-12 / Judges, 18

[1061b]
Apocrypha:  Judith, 1-2— (D) OT, Judith, 1-2 / / Maccabees, 1:16-24— (D)
OT, / Machabees, 1:17-25 5 Aeschylus: Persians 15a-26d esp
[852-908]
24b-d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, 16b-c; 46a; bk hi, 118a-c; bk iv,
138d-159d  passim;  bk v, 161c162b; 165a-166a; 169a-c; bk vi, 211a-b; bk
vii-ix  214a-314a,c  passim,  esp  bk  vii,  214ab,  214d-216b,  bk  ix,
305d-306a,  314a,c  6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 368a371b esp
370d-371b;  384c-386c; bk ii, 396b-c; 402d-404a; bk iv, 461d-462a; bk v,
504c508a;  bk  vi, 510c-516b; 529b-c; 530d-532b; 533c 7 Plato: Republic,
bk ii, 318c-319a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 7
[i255b38-39]
449c; ch 8 [1256^0-26] 450c; bk vii, ch 2
[i^24b2-i325 a
7] 528c-529a; ch 14
[133^41M34
a u] 538b-d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i [283-296] HOb-110a; bk vi
[81-97]
213a-b;
[845-853] 233b-234a; bk
viii  [608-731]  275a-278b  14  Plutarch:  Camillus,  108b-d  / Pyrrhus,
319b-d;  320d-321a / Caesar, 599b-d 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk iv, 290a-c
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  iv, ch 14-15 196b-197a; bk v, ch 12,
216d-218a  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxi, 31d-32d 25 Montaigne: Essays,
91c;  440b-442d  26  Shakespeare:  1st  Henry VI la-32a,c / 2nd Henry VI
33a-68d  / 3rd Henry VI 69a104d / Henry V 532a-567a,c esp act i 533a537b
27  Shakespeare:  Hamlet, act iv, sc iv 58d59c / Cymbeline, act hi, sc i
463c-464c  30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 204d-205a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  xvi  65d-70c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part i, 23a-26a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk i, 3a; bk x 61b,d-68d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 359b;
364a-b  / Political Economy, 380a-d / Social Contract, bk i, 389d-390d;"
bk  ii,  403c-404b;  bk iv, 437d438c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv,
245c-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 2a-3c; 84d-86a; 98d-99d; 109b-110b;
121c-125d  passim;  134a-b;  176b-c; 264d-265a; 398d; 414a-418c; 446b-c;
540b;  558a-c;  571b,d-572a  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 46d; 212c-d;
255a-288a,c  passim,  esp  255a-b,  288a,c;  343b;  347b,d-451c  passim;
494b,d-505c  passim,  esp  496a,  505b-c;  539d-540d 42 Kant: Science of
Right, 413d; 454a-455a esp 454b, 454d-455a 43 Articles of Confederation:
hi  5b  43  Federalist: number 4-6 35a-41c passim; number 16, 66c-67a 43
Mill:  Representative  Government,  425b-426b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of
History, part i, 242d243b; part 11, 275a-b; 276d-277a; 281d-282d;

[1062a]
(6.  The  conception  of  war  as  a  political means or instrument. 6a.
Conquest,  empire, political expansion as ends of war.) part in, 297a-d;
299a-c;  part iv, 339d-340a; 357a-358b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 292a-295a
esp  294a295a  6b.  Liberty,  justice,  honor,  peace as ends of war Old
Testament: Numbers, 31 :i-io /Judges, 3-7; 14-16; 19-20 / // Samuel, 10—
(D)  //  Kings,  10  /  /  Chronicles,  19— (D) / Paralipomenon, 19 / //
Chronicles,  32 : 1-22— (D) // Paralipomenon, 32:1-22 Apocrypha: Judith—
(D)  OT,  Judith / I Maccabees, 1-9; 14:29-37— (D) OT, / Machabees, 1-9;
14:29-37  /  //  Maccabees,  6-10—  (D) OT, // Machabees, 6- 10 4 Homer:
Iliad  3a  179d  passim,  esp  bk ii [155— 368] llc-13d, bk vi [390-465]
44a-d  5  Euripides:  Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp [286- ^ 358] 260d-261c,
[513-565I  262d-263b  5  Aristophanes:  Knights  [547-610]  476d-477d  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  la-2b; bk hi, 99c-100a; bk vii, 214a-216d;
218a-b;  239a-c;  bk  viii,  287c-d 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i
349a386d  esp  378a-380a; bk ii, 402c-404a; bk hi, 430b-431b; 432a-434a;
bk  iv, 468a-469b; bk v, 504c-508a; bk viii, 564c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk x, ch 7
[ii77b5~25]
432a-c / Politics, bk vii, ch 2 [i324b2-i325 a 7] 528c-529a; ch 14
[i333a3o]-cH
15
[i334b
7]  538a-539b  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [845-853] 233b-234a 14 Plutarch:
Flamininus 302b,d-313a,c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 34d-35c / Histories,
bk  iv,  290a-c 18 Augustine: City of God, bk v, ch 12, 216d218a; bk xv,
ch  4  399c-400a;  bk  xix, ch 12, 517c-d 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  q  29,  a  2,  rep  2  531a-d;  q 40, a i, ans and rep 1,3
578a-579b  23  Machiavelli: Prince, ch v 8a-c 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk  i,  35a-36c;  58a-59d; bk hi, 131b,d-133b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  95a-97b  26  Shakespeare:  Richard  III,  act v, sc hi [237270]
146b-c / King John, act v, sc ii
[1-39]
400a-c  / 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc i 487b489d / Henry V, act i 533a-537b
27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii
[188-213] 115c-d /
Cymbeline,  act  hi,  sc  1 463c-464c 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i,
145d146a;  part  ii,  290c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch hi 28d-29d; ch
xvi  65d-70c;  ch  xix,  sect 224-243 76d81d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
225a; 448b-451a

[1062b]
1028  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6b  to  7 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk x,
61b,d63d 38 Rousseau: Social Contract, bk iv, 437d-438c 39 Smith: Wealth
of  Nations,  bk  iv,  269d-271a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 48d-49a;
71b-76a  esp  73c;  144a-d;  420b-422d  esp 420c-d; 535d-536b 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  113d-115a;  127d128a; 383c-384b; 443b-444a 42 Kant:
Science  of Right, 452a-455a esp 454d455a 43 Federalist: number 28, 97c;
number  46,  152b-153a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 334
109c  /  Philosophy  of  History, part ii, 274a275a; 282d-283b; part iv,
345a-b 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[6956-6963]
170b;
[9855-9862] 239b
50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 416c-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  i,  33d-34c  The  inevitability  of  war: the political necessity of
military preparations 5 Aristophanes: Peace [195-222] 528a-c; [10611086]
538b-c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 41c-d; bk iv, 132a-b; bk vi, 192a-b 6
Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 384c386c; bk 11, 389a-c; 396d-397a;
402c;  403c;  bk  in,  436d-437d;  bk  vi,  514b-c;  518a-520d  7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  ii,  318c-319a; bk iv, 343b-c / Laws, bk i, 640d-641a; bk
vi,  701b702a;  bk  viii,  732b-733b  9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 6
[1265 s ! 9-27] 460c; ch 7 [i267a i7~36] 462d-463a; bk iv, ch 4
[i29i a7~33] 490b-c; bk
vii,  ch  2 [1324^- I325 a i5] 528c-529a; ch 4 [i^26s 22-2j[] 530b; ch 5
[i326b38]-cH 6 [i327b i7] 531a-d; ch ii
[i33ob i-i33i a i8] 535a-d; ch 14 [i333a4i-i334a
11] 538b-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[i359b33~
1360s  1  2] 600a-b 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 59d-60b / Themistocles,
89b-d  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk iv, 64d-65a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch hi,
5c;  ch  xii,  18a;  ch  xiv  21b-22a; ch xviii, 25a-b; ch xxi, 32a-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76d;  84c-86b;  part  11, 114b-c; 157a 26
Shakespeare:  Henry  V, act ii, sc iv [1-64] 541d-542c 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i, 40d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [496-505] 122a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i, 2d-3a; bk x, 61b,d-62a; bk xiii,
lOOd-lOla  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 324c; 355b-c / Social Contract, bk
ii,  403c-404a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 304a-b 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 4b; 558a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 321b 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 452c-d; 457a-458a,c / Judgement, 586a-587a

[1063a]
8/o 10 Chapter 98: WAR AND PEACE 1029 43 Declaration of Independence:
[43-47]
2a  43  Articles  of  Confederation: hi 5b; vi-vn 6a-d; ix [173-177] 7a;
[318-367] 8b-d 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article^Jj^ect8
[192-196]
13a;
[220-242]
13b-c; sect 10
[314-320] 14b
43  Federalist: number 3-8 33b-47a passim, esp number 6, 39a; number 16,
68d;  number  23-24  85a-89c  passim,  esp  number  23,  85b; number 25,
90b-91d;  number 28, 96c; number 34, HOa-d; number 41, 132c-135a passim;
number  43,  141d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 326
107d-108a;  par  333-334  109b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,
278c-279b;  part hi, 288c 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 428a-b 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i, 12d-13a; 33d34c; bk v, 220c-d; bk ix,
342a-344b  53  James:  Psychology,  717a-b  54  Freud:  War  and  Death,
755b-757a  passim,  esp  755c,  756c;  766c-d  /  Civilization  and  Its
Discontents,  787a-788c  esp  787b, 788b 8. The desirability of war: its
moral  and  political  benefits 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xii [290-328] 85b-c 5
Euripides:  Trojan  Women  [386-405]  273b-c  /  Helen  [36-41]  298b  6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  hi,  118a-c;  bk  vii, 215c-216b 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk i, 378a380a; 384c-386c; bk ii, 403c-404a; bk vi,
514d; bk viii, 564c-d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 2
[i324b27l
528c-529a; ch 14
[1333*41]-^
15 a I 325 b 7] 538b-539b
[i 334
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 38d-45b / LycurgusNuma, 62bc; 64a,c / Camillus,
108b-c  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii. 26b-c 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xxi,
31d-32d  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  hi,  129a-b  25
Montaigne: Essays, 330b-331a 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry IV, act iv, sc i
[59-87] 487d-488a / Henry
V, act iv, sc hi
[1-78] 555c-556c
27 Shakespeare: Coriolanus, act iv, sc v [233]- sc vi
[9] 381d-382a
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[43-108]
112a113b  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  448b-451a;  535a-b  41 Gibbon:
Decline   and   Fall,  451c-453a,c  esp  452c-453a,c:  505a-c  42  Kant.
Judgement, 504a-b; 586a-587a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
324  107a-d;  additions,  188  149b-c  / Philosophy of History, part ii,
281d-282d; part iv, 318a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [860-867] 22b ;
[88 4"
902]  23a;  part  ii  [9835-9850] 239a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xi,
517d-518a

[1063b]
9. The folly and futility of war 5 Sophocles: Ajax
[1 185-1222] 153b-c
5   Euripides:   Suppliants   [734-749]  264d;  [949954]  266d  /  Helen
[1151-1164]  309a-b  5  Aristophanes:  Acharnians  455a-469a,c  /  Peace
526a-541d  /  Lysistrata  583a-599a,c 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 16b-c;
20d-21a;  bk  vii,  216d-218a;  219d-220a; bk ix, 305d306a 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk ii, 402c; bk iv, 461b-c 7 Plato: Seventh Letter,
813d-814b  13  Virgil:  Aeneid, bk xi [242-375] 334b-338a; bk xii [1-53]
354a-355b  14  Plutarch:  Marcellus, 254d-256b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i,
17b  18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk hi, ch 10 172d 173c; bk iv, ch 3
190a-c;  bk  xv,  ch 4 399c 400a 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 53-54
425b426a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk i, 54a-b; bk ii, 113d
25  Montaigne:  Essays, 225c-227a; 504c-508a 27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act
iv,  sc  iv 58d59c 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Fairfax 68b-69a / Paradise Lost,
bk 11
[496-505]
122a; bk xi
[634-707]
313a-314b;  [759-803]  315b-316b  36  Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 77a-78a;
part  iv,  149b-152a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 355c; 364c-d / Political
Economy,  380a-d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 615a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  133a;  509d-510a,c  42 Kant: Science of Right, 457a-458a,c /
Judgement,  586a-d  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 324a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  i,  12b-14b;  50d;  bk 11, 80b-c; 83d-86a; 88a-89b; 95d-96c;
109d-110a,c; bk hi, 141d-142a; 155b-156d; 157d-158b; 161b-164a,c; bk iv,
179b-180d;  bk  v,  208c-210b;  225c-228b; 232a-234a; bk ix, 342a; bk x,
401d-402b;  464b  54  Freud:  War  and  Death  755a-766d  esp  756d757d,
759d-760a,  766c-d  10.  The  military arts and the military profession:
their  role  in  the  state  6  Herodotus: History, bk ii, 85a-b; bk iv,
132a-b  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  ii,  395d-399a 7 Plato:
Laches,  27d-29a  esp  28a-c  /  Protagoras, 44c-d / Euthydemus, 75a-b /
Republic,  bk  ii,  319a-320c; bk hi, 339b-341d; bk v, 366c367b; bk vii,
391b-392b  / Critias, 480a; 481a-b / Sophist, 552d-553a; 554c / Laws, bk
1,  640d-643d;  bk  iv,  677d-678c;  bk  vi, 699a-c; bk xii, 784d-786b /
Seventh Letter , 812d

[1064a]
(10.  The  military  arts and the military profession: their role in the
state.)  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk i, ch 2 339b-d / Politics, bk 1, ch 8
fi256b2o-26]  450c;  bk  ii,  ch  9  [i27i  b  i-7]  467c-d; bk iv, ch 3
[i289b3340]  488d-489a;  bk  vi,  ch  7  [i32i  a5-27J  524c525a;  ch  8
[i322a29-b6] 526a-b; bk vii, ch 6
[i327a40-b i6] 531c-d; ch 9 [i329a3-i7] 533b-c;
ch 10 533d-534d passim; ch 14
[1333*41i
1 ] 538b-d / Athenian Constitution, ch a 13 34 61 580d-581b 14 Plutarch:
Fabius,  142c-d  /  Aemilius  Paulus,  214d / Pompey, 509d-510a / Galba,
859a-b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i,  6b-15a / Histories, bk 1, 190b-c;
191b-c; 194a-c; 195c-197d; 198c201b;210d-212d; bk ii, 215c; 239c-240a 23
Machiavelli:  Prince, ch xiv 21b-22a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 115d
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 145b147d; part 11, 280b-c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 54a-b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xi, sect
139   57c-58a   36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  237b-238a;  448b451a  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  v, 31c-32b; bk xi, 74b-d; 82d-83a; bk
xiii,  lOOd-lOla;  bk  xix, 143c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 324c; 361a-b /
Political  Economy, 380a-d / Social Contract, bk iv, 437d-438c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  301a-309a,c  esp 303d-305c, 308c-309a,c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  4b-8b  esp 4b-5a; 42b,d; 86a-d; 193c-194a;
226a-b;  246d-248b;  284a-c;  633b-c;  639a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
120a;  311d-312a;  321b-325a  esp  324b; 389b-390b; 508c-510a,c 42 Kant:
Judgement, 504a-b 43 Declaration of Independence:
[58-68]
2a-b 43 Articles of Confederation: vi
[107-123]
6b-c;  vii  6d;  ix  [290-349]  8a-c passim 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article  i,  sect  8  [226-253]  13b-c; article ii, sect 2 [409413] 15a;
amendments, ii-iii, v
[636-641]
17b  43 Federalist: number 4, 36a-b; number 8 44c-47a; number 22, 81c-d;
number 24-26 87b-94d passim; number 28-29 96c-101a; number 41, 132c-135a
passim;  number 46, 152b-153a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 425c-d
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 242d243b; part in, 288c 48
Melville:  Moby Dic\, 79a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 137c-140c;
bk  v,  221b-d;  bk  vii,  275a-276b; bk ix, 358b-365c; bk x, 440c-443b;
449c;  epilogue  ii,  685d-686a  54  Freud:  Group Psychology, 674b-676b
passim, esp674d-675a

[1064b]
1030  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 10 to 10« 10*. The formation of military policy:
the  relation  between  the  military  and  the  statesman  or  prince 6
Herodotus:   History,   bk   ii,  79a-c;  bk  vii,  225c-d  6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i, 353b; 369a-370d; bk ii, 390c-391b; 396d397a;
402a-404d;  bk  hi,  419b-c;  bk  v,  500c;  bk  vi,  518a-520d; 528b-c;
533a-534d;  bk  vii,  545b-c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  hi,  339b-341d /
Statesman, 604c-605d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk hi, ch 14
[i285 a 316]
483a-b;
[i285b
4-28] 483d-484a; ch 15
[i285b34-i286a
5]  484b; bk v, ch 7 [i307a2-4] 508d-509a; ch 9 [i309a33-b 9] 511c-d; bk
vii, ch 9
[1329^-17]
533b-c; ch 14
[i333 a4ii334a n] 538b-d
/  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  26, par 1-2 564d-565a; ch 61 580d-581b /
Rhetoric,  bk  i,  ch  4  [i359b i9-i36oa n] 599d600b 14 Plutarch: Caius
Marius, 344c-345a / Phocion, 607b-d / Demetrius, 742 d- 743b 15 Tacitus:
Histories,  bk  ii,  223c-d; 233d-234b; bk in, 256d-257a 23 Machiavelli:
Prince, ch xii-xiv 17d-22a; ch xviii, 25a-b; ch xix-xx, 27b-31c; ch xxi,
32a-d;  ch  xxiv  34c-35a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 103b; 159a-c 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  327d-329d  26  Shakespeare:  Henry  V, act i, sc ii
[136-220]  535b-536b  35  Locke:  Civil Government, ch viii, sect 107110
49b-50d;  ch xii, sect 145-148 58d59b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
v, 31c32b; bk xi, 74b-d; 80b-c; bk xiii, lOOd101a 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  380a-d  39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk v, 307a-b; 308b-c 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  25d-26d;  30a-b;  42b,d-43c;  50b-c;  56a;
63a-64c;  76c-77b;  78c-79a;  242c-244a;  245d-247c  42 Kant: Judgement,
504a-b 43 Declaration of Independence:
[58-61]
2a; [65-67] 2b 43 Articles of Confederation: vii 6d; ix
[290-349] 8a-c
43 Constitution of the U.S.: article ii, sect 2
[4
9-4i3l  15a  43 Federalist: number 4, 36a-b; number 8, 45b-c; number 74,
221c-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 329 108c; additions,
163  144c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii,  281d-282a;  part  hi,
301c-302a;  part  iv,  324b;  325a-b;  359a-b;  366b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  hi, 144c; 146d; 153d-155a; bk v, 208c-210b; bk viii, 309b-c;
bk ix, 346a-365c passim, esp352d-353a, 355b, 361b-d; bk x, 404c-405a; bk
xii, 534d-537b;

[1065a]
[Ob to 10c
Chapter  98: WAR AND PEACE 1031 bk xin, 565c-566d; bk xiv, 610d-611a; bk
xv, 627d-630a \Ob. Different types of soldiery: mercenaries, volunteers,
conscripts,  militia  ^______  4 Homer: Iliad, bk ii [183-277] lld-12d 5
Aristophanes:  Peace  [1172-1190] 539c-540a 6 Herodotus: History, bk vi,
187d-188b;   bk  vii,  227c-230d;  249b-d;  252b;  253d-254b;  bk  viii,
280d-281a; bk ix, 294c-295c; 302d303a 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
iv, 478d-479b 7 Plato: Critias, 480a; 484b-c / Laws, bk i, 642c-643a; bk
hi,  674c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi, ch 8 [m6a i5-b23] 362b-363a /
Politics, bk vi, ch 7
[1321*5-9]
524c-d; ch 8
[i322b i-6] 526b; bk
vii, ch 6
[1 327*4o-b i8| 531c-d / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  26,  par  1  564d;  ch  42  572b-d; ch 61 580d581b 14
Plutarch:  Pelopidas,  238b-239c  /  Agesilaus,  484b-c;  498a-b / Galba
859a-869d / Otho 869b,d-876d 15 Tacitus: Histories, bk ii, 232d-233a; bk
iv,  271d-272c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part ii-ii, q 188, a 3
677a-678b  23  Machiavelli:  Prince, ch xii-xiii 17d-21a; ch xx, 30ac 26
Shakespeare: 1st Henry IV, act iv, sc ii
[12-52] 458c-d / 2nd Henry IV, act hi, sc
ii
[ioi-3iil484d-486d
36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 80a b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xi,  82d83a;  bk  xv,  112d-113a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 324c; 361b /
Political  Economy, 380b-d / Social Contract, bk iv, 437d-438c 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk v, 301a-309a,c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 4b-5a;
6b-d;  94d95a;  247d-248c;  480a-b  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 324bc;
389b; 488a-b; 490d-491a 43 Declaration of Independence:
[84-87]
2b 43 Articles of Confederation: vi
[1 17-123]
6c  43  Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect 8 [232-242] 13c;
amendments,  ii-iii  17b-c  43 Federalist: number 8, 45b-46d; number 22,
81c-d; number 24, 89a-b; number 25, 91a-b; number 28-29 96c-101a; number
46,  152b-153a  44  Boswell '.Johnson, 281d-282a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History, part hi, 298a; part iv, 325a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
31a-32a;  bk  ii,  77b-c;  94a-96c;  bk  hi,  131c-135c; bk v, 228b230b;
233b-234a;  bk ix, 366b-c; bk xiv, 590d-596c; bk xv, 621b-626d; epilogue
ii, 685d-686a

[1065b]
10c.  The  military  virtues: the qualities of the professional soldier;
education for war 4 Homer: Iliad 3a-179d esp bk iv
[422-445]
28a-b, bk xin
[46-154]
88c-89d,
[206-327]
90b-91c, [723-820] 95d-96d 5 Euripides: Suppliants
[860-917]
266a-b  /  Heracles  Mad [140-205] 366b-d / Phoenician Maidens [697-753]
384a-d 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians
[566-622]
461c462a; [1071-1233] 467d-469a,c / Knights [547610] 476d-477d / Wasps
[1060-1121]
520c521b / Peace [1172-1190] 539c-540a 6 Herodotus: History, bk v, 175b;
bk  vi,  187d;  bk  vii,  232d-233d;  bk  viii,  264c;  bk  ix, 314a,c 6
Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,370a-c; 379bc; bk ii, 389d-390b;
395d-396a;  396d397a;  397d-398c;  411b-412c;  bk  iv,  449b-c;  457b-c;
478d-479b;  bk  v,  501a-b;  bk  vi,  527b-528a;  bk vii, 555b; bk viii,
589d-590a  7  Plato:  Laches 26a-37d / Apology, 205d-206a / Republic, bk
ii-iv,  319a-345a;  bk  iv, 347a-d; bk v, 366a-367b; bk vii, 391b-392b /
Critias,  481a-b / Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, bk i, 642c-643a; 644b-c;
648b-c;  bk  hi,  674c;  bk  vii, 716b-717c; bk viii, 732b-735a; bk xii,
784d-786b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 6 361a-c; ch 8
[iu6ai5-b23] 362b-363a / Politics, bk v, ch 9
[i309a33-b
9] 511c-d; bk vi, ch 7 [1321*22-26] 524d-525a; bk vii, ch ii
[i33ob33-i33i a
9]  535c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk viii [508-519] 272b-273a; bk ix [590-620]
295a-b  14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 41a-45b / Fabius 141a154a,c / Coriolanus
174b,d-193a,c  esp  175b  / Pelopidas, 232a-233a; 238b-239c; 244c-245a /
Marcellus  246b,d-261a,c  /  Marcellus-Pelopidas  261a-262d / Aristides-
Marcus Cato 290b,d292d / Philopoemen 293a-302a,c / Flamininus, 303a-310d
passim  / Flamininus-Philopoemen 313a-314a,c / Caius Marius, 334d-335a /
Sulla, 374d-375b / Lucullus 400a-421a,c passim / Sertorius 457b,d-470d /
Alexander  540b,d-576d  / Caesar, 583a-584b / Cato the Younger, 623a-b /
Antony  748a-779d  esp  749b,  753d-754a,  764a-b / Aratus 826a-846a,c /
Galba,  859a-b  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  i, 6b-9d;BK m,49d-50a; bk xi,
104d-105a;  bk  xiii,  134a-c  /  Histories, bk 1, 190bc; 194ac; 201a-b;
202c-203a;   210d211a;  211c-212b;  bk  ii,  216a-b;  219b-c;  232d233a;
239c-240a;  bk  hi,  246d-247c;  248b-c; 254d; bk iv, 266c-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a 3, rep 5-6 316a-318b; part ii-ii,
q 40, a 2 579b-580c; q 188, a 3, rep i 677a-678b 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch  xiv 21b-22a; ch xviii, 25a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 77a; 86b;
part ii, 115d; 159a-b

[1066a]
(10.  The  military  arts and the military profession: their role in the
state.  10c.  The  military  virtues:  the qualities of the professional
soldier;  education  for war.) 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
ii,  83a  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  20d-22a;  22d-24a;  25c26d;  95d-97b:
302b-306a;  327d-329d: 336c337b: 532d-533a 26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI,
act iv, sc v-vi 23d-25a / 3rd Henry VI, ACT v, sc iv lOla-d / King John,
act v, sc i
[44-76] 399d-400a
/  Henry V, act hi, sc i 543d-544b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida,
act ii, sc 11
[33-50]
113d-114a  /  Antony and Cleopatra, act 1, sc iv [55-80] 316c-d; act hi,
sc i 327b-c; act iv, sc vtii 340a-c / Coriolanus, act 11, sc ii [86-133]
365a-c  /  Cymbeline,  act  v,  sc hi [1-63I 479d-480c 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part  i, 147b-c; part 11, 203a-b; 280b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement
of Learning, 23a 32 Milton: Lord Gen. Fairfax 68b-69a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  449b-451a  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vi, 39a; BK xvi,
117b-c  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  324c;  335a-b:  366a-b  /  Political
Economy,  375a: 376c-377a: 380b-d / Social Contract, bk iv, 437d-438c 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, bk v, 303d304b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
4d-5c;  50b-c:  86c;  94d; 116b-c; 118d; 136b-137a; 246d-247d; 369d-376a
passim,  esp  370a-c,  375b-c;  457a,c;639a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
28c-29a;  120a-c;  127d-128a;  223a-c;  311d-312a; 323a-325a; 389d-390a;
509a-d;  543d-545c;  548d-550b  passim  42  Kant:  Judgement,  504a-b 43
Federalist:  number  25, 91a-b; number 29, 99b-100a 44 Boswell: Johnson,
384b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  328 108b-c /
Philosophy  of History, part ii, 276d277a; part iv, 343d-344a 47 Goethe:
Faust, part ii [9482-9505] 230a-b;
[10,407-422] 253b
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  i,  21d-22b; 31a32a; 33d-34c; bk ii,
67d-68c;  77b-c; 78c-79a; 94a-96c; bk hi, 131c-135c; 137c-140c; 150c; bk
iv,  171c-173d;  bk  v,  208c-210b; 221b-d; 228b-230b; 232a-234a; bk mi,
275a-276b;  bk  ix,  365b-c; 366b-c; 369a-372a; bk x, 400b-c; 421c-426a;
440c-443b;  451c-456a;  457a-c; 459d-461d; 467a-468a,c; bk xi, 481a482b;
512b-513b;  bk  xii,  554b-d;  bk  xiii,  569d-570a;  582a-584b; bk xiv,
589c-596c;  bk  xv,  621b-626d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
153d-157b

[1066b]
1032  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  10cto  10d  10d. The principles of strategy and
tactics: the military genius Old Testament: Judges, 7 Apocrypha: Judith,
7:8-31 — (D) OT, Judith, 7:8-25 4 Homer: Iliad, bk iv [292-325] 26d-27b;
bk vii [433-463] 50bc; bk viii [489-565] 56a-d; bk xii 82a-87a,c passim;
bk xiii
[125-154]
89c-d;
[295-327]
91b-c / Odyssey, bk viii
[499-520] 227b
5 Euripides: Rhesus 203a-211d / Suppliants
[647-730] 264a-d
/ Trojan Women
[511-567]
274b-d  /  Heracles  Mad [140-205] 366b-d / Phoenician Maidens [697-753]
384a-d;  [1086ii99]387d-388c  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk i, 4b-c: 6a-b;
13d14a;  18c-19a;  19d-20a;  37a;  39c-d;  41c-42b; 43a-b; 46a-d: bk hi,
122a-123c:  bk  iv,  124b-d;  141c;  144d-148d:  158d-159b;  bk v, 162b;
166d-167b;  176c-d;  184b-c;  bk  vi, 200a-b; 207c-208a: bk vii, 216b-d;
225a-c; 237b-c; 239a-c; 247d-248b: 253a-258d passim; bk viii, 264d-265a;
276d-287d passim; bk ix, 288b-291a: 293b-c: 294c-295c; 297a-d; 298c299d:
308d-309c   6   Thucydides:   Peloponnesian  War,  bk  i,352a-b;  361bc;
363d-365a;  374a-378a  passim;  378d379a;  384d-386b;  bk ii. 387a-388b;
389d391b;  392b-393c; 402a-404d; 407b-409a; 409d-410c; 411d-412c; bk hi,
423c-424a;  429b-c;  439d-440d;  444c-445a;  bk  iv,  447c-d; 448b-450c;
454a-456d;  465a-c;  478d-479b;  bk v, 483c-485b; 500a-c; bk vi, 509a-b;
515a516b;  518c-519b; 519d-520b; 520d-521a; 522a-523a; 526b-528c; bk vii
538a-563a,c  esp  540c-541d, 551a-552a; bk viii, 570c-d 7 Plato: Laches,
32ac  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch i 339a-b passim / Politics, bk v, ch
9 [i309a33~b 9] 511c-d; bk vi, ch 7
[1321*5-27]
524c-525a; bk vii, ch 5
[i326b38]-cH 6 [i327b i8] 531a-d; ch ii 535a-d
13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk ii
[13-198]
124b-129b;  bk ix [25-76] 279b-281a 14 Plutarch: Themistocles, 93a-95a /
Camillus  102b,d-121a,c  /  Pericles,  130d-139a  / Fabius 141a-154a,c /
Fabius-Pericles,  154a-d  /  Alcibiades 155b,d~174d passim / Coriolanus,
186b187d  /  Timoleon  195a-213d / Aemilius Paulus 214a-230d / Marcellus
246b,d-261a,c   /  Aristides,  266b-273c  /  Philopoemen  293a-302a,c  /
Flamininus,  303a-310d  passim  /  Caius  Marius,  336b-344c / Lysander,
357c-358d  /  Sulla,  374a-385b  passim  / Lucullus 400a-421a,c / Nicias
423a-438d  /  Sertorius  457b,d-470d  esp 464c-d / Eumenes 470b,d-479d /
Agesilaus,  498a-d  /  Pompey, 528c-534d / Agesilaus-Pompex, 539b-540c /
Alexander,  547b-548a; 549c-d; 555d-556b / Caesar 577a-604d / Cleomenes,
663c-667d  /  Antony, m^-llZc / Marcus Brutus, 816d-824a.c / Artaxerxes,
848b-849b / Otho 869b,d-876d

[1067a]
10<?  to  10/  Chapter  98:  WAR 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk i, 15a-c; bk ii,
26b-28c esp 26c-27a; bk hi, 63a-b; bk xiii, 134a-136c / Histories, bk i,
210b-d;  bk  in,  247a-c;  249a; 258a-b; bk iv, 275a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part n-ji^-Q-4%-^ a 3 580d-581b 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch x
16a-d;cH  xii-xiv  17d-22a;  ch  xx  30a-31c  24 Rabelais: Gargantua and
Pantagruel,  bk i, 31d-35a; 39c-44a; 50c-52d; 56b-57c; bk iv, 276d-277d;
280a-282d   25  Montaigne:  Essays,  llb-13c;  20d-22a;  53a-c;  133b-d;
136b-143c;  354b-358b  26 Shakespeare: 1st Henry VI, act ii, sc i [5077]
9b-d: act iv, sc iv 23b-d / 1st Henry IV, act iv, sc in
[1-29] 459b-c / 2nd Henry IV,
act  1,  sc  in  472d-474a / Henry V, act hi, sc ii [59-149] 544d-545c /
Julius  Caesar,  act  iv,  sc  in [196-225] 590c-d; act v 591d 596a,c 27
Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act i, sc in [197-210] HOa-b / Antony
and  Cleopatra,  act  in,  sc  vii  [2i]-sc  x  [37] 331c-333a 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of Learning, 23a-26a 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 236b-238a;
440a447a;  451b-453a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 241a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of  Laws,  bk  ix, 58b,d61a; 61b-d; bk x, 65d-68d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall, 5c-6b;47c-d;75a-c; 85a-d; 94d; 116d-121c passim; 168b-174d passim;
176d-178b;  265c-271b  passim;  281b-287d  passim;  334a-338a; 364d-378d
passim;   420d427a  passim,  esp  426b-427a;  431a-d;  471c489d  passim;
563a-566b  esp 564d; 584b-585d esp 585a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 2d-
26a  passim; 53b66c passim, esp 55a-c, 60a-62b, 64b-65a; 126d131d; 256a;
290b-291c;    293d-294d;    311d312a;356c-360bpassim;372d-373desp373c-d;
394b-401d passim; 432a-433c; 496a-501c esp 500c-d; 545c 551b passim, esp
547d-548d  42  Kant  : Science of Right, 454a-c 43 Federalist: number 8,
44c-45d 43 Mill: Representative Government, 356b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
History,  part i, 242d243b; part 11, 281d-282d; part hi, 297a-d; 298a-b;
part  iv,  343d-344a;  366b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk i, 52c-53c;
54c55c; bk ii, 74a-81b; 83d-86a; 88a-89b; 96c110a,c; bk hi, 142d-164a,c;
bk v, 208b-210b; bk ix, 358b-365c; bk x, 389a-391c; 405a406c; 421c-426a;
430b-432c;  438b-439a;  440c-450a;  456a-461d; bk xi, 470d-475a; bk xii,
536b;  bk xiii, 563a-575a; bk xiii-xiv, 582a-590c; bk xiv, 609a-613d; bk
xv,  618b622c;  626d-630a; epilogue ii, 685d-686b lOe. The rise of naval
power  and  its  role  in  war  5  Aeschylus: Persians [350-432] 19a-d 6
Herodotus:  History,  bk  i, oa-b; bk vii, 239a240d; 247d-251b; bk viii,
260a-276d

[1067b]
AND  PEACE  1033 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350a353b; 355bc;
356b-357a;  360d-363a; 367c368a; 369b-370a; 372c-d; 377c-378a; 385b386b;
bk  ii,  402d-403b;  409d-410c; 411d412c; bk in, 420d; 435d-436b; bk iv,
452d453c;  bk  vi, 517b-d; 520d-521c; bk vii, 547d548b 7 Plato: Laws, bk
iv,  677a-678c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 12 [1274*13-14] 470d; bk
v,  ch  4 [1304*22-24] 505d; bk vi, ch 7 [1321*5-16] 524c-d; ch 8 [i322b
i-6]  526b;  bk  vii,  ch  6 531b-d esp [i327a4o-b i8] 531c-d / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  26, par 1 564d 14 Plutarch: Themistocles 88a-102a,c /
Alcibiades,  166c-173c  /  Lysander,  357c-358d  /  Antony, 770a-773c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xix, 144b bk xxi, 165d-166a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  7d-8b;  176d-178a  396d-397a 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  4bc;  321c-322b  343b-344a;  430d-433b;  547d-548c 43 Articles of
Confederation: ix
[275-367]
8a d passim 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8
[229] 13c
43  Federalist:  number  4,  36bc;  number  ii, 54b-55c; number 24, 89c;
number  41,  134c135a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part ii, 262c-d;
275a-b;  277b-c;  part  hi,  298a 10/. The development of weapons: their
kinds and uses 6 Herodotus: History, bk vii, 227c-232b; bk viii, 268c-d;
bk  ix, 301d-302a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk ii, 407c-d; bk iv,
472a-b 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk iv, ch 3 [i289b26-4o] 488d-489a; bk vi,
ch  7  [1321*5-27]  524c-525a;  ch  8  [i322b  i-6]  526b; bk vii, ch ii
[i33ob321331*181 535c-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[642653] 38b-c; bk v [1241-1251] 77b; [1281-1349]
77d-78c  14  Plutarch:  Camillus,  119c-120b  /  Marcellus,  252a-255a /
Philopoemen,  296b-d  /  Caius  Marius, 343a-344c / Crassus, 449a-451a /
Demetrius,  733b-734a;  743b-c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk ii, 26c-27a;BK
m,56a-b; bk xii, 113c; 120a / Histories, bk i, 210b-d; bk in, 247a-c; bk
iv,  273a-275c  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxvi,  37b-c 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i,  32a-b;  bk  hi,  127d-128b;  bk iv,
304a-305a   25   Montaigne:  Essays,  140c-141c;  193a-194b;  436a-b  29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part i, 147a-d 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vi
[482-506] 206b207a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part ii, 77a-78a

[1068a]
1034 THE GREAT IDEAS (10. The military arts and the military profession:
their role in the state. 10/ The development of weapons: their kinds and
uses.) 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 304a-b; 509a-510b 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  v,  304d-305b;  308c-309a,c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
5d-6a;  6c-d;  94c;  260d-261a; 368c-d; 661c-662a 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,   4a-b;   20d;   64d;  291d-292c;  322b-d;  394d-395c;  482d-483a;
509d-510a,c; 515c; 542b-543a; 545d-546c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  iv,  343d344a  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk x, 429b 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures, 882d-883a lOg. The making of truces or alliances
as  a military device Old Testament: Joshua, g—(D) Josue, 9 Apocrypha: /
Maccabees,  8—  (D) OT, / Machabees, 8 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6a-c;
15d-16a;  bk iv, 144b-d; bk v, 180c-d; bk vi, 187b-c; bk vii, 240d-247b;
bk  ix,  289a-290b;  310d311a  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk i,
356d360d;  371b-372d;  378a-380d;  bk  hi,  418d420c;  bk iv, 450d-452d;
457c-d;  461b-463a;  476a-477a; bk v, 485d-508a,c passim, esp 489a-b; bk
vi,  522d-523a;  528a-b  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  iv,  286c-287c 23
Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxi,  32a-d  25 Montaigne: Essays, llb-13c 26
Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry IV, act iv, sc ii 489d-491b 36 Swift: Gulliver,
part i, 24b-25b 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy, 448b-453a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  95c-96a;  495d496b; 504d-507a; 543b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  428a-d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  hi, 297b-c 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk ii, 83d-86a; 92c-93d; bk v, 208d-209a; bk
viii,  307d309c; bk ix, 350d-354a; bk xiii, 565a-b; 582a 11. The nature,
causes,  and  conditions  of  peace  Old  Testament: Leviticus, 26:3-6 /
Numbers,  6:22-26  /  Deuteronomy,  20:10-11 / / Kings, 4:20-25— (D) ///
Kings, 4:20-25 / / Chronicles, 22:9— (D) I Paralipomenon, 22:9 / Psalms,
29:11;  37:11;  72:i~7;  n9  :i65;  J  47 :i4— (P) Psalms, 28:10; 36:11;
71:1-7;  118:165;  147:14 / Proverbs, 16:7 / Ecclesiastes, 3:8 / Isaiah,
2:4;  9:6-7; 26:12; 32:17; 45:7; 48:18,22; 54:13; 59:8— (D) Isaias, 2:4;
9:6-7;  26:12; 32:17; 45:7; 48:18,22; 54:13; 59:8 / Jeremiah, 33:6 — (D)
Jeremias,  33:6  /  Ezekjel,  34:25; 37:26— (D) Ezechiel, 34:25; 37:26 /
Micah, 4:3— (D) Micheas, 4:3 / Zechariah, 9:10— (D) Zacharias, 9:10

[1068b]
\0gto  \\a  New  Testament:  Matthew,  5:9  / Luke, 2:13-14 5 Aeschylus:
Eumenides  [976-987] 91a 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians 455a-469a,c passim /
Peace 526a-541d esp
[289-520]
529b531d,
[974-1016]
537b-c / Lysistrata 583a599a,c 6 Herodotus : History, bk i, 6a-b; bk iv,
138b-c  6  Thucydides:  Peloponnesian  War, bk i, 366d367a; bk iv, 451d;
462a-b;  bk  v,  485d-486a;  488d-489b 7 Plato: Laws, bk i, 640d-644a 12
Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  iv,  ch  5,  230a-b 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[283-296] HOb-110a; bk vi
[845-853]
233b-234a; bk viii
[608-731]
275a-278b;  bk  xii  [172-21  i] 358b-359b; [830840] 376a-b 14 Plutarch:
Numa Pompilius 49a-61d esp 59c60b / Nicias, 427c-d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  hi,  ch  9-10  172b-173c; bk v, ch 12, 216d-218a; bk xiv, ch 1
376b,d-377a;  bk  xv,  ch 4 399c-400a; bk xix, ch 11-17 516d-523a; ch 26
528d529a  20  Aquinas  : Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 29 530b-533a; q
45,  a  6  602b-603c 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 53-60 425b427b 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 85b-c; 86b-87b; 91a-96b esp 95c-96b; part ii,
102d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 299d-300c 26 Shakespeare: Richard III, act v,
sc  v  [15-41]  148a,c  /  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc ii [23-67] 563c564a 29
Cervantes  :  Don Quixote, part i, 145d-146a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  xix,  sect 228 77d-78a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xx, 146b 38
Rousseau:  Social Contract, bk ii, 403c-404a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  iv,  267c-d 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 4a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  338c  42 Kant: Science of Right, 454c-458a,c esp 454c, 455a-456a,
457a-458a,c  43  Federalist:  number  43,  142c  43 Mill: Representative
Government,  426a-b  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428a-b  51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, bk i, 12d-13a; bk v, 220c-d 54 Freud: War and
Death,  761b-c  1  la. Law and government as indispensable conditions of
civil  peace:  the political community as the unit of peace 5 Aeschylus:
Eumenides   [681-710]   88b-c  7  Plato:  Seventh  Letter,  806d-807b  9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 [1253^9-39] 446d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[254-296]
110a-110a;  bk  vi  [845-853] 233b-234a; bk viii [306-336] 267a-268a; bk
xii  [172-21  i]  358b-359b  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk xix, ch 17
522b523a; ch 26 528d-529a

[1069a]
lib  to  lie  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 95, a 1, ans
226c-227c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 84c-86b; part ii, 99a-101a;
104b-d;  112b-d;  131b-c;  part  iv,  267d  27  Shakespeare: Troilus and
Cressida,  "act  sc  in  [75-137I  108d-109c  30  Bacon:  Advancement of
Learning, 20c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a;
prop  40  437a  35  Locke: Toleration,\6a-c; 17b-c/ Civil Government, ch
viii,  sect  107-110  49b-50d;  ch  xix,  sect  212  74a-b  38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  353d-356a / Political Economy, 370b-d / Social Contract, bk
i,  391b392a;  393b-c;  bk ii, 398a b; 399b-c 42 Kant: Science of Right,
402c;   405d;   412c-414c;   433c-434d;   435a-436b  43  Declaration  of
Independence:
[43-47]
2a  43 Constitution of the U.S.: article iv, sect 4 16b-c 43 Federalist:
number  41,  132c; number 43, 141d 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 469d-470a 46
Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 343b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  xiii,  572a-574d  11^. Justice and fraternity as principles of peace
among  men  Old  Testament:  Psalms,  85:10— (D) Psalms, 84:11 / Isaiah,
32:15-18;  48:22;  57:21 — (D) Isaias, 32:15-18; 48:22; 57:21 Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,  1:18—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticss,  1  :22 New Testament:
Romans,  2:10  /  James,  3:18 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 17a-b; bk iv,
137a138c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk iv, 451d 7 Plato: Republic,
bk  1,  308b-309b; bk v,363b365d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 20,
164d166a;  bk  hi,  ch  24 203c-210a; bk iv, ch 5 228a-230b 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  hi,  sect  ii  262a-b; bk ix, sect i 291a-c 13 Virgil:
Aeneid, bk i
[283-296]
HOb-110a; bk vi [845-853] 233b-234a 14 Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 59c-60b
15  Tacitus:  Histories, bk ii, 224c-d; bk iv, 266b-c 18 Augustine: City
of  God,  bk xii, ch 22 357c; bk xiv, ch 1 376b,d-377a; bk xix, ch 12-17
517b-523a;  ch  23-24,  528a-c;  ch  26  528d529a  20  Aquinas  :  Summa
Theologica, part ii-ii, q 29, a 3 531d-532c; qq 37-42 570c-584d; q 45, a
6 602b-603c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vi [58-75] 9a; PURGATORY, VI
[58-151] 61b-62cj
XI
[46-72]
69b-c; xv [40-81] 75d-76a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 91a-94a; 96a-b

[1069b]
Chapter 98: WAR AND PEACE 1035 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
i,  54a-c: 58a-59d; bk hi, 131b,d-133b 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 204d-205a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, prop 37, schol 2 435b-436a; prop 40 437a;
appendix  x-xvii  448a-d 35 Locke: Toleration, 19a-d / Civil Government,
ch  viii,  sect 107-108 49b-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 355b-c 40 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 536b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 347a 42 Kant: Pref
Metaphysical   Elements   of  Ethics,  375d-376b  /  Science  of  Right,
454d-458a,c esp 455c-456a, 457a-458a,c 43 Declaration of Independence:
[99-108]
3a  43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  425b-426b  / Utilitarianism,
473d-474b  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 428a-b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  vi, 244d-245d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi,
166c-167b  54  Freud:  War  and  Death, 761b-c lc. International law and
international    peace:    treaties,    alliances,    and   leagues   as
instrumentalities  of  international peace Old Testament: / Kings, 5:12—
(D)  ///  Kings,  5:12  Apocrypha:  /  Maccabees,  8; 10:51-58; 12:1-23;
13:34-40; 14:16-24— (D) OT, I Machabees, 8; 10:51-58; 12:1-23; 13:34-40;
14:16-24  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  vi,  193b;  206b-d  6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian  War,  bk v, 485d488d 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk xii [172-21 1]
358b-359b  14  Plutarch: Numa Pompilius, 55c-56a / Camillus, 108b-109a /
Nicias,  427a-428c  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 159c 26 Shakespeare:
1st Henry VI, act v, sc iv
[94-175] 30c-31b
/ King John, act ii, sc i
[416-560] 384a-385c / Henry
V, act v, sc ii
[358-396] 566d-567a
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xii, sect 145-146 58d-59a 36 Sterne:
Tristram  Shandy, 448b-453a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 2d-3b;
bk  ix,  58b,d-60a;  bk  x,  63d-64a  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 355b-c /
Political  Economy,  369a-b  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 103d; 119a-c;
150d152c;   174d-175b;   378b-381a  esp  378b-d;  402b-403b;  431d-432d;
433d-435a,c;  491d492b; 535d-536c 41 Gibbon : Decline and Fall, 48d-49c;
283d-284a  42  Kant:  Science  of Right, 452a-456a esp 452a-d, 455a-b 43
Articles  of Confederation: 5a-9d esp hi 5b 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article i, sect 10 [296-298] 14a; article ii, sect 2 [421-426] 15b

[1070a]
(11. The nature, causes, and conditions of peace. lie. International law
and   international   peace:   treaties,   alliances,   and  leagues  as
instrumentalities  of  international  peace.)  43  Federalist: number 3,
33d-34c;  number  5,  38b-d;  number 6, 41c; number 7, 44b-c; number 15,
64c-65a;  number  18-20 71a-78b; number 64, 197d-198a; number 75, 223b-c
43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  428b-431a;  431d-432b; 435b-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 333 109b-c; par 338 110a-b /
Philosophy  of History, part iv, 343b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 292a-295a
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  ix,  344b-355c  passim;  epilogue i,
645a-646c; 649c-650b \\d. World government and world peace 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk i, ch 9, 114c-d; bk 11, ch 10, 148c-d; ch 20, 164d-165a;
bk  hi, ch 22, 199d; ch 24, 204a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect
ii  CROSS-REFERENCES between civil and international war, see Revolution
ic. 4b; State 3c Citizen 8; Love 4c; State iof.

[1070b]
;  1036  THE  GREAT  IDEAS \d 262a-b; bk iv, sect 4 264a; bk vi, sect 44
278b-c 13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk i
[283-296]
HOb-110a;  bk  vi [845-853] 233b-234a 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix,
ch  7  515a-c;  ch 17, 522d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 471a-c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxvi,  214b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  355b-c /
Political  Economy,  369a-b;  373c  42  Kant:  Science of Right, 452c-d;
456c-458a,c  /  Judgement, 586a- 58 7a 43 Federalist: number 43, 142c 43
Mill:  Representative  Government, 426a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  333 109b-c 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 317c-d 51 Tolstoy:
War and Peace, bk vi, 244d-245d 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
133c-d;  bk  vi, 158b-159a; 166d-167a 54 Freud: War and Death, 755a-761c
esp  755b75  7c  /  Civilization  and Its Discontents, 785d788d For: The
psychological  meanings  of war and peace as conflict and harmony in the
individual  life,  see Emotion 4a; Justice ib; Man 5~5a; Medicine 4, 5e;
Opposition  4-4^;  and  for the theological meaning of peace as heavenly
rest,  see  Happiness 70(1); Immortality 5f; Love 5a (2); Will 7d. Other
discussions  of the state of nature and the state of war, see Government
5;  Law  4g;  Liberty  ib;  Nature  2b;  State  3c The general theory of
revolution  or  civil  war, see Revolution i-ib; and for the distinction
Various  considerations  of  the class war, see Labor 70-7^3); Oligarchy
5c;  Opposition  5b;  Revolution  5a;  State 5d(2); Wealth 9h. The issue
concerning the justice of making war, see Justice 9f. Another discussion
of  the  effect  of  war  upon  women  and  children, see Family 5c. The
weakness  or  strength  of democracy in the sphere of war, see Democracy
7c.  The  costs  of war, see Wealth 9g. Other discussions of imperialism
which  have  a  bearing  on  wars of conquest and rebellions against the
conquerors,  see  Liberty 6c; Monarchy 5—5b; Slavery 6d; State 9f. Other
discussions  of  the  inevitability of war and the necessity of military
preparedness,  see  Necessity  and  Contingency 3d; Opposition 5c; State
9e(i).  Another treatment of the role of the military in the life of the
state, see State 8d(i), 9e(i) and for another discussion of the military
arts,  see  Art  9c.  The  consideration  of  treaties,  alliances,  and
international  law  in relation to war and peace, see Government 5a; Law
4g;  State  9e(2). The conception of law and government as indispensable
to  civil  peace,  see  Government ia; Law ia; and for the conception of
lawlessness  or  crime  as  breaching  the  peace  of a society, see Law
6e-6e(i).  The  consideration  of justice and law as principles of civil
peace,  see  Justice 9b; Love 4aDiscussions bearing on the idea of world
government and its relation to world peace, see

[1071a]
ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included ifirGreatTfoof{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas. Augustine. Reply to Faustus Dante. Convivio (The Banquet), fourth
treatise,  ch  4  . On World-Government or De Monarchia Machiavelli. The
Discourses, bk ii; bk hi, ch io18, 30-33, 37-41, 45, 48 . The Art of War
F.  Bacon.  "Of  Empire,"  in Essays Rousseau. A Lasting Peace A. Smith.
Lectures  onJustice,  Police,  Revenue  and  Arms  Kant.  The  Idea of a
Universal  History on a CosmoPolitical Plan . Perpetual Peace Hegel. The
Phenomenology of Mind, vi, a (2, a) Tolstoy. The Law of Love and the Law
of  Violence  . The Kingdom of God . Christianity and Patriotism . Notes
for  Soldiers  W.  James. Memories and Studies, ch 4 Freud. Why War? II.
Caesar.  The  Gallic War Maimonides. Mishneh Torah, bk xiv, ch 5 Dubois.
De  Recuperatione  Terre  Sancte  T.  More.  Utopia,  bk ii Erasmus. The
Complaint  of  Peace . Antipolemus Luther. Whether Soldiers, Too, Can Be
Saved  Vitoria. De Indis et De Jure Belli Gentili. De Jure Belli (On the
Laws of War) Suarez. On War Cruce. The New Cyneas Grotius. The Rights of
War  and  Peace  Penn.  An Essay Towards the Present and Future Peace of
Europe Saint-Pierre. Schemefor Lasting Peace Vattel. The Law of Nations,
bk  iii-iv Voltaire. "War," in A Philosophical Dictionary . The Ignorant
Philosopher,  ch  48  Burke.  Resolutions  for Conciliation with America
Franklin. On War and Peace Bentham. A Plan for a Universal and Perpetual
Peace  .  Principles  of International Law Godwin. An Enquiry Concerning
Political Justice, bk v, ch 16-19

[1071b]
Chapter   98:   WAR  AND  PEACE  1037  Schiller.  Wallenstein  Channing.
Discourses  on  War  Clausewitz.  On War Gogol. Taras Bulba Pushkin. The
Captain's  Daughter  Stendhal.  The  Charterhouse  of Parma Whewell. The
Elements  of  Morality,  sup,  ch 4 Proudhon. La guerre et la paix T. H.
Green.  The  Principles of Political Obligation, Mahan. The Influence of
Sea  Power upon History H. Sidgwick. Practical Ethics, iv Shaw. Arms and
the  Man Crane. The Red Badge of Courage Bloch. The Future of War in Its
Technical, Economic, and Political Relations Foch. The Principles of War
Sumner.  "War," in War and Other Essays Santayana. Reason in Society, ch
3   Liebknecht.   Militarism  Peguy.  Basic  Verities  (War  and  Peace)
Vanderpol.  Le droit de guerre, ch 4 J. A. Hobson. Towards International
Government  Lenin.  Collected  Worlds, vol xviii, The Imperialist War T.
Veblen.  An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Peace  and the Terms of Its
Perpetuation   Delbruck.   Geschichte  der  Kriegshunst  im  Rahmen  der
politischen  Geschichte  Balfour. Essays Speculative and Political, ch 9
Bernhardi.  The  War  of  the  Future in the Light of the Lessons of the
World  War  Douhet. The Command of the Air Dewey. Characters and Events,
vol  ii, bk iv (i, 6, 20-23) . The Public and Its Problems, ch 5 Sturzo.
The  International Community and the Right of War Ferrero. Peace and War
Sholokhov.  The  Silent  Don Romains. Verdun Foertsch. The Art of Modern
Warfare  Vann. Morality and War Wells. The New World Order K els en. Law
and  Peace  in  International  Relations Wright. A Study of War Borgese.
Common   Cause  Adler.  How  to  Thin\  About  War  and  Peace  Diwakar.
Satyagraha: The Power of Truth

[1072a]
the  only  questions  about wealth concerned IF the means of getting and
keeping  it, the causes of its increase and decrease, the idea of wealth
would  be confined to economics. "The end of the medical art is health,"
writes  Aristotle in the Ethics, and "that of economics, wealth." But as
the  Ethics indicates, the moralist and the statesman are also concerned
with  health  and  wealth—not  simply  as things to get and keep, but in
relation to all other goods and as constituents of the good life and the
good  society.  What  is  regarded as the end in economics may be only a
means  in  ethics  and  politics; in which case, Aristotle suggests, the
latter  sciences  subordinate  economics,  even as politics subordinates
military   strategy,  and  military  strategy  the  making  and  use  of
armaments.  The discussion of riches in the tradition of the great books
exhibits  these  two  ways  of considering wealth. The Bible, the poets,
historians, and philosophers deal with wealth as a factor in the life of
men  and societies. They scrutinize the desire for wealth or the love of
money  in  relation  to  sin and virtue. They raise questions of justice
concerning  the  distribution  of  wealth,  the  rights of property, and
fairness  in exchange —in buying and selling, borrowing and lending, and
in  compensating  the  laborer.  They describe the effect of poverty and
prosperity  or  opulence  upon  states, and prescribe the attitude which
individual  men  as  well  as  societies  should  take toward wealth and
poverty.  Throughout  it  seems  to  be  assumed that wealth is merely a
means,  however  important  or  indispensable. Though wealth may also be
viewed  as an end when the problem is one of how to acquire, produce, or
increase  it,  the  fact that, when possessed, it should be treated as a
means, leads the moralist to condemn not only the miser, the hoarder, or
the man who devotes his whole life to making money, but

[1072b]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH INTRODUCTION also those who elevate wealth into the
sort  of end which justifies any means that can advance its pursuit. The
other  approach is that of the economist. Two of the great books—Smith's
Wealth  of  Nations  and Marx's Capital—deal not with wealth as a means,
but  with  the  means to wealth. A third, though by title A Discourse on
Political  Economy,  is concerned with the principles of government, and
with  wealth  only  insofar  as,  in  Rousseau's  conception, government
includes  "the  administration of property" as well as the protection of
persons.  "Provision  for  the  public  wants," he writes, is "the third
essential  duty  of  government."  Rousseau  explains  the  title of his
treatise  by  reference  to  the  etymology of the word "economy," which
"meant  originally  only  the  wise  and  legitimate  government  of the
household  for the common good of the whole family." It is in this sense
that  Aristotle employs the word and that a work sometimes attributed to
him  bears it as the title. "The meaning of the term," Rousseau goes on,
"was then extended to the government of that great family, the State. To
distinguish  these  two senses of the word, the latter is called general
or  political  economy, the former domestic or particular economy." Adam
Smith uses the term more narrowly. Not only does he limit his inquiry to
the  nature  and  causes  of  wealth,  but  by specifying "the wealth of
nations,"  he restricts himself to political economy which, he says, has
"two  distinct  objects:  first,  to  provide  a  plentiful  revenue  or
subsistence  for  the people, or more properly to enable them to provide
such  a  revenue  or subsistence for themselves; and secondly, to supply
the  state  or  commonwealth  with  a  revenue sufficient for the public
services." In saying that the political economist aims "to enrich 1038

[1073a]
both  the  people  and the sovereign," and that "the great object of the
political  economy  of every country is to increase the riches and power
of that country," Smith takes wealth_as^ an end (though it may also be a
means, "so far as power depends upon riches") and tries to formulate the
natural  laws  of  wealth-making. Nowhere does he define the quantity of
wealth  which  should  satisfy  a  nation.  The  natural  resources of a
country,   the   size  and  industry  of  its  population,  and  various
unfavorable     contingencies,     may    set    certain    bounds    to
themaximizationofwealth.  Within  these  bounds the country which adopts
and  follows  a sound system of political economy—one which accords with
the  right  conception  of  wealth and its causes— can (and deserves to)
become  as  wealthy as possible. Yet Smith, in treating wealth as an end
and  its  increase  without  limit  as  a  good, does not make economics
absolutely  autonomous.  He  regards  political  economy  as  a  part of
politics  "a  branch of the science of a statesman or legislator"—and to
that  extent  implies  that other considerations than wealth may control
the  policies  of  a  nation in its regulation of agriculture, industry,
domestic  commerce,  and  foreign  trade.  Furthermore, the larger moral
questions  which accompany Smith's economic speculations in his Lectures
on  Jurisprudence  and  his earlier treatise Of the Moral Sentiments are
not entirely absent from the Wealth of Nations. But to the extent that he
writes  purely  as  an  economist  concerned with securing "cheapness or
plenty" or, what for him is the same, "wealth and abundance," he adheres
to  considerations  of  expediency and only infrequently permits himself
obiter  dicta on justice or questions of right and wrong. Karl Marx also
writes  as  an  economist.  He  details  the  factors  which  govern the
production  and  distribution  of wealth as these manifest themselves in
the  great historic systems of production— the slave economy, the feudal
economy,  and  the  bourgeois  or  capitalist  economy.  So  far he is a
scientist and, even more than Adam Smith, an historian who describes how
wealth is acquired and how it multiplies by reproducing itself. But Marx
is much less content than Smith to stop there. Smith tries to de-

[1073b]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH  1039 scribe the economic process scientifically in
order  to prescribe the means a nation should use to become increasingly
prosperous, but Marx undertakes to describe it in order to criticize the
way  in  which some men get richer than they need be while others become
poorer  than  they  should be. His critical purpose makes inevitable the
expression  of  moral  judgments  concerning  such  inequities;  and  by
implication  they  are  everywhere  present.  For example, a descriptive
phrase like "surplus value" connotes "unearned increment"; an apparently
neutral  economic  term  like  "profit"  is  given  the  invidious moral
significance  traditionally attached to "usury." Nor does Marx rest with
criticism.  He  has an economic program to propose, a program he reveals
more  clearly in the Communist Manifesto than in Capital. The aim is not
primarily  to  increase  the  production  of  wealth,  but to remedy its
inequitable  distribution  under all past economic systems. This program
looks  forward  to  the  final revolution which will bring the necessary
historic  motion  of progress to its culmination when socialism replaces
capitalism.  Smith  and Marx, it appears, are not economists in the same
sense.  But  it  may  be  supposed  that,  in  spite  of their different
purposes,  they  would  as  scientists  agree  in  their  description of
economic  phenomena. To some extent they do, yet the difference in their
point  of view and aim leads to a quarrel about facts, or at least about
their  interpretation.  Classical  economists  in  the tradition of Adam
Smith dispute the consequences which Marx draws from the labor theory of
value,  especially  with regard to the origin of profit from the surplus
product of unpaid labor time. Profit seems to them as much a part of the
natural  price  of  commodities  as the wages paid to labor and the rent
paid to the landlord. "In exchanging the complete manufacture either for
money,  for  labor,  or  for  other  goods,  over  and above what may be
sufficient  to  pay  the  price  of  the materials, and the wages of the
workmen, something," writes Smith, "must be given for the profits of the
undertaker  of  the  work  who  hazards his stock in this adventure. The
value which the workmen add to the materials, therefore, resolves itself
in this case into

[1074a]
1040  THE  GREAT IDEAS two parts, of which the one pays their wages, the
other  the  profits  of their employer upon the whole stock of materials
and  wages  which he advanced. He could have no interest to employ them,
unless  he expected from the sale of their work something more than what
was  sufficient  to  replace  his  stock  to  him;  and he could have no
interest  to  employ  a  great stock rather than a small one, unless his
profits  were to bear some proportion to the extent of his stock." It is
precisely  on this point of profit as a return for risking one's capital
stock  that  Marx  charges Smith, and after him, Ricardo and J. S. Mill,
with  being  apologists  for  the  capitalistic system. He quotes Mill's
statement  that "the cause of profit is that labor produces more than is
required  for  its  support."  The  fact that Mill does not question the
validity  of  this  surplus  value,  which  accrues  as  profit  to  the
entrepreneur;  the  fact that Ricardo treats surplus value, according to
Marx,  "as  a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production, which
mode,  in  his  eyes,  is  the  natural  form  of social production," is
explicable,  in  Marx's  view,  only if we recognize that their economic
theories  mix special pleading with science. "These bourgeois economists
instinctively  saw, and rightly so," he says, "that it is very dangerous
to stir too deeply the burning question of the origin of surplus value."
Though   he  distinguishes  between  its  classical  and  vulgar  forms,
political  economy  for Marx is a bourgeois science, which "first sprang
into  being  during  the  period of manufacture." Political economy "has
generally  been  content  to  take,  just  as  they  were,  the terms of
commercial  and  industrial life," Engels remarks in a prefatory note to
Capital, and so it "never went beyond the received notions of profit and
rent,  never  examined  this  unpaid part of the product (called by Marx
surplus-product)  in  its  integrity  as  a  whole,  and therefore never
arrived at a clear comprehension, either of its origin and nature, or of
the laws that regulate the subsequent distribution of its value." Marx's
work  is,  in  his  own  conception  of  it,  at one and the same time a
criticism  of  the  capitalist  economy  and of the science of economics
which  accepts  and  defends that economic system. In his own preface to
Capital, Marx tells the reader that the "volume which I

[1074b]
now  submit  to  the public forms the continuation" of an earlier work—A
Contribution  to the Critique of Political Economy. Within the sphere of
political  economy  as  defined  by the problem of augmenting a nation's
wealth,  the  author of the Wealth of Nations similarly finds a critique
of  prevalent  economic  fallacies—  those  of  the  physiocrats and the
mercantilists—  inseparable  from  the constructive statement of his own
theory.  Economists  engage  in controversy over technical points in the
analysis   of   production,   exchange,  and  distribution,  or  in  the
development  of theories of value and price, money and capital, property
and  poverty.  Such  controversy tends to become complicated both by the
larger  questions in which the economic issues are imbedded, and also by
the  different  points  of departure and the different objectives of the
economists.  What  at  first  may look like a simple issue of fact often
fails  on  closer  examination to be capable of resolution by scientific
inquiry,  or  simply  by  an accurate description of the phenomena. Even
when   all   relevant   matters  of  fact  are  determined,  conflicting
interpretations of their significance remain. Behind these lie divergent
presuppositions,  often  unexpressed.  Those  who  start  with different
conceptions of the problem, and from different principles assumed rather
than  argued,  tend  to reach conclusions which may appear to be opposed
but  which  do not really exclude one another—at least not totally. Each
from  its own point of view may be true, and from that point of view the
other  is  not  so  much  false  as  irrelevant. Smith may be right, for
example,  when he says that "the consideration of his own private profit
is  the  sole motive which determines the owner of any capital to employ
it  either in agriculture, in manufactures, or in some particular branch
of the wholesale or retail trade. The different quantities of productive
labor  which  it  may put into motion, and the different values which it
may  add  to  the  annual  produce of the land and labor of the society,
according  as  it  is  employed in one or other of those different ways,
never  enter  his thoughts." Smith may be right, not only as to the fact
asserted, but also with regard to its implication for the increase

[1075a]
of the nation's wealth: that the wealth of a society increases as owners
of  capital  act from self-interest in a system of free enterprise which
permits  the  possibility of profits to indemjiifp them against the risk
of  losses  and  to  reward them for the thrift whereby they accumulated
capital  to invest productively. But Marx may also be right when he says
that the system of free enterprise and capitalistic production could not
have  started  simply  through the thrift of individuals, but required a
primitive  accumulation  of  capital.  "The accumulation of capital," he
says, "presupposes surplus-value; surplus-value presupposes capitalistic
production;   capitalistic   production  presupposes  the  existence  of
considerable masses of capital and labor-power in the hands of producers
of  commodities.  The  whole  movement,  therefore,  seems  to turn in a
vicious  circle,  out  of which we can only get by supposing a primitive
accumulation   (previous   accumulation   of   Adam   Smith)   preceding
capitalistic  accumulation,"  a primitive accumulation which is "nothing
else  than  the  historical  process  of divorcing the producer from the
means  of  production." He may be right, furthermore, when he goes on to
say  that  "the economic structure of capitalistic society has grown out
of  the  economic  structure  of  feudal  society.  . . . The historical
movement  which  changes the producers into wage-workers appears, on the
one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from the fetters of the
guilds  .  . . but, on the other hand, these new freedmen became sellers
of  themselves only after they had been robbed of all their own means of
production,  and  of all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old
feudal  arrangements."  It  may  be true that a capitalist who privately
owns  means  of production would not invest them without the possibility
of  gaining  a  profit.  It  may be true, as Smith would insist, that he
would   not   be   justified  in  doing  so.  This,  however,  does  not
invalidate—as  it  is  not invalidated by—Marx's theory of the "original
expropriation" which, in his opinion, initiated capitalistic enterprise;
nor  does  it  conflict  with Marx's insistence that the capitalist must
exploit  labor  in  order to make profits, since he can derive them only
from the surplus value created by wage-laborers who produce more than

[1075b]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH  1041  is  returned  to them for their own needs or
subThe  foregoing  point and counter-point in economic theory must serve
as  one  example  of  the  way  in which Smith and Marx pass each other,
rather  than  meet,  on  many  of the basic economic issues. It would be
impossible,  within  the  compass  of  this  Introduction,  to chart the
intricate  relationship of their thought, including their agreements and
clear  oppositions  as  well as the matters on which they simply diverge
because  they are discussing the same problem from different viewpoints.
The  reader  can  discover  for himself in greater detail the pattern of
conversation between these two great economists by studying the passages
from  their  works which are cited in the References. As a glance at the
Outline  of  Topics  will show, many of the headings represent technical
problems  or issues in economic theory, as that is narrowly conceived in
modern  times.  Some, however, are more general. They state themes which
place  the  discussion  of  wealth  in  the  larger context of moral and
political  questions  and  which, throughout the whole tradition, engage
poets,  historians,  and  philosophers— not merely the economists of the
eighteenth  and  nineteenth  centuries.  To some extent the more general
themes are treated in other chapters, such as Labor, Justice, Oligarchy,
Virtue  and Happiness, Family and State. Here we shall consider them for
their  bearing on the nature and kinds, the sources and uses, of wealth,
and  also  its  goodness  and  evil.  The  ancients  conceive  wealth as
consisting  in  the  variety  ofexternal goods which sustain life —food,
clothing,  and  shelter.  But  wealth  may  include  more  than the bare
necessities.  When  Socrates  in  the Republic outlines a simple economy
which  aims  to  satisfy  only basic needs, Glaucon tells him that he is
"providing  for  a  city  of  pigs." More is required, he says, for "the
ordinary  conveniences  of  life.  People  who are to be comfortable are
accustomed  to  lie  on sofas, and dine off tables, and they should have
sauces  and  sweets in the modern style." Socrates replies by projecting
"a luxurious State"— "a State at fever heat"—which goes beyond the

[1076a]
1042 THE GREAT IDEAS necessaries, "such as houses and clothes and shoes.
The  arts of the painter and the embroiderer," he says, "will have to be
set  in motion, and gold and ivory and all sorts of materials procured";
and  the  city will "have to fill and swell with a multitude of callings
which  are  not  required by any natural want." This distinction between
necessities  and  luxuries,  which  has many implications for ethics and
economics  as  well  as  for  politics,  does  not draw the line between
natural   and  artificial  wealth.  Nor  is  natural  wealth  identified
exclusively  with  natural resources in their pure state, unconverted by
labor  for  use  or consumption. Wealth is generally thought to comprise
all  consumable goods, whether necessities or luxuries, whether products
of  hunting, agriculture, or manufacture, and all the means of producing
them.  Only  money  is excluded. Only money is declared to be either not
wealth  at  all  or  artificial  wealth. Yet the confusion of money with
wealth  seems  to  be  prevalent  at  all times, as repeated attempts to
correct  the fallacy indicate. The use of money originates, according to
Aristotle, with retail trade, which is "not a natural part of the art of
getting wealth"; for, he goes on, "had it been so, men would have ceased
to  exchange  when  they  had enough." What Aristotle calls retail trade
replaces "the barter of necessary articles." Made possible by the use of
coin,  retail  trade,  he says, comes to be thought of as "the art which
produces  riches  and  wealth. "Indeed," Aristotle continues, "riches is
assumed by many to be only a quantity of coin." But he agrees with those
who  maintain,  to  the  contrary,  that "coined money is a mere sham, a
thing  not natural, but conventional only . . . because it is not useful
as a means to any of the necessities of life, and he who is rich in coin
may  often  be  in want of necessary food. But how can that be wealth of
which  a man may have a great abundance and yet perish with hunger, like
Midas  in  the fable, whose insatiable prayer turned everything that was
set  before  him  into gold?" To say that money in itself cannot satisfy
any  natural  need  does  not  imply that it serves no economic purpose.
Plato and Aristotle, Hobbes, Locke, and Kant, as well as Smith and Marx,
understand the utility of money as a

[1076b]
medium  of exchange, indispensable for "the circulation of commodities"—
to  use  Marx's  phrase—beyond  the stage of barter. Money is not only a
medium of exchange, according to Plato; it "reduces the inequalities and
incommensurabilities  of  goods  to  equality  and  common measure"; and
Aristotle  seems  to  anticipate  Marx's  conception  of  money  as  the
universal  form  in  which  all economic values can be expressed when he
defines  "wealth" to mean "all things whose value is measured by money."
The  economic utility of money in exchange and as a measure of value, or
even  the  fact  that gold and silver coin may have some intrinsic value
because of the labor involved in mining and minting the metals, does not
alter  the  distinction  between natural and artificial wealth. "Natural
wealth," Aquinas explains, "is that which serves man as a remedy for his
natural  wants, such as food, drink, clothing, cars, dwellings, and such
like;  while  artificial  wealth,  such as money, is that which is not a
direct  help  to  nature,  but is invented by man for the convenience of
exchange  and  as  a  measure of all things saleable." The same point is
restated  by Locke in the seventeenth century, but it is still necessary
for  Smith  a  century later to argue against the mercantilist theory of
national  prosperity,  on the ground that it confuses wealth with money.
"It  would  be  too  ridiculous  to  go about seriously to prove," Smith
writes,  "that  wealth  does not consist in money, or in gold or silver;
but  what  money  purchases,  and is valuable only for purchasing. . . .
Goods  can serve many other purposes besides purchasing money, but money
can  serve  no other purpose besides purchasing goods. Money, therefore,
necessarily runs after goods, but goods do not always or necessarily run
after  money.  The man who buys, does not always mean to sell again, but
frequently  to use or consume; whereas he who sells, always means to buy
again."  Nevertheless,  that  "wealth  consists in money, or in gold and
silver,  is  a  popular  notion  which  naturally arises from the double
function  of money, as the instrument of commerce, and as the measure of
value."  The notion is so familiar that, Smith observes, "even they, who
are  convinced  of  its  absurdity,  are  very  apt  to forget their own
principles, and in the course of their

[1077a]
reasonings  to  take  it  for granted as a certain and undeniable truth.
Some of the best English writers on commerce set out with observing that
the  wealth  of a country consists, not in its gold and silver only, but
in  its  lands,  houses, and consumable goods of all different kinds. In
the   course  of  their  reasonings,  however,  the  land,  houses,  and
consumable  goods  seem  to  slip out of their memory, and the strain of
their  argument frequently supposes that all wealth consists in gold and
silver,  and  to  multiply  these metals is the great object of national
industry  and  commerce."  The two principles of the mercantilist policy
are,  according to Smith, that "wealth consisted in gold and silver, and
that  those  metals  could  be brought into a country which had no mines
only by the balance of trade, or by exporting to a greater value than it
imported." A favorable balance of trade thus necessarily became the sole
object of the mercantilists; and, Smith adds, "its two great engines for
enriching  the country, therefore, were restraints upon importation, and
encouragements  to  exportation."  Since  in his opinion the wealth of a
nation  consists  in  "the  whole annual produce of its land and labor,"
Smith  opposes  all  such  restraints,  and  with them the protection of
monopolies.  He  advocates  free  trade  and  the  free  competition  of
producers,  within  a  country  as  well as between domestic and foreign
producers,  on  the ground that "consumption is the sole end and purpose
of all production; and the interest of the producer ought to be attended
to,  only  so  far  as  it  may  be  necessary for promoting that of the
consumer.  But in the mercantile system," Smith claims, "the interest of
the consumer is almost constantly sacrificed to that of the producer." A
laissez-faire  economy, he thinks, not only reverses this situation, but
also, by preferring more consumable commodities to more gold and silver,
tends  to increase the real, not the artificial wealth of a nation. Marx
also  criticizes the mercantilist error, but in terms of his theory that
"since  the  production  of  surplus-value  is  the chief end and aim of
capitalist  production  .  .  .  the  greatness of a man's or a nation's
wealth should be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced,

[1077b]
Chapter   99:   WEALTH  1043  but  by  the  relative  magnitude  of  the
surplusSurplus  value  cannot  be  produced  by  exchange.  Against  the
mercantilists  who  "derived  the  excess  of the price over the cost of
production  of  the  product, from the act of exchange, from the product
being  sold above its value,'* Marx quotes Mill's statement that "profit
arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive power
of  labor;  and  the  general  profit  of the country is always what the
productive  power of labor makes it, whether any exchange takes place or
not."  But this is not the whole picture, according to Marx. Although it
is   impossible  for  capital  or  surplus  value  "to  be  produced  by
circulation,"  or  the  exchange  of  commodities,  he also thinks it is
"impossible  that  outside  the  sphere  of  circulation,  a producer of
commodities  can,  without  coming  into  contact  with  other commodity
owners, expand value, and consequently convert money or commodities into
capital."  The  two sides of the picture are brought together, in Marx's
view,  by  the  treatment of labor itself as a commodity, and the buying
and  selling  of labor power in the open market. The distinction between
real  wealth  and  money  and  the  distinction  between necessities and
luxuries  have  more  than  economic significance. They are basic to the
moralist's strictures concerning the desire for wealth, its place in the
order  of  goods,  and the way it can be put to good use. It is not only
St.  Paul  who says that "the love of money is the root of all evil." It
is not only Christian theologians like Augustine and Aquinas who explain
how  "lust of the eyes" or covetousness is a capital sin and as such the
principle  of  many other transgressions. As Marx points out, the Greeks
also "denounced money as subversive of the economical and moral order of
things."  In  the  passage in Sophocles' Antigone which he quotes, Creon
declares:  "Nothing  so evil as money ever grew to be current among men.
This  lays cities low, this drives men from their homes, this trains and
warps  honest  souls  till  they  set themselves to works of shame; this
still  teaches  folk  to  practice villainies, and to know every godless
deed." Plato condemns the oligarchical state by

[1078a]
1044  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  comparing it to the miser and money-maker among
men.  "Such  a  State,"  he says, "aims to become as rich as possible, a
desire which is insatiable." In the Laws, the Athenian Stranger explains
why  the  reasonable statesman should not aim to make "the state for the
true  interests  of  which  he  is  advising ... as great and as rich as
possible,"  if  he  also "desires to have the city the best and happiest
possible";  for though each may be possible alone, they are not possible
together.  It  is impossible, he holds, to be "good in a high degree and
rich  in  a  high  degree  at  the  same  time."  What Plato says of the
oligarch,  Marx  says  of  the capitalist: "He shares with the miser the
passion  for wealth as wealth." But, Marx adds, "that which in the miser
is  a  mere idiosyncrasy is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social
mechanism,  of  which he is but one of the wheels." Involved as he is by
the  system in "the restless never-ending process of profit-making," the
individual  capitalist,  like  the miser, exhibits "this boundless greed
after  riches,  this passionate chase after exchange-value." The root of
the  evil  in  the  love of money of "gold, yellow, glittering, precious
gold."  which  Shakespeare  calls  the "common whore of mankind"— is the
boundlessness  of  the  lust.  The  hoarding of anything springs from an
insatiable desire, but because money can be converted into every sort of
commodity,  it is, according to Marx, the ideal object of hoarding. "The
antagonism  between the quantitative limits of money and its qualitative
boundlessness," he writes, "continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in
his   Sisyphus-like  labor  of  accumulating."  In  the  light  of  such
observations,  Marx  cites with approval Aristotle's distinction between
"economic"  and  "chrematistic"  or what Aristotle differentiates as the
two  arts of wealthgetting. Considering economics as the management of a
household, Aristotle says that the art of acquisition which is a natural
part  of  it  "must  either  find ready to hand, or itself provide, such
things  necessary to life, and useful for the community of the family or
state,  as  can be stored. They are the elements of true riches; for the
amount  of  property  which is needed for a good life is not unlimited."
But "there is another variety of the art of acquisition which

[1078b]
is  commonly and rightly called an art of wealthgetting, and has in fact
suggested  that riches and property have no limit." The two arts tend to
become  confused  in  men's  minds.  "Some  persons are led to believe,"
Aristotle  observes,  "that  getting  wealth  is the object of household
management,  and the whole idea of their lives is that they ought either
to  increase  their  money without limit, or at any rate not to lose it.
The  origin  of  this  disposition  in  men is that they are intent upon
living  only,  and  not  upon  living  well;  and  as  their desires are
unlimited,  they also desire that the means of gratifying them should be
without  limit." Even "those who do aim at a good life seek the means of
obtaining bodily pleasures; and, since the enjoyment of these appears to
depend  upon  property,  they  are  absorbed in getting wealth; and thus
there  arises the second kind of wealth-getting." Plato, like Aristotle,
while admitting the service of retail trade in effecting the exchange of
commodities,  condemns  the tendency of its practitioners to make "gains
without  limit."  In  the  Laws,  furthermore,  he prohibits interest on
loans;  and in the Republic, he describes this form of money-making as a
process  in  which  "men  of business . . . insert their sting— that is,
their money— into someone else who is not on his guard against them, and
recover  the  parent  sum  many  times  over multiplied into a family of
children."  This  biological  metaphor  for  making  money  out of money
appears  also  in  Aristotle.  The  term "interest," he says, "means the
birth of money from money." Of all forms of money-making, this "breeding
of  money" is, in his opinion, the most unnatural. "Usury, which makes a
gain out of money itself," Aristotle writes, violates the natural object
of  money—  "intended  to  be  used  in exchange, but not to increase at
interest."   Interest  and  usury  are  not  distinguished  in  the  Old
Testament.  "Take  thou no usury of him, or increase," is the command in
Leviticus.  But  this  rule  does  not  apply  to  the stranger. "Unto a
stranger  thou  mayst  lend upon usury," Deuteronomy says, "but unto thy
brother  thou  shalt  not  lend  upon usury." A theologian like Aquinas,
following both Scripture and Aristotle, condemns, for Chris-

[1079a]
tians,  all  interest as usury; and Luther also appeals to pagan precept
as well as to Scriptural warrant. "The heathen were able, by the lrghToT
reason,  to  conclude that a usurer is a doubledyed thief and murderer,"
Luther  says  in  a passage which Marx quotes under the comment that the
usurer   is  "that  old-fashioned  but  ever  renewed  specimen  of  the
capitalist."  Castigating  his feilow-Christians for holding usurers "in
such  honor  that  we  fairly worship them for the sake of their money,"
Lutherdeclares  that  "whoever eats up, robs, and steals the nourishment
of  another,  that man commits as great a murder (so far as in him lies)
as  he  who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Such does a usurer." It
seems  to be a later consequence of the Protestant reformation, as Weber
and  Tawney  point  out,  that  the exaction of interest for the loan of
money  or  goods  is defended, and only exorbitant rates of interest are
denounced  as  usurious. The signs of the change may be seen in Pascal's
diatribe against the specious casuistry which tries to exempt some forms
of  interest-taking  from the charge of usury; and also in the fact that
Montesquieu  attributes to the schoolmen, "who adopted from Aristotle, a
great  many notions on lending upon interest," the mistake of condemning
it  "absolutely  and  in  all cases." In his own opinion, "to lend money
without interest is certainly an action laudable and extremely good; but
is  is  obvious  that  it is only a counsel of religion, and not a civil
law."  Montesquieu  thinks a price for the use of money is necessary for
the  carrying  on  of  trade. If a fair rate of interest is not allowed,
nobody  will  lend  money;  or  rather,  Montesquieu  says, because "the
affairs  of  society  will  ever  make  it necessary," moneylending will
inevitably  take  the  form  of  usury.  "Usury  increases in Mohammedan
countries,"  he  points  out,  "in  proportion  to  the  severity of the
prohibition.  The lender indemnifies himself for the danger he undergoes
of  suffering  the  penalty." Smith agrees that prohibition, "instead of
preventing,  has  been  found  from  experience  to increase the evil of
usury."  A  fair  rate  of interest is justified, he thinks, because "as
something  can  everywhere  be made by the use of money, something ought
everywhere to be paid for the use of it. ... In countries where interest

[1079b]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH 1045 is permitted, the law, in order to prevent the
extortion  of usury, generally fixes the highest rate which can be taken
without incurring a penalty. This rate ought always to be somewhat above
the lowest market price, or the price which is commonly paid for the use
of  money  by  those  who  can  give the most undoubted security." Smith
offers  the  British practice as a good example. "Where money is lent to
government  at  three per cent, and to private people upon good security
at  four, and four and a half, the present legal rate, five per cent, is
perhaps  as  proper  as any." Interest and profit, while not the same in
Smith's  view,  are closely connected. As the revenue from land is rent,
from  labor  wages,  and  "that  derived  from  stock, by the person who
manages  or employs it, is called profit," interest is "the compensation
which  the  borrower  pays to the lender, for the profit which he has an
opportunity  of  making  by  the  use  of the money. Part of that profit
naturally  belongs  to  the  borrower,  who  runs the risk and takes the
trouble  of  employing  it;  and  part to the lender, who affords him an
opportunity  of making this profit." Conceiving interest as a derivative
revenue, Smith holds it to be a maxim that "wherever a great deal can be
made  by  the  use of money, a great deal will be commonly given for the
use  of  it,"  so  that  we may expect to find "the usual market rate of
interest" to vary with "the ordinary profits of stock." The theory which
places  wealth  lowest in the order of goods determines its contribution
to  human happiness accordingly, and leads to a disapproval of luxuries,
on the part of both the individual and society. "Riches are for the sake
of  the  body,  as  the body is for the sake of the soul. The latter are
good,"  writes  Plato,  "and  wealth is intended by nature to be for the
sake  of  them, and is therefore inferior to them both, and third in the
order  of  excellence."  Aristotle  similarly orders wealth, or external
goods,  to  health  and  other  goods  of the body, as these in turn are
subordinate  to  the  virtues,  or  goods  of  the  soul; and Hobbes, in
somewhat  different  terms,  holds  that,  of all goods, "those that are
dearest  to a man are his own life and limbs; and in the next degree (in
most men), those that concern con-

[1080a]
1046 THE GREAT IDEAS jugal affection; and after them riches and means of
living."  While  Aristotle  admits that happiness requires some external
prosperity, he always adds that only a moderate amount of external goods
is  needed.  "Happiness,  whether  consisting  in pleasure or virtue, or
both,"  he  writes,  "is more often found with those who are most highly
cultivated  in  their  mind  and  in  their  character,  and have only a
moderate  share of external goods, than among those who possess external
goods  to  a  useless  extent,  but  are deficient in higher qualities."
Aristotle  praises  Solon  lor  telling  Croesus,  one  of  the  world's
wealthiest   men,   that   happiness  requires  more  than  riches.  The
conversation  is  narrated  by  Herodotus.  "What,  stranger of Athens,"
Herodotus  reports  Croesus as saying, "is my happiness, then, valued so
little by you, that you do not even put me on a level with private men?"
To  which, Solon replies: "Croesus, I see that you are wonderfully rich,
and  the  lord  of many nations," but "he who possesses a great store of
riches  is  no  nearer  happiness  than he who has what suffices for his
daily  needs,  unless  luck  attends  him,  and  so  he  continue in the
enjoyment of all his good things to the end of his life." Aristotle adds
the  further  observation that "one can with but moderate possessions do
what  one  ought"  and  that  "a good life requires a supply of external
goods  in  a  less  degree when men are in a good state and in a greater
degree when they are in a lower state." Aquinas agrees with Aristotle so
far  as the happiness of the active life is concerned, but he holds that
wealth  "does  not  conduce  to the happiness of the contemplative life;
rather  is  it  an  obstacle  thereto."  With  regard  to achieving "the
happiness  of  heaven"  in  the  life hereafter, Aquinas not only thinks
wealth  an  obstacle, but he also explains why the religious orders take
the  vow  of  voluntary poverty. "Man is directed to future happiness by
charity," he writes; and "in the attainment of the perfection of charity
the  first  foundation is voluntary poverty, whereby a man lives without
property  of  his own. The opinion that wealth is an obstacle or that it
should  be  sought in moderation does not seem to be universally shared.
As Herodotus, Plato, and Aristotle report the prevalence in

[1080b]
the  ancient  world  of the notion that "external goods are the cause of
happiness,"  so  Melville  reflects  that  in modern society "the urbane
activity   with  which  a  man  receives  money  is  really  marvellous,
considering  that  we  so  earnestly believe money to be the root of all
earthly  ills, and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah!
how  cheerfully  we consign ourselves to perdition!" Marx quotes a still
more  extravagant  claim.  In a letter from Jamaica in 1503, Christopher
Columbus  exclaims:  "Gold is a wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it is
lord  of  all  he  wants.  By  means of gold one can even get souls into
Paradise."  Against  Rousseau's  attack  upon  opulence  as the cause of
civilization  with all its miseries, Dr. Johnson rises in the defense of
luxuries  and  the  advantages  of  wealth.  "Rousseau's treatise on the
inequality  of mankind," Boswell writes, "was at this time a fashionable
topick.  It  gave  rise  to  an  observation  by  Mr.  Dempster that the
advantages of fortune and rank were nothing to a wise man." To this, Dr.
Johnson  replies:  "If  a  man  were  a  savage,  living in the woods by
himself,  this  might  be  true,"  but  "in  civilized society, external
advantages  make  us  more  respected.  .  .  .  Sir,  you  may make the
experiment.  Go into the street, and give one man a lecture on morality,
and  another  a  shilling, and see which will respect you the most . . .
"And,  Sir,"  he  continues, "if six hundred pounds a year procure a man
more  consequence,  and,  of course, more happiness than six pounds, the
same  proportion  will  hold  as  to  six  thousand, and so on as far as
opulence  can  be carried. Perhaps he who has a large fortune may not be
so  happy  as  he  who has a small one; but that must proceed from other
causes than from his having the large fortune ; for, ceteris paribus, he
who  is  rich  in  a  civilized  society, must be happier than he who is
poor."  On  one  occasion, Dr. Johnson seems to share Solon's view. When
Boswell  suggests that the proprietor of a great estate "must be happy,"
he exclaims: "Nay, Sir, all this excludes but one evil—poverty." But for
the  most  part,  his  opinion is that "it is in refinement and elegance
that  the  civilized  man differs from the savage," and that it is right
for every society to be as luxurious as it can be.

[1081a]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH  1047  "Many things which are false are transmitted
from  book  to book," he says to General Oglethorpe, "and gain credit in
the  world.  One  of these is the cry against the evil of luxuryJslowthe
truth  is  that  luxury  produces much good. You will hear it said, very
gravely, Why was not the half-guinea, thus spent in luxury, given to the
poor?  To  how many might it have afforded a good meal. Alas! has it not
gone to the industrious poor, whom it is better to support than the idle
poor?  You  are much surer that you are doing good when you pay money to
those  who  work  as  the  recompense of their labor, than when you give
money in charity. . . . And as to the rout that is made about people who
are  ruined  by  extravagance,  it  is no matter to the nation that some
individuals  suffer.  When  so  much  general productive exertion is the
consequence of luxury, the nation does not care though there are debtors
in  gaol."  Dr.  Johnson's  pronouncements  may silence Mr. Dempster and
General  Oglethorpe,  but  not  Smith  or  Marx.  To  Smith, spendthrift
extravagance  squanders  wealth  which  might  have been capitalized for
productive  purposes;  to  Marx,  the  multiplication of luxury products
diverts  labor  power that is socially necessary for producing the means
of  subsistence  into  what  Veblen  later  calls  forms of "conspicuous
waste." Not only, in Marx's view, can the capitalistic system be charged
with  indifference  as  to  whether  its  profits  are  made  out of the
production  of  luxuries  or  necessities; but the workers on starvation
wages engaged in the luxury trades constitute a signal indictment of the
inequitable  distribution  of wealth. As the needs of the individual are
thought to set a natural limit to his acquisition of wealth, or at least
to  provide  him  with  a rational standard for stopping short of wanton
luxuries  when he seeks the decencies or amenities of life, so the needs
of society as a whole are thought to establish a criterion of justice in
the  distribution of wealth. "God gave the world to men in common," says
Locke, and "the measure of property nature has well set by the extent of
man's  labor  and  the  convenience  of life. . . . No man's labor could
subdue  or  appropriate all; nor could his enjoyment consume more than a
small part; so

[1081b]
;  that  it  was  impossible for any man, this way, to intrench upon the
right  of  another, who would still have room for as good and as large a
possession  (after  the  other  had  taken  out  his)  as  before it was
appropriated. Which measure did confine every man's possession to a very
moderate proportion, and such as he might appropriate to himself without
injury  to  anybody,  in  the  first  age  of  the  world." This rule of
property—  "that  every man should have as much as he could make use of"
without prejudice or injury to others—worked well in the beginning when,
as  Locke  puts it, "all the world was America." It "would still hold in
the  world  without  straitening anybody," Locke thinks, "since there is
land  enough in the world to suffice double the inhabitants, had not the
invention  of money . . . introduced (by consent) larger possessions and
a  right to them" for gold and silver being relatively imperishable, men
can  hoard  excesses  of  them  without appearing to waste them, as they
would  if  they  amassed  perishable  commodities  which  they could not
consume  or  use.  It  is  not  money but property itself which Rousseau
claims  to  be the origin of inequality among men and of the inequitable
distribution  of  wealth. "The first man who, having enclosed a piece of
ground,  bethought  himself  of  saying  This  is mine, and found people
simple  enough  to  believe him, was the real founder of civil society."
Once  established  as  a  right,  property  tends  to expand. The larger
proprietors  avoid  the  question, "Do you not know that numbers of your
fellow-creatures  are  starving, for want of what you have too much of?"
Instead, according to Rousseau, they conceive "the profoundest plan that
ever  entered  the  mind  of  man"  to protect their possessions against
invasion or plunder. They institute civil government, ostensibly for the
security  of all, but really to secure for themselves their property and
power.  "Such  was, or may well have been," Rousseau writes, "the origin
of  society  and  law, which bound new fetters on the poor, and gave new
powers  to  the  rich;  which  irretrievably  destroyed natural liberty,
eternally  fixed  the  law  of property and inequality, converted clever
usurpation  into  unalterable  right,  and,  for  the advantage of a few
ambitious individuals,

[1082a]
1048  THE GREAT IDEAS subjected all mankind to perpetual labor, slavery,
and  wretchedness."  Adam  Smith  seems  to  agree.  "Where  there is no
property,"  he  says, "or at least none that exceeds the value of two or
three  days  labor,  civil  government  is not so necessary. . . . Civil
government,  so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is
in reality for the defense of the rich against the poor, or of those who
have  some  property  against  those  who have none at all." But, unlike
Smith,  Rousseau  has  an  alternative  to propose. "Since it is plainly
contrary to the law of nature . . . that the privileged few should gorge
themselves  with  superfluities while the starving multitude are in want
of  the  bare  necessities  of  life,"  he thinks it is "one of the most
important  functions  of  government  to prevent extreme inequalities of
fortunes;  not  by  taking  away  wealth  from  its  possessors,  but by
depriving all men of means to accumulate it; not by building asylums for
the  poor, but by securing the citizens from becoming poor." This states
an  end,  but  not the means for achieving it. The problem of poverty is
not  so  easily  solved,  if  it can be solved at all, once the right of
property  is  admitted.  Rousseau,  for  example, no less than Locke and
others  before  him, affirms this right which, for Kant and Hegel later,
is  almost  the whole substance of private or abstract right. "The right
of  property,"  says  Rousseau, "is the most sacred of all the rights of
citizenship,  and  even  more  important  in  some respects than liberty
itself."  Yet  it  is  difficult,  he admits, "to secure the property of
individuals  on  one  side,  without  attacking it on another; and it is
impossible   that   all  the  regulations  which  govern  the  order  of
succession,  wills,  contracts,  etc.,  should not lay individuals under
some  constraint  as  to  the disposition of their goods, and should not
consequently restrict the right of property." To Hegel, poverty seems to
be  an  inevitable  consequence  of  property,  as  war is an inevitable
consequence  of  sovereignty,  and  in  neither  case  can  the cause be
abolished.  "When  the  masses  begin  to decline into poverty," as they
must,  they  can  be  supported from public funds and private charities,
thus receiving "subsistence directly, not by means of their work," or as
an alternative, "they might be given subsist-

[1082b]
ence  indirectly  through  being  given work." But, Hegel adds, "in this
event the volume of production would be increased, but the evil consists
precisely  in an excess of production and in the lack of a proportionate
number  of  consumers  who are themselves also producers, and thus it is
simply  intensified  by  both  of  the  methods by which it is sought to
alleviate it." Hence, Hegel concludes, it "becomes apparent that despite
an  excess  of  wealth  civil  society  is  not rich enough ... to check
excessive  poverty  and  the  creation of a penurious rabble. This inner
dialectic  of  civil  society  thus  drives it—or at any rate a specific
civil society— to push beyond its own limits and seek markets, and . . .
its  necessary  means  of  subsistence,  in other lands which are either
deficient  in the goods it has over-produced, or else generally backward
in  industry."  Imperialism,  according to Marx, will not long work as a
cure  for  what  Tawney  later  calls  "the  sickness  of an acquisitive
society"—  the inner frustration which Marx sees manifested in recurring
economic  crises  and  depressions of greater and greater magnitude. Nor
does  he propose the abolition of all private property as the remedy for
poverty,  when he calls for "the expropriation of the expropriators." On
the  contrary,  only  the  possession  by each individual of an adequate
supply  of consumer's goods can abolish poverty. Differentiating between
individual  and  capitalist property, according as its owners are or are
not  laborers,  and  according as it consists in consumable goods or the
means  of  production,  Marx  would  transfer  the  latter  from private
property  to  public  ownership.  The socialist economy he outlines also
includes "abolition of property in land, and application of all rents of
land  to  public  purposes; a heavy progressive or graduated income tax;
abolition  of  all right of inheritance." It includes "centralization of
credit in the hands of the state, by means of a national bank with State
capital  and  an  exclusive  monopoly,"  and also "centralization of the
means  of  communication and transport." Last but not least, it includes
"equal liability of all to labor." More radical than Marx's socialism is
the  communism  Plato  proposes  in  the Republic. Plato's aim is not to
solve the problem of poverty or economic injustice. By abolishing

[1083a]
for his guardian class all private property, he hopes that his guardians
through  sharing  common possessions (including wives and children) will
have  no  cause  for  rivalry,  dissension,  personal  ambition.  Common
possessions  should  mould  them  into  a  fraternity and free them from
private  interests  to  work  for  the  common  good.  In this matter of
property,  the  condition  of  Plato's  imagined  guardians  was  not so
different  from  that  of  Jesus'  disciples as recounted in the Book of
Acts,  or  of  the  monastic orders whose vows include that of voluntary
poverty.  Aristotle's  criticisms  of  the arrangements for the guardian
class  in  the  Republic  are  largely directed against the community of
women  and children and the elimination of private property. "Property,"
he  says,  "should  be  in a certain sense common, but as a general rule
private;  for,  when  everyone  has  a  distinct  interest, men will not
complain  of  one  another,  and  they  will make more progress, because
everyone  will  be  attending  to  his  own  business." He thinks "it is
clearly  better  that  property  should  be  private,  but the use of it
common,"  in  the  sense  that  its use have the common welfare in mind.
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS  i.  The elements of wealth: the distinction between
natural  and artificial wealth; the dis2. The acquisition and management
of  wealth  in  the  domestic  and tribal community 3. The production of
wealth  in  the  political  community  1053 30. Factors in productivity:
natural  resources,  raw  materials,  labor, tools and machines, capital
investments  3#.  The  use  of  land:  kinds of land or real estate; the
general theory of rent 3<r. Agricultural production: the produce of land
3d.  Industrial  production:  domestic,  guild,  and  factory systems of
manufacturing   4.   The  exchange  of  wealth  or  the  circulation  of
commodities:  the  processes  of  commerce  40.  The forms of value: the
distinction  between use-value and exchange-value 4^. Types of exchange:
barter  economies and money economies 4<r. Rent, profit, wages, interest
as the elements of price: the distinction between the commodities

[1083b]
Chapter  99: WEALTH 1049 Not only does Aristotle defend private property
on  many  counts,  but  he objects to schemes for equalizing it, such as
Plato  sets  forth in the .aws. For one thing, "the legislator ought not
only  to  aim  at  the  equalization of properties, but at moderation in
their  amount."  Yet  if  the legislator "prescribe this moderate amount
equally  to  all,  he  will  be  no  nearer  the mark; for it is not the
possessions  but  the desires of mankind which need to be equalized, and
this  is  impossible  unless  a  sufficient education is provided by the
laws."  Whether or not communism is desirable, there are those who think
it  is  impossible,  not so much on the level of the economic, as on the
level  of  the moral, revolution for which Aristotle looks to education.
The skeptic thinks human nature cannot be so transformed. It may be only
in  the  twentieth  century  that the world is divided into two camps on
this  subject,  but the issue is as old as the western tradition. At its
beginning  Aristophanes  expresses the skeptical position in a form that
is  still  current.  His  Ecclesiazusae  simply  laughs at the idea that
inequalities  of  property  can  ever  be  done  away with— by law or by
education.

[1084a]
1050  THE GREAT IDEAS 4^. The source of value: the labor theory of value
4?. Causes of the fluctuation of market price: supply and demand ^f. The
consequences  of  monopoly  and competition 4£. Commerce between states:
tariffs  and  bounties;  free  trade  5.  Money  equivalents in exchange
commodities  capitalistic enterprise 5<?. The rate of interest on money:
the  condemnation  of  usury  6.  Capital utility of capital 6d. Capital
profits the exploitation of labor risk of losses the diminishing rate of
profit  7. Property yb. Kinds of economic property (1) Chattel slaves as
property  (2)  Property  in  land  (3)  Property in capital goods and in
monetary  wealth  (2)  Government  ownership:  eminent  domain  ye.  The
inheritance of property: laws regulating inheritance

[1084b]
50.  The nature of money as a medium or instrument of exchange, and as a
measure of 5b. Monetary standards: the coining or minting of money; good
and  bad  money  5c.  The  price of money: the exchange rate of money as
measured  in  terms of other 5</. The institution and function of banks:
monetary  loans,  credit,  the financing of 6a. Comparison of capitalist
production  with other systems of production: the social 6b. Theories of
the  nature,  origin,  and growth of capital stock: thrift, savings, ex-
(2)  The source of profit: marginal or surplus value; unearned increment
and  (4)  The  justification  of  profit:  the  reward of enterprise and
indemnification  for  6e.  The  recurrence  of  crises in the capitalist
economy:  depressions,  unemployment,  ya.  The  right of property : the
protection of property as the function ofgovernment yd. The ownership of
property: possession or title; the legal regulation of property

[1085a]
8.  The  distribution  of  wealth:  the  problem of poverty 1059 8a. The
sharing  of  wealth: goods and lands held in common; public ownership of
the means of production ^~ 8b. The division of common goods into private
property:  factors  influencing  the  increase  and  decrease of private
property   8c.   The   causes  of  poverty:  competition,  incompetence,
indigence,  expropriation,  unemployment; the poverty of the proletariat
as  dispossessed  of  the  instruments of production 8d. Laws concerning
poverty:  the  poor laws, the dole 1060 9. Political economy: the nature
of  the  science  of economics ga. Wealth as an element in the political
common  good  gb.  Factors  determining  the  prosperity  or opulence of
states: fluctuations in nagc. Diverse economic programs for securing the
wealth  of nations: the physiocratic, the mercantilist, and the laissez-
faire systems gd. Governmental regulation of production, trade, or other
aspects  of economic life ge. The economic support of government and the
services  of  government  (1)  The  charges  of  government: the cost of
maintaining its services; elements in the national budget (2) Methods of
defraying  the  expenses of government: taxation and other forms of levy
or  impost;  confiscations,  seizures, and other abuses of gf. Wealth or
property  in  relation  to  different forms of government gg. Wealth and
poverty  in  relation  to  crime  and to war between states 1063 gh. The
struggle  of  economic classes for political power 10. The moral aspects
of  wealth  and  poverty  1064  10a. The nature of wealth as a good: its
place  in  the order of goods and its relation to happiness 10b. Natural
limits  to  the  acquisition  of  wealth by individuals: the distinction
between  ior.  Temperance  and  intemperance  with  respect  to  wealth:
liberality,  magnificence,  miserliness,  avarice lod. The principles of
justice  with  respect  to  wealth and property: fair wages and I0£. The
precepts  of  charity  with respect to wealth 1067 (1) Almsgiving to the
needy  and  the  impoverished (3) The choice between God and Mammon: the
love  of  money  as  the  root of all evil 11. Economic determinism: the
economic  interpretation of history 12. Economic progress: advances with
respect to both efficiency and justice

[1085b]
1 Chapter 99 : WEALTH 1 05 PAGE taxation 1062

[1086a]
1052  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tain  cases;  e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
tently  rather  than  continuously  in the work or passage cited. 1. The
elements  of  wealth:  the  distinction  between  natural and artificial
wealth;  the  distinction  between  the  instruments  of  production and
consumable  goods  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-318d 9 Aristotle:
Politics,  bk  i, ch 8-10 449d-452d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [i36i ai4-24]
601c-d  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 2, a 1, ans and rep 3
615d-616c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii,  124b-c  35  Locke:  Civil
Government,  ch v 30b-36a passim, esp sect 40-50 33d-35d 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk  xviii, 128c; bk xx, 152a-b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
348b,d-355a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations, intro, la-c; bk i, 8d-10b;
104b-105a;  106b-c;  bk  ii,  121c-124c;  147c;  bk  in,  163a-d;  bk iv
182a-300d   esp   182b-183a,   186b-187c,  189b-190c,  191d-192a,  194a,
288c-296a  50  Marx:  Capital, 13a-c; 88b-d; 150b-c; 253b255a; 279c-286a
esp 279d-280c, 282c-d, 286a; 291a-b 2. The acquisition and management of
wealth  in  the  domestic  and tribal community 7 Plato: Republic, bk v,
360c-365d / Laws, bk in, 664a-666a; bk vi, 709a-710a; bk xi, 775d-778b

[1086b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-l 19b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c  and  d  to the upper and lower halvesoftheright-
handsideof  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c, the
passage  begins  in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163 and
ends  in  the  upper  half  of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in cerBible References: The references are to book,
chapter,  and  verse.  When  the King James and Douay versions differ in
title of books or in the numbering of chapters or verses, the King James
version is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D), follows; e.g.,
Old  Testament:  Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras,  7:46.  Symbols: The
abbreviation   "esp"  calls  the  reader's  attention  to  one  or  more
especially  relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifies that
the topic is discussed intermitFor additional information concerning the
style  of  the  references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for
general  guidance  in the use of The Great Ideas, consult the Preface. 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 3-13 446d-455a,c passim, esp ch 3
[i253b i2-i4]
447a,  ch 4 447b-c, ch 7 [i255b3i-4o] 449c, ch 8-1 i 449d453d; bk 11, ch
5 [i264b i-7] 459d; bk hi, ch 4
[i277b20-25] 474d
14  Plutarch:  Solon,  72b-c  /  Pericles,  130b-d / Pelopidas, 233a-b /
Marcus  Cato,  278b-279c; 286b-287d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b /
Crassus,  439a-c  / Crassus-Nicias, 455b,d / Agis, 650d-651b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk ii, 32b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk xix, ch 14 520a-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  a 4, ans and rep 1-4
318b-321a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 122b-124c; 183c-191c passim; 458c-462c;
472a-473a  29  Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 148b-149a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  vi,  sect 72-73 40d-41a; ch vii, sect 79-80 42c-43a; ch
xvi,  sect  182-183  67c-68b;  sect  190-192  69b-d  36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  376b-379a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk vii, 50a-b; bk
xviii,  129d-132b; bk xxiii, 190a-b; bk xxvi, 216a-b; bk xxvii 225a-230d
38 Rousseau: Inequality, 350a-b / Political Economy, 367a-368c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  lb-c; bk i, 50a-c; bk hi, 165b-167a; bk v,
309d-311c passim; 383d-384d

[1087a]
3  to  3d  Chapter 99: WEALTH 1053 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 16c-17d;
66d-67b; 88d-90d passim; 498a-50lb passim, esp 498b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  83a;  86d-89d  43 Mill: Liberty, 319b-d 44 Boswell: Johnson,
147c-148b
[fn 3];^74tF
278a;  280c-281a; 282a-b; 289c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par 170172 60d-61a; par 178-180 62a-63c; additions, 109 134c; 114 135b-c
/  Philosophy  of  History, Intro, 194b-195a; part hi, 289a-b 49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man,  324a-c  50  Marx:  Capital,  34c-d;  163a-c; 171d-172b;
174d-175c  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 211a 213a; bk vii 275a-302d
passim,  esp  275a-278a, 291a292b, 301b-302d; bk xv, 633a-d; epilogue i,
650d-652a;  654a-655c  3.  The  production  of  wealth  in the political
community 3a. Factors in productivity: natural resources, raw materials,
labor,  tools and machines, capital investments Old Testament: Proverbs,
6:6-11;  12:24;  13:4,11;  14:23;  20:4;  24:30-34;  28:19  6 Herodotus:
History,  bk ii, 51b-d; bk vi, 194a 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-319a;
bk iv, 342d-343a / Critias, 482 b-c; 483b-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i,
ch 4 447b-c; ch ii
[i258b27-33] 453a
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[1350i35 3 ]78c-d
23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 124b-d 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v,
sect  32-44 32a-34c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xv, 110b-c; bk xx,
152a-d;  bk  xxiii,  191a-c  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a-353c / Social
Contract,  bk  ii, 404a-c; bk hi, 415b-417a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
intro, la-c; bk i, 3a-8b esp 5b-6a; 8d-10b; 27b-28a; 33c-37b; 106b-c; bk
11,  142d-151c esp 142d-146a, 148c149a; 155b-157b esp 156b-c; 158a-159a;
bk  hi,  163a-165b  esp  163a-d;  173b-c;  bk iv, 243b,d-244a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 367d-368a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
196  67a;  par  198  67b;  par 203 68a-c; additions, 125-126 137a-b; 128
137b-c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  194b-195d 50 Marx: Capital,
16b-18d;  31b;  79c;  85a-89b; 96a-99d; 149c-150c; 157a-161b; 170c-171a;
180d-192c   esp   183b-184a,  188c-189a;  197a198a;  216d-219b;  239c-d;
249a-250c;  251a252a;  253b-254b;  285a;  298d; 299b-300a; 303a 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 425a-b 3b. The use of land: kinds of land
or  real estate; the general theory of rent 6 Herodotus: History, bk ii,
70b-c; bk hi, 101d-102a

[1087b]
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch v, sect 32-44 32a-34c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii,  191a-b 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
15a-16a;  20b-23b esp 21c; 62a-77a; bk ii, 121c-122c; bk in 163a-181a,c;
bk  iv,  243b,d-244c;  246d247c  41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 90c-d 44
Boswell:  Johnson, 172c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 80,
34a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 37a; 63a-d; 65c-66a 3c. Agricultural production:
the  produce  of  land  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 43d-44b; bk ii, 51d;
66d-67a;  67c-d;  bk  hi,  112c;  bk  iv,  124b;  128a-b; 154c-d; 158d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 8
[i256ai5-b8]
450a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v
[13611378] 78d-79a
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect  40-48  33d-35c  passim  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk xiii, 96d97b; bk xiv, 105a; 105b-c; bk
xviii,  125a126a;  bk  xxiii,  191a-b  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 352b-d;
365c-366a  /  Social  Contract,  bk  hi,  415b-417a  39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  6d-8b;  62aHOd  passim;  bk ii, 157a-b; 162a-d; bk hi,
163a-170c  esp  163ac;  175b-181a,c  passim; bk iv, 288c-299d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall, 21c-22c; 367d368a 43 Federalist: number 12, 56b-d 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 203 68a-c; additions, 128
137b-c  /  Philosophy  of History, intro, 195a-b; part iv, 352a 50 Marx:
Capital,  210d-211a;  249a-250c;  298c;  318b-c; 333c-353a,c passim, esp
335b-336a, 343a-c; 368c-371c 3d. Industrial production: domestic, guild,
and  factory systems of manufacturing 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xiv, 105c; bk xxiii, 191a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 365c-366a 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk 1, 3a-10b; bk hi, 163a-165b esp 163a-c; 173a-175b;
bk  iv,  189b-d;  288c-299d  41  Gibbon : Decline and Fall, 314c-315b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi, par 204 68c-d; par 243 77b-c /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i, 243d-244c; part iv, 335a336c 50 Marx:
Capital,   110c-146c   passim;   149c-d;  157a-250c  esp  157a,  158a-c,
164a-165c,  175c176a, 184b-188c, 205a-209a, 226a-236c; 369c371c 50 Marx-
Engels: Communist Manifesto, 422d423a

[1088a]
1054  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4. The exchange of wealth or the circulation of
commodities:  the processes of commerce or trade 4a. The forms of value:
the  distinction  between  use-value  and  exchange-value  9  Aristotle:
Politics, bk i, ch 9
[1257*6-41]
451a-b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v, sect 37 33a-b; sect 46-51
35a-36a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  12c-d;  13c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy of Right, part i, par 63 28b-c; par 80, 34a; part hi, par 204
68c-d  50  Marx:  Capital,  13b-27c  esp 13b-14c; 37a-39c; 60c; 74c-76c;
89c-d;  98a-100c; 113d 4b. Types of exchange: barter economies and money
economies  6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 158b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii,
316c-319a  / Sophist, 555a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 9 450d-452b
35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch v, sect 46-51 35a-36a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws, bk iv, 16d-17b; bk xvni, 128a-c; bk xxii, 174a-b; 176a-c
39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i, 10b-13a esp 10b-lla; 13d-14a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  89b-d  44  Boswell:/0^/w0«, 383b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 80, 34a 50 Marx: Capital, 37c-42b;
47a-52c;  74c-75a  4c.  Rent, profit, wages, interest as the elements of
price:  the  distinction  between  the  real  and  the nominal price and
between  the natural and the market price of commodities 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk  xxii,  176a177a  39  Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i,
13a-27b;  62a63a,c;  73a-74d;  bk  ii, 121c-d 42 Kant: Science of Right,
425a  50  Marx:  Capital,  27a-c;  42b-47a  esp 44a-b, 45c-46c; 48b-49b;
74d-77b;  79b  [fn  1];  153d156c;  265c;  270d-271a; 308b; 310a 4d. The
source  of  value: the labor theory of value 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  v, sect 40-44 33d-34c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 353a 39 Smith: Wealth
of Nations, bk i, 13a-16a; 20b23b; 27b-37b; 52b-62a passim 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 274d * / Science of Right, 424b-425a 50 Marx:
Capital, 13a-22a esp 15a-16a, 19a-b, 20d-21a; 24c-25d; 32d-33b; 35d-36a
[fn
1];  45c-46c;  78c-d;  79a-84a,c;  89d-102b  esp 89d90a, 91c-d, 93b-94a;
152a-156d passim; 188c192c; 217c-d; 264a-267d esp 266c-d

[1088b]
4  to 4g4e. Causes of the fluctuation of market price: supply and demand
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part i, 73b-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
xxii,  176a177a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations,  bk  i, 19d-20b; 23c27b;
36c-37b;  62d-63a;  74d-110d  esp  74d77a;  bk  iv, 217a-220b 40 Gibbon:
Decline   and  Fall,  656c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  593a-b  43
Federalist:  number  ii,  53c-55d  passim;  number  35, 112a-c passim 44
Boswell:           Johnson,           172c-d           50          Marx:
Gz/>z/a/,44c-d;54a-d;101c-102b;153d156c;  173c-174b;  198c-199b; 216a-c;
217c;  256b-262a passim, esp 258b-c, 258d-259b; 265c; 276b-c 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk xi, 490a-b; bk xiii, 573a-b 4/. The consequences of
monopoly  and  competition  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 26b-c;
63d64a;   67b-68d;  HOd;  bk  ii,  142d;  bk  iv,  263d264b;  272c-279b;
281d-282a;  287d-288c; bk v, 329d-330c; 394c-395a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  659d-660a  50  Marx:  Capital,  130c;  154b-156d; 174a-c; 237c-d;
248c-d;  261d-262a;  270c-271c;  292d293a; 308d-311b; 373b-374a 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  421c422a  4g.  Commerce  between states:
tariffs  and bounties; free trade 5 Aristophanes: Acharnians 455a-469a,c
esp
[719-999] 463c-466d
6 Herodotus: History, bk iv, 158b-c 6 Thucydides : Peloponnesian War, bk
i,  350d351a;  365b; 384b 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii, 316c-318a / Laws, bk
xii, 788d-789a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 9 [1257*21-41] 451a-b; bk
hi, ch 9 [i28oa36-b3] 478a; bk vii, ch 6 531 b-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[1 360^218] 600b-c
23 HoBBEs:Lm'tf/Atf/7,PARTii,119d-120c; 124c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of
Laws,  bk  xiii, 98b99b; bk xix, 143c-144b; bk xx-xxi 146a173d; bk xxii,
177b-184b  38  Rousseau: Social Contract, bk ii, 404a-b 39 Smith: Wealth
of Nations, bk hi, 173b-175b; bk iv, 182b-279b esp 245d-246b, 248b-252c,
256a-266d;  bk  v, 320b-330b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 21c-23b; 151d;
655d-658b  esp 657d-658b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 222b-d; 314c-315b;
342c-343a;  355c-d;  427c-d  42  Kant:  Judgement, 504a-b 43 Articles of
Confederation: iv
[24-36]
5b-c; vi [100-106] 6b; ix [173-185] 7a; [275285] 8a

[1089a]
5 to 5e Chapter 99: WEALTH 1055 43 Constitution of the U.S. : article i,
sect 8
[201-203] 13b; sect 9 [276-282] 13d; sect 10
[3
4-3i3]  14a 43 Federalist: number 4, 35c-36a; number 5, 38b-c; number 7,
42d-43c;  number^h-it 53b-58d; number 22, 80d-81c; number 35, 112a-113a;
number  41, 135b-c; number 42, 137d-138c; number 44, 145b-c 44 Bosvv ell
:  Johnson,  171a-b;  281b-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
246247  78a-b;  par 339 110b / Philosophy of History, part 1, 243d-244c;
part  ii,  277b-c;  part  iv, 368c 50 Marx: Capital, 67a-69a; 113d-114a;
218d219a;   221d-223a;   372c-375c   passim  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto,  420a-b; 421a-c; 428a-b 5. Money 5a. The nature of money as a
medium  or  instrument  of  exchange, and as a measure of equivalents in
exchange 7 Plato: Laws, bk xi, 774a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk iv, ch i
[11 19^6-27]
366b; bk v, ch 5
[ii33a5-b29]
380d-381c;  bk  ix,  ch  1  416b,d-417c  passim  /  Politics, bk i, ch 9
450d-452b;  ch  10  [1258^8^8]  452d  14  Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ii, 126b-c 30 Bacon: New Atlantis, 201d-202a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xxviiixxix 450a 35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  v,  sect  37  33a-b; sect 46-50 35a-d; ch xvi, sect 184
68b-d  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xviii, 128c; bk xxii, 174a-175a
39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 10b-lla; bk ii, 121c-126d; 139a-b; bk
iv,  182b-192c  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 89b-d 42 Kant: Science of
Right,   423d-425b   43   Federalist:   number   12,   56b-d   43  Mill:
Utilitarianism, 462c-463a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 80,
34a;  part  hi, par 204 68c-d; par 299 99c100b; additions, 40 122d-123b;
177  147d 50 Marx: Capital, 19a-30d esp 19c, 23a-25d, 30a-d; 37c-79a esp
38c-39a,  39d-44b,  49b51c,  60c, 61c-62b, 71d-73d, 77c-78a 5b. Monetary
standards:  the  coining  or  minting  of  money;  good  and bad money 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 9
[1257*31-41]
451b;  [i257b22-23]  451d  /  Athenian  Constitution, ch 10 556d-557a 14
Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  Lysander, 361a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  ii,  126b-d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk xxii, 174b175c;
177b-182c 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 382d-383a

[1089b]
39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 10b-12c; 16d20b; bk 11, 124d-142d;
147a-c;  bk  iv,  182b192c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 89b-d; 127a-c 41
Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 749d [n 49] 43 Articles of Confederation: ix
[275-279]
8a; [350-367] 8c-d 43 Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 8
[207-212] 13b; sect 10 [296-300] 14a
43  Federalist:  number 42, 138d; number 44, 144b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of History, part ii, 277b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 43b-44a; 44d-45c; 52c-57c;
58a-60c;  66d-67b  [fn  3]  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xiii, 574b;
epilogue  11,  680a-b 5c. The price of money: the exchange rate of money
as measured in terms of other commodities 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  xxii,  175c182c  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy, 383b-c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 12b-c; 14d20b; 77a-109b; bk iv, 203c-204c 42
Kant: Science of Right, 424a-425b 43 Federalist: number 79, 233d-234a 43
Mill:  Utilitarianism,  462c-463a 50 Marx: Capital, 40c-47a esp 41a-42a,
44b-d; 54a-d; 57d-58b [fn 3]; 59b-60c; 276b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  xiii,  574b; epilogue 11, 680a-b 5d. The institution and function of
banks:  monetary loans, credit, the financing of capitalistic enterprise
6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 77d-78a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk ix, ch i
[1164^3-22]
417c  15  Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  vi,  90a-c; bk xi, 103c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk  xx, 149a-b; bk xxi, 173a; bk xxii, 179c-180c; 182c;
183a-b  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk ii, 124d-142d; 151c-155b; bk iv,
204b-209a,c;  bk  v,  404d405a 43 Federalist: number 30, 103a-b 50 Marx:
Capital, 62d-66c; 309a-310d; 374a375c 5e. The rate of interest on money:
the  condemnation  of  usury  Old  Testament: Exodus, 22:25 / Leviticus,
25:35-37  /  Deuteronomy,  23:19-20; 24:10-13 / Nehemiah, 5:1-12— (D) II
Esdras,  5:1-12  /  Psalms,  15:5—  (D)  Psalms,  14:5  / Proverbs, 28:8
/Jeremiah,  15:10—  (D)  Jeremias,  15:10 / Eze\- iel, 18:4-21 esp 18:8,
18:13,  18:17; 22:12— (D) Ezechiel, 18:4-21 esp 18:8, 18:13, l %'- l l'>
22:12  7  Plato:  Republic, bk viii, 408c-d / Laws, bk v, 694c-d; bk xi,
775c-d

[1090a]
(5.  Money.  5e.  The  rate  of  interest  on money: the condemnation of
usury.)  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  io  [i258a38-b8]  452d 14
Plutarch:  Marcus Cato, 287c-d / Lucullus, 409b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
vi, 90a-c; bk xi, 103c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 105, a
2,  rep 4 309d-316a; a 3, rep 3 316a-318b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
xi
[91-115]
16a-b;  xvn  [34-75] 24b-c 26 Shakespeare: Merchant of Venice, act i, sc
hi  409c-411b esp [41-103] 410a-c 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 55a-57a
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk v, 29c; bk xii, 92d-93c; bk xxi,
169a-170b;  bk xxii, 175d-176a; 183a-187a,c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  i,  22b-d;  37b41d;  bk  11,  154c-155a;  bk v, 404d-405a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 498c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 90d-91a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  304b-c; 409a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv, 353b-c
50 Marx: Capital, 77c-78c; 252b; 293a-d [fn 1]; 371c-372c 6. Capital 6a.
Comparison  of  capitalist  production with other systems of production:
the  social  utility of capital 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xiii,
96d97a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  Id;  bk ii, 148c-149a;
155b-162d;  bk  hi,  165b-181a,c  passim;  bk  iv,  239d-240a 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and Fall, 17b-c; 144b; 619b620c; 628c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi, par 199 67c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 335a-336c
49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 324a-b 50 Marx: Capital, 33b-37a; 95a-b
[fn
1];   104d105a;   113c-115c;   150b;  160d-164a  esp  160d161b,  163a-c;
171d-176a;  239d-240c;  266c; 267c; 281a-b; 295d-296a; 354c-364a passim;
377c-383d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 419d423a;428d-429c 6b.
Theories  of  the  nature,  origin, and growth of capital stock: thrift,
savings,  excesses  beyond  the  needs  of consumption, expropriation 35
Locke: Civil Government, ch v 30b-36a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk 11,
117a-c;  142d151c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 170 60d;
par 199-208 67c-69c 50 Marx: Capital, 69b; 74a-79a; 89d-94c esp 93d-94a;
lOla-b; 105b
[fn
ij;   221c-d;   279a377a   esp  279a-282a,  286a-288a,  289b,  290c296a,
301b-302d, 319b-d, 354a-355d, 372a-d

[1090b]
1056  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  6  to  la  6c.  Types  of  capital:  fixed  and
circulating,  or  constant  and  variable  capital  39  Smith: Wealth of
Nations, bk ii, 118a-121c; 122b-124c; 151c-162d passim 50 Marx: Capital,
96a-102b  esp  lOla-c;  280d282a; 291c-d; 302d-303b; 307c-309b; 311c312c
6d. Capital profits 6d{\) The distinction of profit from rent, interest,
and  wages  39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 20b-23b esp 22d-23b; 28a;
47c-48a;  109d-110d  50  Marx:  Capital,  255a-256a; 301b-302d 6d{2) The
source  of profit: marginal or surplus value; unearned increment and the
exploitation of labor 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 20b-21c; 27b28a;
109d-110d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 243 77b-c 50 Marx:
Capital, 69a-275c esp 71a-79a, 89c96a, 99d-100b
[fn
2],   lOOa-lOlb,   104b-105c,  112c,  113c-115c,  117c-129b,  154d-156d,
192d194b,  197a-200a,  251c-256a,  263c-d, 271b-c; 285c-286a; 314d-315c;
375c-376c  6d(3) Factors determining the variable rate of capital profit
39  Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 6d-8b; 21a-b; 37b-62a; HOb-d; bk ii,
151c-155b  esp  153a-b,  154b-c;  155b-162d  passim  50  Marx:  Capital,
102b-113c;  146c-151a,c;  255b263d; 296b-301b 6d(4) The justification of
profit:  the reward of enterprise and indemnification for risk of losses
25  Montaigne:  Essays,  42a-b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 55a-57a 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations,  bk  i,  20d-21c;  bk  ii,  142d-151c passim;
155b-162d  passim,  esp  162a-b  44  Boswell: Johnson, 279b-280a 6e. The
recurrence   of   crises   in   the   capitalist  economy:  depressions,
unemployment,  the  diminishing  rate  of  profit 50 Marx: Capital, lid;
64c-d esp 64d
[fn 2-3];
100a; 116c-d; 222d-225d; 311c-316d esp 312b, 313d-314a, 315c-316a; 319a;
330d-333c  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 422a-c 7. Property la.
The  right  of  property:  the protection of property as the function of
government  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3
224d-225d 35 Locke: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government,

[1091a]
lb  to  Id Chapter 99: WEALTH 1057 ch v 30b-36a esp sect 26 30d; ch vii,
sect  87-94  44a-46c;  ch  ix  53c-54d  esp  sect 123 53c-d; ch xi, sect
137-140  56d-58a;  ch xv, sect 173-174 65c-d 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
310a  311a  ^-  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 86c-d; bk xxvi,
221c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348b;  353a-358c  passim / Political
Economy,  377c-d  / Social Contract, bk 1, 393b-394d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk v, 309a-311c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 486c-d 41 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  86d-87c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  408c-409c;
411c-413b  esp  412c-413b;  414a-c; 416a-b; 441d-443b 43 Constitution of
the U.S.: amendments, v
[645-648] 17c; xiv, sect
1  [748-750]  18c  43 Federalist: number 10, 50b-d; number 54, 171b-c 43
Mill:   Representative  Government,  366c-d;422b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,
124b-c;  204b-c;  222d223a;  225a-c; 275d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part i, par 40 21d-22c; par 44-46 23c-24a; par 50 25a; par 66 29a-c; par
71 31b-c; part hi, par 208 69c; par 230 75c; additions, 26-27 121a-b; S°
121c / Philosophy of History, part iv, 364d 50 Marx: Capital, 83d-84a,c;
174b-c; 288c-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 425c427b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  572d-573b  54  Freud:  Civilization and Its
Discontents,  787d788b  lb.  Kinds  of  economic  property 7^(1) Chattel
slaves  as  property  5  Aristophanes:  Plutus [507-526] 635a-b 7 Plato:
Laws,  bk vi, 709a-710a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 2 [i252a26-b i3]
445c-d; ch 3-4 446d-447c; ch 8
[1256*1-3]
449d; bk vii, ch 8 [1328*35-38] 532c; ch 10
[1330*25-34]
534d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361*12-14] 601c
14  Plutarch:  Marcus  Cato,  278d-279a;  287b-d  /  Crassus,  439a-c 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  105,  a 4, ans and rep 1-4
318b-321a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, HOb-110a; part iv, 261d-262a 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk xv, 109a-d; 110d-112c 39 Smith: Wealth
of Natiors, bk hi, 167a-d; bk iv, 239c-240a; 253c-254a 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  16c-17d;  144b;  620a-b; 628c-d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
404d  43 Federalist: number 42, 137b-c; number 54, 170b-171b 44 Boswell:
Johnson, 364a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 48 24b-c; par
66 29a-c

[1091b]
50  Marx: Capital, 113c-114a; 128d-129a; 266b-c; 267c; 283c-d; 354c-355d
lb(2) Property in land Old Testament: Leviticus, 25:23-24 / Deuteronomy,
19:14;  27:17  7  Plato: Laws, bk v, 695c-696a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
ii, ch 9 [i27o*i5-b6] 466b-c; bk vi, ch 4
[1319*6-19] 522c-d; bk
vii,  ch  10 [1329^7-1330*25] 534b-d / Rhetoric, bk 1, ch 5 [1361*12-14]
601c  15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiii, 140b-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
124d-125b  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  v,  sect 31-34 31d-32c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws, bk vi, 33b 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 353a /
Social  Contract,  bk  1,  393d-394d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk hi,
163a-170c  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 198a-b; 618d-619c 41 Gibbon:
Decline and Fall, 87a-c 42 Kant: Science of Right, 411c-412c 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  274c-278a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 195a-b; part
1,  226d-227b;  part  ii,  277b-c;  part hi, 295d-297a 50 Marx: Capital,
355d-364a;  368c-369a  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 211a-213a 7£(3)
Property  in capital goods and in monetary wealth 9 Aristotle: Politics,
bk  i,  ch  9-10  450d452d  /  Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5 [1361*12-14] 601c 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk  vi, 33b 50 Marx: Capital, 60d-62d esp
61d-62a;    69b;    150a-151a,c;    279a-290d    esp    279a,    287a-b,
289d-290c;371c-372b   7c.   The   uses   of  property:  for  production,
consumption, or exchange 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch 4
[1254*1-7]
447c; ch 8-1 1 449d-453d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 5
[1361*12-24] 601c-d
35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v 30b-36a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk
ii,  118a-121c;  142d-151c  esp  150b-151c; 155b-162d; bk hi, 165c-166a;
176a-177d;  bk  v,  351a-c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right, 411c-413b esp
412c413b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par 59-61 27a-c;
additions,  39  122d 50 Marx: Capital, 30c-32c; 38c-40a; 70d-72c; 89a-b;
282b-283c;  289d-290d; 291a-296a esp 291a-b, 293c-294a Id. The ownership
of  property:  possession or title; the legal regulation of property Old
Testament:  Exodus, 20:15; 21 :i6-i9,33~36; 22:1-15; 23:4-5 / Leviticus,
6:2-5;  19:11,13;  24:18-21;  25:13-14,25-34,47-54  / Deuteronomy, 5:19;
19:14; 22:1-4; 24:7; 27:17 / Ruth, 4:i-8/Jeremiah,$2 :6-i2—(D) Jeremias,
32 :6-i2

[1092a]
(7  Property,  id.  The  ownership of property: possession or title; the
legal  regulation  of  property.)  New Testament: Matthew, 19:18 / Mar\,
10:19/  Luke,  18:20  / Romans, 13:9 7 Plato: Laws, bk viii, 738d-740d 9
Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch 5 458a-460a; ch 7 461d-463c; bk vi, ch 4
[1319*6-19]
522c-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk xiii, 140b-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3 224d-225d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 86b;
91a-b;  part  11, 124d-125c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi, sect 176
66a-b;  sect  180-184 67b-68d; sect 192-194 69c- 70a 36 Sterne: Tristram
Shandy,  210b-213a;  310a311a  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk xii,
86c-d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  348b;  353a-356a / Political Economy,
377b-d  / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-394d' 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  hi, 165b-175b 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 86d-87c; 89d-90c; 404d 42
Kant:   Science   of   Right,  404a;  407a-408b;  409d-410d;  412c-415c;
422b,d-425b; 426b428a; 431a-432a; 441d-443b 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
amendments, v
[645-648] 17b; xiv, sect 1 [748-750] 18c
43  Federalist:  number  7,  41d-42d;  number  43,  139d-140a  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 45 23c-d; par 50 25a; par 55 25d-26a;
par  64-65  28c-29a;  par  69 30a-31a; par 80, 33d-34a; part in, par 218
72c-d;  par  230  75c;  additions,  26  121a-b;  30  121c;  34  122a-b /
Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  195a-b;  part  i,  226d227b;  part in,
288c-289a;  310c  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic{, 292a-297a 50 Marx: Capital,
37c-d;   287b-290a  esp  288b-d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,
425d427b;  428d-429a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk xiii, 572d-573b 54
Freud:   Civilization   and  Its  Discontents,  787d788b  ld(l)  Private
ownership:  partnerships, jointstock companies 7 Plato: Republic, bk hi,
341c-d;  bk  v,  364c365d / Laws, bk v, 695a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk
ii, ch 5 458a-460a; ch 7 461d-463c; bk vii, ch 10
[i329b37~
1330^3] 534b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3
224d-225d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 150a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit
of Laws, bk xxvi, 221c222a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 348b

[1092b]
1058  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  7d(l)  to 7e 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk v,
319d-331d  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  441d-443b  43  Mill: Liberty,
319d-320a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 46 23d-24a 50 Marx:
Capital,  89a-b  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist Manifesto, 425d426a; 426c-d
ld{2)  Government  ownership:  eminent  domain  7  Plato:  Laws,  bk  v,
691b-696d  9  Aristotle:  Athenian  Constitution,  ch  47, par 2 574c 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 125c-d; 150a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws,
bk  xxvi,  221c-222b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 378c-379d 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  v,  357b,d-361d  42  Kant:  Science  of Right,
441d-443b 43 Constitution of the U.S.: amendments, v
[645-648] 17b; xiv, sect 1 [748-750] 18c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, part hi, 296b297a; part iv, 355c-d 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  428d429a  le.  The  inheritance  of
property:  laws  regulating inheritance Old Testament: Numbers, 27:8-11;
36—  (D)  Numbers,  27:7-11;  36  / Deuteronomy, 21:1517 / Ruth, 4:1-8 /
Jeremiah,   32:6-12—   (D)   Jeremias,  32:6-12  5  Aristophanes:  Birds
[1641-1670]  562b-c 7 Plato: Laws, bk xi, 775d-779b 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk viii, ch 10
[ii6ob33~
n6i a2] 413a-b / Politics, bk ii, ch 9
[1270s
i5-b6]  466b-c  23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xvii, 24b-c 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  189c-190d 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote, part i, 148b-149a 30 Bacon
:  New  Atlantis,  209d  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch xvi, sect 182184
67c-68d;  sect  190-194 69b-70a passim 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
v, 19d-20d; 21c; 27d-28a; bk xviii, 129d-132a; bk xxvi, 216b-c; 217b; bk
xxvii  225a-230d  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  357b  / Political Economy,
367b-d;  377d-378a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  hi, 165b-173b;
179b-180c;  bk  iv, 246d-247c 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 66d-67b; 619c
41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 83a; 87d-89d 42 Kant: Science of Right,
426b-428a  esp 427c428a; 441d-443b esp 442c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 203c-d;
204c-205c; 274b278a esp 277d
[fn
1]; 280c-281a; 282a-b; 289c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
178180  62a-63c  / Philosophy of History, part ii, 277b; part in, 289a-b
49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 324a-c

[1093a]
8  to  Sc  Chapter  99: WEALTH 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 26a-30a;
38d41a;  45b-47b; bk viii, 306a; 309d-310d; epilogue i, 650d-652a 8. The
distribution  of  wealth:  the  problem  of poverty 7 Plato: Laws, bk v,
691d-696d;  bk  viii,  738d741d  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch 9
[i27oai5-b6]  466b-c / Athenian Constitution, ch 12 557b558a 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk ii, 31a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 124d-126a 35 Locke:
Civil Government, ch v 30b-36a 36 Swift: Gulliver, part iv, 154b-155b 38
Rousseau:  Political Economy, 375b-d / Social Contract, bk ii, 405b-c 39
Smith:  Wealth of Nations, bk i, 20b-63a,c; bk 11, 121c-d; 142d-151c esp
150b-151c  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 22c; 89d; 486c-d; 501c 43 Mill:
Liberty, 309a-c / Representative Government, 366c-367a / Utilitarianism,
472d-473a 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 124d-125c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  i, par 49 24c-25a; part hi, par 244-245 77c-d; additions, 29 121c;
149 140d-141a / Philosophy of History, intro, 193b-c; part i, 226d-227b;
part  11,  263b-d;  277b-c  49  Darwin:  Descent  of Man, 324ac 50 Marx:
Capital,  34d-35c;  218d-219d; 261d262a; 301b-302d; 319d-321b; 354b-c 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  425d426d;  428d-429a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  165b-166a  54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents,  787d788b [fn 3] 8a. The sharing of wealth: goods and lands
held  in  common;  public  ownership  of  the  means  of  production New
Testament:  Acts,  2:44-47;  4  :32-5  :i1 5 Aristophanes: Ecclesiazusae
615a-628d esp
[395-476] 619b-620a, [553-729] 621b-623c
7 Plato: Republic, bk hi, 341c-d; bk v, 364c365d / Critias, 480a; 481a-b
9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  viii, ch 9 411d-412c / Politics, bk 11, ch 1
[i26ob36-i26i a7] 455b,d; ch 5 458a-460a; ch 7 461d-463c; ch 10
[i272ai2-2o] 468b-c; bk hi, ch 10 [1281*13-23]
478d-479a;  bk v, ch 8 [1309^5-17] 511b; bk vii, ch 10 [i329b37~i33oa33]
534b-d / Athenian Constitution, ch 11, par 2 557a-b; ch 12, par 3 557c-d
14   Plutarch:   Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  Numa  Pompilius,  58a-d  /  Agis
648b,d-656d  /  Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c 15
Tacitus:  Annals,  bk  xiii,  140b-c  /  Histories,  bk iv, 286c-287a 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 98, a 1, rep 3 516d-517c

[1093b]
1059  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q  94, a 5, rep 3
224d-225d  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 94d 26 Shakespeare: 2nd Henry
VI, act iv, sc ii
[68-82] 58c
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  iv,  appendix,  xvii  448d  35 Locke: Civil
Government,  ch  v,  sect  24-29  30b-31c;  sect 34 32bc 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk  iv,  16a-17b 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 197b-c 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  222d-223a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par
46  23d-24a; par 64-65 28c-29a; part hi, par 170-171 60d-61a; additions,
27  121b  /  Philosophy of History, part i, 226d-227b; 240d-241a 50 Marx:
Capital, 34d-35a; 163a-d; 174d-175c; 377c-378d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  425d426a  8b.  The  division  of  common  goods into private
property:  factors  influencing  the  increase  and  decrease of private
property   Old  Testament:  Numbers,  26:52-56;  33:50-54  6  Herodotus:
History, bk ii, 70b-c; bk hi, 101d-102a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk ii, ch
5
[i263b5~8]
458c;  bk  vi,  ch  5 [i320a29~b 7] 523d-524a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii,
31a-b  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 98, a 1, rep 3 516d-517c
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94, a 5, rep 3 224d-225d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part ii, 124d-125b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v
30b-36a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 19d-21d; bk xviii, 127c 38
Rousseau: Inequality, 348b,d; 352a / Social Contract, bk i, 393d-394d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of Nations,  bk  i, 20b-21c; 27b28a; bk iv, 239c-d; bk v,
309a-c;  311b-c  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and Fall, 87a 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  414c-415c; 422b,d425b; 426b-428a; 431a-432a 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  i, par 46 23d-24a; par 64-65 28c-29a; part hi, par 178
62a-b;  par  237  76c;  additions,  27  121b  50  Marx: Capital, 288b-d;
358a-361d;   368c369a;  377c-378d;  383d  8c.  The  causes  of  poverty:
competition,  incompetence,  indigence, expropriation, unemployment; the
poverty  of  the  proletariat  as  dispossessed  of  the  instruments of
production  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  LycurgusNuma,  62b-c /
Lucullus,  409b-d  15  Tacitus:  Histories,  bk  i,  194d-195a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  iv,  154b-155b  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xx,
147a; xxiii, 190a-b; 191bc; 199b-200a,c

[1094a]
d (8. The distribution of wealth: the problem of poverty. 8c. The causes
ofpoverty:    competition,   incompetence,   indigence,   expropriation,
unemployment;  the  poverty  of  the  proletariat as dispossessed of the
instruments   of  production.)  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  365c-366a  /
Political  Economy,  375b-d  /  Social Contract, bk hi, 415b-d 39 Smith:
Wealth of Nations, bk i, 27b-37b esp 28a-d, 30b-31b; bk iv, 239c-240a 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 501c-d 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 428b 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right, part hi, par 195 66d-67a; par 240-241 76d-77a; par
243-244  77b-c;  additions,  148-149 140c-141a 50 Marx: Capital, 150b-c;
160d-162d; 209c225d esp 211a-d; 280c-286a esp 282b-c, 283b-d, 285c-286a;
288b-d;  303b-305a;  307a-c; 315c-321b esp 319c-d; 325d-327b; 349a-350a;
354a-355d;  357a-358a;  360a-361c;  364a-c;  370a-371c;  375a-b 50 Marx-
Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  424d425a;  426c-d  8d.  Laws  concerning
poverty:  the  poor  laws,  the  dole  Old  Testament:  Exodus,  23:11 /
Leviticus,  19:910;  23:22; 25:25,35-54 / Deuteronomy, 15:711; 24:17-22;
26:12-13  5  Aristophanes  :  Ecclesiazusae  [408-426]  619b-c  7 Plato:
Republic,  bk  iv,  342a-344a  /  Laws,  bk  v,  695a-c;  bk  xi, 783b 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk vi, ch 5 [i32oa29-b i5] 523d-524b 14 Plutarch:
Solon,  68d-70c  /  Poplicola-  Solon,  87a  /  Pericles,  12 7a- 128a /
Lucullus,  409b-d  /  Caesar,  581c15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk ii, 32b-d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 142b-c; 157a 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv,
appendix,   xvii   448d  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiii,
199b-200a,c  38 Rousseau '.Political Economy, 375b-d 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  i,  59a-61b; bk iv, 200c-201a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
175c-d;  501d-502b 42 Kant: Science of Right, 443b-444a 43 Mill: Liberty,
322a-d  esp  322c-d  / Representative Government, 383d-384a 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson, 442d-443a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 245 77c-d
50 Marx: Capital, 211d
[fn
3]; 358a-b esp 358b-d [fn 5]; 364a-366a 9. Political economy: the nature
of  the  science  of  economics 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 1-2 339a-d
passim, esp ch 1 [i094a7-9] 339a / Politics, bk i,

[1094b]
1060  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  %d to 9a ch 8 [i256b27~39] 450c-d; ch 10 [i258a
i9-38]  452b-c  38  Rousseau:  Political  Economy  367a-385a,c 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  intro,  ld-2a,c; bk iv, 182a 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
281b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par  189 65d-66a;
additions, 120 136b-c 50 Marx: Capital, 6a-d; 8a-lld passim; 33a-37c esp
36a-b  [fn  1];  178d-179c; 305ac [fn 2] 9a. Wealth as an element in the
political common good 5 Euripides: Phoenician Maidens
[528-558]
382c-d 5 Aristophanes: Plutus 629a-642d esp
[415618] 633d-636d
6  Herodotus:  History, bk ix, 314a,c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
i, 352a-b; bk ii, 396d; 397b-c; bk viii, 569d 7 Plato: Republic, bk iii-
iv,  341c-344a;  bk v, 364c-365d; bk viii, 405c-408a / Critias, 485b-c /
Laws,  bk  hi,  665b;  bk  v,  687d-688a;  694a-695c;  bk viii, 733b-d 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  i,  ch  10  [1258*19-38]  452b-c; bk ii, ch 7
[1267*18-36]  462d-463a; ch 9 [i269b i3-i27ob6] 465d-466c; [i27i b i-i7]
467d; bk in, ch 12
[1283*12-20] 481a-b; bk
vii, ch 2
[1324*8-10] 528a; ch
4
[i325b33~
1326*4]  530a;  ch  5-6  530d-531d; ch 8 532c533a / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[i359b  i9-29]  599d600a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b; 47d / Lycurgus-
Numa,  62bc  /  Coriolanus,  180b-d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b /
Lysander, 361a-d / Agis, 649b-c 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 31a-b; bk hi,
57b58d;BKXiii,140b-c/f/^/or/'^,  BKii,232d-233a  23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch  xxi,  32d-33a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a-b; part ii, 124b-127a
38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 19a-21d; 23a-25c; bk vii, 44a-48a;
bk  xiii,  96c;  bk  xx,  146b-147d;  bk  xxi, 153c-d; 154b 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  325d;  327c-328a;  352a-355a  passim; 365c-366b / Political
Economy, 375b-d; 377b-385a,c passim / Social Contract, bk hi, 415b-417a;
421c-d  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk i, 27b-31b; 33c35c 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  89c-d;  456d457a,c; 498a-501d; 642a-b; 655d-656a 42
Kant:  Science  of  Right,  443b-d  43 Federalist: number 21, 79b-80a 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  124d-125c;  172b-173a;  210d-211b;  281b  46  Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, additions, 143 139d-140a / Philosophy of History,
intro,  193b-c;  part  11,  263b-d  49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 324a-d 50
Marx:  Capital,  292d;  320b-321b;  374a-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xiii, 572d-573b

[1095a]
9b  to  9e(\)  Chapter  99:  WEALTH  1061  9b.  Factors  determining the
prosperity or opulence of states: fluctuations in national prosperity ^—
6  Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 352c-d 7 Plato: Republic, bk ii,
316c-317a  /  Laws,  bk  iv,  677a-c 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk vii, ch 6
531b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 154b-c 36 Sterne: Tristram Shandy,
253a-b 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vii, 44a47c; bk xin, 96b-d; bk
xviii,  125d;  127a-b;  132a-b;  bk xx, 152a-d; bk xxi, 154b-c; bk xxii,
174c-d;  183b-c;  bk  xxiii,  191a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a-353a;
360b-361a;  365c-366a  /  Political  Economy,  375b-d;  383b-c  / Social
Contract,  bk  ii, 404a-c; bk hi, 415b-417a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations,
bk  i-iv  3a-300d  esp bk i, 3a-10b, bk ii, 142d-151c, 155b-162d, bk iv,
182b-192c,  279b-300d  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 21c 22c; 236c237a;
239b-d;  456d-457a;  501b-d;  642a-c;  655d-658d  41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  221b-222d; 314c315d esp 315b-d; 355c-d; 427c-d; 558c d; 597c-598a
43  Federalist:  number  2,  31c-d; number 5, 38a; number 11-12, 53b-56d
passim;  number  21, 79c-d 43 Mill: Representative Government, 335a-b 44
Boswell:  Johnson,  171a-b  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
243247  77b-78b  /  Philosophy  of  History, part i, 243d-244c; part ii,
263b-d;  part  hi,  299a-c  50  Marx:  Capital,  31a-37c  passim;  Ilia;
178c179a;  218c-219a;  253b  254b;  377c-378a  50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto,  421b-c 9c. Diverse economic programs for securing the wealth
of  nations:  the  physiocratic, the mercantilist, and the laissez-faire
systems   38   Rousseau:  Inequality,  365c-366a  /  Political  Economy,
377b-385a,c  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  i,  104b-105a;  bk iv
182a-300d  esp  182b-192c,  279b-300d  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 41c;
66b-c;  642b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 87b 43 Federalist: number ii,
55c-d  43  Mill:  Liberty,  312c-313a  44 Boswell: Johnson, 280d-281a 50
Marx: Capital, 251c-252a 50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 426b-c 9d.
Governmental  regulation  of  production,  trade,  or  other  aspects of
economic  life  7  Plato:  Republic, bk iv, 342d-343a; bk viii, 408b-d /
Laws, bk viii, 742a-d; bk xi, 771b775d

[1095b]
14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  / LycurgusNuma, 61b,d-62c / Pericles,
127a-128a  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk vi, 90a-c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
ii,  119d-120b;  125d126a  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xx, 148c-d;
149c-150a;   152a-d;  bk  xxii,  176a-177a;  183a  38  Rousseau:  Social
Contract,  bk  ii, 405b-c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 51a-62a; bk
ii,  161a;  bk  in,  170b-c;  bk iv 182a-300d; bk v, 315a-331d passim 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  66b-c;  198a; 249d250b; 392c-393a; 486c-d;
656c-658b  esp  657d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 87b-91a 43 Articles of
Confederation: iv
[24-36]
5b-c;  ix  [173-185]  7a;  [275-285]  8a  43  Constitution of the U.S. :
article i, sect 8
[201-203] 13b; sect 9 [276-282] 13d; sect 10
[304-313] 14a
43  Federalist:  number  22,  80d-81c;  number 42, 137b-138c; number 44,
145b-c;  number  45, 149d-150a 43 Mill: Liberty, 312c-313a; 319d-320a 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  part  hi,  par 235236 76a-c; par 240-242
76d-77b;  par  248 78b-c; additions, 145 140b; 148 140c-d; 150 141a-b 50
Marx:  Capital,  79d-80b  [fn 4]; 108c-110a passim; 115c-122c; 127c-146c
esp 146a-c; 174a-c; 193a-194b; 200a; 209a-d
[fn
1-3]; 233c-235a; 236c-248d esp 236c-237d, 248c-d; 277d278a,c; 357a-358a;
366c-368b;  374a-375c  50 Marx-Engels: Communist Manifesto, 426c 9e. The
economic support of government and the services of government Ste(l) The
charges of government: the cost of maintaining its services; elements in
the national budget 5 Aristophanes : Knights [773-835] 479b-480b / Wasps
[653-724] 515c-516d 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk i, ch ii
[1259*33-36]
453d; bk 11, ch 9 [i27i b io-i7] 467d; bk vi, ch 5
[i320ai7-b i6]
523d-524b; bk vii, ch 8
[i328b u-i2]
532d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 4
[1359^3-33] 600a
14  Plutarch: Cato the Younger, 625b-626d 15 Tacitus : Histories, bk iv,
268c-d  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch xi, sect 140 58a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk xiii, 96a-b 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 377b-380d
/  Social Contract, bk hi, 415b-417a 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk iv,
182b-192c  passim;  bk  v,  301a-357c;  401d-403b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  41b-c;  65a-b; 155d156a; 249d-250a; 368a-b 41 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  177a-b;  315b-317a 42 Kant: Science of Right, 441d-444c; 451d452a
43 Articles of Confederation: viii 6d-7a; xii 9b

[1096a]
1062  The  economic  support  of  government  and  the  (9e, services of
government. 9^(1) The charges of government: the cost of maintaining its
services; elements in the national budget?) 43 Constitution of the U.S.:
article i, sect 6 [132-135] 12c; [143-148] 12c-d; sect 8 [226229J 13b-c;
[235-253] 13c passim; sect 9 [283288] 13d-14a; article
[, SECT
I
[394-4OO]
15a; article hi, sect TICLE VI
[578-582] 16d
SECT 4
[463-468]
15c;  arAMENDMENTS, XIV, 19a 43 Federalist: number 13 59a-60a; number "'
30-31  101a-107b  esp number 30, lOla-b; number 34 109b-110d; number 43,
142d143a;  number  73,  218d-219b;  number  79,  233c-234a;  number  84,
254c-256a 44 Bos\vell:/0^o/z, 281d-282a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
part  iv,  365c-d 9e(2) Methods of defraying the expenses of government:
taxation and other forms of levy or impost; confiscations, seizures, and
other  abuses  of taxation Old Testament: Genesis, 41:33-36 Apocrypha: /
Maccabees,  10:25-31  —  (D)  OT,  / Machabees, 10:25-31 5 Aristophanes:
Wasps  [653-724] 515c-516d / Birds [27-48] 542c-d Herodotus: History, bk
i,  43c;  bk  hi,  109d111b;  114bc Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i,
373b-c;  bk hi, 420d-421b Plato: Laws, bk xii, 791d Aristotle: Politics,
bk i, ch ii
[1259*23-36
453c-d; bk vi, ch 5
[1320*20-22]
523d / Athenian Constitution, ch 47-48 574b-575b 14 Plutarch: Aristides,
274c-d  /  Marcus Cato, 285c-d / Lucullus, 409b-d 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk
iv,  82d-83a;  bk  xiii,  139ac  /  Histories,  bk  i, 194d-195a; bk ii,
236d-237a  23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvi, 22d-23b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  78c-d;  part  ii,  104b-d;  152a-b;  156c-157a 27 Shakespeare:
Cymbeline,  act  hi,  sc  i 463c464c / Henry VIII, act 1, sc 11 [18-101]
552d553d  35  Locke:  Civil  Government,  ch  xi, sect 140 58a 36 Swift:
Gulliver,  part  i, llb-12a; 29b-31a; part 11, 75a-b; part hi, 113b-114a
38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of Laws,  bk v, 23c-24b; bk xiii 96a-102a,c; bk
xix, 143b-c; bk xx, 149d-150a; bk xxii, 183b-184b 38 Rousseau: Political
Economy,  377b-385a,c  /  Social  Contract,  bk  hi, 415b-417a 39 Smith:
Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  iv,  192c-288c esp 192c-233d, 279b-288c; bk v,
311c-313a;  315a-319d;  356d-421d esp 361b,d-401d 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  41b-c;  64d-68a;  86a;  162c;  251d-255c; 368a-b; 413a; 577d578c;
658c-660c esp 659c-660c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 177a-b; 417b-c

[1096b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  9^(2)  to  9f  42 Kant: Science of Right, 441d-444c 43
Declaration of Independence: [63-70] 2b 43 Articles of Confederation: iv
[24-36]
5b-c;  vi  [100-106]  6b;  vm  6d-7a;  ix  [286-290]  8a;  [299-318] 8b;
[350-367]  8c-d  passim  43  Constitution of the U.S.: article i, sect 2
[17-40] llb-d; sect 7 [152-155] 12d; sect 8
[192-200] 13a; sect 9 13d-14a passim; sect 10
[296-313] 14a; amendments, v 17b-c; xvi 19b
43  Federalist:  number  7,  43c-44a;  number  12,  56d-58d;  number 21,
79b-80c;  number  30-36  101a-117d; number 41, 135b-c; number 44, 145bc;
number 45, 149b-150b; number 83, 246b-c; number 84, 253b [fn 1] 43 Mill:
Liberty,  315c-d / Representative Government, 335a-b; 356c-d; 366d-367a;
383b-d  / Utilitarianism, 473a-c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi,
par  299  99c-100b; additions, 177 147d / Philosophy of History, part i,
226d-227b; 243b; part hi, 299a-c; 310c; part iv, 324b; 325b-c; 335a336c;
364d  50  Marx:  Capital,  65c-66a;  375a-b  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist
Manifesto, 429a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk ix, 384c-388a,c 9/. Wealth
or  property  in relation to different forms of government 6 Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350d351a; 352c-d; bk viii, 575d-576b; 579c-590c
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii, 316c-319a; bk viii 401d-416a / Laws, bk v,
695a-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 3
[1131*24-29]
378d; bk viii, ch 10
[u6ob n-i6]
412d;
[n6ob33-n6i a2] 413a-b
/ Politics, bk ii, ch ii
[i273 a3-b
7] 469c-470a; bk hi, ch 7 476c477a esp
[i279b4-io]
476d-477a; ch 8-10 477a-479a passim; ch ii [1282*24-41] 480a-b; ch 13
[i283a23-i284a2]
481b-482a; ch 15
[i286b8-22] 484d-485a; bk iv, ch 3 [1289^8I290a i3]
488d-489a; ch 4
[i290a30-b2o]
489b-d; [129^7-13] 490d; ch 6 [1293^2-34] 492d-493a; ch 9
[i294b i9-3o] 494c-d; bk v,
ch 1 502a-503b; ch 8
[i3o8b io-i309a3o]
510d-511c;  ch  12  [i3i6b  i5-22]  519c-d;  bk  vi,  ch 3-6 521c-524c /
Athenian  Constitution, ch 2-5 553a-555a; ch 11-12 557a-558a / Rhetoric,
bk  1,  ch  8  [1366^-6]  608b 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b; 47a-48a /
Solon,   68d-71c  /  Poplicola-  Solon,  87a  /  Pericles,  125b-130d  /
Coriolanus,  180b-d  /  Lysander,  361a-d  / Lucullus, 400d-401a / Agis,
649c-650d  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 95, a 4, ans
229b-230c;  q  105, a 2, ans and rep 1-6 309d-316a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part ii, 124d-125c; 150a; 154bc 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect
85  43c-d;  sect 90-94 44d-46c passim; ch xi, sect 138 57bc; ch xv, sect
173-174 65c-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3c-d; bk hi, 10a; bk
iv, 16d-17b; 17d-18a; bk v, 19a-

[1097a]
9g  to 9h 21d; 23a-25c; 27d-28a; 29b-30a; 32b-c; bk vii, 44d-46c; 50a-b;
bk  xiii 96a-102a,c; bk xviii, 125a-c; 126b-d; bk xx, 147a-d; 149a-c; bk
xxn,  174c-d  ^^__38  Rousseau: Inequality, 359a-d / Social Contract, bk
in,  411a-b;  412b-c:  415b-417a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of Nations, bk iv,
243b,d255a,c;  bk  v,  356b,d;  401d-403a  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
90d-91a;  144b;  413a;  619b-c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 73b; 403c-d;
404c-d;  427c-428a  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  413d;  441d-443b esp
441d-442c  43  Federalist:  number 85, 256b-c 43 Mill: Liberty, 309a-c /
Representative  Government,  369b-370a;  384a-386c  passim,  esp 385a-b;
393c-394d  44  Boswell: Johnson, 182c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History,
intro,  193b-c; part i, 226d-227b; part iv, 335a-336c; 364d 48 Melville:
Moby  Dic{, 295a-297a 9g. Wealth and poverty in relation to crime and to
war between states 5 Aristophanes: Peace
[601-648]
532d-533c;
[1191-1264] 540a-d / Lysistrata [486-492] 589a
6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  4b-c; 5a-b; 16b-c; 21b; bk 11, 73b-74d;
79a-c;  87a-b; bk hi, 115c-116a; bk iv, 146a-b; bk v, 160d-161a; 169a-c;
bk  vi,  194a;  211a-b;  bk vii, 214d216b; bk viii, 280b-d; bk ix, 288b;
297b-d;  305d-306a; 314a,c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 349b-d;
350d; 352a-b; 369b-370a; 378c-d; 384d-386b; bk ii, 390c-391c; 402d-404a;
bk  hi, 419d-420b; 420d-421b; bk iv, 461d-462a; bk v, 482d-483a; bk vii,
545b-546c  7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii, 318c-319a; bk iv, 342d-344a; bk
viii,  406c-407a  /  Laws,  bk  xi, 771b-772b / Seventh Letter, 814b-c 9
Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  ii,  ch 6 [i265b io-i2] 461a; ch 7 [1267*2-8]
462c-d; ch 9 [1270*15b 3] 466b-c;
[127^10-17] 467d;
bk v, ch 7
[i3o6b32-i307a
3]  508d-509a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-c; 47d / Sulla, 374d-375b /
Cleomenes, 667a-c / Marcus Brutus, 817d-818a 15 Tacitus : Annals, bk vi,
89c  /  Histories,  bk  1,  195d; 201a-b; bk ii, 223b-c 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, hell, vi
[58-75] 9a
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  76d; part ii, 140c-d; 142b-c; 157a 26
Shakespeare:  Henry  V,  act  v,  sc  ii [23-76] 563c-564a 30 Bacon: New
Atlantis,  204d-205a  35  Locke:  Civil  Government, ch xvi, sect 180184
67b-68d  36  Sterne:  Tristram  Shandy,  225a  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones,
271c-273a,c  38  Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws, bk xii, 86c-d; bk xiii,
lOOd-lOla; bk xviii, 125d; bk xx, 152a-b

[1097b]
Chapter  99: WEALTH 1063 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 353c-354b; 365d-366b /
Social  Contract,  bk  i,  389d-390a;  bk  ii,  404c 39 Smith: Wealth of
Nations,  bk  iv,  187c-190b;  bk  v,  301a-309a,c; 403a-b; 408a-411b 40
Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 35a; 175c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 87b;
343b;  593a-c 43 Federalist: number 4, 35b-d; number 5, 38b-c; number 6,
40a-41a;  number 7 41d44c; number 8, 45b-46a; number 28, 98b; number 30,
102d-103a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, additions, 124 137a; 148-149
140c-141a 47 Goethe: Faust, part ii
[11,151-287]
271b274b 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 325d-326a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk  x,  424b-c;  440d441a; bk xi, 475b-476c; 490a-b; 500d-502a; bk xiii,
572d-573b;  bk  xv,  634a-635a  9h. The struggle of economic classes for
political  power  5  Euripides: Suppliants [229-245] 260b-c 6 Herodotus:
History,  bk  vi,  202c-203b;  bk vii, 243b-c 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  hi, 423a-b; 427d-428a; 428c-d; 434c-438c passim; bk iv, 459ac;
463a-465c;  bk v, 482d483a; 502d-504b; bk vi, 520b-c; bk viii 564a593a,c
passim  7 Plato: Republic, bk iv, 342d-344a; bk viii, 405c-406b esp 406b
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  hi,  ch  10  [1281^1-29]  478d-479a; en 15
[i286b8-22] 484d-485a; bk iv, en 3
[i289b28-i290a i3] 488d-489a; ch 4
[i29i b7-i3]
490d; ch 6
[1293*12-34]
492d493a; bk v, ch i 502a-503b passim; ch 3
[1303^-8]
505a;
[i303b i5-i8]
505a-b; ch 4
[i304a40-b6] 506a; ch
5-6 506b-508c; ch 7
[i3o6b32-i307a
3]  508d-509a;  ch  9  [1310^225] 512c; bk vi, ch 3 521c-522a / Athenian
Constitution,  ch  2-5 553a-555a; ch 11-12 557a-558a 14 Plutarch: Solon,
68d-71c;  75c-76d / Camillus, 117c-121a,c / Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Agis
648b,d-656d  /  Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c /
Caius  Gracchus  681b,d-689a,c  /  Caius  and Tiberius Gracchus-Agis and
Cleomenes  689b,d-691a,c  / Cicero, 708a-713b 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk vi,
97b  26  Shakespeare:  2nd  Henry  VI,  act  iv  56a-64d 27 Shakespeare:
Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp act 1, sc 1 [1-167] 351a-353a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk xi, 77b-80a 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 352a-356a passim,
esp  355a-356a  39  Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk i, 109d-110d; bk v,
309a-311c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 144a-d 43 Federalist: number 10,
50b-51b   43  Mill:  Representative  Government,  345c-346a;  366c-367b;
369b-370a; 393c-394d; 398a-d 44 Boswell: Johnson, 251a; 255d

[1098a]
(9.  Political  economy: the nature of the science of economics. 9b. The
struggle  of  economic classesfor political power.) 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  additions,  149  140d-141a  /  Philosophy of History, intro,
193b-c; part 11, 263b-d; 275b-276a; part hi, 295d-297a 50 Marx: Capital,
6d-7d  esp  7b-d; 8a-9c; 63b-c; 113c; 134c-146c esp 145a 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist  Manifesto  415a434d  esp  415b-c,  416c-d, 420b-c, 423b-425c,
429b-c,  434c-d  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 165b-166a 54
Freud:  New  Introductory  Lectures,  882b-884d 10. The moral aspects of
wealth and poverty 10a. The nature of wealth as a good: its place in the
order  of  goods and its relation to happiness Old Testament: / Kings, 3
.-6-14—   (D)  III  Kings,  3:6-14  /  //  Chronicles,  1:7-12—  (D)  //
Paralipomenon,  1:7-12  / Job, 21:7-13; 31:24-28; 36:18-19 / Psalms, 49;
52:7—  (D)  Psalms,  48;  51:9 / Proverbs, 1:19; 8:10-11; 10:2; 11:4,28;
13:7;  14:20;  15:16-17;  16:8;  17:1;  19:4,6-7;  22:1;  23:4-5; 27:24;
28:6,11,20,22  /  Ecclesiastes,  2:3-11;  4:6-8;  5:9-6:2  esp  5:13-15,
5:1920,  6:2;  7:12;  10:19 (D) Ecclesiastes, 2:3-11; 4:6-8; 5:8-6:2 esp
5:12-14,  5:18-19,  6:2;  7:13; 10:19 / Jeremiah, 9:23-24— (D) Jeremias,
9:23-24  /  Ezekjel,  7:19—  (D)  Ezechiel,  7:19 / Zephaniah, 1:18— (D)
Sophonias,  1:18  Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:21 — (D) OT, Tobias, 4:23 / Wisdom
of  Solomon,  5:8-12;  7:7-11—  (D) OT, Boo\ of Wisdom, 5:8-12; 7:7-11 /
Ecclesiasticus,  7:18-19;  8:2; 10:30-31; 11:18-27; 12:8; 13 esp 13:1-7,
13:19-24;   20:30;   29:22-23;  30:14-16;  31:1-11;  40:25-26—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  7 :2o-2 1 ; 8 :2-3 ; 1 o ^3-3 4 ; 11:1829; 12:8; 13 esp
13:1-8, 13:23-30; 20:32; 29:28-29; 30:14-16; 31:1-11; 40:25-27 / Baruch,
3:16-19—  (D)  OT,  Baruch,  3:16-19  New  Testament:  Matthew, 6:19-34;
13:18-23;  19:16-30  /  Mar\, 4:1-20 esp 4:19; 10:17-31 / Luke, 6:20-26;
8:5-15  esp 8:14; 12:13-34; 16:19-25; 18:18-30 / / Timothy, 6:6-12,17-19
I James, 5:1-6 5 Aeschylus: Persians [161-169] 17a 5 Euripides: Electra
[361-400] 330b-d;
[420431] 331a;
[938-944] 335c
/ Hecuba
[12061232] 363b
/ Phoenician Maidens
[383-442]
381a-d; [528-567] 382c-d / Cyclops [316-346] 443b 5 Aristophanes : Birds
[592-605]
550a-b / Plutus
[76-197]
630a-631b;
[415-618]
633d636d  6  Herodotus:  History,  bk  i,  6c-8a;  bk  hi, 121b-c; bk v,
169d-170a; bk viii, 264c 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 350d351a

[1098b]
1064  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  10  to  10a  7 Plato: Euthydemus, 74b-c / Meno,
177d-178d  /  Apology,  206b-c  /  Gorgias,  254d-255b / Republic, bk i,
296c-297b; bk hi, 325b-c; bk iii-iv, 341c-343b / Critias, 479d; 485b-c /
Laws, bk ix, 751c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch i
[ii6a i~7]
162a; [n6b22-ii7a 4] 163b-c; ch 3
[n8b i-9]
165b-c  /  Sophistical  Refutations,  ch  25 [i8ob711] 248d 9 Aristotle:
Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  1-2  339a-d  passim;  ch  3 [i094bi7-i9] 339d; ch 4
[1095^429] 340b-c; ch 5
[1096^-10] 341a-b; ch
7
[i097ai5-b8] 342c-d passim, esp [1097^5-28]
342c; ch 8 [1099^ i-b 8] 344d-345a; bk iv, ch 3 [ii24a i3-b6] 371a-b; ch
7  [1127V22]  374d375a;  bk v, ch 2 [ii3oai3-b i7] 377c-378a; bk x, ch 3
[ii73b25-27] 428a / Politics, bk i, ch 9-10 450d-452d; bk hi, ch 12
[i283a i2-2o]
481a-b; bk vii, ch i [i323s22]-ch 2 [1324^0] 527a-528a; ch 8 532c-533a /
Rhetoric, bk i, ch 1
[i355b i-8]
594d; ch 5
[1360^4-30]
601a-b;
[i36i ai2-24] 601c-d; ch 6
[i362b io28] 603b-c esp [i362b i8-i9] 603c; bk ii, ch 16
638b-c 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-54]
15a-d; bk v
[1113-1135] 75c-d; bk vi
[1-34]
80a-c  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  ii,  ch 19 162c164b; bk iv, ch 6
230b-232c  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk viii, sect 33 288a 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  36a-37b / Pericles, 130b-c / Pelopidas, 233a-b / Marcus Cato,
285c-d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b / Lysander, 361a-d 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk  vi,  91c;  bk  xiv, 154a-c / Histories, bk ii, 232d-233a 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  i,  ch  8-10  133a136c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 26, a 4, ans and rep 2 151c-152a,c; part i-ii, q
i,  a 7, ans 614c-615a; q 2, a 1 615d-616c; a 5, rep 1 618d-619c; Q 4, a
7 635b-636a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[1-96] 9c10c; purgatory, xv
[40-81]
75d-76a; xvn
[127-139] 79d; xix [7o]-xxn [114] 82b-87c
22 Chaucer: Prologue of Man of Law ' s Tale
[4519-4546] 235b-236a / Tale of Wife of Bath
[6691-6788] 274b-276a / Tale of Melibeus, par
49-53,  422a-425b;  par  77,  430b-431a 23 Machiavelli: Prince, ch xvii,
24b-c; ch xix, 26a-b; ch xxv, 35c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 74d-75a;
90c;  part  11,  155b-c 25 Montaigne: Essays, HOa-c; 122a-124d; 126b131a
passim 26 Shakespeare: Romeo and Juliet, act v, sc i
[66-86] 315b / King John, act
ii, sc 1
[561598] 385c-386a / As You Like It, act ii, sc v
[40-59] 606d
27  Shakespeare:  Othello,  act  i, sc m [339-380] 212c-d; act in, sc hi
[154-161]  223d / Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp act iv, sc 11 410a-c, sc
in
[24-47] 410d-411a, [382-462] 415a-d /

[1099a]
10b  to  10c  Chapter 99: WEALTH 1065 Pericles, act i, sc iv 425c-426d /
Cymbeline, act ii, sc in
[70-95] 460a-b; act hi, sc vi
[1-36] 470d-471b / Sonnets, cxlvi 608c
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii,  222c;  338bc  -~--~ 30 Bacon :
Advancement  of Learning,  86b-c; 92a-b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi, sect 55-56 192c-193b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 17c-d; 32a-d;
103c104a; 263c-d; 283a-c 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk v, 19a-d; bk
xiii,  96c;  bk  xx, 146b-d; 150bc 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 360b-361a 40
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 22c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 297c-298a 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b / Practical Reason,
330d-331a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  370b-d 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  462c-463b  44  Boswell:  Johnson, 102d-103a; 124d-125c;
140b-141a;  189d-190b;  210d-211b;  300a-c;  349a-c; 403a; 491b; 492b-c;
493c; 498d-499a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[2796-2804]
68a-b;  part  11  [5987-6171] 146b-151a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i,
30a-31a;  50b;  bk  in, 110a-113a; bk v, 194d; bk vi, 250a251d; bk viii,
311a-313a  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk iv, 105c-107a; bk v,
110c-110c;  130d-132b;  bk vi, 158b-159a; 164b 166a; bk viii 191b,d235d;
bk  xi,  308a-b 53 James: Psychology, 188b-189b; 202b-203a; 725b-726a 54
Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 777a779a 10b. Natural limits to
the  acquisition  of  wealth  by  individuals:  the  distinction between
necessities and luxuries 5 Euripides: Helen
[903-908]
306d-307a / Electra
[420-431] 331a
/ Phoenician Maidens
[528-567] 382c-d
7  Plato:  Republic,  bk  ii,  316c-319a;  bk viii, 409d-410c / Timaeus,
442c-d / Critias, 479d 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk hi, ch 2
[u8a6-i6]
164d-165a 9 Aristotle: Politics, bk 1, ch 8
[1 256^7-39]
450c-d; ch 9
[i257b i7-i258a i4]
451d-452b;  bk vii, ch 5 [1326^6-38] 530d-531a 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  iv,  ch  4 225a228a; ch 9 237d-238d 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus, 36a-37b /
Marcus  Cato,  285c-d  /  Aristides-Marcus  Cato,  291b-292b 15 Tacitus:
Annals,  bk ii, 31a-b; bk hi, 57b58d 19 Aquinas : Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  2,  a 1, ans and rep 3 615d-616c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part ii-ii, q 32, aa 5-6 544a-546b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[91-115]
16a-b;  xvn  [34-75]  24b-c  22  Chaucer:  Tale  of  Melibeus, par 49-51
422a424a

[1099b]
25   Montaigne:   Essays,   HOa-c;  131b-132a;  216d218a;  489b-490c  27
Shakespeare:  King  Lear,  act  ii,  sc  iv [263274] 261c; act in, sc iv
[27-36]  264c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xxviiixxix 450a 33
Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  91a-94a 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v,
sect  30-39  31c-33c  38  Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk vii, 44a-d; bk
xiii,  96a;  bk  xix,  145b  38  Rousseau:  Inequality, 327c-328a; 337b;
350a-c;  352a-353c;  365c-366b  /  Social  Contract,  bk 1, 393c-394b 39
Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk i, 27b-37b passim; 63a-b; 70a-71d; 74d-75b;
bk  hi,  163c164c;  bk  v,  383c-d  40  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 22c 41
Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 451d-452a 43 Federalist: number 30, 102a-b 43
Mill:   Utilitarianism,   462c-463a;   470d-471b  44  Boswell:  Johnson,
124d-125c;  313a-b; 389d390a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par
190191  66a-b;  par  195 66d-67a; par 203 68a-c; additions, 120 136b-c /
Philosophy  of History,  Intro, 193b-c; part 11, 267a-b 50 Marx: Capital,
16c-17a;  71d-72c;  81a-d;  88c; 112a-c; 147d-148b; 218d-219a; 251a-255a
esp  253a-b,  254c; 261c-d; 282d-283c; 292c-296a esp 293c-294a 54 Freud:
Civilization   and   Its   Discontents,  787d788a  10c.  Temperance  and
intemperance   with   respect   to   wealth:  liberality,  magnificence,
miserliness,   avarice   Old   Testament:   Exodus,  18:20-21;  20:17  /
Deuteronomy,  5:21; 17:16-17 / // Samuel, 12:1-6— (D) // Kings, 12:1-6 /
/  Kings,  21  —  (D)  III  Kings,  21 / // Kings, 5:20-27-(D) IV Kings,
5:20-27  / Job, 31:16-23 / Psalms, :36— (D) Psalms, 61:11; 62:10; 112:5;
JI 9 :4_ 111:5; 118:36 / Proverbs, 1:10-19; I 5 :27l 23 5; 28:22; 30:8-9
/   Ecclesiastes,   5:10-6:12—  (D)  Ecclesiastes,  5:9-6:11  /  Isaiah,
33:15-17;  57:17 — (D) Isaias, 33:15-17; 57:17 / Jeremiah, 22:13-19— (D)
Jeremias,    22:13-19   /   Ezekiel,   22:12-13,25-29—   (D)   Ezechiel,
22:12-13,25-29  /  Amos,  2:6-7;  5:11-12  /  Micah, 3:9-11; 7:2-3 — (D)
Micheas,  3:9-11;  7:2-3  /  Habah^u\,  2:4-5,9—  (D)  Habacuc,  2:4-5,9
Apocrypha: Tobit, 1:1-8; 4:7-11; 5:18-19— (D) OT, Tobias, 1:1-8; 4:7-12;
5:24-25  /  Wisdom  of Solomon,  15:12—  (D)  OT,  Boo^of Wisdom, 15:12 /
Ecclesiasticus,  10:9;  11:11,18-19;  12:16;  14:3-10;  18:32-33; 20:30;
29:1-2,7-13,2028;   31:1-11,23-24—   (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  10:9-10;
11:10,18-20;   12:1-4;   14:3-10;  18:3233;  20:32;  29:1-2,10-17,26-34;
31:1-11,28-29 / Baruch, 3:16-19— (D) OT, Baruch, 3:16-19 / // Maccabees,
3-4— (D) OT, // Machabees, 3-4

[1100a]
(10.  The  moral  aspects  of  wealth  and  poverty. 10c. Temperance and
intemperance   with   respect   to   wealth:  liberality,  magnificence,
miserliness,  avarice.)  New  Testament: Luke, 6:34-35; 12:13-21 / Acts,
20:33-34  /  /  Corinthians, 5:10-11; 6:10 / Ephesians, 5:3 / / Timothy,
6:6-12  /  Hebrews,  13:5  /James, 5:1-6 5 Euripides: Hecuba [1206-1232]
363b  5  Aristophanes:  Wasps  [653-724]  515c-516d  /  Plutus [144-197]
630d-631b 6 Herodotus: History, bk hi, 105b-c; bk vi, 208d-209c; 211a-b;
bk  vii, 221c-222a; bk ix, 305d-306a 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk
vi,  512c513d  7 Plato: Republic, bk viii, 405c-408a / Critias, 485b-c /
Laws, bk viii, 733b-734a; bk ix, 751c-d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 3
[io94b i7-i9]
339d;  bk  11,  ch  7  [uo7b9-2i] 353a-b; bk iv, ch i-2 366b,d-370b; CH3
[ii24a i3-b6]371a-b; bk v, ch 2 [1130^4-28] 377d; bk vii, ch 4
[ii47b24-i 148*4] 398a-b / Politics, bk
ii, ch 5
[i263a22-b26]
458b-d; ch 6
[1265*28-37]
460c-d; ch 7
[i266b24-i267b
9]  462b-463b; ch 9 [i269b i3-i27oai4] 465d-466b; [i27i b io17] 467d; bk
v,  ch 9 [1310*22-25] 512c; bk vi, ch 7 [i32i a35-b2] 525a; bk vii, ch 5
[i326b2638] 530d-531a / Athenian Constitution, ch 5, par 3 554d-555a; ch
12,  par  2  557c  /  Rhetoric,  bk  1,  ch  9 [1366*33^22] 608d-609a 12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk hi
[59-78]
30d-31a;  bk  v [1113-1135] 75c-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk iv, ch 9,
237d238a  12  Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 27 281d; bk viii, sect
33   288a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus,  36a-37b  /  LycurgusNuma,  62b-c  /
Coriolanus,  178c-179a / Aemilius Paulus, 218a-d; 223c-224a / Pelopidas,
233a-b  /  Marcus  Cato  276b,d-290d esp 287c-d / Aristides-Marcus Cato,
291b-292b / Lysander, 361a-d / Lysander-Sulla, 388b-c / Cimon, 394b-395a
/  Lucullus,  419a-420b  /  Crassus,  439a-c / Demetrius, 738c / Antony,
755d-758c  /  Marcus Brutus, 817d-818a 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk ii, 31a-b;
35c-d;  bk  hi,  57b-58d  /  Histories,  bk  i,  194d-195a 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vi,  par  16  40a-c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q  60,  a  5,  ans 53a-54d; q 65, a i, rep 1-2 70b-72a; q 84, a 1
174b-175a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[1-96] 9c10c; xi 15a-16b esp [91-115] 16a-b; xvn [3475] 24bc; xix 26d-28b; xxix [121-139] 44b-c;
purgatory,  xix [7o]-xxn [114] 82b-87c 22 Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par
52-53 424a426a / Parson's Tale, par 27 512a-514b 23 Machiavelli: Prince,
ch xvi 22d-23c 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 73a; 75a

[1100b]
1066  THE  GREAT IDEAS 10c /o \0d 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel,
bk  i,  62c-d;  bk in, 133b-140b 25 Montaigne: Essays, HOa-c; 122a-124d;
436c439c; 462b-c 27 Shakespeare: Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp act 1, sc
11  [197-21  1] 399b, act ii, sc ii 400c-403b 29 Cervantes: Don Quixote,
part  ii,  221d-222c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part iv, appendix, xxviiixxix
450a  33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 91a-94a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  v,  sect  30-39  31c-33c  36  Swift:  Gulliver,  part ii, 53a-56a 37
Fielding:  Tom  Jones, 68d; 87b-88a; 291d292a; 362c-363a 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk hi, 10a; bk v, 19a-21d; bk vn,44d-45b; bk xix, 140cd;
bk xx, 146b-c; 152a-b; bk xxv, 211a-c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 360b-361a
/  Social  Contract,  bk  ii,  405b-c;  bk hi, 411a-b; 412b-c; 421c-d 39
Smith:  Wealth  of  Nations,  bk  ii, 142d-151c; bk iv, 189d-190a; bk v,
346c-347d  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall, 139b-140c passim; 155d-156a;
339d-340c; 510b-c; 660d-661c 44 Boswell: Johnson, 194c-195a; 295c; 319b;
403a;  447b-c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part hi, par 240 76d /
Philosophy  of  History,  part  iv,  353b-c  47  Goethe:  Faust, part ii
[5646-5665] 139a-b;
[5767-5796] 141b-142b
50  Marx:  Capital, 60d-62b; 72a-c; 292d-295d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk i, 25a-32a passim; bk v, 197b-c; bk vii, 275a-278c; 291a292b; bk vii-
viii,  301b-303c;  bk viii, 329c332a; bk x, 414c-416c; bk xi, 490a-493d;
500d-503a;  bk  xiii,  569c; 586c; bk xv, 633a-d; epilogue i, 650d-652a;
664c-665a  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk vi, 164b-165a 53 James:
Psychology,  725b-726a  10d.  The  principles of justice with respect to
wealth  and  property:  fair  wages  and  prices  Old Testament: Exodus,
20:15,17  /  Leviticus,  19:1 1,35-36; 25 -.^-y] I Deuteronomy, 5:19,21;
24:10-15;  25:13-16; 27:17 / // Samuel, 12:1-6 -(D) // Kings, 12:1-6 / /
Kings, 2i-(D) /// Kings, 21 / II Kings, 5:20-27— (D) IV Kings, 5:20-27 /
Nehemiah,  5:1-12—  (D) II Esdras, 5:1-12 / Job, 24 / Proverbs, 1:10-19;
6:30-31;  11:1;  14:31;  16:11;  20:10; 21:6-7; 22:16,2223,28; 23:10-11;
28:8,24;  3 o;8-9 / Isaiah, 3:14-15; 10:1-2— (D) Isaias, 3:14-15; 10:1-2
/  Jeremiah,  17:11—  (D)  Jeremias,  17:11 / Eze\- iel, 22:12-13,25-29;
45:9-12—  (D)  Ezechiel,  22:12-13,25-29; 45:9-12 / Amos, 2:6-7; 5 :II ~
12;  8:1-7  esp  8:4-6 / Micah, 6:9-12— (D) Micheas, 6:9-12 / Zechariah,
5:3— (D) Zacharias, 5:3

[1101a]
1(W  to  10«?(1)  Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 5:8,14; 20:25; 26:29; 27:2;
29:19; 34:18-22— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 5:10,16-17; 20:27; 26:28; 27:2;
29:25;  34:21-27  New  Testament: Matthew, 10:10; 19:18 I^Mrar^, 10:19 /
Luke, 3:12-13; 10:7; 18:20 / Acts, 2:44-47; 4:31-5:11 / Romans, 13:9 / /
Corinthians,  6:10 / Ephesians, 4:28 / / Timothy, 5:18 / // Timothy, 2:6
5 Euripides: Helen
[903-908]
306d-307a  /  Phoenician Maidens [528-567] 382c-d 5 Aristophanes: Plutus
629a-642d  esp  [76-1  n]  630a-b  6 Herodotus: History, bk ii, 73b-74d;
87a-b; bk iv, 158b-c; bk vi, 201d-202c; bk vii, 245b; bk viii, 260d-261a
7  Plato: Republic, bk i, 297a-c; bk ii, 316a319b; bk iii-iv, 340c-343a;
bk  v,  364c-365d / Laws, bk viii, 738c-743a; bk xi, 772d-775d / Seventh
Letter, 814b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk v, ch 2
[ii30a i3-b i7]
377c-378a; ch 4
[ii32b n]-CH
5
[ii33b29]
380b-381c; bk viii, ch 9 411d-412c; ch 13-14 414d-416d passim; bk ix, ch
i  416b,d-417c  / Politics, bk 1, ch 3-1 1 446d-453d passim; bk 11, ch 5
458a-460a; ch 7 461d-463c; bk v, ch 1
[i30i a25~b2] 502b-c / Athenian Constitution, ch 12 557b-558a
12  Aurelius:  Meditations, bk viii, sect 33 288a 14 Plutarch: Lycurgus,
36a-37b  / Solon, 68d70c / Poplicola-Solon, 87a / Crassus-Nicias, 455b,d
15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk ii, 31a-b / Histories, bk ii, 236d-237a; bk iv,
286c-287a  19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 21, a 1 124b-125b; q
98,  a i, rep 3 516d-517c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 94,
a  5,  rep 3 224d-225d; q 95, a 4, ans 229b230c; q 105, a 2, ans and rep
3-6  309d-316a  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  xi 15a-16b passim 22
Chaucer: Tale of Melibeus, par 49-51 422a424a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i,  93b-c;  94d-95a;  part  11,  124d-126a; 140d; 156b-157a 24 Rabelais:
Gargantua  and  Pantagruel, bk hi, 133b-134d 25 Montaigne: Essays, 42a-b
27  Shakespeare:  King Lear, act hi, sc iv [2636] 264c / Coriolanus, act
i, sc i [1-167] 351a353a 30 Bacon : Advancement of Learning, 30c-d; 86b-c
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, appendix, xvii 448d 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  91a-94a;  97b-98b 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch v, sect 30-39
31c-33c;  sect  51  35d-36a  36  Swift:  Gulliver, part iv, 154b-155b 38
Montesquieu:  Spirit of Laws, bk v, 19a-d; 23a-b; 29c; bk xii, 86c-d; bk
xiii, 96a-b; bk xviii, 128b; bk xx, 146b-d; bk xxiii, 199b-200a,c

[1101b]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH 1067 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 348b; 353b; 354a355b;
360b-361a;  365b-366a  / Political Economy, 375b-d; 377b-385a,c / Social
Contract,  bk  in,  415b-417c 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk 1, 13a-16a;
20b23b;  27b-37b  esp  33c;  52b-62a; 106c-107a; bk iv, 225d-228a; bk v,
309a-311c  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 22c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall,
86d-87c  42  Kant:  Science  of  Right,  424b-425a;  443b-d;  446a-b  43
Constitution  of  the  U.S.:  article  i,  sect  2  [17-29]  lib; sect 9
[273-275] 13d; article VI
[578-582] 16d; AMENDMENTS, V [645-648]
17b;  vii  17d;  xiv,  sect  i  [748-750]  18c;  sect  4 19a; xvi 19b 43
Federalist:  number  73,  218d-219b; number 79, 233c-d 43 Mill: Liberty,
309a-c;   322c-d   /  Representative  Government,  335a-b;  366c-367a  /
Utilitarianism,  467b; 470a-471b passim; 472d-473c 44 Bosw ell: Johnson,
124d-125c  46  Hegel:  Philosophy of Right, part i, par 49 24c-25a; part
hi,  par  236  76a-c;  par 241 76d77a; additions, 29 121c; 145 140b; 148
140c-d  / Philosophy of History, part iv, 353b-c 48 Melville: Moby Dic\,
292a-297a  50 Marx: Capital, 13a-50a passim; 69a-84a,c; 89d-102b passim;
112c-113c;   150a-151a,c;   161b-162d;   171a-c;  256b-260c;  261d-262a;
264a-275c;   280c-286a;   296c-298a;   305c-307c;   324a-327b;   354b-c;
366a-368a;  376c-378d  50  Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto, 423c- d',
425d-427b;  429b-c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 197b-c; 211a213a; bk
xiii,  572d-573b;  bk  xv,  633a-d; epilogue 1, 650d-652a 52 Dostoevsky:
Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  165b-166a  54 Freud: Civilization and Its
Discontents, 787d788a esp 787d-788b [fn 3] 10* . The precepts of charity
with  respect  to  wealth  lOtf(l)  Almsgiving  to  the  needy  and  the
impoverished  Old  Testament:  Exodus, 23:11 / Leviticus, 19:910; 23:22;
25:35-37  /  Deuteronomy,  15:7-11;  24:19-22; 26:12-13 / Ruth, 2 / Job,
29:12-17;  31  : 1 6-23 / Psalms, 41 n-3— (D) Psalms, 40:2-4 / Proverbs,
14:21,31;  19:17;  21:13;  22:9;  28:27;  29:7  / Ecclesiastes, 11:1-2 /
Isaiah,  58:1-12—  (D) Isaias, 58:1-12 / Ezekiel, i8: 4-2i-(D) Ezechiel,
18:4-21  Apocrypha:  Tobit,  1:1-8,16-17; 4:7-11; 12:8-10; 14:10-11— (D)
OT,  Tobias,  1:1-8,19-20;  4:712;  12:8-10;  14:10-11 / Ecclesiasticus,
3:30;  4:1-10;  7:10,32-33;  12:1-6; 14:13; 17:22; 29:1-2,7-13,20; 35:2;
40:24—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 3:33; 4:1-11; 7:10,36-37; 12:1-7; 14:13;
17:18; 29:1-2,10-17,26; 35:4; 40:24

[1102a]
1068  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (10*.  The  precepts of charity with respect to
wealth.  10e(l)  Almsgiving  to  the  needy  and  the impoverished.} New
Testament:  Matthew, 5:42; 6:1-4; 10:8,4042; 19:16-22 / Mar\, 10:17-22 /
Luke,  3:11;  6:30-38;  11:41;  12:33-34; 14:12-14; 18:18-25 esp 18:22 /
Acts,  10:1-4;  11:27-30;  20:35 / / Corinthians, 13:3 / // Corinthians,
8-9 / Galatians, 2:10 / / Timothy, 6:17-19 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  ii-ii,  q  32  540a-550a 22 Chaucer: Parson's Tale, par 91 547a 29
Cervantes:  Don  Quixote,  part  ii, 222b 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters,
91a-94a 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xxiii, 199c 40 Gibbon: Decline
and  Fall,  198c-d; 392d-393a 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 233c 42 Kant:
Science of Right, 443b-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part hi, par 242
77a-b;  par  245 77c-d / Philosophy of History, part in, 307b-308a; part
iv,  322b-c;  353b-c  10e(2)  The  religious  vow  of poverty: voluntary
poverty  New  Testament:  Matthew, 8:19-20; 10:7-11; 19:16-30 esp 19:21,
19:27-30  /  Mar\,  6:7-11;  10:17-31 esp 10:21, 10:28-31 / Luke, 9:1-5;
10:1-8;  12:22-30,33;  18:18-30  esp  18:22,  18:28-30 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i-ii, q 64, a 1, rep 3 66d-67c; part ii-ii, q 186, a 3
652d-655b;  aa  6-8  657d-661a;  part hi suppl, q 89, a 2 1006b-1007c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xx [1633] 83b-c; paradise, xi 122a-123c
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  i, 61b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote,  part ii, 338b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 7d 40 Gibbon:
Decline  and  Fall,  597a  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History, part hi,
307b308a;  part iv, 333c; 340d-341a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk i, 50b
52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  iv,  85b86b; bk vi, 164d-165a
10e(3)  The choice between God and Mammon: the love of money as the root
of  all  evil Old Testament: Exodus, 23:8 / Deuteronomy, 16:19; 17:15-17
/Job,  31:24-28  /  Psalms,  52:7  — (D) Psalms, 51:9 / Proverbs, 17:23;
28:20;  30:8-9  /  Jeremiah,  6:13;  8:10—  (D)  Jeremias,  6:13; 8:10 /
Ezekiel,  22:25-29;  33:30-31— (D) Ezechiel, 22:25-29; 33:30-31 / Micah,
3:9-11;  7:2-3—  (D)  Micheas,  3:9-11; 7:2-3 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus,
8:2;   10:9;  11:10,2426;  14:1-10;  20:29;  27:1-2;  31:5-11—  (D)  OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  8:2-3;  10:9-10;  11:10,26-28;  14:1-10; 20:31; 27:1-2;
31:5-11

[1102b]
10d>(2)  to 12 New Testament: Matthew, 6:19-24; 13:8-23; 16:26; 19:16-30
/  Mark,  4:1-20; 8:36; 10:2130 / Luke, 8:5-15; 9:25; 12:13-21; 16:1-13;
18:22-30  / / Corinthians, 6:10 / Ephesians, 5:5 / / Timothy, 6:6-19 esP
6:10 5 Sophocles: Antigone [289-301] 133d 7 Plato: Laws, bk viii, 733b-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 84, a 1 174b-175a 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[1-96] 9c10c; xix 26d-28b; purgatory, xix [7o]-xxii
[114] 82b-87c; paradise, xi 122a-123c
22   Chaucer:   Prologue   of Pardoner's   Tale  [12,263268]  372a/  Tale
of Melibeus,  par  18,  408a;  par  76-77, 430b-431a / Parson's Tale, par
62-64  530a-531a  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk i [670-692] 108a-b 33
Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  94a-97a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 178b-d 47
Goethe:  Faust, part ii [5471-6171] 135a-151a esp [5987-6171] 146b-151a;
[11,151-287]  271b274b 50 Marx: Capital, 61 d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
bk i, 50b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, 130b-132b; bk vi, 164b-166a
bk  v,  11. Economic determinism: the economic interpretation of history
50 Marx: Capital, 7c; 10b-lld; 25c-d; 35b-36c esp 36c-d
[fn
2]; 86d
[fn
4]; 181d
[fn
3];  187a-c;  239b-241a;  377c-378d esp 378c-d 50 Marx-Engels: Communist
Manifesto ,416c-d; 421a; 421c-422c; 427a-b; 428b-d; 429b-c 54 Freud: New
Introductory  Lectures,  834c;  882c883c 12. Economic progress: advances
with  respect to both efficiency and justice 6 Thucydides: Peloponnesian
War,  bk  i,  350d351a  14  Plutarch:  Lycurgus, 36a-37b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of Laws,  bk  xv,  110b-c;  bk xviii, 126c-d; 128a-c 38 Rousseau:
Inequality,  352a-d 39 Smith: Wealth of Nations, bk ii, 142d-151c; bk in
163a-181a,c;  bk  iv,  190b-191a  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 21c- 23c;
498d;  633d-634a,c 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 451d-452a; 452c453a,c 43
Federalist:  number 12, 56b-d 43 Mill: Representative Government, 335a-b
/  Utilitarianism,  452a-b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of History,  part ii,
263b-d;  part iv, 323c-d; 335a-336c; 368c 50 Marx: Capital, 377c-378d 50
Marx-Engels:  Communist  Manifesto,  421d;  428d-429c;  434c-d 54 Freud:
Civilization  and  Its  Discontents,  777a-c; 778b-779a; 787d-788a / New
Introductory Lectures, 882c-884c esp 883d-884c

[1103a]
CROSS-REFERENCES  For: The treatment of the domestic economy, see Family
3a~3b.  ination  of  economic  progress,  see Progress 3a~3c. ADDITIONAL
READINGS  Listed  below  are  works  not  included in Great BooJ{s ofthe
Western  World,  but  relevant  to  the  idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  *•  Locke.  Some  Considerations of the Consequences of Aquinas.
Summa  Contra Gentiles, bk iii, ch 131Lowering the Interest, and Raising
the  Value  of  135  Money  . Quaestiones Disputatae, De Malo, q 13, a 4
Fielding.  Amelia . Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 66, aa 1-2; Hume. Of
the Balance of Trade part 11—11, q 78

[1103b]
Chapter  99:  WEALTH 1069 F. Bacon. "Of Riches," "Of Usury," in Essays .
Of Commerce

[1104a]
1070 THE GREAT IDEAS Hume. Of Interest . Of Money . Of Refinement in the
Arts  . Of Taxes A. Smith. Lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and Arms
J.  S.  Mill.  Principles of Political Economy . Socialism Dostoevsky. A
Raw  Youth  Marx.  The  Poverty  of  Philosophy,  ch  i,  2  (3-4)  .  A
Contribution  to  the  Critique  of  Political Economy . Critique of the
Gotha Programme Engels. Herr Eugen Duhring's Revolution in Science, part
11—III  .  The  Origin of the Family, Private Property and the State II.
Langland.  Piers  Plowman  Biel.  Treatise  on  the Power and Utility of
Moneys  T.  More.  Utopia,  bk  i  Luther.  On Trading and Usury Calvin.
Institutes  of  the  Christian  Religion,  bk  hi,  ch  10  T. Wilson. A
Discourse  upon  Usury  Mun.  A  Discourse of Trade Moliere. Uavare (The
Miser)  Mandeville.  The  Fable  of  the  Bees  Franklin. Poor Richard's
Almanac\  Voltaire.  "Commerce," "Money," "Property," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  Lessing.  Minna  von  Barnhelm  Turgot.  Reflections  on the
Formation  and  Distribution  of the Riches Crabbe. The Village Bentham.
Defence  of Usury Malthus. An Essay on Population Southey. Essays, Moral
and  Political,  iv  Ricardo.  The  Principles  of Political Economy and
Taxation  J. Mill. Elements of Political Economy Balzac. Eugenie Grandet
.  Old Goriot . The Rise and Fall of Cesar Birotteau Cournot. Researches
into  the  Mathematical  Principles  of the Theory of Wealth Gogol. Dead
Souls  Proudhon.  What  Is Property? . The Philosophy of Misery Bastiat.
Economic  Sophisms  .  Harmonies  of  Political  Economy Thoreau. Walden
Dickens.  Oliver  Twist  .  Great Expectations Leslie. The Love of Money
Whewell.  The  Elements  of  Morality,  bk iv, ch 3-4; bk vi, ch 3 . Six
Lectures on Political Economy

[1104b]
Lassalle.  What Is Capital? Menger. Grundsdtze der Vol^swirtschaftslehre
Ruskin.  Munera Pulveris Jevons. The Theory of Political Economy . Money
and  the  Mechanism  of  Exchange  Bagehot.  The  Postulates  of English
Political  Economy  L.  H.  Morgan. Ancient Society George. Progress and
Poverty  T.  H.  Green.  The  Principles  of  Political  Obligation, (m)
Howells.  The  Rise  of  Silas  Lapham S. Butler. Note-Books Frazer. The
Golden  Bough, part v A. Marshall. Principles of Economics J. N. Keynes.
The  Scope  and  Method  of  Political  Economy  Hauptmann.  The Weavers
Kropotkin.  Anarchism Bernstein. Evolutionary Socialism J. B. Clark. The
Distribution  of  Wealth  Weber.  The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of
Capitalism,   ch  2,  5  Sinclair.  The  Jungle  Peguy.  Basic  Verities
(Destitution  and  Poverty;  Socialism  and  the Modern World) Dewey and
Tufts.  Ethics,  part  hi,  ch  22-25 W. C. Mitchell. Business Cycles T.
Veblen. The Theory of the Leisure Class . The Place of Science in Modern
Civilization,  PP  5 6"45 6 . The Instinct of Workmanship, and the State
of  the  Industrial  Arts,  ch  5  Hamsun.  Growth  of  the  Soil Dewey.
Reconstruction in Philosophy, ch 8 Undset. Kristin Lavransdatter Tawney.
The  Acquisitive  Society  .  Religion  and the Rise of Capitalism Shaw.
Widowers'  Houses  .  Major  Barbara  . The Intelligent Woman's Guide to
Socialism  and  Capitalism  Beveridge. Unemployment Berle and Means. The
Modern  Corporation  and  Private  Property E. Chamberlin. The Theory of
Monopolistic Competition Maritain. Freedom in the Modern World, appendix
1   Fanfani.  Catholicism,  Protestantism  and  Capitalism  Belloc.  The
Restoration  of  Property  A. R. Burns. The Decline of Competition J. M.
Keynes. A Treatise on Money . The General Theory of Employment, Interest
and  Money  Gill.  Wor\  and Property Steinbeck. The Grapes of Wrath Von
Neumann and Morgenstern. Theory of Games and Economic Behavior

[1105a]
Chapter^LOo: WILL INTRODUCTION THE great controversy over the freedom of
the  will  tends  to  overshadow the theory of the will itself. For some
thinkers the two notions are inseparable. As the word "choice" popularly
connotes  freedom  in choosing between alternatives, so for them liberty
belongs  to  the very nature of the will. But others who affirm that men
can  act  freely  or  voluntarily also deny that the will itself is ever
free.   Still  others  who  distinguish  between  voluntary  and  reflex
actions—on  the  part  of brute animals as well as men— also distinguish
between the voluntary and the free. They reserve freedom to men alone on
the  ground  that  men  alone have wills. Far from identifying will with
free  will,  they differentiate between those acts of the will which are
necessitated  and  those  which  are  free.  It  would  appear from this
sampling  of  conflicting  opinions  that the issue concerning free will
presupposes,  and often conceals, diverse theories of the will—different
conceptions  of  its nature, its various acts, and its relation to other
faculties.  Those  who  affirm  and those who deny the will's freedom of
action  hardly  meet  on  that  issue  if  they  proceed  from different
conceptions  of  what  the  will  is  and how it operates. The matter is
further  complicated by different conceptions of freedom. Even those who
define  will in somewhat similar terms conceive its liberty differently.
As   the  chapter  on  Liberty  indicates,  freedom  has  many  meanings
theological,  metaphysical,  psychological,  moral,  natural, and civil.
What  is  called  free  in one of these senses may not be so regarded in
another. But one thing is clear. If, as Hobbes thinks, the only sense in
which  freedom  can be affirmed is that of natural or political liberty—
the  sense  in  which  a  man  can do what he wills without restraint or
compulsion—  then  the  will is not free, for its freedom depends on how
its own acts are 1071

[1105b]
caused,  or  how it causes other acts, not on how the acts it causes are
affected by outward circumstances beyond its control. The problem of the
freedom  of the will seems, therefore, to be primarily psychological and
metaphysical.  It  requires us to consider freedom in terms of cause and
necessity.  It  appeals to such distinctions as that between the caused,
the  uncaused,  and  the  self-caused,  or to the difference between the
predetermined, the contingent, and the spontaneous event. To this extent
the problem is metaphysical. But it is psychological insofar as the kind
of  event  with  which  we  are concerned is an interior act of a living
thing  and,  even  more  specifically,  of an intelligent being, a being
which  has mind in some sense of that term. We do not ask whether stones
and  vegetables  have  free  will because we do not usually suppose that
they  have will. Even those who, like Aristotle, attribute desire to all
things  or  who,  like William James, find a striving toward goals in at
least  all  living  things, do not refer to volition or the voluntary in
the  absence  of  imagination  or  thought.  The italicized words in the
foregoing  paragraph  indicate  ideas  which  have  the most fundamental
bearing  on  the  discussion  of will, and hence the relation of this to
other  chapters.  The chapters on Cause and Necessity (and those on Fate
and  Chance)  deal  with doctrines which both affect and are affected by
various  theories  of  the will's freedom. But if we are to postpone the
question  of free will until the nature of will itself is considered, we
must begin with definitions which employ terms discussed in the chapters
on  Mind and Desire. The distinction between thought and action sets the
stage  for  the discovery of a factor or faculty which serves to connect
them. Acting may follow upon thinking, but not without the

[1106a]
1072  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  intervention  of a determination or a desire to
translate  thought  into  deed. Plato, in the Republic, divides the soul
into  three  parts,  of which one, reason, is the faculty of thought and
knowledge,  and  the  other  two, spirit and appetite, are principles of
action.  Both  spirit and appetite need to be guided and ruled by reason
but,  according  to  Plato, reason depends also upon spirit, for without
its  support  even wisdom must fail to influence conduct. Though he does
not  use  the  word,  the  role he assigns to spirit as the auxiliary of
reason  corresponds to the function performed bv what later writers call
"will." The word "will" appears in the English translation of Aristotle.
It  is  used  less frequently than other words—such as "wish," "choice,"
"purpose,"  "impulse,"  "appetite,"  "desire"— to designate a motivating
force,  but  along with them it signifies the factor which turns thought
into  action. Unlike Plato, who separates spirit and appetite, Aristotle
makes  appetite  the generic notion, and treats will and desire as modes
of appetite. But sometimes "desire" is used as a synonym for "appetite,"
and  sometimes  "wish"  or  "choice"  is  substituted for "will." In his
treatise  On  the  Motion of Animals, we find Aristotle saying that "the
living  creature is moved by intellect, purpose, wish, and appetite. All
these  are  reducible  to  mind  and  desire.  For  both imagination and
sensation  have  this  much  in  common  with  mind,  that all three are
faculties  of  judgment.  However,  will,  impulse, and appetite are all
three  forms  of  desire, while purpose belongs both to intellect and to
desire."  But  in  the  treatise On the Soul, we find him insisting that
appetite  be  considered  as  the  single  "faculty of originating local
movement,"  though if the soul were to be divided into a rational and an
irrational part, he would assign wish to the calculative or deliberative
reason,  desire  and  passion to the irrational part. "Wish," he writes,
"is  a  form  of  appetite,  and  when movement is produced according to
calculation,  it  is  also according to wish, but appetite can originate
movement  contrary  to  calculation,  for  desire  is  also  a  form  of
appetite."  What is said of purpose and wish is also said of choice. All
three  somehow  combine reason and desire. Giving choice as the cause of
specifically human action, and desire combined with

[1106b]
deliberation  as  the  origin  of  choice, Aristotle speaks of choice as
"either  desiderative  reason  or ratiocinative desire." Lacking reason,
animals  do  not have choice, according to Aristotle, or for that matter
wish  or  purpose  either; but insofar as their appetites are stirred by
sensation  or  imagination,  and  the  desires  aroused  lead to action,
animals  behave  voluntarily. When the words "desire" and "appetite" are
so used, not to name the generic faculty of originating movement, but to
signify  a  motivation  different in kind from wish, purpose, or choice,
they  correspond  to  what  Aquinas  later  calls  "animal  appetite" or
"sensitive  desire."  This  is  for  him  the  sphere of the emotions or
passions. He treats the impulses of fear and anger, for example, as acts
of  the  sensitive  appetite.  The  kind of desire which, for Aristotle,
depends  upon practical reason, Aquinas calls "intellectual appetite" or
"rational  desire."  Since  "will"  is for him just another name for the
desire  or  appetite which is determined by reason rather than sense, he
necessarily  holds  that  irrational animals do not have will. Aristotle
says  that  "the  apparent  good is the object of appetite, and the real
good  is  the  primary  object  of rational wish." Aquinas distinguishes
somewhat  differently  between the object of the passions and the object
of  the  will. For each sort of appetite or desire, the object takes its
special  character  from  the  faculty  by  which it is apprehended. The
sensible  good,  perceived or imagined, stands to the sensitive appetite
as  the  intelligible good, judged by reason, stands to the intellectual
appetite or will. In one place Aristotle differentiates between wish and
choice  by saying that we can wish for the impossible, whereas choice is
always  of things within our power. But his more usual distinction is in
terms  of means and ends. "The end is what we wish for," he writes, "the
means  what  we  deliberate  about and choose." Aquinas also divides the
acts  of  the  will  according  as they concern means or ends, but where
Aristotle  mentions  only choice and wish, Aquinas enumerates three acts
of  the  will  with respect to ends (volition, intention, and enjoyment)
and three with respect to means (consent, choice, and use). According to
Aquinas, each of these acts of the

[1107a]
will  responds to a distinct act of the practical reason and, except for
the  will's last acts, each mav in turn be followed by further practical
thought.  This  progressive  determinatioiroTthe  will by reason goes on
until  the  use  of  means  leads  to  action,  and  action leads to the
enjoyment  of  the end accomplished. As in practical reasoning ends come
before  means,  so  for  the  will  the  end comes first in the order of
intention;  but  in the order of execution action begins with the means.
Like Aristotle and Aquinas, Kant and Hegel conceive will as a faculty of
desire  or  activity founded upon reason, and so they attribute will, as
they  attribute reason, to man alone. But both Kant and Hegel go further
and  almost identify will in its pure state with reason. "The faculty of
desire," writes Kant, "in so far as its inner principle of determination
as  the  ground  of its liking or predilection lies in the reason of the
subject, constitutes the will"; and he goes on to say that the will, "in
so  far  as  it  may  determine the voluntary act of choice . . . is the
practical reason itself." Only man can claim "possession of a will which
takes  no  account  of  desires  and  inclinations,  and on the contrary
conceives action as possible to him, nay, even necessary, which can only
be  done by disregarding all desires and sensible inclinations." In this
last  statement, Kant seems to use the word "desire" in a sense which is
opposed  to  will.  The  context indicates that he has in mind something
like  the  distinction  made  by  Aquinas between sensitive and rational
desire.  This  indication  is  confirmed  by his own distinction between
brute  and  human  choice.  "That  act  which  is  determinable  only by
inclination  as a sensuous impulse or stimulus would be irrational brute
choice  {arbitrium bruturn). The human act of choice, however, as human,
though  in  fact affected by such impulses or stimuli, is not determined
by  them; and it is, therefore, not pure in itself when taken apart from
the  acquired habit of determination by reason." But, according to Kant,
the human act of choice can be determined solely by reason. Only then is
it  "determined to action by the pure will." One point must be observed,
to which we shall subsequently return. The pure will is for

[1107b]
Chapter  100:  WILL  1073  Kant  a free will. "The act of choice that is
determined  by  pure reason," he writes, "is the act of free will. . . .
The freedom of the act of volitional choice is its independence of being
determined  by  sensuous  impulses  or  stimuli. This forms the negative
conception  of the free will. The positive conception offreedom is given
by  the  fact  that  the  will  is  the  capability of pure reason to be
practical  of  itself."  Insofar  as  pure  reason  is  able  to  become
practical,   that   is,   to   determine   choices  and  direct  action,
independently  of  all sensuous impulses or inclinations, that reason is
in  itself the pure will, and that will is in its very essence free. For
Hegel also, freedom is of the essence of will. "Freedom," he writes, "is
just  as  fundamental  a  character  of the will as weight is of bodies.
Heaviness  constitutes  the  body  and is the body. The same is the case
with  freedom  and will, since the free entity is the will. Will without
freedom  is  an  empty  word,  while  freedom is actual only as will, as
subject."  Though  the  passions enter into the sphere of the subjective
will,  according  to  Hegel, will transforms them. "Subjective volition—
Passion  —is  that  which  sets  men  in  activity,  that  which effects
'practical'  realization."  When  it  is occupied with the passions, the
subjective will, Hegel writes, "is dependent and can gratify its desires
only  within  the limits of this dependence." The passions, however, are
common  to  both  men and animals. "An animal too has impulses, desires,
inclinations,"  Hegel  says,  "but  it  has  no  will  and must obey its
impulses   if  nothing  external  deters  it."  Only  man,  "the  wholly
undetermined,  stands  above his impulses and may make them his own, put
them  into  himself  as his own. An impulse is something natural, but to
put  it  into  my ego depends on my will." Hegel explains this aspect of
the  will  by  reference  to that "element of pure indeterminacy or that
pure reflection of the ego into itself which involves the dissipation of
every  restriction  and  every  content  either immediately presented by
nature,  by needs, desires, and impulses, or given and determined by any
means  whatever."  But indeterminacy is only one moment of the will, its
negative  aspect.  The  second  moment  occurs  in  "the transition from
undifferentiated  indeterminacy  to  the differentiation, determination,
and positing of a deter-

[1108a]
1074  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  minacy  as a content and object." Both of these
moments  are partial, each the negation of the other. "The indeterminate
will,"  in  Hegel's opinion, is "just as one-sided as the will rooted in
sheer  determinacy.  What is properly called the will includes in itself
both  the  preceding  moments."  As the unity of both these moments, the
will  "is  particularity  reflected  into  itself and so brought back to
universality,  i.e.,  it is individuality. It is," Hegel continues, "the
^^"-determination  of  the ego, which means that atone and the same time
the  ego  posits  itself  as  its  own negative, i.e., as restricted and
determinate,  and  yet  remains by itself, i.e., in its selfidentity and
universality."  While  the two previous moments of the will are "through
and  through  abstract  and  one-sided,"  the  third moment gives us the
individual  will  and  freedom in the concrete. "Freedom lies neither in
indeterminacy  nor  in  determinacy;  it is both of these at once. . . .
Freedom  is to will something determinate, yet in this determinacy to be
by  oneself  and to revert once more to the universal." In the tradition
of  the  great books, other writers place the essence of the will not in
its  freedom, but in its being the cause of the voluntary acts performed
by animals and men. The students of physiology from Aristotle to William
James distinguish the movements of the various bodily organs— the heart,
the  lungs,  the  organs  of digestion, excretion, and reproduction—from
those  movements of the whole animal or of its members which are somehow
based  upon desire and imagination or thought. Aristotle sometimes calls
these physiological changes "non-voluntary" and sometimes "involuntary,"
though  he  has  another meaning for "involuntary" when he describes the
conduct  of  a  man,  compelled by fear, to do something contrary to his
wishes,  e.g.,  the  captain  who throws his cargo overboard to save his
ship.  The  completely  non-voluntary  motion  is one which occurs quite
apart  from  any  knowledge  of  the  end,  or without conscious desire,
whereas  the  involuntary  involves  some  conflict of desires. When the
involuntary  in  this  special  sense  is not considered, only a twofold
division is made, as in James' distinction between reflex and vol-

[1108b]
untary  movements,  Harvey's  distinction  between  natural  and  animal
motions, or Hobbes' distinction between vital and animal motions. "There
be  in  animals," Hobbes writes, "two sorts of motions peculiar to them:
one  called  vital . . . such as are the course of the blood, the pulse,
the  breathing,  the  concoction,  nutrition,  excretion, etc.; to which
motions  there needs no help of imagination. The other is animal motion,
otherwise  called  voluntary  motion, as to go, to speak, to move any of
our  limbs,  in  such  manner  as  is  first fancied in our minds. . . .
Because  going,  speaking, and the like voluntary motions, depend always
upon  a precedent thought of whither, which way, and what, it is evident
that  the  imagination  is the first internal beginning of all voluntary
motion."  But  the  imagination,  according  to  Hobbes,  gives  rise to
voluntary  motions through arousing desire or appetite. When desires and
aversions, hopes and fears, alternately succeed one another, what Hobbes
means  by "deliberation" takes place; and, he declares, "in deliberation
the last appetite or aversion, immediately adhering to the action, or to
the  omission  thereof,  is  that  which  we call Will, the act (not the
faculty)  of willing. And beasts that have deliberation must necessarily
also  have  will.  The  definition  of  the  will  given commonly by the
Schools,  that  it  is a rational appetite, is not good. For if it were,
then could there be no voluntary act against reason. For a voluntary act
is  that  which proceedeth from the will, and no other." Locke disagrees
with  Hobbes'  view  that willing is an act of desire. "That the will is
perfectly distinguished from desire," he thinks, may be seen in the fact
that  desire  "may  have  a  quite contrary tendency from that which our
wills set us upon." Desire, according to Locke, "is an uneasiness of the
mind  for want of some absent good"; whereas will is the "power to begin
or  forbear,  continue  or  end,  the  several actions of our minds, and
motions  of  our  bodies,  barely by a thought or preference of the mind
ordering or, as it were, commanding the doing or not doing, such or such
a  particular  action.  .  .  .  The  actual  exercise of that power, by
directing  any  particular  action  or its forbearance, is that which we
call  volition  or  willing."  Though  volition is not an act of desire,
Locke holds that it is the uneasiness of desire which

[1109a]
"determines  the  will  to the successive voluntary actions." And though
Locke   speaks  of  willing  as  if  it  were  an  act  of  thought,  he
distinguishes  between  the  mind's  power  of -Ufltter^ standing and of
willing.   The  one  is  a  passive,  the  other  is  an  active  power.
Understanding or perceptivity is "a power to receive ideas or thoughts";
will  or  motivity  is  the  "power to direct the operative faculties to
motion  or  rest."  In this conception of the will as the power the mind
has  to  control the faculties, or the motions of the body, which can be
voluntarily  exercised,  Locke, like Hobbes before him and William James
after,  explains the will's action in terms of thinking of the motion to
be  performed  or  the deed to be done. Discussing the theory of what he
calls  "ideo-motor  action,"  James  says that "a supply of ideas of the
various  movements  that are possible, left in the memory by experiences
of  their involuntary performance, is thus the first prerequisite of the
voluntary life." Reflexive or other innately determined movements do not
depend  upon  consciousness of the movement to be performed. That is why
"voluntary  movement  must  be  secondary,  not primary functions of our
organism"; or as he says in another place, the action which is performed
voluntarily  "must  before  that,  at least once, have been impulsive or
reflex."  The  kind  of  idea which initiates a voluntary movement James
calls  a  "kinaesthetic image" —an image of the sensations which will be
experienced   when  the  movement  takes  place.  "In  perfectly  simple
voluntary  acts,"  he writes, "there is nothing else in the mind but the
kinaesthetic  image, thus defined, of what the act is to be." In certain
cases,  however,  there must be "an additional mental antecedent, in the
shape  of a fiat, decision, consent, volitional mandate . . . before the
movement  can follow." This becomes necessary when contrary kinaesthetic
images  vie  with  one  another to initiate antagonistic movements. "The
express  fiat,  or  act of mental consent to the movement, comes in when
the  neutralization of the antagonistic and inhibitory idea is required.
"With  the  prevalence, once there as a fact, of the motive idea," James
goes on, "the psychology of volition properly stops. The movements which
ensue are exclusively physiological

[1109b]
Chapter  100:  WILL 1075 phenomena, following according to physiological
laws  upon  neural  events  to  which  the idea corresponds. The willing
terminates  with  the prevalence of the idea. . . . We thus find that we
reach the heart of our inquiry into volition when we ask by what process
it  is  that  the thought of any given object comes to prevail stably in
the  mind."  The  answer  James  gives  is  that  it  is  "the essential
achievement  of the will ... to attend to a difficult object and hold it
fast  before  the  mind.  The  so-doing  is  the  fiat.  . . . Effort of
attention  is  thus  the essential phenomenon of the will." Though Freud
does  not  use  the word "will," or analyze voluntary movements in ideo-
motor  terms,  he does attribute to what he calls "the ego" the function
which Locke and James ascribe to will. "In popular language," he writes,
"we may say that the ego stands for reason and circumspection, while the
id  stands  for  the untamed passions." To the ego is given "the task of
representing  the  external  world  for the id," and so of protecting it
from  destructive  conflicts with reality. In discharging this function,
"on  behalf  of the id, the ego controls the path of access to motility,
but,"  Freud  continues,  "it interpolates between desire and action the
procrastinating  factor  of  thought,  during  which it makes use of the
residues of experience stored up in memory. In this way it dethrones the
pleasureprinciple,  which  exerts  undisputed sway over the processes in
the  id,  and  substitutes  for it the reality-principle, which promises
greater  security  and  greater  success."  As the problem of the will's
freedom  involves the question of whether or how its acts are caused, so
the  will's  action  raises  a  problem  concerning  how  it  causes the
voluntary effects it produces. In Locke's view, we are equally at a loss
to  explain  how one body moves another and how our own bodies are moved
by  our  will.  "The passing of motion out of one body into another," he
thinks,  "is  as obscure and inconceivable as how our minds move or stop
our  bodies  by thought; which we every moment find that they do." If we
could  "explain  this  and  make it intelligible," Locke says in another
place, "then the next step would be to understand creation."

[1110a]
1076  THE  GREAT IDEAS Hume agrees that "it must forever escape our most
diligent  inquiry"  how "the motion of our body follows upon the command
of  our will." That it does, he says, "is a matter of common experience,
like  other  natural  events.  But the power and energy by which this is
effected,   like   that   in   other  natural  events,  is  unknown  and
inconceivable." No less mysterious to Hume is the coming into "existence
of an idea, consequent to the command of the will," which seems to imply
a  "creative power, by which it raises from nothing a new idea, and with
a  kind  of  Fiat,  imitates  the  omnipotence  of its Maker." How "this
operation is performed, the power by which it is produced," seems to him
"entirely  beyond  our  comprehension."  Spinoza  and  Descartes  take a
different  view  of  the  relation between the will and the intellect or
understanding.  Neither  admits that the human will forms new ideas, or,
as  Spinoza  says,  that there are "mere fancies constructed by the free
power  of  the will." Both conceive the will's activity as consisting in
assent  or  dissent  to ideas, their affirmation or negation. But beyond
this  point  they  part  company. For one thing, Descartes distinguishes
between  the  will  as  a  faculty  of choice and the understanding as a
faculty  of  knowledge,  where  Spinoza  holds  that  "the  will and the
intellect  are  one  and  the  same." Since Spinoza denies that will and
intellect  are  anything  except  "the  individual  volitions  and ideas
themselves," it is more precise, he suggests, to say that the individual
volition  (i.e.,  the  affirmation  or  negation  of  this idea) and the
individual idea affirmed or denied are one and the same. In consequence,
they  differ  with  respect to the power of volition. Spinoza criticizes
the  supposition  he  finds  in Descartes, that "the will extends itself
more  widely  than  the  intellect, and is therefore different from it."
Whereas  Descartes  thinks  that  "the  faculty of comprehension which I
possess  ...  is  of  very  small extent and extremely limited," Spinoza
says,  "I  am  conscious  of  a  will so extended as to be subject to no
limits."  We  can  affirm  or  deny  much  more  than  we  can know with
certitude.  This difference between Spinoza and Descartes reveals itself
most  strikingly  in  their  conception  of  God's  will.  According  to
Descartes,

[1110b]
the  omnipotence  of  God  lies  in  the  supremacy  of his will— in its
absolute  independence even with respect to the divine intellect. "It is
selfcontradictory  that  the  will  of  God  should  not  have been from
eternity  indifferent to all that has come to pass or ever will occur. .
.  .  Thus,  to illustrate, God did not will . . . the three angles of a
triangle to be equal to two right angles because he knew that they could
not  be otherwise. On the contrary ... it is because he willed the three
angles  of  a  triangle to be necessarily equal to two right angles that
this  is  true and cannot be otherwise." Against Descartes' voluntarism,
Spinoza declares it absurd to say that "God could bring it about that it
should  not  follow  from the nature of a triangle that its three angles
should  be  equal to two right angles. Such different conceptions of the
will or of its power necessarily lead to opposite conclusions concerning
free  will— in man or God. The human mind, according to Spinoza, "cannot
be  the  free cause of its own actions." In each of its volitions, as in
each  of  its  ideas, it is determined by a cause. The supposition of an
infinite  will  in  God  does  not  exempt that will from the need to be
determined in its acts; nor can God "on this account be said to act from
freedom  of  will."  Yet  Spinoza also affirms that "God alone is a free
cause,  for  God  alone  exists  and  acts from the necessity of his own
nature."  Freedom  does  not  reside  in the will, nor in the absence of
necessity  or causal determination, but rather in self-determination. It
does  not  consist in choice, but in the absence of compulsion by causes
which lie outside one's own nature. Hence only an infinite being—a causa
sui  in  Spinoza's  sense  —can  be  free. Descartes, on the other hand,
places  freedom  in the will and identifies it with the power of choice.
"The  faculty  of  will,"  he  writes, "consists alone in our having the
power of choosing to do a thing or choosing not to do it . . . or rather
it consists alone in the fact that in order to affirm or deny, pursue or
shun, those things placed before us by the understanding, we act so that
we  are  unconscious  that any outside force constrains us in so doing."
Descartes  seems  to conceive the will as cause of itself in its acts of
choice. But he does not attribute to the human will the autonomy Spinoza
ascribes to God. "The knowledge of the understanding," he

[1111a]
writes,  "should  always  precede the determination of the will"; and in
another  place  he says that "our will impels us neither to follow after
nor  to  flee from anything, except as ouramderstanding represents it as
good  or  evil."  In  order  to  be free, Descartes explains, "it is not
necessary  that  I  should be indifferent as to the choice of one or the
other  of  two  contraries;  but contrariwise the more I lean to the one
whether  I  recognize  clearly that the reasons of the good and the true
are  to be found in it, or whether God so disposes my inward thought the
more  freely  do  I choose and embrace it." The will always retains "the
power  of  directing itself towards one side or the other apart from anv
determination  by  the understanding." The human will is, in this sense,
always undetermined from without, though it is not always indifferent to
the  alternatives  confronting  it.  It is indifferent, Descartes holds,
only  when  a man "does not know what is the more true or the better, or
at  least  when  he  does  not  see  clearly  enough to prevent him from
doubting about it. Thus the indifference which attaches to human liberty
is  very different from that which belongs to the divine." The denial of
free  will  in the tradition of western thought seems to follow from the
principle that every happening must have a cause. In the sphere of human
conduct,  voluntary  acts are no less determined effects of prior causes
than  involuntary  acts.  Though  both  are  equally  necessitated,  the
difference  between  the  voluntary  and  the  involuntary, according to
Hobbes,  Locke,  and  Hume,  consists  in  the fact that when a man acts
voluntarily,  he  does  what he himself has decided to do. The fact that
his  decision to act in a certain way is itself caused, does not, in the
opinion  of  these  writers, abolish the freedom of his action, but only
the  freedom  of his will. If freedom is attributed not to a man's will,
but  to  the  man  who  can do what he wills, then, these writers think,
there  is  no  conflict between freedom and necessity—or between freedom
and  the universal reign of causality. For them freedom is abridged only
by  external  forces which coerce a man to act contrary to his wishes or
constrain  him  from  acting  as  he  wills.  Freedom  in  this sense is
incompatible only with exterior com-

[1111b]
Chapter  100: WILL 1077 pulsion, not with the inner causal determination
of  every act of the will. To those who deny free will, it does not seem
to be an entirely satisfactory answer to say, as Descartes does, that we
are  immediately conscious of our freedom of choice. In the Third Set of
Objections,  urged  by  Thomas  Hobbes  against Descartes, Objection XII
(which  is  directed  against  Meditation IV wherein Descartes discusses
free  will)  contains  this  statement: "We must note here also that the
freedom of the will has been assumed without proof, and in opposition to
the  opinion  of  the Calvinists." In replying, Descartes merely repeats
his  original  statement  of  the  evidence  for  free  will. "I made no
assumption  concerning  freedom,"  he  writes, "which is not a matter of
universal  experience.  Though there are many who, looking to the divine
foreordination,  cannot  conceive how that is compatible with liberty on
our part, nevertheless no one, when he considers himself alone, fails to
experience  that  to  will  and to be free are the same thing (or rather
that  there  is  no  difference  between  what  is voluntary and what is
free)."  To Gassendi who, in another set of objections, also denies "the
indeterminateness  of  the  will," Descartes replies: "These matters are
such  that  anyone  ought  to  experience them in himself rather than be
convinced  of  them  by  ratiocination. . . . Refuse then to be free, if
freedom  does  not  please  you; I at least shall rejoice in my liberty,
since I experience it in myself, and you have assailed it not with proof
but with bare negations merely." The experience of free will is no proof
either, the opponents reply, for the experience is open to the suspicion
that  it  is illusory rather than real. It may be, Hume suggest, only "a
false  sensation  or  seeming experience which we have ... of liberty or
indifference  in  many  of  our  actions." We suffer this illusion, even
foist  it  upon ourselves, he further suggests, because we are motivated
by  "the fantastical desire of shewing liberty." In the same vein, Freud
later  discounts  objections to the determinism of psychoanalysis on the
part  of  those  who refuse to recognize the hidden causes which control
their  actions.  "You  have  an illusion of a psychic freedom within you
which  you  do  not  want  to give up," he says. But this "deeply rooted
belief in psychic freedom and choice" must be given up

[1112a]
1078 THE GREAT IDEAS because it "is quite unscientific. ... It must give
way  before the claims of a determinism which governs even mental life."
The  dilemma  of free will or determinism does not seem to other writers
to  be  so  easily resolvable. "All theory is against the freedom of the
will,"  says  Dr.  Johnson;  "all experience for it." Tolstoy states the
dilemma in similar terms. "Regarding man as a subject of observation" by
the rational methods of the sciences, Tolstoy writes, "we find a general
law  of  necessity  to  which  he (like all that exists) is subject. But
regarding him from within ourselves as what we are conscious of, we feel
ourselves  to  be free. This consciousness is a source of self-cognition
quite  apart  from  and  independent  of  reason. Through his reason man
observes himself, but only through consciousness does he know himself. .
.  .  You say: I am not free. But I have lifted my hand and let it fall.
Everyone  understands  that  this  illogical  reply  is  an  irrefutable
demonstration   of   freedom.   That   reply  is  the  expression  of  a
consciousness  that  is  not  subject  to reason." The problem cannot be
solved  ,  Tolstoy  thinks,  by ignoring one side of the question. To do
that  is  to  put  the  problem "on a level on which the question itself
cannot  exist.  In  our  time,"  Tolstoy continues, "the majority of so-
called advanced people— that is, the crowd of ignoramuses—have taken the
work  of  the  naturalists  who deal with one side of the question for a
solution  of  the  whole  problem." But to admit that "from the point of
view  of  reason  man  is subject to the law of necessity . . . does not
advance  by  a  hair's  breadth  the solution of the question, which has
another,  opposite,  side,  based  on the consciousness of freedom." Not
only  does  this  "unshakable,  irrefutable  consciousness  of  freedom,
uncontrolled  by  experiment  or  argument"  constitute for Tolstoy "the
other  side of the question," but it is also for him that "without which
no  conception  of  man  is  possible."  William  James takes a somewhat
different  view  of  the dilemma of free will or determinism. Conceiving
the  act  of free will in terms of the exertion of an effort on our part
which  is  not  determined by its object, James is willing to admit that
our consciousness of freedom may be a

[1112b]
delusion.  "Even in effortless volition we have the consciousness of the
alternative  being  also  possible.  This is surely a delusion here," he
writes;  "why  is  it  not a delusion everywhere?" Hence it seems to him
that  "the  question of free will is insoluble on strictly psychological
grounds."  But  if  the  existence  of  free  will cannot be proved from
experience,  neither,  in his opinion, can determinism be scientifically
demonstrated.  "The  most  that any argument can do for determinism," he
says,  "is  to  make it a clear and seductive conception, which a man is
foolish  not  to  espouse,  so long as he stands by the great scientific
postulate  that the world must be one unbroken fact, and that prediction
of  all  things  without  exception  must  be  ideally, if not actually,
possible."  For  those  who  accept  this postulate, "a little fact like
effort  can  form  no  real  exception  to  the  overwhelming  reign  of
deterministic  law."  Yet it remains a postulate, and postulation is not
proof. Furthermore, there is "a moral postulate about the Universe . . .
which  would  lead  one to espouse the contrary view . . . the postulate
that  what  ought  to  be can be, and that bad acts cannot be fated, but
that  good  ones must be possible in their place." As scientific law and
prediction  seem  to  call  for  the  postulate of determinism, so moral
responsibility  and the genuineness of moral options seem to demand free
will.  Hume  recognizes  that  "it  may be said . . . that, if voluntary
actions  be  subjected to the same laws of necessity with the operations
of matter, there is a continued chain of necessary causes, pre-ordained,
and  pre-determined,  reaching  from  the original cause of all to every
single volition of every human creature." But he does not think that the
assertion  of "no contingency anywhere in the universe; no indifference;
no liberty," requires us to give up our notions of moral responsibility,
and to abstain from making judgments of praise or blame concerning human
actions.  "The  mind  of  man is so formed by nature," he writes, "that,
upon the appearance of certain characters, dispositions, and actions, it
immediately  feels the sentiment of approbation or blame. The characters
which engage our approbation are chiefly such as contribute to the peace
and security of human society; as the characters which excite blame are

[1113a]
chiefly  such  as  tend  to public detriment and disturbance." In Hume's
opinion,    "remote   and   uncertain   speculations"   concerning   the
causation^fJiu^  man  character  or  conduct,  or concerning the general
structure  of  the  universe,  do not affect "the sentiments which arise
from the natural and immediate view of the objects. . . . Why should not
the  acknowledgement  of a real distinction between vice and virtue," he
asks,  "be  reconcileable  to  all speculative systems of philosophy, as
well  as  that  of  a  real  distinction  between  personal  beauty  and
deformity?"  James  takes  the  exactly  opposite  view.  A  doctrine of
necessity   or   determinism   is   for   him  incompatible  with  moral
responsibility, or with the distinction between virtue and vice. Holding
that  free  will  is indispensable to the moral life, James chooses "the
alternative  of  freedom." In doing so he confesses that "the grounds of
his  opinion are ethical rather than psychological." He does go one step
further   into  what  he  calls  "the  logic  of  the  question."  Since
postulation  is  not  proof—since a postulate is not an undeniable axiom
but  an  expression of what James elsewhere calls "the will to believe"—
the  kind  of  dilemma  which is formed by conflicting postulates can be
resolved  only  by the exercise of free choice. The alternatives of free
will  and  determinism constitute that kind of dilemma for James, and so
it  seems  to him quite proper that the first act of free will should be
to  believe in free will. "When scientific and moral postulates war thus
with  each other," he writes, "and objective proof is not to be had, the
only  course  is voluntary choice, for skepticism itself, if systematic,
is  also  voluntary  choice."  Hence  belief  in  free  will  "should be
voluntarily  chosen from amongst other possible beliefs. Freedom's first
deed  should  be  to affirm itself. We ought never to hope for any other
method of getting at the truth if indeterminism be a fact. Doubt of this
particular  truth  will  therefore  probably be open to us to the end of
time, and the utmost that a believer in free will can ever do will be to
show  that  the  deterministic arguments are not coercive. That they are
seductive,"  James concludes, "I am the last to deny; nor do I deny that
effort  may be needed to keep the faith in freedom, when they press upon
it, upright in the mind."

[1113b]
Chapter  100: WILL 1079 In the tradition of the great books, not all who
affirm free will think that to do so requires them to deny the universal
reign  of causality in nature; nor do they base their affirmation on our
immediate  consciousness  of  free  choice  or make it an act of faith—a
pragmatic  postulate.  Kant,  for  example,  explicitly  disclaims  that
freedom  is  a  matter of faith. "It is the only one of all the ideas of
pure  reason,"  he  says, "whose object is a matter of fact." This means
for  him  that  its  objective  reality can be proved. In contrast, "the
existence  of God and the immortality of the soul are matters of faith,"
by which Kant means that they must be postulated by the practical reason
as conditions necessary for the conceivability of the summum bonum which
the  moral  law commands us to seek. In order to understand Kant's proof
of freedom, it is necessary to remember that he conceives the freedom of
the will in terms of its autonomy, and its autonomy in terms of the fact
that  the  practical  reason,  with  which  the  pure will is identical,
legislates   for  itself  in  proclaiming,  and  obeys  only  itself  in
upholding,  the  moral  law. "Autonomy of the will," he writes, "is that
property  of  it by which it is a law unto itself. . . . Now the idea of
freedom  is  inseparably  connected with the conception of autonomy, and
this  again  with  the  universal principle of morality." The moral law,
Kant  goes  on,  "expresses  nothing  else than the autonomy of the pure
practical   reason,"   and  "this  self-legislation  of  the  pure  and,
therefore, practical reason is freedom in the positive sense." In saying
that  "a  free  will  and  a  will subject to moral laws are one and the
same,"  Kant  thinks  that he may be suspected of circular reasoning, in
that  he appears to make freedom a condition of morality and at the same
time  to  infer freedom from the existence of the moral law. There is no
question  that for him freedom "must be the foundation of all moral laws
and  the  consequent responsibility." But, he explains, no inconsistency
results  from  calling "freedom the condition of the moral law" and also
maintaining  that  "the  moral  law  is the condition under which we can
first become conscious of freedom," if it be understood that "freedom is
the  ratio  essendi\gto\i\\& of being] of the moral law, while the moral
law is the ratio cognoscendi [ground of knowing] of freedom."

[1114a]
1080  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  We  know that our will is free from knowing the
existence  of  the  moral  law.  We  know that the moral law exists, for
otherwise  reason  could  never judge, as it does, that we ought to have
done  what  we did not do. It is not freedom but the moral law "of which
we  become  directly conscious (as soon as we trace for ourselves maxims
of  the will)." This, Kant says, "first presents itself to us, and leads
directly  to the concept of freedom." Whenever a man judges that "he can
do  a  certain  thing  because  he  is  conscious  that he ought," then,
according  to Kant, "he recognizes that he is free, a fact which but for
the  moral law he would never have known." The freedom which Kant thinks
can  be  directly  deduced  from the moral law is a very special kind of
causality.  In  the  sensible world of nature, each cause is in turn the
effect of some prior cause. None is the first or unconditioned cause, an
uncaused  cause.  But  for  Kant  freedom  is  "a  faculty  of  absolute
spontaneity"  and  consists in "the unconditioned causality of the cause
...  a  causality capable of producing effects independently of and even
in opposition to the power of natural causes, and capable, consequently,
of  spontaneously  originating  a  series  of events." How are these two
modes  of  causality—which  Kant  calls  "the  causality  of  nature and
oifreedom"—compatible  with  one another? To affirm both would appear to
get  us  into the antinomy in which the thesis that "causality according
to  the  laws  of  nature  is  not the only causality ... a causality of
freedom  is  also  necessary,"  is  contradicted  by the antithesis that
"there  is no such thing as freedom, but everything in the world happens
solely  according  to  the  laws of nature." Yet Kant thinks he can show
that  "this  antinomy is based upon a mere illusion, and that nature and
freedom  are  at  least not opposed." It would be impossible, he admits,
"to  escape  this  contradiction if the thinking subject, which seems to
itself  free,  conceived  itself  in  the same sense or in the very same
relation when it calls itself free as when in respect to the same action
it  assumes  itself  to  be  subject  to  the  laws  of nature." But the
contradiction is only apparent or illusory if man belongs to two worlds—
the  sensible  world of natural phenomena and the supersensible world of
intelligible beings or nou-

[1114b]
\ mena. "The notion of a being that has free will," writes Kant, "is the
notion of a causa noumenon" —of a cause which does not operate under the
temporal  conditions  of  natural causality. "The notion of causality as
physical necessity . . . concerns only the existence of things so far as
it   is  determinable  in  time  and,  consequently,  as  phenomena,  in
opposition  to  their causality as things in themselves." To remove "the
apparent  contradiction  between  freedom and the mechanism of nature in
one  and  the  same action, we must remember . . . that the necessity of
nature, which cannot coexist with the freedom of the subject, appertains
only  to the attributes of the thing that is subject to time-conditions,
consequently  only to those of the acting subject as a phenomenon. . . .
But  the  very  same  subject," Kant continues, "being on the other side
conscious of himself as a thing in himself, considers his existence also
in sofar as it is not subject to time- conditions and regards himself as
only determinable by laws which he gives himself through reason." In the
latter mode of supersensible existence, man exercises the causality of a
free  will.  He is not in any way subject to the natural necessity which
governs  all  physical  things.  Yet  the two worlds— the moral world of
freedom  and  the physical world of necessity—meet in the same act. "The
rational being," Kant explains, "can justly say of every unlawful action
that  he performs, that he could very well have left it undone; although
as  appearance  it  is  sufficiently determined in the past, and in this
respect  is absolutely necessary." The apparent conflict between freedom
and  nature arises for Kant because he conceives the act of free will to
be  absolutely spontaneous. It is as uncaused as the swerve of the atoms
(discussed  in  the  chapter  on  Chance)  on  which Lucretius bases the
existence of free will. There is another conception of freedom that does
not  attribute  to  free will any special character which brings it into
conflict with ordinary causality. It does not belong to liberty, Aquinas
thinks,  that  "what  is  free should be the first cause of itself." Not
only is God the ultimate cause of what a man freely chooses to do, as He
is  the  first  cause  of every natural event, but the will as a natural
faculty of man never moves itself to

[1115a]
operation. It is always moved by the reason, even in its acts of choice,
and so these acts, wherein the will is free, are also caused. Where Kant
identifies  will  with free-will (which implies that the will is free in
all  its  acts),  Aquinas  distinguishes  between those acts of the will
which  are necessitated and those which are free. He quotes Augustine to
the effect that "natural necessity does not take away the liberty of the
will,"  for  that liberty exists only in the will's choice of means, not
in  its  volition  of  the  end. "Just as the intellect naturally and of
necessity  adheres  to first principles," Aquinas explains, "so the will
adheres to the last end." And just as the intellect assents of necessity
to  those  "propositions  which  have  a necessary connection with first
principles,  namely,  demonstrable  conclusions," so the will adheres of
necessity  only  to those things "which have a necessary connection with
happiness." With regard to all else— the whole realm of particular goods
which  are merely contingent means— the will is not necessitated, and so
its choice among them is free. Although Aquinas says that unless man has
free  choice,  "counsels,  exhortations, commands, prohibitions, rewards
and punishments would be in vain," he does not postulate free will as an
indispensable  condition of moral conduct. Rather he shows how reason in
causing  the will's choices at the same time leaves them free. "The root
of  liberty,"  he writes, "is the will as the subject thereof, but it is
the  reason  as  its cause. For the will can tend freely towards various
objects  precisely  because  the  reason can have various perceptions of
good."  When,  for  example,  "the  deliberating reason is indifferently
disposed  to  opposite  things, the will can be inclined to either." The
freedom  of the will's choice with respect to particular means thus lies
in  the fact that, with respect to all contingent matters, "the judgment
of  reason  may follow opposite courses, and is not determinate to one."
"In  all  particular goods," Aquinas writes, "the reason can consider an
aspect  of  some good and the lack of some good, which has the aspect of
evil;  and in this respect it can apprehend any single one of such goods
as  something  to  be  chosen  or to be avoided. The perfect good alone,
which is happiness, cannot be apprehend-

[1115b]
Chapter  100:  WILL 1081 ed by reason as an evil, or lacking in any way.
Consequently man wills happiness of necessity, nor can he will not to be
happy,  or to be unhappy. Now since choice is not of the end, but of the
means,  it  is  not  of  the  perfect  good,  which is happiness, but of
particular  goods. Therefore, man chooses not of necessity, but freely."
Like  Aquinas, Locke holds that "to be determined by our own judgment is
no   restraint  to  liberty."  But  where  Locke  thinks  the  "constant
determination  to  a  pursuit  of  happiness, no abridgment of liberty,"
Aquinas  holds that because "man wills happiness of necessity," his will
is  not  free in the volition of its natural end. Yet Locke does mention
the  case  "wherein a man is at liberty in respect of willing"— the case
in  which "a man may suspend the act of his choice from being determined
for  or  against  the thing proposed, till he has examined whether it be
really of a nature in itself and consequences to make him happy or not."
In  this  type of case Aquinas locates what is peculiar to the causality
of  freedom.  Sometimes  the  judgment  of  reason  is determined by its
object,  as  when  it contemplates the final end of actions. But when it
deliberates  about  alternative  means  (which  are  both particular and
contingent),  reason  can  judge either way. What determines it to judge
this way rather than that? Aquinas' answer is that such judgments of the
reason  are  voluntary,  in  contrast  to reason's involuntary assent to
self-evident  truths,  wherein  it  is determined entirely by the object
being  considered.  But if a voluntary judgment is one in which the will
determines  the  reason's  assent,  and if reason's judgments concerning
means  are  voluntary  in  this  sense, then the act of the reason which
causes the will's act of choice is itself an act caused by the will. The
will's choice is, therefore, not uncaused; but, as Aquinas conceives it,
the  way  in  which  it is caused makes it self-determining, and to this
extent  free. The general theory of the will figures most prominently in
the  theology  of  Aquinas and in the philosophy of Kant and Hegel. They
not  only  present  the  most  elaborate  analyses of its nature and its
relation  to  reason  but, in the tradition of the great books, they are
the most stalwart defenders of its freedom. Their differ-

[1116a]
1082  THE  GREAT IDEAS ences in principle and in reasoning may, however,
obscure  the  common  ground  they  share.  This  may  be  seen in their
conception   of   freedom.   Aquinas  does  not  attribute  autonomy  or
spontaneity  to  the  will.  Yet  in  his view of free choice as a self-
determining  act  of  the  will,  there is something analogous to Kant's
autonomy;  and  where  Kant  makes  the  pure  will essentially free and
spontaneous, Aquinas holds that the will, with respect to willing or not
willing,  is  always  free  and inviolable. It is absolutely within "the
power of the will," he writes, "not to act and not to will." He does not
try  to  explain  such freedom of exercise in the same way as freedom of
choice. It is only with regard to the latter that Aquinas appeals to the
causal reciprocity between reason and will to show how the will's act of
choice  can be both free and caused. The kind of causation which Aquinas
thinks  takes  place  in free choice— the will determining the reason to
make  the  practical  judgment by which it is itself determined—seems to
involve  a circularity, or perhaps simultaneity, in action and reaction.
If  this  is possible only because reason and will are spiritual powers,
then  here  too  there  is  some likeness to Kant's theory of the will's
action as belonging to the supersensible world rather than to the domain
of  physical  movement. On one other point, they tend to agree even more
plainly.  "Free  choice,"  writes  Aquinas,  "is part of man's dignity."
Man's dignity for Kant—his membership in what Kant calls "the kingdom of
ends"—  is  "rendered  possible  by the freedom of the will." But though
they  share  this  opinion  of  the  source  of  human dignity in 2. The
analysis  of the power and acts of the will ia. The objects of the will:
the scope of its power ib. The motivation of the will and evil or by the
moral law

[1116b]
rationality  and  freedom,  they do not draw the same moral consequences
from  their  affirmation of free will as pivotal in human life. Aquinas,
like  Aristotle,  does  not find moral goodness only in the will. On the
contrary,  the  rectitude of the will depends on the goodness of the end
it  adheres to and the means it chooses. But like the Stoics, Kant makes
the  will  the sole repository of moral goodness. As Epictetus says that
all good and evil lie in man's will, and that the morally neutral sphere
is  "in the region outside the will's control," so Kant begins his moral
philosophy with the statement, "Nothing can possibly be conceived in the
world,   or   even   out  of  it,  which  can  be  called  good  without
qualification,  except  a  Good Will." In his view, "a good will is good
not  because  of what it performs or effects, not by its aptness for the
attainment  of  some proposed end, but simply by virtue of the volition;
that  is,  it  is good in itself." In another place, he adds that though
not  indeed  the  sole  and comple te good , ' the will, good in itself,
"must  be the supreme good and the condition of every other, even of the
desire  of  happiness."  These fundamental issues concerning the will in
moral  philosophy  are  more  fully  treated in the chapter on Duty. The
problems  of the will in political theory are considered in the chapters
on  Law and State—especially those problems which involve the concept of
the  sovereign  will  and the distinction of the particular will and the
general  will,  the  majority  will  and  the  will of all. The strictly
theological  problems  concerning  God's  freedom  and  man's freedom in
relation  to  God's  will  are  also  reserved  for treatment elsewhere.
OUTLINE  OF  TOPICS PAGE 1085 1086 (i) The rational determination of the
will's   acts  by  judgments  concerning  good  087  (2)  The  sensitive
determination  of the will's acts by estimations of benefit and harm, or
pleasure and pain: the impulsion of the passions

[1117a]
(i)  The classification and order of the will's acts: means and ends (2)
The  several acts of the wilLwitrrrespect to ends: their antecedents and
consequences  (3)  The  several  acts of the will with respect to means:
their  antecedents  and consequences 3. The functioning of will in human
conduct  and  thought  30.  The  role  of  the  will in behavior (1) The
distinction  between  the  voluntary and the involuntary: the conditions
(2)  The  range of purposive conduct: the relation of habit and instinct
to  the  voluntary  (1) The distinction between knowledge and opinion in
relation  to  the  willful  in  thought: the will to believe and wishful
thinking (2) The will as cause of error (3) Religious faith as dependent
on an act of will or practical reason 4. The divine will 4#. The freedom
of  the divine will: the divine will in relation to the possible and the
impossible 5. The freedom of the will 50. Interpretations of the meaning
of  free  will  (1)  The  freedom  of the will as consisting in a freely
determined  choice  or  a free judgment of the reason (2) The freedom of
the  will  as  consisting  in the freedom of a man to act or not (3) The
freedom  of  the will as consisting in a totally uncaused or spontaneous
act  (4)  The  freedom  of  the  will  as  the  autonomy  of  the reason
legislating  for  itself:  the  identity  of pure will and free will 5#.
Arguments  for the freedom of the will (1) Man's immediate consciousness
of  his  freedom of choice: reason's reflexive knowledge of its autonomy
(2)  The  freedom  of  the  will as deriving from the indetermination of
practical reason judging particular goods (3) The deduction of free will
from  the  moral  law or from the fact of pure practical reason (4) Free
will  as  a  pragmatic  option:  the  postulation  of  free  will  as an
indispensable   condition   of  moral  responsibility  and  action  5<r.
Arguments  against  the freedom of the will: free will as a violation of
the course of

[1117b]
Chapter  100:  WILL  1083  PAGE  tary behavior I08o to act: freedom from
external constraints or coercions 1092

[1118a]
1084  THE GREAT IDEAS choice yb. The factors of freedom and necessity in
the philosophy of history dence (2) The relation of freedom to grace 8b.
The  goodness  or  malice  of  the will (1) The conditions of the will's
rectitude  or  disorder  8c. The will and virtue: justice and charity as
habits  of the will 8d. The will and duty: the categorical imperative 9.
Differences  among  men  in  the  sphere  of  will 10. Will as a term in
political  theory  10a.  The sovereign will: the will of the people; the
will of the majority 10b. The relation of law to will

[1118b]
PAGE  6.  The  analysis  of  the  will's  range  of  freedom 1093 7. The
implications  of free will 1094 vision 1095 ye. Free will in relation to
sin  and  salvation  1096 (1) The freedom to sin: Adam's freedom and the
freedom  of  fallen human nature 8. The will as a factor in morality and
in society 1097 (2) A good will as the exclusive or principal human good
1098  gb.  The pathology of the will: indecision, obsession, compulsion,
inhibition  1099  10c.  The  general will, particular wills, the will of
each, and the will of all 1100

[1119a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (£))  // Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface. 1. The existence and nature of
will:  its  relation to reason or mind and to desire or emotion 7 Plato:
Republic, bk iv, 350b-353c 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5
[i047b
35-1048*24] 573b-c / Soul, bk in, ch 7 [43i b2a22-b 7] 664d-665a; ch 12]
664a-b; ch 9
[432
10  [433*23-26]  666a  9  Aristotle:  Motion  of Animals,  ch 6 [700^525]
235d-236a  /  Ethics,  bk  vi,  ch  2  387d388b  / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[i368b33-i369a 4] 612a-b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[251293] 18b-d
12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 10, 148c; 149d-150a; ch 23 170a-172d
17  Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr vi, ch 4 108c109b / Sixth Ennead, tr viii
342d-353d  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 19-24 58b-60a / City
of  God,  bk  ix,  ch 4-5 287a289a; bk xiv, ch 6-9 380b-385b 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 14, a 8, ans 82c-83b; q 19, a i, ans and rep
2  108d109c;  a  2,  ans  109c-110b;  q  54,  a  2,  ans 285d-286c; q 59
306b-310a; q 75, a 6, ans 383c-384c; q 80, a 2 428a-d; q 82 431d-436c; q
83, aa 3-4 438d-440b; q 87, a 4 468b-d;

[1119b]
Chapter  100: WILL 1085 part i-ii, q 6, a 2, rep 1 646a-c; a 8 650d651c;
q 9, a 6, ans 662a-d; q 10, a 1 662d663d; q 12, a 1 669c-670b; q 13, a 1
672d673c;  a  5,  rep  1  675c-676b;  q 17, a 1 686d687c; q 18, a 7, ans
698c-699c;  q 19, aa 3-6 704c-708a; q 24, a 2, ans 727d-728c; q 26, a 1,
ans  734a-d  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 5 10b-d; q
62,  a  3,  rep  1  61c-62b;  q  77, a 1 145a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
purgatory, xvii
[91-105] 79b-c; xviii
[1-75] 79d-80c esp [6475] 80c
23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-c; 64a-c; part in, 165c; part iv, 272a
27 Shakespeare: Troilus and Cressida, act ii, sc ii
[51-67]
114a-b;
[163-182]
115b-c; act hi, sc 11 [80-96] 121a / Othello, act i, sc hi
[322-337] 212b-c
30  Bacon:  Advancement  of  Learning, 55b-d; 66c-d; 67a-b 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  111,  82d-83a;  iv 89a-93a / Objections and Replies, def 1
130a;  axiom vii 132a; 141d; 215d-216c; 228c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i,
prop  31  366d-367a;  part  11, axiom 3 373d; prop 48-49 391a-394d; PART
III, PROP 9, SCHOL 399c; THE AFFECTS, DEF I, EXPL 416c-d

[1120a]
(1. The existence and nature of will: its relation to reason or mind and
to  desire  or  emotion?)  35 Locke: Civil Government, ch vi, sect 57-63
36d-38c  passim / Human Understanding, bk 11, ch vi 131b-c; ch vii, sect
3  131d-132a;  ch  xxi,  sect  5-6  179c-180a;  sect 15 181c; sect 29-48
184d-190d  passim;  sect  73  198c199c;  ch xxiii, sect 18 209a; sect 28
211b-d;  sect  30  212a-b;  bk iv, ch xiii, sect 2 363d364a 35 Berkeley:
Human  Knowledge,  sect  26-28  418a-c;  sect  144  441d  35 Hume: Human
Understanding,  sect  vii,  div 51-53 472b-474b 38 Rousseau: Inequality,
337d-338a  41  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  150c  42 Kant: Pure Reason,
164a-165c  esp  164b-c;  234c-236a  esp  235c-d; 236d-237a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-d; 264d265a; 271c-d; 279b; 280b-c; 282d-283b;
284d-285a  /  Practical  Reason,  303b-304b; 314a-d; 315c; 329bc / Pref.
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  367c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals,
385a-d;   386b-d   /   Judgement,   483d-484b;  508d  [fn  1]  43  Mill:
Utilitarianism,  463c-464d  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 4
12d-13a;  par  22 17c-d; par 25-26 18a-c; additions, 17 119a; 26 121a-b;
90  130b-d / Philosophy of History, intro, 163a-164a; part iv, 362b-d 53
James:  Psychology,  51a-b;  660b-661a;  767a;  814b-820b esp 814b-815a,
816a-817b,  819a  54  Freud:  Hysteria, 110c / Interpretation of Dreams,
276c;  351  d;  353a-b  /  Ego  and  Id, 702c-d; 715c-d / War and Death,
760d-761a  /  New  Introductory  Lectures,  837b-838d  esp  838b  2. The
analysis  of the power and acts of the will 2a. The objects of the will:
the scope of its power 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 8
[i46a37~b6]
200b;
[i46b36-i47 an]
200d-201a / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[i072 a23-b 4]
602b-c  / Soul, bk hi, ch 7 [43i b2-i2] 664a-b; ch 10 ai3-3i] 665d-666a;
[433^-18] 666b-c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 2-4 357b-359c;
[433
bk  vi,  ch 2 387d-388b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi, ch 24 203c210a;
bk iv, ch i 213a-223d -< 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 8-10 81d82b
/  Fourth  Ennead,  tr iv, ch 35, 177d178a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
viii, par 19-24 58b-60a / City of God, bk xii, ch 8 346d347b 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 19, a 1, rep 1-3 108d-109c; a 3, ans HOb-
110c; a 6, rep 1-2 113c-114d; a 7, ans 114d-115d; a

[1120b]
1086  THE GREAT IDEAS 2 to 2b 9, ans 116d-117d; q 20, a i, ans and rep 3
120a-121b; q 21, a i, rep 2 124b-125b; q 54, a 2, ans 285d-286c; q 59, a
i,  ans  and rep 1 306c-307b; a 2 307c-308b; a 3, ans 308b309a; a 4, ans
and  rep 2-3 309a-310a; q 62, a 8 323c-324a; q 75, a 6, ans 383c-384c; q
82,  a 2, rep 1-2 432d-433c; aa 4-5 434c436c; q 87, a 4, rep 2 468b-d; q
105,  a  4,  ans 541c-542a; part i-ii, qq 1-5 609a-643d; q 6, a 4, rep 2
647b-648a; q 9, a 1, ans and rep 3 657d-658d; a 6, ans and rep 3 662a-d;
q  10,  a  1,  ans  and  rep  3 662d-663d; a 2 663d-664d; q 13, a 2, ans
673c-674c;  aa 3-5 674c-676b; q 18, a 6 697d-698c; a 7, ans 698c-699c; q
19,  a  1, ans and rep 1,3 703b-d; a 2, rep i 703d704c; a 3 704c-705a; a
5,  ans  705d-707a;  q  20, a 1, ans and rep 1-2 712a-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[9i]-xvm [75] 79b-80c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part i, 87c; 93c; part hi, 165bc 27 Shakespeare:
Othello,  act  i,  sc  hi  [322-337] 212bc 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv
89a-93a  /  Objections  and  Replies, axiom vii 132a 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  hi,  prop  4-1 i 398d400b esp prop 9, schol 399c; part iv, prop 19
429d;  prop  63  443d-444a  33  Pascal: Pensees, 81 186b 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  5,  179c; sect 15 181c; sect 41
188b-c;  bk  iv, ch x, sect 19 354a-c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
26-29   418a-c  35  Hume:  Human  Understanding,  sect  vii,  div  51-53
472b-474b;  div  58  476a-b  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
256a-d;  259a-b  /  Practical  Reason,  298a-300a; 304a-307d esp 304a-d;
315c; 327a-329a; 350c351b / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 367c/
Science  of Right, 397b-398a; 403b-404d /Judgement, 584d-585c; 605d-606b
[fn  2]  43  Mill:  Representative  Government, 331b-c / Utilitarianism,
463c-464d  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right, part i, par 39 21d; par 41
22c-d;  par  45  23c-d;  part  ii,  par  107  40b-c;  par 109-111 41a-c;
additions,  8  117c-d;  26 121a-b; 70 127b / Philosophy of History, part
iv,   319b-320a   53  James:  Psychology,  660b-661a;  767a-768a;  787a;
814b-819a;  830a  54  Freud:  Hysteria,  110c  /  Ego and Id, 715c716a /
Civilization  and Its Discontents, 800d801a / New Introductory Lectures,
838b-839b  esp  838c-d 2b. The motivation of the will 8 Aristotle: Soul,
bk  hi,  ch 9 [432b i3]-CH 10 b3°] 665a-666d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi,
ch 2-4 357b-359c
[433
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10 [i368b i-i369b27] 611c613a

[1121a]
2b{\)  to  2b{2)  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch 17 Plotinus 342d-344d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii, par 58b-60a / City of God, bk ix, ch
4-5  289a; bk xxii, ch 2, 587b-d 19-24 287a19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
a  4  434c-435c;  part i-ii, q q 17, a 5 689c-690b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan,
part  i,  64bc PART I, Q 82, 9 657d-662d; 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv,
90b-93a  /  Objections  and Replies, 126a-b; def i 130a; axiom vii 132a;
228c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part hi, prop 4-1 i 398d400b; part iv, prop
9-19  426d-429d; prop 63 443d-444a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii,
ch  vii,  sect  3  131d-132a;  ch  xx, sect 6 177a-b; ch xxi, sect 29-57
184d-193c  passim;  sect  73  198c 199c 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 164a-165c;
236d-237a   /  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  259a-c;  262ac;
264d-265b;  279b,d-287d  esp  282b283d,  284d-285a  /  Practical Reason,
298a300a;  301a; 304a-d; 315c; 318c-d; 327a-329a; 330c-331a; 341c-342a /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  385c  386b;  389a-390a,c  /  Judgement,
571c-572a;  605d-606b  [fn  2] 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par
25-26  18a-c; part i, par 35 21a-b; additions, 22 120c-d / Philosophy of
History, intro, 166b; part iv, 362b-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man, 310c-d;
592b-d  53  James:  Psychology, 790a-799b esp 792b-795b, 798b-799b; 807a
814b  54  Freud:  General  Introduction,  592d-593a  2£(l)  The rational
determination  of  the will's acts by judgments concerning good and evil
or  by  the  moral law 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk vi, ch 8 [i46b36-i47a 11]
200d-201a / Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 7
[io72a26-29] 602b / Soul, bk hi, ch 7 [43i b i12]
664a-b; ch 9
[432b i3J-cH
10
[433
b  i8]  b27-3o]  666c-d  9  Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch 6 [70ob i5]
665a-666c;  ch  10  [433 -ch 7 [70i a39] 235d-236d / Ethics, bk hi, ch 2
357b-358a; ch 3
[ui3a3]-CH
4
[ni3b i]
359ac;  bk  vi,  ch  2  387d-388b;  ch 13 394b-d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
611c-613a  passim 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk iv [877-891] 55d 14
Plutarch: Pericles, 121b / Timoleon, 197c198a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead,
tr  viii,  ch 1-4 342d-344d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 6, a
1,  rep 2 28b-d; q 19, a 7, ans 114d-115d; q 21, a 1, rep 2 124b-125b; q
27, a 3, rep 3 155c-156a; q 59, a i, rep 3 306c-307b; q 82, a 2, ans and
rep 3 432d-433c; a 3, rep 2 433c-434c; a 4 434c-435c; q 83, a 3 438d-

[1121b]
Chapter  100:  WILL  1087  439c; a 4, rep 3 439c-440b; q 87, a 4 468b-d;
part  i-ii,  q 1, a 6, rep 3 614a-c; q 3, a 4, rep 3-4 625a-626b; q 8, a
1, ans and rep 3 655b656a; q 9, a 1 657d-658d; a 3, rep 3 659c660a; a 4,
ans  660a-d; a 6, rep 2-3 662a-d; q 12, a 1, rep 1,3 669c-670b; a 5, ans
672a-c;  q  13,  a  1 672d-673c; a 3, ans 674c-675a; a 5 675c-676b; q 14
677b-681a;  q  15,  a  3, ans 682c-683b; a 4 683b-684a; q 16, a i, rep i
684b-d;  q  17, a 5 689c-690b; q 19, a 3 704c705a; a 5, ans 705d-707a; a
10,  ans  and rep i 710b-711d; q 20, a i, ans and rep i 712a-d 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy, hell, i [i]-iii [21] la4b; purgatory, xvi [52-84] 77b-d;
xvm
[175] 79d-80c
27  Shakespeare:  Troilus  and  Cressida,  act ii, sc 11 [51-67] 114a-b;
[163-182]  115b-c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 66c-d 31 Descartes:
Rules,  1,  ld-2a  / Discourse, part hi, 50b / Meditations, iv 89a-93a /
Objections  and  Replies,  125bc;  axiom vii 132a; 141d; 216b-c; 228c 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  in, prop 9, schol399c; part iv, prop 61 443a-b;
prop  63  443d-444a;  appendix,  in  447b;  xxxn  450c-d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxi, sect 33 186a; sect 37 187a-b; sect 48-49
190c-191a  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  337d-338a  42  Kant: Pure Reason,
169c-170a  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d-265b esp 265b;
271c-d;  279b,d;  282d-283b  /  Practical  Reason, 298a-300a; 306d-307a;
318c-321b  esp  319c-d  /  Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 367c /
Science of Right, 397b-398a / Judgement, 477bc; 571c-572a; 605d-606b [fn
2]  46  Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 139 48d-49b; additions,
90-91  130b-131d  49  Darwin: Descent of Man, 310d 53 James: Psychology,
796a-798b;  807a-808a  2^(2)  The  sensitive determination of the will's
acts  by  estimations  of  benefit  and  harm, or pleasure and pain: the
impulsion of the passions 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433^1-31]
665d-666a;
[433
b5-i3] 666b; ch ii
[434^0I5]666d-667a
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch i [nn a2i]-CH 2
[iui b i9] 357a-c; ch
4 359a-c; bk x, ch i
[ii72ai8-27] 426a; ch 2 [1172^5-1 173^] 427a
/  Rhetoric,  bk  i, ch 10 611c-613a passim 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
vii,  sect  55  283bc 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 6, a 4,
rep  3  647b-648a;  aa  6-7 649a-650d; q 9, a 2 658d-659c; a 4, contrary
660a-d;  a 5, ans and rep 2-3 660d-662a; q 10, a 3 664d-665c 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i-ii, q 77, a 1 145a-d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
hell, i
[i]-iii
[21]

[1122a]
1088  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  (2b.  The  motivation  of  the  will. 2b(2) The
sensitive determination of the will's acts by estimations of benefit and
harm,  or  pleasure  and  pain:  the  impulsion of the passions.} la-4b;
purgatory, xviii
[1-75]
79d-80c;  paradise,  1  [97-142]  107b-d  22  Chaucer:  Manciple's  Tale
[17,097-1  44]  490a-b  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 64a-c 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  iv,  prop 9-18 426d429d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  vii,  sect  3  131d-132a; ch xx, sect 6 177a-b; ch xxi, sect 12
180d-181a;  sect  31  185c-d;  sect  34-35  186a-d; sect 40 187d-188b 38
Rousseau:   Inequality,  337d-338a  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  164a-165c;
234c-236a esp 235c-d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 259a-b; 260a-c;
265b;  284d-285a  /  Practical Reason, 298d-300a; 306d-307a; 341c-342a /
Intro.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 385c-386b / Judgement, 477b-c; 571c-572a;
605d-606b
[fn2]
43  Mill:  Liberty,  269c-270c  passim  /  Utilitarianism,  463c-464d 49
Darwin:  Descent of Man, 310c-d; 316a-317a; 592b-d 53 James: Psychology,
796b-797b;  799a-b;  808b814b;  829b-830a  54  Freud:  Interpretation of
Dreams,   363b-364b;   377c-378b  /  Instincts,  412c-414b  passim,  esp
413d-414a;  419a-420a  /  General  Introduction,  592d-593a / Beyond the
Pleasure  Principle,  639a-640c  / Ego and Id, 702c-d / New Introductory
Lectures,  838c-d  2c. The acts of the will 2c(l) The classification and
order of the will's acts: means and ends CH 2
[l094al8-22]
340b; bk in, ch 2 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i 339b; ch 4
[1095*13-20]
[nn b2o-29] 357c-d; ch
358c-359a;  ch 5 [ui3b3387d-388b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q
19, a 3
[lII2bI3-IU3 a I2]
1  359c;  bk vi, ch 2 2, rep 2 109c-110b; a 5, ans 112d-113c; q 20, a 1,
ans  and  rep  3  120a-121b;  q 83, a 4, ans and rep 1-2 439c-440b; part
i-ii,  q 1, a 6 614a-c; q 6, a 4, ans 647b-648a; q 8, a 2, ans and rep i
656a-d;  a  3  657a-c;  q  9,  a 3 659c-660a; a 4, ans 660a-d; q 12, a 4
671c672a;  q 13, a 3 674c-675a; q 15, a 3 682c683b; q 16, a 3 685b-686a;
q  19,  aa  7-8 708a709d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi, 50b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 52-53 191d-192b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b;  257c-d;  265c-267b; 274d-275b /
Practical Reason, 327d-329a / Pref Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 367c
53 James: Psychology, 51a-b

[1122b]
2c  to 3a 2c(2) The several acts of the will with respect to ends: their
antecedents and consequences 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433*13-31]
665d-666a;  [433  b5-i8]  666b-c  9  Aristotle:  Ethics, bk hi, ch 2 [nu
b20-29] 357c-d; ch 3 [ui2b i3-i 113*3] 358c-359a; ch 4 359a-c; bk vi, ch
2 387d-388b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 20, a 1, ans and rep
3  120a-121b;  part  i-ii,  qq  8-12  655a-672c  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  256a-b;  265c-267b  esp  266a-c;  271d-279d esp
273d-277b  / Practical Reason, 327d-329a / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  367c  /  Judgement,  586a-b;  594b-595d  53  James: Psychology,
767a-798a  esp  767a-768a,  788a-b,  790a,  791b-792b,  796a-b 2c(3) The
several  acts  of  the will with respect to means: their antecedents and
consequences 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk hi, ch 10
[433*13-31]
665d-666a  9  Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  hi, ch 2-3 357b-359a; bk vi, ch 2
387d-388b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  59, a 3, rep 1
308b-309a;  q  60,  a 2 311a-d; a 3, ans 311d-312b; q 83, a 3 438d-439c;
part  i-ii, q 9, a 3, ans and rep i 659c-660a; a 4, ans 660a-d; qq 13-17
672d-693d  42  Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 265c-267d esp
266c-267d  /  Judgement,  586a-b  53  James:  Psychology,  767a-790a esp
767a-768a;  827a-835a  3.  The  functioning of will in human conduct and
thought  3a.  The role of the will in behavior 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics,
bk vi, ch i
[i025b
22-25] 547d; bk ix, ch 5
[i047b35~i048*24]
573b-c; ch 7
[1049*5-8] 574c / Memory and
Reminiscence, ch 2 [453*15-31] 695b-d 9 Aristotle: Motion of Animals, ch
6-1  i  235d-239d  /  Ethics,  bk  hi,  ch  1-5  355b,d361a; bk vi, ch 2
387d-388b  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d; bk iv
[877-891]  55d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  ii  116d118d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par 19-27 58b-60c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 14, a 8, ans 82c-83b; q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q
19, a 4, ans and rep 4 110c-112c; q 20, a i, rep 1 120a-121b; q 25, a i,
rep  4 143d-144c; part 1-11, q 1 609a-615c; q 3, a 4, rep 3-4 625a-626b;
q 6 644a-651c; q 9, a 1, ans and rep 3 657d-658d; q ii, a i, rep 2 666b,
d667a;  q  12,  a  i,  ans  669c-670b;  q 13, aa 4-5 675a-676b; qq 16-17
684a-693d; q 18, a 6,

[1123a]
3a(l)  to3a(2) Chapter 100: WILL 1089 ans 697d-698c; a 7, ans 698c-699c;
q  20  712a-716d;  q 21, a 2 718a-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 64a-c;
part iv, 272a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, SSfctt, 67a-b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk ii, ch xxi, sect 5, 179c; bk iv, ch x, sect 19
354a-c  35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 51-52 472b-473c; div
58  476a-b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 169c-170a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  264d-265a;  275b; 279b,d-287d esp 282b-283d / Practical Reason,
293d
[fn
3]; 296a-d; 307d-314d; 331c337a,c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383c-d;
385ac  /  judgement,  463a-467a;  571c-572a;  587a-588a;  607c 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right,  part  i,  par  72  31c; part 11, par 115 42b-c /
Philosophy of History, intro, 165a-166b 53 James: Psychology, 291a-295a;
790a-798b  esp 792a-b, 794a-795a, 797b-798a; 807a-808a 54 Freud: Ego and
Id,  715c-716a  / New Introductory Lectures, 838b 3<z(l) The distinction
between   the   voluntary   and   the  involuntary:  the  conditions  of
voluntariness;  comparison  of men and animals with respect to voluntary
behavior 7 Plato: Laws, bk ix, 746a-748d 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk v,
ch 5
[1015*
27-b  3J  535d;  bk  ix, ch 5 573a-c / Soul, bk hi, ch 9-1 1 664d-667a 9
Aristotle:  Motion  of  Animals,  ch  ii  239a-d  /  Ethics, bk in, ch 1
[uo9b3o]-cH 2
[1 1 n b
9l 355b,d-357b; ch 5 359c-361a; bk v, ch 8
[ii35 ai5]-CH 9 [ii36b i4] 383a-384d; bk vi, ch
2
[ii39a i7-2i] 387d
/ Rhetoric, bk i, ch 10
[i368b7-i3] 611d; ch 13 [i373b27-37] 618a
10  Galen:  Natural  Faculties,  bk  i,  ch  12,  173a-c  12  Epictetus:
Discourses, bk hi, ch 7, 183c184a 17 Plotinus: Sixth Ennead, tr viii, ch
1-4  342d344d  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i, q 18, a 3, ans
106b-107c;  q  19, a 12, rep 2 118d119d; q 41, a 2 218c-219d; q 47, a i,
rep  i  256a-257b; q 81, a 3, ans and rep 2 430c431d; q 82, a 1, ans and
rep  1,3  431d-432c; q 105, a 4, rep 2-3 541c-542a; part i-ii, q i, a 2,
ans  610b-611b;  q 6 644a-651c; q 7, a 2, ans 652d-653c; q 9, a 4, rep i
660a-d;  q ii, a 2, ans 667b-d; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q 15, a 2 682a-c; q
16,  a  2  684d-685b; q 18, a 6, ans 697d-698c; q 19, a 6, ans and rep 3
707a-708a; q 20, a 2, rep 3 712d-713c; q 21, a 2, ans 718a-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 72, a 3, ans and rep 1-2 113b-114a 23
Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 61a-b; 64b-c; 87c; 93c

[1123b]
28  Harvey: On Animal Generation, 456c-458a passim 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  24b-26b  35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 5,
179c;  sect 7-11 180a-d 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42 Kant: Pure
Reason,  164a-165c  esp  164b-c; 234c-236a esp 235c-d; 236d-237a / Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  264d-265a; 279b,d; 282d-283b; 284d-285a;
286c-287d  /  Practical  Reason, 296a-d; 307d-314d; 331c-337a,c / Intro.
Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-d / judgement, 587a-588a 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  part  ii,  par  115  42b-c;  par 117 42c-d; par 139 48d-49b;
additions,  5  116d-117a;  10  117d-118a; 90 130b-d 49 Darwin: Origin of
Species,  120b-c  /  Descent  of  Man,  291b;  292c-294c passim 50 Marx:
Capital,  85c-d  51  Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 548d-549d; bk xiii,
578b-579d;  epilogue  ii,  689c-690a  53 James: Psychology, 4a-7a; 8a-b;
9a-17b  esp llb-12a, 13a-14b, 17a-b; 47b-52b esp 49a-b, 51a-52a; 71b [fn
1];  269a-274a  esp  272a-273a;  291a-295a  esp 293a, 294b-295a; 691a-b;
704a706b;  767b-790a  esp  767b-768a,  790a; 827a835a esp 827b 54 Freud:
Origin  and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 13a-c / General Introduction,
454b476a,c  passim, esp 473b-d 3^(2) The range of purposive conduct: the
relation   of   habit   and  instinct  to  the  voluntary  8  Aristotle:
Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 5 573a-c / Soul, bk 11, ch 5
[417*21-418^] 647d-648c;
bk  in, ch 4 [429^-9] 661d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 5 359c-361a 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  viii,  par  10-u 55c-56b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 83, a 2, ans 438a-d; q
115,  a  4, ans 589d-590c; part i-ii, q 6, a 4, rep 3 647b-648a; q 12, a
5,  ans  and  rep  3  672a-c;  q  13,  a  2  673c-674c 20 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 50, a 1, rep 1 6a-7b; a 3 8b-9a; a 5, rep 1,3
10b-d;  q  71,  a 4, ans and rep 3 108b-109a; Q 94, A I, REP tO CONTRARY
221a-d  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  39a-40a;  179bc  28  Harvey:  On Animal
Generation,  456c-458a passim 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of'Morals,
256d257a;  264d-265a;  279b,d-287d  esp  282b-283d  /  Practical Reason,
316c-317a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  378a-b 43 Mill:
Utilitarianism,  463c-464d  44  Boswell:  Johnson,  135c-136a  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of Right,  intro,  par 17 16c; part 1, par 41 22c-d; part ii,
par  123  44a-b;  additions,  ii 118a: 128c-d 49 Darwin: Descent of Man,
288b-d

[1124a]
1090  THE  GREAT  IDEAS {3a. The role of the will in behavior. 3a(2) The
range  of  purposive  conduct: the relation of habit and instinct to the
voluntary.}  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace, epilogue i, 665a-d 53 James:
Psychology,  8a-9a; 71b [fn i]; 74b-78b esp 75b, 77a-b; 80a; 90b-93a esp
92a-93a;  691a-b;  704a-706b  esp  706a-b;  767b-768a;  774a; 788a-789a;
790b-791a  3b. The role of the will in thought 8 Aristotle: Soul, bk ii,
ch  5  [4iya2i-b  i]  647d648a;  bk hi, ch 4 [429^-9 ] 661d / Memory and
Reminiscence, ch 2 [453*15-31] 695b-d 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk
iv [777-817] 54b-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 20-21 58c-59a
19  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 6, a 7, rep 3 650a-d; q 9, a
1,  ans  and rep 3 657d-658d; q 10, a 2, ans 663d-664d; q ii, a 1, rep 1
666b,d-667a;  q 13, a 4, rep 2 675a-c; q 14, a i, rep i 677b-678a; q 16,
a i, rep 3 684b-d; a 4, ans 686a-d; q 17, a i, ans 686d-687c; q 19, a 3,
rep  3 704c-705a 31 Descartes: Meditations, in, 83bc; iv 89a93a passim /
Objections and Replies, 125c-126b; 167a-b; 215d-216c 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  ii, prop 49, demonstschol, 391c-392c 33 Pascal: Pensees, 99 191a /
Geometrical  Demonstration.  439b-441b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii, ch xxi, sect 5, 179c; sect 12 180d-181a; sect 17-19 182a-c; sect 38,
187c;  bk  iv,  ch  xiii  363c364b; ch xx, sect 15-16 393a-394a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  vii, div 53 473c-474b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
240b-243c  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par 5-9 13a-14d; par 13
15c-d  53  James:  Psychology,  381b-385b; 666b-667a; 818b-820b'esp 820a
3b{\)  The  distinction between knowledge and opinion in relation to the
willful  in  thought:  the  will  to  believe  and  wishful  thinking 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk iv [777-817] 54b-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i-ii, q 13, a 4, rep 2 675a-c; q 17, a 6, ans 690b-d 20
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 67, a 3, ans 83b-84d; part ii-
ii,  q  2,  a  i  391a392a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk hi,
148a-150d;  154a-156c; 159d-163c; 166a-171a; 175c-178a 28 Harvey: Motion
of  the  Heart, 283b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 27a-c; 38d39a 31
Descartes: Objections and Replies, 125c-126b

[1124b]
3b  to  4 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b-372d 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk iv, ch xiii 363c-364b; ch xx, sect 15-16 393a-394a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  240b-243c  /  Judgement,  601d  43  Mill: Liberty,
269c-270c 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 585b 53 James: Psychology,
636a-b; 644a-b; 652a-659a passim, esp 653a-654a, 659b [fn 1]; 660b-661b;
820a-b  54  Freud: War and Death, 760d-761a / New Introductory Lectures,
819b-c;  874c-d;  882a-b  3b{2) The will as cause of error 31 Descartes:
Meditations,  iv  89a-93a  esp  90b91b / Objections and Replies, 167a-b;
215d-216c  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part ii, prop 49, schol, 392c-393c 3b{3)
Religious  faith  as  dependent on an act of will or practical reason 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk bk vi, par 6-8 36c-37c; bk 55c-56b; par 18-25
57d-60a;  61a  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 2, 1, par 1
lab;  viii,  par  10-12  par  28-29  60d  a  1, rep 3 391a-392a; aa 9-10
398c-400b;  q  4, a 2 403d-404c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 41b-d
31  Descartes:  Rules,  in, 4d-5a / Objections and Replies, 125c-126b 33
Pascal:  Pensees,  252  219a-220a; 268-282 222a-223b; 284 223b-224a; 287
224a-b  / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b 35 Locke: Toleration, 15b 40
Gibbon-  Decline  and  Fall,  296b-c  42  Kant: judgement, 604d-606d esp
606a-d;  607c-610a  esp  607c  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part iv,
350a-b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v, 196a-198b 53 James: Psychology,
652b-653a;  661b;  826b827a  4.  The  divine will New Testament: Romans,
12:1-2  /  Ephesians,  1  :9-u  /  //  Timothy,  1  :8-io  12 Epictetus:
Discourses, bk iv, ch 1, 218b219a; ch 3, 224d 18 Augustine: Confessions,
bk  vii,  par  6  44d45a;  bk xi, par 12 92b; bk xii, par 18, 103a-b; bk
xiii,  par  5  Hid  /  City  of  God,  bk  x,  ch 7, 303a; bk xii, ch 14
350d-351b;  ch  17,  354a;  bk  xxii,  ch  2 587b-588a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  qq 1921 108d-127c; q 59, a i, ans 306c-307b; a 2,
ans 307c-308b; q 60, a i, rep 2 310b-311a; q 61, a 2, rep 1 315c-316a; q
62,  a  6,  rep  i  322a-d;  q  63,  a  i, ans 325c-326c; q 66, a 2, ans
345d-347b;  part  i-ii,  q  1,  a  2,  rep 3 610b-611b; q 10, a i, rep 2
662d-663d; q 19, aa 9-10 709d-711d; q 39, a 2, rep 3 790d791b

[1125a]
4#  to  5a(\)  20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 93, a 4, rep i
218b-d;  q 97, a 3, rep i 237b-238b; part in, q 18 810a-815d; q ax, a i,
ans  823d824d; a 4, ans 826b-827c; part hi suppl. q 72, a 3, ans and rep
5  920c-922b  21  Dante:  Divine Comedy, paradise, hi [64-90] HOa-b; xix
[86-90]  135d-136a  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part IX, 113bc; 162c 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning,  38a  31  Descartes:  Objections and Replies,
228a-c  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part i, def 7 355b; prop 16-17 362a-363c;
prop 32-35 367a-369a; appendix 369b 372d; part ii, prop 3, schol 374b-c;
part  iv,  pref  422b,d-424a  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134]
137a138a;  bk vii [139-173] 220a-221a 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect
29-33  418c-419a  41  Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 150c-151b 42 Kant: Fund.
Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  265be;  2 76b- 2 77a / Practical Reason,
303b304a;  321b c; 324b-325a; 325d-326a; 328b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace,
epilogue  ii,  675a677b;  680b  c; 684b-d 4a. The relation of the divine
will  and  intellect 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xiii, par 19 115c-d /
City  of God, bk xii, ch 18 354a-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i,
q 14, a 8, ans and rep i 82c-83b; q 19, a i, ans 108d-109c; a 2, rep 2-4
109c-110b;  a 3, rep 6 110b-110c; a 4, ans and rep 4 110c-112c; a 6, rep
2 113c-114d; a ii, rep i 118b-d; q 21, a i, rep 2 124b-125b; a 2 125c d;
qq  22-24  127c  "  143c;  Q  25, a 1, rep 4 143d-144c; q 26, a 2, rep 2
150c-151a;  q 27, aa 3-5 155c-157c; q 50, a 1, ans 269b-270a; q 54, a 2,
ans  285d-286c;  q  59, a 2, ans 307c-308b; q 105, a i, rep 2 538d-539c;
part  i-ii, q 1, a 4, rep i 612a613a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part iv, 271b
31 Descartes: Objections and Replies, 228a-c; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  prop 17 362b-363c; prop 32-33 367a-369a esp prop 33, schol 1-2
367c-369a  42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 265a-c / Practical
Reason, 303b-304a; 321b-c; 324b-325a 4b. The freedom of the divine will:
the  divine  will  in  relation  to  the possible and the impossible Old
Testament:  Exodus,  33:19 / Psalms, 135:6 — (D) Psalms, 134:6 / Isaiah,
14:24-27;  46:913—  (D)  Isaias, 14:24-27; 46:9-12 /Jeremiah, 51:29— (D)
Jeremias,  51:29  / Daniel, 4:34-35 — (D) Daniel, 4:31-32 New Testament:
Matthew, 20:1-16 /John, 5:21 / Romans, 8:28-39; 9:15-26 / / Corinthians,
12:18 / Ephesians, 1 13-1 1 esp 1:9,1:11/ James, 1:18

[1125b]
Chapter 100: WILL 1091 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 2
[1 1 39^-1 1]
388a-b  17  Plotinus:  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  viii  342d-353d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii, par 6 44d45a; bk xiii, par 45 123a / City of God,
bk  v,  ch  10  215c-216c;  bk  xxi,  ch  7-8 565d-568d; bk xxii, ch 30,
617d-618a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 19, aa 3-4 110b-112c;
a  10 117d-118b; q 22, a 3, rep 3 130d-131c; q 23, a 5, rep 3 135d-137d;
a 6, rep 3 137d-138c; q 25, aa 3-6 145b-150a; q 41, a 2 218c-219d; q 46,
a  i,  rep  9-10  250a252d;  q  47, a 1, rep 1 256a-257b; q 59, a 2, ans
307c-308b; q 60, a i, rep 2 310b-311a; q 61, a 2, rep 1 315c-316a; q 76,
a  5,  rep  i  394c-396a;  q  104, aa 3-4 537b-538c; part i-ii, prologue
609a,c  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part hi suppl, q 91, a 1, rep 2
1016b-1017c 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv, 90b / Objections and Replies,
228a-c;  229c-d  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  1,  def 7 355b; prop 16-17
362a-363c  esp  prop  17, schol 362c363c; prop 32-35 367a-369a; appendix
369b372d;  part  11,  prop 3, schol 374b-c; part iv, pref 422b,d-424a 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [139-173] 220a221a / Samson Agonistes
[300-329]  346a-b  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect
50-51  191b-c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 106 433c-d 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  303b-304b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals, 393c /
Judgement, 594d
[fni]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii,  684c-d; 685c; 693b 5. The
freedom  of  the  will  5a.  Interpretations of the meaning of free will
5a(l)  The  freedom  of  the  will  as consisting in a freely determined
choice  or  a  free judgment of the reason 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk
ix,  par  1  61c-d  / City of God, bk xxii, ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 19, a 10 117d-118b; q 59, a 3 308b-309a; q
62,  a  3,  rep  2  319c-320b;  a 8, rep 2-3 323c-324a; q 82, a 1, rep 3
431d-432c;  q 83 436c-440b; part i—11, q 1, a 1, ans 609b-610b; a 2, ans
610b-611b;  q  6, a 2, ans and rep 2 646ac; q 13, a 6 676c-677b; q 17, a
i,  rep 2 686d687c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi [5284] 77b-d;
xvm  [1-75]  79d-80c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part  hi, 49b-d; 50b /
Meditations, iv, 90b-91b / Objections and Replies, axiom vii 132a; 141b;
141d; 228c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a

[1126a]
{5  a. Interpretations of the meaning of free will. 5a{ 1) Thefreedom of
the  will as consisting in a freely determined choice or a free judgment
of the reason.} 33 Pascal: Provincial Letters, 154b-159a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  48-54 190c-192c passim; sect 57
193b-c; sect 73 198c-199c 38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 44 Boswell:
Johnson,  392d-393a  53  James:  Psychology,  388a;  787a; 820b-822a esp
821b-822a;825a-826a  5a(2)  The freedom of the will as consisting in the
freedom of a man to act or not to act: freedom from external constraints
or  coercions 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 59b; 86c; part ii, 112d-113a
35  Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect 7-27 180a-184c; sect
57  193b-c;  sect  73  198c-199c;  ch xxiii, sect 18 209a 35 Hume: Human
Understanding, sect vtii, div 73 483c-484a 5^(3) The freedom of the will
as  consisting  in  a  totally uncaused or spontaneous act 12 Lucretius:
Nature  of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def
7 355b; prop 17, corol 1-2 and schol 362b-363c; prop 32 367a-b; part ii,
prop  48  391a-c  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  140b,d-143a esp 141 b.d142d;
164a-165c;   167d-171a;   237a-b  /  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals,
279b,d-280a:  281c283b;  285a-d  /  Practical Reason, 292a-293b; 296a-b;
301d-302a;  304a-b;  307d-308c;  311ab; 327d-328a / Intro. Metaphysic of
Morals,  383c-d;  386b-d;  392d-393c  /Judgement, 463a465c; 571c-572a 51
Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 692c694d 53 James: Psychology, 223a
b;  388a;  787a  5a(4)  The  freedom  of the will as the autonomy of the
reason  legislating  for itself: the identity of pure will and free will
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  236d-237a  /  Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
264d-265a;   279b,d-287d  esp  280b-c,  283d-285a  /  Practical  Reason,
291a293c;  296a-d;  297a-314d  esp  302a-d,  307d311d,  314a-d;  326a-b;
327d-329a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386d-387a,c;  390b,d391a;
392d-393c / Judgement, 463a-465c; 571c-572a; 587c-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of  Right,  intro,  par  4-17  12d-16c  passim, esp par 4 12d-13a, par 7
14a-c,  par  14-15  15d-16b;  par  22  17c-d; par 29 19a-b; part 11, par
106-107 40a-c; part hi, par 142 55a; par 149 56b; additions, 4 116a-d; 7

[1126b]
117b-c;  12  118a-c; 17 119a; 67-68 126d-127a; 95 132b 5b. Arguments for
the  freedom  of  the  will  5&(1)  Man's immediate consciousness of his
freedom  of  choice:  reason's  reflexive  knowledge  of its autonomy 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 5 44c-d 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  141a-b;  216a 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect viii, div 72,
483c-d
[fn
1]  38  Rousseau:  Inequality,  338a  42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  283b-d  /  Practical  Reason,  291b-c;  302a-303b;  310b-311d /
Judgement,  604c-  d;  606c-607c  44  Bosvvell:  Johnson,  392d-393a  51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 688a689b 53 James: Psychology,
661a;  797b-798b; 820b823a esp 821b-822a; 848b-849a 5£(2) The freedom of
the  will  as  deriving  from  the  indetermination  of practical reason
judging  particular goods 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk hi, ch 2-3 357b359a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 19, a 3, ans HOb-110c; q 22, a 2,
rep 4-5 128d130d; q 59, a 3, ans 308b-309a; q 82, a 2 432d-433c; q 83, a
1  436d-438a;  part  i-ii,  q  6,  a  2,  rep 2 646a-c; q 10, a i, rep 3
662d663d;  aa  2-4  663d-666a,c;  q  13,  a 6 676c677b; q 17, a 1, rep 2
686d-687c;  a  6,  ans 690b-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
109,  a 2, rep 1 339c-340b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi,
sect  52-53  191d-192b;  sect  57  193b-c;  sect  73 198c-199c 5£(3) The
deduction  of  free  will  from  the  moral law or from the fact of pure
practical  reason  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 164a-171a; 236d-237a / Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 279b,d287d esp 280b-c, 282b-283d / Practical
Reason, 291a-d; 302a-303b; 304a-d; 307d-314d esp 310b-311d; 331a-337a,c;
348b-349b  / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 390b,d-391a 5b(4) Free will as
a  pragmatic  option:  the  postulation of free will as an indispensable
condition  of moral responsibility and action 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
291b-d; 348b-349b 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 471d-472a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  epilogue ii, 688a694d 53 James: Psychology, 294a-295a; 820b-827a
esp 822b-823a

[1127a]
5c to 6c Chapter 100: WILL 1093 5c. Arguments against the freedom of the
will:  free  will as a violation of the course of nature or the reign of
causality;  the  impossibility of proving free will 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk ii [251-293] 18b-d 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i 78a-82b
18  Augustine:  City  of God,  bk  v,  ch 9-10 213b216c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 83, a 1, rep 1-5 436d-438a; part i-ii, q 13, a 6,
rep 1-3 676c-677b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-84] 77b-d
22 Chaucer: Nuns Priest's Tale
[15,238-256]
456b-457a  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 113b 25 Montaigne: Essays,
218c-219a  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, def 7 355b; prop 16-17 362a-363c;
prop  26-appendix  365b372d;  part  11,  prop  48-49 391a-394d; part hi,
395a-d;  part iv, pref, 422b,d-423b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk i,
ch  ii,  sect  14,  108d-109a; bk ii, ch xxi, sect 22-25 183b-184b; sect
48-52   190c-191d   passim,   esp  sect  49  190d-191a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect  viii  478b-487a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 140b,d-143a;
164a-171a  / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 279b,d287d esp 282b-284d,
285c-287b / Practical Reason, 291a-293b; 296a-d; 301d-302d; 307d314d esp
310b-311d;   331c-337a,c;  340a-342d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,
390b,d-391a  /  judgement,  571c-572a 44 Bosw ell: Johnson, 392d-393a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  epilogue  ii, 692c696d 53 James: Psychology,
291a-295b  esp  293a-294a, 295a-b; 822b-826a; 848b-849a 54 Freud: Origin
and  Development  of PsychoAnalysis, 13c / General Introduction, 454b-c;
462d;  486d  6.  The  analysis  of  the  will's range of freedom 6a. The
limitations  on the freedom of the will: the distinction between acts of
the  will  which  are necessitated and acts of the will which are free 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk hi, ch 2 357b-358a; ch 4-5 359a-361a passim, esp
ch  5  [1114*31b25]  360c-d; bk vi, ch 2 [ii39b5-u] 388a-b 12 Epictetus:
Discourses  105a-245a,c esp bk i, ch 1 105a-106c, ch 18 124a-125a, ch 29
134d138a,  bk  11,  ch 5 142c-144a, ch 10 148c-150a, ch 23 170a-172d, bk
hi,  ch  2 177c-178d, ch 10 185d-187a, ch 14 189c-190a, ch 18 192a-c, bk
iv, ch 1 213a-223d 12 Aurelius: Meditations 253a-310d esp bk ii, sect 16
259a, bk v, sect 19 272a, bk vi, sect

[1127b]
16 275b-d, sect 22 276a, bk vii, sect 16 280d, bk viii, sect 16-17 286d,
sect  28  287c,  sect  48  289c, bk x, sect 34-35 301a-b, bk xii, sect 3
307b-d  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk v, ch 9-10 213b216c 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part i, q 18, a 3, ans 106b-107c; q 19, a 3, ans 110b-
110c;  a 10, ans 117d-118b; q 60, aa 2-3 311a-312b; q 62, a 8 323c-324a;
q  82,  aa  1-2  431d-433c; q 83, a 1, rep 5 436d-438a; a 2, ans 438a-d;
part  1—11,  Q  1, a 5 613a-614a; a 7 614c-615a; q 5, a 4, ans and rep 2
639a-640b;  a 8, ans and rep 2 642d-643d; q 10 662d-666a,c; q 13, aa 5-6
675c-677b;  q 17, a 5, rep 3 689c690b; a 6, ans 690b-d; aa 7-9 690d-693d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 50, a 5, rep 3 10b-d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvin
[1-75] 79d-80c; xxi [34-72] 85b-d
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan, part ill, 165c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part hi,
50b / Objections and Replies, axiom vii 132a; 141b; 141d; 228c 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  12 180d-181a; sect 52-53
191d-192b;  sect  57  193b-c;  sect  59  193d-194a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
164a-165c  esp  164bc;  234c-236a  esp  235c-d;  236d-237a / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of Morals, 259c-260c; 264d265b / Practical Reason, 325d-326b
44  Bosw  ell:  Johnson,  407b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par
8-21  14c-17c;  part  11,  par  118  42d-43b;  additions,  90  130b-d 48
Melville:  Moby Dic\, 159a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xiii, 577a-582a
esp  578d-579a;  bk xiv, 605b-d; bk xv, 630c631a; epilogue ii, 688a-694d
53 James: P^o/o^y, 291a-295a esp 291a-b, 293a; 388a; 821b-822b; 830a 6b.
The  distinction  between  the will's freedom of exercise and the will's
freedom  of  choice  19  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 6, a 3
646d-647b;  a  7,  rep  3  650a-d;  q  9,  a 3 659c-660a; q 10, a 2, ans
663d-664d;  q  13,  a 6, ans 676c-677b 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk
ii,  ch  xxi,  sect  12  180d-181a 6c. The distinction between voluntary
behavior  and behavior resulting from free choice: comparison of men and
animals with respect to freedom 9 Aristotle : Ethics, bk hi, ch 2
[i i i ib6-9] 357b
17  Plotinus:  Third  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  3  93d-94c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 19, a 10, ans 117d-118b; a 12, rep 3 118d-119d; q
59,  a  3, ans 308b-309a; q 115, a 4, ans 589d-590c; part i-ii, q 6, a 2
646a-c; q 10,

[1128a]
(6.  The  analysis  of  the will's range of freedom. 6c. The distinction
between  voluntary  behavior  and  behavior  resulting from free choice:
comparison  of  men  and  animals  with  respect  to  freedom.} a 3, ans
664d-665c;  q  ii,  a 2 667b-d; q 12, a 5 672a-c; q 13, a 2 673c-674c; q
15,  a  2  682a-c; q 16, a 2 684d-685b; q 17, a 2 687d688b 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  218c-219b 31 Descartes: Discourse, part v, 59c-60b / Objections
and  Replies,  156a-d 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxi, sect
8-1  1  180a-d  38 Rousseau: Inequality, 337d-338a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
164a-165c / Practical Reason, 316c-317a / Pre/. Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,   372a-b  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  386b-d;  393c-d  /
Judgement, 584d585d; 587a-588a 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, intro, par
11  15a-b;  part  i, par 47 24a-b; additions, 4 116a-d; 10 117d-118a; 28
121b / Philosophy of History, intro, 168d; part hi, 304d-305b 49 Darwin:
Descent  of Man,  311b-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue ii, 689c690a
7.  The  implications  of  free  will la. Free will as a source of human
dignity:  its  relation  to  slavery and civil liberty 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  59,  a 3, contrary 308b-309a; q 62, a 8, rep 3
323c-324a;  q  96, a 4 512d-513c; part i-ii, prologue 609a,c; q 20, a 6,
rep  3  716b-d;  q  21,  a  3,  rep 2 718d-719c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  v [19-84] 112b-113a 24 Rabelais: Gargantua and Pantagruel, bk
i, 65c-d 26 Shakespeare -.Julius Caesar, act i, sc ii [135161] 570d-571a
31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  ii,  prop  49,  schol,  394c-d  32  Milton:
Areopagitica,  394b-395b  38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk xii, 85a 38
Rousseau:  Inequality,  338a  / Social Contract, bk 1, 389a-d; 393b-c 42
Kant:  Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  271d-279d  esp 273d-277b /
Practical  Reason,  325d-326b; 327d-329a; 341b-342c; 344a; 346b-348b esp
348a-b; 355a-d / Judgement, 594b-595c 43 Mill: Liberty, 316b-d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  Right, intro, par 18 16c-d; par 21 17a-c; part i, par 36
21b-c; par 48 24b-c; par 57 26b-27a; additions, 14 118c-d; 36 122b-c; 62
126a;  67  126d  / Philosophy of History, intro, 161a-c; part i, 230a-c;
236a-c; part iv, 350b-c

[1128b]
51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  xiii,  577a-578b; 581c-582a; bk xiv,
605b-d;  bk xv, 630c631a; epilogue ii, 688a-690a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  v,  127b-137c  passim  lb.  The  factors  of freedom and
necessity  in  the philosophy of history 15 Tacitus: Annals, bk hi, 49c;
bk  iv,  69a; bk vi, 91b-d / Histories, bk i, 194b 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  i,  ch 36 149c-d; bk iv, ch 33 206c-d; bk v, ch i 207d-208c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-105] 77b-d
43 Mill: Representative Government, 332a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  340347 HOb-110c; par 352-360 112b-114a,c / Philosophy of
History,  intro,  160b-164d  168b-d;  170a-172b; 175c-176c; 179b-c; 182d
186a-c;  203c-206a,c;  part iv, 315a; 348a 368d-369a,c 50 Marx: Capital,
7c; 10b-llb 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk hi, 140b; 143a-c; 144d; bk ix,
342a-344b;  bk x, 389a-391c; 405a-b; 430d-431a; 447c-448c; 465c-467a; bk
xi,  469a-472b;  bk  xiii,  563a-571a;  bk  xv,  618b-621b;  epilogue i,
645a-650c;  epilogue  ii  675a-696d 1c. Human freedom in relation to the
will  of  God:  fate,  predestination,  and  providence  Old  Testament:
Genesis, 3 / Exodus, 4:21; 714 esp 7:3, 9:12, 10:1, 14:17 / Deuteronomy^
11:26-28;  30:15-20  /  Joshua,  11:19-20; 24:1424— (D) Josue, 11:19-20;
24:14-24  / Judges, 9:23 / I Kings, 8:57-58-(D) /// Kings, 8:5758 I Job,
3:23;  12:14-25;  34:29 / Psalms, 119: 36; 139:15-16; 141:4— (D) Psalms,
118:36;  138:15-16;  140:4  /  Proverbs,  21:1  /  Eccle-  «*^/^, 1:2-4,
i4-i5;3:i4-i5;6:io;  7:13-15;  9:12;  11:5-6  / Isaiah, 14:24-27; 63:17;
64:8—  (D)  Isaias, 14:24-27; 63:17; 64:8 / Malachi, 4:6— (D) Malachias,
4:6  Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of Solomon, 7:16; 19:4— (D) OT, Boo{ of Wisdom,
7:16;  19:4 / Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-20— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-21
New  Testament: Matthew, 6:10; 20:1-16 esp 20:15-16; 23:37; 26:39 / Lufa
22:3-4  I John, 5:21; 6:22-71 esp 6:37, 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:64-65, 6:70-71;
10:26-29;  12:37-40;  13:18-27—  (D) John, 5:21; 6:22-72 esp 6:37, 6:40,
6:44-45,  6:65-66, 6:71-72; 10:26-29; 12:37-40; 13:1827 / Acts, 4:27-28;
7:51;  13:48;  17:24-27  esp  17:26  /  Romans,  8:28-9:26  esp 8:28-30,
9:18-21;  11:1-10  /  /  Corinthians,  7:21-23; 9:16-17; 12 / Ephesians,
1:3-12;  2:8-10; 4:7-14 / Philippians, 2:12-13 / / Thessalonians, 5:18 /
//  Thessalonians,  2:11-14— (P) II Thessalonians, 2:10-13 / // Timothy,
1:8-9  / James, 4:13-15 / / Peter, 1:1-5 4 Homer: Iliad, bk vi [342-358]
43c-d; bk xix

[1129a]
7c to Id Chapter 100: WILL 1095
[74-144] 137d-138c; bk xxiv [507-551] 176c177a
/ Odyssey, bk xiv
[441-445]
264c; bk xviii
[1 17-150] 285b-c
5 Aeschylus: Agamemnon
[160-254] 53d-54d
/ Choephoroe 70a-80d esp [269-314] 72jk73bv
[885-1076] 78d-80d / Eumenides 81a-91d
5 Sophocles: Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp
[1297-1415] 110b-112b
/ Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp
[258-291]
116c-d,
[939-1015]
123a-d / Philoctetes
[169-200]
183d-184a;
[1316-1347] 193d-194a
5 Euripides: Helen
[711-721]
304d-305a / Electra 327a-339a,c esp
[1 168-1359]
337d339a,c  /  Heracles  Mad  [1255-1357] 376a-d / Orestes 394a-410d esp
[478-629]  398d-400b  6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 7b-8a; 20a-22a; 46c-d;
bk  hi,  98b-99a; bk vii, 218b-220b; bk ix, 291b-c 7 Plato: Republic, bk
x,  439b-441a,c / Laws, bk 1, 650a-b; bk iv, 679a-b; bk x, 765d-769c esp
767c-768b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch i, 106a-b; ch 12 118d-120b;
ch  17,  123c-d; bk hi, ch 22, 197c-198b; ch 24, 208d-210a; bk iv, ch i,
218b-219c;  ch 3, 224d; ch 7, 233d-234a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii,
sect  ii  258a-b; bk in, sect 11 262a-b; bk vi, sect 44 278bc 13 Virgil:
Aeneid,  bk  iv [332-361] 176a-177a 14 Plutarch: Coriolanus, 188d-189c /
Sulla,  370c-371b  15  Tacitus:  Annals, bk hi, 49bc; bk iv, 69a; bk vi,
91b-d  17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr ii-iii 82c-97b passim 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  ii, par 14 12a-b / City of God, bk i, ch 36 149c-d; bk
iv,  ch 33 206c-d; bk v, ch i 207d-208c; ch 9-10 213b-216c; bk xviii, ch
2,  472d-473a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 17, a 1, ans lOOd-
lOld;  q 19, a 8 116a-d; q 22, a 2, rep 4-5 128d-130d; q 23 132b-141a; q
83,  a 1, rep 2-4 436d-438a; q 100, a 2, rep i 521c522b; q 103, a 5, rep
3  531b-532b; q 105, a 4 541c-542a; q 116 592d-595c passim; part i-ii, q
6, a 1, rep 3 644d-646a; a 4, rep i 647b648a; q 9, a 6 662a-d; q 10, a 4
665d-666a,c; q 21, a 4, rep 2 719d-720a,c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell,
vii
[61-96]
10b-c; purgatory, xvi
[52-105]
77b-d; paradise, 1
[94-142]
107b-d; in
[64-90]
110a-b;  xx  [31-148] 137a-138b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk iv,
stanza  150-154  108a-b  /  Nun's  Priest's Tale [15,236256] 456b-457a /
Canon's Yeoman's Tale
[16,940-949] 487a
23  Machiavelli:  Prince,  ch  xxv, 35a-b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii,
113b-c;   part   iv,  272b-c  25  Montaigne:  Essays,  250a;  342a-b  27
Shakespeare: Hamlet, act hi, sc ii
[22c—
223] 51b / King Lear, act i, sc ii [128-164] 249a-b

[1129b]
29  Cervantes:  Don  Quixote, part ii, 408c 31 Descartes: Objections and
Replies,  141b  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix 369b372d passim 32
Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a;
[167-216]
139a-140a; bk v
[224-245]
180a-b;  [506-543]  186a-187a;  bk  vi  [168-188] 200a; bk vii [139-173]
220a-221a; bk ix [342375] 254b-255b; bk x
[1-62]
274b-275b;
[615-640]
287b-288b  /  Areopagitica,  394b395b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect
viii,  div  78-81  485c-487a  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 230b 42 Kant:
Practical Reason, 334a-335c 44 Boswell:/o/i^ow, 173c; 392d-393a; 549c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of History, intro, 158c160b; 161d-162a; 182d-184d 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  158b-159a;  396b;  409b-410b 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  ix,  342a-344b;  357b-358b; bk x, 447d; bk xi, 481d; bk xii,
553b;  bk  xv,  619d-620a;  630d-631c;  epilogue 1, 650b-c; epilogue 11,
675a-677b;  680b-c;  684b-d  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov, bk v,
121d-137c passim 54 Freud: Interpretation of Dreams, 246c-247d / General
Introduction,  582a-b  Id.  God  as  the  object  of the human will: the
quiescence  of  the  will  in the beatific vision Old Testament: Exodus,
33:18-23  /  Deuteronomy,  4:29  /  /  Chronicles,  16:11;  28:9—  (D) /
Paralipomenon,  16:11;  28:9  /  //  Chronicles,  15:2-4,12-15—  (D)  II
Paralipomenon,   15:24,12-15  /  Psalms,  27:8;  42:1-6;  63:1-6;  70:4;
73:25,28;    84:2-3;    119:10—   (D)   Psalms,   26:8;   41:1-6562:1-6;
69:4572:25,28;   83:2-3:118:10/   Isaiah,  26:8-9—  (D)  Isaias,  26:8-9
/Jeremiah, 29:13— (D) Jeremias, 29:13 / Amos, 5:4-8 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  1:1;  13:1-9—  (D)  OT,  Boo\  of  Wisdom,  1  :i ; 13:1-9 New
Testament:  Philippians,  3:7-10  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 1
la-b;  bk vii, par 22 50a; bk xii, par 11 lOld / City of God, bk xiv, ch
11  385d-387a;  bk  xv,  ch 21-22 415b-416c; bk xxii, ch 30, 617c-618a /
Christian  Doctrine,  bk  i, ch 4 625b-c; ch 15 628b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 12, a 1, ans 50c-51c; a 8, rep 4 57b-58b; q 59, a
4,  rep 3 309a-310a; q 60, a 5 313b-314c; q 82, a 2, ans 432d-433c; a 3,
ans and rep 3 433c434c; q 95 506b-510a; q 100 520d-522b; q 105, a 4, ans
541c-542a; q hi, a 2, ans 569c570b; part i-ii, q 1, a 8 615a-c; q 2, a 8
621c622b; Q 3, a 1 622c-623a; a 4 625a-626b; q 4, aa 1-4 629d-632c; q 5,
a  1, ans 636d-637c; a 4, ans and rep 2 639a-640b; a 5, rep i 640b-641a;
q 9, a 6 662a-d; q ii, a i, rep i

[1130a]
1096 The implications offree will. Id. God as the (7 object of the human
will:  the  quiescence of the will in the beatific vision.} 666b,d-667a;
aa 3-4 667d-669b; q 12, a 2 670b-c; a 3, rep 1 670d-671b; q 13, a i, ans
672d-673c;  q  16,  a  3,  contrary  and rep 3 685b-686a; q 19, a 9, ans
709d-710b;  a 10 710b-711d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 62
59d-63a;  part  ii-ii, q 25, a i 501b-502a; a 12 509c-510b; q 26, aa 2-3
511a-512c; q 27, aa 3-8 522c-527b; part hi, q 9, a 2, rep 3 764c-765a 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xxi [3478] 85b-d; paradise, i
[97-142] 107b-d; in
[43-90]
109d-110b; xx
[130-141]
138a; xxi
[64-75] 138d-139a; xxvi [25-36] 146a
42  Kant:  Practical  Reason,  325a-327d  esp  326b327a;  337a-355d  esp
346b-347c  52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim 7e.
Free  will  in  relation  to sin and salvation 7e(l) The freedom to sin:
Adam's  freedom  and  the  freedom of fallen human nature Old Testament:
Genesis,  3  /  Deuteronomy, 11: 26-28; 30:15-20 / Joshua, 24:14-24— (D)
Josue,   24:14-24   /   Isaiah,  5:1-7—  (D)  Isaias,  5:1-7  Apocrypha:
Ecclesiasticus,   15:11-20—   (D)   OT,   Ecclesiasticus,  15:11-21  New
Testament:   Romans,   5:12-8:21   /  Hebrews,  10:26-31  18  Augustine:
Confessions, bk vii, par 5 44c-d / City of God, bk v, ch 9-10 213b-216c;
bk  xii,  ch  21  357a-b; bk xiv, ch 11-12 385d387b; ch 15 388d-390a; bk
xxii,  ch i, 587a-b; ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  17,  a  1,  ans lOOd-lOld; q 22, a 2, rep 4 128d-130d; a 3, rep 3
130d-131c;  q  23,  a 1, rep 1 132c133b; a 3, rep 3 134b-135a; q 24, a 3
142d143c;  q  47,  a  2,  ans 257b-258c; q 62, a 3, rep 2 319c-320b; a 8
323c-324a;  q  63,  a  i,  rep 4 325c-326c; aa 5-7 329a-332b; a 9, rep 3
333b-d;  q  83,  a  2,  ans and rep 3 438a-d; q 100, a 2 521c-522b; part
i-ii,  q  1,  a  7, rep 1 614c-615a; q 6, a 8 650d-651c; q 9, a 6, rep 3
662a-d;  q 21, a 2 718a-d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 74,
aa  1-2  129a-130a;  q  109,  a 2 339c-340b; aa 7-10 344a-347d 21 Dante:
Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvi
[52-105] 77b-d; xvn [82]-xvm
[75] 79b-80c;
paradise, 1
[94-142]
107b-a; iv
[64-114]
110b-d;  v  [19-30]  112b;  vn  [25-33]  115c  30  Bacon: Advancement of
Learning, 17d-18a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk hi [80-134] 137a138a;
[167-216]
139a-140a; bk v
[224-245]

[1130b]
THE GREAT IDEAS le to le(T) 180a-b; [506-543] 186a-187a; bk ix [342-375]
254b-255b; bk x [1-16] 274b / Samson Agonistes
[373-419]
347b-348b  /  Areopagitica, 394b-395b 35 Locke: Toleration, 8c-d; 10c-d;
15d-16a  46  Hegel: Philosophy of History, part hi, 304d305b 51 Tolstoy:
War  and  Peace, epilogue ii, 689b 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
v,  127b-137c  passim  le{2)  The  relation  of  freedom  to  grace  Old
Testament:  Psalms,  95:7-9—  (D)  Psalms,  94:7-9 / Proverbs, 1:20-33 /
Isaiah,  5:1-7—  (D)  Isaias, 5:1-7 New Testament: John, 1:1-18 esp 1:5,
1:10-13;  5:21;  6:37,64-66;  8:31-36;  10:26-29;  I2:37~ 40; 13:18-27 /
Acts,  7:51;  13:38-48; 15:1-11 / Romans, 4-8; 9:9-18; 11:5-10,26-32 / /
Corinthians,   7:21-23;  9:1,19-21  /  //  Corinthians,  3:17;  6:1-2  /
Galatians,   4;   5:1-4,13,  18,22-24  /  Ephesians,  1:3-12;  2:4-10  /
Philippians,  2:12-13  /  Titus, 3:3-7 / James, 1:25; 2:10-12 / / Peter,
2:15-16   /   Revelation,  3:20—  (D)  Apocalypse,  3:20  18  Augustine:
Confessions,  bk ix, par 1 61c-d / City of God, bk x, ch 32 319d-322a,c;
bk xv, ch 1, 398a-c; bk xxii, ch i, 587a-b; ch 30, 617c-618a 19 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i, q 23, a 3, rep 3 134b-135a; aa 5-6 135d-138c;
a  8  140a-141a; q 62, a 3, rep 2 319c-320b; a 4, ans 320b-321b; q 83, a
2,  contrary  438a-d;  q  95,  a 1, rep 3,5 506b-507c; q 100, a 2, rep i
521c-522b;  part  i-ii, q 5, a 5, rep i 640b641a; q 9, a 6, rep 3 662a-d
20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 108, a 1, ans and rep 2
331a-332b;  q  109,  a  2  339c-340b;  q  no,  a  4 350d-351d; q in, a 2
352d-353d;  q  113, a 3 362c-363c; a 5 364b365a; part ii-ii, q 183, a 4,
rep i 627d-628d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, i
[2284] 53b-54a; v [58-66] 59c; vn [37-60] 62d63a;
xi
[25-45] 69a-b; xn
[115-136]
71c-d; xxi [34-72] 85b-d; xxvn [124-142] 95d-96a; paradise, hi
[64-90]
HOa-b; vn
[64-84]
115d-116a; xx
[31-148] 137a-138b; xxi
[5275] 138d-139a
31 Descartes: Meditations, iv, 91a-b / Objections and Replies, 125c-126b
32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii
[1027-1033]
133b; bk in [56-415] 136b-144b esp [130-134] 138a, [227-238] 140b; bk xi
[251-262]  304b305a;  bk  xii  [576-605] 331b-332a 33 Pascal: Provincial
Letters,  141a-166b  esp  154b-159a  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 238b 43 Mill:
Liberty,  296b-297b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 140, 50a
/ Philosophy of History, part hi, 310d311a

[1131a]
8  to  8£(1)  Chapter 100: WILL 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v,
127b-137c  passim 8. The will as a factor in morality and in society 8a.
The  inviolability of the will: its freedom from external compulsions or
constraints   7   Plato:   Gorgias,   285c-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses
105a-245a,c  esp  bk i, ch i 105a-106c, ch 17-29, 123b-138a, bk ii, ch 5
142c-144a,  ch  10  148c-150a,  ch 23 170a172d, bk iv, ch 1 213a-223d 12
Aurelius:  Meditations 253a-310d esp bk ii, sect 9 257d, sect 11 258a-b,
sect 16 259a, bk v, sect 8 269d-270b, sect 19 272a, sect 34 273c, bk vi,
sect  16 275b-d, sect 22 276a, BK VII, SECT l6 280d, BK VIII, SECT 16-17
286d,  sect  28 287c, sect 48 289c, bk ix, sect 7 292b, bk x, sect 34-35
301a-b, bk xi, sect 36 306c, bk xii, sect 3 307b d 18 Augustine: City of
God,  bk  v,  ch  10,  216a-b;  bk  ix, ch 4 287a-288b 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  1, q 82, a 1, ans and rep 1 431d-432c; q 83, a i, rep
1-5  436d-438a;  q  105,  a  4,  rep  i  541c-542a;  part 1—ii, q 6, a 4
647b-648a;  a 5, rep i 648b649a; q 9, a 4, rep 2 660a-d 21 Dante: Divine
Comedy, paradise, iv
[64114] 110b-d
25 Montaigne: Essays, 14a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ix
[342-350]
254b-255a / Samson Agonistes
[1348-1379]
369a-b 35 Locke: Toleration, 3c-4a / Human Understanding, bk 11, ch xxi,
sect  59  193d-194a  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 164a-b; 168d-170d; 235c-d /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of Morals, 279b,d-280a; 281c-283b; 284d-285a /
Practical  Reason,  301d-302d;  304a-d;  307d-308c;  316a-b; 327d-328b /
Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-d; 392d-393a/ Judgement, 605d [fn2] 43
Federalist:  number  73,  218d-219a;  number  79,  233c-d  44  Bosvvell:
Johnson, 407b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 9192 35d-36a 48
Melville:  Moby Dick,, 370b-371a;408b-409a 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk
xiii,  577a-582a  esp  578d-579a,  581d-582a;  bk  xiv,  605c-d;  bk xv,
630c-631a 8b. The goodness or malice of the will 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk
iv,  ch  9  [n28b2o-3o] 376a,c 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 35,
177d-178a  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk viii, par 19-24 58b-60a / City
of  God,  bk  xii, ch 3-9 343d348b; bk xiv, ch 6-9 380b-385b 19 Aquinas:
Summa Theologica, part 1, q 48,

[1131b]
1097  aa  5-6 263a-264d; q 49, a 1, rep i 264d-265d; part i-ii, q 4, a 4
631d-632c;  q  9,  a  6,  rep  3 662a-d; qq 18-21 693b,d-720a,c esp q 19
703a711d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory, xvii
[82]-xviii
[75] 79b-80c
42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a261 d esp 256a-b, 257c-d;
265c  / Practical Reason, 304a-307d; 314d-319b esp 316a-317d; 321b-329a;
356a-360d  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  389a-390a,c  / Judgement,
591b-592d; 595a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part ii, par 114 42a-b;
part  hi,  par  142-157  55a-57d;  additions, 92-100 131d-133a 53 James:
Psychology,  826a-827a  8b{l)  The conditions of the will's rectitude or
disorder  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 13 [no2bi3-no3a 4] 348ac; bk vi,
ch  2  387d-388b  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i, ch 17 122d-124a 14
Plutarch:  Pericles,  121b  /  Timoleon,  197c198a  17  Plotinus: Fourth
Ennead, tr iv, ch 35, 177d178a 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 22
50a; bk xii, par 11 lOld / City of God, bk ix, ch 4-5 287a-289a; bk xii,
ch  3  343d-344b;  ch  6-8  345b-347b;  bk  xiv, ch 6-9 380b-385b; ch 11
385d-387a;  ch 15 388d-390a; bk xv, ch 21-22 415b-416c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  49,  a 1, rep 3 264d-265d; part i-ii, q 4, a 4
631d-632c;  q  5,  a  7,  ans  642a-d;  q  6, a 4, rep 3 647b-648a; q 19
703a-711d  20  Aquinas:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 5, ans and
rep 3 10b-d; q 55, a i, rep 2 26b-27a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, xi
[22-66]
15b-d; purgatory, i-xxvii 53a-96a esp 1
[22-84]
53b-54a, v
[58-66]
59c, vn
[37-60]
62d-63a, xi [25-45] 69a-b, xn
[1 15-136] 71c-d,
xvi [52-105] 77b-d, xvii [82]-xvm
[75] 79b80c, xxi [34-78] 85b-d, xxvn [124-142] 95d96a; paradise, xv [1-6] 128b-c
25 Montaigne: Essays, 159a-162c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 72a 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  iv  89a-93a  32  Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk ix
[342-375] 254b255b / Samson Agonistes
[1334-1379] 368b369b
33  Pascal:  Provincial  Letters,  24b-26b;  44a-53a  42 Kant: Practical
Reason,  321b-329a  /  Pref  Metaphysical  Elements of Ethics, 365b-d 46
Hegel: Philosophy of Right, part i, par 81 34c-d; additions, 51 124c-d /
Philosophy of History, intro, 166b; part hi, 312d-313a; part iv, 365c 52
Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 127b-137c passim

[1132a]
(8b.  The  goodness  or  malice  of  the will.) 8b(2) A good will as the
exclusive  or principal human good 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch ii
116d-118d;  ch 22 127c-128c; ch 25 129d-131b; ch 29 134d-138a; bk ii, ch
16  156b-158d; bk hi, ch 10 185d-187a 18 Augustine : City of God, bk ix,
ch  4  287a288b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q i, a 1, rep 2
609b-610b;  q  3,  a  4  625a-626b;  q  19,  a 1, rep 2 703b-d 30 Bacon:
Advancement  of  Learning, 72a 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
256a261d esp 256a-b, 257c-d / Practical Reason, 314d-319b esp 316a-317d;
321b-329a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  389a-390a,c  / Judgement,
591b-592a 43 Mill: Utilitarianism, 453c-454a; 463c-464d 8c. The will and
virtue:  justice  and charity as habits of the will 9 Aristotle: Ethics,
bk i, ch 13
[no2b i31103*4] 348a-c; bk
ii,  ch 6 [no6b36-i 107*3] 352c; bk in, ch 1-5 355b,d-361a; bk v, ch 8-1
1  383a-387a,c; bk vi, ch 2 387d-388b; ch 13 [1145*3-5] 394d; bk vii, ch
i-io  395a-403c  18  Augustine:  City of God, bk ix, ch 4-5 287a289a; bk
xii,  ch  8-9  346d-348b;  bk  xiv,  ch  6-9  380b-385b; bk xv, ch 21-22
415b-416c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q  21, a 1, rep 1
124b-125b; a 2, rep i 125c-d; q 59, a 4, rep 3 309a-310a; q 60, a 5, ans
and  rep 4 313b-314c; qq 95-96 506b-513c; q 100 520d522b; part 1—n, q 5,
a 5, rep 1 640b-641a; q 13, a 1, ans 672d-673c; q 19, a 10, ans 710b711d
20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 50, a 5 10b-d; q 55, a 1, rep
2 26b-27a; q 56, a 6 34b-35a; q 59, a 4, ans and rep 2 48c-49a; q 60, aa
2-3 50d-52b; q 62, a 3 61c-62b; a 4, ans 62b-63a; part ii-ii, q 23, a 8,
ans  488d-489c;  q  24,  a 1 489d-490b; a 10, rep 3 496d-498a 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part hi, 240d; 245b-c 38 Rousseau: Political Economy, 369a-c;
372b-c  / Social Contract, bk 1, 393 b-c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic
of   Morals,   256a-b  43  Mill:  Utilitarianism,  463c-464d  53  James:
Psychology,  81b-83b;  186b-187a;  807a808a;  816a-819a esp 818a 8d. The
will  and  duty: the categorical imperative 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
viii,sect  32  287d288a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 25, a 3,
rep 3 145b-147a; part i-ii, q 19, aa 3-6 704c-708a; aa 9-10 709d-711d 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, v [13-84] 112b-113a

[1132b]
1098  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  83(2)  to  9a  25 Montaigne: Essays, 13d-14c 38
Rousseau:  Political  Economy, 372b-373b / Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c
42  Kant:  Pure  Reason,  190c-d;  236d-237a / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals,  253d-254d;  260a-261d;  265c-266d; 268c-270c; 272a-b; 273d-279d
esp   277d-279d   /   Practical  Reason,  321b-329a;  330d-331a  /  Pref
Metaphysical   Elements  of  Ethics,  365b-d;  373d/  Intro.  Metaphysic
of Morals,  386b-d;  388b-c;  389a-390a,c;  390b;  392b-393a / Science of
Right,  416b-417b /Judgement, 571c-d; 605d-606b [fn 2] 43 Mill: Liberty,
296b-c  /  Utilitarianism,  446a-d;  453c-454a;  458b-459b; 469d-470b 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of Right, intro, par 29 19a-b; part i, par 79 33a-c;
part  ii,  par  133 47a; par 135 47b-d; par 140 49b-54a passim; part in,
par  148-149  56a-b;  additions,  84 129b; 86 129c; 95 132b / Philosophy
of History,  part  iv, 362c-d 53 James: Psychology, 272b-273a; 797b-798a;
807a-808a  8^.  The  will  and right: the harmony of individual wills in
external  practical  relations  42  Kant:  Pure Reason, 114a-115a / Pref
Metaphysical  Elements  of  Ethics,  371b-372a  /  Intro.  Metaphysic of
Morals,  386d-387a,c  /  Science  of  Right  397a-458a,c  esp 397b-398a,
400b,d402a,  416b-417a,  435a-b,  448b-d  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
intro,  par  4,  12d; par 19 16d-17a; par 21 17a-c; par 29-30 19a-c; par
33,  20b-c; part i, par 34-40 21a-22c; par 44-45 23c-d; par 57, 26d; par
65-66,  28d-29a;  par  73-75 31c-32b; par 79 33a-c; par 81-82 34c-d; par
104  39b-d;  part  ii,  par 107 40b-c; par 113-114 41d-42b; par 117-118,
42c-d; par 120 43c-d; par 127-130 45b-46a; par 132, 46b; par 141, 54c-d;
part  hi, par 151-155 57a-c; par 217, 72b; par 258, 80b-c; additions, 20
119d-120b;  52  124d-125a;  82  129a 50 Marx: Capital, 37c-d; 83d-84a 9.
Differences  among men in the sphere of will 9a. The distinction between
men  of  strong  and  weak  will: cultivation of will power 5 Sophocles:
Antigone
[1-99]
131a-132a / Electra [328-471] 158c-159d 5 Euripides: Hippolytus
[373-430]
228b-d  /  Electra  [907-956]  335b-d;  [959-987] 335d-336a 8 Aristotle:
Soul,  bk hi, ch 9 [432b i 1-433*8] 665a-c; ch ii [434*5-15] 666d-667a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  vii,  ch i-io 395a-403c / Rhetoric, bk i, ch 12
[i372b  n-i6]  616b 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk i, ch 2 106d-108b; ch 5
HOb-c;  bk  11,  ch  15  155c-156b;  bk  iv, ch 9 237d-238d 12 Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk vii, sect 55 283b-c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk viii,
par 26-27 60b-c

[1133a]
9b  to  10b  Chapter  100: WILL 1099 19 Aquinas: Stimma Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 19, a 8, ans 708d-709d 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii,
q  84,  A 4, ans and rep 5 176d-178a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, purgatory,
vjj—21} 59a; xvm
[76-145]
80d-81b; paradise, iv
[64-90] 110b-c
22 Chaucer: Clerks Tale
[8572-8583] 308a
/ Second Nuns Prologue
[15,469-489]
461a  /  Parson  s  Tale,  par  53-61  526b-530a  25  Montaigne: Essays,
115b-121c;  124c-125a;  159a-162c;  200d-205b; 492b-493a 26 Shakespeare:
3rd Henry VI, act hi, sc ii
[123-195] 87c-88a / Richard III 105a-148a,c /
Taming of the Shrew, act iv, sc i
[191-214]
218b-c  /  Richard II 320a-351d / Julius Caesar, act iv, sc in [145-195]
589d-590c 27 Shakespeare: Othello, act i, sc hi [302-410] 212b-213a; act
ii,  sc  hi  [29-270]  217b-219d  /  King Lear, act v, sc ii 278d-279a /
Macbeth,  act  1,  sc  vii  [28-82]  289c  290b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  76d-77c  42  Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 258b-c /
Practical  Reason,  326b-327d;  356a360d / Pref Metaphysical Elements of
Ethics,  368d-369a;  369c  370c  43  Mill:  Liberty,  295b-296b;  300c /
Representative  Government, 346c-350a passim / Utilitarianism, 463c-464d
48  Melville:  Moby Dic{, 123a-124a;137b-138a; 409b-410b 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace, bk i, 15a-16a; bk iv, 177d; bk vi, 235a; bk x, 441c-442a; bk
xiii,  575b-c;  578b;  bk  xiv,  589c-590c; 605b d 53 James: Psychology,
80a-83b  esp 81b-83a; 274a275a; 795b; 798b-801a; 817a-819a; 826a-827a 54
Freud:  New  Introductory Lectures, 884bc 9b. The pathology of the will:
indecision, obsession, compulsion, inhibition 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part
i, 77d 44 Bos\vell:/o^^ow, 38a-c; 138c-139a; 481d 48 Melville: Moby Dic{
esp  123a-b,  135a-138a,  404b-411a  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk hi,
115d-116a; bk v, 203a-d; bk vi, 235a-238c; 245d-246a; 266c-267c; bk vii,
291b; bk viii, 304b-305a; bk xi, 519a-c; 527b-528b 53 James: Psychology,
799b-807a;  828b-829a  54  Freud:  Hysteria, 81c-86a esp 82b-d, 83d-84c;
90a-b;   99c-102a  /  Interpretation  of  Dreams,  247d-248b  /  General
Introduction,  550d-556d  esp  551b-552a;  572b-c;  612a-b / Ego and Id,
713c-716c passim / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 719b-d; 729a-733c
esp  731c-d  10.  Will  as a term in political theory 10a. The sovereign
will:  the  will  of  the  people; the will of the majority 6Thucydides:
Peloponnesian War, bk hi, 432b-c

[1133b]
9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk  iv,  ch  4  [i29i  b3o-38]  491a-b;  ch  9
[i294b35~39]  494d  14  Plutarch:  Tiberius  Gracchus, 678b-d 23 Hobbes:
Lm'tf//itf;2,PARTii,100c-101a;  117c-d;  130b-131a;  131d-132a; part iv,
272c  35  Locke: Civil Government, ch vii, sect 87-94 44a-46c passim; ch
viii,  sect  95-99 46c-47c; ch xiv, sect 163-168 63a-64c passim; ch xix,
sect  240-243  81b-d 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk i, 3c; bk ii, 4b;
bk in, 12d-13a; bk iv, 15a-b; bk v, 30bc 38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
369a-370d   /  Social  Contract,  bk  i,  392d-393b;  bk  ii,  395a396d;
399b-400c;  bk  hi,  409b-c;  bk  iii-iv,  419c-427a 42 Kant: Science of
Right,  436c;  437c-d;  439a441 d; 445a-c; 448b-d; 450a-b 43 Federalist:
number 39, 126c-127a; number 5i,164a-165a;NUMBER7i,214d-215a; number 78,
230d-232a  43  Mill:  Liberty,  268b-271d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right,
part  hi,  par  281 95b-d; par 320 106c / Philosophy of History , Intro,
172d-173a;  175b-c;  part hi, 302a-d 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, epilogue
ii,  680b684a  10£.  The  relation  of law to will 7 Plato: Laws, bk hi,
669b-670c;  bk iv, 681b682c; bk ix, 754a-b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch
9
[1180*14-24]
434d-435a  /  Politics, bk hi, ch 16 485b-486c; bk vi, ch 3 521c-522a 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 21, a 2, rep 1 125c-d 20 Aquinas:
Summa  Theologica, part i-ii, q 90, a 1, rep 3 205b-2O6b; q 96, a 5, ans
and  rep  3  233d-234d  23  Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 130c; 130d-131a;
131d-132b;  132d-133a;  part iv, 272c 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv,
sect  21  29d;  ch  vi,  sect  57-63 36d-38c; ch xi 55b-58b esp sect 137
56d-57b;  ch  xiii,  sect  151  59d-60a;  ch  xix,  sect  212  74a-b  38
Montesquieu:  Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  v,  30b-c;  bk xi, 69a 38 Rousseau:
Political  Economy,  369a-372b  /  Social Contract, bk i, 393b-c; bk ii,
395b-d;  399b-400c;  bk hi, 419d-420a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 110c / Fund.
Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 2 73 d- 2 74a / Science of Right, 401c-402a;
412c-d;  416b-417a;  435a-437c;  438d-439a;  448b-d;  450a; 450d-452a 43
Federalist:   number   78,   230d-232a   43   Mill:  Liberty,  316b-d  /
Representative  Government, 327b,d-332d esp 328d 46 Hegel: Philosophy of
Right,  part  hi,  par  219  72d-73a  /  Philosophy  of  History, intro,
170c178a;  part iv, 327d-328a; 350b-c; 361c-d; 364d-365a 50 Marx-Engels:
Communist Manifesto, 427a-b

[1134a]
(10.  Will  as  a  term  in  political  theory.)  10c. The general will,
particular  wills,  the  will  of  each,  and the will of all 23 Hobbes:
Leviathan, part ii, lOOc-lOla 35 Locke: Civil Government, ch iv, sect 21
29d;  ch  xiii,  sect  151  59d-60a; ch xix, sect 212 74a-b 38 Rousseau:
Political Economy, 369a-370d; 372b-c / Social Contract, bk i, 392d-393b;
bk  11,  395a-398b;  399b-400c; bk hi, 409b-410a; 418a; bk iv, 425a-427a
CROSS-REFERENCES Democracy 5b; Government ih; Law ib; Monarchy ia(2).

[1134b]
1100  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  lOr  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of
Right,  437c-d;  448b-d; 450a-b; 451c-452a 43 Mill: Liberty, 268b-271d /
Representative  Government,  327b,d-332d esp 332a-d 46 Hegel: Philosophy
of Right, part i, par 84 35a; part hi, par 155 57c; par 219 72d-73a; par
257  80b;  par 258, 80d-81b; par 270, 84d86c; additions, 48-49 124bc; 51
124c-d;  162  143b-144c  /  Philosophy  of  History,  intro,  170c-171c;
172d-173c;  203b-206a,c;  part  i, 211a-c; part iv, 363c-d; 366c-367a 54
Freud: Group Psychology, 686d-687b [fn 2] For: The general consideration
of  the  will  in  relation  to desire, emotion, and mind or reason, see
Desire  3b(i);  Emotion  i;  Mind  10(2), id, ie(3)-ig; Prudence 4a, 5b;
Reasoning  5e(3);  Sense  3c  Other  discussions  of  the voluntary, the
involuntary,  and  the  nonvoluntary,  see  Animal  ia(3), 4b; Habit 6c;
Knowledge  8b(2);  Man ia; Necessity and Contingency 5a; Virtue and Vice
4e(i). The bearing of the voluntary on the distinction between knowledge
and   opinion,   see   Knowledge  4b;  Opinion  2b.  The  discussion  of
rationalization  or wishful thinking, see Desire 5b; Emotion 3b; Opinion
2a;  Reasoning  5a.  The  theory of error which attributes error to free
will,  see Mind 5a; Truth 3d(2). The conception of faith as dependent on
an  act of the will or practical reason, see God 6c(2); Knowledge 6c(5);
Metaphysics 2d; Opinion 4a; Religion ia. The understanding of the divine
will  and  its  relation to the divine intellect, and for the problem of
God's freedom, see God 4c, 4g, 5c, 5g; Liberty 5d; Mind iog. Discussions
relevant  to  the  various  doctrines of, and the many-sided controversy
over,  the  freedom  of  the  will,  see  Cause 3; Chance ib; Fate 3, 5;
Liberty ic, 3c, 4a~4b, 5a~5c; Man ia; Metaphysics 2d; Mind ie(3); Nature
2f;  Necessity  and Contingency 5a~5a(i), 5a(3); Prudence 4a; Punishment
2a;  Virtue  and  Vice 5c. Other discussions which have a bearing on the
implications  of  free  will, see God 7d; History 4a(i); Liberty ic, 5a,
5c; Love 5a, 5a(2); Nature 6b; Sin 3D-3C, 6a; Slavery 2d, 3d; Virtue and
Vice  8b.  The ethical doctrine which makes a good will the exclusive or
principal  good, see Good and Evil 30-3^2) ; and for the relation of the
will to duty, the moral law, and the categorical imperative, see Duty 1,
5;  Justice  ie;  Law  4c;  Liberty 3c; Necessity and Contingency 5a(2);
Principle 4b. The moral theory which judges the rectitude of the will by
the  ends  it  adheres  to and by the means it chooses, see Happiness 3;
Liberty  3c;  Prudence  3a;  Virtue  and  Vice 4e(2)- 4e(3); and for the
consideration  of  the  will in relation to virtue, especially prudence,
justice,  and  charity,  see  Habit  5b;  Justice  ic,  ie; Love ia, 5b;
Prudence  4a; Virtue and Vice 2a(i), 5c, 8d(3). Another treatment of the
pathology  of  the  will,  see  Desire  6b; Emotion 3c(2). The will as a
concept  in  political  theory,  and  especially  in relation to law and
sovereignty, see

[1135a]
1 ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Boo{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works  are  divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I.  Epictetus. The Manual Augustine. On Free Will . On Grace and
Free  Will  .  On the Predestination of the Saints Aquinas. Summa Contra
Gentiles,  bk  i, ch 72-88; bk in, ch 88-98 . Quaestiones Disputatae, De
Veritate,  qq  22,  24;  De  Malo,  q  6  Descartes.  The  Principles of
Philosophy,  part  i,  6, 3 2 > 34"35» 37' 39. 4i-42 Hume. A Treatise of
Human  Nature,  bk ii, part hi Hegel. Science of Logic, vol ii, sect ii,
ch  3 }. S. Mill. A System of Logic, bk vi, ch 2 . An Examination of Sir
William   Hamilton's  Philosophy,  ch  26  W.  James.  "The  Dilemma  of
Determinism,"  in  The  Will  to  Believe  Freud.  The Predisposition to
Obsessional  Neurosis  II.  Epicurus.  Letter  to  Menoeceus  Cicero. De
Finibus  {On  the  Supreme Good), iii-iv Anselm of Canterbury. De Libero
Arbitrio  Bernard  of  Clairvaux.  Concerning  Grace  and Free Will Duns
Scotus.  Opus Oxoniense, bk i-ii, iv . Reportata Parisiensia, bk i, dist
10,  qq  i,  3;  bk  iv,  dist 49, qq 9, 17 Valla. Dialogue on Free Will
Luther.  A  Treatise  on  Christian  Liberty  Calvin.  Institutes  ofthe
Christian  Religion,  bk ii, ch 5 Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xi
(3),  xix,  xxiii-xxiv,  xxx (9, 16-17), xxxv (5) Burton. The Anatomy of
Melancholy,  part  i,  sect I, MEMB II, SUB-SECT 1 John of Saint Thomas.
Cursus  Philosophicus  Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis, part iv, q 12
Malebranche.  De  la  recherche de la verite, bk i, ch 1 (2), 2 Bossuet.
Traite  du  libre arbitre Cudworth. A Treatise of Freewill Leibnitz. New
Essays  Concerning  Human  Understanding,  bk  11,  ch  21 J. Edwards. A
Careful . . . Enquiry into the Modern . . . Notions of Freedom of Will

[1135b]
Chapter 100: WILL 1101 Voltaire. "Free-Will," "Will," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  .  The  Ignorant  Philosopher, ch i 3 T. Reid. Essays on the
Active  Powers  of  the Human Mind, 1—11 Bentham. An Introduction to the
Principles   of Morals  and  Legislation,  ch  8-10  Godwin.  An  Enquiry
Concerning  Political  Justice, bk iv, ch 5-6 J. G. Fichte. The Vocation
of  Man  Schelling.  OfHuman Freedom Schopenhauer. The World as Will and
Idea,  vol i, bk 11, 1v ; vol ii, sup, ch 1 9-20 ; vol hi, sup, ch 28 J.
Mill.  Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, ch 24-25 Balzac. The
Wild  Ass's Sf^in Lotze. Microcosmos, bk ii, ch 5 Bain. The Emotions and
the  Will  Emerson.  "Power,"  in  The  Conduct  of  Life  E.  Hartmann.
Philosophy  of  the  Unconscious,  (a)  1—II,  IV,  VII H. Sidgwick. The
Methods  of Ethics, bk i, ch 5 George Eliot. Daniel Deronda T. H. Green.
The  Principles  of Political Obligation, 0> g) . Prolegomena to Ethics,
bk ii Ribot. The Diseases of the Will Bergson. Time and Free Will Wundt.
Outlines  of  Psychology,  (14)  Bosanquet.  Science  and Philosophy, 15
Bradley.  Ethical  Studies,  1  .  Collected  Essays, vol i (14); vol ii
(26-28)  Royce.  The  World  and  the  Individual,  series  i (10) Mann.
Buddenbroo^s  H.  Cohen.  Ethi\ des reinen Willens T. Hardy. The Dynasts
Woodworth. Psychological Issues, ch 2 Moore. Ethics, ch 6 McTaggart. The
Nature of Existence, ch 40, 57 B. Russell. Our Knowledge of the External
World,  .  The  Analysis  of  Mind,  lect  14  Los  sky. Freedom of Will
Garrigou-Lagrange.  God,  His  Existence  and  Nature,  PART  II,  CH 4;
APPENDIX  4  .  The  One  God,  ch 19, 22-23 Maritain. Scholasticism and
Politics, ch v Santayana. The Realm of Spirit, ch 4-5

[1136a]
INTRODUCTION  THE  special  character of wisdom among the attainments of
the  mind  shows  itself  in the things which everyone will agree can be
said about wisdom— things which cannot be said about art and science, or
knowledge  and  learning generally. We believe that, with the centuries,
knowledge can be steadily increased and learning advanced, but we do not
suppose that the same progress can be achieved in wisdom. The individual
may  grow  in wisdom. The race does not seem to. In the tradition of the
great  books,  the  moderns  usually  assert  their superiority over the
ancients  in all the arts and sciences. They seldom claim superiority in
wisdom.  The phrase "modern science" needs no elucidation, but if anyone
were to speak of modern wisdom, he would have to explain his meaning. As
"modern"  seems  to  have an immediately acceptable significance when it
qualifies  "science,"  so  "ancient"  seems  to go with "wisdom," and to
suggest  that,  with  the  centuries, far from increasing, wisdom may be
lost.   Wisdom  is  more  frequently  and  extensively  the  subject  of
discussion  in  the  ancient and mediaeval than in the modern books. The
ancients seem to have not only a greater yearning for wisdom, but also a
greater  interest  in  understanding  what  wisdom  is and how it can be
gained.  The  traditional  discussion  of  wisdom,  furthermore, has its
foundations  in the literature of the Old and the New Testament, as well
as  in  the books of pagan antiquity. This is not true of other forms of
knowledge.  The teachings of revealed religion open a path to the "heart
of  wisdom."  They  do not propose methods of scientific research. Again
and  again  the  Scriptures  proclaim  that  "fear  of  the  Lord is the
beginning  of wisdom"—a wisdom which develops with piety and worship, as
science develops with experiment and proof.

[1136b]
Chapter  101: WISDOM Still another distinctive mark of wisdom is that it
cannot be misused. We recognize that bad men as well as good may possess
other  kinds  of  knowledge.  We have seen artistic skill and scientific
truth  put to evil use. But we do not ordinarily think a man wise unless
he  acts wisely. To act wisely is to act well, even as to have wisdom is
to use it. The satirist's praise of folly condemns a useless wisdom. The
theologian's  condemnation of "worldly wisdom" dismisses it as the worst
of  folly—a  counterfeit of wisdom. Other forms of learning may separate
knowledge  from  action;  wisdom  tends  to  unite  them. Other forms of
inquiry  may  be  content  with knowing and understanding the facts; the
pursuit  of  wisdom  aspires to a knowledge of good and evil. Plato, for
example,  makes  the  vision  of  the good the goal of a dialectic which
ascends   to  wisdom,  yet  which  does  not  rest  there,  but  returns
enlightened  to the realm of action. This conception of wisdom is hinted
at  whenever  we  refrain  from  calling a man wise simply because he is
learned—a  scholar,  scientist,  or  philosopher.  Again it is Plato who
respects  wisdom  so  highly that he will not call the philosopher wise,
but  only  a  lover  of wisdom. "No god is a philosopher or seeker after
wisdom,  for  he  is wise already," Socrates says in the Symposium; "nor
does any man who is wise seek after wisdom. Neither do the ignorant seek
after  wisdom."  The  lovers  of  wisdom  are  neither  the wise nor the
ignorant  and  foolish.  As  Socrates  points  out,  they are "in a mean
between  the  wise  and the ignorant." Aristotle would seem to disagree,
not  from  a  lower  regard for wisdom, but because he identifies wisdom
with philosophical knowledge, and especially with that highest branch of
speculative  science  which is called "theology," "first philosophy," or
"metaphysics." His use 1102

[1137a]
of  the  phrase  "philosophical  wisdom" to distinguish speculative from
practical  or  political wisdom suggests that the philosopher may attain
the   wisdom   he   pursues.   Yet  Aristotle,  like  Plato,  speaks  of
"philosophers  or  lovers  oTwisdom";  and Plato, like Aristotle, treats
wisdom  as  one  of  the  basic  human  virtues.  We shall return to the
distinction  which both Aristotle and Aquinas make between practical and
speculative  wisdom;  they  often  call  the  latter simply "wisdom," in
contrast  to "prudence," which is their name for practical wisdom. Other
writers,  who  treat wisdom as one, sometimes emphasize its speculative,
and  sometimes  its  practical, aspect. But for all of them, this double
aspect  remains  part  of  wisdom's  special  character.  Lucretius, for
example,  finds  nothing "more gladdening than to dwell in the calm high
places,  firmly  embattled  on  the heights by the teaching of the wise,
whence  you  can  look down on others, and see them wandering hither and
thither,  going  astray  as they seek the way of life." The way of life,
free from pain, the distress of fear, and futile struggle, is known only
to  the  wise.  Calm  and repose are here suggested as attributes of the
wise  man.  That  also  seems  to  be  the  implication of Dr. Johnson's
"approbation  of  one who had attained to the state of the philosophical
wise  man,  that is, to have no want of anything." When Boswell observes
that  then  "the  savage is a wise man," Johnson retorts: "Sir, I do not
mean simply being without — but not having a want." For Plotinus, wisdom
seems  to  be  purely  speculative,  and  its  repose a condition of the
reasoning  mind at rest. "Wisdom," he writes, "is a condition in a being
that  possesses repose. Think what happens when one has accomplished the
reasoning  process;  as  soon as we have discovered the right course, we
cease  to  reason. We rest because we have come to wisdom." Still wisdom
has  a moral or, for Plotinus, an aesthetic aspect. "One Soul," he says,
is "wise and lovely, another foolish and ugly. Soulbeauty is constituted
by  wisdom."  The  practical  or  moral aspect of wisdom predominates in
Milton,  Rabelais,  and Tolstoy. In Paradise Lost, Adam communicates his
reflections on human knowledge to Raphael.

[1137b]
;  Chapter  101:  WISDOM  1103  But  apte the Mind or Fancie is to roave
Uncheckt,  and  of  her  roaving is no end Till warn'd, or by experience
taught,  she  learn That not to know at large of things remote From use,
obscure and suttle, but to know That which before us lies in daily life,
Is  the  prime  Wisdom;  what  is  more,  is fume, Or emptiness, or fond
impertinence,  And  renders us in things that most concerne Unpractis'd,
unprepar'd,  and  still  to seek. Gargantua, writing a letter to his son
Pantagruel while the latter is a student in Paris, admonishes him in the
words  of  Solomon  that "Wisdom entereth not into a malicious mind, and
that  knowledge  without conscience is but the ruin of the soul." In War
and  Peace,  Pierre,  after reiterating that "All we can know is that we
know  nothing.  And  that's the height of human wisdom," learns from the
Mason  that  "the  highest wisdom is not founded on reason alone, nor on
those  worldly  sciences of physics, chemistry, and the like, into which
intellectual  knowledge  is  divided."  The  highest  wisdom,  the Mason
continues,  is  "but  one science— the science of the whole— the science
explaining  the  whole  creation  and man's place in it. To receive that
science  it is necessary to purify and renew one's inner self. . . . And
to  attain  this  end,  we have the light called conscience that God has
implanted  in  our  souls." Though Plato defines wisdom as the virtue of
reason—  that  part  of  the  soul  which  is  for  him  the  faculty of
knowledge—he  gives  it  the  function  of  directing conduct as well as
contemplating  truth.  "Him  we  call  wise,"  Socrates  declares in the
Republic, "who has in him that little part which rules" and which has "a
knowledge  of what is for the interest of each of the three parts and of
the  whole."  In  the  state as in the soul, "how can there be the least
shadow  of wisdom," the Athenian Stranger asks in the Laws, "where there
is no harmony?" There is no harmony or wisdom "when fair reasonings have
their habitation in the soul, and yet do no good, but rather the reverse
of  good"  because  reason fails to rule or be obeyed. "When the soul is
opposed  to  knowledge,  or  opinion,  or  reason, which are her natural
lords," the Athenian Stranger goes on, "that I call folly, just as it is
in  the  state,  when  the multitude refuses to obey their rulers or the
laws." The four virtues which Plato enumerates

[1138a]
1104  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  in  both  the Republic and the Laws are wisdom,
temperance,  courage, justice. Justice is given a certain preeminence in
the  Republic as somehow embracing the other three, but in the Laws, the
ruling   virtue  is  wisdom.  Calling  the  virtues  "divine  goods"  to
distinguish  them  from  such  things  as  health, beauty, strength, and
wealth,  the  Athenian  Stranger  makes  wisdom "chief and leader of the
divine  class  of  goods. . . . Next," he says, "follows temperance; and
from  the union of these two with courage springs justice, and fourth in
the  scale  of  virtue  is  courage."  As  the  principle of these other
virtues,  wisdom  like  them  engages in the life of action. It does not
move  solely in the realm of thought. When he refers to wisdom as one of
the  four  virtues,  Aristotle  uses  the word "wisdom" as if it named a
single virtue. In the passage in the Politics in which he says that "the
courage, justice, and wisdom of a state have the same form and nature as
the  qualities  which give the individual who possesses them the name of
just, wise or temperate," he does not divide wisdom into the speculative
and  the practical. But he seldom overlooks that separation. The passage
just  cited,  for instance, begins with the statement that "each one has
just  so  much happiness as he has of virtue and wisdom, and of virtuous
and  wise action." Here the reference to virtue and wisdom places wisdom
outside  the virtues, when the latter are conceived exclusively as moral
virtues.  Wisdom  for  Aristotle  is  a  virtue  only  in  the  order of
intellectual  excellence,  not  of  moral excellence or character. As an
intellectual  virtue,  wisdom  is  not  even  involved  in the growth or
exercise  of  the  moral  virtues.  It  is  as  possible,  Aquinas says,
following  Aristotle, to have the cardinal moral virtues without wisdom,
as  it  is to have them without art or science. But for both Aquinas and
Aristotle  this  is neither true nor intelligible unless we bear in mind
the  distinction  between philosophical and practical wisdom, or between
wisdom  and  prudence.  Though  prudence  is,  no  less  than wisdom, an
intellectual  virtue—  a  quality  of  mind rather than of character— it
belongs  with the moral virtues. As the chapter on Virtue indicates, the
cardinal virtues according to Aquinas in:

[1138b]
elude  prudence, not wisdom. Similarly, as may be seen in the chapter on
Prudence,  Aristotle's  theory  holds  it impossible to be good "without
practical  wisdom,"  just  as  it  is impossible to be "practically wise
without moral virtue." Practical wisdom, Aristotle writes, "is concerned
with  things human and things about which it is possible to deliberate."
Philosophic  wisdom,  on  the  other hand, "will contemplate none of the
things that make a man happy." To explain the difference, Aristotle uses
the  example  of  the early Greek sages. "We say Anaxagoras, Thales, and
men  like  them  have  philosophic but not practical wisdom, when we see
them  ignorant of what is to their own advantage. . . . They know things
that  are  remarkable,  admirable,  difficult,  and divine, but useless;
viz., because it is not human goods they seek." If "wisdom" connotes the
highest  form  of  knowledge,  then the name, according to Aristotle, is
more  properly  applied  to  speculative  than  to practical wisdom. The
highest  form  of  knowledge, in his view, is concerned with the highest
objects.  Hence,  he  says,  "it  would  be  strange to think that . . .
practical  wisdom is the best knowledge, since man is not the best thing
in  the  world. . . . But if the argument be that man is the best of the
animals,  this makes no difference; for there are other things much more
divine in their nature than man," and wisdom is knowledge "of the things
that  are highest by nature." When Hobbes distinguishes between prudence
and  sapience,  he  does not assign a special object to wisdom. "As much
experience  is  Prudence," he writes, "so is much science, Sapience." It
is  the  amount  of  science  a  man  possesses, not his possession of a
particular  kind  of knowledge, which makes him wise. Descartes seems to
take  a  similar view when he says that "the sciences taken all together
are  identical  with  human  wisdom."  But  for  Aristotle  and Aquinas,
philosophical  wisdom  can  be differentiated from the other speculative
virtues, such as the understanding of first principles or the scientific
knowledge  of  the  conclusions  which can be demonstrated from them. It
involves  them,  but  it  is  distinct  from  them  insofar  as  it uses
principles  to  demonstrate  conclusions  concerning the highest causes.
Wisdom can be

[1139a]
called  a  science  if  it is understood that by reason of its object it
stands at the apex of the sciences, crowning and perfecting them. In the
opening  pages  of his Metaphysics, Aristotle identifies wisdom with the
supreme  philosophical  science—  the  science  which investigates first
principles  and  causes.  He  calls it a "divine science" or "theology,"
for,  as  he  says, "God is thought to be among the causes of all things
and to be a first principle." It is not the most useful science, but the
most  "desirable  on its own account and for the sake of knowing. ... It
alone  exists for its own sake. . . . All the sciences, indeed, are more
necessary  than  this,  but  none is better." While adopting Aristotle's
conception  of wisdom, Aquinas finds it most eminently represented among
the  sciences,  not  by metaphysics or the theology of the philosophers,
but by sacred doctrine or the theology based on revelation. "Since it is
the  part  of  a  wise man to order and to judge," he writes, "and since
lesser  matters  can  be  judged in the light of some higher cause . . .
therefore,  he  who  considers absolutely the highest cause of the whole
universe,  namely  God,  is  most  of  all called wise. . . . But sacred
doctrine  essentially  treats of God viewed as the highest cause, for it
treats  of Him not only so far as He can be known through creatures just
as  the  philosophers  know  Him . . . but also so far as He is known to
Himself alone and revealed to others. Hence," Aquinas concludes, "sacred
doctrine  is  especially called wisdom." The contrast between the wisdom
of  the  philosopher  and  the  wisdom  of  the theologian is more fully
discussed  in  the  chapters  on  Metaphysics  and  Theology. But we are
concerned  here  with the further implications of the difference between
natural  and  supernatural  wisdom, or the wisdom of man and of God. The
Greeks  insistently  raise  the question whether man can have wisdom. In
the  Apology, Socrates tells his accusers that his "cross-examination of
the  pretenders  to  wisdom"  was  a duty imposed upon him by the oracle
which  declared  that there was no man wiser than himself. To understand
the  oracle's  meaning, he tried to seek out wisdom in other men but, he
says at his trial, "I found that the men most in repute

[1139b]
Chapter  101:  WISDOM 1105 were all but the most foolish." This gave him
an  insight  into  the  kind  of  wisdom which he himself possessed. "My
hearers  always  imagine," Socrates declares, "that I myself possess the
wisdom  which  I  find  wanting  in  others;  but the truth is, O men of
Athens, that God only is wise; and by his answer he intends to show that
the  wisdom  of  men  is  worth little or nothing; he is not speaking of
Socrates,  he  is  only  using  my name by way of illustration, as if he
said,  He,  O  men,  is  the  wisest, who, like Socrates, knows that his
wisdom  is  in  truth  worth  nothing."  Again in the Phaedrus, Socrates
refuses to call any man wise, "for that is a great name which belongs to
God alone." For men, "lovers of wisdom or philosophers is the modest and
befitting title." Aristotle also says of the science which most deserves
the name of wisdom, because it is a science of divine things, that "such
a  science  either God alone can have, or God above all others." He does
not  think  that  the divine power can be jealous, but if there were any
truth  in  what  the poets say about the jealousy of the gods, "it would
probably  occur  in  this  case  above all, and all who excelled in this
knowledge  would  be  unfortunate." To whatever extent the possession of
wisdom  "might  be  justly  regarded as beyond human power," it would be
unfitting,  in  Aristotle's  opinion, "for man not to be content to seek
the  knowledge  that  is  suited  to him." This is even more typically a
Christian than a pagan sentiment. "Christians have a special knowledge,"
writes Montaigne, "how natural and original an evil curiosity is in man:
the  thirst  of  knowledge,  and the desire to become more wise, was the
first ruin of human kind, and the way by which it precipitated itself in
eternal damnation." In Paradise Lost, as he is about to leave the Garden
of  Eden,  Adam  says  to  the angel Michael: Greatly instructed I shall
hence  depart.  Greatly  in  peace  of  thought,  and  have  my  fill Of
knowledge,  what  this vessel can containe; Beyond which was my folly to
aspire.  To  which  the  angel  replies:  This  having learnt, thou hast
attained  the  summe Of wisdom . . . But Sacred Scripture does more than
enjoin man to humble himself before the chasm be-

[1140a]
1106  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tween human wisdom at its best and the infinite
wisdom  of God. It does more than say in the words of Jeremiah: "Let not
the  wise man glory in his wisdom," for it also says that "fools despise
wisdom."  In  the  Epistle  of  James we find true wisdom set apart from
false.  If  the  knowledge  of  the  wise  man is not accompanied by the
"meekness  of wisdom," if instead there is "bitter envying and strife in
your  hearts,"  then  "this  wisdom  descendeth  not  from above, but is
earthly,  sensual,  devilish. . . . But the wisdom that is from above is
first  pure,  then  peaceable, gentle, and easy to be intreated, full of
mercy  and  good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy." St.
Paul  asks: "Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world ? When .
.  . the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by the foolishness
of preaching to save them that believe. For the Jews require a sign, and
the  Greeks  seek after wisdom: But we preach Christ crucified, unto the
Jews  a  stumbling-block, and unto the Greeks foolishness; But unto them
which  are called both Jews and Greeks, Christ the power of God, and the
wisdom of God. Because the foolishness of God is wiser than men; and the
weakness  of God is stronger than men. "My speech and my preaching," St.
Paul  continues to the Corinthians, . . . was not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, but in demonstration of the Spirit and of power: That your
faith  should  not  stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God.
Howbeit  we speak wisdom among them that are perfect; yet not the wisdom
of  this  world,  nor of the princes of this world, that come to nought:
But  we  speak  the wisdom of God in a mystery, even the hidden mystery,
which  God  ordained  before  the  world  unto  our glory. Wonder is the
beginning  of  the  kind  of  natural  wisdom  which  a philosopher like
Aristotle  regards  as  the  ultimate  goal  of  human  inquiry. But the
supernatural  wisdom  of  which Scripture speaks begins with the fear of
God  and comes to man not through his efforts at learning, but only as a
divine  gift.  "If any of you lack wisdom," St. James declares, "let him
ask  God,  that  giveth  to all men liberally and upbraideth not; and it
shall  be  given  him."  It  is wrong for a man to take pride in his own
learn-

[1140b]
ing  but, according to Pascal, "the proper place for pride if in wisdom,
for  it  cannot  be  granted  to a man that he has made himself wise God
alone gives wisdom, and that is why Qui gloriatur, in Domino glorietur."
The  theologians  dwell  at length on the text of the Psalmist that "the
fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom." Enumerating seven steps to
wisdom,  Augustine writes: "First of all, it is necessary that we should
be  led  by  the  fear  of God to seek the knowledge of His will, what He
commands us to desire and what to avoid. Now this fear will of necessity
excite  in  us  the  thought  of  our mortality and of the death that is
before  us,  and  crucify  all the motions of pride as if our flesh were
nailed  to  the  tree."  Then  in  succession  come  the steps of piety,
knowledge, resolution, counsel, purification of heart; and, finally, the
"holy  man  will be so single and so pure in heart that he will not step
aside from the truth, either for the sake of pleasing men or with a view
to avoid any of the annoyances which beset this life. Such a man ascends
to  wisdom,  which is the seventh and the last step, and which he enjoys
in  peace  and  tranquility."  Only  the wisdom which begins with faith,
according  to Aquinas, also begins with fear. "A thing may be called the
beginning  of  wisdom in two ways," he explains; "in one way, because it
is  the beginning of wisdom itself as to its essence; in another way, as
to  its  effect. Thus the beginning of an art as to its essence consists
in  the  principles from which that art proceeds, while the beginning of
an art as to its effect is that wherefrom it begins to operate." Aquinas
then  points  out  that wisdom is considered by theologians "in one way,
and  in  another way by philosophers." As the wisdom of the philosophers
does  not  begin with articles of faith but with axioms of reason, so it
does not begin with fear but with wonder. The wisdom of the philosophers
and  the  wisdom  of  the  religious both consist in knowledge of divine
things,  but  "wisdom, as we look at it," Aquinas writes, "is considered
not  only as being cognizant of God, as it is with the philosophers, but
also  as directing human conduct, since this is directed not only by the
human  law,  but  by  the divine law. . . . Accordingly the beginning of
wisdom  as  to  its  essence consists in the first principles of wisdom,
i.e., the articles of faith,

[1141a]
and  in  this  sense faith is said to be the beginning of wisdom. But as
regards  the  effect,  the beginning of wisdom is the point where wisdom
begins  to  work,  and  in this way fear is the beginning of wisdom, yet
servile  fear in one wayancT filial fear in another. "For servile fear,"
Aquinas  explains,  "is  like a principle disposing a man to wisdom from
without,  in  so far as he refrains from sin through fear of punishment,
and is thus fashioned for the effect of wisdom. . . . On the other hand,
chaste  or  filial  fear  is the beginning of wisdom, as being the first
effect  of  wisdom.  For  since  the  regulation of human conduct by the
divine  law  belongs  to  wisdom, in order to make a beginning, man must
first  of all fear God and submit himself to Him." The special character
of  wisdom  which  we  noted earlier— that it is at once speculative and
practical  knowledge, that it is concerned both with the ultimate nature
of  things  and  the  ultimate  good  for  man—seems  to  be  strikingly
exemplified in what the theologian calls "the gift of wisdom." Wisdom as
Plato conceives it may have this double character, but for Aristotle, as
we  have seen, wisdom, as opposed to prudence, is purely speculative. It
remains speculative even when it deals with the end which is the good of
each  thing  "and  in  general  with  the  supreme  good in the whole of
nature."  It considers the end or the good, as Aristotle indicates, only
under  the aspect of investigating "the first principles and causes; for
the  good,  i.e.,  the  end,  is one of the causes." It does not thereby
direct  man  to  his  own end, or lay down the rules of a good life. The
supernatural   gift   of  wisdom,  Aquinas  tells  us,  "is  not  merely
speculative  but also practical. ... It belongs to wisdom as a gift, not
only  to  contemplate  divine  things, but also to regulate human acts."
Such  infused wisdom not only extends "to the hidden mysteries of divine
things,"  which  are  beyond  the greatest wisdom man can acquire by his
natural  efforts,  but  this  wisdom  also directs man's actions to "the
sovereign good which is the last end, by knowing which man is said to be
truly  wise."  Christian  theologians  like Augustine and Aquinas do not
hold  the  wisdom  of  the philosophers in contempt because they fail to
pene-

[1141b]
Chapter  101: WISDOM 1107 trate the divine mysteries, or to guide man to
his   salvation.  Augustine  finds  in  Plato's  teaching  a  marvellous
foreshadowing  of Christian wisdom. "It is evident that none come nearer
to  us  than  the  Platonists," he says, when he attributes to Plato the
conception  of "the wise man as one who imitates, knows, loves this God,
and  who  is  rendered  blessed  through  fellowship with Him in His own
blessedness."  Though  Aquinas  holds  that  "wisdom  as  a gift is more
excellent than wisdom as an intellectual virtue, since it attains to God
more  intimately  by a kind of union of the soul with Him," he certainly
regards Aristotle as the epitome of natural wisdom when he refers to him
as  "the  philosopher."  The admonition of St. Paul, "to beware lest any
man spoil you through philosophy and vain deceit, after the tradition of
men,  after the rudiments of the world," does not seem to be interpreted
by Augustine and Aquinas to mean, as Montaigne later suggests, that "the
plague  of man is the opinion of wisdom ; and for this reason it is that
ignorance  is so recommended to us by our religion." But the theologians
do  condemn  the  counterfeits  of  wisdom to which men are susceptible.
These  are  false  wisdoms; the wisdom of the philosophers is not false,
but  imperfect.  We  find  three types of false worldly wisdom listed by
Aquinas. If a man "fixes his end in external earthly things," he writes,
"his wisdom is called earthly, if in the goods of the body, it is called
sensual  wisdom  ;  if in some excellence, it is called devilish wisdom,
because it imitates the devil's pride." These worldly wisdoms constitute
for him the sin of folly. "It is the wisdom of the world," Aquinas says,
"which deceives and makes us foolish in God's sight. . . . Though no man
wishes  to  be  a  fool,"  he adds, "yet he wishes those things of which
folly is a consequence, viz. to withdraw his sense from spiritual things
and  to  plunge  it  into  earthly  things."  The essence of such folly,
according  to  the  Psalmist, lies in denial: "The fool hath said in his
heart, There is no God." But there is another meaning of folly, in which
it  is  neither  a sin nor the opposite of wisdom. "If any man among you
seem  to  be  wise  in this world," St. Paul declares, "let him become a
fool,  that  he  may be wise." Commenting on this text, Aquinas explains
that "just as there

[1142a]
1108  THE GREAT IDEAS is an evil wisdom called worldly wisdom ... so too
there  is a good folly opposed to this evil wisdom, whereby man despises
worldly things." If there is wisdom in such folly, so also, according to
Aquinas,  there can be wisdom in those whom the world regards as natural
fools  or  innocents.  If  they have grace, he writes, "baptized idiots,
like  little  children, have the habit of wisdom, which is a gift of the
Holy  Ghost,  but  they  have  not  the  act,  on  account of the bodily
impediment  which  hinders  the use of reason in ,, them. Throughout the
tradition  of  the  great  books  those  who  praise  folly  do not take
exception  to  the  Psalmist's  remark that only "fools despise wisdom."
Rather  they find wisdom in the appearances of folly, and use the wisdom
of  fools  to expose the folly of those who pretend to be wise. "I every
day hear fools say things that are not foolish," Montaigne declares; and
echoing  him,  Touchstone,  the clown in As You Like It, complains: "The
more  pity  that fools may not speak wisely what wise men do foolishly."
To  which  Celia replies: "By my troth, thou sayest true; for, since the
little  wit  that  fools have was silenced, the little foolery that wise
men  have  makesa  great  show."  And  later,  after a conversation with
Touchstone about the passing of time, Jacques observes: "When I did hear
the  motley  fool  thus  moral  on the time, my lungs began to crow like
chanticleer that fools should be so deep contemplative." The jesters and
clowns  in  Shakespeare's  comedies  have  a  kind of wisdom. In Twelfth
Night,  the  clown  who  banters  with  Viola denies that he is the Lady
Olivia's  fool,  but  says  he  is  simply "her corrupter of words." The
trouble,  he  explains, is not that he lacks reason, but that "words are
grown  so  false that I am loath to prove reason with them"; and he ends
by  telling  Viola: "Foolery, sir, does walk about the orb like the sun;
it  shines  everywhere. I would be sorry, sir, but the fool should be as
oft  with  your  master  as  with my mistress. I think I saw your wisdom
there."  Pantagruel  persuades  Panurge  to take counsel of a fool. "The
wise  may be instructed by a fool," he says. "You know how by the advice
and  counsel  and  prediction of fools, many kings, princes, states, and
commonwealths have been preserved, battles gained, and diverse doubts of

[1142b]
a  most  perplexed  intricacy  resolved." As he who "is called a worldly
wise  man," Pantagruel goes on to remark, may "in the second judgment of
the  intelligences  which are above . . . be esteemed a fool," so he may
be thought a sage who lays "quite aside those cares which are conducible
to  his  body  or  his  fortunes.  . . . All which neglects of sublunary
things  are  vulgarly  imputed  folly."  To  the same general effect are
Pierre's  reflections  in  War  and  Peace on the period of his blissful
insanity  after  the  burning  of  Moscow.  When he recalls the views he
formed  of  men  and circumstances at the time of his madness, he always
finds  them  correct.  "I  may have appeared strange and queer then," he
says  to  himself, "but I was not so mad as I seemed. On the contrary, I
was  wiser  and  had more insight than at any other time, and understood
all  that  is  worth  understanding in life, because . . . because I was
happy."  Folly  is  not  always  praised in paradox, nor is it seriously
condemned  only  by the Christian theologian who equates it with denying
or  turning  away  from  God.  "Folly, eldest of Jove's daughters," says
Agamemnon  in  the  Iliad,  "shuts  men's eyes to their destruction. She
walks  delicately,  not on the solid earth, but hovers over the heads of
men  to  make  them stumble or to ensnare them. Time was when she fooled
Jove  himself."  Agamemnon concludes the story of Jove's befuddlement by
relating  how  in  his  rage  Jove "caught Folly by the hair and swore a
great oath that never should she again invade starry heaven and Olympus,
for  she  was the bane of all. Then he whirled her round with a twist of
his  hand, and flung her down from heaven so that she fell on the fields
of  mortal men." On the earthly plane, folly takes many forms, of which,
in  Montaigne's judgment, the most exasperating are dullness of wit, the
boldness  of  stupidity,  and  contentiousness  in  argument. "Obstinacy
ofopinion  and  heat  in  argument  are  the surest proofs of folly," he
observes.   "Is   there   anything  so  assured,  resolute,  disdainful,
contemplative,  serious,  and  grave  as the ass?" Whatever the forms or
aspects  of  folly,  and  however  the  wisdom  it implies or opposes be
conceived, one thing is clear throughout the

[1143a]
tradition  of  western thought. No one who can separate true wisdom from
folly  in  disguise  places  anything but the highest value on it in the
order  of human goods. ^— The final utterance of the Chorus in Antigone,
that  "wisdom  is  the  supreme  part  of  happiness";  the Aristotelian
doctrine  that  "the  activity  of  philosophic wisdom is admittedly the
pleasantest  of  virtuous  activities"  and  "all  the  other attributes
ascribed  to  the supremely happy man are evidently those connected with
this  activity";  the statement by Plato in his Seventh Letter, in which
he demands that his myth of the philosopher-king be taken seriously, for
"the human race will not see better days until either the stock of those
who rightly and genuinely follow philosophy acquire political authority,
or else the class who have political control be led by some dispensation
of  providence  to  become  real  philosophers"—  all  these express the
tribute  which pagan antiquity pays to wisdom in human life and society.
To  the Christian— theologian, mystic, or poet— it is in Heaven with the
saints  who  dwell  in  God's  presence  that  wisdom* like love, reigns
supreme.  Nor  are  these  two  unconnected. As OUTLINE OF TOPICS 1. The
nature,  origins, and kinds of wisdom \a. Diverse conceptions of natural
wisdom:  the supreme form of human knowledge ib. The distinction between
speculative and practical wisdom, or between philosophical and political
wisdom  ic.  Theological and mystical wisdom: the supernatural wisdom of
faith  and  vision; the gift of wisdom id. The wisdom of God: the defect
of  human  wisdom  compared  with  divine wisdom; the folly or vanity of
worldly  wisdom  2.  Wisdom,  virtue,  and  happiness  ia.  Wisdom as an
intellectual   virtue:  its  relation  to  other  intellectual  virtues,
especially  science  and  understanding;  the  vice  or sin of folly lb.
Wisdom  and  man's knowledge of good and evil: the relation of wisdom to
the  moral virtues ic. Wisdom as a good: its role in the happy life; the
place  of the wise man in society 3. The love of wisdom and the steps to
wisdom:  the sophist, the philosopher, and the wise man 4. The praise of
folly: the wisdom of fools and innocents

[1143b]
Chapter  101:  WISDOM  1109  charity  is  the perfection of the will, so
wisdom is the perfection of the intellect. In the Divine Comedy, Aquinas
explains  to Dante when they meet in Paradise how lack of wisdom's order
in the mind goes hand in hand with love's disorder. "He is very low down
among  the  fools,"  the  spirit  says,  "who  affirms or denies without
distinction,  alike in the one and in the other case: because it happens
that  oftentimes  the  rash judgment bends in false directions, and then
self-love  binds the intelligence." With the accent on earth rather than
on  heaven,  with  reliance  upon reason rather than upon faith, Spinoza
voices  a  comparable insight that to have wisdom is to love wisely, for
to know wisely is to love God. "It is therefore most profitable to us in
this  life,"  he writes, "to make perfect the intellect or reason as far
as  possible,  and  in  this one thing consists the highest happiness or
blessedness  of  man;  for  blessedness is nothing but the peace of mind
which  springs  from the intuitive knowledge of God." Not only does "the
highest  possible  peace of mind" arise from this kind of knowledge but,
he  adds,  from  it  also  "necessarily springs the intellectual love of
God." PAGE IIIO IIII III2 III3 III4 III5 IIl6

[1144a]
1110  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  1. The nature, origins, and kinds of wisdom la.
Diverse  conceptions  of  natural  wisdom:  the  supreme  form  of human
knowledge   7  Plato:  Charmides,  7d-9d;  llb-c;  12d-13d  /  Phaedrus,
125a-126c  /  Symposium, 166c-167c / Apology, 201b-203a / Phaedo, 232a /
Republic,  bk  iv,  346a-347a;  bk vi-vii, 383d-398c / Timaeus, 476a-b /
Parmenides,  491c-d  /  Sophist, 571a-c / Philebus, 634b-635b / Laws, bk
hi, 670b-c / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 9
[i92a33~b2]
268c-d; bk ii, ch 2
[i94b9~i5]
271a; ch 7
[i98a22-3i]
275b-c / Heavens, bk hi, ch i
[298b i3-24] 390a-b / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 1-2
499a-501c;  bk ii, ch i 511b,d-512b; bk hi, ch a23- b27] 513b,d-514b; ch
2
[996
1
[995
a34] 514d-516a; bk iv, ch 1-3 522a-525a; bk vi, ch i 547b,d-548c; bk xi,
ch 1-4 587a590a; ch 7 592b-593a / Soul, bk i, ch i 997
[403b io-i7] 632d
9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 7 390a-d; ch 13
[n45 a7-i2] 394d
11  Nicomachus:  Arithmetic,  bk  i,  811a  813a 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk v
[1-54]
61a-d;  bk  vi  [1-42]  80a-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 22,
167d168a; bk hi, ch 2 177c-178d; bk iv, ch 5 228a-230b

[1144b]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 1 16a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer  to the upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult the Preface. 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk v,
sect  9  270b-c  16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i, 5a-b 17 Plotinus: First
Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  6-tr hi, ch 6 9a-12b / Fifth Ennead, tr hi, ch 2-4
216b-217d  18  Augustine:  City  of God, bk viii, ch i-io 264b,d-271d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q i, a i 3b-4a; a 6 6b-7a; a 8, ans
7c-8d;  q 14, a i, rep 2 75d-76c; q 79, a 10, rep 3 423d-424d 20 Aquinas
:  Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 2 36a-37b; part ii-ii, q 9, a 2,
ans  424b425a;  q  19,  a  7, ans 469d-470c; q 45, a i, ans 598d-599d 23
Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i, 60c-61a; 72a-d; part iv, 267a-b; 269b-c 25
Montaigne:   Essays,  308c-d;  520b-522a;  522c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  443b 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 15d; 17b-c; 40a-48d
esp  40a-41b,  43ac,  44c-45a  /  Novum  Organum, bk ii, aph 9 140b-c 31
Descartes:  Rules, 1 la-2a / Meditations, 70c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
ii,  prop  40,  schol  2prop  42 388a-c; prop 47 390c-391a; part v, prop
25-42 458d-463d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 7 453c-454a 37
Fielding: Tom Jones, 182a b

[1145a]
lb  to  U  Chapter  101: WISDOM 1111 42 Kant: Pure Reason, la-4a,c; 19a;
115d-117d;  120b  [fn  i];  172d-174a esp 173d;243c-248d esp 246a-248d /
Fund.  Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 270c-d / Practical Reason, 337a-338c;
360d361d  /  Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics^ 365a-b;368c-d;377b-c
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref, 6a-7a / Philosophy of History,
intro,  158c-  160b;  165a-b  51  Tolstoy:  War and Peace, bk v, 197b 53
James:  Psychology,  758a  Lb.  The  distinction between speculative and
practical wisdom, or between philosophical and political wisdom 7 Plato:
Apology, 202d / Philebus, 633a-635b 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 8
[i098b24-26]
344b;  bk  vi,  ch  3  [113^14-18]  388b;  ch  7-8  390a-391c  esp  ch 7
[1141*20-35] 390a-b; ch ii
[ii4}b i4]-cH
12
[ii44a io]
393b-d; ch 13
[ii45 a6-i2]
394d / Rhetoric, bk i, ch ii
[i37i b26-28] 615b
18  Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk viii, ch 4 266d267c 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q i, a 6, ans 6b-7a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part i-ii, q 66, a 5, rep 1-2 79b 80c; part ii- ii, q 19, a 7 469d-470c;
q 45, a 3 600c 601a 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xiii
[88111] 126b-c
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  i,  60c-61a;  84c-d;  part  iv, 267a-b 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  327b  d  30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 4c-6c
passim;  16d-17a; 42ac; 65d-66a 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 245a-248d passim /
Fund.  Prin.  Metaphysic  of  Morals,  260d-261d  /  Pref.  Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 365b
[fn
1];  377b-c'  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part ii, 271d272a 47
Goethe:  Faust,  part  i  [2038-2039]  48a  lr.Theological  and mystical
wisdom:  the supernatural wisdom of faith and vision; the gift of wisdom
Old  Testament:  /  Kings, 3:5-14; 4:29— (D) III Kings, 3:5-14; 4:29 / /
Chronicles,  22:12—  (D) I Paralipomenon, 22:12 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12—
(D)  II  Paralipomenon,  1:7-12  / Job, 28; 32:8 / Psalms, 19:7; 111:10;
119:34-40,73,   97-104,125,130,144,169—   (D)   Psalms,   18:8;  110:10;
118:34-40,73,97-104,125,130,144,169  /  Proverbs, 1:7; 2:1-11; 3:5-6; 8;
9:10;  15:33 / Ecclesiastes, 2:26 / Isaiah, 11:1-5— (D) Isaias, 11:1-5 /
Daniel,  1  esp  1:17;  2 esp 2:17-23; 4-5 esp 4:8-9, 4:18, 5:10-16— (D)
Daniel,  1  esp  1:17; 2 esp 2:17-23; 3:98-5:31 esp 4:5-6, 4:15, 5:10-16
Apocrypha:   Wisdom   of   Solomon,   6-9  esp  7:7,  7:15-16,  7:24-26,
8:2i-9:i8-(D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 6-9 esp 7:7, 7:15-16, 7:24-26, 8:21-

[1145b]
9:19  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1;  6:18-37; «:*5; 17:1,614; 19:20; 21:11; 24;
43:33;  45:26;  50:28-29;  51:17—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 1; 6:18-37;
11:15;  17:1^-14; 19:18; 21:13; 24; 43:37; 45:31; 50:30-31; 51:22-23 New
Testament:  Matthew,  11:25-27  / Luke, 10 '.21-22 / John, 1:4-5,9; 3 :i
9~2i;  8:32;  16:1214 / / Corinthians, 1:17-2:16; 3:16-20; 4:10; 8:2-3 /
Ephesians,  1:15-18;  3:1-12;  5:15-17  /  Colossians, 1:9-10; 2:2-3 / H
Thessalonians,  2:10-14—  (Z))  H  Thessalonians,  2:10-13 / James, 1:5;
3:13-18  18  Augustine: Confessions, bk ix, par 23-25 68a-c; bk xii, par
20  103c-d  /  City  of God, bk vm, ch 10 271a-d; bk xi, ch 2 323a-c; bk
xix,  ch 20 523d-524a / Christian Doctrine, bk 11, ch 7 638d-639c; ch 40
655b-656a;  ch  42 656c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a i
3b-4a;  aa 5-6 5c-7a; q 12, aa 12-13 60d-62b; q 32, a 1 175d-178a; q 64,
a  i,  ans  334a-335c  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, qq 8-9
416d-426c  passim; q 19, a 7 469d-470c; q 45 598c-603c; part hi suppl, q
92 1025b1037c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, v
[1-12]
112a-b  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 83b; part iv, 270c-d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  208a-209c; 212a-d; 238d-239c 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
17b-c;  19b-c;  39d-40a; 95d-96c 31 Descartes: Discourse, part i, 43c 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  vii  [109-130]  219b220a; bk xii [552-587]
331a-332a  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  425-555  243b-270a; 793, 326b 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div 132, 509c 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
182bc  40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 308d-309a 42 Kant: Practical Reason,
346b-347c 46 Hegel: Philosophy of History, intro, 157c-d 51 Tolstoy: War
and  Peace,  bk  v,  196a-198b; bk vi, 248d-249a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi  146b,d-170d  esp 168b-c; bk vii, 189a-191a,c; bk xi,
313c-314d  54  Freud: Civilization and Its Discontents, 770d771a Id. The
wisdom  of  God: the defect of human wisdom compared with divine wisdom;
the  folly  or  vanity  of worldly wisdom Old Testament: Job passim, esp
9:1-4,  11:1-12, 12:12-16, 26:1-14, 28:1-28, 38:1-41:34— (D) Job passim,
esp  9:1-4,  11:1-12,  12:12-16,  26:114,  28:1-28, 38:1-41:25 / Psalms,
92:5-6;  94:11;  104:24;  119:97-104;  139; 147:4-5— (D) Psalms, 91:6-7;
93:11;   103:24;  118:97-104;  138;  146:4-5  /  Proverbs,  3:5-8,19-20;
8:22-31; 20:24; 21:30; 23:4; 28:26 / Ecclesiastes passim,

[1146a]
(1. The nature, origins, and kinds of wisdom. Id. The wisdom of God: the
defect  of human wisdom compared with divine wisdom; the folly or vanity
of  worldly  wisdom.)  esp 1:12-18, 2:12-26, 3:11, 6:8, 7:16-17, 7:2325,
8:16-17,  II:  5>  12:8-12  /  Isaiah,  29:14-16; 33:18-19; 40:12-31 esp
40:28;  44:24-25—  (D)  Isaias,  29:14-16; 33:18-19; 40:12-31 esp 40:28;
44:24-25  /  Jeremiah,  8:8-9;  9:23—24;  10:7-8,  12-15; 51:15-18— (Z))
Jeremias,  8:8-9;  9  :23~ 24; 10:7-8,12-15; 51:15-18 / Eze\iel, 28:1-7—
(D)  Ezechiel,  28:1-7  /  Daniel, 2:20-23 Apocrypha: Wisdom of Solomon,
7:15-16;  8:1-4;  9:1-4,13-17; i77-8-(D) OT,' Boo J{ of Wisdom, 7:15-16;
8:1-4;  9:1-4,13-17;  17:7-8  /  Ecclesiasticus, 1:1-10; 3:20-25; 11:15;
15:18-19;  19:24-25;  21:12; 23:19-20; 24:1-9,24-29; 37:19-21; 39:19-20;
42:17-25—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  1:1-10;  3:21-26;  11:15; 15:1920;
19:21-22; 21:14-15; 23:27-29; 24:1-14,3539; 37:22-24; 39:24-25; 42:17-26
New Testament: Matthew, 11:16-19 / Luke, 7:31-35; 16:8 / John, 1:1,4-5,9
/  Romans,  11:33-36  /  I  Corinthians,  1:17-2:16;  3:16-20;  8:1-3  /
Colossians,  2:2-3,8  /  James,  3:13-18  5 Aeschylus: Suppliant Maidens
[86-103] 2a-b 5 Euripides: Bacchantes
[386-433]
343a-b / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [570-575] 416a 7 Plato: Apology, 203a
8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk i, ch 2 [982b28a n] 501a-b; bk xii, ch 7
602d-603a; ch 9 605a-d; ch 10 606c 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk x, ch 8
[1 178^0-23]
433b-c / Politics, bk vii, ch i
[132^21-25]
527c  io72b i3io75b2o-24] -29] 983 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk 1, ch 14
120d-121c  17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch 11-13 163c-165b / Fifth
Ennead,  tr viii, ch 4-6 241b-242d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi, par
8 14d15a; bk v, par 5 28b-c; bk xii, par 20 103c-d / City of God, bk ix,
ch  22  296d-297a;  bk  xi, ch 10, 328c-d / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch
8-14  626c-628b  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q i, a 6, ans and
rep  i  6b-7a; q 3, a 6, rep i 18c-19a; q 4, a 2, rep 3 21b-22b; q 14, a
i,  rep 2 75d-76c; q 15, a 2, rep 2 92a-93b; q 21, a 2, ans 125c-d; a 4,
ans  and rep 4 126c-127c; q 27, a 2, rep 2 154c-155b; q 34, a i, rep 2,4
185b-187b; q 39, a 8 210a-213a; q 44, a 3, ans 240b-241a; q 45, a 6, rep
2-3  247a-248b; q 47, a 1, ans 256a-257b; a 2, ans 257b-258c; q 62, a 6,
ans 322a-d; q 65, a 2, rep 3 340b341b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 51, a 1, rep 2 12b-13c; q 91, a 3, rep 1 209d-210c; part 11—11,
q 45, a 1, rep i 598d-599d; a 4, rep 1 601a-c; a 6, rep 1-2 602b-603c; q
46 603c-605a,c passim esp a i, rep 2-3 603c-

[1146b]
1112  THE  GREAT IDEAS Id to 2a 604b, a 3, rep 2 604d-605a,c; part hi, q
12, a 2, contrary and rep 3 777b-778b; a 3, REP2 778b-779a 25 Montaigne:
Essays,   212a-215a;  238c-239c;  251c-252b  30  Bacon:  Advancement  of
Learning,  17b-c;  19b-c;  98d-99b  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  11
[188-193]  H5b; bk vii [109-130] 219b-220a; bk viii [179-214] 236a-b; bk
xii [561-573] 331b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 425-555 243b-270a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xxiii, sect 34 213a-b; bk hi, ch vi, sect ii,
271c;  sect  12,  272b;  bk iv, ch x, sect 5-6 350a-c 35 Berkeley: Human
Knowledge, sect 32 418d419a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 182b-c; 379c-380a 42
Kant:  Pure  Reason,  242a-b  /  Practical Reason, 303b-304b; 324b-325a;
344a-c;  346a-c;  354d355d  / Judgement, 592a-c 43 Mill: Utilitarianism,
455b  46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, additions, 164, 144c-d / Philosophy
of  History,  intro,  158c160b  48  Melville:  Moby  Dic\,  313b-314a 52
Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  v,  130b-c 2. Wisdom, virtue, and
happiness  2a.  Wisdom  as an intellectual virtue: its relation to other
intellectual  virtues, especially science and understanding; the vice or
sin  of folly Old Testament: Psalms, 14:1-4; 53:1-4— (D) Psalms, 13:1-4;
52:1-4  /  Proverbs,  8:12;  10:14;  12:15-16;  14:8,33; 15:2; 16:21-23;
17:24:  18:15;  21:11; 24:9 / Ecclesiastes, 2:13; 4:5; 7:4-7,25-26; 8:5;
9:13-18;  10:1-3,12-15 / Jeremiah, 8:8-9— (D) Jeremias, 8:8-9 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon,  7:15-22;  8:58;  12:23-14:31 esp 13:1-2, 14:11-14,
14:22—  (D)  OT, Book of Wisdom, 7:15-22; 8:5-8; 12:23-14:31 esp 13:1-2,
14:11-14, 14:22 / Ecclesiasticus, 1:4,19,25; 10:1-3; 18:28-29; 21:12-19;
22:7-8,11-15;  33:5;  34:1;  38:24-25;  39:1-3—  (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
1:4,24,31;  10:1-3;  18:28-29;  21:14-22; 22:7-18; 33:5; 34:1; 38:25-26;
39:1-3 New Testament: Matthew, 7:26-27 / Romans, 1:18-25 4 Homep: Iliad,
bk  xix  [74-144]  137d-138c 7 Plato: Cratylus, 86c-d / Republic, bk iv,
346a-355a esp 346c-347a, 353d-354b; bk vivii, 383b-398c; bk ix, 423c-d /
Laws, bk hi, 670b-c 8 Aristotle: Topics, bk v, ch 6
[i36b7-i4]
5] 191a; bk vi, ch 6 188b-c; ch 8
[i38 a37~b
a27-32] 199a 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 4
[io95b io-i3j
340c d; ch 13 [110^3-10] 348c-d; bk vi, ch 3
[ii39b i4-i8] 388b; ch 6-1 1 389d-393b
[i 45

[1147a]
2b  Chapter 101 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811a-813a 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 15, 156a-b 17 Plotinus: Fourth Ennead, tr iv, ch
12,  164b  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  4-6 241b-242d 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  14,  48a-b  /  City of God, bk viii, ch 10,
271b-c; fiiTxiv, ch 28 397a-d; bk xix, ch 20 523d-524a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 14, a 1, rep 2 75d-76c; q 79, a 9, ans 422b-423d;
a 10, rep 3 423d-424d; part i-ii, q 2, a i, rep 1-2 615d-616c 20 Aquinas
:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii, q 57, a 2 36a-37b; q 66, a 5 79b-80c;
part ii-ii, q 9, a 2, ans 424b-425a; q 45, a i, ans and rep 2 598d-599d;
a  2, ans and rep 3 599d600c; a 3, ans and rep i 600c-601a; a 4, rep 1-2
601a-c;  q  46  603c-605a,c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part i, 56d; 60c-d 25
Montaigne:  Essays,  521d-522a  31  Descartes: Rules, 1 la-2a 32 Milton:
Paradise  Lost,  bk vii [109-130] 219b220a / Areopagitica, 392b 42 Kant:
Fund.   Prin.   Metaphysic  of Mora  Is,  260d261d  /  Practical  Reason,
337a-338c; 360d361d 2b. Wisdom and man's knowledge of good and evil: the
relation  of  wisdom  to the moral virtues Old Testament: Genesis, 3 / /
Kings,  3:5-14—  (D)  ///  Kings, 3:5-14 / // Chronicles, 1 7-12— (D) II
Paralipomenon,  1:7-12  /  Job,  28:28 / Psalms, 14:1-4; 37:30; 53— (£))
Psalms,   13:14;   36:30;  52  /  Proverbs,  1-2;  3:5-7,21-24;  5:2223;
6:6-8,32-33; 7:4-5; 8; 9:9-18; 10:8,19,23, 31; 11:12; 12:16; 13:1,14,19;
14:8-9,16-18,29;  15:21,24,33;  17:10;  18:6-7; 19:3; 24:9; 28:7; 29:3 /
Ecclesiastes,  2:26;  7:9-10,25-26;  8:5;  10:12-15 Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon passim, esp 1 :i- :9-I 8, 10:8-10, 7, 6:12-25, 7:22-30, 8:5-7, 9
12:23-24, 13:1-2, 14:11-14, 14:22-31 — (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom passim, esp
1:1-7,  6:13-  :9-I  9> 10:8-10, 12:23-24, 27, 7:21-30, 8:5-7, 9 13:1-2,
14:11-14,  14:22-31  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1:  4-10,14-21,26-27; 11:15-16;
17:1,7;  18:27;  19:18-25;  21:11-12,22-26;  22:16-18; 23:2-3; 27:11,13;
39:1-11;  43:33;  45:26;  47:12-20;  50:  28-29— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
1:4-10,16-27;   11:15-16;  17:1,6;  18:27;  19:18-22;  21:12-15,  25-29;
22:19-22;  23:2-3;  27:12,14;  39:1-15;  :3i;  47:i4-22 ; 5 o:3°-3 I New
Testament:  Matthew,  7:26-27  /  Romans,  :37;  45  43 1:18-25; 16:19 /
Philippians,  1:9-11  / Colossians, 1:9-10 / James, 3:13-18 5 Aeschylus:
Agamemnon  [160-183]  53d-54a  5  Sophocles: Antigone [1348-1353] 142d 6
Thucydides  : Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370a-c 7 Plato: Charmides, 7a-13c
passim,  esp  7b-c, 1 2d-13a / Laches, 31a-b; 33a-37a / Protagoras, 56b;
58a-64d  esp 62a-64a / Euthydemus, 69a71a / Cratylus, 86c-d / Symposium,
166c-

[1147b]
: WISDOM 1113 167d / Meno, 183c-184c; 189b-d / Phaedo, 226a-b; 230d-234c
esp 232a-b, 233d-234c / Republic, bk i, 306c-308a; bk hi, 337b-d; bk iv,
346a-355a;   bk  vi-vii,  383d-398c  /  Critias,  485b-c  /  Theaetetus,
530b-531a  /  Philebus,  635c-639a,c  /  Laws,  bk  i,  643c-d;  bk  in,
669b-671b; bk xii, 795c-796b / Seventh Letter, 801 b-c; 806b-c; 808c-d 8
Aristotle: Sophistical Refutations, ch 24
[180*7-15]
248a / Metaphysics, bk i, ch 2
[982b4-io]
500d; bk hi, ch 2
[996
a2i-b  i3]  514d-515a  9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk vi, ch 5 389a-d; ch 12-13
393b-394d; bk x, ch 8
[ii78a i6-i8]
432d / Politics, bk vii, ch i
[i323b2i~36]
527c-d  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk ii, ch 22, 167d168a; bk hi, ch 2
177c-178d;  bk  iv,  ch  5  228a-230b  14 Plutarch: Demetrius, 726a-d 17
Plotinus:  First  Ennead,  tr  ii, ch 6-7 9a-10a; tr in, ch 6 lld-12b 18
Augustine:  City  of  God,  bk  xix,  ch  20  523d524a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i, q i, a 6, rep 3 6b-7a; q 64, a i, ans 334a-335c; q
79,  a  10,  rep 3 423d-424d; part i-ii, q 2, a i, rep i 615d-616c; a 2,
rep  3 616d-617b 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 57, a 4, ans
38a-39a;  a 5, ans 39a-40a; q 58, a 4, ans 44a-d; part ii-ii, q 19, a 7,
ans  469d470c;  q  45  598c-603c  esp  aa  3-4 600c-601c; q 46, a 2, ans
604b-d;  a  3  604d-605a,c  23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 112a-b 25
Montaigne: Essays, 59c-60a; 70d-72a; 478c480c 27 Shaxespeare: All's Well
That Ends Well, act 1, sc 1
[109-116]
143c / Macbeth, act hi, sc 1
[48-54] 295b; act
iv, sc ii
[1-17]
302b-c  31  Descartes:  Discourse,  part hi, 49d-50b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part v, prop 42 463b-d 32 Milton: Comus [331-489] 40b-44a esp [375— 385]
41b-42a / Paradise Lost, bk viii
[316337]
239a-b; bk ix
[679-779]
262a-264a; bk xi
[84-98] 301a
/  Samson  Agonistes  [3859] 340b 33 Pascal: Pensees, 460 254b 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk i, ch hi, sect 16, 117a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones,
31c-d;  182a-c  38  Rousseau: Inequality, 344d-345c 42 Kant: Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals, 256a-b / Practical Reason, 337a-338c; 360d361d /
Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365b [fn 1]; 368b-369a; 377b-c 46
Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part  ii, 279d281a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk  v,  194b-195a;  197b;  bk viii, 335a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov, bk v, 120b-121d

[1148a]
1114 THE GREAT IDEAS (2. Wisdom, virtue, and happiness.} 2c. Wisdom as a
good:  its  role in the happy life; the place of the wise man in society
Old  Testament:  Genesis,  41:33,37-45 / Exodus, 18:21-26 / Deuteronomy,
1:13 / / Kings, 3:528; 4:29-34; 10:1-10— (D) III Kings, 3:5-28; 4:29-34;
10:1-10  /  77 Chronicles, 1:7-12; 9:1-9 — (D) II Paralipomenon, 1:7-12;
9:1-9  /  Job,  28:12-20  / Psalms, 90:12— (D) Psalms, 89:12 / Proverbs,
1:1-5:2;   8-9;   10:1;  12:8;  14:1,3,24,  35;  15:20,24;  16:16,20,22;
17:2,16,21,25;    19:2,    8,13,20;    20:15,26;   21:20-22;   22:17-21;
23:1516,19-25;  24:1-14;  26:1,8;  27:11;  28:2,26; 29:8 / Ecclesiastes,
1:17-18;  2:12-26;  6:8; 7:5,1112,16-19; 8:1,5; 9:11-18; 10:1-6; 12:8-12
(D)  Ecclesiastes,  1:17-18;  2:12-26;  6:8;  7:6,  12-13,17-20;  8:1,5;
9:11-18;  10:1-6;  12:8-12  /  Ezefyel,  28:2-7—  IP) Ezechiel, 28:2-7 /
Daniel— (D) Daniel, 1:1-3:23; 3:91-12:13 Apocrypha: Tobit, 4:18— (D) OT,
Tobias,  4:19  / Wisdom of Solomon passim, esp 3:11-15, 4: 8-9, 6:12-25,
7:7-10:21—  (D) OT, Boof{ of Wisdom passim, esp 3:11-15, 4:8-9, 6:13-27,
7:7-10:21  / Ecclesiasticus, 1:16-19; 4:11-19, : 5> I 9'> 8:8-9; 9 :i 4-
I  5»i7?  Io:  23-24;  6:18-37;  7 1-4,25; 11 :i ; 14:20-15:10; 19:8,18;
20:13,2931;  21:12-13,15-17,21,24-26;  22:16-17;  24  :I~ 22; 25:4-5,10;
26:14;  27:12; 34:8; 37:19-26; 38:24-39:11; 40:20,25; 41:14-15; 44:1-15:
47:  13-17;  51:13-28—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 1:2024; 4:12-22,28-29;
6:18-37;  7:5,21;  8:9-12; 9:21-22,24; 10:1-4,28; 11:1; 14:22-15:10; 19:
8,18;    20:13,31-33;    21:14-16,18-20,24,27-29;   22:19-20;   24:1-30;
25:6-7,13;  26:18;  27:13;  34:8;  37:21-29;  38:25-39:15; 40:20,25; 41:
17-18;  44:1-15; 47:15-18; 51:18-36 / Susanna — (D) OT, Daniel, 13 / Bel
and  Dragon-(D)  OT,  Daniel,  14  New  Testament:  Luke, 11:31 / James,
3:13-18 4 Homer: Iliad, bk xi [618-644] 78d-79a 5 Sophocles: Oedipus the
King
[1-57] 99a-d;
[300-462]
102a-103c / Antigone
[632-765]
136c-137d;
[1348-1353] 142d
/ Ajax
[12261263] 153c-154a
5 Euripides: Medea
[292-305]
214c-d  / Bacchantes [386-433] 343a-b 6 Herodotus: History, bk i, 6c-8a;
bk viii, 280a-b 6Thucydides: Peloponnesian War, bk i, 370a-c; 383d-384a;
bk  ii,  402a-404d  7  Plato:  Charmides,  13b-d  /  Laches,  33a-34b  /
Protagoras,  44a-45b  /  Euthydemus,  69a-71a; 76a; 83c-84a / Symposium,
167a-d  /  Meno,  183c-184c  /  Apology,  207a-208a  /  Phaedo,  226a-b;
233c-234c  /  Gorgias, 272b-273b; 291c-292b / Republic, bk iv, 346a-356a
passim,  esp 346a-347a, 354d-355a; bk v-vii, 368c-401d / Timaeus, 476a-b
/  Theaetetus,  525c-526a;  528c-531a  / Statesman, 598b-608d / Philebus
609a-639a,c  esp  635c-639a,c / Laws, bk 1, 643c-d; bk ii, 655b-656a; bk
hi,

[1148b]
2c  669b-671b;  bk  v, 688d; bk xii, 796b-d / Seventh Letter, 801b-802c;
803c-804b; 806bc; 808c-809a 8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk i, ch i
[98ib i3~
24]  500a;  ch  2  500b-501c;  bk  xii,  ch  7 [io72b 13-29! G02d-603a 9
Aristotle:  Ethics,  bk  i,  ch  5  [io95b  i3-io96a  4] 340d-341a; ch 8
[1098^9-32]  344a-b; bk vi, ch 7 [ii4i a i8-b 7] 390a-c; ch 8 390d-391c;
ch 12 [ii43b i7-ii44a 6] 393b-c; bk vii, ch 12
[ii52b33-ii53 a 8] 404a-b; bk x, ch 2 [ii72b2632] 426d-427a; ch 7-8 431d-434a
/  Politics,  bk vii, ch 1 [i323b2i-36] 527c-d; ch 2 [1324* 23-35] 528b;
ch  3  [1325^4-32]  529d-530a  11  Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i, 811d 12
Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk ii f 1—61] 15a-d; bk v [1-54] 61a-d;
[1113-1135]  75c-d;  bk vi [1-42] 80a-d 12 Epictetus: Discourses, bk hi,
ch  22  195a201a  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 17 259b-d; bk v,
sect  9  270b-c  13  Virgil:  Georgics,  11  [490-493]  65b 14 Plutarch:
Lycurgus,  47a-48c  /  Numa  Pompilius,  59c-60b / Solon 64b,d-77a,c esp
68b-d / Pericles, 122d-123c / Alexander, 543b-544a; 566a-567d / Cato the
Younger,  637b-c  / Cicero, 717a-b / Dion, 782c-788b 15 Tacitus: Annals,
bk iv, 72a; bk vi, 91c; bk xiv, 153d-155a; bk xv, 172c-173d 17 Plotinus:
First  Ennead, tr ii, ch 7, 9d-10a; tr iv, ch 4-16 14a-19b 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  hi, par 7 14c-d / City of God, bk viii, ch 5, 267d; ch
8,  270c  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 2, a 1, rep 2
615d-616c;  q  3,  aa  5-6  626b-628a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i-ii,  q 66, a 5, rep 1-2 79b-80c; part ii-ii, q 19, a 7, ans 469d-470c;
q  45,  a  2, rep 2 599d-600c; a 3, rep 3 600c-601a; aa 4-6 601a-603c 21
Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  hell,  iv 5c-7a; purgatory, in [16-45] 56a-b 22
Chaucer:  Prologue  [285-308]  164a-b  /  Tale  of  Melibeus,  par 12-13
404a-405a;  par  15,  407a-b;  par  20-21,  409a-b;  par 29 412b-413a 23
Hobbes:   Leviathan,   part   ii,  164a,c  24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and
Pantagruel,  bk  hi, 127b,d-129a 25 Montaigne: Essays, 55d-62a; 69d-72a;
126b127c;  150c-151a;  231d-242d  passim; 308c-d 26 Shakespeare: Richard
II, act hi, sc ii
[178-185] 337b
/ 1st Henry IV, act i, sc ii
[89-100] 436bc
27 Shakespeare: All's Well That Ends Well, act 1, sc 1 [109-116] 143c 29
Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 185c; part 11, 332b-333b; 340d-343a esp
341c; 353b-356d; 361a-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 5a-b; 20b26a;
27c; 30ac 31 Descartes: Rules, 1 la-2a / Meditations, in, 88d-89a

[1149a]
31  Spinoza:  Ethics, part iv, appendix, iv 447b c; xxxn 450c-d; part v,
prop 25-42 458d-463d 32 Milton: Comus [375-385] 41b-42a / Paradise Lost,
bk viii [540-566] 244a-b / Areopagitka, 383a 35 Locke: Civil Government,
ch  vii,  sect  94  46a-c;  ch  viii, sect 105 48c-49a; ch xiv, sect 166
63d-64a  /  Human Understanding, bk 11. ch xxi, sect 55-56 192c-193b; bk
hi,  ch  x,  sect  8 293c-d 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect i, div 4,
452a-b;  div  5 452d-453b 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 182a-c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  xxiv,  202d-203a  38 Rousseau: Political Economy,
373d-374a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  32a-b;  205d-206a;  284a-c;
338d-339c;  644b-645d 41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 72c; 76d-77b 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason,  339b-d;  360d-361d  esp  361d  /  Pref. Metaphysical
Elements  of  Ethics,  365b  ffh  1];  368c-d  43 Federalist: number 49,
159d-160a;  number  57,  176d-177a 43 Mill: Representative Government, 3
74c  -3  7  7a;  384b-387d; 401a-406a passim, esp 403b-404c 44 Bosw ell:
Johnson,  122d;  296b  46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  Right,  pref, 4b-5c /
Philosophy of History, part ii, 279d-280b; part iv, 360b-c; 363d-364c 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[8094-8133]
197a198a  48 Melville: Moby Dicl{, 107a-b; 313b-314a 51 Tolstoy: War and
Peace,  bk xv, 643a-b 3. The love of wisdom and the steps to wisdom: the
sophist,  the  philosopher,  and  the  wise  man Old Testament: / Kings,
3:5-28;  4:29-34; 10: 1-10— (D) III Kings, 3:5-28; 4:29-34; 10:1-10 / //
Chronicles, 1:7-12— (D) II Paralipomenon, 1:7-12 I Job, 32:7-9 / Psalms,
90:12;  111:10  (£>)  Psalms,  89:12; 110:10 / Proverbs, 1:5-6; :5- J 3;
8:1-11,32-33;  9:1-6,10;  10:132:1-9;  4  14;  12:1;  13:1,20;  14:6,33;
15:2,7,14,31-33; 16:21-23; 17:16,24; 18:15; 19:8,20,25; 21:11; 22:17-21;
23:12,23;  24:13-14 / Ecclesiastes, 1-4 passim, esp 1:12-2:14; 8:1,16-17
Apocrypha:  Wisdom  of  Solomon,  6-9—  (D)  OT,  Book  of Wisdom, 6-9 /
Ecclesiasticus,  prologue;  1:14-20,26;  3:29;  4:11-19,24-25;  6:18-37;
8:8-9;  9:14—15;  14:20-27; 18:28-29; 21:11-15; 24:1,18-22,30-34; 25:10;
26:14;  34  :  9;  37:23-24;  38:24-39:11;  40:20;  47:13-17;  50:27-29;
51:13-30—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  prologue;  1:16-25,33;  3  :3  J 5
4:12-22,29-30;  6:18-37;  8:9-12; 9:21,23; 14:22-27; 18:28-29; 21:12-18;
24:1,24-30,41-47;  25:13;  26:18;  34:  9; 37:26-27; 38:25-39:15; 40:20;
47:15-18; 50:29-31; 51:18-38 New Testament: Lu\e, 2:52 / James, 1:5

[1149b]
Chapter  101:  WISDOM  1115  5 Euripides: Bacchantes [395] 343a 7 Plato:
Lysis,  22b-c  /  Protagoras, 54c-55a / Euthydemus 65a-84a,c / Phaedrus,
125b-126c; 140d / Symposium, 166c-167c; 169c-172d / Apology, 201d-203a /
Phaedo,  223b-225c  esp  225c  /  Republic,  bk  ii,  320b-c;  bk v-vii,
368c-401d / Timaeus, 476a-b / Parmenides, 491a-d / Theaetetus, 528c-531a
esp  530b-c  /  Sophist,  558c-d; 571a-c; 577c-579d esp 579a-d / Seventh
Letter,  808c-809a  8  Aristotle:  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch  2 [982^127]
500d-501a; bk iv, ch 2 [1004^8-27] 523d 9 Aristotle: Ethics, bk i, ch 6
[io96an-i7]
341b;  bk  x,  ch  7 [ii77a28-b 3] 432a 11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk i,
811a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk ii
[1-61]
15a-d;  bk  hi  [1-30]  30a-b;  bk v [1-54] 61a-d; bk vi [1-42] 80a-d 12
Epictetus:  Discourses, bk ii, ch 17 158d161a; bk in, ch 2 177c-178d; ch
10  185d187a;  ch  15  190a-191a;  ch  19 192c-d; ch 21 193d-195a; ch 24
203c-210a  esp  207d-210a;  bk  iv,  ch  5, 228a-b; ch 6 230b-232c; ch 8
235b-237d  12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 12 262b-c; bk v, sect 9
270b-c;  bk  vi, sect 12 274c 17 Plotinus: First Ennead, tr hi 10a-12b /
Fifth  Ennead, tr ix, ch 1-2 246c-247b 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk hi,
par  8-10  14d15d  /  City  of  God, bk viii, ch 1-3, 264b,d266b; ch 5-8
267d-270d esp ch 8, 270c-d; ch 10 271a-d / Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch
7  638d-639c; ch 31 651d-652b; ch 37-38 653d-654c; bk iv, ch 5 677a-d 19
Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part i, q 12, a 1, ans 50c-51c; a 8, rep 4
57b-58b  20  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i-ii,  q 68, a 7, rep 1
94c-95c;  part  ii-ii,  q 19, a 7 469d-470c; q 45, a 6, rep 3 602b-603c;
part  III,  q  12,  a  2,  contrary  777b-778b  21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, iv
[124132] 112a
22 Chaucer: Prologue
[285-308]
164a-b  /  Knight's  Tale  [2438-2452] 200a 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro,
47b-d   24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and  Pantagruel,  bk  ii,  81a-83b  25
Montaigne:  Essays,  55d-62a;  65c-66a;  69d72a;  238c-d;  239d-240a  31
Descartes:  Rules,  1  la-2a  /  Discourse,  part 1, 41d-42a; 43d-44a 33
Pascal:   Pensees,   327   231a-b;   425-555  243b270a  35  Hume:  Human
Understanding,  sect i 451a455b passim, esp div 2 451b-c, div 7 453c454a
41  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 523c-528a,c passim, esp 525b-c, 526c-d 42
Kant:  Practical  Reason,  337a-338c:  360d-361d  /  Pref.  Metaphysical
Elements of Ethics, 365b
[fni];368c-d

[1150a]
1116 THE GREAT IDEAS (3. The love of wisdom and the steps to wisdom: the
sophist, the philosopher, and the wise man.) 43 Mill: Liberty, 276b-277a
46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 4b-5c / Philosophy of History, part
ii, 271d-272a; 279d-281a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i
[354-601]
lla-16b;
[1011-1125] 25b-28a
4. The praise of folly: the wisdom of fools and innocents Old Testament:
Psalms,  8:2;  131—  (D)  Psalms,  8:3;  130/ Ecclesiastes, 1:17-1854:13
Apocrypha:  Ecclesiasticus,  19:24—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus, 19:21 New
Testament:  Matthew, 11:25-26; 18:1-4; 21:15-16 / Mark, 10:13-15 / Luke,
10:21 / / Corinthians, 1:17-2:16; 3:18-20; 4:10 / // Corinthians, 1:12 /
I  Peter,  2:1-2  5 Euripides: Bacchantes [386-433] 343a-b 18 Augustine:
Christian  Doctrine, bk i, ch 11-12 627b-d; ch 14 627d-628b 20 Aquinas :
Summa Theologica, part ii-ii, q 45, a 5, rep 3 601c-602b; q 46, a i, rep
2  603c604b 22 Chaucer: Troilus and Cressida, bk i, stanza 90-93 12b-13a
CROSS-REFERENCES 2a(2).

[1150b]
24  Rabelais:  Gargantua  and Pantagruel, bk hi, 201a-202d 25 Montaigne:
Essays,  150c-151a;  231d-242d  esp  233b,  235b-c,  238c-d;  499d-500a;
502a504c; 508a-512a; 520b-d 26 Shakespeare: Love's Labour's Lost, act v,
sc 11
[68-74] 274d / As You Like
It,  act  i,  sc  11  [92-96] 599d-600a; act ii, sc vn [12-61] 607b-d 27
Shakespeare: Twelfth Night, act i, sc v
[1-146] 4b-5d; act hi, sc
i [1-75] 14a-d; act iv, sc 1
[1-24] 21c-d; sc
11
[76-113] 23a-b
/  King  Lear  244a-283a,c  esp  act  i,  sc iv [106345] 251b-253c, sc v
254a-c, act ii, sc iv
[1-128] 258b-259d, act hi, sc vi [1-91] 266c267c
29  Cervantes:  Don Quixote, part i, 194a; part 11, 334d-336a; 340d-343a
esp  341c-d  32  Milton: Paradise Lost, bk xii [561-573] 331b 33 Pascal:
Pensees, 271 222a; 327 231a-b 42 Kant: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals,
261c-d 47 Goethe: Faust, prelude [85-88] 3a 48 Melville: Moby Dic^ 307a;
380a-381a;  385b  51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk xii, 559d; bk xv, 643a-b
52  Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk v, 121d For: Other discussions of
the  distinction  between  speculative  and practical wisdom, or between
wisdom  and  prudence,  see Philosophy 2a; Prudence 2a; Theology 3b. The
relation  of  wisdom  to  other intellectual virtues, see Science ia(i);
Virtue  and  Vice  Various  conceptions  of  the  supreme  form of human
knowledge,  see  Dialectic 2a; Metaphysics The relation of philosophical
to  theological  wisdom, see Knowledge 6c(5); Philosophy ia; Theology 2,
4a.  Comparisons of divine and human wisdom, see Knowledge 7a; Truth 2d.
Other discussions of the knowledge of good and evil, and of the relation
of  knowledge  to  virtue, see Good and Evil 6a; Knowledge 8b(i); Virtue
and  Vice ia; and for the relation of wisdom to happiness, see Happiness
2b(7);  Philosophy 4a. The conception of the philosopher king, or of the
place  of the wise man in society, see Monarchy 2b; Philosophy 4c; State
8b.  The  conception  of  philosophy  as the love of wisdom, and for the
distinction  between the sophist, the philosopher, and the wise man, see
Philosophy 6a-6b; Truth 8e.

[1151a]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included ifrGfeat Boofy
of  the  Western  World,  but relevant to the idea and topics with which
this chapter deals. These works are divided into two groups: I. Works by
authors  represented  in  this  collection.  II.  Works  by  authors not
represented  in  this  collection.  For the date, place, and other facts
concerning  the publication of the works cited, consult the Bibliography
of  Additional  Readings  which  follows  the  last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  I. Augustine. Divine Providence and the Problem of Evil . On the
Trinity, bk xiii Aquinas. On the Trinity of Boethius . Summa Theologica,
part ii-ii, qq 176-177 F. Bacon. The Wisdom of the Ancients . "Of Wisdom
for  a Man's Self," "Of Seeming Wise," in Essays II. Cicero. De Officiis
(On  Duties),  11  Horace. Satires, bk ii (3, 7) Pirke Aboth (Sayings of
the Fathers) Maimonides. The Guidefor the Perplexed, part hi, CH54

[1151b]
7  Chapter 101: WISDOM 1117 Bonaventura. On the Reduction of the Arts to
Theology Nicolas of Cusa. De Venatione Sapientiae Erasmus. The Praise of
Folly  Donne. The Triple Foole Suarez. Disputationes Metaphysicae, 1 (5)
Charron.  De  la sagesse Gracian y Morales. The Art of Worldly Wisdom S.
Iohnson.  History  of Rasselas Schopenhauer. The World as Will and Idea,
vol  i,  BK  IV  ; VOL II, SUP, CH 1 . "The Wisdom of Life," in Complete
Essays  R.  Browning.  Rabbi  Ben Ezra Nietzsche. Thus Spahe Zarathustra
Mann.  The Magic Mountain Whitehead. Adventures of Ideas, ch 4 Maritain.
The Degrees of Knowledge, ch 6-7 . Science and Wisdom, pp 3-33

[1152a]
INTRODUCTION  HE  who  does  not  know what the world is," writes Marcus
Aurelius,  "does not know where he is. And he who does not know for what
purpose  the  world  exists, does not know who he is, nor what the world
is."  According  to  the  Stoic emperor, for whom "there is one universe
made  up  of  all  things, and one God who pervades all things," man has
only to exercise the divine spark of reason in himself in order to be at
home in a world which reason rules. He does not hesitate long before the
dilemma  that  "it is either a well-arranged universe or a chaos huddled
together."  In  the  belief  that  it  is through and through an orderly
world— cosmos rather than a chaos, governed by providence rather than by
chance—Aurelius  is  willing to assume whatever place destiny allots him
in  the  universal  scheme.  "Everything  harmonizes  with me," he says,
"which  is  harmonious to thee, O Universe." With a Christian's faith in
God's  plan  and  providence,  Montaigne is also willing to conceive the
universe  as the stage on which man acts his destined part. But suppose,
Montaigne adds, that we consider "man alone, without foreign assistance,
armed  only  with  his  own proper arms, and unfurnished with the divine
grace  and  wisdom, which is all his honor, strength, and the foundation
of  his  being."  How  then  does  the  world  appear? Is it, in all its
vastness,  the human habitat— the home of man, its lord and master ? Man
deceives  himself,  Montaigne  thinks,  if he thus pictures the world in
terms  of  his own reason and knowledge. What could lead him to believe,
he  asks,  that  "this  admirable  movement  of  the celestial arch, the
eternal  light  of those planets and stars that roll so proudly over his
head,  the fearful motions of that infinite ocean, were established, and
continue so many ages,

[1152b]
Chapter  ioz:  WORLD  for  his service and convenience ? Can anything be
imagined so ridiculous as that this miserable and wretched creature, who
is not so much as master of himself . . . should call himself master and
emperor  of  the  world ?" If, as Montaigne thinks he should, man "feels
and  sees himself lodged here in the dirt and filth of the world, nailed
and riveted to the worst and deadest part of the universe, in the lowest
story  of the house, and most remote from the heavenly arch," how absurd
for  him  to  imagine himself "above the circle of the moon and bringing
heaven  under  his feet." Except "by the vanity of the same imagination"
by  which  "he  equals  himself  to  God,"  how can he regard himself as
occupying  an  exalted  position  in  the  universe  ?  Deprived  of the
religious  faith that he is made in God's image and that all the rest of
the  visible  universe  is made for him, only presumption or conceit can
save  man  from being dwarfed by the world. But science robs man of such
conceit,  according  to  Freud. The cosmology that "is associated in our
minds  with  the  name  of  Copernicus"  displaces  man and shrinks him.
Humanity  cannot  hold on to "its naive selflove," Freud writes, when it
realizes  that  the earth is "not the center of the universe, but only a
tiny  speck  in  a  world-system of a magnitude hardly conceivable." Not
only   in  the  reflections  of  Aurelius,  Montaigne,  and  Freud,  but
throughout the tradition of the great books, the conception of the world
or  universe  is  inseparable from the ideas of God and man. These three
ideas  always interpenetrate each other, though the resulting pattern of
thought  varies  according  to the direction in which thought moves from
any one of the three to the other two. Sometimes the whole universe lies
on one 1118

[1153a]
side  of the infinite distance between the Creator and His creation, and
man  has  a  special  place  of  honor  in the hierarchy of beings which
constitutes  the  order  of the created world. Thoughman is greater than
the  earth  he  treads  or the skies he watches, the whole world is less
than  God, Who has made it out of nothing and Who, in the freedom of His
act  of  creation,  is unaffected by the world's coming to be or passing
away.  On  this view, taken by Christian theologians, God is not part of
the  world,  the  world is not part of God, nor is there any whole which
embraces  both;  and  if  "world"  means the physical totality, then man
belongs  both  to  this  world  and  to  another— the realm of spiritual
creatures  which is also part of the created universe. Sometimes "world"
means  the  all-embracing  universe,  uncreated  and co-eternal with the
divinity  which dwells in it, a thing of soul as well as body, including
mind  as well as matter. Whether God is the prime mover of the universe;
the  transcendent  One  from  which emanates in all degrees of being the
multiplicity of intelligible and sensible things; the infinite substance
which  exceeds  the  sum of all the finite things that exist only as its
modifications;   or   the   Absolute   Spirit   which  manifests  itself
historically in both physical and psychical nature—on any of these views
cosmology  merges  with  theology,  as  in  the  theories  of Aristotle,
Plotinus,  Spinoza, and Hegel. For Spinoza and Hegel, as for the Stoics,
to  know  the  world is to know God. Its order or structure is more than
divinely instituted. It is the indwelling divinity itself. Such views of
the  world tend, for the most part, to look upon the individual man as a
microcosm mirroring the macrocosm. The world's body and soul, its matter
and   mind,   are  there  to  be  seen  in  miniature.  Considering  the
philosophers  who  assert  that  "mind is the king of heaven and earth,"
Socrates  suggests  in the Philebus that "in reality they are magnifying
themselves."  Nevertheless,  the  doctrine of a world-soul animating the
body of the universe is repeatedly proposed in the dialogues of Plato as
a  way of understanding man; and that mad or at least cryptic Platonist,
Captain Ahab, gazing on the gold doubloon he has nailed to the mast as a
reward for sighting Moby Dick, observes in

[1153b]
Chapter 102: WORLD 1119 soliloquy that "this round gold is but the image
of  the rounder globe, which, like a magician's glass, to each and every
man  in  turn  but  mirrors  back  his  own  mysterious  self."  A third
alternative remains. Sometimes, as with Lucretius and later philosophers
of  a materialist cast, the world is all there is and all there is of it
can  be  reduced  to  atoms and the void. It is thrown together by blind
chance  rather  than  designed by a presiding intelligence. The universe
obeys  no  laws except the laws of its own matter in motion. "Rid of its
haughty  lords,"  nature,  according  to  Lucretius,  is "seen to do all
things  spontaneously  of herself without the meddling of the gods." For
their  own  happiness,  Lucretius  exiles  his  papier-mache gods to the
interspaces  where  they  "lead  a life without care." But man is not so
fortunate.  In  a world that is not made for him, and in which, godless,
he  must  be  entirely  self-reliant,  man is burdened with heavy cares.
Since  he is one of nature's progeny, he may not be wholly alien in this
world of material forces; but neither is he, like a beloved son, assured
of  nature's  hospitality. The dominant note here is that of man against
the  world;  and  in  this  unequal struggle science alone gives him the
sense—or perhaps the illusion— that at least in his little corner of the
world  his  mind  may dominate. Yet from time to time defeat reminds him
that  the  world  remains  unruly.  Bridle  its  matter  and harness its
energies  as  he  will,  he  holds  no  checkrein  to  prevent his being
overthrown. As the chapter on Nature indicates, the word "nature" in one
of  its meanings seems to be synonymous with "world." This fact, as well
as  the  various  ways  in  which "world" has been used in the foregoing
discussion,  requires  us  to note a certain ambiguity. When we speak of
the  world,  our  meaning  may  range  from the earth or globe which man
inhabits  to  the  solar  system in which our planet revolves and beyond
that  to  the  whole  physical  universe,  however farflung. We also use
"world"  to signify an entire realm of things which is distinctively set
apart  from another order of existence, as when we speak of material and
spiritual  worlds, or when we refer to the world of thought or the world
of  sense.  Such  phrases  as  "world  government" and "world peace" use
"world" in a political sense

[1154a]
1120  THE GREAT IDEAS which evokes the image of the whole order of human
society  upon this globe. We shall restrict ourselves in this chapter to
that  sense  of "world" in which it signifies the object of cosmological
speculations  and  controversies.  We are concerned with the idea of the
universe  or  cosmos.  As  we have already observed, the universe may be
quite  differently conceived according to the way in which it is related
to  God, but it is almost always conceived as that totality in which man
and  his  earth and solar system exist, and outside of which nothing can
exist  except God. According to the theologians, the angelic hierarchies
are  no  exception,  for  they  fall  within  the  created universe. But
philosophers  like  Plato  and Plotinus, who identify the world with the
physical  universe,  set apart from it the eternal ideas or the order of
the  pure  intelligences. The traditional issues concerning the world or
universe, so understood, can be summarized by three basic questions: Are
there  many  worlds  or is there only one ? What is the structure of the
world  ?  Does  the world have a beginning and does it have an end ? The
first  of these questions seems to violate the meaning of "world" as the
universe—  the  complete  totality of things. How can there be more than
one  all}  But  that  difficulty, as we shall see, may be avoided by the
hypothesis  of  a plurality of worlds succeeding one another in infinite
time.  It  may even be met by the supposition that the infinity of space
permits  the possibility of two or more coexistent but unrelated worlds.
Considerations  of  the  time  and  space of the world, amplified in the
chapters  on Space and Time, have a bearing on this issue of one or many
worlds.  The  second question presupposes agreement that the world has a
structure,  for  if  it does not, no problem arises concerning what that
structure  is.  Such  agreement  is  present  in  the  tradition, and is
unaffected  by  the  dispute  over  the  role of chance or design in the
world's  production,  and  by  the  controversy  concerning  the world's
creation.  As  Harvey points out, the Greek word "cosmos" connotes order
and  beauty.  Its  opposite  is  chaos.  Writers  may  disagree about an
original chaos prior to the formation of the cosmos. Plato, for example,
refers to a time when the elements

[1154b]
"were  all without reason and measure"— "before they were arranged so as
to  form  a universe." Milton also writes of a time when "yet this world
was  not,  and Chaos wilde reign'd where these Heav'ns now rowl." In the
"dark  illimitable  Ocean  without bound"— before "the Heav'ns and Earth
rose  out  of Chaos"— "eldest Night and Chaos, Ancestors of Nature, held
eternal  Anarchic" In contrast, Aristotle maintains that "chaos or Night
did  not  exist  for an infinite time" prior to the world, and he argues
against  "the  theologians who generate the world from Night." But these
differences  of  opinion leave the main point unaffected. The world is a
cosmos,  not  a chaos. The universe has some order. Even those who doubt
the  perfection  of its order, or who point out how it is marred by evil
and  irrationality, affirm an order or structure, according to which the
universe  hangs  together and is in some degree intelligible to man. The
disputed  question  of the world's structure, therefore, centers on what
the  structure  is. What precisely is the principle or pattern of cosmic
coherence?  By  what  image  or  analogy shall man try to hold the world
before  his  mind  as  if  it  were  a  single intelligible object? This
problem,  as  well as the issue concerning one or many worlds, cannot be
completely  discussed  apart  from the last of the three questions — the
question of the world's beginning and end. For example, if world follows
world in succession, each must have a beginning and an end. So, too, the
world's  structure  takes on a different aspect for those who affirm and
those  who  deny its creation by a divine intelligence; and according to
at  least  one view of the order in the universe, men are persuaded that
it  must  be  made  or  ruled by reason, and argue against its being the
result  of chance. But the question of the world's beginning must not be
confused  with  the  issue  of  creation,  or the problem of the world's
relation  to  God.  Aquinas  may agree with Berkeley's criticism of "the
ancient  philosophers  who maintained the being of a God," while holding
"Matter to be uncreated and co-eternal with Him"; but he does not wholly
agree  with  Hobbes  that "to say the world was not Created, but Eternal
(seeing that which is Eternal has no cause), is to deny there is a God."
For Aquinas, to deny ere-

[1155a]
ation  is to deny God, but whether the created world ever began to be is
a  question  for  faith,  not  reason.  Nor  does the denial of creation
necessarily imply the eternity of the worlcL^atleast not in the sense in
which  Lucretius imagines the world to have both a beginning and an end.
Two   great   exponents  of  atomism  in  the  tradition  of  the  great
books—Lucretius  and  Newton—show us that agreement on some of the basic
questions  of  cosmology  does not preclude disagreement on others. Both
conceive  the  world  as  built of indestructible atomic particles. They
conceive  its  structure  to  be determined by the motions of its parts,
both  large  and  small,  through  the forces exerted by body upon body.
Both,  furthermore,  favor  the hypothesis of a plurality of worlds, but
only  Lucretius  holds  that  this world had a chance beginning and will
come  to  a similar end. When Lucretius refers to the infinite universe,
which,  "bounded  in no direction . . . spreads out free from limit," he
does  not  mean  this world in which man now lives. He means the void in
which  our  world as well as other worlds are formed out of the infinite
number  of  atoms  which,  combining and separating, cause the birth and
death  of  worlds.  "In  no  wise can it be deemed probable," he writes,
"when  space  yawns  illimitable towards all points, and seeds in number
numberless  and sum unfathomable fly about in manifold ways driven on in
ceaseless  motion,  that  this single earth and heaven have been brought
into  being,  that  those  bodies of matter so many in number do nothing
outside them." The existence of other worlds than this seems probable to
him,  not only because of the infinity of the universe in respect to its
space  and  matter,  but also because the atoms form each world "without
purpose,  without  foresight,  without  result." As chance produced this
world,  so  it  can  produce  others. Hence, Lucretius argues, "you must
admit that there are elsewhere other combinations of matter like to this
which  ether  holds  in  its  greedy grasp. . . . You must admit that in
other parts of space there are other earths and various races of men and
kinds  of  wild beasts. Moreover in the sum of all there is no one thing
which is begotten

[1155b]
Chapter  102:  WORLD  1121  single  in  its kind." On this principle, he
thinks,  "you  must  admit that earth and sun, moon, sea, and all things
else  .  .  .  are  not  single in their kind, but rather in number past
numbering."  By  calling  the  atoms eternal bodies and firstbeginnings,
Lucretius  indicates  that it is each particular world, not the universe
of  matter  and the void, which has a beginning and an end. The atoms or
first-beginnings  "fall  into  arrangements  such  as those out of which
this, our sum of things, has been formed," he explains, "not by design .
.  .  but  because  many  in  number  and  shifting  about  in many ways
throughout  the  universe  they are driven and tormented by blows during
infinite  time  past." Thus a world is born, and so even does it grow by
the  addition  of bodies from without. But as a world is born and grows,
it  also  decays  and  dies.  "Many  bodies  ebb  away and withdraw from
things,"  Lucretius  writes,  "but still more must join them, until they
have  touched the utmost point of growth. Then piece by piece age breaks
their  powers  and  matured  strength,  and  wastes  away on the side of
decay,"  until finally "in this way even the walls of the wide world all
around  will be stormed and fall to decay and crumbling ruin." According
to  Newton,  the  atoms  are indestructible but not eternal bodies. Upon
their  indestructibility  or permanence depends the uniform and enduring
texture  of  nature  in  all  ages. "That Nature may be lasting," Newton
says,  "the  changes  of  corporeal  things are to be placed only in the
various  separations and new associations and motions of these permanent
particles."  But for Newton the indivisibility of the ultimate particles
of  matter  does not preclude their being created. "It seems probable to
me,"  he  writes,  "that  God  in  the beginning formed matter in solid,
massy,  hard,  impenetrable movable particles, of such size and figures,
and with such other properties ... as most conduced to the end for which
he  formed  them."  Not  through  the  chance  colligation of atoms, but
through  their  being "variously associated in the first creation by the
counsel  of  an  intelligent agent," is the world formed. "For it became
him  who  created  them  to set them in order. And if he did so," Newton
adds, "it's unphilosophical to seek for any other origin of the

[1156a]
1122  THE  GREAT IDEAS world, or to pretend that it might arise out of a
chaos  by  the  mere  laws  of  nature; though being once formed, it may
continue by those laws through many ages." Newton differs from Lucretius
in  these  particulars,  but  shares his view of the probability of many
worlds.  "Since  space  is  divisible  in  infinitum,  and matter is not
necessarily  in  all  places,  it may also be allowed," Newton declares,
"that  God  is  able  to create particles of matter of several sizes and
figures,  and  in several proportions to space . . . and thereby to vary
the laws of nature, and make worlds of several sorts in several parts of
the  universe.  At least," he continues, "I see nothing of contradiction
in all this." Other writers seem to find a plurality of worlds repugnant
to  reason,  if not flatly contradictory. Plato, for example, appears to
think  that  the  possibility  of  other worlds is inconsistent with the
perfection  of this one— certainly if this world is made in the image of
the  eternal  ideas.  Because  "the original of the universe contains in
itself  all  intelligible  beings,"  Plato's  Timaeus  argues that there
cannot  be  many worlds, but "one only, if the created copy is to accord
with the original." It belongs to the world's perfection to be solitary,
and  for this reason, Timaeus explains, "the creator made not two worlds
or  an  infinite number of them; but there is and ever will be one only-
begotten  and  created  heaven."  Aristotle  reasons  differently to the
conclusion  that  "there cannot be more worlds than one." The conclusion
follows  in  his  view  from the impossibility of an infinity of body or
matter,  and  with it an infinity of space. "The universe is certainly a
particular and a material thing," he writes. "If it is composed not of a
part but of the whole of matter, then though the being of 'universe' and
of  'this  universe' are still distinct, yet there is no other universe,
and  no  possibility  of  others  being  made, because all the matter is
already  included  in this." He thinks it a tenable hypothesis that "the
world  as  a  whole  includes  all  its  appropriate  matter"; hence, he
concludes,  "neither  are  there  now, nor have there ever been, nor can
there  ever be formed, more heavens than one, but this heaven of ours is
one and unique and complete."

[1156b]
On  theological  grounds, Augustine challenges those who suppose "either
that  this  is not the only world, but that there are numberless worlds,
or  that  indeed it is the only one, but that it dies, and is born again
at  fixed  intervals,  and  this  times  without number." On theological
grounds  also,  though  with  a  different  conception  of  God  and the
universe,  Spinoza maintains that "besides God no substance can be or be
conceived";  that  "God  is one, which is to say, in nature there is but
one  substance,  and  it is absolutely infinite"; that all finite things
have  their existence in the one infinite substance of God; and that God
is  "not only the cause of the commencement of their existence, but also
of  their  continuance in existence." Because God's liberty consists, in
Spinoza's  conception,  in  acting according to the necessity of His own
nature,  not  in  freedom  of  will,  he  insists  that "things could be
produced by God in no other way and in no other order than that in which
they  have  been  produced."  This is not merely the only actual but the
only possible world. Aquinas agrees that there is only one actual world.
"The  very  order of things created by God," he writes, "shows the unity
of  the  world."  Since "whatever things come from God have relations of
order  to  each  other  and  to God himself ... it is necessary that all
things  should belong to one world. Therefore," Aquinas continues, "only
those  were  able  to  assert  the  existence  of many worlds who do not
acknowledge  any ordaining wisdom, but rather believed in chance; as did
Democritus,  who  said  that  this  world, besides an infinite number of
other  worlds,  was  made by a coming together of atoms." Aquinas places
God's  liberty  in  freedom  of  choice,  and  so  he  contemplates  the
possibility  of  other  worlds  than  this.  This  is the only world God
actually created, but since, in creating, "God does not act from natural
necessity,"  and  since, in the act of creation, the divine will "is not
naturally and from any necessity determined to these creatures," Aquinas
concludes  that  "in  no way is the present scheme of things produced by
God  with such necessity that other things could not come to be." As the
chapter  on  Will  indicates,  Spinoza  holds that God does not have the
power of free

[1157a]
choice.  He  therefore  argues  that  the  actual  world, being the only
possible  one,  cannot  be  bettered.  All  things, he writes, have been
"produced  by  God in the highest degree ofper^ fection, since they have
necessarily  followed  from  the  existence  of  a most perfect nature."
Aquinas, on the other hand, denies that this is the best of all possible
worlds.  "Given the things which actually exist," he says, "the universe
cannot be better, for the order which God has established in things, and
in  which  the  good of the universe consists, most befits things. . . .
Yet  God  could  make  other  things,  or  add  something to the present
creation;  and then there would be another and a better universe." Other
speculations  concerning  the  cosmos  seem  to divide into three sorts,
according  as they consider the matter and space, the size and shape, of
the  universe; or they try to discover the principle by which all things
are  ordered  together  in  one world; or they examine whatever order is
found, and judge its perfection, its goodness, and its beauty. The first
of  these  three  types  of cosmological theory belongs primarily to the
physicist  and  the astronomer. From Aristotle to Einstein, observation,
mathematical calculation, and imaginative hypotheses have propounded the
alternatives of a finite or infinite universe or, as Einstein prefers to
put it, of a "finite yet unbounded universe," as opposed to one which is
either  simply  finite or both infinite and unbounded. Archimedes in the
Sand-Reckoner  undertakes  to show that the number of the grains of sand
in  a  universe  whose outer sphere extends to the distance of the fixed
stars,  is,  however  large,  a  finite  rather than an infinite number.
Lucretius  and Newton, as we have seen, embrace the opposite hypothesis,
while  Aristotle  defends  the  proposition that the universe is finite,
bounded  and spherical in shape. Among the great astronomers, Copernicus
and  Kepler,  no  less than Ptolemy, conceive the world as bounded by an
outer sphere. Copernicus opens his treatise by remarking that "the world
is  like a globe; whether because this form is the most perfect of all .
.  .  or  because  it  is  the  figure having the greatest volume ... or
because the separate parts of the world, i.e., the sun, moon, and stars,

[1157b]
Chapter  102:  WORLD  1123  are  seen  under such a form; or because all
things  seek  to be delimited by such a form, as is apparent in the case
of  drops  of  water and other liquid bodies, when they become delimited
through  themselves."  A  spherical  or  (if  matter  is not distributed
uniformly)   an   elliptical   or  quasi-spherical  universe,  "will  be
necessarily  finite,"  according  to Einstein, but it will also "have no
bounds."  Among the conceivable "closed spaces without limits," Einstein
points  out that "the spherical space (and the elliptical) excels in its
simplicity,  since  all  points  on it are equivalent." But "whether the
universe  in  which  we live is infinite, or whether it is finite in the
manner  of  the  spherical  universe," he thinks is a question that "our
experience  is far from being sufficient to enable us to answer." Recent
astronomical  observations  of the velocity of the receding nebulae have
suggested  the  hypothesis  of  an  infinitely expanding universe. These
cosmological  theories are more fully discussed in the chapter on Space.
Another  point  of physical speculation concerning the uniformity of the
world's  matter—not the uniformity of its distribution, but the sameness
or  difference  in  kind  of  terrestrial  matter  and the matter of the
heavenly  bodies— is considered in the chapters on Astronomy and Matter.
We turn, therefore, to the question of the world's structure, apart from
its  size, its shape, and the disposition of its matter. Three metaphors
seem  to  express the great traditional images of the world's structure.
The world is a living organism. // is li\e an animal with a soul, even a
soul  endowed  with  reason.  The  world  is  a multitude of diverse and
unequal individual things, forming a hierarchy and associated, according
to  their natures and functions, for the common good of the whole. // is
like  a society, a society under divine law and government. The world is
a  system of interdependent moving parts, linked together from the least
to the greatest in an unbroken chain of causation. // is like a machine.
The  first  of  these  world  views  is proposed by Plato. It is not the
earliest   of   the  three,  perhaps,  if  the  atomistic  cosmology  of
Democritus,  which  Lucretius  later  expounds,  can  be  interpreted as
adopting the mechanical analogy. Full-fledged

[1158a]
1124  THE  GREAT  IDEAS mechanism may, however, be thought to await 17th
century  developments  in the science of mechanics, when, for Descartes,
Newton,  and  others,  the  laws  of  mechanics  become the only laws of
nature.  The  conception  of  the  world  as  a  divinely instituted and
governed  society  seems  to be a product of Jewish and Christian faith.
Though  that  expression of it which includes a hierarchical ordering of
all  things from the elemental bodies to the angels belongs to Christian
theologians  and poets, there may be a preChristian version in the Stoic
theory  of  the world as governed by a divine intelligence. According to
Plato,  in  the  Timaeus, "God desired all things to be good and nothing
bad,"  and he "found that no unintelligent creature taken as a whole was
fairer  than  the  intelligent  taken  as a whole; and that intelligence
could  not  be  present  in anything which was devoid of soul. For which
reason,"  Timaeus  explains,  "when  he was framing the universe, he put
intelligence  in  soul,  and  soul  in  body. . . . Wherefore, using the
language  of  probability,  we  may  say  that the world became a living
creature  truly  endowed with soul and intelligence by the providence of
God."  Since  his  intention  was  that  "the animal should be as far as
possible  a  perfect  whole  and  of  perfect  parts,"  he gave it self-
sufficiency,  a  spherical  body—which figure "comprehends within itself
all  other figures"—and circular movement. The universe did not require,
therefore,  sense-organs  or  hands or feet. "Such was the whole plan of
the eternal God about the god that was to be, to whom for this reason he
gave  a  body,  smooth  and  even,  having  a surface in every direction
equidistant  from  the  center.  .  . . And in the center," according to
Timaeus, "he put the soul, which he diffused throughout the body, making
it also to be the exterior environment of it; and he made the universe a
circle  moving  in  a  circle.  .  .  . Having these purposes in view he
created  the  world  a  blessed god." The theory ofa world soul and ofan
animated,  organic universe appears not only in the 77maeus, but also in
other  Platonic  dialogues.  In the Phaedrus, for example, Socrates says
that  "the  soul  in  her  totality  has  the  care  of  inanimate being
everywhere";  and in the Laws, the Athenian Stranger, asking whether "it
is the

[1158b]
soul which controls heaven and earth, and the whole world," replies that
"the  best  soul  takes  care  of the world and guides it along the good
path." In somewhat different form, the theory of a world soul appears in
Plotinus, according to whom the cosmic soul belongs only to the material
universe  and  is,  therefore,  third  and  lowest  in  the scale of the
"authentic  existents."  It appears in Gilbert and Kepler, though in the
latter  largely  as  the  expansion  of  a metaphor. It is considered by
William  James,  whose  comment  on  the  "materialistic,  or  so-called
'scientific,'  conceptions  of  the  universe"  is  that "they leave the
emotional  and  active  interests  cold," whereas he thinks "the perfect
object of belief would be a God or 'Soul of the World,' represented both
optimistically and moralistically. ... All science and all history would
thus  be  accounted  for in the deepest and simplest fashion." Precisely
because  exponents of the doctrine attribute divinity to the world soul,
Augustine   and   Aquinas   object   to  it.  "Impious  and  irreligious
consequences  follow," in Augustine's opinion, from the notion that "God
is  the  soul of the world, and the world is as a body to Him." To those
who compare the microcosm with the macrocosm by saying that "the soul is
in  the  body  as  God  is  in  the  world,"  Aquinas  replies that "the
comparison  holds in a certain respect, namely, because as God moves the
world,  so  the  soul  moves  the  body.  But  it does not hold in every
respect,  for  the  soul  did  not create the body out of nothing as God
created  the  world."  Furthermore,  according to Aquinas, "God is not a
part  of it, but far above the whole universe, possessing within Himself
the  entire  perfection  of  the universe in a more eminent way." God in
relation  to  the world should not be conceived by analogy with soul and
body,  but  by  comparison  to  a  king  who "is said to be in the whole
kingdom  by  his  power,  although  he  is not everywhere present." This
analogy  fits  better  with  the conception of the universe as a society
under  divine  government.  Although Aurelius reminds himself to "regard
the universe as one living being, having one substance and one soul," he
also  takes  the view that the world is a community of things ordered to
one another. "The intelligence of

[1159a]
the  universe  is  social,"  he  writes.  "Accordingly  it  has made the
inferior  things  for  the  sake  of the superior, and it has fitted the
superior  to  one  another.  ...  It has subordinated, co-ordinated, and
assigned to everything its proper portion." This view of the universe as
a  community  is  the  one  most  fully  developed in Christian thought.
Augustine  and  Aquinas  go  much further than Aurelius in depicting the
hierarchy  of  things  and  their  ordination  to  one another under the
eternal law. Both take as a basic text from Scripture the statement that
God  has  "ordered  all  things  in  measure,  and  number, and weight."
According to its dignity or worth, each thing occupies a place and plays
its part in the general scheme of things. "The parts of the universe are
ordered  to  each  other,"  Aquinas  writes,  "according  as one acts on
another, and according as one is the end and exemplar of the other." The
government of the universe by the divine reason produces a perfection of
order  in the whole, which is the intrinsic common good of the universe,
and  directs  each thing to the attainment of its end, in which consists
its  own  perfection. "It belongs to the divine goodness," Aquinas says,
"as it brought things into being, to lead them to their end. And this is
to  govern."  But neither the perfection of each thing, nor the order of
the  universe  itself,  is  the ultimate end of divine government. "Some
good outside the whole universe," he says, "is the end of the government
of  the universe"—for the end of all things, as their beginning, lies in
the  goodness  of God. The conception of the world as divinely governed,
and  cared  for by divine providence, excludes chance as a factor in the
formation of the world or in its structure. With Democritus and Epicurus
in  mind,  Aquinas  points out that "certain ancient philosophers denied
the government of the world, saying that all things happened by chance."
But  the  rejection  of chance does not seem to be peculiar to Christian
faith  or  theology.  Plato and Plotinus also deny that the order in the
universe  can  be  the result of chance. For Plato it is not merely that
the  world  is  animated  by  a rational soul, but also, as the Athenian
Stranger  suggests  in the Laws, that it is a work of art rather than of
nature or chance.

[1159b]
Chapter  102: WORLD 1125 " 'Atoms' or 'elements'—it is in either case an
absurdity,  an  impossibility,"  writes  Plotinus,  "to  hand  over  the
universe  and  its  contents  to  material  entities,  and  out  of  the
disorderly  swirl  thus  occasioned  to  call  order  . . . into being."
According  to  him,  "there is nothing undesigned, nothing of chance, in
all  the  process."  Aristotle,  too,  speaks  against  the atomists who
"ascribe  this  heavenly  sphere  and  all the worlds to spontaneity" or
chance.  "When  one man," he writes, referring to Anaxagoras, "said that
reason  was  present—as in animals, so throughout nature—as the cause of
order  and  of  all  arrangement, he seemed like a sober man in contrast
with  the  random  talk  of his predecessors." It might be supposed that
those  who  view the world through the eyes of Newton or Descartes (when
they  say,  as  Fielding  does, "the world may indeed be considered as a
vast  machine"), would be inclined to favor chance rather than reason or
design.  But  this does not seem to be the case, at least not for Newton
or  Descartes.  "This  most  beautiful  system  of the sun, planets, and
comets,"  Newton  declares,  "could  only  proceed  from the counsel and
dominion  of  an  intelligent  and powerful Being." Descartes asks us to
consider  what  would  happen  if  God  were  now  to create a new world
"somewhere  in  an imaginary space." Suppose that He agitated its matter
in various ways "so that there resulted a chaos as confused as the poets
ever  feigned,  and concluded His work by merely lending His concurrence
to  Nature  in  the usual way, leaving her to act in accordance with the
laws  which  He  had  established." Something like this orderly universe
would be the result. The laws of matter in motion, Descartes thinks, are
"of  such  a  nature that even if God had created other worlds, He could
not  have created any in which these laws would fail to be observed." In
the tradition of the great books, only the ancient atomists seem to take
the  position  that the universe is a thing of chance. But this does not
mean  that,  except  for the atomists, agreement prevails concerning the
manifestation  of  purpose  or  design in the world's structure. "Is the
Kosmos  an  expression  of  intelligence, rational in its inward nature,
or,"  James  asks,  "a brute external fact pure and simple?" James finds
two answers to this question which he

[1160a]
1126  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  calls "the deepest of all philosophic problems"
—one  which  regards the world "as a realm of final purposes, that . . .
exists  for the sake of something," and one which sees "the present only
as  so  much  mere mechanical sprouting from the past, occurring with no
reference  to the future." As the chapter on Mechanics indicates, Newton
and  Descartes  are,  in a sense, mechanists; yet they also affirm final
causes—ends  or  purposes—in  the plan of the universe. Newton speaks of
God's "most wise and excellent contrivance of things, and final causes."
It  is true that Descartes, while referring to the universe as a work of
divine  art, says that God's purpose may not be visible to us in all its
arrangements.  Therefore  "the  species  of  cause termed final finds no
useful  employment  in  physical  (or  natural)  things; for it does not
appear  to  me,"  he  explains,  "that  I  can  without temerity seek to
investigate  the  (inscrutable)  ends of God." But this states a rule of
method  in natural science, not the denial of a cosmic plan. That denial
is  to  be  found,  however,  most  plainly  in Spinoza. "It is commonly
supposed," he writes, "that all things in nature, like men, work to some
end; and indeed it is thought to be certain that God Himself directs all
things to some sure end, for it is said that God has made all things for
man,  and  man  that  he  may  worship God." Against this view, which he
regards  as  the  most  besetting of all human prejudices, Spinoza holds
that  "nature  does nothing for the sake of an end, for that eternal and
infinite  Being whom we call God or Nature acts by the same necessity by
which  He  exists." Since "He exists for no end, He acts for no end; and
since  He  has  no principle or end of existence, He has no principle or
end  of  action. A final cause, as it is called," Spinoza continues, "is
nothing, therefore, but human desire, in so far as this is considered as
the  principle  or  primary  cause  of  anything." Because man discovers
things  in  nature  which  serve as means to his own ends, man is led to
infer,  Spinoza  declares,  that  "some ruler or rulers of nature exist,
endowed  with  human liberty, who have taken care of all things for him,
and  have  made  all things for his use . . . and hence he affirmed that
the gods direct everything for his advantage, in order that he may

[1160b]
be bound to them and hold them in the highest honor. . . . Thus has this
prejudice  been  turned  into  a superstition, and has driven deep roots
into  the  mind—a  prejudice  which  was  the reason why everyone has so
eagerly  tried  to discover and explain the final causes of things." The
attempt,  however,  to show that nature does nothing in vain (that is to
say,  nothing  which  is  not  profitable  to  man)  seems, in Spinoza's
opinion,  "to  end  in  showing that nature, the gods, and man are alike
mad."  Where  Spinoza  denies  purpose  or  plan in the universe because
everything exists or happens from the necessity of efficient, not final,
causes  (and  ultimately  from  the necessity of nature or God himself),
Lucretius  argues  against design or providence from the imperfection of
the  world.  To those who "suppose that the gods designed all things for
the  sake  of  men,"  Lucretius  says:  "Even  if  I  did  not know what
firstbeginnings  are,  yet  this,  judging from the very arrangements of
heaven,  I  would venture to affirm, and led by many other circumstances
to  maintain, that the nature of the world has by no means been made for
us  by  divine  power:  so  great  are  the defects with which it stands
encumbered."  Spinoza  would  dismiss  this  argument.  He thinks he can
easily  answer those who ask, "How is it that so many imperfections have
arisen  in  nature—corruption,  for instance, of things till they stink;
deformity,  exciting  disgust;  confusion,  evil, crime, etc.?" He holds
that "the perfection of things is to be judged by their nature and power
alone;  nor are they more or less perfect because they delight or offend
the human senses, or because they are beneficial or prejudicial to human
nature."  Others deal differently with the apparent imperfections in the
world.  Descartes,  for  example,  makes  the point that "the same thing
which might possibly seem very imperfect . . . if regarded by itself, is
found  to  be  very  perfect if regarded as part of the whole universe."
Marcus  Aurelius  goes  further.  "Nothing is injurious to the part," he
writes,  "if  it  is for the advantage of the whole. ... By remembering,
then, that I am part of such a whole, I shall be content with everything
that happens." In terms of another principle, Berkeley asks

[1161a]
us  to  "consider  that the very blemishes and defects of nature are not
without  their  use, in that they make an agreeable sort of variety, and
augment the beauty of the rest of creation, as shades in a picture serve
to  set  off  the  brighter  and  more enlightened parts. ... As for the
mixture  of  pain  or  uneasiness  which  is  in  the world, ' he thinks
pursuant to the general laws ofnature, ' that "this, in the state we are
in  at  present,  is  indispensably necessary to our well-being." In the
opinion  of  those "philosophers who, after an exact scrutiny of all the
phenomena  of  nature, conclude that the whole, considered as one system
is, in every period of its existence, ordered with perfect benevolence,"
Hume  sees  only  a specious, if also sublime, consolation for all human
ills.  But  he  does  not  think  such  convictions  ever really work in
practice. "These enlarged views may, for a moment," he says, "please the
imagination  of  a  speculative man, who is placed in ease and security;
but  neither  can  they  dwell  with  constancy on his mind, even though
undisturbed  by  the  emotions  of  pain  or passion; much less can they
maintain  their  ground when attacked by such powerful antagonists." But
according  to  theologians like Augustine and Aquinas, evil does not and
cannot  exist  in  the world except as a privation or corruption of some
good. "Evil neither belongs to the perfection of the universe, nor comes
under  the order of the universe," writes Aquinas, "except accidentally,
that  is,  by reason of some good joined to it." But how does evil enter
into  a  world  created  by  a  supremely  good deity? What "God chiefly
intends  in  created things," Aquinas answers, "is the good of the order
of the universe. Now the order of the universe requires . . . that there
should be some things that can, and sometimes do, fail. And thus God, by
causing  in  things the good order of the universe, consequently and, as
it  were  by  accident,  causes the corruptions of things." Furthermore,
"the  order  of  justice  belongs to the order of the universe; and this
requires  that penalty should be dealt out to sinners. And so God is the
author  of  the  evil  which  is  penalty,  but not of the evil which is
fault."  On  this  point  of  the  perfection of the universe, the great
conversation passes from the

[1161b]
Chapter 102: WORLD 1127 order of the world to the problem of evil and to
related  issues. When Freud, for example, in commenting on what he calls
"the religious Weltanschauung," says that "earthquakes, floods and fires
do not differentiate between the good and devout man, and the sinner and
unbeliever," he raises questions which are considered in the chapters on
Justice,  Punishment,  and Good and Evil. The perfection of the universe
also leads to a discussion of the beauty of its order. The praises which
are  differently  voiced  by  the  astronomers, the theologians, and the
poets  extol  not  the  visible beauties of nature, but the intelligible
beauty   of   the  cosmic  structure—perceptible  to  a  Kepler  in  his
mathematical  and  musical formulation of the harmonies of the world. In
addition  to  questions  of  its goodness and beauty, the problem of the
world's  order is sometimes stated in terms of its rationality. For some
writers,  such  as Hegel, rationality is affirmed as the very foundation
of  existence.  "  What  is  rational  is  actual  and what is actual is
rational"  he  writes.  "On  this  conviction  the  plain  man  like the
philosopher  takes his stand, and from it philosophy starts in its study
of  the  universe of mind as well as the universe of nature." To others,
like  William  James,  "the  whole  war of the philosophies is over that
point  of  faith.  Some  say  that they can see their way already to the
rationality ; others that it is hopeless in any other but the mechanical
way.  To  some  the  very  fact  that  there  is  a  world  at all seems
irrational."  Against  the  Hegelian  notion of the world as a perfectly
ordered  whole  (to  which  James applies the epithet "block universe"),
James  proposes  the  conception of a "concatenated universe." "The real
world  as it is given at this moment," James declares, "is the sum total
of  all  its beings and events now. But can we think of such a sum ? Can
we  realize  for  an  instant what a cross-section of all existence at a
definite  point  in  time  would be ? While I talk and the flies buzz, a
sea-gull  catches a fish at the mouth of the Amazon, a tree falls in the
Adirondack  wilderness,  a  man  sneezes  in  Germany,  a  horse dies in
Tartary,  and twins are born in "What does that mean?" James asks. "Does
the contemporaneity of these events with each

[1162a]
1128  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  other, and with a million more as disjointed as
they,  form  a  rational bond between them, and unite them into anything
that  means  for us a world ?" It would certainly not mean a universe or
cosmos for those who, like Hegel, insist upon the pervasive unity of the
universe  as  a  whole  which  completely and rationally relates all its
parts. But for James, who conceives the universe in a pluralistic rather
than  in  a  monistic  fashion,  the "collateral contemporaneity" of all
things, "and nothing else, is the real order of the world." All of these
issues  carry  the  discussion  back  to  what  is  perhaps the decisive
question—  the  question of the world's origin. According as men believe
it to be the purposeful work of a beneficent intelligence or the product
of  blind  chance  or  of equally blind necessity, their other judgments
about the world tend in the general directions of optimism or pessimism.
Yet  this  is  only  true  for the most part. The problem of the world's
origin  involves  some  technical  issues which do not seem to have such
consequences  for  man's  appraisal of the universe. One is the question
whether  a  created  world has a beginning in time or is co-eternal with
its  creator.  As  is  indicated  in  the chapters on Eternity and Time,
whichever way the disputed question concerning the eternity of the world
is answered, its creation may be affirmed or denied. Those who think the
world  is created declare that the power needed to maintain the world in
being  is  identical with the creative power needed to initiate it. "The
divine  conservation,"  as  Berkeley  points  out,  is  conceived  as "a
continual  creation."  The  most  difficult  point in issue concerns the
meaning of creation itself. According to Christian doctrine, the essence
of  creation  consists  in  making  something  out  of  nothing. On this
principle  Aquinas,  for  example, contrasts creation with generation or
procreation  and with artistic production. In biological generation, the
offspring  is  produced  out  of  the  substance  of its progenitors. In
artistic  production,  some  pre-existent material is transformed by the
craftsman. But according to the theologian, creation is not change, "for
change  means  that  the same thing should be different now from what it
was previously."

[1162b]
In  becoming or alteration, some being is presupposed. "Creation is more
perfect  and  more  excellent  than  generation and alteration," Aquinas
says,  "because  the  term  whereto is the whole substance of the thing;
whereas  what  is  understood  as  the term wherefrom is absolutely non-
being," which, as he remarks, is the same as nothing. Since the distance
between total nonbeing and being is infinite, only an infinite power can
create,  or  make something out of nothing. Lucretius flatly denies this
possibility  when  he  asserts as a first principle that "nothing can be
produced  from  nothing."  Not even the gods can violate this principle.
"Nothing," he declares, "is ever gotten out of nothing by divine power."
To   Locke,   on  the  other  hand,  the  inconceivability  of  creation
constitutes no argument against it. Writers like Lucretius "must give up
their great maxim, Ex nihilo nihil jit. ... It is not reasonable to deny
the  power  of  an  infinite  Being  because  we  cannot  comprehend its
operations.  We  do  not  deny  other  effects  upon this ground," Locke
continues,  "because  we  cannot  possibly  conceive the manner of their
production.  ...  It  is  an overvaluing ourselves, to reduce all to the
narrow  measure of our capacities, and to conclude all things impossible
to  be  done,  whose manner of doing exceeds our comprehension." But may
not  the  world  be  related to a supreme cause or principle in some way
which  does  not  involve  exnihilation? The great books present various
alternatives.  Aristotle's  prime mover is the unmoved and eternal cause
of  the  world's  eternal  motion,  not  of its coming into being or its
conservation  in  being. Plato's demiurge is a divinity which, according
to  the myth of the world's origin in the Timaeus, fashions the universe
after  the  model  of  the  eternal  ideas, artistically producing their
sensible   replicas  in  the  matter  or  space  which  is  called  "the
receptacle."  The  emanation of the sensible as well as the intelligible
world  from the transcendent AllOne in the cosmogony of Plotinus, or the
production  of  finite  things  from  the  infinite  substance of God in
Spinoza's  theory,  seem  to be more like generation or procreation than
like creation in the meaning of the opening chapter of Genesis.

[1163a]
Such  theories,  according to theologians like Augustine and Aquinas, or
philosophers  like Berkeley and Locke, deny what is meant by creation in
the Judaeo-Christian traditionjla Berkeley they are all equally forms of
atheism. Yet it should be remarked that to Spinoza a theory like that of
Plato's  is  also impious; for it places "something outside of God which
is  independent  of  Him,  to which He looks while He is at work as to a
model,  or  at  which  He  aims  as if at a certain mark. This is indeed
nothing  else  than  to subject God to fate, the most absurd thing which
can  be affirmed of Him whom we have shown to be the first and only free
cause  of  the essence of all things as well as of their existence." The
various  theories  of  the  world's  origin  usually  extend also to the
problem  of  the  world's  end.  Aristotle,  for  example,  who denies a
beginning  to the motions of the heavens and all other cycles of natural
change,  affirms  them to go on in everlasting perpetuity. But it is not
merely  those  who  think  the  world  has  no  beginning  or source who
attribute  endless  endurance  to  it. If the world did not have endless
duration,  it  would  not be for Plato the moving image of eternity. And
though  they  conceive  the  world  as  somehow  a  divine  emanation or
production,  Plotinus and Spinoza, no less than Aristotle, hold it to be
everlasting  if  not eternal. "We hold that the ordered universe, in its
material mass," Plotinus writes, "has existed for ever and will for ever
endure." The proposition that nothing is ever reduced to nothing is, for
Lucretius,  as  true  as  the  principle  that  nothing  ever comes from
nothing.  He  applies  these  principles,  however,  only to the eternal
atoms,  uncreated and indestructible, not to the world after world which
arises and perishes as the atoms come together and disperse. Just as any
compound  body which atoms form can be dissolved into its simple bodies,
so  whole  worlds are subject to similar dissolution, and will suffer it
in  the  course  of  long  ages.  Yet though world succeeds world in the
ceaseless  activity  of  the  eternal  atoms,  Lucretius  contemplates a
universe  without  beginning or end. Since annihilation (or reduction to
nothingness)  is  the  opposite  of  exnihilation  (or  creation  out of
nothing), it might be expected that the

[1163b]
; Chapter 102: WORLD 1129 doctrine which rests on the faith that "in the
beginning  God  created  heaven and earth," would also foresee an end to
all  things—a  return  of  the whole created universe to the nothingness
from  which  it  came.  Sacred  Scripture does contain the prophecy of a
final  cataclysm.  "The earth shall reel to and fro like a drunkard, and
shall  be  removed like a cottage," says Isaiah. Reciting the parable of
the tares in the field, Matthew explains that as "the tares are gathered
and burned in the fire, so shall it be in the end of this world." In the
Gospel  according to Luke, Christ foretells His second coming: And there
shall  be  signs in the sun, and in the moon, and in the stars; and upon
the  earth  distress  of nations, with perplexity; the sea and the waves
Men's  hearts  failing them for fear, and for looking after those things
which are coming on the earth: for the powers of heaven shall be shaken;
And  then  shall  they  see  the Son of man coming in a cloud with great
power  and  great  glory  . . . Heaven and earth shall pass away; but my
word  shall not pass away. But there is one other text which exercises a
controlling  influence  on the theologian's interpretation of Scripture.
In  the  second Epistle of Peter, we find: the day of the Lord will come
as a thief in the night; in the which the heavens shall pass away with a
great  noise,  and  the elements shall melt with fervent heat, the earth
also  and the works that are therein shall be burned up Nevertheless we,
according  to his promise, look for new heavens and a new earth, wherein
dwelleth  righteousness.  The final conflagration will be the end of the
world  as  we know it, but it will bring about the re-formation, not the
annihilation,  of the material universe. As God has the power to create,
so, according to Aquinas, He has the power to annihilate, but "since the
power  and  goodness of God are rather manifested by the conservation of
things in being ... we must conclude by denying absolutely that anything
at  all  will  be annihilated." In the concluding treatises of the Summa
Theologica—dealing with the end of the world, the Last Judgment, and the
resurrection  of  the  body—  the  final  cataclysm  is described as the
cleansing of the world by fire to bring into being a new earth and a new
heaven.  In our time, men talk of the end of the world as an event which
might by chance occur if a

[1164a]
1130  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  i  a.  The  universe  as a living organism: the
doctrine  of the world soul \b. The universe as a machine: the system of
its moving parts 2. The universe and man: macrocosm and microcosm natura
naturata  beginning  or end demiurge, the creative ideas, the receptacle
4<r.  The  formation of the world by a fortuitous concourse of atoms \d.
The  emanation of the world from the One duction of creatures in time 6.
The structure of the world 6c. The rationality or intelligibility of the
universe  6d.  The  goodness  and  beauty  of the universe: its evil and
imperfections

[1164b]
chain  reaction  set up by atomic fission got out tives to the religious
prophecy  of the world's of control and exploded the whole material end.
But  what  Jesus  said  of  the  Last Judgment universe. The physicist's
theory  of  entropy  also  —that  its  time  is  a  secret  hidden  from
menforecasts  the eventual dissipation of energy to may be applicable to
any  termination of the the point at which the universe will be a frozen
world,  certainly  if it lies in the hands of God, mass of inert matter.
These  are  secular  alternaand  not  merely  at  the disposal of man or
nature.  OUTLINE OF TOPICS PAGE i. Diverse conceptions of the universe 1
131 divine government 1132 3. The universe and God: divine immanence and
transcendence  1133 4. The origin of the world: cosmos out of chaos 1134
4(?.  The  creation  of  the  world  ex nihilo XI 35 (1) The distinction
between  creation  and  motion,  generation,  and  artistic pro- (2) The
problem  of  time and eternity in relation to creation: the conservation
(3)  The revelation and dogma of creation: interpretations of Genesis 1;
the  work  of  the six days worlds 1 1 36 6b. The diversity, inequality,
and hierachy of things 1137 universe 1138 8. The end of the world 1139

[1165a]
REFERENCES  To  find  the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy type,
which  are  the volume and page numbers of the passages referred to. For
example,  in  4  Homer:  Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d, the number 4 is the
number  of  the  volume  in  the  set; the number 12d indicates that the
passage  is  in  section  d  of page 12. Page Sections: When the text is
printed  in one column, the letters a and b refer to the upper and lower
halves  of  the  page. For example, in 53 James : Psychology, 116a-119b,
the  passage  begins in the upper half of page 116 and ends in the lower
half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters a
and  b  refer to the upper and lower halves of the left-hand side of the
page,  the  letters  c and d to the upper and lower halves of the right-
hand  side  of  the page. For example, in 7 Plato: Symposium, 163b-164c,
the  passage  begins in the lower half of the left-hand side of page 163
and  ends in the upper half of the right-hand side of page 164. Author's
Divisions:  One  or  more of the main divisions of a work (such as part,
bk,  ch, sect) are sometimes included in the reference; line numbers, in
brackets,  are given in certain cases; e.g., Iliad, bk ii [265-283] 12d.
Bible  References:  The references are to book, chapter, and verse. When
the  King  James  and  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the
numbering  of  chapters or verses, the King James version is cited first
and  the  Douay,  indicated  by  a  (D),  follows;  e.g., Old Testament:
Nehemiah,  7:45—  (D)  //  Esdras, 7:46. Symbols: The abbreviation "esp"
calls the reader's attention to one or more especially relevant parts of
a  whole  reference;  "passim"  signifies  that  the  topic is discussed
intermittently  rather  than  continuously in the work or passage cited.
For  additional  information concerning the style of the references, see
the  Explanation  of Reference Style; for general guidance in the use of
The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the  Preface. 1. Diverse conceptions of the
universe  la.  The  universe  as  a living organism: the doctrine of the
world  soul  7  Plato: Phaedrus, 124b-d / Timaeus, 447d450c / Statesman,
586c-590a  /  Philebus,  618b619d  /  Laws, bk x, 757d-765c 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk viii, ch 2 [252b i7~28] 336c-d;
[253*6-21] 337a-b
/ Heavens, bk ii, ch 1
[284a27~35] 376a
/ Soul, bk i, ch 5
[4ii a6-23] 641a-b
12   Epictetus:   Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  14,  120d-121a  12  Aurelius:
Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect 29 266a; sect 40 267a-b; sect 46 267c; bk v,
sect 8 269d-270b; sect 30 273a; bk vi, sect 38 277c-d; bk vii, sect 9-10
280b-c;  bk  ix,  sect 8 292b; bk x, sect 6-7 297a-c; bk xii, sect 29-30
310a-b  13 Virgil: Aeneid, bk vi [724-734] 230b-231a 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  iv,  853b-856a  /  Harmonies  of  the  World,  1030a; 1083a-1084b 17
Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr i, ch 4 36d-37b; tr 11 40a-42a; tr hi, ch 13
46c-47b; ch 16-18 48b-50a; tr ix 65d-77d passim / Third Ennead, tr 1, ch
4  79d-80a;  tr  ii,  ch  16  90c91c;  tr viii 129a-136a passim / Fourth
Ennead,  tr  in,  ch 1-12 141c-149b passim; tr iv, ch 6-16 161b-166b; ch
22-27 168d-172a; ch 29-

[1165b]
Chapter  102:  WORLD 1131 45 173b-183a passim; tr viii, ch 2, 201c 202a;
tr  viii,  ch  7-TR  ix,  ch  i  204b-205c  /  Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 2,
208d-209a;  tr  ii,  ch  2 215a-c; tr ix, ch 3 247b-d; ch 13-14 251a-d /
Sixth  Ennead,  tr  v, ch 12 310b-d 18 Augustine: City of God, bk iv, ch
11-13  194c-196b;  bk  vii,  ch  5-6  247b-248b;  ch 9, 249d-250a; ch 13
251c-252a;  ch  23  256b257b; bk x, ch 29, 317d; bk xiii, ch 16, 367c 19
Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 3, a 8, ans 19d-20c; q 47, a i, ans
256a-257b;  q 90, a 1, ans 480d-481d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b
28  Gilbert:  Loadstone,  bk  v, 104b-105d 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi,
general  schol,  370a  / Optics, bk hi, 542b-543a 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  307b-c;  767c  [n  18] 42 Kant: Judgement, 565d 48 Melville: Moby
Dic\,  115b-117a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and Peace, bk xiv, 608a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  658b-659a  lb. The universe as a machine: the system of its
moving  parts  12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 6bc; bk 11
[62-307]  15d-19a  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  x,  sect 6 297a-b 17
Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 2-3 78d-79c

[1166a]
(1.  Diverse conceptions of the universe, lb. The universe as a machine:
the  system  of  its moving parts.) 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 172b;
part  iv,  269d  30  Bacon:  Novum  Organum,  bk  i,  aph 66 114d115c 31
Descartes:  Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a  /  Meditations,  iv,  90a-b /
Objections  and  Replies,  215a-b  31  Spinoza:  Ethics,  part ii, axiom
i-lemma 7, schol 378c-380b 34 Newton: Principles, la-2a; bk hi 269a-372a
/  Optics, bk in, 540a-542a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk iv, ch vi,
sect 11 334b-335b 35 Hume: Human Understanding, sect vii, div 56 475a-b;
sect  viii, div 78 485c-486a 37 Fielding: Tom Jones, 79c 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i, lb 42 Kant: Judgement, 558b-559d; 561c-562a,c;
562d-564a;  568c-570b  45  Fourier:  Theory  of  Heat,  169a-b 53 James:
Psychology,  5a;  882a-884b;  889b890a  lc.  The  universe as an ordered
community of beings diverse in kind: eternal law and divine government 7
Plato:  Critias,  479c  8  Aristotle: Meteorology, bk i, ch 1-2 445a-d /
Metaphysics, bk xii 598a-606d esp ch 10
[1075*12-24] 605d-606a
9  Aristotle:  Politics, bk vii, ch 4 [1326*29-32] 2 530bc 12 Epictetus:
Discourses,  bk  ii, ch 14, 154b-c; bk in, ch 22, 195a-b; ch 24, 204a-d;
bk iv, ch 7, 233a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk ii, sect 4 257b; bk iv,
sect 27 266a; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; BK VI, SECT 10 274D-C 17 Plotinus:
Second  Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  7 44c45a / Third Ennead, tr ii-iii 82c-97b
passim  /  Fourth  Ennead,  tr  hi, ch 13 149b-d; tr iv, ch 10 163a-c 18
Augustine:  City of God, bk v, ch ii 216c-d; bk viii, ch 6 268d-269c; bk
ix,  ch  22  296d297a;  bk xi, ch 16-18 331a-332a; ch 22 333d334c; ch 29
339a-b; bk xii, ch 4-5 344b345b; bk xix, ch 12-13 517b-520a; bk xxii, ch
24  609a-612a  19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 2, a 3 12c-14a; q
ii,  a  3,  ans  49a-c;  q  19,  a  5, rep 2 112d-113c; q 21, a 1, rep 3
124b-125b;  q  22  127c-132b;  q  26,  a  4,  ans 151c-152a,c; q 44, a 3
240b-241a; q 47, a 3 258c-259a; q 48, a i, rep 5 259b-260c; q 61, aa 3-4
316a-317c; q 65, a 2, ans 340b-341b; a 3, rep i 341c342b; q 73, a 1, ans
and  rep  i 370a-371a; qq 103-119 528a-608d; part i-ii, q 17, a 8, rep 2
692a-c

[1166b]
1132  THE GREAT IDEAS \c to 2 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q
91, a 1 208b-d; q 93 215b,d-220d 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, hell, vii
[61-96]
10b-c; paradise, i
[97-142] 107b-d;
11
[112148] 109a-b; viii [91-114] 117d-118a; x [1-36]
120b-c; xiii
[52-81] 126a-b; xxvn
[103-120]
148b-c; xxviii 148d-150b; xxix
[13-48]
150b-d  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida, bk hi, stanza 1-7 54b-55b;
stanza  250-253 87a-b / Knight's Tale [2987-3016] 209a-b 27 Shakespeare:
Troilus  and  Cressida,  act  i,  sc hi [75-139] 108d-109c 28 Harvey: On
Animal Generation, 491d-492a 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning, 71a-b 31
Descartes:  Meditations,  vi,  99c  31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix
369b372d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost, bk v [468-505] 185b186a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12, 271d-272b; bk iv, ch xvi,
sect  12,  370c-371a  35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 29-33 418c-419a
passim; sect 105-109 433b-434b passim 38 Montesquieu: Spirit of Laws, bk
i,  la-b  40  Gibbon:  Decline and Fall, 346c-347a 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
200c-209d;  239a-240b  /  Judgement,  578a-587a  passim;  594d [fn 1] 47
Goethe:  Faust, prologue [243-270] 7a-b 51 Tolstoy: War and Peace, bk v,
216d-218b  esp  217c  man:  macrocosm  and  The universe and microcosm 7
Plato:  Phaedrus,  124b-126c  /  Timaeus,  447b455c;  466a-b / Philebus,
618c-619c  12  Lucretius:  Nature  of  Things,  bk  vi  [647-652] 89a 12
Epictetus: Discourses, bk ii, ch 5, 143d144a; bk hi, ch 13 188b-189c; bk
iv, ch 7 232c-235a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk iv, sect 4 264a; sect 27
266a  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 849b; 873b; 915b916a / Harmonies of the
World,  1080a-b  19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica, part i, q 91, a 1, ans
484a-485b;  part  i-ii,  q 17, a 8, rep 2 692ac 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise,  i [97-142] 107b-d; 11 [112-148] 109a-b 24 Rabelais: Gargantua
and Pantagruel, bk hi, 137c-139b 25 Montaigne: Essays, 213d-215a; 259a-d
26  Shakespeare:  Richard II, act v, sc v [1-41] 349d-350a / As You Like
It, act ii, sc vii
[136-166] 608c-609a
27 Shakespeare: Hamlet, act ii, sc ii [303-322] 43d / King Lear, act hi,
sc ii 262d-263d / Tempest, act iv, sc i [146-158] 543b 29 Cervantes: Don
Quixote, part ii, 237c

[1167a]
I  to  lb  Chapter  102:  WORLD  1133 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
33d-34b; 50c-d / Novum Organum, bk i, aph 124 133c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part ii, prop 1-13 373d378c 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk viii
[66-178]
233b-236a  -^  33  Pascal:  Pensees,  72  181a-184b; 347-348 233b234a 35
Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  ii,  sect  2 128a-b 42 Kant:
Practical  Reason, 360d-361d / Judgement, 497a-498b; 591b-592d 46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  intro, 156d190b esp 156d-162a, 165a-b; part i,
220c221a 47 Goethe: Faust esp prologue
[280-292] 8a,
part 1
[354-521]
lla-15a,
[1786-1802]
42b43a,  part  11  [4679-4727]  116b-117b 48 Melville: Moby Dic{, 78a-b;
120a-121a;  168a-b; 204a; 209b; 231a; 318a; 347b; 353b354b; 360b-361a 51
Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk  v,  216d-218b  52  Dostoevsky:  Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi, 168bc 53 James: Psychology, 655a-659a esp 655b-656b,
658b-659a  54  Freud:  General  Introduction, 562c-d 3. The universe and
God:  divine  immanence  and transcendence "ha. The unity of God and the
world:  the  distinction between natura naturans and natura naturata Old
Testament:  Jeremiah,  23:24—  (D)  Jeremias,  23:24  Apocrypha:  Wisdom
of Solomon,  1:7;  12:1 — (D) OT, Boo\of Wisdom, 1:7; 12:1 New Testament:
Ephesians,  4:6  12  Epictetus:  Discourses,  bk  i,  ch  14 120d121c 12
Aurelius: Meditations, bk vii, sect 9 280b-c 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead,
tr ix, ch 16, 75c-76a / Third Ennead, tr viii 129a-136a / Fourth Ennead,
tr  ix  205a-207a,c  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr  i,  ch  1-2 208a-209b; tr ii
214c215c;  tr  in,  ch  15-17  224c-226c;  tr viii, ch 7 242d-243c; ch 9
243d-244c  18 Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb-2a; bk hi, par 10
15b-d;  par  18  18b;  bk iv, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; bk vi, par 4
36a-b; bk vii, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c esp par 21 49d-50a; bk
x,  par  8-10  73b-74a; bk xii, par 7 lOOd-lOla / City of God, bk iv, ch
12-13  195d-196b;  bk  vii,  ch  6  248a-b;  ch 30 261b-d; bk xii, ch 25
358b-359a  /  Christian  Doctrine,  bk i, ch 12 627c-d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part i, q 3, a 8 19d-20c; q 4, a 3 22b-23b; q 6, a 4 30b-d;
q  8 34c-38c; q 51, a 3, rep 3 277a-278c; q 90, a 1, ans 480d-481d; part
i-ii, q 17, a 8, rep 2 692ac

[1167b]
21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, xxxiii
[82-105] 157a-b
23  Hobbes:  Leviathan,  part  ii, 162b 28 Harvey: On Animal Generation,
428c-d  31  Descartes:  Meditations,  vi, 99c 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part i
355a-372d  esp  def  3-6 355b, axiom 1-7 355c-d, prop 1-8 355d357d, prop
14-16 359d-362a, prop 18 363c, prop 25 365b, prop 29-30 366b-d; part ii,
prop  i-ii 373d-377c esp prop 7, corol and schol 375a-c; part iv, prop 4
425b-d  32  Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  xi  [334-346]  306b 34 Newton:
Principles,   bk   hi,   general   schol,   370a-371a  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk ii, ch xiii, sect 18 152a-c; ch xv, sect 2-4 162c163b
35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 149-150 442d-443b; sect 155 444b-c 42
Kant: Practical Reason, 334b-335b / Judgement, 565c-d; 566c-d; 580c-d 46
Hegel:   Philosophy   of  History,  intro,  156d157b;  176b-c;  part  i,
220c-221a;  224a-b;  227c-228a 47 Goethe: Faust, part i [447-453] 13a 48
Melville:  Moby  Dic{,  115b-117a  51  Tolstoy:  War  and  Peace,  bk v,
216d-218b;  bk  xiv,  608a-b;  bk  xv,  631a-c  52  Dostoevsky: Brothers
Karamazov,  bk  vi,  153b-d  3£.  The  duality of God and the world: the
distinction  between  Creator  and creature Old Testament: Psalms, 97:9—
(D)  Psalms,  96:9  New  Testament:  I John, 2:15-17 9 Aristotle: Motion
of Animals,  ch  3 [699*1 1]- ch 4 [700*5] 234a-235a 12 Lucretius: Nature
of Things, bk i [146-158] 2d-3a; bk ii [167-183] 17a-b; [1090-1104] 29a;
bk v
[76-90] 62a-b;
[146-194] 63a-c; bk vi
[43-79] 80d-81b
18  Augustine: Confessions, bk i, par 2-3 lb-2a; bk in, par 10 15b-d; bk
iv, par 26 25c-d; bk vi, par 4 36a-b; bk vii, par 4-7 44b-45d; par 16-23
48c-50c  esp  par 17 49a, par 21 49d50a; bk x, par 8-10 73b-74a; bk xii,
par  7  lOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a / City of God, bk vii, ch 29 261a-b;
bk  xii,  ch  17 353a354a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q 3, a 8
19d-20c;  q  8,  a  1,  ans  and rep 1,3 34d-35c; a 3 36b-37c; q 18, a 4
107d-108c;  q  44, aa 1-2 238b-240a; q 61, a 3, rep 2 316a-d; q 90, a i,
ans  480d-481d; q 103, a 2 529a-530a; q 105, a 5 542a-543b; part i-ii, q
17,  a  8,  rep  2  692a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [97-142]
107b-d; 11 [112-148] 109a-b; xiii [52-66] 126a; xix [40-66] 135c-d; xxvm
148d-150b; xxix
[127-145] 151c-d
22 Chaucer: Knight's Tale
[2987-3040]
209a210a

[1168a]
(3.  The  universe and God: divine immanence and transcendence. 3 b. The
duality  of  God  and  the  world:  the  distinction between Creator and
creature.)  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  17c  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v, 54d-56a / Meditations,
vi, 99c / Objections and Replies, 110b-112a; 123c-d; 158b-159a 35 Locke:
Human  Understanding, bk hi, ch vi, sect 11-12 271b-272b 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit  of  Laws,  bk  i,  la-b  42  Kant: Pure Reason, 190a-c; 192c-d /
Practical  Reason,  334b-335b  /  Judgement,  566c-d;  580c-d  46 Hegel:
Philosophy  of  History,  part  i,  245d246c 4. The origin of the world:
cosmos  out  of  chaos  5  Aristophanes: Birds [685-703] 551b-c 7 Plato:
Timaeus,  458a-b  8 Aristotle: Metaphysics, bk xii, ch 6 [io7ib 27-io72a
i3]  601c-602a  12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [416-448] 66c-d 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xiii, par 45 123a 31 Descartes: Discourse,
part v, 54d-56a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk i [6-10] 93b; bk ii
[850-1009]
129b-133a; bk hi
[1-55]
135b136b;  bk v [577-599] 187b-188a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 307b 47
Goethe: Faust, part ii
[7851-7950]
191b193b  Aa.  The denial of ultimate origins: the eternity of the world
and  its  motions  without  beginning  or end 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447b-c 8
Aristotle: Topics, bk i, ch ii
[io4b i3-i8]
148a-b / Physics, bk viii, ch 1-2 334a-337b; ch 8-9 348b-353b / Heavens,
bk  i,  ch 3 [270** 1-24] 361c-362a; bk i, ch 9 [279 ai2]-BK 11, ch b 6]
370b-376a;  bk ii, ch 6 379c-380c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch
io-ii   437d-441a,c   /  Meteorology,  bk  i,  ch  14  [352*  16-353*27]
458b-459a,c; bk ii, ch 3 [356^21
[28 4
357*4] 462b-d / Metaphysics, bk ix, ch 8
[1050^0-28] 576c-d;
bk  xii,  ch 6-8 601b605a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [146-214]
2d-3d; [988-1007] 13b; bk ii [80-141] 16a-d;
[294-307] 18d-19a; [569-580] 22b; [1048-1063]
28b-c;  bk v [187-194] 63c; [416-431] 66c-d 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
v,  sect  13  271b;  sect 23 272b; bk vi, sect 15 275a-b; bk ix, sect 28
293d-294a;  bk  x,  sect  7 297b-c 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 846a-848b;
890a891a  17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead,  tr  i  35a-39d;  tr ix, ch 3-4
67b-68a; ch 7-8, 69c-70a / Third Ennead, tr vil, ch 8, 123d-124a

[1168b]
1134  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4/o  4^  18 Augustine: City of God, bk xi, ch 4
324a-d; bk xii, ch 10-12 348b-350a 19 Aquin\s: Summa Theologica, part i,
q  10,  a 2, rep 2 41d-42c; a 4, ans 43b-44b; q 14, a 12, ans 85d-86d; q
46,  aa 1-2 250a-255a 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part hi suppl, q 91,
a  2,  ans  1017c-1020c  23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b 31 Spinoza:
Ethics,  part  i, prop 16-17 362a363c; prop 33 367b-369a 35 Locke: Human
Understanding,  bk  ii,  ch  xiv,  sect  26 160c-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
132d-i33c;  135a-137a,c;  152a-d;  160b-161d  4b.  Myths  or  hypotheses
concerning  the world's origin by artistic production: the demiurge, the
creative  ideas, the receptacle 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-477a,c / Sophist,
577d578b 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch i
[64^13-29] 164c-d
12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [181-194] 63b-c 17 Plotinus: Second
Ennead,  tr v, ch 3 58d59c; tr ix, ch 8 70a-d; ch 10-12 72a-73d / Fourth
Ennead,  tr  hi,  ch  10-12  147c-149b  /  Fifth  Ennead,  tr viii, ch 7
242d-243c;  ch  1213  245c-246c  /  Sixth Ennead, tr iv, ch 10 302b-c 18
Augustine:  Confessions,  bk  xi,  par 7 90d91a; bk xiii, par 45 123a 31
Spinoza:  Ethics,  part  i,  appendix,  370c-371b 40 Gibbon: Decline and
Fall,  307b  42  Kant:  Pure  Reason, 188c-189a 4c. The formation of the
world by a fortuitous concourse of atoms 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk ii, ch
4
[i96a25~b
4] 272d-273a; ch 6 [i98 a5-i3] 275a 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i
[10221037] 13c-d; bk
11 [216-250] 17d-18b; [10481063] 28b-c; bk v
[184-194]
63c;
[416-508]
66c-67c  12  Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  x,  sect  6,  297a  13 Virgil:
Eclogues, vi [29-40] 19b-20a 17 Plotinus: Third Ennead, tr i, ch 3 79b-c
19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 15, a 1, ans 91b-92a; q 22, a 2,
ans 128d-130d; q 47, a 1, ans 256a-257b 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 542a-b
4d.  The  emanation of the world from the One 17 Plotinus: First Ennead,
tr  vii,  ch  2 26c-d / Second Ennead, tr i, ch 5 37b-c; tr hi, ch 11-12
46b-c;  ch  16-18 48b-50a; tr ix, ch 3-4 67b-68a; ch 7-8 69c-70d / Third
Ennead, tr ii, ch 1-3 82c-84c; ch 16 90c-91c; tr hi, ch 1 93b-c; tr vii,
ch  11-12  126a-127d;  tr  viii  129a-136a passim; tr ix, ch 3, 137b-c /
Fourth  Ennead,  tr  ii,  ch  2  140d-141c;  tr  iv, ch 10 163a-c; ch 13
164d-165b; ch 31-39

[1169a]
4<?  to  4*(3)  174d-180a;  ch 45 182b-183a / Fifth Ennead, tr i, ch 4-9
209d-213c;  tr  hi,  ch  10-12  221b223c; tr iv 226d-228b; tr viii, ch 7
242d243c  / Sixth Ennead, tr ii, ch 21 279b-280a; tr iv, ch 2 297d-298c;
ch  4-5  299a-300a;  tr v 305c-310d; tr vii, ch 1-2 321b-323aTcHif 330ac
4e.  The creation of the world ex nihilo 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  i  [146-214]  2d-3d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk x, par 9 73c-d; bk
xi,   par   6-16  90c-93b;  bk  xii-xiii  99b125a,c  19  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q 21, a 4, rep 4 126c-127c; 00 44-46 238a-255d; q
50,  a  1,  ans 269b-270a; a 3, ans 272a-273b; qq 65-66 339a-349d; q 104
534c-538c;  part  i-ii, q 17, a 8, rep 2 692a-c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy,
paradise, vii
[121148] 116b-c; x [1-6] 120b; xix [40-66] 135c-d;
xxix  [13-48]  150b-d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part ii, 162b; part hi, 188d
30  Bacon:  Advancement of Learning, 17b-d 31 Descartes: Discourse, part
v,  54d-56a  /  Meditations, iv, 90a-b / Objections and Replies, prop in
132d-133a  esp  corol 133a; 137d138a; 140b-c; 229c-d 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part  i,  prop 17, schol 362c363c; appendix, 370c-372d passim 32 Milton:
Paradise Lost, bk i [6-10] 93b; bk hi
[708-735] 150b-151b; bk iv [720-735] 168a-b;
bk v [468-479] 185b; bk vii
[59-640] 218b231a esp [139-161] 220a-b
33  Pascal:  Pensees, 482 258a 34 Newton: Optics, bk hi, 541b; 542a-543a
35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  iv, ch x, sect 15 352d-353a; sect
18-19  353c-354c  35  Berkeley:  Human  Knowledge, sect 92 431a 35 Hume:
Human  Understanding,  sect  xii,  div  132, 509d [fn 1] 38 Montesquieu:
Spirit of Laws, bk i, la-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason, 132d-133c; 135a-137a,c;
152a-d;  160b-161d / Practical Reason, 334b335b / Judgement, 594d [fn 1]
46  Hegel:  Philosophy  of  History,  part i, 245d246a; part iv, 361a 49
Darwin:  Origin  of Species, 239c-d 54 Freud: New Introductory Lectures,
875d876a;  877d  4e{\)  The  distinction  between  creation  and motion,
generation,  and  artistic  production 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk xi,
par  7  90d-91a  /  City  of  God,  bk xi, ch 10, 327d 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica, part i, q 14, a 8, ans 82c-83b; q 19, a 4 110c-112c; q 22, a
2,  ans and rep 3 128d-130d; q 27, a 1 153b154b; a 2, rep 3 154c-155b; q
44, a 2 239b240a; q 45 241d-250a; q 66, a 1 343d-345c;

[1169b]
Chapter 102: WORLD 1135 534cq 75, a 6, rep 2 383c-384c; q 104, a 536c; q
1  10,  a  2,  ans  565d-566d 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, intro, 47a 35 Locke:
Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xxvi, sect 2 217b-d 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
81d-82a; 188c-189a 4e(2) The problem of time and eternity in relation to
creation:  the  conservation  of  creatures in time Apocrypha: Wisdom of
Solomon,  7:17-18—  (D)  OT, Bool{ of Wisdom, 7:17-18 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  vii, ch ii 126a-d 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 7,
45c;  par  21  49d-50a:  bk xi, par 10-17 91d-93c; par 40-41 98d-99b; bk
xii, par 40 109b-110a / City of God, bk xi, ch 4-7 324a-326c; bk xii, ch
12 349b-350a; ch 15-17 351b-354a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part 1, q
8,  a  i, ans 34d-35c; q 9, a 2, ans 39c-40d; q 14, a 12, ans 85d-86d; q
46  250a-255d; q 61, a 2 315c316a; q 66, a 4 348d-349d; q 75, a 6, rep 2
383c-384c;  q  104,  a 1 esp rep 4 534c-536c; aa 3-4 537b-538c 21 Dante:
Divine  Comedy,  paradise,  xxix  [1348] 150b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of
Learning,  17c  31  Descartes: Discourse, part v, 55d-56a / Meditations,
in,  87b-d / Objections and Replies, 228b 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk v
[577-594]   187b188a;   bk   vii  [70-108]  218b-219b  35  Locke:  Human
Understanding,  bk  ii, ch xiv, sect 24-30 160b-161d esp sect 30 161c-d;
ch  xv,  sect  12,  165c 35 Berkeley: Human Knowledge, sect 46 421b-c 42
Kant:  Practical  Reason,  334b-335b  4e(3)  The revelation and dogma of
creation:  interpretations  of  Genesis 1 ; the work of the six days Old
Testament: Genesis, 1-2; 5:1-2 / Exodus, 20 :8-i 1 esp 20:11 / / Samuel,
2:8—  (Z>)  /  Kings,  2:8  /  Nehemiah,  9:6— (D) // Esdras, 9:6 / Job,
9:4-13;  10:8-13;  12:7-10;  26:7-14;  28:24-27;  38:4-13  /  Psalms, 8;
24:1-2;  33:6-9; 74:16-17; 89:11-12; 90:2; 95:4-5; 96:5; 102:25-26; 104;
119:73,90;  121:2; 136:5-9; 146:5-6; 148— (D) Psalms, 8; 23:1-2; 32:6-9;
73:16-17;  88:12-13;  89:2;  94:4-5;  95:5;  101:26-27;  103; 118:73,90;
120:2;  135:5-9; 145:5-6; 148 /Proverbs, 3:1920; 8:22-31 / Ecclesiastes,
3:11 / Isaiah, 40:2128; 42:5; 44:24; 45:7-8,12,18; 48:12-13; 51:13 — (D)
Isaias,   40:21-28;  42:5;  44:24;  45:7-8,  12,18;  48:12-13;  51:13  /
Jeremiah,  10:10-13; 27:5; 31:35; 51 -.15-16— (D) Jeremias, 10:10-13; 27
:  55 3 i:355 5 i:i 5~i6 / Amos, 4:13; 5:8 / Jonah, 1 :g—(D) Jonas, 1 :g
/ Zechariah, 12:1— (D) Zacharias, 12:1 Apocrypha: Judith, 16:14— (D) OT,
Judith, 16:17 / Rest of Esther, i^:io-{D) OT, Esther,

[1170a]
(4e. The creation of the world ex nihilo. 4e(3) The revelation and dogma
of  creation:  interpretations  of Genesis 1; the work of the six days.)
13:10/  Wisdom  of Solomon,  1:14; 6:7; 7:15-21; 9:1,9; 11:17,24— (D) OT,
Book,  of  Wisdom, 1:141 6:8; 7:15-21; 9:1,9; 11:18,25 / Ecclesiasticus,
17:1-9; 18:1,6; 23:19-20; 24:8-9; 33:715; 39:16-35; 42:15-43:27— (D) OT,
Ecclesiasticus,  17:1-8;  18:1,5;  23:28-29;  24:12-14;  337" I 5; 39 :2
i-4i;  42:i5-43  :29  /  Song  °f Three Children, 34-60— (D) OT, Daniel,
3:5682  /  Bel  and  Dragon,  5—  (£>)  OT, Daniel, 14:4 / // Maccabees,
7:23,28—  (D)  OT,  // MacAa- ^f«, 7:23,28 New Testament: John, 1:1-10 /
Acts, 14:15-17; 17:22-28— (D) Acts, 14:14-16; 17:22-28 / Romans, 1:19-20
/  Colossians,  1:16-17  / Hebrews, 1:10-11; 3:4; 11:3 / II Peter, 3:5 /
Revelation,  4:11;  10:6;  14:7—  (D)  Apocalypse,  4:11;  10:6; 14:7 18
Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par 7 45a-d; bk xi, par 5-17 90b-93c; bk
xii-xiii 99b125a,c / City of God, bk vii, ch 29 261a-b; bk viii, ch 9-12
270d-273a;  bk  x,  ch  31  319b-d;  bk  xi, ch 4-34 324a-342a,c; bk xii
342b,d-360a,c  esp  ch  1-2  342b,d-343d,  ch  4-5  344b-345b,  ch  9-27
347b-360a,c;  bk  xxii,  ch  1 586b,d-587b 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  i, q 7, a 2, rep 3 31d-32c; q 8, a 3, ans and rep i 36b-37c; q 14,
a 12, ans 85d-86d; q 21, a 4, rep 4 126c-127c; qq 44-46 238a-255d; q 56,
a 2, rep 4 292d-294a; qq 65-74 339a-377a,c 20 Aquinas: Summa Theologica,
part  hi,  q 3, a 8, rep 2 729b- 730b 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise,
vii
[121148] 116b-c; x [1-6] 120b; xm [52-87] 126a-b;
xix  [40-51] 135c; xxix [1-48] 150b-d 30 Bacon: Advancement of Learning,
17b-d  /  Novum Organum, bk ii, aph 15 149a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk
hi [708-735] 150b151b; bk v
[468-479]
185b;
[800-863] 192b194a;
bk vii
[59-640]
218b-231a esp
[139161] 220a-b
37  Fielding: Tom Jones, 187d-188a 52 Dostoevsky: Brothers Karamazov, bk
v,  120d-121c 5. The number of worlds: the uniqueness of this world; the
possibility  or  actuality  of  other  worlds  7 Plato: Timaeus, 448a-b;
459b-c  /  Statesman,  586c-590a 8 Aristotle: Physics, bk hi, ch 4 [203b
i5~29] 281c-d; bk viii, ch i
[25ob i5~25i a8] 334a-c;
[252a5-b7] 335d-336b / Heavens, bk
1, ch 8-9 367b-370d; ch 10
[279b i2-i7]
370d-371a;
[28oai3-34] 371c-d
12 Lucretius '.Nature of Things, bkii[io23-ii74] 28a-30a,c

[1170b]
18  Augustine:  City of God, bk xi, ch 5 324d325c; bk xii, ch ii 349a-b;
ch  13  350a-d;  ch  17  353a-354a; ch 19-20 354d-357a 19 Aquinas: Summa
Theologica,  part  i,  q  25,  aa  5-6  147d-150a  25 Montaigne: Essays,
252b-253a;   443a-b   31   Descartes:   Discourse,  part  v,  54d-56a  /
Meditations,  iv, 90b / Objections and Replies, 228b 31 Spinoza: Ethics,
part i, prop 33 367b-369a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk ii [910-920] 131a
34  Newton:  Optics,  bk  hi, 543a 6. The structure of the world 6a. The
parts and places of the world: the uniformity of the matter of the world
New  Testament:  /  Corinthians,  15:40-41  7 Plato: Phaedo, 247b-250a /
Timaeus,  448a449c  8  Aristotle:  Heavens,  bk  i, ch 2 359d-360d; ch 3
[270*12^26]  361b-362a;  ch  9  [279 a i2-b 4] 370b-d; bk ii, ch 4 [287b
i5~2i] 379b; ch 7 380c-d / Metaphysics, bk viii, ch 4 [i044b2-8] 569a-b;
bk ix, ch 8 [io5ob6-27] 576b-d esp
[io5ob2o-27] 576c-d; bk xi, ch 6 [io63aio-i7]
591b; bk xii, ch 2 [1069^4-27] 599a 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i,
ch 5
[644b2i-645 a5] 168c-d
12  Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk i [418-448] 6b-c; [1052-1094] 14a-c;
bk ii [294-307] 18d19a; bk v [534-563] 68a-b 16 Ptolemy: Almagest, bk i,
5a-6a;  8b;  9a-llb;  bk  xm,  429a-b  16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk i, 511b; 517b-518a; 519b-520a 16 Kepler: Epitome,
bk  iv,  853b-857b; 888b890b; 894a-b; 919b; 929b-930b; 931b-932a; 935a-b
17  Plotinus:  Second  Ennead, tr i 35a-39d; tr iv, ch 8 52c-53a / Third
Ennead,  tr  v, ch 6, 104a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 10, a
5, ans 44b-45c; a 6, rep 2 45c-46d; q 55, a 2, ans 289d-290d; q 58, a i,
ans  300c-301a;  a 3, ans 301d-302d; q 66, a 2 345d-347b; q 68, a 1, ans
354a-355c; q 70, a 3, ans and rep 2 365b-367a; q 75, a 6, ans 383c-384c;
q  84,  a  3, rep 1 443d-444d; q 97, a 1, ans 513c-514c; q 104, a i, rep
1,3  534c-536c; q 115, a 3, ans 588c-589c 20 Aquinas : Summa Theologica,
part  i-ii,  q  49,  a  4, ans 5a-6a; part hi, q 5, a 2, ans 736d737c 21
Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, ii
[112148] 109a-b; x
[1-36] 120b-c; xxii [124-154]
140d-141b;  xxvm 148d-150b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi, 172b; part iv,
269d  28  Gilbert: Loadstone, bk vi, HOb-c 28 Galileo: Two New Sciences,
third day, 214d 33 Pascal: Vacuum, 358a

[1171a]
6b  to  6d Chapter 102: WORLD 1137 34 Newton: Principles, bk hi, rule hi
270b271a;  prop  7  281b-282b  41 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 226b 6b. The
diversity,  inequality,  and  hierarchy  of  things  —~"~ Old Testament:
Genesis,  1-2 Apocrypha: Ecclesiasticus, 337-15— (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus,
33:7-15 7 Plato: Timaeus, 447a-455c 8 Aristotle: Interpretation, ch 13
[23
a i8-26] 35b-c / Heavens, bk i, ch 2 359d-360d; bk ii, ch 12 383b-384c /
Generation and Corruption, bk 11, ch 10 [336 b25~34] 438d / Metaphysics,
bk  xii, ch 10 [1075*11-24] 605d-606a 9 Aristotle: Generation of Animals,
bk ii, ch i
[73^24-33] 272a-b
11 Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 839d-840a 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk
v, sect 8 269d270b 16 Kepler: Harmonies of the World, 1071b 17 Plotinus:
Second  Ennead, tr hi, ch 7 44c45a; ch 13 46c-47b / Third Ennead, tr ii,
ch  7-8,  86c-d  /  Sixth  Ennead,  tr  vii,  ch 25 334a-c 18 Augustine:
Confessions,  bk  vii,  par  16-23  48c-50c  /  City of God, bk v, ch ii
216c-d;  bk  viii,  ch  6  268d-269c;  bk  xi, ch 16-18 331a-332a; ch 22
333d-334c;  bk  xii,  ch  2  343c-d;  ch 4-5 344b-345b; bk xix, ch 12-13
517b-520a;  bk  xxii,  ch  24 609a-612a / Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 8
626c-627a 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i, q 2, a 3, ans 12c-14a; q
3,  a 1, ans 14b-15b; q ii, a 3, ans 49a-c; q 18, a 3 106b-107c; q 19, a
8,  ans  116a-d; q 22, a 4, ans 131c-132b; q 23, a 5, rep 3 135d-137d; a
7,  ans  138d-140a; q 47 256a-259a; q 50, a i, ans and rep i 269b270a; a
3,  ans  272a-273b;  q 57, a i, ans 295a-d; q 61, a 3 316a-d; q 65, a 2,
ans  and rep 3 340b-341b; qq 66-72 343d-369d; q 75, a 7 384d-385c; q 76,
a  4,  rep  3 393a-394c; q 77, a 2 401b-d; q 106, a 4, ans 548b-549a; qq
108-109  552c-564b  20  Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part i-ii, q 49, a 4,
ans 5a-6a; part ii-ii, q 2, a 3, ans 392d393c; part hi suppl, q 91, a 3,
rep  6  1020d1022c 21 Dante: Divine Comedy, paradise, i [97-142] 107b-d;
11
[1 12-148] 109a-b; vii [64-75] 115d'
116a;
[121-148]
116b-c; viii
[91-114]
117d118a;  xiii  [52-81]  126a-b; xxvm 148d-150b; xxix [13-48] 150b-d 22
Chaucer:  Knight's  Tale  [2987-3016] 209a-b 27 Shakespeare: Troilus and
Cressida,  act  i,  sc  in  [75-139]  108d-109c  28  Harvey:  On  Animal
Generation,  491d-492a  31  Spinoza: Ethics, part i, appendix, 372c-d 32
Milton:  Paradise  Lost,  bk  iv  [610-638]  165b166a;  bk  v  [468-505]
185b-186a  35  Locke:  Human  Understanding,  bk  hi,  ch vi, sect 11-12
271b-272b; bk iv, ch xvi, sect 12, 370c-371a

[1171b]
:  42 Kant: Pure Reason, 187c-188c 53 James: Psychology, 671b [fn 1] 6c.
The  rationality  or  intelligibility of the universe 7 Plato: Phaedrus,
124b-d / Phaedo, 240b-243c / Timaeus, 447a-477a,c / Sophist, 567a-569a /
Philebus,  618b-619d  /  Laws,  bk  x,  757d-765c;  bk  xii, 797d-798a 8
Aristotle: Physics, bk i, ch 4
[188*5-12]
263b; bk in, ch 4 [203*23-33] 281a-b; bk viii, ch 1 [25ob23-26] 334b; ch
5  [256*20-27]  341d  /  Metaphysics,  bk  i,  ch 3 [984^-22] 502d; ch 7
[988b6-i6]  506c-d;  ch  8  [989*3o-b2i] 507c-d; bk 11, ch 2 [994 b8-i6]
512d-513a  9  Aristotle:  Politics,  bk vii, ch 4 [1326*29-33] 530b-c 12
Aurelius:  Meditations,  bk  iv,  sect  4 264a; sect 27,29 266a; sect 40
267a-b;  sect 45-46 267b-c; bk v, sect 8 269d-270b; sect 30 273a; bk vi,
sect i 274a; sect 10 274b-c; sect 36 277c; sect 38 277c-d; sect 40 277d;
sect  58  279d; bk vii, sect 9-11 280b-c; sect 25 281c; sect 75 285c; bk
viii,  sect  7 286a; sect 34 288a- b; bk ix, sect 8 292b; bk x, sect 6-7
297a-c;  bk xii, sect 5 307d-308a; sect 30 310a-b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk
iv,  863b-872b  / Harmonies of the World, 1023b-1080b 17 Plotinus: Third
Ennead,  tr  viii,  ch  1-5  129a13  Id  /  Fifth Ennead, tr ix, ch 8-14
249c251d  18  Augustine:  Christian Doctrine, bk ii, ch 32 652b-c; ch 35
653bc  28  Gilbert:  Loadstone, bk v, 104b-105d 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
i,prop  16  362a; prop 33 367b-369a; appendix 369b-372d passim; part 11,
prop  7  375a-c  34  Newton: Optics, bk hi, 542a-b 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
127a-128a;  187c-189a;  200c-209d;  239a-240b  /  Judgement,  550a613a,c
passim,  esp  564c-565d, 566c-d, 575b578a, 580c-d, 587b-588a 45 Fourier:
Theory  of Heat, 173b; 183a-b 46 Hegel: Philosophy of Right, pref, 6a-7a
/  Philosophy of History, intro, 156d-158c; 160b; part iv, 361a 53 James:
Psychology,  5a;  672a;  862b-863b  [fn  2];  870b;  873a-b;  882a-886a;
889a-890a  6d.  The  goodness  and  beauty of the universe: its evil and
imperfections  Old  Testament:  Genesis,  1 / Psalms, 8; 19:1-6; 92:1-6;
104;  136:1-9—  (D)  Psalms,  8; 18:1-7; 91:1-7; 103; 135:1-9 Apocrypha:
Wisdom  of  Solomon, 1:14; 11:24; 13:1-5— (D) OT, BooI{of Wisdom, 1 114;
11  125;  1-5  /  Ecclesiasticus,  1  6  ^6-30  ;  1 7 7-9 539:121 3 35;
42:22-43:33—  (D)  OT,  Ecclesiasticus,  16:  26-31;  17:6-8;  39:16-41;
42:23-43:37  7  Plato:  Phaedo,  247b-250a  /  Timaeus,  447a477a,c  esp
447a-448a / Statesman, 586c-590a

[1172a]
1138  THE  GREAT  IDEAS (6. The structure of the world. 6d. The goodness
and  beauty  of  the universe: its evil and imperfections.} 8 Aristotle:
Heavens,  bk  ii, ch 12 383b-384c / Generation and Corruption, bk ii, ch
10
[336b25~34] 438d
/ Metaphysics, bk i, ch 3
[98^8-22]
502d; bk ix, ch 9
[1051*17-22]
577a-b;  bk  xii,  ch  7  [i072b3o-i  073*2]  603a;  ch  10 [1075*12-24]
605d-606a; bk xiv, ch 4
[1091*29-1092*9]
624a-d 9 Aristotle: Parts of Animals, bk i, ch 5
[644
b22-645*26]  168c-169a  /  Politics, bk vii, ch 4 [1326*29-32] 530b-c 11
Nicomachus: Arithmetic, bk ii, 839d-840b 12 Lucretius: Nature of Things,
bk  ii [167-183] 17a-b; bk v [195-234] 63c-64a 12 Epictetus: Discourses,
bk  iv, ch 7, 233a-b 12 Aurelius: Meditations, bk hi, sect 2 259d260a 16
Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk i, 5a 16 Copernicus: Revolutions of the Heavenly
Spheres,  bk  i,  526a-529a 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 853b-887a passim,
esp  863b-872b  /  Harmonies  of the World, 1023b-1085b esp 1049b-1050a,
1071b, 1077b1080b 17 Plotinus: Second Ennead, tr hi, ch 16 48b49a; ch 18
49c-50a; tr iv, ch 16 57b-c; tr ix 65d-77d passim / Third Ennead, tr ii,
ch  3 83d-84c; ch 8, 86c-d; ch 10-14 88a-89d / Fifth Ennead, tr viii, ch
8-9 243c-244c; ch 12-13 245c-246c 18 Augustine: Confessions, bk vii, par
16-23  48c-50c; bk x, par 8-10 73b-74a / City of God, bk v, ch 11 216c-d;
bk  viii, ch 6 268d-269c; bk x, ch 14 307c-308a; bk xi, ch 4, 324a-b; ch
16-18  331a-332a;  ch  22-23  333d-335c;  bk  xii,  ch  2 343c-d; ch 4-5
344b-345b;  bk  xix,  ch  12-13  517b-520a;  bk  xxii, ch 24 609a-612a /
Christian Doctrine, bk i, ch 4 625b-c 19 Aquinas: Summa Theologica, part
i,  q  2,  a 3, rep i 12c-14a; q 5, a 3 25a-d; q 6, a 4 30b-d; q 17, a 1
lOOd-lOld;  q 19, a 9, rep 2 116d117d; q 22, a 2, rep 2 128d-130d; q 23,
a  5, rep 3 135d-137d; a 7, rep 3 138d-140a; a 8, rep 2 140a-141a; q 25,
a 6, rep 3 149a-150a; q 48, a 1, rep 5 259b-260c; a 2 260c-261b; q 49, a
2,  ans  266a-c; q 50, a i, ans 269b270a; a 3, ans 272a-273b; q 65, a i,
rep  2-3  339b-340b;  q 66, a 1 343d-345c; q 72, a 1, rep 6 368b-369d; q
74,  a  3,  rep  3  375a377a,c;  q  92, a i, rep 3 488d-489d; q 103, a 2
529a-530a  20  Aquinas  :  Summa  Theologica,  part  hi suppl, q 74, a 1
925c-926c;  q  91  1016a-1025b  21  Dante:  Divine  Comedy,  paradise, i
[97-142] 107b-d; 11
[1 12-148]
109a-b; viii
[91-114]
117d-118a; x
[1-36]
120b-c; xm
[52-81]

[1172b]
6dto7 xxviii 148d-150b; xxix
[13-48]
126a-b;  150b-d  22  Chaucer:  Troilus  and  Cressida, bk hi, stanza 1-7
54b-55b;  stanza 250-253 87a-b 28 Gilbert: Loadstone, bk v, 104b-105d 28
Harvey:  On  Animal Generation, 491d-492a 31 Descartes: Meditations, iv,
90b  /  Objections and Replies, 214d-215b; 228b 31 Spinoza: Ethics, part
1, prop 33 367b-369a; appendix 369b-372d passim; PARTin,595a-d; part iv,
pref 422b,d-424a 32 Milton: Paradise Lost, bk vii
[548-564]
229a-b  34  Newton:  Principles,  bk  hi,  general  schol,  369b-370a 35
Berkeley:  Human Knowledge, sect 109 434b; sect 146 442a-b; sect 151-154
443b444b  35  Hume:  Human Understanding, sect viii, div 79 486b-c; sect
xi,  div  106-107,  499c-500a  passim  37  Fielding:  Tom Jones, 186c-d;
187d-188a  40  Gibbon:  Decline  and  Fall,  81b-c 42 Kant: Pure Reason,
187c-188c / Judgement, 544c-546d 47 Goethe: Faust, prologue
[243-270]
7a-b;  part  11 [11,288-303] 274b-275a 48 Melville: Moby Dic\, 144a-145a
52   Dostoevsky:  Brothers  Karamazov,  bk  vi,  153b-d  54  Freud:  New
Introductory  Lectures,  878a-b  7. The space of the world: astronomical
theories  concerning  the  size or extent of the universe Old Testament:
Job,  38:18-20 / Proverbs, 25:3 7 Plato: Timaeus, 448d-449a 8 Aristotle:
Physics, bk iv, ch 5
[2i2bu21] 292a / Heavens, bk
i, ch 5-7 362c-367b; bk 11, ch 4 378a-379b; ch 8
[29o*3o-bu]
382a  11  Archimedes:  Sand-  Reckoner 520a-526b 12 Lucretius: Nature of
Things, bk i [951-1113] 12d-14d; bk ii
[1048-1104]
28b-29a; bk vi
[647-652] 89a
16  Ptolemy:  Almagest,  bk  i,  10b  16  Copernicus: Revolutions of the
Heavenly  Spheres,  bk i, 516a-517b 16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 882a-886b
19  Aquinas:  Summa  Theologica,  part  i,  q 8, a 4, rep 3-4 37c-38c 32
Milton:  Paradise Lost, bk viii [66-178] 233b236a 34 Newton: Principles,
bk  hi, prop 42, 367a 35 Locke: Human Understanding, bk ii, ch xiv, sect
26  160c-d;  bk  iv,  ch  hi,  sect  24  320c-d  42  Kant:  Pure Reason,
135a-137a,c;   160b-161d   /   Judgement,   501a-b   54  Freud:  General
Introduction, 562c

[1173a]
.  8  Chapter  102:  WORLD  1139  8.  The end of the world Old Testament
:PsaIms, 102 125-26— (D) Psalms, 101:26-27 / Isaiah, 2:1-4; 13:6-22; 24;
34;  51:6;  65:17-66:24—  (D)  Isaias,  2:1-4;  13^=22^  24;  34;  51:6;
65:17-66:24  /  Daniel,  12  / Joel, 2:1-11 / Micah, 4:1-3— (D) Micheas,
4:1-3  /  Zephaniah—(D)  Sophonias  / Zechariah, 14— (D) Zacharias, 14 /
Malachi,  3-4—  (D)  Malachias,  3-4  New  Testament:  Matthew,  3:9-12;
10:14-15; 11:20-24; i3:33-43>47-5o; 24 / Mar{, 13:4-37 / Luke, 17:20-37;
21:5-38   /   Acts,   2:17-21;  17:31  /  /  Corinthians,  7:29-31  /  /
Thessalonians,   4:15-5:4—  (D)  /  Thessalonians,  4:145:4  /  Hebrews,
1:10-11;  9:26-28  /  //  Peter,  3:7-13  /  /  John,  2:18-19  / Jude /
Revelation  esp 10:6, 14:15-16, 21:1-27, 22:13— (D) Apocalypse esp 10:6,
14:15-16,  21:1-27,  22:13 CROSS-REFERENCES For: Discussions relevant to
the  conception  of  the universe as a living organism, as extension and
5g; Prophecy 4d; Soul 4c! (3)

[1173b]
9  Aristotle:  Motion  of Animals,  ch  4  [699b  i27ooa6]  234d-235a  12
Lucretius: Nature of Things, bk v [91-125] 62b-d;
[235-415]
64a-66c; bk vi
[535-607]
87c-88b  16 Kepler: Epitome, bk iv, 847b-848b 18 Augustine: City of God,
bk  xviii,  ch  53  504d-505c;  bk  xx  530a-560a,c  20  Aquinas:  Summa
Theologica,  part hi suppl, QQ 73-74 922b-935a,c; q 77, a 2 945a-946b; q
88,  a  3  1002d-1004b;  q 91 1016a-1025b 23 Hobbes: Leviathan, part hi,
230a;  244b-c  27  Shakespeare:  Tempest, act iv, sc i [146-158] 543b 32
Milton: Christs Nativity
[133-172] 4b-5b
/ Paradise Lost, bk hi
[274-343]
141b-143a;  bk  vii  [139-161]  220a-b;  bk  xi [45-83] 300a301a; bk xii
[537-551] 331a 40 Gibbon: Decline and Fall, 187c-188c 41 Gibbon: Decline
and Fall, 233c

[1174a]
1140  THE GREAT IDEAS I. Augustine. De Genesi ad Litteram Aquinas. Summa
Contra Gentiles, bk ii, ch 32-38; bk iv, ch 96-97 . De Aeternitate Mundi
Galileo. The Sidereal Messenger . Dialogo dei massimi sistemi Descartes.
The  World,  ch  i-ii,  vi-xiv  . The Principles of Philosophy, part ii,
21-22 Hobbes. Concerning Body, part iv, ch 26 Kant. Cosmogony . De Mundi
Sensibilis   {Inaugural   Dissertation)  .  Prolegomena  to  Any  Future
Metaphysic,  par 50-54 W. James. A Pluralistic Universe II. Aristarchus.
On  the  Sizes  and  Distances  ofthe  Sun  and Moon Epicurus. Letter to
Herodotus  .  Letter  to Pythocles Philo Judaeus. On the Eternity of the
World (De Aeternitate Mundi) . On the Creation of the World (De Opificio
Mundi)  Proclus.  The  Elements  of  Theology  Saadia  Gaon. The Boo\ of
Beliefs   and   Opinions,   TREATISE  I  Bernard  Sylvestris.  De  Mundi
Universitate  Maimonides.  The  Guide  for the Perplexed, part i, CH 72;
PART  II,  CH  8-l6,  22-23, 25~3° Bonaventura. Breviloquium, part ii R.
Bacon.  Opus Majus, part iv Nicolas of Cusa. De Docta Ignorantia, bk ii,
ch  4-13  Bruno.  De  Immenso  et  Innumerabihbus  Suarez. Disputationes
Metaphysicae,  xx-xxii,  xxix, xxxi (9, 14) Fontenelle. Conversations on
the Plurality of Worlds Leibnitz. Monadology, par 56-90

[1174b]
ADDITIONAL  READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Bool{s
ofthe Western World, but relevant to the idea and topics with which this
chapter  deals.  These  works are divided into two groups: For the date,
place,  and  other  facts concerning the publication of the works cited,
consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last
chapter  of  The Great Ideas. Voltaire. Micromegas . Candide . "Chain of
Created Beings," "End of World,*' in A Philosophical Dictionary Laplace.
The  System  of the World Schleiermacher. The Christian Faith, par 59 A.
Humboldt.  Cosmos  Whewell. The Plurality of Worlds Clifford. "The First
and  the  Last  Catastrophe,"  in  vol  1,  Lectures  and Essays Stallo.
Concepts  and  Theories  of  Modern  Physics,  ch  13-15  C.  S. Peirce.
Collected  Papers,  vol  vi,  par  185-237  Haeckel.  The  Riddle of the
Universe  Royce. The World and the Individual Duhem. Le systeme du monde
Einstein. Relativity: The Special and the General Theory . Sidelights on
Relativity McTaggart. The Nature of Existence, ch 28-31 G. N. Lewis. The
Anatomy of Science, essay vi Heidegger. Sein und Zeit Jeans. Problems of
Cosmogony  and Stellar Dynamics . Astronomy and Cosmogony . The Universe
Around  Us,  ch  4,  6  Sitter.  Kosmos  Weyl.  The  Open  World, lect i
Eddington.  Stellar  Movements  and  the Structure of the Universe . The
Nature of the Physical World, ch 4, 11 . The Expanding Universe Lovejoy.
The  Great Chain of Being Whitehead. Process and Reality . Adventures of
Ideas,  ch 7-8 Planck. "The Unity of the Physical Universe," in A Survey
of  Physics  .  The  Philosophy  of  Physics,  ch  i  Milne. Kinematical
Relativity  C. S. Lewis. Out of the Silent Planet E. T. Whittaker. Space
and Spirit Hartshorne. The Divine Relativity Von Weizsacker. The History
of Nature

[1175a]
i Ne,

rN

RAPHY OF AW Awl. Py ny ) i

y Ready ase “a.

eaters? Reudings ts

ce give we iy } i eins tetletaret cube uty

e-the rocennine teob mais ca, ¢t the oe a

if  HANS Coy cs 3 “/ APPENI Daigle torapilacion cat tt e Lng Wy iilertst
precipies, The 6 un Um R tie Bihtiayeip>- f

Wn  Niserss  fn  whe  Ards  ons)  Be  ’ ary o Oletowuase vbonties anrive
Diceres, fallnancs are yer aca oe Vine. The cominon Auylw:

beri archer of ginthos TY, .

RAINS 2 ot | post i i 4

ae wuchir’ in fhe Ff how p>

not wader “TV ov V,

en

Lin -Trtes or Wor rs, be the Addition = abbreviated fortes are cinpley !

i geen peeaeset yb both ‘ax -- tates Pepresas on the tlic po

este  haat “¢' wernt tacad pution ae disregieds yecin! ome eee Ye he Bec
ee Works are | a te rineiiss aod No olen Seats

P  words  ab  » sabe Leiner tin! oD oii thle chine oer. sa i SOP KRIS, >
ography as {Varicus Forces oc Mio and Their Pelanors be ex: :

»  De aticktnct ode Lhe thai ries af tes dnl) ocie, jérhke o pans g Me 6
nz amuit Readings, the latver is plecad » 0 kate it, Stiaw's Ura: OF rey
a) S Dalusnras, wide 2 Lora maande by the brtketed Ute, sncr

5 marshes les oles ta th Dable ty po, transla: ion.

Gtigius) langisge. | $0) lu A, wer tiimewNn com) tire |

LTAZ

[1175b]
yh  eS  sR 4. ther Viepang Cle viphy he pa, aud Me), arial tart Pee Cote
bef

cae  Readings  eernnions dali | when vlan dul) orhé oo the Hav rage aps,
Fevcal Ot Maer hypravs ta the!

if Sie Lagmeres an the Vewnncg 2 wrt of

che Poll wrestis: af which ee “pte at ditier tenn Thess, a

[1176a]
a  :  el j 8 % { os ¢ oy eG: U P is re ‘ ¥K ‘ e ph MJ 2 . A eg Oh aN =.)
(e ~ Ur

oy  ee  Fone  dy ak ee ; Fh wy S 3 4 ey tens | pars bay el oh: TN Tar? .
pucks ee

“i < coer hae Sea ens eS eae a Re hada Fr ns

mW

ealig eet

Auoustim,  De  Genes Soo hone i Aq usas, Summa Contra reniiles, * en LY,
ct  96-97  *8HS  -—~.  De  Aclermiiase  Mundi  “ai Gauivao. The Sidereal
Neaiges ~~, Dialogo dey matsp sitery Descartes, Tae World, et ct, Via be
~—-—. The Peiyaples of Philosophy, tax 2. 24Howars. Concermng Body, ®anr
iy.  tu  26°  Kant,  to  mopoay  —.  Dr Mundi Sensfbikis. (riergueat ——.
Prolepomend ta Any Piture

se-g4 Pitts alt W. Jasss. 4 Pluradiou Universe |

a ty ada

ne cto ns

4

[1176b]
[página ilustrada]

[1177a]
Appendix  I  BIBLIOGRAPHY  OF  ADDITIONAL  READINGS  The Bibliography of
Additional  Readings  provides  information  concerning  the authors and
works cited in the Additional Readings. In addition to the full name and
dates  of  each  author, the Bibliography gives as much of the following
information  as  is  appropriate to each work cited: the full title (and
subtitle,  if  any);  the name of the editor or translator, if these are
identified  in  the recommended edition; the place of publication of the
edition  or  translation  recommended; the name of the publisher and the
date  of  publication;  the original title; the date and, in some cases,
the  place  of composition or publication. Since the Additional Readings
are  102  separate lists of authors and works, and the Bibliographv is a
single  compilation  of  the titles which comprise these 102 lists, each
was   constructed  according  to  different  principles.  The  following
statement  of  these  principles serves to guide the reader in using the
Bibliography  in relation to the Additional Readings. Authors' Names: In
the  Additional  Readings,  surnames  are used, with initials added only
where  necessary  to  distinguish identical surnames; for example, J. H.
Newman.  In a few exceptional cases, full names are used because this is
the  more  recognizable form; for example, Leonardo da Vinci. The common
Anglicized spelling is employed for reference to foreign names. in which
the  names appear in the Additional Readings. Initials do not affect the
order;  for example, J. H. Newman appears in the Bibliography as Newman,
John  Henry.  When  full  names are used in the Additional Readings, the
first  name  determines  the  alphabetical location of the author in the
Bibliography;  for  example,  Leonardo da Vinci is listed under "L," not
under  "D"  or  "V."  Titles  of Works: In the Additional Readings, full
titles  are generally used. In some cases abbreviated forms are employed
to avoid undue length. All subtitles are omitted. is given as it appears
on  the  title  page  of  the edition cited. zation of titles disregards
initial English articles (a, an, and the), but not prepositions (of, on,
etc.).  for  example, Aucassin and Nicolette appears in the Bibliography
between  Athanasius  and  Augustine.  those  of the full title. In these
cases,  the short title precedes the full title in the Bibliography, and
is  placed  in brackets; for example, Faraday's Various Forces of Matter
appears  in  the  Bibliography as [Various Forces of Matter] A Course of
Six Lectures on the Various Forces of Matter and Their Relations to Each
Other.  Readings  cites only one. If the opening words of the full title
differ from those of the title in the Additional Readings, the latter is
placed  in brackets and precedes the full title in the Bibliography; for
example,  Shaw's Crude Criminology appears in the Bibliography as [Crude
Criminology]  Doctors' Delusions, Crude Criminology, and Sham Education.
The  alphabetization is determined by the bracketed title, since this is
the  title  which appears in the Additional Readings. Translations : The
manner  of  citing titles in the Additional Readings indicates whether a
foreign  work  is  available  in  English translation. If no translation
exists  or  is  available,  the  title  is  given  only  in its original
language.  If,  however, the work has been translated, the English title
is  always  used,  sometimes  in  conjunction  with its original foreign
title. When two 1143

[1177b]

[1178a]
lection  in  which  it  is published. of the Christian Church. Ed. by P.
Schaff. First Series, 8 vols. last entry for that author. find the pages
cited.  of  the  work  cited.  precisely  as  they  appear  in the works
themselves.

[1178b]
The title of an individual essay or paper, or of a single lyric poem, is
sometimes  cited  A  work  listed  in  the  Additional  Readings  may be
available  only  in  a  collection  or  set  of  volumes  with  a single
collective  title.  The collective title and the number of the volume in
which  the  cited  work  appears  are  included  in  the bibliographical
information;  for  example,  what is cited in the Additional Readings as
"Augustine.  On the Trinity" is represented in collective title of a set
of volumes; i.e., A Select Library of the Nicene and Post-Nicene Fathers
When  the  full  title  of a collection, and bibliographical information
about it, is given as When author's or editor's divisions are used, they
are  usually applicable to all standard tions, it sometimes happens that
the   translator   has  made  his  own  divisions  of  the  work.  Where
Bibliography.  The  author's  or translator's divisions are given in the
same manner as similar Sometimes letters or numbers, without part names,
signify  subordinate divisions of the author's work; for example, Hegel.
The  Phenomenology  of  Mind, iv, b (3). These are given In a few cases,
the  recommended  part  of  an  author's work is titled. Such titles are
placed  in  parentheses after the title of the work itself; for example,
Peguy. Basic Verities (Freedom). 1144

[1179a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY Chronological Order: In the Additional Readings, the titles
are  listed  in  a  chronological  order;  or,  more precisely, they are
divided into two groups, each in chronological order. The first of these
consists  of  works written by the authors represented in Great Boo\s of
the Western World, but not published in this set; the second consists of
works  by other authors. The order is determined in the same way4n--boTh
groups—by  the date of an author's work, not by his birth or death date.
For  each  title  listed  in the Additional Readings, the determining or
order date is given in the Bibliography. For all contemporary works, and
works  written  in  English  which  appear in only one edition, the date
which  follows the place of publication and the name of the publisher is
the  order date. For all translations, the order date is the date of the
original  writing  or  publication.  This is given in parentheses, along
with  information  about  the original title and its place of writing or
publication.  Similarly,  for works which have been recently republished
or  which  exist  in several editions, the order date is the date of the
original  publication,  or perhaps the date of composition. This date is
given  in  parentheses. If it is the date of composition, it is given by
itself.  If it is the date of a first edition or an original publication
of  the  work,  it is given with other bibliographical information. When
parts  of  collections—poems,  essays, plays—are individually cited, the
order is determined by the date, in parentheses, of the individual work,
not  by  the  publication  date  of the collection. When the entry for a
particular  title in the Bibliography includes two dates, the order date
is always the one in the parentheses at the end of the entry. A question
mark  in  conjunction with a date signifies that it cannot be determined
with certainty; the letter c. (for circa, or "about") signifies that the
date  is  regarded as an approximation. In a great many cases, more than
one  work  is  cited  for a particular author, and often the publication
date,  or  even the date of composition, is difficult to ascertain. This
is   especially   true   of   works  written  in  antiquity.  Hence  the
chronological   principle   had   to   be  applied  with  the  following
qualifications:  i. When two or more works by the same author are cited,
they  are  grouped  together  under  his  name  in  strict chronological
sequence.  The  chronological  position  of  such  a  group of titles is
determined by the date of the most recent title in the group. Hence, the
whole  series  of individual titles in a list of Additional Readings may
not be in strict chronological sequence. 2. If the work was published in
the  author's  lifetime,  the  date  used (if available) was that of its
first publication. In the case of posthumously published works, the date
of  composition  was  used.  3.  In  the  case  of  works  for  which no
publication  or composition date was available, the date of the author's
death  was usually substituted; or, as indicating the period in which he
flourished,  the  median  date  of  the author's life. 4. In the case of
lectures  later  compiled  and published as books, the date the lectures
were  first  delivered  was  used. 5. In the case of a work published in
several  volumes  over  a  period  of years, the publication date of the
first volume was used. 6. In the case of collections of papers or essays
published  during  the  author's lifetime and within a short time of the
first scattered publication of the individual papers or essays, the date
used was the publication date of the collection. But when the collection
was  published  posthumously,  or  a long time elapsed between the first
scattered  publication and the publication of the collection, the median
date  of  original publication dates was used. Whenever one set of dates
could  not  be  definitely  determined,  the  other  was  used.  7. If a
collection,  published posthumously, represented the bulk of an author's
writing,  a  date  in the middle of his productive period was chosen. 8.
When  a  single  essay  from  a  collection  was  cited, the date of the
original publication of that essay was used, not the publication date of
the collection. 1145

[1179b]

[1180a]
ascertainable,  the earlier was used. period when the author flourished.
Abailard,  Peter  (1  079-1  142)  Dialectica.  In Ouvrages inedits pour
servir  a  Vhistoire  de la philosophic scolastique en France. Ed. by V.
Cousin.  Paris:  Imprimerie Royale, 1836 (before 1125). —Ethics. Ed. and
trans,  by  J.  R. McCallum. Oxford: Blackwell, 1935 (Scito Teipsum, seu
Ethica,  before  11 40). — The Glosses of Peter Abailard on Porphyry. In
Selections from Medieval Philosophers. Ed. and trans, by Richard McKeon.
2  vols.  New  York: Scribner's, 1 929-1 930 {Petri Abaelardi Glossae in
Porphyrium).  —Introductio  ad Theologiam. Ed. by V. Cousin. Paris, 1859
(1136-1140).  — The Letters of Abelard andHeloise. Trans, by C. K. Scott
Moncrieff. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1929 (c. 1 1 30-1 1 40). — Sic et Non.
In  Petri  Abaelardi,  Opera  Omnia.  Ed. by J. P. Migne. Paris: Gamier,
1885.  Abercrombie,  Lascelles (1 881-1938) An Essay Towards a Theory of
Art.  London: M. Seeker, 1922. — The Theory of Poetry. New York: Harcourt
Brace,  1926  (originally  pub.  as The Theory of Poetry and The Idea of
Great Poetry, London, 1924; 1925). Abetti, Giorgio (1882- ) The Sun: Its
Phenomena  and  Physical  Features.  Trans,  by  A.  Zimmermann  and  F.
Borghouts.  New York: Van Nostrand, 1938 (// sole, Milan, i936 )- Acton,
John  Emerich  Edward Dalberg, Lord ( 1 834-1 902) Essays on Freedom and
Power.  Boston:  Beacon Press, 1948 (The History of Freedom in Antiquity
and  The  History  of  Freedom  in Christianity, both Bridgnorth, 1877).
Adams,  Brooks (1 848-1 927) The Law of Civilization and Decay: An Essay
on History. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1943 (London, 1895).

[1180b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS 9. In the case of single plays, the date used was that
of  original  publication  or first performance, whichever could be more
definitely ascertained. If both were equally 10. The publication date of
a  single  lyric  poem  was  used  if  it appeared separately before its
appearance  in  a  collection.  Otherwise the date of the collection was
used.  Because  the  foregoing  factors  affected the application of the
chronological principle, the authors are frequently not listed in strict
chronological  order  in  the  Additional Readings. However, the precise
chronological  position  of  each  author  can be determined by his life
dates,  which appear in the Bibliography. A question mark in conjunction
with   these  dates  signifies  that  they  cannot  be  determined  with
certainty;  the  letter  c.  signifies  that  a  date  is regarded as an
approximation;  and fl. (for_/?oruit) indicates that a date given is the
—  The  Theory of Social Revolutions. New York: Macmillan, 191 3. Adams,
Henry  Brooks (1838— 191 8) The Degradation of the Democratic Dogma. Ed.
by  B.  Adams.  New  York:  Macmillan, 1920 (1894-1910). — The Education
of Henry  Adams.  Modern  Library,  New  York: Random House, 1941 (1906).
—Mont-Saint-Michel  and  Chartres.  New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1927
(Washington,   1904).   Adams,  John  (1735—  1826)  A  Defense  of  the
Constitutions  of  Government  of the United States of America. In Vols,
iv-vi, Worlds of John Adams. Ed. by C. F. Adams. 10 vols. Boston: Little,
Brown & Co., 1 850-1 856 (1787). Adler, Mortimer Jerome (1902— ) Art and
Prudence,  a  Study in Practical Philosophy. New York: Longmans, Green &
Co.,  1937.  —Dialectic. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1927. —A Dialectic of
Morals;  Towards  the  Foundations  of Political Philosophy. Notre Dame,
Ind.:  The  Review  of Politics, University of Notre Dame, 1941. —How to
Thin\  About  War and Peace. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1944. —Problems
for  Thomists:  The  Problem  of  Species. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1940.
Adrian,  Edgar  D.  (1889-  )  The  Basis  of Sensation. New York: W. W.
Norton,  1928.  Aesop's  Fables. Trans, by V. S. Vernon Jones. New York:
Garden  City  Publishing  Co., 1939. Agard, Walter Raymond (1894- ) What
Democracy  Meant  to  the Greeks. Chapel Hill, N. C: University of North
Carolina  Press, 1942. Airy, Sir George Biddell (1801-1892) Gravitation.
An  Elementary  Explanation  of the Principal Perturbations in the Solar
System.  London: Macmillan, 1884 (London, 1834). Alain, pseud, for Emile
Chartier^(i868-t95i)  Systeme  des  beaux-arts.  Paris:  Editions  de la
Nouvelle Revue Francaise, 1920. 1146

[1181a]
Alberti,  Leone  Battista (i 404-1 472) Delia Famiglia. Milan: Instituto
Editoriale  Italians  1  910?  (1443).  Albertus Magnus (1193/1206-1280)
(before  1256). '^--— —De Natura et Origine Animae. Ibid, (before 1256).
—De  Sensu  et Sensato. Ibid, (before 1256). — [On the Intellect and the
Intelligible]  Treatises  De Memoria et Reminiscentia. In Vol. ix, Opera
on  the  Intellect  and  the  Intelligible.  In Selections from Medieval
Philosophers.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  Richard  McKeon.  2 vols. New York:
Scribner's,  1 929-1 930 (before 1256). —On Union with God. Trans, by "a
Benedictine  of  Princethorpe  Priory." London: R. & T. Washbourne, 1912
{De  Adhaerendo  Deo,  c.  1278— 1280). —Summa Theologiae. In Vol. xxxi,
Opera  (c. 1274). note: B. Alberti Magni Opera Omnia. Ed. by A. Borgnet.
38  vols.  Paris:  Vives, 1 890-1 899. Albo, Joseph (1380 ?-i 444) Sefer
ha-IJfarim (The Boo{ of Principles). Ed. and trans, by I. Husik. 4 vols.
Philadelphia:  Jewish  Publication  Society  of America, 1929 (f- M2 5)-
Alcuin  (Flaccus  Albinus)  (c.  735-804)  The  Rhetoric  of  Alcuin and
Charlemagne. Ed. and trans, by W. S. Howell. Princeton University Press,
1  94  1  (Disputatio de Rhetorica et de Virtutibus, 794). Aleman, Mateo
(1547-c.  161  4) The Rogue; or, The Life of Guzman de Alfarache. Trans,
by  J.  Mabbe.  4  vols.  New  York:  A.  A. Knopf, 1924 (Madrid, 1599).
Alexander, Franz (1891-1964) The Psychoanalysis ofthe Total Personality.
Washington,  D.  C: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing Co., 1935 (Die
Psychoanalyse   der  Gesamtpersonlichheit.  Neun  Vorlesungen  uber  die
Anwendung  von  Freuds Ichtheorie auf die Neurosenlehre, Leipsic, 1927).
Alexander,  Samuel (1 859-1 938) Space, Time, and Deity. 2 vols. London:
Macmillan, 1927 (London, 1920). Al-Ghazzali (1058—iiii)
[The
Destruction  of  Philosophy]  Tahafot  alFaldsifat.  Ed.  by M. Bouyges.
Beyrouth: Imprimerie Catholique, 1927. Also Destructio Philosophorum. In
Opera  Omnia  of  Averroes.  Venice, 1527 (c. 1095). Alibert, Jean Louis
Marie  (c.  1766—  1837) Physiologie des passions; ou, Nouvelle doctrine
des  sentiments moraux. 2 vols. Paris: Bechet jeune, 1825. Allen, Arthur
Henry  Burlton (1872— ) Pleasure and Instinct; A Study in the Psychology
of Human Action. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1930. 1147

[1181b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Appell  Allen,  Sir  Carleton Kemp (1 887-1966) Law in the
Maying.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press, 1939 (Oxford, 1927). Allen, Edgar et
al.  (1  892-1  943)  Sex  and  Internal  Secretions;  a Survey of Recent
Research.  Baltimore, Md.: Williams & Wilkins, 1932. Althusius, Johannes
(1557-1638) Politica Methodice Digesta Atque Exemplis Sacris et Profanis
Illustrata.  Ed.  by  C. J. Friedrich. 2 vols. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University  Press,  1932  (Herborn,  1603). Alverdes, Friedrich (1889- )
Social  Life  in  the  Animal  World.  Trans, by K. C. Creasy. New York:
Harcourt  Brace,  1927 (Tiersoziologie, Leipsic, 1925). Amis and Amilon.
Ed.  by  MacEdward  Leach.  New York: Oxford University Press, 1937 (nth
century).  Ampere,  Andre Marie (1775-1836) Essai sur la philosophic des
sciences,  ou  Exposition  analytique  d'une classification naturelle de
toutes  les  connaissances  humaines.  2  vols.  Paris:  Bachelier, 1856
(Paris,  1  834-1 843). Andrade, Edward Neville da Costa (1887-1971) The
Atom  and  Its  Energy. London: G. Bell & Sons, 1948. Andre le Chapelain
(b.  c.  n 70) The Art of Courtly Love. Trans, by J. J. Parry. New York:
Columbia  University  Press,  1941  (Liber  de Arte Honeste Amandi et de
Reprobatione  Inhonesti  Amoris,  early  13th century). Andreyev, Leonid
Nikolaevich  (1871-1919)  Lazarus.  Trans,  by  A.  Yarmolinsky. Boston:
Stratford  Co.,  1918  (Stuttgart, 1906). — The Seven Who Were Hanged. A
Story. Trans, by H. Berstein. New York: Illustrated Editions Co., 1 94 1
(Berlin,  1908).  Anselm  of  Canterbury,  Saint (c. 1033-1109) Cur Deus
Homo?  See  Proslogium  (c.  1098).  —De Conceptu Virginali et Originali
Peccato.  In  Vol.  clviii, Patrologia Latina (1099 or 1100). —De Libero
Arbitrio.   Ibid.   (1   063-1   078).   —De  Potestate  et  Impotentia;
Possibilitate  et  Impossibilitate;  Necessitate et Libertate. Ein neues
unvollendetes  Wer\  des  Heiligen  Anselm  von Canterbury. Ed. by F. S.
Schmitt.  Munster:  Aschendorff",  1936  (1109?). —Dialogue on Truth. In
Selections from Medieval Philosophers. Ed. and trans, by Richard McKeon.
2 vols. New York: Scribner's, 1 929-1 930 (Dialogus de Veritate, 1 063-1
078).   —Monologium.   See   Proslogium   (1  063-1  078).  —Proslogium;
Monologium;  an  Appendix,  In  Behalf of the Fool, by Gaunilon; and Cur
Deus  Homo.  Ed. and trans, by S. M. Deane. Chicago: Open Court, 1903 (1
063-1   078).   Appell,  Paul  Emile  (1855-1930)  TraitS  de  mecanique
rationnelle. 5 vols. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1 893-1 926.

[1182a]
Appian  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Appian  of Alexandria (c. 95-r. 165 a.d.) The
Civil  Wars.  Vols, m-iv, Appian 's Roman History. Trans, by H. White. 4
vols.  New  York: Macmillan, 1913. Aquinas, Saint Thomas (c. 1225— 1274)
Compendium  of  Theology.  Trans,  by C. Vollert. St. Louis, Mo.: Herder
Book  Co., 1949 {Compendium Theologiae, 1273). — Concerning the Teacher.
In  M.  H.  Mayer,  The  Philosophy  of  Teaching of St. Thomas Aquinas.
Milwaukee,  Wis.:  Bruce Publishing Co., 1929 {Quaestiones Disputatae de
Veritate,   q   xi,  12561259).  —  Contra  Impugnantcs  Dei  Cultum  et
Religionem.  In  Vol. iv, Opuscula (1257). — Contra Pestiferam Doctrinam
Retrahentium   Homines   a   Religionis   Ingressu.  Ibid.  (1270).  —De
Aeternitate  Mundi  Contra  Murmurantes.  In  Vol.  1, ibid. (1270). —De
Fallaciis.  In  Vol.  iv,  ibid.  (1244).  —De  Mixtione  Elementorum ad
Magistrum  Philippe.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid. (1273). —De Natura Materiae et
Dimensionibus   Interminalis.   In   Vol.  v,  ibid.  —De  Natura  Verbi
Intellectus.  Ibid. —De Perfectione Vitae Spiritualis. In Vol. iv, ibid.
(1269).   —De   Principiis   Naturae.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid.  (1255).  —De
Propositionibus   Modalibus.   In   Vol.   iv,  ibid.  (1244-1245).  —De
Substantiis  Separatis.  In  Vol. 1, ibid. (1272I2 73)- . — On Being and
Essence.  Ed.  and trans, by A. Maurer. Toronto: Pontifical Institute of
Mediaeval  Studies,  1948  (DeEnteet Essentia, 1254-1256). —On Spiritual
Creatures.  Trans,  by  M.C.  Fitzpatrick and J. J. Wellmuth. Milwaukee,
Wis.:  Marquette  University  Press, 1949 (De Spiritualibus Creaturis, 1
266-1  269).  —On  the  Governance  of  Rulers.  Trans, by G. P. Phelan.
Toronto:  St.  Michael's  College,  1949 (De Regimine Principum, 1 265-1
266).  — On the Power of God. Trans, by Fathers of the English Dominican
Province.   3  vols.  London:  Burns,  Oates,  &  Washbourne,  1932—1934
(Quaestiones  Disputatae de Potentia Dei, 1265— 1267). — [On the Trinity
of Boethius] 'The Trinity' and 'The Unicity of the Intellect.' Trans, by
Sister  R.  E.  Brennan. London: Herder Book Co., 1946 (Expo sitio Super
Librum Boethii de Trinitate, 1257— 1258). — Quaestiones Disputatae
[.
.  .  de  Veritate (12561259) . . . de Malo (1 268-1 269) . . . de Anima
(1269-  1  270)  .  .  .  de  Unione Verbi Incarnati (12681272) . . . de
Virtutibus  Cardinalibus  (1269-  1272)  .  . . de Virtutibus in Communi
(1269-1272) . . . de Caritate (1 269-1 272) . . . de Spc (1 269-1 272)].
Ed.  by  P.  Mandonnet.  3 vols. Paris: Lethielleux, 1925. —Summa Contra
Gentiles.  Trans,  by Fathers ot the English Dominican Province. 5 vols.
New York:

[1182b]
Benziger  Bros.,  1924-1929  (1258-1264).  —Summa  Theologica. Trans, by
Fathers  of  the English Dominican P/ovince. 22 vols. New York: Benziger
Bros.,  1911-1920  (1265-1272). —Super Boethium de Hebdomadibus. In Vol.
1,  Opuscula  (1258). —[Two Precepts of Charity] The Commandments of God;
Conferences  on  the  Two  Precepts of Charity and the Ten Commandments.
London: Burns, Oates, & Washbourne, 1937 (De Duobus Praeceptis Caritatis
et  Decern  Legis Praeceptis, 1273). — The Unicity of the Intellect. See
On  the Trinity (c. 1270). note: S. Thomae Aquinatis Opuscula Omnia. Ed.
by  P. Mandonnet. 5 vols. Paris: Lethielleux, 1927. Ariosto, Ludovico (1
474-1  533)  Orlando Furioso. Trans, by W. S. Rose. 2 vols. New York: G.
Bell  & Sons, 1892 (Ferrara, 1516). Aristarchus (fl. c. 280 B.C.) On the
Sizes  and  Distances  of  the  Sun  and  Moon.  In  Sir  Thomas  Heath,
Aristarchus  of  Samos: A History of Gree\ Astronomy. Oxford : Clarendon
Press,  1913. Arnauld, Antoine (1612-1694) Logic or the Art of Thinking:
Being  the  Port Royal Logic. Ed. and trans, by T. S. Baynes. London: W.
Blackwood,  1850  (La  logique  ou  Vart  de penser; contenant outre les
regies  communes^  plusieurs  observations  nouvelles, propres ci former
lejugement,  Paris,  1662). Arnauld, Antoine and Lancelot, Claude (1615—
1695)  A  General  and Rational Grammar Containing the Principles of the
Art of Speaking. London, 1753 (Grammaire generale et raisonnee contenant
les   fondemens  de  Vart  de  parler,  Paris,  1660).  Arnold,  Matthew
(1822-1888)  Culture  and  Anarchy;  an  Essay  in  Political and Social
Criticism. Ed. by J. D. Wilson. 5 vols. Cambridge University Press, 1932
(London,  1869).  —Empedocles  on  Etna. In The Poems of Matthew Arnold,
1840-1867.  World's  Classics,  New  York: Oxford University Press, 1940
(London, 1852). — Essays in Criticism (First and Second Series). 2 vols.
London:  Macmillan,  1935—  1937  (London,  1865; 1888). —Literature and
Dogma;  an  Essay  Towards a Better Apprehension of the Bible. New York:
Macmillan,  1903 (London, 1873). —Mixed Essays, Irish Essays and Others.
New  York:  Macmillan,  1904  (London,  1879).  Arrhenius, Svante August
(1859-1927) The Destinies of the Stars. Trans, by J. E. Fries. New York:
Putnam's,  1918 (Stockholm, 1915). Asch, Sholem (1880-1957) The Apostle.
Trans, by M. Samuel. New York: Putnam's, 1943.

[1183a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  —  The  Nazarene. Trans, by M. Samuel. New York: Putnam's,
1939.  Athanasius, Saint {c. 293-373) Select Treatises of St. Athanasius
in  Controversy  with  the  Arians.  Trans,  by  J.  H.  Newman. London:
Longmans,  Green  &  Co., 1903 {c. 34^-359). Aucassin and Nicolette, and
other Medieval Romances and Legends. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1910 (12th century). Augustine, Aurelius, Saint, Bishop of Hippo
(354-43°)  Admonition  and  Grace.  Trans,  by J. C. Murray. In Vol. iv,
Fathers  (De  Correptione  et Gratia, 42 7)- —Against Two Letters of the
Pelagians.  In Vol. xv, Works {Contra Duas Epistolas Pelagianorum. 420).
—Answer  to  Skeptics.  Trans,  by  D.  J.  Kavanagh. In Vol. 1, Fathers
{Contra  Academicos,  386).  —Concerning  the Nature of Good. In Vol. 1,
Basic  Writings  {De Natura Boni, Contra Manichaeos, 404?). — Concerning
the  Teacher. Ibid. {De Magistro, 389). —De Fide et Symbolo. In Vol. xl,
Patrologia  Latina  (393)-  —De  Genesi  ad  Litteram Libri XII. In Vol.
xxxiv,  ibid.  (401  ?-4i5 ? )- —De Vera Religione. Ibid. (390). —Divine
Providence  and  the  Problem of Evil. Trans. by R. PRussell. In Vol. 1,
Fathers  {De Ordine, 386). — The Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love. In
Vol.  1, Basic Writings {Enchiridion ad Laurentium. seu de Fide, Spe, et
Caritate  Liber, 421). — The Happy Life. Trans, by L. Schopp. In Vol. 1,
Fathers  {De Beata Vita, 386). — The Harmony of the Gospels. In Vol. vi,
Select Library {De Consensu Evangelistarum, 400). — The Magnitude of the
Soul.  Trans,  by  I.  J.  McMahon.  In  Vol. 11, Fathers {De Quantitate
Animae,   388).   —Of   Continence.  In  Vol.  in.  Select  Library  {De
Continentia,  395). —Of Marriage and Concupiscence. In Vol. v, ibid. {De
Nuptiis et Concupiscentia, 419-420). — Of the Work of Monks. In Vol. in,
ibid.  {De Opere Monachorum, 401 ?). —On Baptism, Against the Donatists.
In  Vol.  iv, ibid. {De Baptismo, Contra Donatistas, 400). — On Faith in
Things  Unseen. Trans, by R. J. Defferari and M. F. McDonald. In Vol. n,
Fathers {De Fide Rerum Quae Non Videntur, 400). —On Free Will. Trans, by
C.  M. Sparrow. Charlottesville, Va.: University of Virginia Press, 1947
{De  Libero  Arbitrio,  395).  —On Grace and Free Will. In Vol. 1, Basic
Writings  {De  Gratia et Libero Arbitrio, 426?). —On Music. Trans, by R.
C.  Taliaferro.  In  Vol.  n,  Fathers  {De Musica, 386). —On Nature and
Grace.  In Vol. 1, Basic Writings {De Natura et Gratia, Contra Pelagium,
415).

[1183b]
AVENARIUS  Select —On the Good of Marriage. In Vol. in, Library {De Bono
Conjugali,  400).  —On the Good of Widowhood. Ibid. {De Bono Viduitatis,
414?).  —On  the  Grace  of Christ and on Original Sin. In Vol. 1, Basic
Writings {De Gratia Christi et Peccato Originali, Contra Pelagium, 418).
—On the Immortality of the Soul. Ibid. {De Im~ mortalitate Animae, 387).
—On  the  Merits  and  Remissions of Sins. In Vol. v, Select Library {De
Peccatorum  Mentis  et  Remissione, et De Baptismo Parvulorum, 412). —On
the Morals of the Catholic Church. In Vol. 1, Basic Writings {De Moribus
Ecclesiae Catholicae, 368). — On the Predestination of the Saints. Ibid.
{De  Praedestinatione  Sanctorum,  428?).  — On the Profit of Believing.
Ibid.  {De Utilitate Credendi, 391-392). — On the Spirit and the Letter.
Ibid.  {De Spiritu et Littera, 412). —On the Trinity. In Vol. in, Select
Library  {De  Trinitate,  400-416). —Reply to Faustus. In Vol. iv, ibid.
{Contra  Faustum  Manichaeum,  400—404).  —  The  Soliloquies  of  Saint
Augustine.  In  Vol. 1, Basic Writings {Soliloquia, 387). — The Soul and
Its Origin. Trans, by A. C. Pegis. In Vol. in, Fathers {De Anima et Eius
Origine,  419).  note:  Basic  Writings of Saint Augustine. Ed. by W. J.
Oates. 2 vols. New York: Random House, 1948. — [Fathers] Writings of St.
Augustine,  in  The  Fathers  of the Church. Ed. by L. Schopp. New York:
Cima,  1947.  —A  Select Library of the Nicene and PostNicene Fathers of
the  Christian  Church. Ed. by P. SchafT. First Series, 8 vols. Buffalo,
N.  Y.:  Christian  Literature  Co.,  1886-1888.  —  Works  of  Aurelius
Augustine.  Ed.  by  M.  Dods,  trans, by P. Holmes and R. E. Wallis. 15
vols. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1876. Austen, Jane (1775-1817) Pride and
Prejudice.  Garden  City,  N.  Y.: Doubleday Doran, 1945 (London, 1813).
Austin,  John  (1790-1859) Lectures on Jurisprudence; or, The Philosophy
of  Positive  Law.  Ed. by R. Campbell. 2 vols. London: J. Murray, 191 1
(London,  1832).  —  The  Province  of Jurisprudence  Determined. 3 vols.
London:  J.  Murray, 1861-1863 (London, 1832). Avebury, Sir John Lubbock
(1834-19  13)  The  Pleasures  of Life. 2 vols. London: Macmillan, 1887.
Avenarius,  Richard  (1843—1896)  Kritik der reinen Erfahrung. Ed. by J.
Petzold. 2 vols. Leipsic: R. Reisland, 1907 (Leipsic, 1 888-1 890).

[1184a]
AVERROES THE GREAT IDEAS AvERROES (i 126— I I98)
[The Destruction of the "Destruction"] Tahdfot
at-Tahdfot.  Ed.  by  M. Bouyges. Beyrouth: Imprimerie Catholique, 1930.
Also  Destructio Destructionum. In Opera Omnia of Averroes. Venice, 1527
(c.  1 1 80). Avicenna (c. 980-1037) A Treatise on the Canon of Medicine
of  Avicenna,  Incorporating a Translation of the First BookTrans, by O.
C.  Gruner.  London:  Luzac  &  Co  ,  1930. Ayer, Alfred Jules (1910- )
Thinking  and  Meaning.  London:  H.  K.  Lewis, 1947. B Babbitt, Irving
(1865-1933)  The New Laokpon; an Essay on the Confusion of the Arts. New
York:  Houghton  Mifflin  Co., 1910. Bachofen, Johann Jakob (18 15-1887)
Das Mutterrecht. Eine Untersuchung iiber die Gynahpkratie der alien Welt
nach  ihrer  religiosen  und  rechtlichen Natur. Basle: B. Schwabe, 1897
(Stuttgart,   1861).  Bacon,  Francis  (Lord  Verulam)  (1561-1626)  The
Essayes; or Counsels Civill and Morall. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P.  Dutton,  1932  (London, 1625). — The Maxims of the Law. In Vol. xiv,
The  Worlds  of Francis Bacon. Ed. by J. Spedding, R. L. Ellis and D. D.
Heath.  15 vols. Boston: Brown & Taggard, 1 86 1 (London, 1630). —Of the
Colours  of  Good  and  Evil.  In Vol. I, ibid. (first pub. with Essays,
London, 1597). —The Wisdom of the Ancients. Ibid. (De Sapientia Veterum,
London, 1609). Bacon, Roger (c. 12 14-1294) On the Errors of Physicians.
In  Essays  on  the  History  of  Medicine.  Ed.  by C. Singer and H. E.
Sigerist, trans, by E. T. Withington. New York: Oxford University Press,
1924  (De Erroribus Medicorum , 1250?- 1260?). —Opus Majus. Trans, by R.
B.  Burke.  2 vols. Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1928
(1268).  Bagehot,  Walter  (1  826-1  877) The English Constitution. New
York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1933  (London,  1867).  —Physics  and
Politics;  or  Thoughts  on the Application of the Principle of "Natural
Selection'   and  "Inheritance"  to  Political  Society.  New  York:  D.
Appleton,  1906  (1867-1869).  —  The  Postulates  of  English Political
Economy.  New  York:  Putnam's,  1894  (London,  1876).  Bain, Alexander
(1818-1903) Education as a Science. New York: D. Appleton, 1897 (London,
1879). — The Emotions and the Will. New York: D. Appleton, 1888 (London,
1859).

[1184b]
—Mind and Body: The Theories of Their Relation. London: K. Paul, Trench,
Triibner,  1910 (London, 1872). —The Senses and the Intellect. New York:
D.  Appleton,  1894  (London, 1855). Bakunin, Mikhail Aleksandrovich (18
14-1876)   God   and  the  State.  New  York:  Mother  Earth  Publishing
Association,  1916? (Dieu et VEtat, 1871-1872). Balfour, Arthur James (1
848-1 930) Essays Speculative and Political. London: Hodder & Stoughton,
1920. — The Foundations of Belief; Being Notes Introductory to the Study
of Theology. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1902 (London, 1895). Ball,
Sir  Robert  Stawell  (1840-1913)  A  Treatise  on the Theory of Screws.
Cambridge  University  Press. 1900 (1887). Balzac, Honore de (1799-1850)
At  the  Sign of the Cat and Racket. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1930 (Gloire et malheur, Paris, 1830). —Cousin Bette. Trans, by
K.  P.  Wormeley.  Boston:  Little, Brown & Co., 1928 (La cousine Bette,
Paris,  1846).  —Eugenie  Grandet.  Ed.  by  G. Saintsbury, trans, by E.
Marriage.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1907 (Paris,
1834).  —[Gobseck]  Father Goriot and M. Gobsec\. Trans. by E. Marriage.
Philadelphia:  Gebbie Publishing Co., 1900 (Les dangers de Vinconduite ,
Paris,  1830).  —Old  Goriot. Trans, by E. Marriage. Everyman's Library,
New  York:  E. P. Dutton, 1935 (Le pere Goriot, Paris, 1835). —A Passion
in the Desert. In Short Stories by Honore de Balzac. Modern Library, New
York: Random House, 1920 (1830). — The Petty Annoyances of Married Life.
Trans,  by  O.  \V. Wight and F. B. Goodrich. New York: Rudd & Carleton,
1861  (Petites  miseres  de  la  vie  conjugale,  Paris,  1845).  —  The
Physiology  of  Marriage.  New  York:  Liveright,  1932  (Physiologie du
marriage; ou, Meditations de philosophic eclectique sur le bonheur et le
malheur  conjugal,  Paris, 1829). —The Rise and Fall of Cesar Birotteau.
Trans,  by E. Marriage. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1925
(Grandeur  et  decadence  de  Cesar  Birotteau, Paris, 1837). — The Wild
Ass's  Sf^in. Trans, by E. Marriage. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1933  (La  peau  de  chagrin,  Paris,  1831).  Barclay,  Robert
(1648-1690)  An  Apology  for  the  True  Christian  Divinity,  Being an
Explanation  and  Vindication  of  the  Principles  and Doctrines of the
People   Called   Quakers.   Philadelphia:   Friends   Book-Store,  1869
(Amsterdam,  1676).  Barclay,  William  (1546-1608)  De  Regno et Regali
Potestate, Adversus Buchana-

[1185a]
num,   Brutum,   Boucherium,   et  Reliquos  Monarchomachos.  Paris:  G.
Chaudiere,   1600.  Barker,  Sir  Ernest  (1  874-1960)  Reflections  on
Government.  New  York: Oxford University Press, 1942. ^^_ Barrow, Isaac
(1630-1677)  Lectiones  Mathematical  In The Mathematical Worlds of Isaac
Barrow.  Ed.  by  William  Whewell.  Cambridge  University  Press,  i860
(London, 1664). — Thirteen Geometrical Lectures. Ed. and trans, by J. M.
Child.  Chicago: Open Court, 1916 {Lectiones Geometricae, London, 1670).
—A  Treatise  of  the  Pope's  Supremacy.  To Which Is Added a Discourse
Concerning  the Unity of the Church. In Vol. vin, The Theological Worlds
of  Isaac  Barrow. Ed. by A. Napier. 8 vols. Cambridge University Press,
1859.   Barth,   Karl   (1886-1968)  Dogmatics  in  Outline.  New  York:
Philosophical  Library,  1949.  —Epistle  to the Romans. Trans, by E. C.
Hoskyns.  New  York: Oxford University Press, 1933 (Der Romerbrief Bern,
1919). Bartholomaeus Anglicus (fl. 1230-1260)
[On Medicine] De Proprietatibus Rerum (B{.
VII,  On  Medicine).  Trans,  by J. Walsh. New York: Froben Press, 1933.
Barzun,  Jacques  Martin  (1907-  )  Teacher in America. Boston: Little,
Brown  &  Co.,  1945.  Bastiat,  Claude  Frederic  (1801-1850)  Economic
Sophisms.   Trans,   by   P.  J.  Stirling.  New  York:  Putnam's,  1922
(1845-1848).  —Harmonies of Political Economy. Trans, by P. J. Stirling.
Edinburgh:  Oliver  &  Boyd,  1880 (Harmonies economiques, Paris, 1850).
Bateson,  William  (1861-1926)  Problems of Genetics. New Haven, Conn. :
Yale  University  Press,  1913.  Baudelaire,  Charles Pierre (1821-1867)
Curiosites  esthetiques. Paris: L. Conard, 1923 (1845-1859). —Flowers of
Evil.  Trans,  by G. Dillon and E. St. Vincent Millay. New York: Harper,
1936  (Les  fleurs  du  mal,  Paris,  1857). Baxter, Richard (1615-1691)
Chapters from A Christian Directory; or, A Summ of Practical Theology and
Cases  of  Conscience.  Ed.  by  J. Tawney. London: G. Bell & Sons, 1925
(London,  1673). —The Saints 1 Everlasting Rest. Abr. ed. by B. Fawcett.
New  York:  American  Tract Society, 1851 (London, 1650). Beard, Charles
Austin  (1874-1948)  The  Economic  Basis  of  Politics. New York: A. A.
Knopf,  1945  (New  York,  1922).  —An  Economic  Interpretation  of the
Constitution  of the United States. New York: Macmillan, 1944 (New York,
19 13).

[1185b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Ben Jonson —Economic Origins ofjeffersonian Democracy. New
York:  Macmillan, 1949 (1915). — The Supreme Court and the Constitution.
New  York: Paisley Press, 1938 (New York, 1912). Beattie, James (i 735-1
803)  An  Essay  on  Poetry and Music, as They Affect the Mind. In Vols,
ii-m,  Essays  by  James Beattie. 3 vols. Philadelphia: Hopkins & Earle,
1809  (Edinburgh,  1776).  —An  Essay  on the Nature and Immutability of
Truth,  in  Opposition to Sophistry and Scepticism. In Vols. 1—11, ibid.
(Edinburgh,  1770).  Beaumont,  Francis  (1584-1616)  and Fletcher, John
(1579-1625)  The  Maid's Tragedy. In Beaumont and Fletcher. Ed. by F. E.
Schelling.  New  York:  American  Book  Co., 1912 (1610-1611). Beccaria,
Cesare  Bonesana  (c. 1738-1794) Crimes and Punishments; Including a New
Translation  of  Beccaria's  'Dei delitti e delle pene.' Trans, by J. A.
Farrer.  London:  Chatto  &  Wind  us,  1880  (Dei delitti e delle pene,
Leghorn,  1764).  Becker,  Carl  Lotus  (1  873-1  945) Everyman His Own
Historian:  Essays  on  History  and  Politics.  New York: Crofts, 1935.
—Modern  Democracy.  New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1941. —New
Liberties  for Old. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1941. Bede,
The  Venerable  (c.  673-735)  The Ecclesiastical History of the English
Nation.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1930 (Historia
Ecclesiastica  Gentis  Anglorum,  73'?).  Beebe-Center,  John Gilbert (i
897-1958)  The  Psychology of Pleasantness and Unpleasantness. New York:
Van  Nostrand,  1932.  Bell, Eric Temple (1 883-1960) The Development of
Mathematics.   New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1945  (1940).  Bellamy,  Edward
(1850-1898)  Looting  Backward,  2000-188J.  Modern  Library,  New York:
Random  House,  1942  (Boston,  1888). Bellarmine, Saint Robert (1 542-1
621)  De  Laicis;  or, The Treatise on Civil Government. Trans, by K. E.
Murphy.  New York: Fordham University Press, 1928 (from Disputationes de
Controversiis  Christianae  Fidei  Adversus  Hujus  Temporis Haereticos,
Ingolstadt,  1586-  1592). Belloc, Joseph Hilaire Pierre (1870-1953) The
Restoration  of  Property.  New  York:  Sheed & Ward, 1936. —The Servile
State.  New  York:  Henry  Holt,  1946 (London, 191 2). Ben Jonson (c. i
573-1 637) Every Man in His Humour. In Vol. 1, The Complete Plays of Ben
jonson. 2 vols. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1934 (1598).

[1186a]
. Benedict of Nursia THE GREAT IDEAS —Sejanus: His Fall. Ibid. (1603). —
I  'olpone:  or.  The  Fox.  Ibid. ( 1 605 or 1 606) Benedict of Nursia,
Saint  (c. 480-r. 544) The Rule of St. Benedict. Ed. and trans, by F. A.
Gasquet.  London:  Chatto  6c  Windus, 1925 (Regula Monachorum. c. 516).
Benes,  Eduard  (1884-1948)  Democracy  Today  and  Tomorrow.  New York:
Macmillan,  1939.  Bentham. Jeremy (1748-1832) The Boo^ of Fallacies. In
Vol.  11.  Worlds  (London,  1824).  —A  Comment  on the Commentaries. A
Criticism  of Wm. Blac\stone 's Commentaries on the haws of England. Ed.
by  C.  W.  Everett.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1928 (1775). —Defence of
Usury. Washington, D.C.: Hayworth Publishing House, 1916 (London. 1787).
—Deontology;  or.  The  Science  of Morality. Ed. by }. Bowring. 2 vols.
London:  Longmans.  1834 (.832). —A Fragment on Government. Ed. by F. C.
Montague.  New  York:  Oxtord University Press. 1931 (London, 1776). —An
Introduction  to  the  Principles  of  Morals  and  Legislation. Oxford:
Clarendon  Press,  1907 (London, 1789). —On the Liberty of the Press. In
Vol.  11. Workj (1821). —A Plan for a Lniversal and Perpetual Peace. Ed.
by  C.  J. Colombos. London: Peace Book Co.. 1939 ( I 78 9)- —Principles
of  International  Law.  In  \  ol. 11, W (17S9). —Rationale of Judicial
Evidence. In \ ols. vi-vn. ibid. (Traite des preuves judiciaires. Paris.
1823).  —The  Rationale  of Punishment. In Vol. 1, ibid, (in Theorie des
peines  et des recompenses. Paris, 181 1). — The Rationale of Reward. In
Vol.  11, ibid, (in Theorie des peines et des recompenses, Pans, 181 1).
—  The Theory of Legislation. Ed. by C. K. Ogden, trans, by R. Hildreth.
New York: Harcourt Brace, 1931 (Traites de legislation civile et penale,
Pans,  1802).  note:  The  Works of Jeremy Bentham. Ed. by J. Bowring. 11
vols.  Edinburgh:  W.  Tait, 18381843. Beowulf, the Oldest English Epic.
Trans, by C. W. Kennedy. New York: Oxford University Press, 1940 (7th to
8th  century). Berdyayev, Nikolai Alexandrovitch (18741948) Christianity
and the Class R ar. Trans, by Donald Att water. New York: Sheed 6c Ward,
1933  (Paris,  1  931). —Freedom and the Spirit. Trans, by O. F. Clarke.
New  York: Scribner's, 1935 (Paris. 1927). — The Meaning of History. New
York:  Scribner's,  1936 (Berlin, 1923). —Slavery and Freedom. New York:
Scribner's, 1944.

[1186b]
Bergson,  Henri  (1859-1941)  Creative Evolution. Trans, by A. Mitchell.
Modern  Library,  New  York:  Random  House, 1944 (Uevolution creatrice,
Paris,  1007).  —  The Creative Mind. Trans, by M. L. Andison. New York:
Philosophical  Library,  1946  (La  pensee  et  le  mouvant;  essais  et
conferences. Paris, 1934
[ I 9 3" I 934])-
—Dreams. Trans, by E. E. Slosson. New York: B. W. Huebsch, 191 4 (1901).
—Duree  et  simultaneity  a  propos de la theorie d''Einstein. Paris: F.
Alcan, 1929 (Paris. 1922). —An Introduction to Metaphysics. Trans, bv T.
E.  Hulme.  New York: Putnam's. 19 12 (1903). —Laughter; an Essay on the
Meaning  of the Comic. Trans, by C. Brereton et al. New York: Macmillan,
191  1  (Le  rire.  Essai  sur la signification du comique. Pans. 1900).
—Matter  and Memory. Trans, by N. M. Paul and W. Scott Palmer. New York:
Macmillan,  1929 (Matiere et memoire; essai sur la relation du corps a 1
esprit,  Paris,  1896). — Mind-Energy. Lectures and Essays. Trans, by H.
W.  Carr.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1920 (L'energie spirituelle, essais et
conferences,  Paris,  191  9).  —  Time  and  Free Will, an Essay on the
Immediate  Data  of  Consciousness. Trans, by F. L. Pogson. London: Swan
Sonnenschein,  1910  (Essai sur les donnees immediates de la conscience.
Paris,  1889).  —  Two Sources of Morality and Religion. Trans, by R. A.
Audra  and C. Brereton. New York: Henry Holt, 1 935 (Les deux sources de
la  morale  et de la religion, Paris. 1932). Berkeley. George, Bishop of
Cloyne  (1685— Alciphron, or The Minute Philosopher, in Seien Dialogues.
In  Vol. 11, The Worlds of George Berkeley. Ed. by A. C. Fraser. 4 vols.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1  90 1 (London, 1732). — The Analyst; or. A
Discourse  Addressed  to  an  Infidel  Mathematician.  In Vol. in, ibid.
(London,  1734)-  —DeMotu.  Ibid. (1721). —A Defence of Free Thinking in
Mathematics.  Ibid.  (London,  1735).  —An Essay Towards a Xew Theory of
Vision.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid. (Dublin, 1709). —Passive Obedience, or. The
Christian  Doctrine  of  Xot  Resisting  the  Supreme  Power  Proved and
Vindicated  upon  the  Principle  ofthe  Law of Nature. In Vol. in, ibid.
(London,  17  12).  —Siris:  A  Chain  of  Philosophical  Reflexions and
Inquiries  Concerning  the  I  'irtues of Tar- H 'ater, and Divers Other
Subjects, etc. Ibid. (London. 1744). — Three Dialogues Between Hylas and
Philonous.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid.  (London,  1713).  Berle, Adolph A., Jr.
(1895-1971)  and  Means, Gardiner C. (1896- ) The Modern Corporation and
Private Property. New York: Macmillan, 1934 (1932). 1152

[1187a]
Bernal, John Desmond (1901-1971) The Social Function of Science. London:
G.  Routledge, 1939. Bernard, Claude (18 13-1878) An Introduction to the
Study  of  Experimental Medicine. Trans, by H. C. Greene. New YorkHtfac^
millan, 1927 {Introduction a Vetude de la medecine experimental , Paris,
1865). Bernard of Clairvaux, Saint (c. 1 090-1 153) Concerning Grace and
Free  Will.  Ed. and trans, by W. W. Williams. New York: Macmillan, 1920
(De Gratia et Libero Arbitrio, 1 127 ?). —On Consideration. Trans, by G.
Lewis.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1908 (De Consideratione Libri V, 1 1
49-1  152).  —On  the  Love  of God. Ed. and trans, by E. G. Gardner. New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  191  5  (De  Diligendo  Deo, 1126-1141). Bernard
Sylvestris  (12th  century)  De  Mundi  Universitate  Libri  Duo;  site,
Megacosmus et Microcosmus. Ed. by C. S. Barach and J. Wrobel. Innsbruck:
Wagner,  1876  (1145-1153).  Bernhardi, Friedrich Adam Julius von (1849—
"93°)  The  War  of  the Future in the Light of the Lessons of the World
War.  Trans,  by F. A. Holt. New York: D. Appleton, 1921 (Vom Kriege der
Zukunft,  nach den Erfahrungen des Weltkrieges, Berlin, 1920). Bernheim,
Ernst   (1850-1942)   Lehrbuch   der   historischen   Methode   und  der
Geschichtsphilosophie.  Munich:  Duncker & Humblot, 1914 (Munich, 1889).
Bernstein,  Eduard  (1850-1932)  Evolutionary Socialism; a Criticism and
Affirmation. Trans, by E. C. Harvey. New York: B. W. Huebsch, 191 1 (Die
Voraussetzungen  des  Socialismus und die Aufgaben der Sozialdemokratie,
Stuttgart,  1899).  Bertrand,  Louis  Marie Emile (1866-1941) The Art of
Suffering. Abr. trans, by E. F. Peeler. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1937 (Le
livre  de  consolation, Paris, 1933). Best, Charles Herbert (1899- ) and
Taylor,  Norman  Burke  (1885-  )  The  Physiological  Basis  of Medical
Practice, a University of Toronto Text in Applied Physiology. Baltimore,
Md.: Williams & Wilkins, 1945 (Baltimore, Md., 1937). Beveridge, William
Henry,  Lord  (1879-1963)  Unemployment: A Problem of Industry. New York:
Longmans,  Green  &Co.,  1930. Bichat, Marie Francois Xavier (1771-1802)
General  Anatomy,  Applied  to  Physiology  and  Medicine.  Trans, by G.
Hayward.  3  vols.  Boston:  Richardson  & Lord, 1822 (Anatomie generale
appliquee a la physiologie et a la medecine, Paris, 1801). Biel, Gabriel
(c. 1 430-1 495) Treatise on the Power and Utility of Moneys. 1153

[1187b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Boccaccio  Trans, by R. B. Burke. Philadelphia: University
of  Pennsylvania Press, 1930 (De Monetarum Potestate Simul et Utilitate)
.  Billot,  Louis (1 846-1 932) De Ecclesia Sacramentis. Commentarius in
Tertiam  Partem S. Thomae. 2 vols. Rome: Sacra Congregatio de Propaganda
Fide,  1  893-1  897. —De Virtutibus Infusis. Rome: Sacra Congregatio de
Propaganda  Fide,  1901.  Birkhoff,  George  David (1884-1944) Aesthetic
Measure. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1933. Black, Joseph
(1728-1799)  Experiments  upon  Magnesia Alba, Quicklime, and Some Other
Alcaline  Substances.  University  of Chicago Press, 1902 (from Vol. 11,
Essays  and  Observations,  Edinburgh,  1756).  Blackstone,  Sir William
(1723-1780)  Commentaries  on  the Laws of England. Ed. by W. D. Lewis. 2
vols.  Philadelphia:  G.  T.  Bisel, 1922 (758)- Blair, Hugh (1718-1800)
Lectures  on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres. Philadelphia: Porter & Coates,
1886  (London,  1783).  Blake,  William (1757-1827) The Bool{ of Thel. In
Poetry  and  Prose  of William Blake. Ed. by G. Keynes. New York: Random
House, 1927 (London, 1789). —The Everlasting Gospel. Ibid. (c. 18 10). —
The  Marriage  of Heaven  and  Hell.  Ibid.  (London,  1790).  —Songs  of
Experience.  Ibid.  (London,  1794). —Songs of Innocence. Ibid. (London,
1789).  Blanshard, Brand (1892- ) The Nature of Thought. 2 vols. London:
Allen  &  Unwin, 1939. Bloch, Jan Gotlib (1 836-1 902) The Future of War
in  Its  Technical,  Economic,  and Political Relations. Trans, by R. C.
Long.  Boston:  Ginn &Co., 1903 (St. Petersburg, 1898). Blondel, Maurice
(1861-1949)  Lapensee. 2 vols. Paris: F. Alcan, 1934. —U action. 2 vols.
Paris:  F.  Alcan,  1936-  1937.  —Uetre et les etres; essai d'ontologie
concrete  et  integrale.  Paris:  F.  Alcan,  1935. Blood, Benjamin Paul
(1832-1919)  Pluriverse; an Essay in the Philosophy of Pluralism. Boston:
Marshall  Jones,  1920.  Boccaccio, Giovanni (1313— 1375) The Decameron.
Trans,  by  John  Payne.  Modern  Library,  New York: Random House, 1930
(1353).  —II  Filocolo.  Ed.  by  S.  Battaglia.  Bari: G. Laterza, 1938
(1341-1346).  —On  Poetry;  Being  the  Preface  and  the Fourteenth and
Fifteenth  Boo^s  of  Boccaccio'  s Genealogia Deorum Gentilium. Ed. and
trans,  by  C.  G.  Osgood.  Princeton University Press, 1930 (c. 1363).
—Patient Griselda. Tenth Day, Story x, in the Decameron, q.v.

[1188a]
BODIN  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Bodin,  Jean (i 530-1 596) Method for the Easy
Comprehension  of  History.  Trans,  by  B. Reynolds. New York: Columbia
University  Press,  1945  (Methodus  ad Facilem Historiarum Cognitionem,
Paris,  1566).  —The  Six  Bootes ofa Commonweale. Trans, by R. Knolles.
London:  G.  Bishop,  1606  (Six  livres de la Republique, Paris, 1576).
Boehme,  Jakob  (1575-1624)  The  Aurora.  Ed. by C. J. Barker and D. S.
Hehner,  trans,  by  J. Sparrow. London: J. M. Watkins, 1914 (1612). —De
Electione Gratiae
[with
Quaestiones  Theosophicae].  Trans,  by J. R. Earle. London: Constable &
Co.,  1919  (1623).  —Of  the Supersensual Life. In The Signature of All
Things,  with  Other  Writings.  Ed.  by C. Bax, trans. by J. Ellistone.
Everyman's  Library, New York: E'. P. Dutton, 1926 (i6i8?-i62 4 ).' —The
Signature  of  All Things. Ibid. (161 8?- 1624). — The Way from Darkness
to  True  Illumination. Ibid. (i6i8?-i62 4 ). —The Way to Christ. Trans,
by  J.  J.  Stoudt.  New  York:  Harper,  1947 (1623). Boethius, Anicius
Manlius  Severinus  (c.  4805  2 4) The Consolation of Philosophy. In The
Theological Tractates and The Consolation of Philosophy. Trans, by H. F.
Stewart  and  E.  K.  Rand.  Loeb  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard
University  Press,  1936  (510-524).  —Contra  Eutychen.  In Theological
Tractates.  See  above  (512).  —De Fide Catholica. Ibid. —De Trinitate.
Ibid.  —In  Isagogem  Porphyri  Commenta.  Ed.  by S. Brandt. Vienna: F.
Tempsky, 1906 (before 505). —Quomodo Substantiae in eo quod Sint cum Non
Sint  Substantialia  Bona.  In  Theological  Tractates. See above. Bohr,
Niels  Henrik  David  (1885-1962)  Atomic  Theory and the Description of
Nature.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1934  (1  925-1  929).  —On  the
Application  of  the Quantum Theory to Atomic Structure. Trans, by L. F.
Curtiss. Cambridge University Press, 1924 (1923). —The Theory of Spectra
and  Atomic Constitution, Three Essays. Trans, by A. D. Udden. Cambridge
University   Press,  1922  (191  4-1  921).  Boileau-Despreaux,  Nicolas
(1636-1711)  The  Art of Poetry. Ed. by A. S. Cook, trans, by W. Soames.
New   York:  G.  E.  Stechert,  1926  (V  art  poetique,  Paris,  1674).
Bolingbroke,  Henry  Saint-John (1678-1751) A Dissertation upon Parties.
In  Vol.  11, The Wor^s of Lord Bolingbroke. 4 vols. Philadelphia: Carey
&Hart, 1841 (London, 1734). Boltzmann, Ludwig ( 1 844-1 906) Vorlesungen
uber die Principe der Mechanic 3 vols. Leipsic: Barth, 1897-1920.

[1188b]
Bolzano,  Bernhard  (1781-1848)  Paradoxien  des  Unendlichen. Ed. by A.
Hofler   and   H.   Hahn.   Leipsic:   Philosophische  Bibliothek,  1920
(1847-1848).  Bonar,  James  (1852-1941)  The  Intellectual Virtues. New
York:  Macmillan,  1894.  BONAVENTURA,  SaINT  (122I-I274) Breviloquium.
Trans,  by  E. E. Nemmers. St. Louis, Mo.: Herder Book Co., 1946 (before
I2.57)- . —Itinerarium Mentis in Deum. Trans, by J. and J. R. Cresswell.
London:  Burns,  Oates, & Washbourne, 1937 (1259?). —On the Reduction of
the Arts to Theology. Trans, by C. G. Wallis. Annapolis, Md.: St. John's
Press, 1938 (De Reductione Artium ad Theologiam, 1250?). Bonola, Roberto
(1874-1911)  Non-Euclidean  Geometry.  Trans, by H. S. Carslaw. Chicago:
Open  Court,  1912  (1906).  Boole,  George (1815-1864) An Investigation
ofthe  Laws of Thought on Which are Founded the Mathematical Theories of
Logic  and  Probabilities.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1940 (London, 1854).
—Mathematical  Analysis  of Logic. New York: Philosophical Library, 1949
(1847). —A Treatise on Differential Equations. New York: G. E. Stechert,
1931  (London, 1859). —A Treatise on the Calculus of Finite Differences.
New   York:  G.  E.  Stechert,  1926  (London,  i860).  Borgese,  G.  A.
(1882-1952)  Common  Cause.  New  York:  Duell,  Sloan and Pearce, 1943.
Borgese,  G.  A.  et  al.  Preliminary  Draft  of  a World Constitution.
University  of  Chicago Press, 1948. Boring, Edwin Garrigues (1886-1968)
The  Physical  Dimensions of Consciousness. New York: Century Co., 1933.
Borne,  Etienne  and  Henry, Francois A Philosophy of Work- Trans, by F.
Jackson.  New  York:  Sheed  &  Ward,  1938 (Le travail etVhomme, Paris,
1937).   Bosanquet,   Bernard  (1  848-1  923)  Implication  and  Linear
Inference. London: Macmillan, 1920. —Knowledge and Reality. London: Swan
Sonnenschein,  1892  (London,  1885).  —Logic;  or,  The  Morphology  of
Knowledge.  2  vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 191 1 (Oxford, 1888). —The
Philosophical  Theory  of  the  State.  London: Macmillan, 1920 (London,
1899).  —Science and Philosophy, and Other Essays. Ed. by J. H. Muirhead
and  R.  C.  Bosanquet.  New  York: Macmillan, 1927 (1886-1919). — Three
Chapters  on the Nature of Mind. Ed. by H. Bosanquet. London: Macmillan,
1923. 1154

[1189a]
)  BIBLIOGRAPHY Brooke — Three Lectures on Aesthetic. London: Macmillan,
1915.  —The Value and Destiny ofthe Individual. London: Macmillan, 1913.
—  What Religion Is. London: Macmillan, 1929^- Bose, Sir Jagadis Chunder
(1858—  1937) Growth and Tropic Movements of Plants. New York: Longmans,
Green  &  Co.,  1929.  —Life Movements in Plants. 4 vols. Calcutta: Bose
Research  Institute,  1918-1921. Bossuet, Jacques Benigne (1627-1704) De
la  connaissance  de  Dieu  et  de soi-meme. Paris: Gamier, 1937 (1677).
—Discours  sur  Vhistoire  universelle.  Ed.  by  A.  Gaste.  Paris:  E.
Flammarion,  1928  (Paris, 1 68 1 v —Politique tiree des propres paroles
de  VEcriture  Sainte.  Turin: A. Alliana, 1 824-1 825 ( 1 677— 1701). —
Traite  de  la concupiscence. Paris: F. Roches, 1930 (1694). — Traite du
libre  arbitre.  In Vol. iv, Oeuvres choisies de Bossuet. 5 vols. Paris:
Hachette,  1  887-1  901  (1670-1681).  BOUGLE,  CELESTIN C. (187O-I940)
Essais  sur le regime des castes. Paris : F. Alcan, 1 935 (Paris, 1908).
Boutroux,  Etienne  Emile  Marie  (1845-1921) The Contingency ofthe Laws
of Nature.  Trans,  by  F.  Roth  well. Chicago: Open Court, 191 6 (De la
contingence   des  lois  de  la  nature,  Paris,  1874).  Boyle,  Robert
(1627-1691)  A  Defence ofthe Doctrine Touching the Spring and Weight of
the  Air . . . Against the Objections of Franciscus Linus, Wherewith the
Objector  s Funicular Hypothesis Is also Examined. In Vol. 1, The Worlds
ofthe  Honourable Robert Boyle. 6 vols. London, 1772 (originally pub. in
2nd  ed.  of  New  Experiments  Physical-Mechanical,  Touching  the Air,
Oxford, 1662). —A Disquisition About the Final Causes of Natural Things,
Wherein  Is  Inquired  Whether,  and  (if  at  All)  with What Caution a
Naturalist  Should  Admit  Them?  In  Vol.  v,  ibid.  (London, 1688). —
Experiments,  Notes,  etc.,  About  the Mechanical Origine or Production
of Divers Particular Qualities. In Vol. iv, ibid. (London, 1675-1676). —A
Free  Inquiry  into  the  Vulgarly Received Notion of Nature. In Vol. v,
ibid. (London, 1686). —New Experiments Physico -Mechanical, Touching the
Spring  ofthe  Air,  and Its Effects. In Vol. 1, ibid. (Oxford, 1660). —
The  Origin  of  Forms  and  Qualities,  According  to  the  Corpuscular
Philosophy.  In  Vol.  111,  ibid. (Oxford, 1666). —Reflections upon the
Hypothesis  ofAl\ali  and Acidum. In Vol. iv, ibid. (London, 1675). —The
Sceptical  Chymist.  Everyman's  Library,  New York: E. P. Dutton, 191 1
(London,   1661).   Bracton,   Henry   de   (d.   1268)  De  Legibus  et
Consuetudinibus Angliae. Ed. and 1155

[1189b]
trans,   by   T.  Twiss.  6  vols.  London:  Longman  &  Co.,  1878-1883
(1232-1259).  Bradley,  Francis  Herbert  (1846-1924) Aphorisms. Oxford:
Clarendon  Press,  1930.  —Appearance and Reality; a Metaphysical Essay.
London: Allen & Unwin, 1925 (London, 1893). —Collected Essays. Ed. by M.
de  Glehn  and  H.  J.  Joachim.  2  vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1935
(1874-1924). —Essays on Truth and Reality. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1914
(1893-1914).  —Ethical  Studies.  Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1927 (London,
1876).  —  The  Principles  of Logic. 2 vols. New York: Oxford University
Press,  1928  (London,  1883).  Breal,  Michel  Jules Alfred (1832-1915)
Semantics: Studies in the Science of Meaning. Trans, by Mrs. Henry Cust.
New   York:   Henry   Holt,  1900  (Essai  de  semantique,  science  des
significations,  Paris,  1897).  Brentano,  Franz (1838-1917) The Origin
ofthe  Knowledge of Right and Wrong. Trans, by C. Hague. New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1902  (Vom  Ursprung der sittlichen Erfenntnis. Leipsic, 1889).
Bridgman,  Percy  Williams  (1882-1961) The Logic of Modern Physics. New
York:  Macmillan,  1927.  Briefs,  Goetz  (1889-  )  The  Proletariat, a
Challenge  to  Western Civilization. Trans, by R. A. Eckhardt. New York:
McGrawHill,  1937  (Das gewerbliche Proletariat, Vol. 1 of Grundriss der
Sozialokpnomi\,  Tubingen,  1926). Briffault, Robert Stephen (1876-1948)
The  Mothers:  A  Study  ofthe Origins of Sentiments and Institutions. 3
vols.  New  York:  Macmillan  1927. Brinton, Clarence Crane (1898- ) The
Anatomy  of  Revolution.  New  York:  W. W. Norton, 1938. Broad, Charlie
Dunbar  (1887-  )  The  Mind and Its Place in Nature. New York: Harcourt
Brace,  1925.  —Perception,  Physics,  and Reality. Cambridge University
Press,  1  91  4.  —Scientific  Thought.  New York: Harcourt Brace, 1927
(London, 1923). Broglie, Louis Victor de (1892- ) An Introduction to the
Study  of  Wave  Mechanics. Trans, by H. T. Flint. London: Methuen, 1930
(Introduction  a  Vetude  de  la  mecanique  ondulatoire,  Paris, 1930).
Bronte,  Charlotte  (1816-1855) jane Eyre. Everyman's Library, New York:
E.  P.  Dutton,  1946  (London,  1847).  Bronte,  Emily Jane (1818-1848)
Wuthering  Heights.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1943
(London,  1847). Brooke, Fulke Greville, Lord (1554-1628) An Inquisition
upon Fame and Honour. In Vol. 1,

[1190a]
Brown  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Poems  and Dramas of Ful^e Greville First Lord
Brooke.  Ed.  by  G.  Bullough.  2 vols. Edinburgh: Oliver & Boyd, 1939.
Brown,  Thomas  (1778-1820)  An  Inquiry  into the Relation of Cause and
Effect.  London:  H.  G. Bohn, 1835 (Edinburgh, 18 18). —Lectures on the
Philosophy  of the Human Mind. 4 vols. London: W. Tegg, i860 (Edinburgh,
1820).  Browne, Sir Thomas (1605-1682) Hydriotaphia. Urne Buriall; or, A
Discourse ofthe Sepulchrall Urnes Lately Found in Norfolk In The Religio
Medici  and  Other Writings. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1934  (London, 1658). —Pseudodoxia Epidemica. In Vols. 11-111, The Wor^s
of  Sir  Thomas Browne. Ed. by G. Keynes. 6 vols. New York: W. E. Rudge,
1928-1931 (London, 1646). —Religio Medici. Everyman's Library. See above
(London, 1643). Browning, Elizabeth Barrett (1806-1861) Sonnets from the
Portuguese.  New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1945 (London, 1850). Browning,
Robert  (1812-1! The Bishop Orders His Tomb at Saint Praxed's Church. In
The  Shorter  Poems  of Robert  Browning. Ed. by W. C. De Vane. New York:
Crofts, 1945 (London, 1845). —Rabbi Ben Ezra. Ibid. (London, 1864). —The
Ring  and  the  Boo/{.  Ed.  by  A. K. Cook. New York: Oxford University
Press,  1940  (London,  1  868-1  869).  —Why I Am a Liberal. In Shorter
Poems.  See  above  (London, 1885). Brunetiere, Ferdinand (1849-1906) An
Apology  for  Rhetoric.  In  Brunetiere's  Essays  in French Literature.
Trans, by D. N. Smith. London: T. F. Unwin, 1898 (1890). Bruno, Giordano
(c.  1  548-1 600) De Immenso et Innumerabilibus. In Vols. 1-11, Jordani
Bruni  .  .  .  Opera  Latina.  3  vols.  Naples:  D.  Morano, 1879-1891
(Frankfort,  1591).  —De  la  causa,  principio, e uno. In Vol. 1, Opere
Italiane.  Ed.  by G. Gentile. 2 vols. Bari: Laterza, 1925-1927 (Venice,
1584).  —De  Vinfinite,  universo e mondi. Ibid. (Venice, 1583). Bryant,
William  Cullen  (1794-1878)  Thanatopsis. In Poetical Worlds of William
Cullen  Bryant.  New  York:  D.  Appleton,  1906  (18  17). Bryce, James
(1838-1922)  Address  on  Colonial  Policy.  London, 1892. —The American
Commonwealth.  2  vols.  New York: Macmillan, 1 931-1933 (London, 1888).
—The Functions ofa University. Adelaide, Australia: W. K. Thomas, 191 2.
—  The Hindrances to Good Citizenship. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press, 1909. —Marriage and Divorce. New York: Oxford Uni-

[1190b]
versity  Press,  1905  (from  Studies  in History and Jurisprudence, New
York,  1901).  —Modern Democracies. 2 vols. New York : Macmillan, 1 93 1
(New  York,  1921).  —Studies  in  History  and Jurisprudence. New York:
Oxford  University  Press,  1901.  Buber,  Martin  (1878-1965) Hasidism.
Trans,  by  G. Hort et al. New York: Philosophical Library, 1948 (1920).
—I  and  Thou.  Trans,  by  R.  G. Smith. Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1937
(1923).  —Jewish  Mysticism  and  the legends of Baalshem. Ed. by Martin
Buber, trans, by L. Cohen. London: J. M. Dent, 1931 (late 18th century).
— Tales ofthe Hasidim. Ed. by Martin Buber, trans, by O. Marx. New York:
Schocken  Books,  1947 (late 1 8th century). Buchanan, Scott (1895-1968)
The  Doctrine  of Signatures; a Defence of Theory in Medicine. New York:
Harcourt Brace, 1938. —Poetry and Mathematics. New York: John Day, 1929.
—Possibility.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1927. —Symbolic Distance in
Relation  to  Analogy  and  Fiction.  London: K. Paul, Trench, Triibner,
1932.  Buchez,  Philip  Joseph  Benjamin  (1796-1865)  Introduction a la
science   de  Vhistoire.  Paris:  Paulin,  1833.  Buckle,  Henry  Thomas
(1821-1862) History of Civilization in England. 3 vols. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1 925-1 931 (London, 1857-1861). Bucher, Karl (1 847-1
930)  Arbeit  und  Rhythmus. Leipsic: E. Reinicke, 1924 (Leipsic, 1896).
BtJCHNER,  LUDWIG  (1824-1899) Force and Matter, Empirico -philosophical
Studies.  Ed.  and  trans, by J. F. Collingwood. London: Triibner & Co.,
1870  {Kraft und Stoff. Empirischnaturphilosophische Studien, Frankfort,
1855).  Buhler, Karl (1879-1963) Sprachtheorie: die Darstellungsfunction
der  Sprache.  Jena:  G.  Fischer,  1934.  Buffon, Georges Louis Leclerc
(1707-1788)  Discours  sur  le  style.  Paris: C. Delagrave, 1903 (753)-
—Natural  History, General and Particular. Trans, by W. Smellie. 9 vols.
London:  A. Strahan, 1791 {Histoire naturelle, generale et particuliere,
Paris,  1749-1788).  Bukharin,  Nikolai Ivanovich (1888-1938) Historical
Materialism:  A System of Sociology. New York: International Publishers,
1929  (Moscow,  1921).  Bunyan, John (1628-1688) The Pilgrim's Progress.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1932  (London, 1678).
BURCKHARDT,  JaKOB  (l8l8—  1897) The Civilization of the Renaissance in
Italy. Trans, by S. G. C. Middlemore. New York: Oxford 1156

[1191a]
University  Press,  1944  {Die Kultur der Renaissance in Italien, Basle,
i860). —Force and Freedom, Reflections on History. Ed. by J. H. Nichols.
New  York: Pantheon Books, 1943 (Welthistorische Betrachtungen, Leipsic,
-^905^
[1868-1871]).
Burgess,  John William (1844-1931) The Reconciliation of Government with
Liberty.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1915.  Burke,  Edmund  (1729-1797) An
Appealfrom  the  New  to  the  Old  Whigs  in  Consequence  of Some Late
Discussions  in Parliament Relative to the Reflections on the Revolution
in  France. In Vol. m, The Works of the Right Honourable Edmund Burke. 8
vols.  New York: G. Bell & Sons, 1890-1894 (1791)- —Hintsfor an Essay on
the  Drama.  In  Vol. vi, ibid. (i756). —A Letter to a Noble Lord on the
Attacks  Made upon Him and His Pension. In Vol. v, ibid. (London, 1796).
—Letter  to  Sir  Hercules  Langrishe, Bart. M.P., on the Subject of the
Roman  Catholics  of Ireland, and the Propriety of Admitting Them to the
Elective Franchise. In Vol. in, ibid. (1792). —Letter to the Sheriffs of
Bristol,  on  the  Affairs  of America, April 3, ijjj. In Vol. 11, ibid.
(1777).  —On the Reform ofthe Representation in the House of Commons. In
Vol.  vi,  ibid. (1782). —A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our
Ideas  of  the  Sublime  and  Beautiful  with  an Introductory Discourse
Concerning  Taste.  In Vol. 1, ibid. (London, 1756). —Reflections on the
Revolution  in France, and on Proceedings in Certain Societies in London
Relative to That Event. In Vol. 11, ibid. (London, 1790). —[Resolutions]
Speech  on Moving His Resolutions for Conciliation with America. In Vol.
1,  ibid.  (London,  1775).  —Thoughts  on  the  Cause  of  the  Present
Discontents.  Ibid.  (London,  1770).  —[Thoughts  on  the Prospect of a
Regicide  Peace]  Three  Letters  Addressed  to  a  Member ofthe Present
Parliament,  on  the  Proposals  for  Peace  with the Regicide Directory
of France.  In  Vol.  v,  ibid.  (London, 1 796- 1 797). BURLAMAQUI, JEAN
JaCQUES (1694-I748) The Principles of Natural and Politic Law. Trans, by
Nugent.  Philadelphia:  Lippincott,  1859  (Principesdu  droit  naturel,
Geneva,  1747, and Principes du droit politique, Geneva, 1751). Burnham,
James  (1905- ) The Machiavellians, Defenders of Freedom. New York: John
Day,  1943.  Burns, Arthur Robert (1895- ) The Decline of Competition: A
Study  ofthe Evolution of American Industry. New York: McGrawHill, 1936.
Burns,  Robert  (1759-1796)  Address  to  the  Unco Guid, or the Rigidly
Righteous. In The Poetical Works of Robert Burns. Ed. by J. 1157

[1191b]
: BIBLIOGRAPHY Caesar L. Robertson. New York: Oxford University Press, 1
91 6 (Edinburgh, 1787). —The Cotter's Saturday Night. Ibid. (Kilmarnock,
Burnside,  William (1852-1927) Theory of Groups of Finite Order. Cambridge
University  Press, 191 1 (1897). Burton, Robert (1 577-1640) The Anatomy
of Melancholy.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1932 (Oxford,
1621).  Bury,  John Bagnell (1861-1927) A History of Freedom of Thought.
New  York  Henry  Holt, 1913. — The Idea of Progress; an Inquiry into its
Origin  and  Growth.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1932 (London, 1920). — The
Science  of  History,  an Inaugural Lecture. Cambridge University Press,
1903.  Butler,  Joseph  (1692-1752) The Analogy of Religion, Natural and
Revealed.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E. P. Dutton, 1927 (London,
1736).  —Fifteen  Sermons  upon  Human  Nature.  In  Vol.  11, The Works
of Bishop  Butler.  Ed. by J. H. Bernard. 2 vols. London: Macmillan, 1900
(London, 1726). Butler, Samuel (1835-1902) Darwin Among the Machines. In
Note-Books,  q*v.  (essay  cited,  1863).  —Erewhon,  or Over the Range.
Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1927 (London, 1872). —Evolution,
Old  and  New;  or,  The  Theories  of Bufl  fon,  Dr. Erasmus Darwin and
Lamarck,  as  Compared  with  That  of  Charles  Darwin. New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1914  (London,  1879).  —Life  and Habit. London: J. Cape, 1924
(London,  1877).  —The  Note-Books of Samuel Butler. Ed. by H. F. Jones.
London:  A.  C.  Fifield,  1912.  —Unconscious  Memory.  New York: E. P.
Dutton,  191  1  (London,  1880).  —  The Way of All Flesh. Ed. by W. L.
Phelps.  Everyman's  Library,  New York; E. P. Dutton, 1934 (1872-1884).
Byron,  George  Gordon (Lord Byron) (17881824) Don Juan. In The Complete
Poetical   Works  of Lord  Byron.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1927  (London,
1819-1824).  —[The Isles of Greece] Canto in (lxxxvi) of Don Juan. Ibid.
(London,  1821). —Prometheus. Ibid. (London, 18 16). —Sonnet on Chillon.
Ibid. (London, 1816). Caesar, Gaius Julius (100-44 B.C.) The Gallic War.
Trans,  by  H.  J.  Edwards.  Loeb  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1 91 9 (Commentarii de Bello Gallico, 51

[1192a]
Caird  THE  GREAT IDEAS Caird, John (i 820-1 898) An Introduction to the
Philosophy  of  Religion.  Glasgow:  J. MacLehose, 1901 (Glasgow, 1880).
Cajetan,  Thomas  de  Vio  (1 468-1 534) De Conceptu Entis. Ed. by P. M.
Zammit.  Rome:  Institutum  Angelicum,  1934  (Rome, 15 19). —De Nominum
Analogia. Ed. by P. M. Zammit. Rome: Institutum Angelicum, 1934 (Pa via,
1498).  —In  De Ente et Essentia D. Thomae Aquinatis Commentaria. Ed. by
P.  M.  H. Laurent. Turin: Marietti, 1934 (Venice, 1496). Calderon de la
Barca, Pedro (1 600-1 681) Life Is a Dream. In Continental Drama. Trans,
bv W. F. Stirling. "The Harvard Classics." New York: P. F. Collier, 1910
{La  vida es sueno, Madrid, 1636). —The Mighty Magician. In Eight Dramas
of  Calderon.  Freely trans, by E. Fitzgerald. New York: Macmillan, 1906
{El  mdgico prodigioso. 1637). —The Physician of His Own Honour. In Vol.
1,  Dramas  of  Calderon,  Tragic, Comic, and Legendary. Trans, by D. F.
McCarthy.  2  vols.  London:  C.  Dolman,  1853  {El medico de su honra,
Madrid,  l637)-  Calhoun,  John Caldwell (1782- 1850) A Discourse on the
Constitution  and Government of the United States. In Vol. 1, The Worlds
of  John  Calhoun.  Ed. by R. K. Cralle'. 6 vols. New York: D. Appleton,
1861-1864  (1850).  —A  Disquisition  on Government. New York: Political
Science  Classics, 1947 (1849). Calvin, John (1509-1564) Commentaries on
the  Epistle  of Paul  the  Apostle  to  the Romans. In Vol. xxxvm, Wor\s
of John  Calvin.  Ed. and trans, by John Owen. 51 vols. Edinburgh: Calvin
Translation   Society,  1849  {Commentarius  in  Epistolam  ad  Romanos,
Strasbourg, 1540). —Institutes of the Christian Religion. Ed. and trans,
by  John  Allen.  2  vols. Philadelphia: Presbyterian Board of Christian
Education  {Christianae  Religionis  Institutio, Basle, 1536). Camfield,
Benjamin   (1638-1693)   A  Theological  Discourse  of Angels  and  Their
Ministries.  London:  H. Brome, 1678. Campanella, Tommaso ( 1 568-1 639)
The City ofthe Sun. In Ideal Commonwealths. Ed. and trans, by H. Morley.
New  York: Colonial Press, 1 90 1 {Civitas Solis, Frankfort, 1623). —The
Defense  of Galileo of Thomas Campanella. Ed. and trans, by G. McColley.
In  Vol.  xxii,  Smith  College  Studies in History. Northampton, Mass.:
Smith   College,  1937  {Apologia  pro  Galileo,  Frankfort,  1622).  —A
Discourse  Touching the Spanish Monarchy. Trans, by E. Chilmead. London:
P. Stevens, 1654 {De Monarchia Hispanica Discursus, Amsterdam, 1640).

[1192b]
Campbell, George (1719-1796) Philosophy of Rhetoric. Ed. by G. S. Keith.
London:   Harper,  1868  (London,  1776).  Campbell,  Norman  Robert  (1
880-1949) Physics; the Elements. Cambridge University Press, 1920. —What
Is  Science? London: Methuen, 1921. Cannon, Walter Bradford (1 871-1945)
Bodily  Changes  in  Pain,  Hunger,  Fear and Rage; an Account of Recent
Researches  into  the  Function  of Emotional  Excitement.  New  York: D.
Appleton,  1929  (New York, 191 5). —The Wisdom ofthe Body. New York: W.
W. Norton, 1932. Cantor, Georg (1845-1918) Contributions to the Founding
of  the  Theory  of  Transfinite  Numbers.  Trans, by P. E. B. Jourdain.
Chicago:  Open  Court,  191  5  (1895;  l8 97)- Cardozo, Benjamin Nathan
(1870-1938)  The  Growth  ofthe  Law. New Haven, Conn. : Yale University
Press,  1944  (New  Haven,  Conn.,  1924).  — The Nature of the Judicial
Process.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Yale  University  Press, 1941 (New Haven,
Conn.,  1921).  Carew,  Thomas  {c. 1595-c. 1639) A Rapture. In Poems of
Thomas  Carew. Ed. by A. Vincent. New York: E. P. Dutton, 190-. Carlson,
Anton  Julius  (1 875-1956) The Control of Hunger in Health and Disease.
University of Chicago Press, 191 6. Carlyle, Alexander James (1861-1943)
Political  Liberty,  a  History  ofthe Conception in the Middle Ages and
Modern   Times.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1  94  1.  Carlyle,  Thomas
(1795-1881)  Chartism.  In English and Other Critical Essays. Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1925  (London, 1839). —The French
Revolution:  A  History.  Modern  Library,  New York: Random House, 1934
(London,  1837).  —Latter-Day  Pamphlets.  New  York: Scribner's, 1 90 1
(London,  1850).  —[On Heroes, Hero-Worship] Sartor Resartus, On Heroes,
Hero-  Worship  and the Heroic in History. Everyman's Library, New York:
E.  P.  Dutton,  1934  (London, 1841). —On History. In English and Other
Critical  Essays.  Everyman's  Library.  See  Chartism  (1830).  —Sartor
Resartus.  See  On  Heroes,  Hero-Worship  (1833-1834).  Carnap,  Rudolf
(1891-1970)   Foundations   of   Logic  and  Mathematics  (International
Encyclopedia  of  Unified  Science).  University of Chicago Press, 1939.
—Introduction  to Semantics. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1942. —The Logical Syntax of Language. Trans, by A. 1158

[1193a]
Smeaton.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1937  (Die  Logische  Syntax der
Sprache,  Vienna,  1934).  —Meaning and Necessity: A Study in Semantics;
Modal  Logic. University of Chicago Press, 1947. —Philosophy and Logical
Syntax. London: K J?atttV Trench, Triibner, 1935. —The Unity of Science.
Trans,  by  M.  Black.  London:  K. Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1934 (1932).
Carnot,  Lazare  Nicolas  Marguerite (17531823) Principesfondamentaux de
Vequilibre  et du mouvement. Paris: Deterville, 1803 (1782). —Reflexions
sur  la  metaphysique  du calcul infinitesimal. Paris: Gauthier-Villars,
1921 (1797). Carritt, Edgar Frederick (1876- ) The Theory of Beauty. New
York:  Macmillan, 1914. Cartwright, John (1 740-1 824) Take Your Choice!
Representation  and Respect: Imposition and Contempt. Annual Parliaments
and  Liberty:  Long  Parliaments  and  Slavery.  London: J. Almon, 1776.
Cassiodorus Senator, Flavius Magnus Aurelius (c. 490-f. 583)
[Institutions] An Introduction to Divine and Human Readings. Trans, by L. W. Jones. New York:
Columbia  University  Press, 1947 (543-545). Cassirer, Ernst (1874-1945)
An  Essay  on Man; an Introduction to a Philosophy of Human Culture. New
Haven,  Conn.  : Yale University Press, 1944. —Language and Myth. Trans,
by  S. K. Langer. New York: Harper, 1946 (1925). —The Myth of the State.
New  Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1946 (1944-1945). —Philosophic
der symbolischen Formen. Vol. 1, Die Sprache. Berlin: B. Cassirer, 1923.
—Substance  and Function, and Einstein's Theory of Relativity. Trans, by
W.  C.  Swabey.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1923 (Substanzbegriff und Fun\-
tionsbegriff,  Berlin, 1910, and Zur Einstein'schen Relativitdtstheorie,
Berlin,  1921).  Castiglione, Baldassare ( 1 478-1 529) The Boo)^ °f tne
Courtier. Trans, by T. Hoby. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1928  (JlLibro  del  Cortegiano, Venice, 1528). Catullus, Gaius Valerius
(c.  84-54  B  -c  The  Poems.  In  Catullus,  Tibullus, and Pervigilium
Veneris.  Trans,  by  F.  W.  Cornish.  Loeb  Library, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard  University  Press,  1935Cavendish, Henry (1731-1810) Electrical
Researches.  In  Vol.  1,  The Scientific Papers of the Honourable Henry
Cavendish,  F.R.S. Ed. by J. C. Maxwell and E. Thorpe. 2 vols. Cambridge
University  Press,  1921  (1771-1781).  —[Experiments of Factitious Air]
Three  Papers,  Containing  Experiments  of  Factitious Air. In Vol. 11.
ibid. (1766). 1159

[1193b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Chekhov  —Experiments  on Air. Ibid. (1784-1785). Cellini,
Benvenuto  (1500-1571)  Autobiography  of  Benvenuto Cellini. Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1942 (1558CELSUS, AULUS CORNELIUS^.
I4~37  A.D.) De Medicina. Trans, by W. G. Spencer. 3 vols. Loeb Library,
Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1  935-1 938. Chalmers,
Thomas  (1780-1847)  On  the  Power,  Wisdom,  and  Goodness  of God, as
Manifested  in  the  Adaptation  of External  Nature  to  the  Moral  and
Intellectual   Constitution  of  Man.  London:  G.  Bell  &  Sons,  1884
(Bridgewater  Treatise  on  the  Power, etc., London, 1833). Chamberlin,
Edward  Hastings  (1 899-1967) The Theory of Monopolistic Competition: A
Reorientation   of  the  Theory  of  Value.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard
University  Press,  1933.  Chamberlin, Thomas Chrowder (1 843-1 928) The
Origin  of  the  Earth.  University  of Chicago Press, 1 91 6. Chambers,
Robert  (1802-1871)  Vestiges  of  the  Natural History of Creation. New
York:G.   Routledge,  1890  (London,  1844).  Channing,  William  Ellery
(1780-1842)
[Discourses on War]
War.  Discourse  Before  the  Congregational  Ministers of Massachusetts,
Boston, 1 816; War. Discourse Delivered January 25, 1835; Lecture on War
(1838).  In The Works of William E. Channing. Boston: American Unitarian
Association,  1903.  —Slavery.  Ibid.  (Boston,  1835).  Charron, Pierre
(1541-1603) De la sagesse, trois livres. Paris: Lefevre, 1836 (Bordeaux,
1601).  Chateaubriand, Francois Auguste Rene (17681848) Rene. London: T.
Hamilton,  18  13  (Paris, 1802). Chaucer, Geoffrey (c. 1 340-1 400) The
House  of  Fame.  In  The  Complete Works of Geoffrey Chaucer (Student's
Cambridge  Edition).  Ed.  by F. N. Robinson. New York: Houghton Mifflin
Co.,  1933  (1385). —The Legend of Good Women. Ibid. (1385). —A Treatise
on  the  Astrolabe. Ibid. (1391). Chekhov, Anton Pavlovich (1 860-1 904)
Letters  on the Short Story, the Drama and Other Literary Topics. Ed. by
L.  S.  Friedland.  New  York: Minton Balch, 1924. —The Sea-Gull. In The
Plays  of Anton Tchekpv. Trans, by C. Garnett. Modern Library, New York:
Random House, 1930 (first performed, 1896). —Three Sisters. Ibid, (first
performed,  1901).  —  Ward  No.  6.  In  The  Horse- Stealers and Other
Stories. Trans, by C. Garnett. New York: Macmillan, 1921 (1892).

[1194a]
.  Chesterfield THE GREAT IDEAS Chesterfield, Fourth Earl of (1694-1773)
Letters  to  His  Son  and  Others.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1946  (17381768).  Chesterton,  Gilbert Keith (1 874-1 936) The
Everlasting  Man.  London: Hodder & Stoughton, 1927 (1925). —The Man Who
Was  Thursday; a Nightmare. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1 91
7  (London, 1908). — The Napoleon of Notting Hill. London: J. Lane, 1937
(London,  1904).  —Orthodoxy.  New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1936 (London,
1908). — What's Wrong with the World. London: Cassell, 1910. Chretien de
Troyes  (12th  century) Arthurian Romances by Chretien de Troyes. Trans,
by  W.  W.  Comfort.  Everyman's  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1935.
Cicero, Marcus Tullius (106-43 B<c
[Academics]
De  Natura  Deorum,  Academica.  Trans,  by  H.  Rackham.  Loeb Library,
Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University Press, 1933 (45 B -c 0- —Brutus,
Orator.  Trans,  by  G.  L. Hendrickson. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard University Press, 1939 (46 b.c). —[De Divinatione] De Senectute,
De  Amicitia,  De  Divinatione.  Trans, by W. A. Falconer. Loeb Library,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1923 (44 b.c). —De Domo Sua.
In  Pro  Archia  Poeta,  etc.  Trans,  by  N.  H.  Watts.  Loeb Library,
Cambridge,  Mass.  Harvard  University  Press,  1923 (57 b.c). —De Fato.
Trans,  by  C.  D.  Yonge.  London:  G. Bell, 1907 (44 b.c). —De Finibus
Bonorum  et  Malorum.  Trans,  by  H.  Rackham. Loeb Library, Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  191  4  (45  b.c).  —De Legibus, De
Republica.  Trans,  by  C.  W.  Keyes.  Loeb  Library, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard  University  Press,  1928  (50  b.c  ?).  —De Natura Deorum. See
Academics  (45  b.c).  —De  Officiis. Trans, by W. Miller. Loeb Library,
Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1913 (44 B.C.). —De Oratore.
Trans,  by E. W. Sutton and H. Rackham. 2 vols. Loeb Library, Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard  University Press, 1942 (55 b.c?). —De Republica. See De
Legibus (5 1 b.c ?) —De Senectute. See De Divinatione (44 b.c). —Laelius
de  Amicitia.  See  De  Divinatione  (44  b.c).  —The Orations of Marcus
Tullius  Cicero. Trans, by C. D. Yonge. 4 vols. London: G. Bell, 1913192
1. —Orator. See Brutus (46 b.c), —Tusculan Disputations. Trans, by J. E.
King.  Loeb  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1927
(Tusculanae Disputationes, 45 B.C.).

[1194b]
:  Clark,  Iohn Bates (1 847-1 938) The Distribution of Wealth; a Theory
of  Wages, Interest, and Profits. New York: Macmillan, 1899. Clark, Iohn
Maurice  (1884-  )  Alternative  to Serfdom. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1948
(1947).  Clarke,  John  (1682-1757) An Inquiry into the Cause and Origin
of Evil. London, 1720.
[Clarke
Papers]  Puritanism and Liberty, Being the Army Debates (1647-1649) from
the  Clarke  Manuscripts  with  Supplementary Documents. Ed. by A. S. P.
Woodhouse.  London:  J. M. Dent, 1938. Claudel, Paul (1 868-1955) Poetic
Art.  Trans,  by  Renee  Spodheim. New York: Philosophical Library, 1948
(Art Poetique, 1904). —The Tidings Brought to Mary: A Mystery. Trans, by
L.  M.  Sill.  New  Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1927 (L Annonce
faite  a Marie, Paris, 1 91 2). Clausewitz, Karl von (1780-1831) On War.
Ed.  by  J. Greene, trans, by O. J. Matthijs lolles. Modern Library, New
York: Random House, 1943 (Vom Kriege, Berlin, 1832- 1834
[1816-1831]).
Cleanthes of Assos (c. 331-f. 232 B.C.) Hymn to Zeus. Trans, by J. Adam.
In Gree\ Literature in Translation. Ed. by W. J, Oates and C. T. Murphy.
New  York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1945. Clifford, William Kingdom (1845—
1879)  The  Common Sense of the Exact Sciences. Ed. by K. Pearson and J.
Newman.  New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf,  1946  ( 1 875-1 879). —Lectures and
Essays.  Ed.  by  L.  Stephen and F. Pollock. 2 vols. London: Macmillan,
1901  (London,  1879).  —On  the  Canonical  Form  and  Dissection  of a
Riemann's  Surface.  In  Mathematical  Papers. Ed. by R. Tucker. London:
Macmillan,  1882  (1877).  —Preliminary  Sketch  of Biquaternions. Ibid.
(1873).  —Seeing  and  Thinking. London: Macmillan, 1890 (London, 1879).
The  Cloud of Unknowing, and Other Treatises by an English Mystic of the
Fourteenth  Century,  with a Commentary on the Cloud by Father Augustine
Balder.  Ed.  by  J.  McCann.  London: Burns, Oates, & Washbourne, 1924.
Cohen,  Felix  S. (1907-1953) Ethical Systems and Legal Ideals; an Essay
on  the  Foundations  of  Legal Criticism. New York: Falcon Press, 1933.
Cohen,   Hermann  (1842-1918)  Ethi{  des  reinen  Willens.  Berlin:  B.
Cassirer,  1921  (Berlin, 1904). Cohen, Morris Raphael (1 880-1 947) Law
and  the  Social  Order;  Essays in Legal Philosophy. New York: Harcourt
Brace, 1933. 1160

[1195a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  CORNEILLE  —The  Meaning of Human History. La Salle, 111.:
Open  Court,  1947  (1944). —A Preface to Logic. New York: Henry Holt, !
944-  —Reason and Nature, an Essay on the Meanirig-ef Scientific Method.
New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  I93  1  -  Coke,  Sir  Edward  (1552-1634)
Institutes  of  the  Laws  of  England. 4 parts, 7 vols. London: E. & R.
Brooke,   1809   (1614-1634).   Coleridge,   Samuel  Taylor  (1772-1834)
Biographia  Literaria; or, Biographical Sketches of My Literary Life and
Opinions.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E. P. Dutton, 1934 (London,
1817).  —The  Pains  of Sleep.  In  The  Poems of Samuel Taylor Coleridge.
World's  Classics,  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press, 1930 (London,
1828).  —  The  Rime  of  the  Ancient  Mariner. Ibid. (London, 1798). —
Treatise on Method, as Published in the Encyclopaedia Metropolitana. Ed.
by  A.  D.  Snyder.  London:  Constable  & Co., 1934 (from Encyclopaedia
Metropolitana,  1818).  COLLINGWOOD,  ROBIN  GEORGE (1889-I943) The Idea
of History. Ed. by T. M. Knox. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1946 (1936). —The
Idea  of Nature. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1945 ( I 933~ I 943)- Collins,
William  (1721-1759)  The  Passions,  An  Ode for Music. In The Poetical
Worlds  of  Gray  and  Collins.  Ed.  by  A.  L. Poole. New York: Oxford
University  Press,  1926  (London,  1747).  Comenius,  Joannes  Amos  (i
592-1670)  The Great Didactic. Ed. and trans, by M. W. Keatinge. London:
A.  &  C.  Black,  1923  (Didactica  Magna,  in  Opera  Didactica Omnia,
Amsterdam,  1657).  —School  of Infancy. Ed. and trans, by W. S. Monroe.
London:  D.C.  Heath,  1865 (Schola Infantiae, in Opera Didactica Omnia,
Amsterdam,  1657).  COMTE,  AUGUSTE  (  1  798-  1 857) The Catechism of
Positive  Religion.  Trans,  by  R.  Congreve.  London: J. Chapman, 1858
(Catechisme  positiviste,  Paris, 1852). —The Philosophy of Mathematics.
Trans,  by  W.  M.  Gillespie.  New  York:  Harper,  1851 (from Cours de
philosophic positive, Vol. 1, Paris, 1830). — The Positive Philosophy of
Auguste Comte. Abr. trans, by H. Martineau. London: G. Bell & Sons, 1896
{Cours  de  philosophie  positive, Paris, 1830l842)- —System of Positive
Polity.  Vol.  1,  General  View of Positivism; Vol. 11, Social Statics;
Vol.  in,  Social Dynamics; Vol. iv, Theory of the Future of Man. Trans,
by  J.  H.  Bridget  et  al.  London:  Longmans,  Green & Co., 1875-1877
(Systeme  de  politique positive; ou, Traite de sociologie instituant la
religion deVhumanite, Paris, 1 851-1854). 1161

[1195b]
Conant,  James  Bryant (1893- ) Education in a Divided World. Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press, 1948. —On Understanding Science. New
Haven,  Conn.: Yale University Press, 1947. Condillac, Etienne Bonnot de
(1715-1780)  Essai  sur Vorigine des connaissances humaines: ouvrage oil
Von  reduit a un seul principe tout ce qui concerne Ventendement. Paris:
A.  Colin,  1924 (Amsterdam, 1746). —La langue des calculs. In Vol. xxm,
Oeuvres  de  Condillac.  23  vols. Paris: Houel, 1798. —Logique. In Vol.
xxn,  ibid.  (Paris,  1780).  —  Traite  des  animaux. In Vol. in, ibid.
(Amsterdam,  :  — Treatise on the Sensations. Ed. and trans, by G. Carr.
London:   Favil  Press,  1930  (Traite  des  sensations,  Paris,  1754).
Condorcet, Marie Jean Antoine Nicolas CariTAT (1743-I794) Outlines of an
Historical  View  of  the  Progress  of  the Human Mind. Baltimore, 1802
(Esquisse  d'un tableau historique des progres de Vesprit humain, Paris,
1795).  Congreve,  William  (1670-1729)  The  Way ofthe World: A Comedy.
London:   J.   M.  Dent,  1933  (London,  1700).  Cook,  Arthur  Bernard
(1868-1952)  Zeus:  A  Study  in  Ancient  Religion.  3  vols. Cambridge
University  Press,  191 4-1940. COOMARASWAMY, AnANDA KENTISH (1877-1947)
The Transformation of Nature in Art. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press,  1934.  Cope,  Edward  Drinker (1840-1897) The Primary Factors of
Organic  Evolution.  Chicago:  Open Court, 1896. Copernicus, Nicolaus (1
473-1  543)  Commentariolus. In Three Copernican Treatises. Trans, by E.
Rosen. New York: Columbia University Press, 1939 (1508). —Letter Against
Werner.  Ibid. (1524). Corneille, Pierre (1606-1684) Cinna. In Six Plays
of  Corneille  and  Racine. Ed. and trans, by P. Landis. Modern Library,
New  York: Random House, 1931 (1640). —Examens. Prefixed to each play in
Oeuvres  de  Pierre  Corneille. Ed. by C. Marty-Laveaux. 10 vols. Paris:
Hachette,  1862- 1868 (appeared first in Le theatre de Corneille, Paris,
1660).  —Horace. Ed. by F. L. Marcou. Paris: Gamier freres, 1920 (1640).
—La  Place  Royale.  In Vol. n, Oeuvres. See Examens (1634). —Le Cid. In
Six  Plays.  See  Cinna  (1636).  —Polyeucte. Trans, by T. Constable. In
Continental  Drama.  "Harvard  Classics,"  New York: P. F. Collier, 1910
(1640).  —Trois  discours  sur  Van  dramatique. In Vol. x, Oeuvres. See
Examens (Discours de Vutilite et des parties de la tragedie, Discours de
la tragedie, Dis-

[1196a]
Coster  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  cours  des  trois  unites,  in  Le theatre de
Corneille,  Paris,  1660).  Coster, Charles Theodore Henri de (18271879)
The  Glorious  Adventures  of Tyl Ulenspiegl. Trans. by A. R. Macdougall.
New  York: Pantheon Books, 1943 (La legende d'Ulenspiegel, Paris, 1868).
Courant,  Richard  (1888-1972)  and  Robbins,  Herbert  (1915- ) What Is
Mathematics?  An  Elementary  Approach  to  Ideas and Methods. New York:
Oxford  University Press, 1 94 1. CoURNOT, A.NTOINE AuGUSTIN (180I-1877)
Essai  sur  lesfondements de nos connaissances et sur les characteres de
la   critique   philosophique.  Paris:  Hachette,  1912  (Paris,  1851).
—Exposition  de  la  theorie  des  chances  et des probability's. Paris:
Hachette,  1843.  —Researches  into  the  Mathematical Principles of the
Theory  of  Wealth.  Trans,  by  N.  T. Bacon. New York: Macmillan, 1927
(Recherches sur les principes mathematiques de la theorie des richesses,
Paris,  1838).  Cousin,  Victor  (1 792-1 867) Lectures on the True, the
Beautiful  and  the  Good. Trans, by O. W. Wight. New York: D. Appleton,
1875 (Du vrai, du beau et du bien, Paris, 1853
[1818]).
Couturat,  Louis  (1  868-1  91 4) The Algebra of Logic. Trans, by L. G.
Robinson.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  191 4 (Ualgebre de la logique, Paris,
1905).  —De Vinfini mathematique. Paris: F. Alcan, 1896. Couturat, Louis
and  Leau,  Leopold  Histoire de la langue universelle. Paris: Hachette,
1903.  Cowley,  Abraham  (161  8-1  667) To the Royal Society. In Poems:
Miscellanies,  etc. Ed. by A. R. Waller. Cambridge UniversityPress, 1905
(1667).  Crabbe,  George (1754-1832) The Village. In The Poetical Worlds
of  George  Crabbe.  Ed.  by  A.  J. and R. M. Carlyle. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1932 (London, i 78 3). Crane, Stephen (1 871-1900) The
Red  Badge of Courage. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1942 (New
York,  1895).  Crashaw, Richard (c. 1613-1649) The Flaming Heart. In The
Poems, English, Latin and Greeks of Richard Crashaw. Ed. by L. C. Martin.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1927  (from  Steps  to  the Temple, 2nd ed.,
London,  1648, and Carmen Deo Nostro, Paris, 1652). Crescas, Chasdai Ben
Abraham  (1340-1410)  Or Adonai. Bk. 1, ed. and trans, by H. A. Wolfson.
Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1929.

[1196b]
Creuzer,  Georg  Friedrich (1771-1858) Symbolic und Mythologie der alien
Voider,  besonders  der  Griechen.  4  vols.  Leipsic:  Leske,  18361843
(Leipsic,  1810-1812).  Crile,  George Washington (1864-1943) The Origin
and  Nature of the Emotions; Miscellaneous Papers. Ed. by A. F. Rowland.
Philadelphia:  W.  B.  Saunders,  191  5.  Croce, Benedetto (1 866-1952)
Aesthetic  as Science of Expression and General Linguistic. Trans, by D.
Ainslie.    New   York:   Macmillan,   1929   (Estetica   come   scienza
delVespressione  e linguistica genera le, Milan, 1902). — The Conduct of
Life.  Trans, by A. Livingston. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1924 (1922). —
The  Defense of Poetry, Variations on the Theme of Shelley. Trans, by E.
F.  Carritt.  Oxford:  Clarendon Press, 1933. —The Essence of Esthetics.
Trans,  by  D. Ainslie. London: W. Heinemann, 1921 (1912). —Freedom, Its
Meaning.  Ed.  by R. N. Anshen, trans, by A. Livingston. London: Allen &
Unwin, 1942. —History as the Story of Liberty. Trans, by S. Sprigge. New
York:  W.  W. Norton, 1941 (La storia come pensiero e come azione, Bari,
1938).  —History,  Its  Theory  and  Practice. Trans, by D. Ainslie. New
York:   Harcourt  Brace,  1923  (feoria  e  storia  della  storiografia,
1911-1913).  —Logic as the Science of Pure Concept. Trans, by D. Ainslie.
New  York:  Macmillan,  191  7  (Logica come scienza del concetto puro ,
Bari,  1909).  —  The  Philosophy  of the Practical: Economic and Ethic.
Trans,  by  D.  Ainslie.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1 913 (Filosofia della
practica economia ed etica, Bari, 1908). —Politics and Morals. Trans, by
S.  J.  Castiglione.  New  York:  Philosophical Library, 1945 (sel. from
Elementi  di  politica,  Bari,  1925,  and  Aspetti  morali  della  vita
politica,  Bari,  1928).  Croly,  Herbert  David (1869-1930) Progressive
Democracy.   New  York:  Macmillan,  1915.  Crookshank,  Francis  Graham
(1873-1933)  Individual  Diagnosis.  London:  K. Paul, Trench, Triibner,
1930. Cruce, Emeric (c. 1 590-1 648) The New Cyneas of Emeric Cruce. Ed.
and  trans,  by T. W. Balch. Philadelphia: Allen, Lane & Scott, 1909 (Le
Nouveau Cynee, ou, Discours d'estat representant les occasions et moyens
d'establir  unepaix  generalle  et  la  liberte  du commerce par tout le
monde,  Paris,  1623).  Cudworth,  Ralph  (16  17-1688)  A  Treatise  of
Freewill.  Ed.  by  J.  Allen.  London:  J.  W. Parker, 1838. — The True
Intellectual  System  of  the  Universe:  Wherein  All  the  Reason  and
Philosophy  of Atheism is Confuted, and Its Impossibility Demonstrated. 2
1162

[1197a]
vols.  New  York:  Andover, Gould & Newman, 1 837- 1 838 (London, 1678).
Curie,  Marie  (1  867-1934)  Traite  de radioactivite. Paris: Gauthier-
Villars^  1910.  Cuvier,  Georges Leopold Chretien Frederic Dagobert ( 1
769-1  832) The Animal Kingdom, Arranged After Its Organization, Forming
a  Natural  History  of Animals,  and  an  Introduction  to a Comparative
Anatomy.  With  Considerable  Additions  by  W.  B.  Carpenter and J. O.
Westwood.  London:  W. H. Allen, 1890 (Le regne animal distribue d'apres
son  organization, Paris, 1 8 17). D D'Abro, A. The Decline of Mechanism
in  Modern  Physics.  New  York: Van Nostrand, 1939. D'Alembert, Jean Le
Rond (1717-1783) Traite de dynamique. 2 vols. Paris: Gauthier-Villars, 1
92  1 (Paris, 1743). Dalton, John (1 766-1 844) A New System of Chemical
Philosophy.  2  vols.  Manchester:  R.  BickerstafT,  1 808-1 827. Dante
Alighieri  (1265-1321)  The Convivio of Dante Alighieri. Trans, by P. H.
Wicksteed. Temple Classics, London: J. M. Dent, 1912 (c. 1304-1307). —De
Vulgari  Eloquentia.  In  A  Translation  of  the  Latin Worlds of Dante
Alighieri  by  A.  G.  F.  Howell  and P. H. Wicksteed. Temple Classics,
London:  J.  M.  Dent, 1904 (c. 1303-1304). —Epistle to Can Grande della
Scala  (Letter  x). Ibid. (1318?). —La Vita Nuova. Trans, by T. Okey and
P. H. Wicksteed. Temple Classics, London: J. M. Dent, 191 1 (1293?). —On
World-Government  or  De Monarchia. Trans, by H. W. Schneider. New York:
Liberal  Arts  Press, 1949 (c. 1310-1313). D'Arcy, Martin Cyril (1888- )
The Mind and Heart of Love, Lion and Unicorn; a Study in Eros and Agape.
New York: Henry Holt, 1947 (London, 1945). Darwin, Charles Galton (1887-
1962)  The  New Conceptions of Matter. New York: Macmillan, 1931. Darwin,
Charles Robert (1 809-1 882) The Different Forms of Flowers on Plants of
the  Same  Species.  New  York:  D.  Appleton, 1903 (London, 1877). —The
Expression of Emotions in Man and Animals. Ed. by F. Darwin. New York: D.
Appleton,  1929  (London,  1872). —Foundations of the Origin of Species.
Ed.  by  F.  Darwin.  Cambridge  University  Press, 1909 (1842-1843). —A
Posthumous Essay on Instinct. In G. J. Romanes, 1163

[1197b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY E. Delacroix Mental Evolution in Animals. London: K. Paul &
Co.,  1883  (before  1859).  -The  Variation of Animals and Plants Under
Domestication.  2  vols.  New  York:  D.  Appleton, 1900 (London, 1868).
Darwin,  Erasmus  (1731-1802)  The  Loves  of the Plants. In The Botanic
Garden.  London:  J. Johnson, 1799 (Lichfield, 1789). —Zoonomia; or, The
Laws  of  Organic  Life.  2 vols. Philadelphia: E. Earle, 18 18 (London,
17941796).  Darwin,  George  Howard  (1845-19  12)  The  Evolution ofthe
Satellites.  Smithsonian  Institution,  Annual Report. Washington, D.C.,
1898.  —The  Tides and Kindred Phenomena in the Solar System. London: J.
Murray,  191 1 (New York, Daudet, Alphonse ( 1 840-1897) Letters from My
Mill.  Trans, by F. H. Potter. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1893 (Lettres
de  mon moulin, 1 866-1 869). Davy, Sir Humphrey (1778-1829) Elements of
Chemical  Philosophy:  As Regards Laws of Chemical Changes: Undecomposed
Bodies  and Their Primary Combinations. London: Smith, Elder & Co., 1840
(London,  18  12).  Dawson, Christopher Henry (1889-1970) Enquiries into
Religion  and  Culture.  New  York:  Sheed  &  Ward, 1933. —Progress and
Religion:  An  Historical Enquiry. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1938 (London,
1929). —Religion and the Modern State. New York : Sheed & Ward, 1935. De
Burgh,  William  George  (1866-1943)  Towards  a  Religious  Philosophy.
London:  Macdonald  &  Evans,  1937.  Dedekind,  Julius  Wilhelm Richard
(1831-1916)  Essays  on  the  Theory  of Numbers.  Trans, by W. W. Beman.
Chicago: Open Court, 1924 {Stetigkeit und irrationale Zahlen, Brunswick,
1872,  and  Was  sind und sollen die Zahlen, Brunswick, il Defoe, Daniel
(c. 1661-1731)
[Moll Flanders] The Fortunes and Misfortunes of
the  Famous  Moll  Flanders. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1945 (London, 172 1). —Robinson Crusoe. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P.  Dutton, 1947 (1719). —The Shortest Way with the Dissenters and Other
Pamphlets.  Oxford:  Blackwell, 1927 (London, Dekker, Thomas (c. 1570-r.
1641) The Shoemaker's Holiday. In Thomas Deh^er. Ed. by E. Rhys. Mermaid
Series,  London: T. F. Unwin, 1904 (London, 1599). Delacroix, (Ferdinand
Victor)  Eugene (17991863) The Journal of Eugene Delacroix. Trans, by W.
Pach. New York: Covici-Friede, 1937 (18221824; 1847-1863).

[1198a]
H.  Delacroix  THE  GREAT IDEAS Delacroix, Henri Joachim (1873— 1937) Le
langage et la pensee. Paris: F. Alcan, 1924. —Psychologie de Vart, essai
sur   Vactivite  artistique.  Paris:  F.  Alcan,  1927.  Delbruck,  Hans
(1848-1929)   Geschichte  der  Kriegs^unst  im  Rahmen  der  politischen
Geschichte.  7 vols. Berlin: G. Stilke, 19001936. De Man, Henri (1885- )
Joy  in  Wor\. Trans, by E. and C. Paul. New York: Henry Holt, 1929 (Der
Kampf  urn  die  Arbeitsfreude,  1927).  Demetrius (1st century a.d.) On
Style.  Trans, by W. R. Roberts. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University  Press,  1932.  De  Morgan,  Augustus (1806-1871) A Budget of
Paradoxes.  Ed.  by  S.  De  Morgan.  2  vols. Chicago: Open Court, 1915
(1863-1867).  —An  Essay  on  Probabilities, and on Their Application to
Life  Contingencies and Insurance Offices. London: Longmans, Orme & Co.,
1849  (London,  1838). —Formal Logic. Ed. by A. E. Taylor. Chicago: Open
Court,   1926   (London,  1847).  —On  the  Study  and  Difficulties  of
Mathematics.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1910  (London,  1831). Demosthenes
(384-322  b.c.) De Corona and De Falsa Legatione. Trans, by C. A. and J.
H. Vince. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1926
(330 B.C.). —[Philippics] Olynthiacs, Philippics, Minor Public Speeches.
Trans,   by  J.  H.  Vince.  Loeb  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard
University  Press,  1930. De Quincey, Thomas (1785— 1859) Confessions of
an  English  Opium-Eater.  World's Classics, New York: Oxford University
Press,  1934  (1821).  —Letters  to a Young Man Whose Education Has Been
Neglected.  In  Essays.  New  York:  Ward,  Lock & Co., 1886(1823). —The
Literature  of  Knowledge  and  the  Literature  of Power. In Masters of
Literature:  De  Quincey. Ed. by Sidney Low. London: G. Bell & Sons, 191
(1823;  1848). —On the Knocking at the Gate in Macbeth. In De Quincey 's
Literary  Criticism.  Ed.  by  H.  Darbishire.  London:  H. Frowde, 1904
(1823).  —Rhetoric.  In  Masters  of  Literature:  De Quincey. See above
(1828). Descartes, Rene (1596-1650) The Passions of the Soul. In Vol. 1,
Philosophical  Wor\s. Trans, by E. S. Haldane and G. R. T. Ross. 2 vols.
Cambridge  University  Press,  1931 (Les passions de Tame, Paris, 1649).
—The Principles of Philosophy. Ibid. {Principia Philosophiae, Amsterdam,
1644).

[1198b]
1 — The World; or Essay on Light. In Descartes. Selections. Ed. by R. M.
Eaton.  New  York:  Scribner's, 1927 (Traite de la lumiere, 1630- 1633).
Descoqs,  Pedro (1877-1946) Essai critique sur Vhylemorphisme. Paris: G.
Beauchesne,  1924.  Dewey, John (1859-1952) Art as Experience. New York:
Minton Balch, !934- —Characters and Events; Popular Essays in Social and
Political  Philosophy.  Ed.  by J. Ratner. 2 vols. New York: Henry Holt,
1929  (1891-1928).  —A  Common Faith. New Haven, Conn. : Yale University
Press, 1934. —Democracy and Education; an Introduction to the Philosophy
of  Education. New York: Macmillan, 1 93 1 (New York, 191 6). —Essays in
Experimental  Logic.  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1916 (1903-1916).
—Experience  and  Education.  New York: Macmillan, 1938. —Experience and
Nature.  New  York  :  W.  W. Norton, 1929 (Chicago, 1925). —Freedom and
Culture.  New  York: Putnam's, 1939. —How We Thinkj a Restatement of the
Relation  oj Reflective Thinking to the Educative Process. Boston: D. C.
Heath,  1933  (Boston, 1910). —Human Nature and Conduct; an Introduction
to  Social Psychology. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1930 (New
York,  1922). —The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy, and Othei Essays in
Contemporary   Thought.  New  York:  Henry  Holt,  1910  (1897-1909).  /
—Interest  and  Effort in Education. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1913.
—Logic, the Theory of Inquiry. New York: Henry Holt, 1938. —Outlines ofa
Critical  Theory  of Ethics.  Ann  Arbor, Mich.: Register Publishing Co.,
1891.  —Philosophy  and  Civilization.  New  York:  Minton  Balch,  1931
(1902-1931).  —The  Public and Its Problems. New York: Henry Holt, 1927.
—The Questfor Certainty: A Study ofthe Relation oj Knowledge and Action.
New  York:  Minton Balch, 1929. —Reconstruction in Philosophy. New York:
Henry  Holt, 1920. —The School and Society. University of Chicago Press,
1926 (Chicago, 1899). —The Study of Ethics: A Syllabus. Ann Arbor, Mich:
Register Publishing Co., 1894. Dewey, John et al. Creative Intelligence;
Essays  in the Pragmatic Attitude. New York: Henry Holt, 191 7. —Studies
in  Logical  Theory.  University of Chicago Press, 1903. Dewey, John and
Bentley,  Arthur  F.  (18701957)  Knowing  and the Known. Boston: Beacon
Press, 1949. 1164

[1199a]
Dewey,  John  and  Tufts, James H. (i 862-1 942) Ethics. New York: Henrv
Holt,  1938  (New  York,  1908).  Diamond,  Arthur  Sigismund  (1897-  )
Primitive  Law. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1935. Diaz de Gamez {c.
1379-r.  1450)  The  Unconquered  Knight;  a Chronicle ofthe Deeds of Don
Pedro  Nino,  Count  of Buelno,  by  His Standard Bearer Gutierre Diaz de
Gamez.  Trans,  by  Joan  Evans.  London: G. Routledge, 1928 (14311449).
Dicey,  Albert  Venn (1835-1922) Introduction to the Study of the Law of
the  Constitution.  London: Macmillan, 1939 (London, 1885). —Lectures on
the  Relation  Between  Law  and  Public  Opinion  in England During the
Nineteenth  Century.  London:  Macmillan,  1924 (London, 1905). Dickens,
Charles  (1812-1870)  Blea\  House.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,   1948  (London,  1852-1853).  —Great  Expectations.  Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton, 1932 (1860-1861). —Little Dorritt.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1907 (1856). —[Nicholas
Nickleby]  The  Life  and  Adventures  of  Nicholas Nickleby. Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1930 (1838- 1839). —Oliver Twist.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton, 1946 (1837-1839). —Our
Mutual Friend. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1929 (London,
1864-1865).  —[Pickwick  Papers]  The  Posthumous Papers of the Pickwic\
Club.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1934  (London,
1836-1837).  —A  Tale of Two Cities. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1948  (1859). Dickinson, Goldsworthy Lowes (1862- 1932) Justice
and  Liberty;  A Political Dialogue. New York: McClure, 1908. Dickinson,
John  (1894-  )  Administrative  Justice and the Supremacy of Law in the
United  States.  Cambridge,  Mass.  :  Harvard  University  Press, 1927.
Dickson,   Leonard   Eugene   (1874-1954)  Introduction  to  the  Theory
of Numbers.  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1929.  Diderot,  Denis  (17
13-1784)  Citoyen. Article from the Encyclopedic, reprinted in Vol. xiv,
Oeuvres  completes  de  Diderot.  Ed.  by J. Assezat and M. Tourneux. 20
vols.   Paris:  Gamier,  1875-1877  (1753).  —[Le  reve  de  d'Alembert]
Entretien  entre  d'Alembert  et  Diderot;  Reve de d'Alembert; Suite de
Ventretien.  Ed.  by  G.  Maire.  Paris:  Editions Bossard, 1921 (1769).
Digby, Sir Kenelm (1603- 1665)
[The Nature of Bodies] Two Treatises: In the One
of Which, the Nature of Bodies; in the Other, the 1165

[1199b]
. . BIBLIOGRAPHY DOSTOEVSKY Nature of Man's Soul, Is Looked into: In Way
of  Discovery of the Immortality of Reasonable Souls. 2 vols. London: J.
Williams,  1658 (Paris, 1644). •igges, Dudley (161 3-1 643) Unlawfulness
of  Subjects  Taking  up  Arms  Against  Their  Soveraigne, in What Case
Soever.  London:  P.  Parker,  1679  (London,  1643).  DlLTHEY,  WlLHELM
(1833-I9I1)  Das  Erlebnis  und  die Dichtung: Lessing, Goethe, Novalis,
Holderlin. Leipsic: B. G. Teubner, 1922 (Leipsic, 1905). Dingle, Herbert
(1890-  ) Modern Astrophysics. New York: Macmillan, 1924 (London, 1921).
Diogenes Laertius (3rd century) Lives of Eminent Philosophers. Trans, by
R.  D. Hicks. 2 vols. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press,  1925.  Dionysius (The Pseudo-Areopagite)(^?. c. 500) On Mystical
Theology.  In  Vol.  1,  The  Wor^s of Dionysius the Areopagite. Ed. and
trans,  by J. Parker. 2 vols. London: J. Parker, 1 897-1 899 {De Mystica
Theologica)  —On  the Celestial Hierarchy. In Vol. 11, ibid. {De Celesti
Hierarchia).  —On  the  Divine  Names.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid.  {De Divinis
Nominibus) Dirac, Paul Adrien Maurice (1902- ) The Principles of Quantum
Mechanics. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1930. DlWAKAR, RANGANATH RAMACHANDRA
(  1  894- ) Satyagraha: The Power of Truth. Hinsdale, 111.: H. Regnery,
1948.  DOBZHANSKY,  ThEODOSIUS  GrIGORIEVICH  (19OO- .) Genetics and the
Origin of Species. New York: Columbia University Press, 1937. Doddridge,
Philip   (1702-175   1)  Rise  and  Progress  of Religion  in  the  Soul;
Illustrated  in  a  Course of Serious and Practical Addresses, Suited to
Persons of Every Character, etc. New York: American Tract Society, 1849?
(London,  !745)-  Domet  de Vorges, Edmond Charles Eugene (.829-?) Cause
efficiente  et  cause  finale. Paris: Bureau des "Annales de Philosophic
Chretienne," 1888. Donne, John (1573— 1631) Songs and Sonnets
[includes
Aire  and  Angells,  Lovers Infinitenesse, and The Triple Foole], In The
Complete  Poetry  and  Selected Prose of John Donne. Ed. by John Hayward,
New  York:  Random  House, 1 94 1 {c. 1590-r. 1 601). DOSTOEVSKY, FYODOR
MlKHAILOVICH  (l82I-l88l)  Crime and Punishment. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1933  (1866).  —The House ofthe Dead. Everyman's
Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1933 (1861-1862). —The Idiot. Trans, by
C. Garnett. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1942 (1868- 1869).

[1200a]
DOUHET  THE  GREAT IDEAS —Notes from Underground. In The Short Novels of
DostoevsJ{y.  Trans,  by  C. Garnett. New York: Dial Press, 1945 (1864).
—Poor  Fol/{.  Trans, by C. J. Hogarth. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P.  Dutton,  1935  (1846). ^-The Possessed. Trans, by C. Garnett. Modern
Library,  New York: Random House, 1936 (1871). "—A Raw Youth: A Novel in
Three  Parts.  Trans,  by  C. Garnett. New York: Macmillan, 1923 (1875).
Douhet,  Giulio  (1  869-1  930)  The  Command  of the Air. Trans, by D.
Ferrari. New York: Coward-McCann, 1942 (1 921- 1930). Dreyer, John Louis
Emil (1852-1926) History of the Planetary Systems from Thales to Kepler.
Cambridge University Press, 1906. Driesch, Hans Adolf Eduard (1867-1941)
Mind  and Body. Trans, by T. Besterman. New York: Dial Press, 1927 {Leib
und  Seele, Leipsic 1916). — The Science and Philosophy of the Organism.
London:  A.  &  C. Black, 1929 (London, 1908). Dryden, John (1 631-1700)
Absalom  and Achitophel. In Poems of John Dryden. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1934 (London, 1681). —Allfor Love; or, The World
Well  Lost. Ed. by W. Strunk. Boston: D. C. Heath, 191 1 (London, 1678).
—A Discourse Concerning the Original and Progress of Satire. In Vol. 11,
Essays of John Dryden. Ed. by W. P. Ker. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press,
1900 (prefixed to his translation of Juvenal and Persius, London, 1693).
—An  Essay  of  Dramatic  Poesy.  In  Dramatic  Poesy  and Other Essays.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1939  (London, 1668).
—OfHeroic  Plays.  Ibid,  (prefixed  to The Conquest of Granada, London,
1672).  Dubislav,  Walter  (1895-  ) Die Definition. Leipsic: F. Meiner,
1930.  Dubois,  Pierre  (c.  1250-^.1322) De Recuperatione Terre Sancte.
Traite  de  politique generale. Ed. by C. V. Langlois. Paris: A. Picard,
1891 (i305-i3°7)- Ducasse, Curt John (1881-1969) Causation and the Types
of  Necessity.  Seattle,  Wash.:  University  of Washington Press, 1924.
Duguit,  Leon  (1859-1928)  Law in the Modern State. Trans, by F. and H.
Laski.  New  York:  B.  W.  Huebsch, 191 9 (Les transformations du droit
public,  Paris,  1913).  —Uetat,  le  droit objectif et la loi positive.
Paris:  A.  Fontemoing,  1901. —Souverainete et liberie, lecons faites a
VUniversite Columbia. Paris: F. Alcan, 1922. Duhem, Pierre Maurice Marie
(1861-1916)  Etudes  sur  Leonard de Vinci. 3 vols. Paris: A. Hermann, 1
906-1  913.  —La  theorie  physique,  son  objet—sa structure. Paris: M.
Riviere, 191 4 (Paris, 1906).

[1200b]
—Le  systeme  du  monde.  Histoire des theories cosmologiques de Plato a
Copernic.  5  vols. Paris: Hermann & his, 1913-1917. —Les origines de la
statique.  Paris:  A. Hermann, 1905-1906. —L 'evolution de la mecanique.
Paris:  A.  Hermann,  1903.  Dunkmann, Karl (1 868-1 933) Soziologie der
Arbeit.  Halle:  C.  Marhold, 1933. Duns Scotus, Joannes (c.i 266-1 308)
Opus  Oxoniense  (Commentaria  in  Libros Sententiarum). Vols, viii-xxi,
Ioannis  Duns  Scoti  Opera  Omnia. 26 vols. Paris: L. Vives, 1 891-1895
(1300?).  —Oxford  Commentary.  In  Vol.  11,  Selections  from Medieval
Philosophers.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  Richard  McKeon.  2 vols. New York:
Scribner's,  19291930 (1300?). —Reportata Parisiensia {Opus Parisiensis)
.  Vols,  xxn-xxiv,  Opera.  See  above  (1304?).  —  Tractatus de Primo
Principio.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  E.  Roche.  St. Bonaventure, N.Y.: The
Franciscan  Institute,  1949 (before 1302?). DURKHEIM, EMILE (1858-I917)
The  Division  of  Labor  in  Society.  Trans,  by G. Simpson. New York:
Macmillan,   1933   {De   la  division  du  travail  social;  etude  sur
Vorganisation  des  societes  superieures,  Paris,  1893).  Eaton, Ralph
Monroe  (1 892-1 932) Symbolism and Truth; an Introduction to the Theory
of   Knowledge.   Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1925.
Ebbinghaus, Hermann (1 850-1 909) Memory. A Contribution to Experimental
Psychology.  Trans, by H. A. Ruger. New York: Columbia University Press,
191 3 {fiber das Gedachtnis, Leipsic, 1885). Ebreo, Leone (Leo Hebraeus)
{c.  1460-^.1525)  The Philosophy of Love. Trans, by F. FriedebergSeeley.
London:   Soncino  Press,  1937  {Dialoghi  d'amore,  c.1502).  Eckhart,
Johannes  {c.  1260-^.1327)  Meister  Eckhart  [Sermons  and Collations;
Tractates;   Sayings   and  Liber  Positionum].  Abr.  trans,  of  Franz
PfeifFer's  Eckhart  by  C.  de  B.  Evans.  London:  M.  Watkins, 1924.
Eddington,  Sir Arthur Stanley (1 882-1 944) The Expanding Universe. New
York:  Macmillan,  !  933-  —The  Internal  Constitution  of  the Stars.
Cambridge University Press, 1926. —The Mathematical Theory of Relativity.
Cambridge  University  Press, 1930 (Cambridge, 1923). —The Nature of the
Physical  World.  London:  J.  M.  Dent,  1942  (Cambridge,  1928). —The
Philosophy of Physical Science. New York: Macmillan, 1939. 1166

[1201a]
.  . Science and the Unseen World. London : Allen & Unwin, 1929. —Space,
Time,  and  Gravitation;  an  Outline  of the General Relativity Theory.
Cambridge  University  Press,  1920. —Stars and Atoms. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale University Press, 1927. —Stellar Movements and the Structure of the
Universe.  London:  Macmillan,  191 4. Edwards, Jonathan (i 703-1 758) A
Careful  and  Strict  Enquiry into the Modern Prevailing Notions of That
Freedom  of  Will,  Which  Is  Supposed to Be Essential to Moral Agency,
Virtue  and  Vice,  Reward  and  Punishment, Praise and Blame. New York:
Carter  & Bros., 1869 (Boston, 1754). —Charity and Its Fruits. Ed. by T.
Edwards.  New  York: Carter & Bros., 1852 (1738). —A Dissertation on the
Nature of True Virtue. In Vol. 1, The Works of Jonathan Edwards. 2 vols.
London:  H.  G.  Bohn,  1865  (1755).  —The  Great Christian Doctrine of
Original Sin Defended; Evidences of Its Truth Produced, and Arguments to
the  Contrary  Answered.  Edinburgh:  J. Murray, 1798 (Boston, 1758). —A
Treatise  Concerning Religious Affections, in Three Parts. Philadelphia:
J.  Crissy,  1821  (Boston, 1746). Edwards, Lyford Paterson (1882- ) The
Natural  History  of  Revolution.  University  of  Chicago  Press, 1927.
Edwards, Richard (r.i 523-1 566) Damon and Pithias. In Vol. iv, A Select
Collection  of  Old  English  Plays. Ed. by R. Dodsley. 15 vols. London:
Reeves  &  Turner, 1 874-1 876 (1564)- Einstein, Albert (1879— 1955) The
Meaning of Relativity. Trans, by E. P. Adams. Princeton University Press,
1950  (Vier  Vorlesungen uber Relativitatstheorie, Brunswick, 1922). —On
the  Method  of  Theoretical Physics. New York: Oxford University Press,
1933.  —Relativity  :  The  Special  and  the  General Theory. A Popular
Exposition.  Trans,  by  R.  W.  Lawson. London: Methuen, 1931 {Uber die
spezielle  und  die allgemeine Relativitatstheorie, B runswick, 1 9 1 7)
—Sidelights  on  Relativity.  Trans,  by  G.  B. Jeffery and W. Perrett.
London:  Methuen, 1922 (Ather und Relativitatstheorie, Berlin, 1920, and
Geometric  und  Erfahrung, Berlin, 1 92 1 ) Einstein, Albert and Infeld,
Leopold  (1898- ) The Evolution of Physics; the Growth of Ideasfrom Early
Concepts  to  Relativity  and  Quanta. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1938.
Eliot,  Thomas  Stearns  (1  888-1  965) After Strange Gods; a Primer of
Modern  Heresy.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace, 1934. —Essays, Ancient and
Modern. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1936. 1167

[1201b]
:  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Engels  —The Family Reunion: A Play. New York: Harcourt
Brace,  1939. —Four Quartets. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1943. —Murder in
the  Cathedral.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1935.  —Notes Towards the
Definition of Culture. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1949. —The Sacred Wood;
Essays  in  Poetry  and Criticism. London: Methuen, 1934 (London, 1920).
—Selected  Essays,  191J-1932. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1932. — The Use
of Poetry  and the Use of Criticism, Studies in the Relation of Criticism
to  Poetry  in  England.  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University Press,
1933Ellis,  Henry  Havelock  (1859-1939) Man and Woman: A Study of Human
Secondary  Sexual  Characters.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1926 (New York,
1894).  Studies  in the Psychology of Sex. 4 vols. New York Random House,
1936  (New  York,  1  897-1 928). Elyot, Sir Thomas (c. 1 490-1 546) The
Governour.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1937 (London,
1531).  Emerson,  Ralph  Waldo  (1  803-1  882) The American Scholar. An
Oration Delivered Before the Phi Beta Kappa Society, August 31, 1837. In
Complete  Essays (Boston, 1837). —The Conduct of Life, Nature, and Other
Essays. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1927 (Boston, i860).
—English   Traits,  Representative  Men  and  Other  Essays.  Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1932  (Boston, 1856). —Essays. In
Complete  Essays  (First  Series,  Boston, 1 841; Second Series, Boston,
1844).  —Natural  History  of  Intellect  and  Other  Papers.  New York:
Houghton  Mifflin,  1899  (1870).  —Nature.  See Conduct of Life (Boston,
1836).  —Representative Men. See English Traits (Boston, 1850). —Society
and  Solitude  and  Other  Essays.  Everyman's  Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1922  (Boston,  1870).  — Threnody. In Complete Essays (London,
1847).  note:  The  Complete  Essays  and  Other Writings of Ralph Waldo
Emerson.  Ed.  by  B.  Atkinson. Modern Library, New York: Random House,
1940.  Engels,  Friedrich  (1  820-1  895)  The Condition of the Wording
Classes  in  England.  Trans,  by  F.  Kelly-Wischnewetzky. London: Swan
Sonnenschein,  1892 (Leipsic, 1845). —Dialectics of Nature. Ed. by J. B.
S.  Haldane,  trans,  by C. P. Dutt. New York: International Publishers,
1940  {c.  1872-1882).  —Germany: Revolution and Counter-Revolution. New
York:  International  Publishers, 1933 (185 11852). —Herr Eugen Duhnng's
Revolution in Science.

[1202a]
.  Enriques  THE GREAT IDEAS Trans, by E. Burns. New York: International
Publishers,  1935  (1877-1878).  —Ludwig  Feuerbach  and  the Outline of
Classical  German Philosophy. Ed. by C. P. Dutt. New York: International
Publishers, 1934 (1886). —The Origin of the Family, Private Property and
the State. New York: International Publishers, 1940 (Zurich, 1884). —The
Peasant  War  in Germany. Trans, by M. J. Olgin. New York: International
Publishers,   1926   (1850).  Enriques,  Federigo  (1871-1946)  Problems
of Science.  Trans,  by  K.  Royce.  Chicago: Open Court, 191 4 (Problemi
della  scienza, Bologna, 1906). Epictetus (b. c. 60 A.D.) The Manual. In
The  Stoic  and  Epicurean  Philosophers.  Ed. by W. J. Oates. New York:
Random House, 1940. Epicurus (341-270 b.c.) Epicurus to Herodotus; . ...
to  Menoeceus;  .  .  .  .to  Pythocles.  In  The  Stoic  and  Epicurean
Philosophers. Ed. by W. J. Oates. New York: Random House, 1940. Erasmus,
Desiderius  (c. 1 467-1 536) Antipolemus: Erasmus Against War. Ed. by J.
W.  Mackail. Boston: Merrymount Press, 1907 (Bellum, Basle, 151 7). —The
Complaint  of  Peace.  Trans,  attributed  to  T. Paynell. Chicago: Open
Court,  191  7  (Querela  Pads  Undique  Gentium Ejectae Profligataeque,
Basle,  15 16). —De Pueris Statim ac Liberaliter Instituendis. Trans, in
W.  H.  Woodward,  Desiderius  Erasmus  Concerning the Aim and Method of
Education.  Cambridge University Press, 1904 (1529). —The Education of a
Christian  Prince.  Trans,  by L. K. Born. New York: Columbia University
Press,  —The  Praise  of  Folly.  Trans,  by  H.  H.  Hudson.  Princeton
University  Press, 1941 (Encomium Moriae, Id Est Stultitiae Laus, Paris,
1509?).  Erigena,  Joannes Scotus (d. c. 877) De Divisione Naturae. Vol.
cxxn, Patrologia La1 936 (Institutum Principis Christiani, 1 5 1 6) tina
(862-866). EULER, LEONHARD (1707-I783) Elements of Algebra. Trans, by J.
Hewlett.  London: Longmans, Orme & Co., 1840 (Anleitung zur Algebra, St.
Petersburg,  1770).  —Letters  of Euler on Different Subjects in Natural
Philosophy,  Addressed  to  a German Princess. 2 vols. New York: Harper,
1842  (Lettres a une princesse d'Allemagne sur divers sujets de physique
et  de  philosophic,  St.  Petersburg,  1  768-1  772).  —Mechanic  oder
analytische  Darstellung  der Wissenschaftvon der Bewegung. Ed. by J. P.
Wohlfers.  3  vols. Greifswald: C. A. Koch, 1 848-1 853 (Mechanica, sive
Motus  Scientia,  St.  Petersburg,  1736).  Eusebius Pamphili, Bishop of
Caesarea   (c.   260c.  340)  The  Ecclesiastical  History  of  Eusebius
Pamphilius.

[1202b]
Ed.  and  trans,  by C. F. Cruse. London: G. Bell & Sons, 1892 (Historia
Ecclesiastica, 323-340). Ewing, Alfred Cyril (1 899-1973) The Definition
of  Good.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1947. — The Individual, the State and
World   Government.   New   York:  Macmillan,  1947.  —The  Morality  of
Punishment, with Some Suggestionsfor a General Theory of Ethics. London:
K.  Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1929. Fanfani, Amintore (1908- ) Catholicism,
Protestantism   and   Capitalism.   New   York:   Sheed   &  Ward,  1935
(Cattolicesimo   e   protestantesimo   nella   formazione   storica  del
capitalismo,  Milan,  1934).  Faraday,  Michael  (1791-1867) Lectures on
Education.  London  : J.W. Parker, 1 855. —Observations on the Education
of  the  Judgment.  In  The Culture Demanded by Modern Life; a Series of
Addresses and Arguments on the Claims of Scientific Education. Ed. by E.
L.Youmans.  New  York:  D.  Appleton,  1871  (1854). —[Various Forces of
Matter]  A  Course  of  Six Lectures on the Various Forces of Matter and
Their Relations to Each Other. Ed. by W. Crookes. New York: Harper, 1868
(London,  i860).  Farnell,  Lewis Richard (1856— 1934) Greeks Hero Cults
and  Ideas  of  Immortality. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1921. Farrand, Max
(1869-1945)  The  Framing  of the Constitution of the United States. New
Haven,  Conn.:  Yale  University Press, 1936 (New Haven, 191 3). Farrar,
Frederic  William  (1831-1903)  Chapters  on Language. London: Longmans,
Green & Co., 1865. Fauconnet, Paul (1874- ) La responsabilite ; etude de
sociologie.  Paris:  F.  Alcan,  1920.  Fearing, Kenneth (1902-1961) The
Hospital.   New  York:  Random  House,  1939.  Fechner,  Gustav  Theodor
(1801-1887)  Elemente  der  Psychophysi\.  2  vols. Leipsic: Breitkopf &
Hartel,  1907  (Leipsic,  i860).  —Life  After  Death.  Trans,  by M. C.
Wadsworth  et  al.  New York: Pantheon Books, 1943 (principally from Das
Biichlein  vom  Leben  nach  dem  Tode,  Leipsic,  1836).  —Religion ofa
Scientist. Sel. and trans, by W. Lowrie. New York: Pantheon Books, 1946.
—Uber  die  physitylische  und  philosophische  Atomenlehre. Leipsic: H.
Mendelssohn, 1855. Fenelon, Francois de Salignac de la Mothe (1651-1715)
Adventures of Telemachus. Ed. by O. W. Wight, trans, by Dr. Hawkesworth.
Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin, 1887 (Suite du quatrieme litre de "VOdyssee"
d'Homere, ou les Avantures de Telemaque,fih d'Ulysse, Paris, 1699). 1168

[1203a]
:  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Forest —A Demonstration of the Existence and Attributes
of  God.  Harrisburg, Pa.: W. Gillmor, 1811 {Demonstration de Vexistence
de  Dieu,  tiree  de  la  connaissance  de  la  nature,  Paris,  17 12).
—Dialogues  on  Eloquence  in  General,  Particularly That Kind Which Is
Fittedfor  the  Pulpit.  Ed.  by  J.  Creighton, trans, by W. Stevenson.
Boston:  Farrand,  Mallory  &  Co., 18 10 (Dialogues sur /' eloquence en
general et sur celle de la chaire en particulier, Paris, 171 8
[1 681-1686]).
—A  Treatise  on  the  Education  of Daughters.  Ed.  and trans, by T. F.
Dibdin. Boston: C. Ewer, 1821 (Education desfiles, Paris, 1687). Fenton,
Joseph  Clifford (1906- ) The Concept of Sacred Theology. Milwaukee, Wis.
Bruce  Publishing Co., 1941. Ferguson, Adam (1723-18 16) An Essay on the
History  of  Civil  Society.  Philadelphia:  A. Finley, 1819 (Edinburgh,
1767).  Ferrero,  Guglielmo  (1871-1942)  Peace  and  War.  Trans, by B.
Pritchard.  New  York : Macmillan, 1933 (Lafin des aventures ; guerre et
paix,  Paris, 1931). —The Principles of Power: The Great Political Crises
of  History.  Trans,  by  T.  R.  Jaeckel.  New  York:  Putnam's,  1942.
Feuerbach,  Ludwig  Andreas  (1  804-1 872) The Essence of Christianity.
Trans,  by  M. Evans. London: K. Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1893 (Das Wesen
des   Christentums,   Leipsic,   1   841).   —Gedanken   iiber  Tod  und
Unsterblichkeit.  In  Vol.  1,  Sdmtliche  Werke. Ed. by W. Bolin and F.
Jodl.  10  vols.  Stuttgart:  F.  Frommann, 1903-1911 (first pub. anon.,
1830).   Fichte,   Immanuel   Hermann   von  (1796-1879)  Die  Idee  der
Persbnlichkeit  und  der  individuellen Fortdauer. Elberfelde: Buschler,
1834.  —Ontologie. Vol. in, Grundzuge zum System der Philosophic 3 vols.
Heidelberg:  C.  B.  Mohr,  1836.  Fichte,  Johann  Gottlieb (1762-1814)
Addresses  to  the  German  Nation.  Trans,  by  R.  F.  Jones and G. H.
Turnbull.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1922  (Reden  an die Deutsche Nation,
Berlin,  1808).  —The  Dignity  of Man.  In The Science of Knowledge, q.v.
(Uberdie  Wurde des Menschen, 1794). —The Science of Knowledge. Trans, by
A.  E.  Kroeger.  London:  Triibner  &  Co.,  1889 (Uber den Begriff der
Wissenschaftslehre   oder  der  sogenannten  Philosophic  Weimar,  1794;
Grundlage der gesammten Wissenschaftslehre, Leipsic, 1794; Grundriss des
Eigenthiimlichen   der   Wissenschaftslehre   in   Ruchsicht   auf   das
theoretische  Vermogen,  Jena, . —The Science of Rights. Trans, by A. E.
Kroeger.  1795)-  London:  Triibner  &  Co.,  1889 (Rechtslehre, Berlin,
1812).  —The  Vocation  of Man. Trans, by W. Smith. Chicago: Open Court,
1940  (Die  Bestimmung  des  Menschen,  Berlin,  1800). Ficino, Marsilio
(1433-1499) Five Questions Concerning the Mind. Trans, by J. 1169

[1203b]
: L. Burroughs. In The Renaissance Philosophy of Man. Ed. by E. Cassirer
et  al.  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1948  (1476).  Fielding, Henry
(1707-1754)  Amelia. 2 vols. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1930 (London, 1752). —Jonathan Wild. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1932  (London,  1743). —Joseph Andrews. Everyman's Library, New
York:   E.   P.  Dutton,  1935  (London,  1742).  Figgis,  John  Neville
(1866-1919)  Theory  of  the Divine Right of Kings. Cambridge University
Press,  1914 (Cambridge, 1896). Filmer, Sir Robert (d. 1653) The Anarchy
ofa  Limited  or  Mixed  Monarchy;  or,  A  Succinct  Examination of the
Fundamentals  of Monarchy. In Patriarcha, and Other Political Works. Ed.
by  P.  Laslett.  New York: Macmillan, 1949 (London, 1648). —Patriarcha.
Ibid.  (London,  1680).  Fisher, Ronald Aylmer (1890—1962) The Design of
Experiments.  London:  Oliver  &  Boyd, 1942 (London, 1935). Fiske, John
(1842-1901) Essays: Historical and Literary. 2 vols. New York Macmillan,
1907 (1 895-1 900). —Life Everlasting. New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1
90  1.  Fitzgerald,  Francis  Scott  Key (1 896-1 940) The Great Gatsby.
Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1934 (New York, 1925). Flaubert,
Gustave  (1821-1880)  Madame  Bovary.  Trans,  by  E. M. Aveling. Modern
Library, New York: Random House, 1940 (Paris, 1857). — The Temptation of
Saint  Anthony. Trans, by L. Hearn. New York: Harper, 1932 (La tentation
de Saint Antoine, Paris, 1874). Flugel, John Carl (1884-1955) The Psycho
-Analytic  Study  ofthe  Family.  London:  Hogarth  Press, 1939 (London,
1921).  Foch,  Ferdinand (1851-1929) The Principles of War. Trans, by J.
de  Morinni.  New  York:  H.  K. Fly, 191 8 (Des principes de la guerre,
conferences   faites  a  VEcole  superieure  de  guerre,  Paris,  1903).
Foertsch,  Hermann  (d.  1961)  The  Art of Modern Warfare. Ed. by G. F.
Eliot,  trans,  by  T.  W. Knauth. New York: O. Piest, 1940 (Kriegs^unst
heute und morgen, Berlin, 1939). Fontenelle, Bernard le Bovier de (1657—
1757)  Conversations  on  the Plurality of Worlds. Trans, by E. Gunning.
London:  T.  Hurst, 1803 (Entretiens sur la pluralite des mondes, Paris,
1686).  —Histoire  des  oracles.  Paris:  E.  Droz,  1934 (Paris, 1686).
Forest,  Aime  La  structure  metaphysique du concret selon Saint Thomas
d'Aquin. Paris: J. Vrin, 1931.

[1204a]
.  FORSTER  THE  GREAT IDEAS Forster, Edward Morgan (i 879-1970) Aspects
ofthe  Novel.  New  York:  Harcourt Brace, 1927. Fortescue, Sir John (c.
1389-r.  1476)  De  Laudibus  Legum  Angliae.  Ed.  and  trans, by S. B.
Chrimes.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1942  (c. 1470). —Governance of
England:  Otherwise  Called  the  Difference  Between  an Absolute and a
Limited  Monarchy.  Ed.  by  C.  Plummer.  Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1885
(after  1471).  Fourier,  Francois  Marie  Charles  (1 772-1 837) Social
Destinies.  In  General  Introduction  to  Social  Sciences.  Ed.  by A.
Brisbane.  New  York: C. P. Somerby, 1876 (Theorie des quatre mouvements
et  des  destinies  generales,  Leipsic,  1808). —Traite de Vassociation
domestique-agricole.  2  vols. Paris: Bossange, 1822. France, Anatole (1
844-1 924) The Crime of Sylvestre Bonnard. Trans, by Lafcadio Hearn. New
York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1 93 1 {he crime de Sylvestre Bonnard, membre de
rinstitut,  Paris,  1881).  —Penguin  Island. Trans, by A. W. Evans. New
York:  Dodd,  Mead  &  Co., 1924 {Vile des pingouins, Paris, 1908). —The
Revolt  of the Angels. Trans, by W. Jackson. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co.,
1927 (La revoke des anges, Paris, 191 4). Francis of Assisi, Saint (c. 1
182-1226)  The  Little Flowers of St. Francis of Assisi with the "Mirror
of Perfection"  (attributed  to  St.  Francis).  Trans, by T. Okey et al.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton, 1944 (Ifioretti di San
Francesco,  c.  1322).  —[The Rules] The Rule ofthe Friars Minorfrom the
Text  of  1  210-122  1 and The Rule of the Friars Minorfrom the Text of
1223.  In The Writings of St. Francis of Assisi. Ed. and trans, by C. de
la  Warr.  London:  Burns,  Oates, & Washbourne, 1905. Francis of Sales,
Saint  (1567-1622)  Introduction  to the Devout Life. Trans, by A. Ross.
London:  Burns, Oates, & Washbourne, 1937 {Introduction a la vie devote,
Lyons,  1  609)  —  Treatise on the Love of God. Trans, by H. B. Mackay.
Westminster,  Md.:  Newman  Bookshop,  1942  (Traite  de Vamour de Dieu,
Lyons, 1616). Frank, Erich (1 883-1 949) Philosophical Understanding and
Religious Truth. New York: Oxford University Press, 1945. Frank, Philipp
(1884-1966)  Between  Physics  and Philosophy. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University Press, 1941. Franklin, Benjamin (1706-1790) The Autobiography
of  Benjamin  Franklin,  the  Unmutilated and Correct Version. Ed. by J.
Bigelow. New York: Putnam's, 1927 (1771-1790).

[1204b]
—A  Dissertation  on Liberty and Necessity, Pleasure and Pain. Ed. by L.
C.  Worth. New York: Facsimile Text Society, 1930 (London, 1725). —Essay
on   the  African  Slave  Trade.  Philadelphia  :  D.  Humphreys,  1790.
—Experiments.  Ed.  by J. B. Cohen. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press,   1941  (originally  pub.  as  Experiments  and  Observations  on
Electricity,  London,  1751— 1753). —On Marriage. Larchmont, N.Y.: Peter
Pauper  Press,  1929.  —On  War  and Peace. Boston: Directors of the Old
South  Work,  1902  (1776-  1789).  —Poor  Richard's  Almanac^ and Other
Papers.  East  Aurora,  N.Y.: Roycrofters, 1924 (1728-1780). Frazer, Sir
James  George  (1854-1941)  The  Golden  Bough;  a  Study in Comparative
Religion.  12  vols.  London: Macmillan, 1911-1915 (London, 1890). —Man,
God,  and  Immortality; Thoughts on Human Progress. New York: Macmillan,
1927.   —Psyche's   Tas/{,  a  Discourse  Concerning  the  Influence  of
Superstition  on  the  Growth  of Institutions. London: Macmillan, 1909.
Freeman,  Edward  Augustus (1 823-1 892) History of Federal Government in
Greece and Italy. Augmented ed. by J. B. Bury. New York: Macmillan, 1893
(originally pub. as History of Federal Government, from the Foundation of
the Achaian League to the Disruption ofthe United States, London, 1863).
Frege,  Friedrich Ludwig Gottlob (1848-1925) Grundgesetze der Arithmetic
begriffschriftlich  abgeleitet.  2  vols.  Jena:  H.  Pohle, 1893- 1903.
Fresnel,  Augustin  Jean  (1  788-1 827) Theorie de la lumiere. In Vols.
1-11,  Oeuvres  Completes. 3 vols. Paris: Imprimerie Imperiale, 18661870
(1820).  Freud,  Sigmund  (1 856-1 939) A Childhood Memoryfrom "Dichtung
und   Wahrheit."  Collected  Papers,  xxi  (1917).  —"Civilized"  Sexual
Morality  and  Modern  Nervousness.  Ibid.,  vii  (1908).  —A Connection
Between  a Symbol and a Symptom. Ibid., xv (1916). —Contributions to the
Psychology  of  Love.  Ibid.,  xi-xm  (1910-1918).  —The Dynamics of the
Transference.   Ibid.,   xxvm   (1912).   —The   Employment   of  Dream-
Interpretation  in  Psycho-Analysis. Ibid., xxvn (191 2). —The Future of
an  Illusion.  Trans,  by  E.  Jones. New York: Liveright, 1928 (Vienna,
1927).  —Leonardo  da  Vinci:  A  Psycho-Sexual  Study  of  an Infantile
Reminiscence.  Trans,  by  A. A. Brill. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1932
(Vienna, 19 10). —Moses and Monotheism. Trans, by K. Jones. New York: A.
A.  Knopf,  1939.  —The  Moses  of  Michelangelo.  Collected Papers, xvi
(1914). —Mourning and Melancholia. Ibid., vm (1916). 1170

[1205a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Gaunilon  —An  Outline  of  Psychoanalysis.  Trans,  by J.
Strachey.  New  York:  W. W. Norton, 1949 (1939). —The Predisposition to
Obsessional Neurosis. Collected Papers, xi (191 3). —The Psychopathology
of Everyday  Life.  Trans^by  A.  A.  Brill.  New  York:  Macmillan, 1930
(Berlin,  1904).  —Recommendations  for Physicians on the PsychoAnalytic
Method  of  Treatment.  Collected Papers, xxix (1912). —A Review of "The
Antithetical  Sense  of Primal Words." Ibid., x (1910). —The Theme ofthe
Three  Caskets. Ibid., xv (191 3). —Three Contributions to the Theory of
Sex.  Trans,  by  A.  A.  Brill.  New  York:  Nervous  & Mental Diseases
Publishing  Co.,  1925  (Vienna,  1905).  —Totem and Taboo; Resemblances
Between  the  Psychic  Lives  of  Savages and Neurotics. Trans, by A. A.
Brill.  New  York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1930? (Vienna, 191 3). —Why War? In
Civilization,  War  and  Death.  Ed.  by John Rickman. New York: Hogarth
Press, 1939 (i933)- — Wit and Its Relation to the Unconscious. Trans, by
A.  A.  Brill.  New York: Moffat, Yard & Co., 1916 (Vienna, 1905). note:
Collected  Papers.  Ed.  and trans, by J. Riviere. 4 vols. New York: The
International  Psychoanalytical  Press, 1 924-1 925. (The Roman numerals
indicate  the  number  of  the  paper  in that edition.) Friedrich, Carl
Joachim  (1901-  )  Constitutional  Government and Democracy; Theory and
Practice  in Europe and America. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1941 (rev.
ed. of Constitutional Government and Politics, New York, 1937). Froebel,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  August (17821852) The Education of Man. Trans, by W.
N.  Hailmann.  New  York: D. Appleton, 1887 (Menschenerziehung, Keilhau,
1826).   Froissart,  Sir  John  (c.  1338-^.14  10)  The  Chronicles  of
Froissart. Abr. ed. by G. C. Macaulay, trans, by J. Bourchier. New York:
Macmillan,  1904.  Froude,  James  Anthony  (18  18-1894) The Science of
History.  A  Lecture  Delivered at the Royal Institution, 1864. In Short
Stories  on  Great  Subjects,  First Series. New York: Oxford University
Press,  1924.  FULLERTON,  GEORGE  StUART  (i 859- 1 925) The Conception
ofthe Infinite, and the Solution of the Mathematical Antinomies: A Study
in  Psychological  Analysis.  Philadelphia:  Lippincott, 1887. FUSTEL DE
COULANGES,  NuMA  DENIS  (183O-1889)  The  Ancient  City: A Study on the
Religion,  Laws, and Institutions of Greece and Rome. Trans, by W. Small.
Boston:  Lothrop,  Lee  &  Shepard, 192- (La cite antique, Paris, 1864).
1171

[1205b]
Gaius  (d.  c. 180 A.D.) The Commentaries of Gaius. Ed. and trans, by J.
T.  Abdy and B. Walker. Cambridge University Press, 1885. Galen (fi. 2nd
century  a.d.)  Claudii Galeni Opera Omnia. Ed. by C. G. Kiihn. 20 vols.
Leipsic:  C.  Cnobloch, 1 821-1833. —On Medical Experience. Trans, by R.
Walzer.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1944.  —On  the Utility
of Parts.  Trans,  by  R.  McCoy. New York: Pantheon Press, 1951. Galileo
Galilei  (1564-1642)  Dialogo  dei  massimi  sistemi. In Vol. 1, Galileo
Galilei  Opera. Ed. by S. Timpanaro. 2 vols. Milan: Rizzoli & Co., 1936-
1938 (Florence, 1632). — The Sidereal Messenger of Galileo Galilei and a
Part  of  the  Preface  to  Kepler's  Dioptrics. Ed. and trans, by E. S.
Carlos.  London:  Rivington's,  1880  (Nuncius  Sidereus, Venice, 1610).
Galsworthy,  John  (1  867-1  933)  The  Forsyte Saga. 3 vols. New York:
Scribner's,  1934  (New  York,  1922).  Galton,  Sir Francis (1822-1911)
Essays   in   Eugenics.   London:   Eugenics  Education  Society,  1909.
—Hereditary  Genius:  An Inquiry into Its Laws and Consequences. London:
Macmillan,  191  4 (London, 1869). —Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
Development.  Everyman's  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1928 (London,
1883).  —Natural  Inheritance.  London:  Macmillan, 1889. Galvani, Luigi
(1737-1798) De Viribus Electricitatis in Motu Musculari Commentarius. In
Opere.  Bologna:  E.  Dall'Olmo,  1841  (i790. Gamow, George (1904-1968)
Atomic  Energy in Cosmic and Human Life. New York: Macmillan, 1946. —The
Birth and Death of the Sun; Stellar Evolution and Sub-Atomic Energy. New
York:  Viking Press, 1940. Garrigou-Lagrange, Reginald (1 877-1964) God,
His  Existence  and  Nature;  a  Thomistic  Solution of Certain Agnostic
Antinomies. Trans, by B. Rose. 2 vols. St. Louis, Mo. : Herder Book Co.,
1  939- 1 94 1 (Dieu, son existence et sa nature, Paris, 1915). —The One
God:  A  Commentary  on the First Part of St. Thomas' Theological Summa.
Trans,  by  B.  Rose. St. Louis, Mo.: Herder Book Co., 1943 {De Deo Uno:
Commentarium  in  Primam  Partem  S. Thomae, Paris, 1938). Gaunilon (nth
century)  In  Behalf  of  the Fool. See Anselm of Canterbury, Proslogium
(Liber  pro Insipiente Adversus Anselmi in Proslogio Ratiocinationem, c.
1070).

[1206a]
Gauss   THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Gauss,  Karl  Friedrich  (1777-1855)  General
Investigations  of  Curved  Surfaces  of  1827 and 182$. Trans, by J. C.
Morehead  and  A.  M.  Hiltebeitel.  Princeton  University Library, 1902
(Disquisitiones   Generates   Circa  Superficies  Curvas.  In  Vol.  vi,
Commentationes  Societatis  Regiae Scientiarum Gottingensis Recentiores,
Gottingen,  1828).  —Inaugural  Lecture  on  Astronomy and Papers on the
Foundations  of  Mathematics.  Trans,  by G. W. Dunnington. Baton Rouge,
La.:  Louisiana  State  University  Press, 1937 (1808). — Untersuchungen
uber hohere Arithmetic. Ed. and trans, by H. Maser. Berlin: J. Springer,
1889  (Disquisitiones Arithmeticae, Leipsic, 1801). Gentili, Alberico (1
552-1  608)  De  jure  Belli  Libri Tres. Trans, by J. C. Rolfe. 2 vols.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1933 (Hanau, 1598). George Eliot, pseud, for
Mary Ann Evans (1819-1880) Daniel Deronda. New York: T. Y. Crowell, 1917
(Edinburgh,  1876). —Romola. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1  93  1 (London, 1863). George, Henry (1839-1897) Progress and Poverty.
Modern  Library,  New  York:  Random  House, 1948 (San Francisco, 1879).
Gersonides  (Levi  ben-Gerson) (1 288-1 344) The Commentary of Levi ben-
Gerson  (Gersonides) on the Book of job. Ed. and trans, by A. L. Lassen.
New  York:  Bloch Publishing Company, 1946. Gibbon, Edward (i 737-1 794)
An  Essay on the Study of Literature. London: T. Becket, 1764 (Essai sur
Vetude   de   la  litterature,  London,  1761).  GlBBS,  loSIAH  WlLLARD
(1839-I9O3)  Collected Worlds. 2 vols. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press,  1949.  Gibson, Alexander George (1875-1950) The Physician's Art;
an  Attempt  to  Expand  John  Locke's Fragment, De Arte Medica. Oxford:
Clarendon  Press,  1933.  Giddings, Franklin Henry (1855-1931) Democracy
and  Empire;  with  Studies  of Their Psychological, Economic, and Moral
Foundations.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1900.  Gide,  Andre Paul Guillaume
(1869-1951)  The Counterfeiters. Trans, by D. Bussy. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House,  1931  (Les  faux-monnayeurs,  Paris,  1925). —The
Immoralist.   Trans,   by   D.  Bussy.  New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf,  1930
(Ulmmoraliste,  Paris,  1902).  —Strait Is the Gate. Trans, by D. Bussy.
New York: A. A. Knopf, 1943 (La porte etroite, Paris, 1909).

[1206b]
Gilbert  de  la  Porree  (1076-1154)  Liber  de  Sex Principiis. In Vol.
clxxxviii,  Patrologia Latina. Gilby, Thomas (1902- ) Poetic Experience;
an  Introduction  to  Thomist  Aesthetic.  New York: Sheed & Ward, 1934.
Gill,  (Arthur) Eric Rowton Peter Joseph ( 1 882-1 940) Art-Nonsense and
Other  Essays.  London:  Cassell, 1929. —Beauty Looks After Herself. New
York  : Sheed & Ward, 1933. —The Necessity of Belief: an Enquiry into the
Nature  of  Human Certainty, the Causes of Scepticism and the Grounds of
Morality,  and  a  Justification  of  the  Doctrine  that the End Is the
Beginning. London: Faber & Faber, 1936. —Wor\ and Leisure. London: Faber
&  Faber,  1935.  —Work  and Property. London: J. M. Dent, 1937. Gilson,
Etienne  Henry (1884- ) Being and Some Philosophers. Toronto: Pontifical
Institute  of  Mediaeval  Studies,  1949.  —Christianisme et philosophic
Paris:  J.  Vrin,  1936.  —God  and  Philosophy.  New Haven, Conn.: Yale
University   Press,   1941.   —History  of Philosophy  and  Philosophical
Education.  Milwaukee,  Wis.:  Marquette  University Press, 1948 (1947).
—Vetreet  Vessence. Paris: J. Vrin, 1948. —Realisme thomiste et critique
de  la connaissance. Paris: J. Vrin, 1939. —Reason and Revelation in the
Middle  Ages.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1938. —The Unity of Philosophical
Experience. New York: Scribner's, 1937. Glanvill, Joseph (1636-1680) The
Vanity  of Dogmatizing.  New  York:  Columbia University Press, Facsimile
Text  Society,  1931 (London, 1661). Glover, Terrot Reaveley (1869-1943)
Greek  Byways.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1932.  Gobineau,  Joseph Arthur,
Comtede  (18  16-1882)  The  Inequality  of  Human  Races.  Trans, by A.
Collins.  New  York:  Putnam's,  191 5 (Vol. 1, Essai sur Vinegalite des
races  humaines,  Paris, 1853). Godwin, William (1 756-1 836) An Enquiry
Concerning  Political  Justice,  and Its Influence on General Virtue and
Happiness.  2  vols.  London:  J.  Watson,  1842 (London, 1793). Goethe,
Johann  Wolfgang  von  (1  749-1  832)  Beitrdge  zur OptikIn Vol. xxvn,
Goethes  Sdmmtliche  Werke.  30  vols.  Stuttgart  and  Tubingen: Cotta,
1850-1851.  —Conversations  of Goethe with Eckermann and Soret. Trans, by
J. Oxenford. New York: G. Bell & Sons, 1892 (Gesprdche mit Goethe in den
letzten   Jahren   seines   Lebens,  Leipsic  and  Magdeburg,  1836-1848
[1822-1832]). — The Elective Affinities. In Novels and Tales by 1172

[1207a]
Goethe.  London:  G.  Bohn,  1854  (Die  Wahlverwandtschaften, Tubingen,
1809). —The Maxims and Reflections of Goethe. Trans, by B. Saunders. New
York:  Macmillan,  1893.  —[Metamorphose]  Versuch, die Metamorphose-der
Pflanzen   zu   erklaren.   In   Vol.  xxxix,  Goethes  Samtliche  Werke
("Jubilaumsausgabe").  40  vols.  Berlin: J. G. Cotta, 1902-1907 (1790).
—Poetry  and  Truthfrom  My Own Life. Trans, by J. Oxenford and A. J. W.
Morrison.  2  vols.  New  York:  Harcourt Brace, 1925 (Aus meinem Leben:
Dichtung  und  Wahrheit,  Tubingen,  1811-1814).  —The  Sorrows of Young
Werther.  Trans,  by  R.  D.  Boylan.  In Novels and Tales. See Elective
Affinities  (Die  Leiden  desjungen Werther, Leipsic, 1774). — Theory of
Colours.  Trans,  by  C.  L.  Eastlake.  London:  J.  Murray,  1840 (Zur
Farbenlehre,  Tubingen,  1810).  —  Travels  in Italy: Together with His
Second  Residence  in  Rome  and  Fragments on Italy. Trans, by A. J. W.
Morrison  and  C. Nisbet. London: G. Bell, 1885 (Die italienische Reise,
Tubingen,  181  61817).  — William Meister's Apprenticeship and Travels.
Trans,  by  Thomas  Carlyle. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1903  (Wilhelm  Meisters Lehrjahre, Berlin, 1795- 1796; Wilhelm Meisters
Wanderjahre,  oder  die  Entsagenden,  Stuttgart,  1821). —ZurNatur- und
Wissenschaftslehre.    In    Vol.   xxxix,   Goethes   Samtliche   Werke
("Jubilaumsausgabe")  See  Metamorphose.  Gogol,  Nikolai Vasilievich (1
809-1  852)  Dead Souls. Trans, by C. Garnett. Modern Library, New York:
Random  House,  1936  (first  pub., 1842). —The Government Inspector and
Other  Plays.  Trans,  by C. Garnett. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1927 (first
performed,  1836).  —  The  Nose.  In  The  Overcoat,  q.v. (1836). —The
Overcoat and Other Stories. Trans, by C. Garnett. New York: A. A. Knopf,
1923 (first pub., 1842). — Taras Bulba, a Tale ofthe Cossacks. Trans, by
I.  Hapgood.  New York: A. A. Knopf, 1931 (first pub., 1835). Goldsmith,
Oliver  (1  728-1  774)  The  Citizen ofthe World and The Bee. Ed. by A.
Dobson.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E. P. Dutton, 1934 (London, 1
760-1 761). —The Deserted Village. In Poems and Plays. Ed. by A. Dobson.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1930 (London, 1770). —She
Stoops  to  Conquer.  Ibid.  (London,  1773).  —The  Vicar of Wakefield.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1934  (London, 1766).
Goldstein,  Kurt  (1  878-1965)  The  Organism:  A  Holistic Approach to
Biology  Derived  from Pathological Data in Man. New York: American Book
Co., 1939 (Der Aufbau des Organismus, The Hague, 1934). 1173

[1207b]
y  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Gregory  of  Nyssa  Gorky,  Maxim,  pseud,  for  Alexey
Maximovich  Peshkov  (  1  868-1 936) Decadence. Trans, by V. Dewey. New
York:  R.  M. McBride, 1927 (Berlin, 1925). —Forty Years—the Life of Clim
Samghin  [tetralogy  comprising:  Vol.  1,  Bystander,  trans,  by B. G.
Guerney; Vol. 11, The Magnet, trans, by A. Bakshy. Both New York: Cape &
Smith,  1930; 1931. Vol. in, Other Fires, trans, by A. Bakshy. New York:
D.  Appleton, 1933. Vol. iv, The Specter, trans, by A. Bakshy. New York:
D.  Appleton-Century  Co.,  1938].  (Moscow,  1927;  1928;  1931; 1937).
—Mother.  New  York:  D.  Appleton, 191 9 (first pub., 1907). Gosse, Sir
Edmund  William (1849-1928) Father and Son; a Study of Two Temperaments.
New  York:  Oxford University Press, 1934 (London, 1907). GOURMONT, REMY
DE (1858-I915) The Natural Philosophy of Love. Trans, by Ezra Pound. New
York:  Liveright, 1932 (Physique de Vamour: essai sur V instinct sexuel,
Paris,  1903).  Gower,  John  (*:.i 325-1 408) Confessio Amantis. In The
English  Works  of John  Gower. Ed. by G. C. Macaulay. 2 vols. London: K.
Paul,  Trench, Triibner, 1 900-1 901 (1390). Gracian y Morales, Baltasar
(1601-1658)  The  Art  of Worldly Wisdom. Trans, by J. Jacobs. New York:
Macmillan,  1945  (Ordculo manual arte, Aragon, f.1647). Gratry, Auguste
Joseph  Alphonse  (1  805-1  872)  Logic. Trans, by H. and M. Singer. La
Salle,  111.:  Open  Court,  1944  (Philosophic  Logique,  Paris, 1855).
—Philosophic  De  la connaissance de Vdmc Paris: C. Douniol, 1857. Gray,
Thomas  (1716-1771)  Elegy  Written  in  a  Country  Church-Yard. In The
Poetical Works of Gray and Collins. Ed. by A. L. Poole. New York: Oxford
University  Press,  1926  (London,  1751).  —  The  Progress  of Poesy. A
Pindaric  Ode.  Ibid.  (London,  1757).  Green, Sanford Moon (1807-1901)
Crime:  Its  Nature,  Causes,  Treatment  and  Prevention. Philadelphia:
Lippincott,  1889.  Green,  Thomas  Hill  (1  836-1 882) Lectures on the
Principles  of  Political  Obligation.  Ed.  by  B. Bosanquet. New York:
Longmans,  Green & Co., 1941 (1879-1880). —Prolegomena to Ethics. Ed. by
A.  C.  Bradley. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1883 (1878-1882). Gregory, Sir
Richard  Arman  (1  864-1952)  Discovery;  or, The Spirit and Service of
Science.  New  York:  Macmillan, 1923 (London, 191 6). Gregory of Nyssa,
Saint  (c.  335-r.  395)  On the Soul and the Resurrection. In Vol. v, A
Select  Library  of  Nicene  and  Post-Nicenc  Fathers  of the Christian
Churchy Second Series. Ed. by P.

[1208a]
Gregory  of Tours THE GREAT IDEAS Schaff and H. Wace. 14 vols. New York:
Christian Literature Co., 1 890-1 900 (380). Gregory of Tours, Saint (c.
538-f.  594)  History of the Franks. Trans, by E. Brehaut. In Records of
Civilization:  Sources and Studies. New York: Columbia University Press,
1926  (Gregori Turonensis Episcopi Historiarum Precipue Gallicarum Libri
X,  576 ?-59i). —[Libri Septem Miraculorum] De Gloria Beatorum Martyrum;
De  Passione,  Virtutibus,  et  Gloria Sancti Juliani Martyris; Liber de
Gloria Beatorum Confessorum; De Miraculis Sancti Martini Episcopi, Libri
Quatuor.  In  Vol. lxxi, Patrologia Latina (573-594)- Gregory the Great,
Pope  (Saint  Gregorius I) (c. 540-604) Morals on the Boof{ of Job, by S.
Gregory  the  Great,  the First Pope of That Name. Trans, by J. Bliss. 3
vols.  Oxford:  J.  H.  Parker,  1 844-1 850 {Magna Moralia, 578?-6oo?).
Grimm,  Jakob  Ludwig  Karl  (1785-1863)  Uberden  Ursprung der Sprache.
Berlin: F. Diimmler, 1 85 1. Groos, Karl(i86i-i946) The Play of Animals.
Trans,  by E. L. Baldwin. New York: D. Appleton, 1898. —The Play of Men.
Trans,  by  E.  L.  Baldwin. New York: D. Appleton, 1899 (Die Spiele der
Menschen,  Jena, 1896). Grosse, Ernst (1862-1927) The Beginnings of Art.
New  York:  D.  Appleton, 1 91 4 (Die Anfange der Kunst, Leipsic, 1894).
Grosseteste, Robert (c. 1 175-1253) On Truth. In Vol. 1, Selections from
Medieval  Philosophers.  Ed.  and  trans, by Richard McKeon. 2 vols. New
York:  Scribner's,  1  929-1  930  (De  Veritate,c. 1239). Grotius, Hugo
(1583-1645) The Rights of War and Peace, Including the Law of Nature and
of Nations.  Trans, by A. C. Campbell. London: M. W. Dunne, 1901 (De Jure
Belli   et  Pads,  Paris,  1625).  Guericke,  Otto  von  (1  602-1  686)
Experimenta  Nova.  Leipsic:  W.  Drugulin,  1881  (1672). Guicciardini,
Francesco  (1  483-1  540) Dialogo e discorsi del reggimento di Firenze.
Ed.  by R. Palmarocchi. Bari: Laterza, 1932 (15211526). Guizot, Francois
Pierre  Guillaume  (  1  787-1  874)  General History of Civilization in
Europe.  Ed  .  by  G.  W. Knight. New York: D. Appleton, 1907 (Histoire
generale  de  la  civilisation en Europe, Pans, 1828). Guyau, Jean Marie
(1854-1888) Esquisse d'une morale sans obligation ni sanction. Paris: F.
Alcan,  1935 (Paris, 1885). —Vart au point devue sociologique. Paris: F.
Alcan, 1909 (Paris, 1889).

[1208b]
: H Haeckel, Ernst Heinrich (1834-1919) The Riddle ofthe Universe at the
Close  of the Nineteenth Century. Trans, by J. McCabe. New York: Harper,
1900  (Die  Weltrathsel.  Gemeinverstandliche  Studien  uber monistische
Philosophic  Bonn,  1899).  Hahnemann,  Samuel (1755-1843) Organon ofthe
Rational Art of Healing. Trans, by C. E. Wheeler. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E. P. Dutton, 1 91 3 (Organon der rationellen Heilkunde, Dresden,
18 10). Haldane, John Burdon Sanderson (1892-1964) Daedalus; or, Science
and the Future. New York E. P. Dutton, 1924. — The Inequality of Man, and
Other  Essays. London: Chatto & Windus, 1932. —Possible Worlds and Other
Essays.  London:  Chatto & Windus, 1927. Haldane, John Scott (1860-1936)
Mechanism, Life and Personality; an Examination ofthe Mechanistic Theory
of  Life  and  Mind. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1923 (London, 191 3). — The
Sciences  and  Philosophy.  Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Doubleday Doran, 1929.
Haldane, John Scott and Priestley, John Gillies (1880-1941) Respiration.
New Haven, Conn. : Yale University Press, 1935 (New Haven, Conn., 1922).
Hamilton,   Sir   William  (1788-1856)  Discussions  on  Philosophy  and
Literature,  Education  and  University  Reform.  New York: Harper, 1856
(1829-1839). —Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic. Ed. by H. L. Mansel and
J. Veitch. 4 vols. Edinburgh: W. Blackwood, 1877 (Edinburgh, 1 859-1 860
[18361838]). Hamilton, William Gerard (1 729-1 796) Parliamentary Logic.
Ed.  by  C.  S.  Kenny. Cambridge: W. HefTer & Sons, 1927 (1 754-1 796).
Hamilton,  Sir  William  Rowan  (1  805-1  865)  Dynamics.  In  Vol. 11,
Mathematical  Papers.  Ed.  by  A.  W. Conway and J. L. Synge. Cambridge
University Press, 1931 (1834). —Lectures on Quaternions. Dublin: Hodge &
Smith,  1853. Hamsun, Knut, pseud, for Knut. Pedersen (1859-1952) Growth
of the Soil. Trans, by W. W. W 7orster. Modern Library, New York: Random
House,  1935  (Christiania, 1917). Hardy, Godfrey Harold (1 877-1 947) A
Course of Pure Mathematics. Cambridge University Press, 1938 (Cambridge,
1908).  —A  Mathematician's  Apology.  Cambridge University Press, 1940.
Hardy,  Thomas (i 840-1 928) The Dynasts: A Drama ofthe Napoleonic Wars,
in Three Parts, Nineteen Acts, and One Hundred and 1174

[1209a]
.  Thirty Scenes. New York: Macmillan, 1936 (London, 1 903-1 908). —jade
the Obscure. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1927 (1 894-1 895).
—Life's  Little  Ironies; a Set of Tales, withjkane Colloquial Sketches.
London:  Macmillan,  1928  (London,  1894).  —The  Return of the Native.
Modern  Library,  New  York: Random House, 1949 (London, 1878). —Tess of
the  UUrbervilles. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1932 (London,
1891).  Harnack,  Adolf  von (1 851-1930) History of Dogma. Trans, by N.
Buchanan. 7 vols. London: Williams & Norgate, 1894- 1903
[Lehrbuch derDogmengeschichte, Tubingen, 1885).
Harrington,  James  (161  1—1677) The Commonwealth of Oceana. London: G.
Routledge,  1887  (London, 1656). Harris, James (1709-1780) Hermes, or A
Philosophical   Inquiry   Concerning   Universal   Grammar.  London:  J.
Collingwood,   1825   (London,  1751).  —  Three  Treatises.  The  First
Concerning  Art.  The Second Concerning Music, Painting, and Poetry. The
Third  Concerning  Happiness.  London: F. Wingrave, 1792 (London, 1744).
—Upon  the  Rise  and Progress of Criticism. London, 1752. Harris, James
Rendel   (1852-1941)  Boanerges.  Cambridge  University  Press,  191  3.
Harrison, Jane Ellen (1850-1928) Ancient Art and Ritual. New York: Henry
Holt,  Hartland,  Edwin  Sidney  (1  848-1  927)  Primitive Society, the
Beginnings  of the Family and the Reckoning of Descent. London : Methuen,
1  92  1  Hartley, David (1705-1757) Observations on Man, His Frame, His
Duty  and  His  Expectations.  London:  T.  Tegg,  1834  (London, 1749).
Hartmann,  Eduard von (1 842-1 906) Kategorienlehre. Leipsic: H. Haacke,
1896.  —Philosophy of the Unconscious. Trans, by W. C. Coupland. London:
Triibner  &  Co.,  1884 {Die Philosophic des Unbewussten, Berlin, 1869).
Hartmann,  Nicolai (1882-1950) Ethics. Vol. 1, Moral Phenomena; Vol. 11,
Moral  Values;  Vol.  in,  Moral  Freedom.  Trans, by S. Coit. New York:
Macmillan,  1932 (Ethik, Berlin, 1926). Hartshorne, Charles (1897- ) The
Divine Relativity. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1948. —Man's
Vision of God, and the Logic of Theism. Chicago: Clark & Co., 1941. —The
Philosophy  and  Psychology  of  Sensation. University of Chicago Press,
1934.  Hauptmann,  Gerhart  Johann  Robert (1862- .946) The Island ofthe
Great Mother, or, The Miracle of 1175

[1209b]
?  1  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Hegel  lie  des  Dames:  A  Story  from  the Utopian
Archipelago. Trans, by W. and E. Muir. New York: Viking Press, 1925 {Die
Insel  der  grossen  Mutter, Berlin, 1924). —The Weavers. A Drama of the
Forties.  Trans, by M. Morison. New York: B. W. Huebsch, 191 {Die Weber,
Berlin,  1892).  Hawthorne,  Nathaniel  (i  804-1  864)  The  Blithedale
Romance.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1926 (Boston,
1852).  —The Scarlet Letter. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1947  (Boston,  1850).  Hazlitt,  William  (1 778-1 830) Lectures on the
English Poets. New York : Oxford University Press, 1924 (London, 18 18).
—My  First  Acquaintance with Poets. In Selections from William Hazlitt.
Ed.  by  W.  D.  Howe.  New York: Ginn & Co., 1913 (1823). —On Taste. In
Sketches   and   Essays.   New   York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1936
(1818-1819). —On the Feeling of Immortality in Youth. In Selections. See
above  (1827).  —Table  TalkEveryman's  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1930  (London,  1821-1822).  Head, Henry (1861-1940) Aphasia and Kindred
Disorders  of  Speech.  2  vols.  New  York: Macmillan, 1926. Heaviside,
Oliver  (1850-1925)  Electromagnetic  Theory.  3  vols.  New  York:  Van
Nostrand, 1894-1912. Hecht, Selig ( 1 892-1947) Explaining the Atom. New
York:  Viking  Press, 1947. Hegel, Georg Wilhelm Friedrich (1 770-1 831)
Lectures on the History of Philosophy. Trans, by E. S. Haldane and F. H.
Simson.  London:  K. Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1894 (1822-1831). —Lectures
on  the  Philosophy of Religion Together with a Work on the Proofs ofthe
Existence  of  God.  Trans, by E. B. Speirs and J. B. Sanderson. 3 vols.
London:  K.  Paul,  Trench,  Triibner,  19—  (1821-1831). — The Logic of
Hegel.   Trans,   by  W.  Wallace.  Oxford  :  Clarendon  Press,  1  892
{Enzykfopadie   der   philosophischen   Wissenschaften,   I.  Teil:  Die
Wissenschaft  der  Logik,  Heidelberg,  18  17).  —On  the  Proofs ofthe
Existence  of  God.  See  Lectures on the Philosophy of Religion (Berlin,
1832  [1831]).  —  The  Phenomenology of Mind. Trans, by J. B. Bailie. 2
vols.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1910  {System  der  Wissenschaft,  I: Die
Phdnomenologie des Geistes, Bamberg, 1807). —The Philosophy of Fine Art.
Trans,  by  F.  P.  B.  Omaston.  4  vols.  London: G. Bell & Sons, 1920
(1817-1829).  —The  Philosophy  of  Mind.  Trans, by W. Wallace. Oxford:
Clarendon  Press, 1894 {Enzykfopadie der philosophischen Wissenschaften,
3.   Teil:  Die  Philosophic  des  Geistes,  Heidelberg,  181  7).  —The
Positivity of the Christian Religion. In Early

[1210a]
Heidegger  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Theological Writings. Trans, by T. M. Knox.
University  of  Chicago  Press, 1948. —Science of Logic. Trans, by W. H.
Johnston  and  L.  G.  Struther.  2  vols.  London:  Allen & Unwin, 1929
(Wissenschaft   der   Logi/{,  Nurnberg,  18  121816).  —The  Spirit  of
Christianity.  In Early Theological Writings. See Positivity. Heidegger,
Martin  (1889-  )  Sein und Zeit. Halle: M. Niemeyer, 1935 (1927). — Was
ist  Metaphysik?  Frankfort:  V.  Klostermann, 1943 (Bonn, 1929). Heine,
Heinrigh  (1797—  1856) Gods in Exile. In The Prose Writings of Heinrich
Heine.  Ed.  by  H.  Ellis. London: W. Scott, 1887 (1853). —Religion and
Philosophy  in  Germany:  A Fragment. Trans, by J. Snodgrass. London: K.
Paul,  Trench,  Trubner,  1891  (1834).  Heisenberg, Werner (1901- ) The
Physical Principles of the Quantum Theory. Trans, by C. Eckart and F. C.
Hoyt.  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1930.  Helmholtz, Hermann Ludwig
Ferdinand von (1821-1894) Counting and Measuring. Trans, by C. L. Bryan.
New  York:  Van  Nostrand,  1930  (1887). —On the Sensation of Tone as a
Physiological  Basis  for  the  Theory  of Music. Trans, by A. J. Ellis.
London:  Longmans,  Green & Co., 1930 {Die Lehre von den Tonempfindungen
als  physiologische  Grundlagefiir  die  Theorie  der  Musi\, Brunswick,
.863).  —Popular  Lectures on Scientific Subjects. Trans, by E. Atkinson
et  al. First and second series, New York: D. Appleton & Co., 1900; 1901
(Populdre wissenschaftliche Vortrage, Brunswick, 1865; 1876). — Treatise
on  Physiological  Optics.  Ed.  and  trans,  by J. P. Southall. 3 vols.
Rochester, N. Y. : Optical Society of America, 1 924-1 925 (Handbuch der
physiologischen   Opti\,   Leipsic,   1856).  Helvetius,  Claude  Adrien
(1715-1771)  Traite  de  V esprit. 4 vols. Paris: Bibliotheque National,
1880  (Paris,  1758). —A Treatise on Man; His Intellectual Faculties and
His  Education.  Trans,  by  W.  Hooper. 2 vols. London: Vernor, Hood, &
Sharpe,  18 10 (1771). Hendel, Charles William (1890- ) Civilization and
Religion.   New  Haven,  Conn.:  Yale  University  Press,  1948  (1947).
Henderson,  Lawrence  Joseph  (1878-1942)  Blood;  A  Study  in  General
Physiology.  New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1928. —The Fitness
ofthe  Environment;  an  Inquiry into the Biological Significance of the
Properties  of Matter. New York: Macmillan, 1927 (New York, 191 3). —The
Order of Nature; an Essay. Cambridge, Mass. Harvard University Press, 191
7.

[1210b]
3  3  :  :  Herbart,  Johann  Friedrich  (1  776-1  841)  The Science of
Education,   Its  General  Principles  Deducedfrom  Its  Aim  [with  The
Aesthetic  Revelation  ofthe  World].  Trans,  by  H.  M. and E. Felkin.
Boston:  D.  C.  Heath,  1902  (Allgemeine  Padagogi\  aus dem Zwec\ der
Erziehung  abgeleitet,  Gottingen,  1806). Herbert, George (i 593-1 633)
The  Temple and A Priest to the Temple. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P.  Dutton,  1927.  Herbert of Cherbury (Baron Edward Herbert) ( 1 583-1
648)  De  Religione  Laid. Ed. and trans, by H. R. Hutcheson. New Haven,
Conn.:  Yale  University  Press,  1944  (originally  pub. with De Causis
Errorum, London, 1645). —De Veritate. Trans, by M. H. Carre. Bristol: J.
W.   Arrowsmith,  1937  (Paris,  1624).  Herder,  Johann  Gottfried  von
(1744-1803)  God,  Some  Conversations.  Trans,  by F. H. Burkhardt. New
York:  Veritas  Press,  1940  (Gott.  Einige  Gesprdche,  Gotha,  1787).
—Outlines  of  a  Philosophy  of  the  History  of  Man. Trans, by T. O.
Churchill.  London:  Hansard,  1  803  (Ideen  zu  einer Philosophic der
Geschichte   der  Menschheit,  Riga,  1  784-1  791).  —Plastu\.  Einige
Wahrnehmungen  iiber Form und Gestalt aus Pygmalion' s bildendem Traume.
In  Vol.  viii,  Herder's  Samtliche  Werke.  Ed. by B. Suphan. 33 vols.
Berlin:  Weidmann,  1 877-191 (Riga, 1778). Hering, Ewald (1 834-1 91 8)
Memory;  Lectures  on  the  Specific  Energies  of  the  Nervous System.
Chicago:  Open  Court,  191  (Uber  das  Geddchtnis  als eine allgemeine
Function  der  organisierten  Materie, Vienna, 1870). Herschel, Sir John
Frederick  William  (1792i8?o  Familiar Lectures on Scientific Subjects.
New  York G. Routledge, 1869 (London, 1866). —A Preliminary Discourse on
the  Study  of  Natural  Philosophy.  London:  Longman,  Brown,  Green &
Longman,  1851 (from Cabinet Cyclopaedia, 1830). Hertwig, Oscar (1 849-1
922)  The  Cell;  Outlines  of General Anatomy and Physiology. Ed. by H.
Johnstone-Campbell,  trans,  by  M.  Campbell. New York: Macmillan, 1909
(Die  Zelle  und die Gewebe, Jena, 1 893-1 898). Hertz, Heinrich Rudolph
(1857-1894)  The Principles of Mechanics Presented in a New Form. Trans,
by  D.  E.  Jones  and  J.  T.  Walley.  New  York: Macmillan, 1899 (Die
Prinzipien  der  Mechanic  in  neuem Zusammenhange dargestellt, Leipsic,
1895  [1891-1894]).  Hesiod (8th century? b.c.) Theogony. In Hesiod, the
Homeric  Hymns  and  Homerica.  Trans, by H. Evelyn-White. Loeb Library,
Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press, 1936. — Worlds and Days.
Ibid. 1176

[1211a]
Hess,  Moses  (1812-1875) Sozialistische Aufsatze, 184 1-1847. Ed. by T.
Zlocisti.  Berlin:  Welt  Verlag, 1921. Heywood, Thomas (r.1574-1641) ^^
The  Hierarchie  ofthe Blessed Angells. Their Names, Orders and Offices.
The  Fall  of Lucifer with His Angells. London: A. Islip, 1635. —A Woman
Killed  with  Kindness. In Thomas Heywood. Mermaid Series, London: T. F.
Unwin,  1903  (1602?).  Hilbert,  David (1 862-1 943) The Foundations of
Geometry.  Trans,  by  E. Y. Townsend. Chicago: Open Court, 1902 (1899).
Hilbert,  David  and Ackermann, W. (1896- ) Grundziige der theoretischen
Logi{.  New  York:  Dover Publications, 1946 (Berlin, 1928). HlLDEBRAND,
DlETRICH  VON (1889- ) In Defense of Purity: An Analysis of the Catholic
Ideal  of  Purity  and Virginity. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1938 (Reinheit
und  Jungfraulichh^it,  Cologne,  1927).  Hinton,  James (1822-1875) The
Mystery  of  Pain: A Boo J{ for the Sorrowful. London: C. K. Paul & Co.,
1866.  Hirn,  Yrjo  (1870-1952) The Origins of Art. New York: Macmillan,
1900.  Hirsch,  Max  (1853-1909)  Democracy Versus Socialism, a Critical
Examination  of  Socialism  as  a  Remedy  for  Social  Injustice and an
Exposition  of  the  Single-Tax  Doctrine.  New  York:  Macmillan, 1901.
Hirsch,  Samson  Raphael  (1808-1888)  The Nineteen Letters of Ben Uziel,
Being  a  Spiritual Presentation of the Principles of Judaism. Trans, by
B.  Drachman. New York: Bloch Publishing Co., 1942 (Neunzehn Briefe uber
Judenthum,   Altona,  1836).  Hobbes,  Thomas  (1588-1679)  The  Art  of
Sophistry.  In  Vol.  vi,  English Worlds. —Behemoth. Ed. by F. Tonnies.
London:  Simpkin,  1889  (1668).  —Concerning  Body.  In Vol. 1, English
Worlds  (Elementa  Philosophiae Sectio Prima: de Corpore, London, 1655).
—A  Dialogue  Between  a Philosopher and a Student of the Common Laws of
England.  In Vol. vi, ibid. (1667?). —Dialogus Physicus de Natura Aeris.
In  Vol.  iv,  Opera Philosophica quae Latine Scripsit Omnia. Ed. by Sir
William  Molesworth.  5  vols. London: Longman, Brown, Green, & Longman,
18391845  (1661).  —The  Elements  of Law, Natural and Politic and Human
Nature,  or  The  Fundamental  Elements  of  Policy.  Ed. by F. Tonnies.
Cambridge   University   Press,  1928  (London,  1650).  —Examinatio  et
Emendatio  Mathematicae  Hodiernae.  In Vol. v, Opera. See above (1660).
—Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Government 1177

[1211b]
.   BIBLIOGRAPHY   Hodgson   andSociety.  In  Vol.  11,  English  Worlds
(Amsterdam,   1647).   —Six   Lessons  to  the  Savtlian  Professors  of
Mathematics.  In  Vol. vii, ibid. (London, 1656). —A Treatise of Liberty
and  Necessity.  In  Vol.  iv,  ibid.  (London, 1654). —The Whole Art of
Rhetoric.  In Vol. vi, ibid. ( 1 679) note: The English Worlds of Thomas
Hobbes.  Ed.  by  Sir  William  Molesworth.  11  vols.  London: J. Bohn,
1839-1845.  Hobhouse,  Leonard  Trelawney  (1864-1929)  The  Elements of
Social  Justice.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1922. — The Metaphysical Theory
ofthe  State;  a  Criticism. New York: Macmillan, 1926 (New York, 1918).
—Mind in Evolution. London: Macmillan, 1926 (New York, 1901). —Morals in
Evolution:  A  Study  in Comparative Ethics. New York: Henry Holt, 191 5
(New  York,  1906).  Hobson,  Ernest  William  (1856-1933) The Theory of
Functions of a Real Variable and the Theory of Fourier's Series. 2 vols.
Cambridge  University Press, 1 926-1 927 (Cambridge, 1907). Hobson, John
Atkinson  (1858-1940)  Democracy  and a Changing Civilisation. London J.
Lane,  1934.  — The Evolution of Modern Capitalism. New York Scribner's,
191  7  (New  York,  1894). — Towards International Government. New York
Macmillan,  1915.  —  Wor\and  Wealth: A Human Valuation. London Allen &
Unwin,  1933  (New  York,  191  4). Hocart, Arthur Maurice (1 884-1 939)
Kingship.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press, 1927. Hocking, William
Ernest  (1  873-1966) Freedom of the Press. University of Chicago Press,
1947. —Man and the State. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1926.
—Present  Status  of  the  Philosophy  of  Law and of Rights. New Haven,
Conn.:  Yale  University  Press,  1926. —Thoughts on Death and Life. New
York:  Harper,  I037Hodder,  Alfred (1 866-1 907) The Adversaries of the
Sceptic;  or,  The Specious Present, A New Inquiry into Human Knowledge.
New  York:  Macmillan, 1901. Hodgson, Shadworth Hollway (1832-19 12) The
Metaphysic  of  Experience  .  4  vols. New York: Longmans, Green & Co.,
1898.  —The  Theory  of Practice,  an  Ethical  Enquiry.  2 vols. London:
Longman,  Green,  Reader,  & Dyer, 1870. —Time and Space; a Metaphysical
Essay. London: Longman, Green, Reader, & Dyer, 1865.

[1212a]
HOLBACH  THE  GREAT IDEAS Holbach, Paul Henri Thiry, Baron d' (17231789)
The System of Nature; or, Laws ofthe Moral and Physical World. Trans, by
H. D. Robinson. Boston: J. P. Mendum, 1889 (Systeme de la nature, ou Des
lois  du  monde physique et moral, London, 1770). Holmes, Oliver Wendell
(1  809-1  894)  Currents  and  Counter-Currents  in Medical Science. In
Medical  Essays,  1  842-1  882.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin  Co., 191 1
(Boston,  i860). Holmes, Oliver Wendell, Jr. (1841-1935) The Common Law.
Boston:  Little,  Brown  & Co., 1938 (Boston, 1881). Holt, Edwin Bissell
(1873-1946)  The  Concept  of Consciousness. New York: Macmillan, 191 4.
Hook,  Sidney  (1902-  ) Education for Modern Man. New York: Dial Press,
1946.  —The  Metaphysics  of  Pragmatism.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1927.
—Reason,  Social  Myths  and  Democracy.  New  York: John Day Co., 1940.
Hooker,  Richard  (1  553-1600)  Of  the  Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity.
Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1907 (London, 1594 ?-i 597).
Horace  (Quintus Horatius Flaccus) (65-8 B.C.) The Art of Poetry. In The
Complete  Wor\s of Horace. Trans, by E. H. Blakeney. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House,  1936  (13-8  B.C.). —[Epistles] Letters in Verse.
Ibid.  (19-8  B.C.).  —[Satires]  Conversation Pieces. Ibid. (35 b.c; 29
B.C.).  Housman,  Alfred  Ernest  (1  859-1  936)  The  Name  and Nature
of Poetry.  New  York: Macmillan, 1933. Howard, John (c. 1 726-1 790) The
State  of  the Prisons. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1929
(Warrington,  1777-1780). HOWELLS, W'lLLIAM DEAN (1837-I920) The Rise of
Silas  Lapham. Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1937 (Boston, 1885). Hsiao,
Kung-Chuan  Political  Pluralism;  a  Study  in  Contemporary  Political
Theory. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1927. Hubble, Edwin Powell (1889-1953)
The Realm of the Nebulae. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1936.
Hudson,  Michael  (1605-1648)  The Divine Right of Government, Naturall,
and Politique. London, 1647.

[1212b]
HUGEL,  FRIEDRICH VON (1852-I925) Essays and Addresses on the Philosophy
of Religion.  First and Second Series. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1921; 1926
(1904-1922).   —Eternal   Life:   A   Study   of  Its  Implications  and
Applications.  Edinburgh: T. & T. Clark, 1912. — The Mystical Element of
Religion as Studied in Saint Catherine of Genoa and Her Friends. 2 vols.
New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1923 (New York, 1908). Hugh of Saint Victor
(1096-1141)  De  Sacramentis.  In Vol. clxxvi, Patrologia Latina (1134).
—Didascalicon:  De  Studio  Legendi.  Ed. by C. H. Buttimer. Washington:
Catholic  University  Press,  1937. Hugo, Victor Marie (1 802-1 885) Les
Miserables.  Trans,  by  C. E. Wilbour. Modern Librarv, New York: Random
House,  1931  (Paris,  1862). —Ninety-Three. Trans, by F. L. Benedict. 2
vols.  New  York:  G. Routledge, 1889 (Quatre-vingttreize, Paris, 1874).
—Preface  de  'Cromwell:  Ed.  by E. Wahl. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1909
(Paris,  1827).  HUIZINGA,  JOHAN (1872-I945) In the Shadow of Tomorrow.
Trans,  by J. H. Huizinga. New York: W. W\ Norton, 1936 (Haarlem, 1936).
Humboldt,  Alexander  von  (1769-1859)  Cosmos,  a  Sketch of a Physical
Description  of  the  Universe. Trans, by E. C. Otte. 5 vols. London: G.
Bell    &    Sons,   1   899-1901   (Kosmos:   Entwurf   einerphysischen
Weltbeschreibung,  Stuttgart,  18451862). Humboldt, Wilhelm von (1 767-1
835)  The  Sphere  and  Duties  of  Government.  Trans, by J. Coulthart.
London:  J.  Chapman,  1854  (Ideen  zu  einem  Versuch, die Grenzen der
Wir\samkeit  des  Staates  zu  bestimmen, 1792). Hume, David (1711-1776)
Dialogues  Concerning  Natural  Religion.  Ed.  by  N. K. Smith. Oxford:
Clarendon  Press, 1935 (i75 I - I 755)- —A Dissertation on the Passions.
In  Vol.  11,  Essays  (in Four Dissertations, London, 1757). —Idea of a
Perfect  Commonwealth.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid.  (in  Political  Discourses,
Edinburgh,  1752).  —An  Inquiry  Concerning  the  Principles of Morals.
Chicago:  Open  Court,  1930  (London,  1  751). —The Natural History of
Religion.  In Vol. 11, Essays (in Four Dissertations, London, 1757). —Of
Commerce.  In  Vol. 1, ibid, (in Political Discourses, Edinburgh, 1752).
—Of  Interest.  Ibid,  (in  Political  Discourses, Edinburgh, 1752). —Of
Money.  Ibid,  (in  Political  Discourses,  Edinburgh, 1752). —OfPassive
Obedience.  Ibid,  (in Three Essays, Moral and Political, London, 1748).
1178

[1213a]
—OfRefinement  in the Arts. Ibid. ("Of Luxury," in Political Discourses,
Edinburgh,  1752).  —Of  Some  Remarkable  Customs.  Ibid, (in Political
Discourses,  Edinburgh, 1752). —Of Suicide. In Vol. 11, ibid. (c. 1750).
^__  —- —Of Taxes. In Vol. 1, ibid, (in Political Discourses, Edinburgh,
1752).  —Of  the  Balance  of  Trade.  Ibid,  (in  Political Discourses,
Edinburgh,  1752).  —Ofthe Immortality ofthe Soul. In Vol. 11, ibid. (c.
1750).  —Ofthe  Original  Contract.  In  Vol. 1, ibid, (in Three Essays,
Moral  and  Political,  London,  1748). —Of the Rise and Progress of the
Arts  and  Sciences. Ibid. (Edinburgh, 1742). —Of the Standard of Taste.
Ibid, (in Four Dissertations, London, 1757). —Of Tragedy. Ibid, (in Four
Dissertations,  London,  1757)-  —A  Treatise  of Human  Nature.  2 vols.
Everyman  s  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1940 (London, 1739). note:
Essays,  Moral,  Political  and  Literary.  Ed. by T. H. Green and T. H.
Grose.  2 vols. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1912. Hunt, (James Henry)
Leigh  (1784-1859) Imagination and Fancy . . . and an Essay in Answer to
the  Question  "  What  Is  Poetry?"  London:  Smith,  Elder & Co., 1891
(London,  1844). Huntington, Edward Vermilye (i 874-1952) The Continuum,
and  Other  Types  of  Serial  Order,  with  an Introduction to Cantor's
Transfinite  Numbers. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 91 7
(1905). —The Fundamental Propositions of Algebra. In Monographs on Topics
of  Modern  Mathematics,  Relevant to the Elementary Field. Ed. by J. W.
Young.  New  York:  Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  1932  (New  York, 191 1).
Huntington,  Ellsworth  (1  876-1  947)  Earth and Sun; an Hypothesis of
Weather  and  Sunspots.  New  Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1923.
Hurd,  Richard (1720-1808) ' s Letters on Chivalry and Romance, with the
1  Hiiro  Third  Elizabethan  Dialogue.  Ed. by E. J. Morley. London: H.
Frowde,  191  1  (London,  1762).  Husserl,  Edmund (1 859-1 938) Ideas:
General  Introduction  to Pure Phenomenology. Trans, by W. R. B. Gibson.
New  York:  Macmillan,  1931  (191 3). —Logische Untersuchungen. 2 vols.
Halle:   M.   Niemeyer,   1913-1922   (Halle,  1900-1901).  —Meditations
Cartesiennes  ;  Introduction  a la phenomenologie. Trans, by G. Peiffer
and  M.  E.  Levinas. Paris: A. Colin, 1931. Hutcheson, Francis (1 694-1
746)  An Essay on the Nature and Conduct of the Passions and Affections.
Glasgow: R. & A. Foulis, 1769 (London, 1728).

[1213b]
1  .  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Ibn  Ezra  —An Inquiry into the Original of Our Ideas
of Beauty  and  Virtue.  London:  R. Ware, 1753 (London, 1725). —A System
of Moral  Philosophy  .  Ed.  by F. Hutcheson. 2 vols. London: A. Millar,
1755  (1  734-1  737).  Hutchins,  Robert  Maynard (1899- ) Educationfor
Freedom. Baton Rouge, La.: Louisiana State University Press, 1943. — The
Higher  Learning  in  America.  New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1936. Huxley, Aldous Leonard (i 894-1 963) Brave New World: A Novel. New
York: Harper, 1944 (London, 1932). — The Perennial Philosophy. New York:
Harper,  1945.  Huxley,  Julian  Sorell  (1887-  ) Evolution, the Modern
Synthesis.  London:  Allen  &  Unwin,  1942.  —Evolutionary  Ethics.  In
Touchstonefor  Eth^s.  New  York: Harper, 1947 (1943). —Religion Without
Revelation.  London:  Watts  &  Co., 1 94 1 (London, 1927). —Science and
Social  Needs.  New  York:  Harper,  1935 (originally pub. as Scientific
Research   and   Social  Needs,  London,  1934).  Huxley,  Thomas  Henry
(1825-1895) Darwiniana. Essays. New York: D. Appleton, 1893 (1859-1888).
—Evolution  and Ethics. In Touchstone for Ethics. New York: Harper, 1947
(1893). —Mans Place in Nature, and Other Essays. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  191  (title  essay,  London, 1863). —Methods and
Results.  Essays.  New  York:  D.  Appleton, 191 1 (1868-1890). Huygens,
Christiaan  (1  629-1  695)  Force  centrifuge.  In  Vol.  xvi,  Oeuvres
completes  de  Christiaan Huygens. 17 vols. The Hague: M. Nijhoff, 1888.
—Lhorloge  a  pendule. In Vol. xvn, ibid. (Paris, .673). —Percussion. In
Vol.  xvi,  ibid.  (Tractatus  de  motu  corporum ex percussione, 1 668)
—Question  de  Vexistence  et  de la perceptibilite du mouvement absolu.
Ibid. —[Sur la cause de la pesanteur] Traite de la lumiere . . . Avec un
discours  de la cause de la pesanteur. Leipsic: Gressner & Schramm, 1885
(Leyden,  1666).  — Travaux divers de statique et de dynamique de 1659 a
1666.  In  Vol.  xvi, Oeuvres completes. 1 Ibn Ezra, Abraham (c. 1 092-1
167)  The Beginning of Wisdom : An Astrological Treatise. Ed. and trans,
by  R.  Levy  and  F.  Cantero. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins University
Press, 1939(1148).

[1214a]
Ibn  Gabirol  THE  GREAT IDEAS Ibn Gabirol (Avicebron) (c. 1021-c. 1058)
The  Improvement of the Moral Qualities. Trans, by S. S. Wise. New York:
Macmillan,  1901  (Sefer  Ti%un Hamiddoth, 1045). Ibsen, Henrik (i 828-1
906)  A  Doll's  House. In Eleven Plays of Henri\ Ibsen. Modern Library,
New York: Random House, 1935 (Copenhagen, 1879). —An Enemy ofthe People.
Ibid.  (Copenhagen.  1882).  —Ghosts.  Ibid.  (Copenhagen, 1881). —Hedda
Gabler.   Ibid.   (Copenhagen,   1890).  —  The  Master  Builder.  Ibid.
(Copenhagen,  1892).  —The Pillars of Society. Ibid. (Copenhagen, 1877).
Ignatius  of  Loyola,  Saint  (1  491-1556)  The  Constitutions.  In St.
Ignatius and the Ratio Studiorum. Ed. by E. A. Fitzpatrick, trans, by M.
H. Mayer. New York: McGraw-Hill, 1933 (Constitutiones Societatis Jesu, 1
541-1550).  —The  Spiritual  Exercises  of Ignatius Loyola. Trans, by C.
Seager.  London:  Webb,  M'Gill & Co., 1849 (1522). Ihering, Rudolph von
(18  18-1892)  Law  as  a  Means  to an End. Trans, by I. Husik. Boston:
Boston  Book  Co.,  191  3 (Vol. 1 of Der Zwec\im Recht, Leipsic, 1877).
—The  Struggle  for  Law. Trans, by J. ILalor. Chicago : Callaghan & Co.
,1915  {Der  Kampf  urn's Recht, Vienna, 1872). Isocrates (436-338 B.C.)
Aegineticus.  In  Vol.  hi,  Isocrates.  Vols. 1 and 11 trans, by George
Norlin,  Vol. in by L. Van Hook. 3 vols. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard  University  Press,  1  928-1  945  (c.  393 B.C.). —Against the
Sophists. In Vol. 11, ibid. (c. 391 B.C.). —Antidosis. Ibid. (353 B.C.).
—Panegyricus.  Ibid.  (380  B.C.).  J  Jackson,  Thomas  Alfred (1879- )
Dialectics;  the  Logic  of  Marxism,  and  Its  Critics—  an  Essay  in
Exploration.  London:  Lawrence  &  Wishart,  1936.  Jacobus de Voragine
(£-.1228-1298)  The  Golden  Legend. Trans, by G. Ryan and H. Ripperger.
London:  Longmans,  Green  &  Co., 1 94 1 (Legenda Aurea, before 1273?).
Jaeger,  Werner  Wilhelm  (1888-1961)  Humanism and Theology. Milwaukee,
Wis.:  Marquette  University Press, 1943. —Paideia: The Ideals of GreeJ{
Culture.  Trans, by G. Highet. 3 vols. Oxford: Blackwell, 1939 (Paideia:
Die  Formung  des  Griechischen  Menschen.  Vol.  1 only, Berlin, 1934).
Jaensch,  Erich  (1883-1940)  Eidetic Imagery and Typological Methods of
Investigation;  Their  Importancefor  the  Psychology  of Childhood, the
Theory  of  Education,  General  Psychology, and the Psychophysiology of
Human Personality. Trans, by Oscar Oeser. New York:

[1214b]
5    Harcourt    Brace,    1930   (Die   Eideti\und   die   typologische
Forschungsmethode,  Leipsic,  1925).  James  I, King of England (1 566-1
625)  An Apologie for the Oath of Allegiance. In The Political Worlds of
James  I.  Reprinted  from  the ed. of 1 61 6. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University  Press,  1  91  8  (London, 1609). —A Defence of the Right of
Kings,  Against  Cardinall  Perron. Ibid. (161 5). —A Premonition to all
Christian  Monarches,  Free  Princes and States. Ibid. (1609). —The Trew
Law  of  Free  Monarchies.  Ibid.  (1603).  James, Henry (1843-1916) The
American.  Boston: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1907 (New York, 1877). —The Art
of  the  Novel;  Critical  Prefaces.  Ed.  by  R. P. Blackmur. New York:
Scribner's,  1934  (1907-1909).  —The  Beast  in  the Jungle. London: M.
Seeker,  191  (in  The  Better Sort, New York, 1903). —Daisy Miller. New
York:  Harper,  191  6  (1878).  —Notes  ofa  Son and Brother. New York:
Scribner's,  1914.  —A Small Boy and Others. New York: Scribner's, 1914.
—The  Turn of the Screw. Modern Library, NewYork: Random House, 1930 (in
The Two Magics, New York, 1! James, William (1842-1910) Collected Essays
and  Reviews. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1920 (1869-1910). —Essays
in  Radical  Empiricism.  Ed.  by R. B. Perry. New York: Longmans, Green
&Co.,  1943 (1884— 1907). —Human Immortality; Two Supposed Objections to
the  Doctrine.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin  Co.,  1898. — The Meaning of
Truth,  a  Sequel to 'Pragmatism.' New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1909
(New  York,  1909).  —Memories  and Studies. New York: Longmans, Green &
Co.,  1917  (1897-1910).  —A  Pluralistic  Universe; Hibbert Lectures at
Manchester  College  on  the  Present Situation in Philosophy. New York:
Longmans, Green & Co., 1909. —Pragmatism, a New Namefor Some Old Ways of
Thinking. Ed. by R. B. Perry. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1943 (New
York,   1907).   —Some   Problems  of  Philosophy;  a  Beginning  of  an
Introduction  to  Philosophy.  New  York:  Longmans,  Green  & Co., 1928
(1909-1910).  —The  Varieties  of Religious Experience; a Study in Human
Nature. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1936 (New York, 1902). —
The  Will  to Believe, and Other Essays in Popular Philosophy. New York:
Longmans,  Green  & Co., 1937 (1879-1896). Janet, Paul Alexandre Rene (1
823-1  899)  Final  Causes.  Trans, by W. Affleck. New York: Scribner's,
1892 (Les causes finales, Paris, 1876). 1180

[1215a]
4  :  New  York  :  Scribner's, 1 900 {Elements de morale, Paris, 1870).
Janet,  Pierre  Marie  Felix  (1  859-1  947) ^__^_The Major Symptoms of
Hysteria.  New~"York  Macmillan,  1929  (New  York, 1907). Jaspers, Karl
(1883-  )  Man  in  the Modern Age. Trans, by E. and C. Paul. London: G.
Routledge,  1933  (Die geistige Situation der Zeit, Leipsic, 1931). —The
Perennial  Scope  of  Philosophy. New York: Philosophical Library, 1949.
Jean  Paul, pseud, for Johann Paul Friedrich Richter (1763-1825) Levana;
or,  The  Doctrine  of  Education. Boston: D. C. Heath, 1886 (Brunswick,
1807).  —  Vorschule  der  Astheti){.  In  Vol. ix, Jean Pauls Sdmtliche
Werke.  Preussische  Akademie  der  Wissenschaften,  36 vols. Weimar: H.
Bohlau,  1927  (Hamburg,  1804).  Jeans,  Sir  James Hopwood (1877-1946)
Astronomy  and Cosmogony. Cambridge University Press, 1928. —Problems of
Cosmogony  and Stellar Dynamics. Cambridge University Press, 191 9. —The
Universe  Around  Us.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1944  (New  York,  1929).
Jefferson,   Thomas  (1  743-1  826)  The  Commonplace  Boo\  of  Thomas
Jefferson.  A  Repertory  of His Ideas on Government. Ed. by G. Chinard.
Baltimore,   Md.:   Johns   Hopkins  University  Press,  1926  (f.1775).
—Democracy. Sel. and ed. by S. K. Padover. New York: D. Appleton-Century
Co.,  1939.  —Notes  on  the  State  of  Virginia.  Richmond, Va.: J. W.
Randolph,   1853   (Philadelphia,   1788).  Jeffreys,  Harold  (1891-  )
Scientific  Inference.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1937  (Cambridge,
1931).  —Theory  of  Probability. Oxford: Clarendon Press, !939Jellinek,
Georg   (1851-1911)  Allgemeine  Staatslehre.  Berlin:  O.  Haring,  191
(Berlin,  1900).  —The  Declaration  ofthe  Rights of Man and Citizens: A
Contribution to Modern Constitutional History. Trans, by M. Farrand. New
York:  Henry  Holt,  1 90 1 (Die Erfydrung der Menschenund Burgerrechte,
Leipsic,  1895). Jenner, Edward (1 749-1 823) An Inquiry into the Causes
and  Effects ofthe Variolae Vaccinae, a Disease Discovered in Some ofthe
Western  Counties  of  England  .  . . and Known by the Name of Cow-Pox.
Springfield,  Mass.:  Ashley  &  Brewer,  1802 (London, 1798). Jennings,
Herbert  Spencer  (1868-1947) Behavior of the Lower Organisms. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1931 (New York, 1906).

[1215b]
:  Jensen,  Johannes Vilhelm (1 873-1950) The Long Journey. Trans, by A.
G.  Chater.  New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf,  1945  (Christiania,  19081921).
Jespersen, Jens Otto Harry (1860-1943) Language: Its Nature, Development
and  Origin.  New York: Henry Holt, 1934 (London, 1922). —The Philosophy
of Grammar. New York: Henry Holt, 1924. Jevons, William Stanley (1 835-1
882)  Money  and  the Mechanism of Exchange. New York: D. Appleton, 1919
(London,  1875). —On a General System of Numerically Definite Reasoning.
In  Pure  Logic and Other Minor Worlds. Ed. by R. Adamson and H. Jevons.
New  York:  Macmillan,  1890  (1870).  —On  Geometrical Reasoning. Ibid.
(1877).  —On  the  Mechanical  Performance  of  Logical Inference. Ibid.
(1870).  —The  Principles of Science: A Treatise on Logic and Scientific
Method.  London:  Macmillan,  1924  (London,  1874). —Pure Logic, or the
Logic of Quality Apart from Quantity: With Remarks on Boole's System and
on  the  Relation  of Logic  and  Mathematics.  New  York Macmillan, 1890
(London,  1864).  — The State in Relation to Labour. Ed. by F. W. Hirst.
London:  Macmillan,  1910 (London, 1882). —Studies in Deductive Logic. A
Manualfor  Students.  New  York;  Macmillan,  1896 (London, 1880). — The
Substitution  of  Similars.  In  Pure  Logic, q.v. (London, 1869). — The
Theory  of  Political  Economy.  Ed. by H. S. Jevons. London: Macmillan,
1931  (London,  lip).  Joachim,  Harold  Henry (1868-1938) The Nature of
Truth, an Essay. New York: Oxford University Press, 1939 (Oxford, 1906).
John Chrysostom, Saint (c. 345-407) On the Priesthood. Ed. and trans, by
B.  H.  Cowper.  London, 1866 (381-385). John of Saint Thomas (Joannis a
Sancto  Thoma) (1589-1644) Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus. Vol. 1, Ars
Logica;  Vols.  11-111,  Philosophia  Naturalis. Ed. by B. Reiser. Rome:
Marietti,  1930-1937  (Madrid,  1637).  John of Salisbury (c. 1115-1180)
Metalogicon.  Ed.  by C. Webb. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1929 (c. 1 159).
—The  Statesman's Boo\. Bks. iv-viii, Polycraticus. Ed. and trans, by J.
Dickinson.  New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf,  1927 (before 1 159). John of the
Cross,  Saint  (1  542-1  591)  Ascent  of  Mount Carmel. In Vol. 1, The
Complete  Wor\s  of  Saint  John  of  the Cross. Ed. and trans, by E. A.
Peers.  3  vols. London: Burns, Oates, & Washbourne, 1 934-1 935 (Subida
del  Monte  Carmelo, 1 578-1 584). —Dar\ Night of the Soul. Ibid. (Noche
Oscura del Sentido, 1 582-1 584).

[1216a]
A.  Johnson THE GREAT IDEAS — The Living Flame of Love. In Vol. in, ibid.
(Llamo  de  amor viva, 1585-1587). —Spiritual Canticle. In Vol. n, ibid.
{Cdntico  Espiritual,  1  577-1  584). Johnson, Alexander Bryan (1 786-1
867)  A  Treatise  on  Language:  or,  The  Relation Which Words Bear to
Things.  New  York:  Harper,  1836  (New  York,  1828).  Johnson, Samuel
(1709-1784)  History of Rasselas, Prince of Abyssinia. Oxford: Clarendon
Press,  1931  (London,  1759).  —Lives  ofthe  English  Poets.  2  vols.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1925 (17791781). Johnson,
William  Ernest (1 858-1 931) Logic. 3 vols. Cambridge University Press,
1921.  Jones,  Ernest  (1879-1958)  Nightmare,  Witches, and Devils. New
York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1931.  Joule,  James  Prescott  (18 18-1889) The
Scientific  Papers  of James  Prescott  Joule.  2  vols. London: Tavlor &
Francis,  1  884-1  887  (18401878).  JOURDAIN,  PHILIP,EDWARD  BeRTRAND
(1879-I919)  The Nature of Mathematics. London: T. C. & E. C. Jack, 1919
(London,  1913). Joyce, James (1882-1941) Dubliners. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House,  1926  (London, 191 4). —Finnegans Wake. New York:
Viking  Press,  1939.  —A  Portrait  ofthe Artist as a Young Man. Modern
Library,  New  York:  Random  House, 1928 (New York, 1 91 6). — Ulysses.
Modern  Library,  New  York: Random House, 1942 (Paris, 1922). Judah ha-
Levi  (c.  1085-c.  1  1 42) Kitab al Khazari (Al Chusari). Trans, by H.
Hirschfeld.  New York: B. G. Richards, 1927 (1140). Jung, Carl Gustav (1
875-1961)   Instinct  and  the  Unconscious.  In  Contributions  (1919).
—Marriage  as  a Psychological Relationship. Ibid. (1925)- —Mind and the
Earth.  Ibid.  (1927).  —Modern  Man in Search ofa Soul. Trans, by W. S.
Dell  and  C. F. Baynes. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1933 (1929-1932). —On
the  Relations  of Analytical Psychology to Poetic Art. In Contributions
(1922).  —Psychological  Types,  or,  The  Psychology  of Individuation.
Trans,  by  H.  G.  Baynes.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1926  (1921).
—Psychology and Religion. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1938.
—Spirit  and  Life.  In  Contributions (1926). —Two Essays on Analytical
Psychology.  Trans,  by  H.  G. and C. F. Baynes. New York: Dodd, Mead &
Co., 1928 (1912).

[1216b]
.  Contributions  to  Analytical  Psychology.  Trans, by H. G. and C. F.
Baynes.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1928.  Justinian (Flavius Anicius
Justinianus) (c. 482565). The Digest of Justinian. Trans, by C. H. Monro.
2  vols. Cambridge University Press, 1 904-1 909 (533)- — The Institutes
of Justinian.  Trans,  by  J.  B.  Moyle.  Oxford: Clarendon Press, 191 3
(533).  Juvenal, Decimus Junius (2d century a.d.) The Satires of Juvenal.
Trans,  by W. Gifford. New York: Putnam's, 1906. K Kafka, Franz (1 883-1
924)  The Castle. Trans, by E. and W. Muir. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1941.
—The  Trial.  Trans,  by  E.  and  W. Muir. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1937.
Kallen,  Horace  Meyer  (1882-  )  The BooJ{ °fJ°b as Greek Tragedy. New
York:  Moffat,  Yard  &Co.,  1918. Kames, Lord (Henry Home) (1696- 1782)
Elements  of Criticism.  Ed.  by  A.  Mills. New York: Sheldon &Co., 1871
(Edinburgh,  1762).  —Sketches  ofthe  History of Man. 3 vols. London: T.
Cadell & W. Davies, 1807 (Edinburgh, 1774). Kant, Immanuel (1 724-1 804)
Anthropologic  in  pragmatischer  Hinsicht.  In Vol. iv, Sdmtliche Werke
(Konigsberg, 1798). —Cosmogony
[1,
Examination   of  the  Question  Whether  the  Earth  Has  Undergone  an
Alteration  of  Its  Axial  Rotation;  11, Universal Natural History and
Theory  ofthe  Heavens].  Trans,  by  W. Hastie. Glasgow: J. MacLehose &
Sons,   1900   (Allgemeine  Naturgeschichte  und  Theorie  des  Himmels,
Konigsberg,  1755).  —[De  Mundi  Sensibilis] Inaugural Dissertation and
Early  Writings  on  Space. Trans, by J. Handyside. Chicago: Open Court,
1929  (De  Mundi  Sensibilis  Atque  Intelligibilis Forma et Principiis,
Konigsberg,  1770).  — The Educational Theory of Immanuel Kant. Trans, by
E. F. Buchner. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 1904 (F. T. Rink, Immanuel Kant
Uber Pddagogik, Konigsberg, 1803). —The Idea of a Universal History on a
CosmoPolitical   Plan.   Trans,   by   T.  de  Quincey.  Hanover,  N.H.:
Sociological Press, 1927 (1784). —Introduction to Logic. Trans, by T. K.
Abbott.  London:  Longmans, Green & Co., 1885 (Logik, Konigsberg, 1800).
—Lectures  on  Ethics. Trans, by L. Infield. New York: Century Co., 1930
(1780-1781).   —Metaphysical   Foundations   of   Natural  Science.  See
Prolegomena (Metaphysische Anfangsgriinde der Naturwissenschaften, Riga,
1786). —On the First Grounds of the Distinction of Regions in Space. See
Inaugural Dissertation ( 1 768) 1182

[1217a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY Kierkegaard —Perpetual Peace, a Philosophical Essay. Trans,
by  M.  Campbell-Smith.  New York: Columbia University Press, 1939. {Zum
ewigen  Frieden,  ein  philosophischer Entwurf, Konigsberg, 1795). — The
Principle  of Progress. In Principles ofjfylitics. Ed. by W. Hastie. New
York:  Scribner's,  1891  •  • , , —Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic
[includes ( J 794)- Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science]. Ed. and
trans,  by  Paul  Carus.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1929  {Prolegomena  zu
einerjeden  zufyinfiigen Metaphysi\, die als Wissenschaft wird auftreten
kpnnen,  Riga, 1783). —Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone. Trans,
by  T.  M.  Greene  and  H.  H.  Hudson.  Chicago: Open Court, 1934 {Die
Religion  innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft, Konigsberg, 1794).
—  Untersuchung  uber  die  Deutlichkeit  der Grundsdtze der naturlichen
Theologie  und  der  Moral.  In  Vol. 1, Sdmtliche Werke (Berlin, 1764).
note: Sdmtliche Werke ("Akademieausgabe"). 22 vols. Berlin: F. Meiner, 1
902-1  920. Kapteyn, Jacobus Cornelius (1 851-1922) Recent Researches in
the  Structure  of  the Universe. Smithsonian Institution, Annual Report
(1908),  Washington,  D.C, 1909. Kasner, Edward (1 878-1955) and Newman,
James  (1907-1966)  Mathematics  and  the Imagination. New York: Simon &
Schuster,  1940.  Keith,  Sir  Arthur  (1866-1955)  A New Theory of Human
Evolution.   New   York:   Philosophical  Library.  1949.  Kelsen,  Hans
(1881-1973)   Der   soziologische  und  der  juristische  Staatsbegriff,
kritische  Untersuchung des Verhdltnisses von Staat und Recht. Tubingen:
J.  C.  Mohr,  1928  (Tubingen, 1922). —General Theory of Law and State.
Trans, by A. Wedberg. Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1945.
—Law  and  Peace  in  International Relations. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University  Press,  1942.  —Society  and Nature: A Sociological Inquiry.
University   of  Chicago  Press,  1943.  —Sozialismus  und  Staat,  eine
Untersuchung  der  politischen  Theorie  des  Marxismus.  Leipsic: C. L.
Hirschfeld  1920.  —Staatsform und Weltanschauung. Tubingen: J. C. Mohr,
1933.  —Vom  Wesen  und  Wert  der Democratic Tubingen: J. C. Mohr, 1929
(Tubingen,  1920).  Kelso,  Ruth  (1885-  )  The  Doctrine ofthe English
Gentleman  in  the  Sixteenth  Century.  Urbana,  111.  :  University of
Illinois  Press,  1929  (1923).  Kelvin,  Baron  (Sir  William  Thomson)
(18241907)  Lectures on Molecular Dynamics and the Wave Theory of Light.
Baltimore, Md.: Publication

[1217b]
.  Agency  of  the Johns Hopkins University Press, 1904 (1884). —Popular
Lectures  and Addresses. 3 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1891-1894 (London,
1889-1894).  Kent,  Sherman  (1903- ) Writing History. New York: Crofts,
1941.  Kepler,  Johannes  (1571-1630) De Motibus Stellae Martis. In Vol.
in,  Joannis  Kepleri  Astronomi  Opera Omnia. Ed. by C. Frisch. 8 vols.
Frankfort:  Heyder  &  Zimmer, 1 858- 1 87 1 (1609). —Dioptrif{. Ed. and
trans,  by  F.  Plehn.  Leipsic: W. Engelmann, 1904 (161 1). —Harmonices
Mundi.   In   Vol.   v,  Opera.  See  De  Motibus  (161  9).  —Mysterium
Cosmographicum.  In  Vol.  1,  ibid. See De Motibus (1596). Keynes, John
Maynard  (1  883-1946)  The  General  Theory of Employment, Interest and
Money. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1936. —A Treatise on Money. 2 vols. New
York:  Harcourt  Brace, 1935 (London, 1930). —A Treatise on Probability.
London: Macmillan, 1929 (London, 1921). Keynes, John Neville (1852-1949)
The Scope and Method of Political Economy. New York: Macmillan, 1904 (New
York,  1891).  —Studies  and  Exercises  in  Formal  Logic,  Including a
Generalisation  of  Logical  Processes  in  Their Application to Complex
Inferences.  London:  Macmillan, 1906 (London, 1884). Kierkegaard, Soren
Aabye  (1813—1855)  Christian Discourses. Trans, by W. Lowrie. New York:
Oxford University Press, 1939 (Copenhagen, 1848). —The Concept of Dread.
Trans,  by  W.  Lowrie.  Princeton  University  Press, 1944 (Copenhagen,
1844).  —Concluding Unscientific Postscript. Trans, by D. Swenson and W.
Lowrie. Princeton University Press, 1 94 1 (Copenhagen, 1846). —Edifying
Discourses.  Trans,  by D. and L. Swenson. Minneapolis, Minn. : Augsburg
Publishing  House,  1944  (Copenhagen, 1844). —Either/ Or: A Fragment of
Life.  Trans,  by  D. Swenson et al. 2 vols. Princeton University Press,
1944  (Copenhagen,  1843).  —Ofthe  Difference  Between  a Genius and an
Apostle.  In  The Present Age and Two Minor Ethico -Religious Treatises.
Trans,  by A. Dru and W. Lowrie. New York: Oxford University Press, 1940
(Copenhagen,   1849).   —Philosophical  Fragments;  or,  A  Fragment  of
Philosophy.  Trans,  by  D. F. Swenson. Princeton University Press, 1936
(Copenhagen,  1844).  —The  Point of View, etc. Trans, by W. Lowrie. New
York  : Oxford University Press, 1 939 ( 1848) —The Sickness Unto Death.
Trans,  by  W.  Lowrie.  Princeton  University  Press, 1941 (Copenhagen,
1849).

[1218a]
King  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  —Stages  on  Life's  Way. Trans, by W. Lovvrie.
Princeton  University  Press,  1940  (1845).  —  Worlds  of  Love:  Some
Christian  Reflexions  in  the  Form  of Discourses.  Trans, by D. and L.
Swenson.  Princeton  University  Press,  1946  (Copenhagen, 1847). King,
Henry,  Bishop  of  Chichester  (1  592-1669)  The  Exequy. In The Poems
of Bishop  Henry  King.  Ed.  by J. Sparrow. London: Nonesuch Press, 1925
(London,  1657).  Kingsley,  Charles  (1819-1875)  Westward* Hoi or, The
Voyages  and  Adventures  of  Sir  Amyas Leigh, Knt., of Burrough, in the
County   of Devon,  in  the  Reign  of Her  Most  Glorious  Majesty  Queen
Elizabeth.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1934 (Cambridge,
1855).  Kirk, Kenneth Escott (1 886-1954) Conscience and Us Problems: An
Introduction  to  Casuistry.  New  York:  Longmans,  Green  & Co., 1927.
—Ignorance,  Faith  and Conformity: Studies in Moral Theology. New York:
Longmans,  Green & Co., 1925. —The Vision of God: The Christian Doctrine
of  the  Summum  Bonum.  New  York:  Longmans, Green & Co., 1931. Klein,
Christian  Felix  (1  849-1  925) Elementary Mathematicsfrom an Advanced
Standpoint.  Trans,  by  E.  R.  Hedrick  and  C.  A.  Noble.  New York:
Macmillan,  1922  (Elementarmathemathif^  vom  hoheren  Standpunty  aus,
Leipsic,   19081909).  —Famous  Problems  of  Elementary  Geometry:  The
Duplication ofthe Cube, the Trisection ofan Angle, the Quadrature of the
Circle. Trans, by W. W. Beman and D. E. Smith. New York: G. E. Stechert,
1930   (Vortrdge   uber  ausgewdhlte  Fragen  der  Elementargeometrie  ,
ausgearbeitet von F. Tdgeri, Leipsic, 1895). Knox, John (c. 1 505-1 572)
An  Answer  to the Cavillations of an Adversarie Respecting the Doctrine
of Predestination. In Vol. v, The Wor\s of John Knox. Ed. by D. Laing. 6
vols. Edinburgh: J. Thin, 1895 (Geneva, 1560). Koch, Robert (1843-19 10)
The   Aetiology   of Tuberculosis.   New  York  :  National  Tuberculosis
Association,   1932  (1882).  Koehler,  Wolfgang  (1  887-1967)  Gestalt
Psychology. New York: Liveright, 1929. — The Mentality of Apes. Trans, by
E.  Winter.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1925 (Intelligenzprufungen an
Anthropoiden,  1,  Berlin, 191 7). Koestler, Arthur (1905- ) Darkness at
Noon.  Modern  Library,  New  York:  Random  House, 1949 (London, 1940).
Koffka,  Kurt  (1 886-1 941) Principles of Gestalt-Psychology. New York:
Harcourt  Brace,  -1  935.  Kohler, Josef (1849-1919) Philosophy of Law.
Trans, by A. Albrecht. New

[1218b]
York:  Macmillan,  1921  (Lehrbuch der Rechtsphilosophie, Berlin, 1909).
Kohn,  Hans  (1891-1971) The Idea of Nationalism: A Study in Its Origins
and   Background.   New   York:   Macmillan,   1944.   —Revolutions  and
Dictatorships;  Essays  in  Contemporary  History.  Cambridge,  Mass.  :
Harvard University Press, 1939. Koninck, Charles de (1906- ) Le probleme
de   Vindeterminisme.   Quebec,   1937.  KOVALEVSKY,  MaXIM  MaXIMOVITCH
(185I-I916)  Modern  Customs  and  Ancient  Laws  of  Russia;  Being the
Illchester  Lecturesfor 1889-90. London: D. Nutt, 1891. Kropotkin, Peter
Alexeivich  (1  842-1  921) Anarchism: Its Philosophy and Ideal. London:
Freedom  Press,  1904  (Uanarchie  ;  sa  philosophic— son ideal, Paris,
1896).  —The  Conquest  of  Bread.  New  York:  Vanguard Press, 1926 {La
conquete  du  pain,  Paris, 1892). —Fields, Factories and Workshops; or,
Industry  Combined with Agriculture and Brain Wor\ with Manual Wor\. New
York:  Putnam's,  191  3  (London,  1899).  —Mutual  Aid,  a  Factor  of
Evolution.  New  York:  A.  A. Knopf, 1925 (1890-1896). — The State, Its
Historic  Role.  London:  Freedom  Press, 1903. La Boetie, Etienne de (i
530-1  563)  Anti-Dictator,  the  Discours  de  la servitude volontaire.
Trans,  by  H.  Kurz. New York: Columbia University Press, 1942 (1546 ?—
1548 ?). La Bruyere, Jean de (1 645-1696) The Characters. Ed. and trans,
by   H.  Van  Laun.  London:  G.  Routledge,  1929  (Les  caracteres  de
Theophraste  traduits  du  Grec. Avec les caracteres ou les moeurs de ce
siecle,  Paris,  1688).  Lactantius, Lucius Caecilius Firmianus (26033°)
The  Divine  Institutes.  In Vol. vn, The Ante-Nicene Fathers. Ed. by A.
Roberts  and  J. Donaldson. 10 vols. New York: Christian Literature Co.,
18851896  (Institutionum  Divinarum, 304?^ 13?). Laennec, Rene Theophile
Hyacinthe   (17811826)   Translation   of Selected  Passagesfrom  Mediate
Auscultation. New York: W. Wood, 1923 (De V auscultation mediate, Paris,
1819). La Fayette, Marie Madeleine, Comtesse de (1634-1693) The Princess
of Cleves.  Trans,  by  H.  Ashton.  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton, 1925 (La
Princesse  de Cleves, Paris, 1678). La Fontaine, Jean de (1621-1695) The
Fables of Jean de la Fontaine. Trans, by E. Marsh. London: W. Heinemann,
1933 (Paris, 1 668- 1 694). 1184

[1219a]
.  Lagerlof,  Selma  Ottiliana  Lovisa  (i  858-1  940)  The Ring of the
Lowenskplds.  Trans,  by  V. S. Howard and F. Martin. Garden City, N.Y.:
Doubleday  Doran, 1931 {L6wens\6ldska Ringen, Charlotte Lowenskpld, Anna
Svdrd,  StocJ^holrn,  1925-1928).  Lagrange,  Joseph  Louis (1736-18 13)
Mecanique  analytique. 2 vols. Paris: GauthierVillars, 1888-1889 (Paris,
1788). Laird, John (1887-1946) An Enquiry into Moral Notions. New York :
Columbia  University  Press, 1936 (London, 1935). —Knowledge, Belief and
Opinion.   New  York:  Century  Co.,  1930.  Lake,  Kirsopp  (1872-1946)
Immortality  and  the  Modern Mind. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press,  1922.  Lalo,  Charles  (i 877-1953) Vart et la morale. Paris: F.
Mean, 1934 (Paris, 1922). Lamarck, Jean Baptiste Pierre Antoine de Monet
(1744-1829)  Zoological  Philosophy;  an  Exposition  with Regard to the
Natural History of Animals. Trans, by H. Elliot. London: Macmillan, 1914
(Philosophie  zoologique,  ou  Exposition des considerations relatives a
Vhistoire  naturelle  des  animaux, Paris, 1 809) Lamb, Charles (i 775—1
834)  The  Essays  of  Elia. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1932  (London,  1823).  —Hospita  on  the  Immoderate  Indulgences ofthe
Pleasures  of the Palate. In Vol. iv, The Worlds of Charles Lamb. 5 vols.
New  York: T. Y. Crowell, 1881 (1810?). —On the Custom of Hissing at the
Theatres;  with  Some  Account  of  a Club of Damned Authors. In Vol. v,
ibid.   (181  1).  Lamettrie,  Julien  Offroy  de  (1709-1751)  Histoire
naturelle  de  Vdme. The Hague: J. Neaulme, 1745. —Man a Machine. Trans,
by  G.  C.  Bussey.  Chicago:  Open Court, 1912 {Uhomme machine, Leyden,
1748). Lamprecht, Karl (1856-1915) What Is History? Eive Lectures on the
Modern  Science  of History . Trans, by E.A.Andrews. New York: Macmillan,
1905  {Moderne Geschichtswissenschaft, Freiburg, 1904). Landtman, Gunnar
(  1  878-1940)  The  Origin  of  the  Inequality of the Social Classes.
University  of  Chicago Press, 1938. Lang, Andrew (1844-1912) Custom and
Myth.  New York: Harper, 1885 (London, 1884). Lange, Friedrich Albert (1
828-1  875)  The  History  of  Materialism  and Criticism of Its Present
Importance.  Trans,  by  E. C. Thomas. 3 vols. New York: Harcourt Brace,
1925  {Geschichte  des  Materialismus und Kriti\ seiner Bedeutung in der
Gegenwart, Iserlohn, 1866).

[1219b]
:  BIBLIOGRAPHY  D.  H. Lawrence Langland, William (c. 1330-c. 1400) The
Vision  of  Piers  Plowman.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1945  (1362?-  1392?).  Langlois,  Charles  Victor  (1  863-1  929)  and
Seignobos,  Charles  (1854-1942)  Introduction  to the Study of History.
Trans,  by  G.  G  Berry.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1932 {Introduction aux
etudes  historiques,  Paris,  1898). Laplace, Pierre Simon (1 749-1 827)
Mecanique  celeste {Celestial Mechanics). Trans, by N. Bowditch. 4 vols.
Boston:  Hillard  Gray,  1829-1839  (Paris, 1799-1825). —A Philosophical
Essay  on  Probabilities. Trans, by F. W. Truscott and F. L. Ermory. New
York: J. Wiley, 1 91 7 {Essai philosophique sur les probabilites, Paris,
181  4). — The System ofthe World. Trans, by H. H. Harte. 2 vols. Dublin
University  Press,  1830  {Exposition du systeme du monde, Paris, 1796).
Large,  Ernest  Charles  The Advance of the Fungi. New York: Henry Holt,
1940.   Lashley,   Karl   Spencer  (1  890-1958)  Brain  Mechanisms  and
Intelligence;  a Quantitative Study of Injuries to the Brain. University
of  Chicago  Press,  1929. Laski, Harold Joseph (1893-1950) Authority in
the  Modern  State.  New  Haven,  Conn. Yale University Press, 1927 (New
Haven,  1919).  —Democracy  in  Crisis. Chapel Hill, N.C.: University of
North  Carolina  Press,  1933.  —Liberty  in the Modern State. New York:
Harper,  1930.  —Refections  on  the  Revolution  of Our Time. New York:
Viking  Press, 1943. —The State in Theory and Practice. New York: Viking
Press,  1935.  Lassalle,  Ferdinand  Johann  Gottlieb (18251864) What Is
Capital?  Trans,  by F. Keddell. New York: International Publishing Co.,
1899  (from Herr Bastiat Schultze von Delitzsch, der okpnomische Julian,
oder  Kapital  und  Arbeit,  Berlin, .864). Law, William (1 686-1761) An
Appeal to All That Doubt, or Disbelieve the Truths ofthe Gospel. In Vol.
vi,  The  Wor\s  ofthe  Reverend  William  Law,  M.A. 9 vols. London: G.
Moreton,  1  892-1  893  (London,  1740).  —A  Practical  Treatise  upon
Christian  Perfection. In Vol. in, ibid. (London, 1726). —A Serious Call
to  a  Devout and Holy Life. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1931  (London,  1729).  Lawrence,  David  Herbert (1 885-1 930) Sons and
Lovers.  Modern  Library,  New York: Random House, 1940 (London, 191 3).
—Women  in Love. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1937 (New York,
1920).

[1220a]
H.  Lawrence  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Lawrence,  Henry  (i  600-1 664) Of Our
Communion  and  Warre  with  Angels.  Amsterdam,  1646. Lawrence, Thomas
Edward  (1 888-1 935) Seven Pillars of Wisdom. Garden City, N.Y.: Garden
City  Publishing Co., 1938 (New York, 1926). Lea, Charles Henry (1 825-1
909)  Materials  Toward  a  History of Witchcraft. Ed. by A. C. Howland.
Philadelphia:  University  of  Pennsylvania  Press, 1939. Lecky, William
Edward  Hartpole (1 838-1 903) Democracy and Liberty. 2 vols. New York :
Longmans,  Green  &  Co., 1900 (London, 1896). —The Map of Life; Conduct
and  Character.  New  York: Longmans, Green & Co., 191 3 (London, 1899).
Legnano,  Giovanni da (d. 1383) Tractatus De Bello, De Represaliis et De
Duello  (On  War, Reprisals, and the Duel). Ed. by T. E. Holland, trans,
by  J.  L.  Brierly. New York: Oxford University Press, 191 7 (c. 1360).
Leibnitz,   Gottfried   Wilhelm  (1646-1716)  Characteristica  (Scientia
Generalis).  In  Vol. vn, Philosophische Schriften. —Correspondence with
Clarke.  In  Philosophical  Worlds,  q.v.  (171 5-1 7 16). —Discourse on
Metaphysics,  Correspondence  with  Arnauld,  and  Monadology. Ed. by P.
Janet, trans, by G. R. Montgomery. Chicago: Open Court, 1 93 1 (Discours
de  le  metaphysique,  1686).  —  The  Early Mathematical Manuscripts of
Leibnitz.  Trans, by J. M. Child. Chicago: Open Court, 1920 (1673-1677).
—Monadology.  See  Discourse  on  Metaphysics  (  1  7  1 4) —New Essays
Concerning  Human  Understanding. Trans, by A. G. Langley. Chicago: Open
Court,   191   6   (Nouveaux  essais  sur  Ventendement  humain,  1704).
—Philosophical  Worlds. Ed. and trans, by G. M. Duncan. New Haven, Conn.
:  Tuttle, Morehouse, & Taylor, 1908 (1684-17 14). —[Theodicy] Essais de
Theodicee  sur  la  bonte  de Dieu, la liberte de Vhomme, et Vorigine du
mal.  In  Vol. vi, Philosophische Schriften (Amsterdam, .7.0). — What Is
"Idea"?  Appended  to New Essays, q.v. (1678-1679). note: Philosophische
Schriften. Ed. by C. J. Gerhardt. 7 vols. Berlin: Weidmann, 1 875-1 890.
Lenin,  Vladimir Ilyich (1870- 1924) Collected Works. 23 vols. New York:
International  Publishers, 1927. Vol. xvin, The Imperialist War (191 4-1
91  6); Vol. xxi, Toward the Seizure of Power (191 7). —Imperialism, the
Highest  Stage  of  Capitalism. New York: International Publishers, 1939
(St. Petersburg, 1917). —"Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile Disorder; A
Popular Essay in Marxian Strategy and Tactics.

[1220b]
New  York:  International  Publishers, 1940 (Moscow, 1920). —Materialism
and  Empiriocriticism.  Trans,  by  D.  Kuitko  and  S. Hook. London: M.
Lawrence,  1927  (Moscow,  1909).  —Selected  Worlds. 12 vols. New York:
International  Publishers,  1943  (paper  cited, 191 5). — The State and
Revolution.  New  York:  International Publishers, 1935 (St. Petersburg,
191  8).  Lenzen, Victor Fritz (1890- ) The Nature of Physical Theory; a
Study  in  Theory of Knowledge. New York: J. Wiley, 1931. Leo XIII, Pope
(1810-1903)
[Rerum Novarum] On the Condition of Labor. In
Five  Great  Encyclicals. New York: Paulist Press, 1939 (1891). Leonardo
da  Vinci  (1452-15 19) The Notebooks of Leonardo da Vinci. Trans, by E.
MacCurdy.  Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Garden  City  Publishing  Co., 1941. —A
Treatise  on Painting. Trans, by J. F. Rigand. New York: G. Bell & Sons,
1892  (Trattato  delta pittura, i485?-i5oo?). Leopardi, Count Giacomo (1
798-1  837) Essays, Dialogues, and Thoughts. Ed. by B. Dobell, trans, by
J.  Thomson.  New  York:  E. P. Dutton, 1905 (sel. from Operettc Morali,
Florence, 1827, and Pensieri). Lermontov, Mikhail Yurevich (1814-1841) A
Hero  of Our Own Times. Trans, by E. and C. Paul. London: Allen & Unwin,
1940  (1840).  Le  Sage,  Alain Rene (1 668-1 747) The Adventures of Gil
Bias.  Trans,  by Tobias Smollett. 2 vols. Everyman's Library, New York:
E.  P.  Dutton, 1928 (Histoire de Gil Bias de Santillane, Paris, 171 5-1
735).  Leslie,  Thomas Edward Cliffe (1 826-1 882) The Love of Money. In
Essays  in Political Economy. Dublin: Hodges, Figgis & Co., 1888 (1862).
Lessing,  Gotthold  Ephraim (1729-1781) The Education of the Human Race.
Trans, by F. W. Robertson. London: C. K. Paul & Co., 1881 (Die Erziehung
des  Menschengeschlechts,  Berlin, 1780). —[How the Ancients Represented
Death}  Laokpon,  and  How  the Ancients Represented Death. Trans, by H.
Zimmern  and  E. C. Beasly. London: G. Bell & Sons, 191 4 (Wie die Alten
den  Todgebildet; eine Untersuchung, Berlin, 1769). —Laocoon, Nathan the
Wise and Minna von Barnhelm. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1930  (Laokpon:  oder  iiber die Grenzen der Malerei und Poesie, Berlin,
1766). —Minna von Barnhelm; or, Soldier's Fortune. Ibid. (Berlin, 1767).
—Nathan  the  Wise. Ibid. (Nathan der Weise, Berlin, 1779)' Levi-Civita,
Tullio  (  i  873-1  942)  Fragen  der  klassischen und relativistischen
Mechanic Berlin: J. Springer, 1924 (1921). 1186

[1221a]
7  :  Levy-Bruhl,  Lucien  (1857-1939)  Primitives and the Supernatural.
Trans, by L. A. Clare. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1935 (Le surnaturel et la
nature  dans  la mentalite primitive, Paris, 1 931). _^_ — Lewes, George
Henry  (18  17—1878)  The  Principles  of Success in Literature. Boston:
Allyn  &  Bacon, 1894 (1865). —Problems of Life and Mind. First to Third
Series.  5  vols. New York: Houghton Mifflin, 1 874-1 891 (London, 1874-
1879). Lewis Carroll, pseud, for Charles Lutwidge Dodgson ( 1 832-1 898)
Alice's  Adventures  in  Wonderland. In Alice in Wonderland, Through the
Looking-Glass,  and Other Comic Pieces. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P.  Dutton,  1946 (London, 1865). —Euclid and His Modern Rivals. London:
Macmillan,  1885  (London,  1879).  —Symbolic Logic, Part I, Elementary.
London: Macmillan, 1896. —Through ihe Looting-Glass and What Alice Found
There.  See Alice (London, 1871). Lewis, Clarence Irving (1 883-1964) An
Analysis  of  Knowledge and Valuation. La Salle, 111.: Open Court, 1947.
—Mind  and  the  World Order; Outline ofa Theory of Knowledge. New York:
Scribner's, 1929. Lewis, Clive Staples (1898-1963) The Allegory of Love;
a  Study  in Medieval Tradition. New York: Oxford University Press, 1938
(Oxford, 1936). —Out of the Silent Planet. New York: Macmillan, 1943 093
8  )-  —Perelandra. New York: Macmillan, 1944. — The Problem of Pain. New
York: Macmillan, 1944 (London, 1940). — The Screwtape Letters. New York:
Macmillan,  1944  (London,  1942).  Lewis, Sir George Cornewall (1 806-1
863) A Treatise on the Methods of Observation and Reasoning in Politics.
2  vols. London: J. W. Parker, 1852. Lewis, Gilbert Newton (1 875-1 946)
The  Anatomy  of  Science. New Haven, Conn. Yale University Press, 1926.
Lewis, Sinclair (1885-1951) Arrowsmith. Modern Library, New York: Random
House, 1933 (New York, 1925). —Babbitt. Modern Library, New York: Random
House,  1942  (New  York,  1922).  Lieber, Francis (1800-1872) Manual of
Political  Ethics, Designed Chiefly for the Use of Colleges and Students
at  Law.  Ed.  by T. D. Woolsey. 2 vols. Philadelphia: Lippincott, 191 1
(Boston,  1838-1839). LlEBKNECHT, KARL PAUL AUGUST FRIEDRICH (1871-1919)
Militarism. New York: B. W. Huebsch, 191

[1221b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  LOEB  (Militarismus  und Antimilitarismus, Leipsic, 1907).
Lillie,  Ralph  Stayner  (1  875-1952)  Protoplasmic  Action and Nervous
Action.  University of Chicago Press, 1923. Lindsay, Alexander Dunlop (1
879-1952)  The  Modern  Democratic  State.  New  York: Oxford University
Press, 1943. Linnaeus (Carl von Linne) (1707-1778) Caroli Linnei Systema
Naturae—Regnum  Animale.  Leipsic:  W. Engelmann, 1894 {Systema Naturae,
sive  Regna  Tria  Naturae  Systematice  Proposita per Classes, Ordines,
Genera  et  Species,  Leyden,  1735).  Lippmann,  Walter (1889- ) Public
Opinion.   New   York:   Penguin  Books,  1946  (1922).  Lipps,  Theodor
(1851-1914)  Asthetikj  Psychologie  des  Schonen und der Kunst. 2 vols.
Leipsic:  L. Voss, 191 4-1 920 (Leipsic, 1 903- 1 906). Livingstone, Sir
Richard  Winn (1880-1960) On Education. Cambridge University Press, 1944
(originally  pub.  as  The  Future  in  Education,  Cambridge, 1941, and
Education  for  a  World  Adrift, Cambridge, 1943). LOBACHEVSKI, NlCOLAS
IvANOVICH (1793-1856) Geometrical Researches on the Theory of Parallels.
Trans,  by  G.  B.  Halsted.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1942 (Geometrische
Untersuchungen  zur  Theorie  der  Parallellinien, Berlin, 1840). Locke,
John  (1  632-1  704)  Conduct  of  the Understanding. Ed. by T. Fowler.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1901 {c. 1697). —A Discourse of Miracles. In
Vol. ix, The Worlds of John Locke. 10 vols. London: T. Tegg, 1 823-1 824
(1702-1703).  —Four Letters on Toleration in Religion, Letters II-IV. In
Vol. vi, ibid. (Second Letter, London, 1690; Third Letter, London, 1692;
Fourth   Letter,   posth.,   London,  1706).  —  The  Reasonableness  of
Christianity  as Delivered in the Scriptures. In Vol. vn, ibid. (London,
1695).  —A  Second  Vindication  of  the Reasonableness of Christianity.
Ibid.  (London,  1697).  —Some  Considerations  of  the  Consequences of
Lowering  the  Interest, and Raising the Value of Money. In Vol. v, ibid.
(1691).  —Some Thoughts Concerning Education. In Vol. ix, ibid. (London,
1693).  Lods,  Adolphe  (1867-1948) The Prophets and the Rise of Judaism.
Trans,  by  S.  H.  Hooke.  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1937 (Les prophetes
dTsrael  et les debuts du judaisme, Paris, 1935). Loeb, Jacques (1 859-1
924)  Comparative Physiology ofthe Brain and Comparative Psychology. New
York: Putnam's, 1902
[Einleitung in die vergleichende Gehirnphysiologie

[1222a]
LOWITH  THE  GREAT  IDEAS und vergleichende Psychologies Leipsic, 1899).
—Forced   Movements,   Tropistns   and   Animal  Conduct.  Philadelphia:
Lippincott,  191  8. — The Mechanistic Conception of Life. University of
Chicago  Press, 191 2. — The Organism as a Whole, from a Physicochemical
Viewpoint.  New  York: Putnam's, 191 6. Lowith, Karl (1897- ) Meaning in
History.  University  of Chicago Press, 1949. Longinus (1st century a.d.
?) On the Sublime. Trans, by W. H. Fyfe. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard  University  Press,  1932.  LORENTZ,  HENDRIK AnTOON (1853-1928)
Lectures  on  Theoretical Physics. Trans, by L. Silberstein and A. P. H.
Trivelli.  London:  Macmillan, 1927 (1907). —Problems of Modern Physics.
Ed.  by  H.  Bateman. New York: Ginn & Co., 1927 (1922). Lossky, Nikolai
Onufrievich  (1870-  ) Freedom of Will. Trans, by N. Duddington. London:
Williams  &  Norgate,  1932  (1927).  Lotze,  Rudolf Hermann (1817-1881)
Grundzuge  der Naturphilosophie. Dictate aus den Vorlesungen von Hermann
Lotze.  Leipsic:  S.  Hirzel,  1887  (1876).  —Logic, in Three Books: Of
Thought, of Investigation, and of Knowledge. Ed. by B. Bosanquet, trans,
by R. L. Nettleship et al. Oxford : Clarendon Press, 1884 (Logi\. System
der  Philosophic,  1,  Leipsic,  1874).  —Metaphysics,  in  Three Boo\s,
Ontology,  Cosmology,  and  Psychology.  Ed. and trans, by B. Bosanquet.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1884 {Metaphysi\. System der Philosophic 11,
Leipsic,  1879).  —Microcosmos, an Essay Concerning Man and His Relation
to  the  World. Trans, by E. Hamilton and E. E. Constance Jones. 2 vols.
Edinburgh:  T.  & T. Clark, 1885 (Mikrokpsmus, Ideen zur Naturgeschichte
und  Geschichte  der  Menschheit,  Leipsic,  1856-1858).  —Outlines of a
Philosophy  of  Religion.  Ed. by F. C. Conybeare. New York: Scribner's,
191  6 (1875; 1 878-1 879). —Outlines of Encyclopedia of Philosophy. See
Outlines of Logic. —Outlines of Logic and of Encyclopedia of Philosophy:
Dictated  Portions  ofthe  Lectures  ofH. Lotze. Ed. and trans, by G. T.
Ladd.  Boston: Ginn & Co., 1887. —Outlines of Metaphysic. Ed. and trans,
by  G.  T.  Ladd. Boston: Ginn & Co., 1884. —Outlines of Psychology. Ed.
and  trans,  by  G.  T.  Ladd.  Boston:  Ginn & Co., 1886 (Grundzuge der
Psychologic  Diktate  aus  den Vorlesungen von H. Lotze, Leipsic, 1881).
Lovejoy, Arthur Oncken (1873- 1962) The Great Chain of Being; a Study of
the History of an Idea. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1936
(1933).

[1222b]
—The  Revolt  Against  Dualism:  An  Inquiry Concerning the Existence of
Ideas.  New York: W. W. Norton, 1930. Lowes, John Livingston (1867-1945)
The  Road  to  Xanadu:  A  Study in the Ways of the Imagination. Boston:
Houghton  Mifflin Co., 1927. Lubac, Henri De (1896- ) Surnaturel. Paris:
Aubier,   1946.   Lucian  (Lucianus  Samosatensis)  (2nd  century  A.D.)
Alexander  the  Oracle-Monger.  In  Vol.  11,  The  Works  of  Lucian of
Samosata.  Trans,  by  H. W. and F. G. Fowler. 4 vols. Oxford: Clarendon
Press,  1905  (180?). —The Fisher. In Vol. 1, ibid. (165 ?— 175 ?). —The
Gods  in  Council.  In  Vol. iv, ibid. (165 ?-i75 ?). —Icaromenippus: An
Aerial  Expedition. In Vol. in, ibid. (i6 5 ?-i 7 5?). —Of Sacrifice. In
Vol.  1,  ibid. (165 ?-i75 ?). —Sale of Creeds. Ibid. (165?- 175?). —The
Way  to  Write  History.  In  Vol. n, ibid. (165 ?). Lull, Ramon (Lully)
(1235-1315)  The  Boo\ofthe  Ordre  of Chyvalry.  Ed.  by A. T. B. Byles,
trans,  by  W.  Caxton.  London:  H.  Milford, 1926 (1276-1286). Luther,
Martin (1 483-1 546)
[Address to the German Nobility] An Open Letter to the Christian Nobility of the German Nation.
In   Three  Treatises  (Wittenberg,  1520).  —Against  the  Robbing  and
Murdering  Hordes of Peasants. In Vol. iv, Worlds (Wider die stiirmenden
Bauren,  Wittenberg, 1525). —[The Babylonian Captivity] A Prelude on the
Babylonian  Captivity  of  the  Church.  In Three Treatises (Wittenberg,
1520).  — The Magnificat. In Vol. hi, Worlds (Das Magnificat verdeutscht
und  ausgelegt durch Martin Luther, Wittenberg, 1520; 1521). —On Trading
and Usury. In Vol. iv, ibid. (Von Kauffshandlung und Wucher, Wittenberg,
1524).  —The  Schmal\ald  Articles.  In  The  Christian Book of Concord.
Philadelphia:  Jacob, 1882 (1537). —Secular Authority: To What Extent It
Should Be Obeyed. In Vol. 111, Worlds (Von weltlicher Oberkeit, wie weit
man  ihr  Gehorsam  schuldig  sei, Wittenberg, 1523). —The Table Talk of
Martin  Luther.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  W.  Hazlitt. Philadelphia: United
Lutheran  Publication House, 1904 (1531-1546). —To the Councilmen of All
Cities in Germany That They Establish and Maintain Christian Schools. In
Vol.  iv, Works (Wittenberg, 1524). —A Treatise on Christian Liberty. In
Three  Treatises  (Wittenberg,  1520). — Trinity Sunday. In Vol. ix, The
Precious  and  Sacred  Writings  of  Martin Luther. Ed. by J. N. Lenker,
trans,  by  H. L. Burry. Minneapolis, Minn.: Lutherans in All Lands Co.,
1903 (Wittenberg, 1535). 1188

[1223a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Maimonides  — Whether Soldiers, Too, Can Be Saved. In Vol.
v, Worths {Ob Kriegsleute auch in seligem Stand sein kpnnen, Wittenberg,
1526).  note:  Three  Treatises.  Ed.  and  trans, by C. M. Jacobs etal.
Philadelphia:  Muhlenberg Press, 1947. —Works of Martin Luther. Ed. by H.
E.  Jacobs.  6  vols.  Philadelphia:  A. J. Holman, 19151932. Lyell, Sir
Charles  (i 797-1 875) The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of Man.
Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1 91 4 (Philadelphia, 1863).
—Principles  of  Geology;  or,  The  Modern Changes of the Earth and Its
Inhabitants Considered as Illustrations of Geology. 2 vols. New York: D.
Appleton,  1892  (London,  1  830-1  833).  Lyly,  John  (c. 1 554-1606)
Euphues: The Anatomy of Wit; Euphues and His England. Ed. by M. W. Croll
and  H.  Clemons. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1916 (London, 1579; i 5 8o). M
Mably,  Gabriel  de Bonnot (1709-1785) Des droits et devoirs du citoyen.
Paris  :  Bibliotheque  Nationale,  1876 (Paris, 1758). Macaulay, Thomas
Babington  (i 800-1 859) Miscellaneous Essays; the Lays of Ancient Rome.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1932 (essay cited, 1828).
McDougall,   William   (1  871-1938)  Modern  Materialism  and  Emergent
Evolution.  New  York:  Van  Nostrand, 1929. Mach, Ernst (1838-1916) The
Analysis  of  Sensations  and  the  Relation  of  the  Physical  to  the
Psychical.  Ed.  by S. Waterlow, trans, by C. M. Williams. Chicago: Open
Court,  1  91  4  {Beitrdge  zur  Analyse der Empfindungen, Jena, 1886).
—ErJ^enntnis und Irrtum: Skizzen zur Psychologie der Forschung. Leipsic:
J.   A.  Barth,  1905.  —History  and  Root  of  the  Principle  of  the
Conservation  of  Energy.  Trans,  by  P.  E. B. Jourdain. Chicago: Open
Court,  191  1  (1872).  —Popular  Scientific  Lectures.  Trans,  by  J.
McCormack.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1895.  —The  Science  of Mechanics: A
Critical  and  Historical  Account  of  Its Development. Trans, by T. J.
McCormack. Chicago: Open Court, 1942 {Die Mechanic in ihrer Entwicklung,
Leipsic,  1883).  —Space  and  Geometry  in  the Light of Physiological,
Psychological  and Physical Inquiry. Trans, by T. J. McCormack. Chicago:
Open  Court, 1906 (19011903)- Machiavelli, Niccolo (1 469-1 527) The Art
of War. In Machiavelli. Ed. by H. Cust, trans, by P. Whitehorne. 2 vols.
London:  D.  Nutt,  1905  {DelV  Arte  della  guerra,  Florence,  1521).
—Belfagor. In Italian Novelists. Ed. and trans, by 1189

[1223b]
-  T.  Roscoe.  London: F. Warne & Co., 1908. —Castruccio Castracani. In
The  Prince  and Other Worlds. Ed. and trans, by A. H. Gilbert. Chicago:
Packard  &  Co.,  1941  (1520).  —[The  Discourses]  The  Prince and the
Discourses.  Trans,  by  C. E. Detmold. Modern Library, New York: Random
House,  1940  {Discorsi  .  . . sopra la prima deca di Tito Livio, c. 15
13).  —Florentine History. Trans, by W. K. Marriott. Everyman's Library,
New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1922 {c. 1 520-1 525). McIlwain, Charles Howard
(1871-   )   Constitutionalism,  Ancient  and  Modern.  Ithaca:  Cornell
University  Press, 1940 (1938-1939). —Constitutionalism and the Changing
World;  Collected  Papers.  New York: Macmillan, 1939. — The Fundamental
Law Behind the Constitution. In The Constitution Reconsidered. Ed. by C.
Read.  New  York:  Columbia  University  Press,  1938.  MacIver,  Robert
Morrison  (1882-1970)  Leviathan  and  the  People.  Baton  Rouge,  La.:
Louisiana  State  University  Press,  1939.  —Society; Its Structure and
Changes. New York: Long & Smith, 1931. —The Web of Government. New York:
Macmillan,  1947.  McLellan, James Alexander (1832-1907) and Dewey, John
(1859-1952)  The  Psychology of Number and Its Applications to Methods of
Teaching  Arithmetic.  New  York:  D. Appleton, 1 91 6 (New York, 1895).
McTaggart, John McTaggart Ellis (1 866-1 925) The Nature of Existence. 2
vols.  Cambridge University Press, 1 921-1927. —Some Dogmas of Religion.
London:  E.  Arnold, 1906. —Studies in the Hegelian Dialectic. Cambridge
University  Press,  1922 (Cambridge, 1896). Madariaga, Salvador (1886- )
Anarchy  or  Hierarchy. New York: Macmillan, 1937 (Madrid, 1935). Mahan,
Alfred  Thayer  (1840-1914)  The  Influence  of  Sea Power upon History,
16601783.  Boston:  Little, Brown & Co., 1915 (Boston, 1890). Maimonides
(Moses  ben  Maimon)  (1  135-1204)  The Eight Chapters of Maimonides on
Ethics;  a  Psychological  and Ethical Treatise. Ed. and trans, by J. I.
Gorfinkle.  New  York:  Columbia  University Press, 1 912 (11 58-1 168).
—The  Guidefor the Perplexed. Trans, by M. Fried lander. New York: E. P.
Dutton,  1928 (1190?). —The Mishneh Torah. Ed. and trans, by M. Hyamson.
New  York:  Bloch  Publishing Co., 1937 (1158-1190). —Regimen Sanitatis.
Facsimile  of  1477(F)  ed.  Heidelberg: H. Grossberger, 1931 (1198?). —
Treatise  on  Logic.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  I. Efros. New York: American
Academy for Jewish Research, 1938 (1151).

[1224a]
Maine  Maine,  Sir  Henry  James  Sumner (1822-L Ancient Law. Everyman's
Library,  New York: E. P. Dutton, 1931 (London, 1861). —Dissertations on
Early  Law  and  Customs,  Chiefly  Selected  from Lectures Delivered at
Oxford.  New  York:  Henry  Holt,  1886 (London, 1883). —Lectures on the
Early  History  of  Institutions.  New  York:  Henry Holt, 1888 (London,
1875).  —Popular  Government;  Four  Essays.  London:  J.  Murray,  1897
(London, 1885). Maine de Biran, Pierre, pseud, for Marie Francois Pierre
Gonthier (1 766-1 824) The Influence of Habit on the Faculty of Thinking.
Trans,  by  M.  D.  Boehm.  Baltimore,  Md.:  Williams  & Wilkiiis, 1929
{Influence  de Vhabitude sur la faculte de penser, Paris, 1803). Mairet,
Philippe  (1886-  )  Aristocracy and the Meaning of Class Rule: An Essay
upon  Aristocracy  Past and Future. London: C. W. Daniel, 1931. Maistre,
Joseph  Marie  de  (1753-1821)  Du  pape.  In  /.  de Maistre. Ed. by A.
Crosnier.  Paris:  Desclee,  de  Brouwer, 1933 (Lyons, 18 19). Maitland,
Frederic  William  (1  850-1 906) Justice and Police. London: Macmillan,
1885. Malebranche, Nicolas (1638-1715) De la recherche de la verite. Ed.
by  F.  Bouillier.  2  vols.  Paris:  Gamier, 1879 (Paris, 1 674-1 675).
—Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion. Trans, by M. Ginsberg. New York:
Macmillan,   1923  (Entretiens  sur  la  metaphysique  et  la  religion,
Rotterdam,  1688).  Malinowski, Bronislaw Kasper (1 884-1 942) Crime and
Custom  in  Savage  Society.  New  York: Harcourt Brace, 1932 (New York,
1926). —Freedom and Civilization. Ed. by A. V. Malinowska. New York: Roy
Publishers,  1944.  —The  Sexual  Life  of  Savages  in  North-  Western
Melanesia.  An  Ethnographic  Account  of Courtship, Marriage and Family
Life  Among  the Natives of the Trobriand Islands, Brit. New Guinea. New
York:   Liveright,   1929.   Mallock,  William  Hurrell  (1  849-1  923)
Aristocracy  and  Evolution:  A  Study of the Rights, the Origin and the
Social  Functions  ofthe  Wealthier  Classes. New York: Macmillan, 1898.
—Social  Equality:  A  Short  Study  in  a  Missing  Science. London: R.
Bentley, 1882. Malory, Sir Thomas (fl. 1470) Le morte d" Arthur. 2 vols.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1934-1935. Malraux, Andre
(1895-  )  Man's  Fate.  Trans,  by H. M. Chevalier. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House,  1936  {La condition humaine, Paris, 1933). —Man's
Hope.  Trans,  by S. Gilbert and A. Macdonald. Modern Library, New York:
Random  House,  1  94  1  {Uespoir, Paris, 1937). Malthus, Thomas Robert
(1766-1834) An Essay on Population. 2 vols. Everyman's

[1224b]
THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1933 (London, 1798).
—Principles  of  Political  Economy  Considered  with  a  View  to Their
Practical  Application.  London:  W.  Pickering,  1836  (London,  1820).
Mandeville,  Bernard  de  {c.  1  670-1  733) An Enquiry into the Origin
of Honor,   and  the  Usefulness  of  Christianity  in  War.  London:  J.
Brotherton,  1732.  —The  Fable  of the Bees; or, Private Vices, Public^
Benefits.  Ed.  by F. B. Kaye. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1924 (originally
pub.  as  The  Grumbling  Hive; or, Knaves Turrtd Honest, London, 1705).
Mann, Thomas (i 875-1955) Buddenbroo^s. Trans, by H. T. Lowe-Porter. New
York:  Garden  City Publishing Co., 1940 (Berlin, 1901). —Joseph and His
Brothers.  Trans,  by  H.  T.  LowePorter.  New  York: A. A. Knopf, 1936
(Berlin, . —Joseph in Egypt. Trans, by H. T. Lowe-Porter. 2 1933)- vols.
New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf, 1938 {Joseph in Agypten, Vienna, 1936). — The
Magic  Mountain.  Trans,  by H. T. LowePorter. Modern Library, New York:
Random  House,  1932  {Der Zauberberg, Berlin, 1924). — Tonio Kroger. In
Stories  of  Three Decades. Trans, by H. T. Lowe-Porter. New York: A. A.
Knopf, 1936 (Berlin, 1903). — Young Joseph. Trans, by H. T. Lowe-Porter.
New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf, 1935 {Derjunge Joseph^ Berlin, 1934). Mansel,
Henry  Longueville (1 820-1 871) Prolegomena Logica. An Inquiry into the
Psychological  Character of Logical Processes. Oxford: H. Hammans, 1851.
Manzoni,  Alessandro Francesco Tommaso Antonio (1785-1873) The Betrothed
{I promessi sposi) : A Milanese Story of the Seventeenth Century. Trans,
by  D. J. Connor. New York: Macmillan, 1937 (Milan, 18251827). Marechal,
Joseph  (1 878-1 944) Le point de depart de la metaphysique : lecons sur
le developpement historique et theorique du probleme de la connaissance.
3  vols.  Bruges: C. Beyaert, 1922-1923. Marett, Robert Ranulph (1 866-1
943)  Head,  Heart  and  Hands in Human Evolution. New York: Henry Holt,
1935.  Mariana,  Juan  de (1 536-1 624) The King and the Education ofthe
King.  Trans, by G. A. Moore. Washington: Country Dollar Press, 1948 {De
Rege  et  Regis  Institutione, 1599). Maritain, Jacques (1882- ) Art and
Scholasticism,  with  Other  Essays.  Trans. bv J. F. Scanlan. New York:
Scribner's,  1937  {Art et scholastique, Paris, 1920). —Christianity and
Democracy. Trans, by D. C. An1190

[1225a]
:  son.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1944 {Christianisme et democratic, New
York,  1943). —De la philosophic chretienne. Paris: Desclee, de Brouwer,
1933  (1931).  —The  Degrees  of Knowledge. Trans, by B. Watt-antr^ M. R.
Adamson. New York: Scribner's, 1938 {Distinguer pour unir, ou les degres
du  savoir, Paris, 1932). —Education at the Crossroads. New Haven, Conn.
Yale  University  Press,  1943.  —Existence  and the Existent. New York:
Pantheon  Press,  1948.  —Freedom  in  the  Modern  World.  Trans, by R.
O'Sullivan.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1936  {Du regime temporel et de la
liberte,   Paris,  1933).  —An  Introduction  to  Logic.  Trans,  by  G.
Choquette.  New York: Sheed & Ward, 1937 (Uordre des concepts: I, Petite
logique,  Paris,  1923). —An Introduction to Philosophy. Trans, by E. I.
Watkin. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1930 (Introduction generale (i la
philosophic, Paris, 1920). —The Person and the Common Good. Trans, by J.
J.  Fitzgerald.  New  York: Scribner's, 1947. —A Preface to Metaphysics,
Seven  Lectures  on Being. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1939 {Sept lemons sur
Vetre  et les premiers principes de la raison speculative, Paris, 1934).
—Principes  d'une  politique  humaniste. New York: Editions de la Maison
Franchise,  1944. —Ransoming the Time. Trans, by H. L. Binsse. New York:
Scribner's,  1941.  —Reflexions sur V intelligence et sur la vie propre.
Paris: Desclee, de Brouwer, 1921. —Religion and Culture. Trans, by J. F.
Scanlan.  New  York:  Sheed  &  Ward,  1931 {Religion et culture, Paris,
1930).  —The  Rights  of Man and Natural Law. Trans, by D. C. Anson. New
York:  Scribner's,  1943  {Les  droits de Vhomme et la hi naturelle, New
York,  1942).  —Saint  Thomas and the Problem of Evil. Trans, by Mrs. G.
Andison.    Milwaukee,   Wis.:   Marquette   University   Press,   1942.
—Scholasticism  and  Politics.  Ed. by M. J. Adler. New York: Macmillan,
1940.  —Science  and Wisdom. Trans, by B. Wall. London: Centenary Press,
1940  {Science  et  sagesse, suivi d'eclaircissements sur la philosophie
morale,  Paris,  —  Theonas,  Conversations  of  a Sage. Trans, by F. J.
Sheed.  New  York:  Sheed  & Ward, 1933 {Theonas, ou Les Entretiens d'un
sage et de deux philosophes sur diverses matieres inegalement actuelles,
Paris,  1921).  —The  Things  That  Are  Not  Caesar's.  Trans, by J. F.
Scanlan.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1930  {Primaute  du spirituel, Paris,
1927). —True Humanism. Trans, by M. R. Adamson. London: Centenary Press,
1938  {Problemas  espirituales  y  temporales  de una nueva cristiandad,
Madrid, 1934). 1191

[1225b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Marx  Mark  Twain,  pseud,  for  Samuel  Langhorne Clemens
(1835-1910)  The  Adventures  of Huckleberry  Finn.  In  Tom  Sawyer  and
Huckleberry  Finn.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E. P. Dutton, 1944
(London,  1884). — The Adventures of Tom Sawyer. Ibid. (Hartford, Conn.,
1876).  —  What Is Man? And Other Essays. New York: Harper, 191 7 (title
essay,  New  York,  1906). Marlowe, Christopher (1 564-1 593) Edward the
Second.  In  The  Plays  of Christopher Marlowe. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E. P. Dutton, 1947 (1592 or 1593). — Tamburlaine the Great. Ibid.
(1587  or 1588). —The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus. Ibid. (1589?).
Marriott,   Sir  John  Arthur  Ransome  (1859—  1945)  Dictatorship  and
Democracy. Oxford : Clarendon Press, 1935. Marshall, Alfred (1 842-1924)
Principles   of Economics.   London:   Macmillan,  1936  (London,  1890).
Marshall,  Henry  Rutgers  (1  852-1  927) Instinct and Reason, an Essay
Concerning  the  Relation of Instinct to Reason, with Some Special Study
ofthe  Nature of Religion. New York: Macmillan, 1898. Marsilius of Padua
{c. 1 270-1 342)
[Defensor Pacis] The Defender of Peace. Trans, by
A.  Gewirth. New York: Columbia University Press, 1950 (1324). Martianus
Capella  (5th  century) De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurii. In Martianus
Capella. Ed. by A. Dick. Leipsic: B. G. Teubner, 1925 (430 ?). Martin du
Gard,  Roger  (1881-1958) The Thibaults. Trans, by S. Gilbert. New York:
Viking Press, 1939 (Paris, 1922- 1929). Martineau, James (1 805-1 900) A
Study  of Religion,  Its  Sources and Contents. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon
Press, 1900 (Oxford, 1888). Marvell, Andrew (1621-1678) Dialogue Between
the Soul and the Body. In Vol. 1, The Poems and iMters of Andrew Marvell.
Ed.  by H. M. Margoliouth. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1927 (1681).
—  To  His Coy Mistress. Ibid. (168 1). Marx, Karl (1818-1883) The Civil
War  in  France.  New  York:  International  Publishers, 1937 (1871). —A
Contribution to the Critique of Political Economy. Trans, by N. I. Stone.
New  York:  International  Library  Publishing Co., 1904 {Zur Kritik der
politischen  Oekpnomie,  1,  Berlin,  1859). —A Criticism ofthe Hegelian
Philosophy  of  Right. In Selected Essays. Trans, by H. J. Stenning. New
York:   International   Publishers,  1926  {Zur  Kritik  der  Hegelschen
Rechtsphilosophie, in DeutschFranzosische Jahrbucher, Paris, 1844).

[1226a]
Marx and Engels THE GREAT IDEAS —Critique of the Gotha Programme. Ed. by
C.  P.  Dutt.  New  York:  International  Publishers, 1938 (1875).. —The
Eighteenth  Brumaire  of  Louis  Bonaparte.  Trans,  by  E. and C. Paul.
London:  Allen & Unwin, 1926 (1852). — The Poverty of Philosophy. Trans,
by  H.  Quelch.  Chicago:  C.  H.  Kerr,  1910 (Misere de la philosophic
Reponse  a  La  philosophie de la misere de M. Proudhon, Paris, 1847). —
LJber    die    Dijferenz    der    demo^ritischen   und   epikureischen
Naturphilosophie.    Vol.    1,   First   Series.   Historisch-Kritische
Gesamtausgabe.  Ed.  by D. Rjazanov. Frankfort: Marx-Engels Archiv, 1927
(1841).  Marx,  Karl  and  Engels,  Friedrich  (1  820-1 895) The German
Ideology.  Ed.  by  R.  Pascal. New York: International Publishers, 1939
(Parts 1 and in, Die deutsche Ideologic, Moscow, 1932
[1846]).
Mason,  Otis  Tufton (1838-1908) Woman's Share in Primitive Culture. New
York:  D.  Appleton, 191 4 (New York, 1894). Matthew of Aquasparta (c. 1
234-1  302)  Ten Disputed Questions on Knowledge. In Vol. 11, Selections
from  Medieval  Philosophers.  Ed. and trans, by Richard McKeon. 2 vols.
New   York:   Scribner's,  1  929-1  930.  Maudsley,  Henry  (1835-1918)
Responsibility in Mental Disease. New York: D. Appleton, 1 90 1 (London,
1874).  Maurice,  Frederick Denison (1805-1872) The Conscience: Lectures
on   Casuistry,  Delivered  in  the  University  of  Cambridge.  London:
Macmillan,   1883   (London,   1868).  Mauron,  Charles  Aesthetics  and
Psychology.  Trans,  by R. Fry and C. John. London: Hogarth Press, 1935.
Maurras,  Charles (1868-1952) Enquete sur la monarchic Paris: A. Fayard,
1937  (Paris, 1 900-1 909). Maxwell, James Clerk (1 831-1879) Matter and
Motion.  Ed.  by  J.  Larmor.  London:  Society  for Promoting Christian
Knowledge,  1920  (London,  1876).  —The Scientific Papers of James Cler\
Maxwell.  Ed.  by  W. D. Niven. 2 vols. Cambridge University Press, 1890
(1846-1879). — Theory of Heat. Ed. by Lord Rayleigh. New York: Longmans,
Green  &  Co.,  1916  (London,  1871).  —A  Treatise  on Electricity and
Magnetism.  Ed.  by J. J. Thomson. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1892
(Oxford,  1873).  Mayr,  Ernst  (1904-  )  Systematics  and  the  Origin
of Speciesfrom   the   Viewpoint  of  a  Zoologist.  New  York:  Columbia
University Press, 1942.

[1226b]
Mazzini,  Giuseppe  (1805-1872)  The  Duties  of Man,  and  Other Essays.
Everyman's  Library,  New York: E. P. Dutton, 1936 [Dei doveri delVuomo,
Genoa,  1851). —From the Council to God. Ibid. (Letter to the Members of
the Oecumenical Council, London, 1870). Mead, George Herbert (1863-1931)
The  Philosophy ofthe Present. Ed. by A. E. Murphy. Chicago: Open Court,
1932  (1930).  Meiklejohn, Alexander ( 1 872-1964) Education Between Two
Worlds.  New  York:  Harper,  1942.  Melanchthon,  Philip  (1 497-1 565)
Commentarius de Anima. In Vol. xm, Philipi Melanthonis Opera . . . Omnia
[Corpus  Reformatorum).  Ed.  by C. G. Bretschneider. 28 vols. Halle: C.
Schwetschke,  1 834-1 840 (Strasbourg, 1540). —[Dialectical Compendiaria
Dialectices  Ratio.  Ibid.  (Wittenberg,  1520).  —  The  Loci  Communes
of Philip  Melanchthon.  Trans,  by C. L. Hill. Boston: Meador Publishing
Co.,  1944  (Wittenberg,  1521).  Melville,  Herman  (1819-1891) Omoo: A
Narrative  of Adventures in the South Seas. Everyman's Library, New York:
E.  P.  Dutton, 1925 (New York, 1847). —Pierre; or, The Ambiguities. New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton, 1929 (New York, 1852). —Typee: A Narrative of the
Marquesas Islands. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1930 (New
York,  1846).  Mendel,  Gregor Johann (1 822-1 884) Experiments in Plant
Hybridization.  Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1941 (1866).
Mendeleyev,  Dmitri  Ivanovich  (1834-1907) The Principles of Chemistry.
Ed.  by  T.  H.  Pope,  trans, by G. Kamensky. 2 vols. London: Longmans,
Green  &  Co.,  1905  (St.  Petersburg,  1869187.).  Mendelssohn,  Moses
(1729-1786)  Phddon;  oder  Ueber die Unsterblichkeit der Seele. Berlin:
Nicolai,  1868  (Berlin,  1767). Menger, Karl (1840-1921) Grundsdtze der
Vol\swirtschaftslehre.  Vienna: W. Braumuller, 1871. Meredith, George (1
828-1   909)  The  Amazing  Marriage.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1  91  5
(Westminster,  1895). —Diana of the Crossways. Modern Library, New York:
Random House, 1931 (London, 1885). —Earth and Man. In The Poetical Works
of  George  Meredith.  New  York:  Scribner's, 1912 (London, 1883). —The
Egoist:  A  Comedy in Narrative. Modern Library, New York: Random House,
1947  (London,  1879).  —An  Essay  on  Comedy and the Uses of the Comic
Spirit. New York: Scribner's, 191 8 (1877). 1192

[1227a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY Milton —Modern Love. In Poetical Worths. See above (London,
1862).  —The  Ordeal  of Richard Feverel. Everyman's Li1859). ^ - brary,
New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1935  (London,  Merriam,  Charles Edward (i
874-1953)  The  Making  of  Citizens;  a Comparative Study of Methods of
Civic  Training. University of Chicago Press, 1 93 1. —The New Democracy
and   the  New  Despotism.  New  York:  McGraw-Hill,  1939.  —Systematic
Politics.  University  of  Chicago  Press,  1945.  —  What Is Democracy?
University  of  Chicago  Press,  1941. —The Written Constitution and the
Unwritten  Attitude.  New  York:  R. R. Smith, 1931. Mersch, Emile Love,
Marriage  and  Chastity. New York : Sheed & Ward, 1939 (1928). Meyerson,
Emile  (1  859-1  933) De Vexplication dans les sciences. 2 vols. Paris:
Payot,  1927 (Paris, 1921). —Du cheminement de la pensee. 3 vols. Paris:
F.  Alcan,  1  93 1. —Identity and Reality. Trans, by K. Loewenberg. New
York: Macmillan, 1930 (Identite et realite, Paris, 1908). Michel, Virgil
George  (1890-1938)  Christian  Social Reconstruction; Some Fundamentals
ofthe  Quadragesimo  Anno.  Milwaukee, Wis.: Bruce Publishing Co., 1937.
Michelangelo  Buonarroti  (1  475-1  564)  The Sonnets of Michael Angelo
Buonarroti,  Now  for  the  First  Time  Translated into Rhymed English.
Trans,  by  I.  A. Symonds. London: J. Murray, 1926 (i530MlCHELET, lULES
(1798-1874)  Introduction a Vhistoire universelle. In Vol. xxxv, Oeuvres
Completes.  40  vols.  Paris:  E. Flammarion, 1893-1899 (1831). —Uamour.
Paris:  Calmann-Levy,  1884  (Paris,  1858).  —The  People. Trans, by C.
Cocks. London: Longman, Brown, Green & Longmans, 1846 {Le peuple, Paris,
1846).  —Satanism  and Witchcraft: A Study in Medieval Superstition. Ed.
and  trans,  by  A. R. Allinson. New York: Walden Publications, 1939 {La
sorciere,   Paris,   1862).  Michels,  Robert  (1  876-1  936)  Economia
efelicita. Milan: F. Vallardi, 191 8. —Political Parties: A Sociological
Study  of the Oligarchical Tendencies of Modern Democracy. Trans, by E. &
C.  Paul.  Glencoe,  111.:  The  Free  Press,  1949  (Zur Soziologie des
Parteiwesens in den modernen Demokratien, German ed., 1910). Mill, Iames
(1773-1836) Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind. 1193

[1227b]
Ed. by J. S. Mill. 2 vols. London: Longmans & Dyer, 1878 (London, 1829).
—Elements of Political Economy. London: H. G. Bohn, 1844 (London, 1821).
—An  Essay  on Government. Ed. by E. Barker. Cambridge University Press,
1937  (reprinted  from  the  Supplement  to  the  5th ed., Encyclopaedia
Britannica, 1824). Mill, John Stuart (1 806-1 873) Autobiography. Ed. by
J.  J.  Cross. New York: Columbia University Press, 1944 (London, 1873).
—Dissertations   and   Discussions   :   Political,   Philosophical  and
Historical.  4  vols.  London:  J. W. Parker, 1859-1875 (1833-1873). —An
Examination  of  Sir William Hamilton s Philosophy, and of the Principal
Philosophical  Questions  Discussed in His Writings. New York: Longmans,
Green  &  Co., 1889 (London, 1865). —Inaugural Address, Delivered to the
University  of  St.  Andrews,  Feb.  1st, 1867. London: Longmans, Green,
Reader,  &  Dyer,  1867.  —Principles  of Political Economy, with Some of
Their  Applications  to  Social Philosophy. Ed. by W. J. Ashley. London:
Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  1936  (London,  1848).  —Socialism.  Chicago:
Belfords,  Clarke  &  Co.,  1879 (1872-1873). — The Subjection of Women.
Everyman's  Library,  New York: E. P. Dutton, 1929 (Philadelphia, 1869).
—A  System of Logic, Ratiocinative and Inductive, Being a Connected View
of   the   Principles   of   Evidence  and  the  Methods  of  Scientific
Investigation.  London:  Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  1930 (London, 1843).
—Thoughts  on  Parliamentary Reform. London: J. W. Parker, 1859. —[Three
Essays  on  Religion]  Nature;  the Utility of Religion; and Theism. New
York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1923 (1850-1858; Theism, 18681870). Millar,
John  (1735-1801)  Observations  Concerning  the Distinction of Ranks in
Society.  London:  J. Murray, 178 1 (London, 1771). Milne, Edward Arthur
(1896-1950)  Kinematical  Relativity.  Reprinted  from the Journal ofthe
London Mathematical Society, London, 1940. Milton, John (1608-1674)
[Defence of the People of England] John Milton
an  Englishman  His  Defence  ofthe  People  of England  Against Claudius
Anonymous,  Alias  Salmasius,  His  Defence  ofthe King. In Vol. vn, The
Works  of  John  Milton.  Ed.  by  F.  A.  Patterson. 18 vols. New York:
Columbia  University  Press,  19311938 (Joannis Miltoni Angli pro Populo
Anglicano  Defensio,  London,  1650).  —The  Doctrine  and Discipline of
Divorce:  Restored  to  the  Good  of Both Sexes, etc. In Vol. in, ibid.
(London, 1643).

[1228a]
MlSES  THE  GREAT IDEAS —[Grammar] Accedence Commenc't Grammar, Supply'd
with  Sufficient  Rules,  etc.  In  Vol.  vi,  ibid. (London, 1669). —Of
Education.  In Vol. iv, ibid. (London, 1644). — The Readie and Easie Way
to Establish a Free Commonwealth. In Vol. vi, ibid. (London, 1660). —The
Reason  of  Church-Government  Urg'd  Against Prelaty. In Vol. hi, ibid.
(London,  1641).  —The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates. In Vol. v, ibid.
(London, 1649). Mises, Richard von (1 883-1953) Probability, Statistics,
and  Truth.  Trans,  by  J.  Neyman  et  al.  New  York: Macmillan, 1939
(Wahrscheinlichkeit,  Statistic  und  Wahrheit, Vienna, 1928). Mitchell,
Silas  Weir  (1829-1914)  Doctor  and Patient. Philadelphia: Lippincott,
1904  (Philadelphia,  1888). Mitchell, Wesley Clair (1874-1948) Business
Cycles:  The  Problem  and  Its  Setting.  New  York: National Bureau of
Economic Research, 1927 (Berkeley, Cal., 1913). Moliere, pseud, for Jean
Baptiste  Poquelin  ( 1 622-1 673) La critique de Vecole des femmes {The
School  for  Wives  Criticised). In Vol. 1, Comedies. Trans, by H. Baker
and  J. Miller. 2 vols. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1935
(1663).  —Uavare  {The  Miser).  Ibid. (1668). —Le bourgeois gentilhomme
{The  Cit  Turned  Gentleman).  In  Vol.  11,  ibid.  (1670). —Le malade
imaginaire {The Hypochondriac). Ibid. (-673)- —Le medecin malgrelui {The
Moc/{-Doctor). In Vol. 1, ibid. (1666). —Le misanthrope {The Man-Hater).
Ibid.  (1666).  —Vecole des femmes {The School for Wives). Ibid. (1662).
—Vecole  des  maris {The School for Husbands). Ibid. (1661). — Tartuffe,
or  The Impostor. In Vol. 11, ibid. (1664). MONTALEMBERT, CHARLES FORBES
RENE  DE  TrYON,  COMTE  DE  (181O-1870)  On  Constitutional Liberty : A
Picture  of  England  Painted  by  a Frenchman. London: E. Wilson, 1858.
Montesquieu, Charles de Secondat, Baron de (1689-1755) Considerations on
the  Causes  of  the  Grandeur and Decadence of the Romans. Trans, by J.
Baker.  New  York: D. Appleton, 1894 {Considerations sur la grandeur des
Romains  et  de  leur  decadence,  Paris,  1734). — The Persian Letters.
Trans,  by  J.  Davidson.  New York: Dial Press, 1929 {Lettres persanes,
Cologne,  1721).  Montessori,  Maria  (1870-1952) The Montessori Method:
Scientific  Pedagogy  as  Applied  to Child Education in the "Children's
Houses.""  Trans,  by A. E. George. New York: F. A. Stokes, 1912 (Turin,
1909).

[1228b]
Moore,  George  Edward (i 873-1958) Ethics. New York: Henry Holt, 191 2.
—Philosophical  Studies.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1922. —Principia
Ethica.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1903. More, Henry (1614-1687) An
Account  of  Virtue.  Trans,  by  E. Southwell. New York: Facsimile Text
Society,  1930  {Enchiridion  Ethicum,  Praecipua  Moralis  Philosophiae
Rudimenta  Complectens,  etc.,  London,  1667).  —The  Antidote  Against
Atheism. In Philosophical Writings of Henry More. Ed. by F. I. MacKinnon.
New   York:   Oxford  University  Press,  1925  (London,  1652).  —  The
Immortality  ofthe  Soul. Ibid. (London, 1659). More, Louis Trenchard (1
870-1  944)  The  Dogma  of Evolution. Princeton University Press, 1925.
More, Paul Elmer (1 864-1 937) Aristocracy and Justice. Boston: Houghton
Mifflin  Co.,  1915.  More, Saint Thomas (1 478-1 535) Utopia. Ed. by H.
Goitein,  trans,  by  R.  Robinson and F. Bacon. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1928 (Louvain, 15 16). Morgan, Conway Lloyd (1852-
1936)  Animal  Life  and  Intelligence  .  London: E. Arnold, 1890-1891.
—Emergent  Evolution.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1922. —Habit and Instinct.
London:  E. Arnold, 1896. —Instinct and Experience. New York: Macmillan,
1912.  Morgan, Lewis Henry (181 8-1 881) Ancient Society; or, Researches
in   the  Lines  of Human  Progressfrom  Savagery  Through  Barbarism  to
Civilization.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1907 (New York, 1877). —Systems of
Consanguinity  and  Affinity  of  the  Human  Family. Washington, D.C. :
Smithsonian  Institution, 1870 (1868). Morgan, Thomas Hunt (1 866-1 945)
Evolution  and  Genetics.  Princeton  University Press, 1925 (originally
pub.  as A Critique of the Theory of Evolution, Princeton, 191 6). — The
Physical   Basis   of Heredity.   Philadelphia:  Lippincott,  1919.  —The
Scientific  Basis  of Evolution. New York: W. W. Norton, 1935 (New York,
1932).  —The Theory ofthe Gene. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press,
1928  (New Haven, Conn., 1926). Morgann, Maurice (1 726-1 802) Morganris
Essay on the Dramatic Character of Sir John Falstaff. Ed. by W. A. Gill.
London:  H. Frowde, 191 2 (London, 1777). Morley, John (1838-1923) Notes
on Politics and History; a University Address. London: Macmillan, 191 3.
1194

[1229a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  NlCOD  —On  Compromise.  London:  Macmillan, 1923 (London,
1874).  Morris, William (1834-1896) The Aims of Art. In Signs of Change:
Seven Lectures, Delivered on Various Occasions. Loadorrr Longmans, Green
&  Co.,  1903 (London, 1887). —Art and Socialism: The Aims and Ideals of
the  English  Socialists of Today. In Architecture, Industry and Wealth:
Collected  Papers by William Morris. London: Longmans, Green & Co., 1902
(London, 1884). —Hopes and Fears for Art. London: Longmans, Green & Co.,
1929 (London, 1882). Mosca, Gaetano (1858-1941) The Ruling Class. Ed. by
A.  Livingston,  trans,  by  H.  D.  Kahn.  New  York: McGraw-Hill, 1939
{Elementi   di   scienze   politica,  Turin,  1896).  Mounier,  Emmanuel
(1905-1950)  A  Personalist  Manifesto.  Trans,  by  monks of St. John's
Abbey.  New  York:  Longmans, Green & Co., 1938 (Manifeste au service du
personnalisme,   Paris,   1936).   MtJLLER,  FRIEDRICH  Max  (1823-I900)
Comparative  Mythology. In Vol. n, Chips from a German Workshop. 5 vols.
New York: Scribner's, 1889-1891 (1856). —The Languages ofthe Seat of War
in  the  East. With a Survey of the Three Families of Language, Semitic,
Arian,  and  Turanian.  London: Williams & Norgate, 1855 (London, 1854).
—The  Science  of  Language,  Founded on Lectures Delivered at the Royal
Institution  in  1861  and  1863.  2  vols.  New  York: Scribner's, 1891
(London, 1861-1863). Muir, Edwin (1887-1959) The Structure of the Novel.
New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1929  (London, 1928). Muirhead, John Henry
(1855-1940)  Rule and End in Morals. New York : Oxford University Press,
1932.  Mumford,  Lewis  (1895-  )  Technics  and Civilization. New York:
Harcourt  Brace,  1934. Mun, Thomas (1571-1641) A Discourse of Tradefrom
England  unto the East Indies; Answering to Diverse Objections Which Are
Usually  Made  Against  the Same. New York: Facsimile Text Society, 1930
(London,  1621).  N  Nagel, Ernest (1901- ) On the Logic of Measurement.
New  York,  1930.  Needham,  Joseph  (1900- ) Order and Life. New Haven,
Conn.:  Yale  University  Press,  1936.  Neff, Emery Edward (1892- ) The
Poetry of History. New York : Columbia University Press, 1947. 1195

[1229b]
7  Newman,  George  (1  870-1  948)  Citizenship  and  the  Survival  of
Civilization.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Yale University Press, 1928. Newman,
John  Henry  (1801-1890)  Apologia Pro Vita Sua. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1934  (London, 1864). —Callista; A Sketch of the
Third Century. New York: Sheed & Ward, 1941 (London, 1856). —An Essay in
Aid  ofa Grammar of Assent. London : Longmans, Green & Co., 1939 (London,
1870).  —An  Essay  on  the  Development  of Christian Doctrine. London:
Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  1920  (London, 1845). —Essays and Sketches. 3
vols.  New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1948. — The Idea of a University
Defined  and Illustrated. Ed. by D. O'Connor. New York: America Press, 1
941  (originally  pub.  as The Scope and Nature of University Education,
Dublin,  1852).  —Lectures  on  the  Doctrine  of Justification.  London:
Longmans, Green & Co., 1900 (London, 1838). —Lectures on the Prophetical
Office   of  the  Church  Viewed  Relatively  to  Romanism  and  Popular
Protestantism.  London: Rivington, 1837. —A Letter to His Grace the Duke
of Norfolk- London: B. M. Pickering, 1875. —Parochial and Plain Sermons.
Ed.  by W. J. Copeland. 8 vols. New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1 900-1
902 (London, 1 837-1 842). — University Sketches. New York: Walter Scott
Publishing  Co.,  1902  (1854). Newton, Sir Isaac (1642-1727) Daniel and
the Apocalypse. Ed. by Sir W. Whitla. London: J. Murray, 1922 (c. 1693).
—Letters  of Sir Isaac Newton on Various Subjects in Natural Philosophy.
In Vol. iv, Isaaci Newtoni Opera Quae Extant Omnia. Ed. by S. Horsley. 5
vols.  London:  J.  Nichols,  1  779-1  785  (1672i676).  —The Method of
Fluxions  and  Infinite  Series. Ed. and trans, by J. Colson. London: H.
Woodfall, 1736 (Geometrica Analytica, 1671). — Universal Arithmetic; or,
A  Treatise  of  Arithmetical  Composition  and  Resolution.  Trans,  by
Ralphson.  London:  W.  Johnston, 1769 (Arithmetica Universalis; Sive de
Compositione  et  Resolutione  Arithmetica  Liber,  London, 1707). Nexo,
Martin  Andersen (1 869-1954) Pelle the Conqueror. Trans, by J. Muir and
B.  Miall.  2  vols. New York: Henry Holt, 191 (Copenhagen, 1906-19 10).
The  Nibelungenlied.  Trans,  by D. B. Shumway. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Co., 1937 (1190?- 1205?). Nicod, Jean (1893-1924) Foundations of Geometry
and  Induction.  Trans,  by P. P. Wiener. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1930
(Le probleme logique de Vinduction, Paris 1923, and La geometrie dans le
monde sensible, Paris,

[1230a]
Nicolas  of  Cusa  THE  GREAT IDEAS Nicolas of Cusa (1401-1464) De Docta
Ignorantia. In Vol. 1, Nicolai de Cusa Opera Omnia. Ed. by E. Hoffman et
al.  14  vols.  Leipsic:  F.  Meiner,  1932-1939  (1440).  —De Venatione
Sapientiae.  In Vol. xn, ibid. (1463). — The Idiot. Ed. by P. Radin. San
Francisco:  California  State Library, 1940 (Idiota, 1450). — The Vision
of God. Ed. and trans, by E. G. Salter. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1928 (De
Visione  Dei,  1453).  Nieboer,  Herman  Jeremias (1873- ) Slavery as an
Industrial System; Ethnological Researches. The Hague: M. NijhofT, 1900.
NlEBUHR,  REINHOLD  (1892-  ) The Nature and Destiny of Man, a Christian
Interpretation.  2  vols.  New  York:  Scribner's,  19411943. Nietzsche,
Friedrich  Wilhelm  (1  844-1  900)  Beyond  Good and Evil. Trans, by H.
Zimmern.  In Philosophy of Nietzsche (Jenseits von Gut und Bose, Vorspiel
einer  Philosophic  der  Zukunft,  Leipsic, 1886). —The Birth of Tragedy
from the Spirit of Music. Trans, by C. P. Fadiman. Ibid. (Die Geburt der
Tragodie  aus  dem  Geist  der Musi/{, Leipsic, 1872). —The Dawn of Day.
Trans,  by  J. M. Kennedy. Vol. ix, Complete Works (Morgenrote. Gedanken
iiber  moralische Vorurteile, Chemnitz, 1881). —The Genealogy of Morals.
Trans,  by  H. B. Samuel. In Philosophy of Nietzsche (Zur Genealogie der
Moral,  Leipsic,  1887).  —Human, All-Too-Human, A Bookjor Free Spirits.
Trans,  by  H.  Zimmern.  Vols,  vi-vn,  Complete  Worlds (Menschliches,
Allzumenschliches,  Chemnitz,  1878).  —The  Joyful Wisdom. Trans, by T.
Common.  Vol. x, ibid. (Die frohliche Wissenschaft. Chemnitz, 1882). —On
the  Future  of  Our  Educational Institutions. Trans, by J. M. Kennedy.
Vol.  in, ibid. (1872). —Thus Spake Zarathustra. Trans, by T. Common. In
Philosophy  of Nietzsche (Also sprach Zarathustra, Chemnitz, 1883-1891).
—  The Use and Abuse of History. Trans, by Adrian Collins. New York: The
Liberal  Arts  Press, 1949 (Vom Nutzen und Nachteil der Historie fur das
Leben,  in Unzeitgemasse Betrachtungen, Leipsic, 1 873-1 876). —The Will
to  Power,  an  Attempted  Transvaluation of All Values. Trans, by A. M.
Ludovici.  Vols, xivxv, Complete Works (1 883-1 889). note: The Complete
Works of Friedrich Nietzsche. Ed. by Dr. O. Levy. 18 vols. London: T. N.
Foulis,  1 909-1 91 5. —The Philosophy of Nietzsche. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House, 1937. INjalssaga] The Story of Burnt Njal; or Life
in  Iceland  at  the  End  of the Tenth Century. Trans, by G. W. Dasent.
Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 19— ? (late 13th century).

[1230b]
Nock,  Albert  Iay  (1873  ?— 1945) The Theory of Education in the United
States.  New  York: Harcourt Brace, 1932. Northrop, Filmer Stuart Cuckow
(1893-  )  Science  and  First  Principles. New York: Macmillan, 1 93 1.
Nygren,  Anders  Theodor  Samuel (1890- ) Agape and Eros; A Study of the
Christian Idea of Love. Trans, by A. G. Hebert and P. S. Watson. 2 vols.
New  York:  Macmillan,  1  932-1  939 (Stockholm, 1930; 1936). o Ockham,
William  of  (c.  1290-r.  1349) Expositio Aurea et Admodum Utilis Super
Artem   Veterem.   Bologna:  Benedictus  Hectoris,  1496.  —Studies  and
Selections.  Ed.  and trans, by S. C. Tornay. Chicago: Open Court, 1938.
—Summa Totius Logicae. Venice, 1508 (c. 1322). O'Connor, William Richard
(1897-  )  The  Eternal  Quest.  New York : Longmans, Green & Co., 1947.
Ogden,  Charles  Kay  (1  889-1957) Opposition. London: K. Paul, Trench,
Triibner, 1932. Ogden, Charles Kay and Richards, Ivor Armstrong (1893- )
The Meaning of Meaning; a Study ofthe Influence of Language upon Thought
and  of  the  Science  of Symbolism. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1944 (New
York,  1923).  O'Neill,  Eugene  Gladstone (1 888-1953) Desire Under the
Elms.  In Nine Plays by Eugene O'Neill. Modern Library, New York: Random
House,  1  94  1  (1925).  —  The Emperor Jones. Ibid. (1920). —Mourning
Becomes   Electra.  Ibid.  (1931).  —Strange  Interlude.  Ibid.  (1928).
Oppenheimer,  Franz (1 864-1 943) The State, Its History and Development
Viewed  Sociologically.  Trans,  by  J. M. Gitterman. New York: Vanguard
Press, 1926 (Der Staat, Frankfort, 1907). Oreme, Nicole (Nicolas Oresme)
(1320-1382)  An  Abstract  of  Nicholas  Oreme's Treatise on the Breadth
of Forms.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  C. G. Wallis. Annapolis, Md.: St. John's
Press,  1941  (from  De  Latitudinibus  Formarum, before 1370). Ortega y
Gasset,  Jose(i883-i955)  The Dehumanization of Art. Princeton University
Press,  1948  (1925).  —Mission  of  the  University.  Trans,  by  H. L.
Nostrand.  Princeton  University  Press, 1944 (Mision de la universidad,
Madrid,  1930).  —The  Revolt ofthe Masses. New York: W. W. Norton, 1932
(La  rebelion  de  las  masas,  Madrid,  1929).  —Toward a Philosophy of
History. Trans, by H. Weyl. New York: W. W. Norton, 1941. 1196

[1231a]
.  Osler,  Sir William (i 849-1 91 9) Aequanimitas, with Other Addresses
to Medical Students, Nurses and Practitioners of Medicine. Philadelphia:
Blakiston  Co., 1942 (London, 1904). ^ —A Way of Life. London: Constable
&  Co.,  191  4.  OSTROGORSKI,  MoiSEI  Y. (1854-I919) Democracy and the
Organization of Political Parties. Trans, by F. Clarke. 2 vols. New York:
Macmillan, 1902. OSTWALD, WlLHELM (1853-I932) Natural Philosophy. Trans,
by   T.   Seltzer.   New   York:  Henry  Holt,  1910  (Vorlesungen  uber
Naturphilosophie, Leipsic, 1902). Otto, Rudolph (1869- 1937) The Idea of
the  Holy;  an  Inquiry  into  the NonRational Factor in the Idea of the
Divine  and  Its  Relation  to the Rational. Trans, by J. W. Harvey. New
York:  Oxford  University Press, 1923 (Das Heilige. Uber das Irrationale
in  der Idee des Gottlichen und sein Verhdltnis zum Rationalen, Breslau,
1917). Ovid (Publius Ovidius Naso) (43 B.c.-r. 18 a.d.)
[Amores]
Heroides  and  Amores.  Trans, by G. Showerman. Loeb Library, Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1925 (2 a.d.?). —The Art of Love and
Other  Poems.  Trans,  by  J. H. Mozley. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.:
Harvard  University Press, 1929 (Ars Amatoria, 2 A.D.?). —Metamorphoses.
Trans,  by F. J. Miller. 2 vols. Loeb Library, New York: Putnam's, 191 6
(7   A.D.).  Paine,  Thomas  (1737-1809)  The  Age  of Reason;  Being  an
Investigation of True and Fabulous Theology. In Vol. iv, The Writings of
Thomas  Paine.  Ed.  by  M. D. Conway. 4 vols. New York: Putnam's, 1894-
1908  (Paris,  I794)-  —Common Sense. Ed. by M. van der Weyde. New York:
Rimington  &  Hooper, 1928 (Philadelphia, x 776)- —Dissertation on First
Principles of Government. In Vol. in, Writings. See above (Paris, 1795).
—Rights  of  Man;  Being  an Answer to Mr. Burke's Attack^ on the French
Revolution.  Everyman's  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 191 5 (London,
1791).  Painleve, Paul (i 863-1 933) Les axiomes de la mecanique, examen
critique; note sur la propagation de la lumiere. Paris: GauthierVillars,
1922  (partly  from  La  methode  dans  les  sciences,  Paris, 1909, and
Bulletin  de  la  Societe Francaise de Philosophic, Paris, 1 905) Paley,
William (1 743-1 805) Moral Philosophy. Ed. by R. Whately. London: J. W.
Parker, 1859 (from Principles of Moral and Political Philosophy, London,
1785). 1197

[1231b]
1 . BIBLIOGRAPHY Pearl —Natural Theology; or, Evidences of the Existence
and Attributes of the Deity Collectedfrom the Appearances of Nature. Ed.
by  J. Ware. Boston: Gould & Lincoln, 1854 (London, 1802). —A View ofthe
Evidences  of Christianity. Ed. by R. Whately. New York: J. Miller, i860
(London. 1794)- Paracelsus (Theophrastus von Hohenheim) (c. 1 490-1 541)
The Diseases That Deprive Man of His Reason. In Four Treatises. Ed. by H.
Sigerist.  Baltimore,  Md.: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1941 —On the
Miners'  Sickness and Other Miners' Diseases. (15*5?). Ibid. (i 533 >) :
—Seven  Defensiones.  Ibid.  (1538).  Pareto, Vilfrido (1 848-1 923) The
Mind  and Society. Ed. by A. Livingston, trans, by A. Bongiorno. 4 vols.
New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1935  (Trattato  di  sociologia  generaley
Florence, 191 6). Parsons, Sir John Herbert (1 868-1957) An Introduction
to  the  Theory of Perception. New York: Macmillan, 1927. Pascal, Blaise
(1623-1662)  Discours sur les passions de Vamour, attribue h Pascal. Ed.
by  E.  Faguet.  Paris: B. Grasset, 191 (c. 1650-f. 1653). Pater, Walter
Horatio (1 839-1 894)
[Essay on Style] Appreciations; with An Essay on
Style. London: Macmillan, 1931 (1888). —Marius the Epicurean. Everyman's
Library,  New York: E. P. Dutton, 1934 (London, 1885). Patmore, Coventry
Kersey  Dighton  (18231896) Mystical Poems of Nuptial Love. Ed. by T. L.
Connolly.  Boston:  B.  Humphries,  1938.  Pauli,  Wolfgang (1900— 1958)
Relativitdtstheorie.   Leipsic:   B.  G.  Teubner,  1921.  Pavlov,  Ivan
Petrovich (1 849-1 936) Lectures on Conditioned Reflexes. Ed. and trans,
by  W. H. Gantt. 2 vols. New York: International Publishers, 1 928-1 941
(Moscow,  1923).  Peacock,  George  (1791-1858) A Treatise on Algebra. 2
vols.  New  York:  Yeshiva College, 1940 (London, 1 842-1 845). Peacock,
Thomas Love (1785-1866) Four Ages of Poetry. Ed. by H. F. B. BrettSmith.
Oxford:  Blackwell, 1921 (1820). Peano, Giuseppe (1858-1932) Arithmetica
generale e algebra elementare. Turin: G. B. Paravia, 1902. —Arithmetices
Principia.  Turin:  Bocca,  1889.  —Form'ulaire de mathematique. 5 vols.
Turin:  Bocca,  1 895-1 908. Pearl, Raymond (1 879-1 940) The Biology of
Death. Philadelphia: Lippincott,

[1232a]
Pearson  Pearson,  Karl  (i  857-1  936) The Chances of Death, and Other
Studies in Evolution. 2 vols. New York: E. Arnold, 1897. —The Grammar of
Science.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1937 (London,
1892).  Peguy,  Charles  Pierre  (1873-1914)  Basic  Verities. Prose and
Poetry.  Trans, by A. and J. Green. New York: Pantheon Books, 1943 (from
Cahiers  de la quinzaine, Paris, 1900-19 14). —Men and Saints. Prose and
Poetry.  Trans, by A. and J. Green. New York: Pantheon Books, 1944 (from
Cahiers  de  la quinzaine, Paris, 1900-19 14). Peirce, Benjamin (1 809-1
880)  An  Elementary  Treatise on Curves, Functions, and Forces. 2 vols.
Boston:  J.  Munroe,  1  846-1  852. Peirce, Charles Sanders (1839-1914)
Collected  Papers. Ed. by C. Hartshorne and P. Weiss. 6 vols. Cambridge,
Mass.: Harvard University Press, 1 93 1. Penido, Maurilio Teixeira-Leite
(1895-  )  he role de Vanalogie en theologie dogmatique. Paris: J. Vrin,
1931. Penn, William (1644-17 18) An Essay Towards the Present and Future
Peace  of  Europe.  In  The Peace of Europe: The Fruits of Solitude, and
Other  Writings.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 191 6
(London,  1693)-  —Primitive  Christianity  Revived,  in  the  Faith and
Practice  of  the  People  Called  Quakers. Ibid. (London, 1696). Penty,
Arthur  Joseph (1875— 1937) A Guildsmaris Interpretation of History. New
York:  Sunrise  Turn, 1920. Pepys, Samuel (1633-1703) 2 vols. Everyman's
Dutton,  1930-1934  The  Diary of Samuel Pepys. Library, New York: E. P.
(1660-  1  669).  Perkins, William (1558-1602) The Whole Treatise of the
Cases  of  Conscience. London: T. Pickering, 1651 {A Case of Conscience,
the  Greatest  That Ever Was; How a Man May Know Whether He Be the Child
of  God  or  No. Resolved by the Word of God, London, 1592). Perry, Ralph
Barton  (1876-1957)  The  Hopefor Immortality. New York: Vanguard Press,
1945.  —Puritanism  and  Democracy.  New  York  :  Vanguard Press, 1944.
Pestalozzi,  Johann  Heinrich  (1  746-1  827)  How Gertrude Teaches Her
Children; an Attempt to Help Mothers to Teach Their Own Children. Ed. by
E.  Cooke,  trans, by L. E. Holland and F. C. Turner. Syracuse, N.Y.: C.
W.  Bardeen,  1  9  1 5 ( Wie Gertrude ihre Kinder lehrt, Bern, 1 80 1 )
Peter  Lombard  (c.iioo-c. n 64) The Four Books of Sentences. In Vol. 1,
Selections from Medieval Philosophers. Ed. and trans, by Richard McKeon.
2 vols. New York: Scribner's, 1929-1930 (1145-1151).

[1232b]
THE  GREAT IDEAS Petrarch, Francesco (1 304-1 374) On His Own Ignorance.
In  The  Renaissance  Philosophy  of Man.  Ed.  by  E.  Cassirer  et  al.
University  of  Chicago  Press,  1948 (1368). —The Sonnets. Trans, by J.
Auslander.  New  York:  Longmans,  Green  & Co., 1931 (1327-1361). — The
Triumph  of Love. In Sonnets, Triumphs, and Other Poems. London: G. Bell
&  Sons,  1890 (135^). Petrie, William Matthew Flinders (1853- *942) The
Revolutions  of Civilization. New York: Peter Smith, 1941 (New York, 191
1). Petrus Alphonsi (1062-f. 1 1 10) Disciplina Clericalis. Trans, by W.
H.  Hume.  Cleveland:  Western Reserve Studies, 191 9. Petrus Hispanicus
(John  XXI)  (c.  1210-1277) The Summulae Logicales of Peter of Spain. Ed.
and  trans,  by  Joseph  Patrick  Mullally. Notre Dame, Ind.: Notre Dame
University  Press,  1945. Philo Judaeus of Alexandria (b. 20-10 b.c.) On
the  Cherubim  (De Cherubim). In Vol. 11, Philo, An English Translation.
Trans,  by  F.  H.  Colson  and  G.  H. Whitaker. 10 vols. Loeb Library,
Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1  929- 1 94 1. —On the
Creation  ofthe  World  (De  Opificio  Mundi).  In Vol. 1, ibid. —On the
Eternity   ofthe  World  (De  Aeternitate  Mundi).  In  Vol.  ix,  ibid.
Philodemus  of  Gadara  (1st  century  b.c.)  Philodemus:  On Methods of
Inference; a Study in Ancient Empiricism. Ed. and trans, by P. H. and E.
A.  DeLacy.  Philadelphia:  American Philological Association, 1941 (54?
b.c). Philostratus, Flavius (c. 170-245 A.D.) Philostratus and Eunapius;
the  Lives  of  the  Sophists. Trans, by W. C. Wright. Loeb Library, New
York:  Putnam's, 1922 (230-238 b.c.?). Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni (1
463-1  494) Of Being and Unity. Ed. and trans, by V. M. Hamm. Milwaukee,
Wis.  :  Marquette  University  Press,  1943  (De Ente et Uno, c. 1492).
—Oration  on  the  Dignity of Man. In The Renaissance Philosophy of Man.
Ed.  by E. Cassirer et al. University of Chicago Press, 1948 (1488?). —A
Platonic^  Discourse  upon  Love.  Ed.  by  E.  G. Gardner, trans, by T.
Stanley. Boston: Merrymount Press, 1 91 4 (Canzone dello Amore secondo y
Platonici,  1487). la mente e opinione de Pico della Mirandola, Giovanni
Francesco 470-1 533) On the Imagination. Trans, by H. Caplan. New Haven,
Conn.:  Yale  University  Press,  1930  (De  Imaginatione,  Rome, 1500).
Pieron, Henri (1881- ) Thought and the Brain. Trans, by C. K. Ogden. New
York: Harcourt Brace, 1927 (Le cerveau et lapensee, Paris, 1923). 1198

[1233a]
Pirandello,  Luigi  (i 867-1 936) The Old and the Young. Trans, by C. K.
ScottMoncrierT.  2  vols.  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1928 (/ vecchi e i
giovani, 1909). —The Outcast: A Novel. Trans, by L. Qngley. New York: E.
P.  Dutton,  1935  (Uesclusa,  Rome,  1901).  Pirke  Aboth; the Tractate
'Fathers,''  from the Mishnah, Commonly Called 'Sayings of the Fathers.'
Ed.  and  trans,  by R. T. Herford. New York: Bloch Publishing Co., 1930
(70 a.d.?-2oo a.d.?). Pius XI, Pope (1857-1939)
[Casti
Connubii]  Christian  Marriage.  In  Five  Great  Encyclicals. New York:
Paulist  Press,  1939  (  IQ3°)-  —[Divini  Illius  Magistri]  Christian
Education  of  Youth.  Ibid. (1929). —[Quadragesimo Annol Reconstruction
ofthe  Social  Order.  Ibid.  (1931).  Planck,  Max  Karl  Ernst  Ludwig
(1858-1947)  Das  Prinzip  der  Erhaltung  der  Energie.  Leipsic: B. G.
Teubner, 1887. —The Origin and Development of the Quantum Theory. Trans,
by  H.  T. Clarke and L. Silberstein. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1922 {Die
Entstehung und bisherige Entwickfung der Quantentheorie, Leipsic, 1920).
—The  Philosophy  of Physics. Trans, by W. H. Johnstone. New York: W. W.
Norton,  1936  (from Wege zur physi^alischen Er^enntnis, Leipsic, 1933).
—Scientific  Autobiography  and  Other  Papers.  New York: Philosophical
Library,  1949.  —A  Survey  of Physics.  Trans,  by  R.  Jones and D. H.
Williams.  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1923 (Physityilische Rundblicke,
Leipsic,  1922). — Treatise on Thermodynamics. Trans, by A. Ogg. London:
Longmans,  Green  &  Co.,  1945 (Vorlesungen uber Thermodynamic Leipsic,
1897).  —  Where  Is Science Going? Trans, by J. Murphy. New York: W. W.
Norton,  1932  (from Wege zur physikalischen Erkenntnis, Leipsic, 1933).
Plekhanov,  Georgi  Valentinovich (1857-19 1 8) Essays in the History of
Materialism.  Trans,  by  R.  Fox.  London:  J. Lane, 1934 (Beitrdge zur
Geschichte des Materialismus, Stuttgart, 1896). —Fundamental Problems of
Marxism.  Ed.  by  D.  Ryasanov,  trans,  by  E.  and C. Paul. New York:
International  Publishers,  1930  (1897).  —In  Defense  of Materialism.
Trans,  by  A. Rothstein. London : Lawrence &Wishart, 1947 (1894). Pliny
the  Elder (Gaius Plinius Secundus) (23/4 A.D.-79 A.D.) Natural History.
Trans,  by  J.  Bostock and H. T. Riley. 6 vols. London: G. Bell & Sons,
1855— 1890. Plutarch (c. 46-c. 120 a.d.)
[Moralia] Plutarch's Morals. Ed. by W. Goodwin.
5  vols. Boston: Little, Brown & Co., 1871. Poe, Edgar Allan (1809-1849)
The Poetic Principle. In Edgar Allan Poe: Representative Selections. Ed.
by M. Alterton and 1199

[1233b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  POWYS  H. Craig. New York: American Book Co., 1935 (1849).
Pohle,  Joseph  (1  852-1 922) Eschatology; or, The Catholic Doctrine of
the  Last  Things, a Dogmatic Treatise. Ed. and trans, by A. Preuss. St.
Louis,  Mo.:  Herder  Book  Co.,  1929  (Lehrbuch der Dogmatic in sieben
Biichern,  German  ed.,  1902).  Poincare, Henri (1854-1912) Science and
Hypothesis.  In The Foundations of Science. Trans, by G. B. Halsted. New
York:  Science  Press,  1929  (La  science  et Vhypothese, Paris, 1902).
—Science and Method. Ibid. (Science et methode, Paris, 1908). —The Value
of Science. Ibid. (La valeur de la science, Paris, 1905). Poinsot, Louis
(1777-  1  859)  Elemens  de  statique.  Paris:  Bachelier, 1848 (1803).
Pollock, Sir Frederick (1 845-1 937) Essays in Jurisprudence and Ethics.
London:  Macmillan,  1882.  —  The  Expansion of the Common Law. London:
Stevens  &  Sons,  1904.  Polybius  (c.  204-122  B.C.) The Histories of
Polybius.  Trans,  by  W.  R.  Paton.  6  vols.  Loeb Library, New York:
Putnam's,  1922I925  (l32?-I22).  POMERIUS,  JULIANUS (fl. 498 A.D.) The
Contemplative  Life.  Trans,  by M. J. Suelzer. Westminster, Md.: Newman
Bookshop,  1947. POMPONAZZI, PlETRO (1462-1524) On the Immortality ofthe
Soul.  In  The  Renaissance  Philosophy of Man. Ed. by E. Cassirer et al.
University of Chicago Press, 1948 (1516). Poncelet, Jean Victor (1 788-1
867) Cours de mecanique appliquee aux machines. 2 vols. Paris: Gauthier-
Villars,  1  874-1 876 (1826). Ponsonby, Arthur (1 871-1946) The Decline
of Aristocracy. London: T. F. Unwin, 1912. Pope, Alexander (1688-1744) An
Essay  on  Criticism.  In  Selected  Worlds  of  Alexander  Pope. Modern
Library, New York: Random House, 1948 (London, 171 1). —An Essay on Man.
Ibid.  (London,  1733).  Porphyry  (233-c.  301  a.d.)  Introduction  to
Aristotle's  Predicaments: A Translation of Porphyrio's Eisagoge. Trans,
by C. G. Wallis. Annapolis, Md.: St. John's Press, 1938. Poulton, Edward
Bagnall  (1 856-1 943) Essays on Evolution, 1889-1907. Oxford: Clarendon
Press,  1908.  Pound,  Roscoe  (1 870-1964) The Spirit ofthe Common Law.
Boston:  Marshall  Jones  Co., 1921. Powys, John Cowper (1 872-1 963) In
Defence of Sensuality. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1930.

[1234a]
Price  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Price,  Henry  Habberley  (1899- ) Perception.
London:  Methuen,  1932.  Prichard,  Harold  Arthur (1871-1947) Duty and
Interest.  Oxford : Clarendon Press, 1920. Priestley, Joseph (1733-1804)
Experiments  and  Observations  on  Different  Kinds  of  Air.  3  vols.
Birmingham:  T.  Pearson,  1790  (London, 1 774-1 786). —Experiments and
Observations Relating to Various Branches of Natural Philosophy. 3 vols.
London  J.  Johnson,  1  779-1 786. Priestley, Joseph and Price, Richard
(17231791)  A  Free  Discussion  of  the  Doctrine  of  Materialism  and
Philosophical  Necessity,  in a Correspondence Between Dr. Price and Dr.
Priestley.  London:  J.  Johnson  &  T.  Cadell,  1778.  Proclus  Lycius
Diadochus  (410-485  A.D.)  The  Elements  of  Theology. Trans, by E. R.
Dodds.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  1933  (432?  a.d.). Proudhon, Pierre
Joseph  (1809-1865)  De  la  justice  dans la revolution et dans Veglise
(Essais   d'une   philosophic   populaire).  6  vols.  Paris:  Marpon  &
Flammarion,  1870  (Paris, 1858). —General Idea of the Revolution in the
Nineteenth  Century.  Trans, by J. B. Robinson. London: Freedom Press, 1
923  {Idee  generale de la revolution au XIXe siecle, Paris, 185 1). —La
guerre  et  la  paix:  Recherches  sur le principe et la constitution du
droit  des  gens. Paris: M. Riviere, 1927 (Paris, 1861). —[Philosophy of
Misery] System of Economic Contradictions; or, The Philosophy of Misery.
Trans,  by  B.  R.  Tucker.  Boston,  1888  (Systeme  des contradictions
economiques,  ou,  Philosophic  de  la  misere,  Paris, 1846). — What Is
Property;  an  Inquiry  into  the  Principle  of Right and of Government.
Trans,  by  B.  R.  Tucker.  London:  W.  Reeves, 1902 (Qu'est-ce que la
propriety?  Ou,  Recherches sur le principe du droit et du gouvernement,
Paris,  1840-1841).  Proust,  Marcel  (1 871-1922) Remembrance of Things
Past.  Trans, by C. K. Scott-Moncrieff.v 2 vols. New York: Random House,
1  94  1  (A  la  recherche  du temps perdu, Paris, 1 913-1927). Prynne,
William  (1600- 1669) The Soveraigne Power of Parliaments and Kingdomes.
London:  M.  Sparke,  1643.  Ptolemy  (Claudius Ptolemaeus) (2nd century
A.D.)  Tetrabiblos.  Trans,  by  F. E. Robbins. Loeb Library, Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard University Press, 1940. PUFENDORF, SAMUEL (1632-1694) De
Jure  Naturae  et  Gentium. Trans, by C. H. and W. A. Oldfather, English
text in Vol. n. New York: Oxford University Press, 1934 (Lund, 1672).

[1234b]
:  —De  Officio  Hominis et Civis Juxta Legem Naturalem. Trans, by F. G.
Moore,  English text in Vol. 11. New York: Oxford University Press, 1927
(Lund,  1673).  Pushkin,  Alexander  Sergygyevich  (i  799-1  837) Boris
Godunov.  Trans,  by A. Hayes, in The Poems, Prose and Plays of Pushkin.
Ed.  by  A.  Yarmolinsky.  Modern  Library, New York: Random House, 1943
(1831).  —The Captain's Daughter. Trans, by N. Duddington, ibid. (1836).
—The  Queen  of  Spades.  Trans,  by  T. Keane, ibid. (1834). Quintilian
(Marcus  Fabius  Quintilianus)  (c.  35-C. 95 A.D.) Institutio Oratoria.
Trans,  by H. E. Butler. 4 vols. Loeb Library, Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University  Press,  1921  (after  88?  a.d.). R Racine, Jean Baptiste (1
639-1  699)  Andromaque.  In  The  Best  Plays of Racine. Trans, by Lacy
Lockert.  Princeton  University  Press,  1936  (1667).  —Athalie.  Ibid.
(Paris, 1691). —Britannicus. Ibid. (1669). —Phedre. Ibid. (Paris, 1677).
Radestock,  Paul  Habit  and  Its  Importance  in Education: An Essay in
Pedagogical  Psychology.  Trans,  by F. A. Caspari. Boston: D. C. Heath,
1908  (Die  Gewohnung  und  ihre  Wichtigkeit  fur  die  Erziehung. Eine
psychologisch-pddagogische Untersuchung, Berlin, 1882). Raglan, Fitz Roy
Richard  Somerset,  Baron  (1885-1964)  The  Hero; a Study in Tradition,
Myth, and Drama. New York: Oxford University Press, 1937 (London, 1936).
Ramazzini,  Bernardino  (1633-1714) De Morbis Artificum (The Diseases of
Workers).  Ed.  and trans, by W. C. Wright. University of Chicago Press,
1940 (17 13). Ramus, Petrus (Pierre de la Ramee) (1515J 572) Dialecticae
Institutiones.  Paris:  J.  Bogardus, 1543. Rank, Otto (1 884-1 939) Art
and  Artist;  Creative Urge and Personality Development. Trans, by C. F.
Atkinson.  New York: A. A. Knopf, 1932 (Der Kunstler und andere Beitrdge
zur Psychoanalyse des kiinstlerischen Schaffens, Leipsic, 1925). —Modern
Education;  a  Critique of Its Fundamental Ideas. Trans, by M. E. Moxon.
New  York:  A.  A.  Knopf,  1932.  —The  Myth  ofthe Birth ofthe Hero: A
Psychological Interpretation of Mythology. Trans, by F. Robbins 1200

[1235a]
and  Smith  E.  JelifTe. New York: Nervous and Mental Disease Publishing
Company,  191  4  {Der  Mythos von der Geburt des Helden, Vienna, 1909).
Ranke,  Leopold  von  (1  795-1  886)  -sf= Uber die Epochen der neueren
Geschichte.  In  Vol. ix, Part 11, Weltgeschichte. Ed. by Alfred Dove. 9
vols.  Leipsic: Duncker & Humblot, 1 881-1888 (1854)- Ransom, Iohn Crowe
(1888-  )  The  World's  Body.  New  York:  Scribner's, 1938. Ranulph de
Glanville  (i  130-1  190) The Laws and Customs ofthe Kingdom of England.
Trans,  by  J.  Beames. Washington: J. Byrne, 1900 (1 188 ?). Ravaisson-
Mollien, Jean Gaspard Felix LaCHER (l8 I 3-I 900) DeVhabitude. Paris: F.
Alcan,   1933  (Paris,  1838).  Rayleigh,  John  William  Strutt,  Baron
(18421919)  The  Theory  of Sound. 2 vols. New York: Dover Publications,
1945  (London,  1877-1878). Read, Carveth (1848-1931) The Metaphysics of
Nature.  London:  A. & C. Black, 1905. Read, Herbert Edward (1 893-1968)
Form  in  Modern  Poetry.  New  York: Sheed & Ward, 1932. Reade, Charles
(1814-1884)  The  Cloister and the Hearth. Everyman's Library, New York:
E.  P. Dutton, 1933 (London, 1861). Reichenbach, Hans (1891-1953) Theory
of  Probability.  Berkeley, Calif.: University of California Press, 1949
(1935).  Reid,  Legh  Wilber  (1867-  )  The  Elements  ofthe  Theory of
Algebraic  Numbers.  New York: Macmillan, 1910. Reid, Thomas (1710-1796)
An  Essay  on Quantity; Occasioned by Reading a Treatise in Which Simple
and  Compound  Ratios  Are Applied to Virtue and Merit. In The Worlds of
Thomas  Reid,  D.D.  Ed.  by  Sir  W.  Hamilton. Edinburgh: MacLachlan &
Stewart,  1852  (1748).  —Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind.
Ibid. (Edinburgh, 1788). Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man. Ibid.
(Edinburgh, 1785). —An Inquiry into the Human Mind, on the Principles of
Common  Sense. Ibid. (Edinburgh, 1764). Renan, Joseph Ernest (1823-1892)
Caliban:  A  Philosophical  Drama  Continuing  "The  Tempest" of William
Shakespeare.  Trans, by E. G. Vickery. New York: Shakespeare Press, 1896
{Caliban,  suite de "La tempete," drame philosophique, Paris, 1878). —De
Vorigine du langage. Paris: Michel-Levy, 1864 (Pans, 1858). 1201

[1235b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Richards — The Future of Science; Ideas of 1848. Trans, by
A.D.  Vandam.  London:  Chapman  &  Hall,  1891  {Uavenir de la science;
pensees  de 1848). — The Life of Jesus. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P. Dutton, 1934 {La vie de Jesus, Paris, 1863). —Philosophical Dialogues
and  Fragments.  Trans,  by R. B. Mukharji. London: Triibner & Co., 1883
{Dialogues et fragments philosophiques, Paris, 1876). Renouvier, Charles
Bernard  (1815-1903)  Essais  de  critique  genera le. 3 vols. Paris: A.
Colin,  1  91 2 (Essay 11, Uhomme: La raison, la passion, la liberie, la
certitude,  la probability morale, Paris, 1859; Essay iv, Introduction a
la philosophic analytique de Vhistoire, Paris 1864). — Uchronie {VUtopie
dans  Vhistoire).  Esquisse  historique apocryphe du developpement de la
civilisation  Europeenne tel qu'il ria pas ete, tel qu'il auraitpu etre.
Paris:  F.  Alcan,  1901  (Paris, 1876). Reuleaux, Franz (1829-1905) The
Kinematics  of Machinery. Outlines ofa Theory of Machines. Ed. and trans,
by  A.  B.  Kennedy. London: Macmillan, 1876 {Lehrbuch der Kinemati\, 1,
Brunswick,  1875).  Reynolds,  John (1667-1727) Inquiries Concerning the
State  and  Economy  of  the  Angelical  Worlds. London: J. Clark, 1723.
Reynolds,  Sir  Joshua  (1723-1792)  Discourses on Art, Delivered to the
Students of the Royal Academy. London: G. Routledge, 1909 (1769- 1 790).
Rheticus (Georg Joachim von Lauchen) (15141576) Narratio Prima. In Three
Copernican  Treatises. Trans, by E. Rosen. New York: Columbia University
Press,  1939  (1540).  Ribot,  Theodule  Armand  (1839-1916) Diseases of
Memory. Trans, by W. H. Smith. New York: D. Appleton, 1893 (Les maladies
de la memoire, Paris, 1881). —The Diseases ofthe Will. Trans, by Merwin-
Marie  Snell.  Chicago:  Open  Court,  1894 {Les maladies de la volonte,
Paris, 1883). —Essay on the Creative Imagination. Trans, by A. H. Baron.
Chicago:  Open  Court,  1906  {Essai  sur rimagination creatrice, Paris,
1900). — The Evolution of General Ideas. Trans, by F. A. Welby. Chicago:
Open  Court,  1899  {Uevolution  des idees generales, Paris, 1897). —The
Psychology  of the Emotions. London: W. Scott, 191 1 {La psychologie des
sentiments,  Paris,  '  Ricardo,  David  (1 772-1 823) The Principles of
Political  Economy  and  Taxation.  Everyman's  Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton,   1937   (London,  1817).  Richards,  Ivor  Armstrong  (1893-  )
Interpretation in Teaching. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1938.

[1236a]
Richardson THE GREAT IDEAS —Mencius on the Mind; Experiments in Multiple
Definition.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1932.  —  The  Philosophy  of
Rhetoric.  New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1936.  —Principles of
Literary  Criticism.  New  York:  Harcourt Brace, 1930 (New York, 1924).
—Science  and  Poetry.  London: K. Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1935 (London,
1926).  Richardson,  Samuel  (1 689-1 761) Clarissa; or, The History ofa
Young  Lady.  4  vols.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1932
(London,  1747-1748).  —Pamela.  2  vols.  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1933
(London,  1740-1741). RlEMANN, GEORG FrIEDRICH BeRNHARD (18261866) liber
die  Hypothesen  welche  der Geometrie zu Grunde liegen. Ed. by H. Weyl.
Berlin: }. Springer, 1923 (1854)
[trans, by W. K.
Clifford  in  Nature,  Vol.  vm,  May,  1873].  Riezler, Kurt(i882-i955)
Physics  and  Reality;  Lectures  of  Aristotle  on Modern Physics at an
International  Congress  of  Science.  New Haven, Conn.: Yale University
Press,  1940.  Ritchie,  David  George  (1853-1903)  Natural  Rights,  a
Criticism  of  Some  Political  and  Ethical  Conceptions.  London: Swan
Sonnenschein,  1903  (London,  1895).  Rivers, William Halse (1864-1922)
Instinct  and  the Unconscious; a Contribution to a Biological Theory of
the  Psycho-Neuroses.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1920. Robb, Alfred
Arthur  (1  873-1  936) A Theory of Time and Space. Cambridge University
Press,  1  91  4. Romains, Jules, pseud, for Louis Farigoule (1885-1972)
Doctor  Knoc\;  a  Comedy  in Three Acts. Trans, by H. Granville-Barker.
London:  E.  Benn,  1925  (i923)-  — Verdun [Vol. vm, Men of Good Will].
Trans,  by G. Hopkins. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1939 {Prelude a Verdun and
Verdun,  Paris,  1938).  The Romance of the Rose. Trans, by F. S. Ellis.
Temple  Classics,  London:  J.  M.  Dent,  1900 (13th century). Romanes,
George  John  (1  848-1 894) Animal Intelligence. New York: D. Appleton,
1890  (London,  1881). —A Candid Examination of Theism. London: K. Paul,
Trench, Triibner, 1892 (London, 1878). —Mental Evolution in Animals. New
York: D. Appleton, 1891 (London, 1883). Ross, William David (1877- ) The
Right  and  the  Good.  Oxford:  Clarendon  Press, 1930. Rossetti, Dante
Gabriel  (1828-1882)  The  House  of Life, a Sonnet-Sequence. Cambridge,
Mass.:  Harvard  University Press, 1928 (in Ballads and Sonnets, London,
1881).

[1236b]
.   Rossiter,   Clinton   L.  (1917-1970)  Constitutional  Dictatorship.
Princeton  University Press, 1948. Rostand, Edmond (1868-1918) Cyrano de
Bergerac. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1949 (1897). —UAiglon:
A  Drama in Six Acts in Verse. Trans. by B. Davenport. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale  University Press, 1927 (Paris, 1900). Rougemont, Denis de (1906- )
Love  in  the  Western  World.  Trans, by M. Belgion. New York: Harcourt
Brace,  1940  (L  'amour  et  V  Occident,  Paris, 1939). Rousseau, Jean
Jacques (1712-1778)
[A Discourse on the Arts and Sciences] The Social Contract and Discourses. Trans, by G. D. H.
Cole. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1 913 {Discours sur la
question proposee par VAcademie de Dijon, etc., 1750). —Eloisa; a Series
of Original  Letters.  3  vols.  London:  J. Harding, 18 10 {Julie, ou la
nouvelle  Heloise,  Amsterdam,  1761).  —Emile.  Trans,  by  B.  Foxley.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1933 (The Hague, 1762).
—Essai  sur  Vorigine des langues. In Vol. 1, Oeuvres completes de J. J.
Rousseau.  13  vols. Paris: Hachette, 1909-1912 (1755). —A Lasting Peace
Through  the  Federation  of Europe.  In A Lasting Peace and The State of
War.  Trans,  by  C.  E.  Vaughan. London: Constable, 1917 (756)- Routh,
Harold  Victor  (1  878-1951)  God,  Man,  and  Epic  Poetry, a Study in
Comparative Literature. 2 vols. Cambridge University Press, 1927. Royce,
Josiah  (1855-1916)  The Conception of God: An Address Before the Union.
New  York:  Macmillan,  1902 (Berkeley, Cal., 1895). — The Conception of
Immortality.  Boston:  Houghton  Mifflin  Co., 1900. — The Philosophy of
Loyalty. New York: Macmillan, 1936 (New York, 1908). — The Principles of
Logic.   Trans,  by  B.  E.  Meyer.  In  Vol.  1,  Encyclopedia  of  the
Philosophical  Sciences.  London:  Macmillan,  1913  {Prinzipien  —  The
Problem  of Christianity. 2 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1913. —Studies of
Good  and Evil; a Series of Essays upon der Logil{, 1 9 1 2) Problems of
Philosophy  and of Life. New York: D. Appleton, 1915 (New York, 1898). —
The World and the Individual. First and Second Series. 2 vols. New York:
Macmillan,  1904  (New  York, 1900- 1 901). Rueff, Jacques (1896- ) From
the Physical to the Social Sciences; Introduction to a Study of Economic
and Ethical Theory. Trans, by H. Green. Baltimore, Md.: Johns 1202

[1237a]
:  Hopkins  University  Press, 1929 (Des sciences physiques aux sciences
morales,   Paris,  1921).  Rumford,  Benjamin  Thompson  (1753-1814)  An
Experimental  Inquiry Concerning the Source of the Heat Which Is Excited
by Friction. In Vok-rr, Essays, Political, Economical and Philosophical.
3  vols.  Boston:  D. West, 1798- 1804 (London, 1796-1802). Ruskin, John
(1819-1900)  Fors  Clavigera;  Letters  to  the Workmen and Labourers of
Great  Britain.  4  vols.  New  York:  J. W. Lovcll Co., 1886 (New York,
1871-1884).  —Modern  Painters. 5 vols. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P. Dutton, 1 929-1 935 (London, 1843-1860). —Munera Pulveris: Six Essays
on  the  Elements  of  Political Economy. New York: C. E. Merrill, 1 891
(London,  1872).  —Sesame  and  Lilies.  The  Two Paths. The King of the
Golden  River. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1934 (London,
1865).  —The Stones of Venice. 3 vols. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1921-1927
(London,  1851-1853). —Time and Tide, etc. Everyman's Library, New York:
E.  P.  Dutton,  1921  (London,  1867).  Russell,  BertrandArthurWilliam
(1872-1970)  The  Analysis  of Matter. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1927. —
The Analysis of Mind. New York: Macmillan, 1921. —Education and the Good
Life. New York : Boni & Liveright, 1926. —An Essay on the Foundations of
Geometry.    Cambridge   University   Press,   1897.   —Freedom   Versus
Organization,   1814-19  14.  New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1934.  —Human
Knowledge,  Its  Scope and Limits. New York: Simon & Schuster, 1948. —An
Inquiry   into  Meaning  and  Truth.  New  York:  W.  W.  Norton,  1940.
—Introduction  to  Mathematical  Philosophy.  London Allen & Unwin, 1938
(New  York, 191 9). —Mysticism and Logic, and Other Essays. New York: W.
W. Norton, 1929 (London, 1918). —Our Knowledge ofthe External World. New
York:  W.  W.  Norton, 1929 (Chicago, 191 4). —Philosophical Essays. New
York:  Longmans,  Green  & Co., 1910. —Power, a New Social Analysis. New
York: W. W. Norton, 1938. —The Principles of Mathematics. New York: W. W.
Norton,  1938 (Cambridge, 1903). —The Problems of Philosophy. London: T.
Butterworth,   1929  (New  York,  1912).  —Proposed  Roads  to  Freedom:
Socialism, Anarchism, and Syndicalism. New York: Blue Ribbon Books, 1 93
1  (New York, 191 9). —Religion and Science. New York: Henry Holt, !935-
—The Scientific Outloo\. New York: W. W. Norton, 1 93 1. 1203

[1237b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Santayana —Skeptical Essays. New York: W. W. Norton, 1928.
— What I Believe. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1925. Russell, George William,
pseud.,  /£  (1867-  !935) The Hero in Man. London: Orpheus Press, 1909.
Russell,  Henry  Norris (1877-1957) The Solar System and Its Origin. New
York: Macmillan, 1935. Rutherford, Ernest Rutherford (1 871-1937) Radio-
active  Substances  and Their Radiations. New York: Macmillan, 1930 (191
2). Saadia Gaon (c. 892-942) The Boo{ of Beliefs and Opinions. Trans, by
S.  Rosenblatt.  New  Haven,  Conn.:  Yale University Press, 1948 (933).
Saccheri,  Giovanni  Girolamo  (1667— 1733) Girolamo Saccheri s Euclides
Vindicatus. Ed. and 1 trans, by G. B. Halsted. Chicago: Open Court, 1920
{Euclides   ab   Omni  Naevo  Vindicatus,  Milan,  1733)-  Saint-German,
Christopher  (1460-1540)  Doctor  and  Student;  or, Dialogues Between a
Doctor  of  Divinity  and  a  Student in the Laws of England. London: S.
Sweet,  181  5 (Dialogus de Fundamentis Legum Angliae et de Conscientia,
London,  1523).  Saint-Pierre,  Charles  Irenee  Castel  de (1658— 1743)
Scheme  for  Lasting  Peace.  Selections  from the Second Edition of the
Abrege  du projet de paix perpetuelle. Trans, by H. Hale Bellot. London:
Peace  Book Co., 1939 {Projet pour rendre la paix perpetuelle en Europe,
Utrecht,  171  3-17  17). Saint-Simon, Louis de Rouvroy (1675— 1755) The
Memoirs  of  the  DuJ^e of Saint-Simon on the Reign of Louis XIV and the
Regency. Trans, by B. St. John. 4 vols. New York: J. Pott, 1901 (1740- 1
743?).   Saleilles,   Raymond   (1855-1912)   The  Individualisation  of
Punishment.  Trans,  by  R.  Szold.  Boston:  Little,  Brown & Co., 1913
(L'individualisation  de  la peine; etude de criminalite sociale, Paris,
1898).  Sallust  (C.  Sallustius Crispus) (86-35/34 B -c -) The War with
Catiline.  In  Sallust.  Trans,  by  J.  Rolfe.  Loeb Library, New York:
Putnam's,  1931  {Bellum  Catilinae,  c.  40  B.C.).  Sanderson,  Robert
(1587-1663) De Obligatione Conscientiae. Ed. by W. Whewell, trans, anon.
London:  J.  W.  Parker,  1851  (London,  1660).  Santayana,  George  (1
863-1952)  Dialogues  in Limbo. New York: Scribner's, 1925. —The Genteel
Tradition  at  Bay. New York: Scribner's, 1 93 1. —The Idea of Christ in
the  Gospels;  or,  God  in Man, a Critical Essay. New York: Scribner's,
1946.

[1238a]
Sapir THE GREAT IDEAS —Interpretations of Poetry and Religion. New York:
Scribner's,  1900. — The Realm of Essence. In Realms of Being. New York:
Scribner's,  1942  (New  York,  1927). — The Realm of Matter. Ibid. (New
York,  1930). — The Realm of Spirit. Ibid. (New York, 1940). — The Realm
of  Truth.  Ibid.  (London,  1937). —Reason in Art. Vol. iv, The Life of
Reason;  or,  The Phases of Human Progress. New York: Scribner's, 1 928-1
929 (New York, 1 905-1 906). —Reason in Common Sense. Vol. 1, ibid. (New
York,  1  905-1  906).  —Reason  in Religion. Vol in, ibid. (New York, 1
905-1  906).  —Reason  in  Science.  Vol. v, ibid. (New York, 19051906).
—Reason in Society. Vol. 11, ibid. (New York, 19051906). —Scepticism and
Animal  Faith;  Introduction  to  a  System  of  Philosophy.  New  York:
Scribner's, 1923. — The Sense of Beauty; Being the Outlines of Aesthetic
Theory.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1926 (New York, 1896). —Soliloquies in
England  and  Later  Soliloquies.  1,  Soliloquies  1914-1918; 11, Later
Soliloquies  1918iQ.21.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1922.  —Some  Turns of
Thought  in  Modern Philosophy. Cambridge University Press, 1933. Sapir,
Edward  (1  884-1 939) Language, an Introduction to the Study of Speech.
New  York:  Harcourt Brace, 1939 (New York, 1921). Sarton, George Alfred
Leon (1 884-1956) The Life of Science. New York: H. Schuman, 1948. — The
Study  of  the  History of Science. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University
Press,  1936.  Sartre,  Jean-Paul  (1905- ) Existentialism. Trans, by B.
Frechtman.  New  York: Philosophical Library, 1947 {Vexistentialisme est
un  humanisme,  Paris,  1946).  —Vetre  et  le  neant. Essai d'ontologie
phenomenologique.  Paris:  Nouvelle  Revue  Franchise,  1943.  — What Is
Literature?  New  York:  Philosophical Library, 1948. Savigny, Friedrich
Karl  von  (1779-1861)  Jural Relations, or, The Roman Law of Persons as
Subjects of Jural Relations. Trans, by W. Rattigan. London: Wildy & Sons,
1884  (Vol. 1, System des heutigen romischen Rechts, Berlin, 1840). —Vom
Beruf unserer Zeit fiir Gesetzgebung und Rechtswissenschaft. Heidelberg:
J.  Mohr, 1914 (Heidelberg, 18 15). Sayce, Archibald Henry (1 845-1 933)
Introduction  to  the  Science  of  Language.  2  vols. London: K. Paul,
Trench,   Triibner,   1900   (London,   1880).  Scheler,  Max  Ferdinand
(1874-1928) Der Formalismus in der Ethik und die materiale

[1238b]
Wertethi{. Halle: M. Niemeyer, 1927 (19131916). —Vom Ewigen im Menschen.
2  vols.  Leipsic: Neuer Geist Verlag, 1933 (Leipsic, 1921). — Wesen und
Formen  der  Sympathie.  Bonn:  F.  Cohen,  1923 (originally pub. as Zur
Phdnomenologie  und Theorie der Sympathiegefuhle und von Liebe und Hass,
Halle,  191  3). Schelling, Friedrich Wilhelm von (1 775-1 854) The Ages
of  the  World.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  F. de Wolfe Bolman, Jr. New York:
Columbia University Press, 1942 (181 1). —Ideen zu einer Philosophic der
Natur.  In  Vol.  11,  First  Series,  Sdmtliche  Werke (Leipsic, 1797).
—OfHuman  Freedom.  Trans,  by  J.  Gutmann.  Chicago:  Open Court, 1936
{Philosophische Untersuchungen tiber das Wesen der menschlichen Freiheit
und   die   damit   zusammenhdngenden   Gegenstdnde.  In  Philosophische
Schriften,  Landshut,  1809).  —Philosophic  der Kunst. In Vol. v, First
Series,  Sdmtliche  Werke (1802- 1805). — Von der Weltseele. In Vol. 11,
ibid. (Hamburg, 1798). note: Sdmtliche Werke. Ed. by K. A. F. Schelling.
24  vols.  Stuttgart:  Cotta,  1856-1861.  Schiller  (Johann  Christoph)
Friedrich  von  (1759-1805)  Don Carlos. Trans, by R. D. Boylan, in Vol.
in,  Works (Leipsic, 1787). —Letters upon the Esthetic Education of Man.
In  Literary and Philosophical Essays. "The Harvard Classics," New York:
P.  F.  Collier, 1910 (1795). —On Simple and Sentimental Poetry. In Vol.
vi,  Works  (1795).  — The Stage as a Moral Institution. In Literary and
Philosophical  Essays.  See above (1785). — Wallenstein. Trans, by S. T.
Coleridge, in Vol. vn, Works (Tubingen, 1800). — William Tell. Trans, by
T.  Martin,  ibid.  (Tubingen,  1804).  note : Schiller's Works. 7 vols.
London:  G.  Bell  &  Sons, 1 897-1 903. Schlegel, August Wilhelm von (1
767-1  845)  Lectures  on  Dramatic  Art  and  Literature.  Ed. by A. J.
Morrison,  trans,  by  J.  Black.  London:  G.  Bell  & Sons, 1902 (Uber
dramatische Kunst und Literatur, Heidelberg, 1809-1811). Schlegel, (Karl
Wilhelm)  Friedrich  von  (17721829) Lucinde. Trans, by P. B. Thomas. In
Vol.  iv, The German Classics of the Nineteenth and Twentieth Centuries.
Ed.  by K. Francke and W. Howard. 20 vols. New York: German Publications
Society,  1913-1915 (Berlin, 1799). —The Philosophy of History. A Course
of  Lectures  Delivered at Vienna. Trans, by J. B. Robertson. London: G.
Bell & Sons, 191 5 (Philosophic der Geschichte, Vienna, 1829). 1204

[1239a]
Schleicher,  August  (1821-1868)  Darwinism  Tested  by  the  Science of
Language.  Trans,  by  A.  V.  W. Bikkers. London: Hotten, wissenschaft,
Weimar,    1863).    ^    1869   {Die   Darwinsche   Theorie   und   die
SprachSCHLEIERMACHER,  FRIEDRICH  ERNST DANIEL (1768-1834) The Christian
Faith.  Ed.  by  H.  R. Mackintosh and J. S. Stewart. Edinburgh: T. & T.
Clark,   1928   {Der   Christliche   Glaube  nach  den  Grundsatzen  der
Evangelischen Kirche, Berlin, 18211822). —Dialektil{. Ed. by J. Halpern.
Berlin: Mayer & Miiller, 1903 (1810-1831). —On Religion; Speeches to Its
Cultured  Despisers.  Trans,  by  I.  W.  Oman. London: K. Paul, Trench,
Trubner,  1893  {Uber  die Religion. Reden an die Gebildeten unter ihren
Verdchtern,  Berlin,  J  799)-  —Soliloquies.  Trans,  by  H. L. Friess.
Chicago:  Open  Court,  1926  {Monologen, Berlin, 1800). SCHLICK, MORITZ
(1882-1936) Philosophy of Nature. New York: Philosophical Library, 1949.
Schopenhauer,   Arthur  (1789-  1860)  The  Complete  Essays  of  Arthur
Schopenhauer.  New  York:  Willey  Book  Co.,  1936  (from  Parerga  und
Paralipomena,  Berlin,  1851).  —Die  beiden Grundprobleme der Ethi{: 1,
Uber  die  Freiheit des menschlichen Willens; 11, Uber das Fundament der
Moral.  Leipsic:  F.  H.  Brockhaus,  1908  (Frankfort, 1841). —On Human
Nature.  Essays  {Partly  Posthumous)  in  Ethics  and Politics. Ed. and
trans,  by  T.  Bailey Saunders. New York: Macmillan, 1897. Reprinted in
Complete Essays, q.v. (largely from Parerga und Paralipomena, Berlin, l8
50- —On the Doctrine ofthe Indestructibility of Our True Nature by Death.
In  Philosophy of Arthur Schopenhauer. Trans, by B. Bax and B. Saunders.
New  York:  Tudor  Publishing  Co.,  1933  (in Parerga und Paralipomena,
Berlin,  1851).  —On  the  Fourfold  Root of the Principle of Sufficient
Reason,  and  On Will in Nature. Trans, by Mme. Karl Hillebrand. London:
G.  Bell  &  Sons,  1891  {Uber  die  vierfache  Wurzel  des  Satzes vom
zureichenden  Grunde,  Rudolstadt, 18 13). —Studies in Pessimism. Trans,
by  T. Bailey Saunders. London, 1898. Reprinted in Complete Essays, q.v.
(from   Parerga   und   Paralipomena,   Berlin,  1851).  —  Transcendent
Speculations on Apparent Design in the Fate of the Individual. Trans, by
D.  Irvine.  London:  Watts  &  Co., 191 3 (in Parerga und Paralipomena,
Berlin,  1851). —The World as Will and Idea. Trans, by R. B. Haldane and
J. Kemp. 3 vols. London: K. Paul, Trench, Trubner, 1 907-1 909 {Die Welt
als Wille und Vorstellung, Leipsic, 181 9). 1205

[1239b]
. BIBLIOGRAPHY Shaftesbury SCHRECKER, PAUL (1889-I963) Wor\ and History.
Princeton   University   Press,  1948.  ScHRODINGER,  ERWIN  (1887-I961)
Collected  Papers  on  Wave Mechanics. Trans, by J. F. Shearer and W. M.
Deans.  London:  Blackie  &  Son,  1928 {Abhandlungen zur Wellenmechani^
Leipsic, 1927). —Four Lectures on Wave Mechanics. London: Blackie & Son,
1928.  —  What  Is  Life?  New York : Macmillan, 1 945 ( 1 943) Schwann,
Theodor (18 10-1882) Microscopical Researches into the Accordance in the
Structure  and Growth of Animals and Plants. Trans, by H. Smith. London:
Sydenham   Society,   1847   {Mihjoshppische   Untersuchungen  uber  die
Uebereinstimmung  in  der  Struktur  und  dem  Wachsthum  der Thiere und
Pflanzen,  Berlin,  1839).  Scott,  Dukinfield  Henry  (1854—  1934) The
Evolution of Plants. New York: Henry Holt, Scott, Sir Walter (1771-1832)
Ivanhoe;  a Romance. New York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1944 (Edinburgh, 1820).
—Letters on Demonology and Witchcraft, Addressed to J. G. Lockhardt. New
York:  G.  Routledge,  1885 (London, 1830). Seneca, Lucius Annaeus {c. 4
b.c.-c.  65  a.d.)  De  Beata  Vita.  In  Vol.  11,  Moral  Essays, q.v.
(5859A.D.). —De Beneficus. Vol. in, ibid. (59-62 a.d.). —De Consolatione
ad Marciam. In Vol. 11, ibid. {c. 40 A.D.). —De Constantia Sapientis. In
Vol.  1,  ibid.  (41-42  A.D.). —Moral Essays. Trans, by J. W. Basore. 3
vols. Loeb Library, New York: Putnam's, 1 928-1 935. —Moral Letters. Ed.
and  trans,  by R. M. Gummere. 3 vols. Loeb Library, New York: Putnam's,
1920  (63-65 A.D.). Sertillanges, Antonin Gilbert (1863-1948) La famille
et  Vetat  dans  Veducation. Paris: V. LecofTre, 1907. Sevigne, Marie de
Rabutin-Chantal,  Marquise  de  (1626-  1  696)  The Letters of Madame de
Sevigne.  Sel.  and  ed.  by  J.  A.  Harrison. Boston: Ginn & Co., 1899
(16471696).  Sextus  Empiricus (2nd century a.d.) Against the Ethicists.
In  Sextus  Empiricus.  Trans,  by  R.  G.  Bury.  3 vols. Loeb Library,
Cambridge,   Mass.:   Harvard   University  Press,  1933.  —Against  the
Logicians. Ibid. —Against the Physicists. Ibid. —Outlines of Pyrrhonism.
Ibid.  Shaftesbury,  Anthony  Ashley  Cooper,  Third Earl of (1671-1713)
Characteristics   of  Men,  Manners,  Opinions,  Times.  Ed.  by  J.  M.
Robertson. 2 vols. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1900 (London, 171 1).

[1240a]
Shapley THE GREAT IDEAS Shapley, Harlow (1885-1972) Starlight. New York:
G.  H.  Doran, 1926. Shaw, George Bernard (i 856-1950) Arms and the Man.
In  Vol. 11, Plays: Pleasant and Unpleasant (1894). —Back to Methuselah:
A  Metabiological  Pentateuch.  London:  Constable  & Co., 1931 (London,
1921).  —Candida.  In  Vol.  11,  Plays: Pleasant and Unpleasant (1895).
—[Crude  Criminology]  Doctors'  Delusions,  Crude Criminology, and Sham
Education.  London:  Constable  &  Co., 1932 (London, 1931). —Doctors' 1
Delusions.  Ibid. (London, 1931). —Dramatic Opinions and Essays, with an
Apology by Bernard Shaw. 2 vols. New York: Brentano's, 1 907-1 91 3 (New
York, 1906). —The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and Capitalism.
London:  Constable  &  Co., 1928. —Major Barbara. New York: Dodd, Mead &
Co.,  1941  (1905).  —Man  and  Superman: A Comedy and a Philosophy. New
York:  Dodd, Mead & Co., 1939 (Westminster, 1903). —Pygmalion. New York:
Dodd,  Mead  & Co., 1939 (London, 191 3). —The Revolutionist' s Handbook
and  Pocket  Companion  by  John  Tanner,  M.I.R.C.  Appended to Man and
Superman,  q.v.  —The Sanity of Art: An Exposure of the Current Nonsense
About  Artists  Being  Degenerate.  New York: B. R. Tucker, 1908 (1895).
—Socialism  and  Superior  Brains:  A Reply to Mr. Malloc\. New York: J.
Lane,  1910  (London,  1909).  —  Widowers'  1 Houses. In Vol. 1, Plays:
Pleasant  and Unpleasant (1892). note: Plays: Pleasant and Unpleasant. 2
vols.  New  York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1940. Sheldon, Wilmon Henry (1875- )
Strife  of  Systems  and  Productive  Duality;  an  Essay in Philosophy.
Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1  91 8. Shelley, Percy
Bysshe  (1  792-1  822)  Adonais. An Elegy on the Death of John Keats. In
Poetical  Worlds  (1821).  —A  Defense  of  Poetry. Ed. by Mrs. Shelley.
Indianapolis, Ind.: Bobbs Merrill Co., 1904 (1821). —Preface to Alastor.
In Poetical Worlds (18 16). —Prometheus Unbound; A Lyrical Drama in Four
Acts. Ibid. (1820). note : John Keats and Percy Bysshe Shelley: Complete
Poetical  Works. Modern Library, New York: Random House, 1932. Sheridan,
Richard  Brinsley  Butler  (175  11816)  The Rivals. In Plays by Richard
Brinsley Sheridan. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, I93 1 ( I
775)- —The Schoolfor Scandal. Ibid. (1777).

[1240b]
:  Sherrington,  Sir  Charles  Scott  (i  857-1952)  The  Brain  and Its
Mechanism.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1933. —The Integrative Action
ofthe Nervous System. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1923 (New
York,  1906).  —Man on His Nature. New York: Macmillan, 1941 (Cambridge,
1940).  Sholokhov,  Mikhail  Aleksandrovich (1905The Silent Don. Vol. 1,
And  Quiet Flows the Don; Vol. 11, The Don Flows Home to the Sea. Trans,
by  S.  Gary.  New  York: A. A. Knopf, 1942 (1928-1938). SHOTWELL, IAMES
THOMSON   (1874-I965)   The  History  of History.  New  York  :  Columbia
University  Press,  1939 {An Introduction to the History of History, New
York,  1922).  Sidgwick,  Alfred  (1  850-1  943)  Distinction  and  the
Criticism of Beliefs. New York Longmans, Green & Co., 1892. —Fallacies. A
View  of Logicfrom the Practical Side. London: K. Paul, Trench, Triibner,
1901  (London,  1883).  — The Use of Words in Reasoning. London: A. & C.
Black,  1 90 1. Sidgwick, Henry (1 838-1 900) The Methods of Ethics. Ed.
by  E.  lones.  London: Macmillan, 1913 (London, 1874). —Philosophy, Its
Scope   and  Relations.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1902  (1886  ?-i  900).
—Practical  Ethics:  A  Collection  of  Addresses  and Essays. New York:
Macmillan,  1909  (New  York,  Sidney, Algernon (i 622-1 683) Discourses
Concerning  Government. 2 vols. Philadelphia: M. L. Weems, 1805 (1 680-1
681  ?).  Sidney,  Sir  Philip  (1554-1586) An Apologyfor Poetry. In The
Portable  Elizabethan  Reader.  New  York:  Viking  Press,  1946 (1581).
—Astrophel  and  Stella.  Ibid. (1575-1583). —The Countess of Pembroke"s
Arcadia.  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1921  (1580-1583). Sieyes, Joseph
Emmanuel (1 748-1 836)
[Discours]
Les  discours de Sieyes dans les debats constitutionnels de Van III. Ed.
by   Paul  Bastid.  Paris:  L.  Hachette,  1939  (1795).  —An  Essay  on
Privileges,  and  Particularly  on  Heredity.  Trans,  anon.  London: }.
Ridgeway,  1791  (Essai  sur les privileges, first pub., 1789). SlGWART,
CHRISTOPH  VON  (183O-I904)  Logic.  Trans,  by Helen Dendy. 2 vols. New
York:  Macmillan,  1895  (Tubingen, 1873- 1878). Simon, Yves (1903-1961)
Community  of  the  Free.  Trans,  by W. R. Trask. New York: Henry Holt,
1947.  —Introduction  a  Vontologie  du  connaitre.  Paris:  Desclee, de
Brouwer,  1934.  —Nature  and  Functions  of Authority. Milwaukee, Wis.:
Marquette University Press, 1940. 1206

[1241a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Spinoza — Trois lecons sur le travail. Paris: Tequi, 1938.
Sinclair, Upton Beall (1 878-1968) The Jungle. New York: Vanguard Press,
1927  (New  York, 1906). Sir Gawain and the Green Knight. Modern EngfisI
bv S. O. Andrew. New York: E. P. Dutton, 1929 (1375?). Sitter, Willem de
(1 872-1 934) Kosmos: A Course of Six Lectures on the Development of Our
Insight  into  the  Structure of the Universe. Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard
University  Press,  1932.  Skidmore, Thomas (?-i832) The Rights of Man to
Property!  Being  a  Proposition to Make It Equal Among the Adults ofthe
Present Generation, etc. New York: A. Ming, 1829. Smiles, Samuel (18 12-
1904)  Life  and  Labor: or, Characteristics of Men of Industry, Culture
and  Genius. New York: Harper, 1888 (London, 1887). Smith, Adam (1 723-1
790)  A  Dissertation  on  the  Origin of Languages. See Theory of Moral
Sentiments  (in  3rd  ed.,  Theory  of  Moral Sentiments, London, 1767).
—Essays Philosophical and Literary. London: Ward, Lock & Co., 1880. —The
History  of Astronomy. In Essays Philosophical and Literary, q.v. (before
1773?). —Lectures on justice, Police, Revenue and Arms, Delivered in the
University  of  Glasgow. Ed. by E. Cannan. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1896
(1766).  —The  Theory  of Moral Sentiments. Ed. by D. Stewart. London: G.
Bell  & Sons, 1892 (London, 1759)- Smith, William Robertson (1846- 1894)
The  Prophets  of  Israel and Their Place in History to the Close of the
Eighth  Century  B.C.  London:  A.  &C.  Black,  1907 (Edinburgh, 1882).
Smollett,  Tobias  George (1721-1771) The Expedition of Humphry Clinker.
Everyman's  Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1943 (London, 1771). Smuts,
Jan  Christiaan  (1 870-1950) Holism and Evolution. New York: Macmillan,
1936  (New  York, 1926). Smyth, Henry de Wolf (1898- ) Atomic Energy for
Military  Purposes.  Princeton  University Press, 1945. Soddy, Frederick
(1877-1956) The Interpretation of the Atom. London: J. Murray, 1932. The
Song  of  Roland.  Trans, by A. S. Way. Cambridge University Press, 1913
(late  nth  century).  Sorel,  Georges  (1  847-1  922) Les illusions du
progres. Paris: M. Riviere, 1927 (Paris, 1908). —Reflexions on Violence.
Trans, by T. E. Hulme. 1207

[1241b]
: London: Allen & Unwin, 1925 (Reflexions sur la violence, Paris, 1908).
Soto, Domingo de (1 494-1 560) Libri Decern de Justitia et Jure. 2 vols.
Salamanca,  Southey,  Robert  (1774-  1843) Essays, Moral and Political.
Vol. 1, London: J. Murray, 1832 (1810-1816). Spearman, Charles Edward (1
863-1 945) The Abilities of Man; Their Nature and Measurement. New York:
Macmillan,  1927. Spencer, Herbert (1 820-1 903) Essays on Education and
Kindred  Subjects.  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1928 (1854-1859). — The Man
Versus  the  State.  New  York:  D.  Appleton, 1884. — The Principles of
Ethics. 2 vols. New York: D. Appleton, 1 91 4 (London, 1 892-1 893. Part
1  pub.  as  Data  of  Ethics,  New  York,  1879).  —  The Principles of
Psychology  .  2  vols.  New  York:  D.  Appleton,  1914 (London, 1855).
—Progress:  Its  Law and Cause. In Essays on Education, q.v. (in Essays,
Scientific,  etc.,  London,  Spengler, Oswald (1880-1936) The Decline of
the  West. Trans, by C. r\ Atkinson. 2 vols. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1939
(Der  Untergang  des  Abendlandes, Munich, 191 8-1 922). Spenser, Edmund
(c.  1 552-1 599) Epithalamion. New York : Crofts, 1 926 (London, 1595)-
—  The Faerie Queene: Disposed into Twelve Boo\s Fashioning Twelve Moral
Virtues.  2  vols.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 19311933
(London,  1  590-1  596). —An Hymne of Heavenly Love. In Spenser's Minor
Poems.  Ed. by E. De Selincourt. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1 910 (London,
1596).  Spinoza,  Benedict  de (1 632-1 677) Cogita Metaphysica. In Vol.
in,  Benedicti  de  Spinoza  Opera  Quotquot Reperta Sunt. Ed. by J. Van
Vloten and J. P. N. Land. 3 vols. The Hague M. NijhofT, 1895 (first pub.
with  Renati  Descarti  Principiorum  Philosophiae,  Pars  i et ii, More
Geometrico   Demonstratae,   Amsterdam,   1663).  —  The  Correspondence
of Spinoza.  Ed.  and  trans,  by  A.  Wolf.  New  York: Dial Press, 1927
(16611676).  —Of  the  Improvement of the Understanding. In Vol. 11, The
Chief Wor\s of Baruch Spinoza. Ed. by R. H. M. Elwes. 2 vols. London: G.
Bell  &  Sons,  1906  {Tractatus  de  Intellectus  Emendatione. In Opera
Posthuma,   Amsterdam,  1677).  —Tractatus  Politicus.  In  Writings  on
Political  Philosophy.  New  York:  D.  Appleton-Century, 1937 (1677). —
Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus.  In  Vol.  1,  Chief  Wor\s.  See Ofthe
Improvement ofthe Understanding (Amsterdam, 1670).

[1242a]
Stallo  THE GREAT IDEAS Stallo, John Bernhard (i 823-1 900) Concepts and
Theories  of  Modern  Physics.  New  York: D. Appleton, 1897 (New York >
1882).  Stammler,  Rudolf  (1856—  1938) The Theory of Justice. Ed. by F.
Geny  and  J.  C.  H.  Wu, trans, by I. Husik. New York: Macmillan, 1925
(Theorie  der Rechtswissenschaft, Halle, 1911). Steffens, Joseph Lincoln
(1  866-1  936) The Autobiography of Lincoln Steffens. 2 vols. New York:
Harcourt  Brace,  1931.  Steinbeck, John Ernst (1902-1968) The Grapes of
Wrath.  Modern  Library,  New York: Random House, 1941 (New York, 1939).
Stendhal,  pseud,  for  Marie Henri Beyle (17831842) The Charterhouse of
Parma. Trans, by C. K. Scott-MoncrierT. Modern Library, New York: Random
House,  1937  (La chartreuse de Parme, Paris, 1839). —On Love. Ed. by P.
S.  and  C. N. Woolf. London: Duckworth, 191 5 {De Vamour, Paris, 1822).
—Racine  et  Shakespeare. Ed. by P. Martino. 2 vols. Paris: E. Champion,
1925  (Paris,  1 823-1 825). —The Red and the Blac\. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House, 1949 (Le rouge et le noir, Paris, 1 831). Stephen,
Sir  James  Fitzjames (1829-1894) Liberty, Equality, Fraternity. London:
Smith,  Elder  &  Co.,  1873.  Stephen,  Sir  Leslie  (1  832-1  904) An
Agnostic's  Apology,  and  Other Essays. London Smith, Elder & Co., 1893
(title  essay,  London,  1876).  —The  Science of Ethics. London: Smith,
Elder  &  Co., 1907 (London, 1882). —Social Rights and Duties. Addresses
to  Ethical  Societies. 2 vols. London: Swan Sonnenschein, 1896. Sterne,
Laurence  (1713-1768)  A  Sentimental  Journey Through France and Italy.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1947  (London, 1768).
Stevenson,  Robert  Louis  (1850-1894)  Across  the  Plains,  with Other
Memories  and  Essays.  New  York:  Scribner's,  191 2 (London, 1892). —
Virginibus  Puerisque,  Familiar  Studies  of Men  and  Boofe. Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton, 1929 (London, 1881). Stevin, Simon
(1548-1620)   Uartponderaire,  ou  la  statique.  In  Vol.  iv,  Oeuvres
mathematiques.  6  vols. Leyden: B. & A. Elsevier, 1634 (1585)- Stewart,
Balfour  (1828-1887)  The  Conservation of Energy. New York: D. Appleton,
1900  (New  York,  1874).  Stewart,  Dugald (1753- 1828) Elements of the
Philosophy of the Human Mind. Vols, ii-iv, The Collected Worths of Dugald
Stewart. Ed. by Sir W. Hamilton. 1 1 vols. Edinburgh:

[1242b]
.  T. & T. Clark, 1877 (Edinburgh, 1792; 1814; 1827). —Outlines of Moral
Philosophy.  Vols,  iv  and  vi, ibid. (Edinburgh, 1793). —Philosophical
Essays.  Vol.  v,  ibid. (Edinburgh, 1810). —Philosophy ofthe Active and
Moral  Powers  of Man.  Vols,  vi-vii, ibid. (Edinburgh, 1828). Stirling,
James  Hutchison  (1 820-1 909) Philosophy and Theology. Edinburgh: T. &
T. Clark, 1890. Stout, George Frederick (1860-1944) Analytic Psychology.
2  vols.  London:  Allen  &  Unwin,  191  8 (London, 1896). —A Manual of
Psychology.  London:  University  Tutorial  Press,  1938 (London, 1898).
—Mind   and   Matter.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1931  (1919-1921).
Stranathan,  James  Docking  (1898- ) The "Particles" of Modern Physics.
Philadelphia:  Blakiston  Co., 1942. Straus, Erwin (1891- ) Vom Sinn der
Sinne:  Ein Beitrag zur Grundlegung der Psychologic Berlin: J. Springer,
1935.  Strauss,  Leo (1899-1973) On Tyranny. New York: Political Science
Classics,  1948.  Strindberg,  August (1849-1912) The Dance of Death. In
Plays.  First  Series. Trans. by E. Bjorkman. New York: Scribner's, 1928
(Stockholm,  1901).  —The  Father:  A  Tragedy.  Trans,  by N. Erichsen.
Boston:  J.  W.  Luce,  1907  (Helsingborg,  1887).  Sturzo,  Luigi  ( 1
871-1959)  Church and State. Trans, by B. B. Carter. New York: Longmans,
Green  &  Co.,  1939  (London,  1937)- —The Inner Laws of Society: A New
Sociology. Trans, by B. B. Carter. New York: P. J. Kenedy, 1944 (i935)-.
—The  International  Community  and  the  Right  of War. Trans, by B. B.
Carter.  New  York:  R. R. Smith, 1930 (London, 1929). Suarez, Francisco
(1548-1617)  De  Religione. In Vol. xm, Opera Omnia. Ed. by M. Andre and
C.  Berton.  28  vols. Paris: L. Vives, 1856-1878 (1609). —Disputationes
Metaphysicae.  In  Vols,  xxv-xxvi,  ibid.  (Salamanca,  1597).  —On the
Various  Kinds  of  Distinctions. Trans, by C. Vollert. Milwaukee, Wis.:
Marquette   University   Press,   1   947  {Disputationes  Metaphysicae,
Disputatio  VII, De Variis Distinctionum Generibus). —On War. In Vol. 1,
Selections from Three Works of Francisco Suarez, S.J. Ed. by J. B. Scott,
trans,  by  G. L. Williams et al. 2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1944.
—A  Treatise on Laws and God the Lawgiver. In Vol. 11, ibid. (De Legibus
ac Deo Legislatore in Decern Libros Distributus, Coimbra , 1 6 1 2) 1208

[1243a]
1 Sully, James (i 842-1 923) Illusions: A Psychological Study. New York:
D. Appleton, 1888 (London, 1881). Sumner, William Graham (1840-1910) The
Absurd  Effort  to  Make the World 0vp^4n War, q.v. (1894). —Folkways; a
Study of the Sociological Importance of Usages, Manners, Customs, Mores,
and  Morals.  Ed.  by  A.  G.  Keller. Boston: Ginn & Co., 1940 (Boston,
1907).  —  War  and Other Essays. Ed. by A. G. Keller. New Haven, Conn.:
Yale  University  Press,  191 1 (title essay, 1903). SWEDENBORG, EMANUEL
(1688-I772)  Angelic  Wisdom  Concerning  the Divine Providence. In Vol.
xxv,  Theological  Works.  Rotch  ed., 32 vols. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Co.,  1907  (Sapientia Angelica de Divina Providentia, Amsterdam, 1764).
—Heaven and Its Wonders and Hell, from Things Heard and Seen. Everyman's
Library,  New York: E. P. Dutton, 1909 {De Coelo et Ejus Mirabilibus, et
de Inferno, ex Auditis et Visis, London, 1758). Swift, Jonathan (1 667-1
745)  An  Argument  to  Prove  That  the  Abolishing  of Christianity in
England,  May.  .  . . Be Attended with Some Inconveniences, and Perhaps
not  Produce  those  Many Good Effects Propos'd Thereby. In Vol. in, The
Prose  Works of Jonathan Swift. Ed. by T. Scott. 12 vols. London: G. Bell
&  Sons, 1900-1914 (London, 1708). —The Battle of the BooksSee Tale of a
Tub  (London,  1704).  —An  Essay on Modern Education. In Vol. xi, Prose
Works.  See  An  Argument  (1732). —A Modest Proposal for Preventing the
Children of Poor Peoplefrom Being a Burthen to Their Parents or Country,
andfor  Making Them Beneficial to the Public. In The Portable Swift. New
York: Viking Press, 1948 (Dublin, 1729). —A Tale of a Tub, The Battle of
the Books and Other Satires. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton,
1948  (London,  1704). Synge, John Millington (1 871-1909) Deirdre ofthe
Sorrows.  Boston:  J.  W.  Luce,  191 (1908- 1 909). —Riders to the Sea.
Boston: J. W. Luce, 191 1 (1903). Tacitus, Cornelius (c. 55-c. 120 a.d.)
[A Dialogue on Oratory] Dialogus, Agricola, Germania.
Trans,  by W. Peterson. Loeb Library, New York: Putnam's, 1925 (Dialogus
de  Oratoribus,  78-81  a.d.).  —Germania.  Ibid  (c.  98  a.d.). Taine,
Hippolyte Adolphe (1 828-1 893) Essais de critique et d'histoire. Paris:
Hachette,  1887  (Paris,  1858). —On Intelligence. Trans, by T. D. Haye.
New York: Henry Holt, 1889 (De Vintelligence, Paris, 1870). 1209

[1243b]
:  BIBLIOGRAPHY  Teggart  —The Philosophy of Art. Trans, by John Durand.
New York: Henry Holt, 1875 (Philosophic de Vart, Paris, 1865).
[Talmud] New Edition of the Babylonian Talmud.
Trans, by M. L. Rodkinson. 20 vols. New York: New Talmud Publishing Co.,
1896- 1903 (3rd~5th centuries a.d.). Tarde, Gabriel de (1 843-1 904) The
Laws  of  Imitation. Trans, by E. C. Parsons. New York: Henry Holt, 1903
(Les  lois  de  limitation;  Etude  sociologique,  Paris, 1890). Tarski,
Alfred  (1902-  )  Introduction  to  Logic  and  to  the  Methodology of
Deductive  Sciences.  Trans,  by  O. Helmer. New York: Oxford University
Press, 1941 (Polish ed., *936)- Tasso, Torquato ( i 544-1 595) Jerusalem
Delivered.  Ed.  by  H. Morley, trans, by E. Fairfax. New York: Colonial
Press,  1901  (Gerusalemme  Liberata,  Casalmaggiore,  1581). Tate, John
Orley  Allen  (1899-  ) Reactionary Essays on Poetry and Ideas. New York
Scribner's,  1936.  Tawney,  Richard  Henry  (1880-1962) The Acquisitive
Society.  New  York: Harcourt Brace, 1928 (London, 1920). —Equality. New
York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1931.  —Religion  and the Rise of Capitalism, a
Historical  Study. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1926. Taylor, Alfred Edward
(1869-1945)  The  Christian Hope of Immortality . London : Unicorn Press,
1938.  —Does  God  Exist?  New  York:  Macmillan, 1947 (i945)- —Elements
of Metaphysics. London: Methuen, 1903. — The Faith of a Moralist. 2 vols.
London:  Macmillan, 1937 (London, 1930). —Philosophical Studies. London:
Macmillan,  1934. — The Problem of Conduct; a Study in the Phenomenology
of  Ethics.  London:  Macmillan,  1901.  Taylor,  Jeremy  (161  3-1 667)
e«oXo7ia  'EkX«ktiki7,  or,  A  Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying,
with Its Just Limits and Temper. In Vol. 11, The Whole Works ofthe Right
Rev.  Jeremy  Taylor.  3  vols.  London:  H. G. Bohn, 1851-1867 (London,
1647). —A Discourse ofthe Nature, Offices and Measures of Friendship. In
Vol.  in,  ibid.  (London,  1657).  —Ductor Dubitantium; or, The Rule of
Conscience  in All Her General Measures. Ibid. (London, 1660). —[Of Holy
Dying]  The  Rule and Exercises of Holy Dying. In Vol. 1, ibid. (London,
1651).  —(Of  Holy  Living] The Rule and Exercises of Holy Living. Ibid.
(London,  1650).  —Twenty-Five  Sermons  Preached at Golden Grove. Ibid,
(originally  pub.  as  A  Course of Sermonsfor AlltheSundaiesofthe Year,
London,  1653-  1655).  Teggart,  Frederick  John  (1  870-1 946) Theory
of History. New Haven, Conn. : Yale University Press, 1925.

[1244a]
.  Tennant  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Tennant, Frederick Robert (i 866-1957) The
Concept   of  Sin.  Cambridge  University  Press,  1912.  —Philosophical
Theology.  2  vols. Cambridge University Press, 1 928-1 930. —Philosophy
of the Sciences, or, The Relations Between the Departments of Knowledge.
Cambridge  University  Press,  1932.  Tennyson,  Alfred  (1  809-1  892)
Crossing  the Bar. In Tennyson's Poems. Everyman's Library, New York: E.
P.  Dutton,  1950  (1889).  —In  Memoriam. Ibid. (1850). —Loc\sley Hall.
Ibid.  (1842).  —Ulysses.  Ibid.  (1842).  Teresa  of  Jesus,  Saint (15
15-1582) Boo\ of the Foundations. In Vol. in, The Complete Works of Saint
Teresa  of Jesus.  Ed.  and trans, by E. Allison Peers. 3 vols. New York:
Sheed  &  Ward,  1946  (L/^ro  delasfundaciones, 1 573-1 582). —Interior
Castle  (The  Mansions).  In  Vol.  n,  ibid.  (Las  moradas  o Castillo
interior, 1577). — The Way of Perfection. Ibid. (Camino de perfection, 1
565-  1  5  66).  Tertullian (Quintus Septimius Florens TerTULLIANUS) (C
155—tT.  222  A.D.)  Apology and De Spectaculis. Trans, by T. R. Glover.
Loeb  Library,  Cambridge,  Mass.:  Harvard  University  Press,  1  93 1
(Apologeticus,  197?).  —De  Spectaculis.  See Apology (after 197?). —On
Idolatry. In Vol. 111, The Ante-Nicene Fathers. Ed. by A. Roberts and J.
Donaldson.  10  vols.  New York: Christian Literature Co., 1885-1896 (De
Idolatria,   212?).   —The  Prescription  Against  Heretics.  Ibid.  (De
Praescriptione  Haereticorum)  —A Treatise on the Soul. Ibid. (De Anima,
203  ?).  Thackeray,  William Makepeace (1811-1863) The History of Henry
Esmond,  Esq.  Modern  Library,  New  York:  Random House, 1936 (London,
1852).  — Vanity Fair, a Novel without a Hero. Modern Library, New York:
Random  House,  1949  (London/  1847-1848).  Theologia  Germanica: Which
Setteth Forth Many Fair Lineaments of Divine Truth, and Saith Very Lofty
and Lovely Things Touching a Perfect Life. Ed. by F. PfeifTer, trans, by
S.  Winkworth. London: Macmillan, 1937 (c. 1375). Theophrastus of Eresos
(c.  372-f.  286  B.C.)  The  Characters.  Trans, by J. M. Edmonds. Loeb
Library,  Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1929 (319 b.c.?).
—Enquiry  into  Plants.  Trans,  by  A.  Hort.  2  vols.  Loeb  Library,
Cambridge, Mass. : Harvard University Press, 1 91 6 (315 b.c.?). —On the
Senses.  In  G.  M.  Stratton,  Theophrastus and the Gree/{Physiological
Psychology. New York: Macmillan, 1917.

[1244b]
Thomas  a Kempis, Saint (c. 1 380-1 471) The Imitation of Christ. Trans,
by  Richard  Whitford,  ed.  by  E.  J.  Klein. New York: Harper, 1 94 1
(Imitatio  Christi,  1421  ?—  1434  ?). Thomas of Erfurt (14th century)
Grammatica Speculativa (Liber Modorum SigniHcandi). Ed. by M. F. Garcia.
Florence:  Tipographia  Collegii  S.  Bonaventurae, 1902. ThOxMpson, Sir
D'Arcy  Wentworth (1 860-1 948) On Growth and Form. Cambridge University
Press,  1942  (Cambridge,  191  7).  Thompson, Francis (1 859-1 907) The
Hound  of  Heaven.  New  York:  Dodd, Mead & Co., 1922 (1893). Thompson,
William  Robin  (1887-1972)  Science  and  Common Sense, an Aristotelian
Excursion.  New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1937. Thomson, George Paget
(1892-  )  The  Atom.  New  York:  Home University Library, IQ47 (i93°)-
Thomson,  Sir  William (Baron Kelvin) (18241907) and Tait, Peter Guthrie
(1831-1901)  Elements of Natural Philosophy. Cambridge University Press,
1879 (Oxford, 1873). — Treatise on Natural Philosophy. 2 vols. Cambridge
University  Press,  1 895-1 896 (Oxford, 1867). Thoreau, Henry David (18
17-1862) Civil Disobedience. In Walden and Other Writings of Henry David
Thoreau.  Ed.  by  B.  Atkinson. Modern Library, New York: Random House,
J937  (1849)-  —A  Plea  for Captain John Brown. Ibid, (in James Redpath
ed.,  Echoes  of Harper's Ferry, Boston, i860). — Walden. Ibid. (Boston,
1854). —A Wee\ on the Concord and Merrimack, RiversIbid. (Boston, 1849).
Thorndike, Edward Lee (1 874-1 949) Man on His Works. Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard  University  Press, 1943. Thurstone, Louis Leon (1 887-1955) The
Vectors  of Mind;  Multiple-Factor  Analysisfor  the  Isolation of Primary
Traits.  University  of Chicago Press, 1935. Tirso de Molina, pseud, for
Gabriel  Tellez (c. 1 570-1 648) The Love Rogue; a Poetic Drama in Three
Acts.  Trans, by H. Kemp. New York: Lieber & Lewis, 1923 (El Burlador de
Sevilla.  In  Doze  Comedias  Nuevas  de  Lope de Vega, etc., Barcelona,
1630).  Titchener,  Edward  Bradford  (1  867-1  927)  Lectures  on  the
Elementary  Psychology  of  Feeling  and Attention. New York: Macmillan,
1908. —Lectures on the Experimental Psychology of the Thought-Processes.
New  York:  Macmillan,  1909.  Tocqueville, Alexis Charles Henri Maurice
Clerel  de  (1805-1859)  Democracy in America. Ed. by P. Bradley, trans.
1210

[1245a]
by  H.  Reeve.  2 vols. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1945 (De la democratic en
Amerique,  Brussels,  1835-1840).  —Uancten  regime.  Trans,  by  M.  W.
Patterson.  Oxford:  Blackwell, 1933 (Paris, 1856). -—- TODHUNTER, ISAAC
(182O-1884)  History  of the Mathematical Theory of Probability from the
Time  of  Pascal  to  That  of  Laplace.  New York: G. E. Stechert, 1931
(Cambridge,  1865). Tonnies, Ferdinand (1855— 1936) Fundamental Concepts
of  Sociology. Trans, by C. P. Loomis. New York: American Book Co., 1940
(Gemeinschaft  und Gesellschaft. Abhandlung uber den Communismus und den
Socialismus als empirische Culturformen, Leipsic, 1887). Tolman, Richard
Chace  (i  881-1948)  Relativity, Thermodynamics, and Cosmology. Oxford:
Clarendon Press, 1934. Tolstoy, Count Leo Nikolaevich (1 828-1 910) Anna
Karenina.  Trans,  by  R.  S.  Townsend. 2 vols. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1935 (1875-1877)- —Christianity and Patriotism. In
War-PatriotismPeace.  Ed.  by S. Nearing. New York: Vanguard Press, 1926
(Geneva,  1895). — The Cossacks, and Other Tales of the Caucasus. Trans,
by L. and A. Maude. World's Classics, New York: Oxford University Press,
1929  (Moscow,  1863).  —  The  Death of Ivan Ilyitch, and Other Stories.
Trans.  by  C.  Garnett.  New  York: Dodd, Mead & Co., 1927 (1886). —The
Gospel  in  Brief New York: T. Y. Crowell, 1896 (1883). — The Kingdom of
God,  with Peace Essays. Trans. by A. Maude. New York: Oxford University
Press,  1936  (Berlin,  1893). —The Law of Love and the Law of Violence.
New  York:  Boni  &  Gaer, 1948. —Memoirs of a Madman. In Ivan llych and
Hadji  Murad.  Trans,  by  L.  and A. Maude. World's Classics, New York:
Oxford  University  Press,  1935(1883).  —Notesfor  Soldiers. In What Is
Religion?  and  Other New Articles and Letters by Leo Tolstoy. Trans. by
V.  TchertkofT  and A. C. Fifield. New York: T. Y. Crowell, 1902 (1901).
—On  Life, and Essays on Religion. Trans, by A. Maude. World's Classics,
New  York:  Oxford University Press, 1934 (Geneva, 1891). —Resurrection.
Trans, by L. Maude. World's Classics, New York: Oxford University Press,
1928  (1899).  —Three  Deaths.  In  The Death of Ivan Ilyitch, and Other
Stories,  q.v.  (1859).  —What  Is  Art? and Essays on Art. Trans, by A.
Maude.  New  York:  Oxford University Press, 1932 (1897-1898). —What Men
Live  By.  In  Twenty-three  Tales.  Trans.  by L. and A. Maude. World's
Classics, New York: Oxford University Press, 1930 (1881). 1211

[1245b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY TURGENEV —What Then Must We Do? Trans, by A. Maude. World's
Classics,  New  York:  Oxford University Press, 1925 (originally pub. as
What  To  Do?,  London,  1887).  Tooke,  John  Horne (1736-18 12) "Eirea
UrepoevTa,  or  The Diversions of Purley. London: W. Tegg, i860 (London,
1786). Toynbee, Arnold (1852-1883) Lectures on the Industrial Revolution
of  the  Eighteenth  Century  in  England, Popular Addresses, Notes, and
Other  Fragments.  New  York:  Longmans,  Green & Co., 1937 (1879-1882).
Toynbee,  Arnold Joseph (1889- ) Civilization on Trial. New York: Oxford
University Press, 1948. —A Study of History. Abr. ed. by D. C. Somervell.
New  York:  Oxford  University  Press,  1947 (London, 1934). Treitschke,
Heinrich  von (i 834-1 896) Politics. Trans, by B. Dugdale and T. Bille.
2  vols.  New  York:  Macmillan,  191 6 (Politi^, Leipsic, 1 897-1 898).
Trench, Richard Chenevix (i 807-1 886) On the Study of Words. Everyman's
Library,  New  York:  E.  P. Dutton, 1936 (London, 1851). Trendelenburg,
Friedrich  Adolf  (1  802-1  872)  Naturrecht  aufdem  Grunde der Ethi\.
Leipsic: S. Hirzel, 1868 (Leipsic, i860).
[Tristan and
Iseult]  The  Romance  of Tristan and Iseult. Trans, by H. Belloc and P.
Rosenfeld.  New  York:  Pantheon  Books,  1945 (12 10). Troeltsch, Ernst
(1865-192  3)  Der  Historismus und seine Vberwindung. Berlin: R. Heise,
1924.  —Gesammelte Schriften. 4 vols. Tubingen: Mohr, 1 91 2-1 925. —The
Social Teaching of the Christian Churches. Trans, by Olive Wyon. 2 vols.
New  York:  Macmillan, 1 93 1 (Die Soziallehren der Christlichen Kirchen
und  Gruppen, Tubingen, 1912). Trollope, Anthony (18 15-1882) Barchester
Towers.  Garden  City,  N.Y.:  Doubleday  Doran,  1945  (London,  1857).
Trotsky,   Leo  Davidovich  (1  877-1  940)  The  Defense  of  Terrorism
{Terrorism  and  Communism):  A  Reply  to Karl Kautshj. London: Allen &
Unwin,  1921  (St.  Petersburg,  1920).  —The  History  of  the  Russian
Revolution.  Trans,  by  M.  Eastman.  New  York: Simon & Schuster, 1936
(Berlin,  i93  I_I  933)-  —Literature  and  Revolution.  Trans,  by  R.
Strumsky.  New  York:  International  Publishers,  1925  (Moscow, 1923).
Tsanoff,   Radoslav  Andrea  (1887-  )  The  Nature  of Evil.  New  York:
Macmillan,  1931.  Turgenev,  Ivan  Sergeyevich (18 18-1883) Fathers and
Sons.  Trans,  by  C.  J.  Hogarth.  Everyman's Library, New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1934 (1862).

[1246a]
TURGOT  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  —Liza. Trans, by W. R. S. Ralston. Everyman's
Library,  New  York: E. P. Dutton, 1923 (1858). — Virgin Soil. Trans, by
R. S. Townsend. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1929 (i877)-
Turgot,  Anne  Robert  (1  727-1  781)  Reflections on the Formation and
Distribution of the Riches. New York: Macmillan, 1898 (17691770). Tylor,
Sir  Edward  Burnett (1832-19 17) Primitive Culture: Researches into the
Development  of  Mythology,  Philosophy,  Religion,  Language,  Art, and
Custom.  2  vols. New York: Brentano, 1924 (London, 1871). Tyndall, John
(1  820-1  893)  The  Belfast  Address. In Vol. 11, Fragments of Science
(London,  1874). —Light and Electricity: Notes of Two Courses of Lectures
Before  the  Royal  Institution of Great Britain. New York: D. Appleton,
1895  (London,  1870). —On the Study of Physics. In Vol. 1, Fragments of
Science  (1854).  —Scientific  Use of the Imagination. In Vol. 11, ibid.
(London, 1870). note: Fragments of Science. A Series of Detached Essays,
Addresses,  and Reviews. 2 vols. New York: D. Appleton, 1897. u Uexkull,
Jakob  Johann  von  (1864-1944)  Theoretical  Biology.  Trans,  by D. L.
MacKinnon.  New  York:  Harcourt  Brace,  1926  (Theoretische  Biologie,
Berlin,  1920). Unamuno y Jugo, Miguel de (1864-1936) Mist: A Tragicomic
Novel.  Trans,  by W. Fite. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1928 (Niebla, Madrid,
1914).  —The  Tragic  Sense  of Life.  Trans, by J. E. C. Flitch. London:
Macmillan,  1931  (Del  sentimiento  trdgico  delavida,  Madrid, 191 3).
Undset, Sigrid (1882-1949) Kristin Lavransdatter: The Bridal Wreath, The
Mistress  of Husaby, The Cross. Trans, by C. Archer and J. S. Scott. New
York:  A.  A.  Knopf,  1930  (Christiania,  1920-  1922).  Urban, Wilbur
Marshall  (1 873-1 952) Language and Reality: The Philosophy of Language
and the Principles of Symbolism. London: Allen & Unwin, 1939. Ure, Percy
Neville  (1879— 1950) The Origin of Tyranny. Cambridge University Press,
1922. v Valentine and Orson. Ed. by A. Dickson, trans, by H. Watson. New
York:   Oxford  University  Press,  1937  (C.1475-C1489).  Valery,  Paul
Ambroise  (1871-1945)  Introduction  <i  la  poetique. Paris: Gallimard,
1938.

[1246b]
— Variety. Trans, by M. Cowley. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1927 (Variete,
Paris, 1924). Valla, Lorenzo (1 406-1 457) Dialogue on Free Will. In The
Renaissance  Philosophy  of Man.  Ed. by E. Cassirer et al. University of
Chicago  Press,  1948  (1439). Vanderpol, Alfred (1854-1915) Le droit de
guerre  d'apres  les theologiens et les cannonistes du moyen-dge. Paris:
T.  Tralin, 191 1. Van Doren, Mark Albert (1894-1972) Liberal Education.
New  York:  Henry  Holt,  1943.  —The  Noble Voice, a Study of Ten Great
Poems.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1946. Van Gogh, Vincent (1 853-1 890) The
Letters  of Vincent Van Gogh to His Brother, 1872-1886. Trans, by J. Van
Gogh-Bonger.  2 vols. New York: Houghton Mifflin Co., 1927. Vann, Gerald
(1  906-1  963)  Morality  and  War. London: Burns, Oates, & Washbourne,
1939.  —Morals  Ma^yth  Man.  New York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1938. —On
Being  Human:  St. Thomas and Mr. Aldous Huxley. New York: Sheed & Ward,
1933.  Vattel,  Emmerich  de  (17  14-1767)  The  Law of Nations, or the
Principles  of  Natural Law Applied to the Conduct and to the Affairs of
Nations  and  of  Sovereigns. Trans, by C. G. Fenwick. Washington, D.C.:
Carnegie Institution, 1 91 6 (Le droit des gens, ou, Principes de la loi
naturelle  appliquees  a  la conduite et aux affaires des nations et des
souverains, Neuchatel, 1758). Vaughan, Henry (1 622-1 695) The Retreate.
In  Vol.  11,  The Worlds of Henry Vaughan. Ed. by L. C. Martin. 2 vols.
Oxford:  Clarendon  Press,  191  4 (in Silex Scintillans, London, 1650).
Vauvenargues,  Luc de Clapiers, Marquis de (1715-1747) Introduction a la
connaissance  de  V  esprit  humatn.  In Oeuvres de Vauvenargues. Paris:
Furne  &  Cie.,  1857  (Paris,  1746).  Veblen,  Oswald (1880— 1960) and
Lennes,  Nels  Johann  (1874-  ) Introduction to Infinitesimal Analysis;
Functions  of  One  Real  Variable.  New York: G. E. Stechert, 1935 (New
York,   1907).   Veblen,  Oswald  and  Young,  John  Wesley  (1879-1932)
Projective  Geometry.  2  vols.  Boston:  Ginn & Co., 1910-1918. Veblen,
Thorstein Bunde (1857-1929) The Higher Learning in America; a Memorandum
on the Conduct of Universities by Business Men. New York: B. W. Huebsch,
1918.  —An  Inquiry  into  the  Nature  of  Peace  and  the Terms of Its
Perpetuation. London: Macmillan, 1917. —The Instinct of Workmanship, and
the  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts. New York: Viking Press, 1943 (New
York, 191 4). 1212

[1247a]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Voltaire —The Place of Science in Modern Civilization, and
Other  Essays. New York: Viking Press, 1932 (1892-1913). — The Theory of
Business Enterprise. New York: Scribner's, 1904. __^- —The Theory of the
Leisure  Class.  An  Economic  Study of Institutions. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House,  1934 (New York, 1899). — The Vested Interests and
the  State  of  the  Industrial  Arts.  New  York:  B. W. Huebsch, 1919.
Vecchio,  Giorgio  del  (1878-  )  The Formal Bases of Law. Trans, by J.
Lisle.  Boston:  Boston  Book Co., 191 4 (/ presupposti filosofici della
nozione  del  diritto,  Bologna, 1905; // concetto del diritto, Bologna,
1906; // concetto della natura e il principio del diritto, Milan, 1908).
Vendryes,  Joseph  (i  875-1960)  Language; a Linguistic Introduction to
History.  Trans,  by  P. Radin. New York: A. A. Knopf, 1931 (Le langage,
Paris,  1921).  Venn,  John (1834-1923) The Logic of Chance. An Essay on
the  Foundations and Province ofthe Theory of Probability, with Especial
Reference  to  Its  Logical  Bearings  and  Its Application to Moral and
Social  Science,  and  to Statistics. New York: Macmillan, 1888 (London,
1866).  —On  Some  of  the  Characteristics  of  Belief  Scientific  and
Religious.  Being the Hulsean Lecturesfor 1869. London: Macmillan, 1870.
—  The  Principles  of  Empirical or Inductive Logic. London: Macmillan,
1907  (London,  1889). —Symbolic Logic. London: Macmillan, 1894 (London,
1881). Verlaine, Paul Marie (1844-1896) Art poetique. In Vol. 1, Oeuvres
completes  de Paul Verlaine. 5 vols. Paris: Messein, 1 926-1 930 (1882).
Veron, Eugene (1825-1889) Aesthetics. Trans, by W. H. Armstrong. London:
Chapman  &Hall,  1879 (Uesthetique, Paris, 1878). Ves alius, Andreas (15
14-1564)  The  Epitome.  Trans, by L. R. Lind. New York: Macmillan, 1949
(1543). Vico, Giovanni Battista (1 668-1 744) // diritto universale. Ed.
by  F.  Nicoloni.  3 vols. Bari: G. Laterza, 1936 (De Uno Universi Juris
Principio  et  Fine Uno and De Constantia Jurisprudents, Naples, 1720; 1
721). — The New Science. Trans, by T. G. Bergin and M. H. Fisch. Ithaca,
N.Y.:  Cornell University Press, 1948 (1725). Vigny, Comte Alfred Victor
de (1 797-1 863) Military Servitude and Grandeur. Trans, by F. W. Huard.
New  York:  G. H. Doran, 191 9 (Servitude et grandeur militaires, Paris,
1835).  Villon, Francois (1431-c. 1463) The Debate of the Heart and Body
of  Villon.  In  The  Complete  Worlds of Francois Villon, Including the
Poems Long Attributed to Him. Trans, by 1213

[1247b]
2  J.  U.  Nicolson. New York: Covici-Friede, 1931 (1458?). VlNOGRADOFF,
SlR  PAUL  GaVRILOVITCH  (1854I925) Common Sense in Law. New York: Henry
Holt,  —Custom  and  Right.  Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press,
1925.  —  The  Growth of the Manor. London: Allen & Unwin, 1932 (London,
1905).  Virchow,  Rudolf  Ludwig Karl (1 821-1902) Cellular Pathology as
Based  upon  Physiological  and  Pathological  Histology.  Trans,  by F.
Chance.  New  York:  R. M. DeWitt, i860 (Die Cellularpathologic in ihrer
Begrundung  auf  physiologische  und  pathologische Gewebelehre, Berlin,
1858).  Vitoria, Francisco de (c. 1 480-1 546) De Indis et De Jure Belli
Relectiones.   Trans,   by   J.  P.  Bate.  Washington,  D.C.:  Carnegie
Institution,  1917  (1532?).  Vitruvius  Pollio,  Marcus  (fi.  late 1st
century  B.C.)  On  Architecture.  Ed. and trans, by F. Granger. 2 vols.
Loeb Library, New York: Putnam's, 1931- *934Vives, Juan Luis (1492-1540)
A  Fable  About  Man.  In  The  Renaissance  Philosophy of Man. Ed. by E.
Cassirer  et  al.  University of Chicago Press, 1948. —On Education. Ed.
and trans, by F. Watson. Cambridge University Press, 191 3 (De Tradendis
Disciplinis,  Antwerp,  153 1). Volsung Saga : The Story of the Volsungs
and  Niblungs,  with  Certain  Songsfrom  the  Elder  Edda. Ed. by H. H.
Sparling,  trans,  by W. Morris and E. Magnusson. London: W. Scott, 1888
(c.  11401220). Voltaire, pseud, for Francois Marie Arouet (1694- 1 778)
Candide,  or  Optimism.  Modern  Library,  New  York: Random House, 1930
(Geneva,  1759).  —[Essay  on  Toleration]  Toleration and Other Essays.
Trans,  by  J. McCabe. New York: Putnam's, 191 (Traite sur la tolerance,
Geneva,  1763).  —  The  Huron, or Pupil of Nature. In Best Known Worlds
(Uingenue,   Utrecht,   1767).  —The  Ignorant  Philosopher.  Ibid.  (Le
philosophe  ignorant,  Geneva, 1766). —Letters on the English. In French
and  English Philosophers, Vol. xxxiv, "The Harvard Classics," ed. by C.
W.  Eliot. New York: P. F. Collier, 1910 (London, 1733). —Micromegas. In
Zadig and Other Romances. Trans, by I. H. Woolf. New York: E. P. Dutton,
1923  (London, 1752). —A Philosophical Dictionary. Ed. by W. F. Fleming.
10  vols.  New  York:  E.  R.  DuMont,  1901 (Dictionnaire philosophique
portatif London, 1764). — The Philosophy of History. In Best Known Works
(from La philosophic de Vhistoire, Geneva, 1765).

[1248a]
.  VONIER  THE GREAT IDEAS —The Sage and the Atheist. Ibid. (Histoire de
Jenni, ou le sage et Vathee, Geneva, 1775). — The Study of Nature, Ibid.
(Les  singularites  de  la  nature, Basel, 1768). —Zadig. See Micromegas
(Zadig,  ou  la  destinee, Paris, 1747). note : The Best Known Worlds of
Voltaire. New York: Blue Ribbon Books, 1 93 1 Vonier, Anscar (1875-1938)
The  Angels.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1928.  —  The  Human  Soul and Its
Relations  with  Other  Spirits. London: B. Herder, 1925 (London, 1913).
Von  Neumann, John (1903-1957) and MorgenSTERN, OSKAR (1902- ) Theory of
Games  and  Economic  Behavior.  Princeton  University  Press, 1944. Von
Weizsacker,  Carl Friedrich (1912- ) The History of Nature. Trans, by F.
D. Wicck. University of Chicago Press, 1949. Vries, Hugo de (1848— 1935)
The  Mutation  Theory:  Experiments  and  Observations  on the Origin of
Species  in  the  Vegetable  Kingdom.  Trans,  by J. B. Farmer and A. D.
Darbishire. 2 vols. Chicago: Open Court, 19091910 (Die Mutationstheorie.
Versuche   und   Beobachtungen   iiber   die  Entstehung  von  Arten  im
Pfianzenreich,   Leipsic,   1   901-1903).  w  Wallace,  Alfred  Russell
(1823-1913) Contributions to the Theory of Natural Selection. A Series of
Essays.  New  York: Macmillan, 1871 (1855-1870). Wallas, Graham (1 858-1
932)  The Great Society : A Psychological Analysis. New York: Macmillan,
1923  (New  York,  191  4). Wallis, John (1616-1703) Mechanica: sive, De
Motu.  3  vols. London, 1670- .671. Ward, James (1 843-1 925) Naturalism
and  Agnosticism. 2 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1899. —The Realm of Ends,
or  Pluralism and Theism. Cambridge University Press, 191 1. Ware, Henry
(1794-1843)  The  Law  of  Honor. A Discourse Delivered 1838. Cambridge:
Folsom,  Wells,  &  Thurston,  1838.  Wassermann, Jacob (1873- 1934) The
World's  Illusion. Trans, by L. Lewisohn. New York: Harcourt Brace, 1920
(Christian  Wahnschaffe,  Berlin,  1919).  Watson,  W.  H.  (1899-  ) On
Understanding  Physics.  Cambridge University Press, 1938. Watts, Robert
(i 820-1 895) The Reign of Causality : A Vindication ofthe Scien-

[1248b]
,  tific  Principle of Telic Causal Efficiency. Edinburgh: T. &T. Clark,
1888.  Webb,  Sidney  James  (1859-1947)  and Webb, Beatrice (1858-1943)
Industrial  Democracy.  2  vols.  New  York: Longmans, Green & Co., 1919
(London,  1897).  Weber,  Max (1864-1920) (Essays in Sociology] From Max
Weber: Essays in Sociology. Sel. and trans, by H. H. Gerth and C. Wright
Mills. New York: Oxford University Press, 1946. —Politics as a Vocation.
In  Essays  in  Sociology,  q.v.  (Politicals  Beruf Munich, 1919). —The
Protestant  Ethic  and  the  Spirit of Capitalism. Trans, by T. Parsons.
London: Allen & Unwin, 1930 (1904). —Science as a Vocation. In Essays in
Sociology,   q.v.  (Wissenschaft  als  Beruf  Munich,  1919).  Wedgwood,
Hensleigh (1803-1891) On the Origin of Language. London: Triibner & Co.,
1866.  Weininger,  Otto  (1  880-1  903)  Sex  and  Character. New York:
Putnam's,  1906  (Geschlecht  und  Character,  Vienna,  1903). Weismann,
August   (1834-19  14)  Essays  upon  Heredity  and  Kindred  Biological
Problems.  Ed.  by  E.  P.  Poulton,  trans,  by  S. Schonland and A. E.
Shipley.  Oxford  :  Clarendon Press, 1889 (Aufsatze iiber Vererbung und
verwandte  Fragen,  Jena,  1892).  —The Germ-Plasm, a Theory of Heredity.
Trans, by W. N. Parker and H. Ronnfeldt. New York: Scribner's, 1902 (Das
Keimplasma.  Eine  Theorie  der  Vererbung, Jena, 1892). —Studies in the
Theory  of Descent.  Ed.  and  trans, by R. Meldola. 2 vols. London: Low,
Marston & Co., 1882 (Studien zur Descendenztheorie, Leipsic, 1875-1876).
Weiss,  Paul  (1901-  )  Nature  and  Man.  New  York: Henry Holt, 1946.
—Reality. Princeton University Press, 1938. Welby-Gregory, Lady Victoria
(1837-1912) Signifies and Language; the Articulate Form of Our Expressive
and  Interpretative  Resources.  London:  Macmillan,  191  1.  — What Is
Meaning?  Studies in the Development of Significance. London: Macmillan,
1903.  Wells, Herbert George (1866-1946) The New Machiavelli. New York :
Duffield  &  Co.  1919  (1910).  —The  New  World  Order;  Whether It Is
Attainable,  How  It  Can Be Attained, and What Sort of World a World at
Peace  Will  Have  to  Be.  New  York:  A. A. Knopf, 1940. —The World of
William  Clissold: A Novel at a New Angle. 2 vols. New York: G. H. Doran
Co.,  1926.  Wells,  Herbert  George, Huxley, Julian Sorell and W tells,
George  Philip Reproduction, Genetics and the Development of Sex. Garden
City, N.Y.: Doubleday Doran, 1214

[1249a]
1932  (reprinted  from  The  Science  of Life, New York, 1929). Wendell,
Barrett  (1  855-1  921)  The  Privileged Classes. New York: Scribnex!s^
1908.   —Stelligeri  and  Other  Essays.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1893.
Wertheimer,  Max  (1880-1943)  Productive Thinking. Ed. by S. E. Asch et
al.  New  York:  Harper, 1945 ( I 943)- Westermarck, Edvard Alexander (1
862-1  939) Ethical Relativity. London: K. Paul, Trench, Triibner, 1932.
—The  History  of  Human  Marriage. 3 vols. New York: Allerton Book Co.,
1922  (London,  1891). —The Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas. 2
vols.  New  York:  Macmillan, 1 924-1 926 (New York, 1 906-1 908). Weyl,
Hermann  (i 885-1955) The Open World; Three Lectures on the Metaphysical
Implications  of Science. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1932.
—The Philosophy of Mathematics and Natural Science. Princeton University
Press, 1948. —Space—Time—Matter. Trans, by H. L. Brose. London: Methuen,
1922    (Raum,    Zeit,    Materie.    Vorlesungen    uber    allgemeine
Relativitatstheorie, Berlin, 1918). Wharton, Edith Newbold (1 862-1 937)
Ethan  Frome.  New  York:  Scribner's,  1938 (New York, 191 1). Whately,
Richard  (1787-1863)  Elements  of  Logic. New York: Sheldon & Co., 1873
(London,  1826).  —Elements of Rhetoric. New York: Sheldon & Co., 1 87 1
(Oxford, 1828). Wheeler, William Morton (1 865-1 937) Foibles of Insects
and  Men.  New  York : A. A. Knopf, 1928. Whewell, William (1 794-1 866)
Astronomy  and  General  Physics  Considered  with  Reference to Natural
Theology.  London:  H.  G.  Bohn,  1852 (London, 1833). —The Elements of
Morality,  Including  Polity.  Cambridge:  Deighton, Bell, 1864 (London,
1845). —Of a Liberal Education in General; and with Particular Reference
to  the  Leading  Studies  ofthe  University of Cambridge. London: I. W.
Parker,  1880  (London,  1  845-1  852). —On the Philosophy of Discovery,
Chapters  Historical  and  Critical.  London:  J.  W. Parker, i860. —The
Philosophy  of  the  Inductive  Sciences,  Founded upon Their History. 2
vols.  London:  J.  W.  Parker,  1840. —The Plurality of Worlds. Boston:
Gould  &  Lincoln,  1  861  (London,  1853).  —Six Lectures on Political
Economy  Delivered  at  Cambridge  in  Michaelmas  Term, 1861. Cambridge
University Press, 1862. 1215

[1249b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  Wiener  Whitehead,  Alfred  North  (1 861-1947) Adventures
of Ideas.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1933. —The Aims of Education and Other
Essays.  New York: Macmillan, 1929 (1 912-1928). —The Concept of Nature.
Cambridge   University   Press,  1930  (Cambridge,  1920).  —An  Enquiry
Concerning  the  Principles  of  Natural Knowledge. Cambridge University
Press,  1925  (Cambridge,  191  9).  —The  Function of Reason. Princeton
University  Press,  1929.  —An  Introduction  to Mathematics. London: T.
Butterworth,  1931  (London,  191  1).  —Modes  of  Thought.  New  York:
Macmillan,   1938.  —  The  Organization  of  Thought,  Educational  and
Scientific.   Philadelphia:   Lippincott,   1917.  —  The  Principle  of
Relativity  with  Applications to Physical Science. Cambridge University
Press,  1922.  —Process  and  Reality,  an Essay in Cosmology. New York:
Macmillan,  1929.  —Religion  in  the Maying. New York: Macmillan, 1926.
—Science  and  the  Modern  World. New York : Macmillan, 1937 (New York,
1925).  —Symbolism,  Its Meaning and Effects. New York: Macmillan, 1927.
—A   Treatise   on   Universal  Algebra,  with  Applications.  Cambridge
University  Press,  1898.  Whitehead, Alfred North and Russell, Bertrand
(1872-1970)  Principia Mathematica. 3 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1 925-1
927  (Cambridge,  191  0-19  13).  Whitman, Walt (18 19-1892) Democratic
Vistas,  and  Other  Papers.  London : W. Scott, 1888 (Washington, D.C.,
1871).  —Leaves  of  Grass.  New  York: Doubleday Doran, 1945 (New York,
1855).  Whitney,  William  Dwight  (1 827-1 894) Oriental and Linguistic
Studies.  2  vols.  New  York: Scribner's, 1893 (New York, 1 873-1 874).
Whittaker,  Edmund  Taylor  (1  873-1956)  A  History of the Theories of
Aether  and  Electricity  from  the  Age of Descartes to the Close ofthe
Nineteenth  Century.  London:  Longmans,  Green  & Co., 1910. —Space and
Spirit.  New  York:  T.  Nelson,  1947.  —A  Treatise  on the Analytical
Dynamics  of  Particles  andRigid  Bodies,  with  an Introduction to the
Problem  of Three Bodies. New York: Dover Publications, 1944 (Cambridge,
1904).  Whittaker, Thomas (1 856-1 935) Prolegomena to a New Metaphysic.
Cambridge  University Press, 1931. Whitworth, William Allen (1840- 1905)
Choice  and  Chance, with 1000 Exercises. New York: G. E. Stechert, 1927
(Cambridge,  1867).  Wiener,  Norbert (1894-1964) Cybernetics. New York:
lohn Wiley & Son, 1949.

[1250a]
Wilde  THE  GREAT IDEAS Wilde, Oscar (i 854-1 900) The Picture of Dorian
Gray. Modern Library, New York : Random House, 1 94- ? (London, 1 89 1 )
Wilder, Thornton Niven (1897- ) The Bridge of San Luis Rey. New York: A.
&  C.  Boni,  1927. William of Saint-Thierry (1085-c.i 148) De Natura et
Dignitate  Amoris. In Vol. clxxxiv, Patrologia Latina. Williams, Charles
(1   886-1   945)   The  Place  of  the  Lion.  London:  Gollancz,  1947
(>930WlLLOUGHBY,  WeSTEL WoODBURY (1867-1945) Social justice; a Critical
Essay.  New  York:  Macmillan,  1900.  Wilson, Edmund (1895-1972) To the
Finland Station; a Study in the Writing and Acting of History. New York:
Harcourt  Brace,  1940.  Wilson, Francis Graham (1901- ) The Elements of
Modern Politics: An Introduction to Political Science. New York: McGraw-
Hill,  1936.  Wilson,  James  (1  742-1  798)  Wor\s,  Being  His Public
Discourses  upon  Jurisprudence  and the Political Science. Ed. by J. De
Witt  Andrews.  Chicago:  Callaghan  &  Co.,  1896.  Wilson,  John  Cook
(1849-1915)  Statement  and  Inference, with Other Philosophical Papers.
Ed.  by  A.  S.  L.  Farquharson.  2 vols. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1926
(1874-19  14). Wilson, Richard Albert (1 874-1 949) The Miraculous Birth
of  Language.  New  York:  Philosophical  Library,  1948 (1937). Wilson,
Thomas (a 525-1 581)
[Arte of Rhetorique] Wilson's Arte of Rhetorique
(1560). Ed. by G. H. Mair. Oxford: Clarendon Press, 1909 (London, 1553).
—A  Discourse  upon  Usury, by Way of Dialogue and Orationsfor the Better
Variety and More Delight of All Those That Shall Read This Treatise. Ed.
by R. H. Tawney. New York : Harcourt Brace, 1925 (London, 1572). Wilson,
Woodrow (1 856-1 924) Congressional Government. Boston: Houghton Mifflin
Co.,  1913  (1885).  —  The  State: Elements of Historical and Practical
Politics.  A Sketch of Institutional History and Administration. Boston:
D.  C.  Heath,  191  8 (Boston, 1889). Wittgenstein, Ludwig (1 889-1951)
Tractatus  Logico-Philosophicus.  Trans, anon. New York: Harcourt Brace,
1922 (1921). Wolff, Christian von (1 679-1 754)
[Ontologia]
Philosophia  Prima,  sive  Ontologia,  Methodo Scientifica Pertracta qua
Omnis  Cognitionis  Humanae  Principia  Continentur.  Frankfort  Ofncina
Libraria Rengeriana, 1729.

[1250b]
. : : WOLLSTONECRAFT, MaRY (Mrs. Godwin) (17591797) The Rights of Woman.
Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1929  (London, 1792).
WOODBRIDGE,  FREDERICK  JAMES  EUGENE ( 1 867— 1940) An Essay on Nature.
New  York:  Columbia  University Press, 1940. —Nature and Mind, Selected
Essays.  New  York: Columbia University Press, 1937 (1 894-1 936). — The
Realm  of  Mind:  An Essay in Metaphysics. New York: Columbia University
Press,  1926.  Woodger,  Joseph  Henry (1894- ) Biological Principles: A
Critical  Study.  New  York  Harcourt  Brace,  1929.  Woodworth,  Robert
Sessions  (1869-1962) Psychological Issues; Selected Papers of Robert S.
Woodworth  . . . with a Bibliography of His Writings. New York: Columbia
University   Press,  1939  (1897-1920).  Woolman,  John  (1  720-1  772)
TheJournal,  with Other Writings of John Woolman. Everyman's Library, New
York:  E.  P.  Dutton,  1922  (1772).  Wordsworth, William (i 770-1 850)
Intimations of Immortality from Recollections of Early Childhood. In The
Poems  of  Wordsworth. Ed. by T. Hutchinson. New York: Oxford University
Press,  1926  (1807).  —Michael.  A Pastoral Poem. Ibid. (1800). —Ode to
Duty. Ibid. (1807). —Preface to the Lyrical Ballads. Ibid. (1800). — The
Prelude;  or,  Growth  of  a Poet's Mind. Ibid. (1805). —[Tintern Abbey]
Lines  Composed a Few Miles Above Tintern Abbey, on Revisiting the Ban\s
ofthe  Wye  During  a  Tour. Ibid. (1798). Wright, Quincy (1 890-1970) A
Study  of War. 2 vols. University of Chicago Press, 1942. WUNDT, WlLHELM
Max  (1832-1920)  Die Prinzipien der mechanischen Naturlehre. Stuttgart:
F.  Enke,  1910  (originally  pub. as Die physikalischen Axiome und ihre
Beziehung  zum Kausalprincip, Erlangen, 1866). —Ethics: An Investigation
of  the  Facts  and Laws of the Moral Life. Trans, by E. B. Titchener et
al.  3 vols. New York: Macmillan, 1 897-1 901 (Ethif{- Eine Untersuchung
der  Thatsachen  und  Gesetze  des  sittlichen Lebens, Stuttgart, 1886).
—Outlines of Psychology. Trans, by C. H. Judd. New York: G. E. Stechert,
1907   (Grundriss   der  Psychologie,  Leipsic,  1896).  —Principles  of
Physiological   Psychology.   Trans,  by  E.  B.  Titchener.  New  York:
Macmillan,  1910  {Grundziige  der physiologischen Psychologie, Leipsic,
1874). Wycliffe, John (c.i 320-1 384) Tractatus de Officio Regis. Ed. by
A. W. Pollard 1216

[1251a]
and  C.  Sayle.  London:  Triibner  &  Co.,  1887  (*i379)-  X  Xenophon
((7.430-^.355  B.C.) The Education of Cyrus (Cyropedia). Trans, by H. G.
Dakyns.  Everyman's  Library,  New  York:  E.  ?~370?  B  -c  -)-  — The
Oeconomicus.  Ed.  by  A.  H. N. Sevvell. CamP. Dutton, 1914 (394 bridge
University Press, 1925. Xirau, Joaquin (1895- ) Amor y mundo. Mexico, D.
F.:  Colegiode Mexico, 1940. Yeats, William Butler (1 865-1 939) Letters
on  Poetry  from  W.  B.  Yeats  to  Dorothy Wellesley. New York: Oxford
University  Press,  I  935"  I  938  )-  194°  (  Yerkes,  Robert Mearns
(1876-1956)  and  Yerkes,  Ada  W.  (1873-  )  The  Great  Apes: A Study
of Anthropoid Life. New Haven, Conn.: Yale University Press, 1929. Young,
John  Wesley  (1  879-1 932) Lectures on Fundamental Concepts of Algebra
and Geometry. New York: Macmillan, 1920 (New York, 191 1). 1217

[1251b]
BIBLIOGRAPHY  ZwiNGLI  Young,  Thomas  (1773-1829) Miscellaneous Worlds.
London:  J.  Murray, 1855. —[Natural Philosophy] A Course of Lectures on
Natural  Philosophy  and  the  Mechanical Arts. 2 vols. London: Taylor &
Walton,  1845  (London,  Zilboorg, Gregory (1890- 1 959) The Medical Man
and  the  Witch  During  the  Renaissance. Baltimore, Md.: Johns Hopkins
University  Press,  1935.  Zola, Emile (1 840-1 902) Germinal. Trans, by
Havelock Ellis. Everyman's Library, New York: E. P. Dutton, 1933 (Paris,
1885).  —Les  Rougon Macquart. 20 vols. Paris, 1 871-1893. —Letter to M.
Felix  Faure  [J'  accuse]. In The Dreyfus Case, Four Letters to France.
London:  J.  Lane,  1  898  (Lettre  a  M.  Felix Faure, president de la
Republique,  13  Janvier, 1898). —Nana. Trans, anon. Modern Library, New
York:  Random  House, 1928 (Paris, 1880). ZwiNGLI, HULDREICH (1484-I531)
Commentary  on  True  and  False  Religion. In Vol. in, The Latin Worlds
of Huldreich  Zwingli.  Ed. by C. N. Heller, trans, by H. Preble. 3 vols.
Philadelphia:  Heidelberg  Press,  1929  (Commentarius  de Vera et Falsa
Religione, Zurich, 1525).

[1252a]
: ey Loe Navwrs er : BS 1 radol yibM, ; 140 Plate ; Le i, > Mig ene arte
Ay Ayo Mra

SA WN, ost

onl OT fnebiio De? ot? ARES AWE Saray AA meget

1s  (881 rivanj st heYousArsrewid mobo inoas 2asigf a0 we The Elonedos@i
Ntiatty  y  esau  EH  ‘esieubte  0 Folvenl Sees Bei) Heine IH Aas Jo PHL
‘ooigilah  vist hen sitl no qentersicen WubsalgaioS Gish Xe yoooW er a (
-ldD blo Be ngldsi me

With eed vn apni sl

Wilsor,  cg  ok  (1B  ge-tg1 5)! Statemer | bnference, with Other Philos
Papers.  Ex.  t  ‘by ASB: Ls Parqubarson. 2 vole ford; Ctshenidcl Press,
1626 (3874-191 4):

Witson,  Richaay ALayar (18- 41949) ~The Mirage tous Birth voy hangiiege
New)  Philosophical, ‘Eabrary( egy (1997). 2 hy TN WiLhon, ‘T¥omas Kents
pS Bi) |
[Avie of Rheton ‘! iheon's Arie 6 hbo
(1560}s Bed by: Gx He Moire cgay Cure Poss, 1K) (Loudon, x65)" ~—yf aang
i  Epon  pty by if Dialog ART f reatio, | . e oat ‘Newt ree Treen andor,
1528)yi 550 yuh Woes Woonncry shasta) * a sessional Gaucrenenit.: Hoo

=—_

[1252b]
QOLTHIS 886: O08 igadinD snobped sshesd SD ine, F

: AQRERY |

' ibrarv. Me

Hs, F On, 792)

1d PEE OS a MOReha eT H yd vemaT .(ethoqon>) we) Yo nonmanbil sat

; mck AS -SgiFore~i por) pro orn

“Athy 6 Woe Yi } vi i | ASG Laity een ONG) site 4

al ie ae aw

LAMO Two Tee. a etkehby oor

oT aed é 2% Sl VPRO An subi

ve  es  Te  ret ‘ > eps Foe | ) CTASTRA 4 ; ve 4 ph x3Mi Ab eres Poot AT
OOK, SMT Y LOWES

bOL ODI

pdr-2061) gaITUE WATE Brag

1  >  ‘  ’  " f x § : ‘ of =f TO, THAT ho Fist agi ¢ : } 17 r (At 4 zeit
sVinU  (OHIO ¥ Ws Sais ASEU! iY) ObOT J ‘ + 2 % , TF ft 2: (\UYFOI-OCGI)
2HAARIA THA of ae st & f eke) Ue FA & to's CPT ot} i re 228 wre i oe | \
an ad a he . : 5, % U 4 Px ws | SHOT CERT Re n > 299 Ws SAF ’ 3 . dj “51
ra [ sis Y Anaol of

rile} tagen AHO? OA 10YF

tH RT WEE, he iqridd DMA Dy No vets E

" é . <i “9 : j S Yt} Of wIi5h MIO T AP) Cryarioted

rn hea CisOT OF

&

“N or ’ i >) | S. GST eye / ‘ Oca ' ‘ i ‘ - e °

[1253a]
Appendix  II  THE  PRINCIPLES AND METHODS OF SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION The
following  essay is intended as a supplement to the Preface. The Preface
is the editor's statement of the nature, structure, purpose, and uses of
the  Syntopicon.  But,  as  therein  remarked,  it  does  not  treat the
intellectual and editorial problems which were faced in constructing the
Syntopicon, nor does it explain the principles and methods by which they
were  solved. Any sustained use of the Syntopicon will undoubtedly raise
questions  about  these principles and methods. Such questions may arise
from  a purely speculative interest, or they may be prompted by a desire
for  more  detailed  guidance  in the use of the Syntopicon— the ways in
which  it  can  be  used,  the procedures to facilitate its use, and the
limitations  to  which  its  use  is  subject.  This  essay  attempts to
anticipate  and  to  give  systematic  answers  to such questions. Since
different  problems  were faced and different principles followed in the
several  parts  of  the  work,  this essay is divided into the following
sections:  I.  The  Great Ideas and the Inventory of Terms . . 12 19 II.
The  Outlines  of  Topics  and  the  Cross-  References  . 1233 III. The
Introductions  1254  IV.  The References 1265 V. The Additional Readings
1295 I. THE GREAT IDEAS AND THE INVENTORY OF TERMS The great ideas, like
the  great  books,  represent  a  selection.  In both cases the criteria
controlling  the  selection  can  be  explained.  In neither case do the
purpose  and  rationale  of  the  choice  preclude  the  possibility  of
disagreement, even when due consideration is given to these criteria. No
list of the great works of western civilization can expect unanimous and
unqualified  acceptance by persons learned enough to judge. There may be
disagreement  concerning what constitutes a great book or concerning the
principles  which  give form to the collection as a whole. But even when
such  disagreement  is  absent,  there are likely to be differences with
regard  to  the inclusion or exclusion of particular authors and titles.
Under  the  circumstances,  the most that can be hoped for is that these
differences  concern  no  more  than  a  small fraction of the whole. No
greater measure of 1219

[1253b]
PAGE

[1254a]
1220  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ing  of  the criteria of their selection. Great
Ideas.  The  two explanations are mutually supporting. with the greatest
range of imaginative or intellectual content.

[1254b]
acceptance  need  be  sought  for a list of great books than assent to a
very  large  proportion  of  its  contents  by  those who understand the
purpose  and  criteria governing the selection. The editors believe that
the  74  authors  and  the  443  works  1 included in Great Boo\s of the
Western  World  form  a  collection which meets this test. The same test
applies  to  the  list  of  great  ideas which are the titles of the 102
chapters  of the Syntopicon. The editors have reason to believe that the
number  of  exceptions  which  might  be  taken  to this list, by way of
addition  or  subtraction,  would be inconsiderable as compared with the
total.  But,  as  with  the  great  books,  so with the great ideas, the
application  of  this  test  presupposes  some understandThe purpose and
principles  underlying  the  compilation  of  Great Boofc of the Western
World  are  stated  and  illustrated  in  the  introductory  essays that
comprise  Volume  1  of this set. Here we shall undertake to explain the
compilation  of The Both the great books and the great ideas were chosen
to  represent  the  unity  and  continuity  of  the tradition of western
thought.   The  great  books  are  those  which  deal  imaginatively  or
intellectually  with  the  ideas  which  are fundamental throughout this
whole  tradition.  Any important work— ancient, mediaeval, or modernwill
necessarily   be   concerned   with   these  ideas  in  some  way.  What
distinguishes  the  great  books is the originality, the profundity, and
the  scope  of their treatment of these ideas. Other books, important in
some special field of learning, may have these qualities with respect to
one  idea  or even to several related ideas, but the great books possess
them  for  a  considerable range of ideas, covering a variety of subject
matters or disciplines; and among the great books the greatest are those
It  seems  fitting that the ideas which are the central insights and the
richest  concepts of western thought should be used as the touchstone—or
at  least  as  one  of  the  principal criteria— for selecting the great
books.  In  the  deliberations  leading to the selection of Great Bool^s
ofthe  Western  World,  the  Board  of  Editors  applied  this  test  to
particular  authors  and  works.  The reader can apply it for himself by
comparing the 443 works which are published in this set with the 2600 or
more  It  is  no  less fitting that the books which are creations of the
highest literary art and expressions of the most powerful thought in our
tradition,  should  be  used  to  *In  the Table of Authors, Titles, and
Author's  Divisions  Cited, which concludes the Explanation of Reference
Style, the number of authors' names listed is 71. Hamilton, Madison, and
Jay, the authors of The Federalist, are listed in brackets because their
names  do  not  actually  appear in the References. The number of titles
listed  is  437,  not 443. The criterion used to determine the number of
individual  works  included in Great Booths of the Western World was not
the  same  as the principle followed in selecting the separate titles to
cite  in  the  References.  For  example, each play of Shakespeare, each
essay  of  Montaigne,  each  one  of Plutarch's Lives was regarded as an
individual  work;  whereas  Chaucer's  Canterbury Tales was counted as a
single  work,  as were Shakespeare's sonnets. But in the References, for
reasons of convenience, the titles of particular essays by Montaigne are
not cited; instead the collective title, Essays, is used. But the titles
of  the  particular  lives  and  the  titles  of the particular tales in
Plutarch  and Chaucer are cited. Hence there is a difference between the
number  of  distinct  titles  cited  in the References and the number of
individual works which comprise Great Boo^s of the Western World.

[1255a]
determine  which  are  the  great  ideas  in that tradition. The work of
constructing  The Great Ideas began with a list much longer than the 102
chapter  titles of the Syntopicon in its final form. Duringohe-fixst two
years  of  preliminary work, the editorial staff operated with this list
of  possible  terms,  progressively reducing the number to the 102 which
were finally selected. The great majority of terms eliminated were those
which  did not appear to receive extensive or elaborate treatment in the
great  books. They were terms that did not seem to have a lively career—
a  continuous and complex development throughout the three-thousand-year
tradition  of the great books.The editors used the actual content of the
great  books  as the test whereby to separate a small set of truly great
ideas  from  a  much larger number of important concepts or notions. The
reader can apply this test himself by comparing the 1800 concepts listed
in  the  Inventory  of Terms, with the 102 ideas that are treated as the
principal  terms  in  the  Syntopicon. It seems circular to say that the
great  books  are those which deal most fully and significantly with the
great  ideas,  and  that the great ideas are those dealt with most fully
and  significantly in the great books. Circularity in definition is not,
however,  always  a  grievous fault. We recognize, for example, the good
sense  of  saying that, among works of art, the best are those preferred
by  persons  of  the best taste and greatest critical competence; yet we
also  find  it  necessary  to say that, among the critics of an art, the
best  and  most  competent  are those who like the best works best. That
each  is  used  to measure the other does not invalidate the measure for
anyone  who perceives that the same principle— the principle of artistic
excellence—  is operative, though differently, in both measurements. So,
too,  the same principle— that of cultural significance in the tradition
of  western  thought—determines  which are the great books and which the
great  ideas.  When  this  is understood, the use of each to measure the
other will seem justified. The editors were keenly aware of this problem
during  the  period  in  which  the two lists—of the great books and the
great  ideas—  were being shaped and given final form, each by reference
to  the other. But the record of their deliberations will also show that
the circularity was far from complete. That it deals in an important way
with  the  great ideas of western thought is not the only criterion of a
great  booh,.  That it receives significant treatment in the great books
of  the  western  tradition  is  not the only criterion of a great idea.
Other  criteria were present in the construction of both lists. Yet even
these  may  not  be altogether independent. For example, the recognition
that  the  great  books  are  not  merely  monuments of our literary and
cultural  past,  but  also books of contemporary eminence, parallels the
recognition  that  the  great  ideas  are  not  merely  the  vehicles of
traditional  thought,  but  also the notions which men must use today in
thinking  about  contemporary  realities.  The  fundamental  fact  which
somehow  emerges is that the greatness of the books and the greatness of
the ideas derive from the same source. The correlation between the great
ideas  and  the  great books is thus an answer to the question, Why were
these 102 terms chosen as the basic divisions of

[1255b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1221

[1256a]
1222  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  great  books and the great ideas. ideas of that
partial  or  sectarian  tradition. man's view of nature and history. was
relaxed.

[1256b]
the  Syntopicon?  If  the  books had been radically different, the ideas
would  have been different also. If, for example, world culture were now
an  historic reality, and if a set of books were chosen to represent the
unity and continuity of a world tradition, the list of great ideas would
probably  differ in a number of striking respects. But it is the western
world,  not  the  whole  world, of which these are the It is the western
tradition  as  a whole that the great books as a set represent. But each
one  of  the  great  ideas,  not the total collection of them, stands in
relation  to  the whole tradition represented by the set. One indication
of the greatness of these ideas is that each of them pervades the entire
tradition.  If,  for example, the set of great books had been restricted
in  any  way—  to represent the culture of antiquity exclusively or only
modern thought, or to represent what is sometimes called "the scientific
tradition"  as  opposed  to  "the  tradition  of humane letters"— then a
somewhat different set of terms would have had to be chosen as the great
Not  all of the great ideas are equally extensive in range. Not all have
equal  vitality  in  all  the  epochs  of western civilization, or equal
significance for all its Ideas like Knowledge, Man, God have the maximum
range,  pervading  all  the  major periods and also all the divisions of
learning or kinds of literature. Ideas like Justice, Liberty, State, and
Wealth  on  the  one hand, or like Matter, Space, Time, and World on the
other,  have  universality  insofar  as  they  are basic concepts in all
periods of the western tradition. They are discussed from one end of the
great  conversation  to the other. But they are not discussed in all the
great  books,  for  they  are  not  relevant  to  every  imaginative  or
intellectual   consideration.  Still  other  ideas  do  not  run  evenly
throughout  the  entire  tradition.  Oligarchy, Prophecy, and Angel, for
example,  have  a  more lively incidence in ancient or mediaeval than in
modern thought. Evolution and Progress are examples of an opposite sort.
There  may  be  anticipations  of  these  ideas in ancient and mediaeval
thought,  but  not until the modern period do they become dominant notes
in  These  exceptions  to the universality— in time and interest— of the
great ideas testify to the principle followed in selecting the 102 basic
terms  of  the  Syntopicon.  For  the  most  part,  these terms have the
requisite  universality.  The  reader  can  verify  this  for himself by
observing  the  distribution of authors and books cited in the Reference
sections  of  the  various  chapters. He will find that authors of every
period  have  a voice in the conversation, and that almost every sort of
book  is represented— poetry, science, history, philosophy, theology. He
will  also  find,  however, that, except for the truly ubiquitous ideas,
one  or  another  branch  of learning or literature may predominate, and
sometimes  a  whole  field  of inquiry may be absent. Some ideas, by the
intensity of their significance for one epoch or one department of human
thought, make up for their limited range or scope. To admit these to the
company of the great ideas, the requirement of universality

[1257a]
The  varying  lengths of the 102 chapters, ranging as they do from 11 to
62  pages,  cannot be taken, without some qualification, as a measure of
the universality of these ideas in the tradition of western-thought. The
length  of  a  chapter  does  not  depend  only  on  the  volume  of the
references— the number of authors, books, and passages cited; it depends
also upon the complexity of the idea, that is, upon the number of topics
required  to  state  all the related meanings, problems, or issues which
have  been  discussed  in  the  name of that idea. But these two factors
taken  together  do  account  for  the size of each chapter. The varying
chapter  length  therefore  indicates  a  gradation  among the 102 great
ideas,  with  respect to their universality or ubiquity in extent and to
their  interior  complexity  or  manifold  significance in intent. It is
impossible  to  define  any  minimum degree of range and amplitude which
distinguishes  the  ideas  selected  for  syntopical  treatment from the
hundreds  of other terms that were eliminated in the early stages of the
work.  With regard to the vast majority of those eliminated, a clear and
certain  judgment was possible, in the light of criteria already stated.
There were, of course, borderline cases in which the decision to include
or  exclude  a term remained doubtful even after prolonged deliberation.
Such decisions had to be made, finally, in a somewhat arbitrary fashion,
in  terms  of  practical  criteria  not  yet  stated.  One of these, for
example,  was  the  necessity  for  some  limitation  on  the  number of
chapters.  In  some cases, the significance of the dropped term might be
adequately  covered  in  the  analysis of other terms which more clearly
deserved  inclusion. The first list of possible terms numbered upward of
700.  It  might  serve  some  purpose to present a brief sampling of the
terms  which, while among the most likely candidates for inclusion, were
discarded   in  the  early  stages  of  the  work.  analysis  generation
persuasion society axiom grammar population sovereignty authority growth
possibility  spirit becoming harmony poverty style belief heredity power
substance character hero prediction superstition choice hope probability
synthesis  conquest  ideal  production  taxation contemplation imitation
profit   teaching  creation  inference  property  temperament  criticism
instinct  providence  theory  deduction  intuition purpose thought doubt
jurisprudence  reality tolerance environment learning republic tradition
equality  marriage  revelation  use  essence  methodology revenge Utopia
equity  money rights value fact nutrition ruler volition faith obedience
salvation  wages fallacy organism self woman force ownership sex worship
friendship patriotism skepticism youth

[1257b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1223

[1258a]
1224 THE GREAT IDEAS itself and in its relation to other chapters. under
each.

[1258b]
The  penultimate  list  consisted  of  115 terms. Thirteen of these were
finally  dropped:  analogy,  biology, body, community, empire, genus and
species,  health  and  disease, individual, light, music, order, person,
tragedy.  From  that  point  on,  the  words or pairs of words chosen to
express  the  great  ideas  numbered  102. The two measures of intrinsic
greatness—   scope   and  significance—do  not  fully  explain  all  the
eliminations  from  the  original  list.  Certain arbitrary factors were
operative  in  the  final  determination  of  the  102  chapters  of the
Syntopicon.  In  the  first  place,  a  number of words do not appear as
chapter  titles  simply  because  they are synonyms of words selected as
principal   terms.   For   example,   "freedom,"  "motion,"  "conflict,"
"obligation,"  and "universe" were discarded in favor of their synonyms:
"liberty,"  "change,"  "opposition,"  "duty," and "world." In the second
place, certain words were paired, either for convenience of treatment or
because  they  are  usually  discussed  together  in  the  great  books.
Sometimes  these  words  represent fundamental opposites: good and evil,
life  and  death,  necessity and contingency, one and many, pleasure and
pain, same and other, universal and particular, virtue and vice, war and
peace; and sometimes they represent closely associated terms: custom and
convention,  memory and imagination, sign and symbol. Opposites were not
always  made  explicit,  especially  if  one  of  the  pair was a purely
negative  term  (e.g.,  justice  and injustice, prudence and imprudence,
temperance  and intemperance); and this policy affected the decision not
to  pair  "cowardice"  with "courage." Nor were closely associated terms
always  indicated  in  the  chapter title. For example, "becoming" might
have  been associated with "change," "friendship" with "love," "society"
with  "state,"  or  "despotism"  with  "tyranny,"  just  as  "symbol" is
associated  with  "sign," or "convention" with "custom." The decision in
each  of these cases rested upon considerations germane to the treatment
of  a particular chapter, in With one exception, the decisions made with
regard  to synonyms and the pairing of words do not affect the number of
chapters, but only the character and the number of words which appear in
the  chapter  titles.  That one exception is the pairing of "memory" and
"imagination";  each might conceivably have been the title of a separate
chapter.  Joining  them  in a single chapter avoided a certain amount of
duplication  in the topics and references which would have appeared This
leads  us  to  a  third  principle—  a  principle  of convenience— which
affected the number of chapters. The number might have been made smaller
by subordinating certain terms to others among the 102. For example, all
the forms of government (aristocracy, democracy, constitution, monarchy,
oligarchy,  tyranny)  might  conceivably  have been treated as topics or
groups of topics in the chapter on Government; all the virtues (courage,
justice, prudence, temperance, wisdom) might have been similarly treated
in  the  chapter on Virtue and Vice. But convenience dictated a separate
treatment  of  each  of  these  notions  in order to avoid the excessive
complexity and unwieldy length which would have re-

[1259a]
suited  from the number of topics and the volume of the references these
chapters  would  have had to contain. The number of chapters might^also-
have  been expanded, as, for example, by dividing Memory and Imagination
into  two  chapters;  or  by breaking a large and complex chapter into a
number  of smaller ones. This might have been done in the case of Being,
by  substituting chapters on existence, essence, substance, reality. The
reason  which  operated  against such multiplication of chapters was (as
already  stated)  the desire to avoid excessive duplication among topics
and references. To the extent that such pragmatic criteria or reasons of
convenience  were operative, the number 102 and the list of terms chosen
as   chapter   titles  are  somewhat  arbitrary.  But  this  unavoidable
arbitrariness does not affect the character of the terms selected as the
great  ideas  of  the western tradition. Their character would have been
the  same had the number been 92 or 112. It would have been the same had
other  words  been  used  to  express the same meaning— if, for example,
"freedom"  had  been used instead of "liberty," or "universe" instead of
"world." What is not arbitrary, in short, is the distinction between the
character  of  the terms selected, and the character of those eliminated
because they do not function as major centers or pivots of discussion in
the  great books. All the eliminated terms, and many more, appear in the
Inventory of Terms. The Inventory has 1798 entries, whereas the original
list  of  possible terms numbered less than 1000. In analyzing the basic
concepts,  it was discovered that terms not thought of as candidates for
primary   treatment,  had  significance  as  subordinate  concepts.  The
composition  of  the  Inventory  of  Terms  tends  to throw light on the
character  of  the  great  ideas, and to confirm the distinction between
primary and subordinate concepts. But it must first be observed that not
all  of  the  words  that  appear  in  the  Inventory  of  Terms express
subordinate  concepts.  Some,  as we have already seen, are synonyms for
the  words  chosen to express the great ideas; and some are words which,
if  not  strictly  synonyms, have a significance coordinate with that of
the  great  ideas.  Some have even more generic meaning than the chapter
words,  and  some  are  chapter  titles. The concept of a republic or of
republican  government  is,  for  example, coordinate with the idea of a
constitution   or   of   constitutional  government;  but  the  idea  of
Constitution, with its correlative notions of constitutional law and the
principle  of  constitutionality, better served the purpose of analyzing
this  whole complex of notions as they appear in the great political and
historical  books of the western tradition. In other cases, a word which
at first seems coordinate in meaning is found, on closer examination, to
have  less generality, at least so far as the great books are concerned.
This  is  true  of  "becoming" as compared with"change," "friendship" as
compared  with  "love,"  or  "atom" as compared with "element." In their
greater  amplitude,  the  chapters  on Element, Love, and Change provide
places for adequate treatment of these subordinate concepts.

[1259b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1225

[1260a]
1226  THE  GREAT IDEAS great books. ature of sociology and anthropology.
books. as well as words verbally present in the topics.

[1260b]
Certain  terms  which  may at first appear coordinate with the 102 great
ideas  are actually more rather than less general in their significance.
"Society"  and  "thought," for example, express concepts which require a
number  of chapters, in part or whole, for their adequate treatment. The
entry  under  "thought" in the Inventory of Terms refers the reader to a
large  number  of chapters, such as Idea, Judgment, Language, Memory and
Imagination,  Mind,  Reasoning.  The  word  "thought"  is  not only more
general but also more indefinite; these chapters cover the discussion of
thought  in  the  more  definite  terms  in  which  it occurs in the The
situation  with  respect  to  "society" is not quite the same. The entry
under  "society" in the Inventory of Terms refers the reader to a number
of chapters, of which two—Family and State— deal with the two main types
of  society or community (i.e., the domestic and the political). For the
most  part, the great books discuss the family and the state rather than
the more generic notion of society or human association as such. For the
most  part,  they  do not discuss primitive societies which are strictly
neither  families  nor  states;  and  if  they  consider  other types of
association,  such  as  economic  corporations or religious communities,
they  do  so in relation to the family or the state. The generic concept
of   society  is  treated  fully  at  the  generic  level  only  in  the
comparatively  recent  literIt  should  be clear from these two examples
that  words  expressing  concepts more generic than the great ideas, are
relegated  to  the Inventory of Terms according to the same principle as
that applied to words expressing subordinate concepts. In both cases the
standard  is  set  by the range and level of the discussion in the great
With  a  few exceptions, such as "thought" and "society" (which are more
generic),  or "republic" (which is coordinate), the vast majority of the
words  listed  in  the  Inventory  are subordinate terms. Many are words
which actually appear in the phrasing of one or more of the topics under
the great ideas; or they may be synonyms for these words. Some are words
which  are  implied by the meaning of one or more topics. Such words and
their  synonyms  are  listed in the Inventory, As the 2987 topics of the
Syntopicon  state  the themes which are discussed under the great ideas,
so  the words listed in the Inventory represent the terms in which those
themes  are  discussed. For both, the ultimate point of reference is, of
course,  the  content  of  the  great  books  and  of the tradition they
represent.  Through  the  intermediation of the topics, the terms of the
Inventory  reflect  the  same  principles  of  selection as do the great
ideas.  This accounts for differences between the Inventory of Terms and
other  basic  word lists, such as Baldwin's Dictionary of Philosophy and
Psychology,   Lalande's   Vocabulaire   technique   et  critique  de  la
philosophic,  the  general  terms contained in the classified listing of
articles  in the Encyclopaedia Britannica, and the abstract titles under
the  classification  of  articles  in  the  Encyclopaedia  ofthe  Social
Sciences. All of these necessarily include technical terms

[1261a]
of  highly specialized import in particular fields of inquiry. They also
tend  to reflect predominantly the state of knowledge and opinion in the
19th and 20th centuries— the latest developments of the tradition rather
than the whole of it. The Inventory of Terms consists mainly of words in
common  use.  It  is  not  the vocabulary of philosophy, science, or any
other  special  study.  It  is  the  basic vocabulary of ordinary speech
concerning  ideas which belong not to the last century or to the present
day, but to the collective, common wisdom of mankind. Though most of its
words  have  currency  in  contemporary  English  speech, they also have
currency  in  the  thought  of thirty centuries, no matter how they were
verbally expressed, in a variety of languages, living and dead. An entry
in  the  Inventory  of  Terms  usually consists of a term followed by an
enumeration  of  the topics in which that term is a significant element.
There  are  two exceptions to this procedure, which deserve comment. For
most  of  the  terms  listed,  the relevant topics are cited in a single
group  in  the  alphabetical order of the chapters in which they appear.
But  for  a  certain  number  of  terms, the topics are divided into two
groups,   each  arranged  alphabetically.  In  these  cases,  topics  of
immediate  relevance  are  distinguished from those of remote relevance.
The  former state themes or issues in which the term under consideration
is  central to the discussion; the latter, those to which it tends to be
peripheral.  The  second  exception is the citation of whole chapters in
addition  to  individual topics from other chapters. When whole chapters
are  cited,  they  are placed first in the enumeration because all their
topics  are  of  maximum  relevance to the term under consideration. The
procedure  of  citing  whole  chapters  was  adopted  initially  in  the
construction  of  those  entries  which are the names of the great ideas
themselves.  It was extended to words which are synonyms for the chapter
titles,  and  to  a  small  number of other words which express terms of
considerable  magnitude.  The  reason  for  the inclusion of the chapter
names and their synonyms in the Inventory of Terms should be immediately
apparent.  Each  of the great ideas is involved in the meaning of topics
in  other  chapters. The fact that each of the great ideas is implicated
in the analysis of many others shows the interconnection of the ideas, a
point  to which we shall return presently. It also helps to indicate the
difference  in  magnitude— in topical range— between the great ideas and
all  subordinate  notions.  In almost every case, the names of the great
ideas (or their synonyms) have a greater number of topics cited for them
in  the Inventory of Terms than do other terms. This shows that they are
the  major terms in the tradition of western thought. They are the terms
with  the  most  varied and manifold significance, and with the greatest
incidence  in  the  discussion of important problems. It might almost be
said  that  they  are  the  unavoidable  terms in the principal areas of
discourse.  That  subordinate  terms have a much more restricted topical
range  confirms  the difference in discursive amplitude between them and
the  great  ideas.  The  reader  can  therefore  verify  for himself, by
examining the Inventory of Terms, the difference between the great ideas
and all other terms. He need only

[1261b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1227

[1262a]
1228  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  ity over others. in the topics of Infinity. the
Inventory of Terms. References cannot become a systematic order.

[1262b]
compare  the  number and variety of topics cited for the great ideas and
for  all  other  terms. By the same criterion, he can also order all the
other  terms  in  the  Inventory  according  to the degree to which they
approach  the great ideas in topical range. He would find that the class
of  terms which, by this test, most nearly approximated the great ideas,
is  not  large— probably much less than one hundred of the 1798 terms in
the  Inventory.  These  would  be  the  borderline  terms— the few whose
omission  from the company of the great ideas might be disputed. The 102
chapters  of  the  Syntopicon  present  the  great ideas in alphabetical
sequence. The Inventory of Terms is also alphabetically arranged, partly
for  convenient  reference  and  partly  to avoid the formulation of any
rigid  systematic  order  among  the  great  ideas and their subordinate
terms.  Many systematic arrangements of these concepts are possible, and
the  adoption of any one of them would be prejudicial to the others. The
alphabetical  arrangement  admits  all  possibilities,  and conceals all
alike.  On  the other hand, as we have just seen, the Inventory of Terms
reveals  as  well  as  conceals  the  relation of the great ideas to one
another,  and  of other terms to them. But the relationships revealed in
the  Inventory are not systematic in the sense of giving one idea or set
of   ideas   logical  priorThe  Inventory  of  Terms  merely  shows  the
subordination  of  one concept to another insofar as the one enters into
the  topics  which  express  the  content of the other. But this sort of
relationship  between  two  great  ideas  does not place them in a fixed
systematic  order,  for  each  may be subordinate to the other; that is,
each  may  be involved in the topics of the other. Liberty, for example,
is  involved  in  the  topics  of  Justice, and Justice in the topics of
Liberty;  Infinity is jnvolved in the topics of Space, Time, Matter, and
World,  and  they in turn are involved Other types of relation among the
great ideas are indicated in the Introductions and the Cross-References,
which  are,  respectively, the first and fourth parts of each of the 102
chapters. Both of these parts of the Syntopicon are discussed at greater
length subsequently in this Appendix. Here it is sufficient to point out
that  the interconnection of the great ideas which the Introductions and
the  Cross-References  suggest, is an order no more systematic than that
indicated  by  The  Cross-References  in  one  chapter call the reader's
attention  to  similar or related topics in other chapters. A particular
Introduction  usually  refers  the  reader  to other Introductions for a
fuller  consideration  of  certain  matters,  or  for  the exposition of
affiliated  points.  That neither of these types of connection sets up a
systematization  of  the ideas, is simply shown by the fact that neither
places  them  in a unique logical order. The Introduction and the Cross-
References  merely  show  that  one idea is related to a number of other
ideas,  without  specifying  the  logical  character  of the connection.
Without  such  specification,  the  network of connections set up by the
Inventory of Terms, the Introductions, and the Cross-

[1263a]
A  systematic  order of concepts belongs properly to the exposition of a
doctrine.  The  tradition  of  western  thought  contains  a  variety of
doctrines, many of them conflicting. Of these, certainly ofjhe_prrncipal
ones, the great books provide the best and fullest exposition; and their
conflict   appears  most  sharply  whenever  the  voices  in  the  great
conversation  engage  in  explicit  controversy.  The  Great Ideas, as a
syntopicon  of  the great books, must therefore avoid, so far as that is
humanly  possible,  any trace of systematic order. In no other way could
it  present  the whole tradition free of prejudicial coloring by any one
of its parts. In no other way could it embrace every variety of position
without  the  distortion  that  would necessarily follow from a stronger
attachment  to one than to others. Detachment is the essence of a purely
dialectical treatment of ideas, as opposed to the dogmatic exposition of
a  particular  doctrine—  dogmatic  not  in  the  sense of being without
rational  foundation  or  defense,  but  simply  in  the  sense of being
attached  to some particular order of ideas in preference to all others.
The  explanations  which  follow,  concerning  the  construction  of the
Outlines  of  Topics  and  the  manner  in  which the Introductions were
written,  will offer further evidence of the dialectical detachment that
was  sought  in  every  phase of this work, because it was necessary for
carrying   out  the  conception  of  the  Syntopicon.  That  dialectical
detachment  is preserved by the alphabetical ordering of the great ideas
insofar as it alike admits or conceals all possible orderings; and it is
confirmed  by  the  non-systematic  character of the various connections
among the great ideas, as these are indicated by the Inventory of Terms,
the  Cross-References,  and the Introductions. These connections, though
not  systematic,  are neither haphazard nor insignificant. They point to
various  constellations  of  ideas  which are the conceptual patterns of
major  fields  of  learning  or  inquiry.  Consider,  for  example,  the
interconnection   of  the  ideas  of  Government,  Family,  State,  Law,
Constitution, Duty, Justice, Liberty, Man, Citizen, Slavery, Punishment,
War,  and Revolution; and of these with the ideas of particular forms of
government,  such  as  Aristocracy,  Democracy, Monarchy, Oligarchy, and
Tyranny.  These  ideas have more complex and intimate relations with one
another  than  any  of  them  has  with  such  ideas  as Animal, Chance,
Definition,   Evolution,   Matter,   Sense,   Soul,   or   World.  Their
interconnection forms that constellation of concepts which characterizes
the  field  of  political  thought,  and distinguishes it from all other
fields.  The  interconnection  of  the  ideas of Labor, Wealth, Justice,
Liberty,  Slavery, Family, State, Revolution, War, and perhaps Democracy
and  Oligarchy,  forms the constellation of concepts which characterizes
the  field  of  economic  thought.  To  take  a more sharply contrasting
example,  the  interconnection  of  the  ideas of God, Man, Immortality,
Fate,  Prophecy,  Soul,  Sin,  World,  Religion,  and  Theology, and the
relation  of  these  to  such  ideas  as Good and Evil, Duty, Happiness,
Virtue,  Law,  and  Punishment,  constitute  the  conceptual  pattern of
religious thought.

[1263b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1229

[1264a]
1230 THE GREAT IDEAS traditional subject matters. others.

[1264b]
In  none  of the preceding examples is the enumeration of ideas intended
to  be  exhaustive.  In  each  case,  only  the  principal  concepts are
mentioned.  But even if to these were added all the peripheral concepts—
those  having  any  appreciable  degree  of  relevance  to  the  subject
matter—many  of  the  great  ideas  would  still  be  omitted  from  the
constellation  of  concepts  involved  in a particular subject matter or
field  of  inquiry.  This  indicates  that  every idea is not associated
equally with every other. All belong together in the single intellectual
firmament  of western thought, but they also form separate sub-groups or
constellations  which  delineate  Yet one may wonder whether every great
idea is not in some way related to every other— if not directly, then at
least  through the mediation of other ideas. Some evidence on this point
is  afforded  by  the  examples given above. Politics and economics have
common  ideational  elements. The concepts of Justice, Liberty, Slavery,
Family, State, Revolution, War, Democracy, and Oligarchy are involved in
both   fields  of  thought.  Politics  and  religion  also  have  common
ideational  elements {viz., Man, Duty, Law, Punishment). By this measure
they  would  seem  to  overlap  less than do politics and economics. But
whether  they  overlap  more  or less, it is through the relation of the
various  fields  of  inquiry  to  one another that each of the 102 great
ideas  has some degree of relevance to all the At different times in the
tradition  of  western  thought,  the major fields of inquiry or subject
matter  have been differently conceived, and either more broadly or more
narrowly  defined. According to different doctrines, the relation of the
fields to one another— the order of the sciences, the general groundplan
of learning— is differently construed. Hence it would be prejudicial and
presumptuous  to  advance  here  a  definitive  formulation of concepts,
central  and peripheral, which separate or relate the traditional fields
of  inquiry,  such  as politics; ethics or morality; economics; religion
and  theology;  metaphysics;  physics,  biology,  or  the  philosophy of
nature; psychology, anthropology, or the philosophy of man; epistemology
or  the  theory of knowledge; history and the philosophy of history; the
liberal  arts of grammar, rhetoric, and logic; poetry and the philosophy
of art. By using the Syntopicon, the reader can discover for himself the
grouping  of  the  great  ideas  in  the various patterns appropriate to
distinct  and  related  subject  matters. In doing this he will be aided
primarily  by  the  Cross-References  and the Introductions, and also to
some  extent  by  the Inventory of Terms. Instead of constraining him by
dogmatically  imposing  one against any other construction of the fields
of  learning,  the  Syntopicon  leaves the reader free to find, and even
facilitates his finding, the various and often conflicting constructions
that  have  been  made  in  the  tradition of the great books. It may be
observed  that,  of the various fields of learning named above, some are
also  names  of  great  ideas, whereas others, which seem to be of equal
importance, are not. This fact requires some explanation. It also raises
the question whether the great ideas are all ideas in the same sense. Is
the idea which signifies

[1265a]
a  field  of learning or a subject matter, such as mathematics, physics,
or  theology,  the  same  sort  of conception as the ideas which signify
basic  notions in that particular field ? Is the chapter on Physics, for
example, on the same level with the chapters on Change, Element, Matter^
Space,  Time?  Clearly there is a difference between these two orders of
ideas.  The  conception  of  a  science, a subject matter, or a field of
inquiry,  is  obviously  different from the conception of the objects or
realities considered in that field. One of the basic problems throughout
the  tradition  of  western  thought  has  been  the  division  of human
knowledge, the definition of the departments of learning, the nature and
order  of  the  arts and sciences. Hence, among the great ideas, certain
ideas  have developed in the course of thinking about this problem. They
are conceptions of the nature of particular sciences or subject matters.
But   not   all   subject  matters  which  appear  in  the  most  recent
classifications  of  the  sciences are discussed at sufficient length in
the  great  books  to  warrant  their taking their place among the great
ideas  of the whole tradition. Psychology, for example, does not receive
as much attention as physics, and so there is a chapter dealing with the
conception   of  physics,  but  none  dealing  with  the  conception  of
psychology. Instead the consideration of psychology appears primarily as
a  group  of  topics in the chapters on Man and Soul. Grammar, likewise,
does  not receive the attention that logic and rhetoric do; accordingly,
there  are  chapters  dealing  with  the  arts  or sciences of logic and
rhetoric,  but  none dealing with grammar. Instead grammar is considered
in  a group of topics in the chapter on Language, and also occurs in the
chapters  on  Logic  and Rhetoric, in topics which treat the relation of
grammar  to  these  other arts. By consulting the Inventory of Terms the
reader will be able to discover in which chapters and under which topics
consideration  is  given  to the arts, sciences, or branches of learning
whose  names  do  not  appear  among  the  102 chapter titles. It may be
useful, however, to enumerate those chapters which deal with branches of
learning  or fields of inquiry. They are: Astronomy, Dialectic, History,
Logic,   Mathematics,   Mechanics,  Medicine,  Metaphysics,  Philosophy,
Physics, Poetry, Religion, Science, and Theology. With a few exceptions,
each  of  these  chapters  is devoted entirely to the consideration of a
discipline or subject matter— its definition, its scope, its principles,
methods,  and  problems.  The  exceptions are the chapters on Astronomy,
History,  Mechanics, and Medicine, which are concerned only in part with
various  conceptions  of  the  nature,  principles,  and  methods of the
disciplines  named.  In part they also include topics which state issues
not  about  these  sciences,  but  within them— issues about the objects
studied  in  these  sciences.  The  chapter  on  Astronomy, for example,
includes discussions of celestial phenomena in general and of particular
heavenly  bodies;  the  chapter  on  History includes discussions of the
processes  and  patterns  of  historical change; the chapter on Medicine
includes  discussions  of  the  nature,  causes,  and  classification of
diseases  and  the  general theory of health; and considerably more than
half  the  chapter  on  Mechanics  deals  with  the basic notions in the
science of mechanics, and the

[1265b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1231

[1266a]
1232  THE  GREAT  IDEAS nature. period or phase of the tradition. others
concepts of the objects of human inquiry. books.

[1266b]
concepts and problems of various branches of physical science. This part
of the chapter on Mechanics is (along with such chapters as Space, Time,
and  Quantity)  the complement of the chapter on Physics, which concerns
itself entirely with the character of physics as an experimental science
and  as  a  philosophy of The other chapters which are restricted to the
consideration of the character and method of particular disciplines also
have  their  complements.  The chapters on Definition, Hypothesis, Idea,
Induction,  Judgment, Opposition, Principle, and Reasoning, for example,
are  complementary, in the sense indicated, to the chapter on Logic; the
chapters on Infinity, Quantity, Space, and Time are complementary to the
chapter on Mathematics; and so on for each of the chapters which revolve
around  the  nature  and  methods  of  a particular discipline. That the
chapters  on  Astronomy,  History,  Mechanics,  and Medicine are treated
somewhat  differently  from  the  rest (being mixed chapters rather than
exclusively  concerned  with  the  idea  of  a science or of its subject
matter),  is  explained in the same way as the fact that the sciences of
economics  and psychology are treated in topics subordinate to the ideas
of  Wealth  and  Man.  On  purely  logical grounds, these disciplines or
branches  of  learning  may  be  considered  as  important as Astronomy,
Mechanics,  or  Physics,  but as a matter of historic fact they have not
been  equally  subjected  to analysis, definition, and discussion in the
tradition  of western thought, especially when that is taken as a whole.
All  such  differences  in  treatment  reflect the actual content of the
great  books  rather  than  any theory developed apart from the books or
according  to  the  bias  of  one We have now sufficiently explained the
selection  of  the 102 great ideas and their relation to one another and
to   the  concepts  enumerated  in  the  Inventory  of  Terms.  We  have
distinguished  whatever  was  based,  in  the treatment of the ideas, on
purely pragmatic considerations or reasons of convenience, from policies
which  were  based  on theoretic principles reflecting the conception of
the  Syntopicon  itself.  We have observed a number of differences among
the  great ideas: that all are not equally great, not equally complex in
structure, or extensive in scope; that they vary in the range of subject
matters  to  which  they  pertain  or  in  the  emphasis they receive in
different  periods or phases of the western tradition; that they are not
all  on  the  same  level,  some being concepts of the branches of human
learning,  One more point of difference among the great ideas remains to
be  mentioned.  That  is the difference between what might be called the
"easy"  and the "difficult" ideas. The measure of this difference is the
number  of  distinct meanings which have been attached to the name of an
idea  in  the  tradition  of  the great Two ideas represent the extremes
between  which all the rest vary. One extreme is the chapter on Idea; it
almost  seems  that  no two of the great books which expound a theory of
ideas use the word "idea" in the same sense. At the

[1267a]
other  extreme  is  the  chapter on Punishment; the authors of the great
books  may differ in their theories of the purpose or use of punishment,
but  they  differ  very  little,  if at all, on the meaning of-tfre-word
"punishment." In proportion to the degree of their systematic ambiguity,
the  great  ideas  are more or less difficult as subjects for syntopical
treatment.  The  names  of  the  great  ideas,  like  other  words, have
systematic  ambiguity  when  their various distinct meanings are related
according  to  some  principle.  That  the  ambiguity  be  systematic is
obviously  indispensable  to  the  unity  of each chapter dealing with a
great  idea.  To  preserve  the  unity  of  a chapter, some intelligible
relation must obtain among all the senses in which its principal term is
used  in  the topical development of the idea. The unity of each chapter
depends on the existence of a common thread underlying all the twists in
meaning  that its principal term undergoes. Sheer equivocation— that is,
the  use  of  the  principal  term in two absolutely unrelated meanings—
would  divide the chapter into two parts, with no reason for their being
together  except  a purely verbal identity, of accidental origin. Hence,
in  proportion  as  the  word  expressing an idea is more ambiguous, the
danger  is  greater  that  the systematic ambiguity may verge upon sheer
equivocation.  The  handling of the systematic ambiguity itself, and the
avoidance  of  sheer  equivocation,  are the two aspects of the semantic
difficulty  encountered  in  treating  almost  all  of  the great ideas,
because  of their manifold or complex significance. The solution of this
difficulty—  different  in  different  chapters according to the precise
nature  of  the  semantic  problem in each— was achieved by means of the
topical  subdivision  of  the great ideas. The order and relation of the
topics  made  it  possible to take care of the order and relation of the
various  meanings  of  the  idea. A fuller statement of the way semantic
difficulties  were  overcome  in  the  construction  of  the  Syntopicon
belongs,  therefore, to the next section of this essay, which deals with
the  Outlines  of  Topics.  II.  THE  OUTLINES  OF TOPICS AND THE CROSS-
REFERENCES  The  topics  are  the  basic  units  of the Syntopicon. They
perform  a double function. The Outline of Topics in each chapter is the
analysis of a great idea, setting forth its various meanings, its themes
and  problems; and the individual topics serve as the immediate headings
under  which  are  assembled  the  references  to the discussion of each
particular  subject  in  the  great  books.  The  topics  are  the major
subdivisions of the discussion in the sphere of each of the great ideas,
as the ideas are the main divisions of the whole discussion in the great
books. As each idea represents a general field of discourse— a domain of
learning and inquiry— covering a variety of related themes and problems,
so,  under  each  idea,  the  various  topics  represent  the themes and
problems  which are the particular subjects of discussion in that field.
To  understand  how  the  topics  perform  these  two functions— that of
analyzing  the  ideas and that of providing headings for the references—
it  is  necessary,  first,  to  consider  the  nature and variety of the
individual topics; and, second, to exam-

[1267b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1233

[1268a]
1234  THE  GREAT  IDEAS of others. them can be found in the tradition of
the great books.

[1268b]
ine  the  structure  of  the  Outlines  of  Topics  in  the light of the
principles  which  determined  the order of the topics, the selection of
certain  topics  and  the  omission A topic is essentially a subject for
discussion. The Greek word topos from which "topic" is derived literally
means  a place. Its literal meaning is retained in such English words as
"topography"  and  "topology,"  which  signify  the study of physical or
geometrical  places.  The  conception  of  a  topic  as  a  subject  for
discussion  is a metaphorical extension of this root meaning. A topic is
a  logical place; it is a place where minds meet to consider some common
problem  or  theme.  The minds may agree or disagree; they may argue the
matter  from  different  points  of  view;  they  may  contribute to the
discussion  in  a  variety  of  ways— by offering examples, by proposing
definitions or hypotheses, by stating analyses or arguments, by debating
what  has  already  been  said, or by advancing a new view. But whatever
form each contribution takes, it must be relevant, though it need not be
relevant   in   the  same  way  or  to  the  same  degree.  The  various
contributions  are relevant to each other through their relevance to the
common theme or A topic, then, is a place where minds meet through being
relevant  to  a  common subject of discussion. It is a place at which an
intelligible  exchange  of  thought,  insight,  or opinion can occur. We
recognize  this  when  we  refer  to  the  topics of a conversation; and
thereby  we  also  acknowledge that a conversation, in order to be good,
must  have  topics. The more conscious it is of its topics, the better a
conversation  is,  the better it can sustain relevance as it shifts from
theme  to  theme.  In  this  sense  the  conception of the Syntopicon is
inseparable from the conception of the tradition of western thought as a
single  great  conversation  in which the best minds of every period and
persuasion  have participated. As the units of any good conversation are
its  topics,  so the units of the great conversation are the 3000 topics
under which the Syntopicon cites relevant discussion in the great books.
If  the notion of the great conversation had been a myth, the Syntopicon
could not have been constructed at all. To say that these two volumes of
The  Great  Ideas make possible a syntopical reading of the great books,
is  to  say  also  The  traditional conception of a topic belongs to the
logic  of  discussion— of dispute, controversy, or any other exchange of
opinion among men. It is not necessary that every topic be disputed, for
it  to  be  true  that every topic is necessarily disputable. Wherever a
difference  of  opinion  is  possible, or wherever a variety of relevant
views is conceivable, there a topic can be formulated, for there will be
a  meeting  place for discussion. According to this understanding of the
nature  of  a  topic,  the 3000 topics of the Syntopicon are the meeting
places  of  western  thought.  They  are not possible but actual topics.
Discussion  of each of To accord with its logical function, a topic must
have  a  certain  grammatical  and,  perhaps,  even rhetorical form. For
example, a topic is not a proposition. It

[1269a]
neither  asserts  nor  denies anything. It is neither true nor false. It
would  be  inappropriate,  therefore,  to state a topic in a declarative
sentence.  If  we consider the relation of lawjxliieerty , we can assert,
in  a  proposition,  that  the  supremacy  of  law  is  the principle of
political  liberty;  or  we  can  deny  this,  if  we  say it is not the
principle.  But topic 7b in the chapter on Law does neither, and permits
both.  This  topic—  "The supremacy of law as the principle of political
liberty"—merely  presents  for consideration one traditional formulation
of  the  relation  of law to liberty. It may be supposed that if a topic
states  a  problem,  it  should  be  put  in the form of a question. For
example, Law 7b might have been expressed thus: "Is the supremacy of law
the principle of political liberty?" or "Whether the supremacy of law is
the  principle  of  political  liberty?"  But  the interrogative form of
statement  is almost as restrictive as the declarative. It seems to call
only  for  a  Yes  or No answer. If the issue were as simple as this, it
might  have  been  most  explicitly  expressed in the form of a dilemma:
"Either the supremacy of law is the principle of political liberty or it
is  not."  But  a dilemma of this sort does not exhaust all the relevant
possibilities.  It  is therefore a bad phrasing of the topic, and at the
same  time  indicates  what is wrong with the interrogative phrasing. It
limits  the topic to one question or one issue. The topic concerning the
relation  of  law to liberty raises more than one question. Its phrasing
permits  such  questions  as, "In what sense is the supremacy of law the
principle  of  political  liberty?"  Furthermore,  as phrased, the topic
allows  for  more  than  an  affirmation  or  a  denial.  It permits the
expression  of  doubt  on  the subject; it permits the formulation to be
entertained as an hypothesis for the purpose of seeing what consequences
follow;  it is open to a variety of explanations or reasons for thinking
that  the  supremacy  of  law  is  or  is not the principle of political
liberty;  it  is  even  open  to  the  adduction of examples— particular
instances  in  history or fiction which show the dependence of political
liberty  upon  the supremacy of law, or the opposite. A topic, in short,
must  have  greater  amplitude than any other logical form of statement.
The  familiar  grammatical  forms  of  the  declarative or interrogative
sentence,  or  even  the complex sentence which expresses a dilemma, are
therefore  inappropriate  for  the statement of topics. Since it must be
able  to  include  all  these and more, the statement of a topic must be
less  determinate  in verbal structure. It is easier to say what a topic
is  not,  than  what  it  is  or  should be. If it must always be a less
determinate expression than a sentence, and if it must usually be a more
complex  expression  than  a single word or pair of words (which are the
verbal  expression  of terms, such as the great ideas), it would seem to
follow  that  the  proper  expression  of  a  topic  is a phrase— often,
perhaps,  a  fairly  elaborate  phrase  involving  a number of terms and
signifying  a  number  of  possible relations between them. This general
description of the grammatical form of a topic does not, however, convey
an adequate notion of the extraordinary variety of possible phrasings.

[1269b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1235

[1270a]
1236 THE GREAT IDEAS of the relation of its parts. are many instances of
each type. Courage i . The nature of courage Dialectic i. Definitions of
dialectic  Chance  i  .  The  conception  of  chance  Government le. The
attributes of good government of human nature Art ja. Art as a source of
pleasure  or delight workers Medicine 5^. The classification of diseases
Happiness  2^(2)  Pleasure and happiness Causes 3. Causality and freedom
Courage yc. Courage in war Habit $c. Instinct in relation to reason ment

[1270b]
An  examination of the phraseology employed in the statement of the 3000
topics  of  the  Syntopicon will reveal many types of topical statement.
Some  topics  are  simple and others complex; and of the complex topics,
some  involve  two  and some more than two component phrases, related as
coordinate, as primary and secondary, or in some other way. For example,
"The  ideal  of the educated man" (Education ia) is a simple topic; "The
right  to property: the ownership of the means of production" (Labor 7b)
is  a  complex  topic;  and  "The  use and criticism of the intellectual
tradition:  the  sifting  of  truth from error; the reaction against the
authority  of  the past" (Progress 6c) is a more complex topic. We shall
return  presently to the problem of the complex topic, and especially to
the  consideration  For  the  moment, let us examine the various ways in
which  topics—  simple  or  complex— are phrased. The following is a far
from  exhaustive  sampling  of the types of topical statement, but among
the  3000  topics  of the Syntopicon, there Man i . Definitions of man :
conceptions  of  the properties and qualities Labor 3. The kinds of work
and  the  relationship of different types of Aristocracy 2. The relation
of  artistocracy  to  other  forms  of  governCustom  i. The distinction
between nature and convention: its applicaConstitution i. The difference
between  government  by  law  and  government  by  men  :  the nature of
constitutional  government  Family  2b.  Comparison  of the domestic and
political community in manner of government

[1271a]
Justice  3.  The  duties of justice compared with the generosity of love
and friendship Art 1 1 . Myths and theories Concerning the origin of the
arts  Democracy  5b.  The  theory  of  representation Government i . The
general  theory of government Evolution 4. The problem of evolution: the
origin  of  plant  and  animal  species  Change  13.  The problem of the
eternity  of  motion or change Element 5b. Arguments for and against the
existence  of  atoms:  the issue concerning the infinite divisibility of
matter  Poetry gb. The issue concerning the censorship of poetry Opinion
5b.  Advantages and disadvantages of freedom of discussion Education 8b.
The economic support of educational institutions Experience 6b. The role
of experience in politics: the lessons of history The foregoing examples
illustrate various forms topics take according to the different kinds of
subjects  they  propose  for  discussion. Some deal with the nature of a
thing  or  its  definition,  some with its qualities or attributes, some
with its causes, and some with its kinds; some deal with distinctions or
differences,  and  some  with  comparisons  or contrasts; some propose a
general theory for consideration, some present a problem, and some state
an  issue.  Some—  such  as  the  last  three  above—  are  difficult to
characterize  by  any formula. The reason for all these types of topical
statement—and  others  not  illustrated in the examples given— cannot be
explained  without reference to the Outline of Topics as a whole. In the
Outline  of  Topics for each chapter, many different kinds of topics are
necessary  to cover the whole field of discussion represented by a great
idea.  Thus,  for  example,  a  topic  like  Courage  1 — "The nature of
courage"—  will  occur  in  many chapters, for many chapters open with a
consideration  of  the  nature of the thing signified by their principal
term.  A topic like Aristocracy 2— "The relation of aristocracy to other
forms  of government"— will appear frequently, for the discussion of the
principal  term  usually  involves  the consideration of its relation to
other terms; a topic like Emotion 2, "The classification and enumeration
of the emotions," or Labor 3, "The kinds of work and the relationship of
different  types of workers," will often occupy a place in an Outline of
Topics  because  the  classification or enumeration of kinds is a matter
considered in many fields of inquiry or discussion. The same can be said
for  the  topics  which  state  theories, problems, issues, definitions,
attributes,  distinctions,  comparisons,  and so on. Under a great idea,
many   different   kinds  of  subjects  are  discussed,  and  these  are
represented by the various topics set forth in the Outline of Topics for
each of the great ideas. It is not surprising that the discussion of one
idea should re-

[1271b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1237

[1272a]
1238  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  source of pleasure or delight." exist. ancient,
mediaeval, and modern times.

[1272b]
semble, in many respects, the discussion of another; hence we should not
be  surprised  to find a certain sort of topic in chapter after chapter.
Some  kinds  of  topics  will,  of  course,  appear more frequently than
others;  some  chapters  will have a much greater variety of topics than
others.  The  topics  not  only  vary in type according to their subject
matter;  they also vary in scope or amplitude according to the broadness
or  narrowness  of the theme they enunciate. Some are open to every type
of  discussion,  whereas others seem to impose certain restrictions upon
the  type  of discussion that would be relevant. A topic like "Arguments
for   and  against  the  existence  of  atoms"  specifically  calls  for
arguments.   In  contrast,  a  topic  like  "The  issue  concerning  the
censorship  of  poetry" permits, in addition to arguments for or against
censorship,  discussions of the issue itself, dealing, perhaps, with its
significance,  its  presuppositions or implications, and its relation to
issues  concerning  the  censorship  of  other forms of expression. Even
broader  or more open in this respect are such topics as "The difference
between  government  by law and government by men" or "Art as a In terms
of  what  a  topic  purports  to  be,  every topic should have a certain
minimum  amplitude.  It  should  solicit  and  allow  the  expression of
opposite  opinions on whatever is the subject of discussion. Whether the
topic  happens  to  be  stated positively or negatively, it should cover
both  negations  and  affirmations of the point in question. It may have
greater  amplitude  than  this,  but  this much at least it should have.
Since  a  topic is a meeting place for minds that disagree or differ, it
is  defective  if its wording suggests one point of view or one position
on  an  issue  where  many  are possible, or where opposite arguments or
views  are known to What has just been said applies to topics generally,
as  statements  having a certain logical character. But because they are
intended  to function as the commonplaces of the great conversation, the
topics  of the Syntopicon should have scope or range of another sort, in
addition  to logical amplitude. Ideally, they should be so conceived and
so  phrased that each topic is able to solicit or to cover contributions
from  the  whole  range of authors and works included in Great Bool{s of
the  Western  World, and from the books of the Bible as well. This means
that  the  ideal  topic  is  one which is open to contributions from the
poets  and  historians  as  well  as  the  scientists, philosophers, and
theologians;  which  can cover every variety of doctrine or opinion that
has  been  expressed  in  the tradition of the great books; and which is
equally  receptive to the imagination and thought of These are difficult
requirements  to  meet.  They  demand  a  comprehensiveness difficult to
achieve  without  falling  into a vagueness which would render the topic
useless or unintelligible. They demand, in the formulation of the topic,
an  almost  perfect impartiality on the level of thought, and neutrality
on  the  level  of  language.  The more various and opposed the partisan
views  a topic tries to cover, the more difficult it is for the topic to
be conceived impartially, that is, without

[1273a]
prejudice to any of these views, so that it seems to be formulated as if
from   no   point  of  view.  The  more  diverse  and  incompatible  the
terminologies  in  which  the  opinions  to  be covered are expressexlT-
theTnore  difficult it is for the topic to be worded neutrally, that is,
without  verbal  coloration from one or another of the many vocabularies
that  have been used for the expression of relevant opinions. In view of
such  difficulties,  it could hardly be expected that the ideal would be
realized  in  the  formulation  of  every  one of the 3000 topics in the
Syntopicon.  Yet  it  is  realized  in many and approximated in a fairly
large  proportion  of the rest. Those which fall short of the ideal seem
to  be  of  two main types. (1) Some topics are so conceived and phrased
that  their  coverage  is  restricted  to  analytical  or  argumentative
discussions— discussions of the sort which are to be found in expository
works  of  science,  philosophy,  and  theology,  or  in  the discursive
passages of poetry and history, whether in the speeches of historical or
fictional  personages  or  in  the  comments  of the poets or historians
themselves.  The  conception  and  wording of the topic tends to exclude
exemplary  or  imaginative  material,  of  the  sort  to be found in the
narrative  passages  of  history  or fiction; or in other instances, the
topic  tends  to  exclude  material of purely illustrative significance,
such  as  reports  of experiments in scientific books. These topics fall
short  of the comprehensiveness of the ideal topic by virtue of the type
of  material  they  reject. (2) Some topics are so conceived and phrased
that  their  coverage  is  restricted  to  the  doctrines,  theories, or
opinions  of  one  part,  period,  or  phase of the whole tradition. The
limitation  on  the  range  of materials which are admissible under such
topics  may be more or less stringent. Least restricted are those topics
which  fail  to  comprehend both pagan and Christian literature, because
they are so conceived and worded that they apply to one or the other but
not  both  of  these  two  major  phases  of the western tradition. More
restricted  are those topics so conceived and worded as to apply only to
a certain group of authors sharing a common doctrine or vocabulary. Most
restricted  are  the  topics which cover the thought of a single author.
The last represents the extreme opposite of the ideal topics which cover
the  thought  and  imagination  of  every  period  and  every variety of
doctrine  or  opinion, no matter how they may be verbally expressed. But
all three of these defective topics fall short of the ideal by virtue of
their  acknowledged  failure  to  be  impartial in thought or neutral in
phrasing.  The second of the two main types of defective topics fails to
perform  the  logical function of a topic, and also fails to do what the
topics  were  normally  intended  to  do  in  the  construction  of  the
Syntopicon.  Logically,  a  topic should be hospitable to differences of
opinion  or  opposite  views on the same subject. If, for example, there
are two or more contrary views on a given subject, it should be possible
to formulate a topic which indicates the subject of the controversy in a
manner that is impartial to all sides. But this was not always possible,
because  of  difficulties  inherent  in  the materials to be covered. It
sometimes  became  necessary,  in constructing topics appropriate to the
content of the great books, to state con-

[1273b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1239

[1274a]
1240  THE  GREAT IDEAS syntopical reading of the great books. languages.
conception.  tially  different  notions. and record the existence of the
great conversation.

[1274b]
trary  views  in a set of topics, each worded to fit the particular view
it  represents.  This  set of topics then performed the logical function
which,  ideally,  a  single  topic should perform; and from the point of
view  of  the  Syntopicon,  the set of topics provided the remedy in all
those  instances in which logically defective single topics seemed to be
unavoidable.  It  had  the  requisite  comprehensiveness for a Before we
examine  the  remedy,  it  may  be  useful  to examine the reason it was
necessary.  The  authors  of  the  great  books  tend  to  have  special
vocabularies.  This has little to do with the diversity of the languages
in  which  they originally wrote; it is rather the result of the diverse
terminologies  they use to express their thought. This is as apparent in
English  translations of their works as it is in their original The more
inventive  and  fecund  a  great  mind  is,  the  more it will shape the
language it uses to fit its thought. To express a new idea or insight, a
new  word is invented or an old word given a novel meaning. Sometimes in
the  development  of  his  own characteristic vocabulary, a great writer
uses  a  new  word  for  an  old  idea  which  he  has  appropriated and
assimilated  to  his  own  thought.  Sometimes  the opposite occurs; the
traditional word is appropriated or borrowed, but the idea which it long
expressed is replaced either by a totally new, or at least by a variant,
It  can  be  said  without exaggeration that no two authors of the great
books have identical vocabularies. This does not mean that they share no
common  terms— identical words with identical meanings. On the contrary,
even  those  who  seem  to  be  most divided by the differences in their
terminologies  give evidence of belonging to the same tradition by their
common  acceptance  of a large number of terms. Yet, from the extreme at
which  they  share a minimum number of important terms to the extreme at
which  their basic vocabularies are much more alike than different, this
much  can  be  said  of any two authors of the great booths: first, that
they  use  some  words in the same way and some differently; and second,
that,  when  they  use words differently, they are either expressing the
same  thought  in  different words or are using the same word to express
wholly  or parThese facts do not make it impossible for the tradition of
the  great  books  to have the qualities of a good conversation. But the
necessity  of  shifting  from the vocabulary of one to the vocabulary of
another  makes  it difficult, often extremely difficult, to discover and
point  out when the authors are talking about the same idea, and in what
way their remarks are relevant to the same theme. These are the semantic
difficulties which the Syntopicon had to overcome in order to reveal For
the  most  part differences in terminology do not make it impossible for
topics to cover all authors who make some contribution to the discussion
of  a particular theme. Even though they do not all use the same word to
express  their  thought, or do not attach the same meanings to the words
they use in com-

[1275a]
mon, it is usually possible to find a neutral phrasing for the topic. If
the  relevant  authors  use  the same words with different— but related—
meanings,    the    language    of    the    topic    will    have   the
systemati(>aflrrbrgiiity  necessary  to  cover  these variations. If the
relevant authors do not all use the same words to express their thought,
but use words which are closely related in meaning, then it may still be
possible  to find a neutral phrasing for the topic. This may be achieved
by formulating the topic in the words of ordinary discourse, words which
are  not  specially characteristic of any of the authors. Another method
is  to  phrase  the  topic  in  the words used by one author or group of
authors. This can be done without prejudice to the thought of the others
when  the  key words in the distinct vocabularies of the several authors
are  related as synonyms. It may even be possible to use synonyms in the
phrasing  of  the  topic,  to  represent  the  vocabularies of different
authors.  By any of these methods, the wording of the topic can be given
sufficient  systematic  ambiguity  to  carry  all  the related meanings.
Sometimes,  however,  the meanings which different authors attach to the
same word are not closely related', sometimes an author has coined words
to  express  his meaning, or given certain words or phrases the stamp of
his  own  doctrine; sometimes the words used by an author have overtones
or systematic implications which make it impossible to find synonyms for
them  in  the language of other authors or in the vocabulary of ordinary
speech.  In  all  these  cases,  a single topic to cover all the authors
concerned  would  require  phrasing so vague or so general that it could
not  contribute  anything  to  the  analysis  of the idea under which it
occurred.   Such  semantic  difficulties  were  usually  solved  by  the
construction   of  a  set  of  topics,  each  phrased  in  the  language
characteristic  of particular authors or groups of authors. The unity of
the set was indicated by a topic which served as the heading under which
the  particular  topics  were assembled. For the purpose of stating this
unity,  a  vague  or  general  phrasing of the heading was satisfactory,
since  the  content of the discussion could be sufficiently indicated by
the  more  explicit  phrasing of the subordinate topics. For example, in
the  Outline of Topics for the idea of Dialectic, four topics state four
distinct  theories of the nature of dialectic. The heading for the group
of  topics— "2. Diverse theories of dialectic"—merely indicates that the
subordinate  topics  state  the different conceptions to be found in the
tradition  of  the  great books. The four topics are phrased in a manner
appropriate, respectively, to the thought of Plato, Aristotle, Kant, and
Hegel  and  Marx.  2a.  Dialectic  as  the  pursuit  of  truth  and  the
contemplation of being ib. Dialectic as the method of inquiry, argument,
and  criticism  in  the  sphere of opinion 2c. Dialectic as the logic of
semblance  and  as  the  critique  of  the illusory employment of reason
beyond experience 2d. Dialectic as the evolution of spirit or matter

[1275b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1241

[1276a]
1242  THE  GREAT  IDEAS the ideas as eternal forms Idea Augustine in the
case  of  ie.  dreams:  the dream-work." class: its revolutionary aims."
dependent substances or as attributes of infinite substance."

[1276b]
The  use  of  the words "or matter" in topic 2d shows how a single topic
can  be  so  phrased  as to cover the thought of authors whose positions
have  a  certain  affinity even though they disagree as much as do Hegel
and  Marx.  For both Hegel and Marx, dialectic is an evolution. Phrasing
the  rest  of the topic in the alternative (viz., "of spirit or matter")
enables it to associate under one heading the Hegelian conception of the
dialectic  of  spirit  and  the dialectical materialism of Marx. Another
example  can  be found in the chapter on Idea. Here the six topics which
appear  under  the  general  heading—  "1. Doctrines of idea"— represent
phrasings appropriate to groups of authors or to single authors. The six
topics are: \a. Ideas, or relations between ideas, as objects of thought
or  knowledge: lb. Ideas or conceptions as that by which the mind thinks
or knows id. Ideas as the pure concepts of reason: regulative principles
le.  Ideas  in  the  order  of  supra-human  intelligence or spirit: the
eternal  exemplars and archetypes; the modes of the divine mind if. Idea
as the unity of determinate existence and concept: the Absolute Again it
can  be  pointed  out  that  the wording of topics ia and ie permits the
association  of  authors whose doctrines are affiliated even though they
do  not  agree—  Plato  with Locke in the case of topic ia; Spinoza with
Aquinas  and  Sometimes,  however,  a  topic  that  is restricted to the
doctrine  of  one author may have to be introduced into a set of topics,
all  the  rest of which have general or unrestricted range. This happens
most  frequently  when  a  particular author makes a contribution to the
conversation,  which  no  one  else  anticipates or echoes. Thus, in the
chapter on Memory and Imagination, under the heading of a general topic,
a  specially  phrased  subordinate  topic  had  to be introduced for the
contribution  of  Freud. The general topic was "8. The nature and causes
of dreaming"; the subordinate was "8d(i) The manifest and latent content
of  In  the chapter on Labor, under the general heading "7. Economic and
political  justice  to  the  laborer,"  a  subordinate  topic, specially
phrased,  had  to be introduced for the contribution of Marx: "jc($) The
proletariat  as  a  revolutionary  In  the  chapter  on Being, under the
general  heading  "7b.  The distinction between substance and attribute,
accident  or modification: independent and dependent being," a specially
phrased  subordinate  topic had to be introduced for the contribution of
Descartes and Spinoza: "7^4) Extension and thought as

[1277a]
These  restricted  or  doctrinal topics are exceptions to the rule. Most
topics  have  a neutral phrasing and a systematic ambiguity which permit
them  to  comprehend the whole tradition and all differences-inrdoctrine
or  opinion.  The  great  majority are topics like "The happiness of the
individual in relation to the happiness or good of other men" (Happiness
5a),  or  "Chance,  necessity,  and  design or purpose in the origin and
structure  of  the  world"  (Chance 3), or "The political regulation and
censorship  of education" (Education 8c). Topics of this sort contain no
words  prejudicial  to  the thought of any author, and impartially cover
every  variety  of  relevant  opinion  in the whole tradition of western
thought,  no matter how violently the opinions may differ. In short, the
topical  ideals  of  comprehensiveness and impartiality were achieved in
the  Syntopicon  either  by  single  topics  or  by sets of topics which
comprehended  the  dialectical  development  of a concept or an issue in
western  thought. The rule followed was to employ single topics wherever
they  could  be constructed, and to construct a set of doctrinal topics,
or  to introduce a doctrinal topic into the context of others, only when
the  semantic  difficulties could not be otherwise surmounted. To follow
the  rule of using single topics wherever they could be constructed, and
to  approach  the  ideal of making them as comprehensive as possible, it
was sometimes both necessary and desirable to formulate a complex rather
than  a simple topic. Examples of these two kinds of topics have already
been  given.  The  most  obvious  distinction  between  them can be most
precisely  stated  in  grammatical terms. The simple topic is undivided;
its  elements  are  words,  all  of which belong to the same phrase. The
complex  topic  is  divided; its divisions are indicated by two kinds of
punctuation.  A colon divides the complex topic into its two main parts.
The first of these two parts is usually undivided, but the second may be
divided  into two or more subordinate parts by semi-colons. The two main
parts of a complex topic are always separate phrases; when the second of
these  is  divided,  its  parts  are usually separate phrases. From this
grammatical description of the complex topic, it might be inferred that,
considered logically, it is always a union of two or more simple topics,
each  expressed  by  separate  phrases. But this is not always the case.
Complex  topics  seem  to  fall  into  three  principal types, and their
differences  must  be  examined  in  order  for  their  several distinct
functions to be understood. (1) Sometimes the phrase following the colon
does not represent a separate topic, but merely makes the meaning of the
phrase  preceding  the  colon  clearer  in some way— by expanding it, by
specifying  it, even by illustrating it. The colon, separating the first
phrase  from the one or more phrases which follow, is roughly equivalent
in meaning to the words "that is to say" or "such as." The first type of
complex topic is, therefore, only grammatically, not logically, complex,
and cannot be broken up into two or more separate topics.

[1277b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1243

[1278a]
1244  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  evolution man sional, religious ing to each his
own,  treating equals equally things and names signifying names separate
topics. instructive propositions (Loc^e) structure of the psyche (Freud)

[1278b]
History  4^.  The  laws  and  patterns  of  historical  change:  cycles,
progress,  Citizen  8.  The  idea  of  world  citizenship: the political
brotherhood  of  Education  2.  The kinds of education: physical, moral,
liberal,   profesConstitution   yb.  The  safeguards  of  constitutional
government:  bills  of rights; separation of powers; impeachment Justice
2. The precepts of justice: doing good, harming no one, renderExperience
7.  Mystical  or  religious  experience:  experience of the supernatural
Evolution  ^c.  The  origin  of  new  forms  of  life: special creation,
spontaneous  generation,  or  descent with modification from older forms
Sign  ia. The first and second imposition of words: names signifying (2)
In  the  second  type, the separate phrases of a complex topic represent
the phrasing of the same topic or related topics in a manner appropriate
to  different  authors.  In some cases, the difference between the first
and second phrasing is largely verbal; it is almost as if the same topic
were  being  phrased in parallel ways. In other cases, the difference is
doctrinal  as  well  as  verbal.  Here the phrase which precedes and the
phrase  which  follows  the  colon  express more or less distinct topics
which  are like two closely related doctrinal topics. Clearly it is only
in  the  second  case that the complex topic could have been broken into
two  The following examples illustrate the second type of complex topic.
(In  these illustrations, the authority for the doctrine is indicated in
parentheses.)  Judgment  Sb.  Analytic  and  synthetic judgments (Kant):
trifling  and Soul ib. The order, connection, and interdependence of the
parts  of the soul {Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas) : the id, ego, and super-
ego  in  the  Sense 3^(3) The estimative or cogitative power (Aquinas) :
instinctive  recognition  of  the harmful and beneficial (Darwin, Freud)
Quality  ib.  Primary  and  secondary  qualities  (Locke):  the  related
distinction  of proper and common sensibles (Aristotle) Of the foregoing
examples, Judgment 8b illustrates a grammatically complex topic which is
logically simple; the two doctrinal phrasings are parallel phrasings

[1279a]
of  the  same  topic. On the other hand, Soul 2b illustrates a logically
complex topic, the two parts of which are distinct topics, and represent
related  doctrines  in  the theory of soul. ^__^^ In some instances, the
topic  which  precedes  the colon is generally phrased, while that which
follows  is  the  same  topic  phrased  in  the language of a particular
doctrine.  For  example:  Family yd. The emotional impact of family life
upon  the child: the domestic triangle; the symbolic roles of father and
mother  (Freud)  In  some  instances,  what  follows the colon is itself
divided  into subordinate parts by a semi-colon. These subordinate parts
may  be  related  as  two  parallel doctrinal topics. For example: Sense
3^(4)  The  distinction  between  sensation  and perception (James): the
accidental sensible (Aristotle); complex ideas of substance (Locl^e) (3)
In  the  third  type,  the separate phrases of a complex topic represent
distinct  but related topics. Here the related topics are all phrased in
the  language  of  common  speech.  They do not express the doctrines of
particular  authors or groups of authors. These topics are all logically
as  well  as  grammatically  complex; in every case they could have been
broken  up  into  separate topics, though in many instances, giving them
independent  status would have necessitated a more explicit or elaborate
phrasing of each. The union of these potentially independent topics into
a  single complex topic is justified by the logical relation between the
parts.  They  are  related  aspects  of  a problem or issue; or they are
related  points  in  the  discussion of a theme which is itself complex.
Sometimes  the  parts  are logically coordinate, in which case the topic
preceding  and  the topic following the colon have equal weight; neither
restricts  the  meaning  of  the  other.  Sometimes  the  parts  are not
coordinate;  the  one  or  more topics following the colon are logically
subordinate  to  the  one  preceding it, in which case the primary topic
controls  and limits the meaning of the subordinate parts. The following
examples  illustrate  the  third  type  of complex topic with coordinate
parts.  Evolution  $b.  Competition in mating: sexual selection Infinity
4^.  The  infinite  divisibility  of  matter: the issue concerning atoms
Science  6b.  The  place  of  science  in society: the social conditions
favorable  to  the  advancement  of  science Justice gf. Justice between
states:  the  problem  of right and might in the making of war and peace
The  following examples illustrate the third type of complex topic which
has a first or primary topic followed by one or more subordinate topics.

[1279b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1245

[1280a]
1246  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  tricity  lated as the parts of a single complex
topic.  topics  would  have,  had  each  been  treated  as  independent.
tributions to the discussion it covers.

[1280b]
State  ic.  The  source  or  principle  of  the state's sovereignty: the
sovereignty of the prince; the sovereignty of the people Space 2c. Space
as  a  medium of physical action: the ether and actionat-a-distance; the
phenomena  of  gravitation,  radiation,  and elecPhysics $. Experimental
discovery:  inductive generalization from experiment; the role of theory
or hypothesis in experimentation Medicine i. The profession of medicine,
its  aims  and  obligations:  the  relation of physician to patient; the
place of the physician in society In a whole Outline of Topics, distinct
topics are logically related in two ways: they are either coordinate, or
one  is  subordinate and the other is its supraordinate. This is clearly
parallel  to  the two sorts of relation between the principal parts in a
complex topic of the third type. It is reasonable, therefore, to ask why
certain topics which are logically coordinate or logically supraordinate
and  subordinate  should  be  related  in these ways as separate topics;
whereas  other  topics  which have the same logical relationships to one
another  should  be  reIn  differentiating  between  topics  to be given
independent  status and topics to be united into a single complex topic,
two   principles   were   followed.  The  first  was  the  principle  of
comprehensiveness.  A number of related topics were united into a single
complex  one  when their union seemed to be required for a comprehensive
discussion  of the matter under consideration. The discussion each would
have  covered,  if  it had been left as an independent topic, would have
been fragmentary or partial. The decision to unite topics was never made
in  the abstract, but always in terms of the content of the great books,
that  is,  in terms of how their various contributions to the discussion
could  be  most  perspicuously  organized. In short, related topics were
united  to  form  a complex topic when the coverage of the complex topic
more nearly approximated the syntopical ideal than the simple The second
principle involved the ideals of simplicity and unity, and thus acted as
a  check  to the first principle. If two simple topics were sufficiently
comprehensive  in  their  coverage, then, even though logically related,
they  were  given  independent  status, on the ground that simple topics
have greater unity than can be achieved by the union of separate topics,
no  matter  how  closely  related. The greater the unity of a topic, the
greater  can  be  the  mutual  relevance of the conThis second principle
worked  automatically  when two logically related topics were themselves
complex.  Complex  topics  were  always  made  independent. But when the
problem  was  whether certain simple topics should remain independent or
be united, the two principles of comprehensiveness and simplicity had to
be applied with discretion, sometimes in favor of comprehensiveness, and
sometimes  in  favor of unity. It is impossible to state all the reasons
of convenience or

[1281a]
policy  which  operated  in  such decisions, or to report how particular
judgments  were  made. That such decisions could not always be made with
certainty or by rule of thumb, is indicated by the^feetrthat, during the
construction  of  the  Syntopicon, many topics which were independent at
one  stage  of  the  work  were  later  merged,  and complex topics were
frequently broken into a number of simple ones. The final product of all
these  working  judgments is manifest in the structure of the Outline of
Topics  for each of the great ideas. The numbering of the topics in each
Outline  indicates  which topics are related as coordinate and which are
related  as  supraordinate  and  subordinate.  2  But  it  is not always
possible  to  tell  from  its  grammatical form whether a given topic is
simple  or  complex,  since, as we have seen, some grammatically complex
topics  are  logically simple. Nor is it always possible to tell at once
whether a logically complex topic is of the second or third type; or, if
of the third type, whether its parts are coordinate or supraordinate and
subordinate.  Sometimes  this  will  be  obvious  from  the  wording  or
construction  of the topic; but often it will be discoverable only after
the  discussion  it  covers has been read and studied. A number of other
points concerning the structure of the Outlines of Topics call for brief
comment.  (i)  The relation of supraordinate and subordinate topics. The
subordinate  topics  usually  represent an analytical development of the
theme  or  problem  stated  in  the supraordinate topic under which they
appear.   They  indicate  particular  points  in  the  general  area  of
discussion  defined  by the supraordinate topic. As it covers the whole,
they  cover  the  related  parts  of  the whole. Sometimes, however, the
subordinate topics represent a set of doctrinal alternatives rather than
an  analytical  development of connected points under the supraordinate.
Examples  of  this  have already been given (see pp. 1 241-1242). In the
first  case,  the supraordinate may function as a topic in its own right
in  addition  to  serving as a general heading for subordinates. When it
functions  as  a  topic,  it usually covers a discussion of the whole or
general  theme,  whereas the subordinate topics cover discussions of the
parts  or  particular points. In rare instances, the supraordinate topic
introduces  a  special  point  of  its  own,  in addition to stating the
general  theme  which  the subordinates particularize. But in the second
case,  that  is,  when  the  subordinate topics state a set of doctrinal
alternatives,  the  supraordinate  serves  merely  as a general heading.
topics  numbered  i,  2,  3,  etc.  are  primary and coordinate with one
another.  Any  of these may be supraordinate, in which case topic 2 will
have  under  it  subordinate topics numbered 2a, 2b, 2c, etc., and these
subordinates   will  be  coordinate  with  one  another.  Any  of  these
subordinate  topics  may,  in turn, be supraordinate with respect to its
own  set  of  subordinates,  in  which  case topic 2c will have under it
subordinate  topics  numbered  2c(i),  2c(2), etc. Primary and secondary
topics  may or may not have subordinates; but topics of the order 2c(i),
2c(2),  etc. never have subordinates. 3The above summary of the relation
of  supraordinate and subordinate topics applies to the relation between
primary  and  secondary topics (e.g., between topic 3 and topics 3a, 3b,
3c, etc.) and also to the relation between secondary and tertiary topics
(e.g., between topic 3b and topics 3b(i), 3b(2), etc.)

[1281b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1247 3

[1282a]
1248  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  kinds,  causes,  and  relations.  collection of
illustrative materials.

[1282b]
(2) The analytical order ofthe Outline of Topics as a whole. The primary
topics  {i.e.,  topics  1, 2, 3, etc.) are coordinate in rank; but among
these  coordinates,  certain  kinds  of  topics normally tend to precede
others in the Outline. The discussion usually opens with a consideration
of  the  meaning of the idea or of the various ways in which the idea is
defined  or conceived. Almost as frequently the opening topic deals with
the  nature  of  the  thing  signified by the idea, or proposes the most
general   theory  or  theories  in  which  the  idea  is  involved.  The
immediately  following  topics  are usually concerned with the principal
divisions  or  classifications  of  the  idea  or the thing it signifies
(i.e.,  its  kinds, types, or modes) ; or with its causes or conditions,
and  with  its  relation  to other ideas or things, frequently stated in
terms  of comparisons or contrasts. In some instances, this second group
of  topics deals with the main problems or issues raised by the idea; in
some  instances,  topics  of  this  sort follow the consideration of The
concluding  topics  usually  deal  with  the significance of the idea in
fields of learning and inquiry other than the field in which the idea is
a  principal  term  or  concept;  or  they may deal with the problems or
issues raised by the idea in these other fields. In any case, concluding
topics  of  this  character  cover  phases  of  the discussion which are
plainly  subsidiary  to the matters dealt with in the opening and middle
topics.  In  chapters on ideas which are susceptible to such discussion,
the  final  topic may be concerned with historical considerations or may
provide  a  place for the (3) Variations in the structure ofthe Outlines
of Topics. The statements made in (2) above are intended to describe the
normal  or  typical order of the primary topics. But of the 102 Outlines
of   Topics,  no  two  are  exactly  alike  in  structure  or  order  of
development. Not all, for example, open or close with topics of the sort
indicated; nor do all contain the same variety of intermediate topics or
dispose  them  in the same order. The Outlines vary in a number of other
respects. They differ strikingly in length, or number of topics, ranging
from the chapter on Fate with only 6 topics, to the chapter on Mind with
76  topics. They differ almost as much in their analytical detail or the
complexity of their structure: some chapters have only primary topics or
very  few  subordinates;  whereas in other chapters almost every primary
topic  covers  a  set  of  subordinates,  and many of these in turn have
subordinate  topics  of  their own. The chapters on Fate or Courage, for
example,  have  extremely  simple  Outlines;  those  on  Mind  or State,
extremely  complex  ones.  The  Outlines  also  differ  in regard to the
presence  or  absence  of sets of specialized doctrinal topics. Chapters
like Punishment and Education, in which: the principal term has a common
core  of  meaning  throughout  the  great  books, are not embarrassed by
semantic  difficulties  and so do not need to resort to doctrinal topics
stated  in the language of different authors; whereas chapters like Idea
and

[1283a]
Mind,  beset  by semantic difficulties, require topics which specify the
various  senses in which the principal term is used by different authors
or groups of authors. Not only in this last respect, but^ajsojvkh regard
to  their  differences  in  complexity,  length,  and the order of their
topics,  the  Outlines  vary  with the character of the great ideas they
articulate  and analyze. As each idea is different from all the rest, so
is  each  Outline of Topics. Each was constructed and written to fit the
idea—  not  the idea by itself, but as it has been treated and discussed
in  the  great books. The point just made explains why these 2987 topics
were  selected—  no  more,  no  fewer,  and  no others—and why they were
ordered  as  they appear in the Outlines. It is like the explanation why
just  these  102  terms  were  chosen  as  the  great  ideas. Yet if the
explanation  is  understood  to  mean  that  the Outlines of Topics were
entirely  fitted  to the great books, it is only partly understood. This
would  ignore  another  factor which shaped the Outlines and ordered the
topics,  even  if  it  did  not  greatly  affect  the  selection  of the
individual  topics  and  their  phrasing.  That  other  factor  was  the
consideration  of  purely logical criteria in constructing the Outlines.
To the extent that such logical considerations prevailed, the content of
the  great  books  was  also fitted into the Outlines of Topics. Logical
considerations did not always prevail. The Outlines of Topics assume the
form  of  analyses,  but  as analyses many of them have logical flaws or
deficiencies.  Certain  topics  call  attention to the absence of others
which  would  be  included  in a logically rounded analysis of the idea.
Certain  topics  seem  to  be  given  greater prominence than they would
deserve in a logically balanced analysis; and certain topics are treated
with  greater  analytical refinement than others which logically deserve
the  same  treatment. In addition, the actual order of topics often only
approximates  the  ideal analytical order, and sometimes even definitely
departs  from  it.  These  defects, both logical and substantive, in the
Outlines  of  Topics  are all consequences of the same fundamental fact.
The  Outlines  do  not  represent analyses of the great ideas considered
abstractly  or  in themselves. It might almost be said that they are not
analyses  of the ideas at all, but rather of the discussion of the ideas
in  the  great  books.  That  statement,  however, would be too extreme.
Though  the  selection of certain topics and the omission of others were
wholly  determined  by  the content of the great books, the order of the
topics  selected,  the  choice  of the primary topics, and the weight or
importance given to certain topics were determined partly by the content
of  the  great books and partly by standards of logical precision in the
construction of a rounded and balanced analysis. The Outlines of Topics,
therefore,  represent  an attempt to reconcile the demands of logic with
fidelity  to  the syntopical aim of exhibiting the great conversation in
all  its strength and weakness. The actual process by which the Outlines
of  Topics  were  progressively  formed  over  a  period  of seven years
reflects  the  tension  between  these  two interests, even as the final
product reflects their joint influence. The first drafts of the Outlines
of Topics were largely a priori. They were logical

[1283b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1249

[1284a]
1250  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  is,  empirical or historical rather than purely
logical.  organization,  of  the  whole discussion of a great idea. lems
which   have   become  dominant  only  in  our  own  day.  analyzed  and
articulated.

[1284b]
analyses  of the ideas, formulated prior to any effort to use the topics
as headings for collecting references to the great books. Yet even these
first  drafts  were  not entirely a priori; they were constructed in the
light  of considerable knowledge of the tradition of western thought. To
this  extent  they  were  a  posteriori, that These original drafts were
repeatedly  revised  in  the effort to use each topic as a heading for a
segment of the discussion. Topics were discarded; new topics were added;
certain  topics  were  merged  and  others were subdivided; a very large
proportion  of  the  topics  were  rephrased  again  and  again; and the
Outlines  as  wholes  were  reshaped whenever substantive alterations in
their component parts necessitated logical reorganization or refinement.
In this process almost all the Outlines went through many drafts. At the
same   time   each   Outline   was   scrutinized  as  a  whole  for  its
intelligibility  as  an  articulation,  and  its  rationality  as an The
absence  of certain concepts of contemporary importance from the list of
the great ideas can be interpreted to mean that those concepts have only
recently  risen  to  a prominence they do not have in the tradition as a
whole.  The absence of certain topics from the Outlines can be similarly
interpreted.  The  omitted topics cover discussions of recent origin, or
discussions  which,  though they may have antecedents in an earlier day,
do  not  receive  as much attention in the great books as they currently
attract.  In  marking  the  points  on which the great books are silent,
these  absent  topics  point  to contributions to the great conversation
made in our time, as well as to lacunae in our intellectual heritage. On
the  other  hand,  the  Outlines contain a number of topics which elicit
from  the  great  books  contributions  that  are  slight  in number and
variety. In certain instances, the presence of these topics reflects the
effort  to make the Outlines as analytically rounded and balanced as the
content  of the books would permit. But in other cases, the retention of
topics in spite of the slightness of the discussion they cover serves to
record the antecedents in the tradition of themes or probOne final point
about  the  Outlines remains to be made. They often contain topics which
resemble one another in the matters they propose for discussion. This is
seldom if ever true of the primary topics. The overlapping occurs mainly
among  the subordinates, and in the interest of analytical refinement or
balance.  In  the  analytical  breakdown  of two primary topics, similar
points are often logically relevant. In consequence, similar topics will
appear  in  the  two  sets  of  subordinates.  If, in order to avoid the
duplication,  one  of  these subordinate topics had been omitted, one of
the supraordinates would have been left incompletely For example, in the
chapter  on  Law,  under  the  general  heading of topic 4— "The natural
law"—one  of  the subordinates is topic ^i: "The relation of natural law
to  civil  or  municipal law: the state of nature and the regulations of
the  civil  state."  In  the  same chapter, under the general heading of
topic 7— "Law and the

[1285a]
state"—one  of the subordinates is topic 7c: "The priority of natural to
civil  law:  the inviolability or inalienability of natural rights." The
two  topics  are by no means identical, yet they do hayejnuch in common.
Each  proposes  a theme that is logically appropriate in the analysis of
the  general  heading under which it falls. The decision to include both
represents  the  judgment  that  the  inclusion of partially overlapping
topics  is a much less serious fault than the logical defect which would
result  from the exclusion of one of them in order to avoid duplication.
The  policy  which  permitted overlapping topics in the same chapter for
reasons of analytical completeness had even greater justification in the
case of different chapters. The great ideas are so related that it would
be  impossible  to  construct  analytically  adequate Outlines of Topics
without  some  topics  under one idea resembling some topics under other
ideas. In the same chapter, the resemblance between topics is never more
than  a  similarity—  a  partial  overlapping. But between chapters, the
overlapping  may be almost complete. The topics may be identical, except
for  a  slight  difference  in phrasing. For example, the chapter on Law
necessarily includes topic 7b— "The supremacy of law as the principle of
political  freedom"—  under the general heading of topic 7: "Law and the
state." But there is an equal necessity for including, in the chapter on
Liberty,  topic  id  —"The  supremacy of law as a condition of political
liberty"—  under  the  general  heading of topic 1: "Natural freedom and
political  liberty." Such identical topics are the exception rather than
the rule. For the most part, the resemblance between topics of different
chapters  goes  no further than similarity. But there is as much reason,
in   the   interest   of  analytical  completeness,  for  the  partially
overlapping  topics  as  for  the identical ones. The chapter on Citizen
necessarily   contains   a   discussion   of   "The  qualifications  for
citizenship:   extent  of  suffrage"  (Citizen  3);  this  is  partially
duplicated  by  a  discussion  that  is  unavoidable  in  the chapter on
Constitution—  "The  justice  of different constitutions: the extent and
character  of  citizenship  under  each"  (Constitution 5a). Or, to take
another  example,  the discussion of philosophy necessarily includes the
consideration of "The relation of philosophy to mathematics" (Philosophy
ib),  which  approaches  that  problem  somewhat  differently  from  the
inevitable  consideration  of  a  similar  theme  in  the  discussion of
mathematics—  "The  service  of mathematics to dialectic and philosophy:
its place in liberal education" (Mathematics ib). Between any one of the
102  chapters  and  all  the  others,  the number of overlapping topics—
either  identical  or similar in scope—may at first appear large; but it
will  seem  less  remarkable  as one realizes the interdependence of the
great ideas. Far from concealing the overlapping of topics as if it were
a  blemish,  the  Syntopicon calls attention to it, precisely because it
points  out  the  interconnection of the great ideas. This is one of the
functions  performed  by  the  CrossReferences  in  each chapter. As the
Inventory  of Terms shows the interrelation of the great ideas by noting
the  appearance  of  the same term in topics of various chapters, so the
Cross-References show the interrelation of the great ideas by

[1285b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1251

[1286a]
:  1252  THE  GREAT  IDEAS such supplementary topics. tain the following
entry

[1286b]
noting, for the topics of one chapter, the topics in other chapters with
which  they  have  some  affinity.  The  Cross-References  point out two
different  kinds  of  affinity between the topics of one chapter and the
topics  in others. One sort, the affinity of similar topics, has already
been discussed. The other sort of affinity exists between a topic in one
chapter  and  topics  in  other  chapters  that  deal  with related, not
similar,  matters.  The  latter provide contextual discussion of matters
bordering  on  the theme proposed by the first. For example, the chapter
on  Family  contains  a  discussion  of "Eugenics: control of breeding ;
birth  control"  (Family  6b) ; the chapter on Evolution goes more fully
into  the  problems  of  genetics and heredity, and contains two sets of
topics which provide a general context for the consideration of eugenics
in the chapter on Family. They are the topics in Evolution headed by "2.
Genetic  variation in the course of generations," and "3. The process of
heredity."  The  Cross-References  in  the chapter on Family, therefore,
call  attention to the topics in Evolution in the following manner: For:
A  more general consideration of the problems of heredity, see Evolution
2-3C  The  Cross-References  also perform one other service. Sometimes a
topic  or  group of topics is omitted from a particular chapter because,
while  it  has  relevance  to  the  idea  of  that  chapter,  it  is not
indispensable  to  a rounded or balanced analysis of that idea. However,
this  topic  or  group  of  topics  may  be  necessarily involved in the
analysis  of some other idea. The Cross-References call attention to For
example,  the  chapter on Poetry might have considered the nature of the
fine  arts, of which poetry is one. But the Outline of Topics for Poetry
opens  with  a  consideration  of "The nature of poetry: its distinction
from  other  arts."  To supplement this with a discussion of the general
theory  of  the fine arts, presupposed by the distinction of poetry from
other  arts,  the  Cross-References  con- "For: The consideration of the
fine  arts  in  general,  see  Art  7a."  Often  there is only a shadowy
difference between the cross-references to such supplementary topics and
the  cross-references  to related or contextual topics. It rests largely
on  a  sense  of  the  fitness  of a particular topic for the Outline of
Topics  of  a  particular  chapter.  If  the  topics cited by the Cross-
References  might  have  been  included  in  this  chapter  but were not
necessary, they can be regarded as supplementary; if, on the other hand,
they  would  have  been  adventitious  or,  at  best, peripheral in this
chapter,  they  can  be  regarded as contextual. In contrast, there is a
sharp  difference  between  both  these types of crossreferences and the
third  type,  which  cites similar or identical topics in this and other
chapters— topics which are necessary to all the chapters concerned.

[1287a]
The  three  types  of  cross-references  can  sometimes be recognized by
certain  characteristic words in their phrasing. The cross-references to
similar  or  identical  topics often begin with such wordsas_^£ar; Other
discussions  of . . ," or "For: Another consideration of . . ," or "For:
Other  aspects  of.  . . ."The cross-references to contextual or related
topics usually begin with such words as "For: Matters relevant to . . ,"
or  "For: Discussions bearing on. . . ," or "For: Discussions related to
.  .  ."  Still  another phrasing for the contextual cross-references is
"For:  The general theory of. . . ," or "For: The general discussion of.
.  .  ."4 The order of the Cross-References follows roughly the order of
topics  in  the  Outline.  The wording of the Cross-References generally
indicates  the  topic  or  group  of topics in the Outline for which the
particular  cross-reference  to  topics in other chapters is being made.
For  example, Labor ia reads: "The curse of labor: myths of a golden age
and  the  decay of the world." The first cross-reference in Labor reads:
"For: Other discussions of the golden age, see Man 9a; Progress ic; Time
8b."  Labor  ic  reads: "The pain of labor and the expiation of sin: the
disciplinary  and  penal  use  of  labor." The second cross-reference in
Labor  reads:  "For: Other considerations of penal labor, see Punishment
4^3)."   Labor   ie  reads:  "The  honor  of  work  and  the  virtue  of
productivity: progress through the invention of arts for the conquest of
nature."  The  third  cross-reference  in  Labor  reads:  "For:  Matters
relevant  to  the  nature of productive work and the factors influencing
productivity,  see  Art  4,  9a—9b;  Education  6; Science ib(i)— ib(2);
Wealth  3a." Since the relation between particular topics and particular
cross-references  is  immediately  obvious from the parallelism in their
wording,  the  absence of crossreferences for some of the topics is also
immediately discernible. For example, Labor id— "The social necessity of
labor and the moral obligation to work"— does not have a cross-reference
to  topics  in  other chapters. No other chapter contains topics similar
enough  or  closely  enough related to this theme to warrant their being
cited.  This  is usually the explanation of the lack of cross-references
for  certain  topics. But sometimes the omission of cross-references for
particular  topics  may  have been simply an oversight, which is natural
enough  in  view of the magnitude of the comparison involved— each topic
with  3000  others. And sometimes the omission may represent a debatable
judgment  concerning  the  relevance  of  topics  in other chapters to a
particular  topic  in  this  one, or concerning the similarity between a
topic  in this chapter and those in other chapters. Whether other topics
are  similar  enough  or  closely  enough  related  may  frequently be a
difficult  and  reversible  decision.  As  already pointed out, both the
Cross-References  and  the  Inventory  of Terms 4The cross-references to
supplementary  topics are usually signified by the same opening words as
those  to the contextual topics; and a great many cross-references which
are  not marked by any distinctive phrasing may belong to any one of the
three  types.  The  reader may not always be notified in advance what to
expect  in  the  topics of other chapters cited by the Cross-References;
but  where  the  phrasing  fails  to  give  him such information, he can
readily discover for himself the type of relation involved in the cross-
references by turning to the topics cited.

[1287b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1253

[1288a]
1254  THE  GREAT IDEAS Introductions before it discussed the Outlines of
Topics.  on  them.  in  the  same  order. different in origin and in the
possibilities of their resolution.

[1288b]
serve  to  trace  the  intricate  network of relationships among the 102
great ideas. Each does this in its own way. It should be added that both
the  Cross-  References  and  the  Inventory  of  Terms  also  serve  as
instruments  for  finding particular topics among the 3000 topics in the
102  chapters.  The  Cross-  References do this by listing the topics of
other  chapters according to their relevance or similarity to those of a
particular  chapter.  Hence  the  reader,  while  using  or  studying  a
particular  chapter,  is  informed  of the location of germane topics in
other   chapters.   The  Inventory  of  Terms  lists  the  fundamentally
significant  words  in  each  of  the topics and, in addition, the terms
which  are  implied  by  its meaning. Each term is followed by a list of
chapters   in   which   related  or  similar  topics  appear.  III.  THE
INTRODUCTIONS  In  the  structure of each chapter, the Outline of Topics
follows   the   Introduction.  This  essay  might  have  been  expected,
therefore,  to  deal  with  the  There are two reasons for reversing the
expected order. First, the topics are, in a sense, integral parts of the
great ideas; and, therefore, the examination of the Outlines as analyses
of   the   ideas  naturally  follows  the  consideration  of  the  ideas
themselves.  Second,  the  topics state the themes, problems, and issues
with which the Introductions deal. The Introduction to each of the great
ideas is, in part at least, a commentary on its topics. It is not out of
order, therefore, to examine the commentary after considering the topics
commented  on.  But if this is the proper order, then it would seem that
it  might  have  been  better,  in  constructing the Syntopicon, to have
placed   the   Outline  of  Topics  first  in  each  chapter,  with  the
Introduction  following  rather  than preceding it. But the fact is that
the Introductions are only in part a commentary on the topics. They also
deal  with  the  idea as a whole, in such a way as to be preparatory for
reading  the  topics.  They are genuinely introductions to the topics as
well  as  commentaries  The reciprocal illumination of each by the other
will be better understood in terms of the purposes the Introductions are
intended  to  serve.  It  will  then  become clear that the advantage of
reading  the Outlines of Topics before the Introductions is almost equal
to  the  advantage of reading the Introductions first. Like the Outlines
of  Topics, the Introductions vary from chapter to chapternot so much in
length as in their method of exposition. They do not all begin or end in
the  same  way;  nor do they uniformly treat the same matters or proceed
The  way  in which each Introduction deals with a great idea corresponds
to  the  characteristic difference of that idea from all the others. The
ideas differ in four respects, and the Introductions differ accordingly.
Each  idea  has  a  unique  structure. It also has a unique history. The
character and intensity of its verbal difficulties are often peculiar to
itself. The problems and issues it has engendered are

[1289a]
Nevertheless,  all  the  Introductions  were  conceived  and  written to
perform  a  common  task.  They were intended to serve the same fourfold
purpose,  corresponding  to the four respects in which_ihe ideas differ.
The Introductions attempt to treat each idea semantically, historically,
analytically,  and  dialectically.  (i) The semantic aim. It has already
been  pointed out that most of the names of the great ideas have a range
of  meanings.  They  have been used by the authors of the great books in
different senses, and many of them have, in addition, meanings of recent
origin  or  popularity.  This  is true not only of the principal term in
each  chapter, but also of some of the subordinate terms which appear in
the  topics.  Often the meaning of the principal term is affected by the
meaning  of  a  subordinate term connected with it in the statement of a
topic.  The  semantic  aim of the Introductions is to record the various
meanings  of the words which have been used to name the great ideas, and
of  the  other words which have been used traditionally and currently in
discussing  the  great  ideas.  The  Introductions seldom try to do this
exhaustively.  They aim at verbal clarification only where necessary— in
order  to  prevent real agreements from being obscured by differences in
language,  or to discover real disagreements in thought between men who,
so far as their language goes, appear to be saying the same, or at least
compatible,  things.  Like  the  other  parts  of  the  Syntopicon,  the
Introductions  have  as their ultimate aim the re-enactment of the great
conversation.  Each  Introduction  tries to recreate the discussion of a
great  idea  as  though the authors contributing to that discussion were
engaged in conversation about its major topics—and almost as though they
were  contemporaries, confronting each other in actual discourse, rather
than  dispersed  across  thirty  centuries.  The  semantic  aim  of  the
Introductions  is  to clarify the meanings of the words they use so that
they  can  be heard talking relevantly to one another. The Introductions
succeed  to  the  extent  that  they  suggest how the great minds of the
western  tradition exist together in a single universe of discourse. (2)
The  historical  aim.  To  collapse  thirty centuries of imagination and
thought  into  a  single historical moment would seem to be unhistorical
or,   worse,  antihistorical.  Yet  the  Introductions  have  just  been
described  as  doing  exactly  this, since they treat the authors of the
great books as if they were contemporaries, and use the present tense in
reporting  their  discussion  of ideas. Mill and Aristotle, for example,
may  be  reported  as  taking  one  side  of an issue, on which they are
opposed  by  Plato  and  Hobbes.  Lucretius  may  be  said to be more in
agreement  with  Freud  on  certain  matters  than  he is with anyone in
antiquity.  As  far  as  possible  the  authors  are associated with one
another  in terms of their thought, not their times. They are opposed to
one  another in the same way. The centuries can be as readily bridged by
genuine  agreements as they can be divided by disagreements, apparent or
genuine.  Neither  the  agreement  nor  the  disagreement is a necessary
function of simultaneity or succession in time.

[1289b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1255

[1290a]
1256 THE GREAT IDEAS transcendentalism. the dialectic of ideas.

[1290b]
Yet  sometimes  a certain point of view is characteristic of a period or
phase  of  western  civilization. Sometimes the political, economic, and
cultural  conditions  of a time are more than the background of thinking
or  the  environment to which the thought refers; they are conditions of
the  thought  itself,  and  therefore  of  its  intelligibility.  It  is
unquestionable  that  some  men  originate ideas which others borrow and
often change. There is little doubt that the thought of one whole period
influences  the thought of a later period, either to react against it or
to  alter  it  for  assimilation. Certainly, then, the succession of the
centuries,  the  location  of minds in time, the relation of thought and
imagery  to  the  culture  of  a  period, the influence of one mind upon
another  and  one  period  upon  another— certainly all these things are
significant  features  of the great conversation as it develops in time.
The  very  word  "tradition"  connotes a passing from age to age— both a
heritage  and  an  inheritance.  To  consider  the  tradition of western
thought  is, therefore, to deal with the history of ideas. Both sides of
the  picture  contain  a portion of the truth— the temporal and the non-
temporal,  the  historical and the unhistorical. Thought transcends time
to  a  certain  extent, and to a certain extent time conditions thought.
Ideas  have  a  career  in time and, therefore, a history; but they also
have an inner logic which transcends history. To some extent, therefore,
all  minds  dealing  with  the  same  ideas  are  contemporary; they are
together  in  the  same  logical, if not historical, moment by virtue of
their  agreements and disagreements. To deny this is to commit the error
of  historicism.  But  in some measure minds dealing with the same ideas
cannot  deal  with them in the same way at different historical moments.
To  neglect  or  ignore  this  fact is to commit an opposite error which
might  be  labelled The Introductions try to avoid the fallacies of both
extremes  by  combining  the  historical  with  the logical treatment of
ideas.  But  they  do not try to do equal justice to both aspects of the
matter, and in consequence do not preserve a perfect balance between the
two  approaches. The primary aim of the Introductions is not historical,
as it is not semantic. It is dialectical. The Introductions do not carry
verbal  clarification further than is necessary to prevent language from
obscuring  the  logical  realities—  the  issues,  the  agreements,  the
disagreements, and the arguments. For the same reason, the Introductions
do  not  engage  in  the  history of ideas for its own sake. They remain
unhistorical  wherever  possible, and become historical only to indicate
places where the history of ideas is itself part of Not all of the great
ideas are involved in an historical dialectic to the same extent. At one
extreme, with ideas like Beauty, Chance, Courage, Definition, Education,
Emotion, Happiness, Infinity, Justice, Knowledge, Love, Nature, Opinion,
Pleasure  and Pain, Punishment, Sense, and Tyranny, the discussion seems
to  be  comparatively unaffected by the historical location of the minds
engaged   in  it.  It  completes  almost  the  same  circle  of  logical
development  in  every  period;  the  focus does not change from time to
time;  the  discussion  as  a whole does not move irreversibly along the
line of history. The Introductions to

[1291a]
such   chapters,   therefore,  can  be  largely  unhistorical  in  their
dialectical  effort to state the main features of the discussion. At the
other  extreme,  with  such  ideas_as  Angel,  Astronomy,  Constitution,
Democracy,  Element,  Evolution, Family, God, Immortality, Labor, Logic,
Mathematics,  Mechanics,  Philosophy, Progress, Prophecy, Religion, Sin,
Theology,  War  and  Peace,  and  Wealth,  the  discussion  seems  to be
seriously  affected  by  intellectual  and  cultural differences between
different  epochs.  The whole conversation shifts its ground and changes
its  focus  as it passes, in the spheres of politics, economics, and the
sciences,  from ancient to modern times; and, in the spheres of religion
and  theology, from pagan antiquity to the Christian Middle Ages or from
mediaeval  Christendom to the increasingly secular culture of the modern
epoch. Its starting points are not the same, and its logical development
takes   different   directions   as   the   whole   discussion  develops
historically.   Hence   the  Introductions  to  such  chapters  must  be
historical  in  treating  the  pivotal  points  of the dialectic. To the
extent  to  which  the Introductions treat the great ideas historically,
they  trace  their  development  in  a  number  of  ways.  They may call
attention,  on the semantic side, to changes in the meaning of the basic
words  from  period  to  period. On the analytical side, they frequently
note which parts of the idea— which of its topics or themes—occupied the
center of discussion at one time, but received little or no attention at
another. Above all, in relation to the dialectic of the discussion, they
try to suggest the actual course of the great conversation. By observing
its  continuities and discontinuities, especially the latter, they throw
historical  light on the failures of the dialectic— the failure of minds
to meet or join issue, or, as between the thought of one period and that
of another, the weakening of relevance to the breaking point. If, on the
whole,  the Introductions lean more to the dialectic than to the history
of  the  great ideas, the balance is somewhat restored by the fact that,
under  each  topic,  the  references  to the great books are arranged in
historical  order.  The reader who follows the discussion by reading the
books  or  passages in the order in which they are cited will be able to
discover  for  himself  many historical collocations and sequences which
the Introductions fail to note; where they are only suggested or briefly
touched  on  in  the  Introductions,  they  are  amply documented in the
References.  Yet  even  here the complementary point remains to be made.
Under  each topic, the references are set forth in historical order. But
the  books  and passages cited under one topic would not be there unless
they all satisfied the requirement of relevance. They can be relevant to
one  another  only  if  they  are  talking  about  the  same thing. Such
relevance  signifies  that all the authors belong to the same tradition,
or,  in  other  words,  that they all participate in the same culture or
civilization,  no matter how it may be subdivided into epochs or phases.
From  the  point of view of world culture, which must remain unformed so
long  as  the  world remains divided into a number of distinct cultures,
what  we  call  the  culture of the west is unitary, in spite of all the
separate strands or segments we

[1291b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1257

[1292a]
1258  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  structure  of  the  ideas  as  set forth in the
Outlines. of the Outlines. that suitable to a topical outline.

[1292b]
can  find  in  it.  From  the point of view of world history, which in a
strict  sense  cannot  begin until a world culture is formed, the thirty
centuries of imagination and thought represented in the great books tend
to  become  a  single time, even as the books tend to belong to a single
tradition  and  culture.  By  taking  the  point of view of future world
history,  we  can imagine how the whole tradition of western culture may
some  day  appear  as  a  single  parochial  episode.  In  a  sense  the
Introductions  are  making this imaginary construction when they present
the  great conversation in the present tense, as if it were taking place
among  contemporaries.  (3)  The  analytical aim. The Outlines of Topics
present  analyses  of  the  great  ideas.  The  Introductions perform an
analytical  function  in  commenting  on the The Outlines do not explain
themselves; for the most part, the order and subordination of the topics
do  not  need  explanation. But occasionally the reason for including or
giving  special prominence to a certain topic or group of topics may not
be  immediately  obvious,  especially  if the matters dealt with are not
familiar   to   contemporary   thought.   The  converse  is  also  true.
Occasionally,  the  absence  of  topics  which are currently subjects of
great  interest may deserve a word of explanation. The Introductions try
to  throw  light on both these aspects The major parts of the discussion
of  a  great  idea are the fundamental problems and issues in which that
idea  is  involved.  In  commenting  on these, the Introductions usually
adopt  the  topical  statement  of them in the Outlines. Though there is
seldom a perfect correspondence between the content of the Introductions
and that of the Outlines, there is a general conformity between the main
points  treated  in each. Their order is not necessarily the same, for a
discursive  treatment  of related problems and issues usually demands an
order  markedly different from In many chapters, topics will be found in
the  Outline which are not considered in the Introduction. There are two
reasons  for  this.  First,  the Outline of Topics for a particular idea
usually raises more points of importance or interest than can be treated
in  a  short essay. Therefore, some must be ignored or mentioned only in
passing. Second, the Outline in a particular chapter frequently includes
topics  which are similar to or identical with topics in other chapters.
Hence,  to  avoid  repetition  and  undue  length, the Introduction to a
particular  chapter  may  leave  to  another  chapter's Introduction the
treatment   of   a  subject  common  to  both.  Wherever  possible,  the
Introductions notify the reader that a given topic receives attention or
ampler  treatment  in  the  Introductions to other chapters, fust as the
Cross-References for a given chapter indicate the relation of its topics
to  those of other chapters, so the Introduction supplies its own cross-
references   to   other  Introductions  in  which  related  matters  are
discussed. In doing this, the Introductions not only indicate, but often
try  to  illuminate, the interconnection of the great ideas. In addition
to  examining  the structure of the idea with which it deals, it is part
of the analytical aim of each Introduction to place this idea in

[1293a]
the  larger  structure  of the whole set of ideas, and especially in the
constellation   of  closely  related  ideas  to  which  it  belongs.  In
performing their function as^gommentaries on the Outlines of Topics, the
Introductions  usually  pay special attention to the groups of doctrinal
topics  which  set  forth the positions or views of different authors in
their  own language. The fact that doctrinal topics could not be avoided
in  the  Outline  for  a  particular chapter indicates both semantic and
analytical  difficulties  which  the  mere statement of doctrinal topics
seldom  solves  completely. Wherever possible, the Introductions attempt
to  deal with these difficulties discursively and to clarify points that
the  elliptical  statement of the topics necessarily leaves obscure. But
the  groups  of  doctrinal topics call for more than clarification. They
usually  represent  a  profound  difference  of  opinion or a many-sided
controversy  in  the  tradition  of  the  great  books. In treating such
matters,  the  Introductions  go  beyond  their  semantic and analytical
functions  to  the  dialectical,  which  is  their  primary aim. (4) The
dialectical  aim.  The Introductions attempt to report some of the major
issues,  or basic intellectual oppositions, in the sphere of each of the
great  ideas.  That  this  is  their  primary  aim  does  not imply that
disagreement  is  the dominant feature of the intellectual tradition. On
the  contrary,  agreement in almost every case accompanies disagreement;
that  is,  on  most  of  the  great  issues, the opinions or views which
represent  opposite  sides of the dispute are shared by several authors,
often  by many. Seldom do we find a solitary exponent of a controversial
position.  The great issues align men side by side as well as range them
against  one  another. If, in the rare case, disagreement does not carry
with  it  a  proportionate  amount  of  agreement, that disproportion is
balanced  by  the fact that, on a small number of fundamental questions,
there  seems to be no disagreement among the authors of the great books.
On  the  whole,  there  is  as  much  agreement  as  disagreement in the
tradition  of  western thought—agreement across the centuries as well as
among  contemporaries,  and  disagreement  likewise.  The primacy of the
dialectical  aim  of  the  Introductions follows from the primacy of the
mind's   concern  with  truth.  The  other  aims  represent  preparatory
considerations—how  language  has  been  used  to  express  thought, how
thought  has been affected by historic circumstances, the ground thought
has covered in dealing with the great ideas. All these preparations lead
to  the  question they leave unanswered. Where does the truth lie in all
the  thinking  that  has been done on each of the great ideas ? Where is
thought  true,  and  where  is  it  false  ?  The dialectical aim of the
Introductions  is  primary  because  it is motivated by this fundamental
consideration.  In  their concern with agreements and disagreements, the
Introductions  approach the question of truth and falsity. The agreement
of  men  about  the nature of things in any field of inquiry establishes
some  presumption of the truth of the opinions they commonly hold. Their
disagreement  establishes  the  counter-presumption—  that  none  of the
opinions  in  conflict, whether shared or not, may be wholly true. Among
conflicting opinions, one may,

[1293b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1259

[1294a]
1260  THE  GREAT IDEAS challenge or rebut. this in order to do something
else.  in  the  books  and  passages  there  referred  to.  ness  of its
approximation to this ideal. avoided."

[1294b]
of  course,  be  wholly  true  and  all  the  rest false; but it is also
possible  that  each  expresses  some  portion  of the whole truth; and,
except  for flat and isolated contradictions (which seldom if ever occur
in the great conversation), it is even possible that all the conflicting
opinions  may  be  false,  just as it is possible for that opinion to be
false  on  which  all seem to agree. Some opinion as yet unexpressed— at
least  not discoverable in the great books or in other books— may be the
truth  or  nearer  to  it. In short, agreement and disagreement raise no
more  than  a  presumption  of  truth  and  falsity, a presumption which
further  inquiry  can  always This being the case, the Introductions, in
their  dialectical  effort,  must  fall  short of answering the question
which  is  the  mind's  fundamental concern. They would be dogmatic, not
dialectical,  if,  on any of the great issues, they asserted or tried to
prove  the  truth  or  falsity of any view. They would simply become one
more  voice  in the perennial debate on fundamental issues. They refrain
from doing The point is not that one more voice carries no weight in the
forum  of human discussion. The point is rather that a different type of
contribution  to  the pursuit of truth can and should be made. Moreover,
it  is  the  only contribution the Introductions can properly make as an
integral part of a syntopicon of the great books. These are not isolated
essays published by an author in his own name. They are Introductions to
chapters  on  the  great  ideas  in  the great books. They introduce the
Outlines  of  Topics.  Together with the topics, they lead the reader to
the  References,  and  prepare him to read, interpret, and judge what he
finds  The  special  contribution  the  Introductions try to make to the
debate  of  perennial  issues  consists  in being resolutely dialectical
throughout.The  special quality they try to achieve can be summarized in
two   words:   dialectical   objectivity.   5  6The  words  "dialectical
objectivity"  may  be  new,  but  the  ideal they express is old. It has
always  been  the  ideal  of the encyclopaedist, and the greatness of an
encyclopaedia can almost be measured by the closeIn his Prefatory Notice
to  the  9th  edition of the Encyclopaedia Britannica, the Editor, T. S.
Baynes,  wrote  that,  in  the  conflict  of  opinion,  "a work like the
Encyclopaedia  is  not called upon to take any direct part. It has to do
with knowledge rather than opinion, and to deal with all subjects from a
critical  and  historical,  rather  than  a  dogmatic, point of view. It
cannot  be  the  organ  of  any  sect  or party in Science, Religion, or
Philosophy.  Its  main  duty is to give an accurate account of the facts
and  an  impartial summary of results in every department of inquiry and
research."  In  the  Prefatory  Material  to  the  nth  edition  of  the
Encyclopaedia  Britannica,  James  Bryce  quoted the foregoing paragraph
from Baynes, and added: "The Encyclopaedia Britannica itself has no side
or  party, it attempts to give representation to all parties, sects, and
sides.  .  .  .  Every effort has been made to obtain, impartially, such
statements  of  doctrine  and  belief in matters of religion and similar
questions  as  are satisfactory to those who hold them, and to deal with
these  questions,  so  far as criticism is concerned, in such a way that
the  controversial  points  may  be  understood and appreciated, without
prejudice  to the argument. The easy way to what is sometimes considered
impartiality  is  to  leave controversy out altogether; that would be to
avoid  responsibility  at  the cost of perpetuating ignorance, for it is
only in the light of the controversies about them that the importance of
these  questions of doctrine and opinion can be realized. . . . Amid the
variety  of beliefs which are held with sincere conviction by one set of
people   or   another,  impartiality  does  not  consist  in  concealing
criticism,  or in withholding the knowledge of divergent opinion, but in
an  attitude  of scientific respect which is precise in stating a belief
in the terms, and according to the interpretation, accepted by those who
hold  it."  And  in another place, Bryce said: "He who writes a treatise
often  writes  it  to prove his own theory and disparage the theories of
others;  but  in  a work of reference such exclusiveness or partisanship
would be reprehended, and is therefore usually

[1295a]
They try to look at all sides and take no sides. Of course, they fail to
achieve  so  exacting  an ideal. They may succeed, as the. topics do, in
taking no sides. Just as the topics state subjects on which^thexe^ean be
different  opinions,  without  affirming  or denying any of the possible
opinions,  so  the  Introductions  try  to  present  the  issues without
prejudice to any partisan point of view, and treat conflicting positions
impartially.  But  it  is  easier  to  take no sides than to look at all
sides.  In  this  latter respect, the Introductions undoubtedly fail. To
begin  with,  it  is never possible to say that all possible sides of an
important  issue  have  been  examined.  They  can never be exhaustively
enumerated. The answers and arguments to be found in the great books are
always  weighty  and significant, and are usually a fair sampling of the
best   human  thought  on  the  subject,  but  they  never  exhaust  the
possibilities  of  thought.  Secondly,  it  is  seldom  possible for the
Introductions,  within  the limits of a short essay, to examine even all
the answers and arguments in the great books; and even if some selection
can  be  justified  on  the  ground that it chooses the most significant
opinions  or  the  principal  arguments,  it  still remains a selection.
Finally, even those positions and arguments selected for examination and
summary  may not all be viewed with an equally open mind or presented in
an  equally  favorable  light.  Perfect  dialectical  objectivity is not
guaranteed  by  avoiding  explicit judgments on the truth of conflicting
opinions. Partiality can intrude itself in a variety of subtler ways— by
the  manner in which arguments are summarized, by shades of emphasis and
neglect, by the tone of a question or the color of a passing remark, and
by  the  order in which the various positions are presented. In order to
avoid  some of these faults, or at least to minimize their impairment of
dialectical  objectivity,  the Introductions resort to an obvious device
and  use  it as much as possible. They report the opinion or argument of
an  author  in  his  own  language,  substituting quotation for summary.
Quotations  may,  of course, be wrenched out of context, and their sense
may  be  falsified  by  the way in which they are quoted. But since each
introductory  essay  is  associated  with references to the great books,
citing  fully  all the passages from which the quotations are taken (and
many more besides, which provide the rest of the context), the reader of
the  Introductions is protected against such discrepancies as may occur.
This  device  of  quotation  provides the Introductions with a safeguard
against  the greater danger of summarization. In addition, it gives them
the  flavor  of  the  great  conversation itself. It offers the reader a
sample  of  the  wealth  of  material  cited in the References. Only the
writer's  firm intention to avoid them can be relied on to prevent other
sorts of defection from dialectical objectivity. Dialectical objectivity
demands  a  deliberate  effort  to balance question against question, to
forego  any  comment  that  might  be prejudicial, to check any tendency
toward  over-  or  underemphasis.  The  reader can judge for himself the
extent  to  which  such effort has been successful in the writing of the
Introductions.   On   all  these  counts,  the  measure  of  dialectical
objectivity  achieved  should  be  evident. But the reader cannot easily
judge  its  achievement  on  the  one  remaining  count—  the  order  of
discussion in the Introductions.

[1295b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1261

[1296a]
1262  THE GREAT IDEAS uniformity has been avoided. be answered. have for
him as much dialectical truth as can be attained. Introductions.

[1296b]
For  example, many Introductions end with the exposition of a particular
author's  theory  of  a  controversial  subject,  and  sometimes  with a
quotation  unaccompanied  by  comment. Does this signify approval of the
author's position on the question? In presenting a number of conflicting
positions,  the  Introductions  must  necessarily  expound  them in some
order. Does the theory coming last in the series have the favored place,
or  does  the first ? The assumption behind these questions (which arise
naturally  enough)  is  that  the  writer  of the Introductions may have
intellectual convictions which influence his ordering of the discussion,
even  though he does not allow himself to express them explicitly in the
form of judgments about what is true or false. That assumption is partly
correct.  No  mature  mind  can  be without convictions. But they do not
necessarily  constitute  an  insuperable  obstacle  to  maintaining  the
dialectical  detachment  sought  for in the Introductions. If the writer
can  refrain  from  expressing  his  own judgment about what is true and
false,  he  can  also,  though  perhaps  with  more difficulty, exercise
sufficient caution to prevent his convictions from influencing the order
in  which  he  treats a variety of opinions, one of which he may hold as
his  own.  He  can  do  this by making certain that the views he himself
favors  do  not  uniformly  occupy  the  same  place  in  the  order  of
discussion—  whether that be first or last. A deliberate effort was made
to  avoid  uniformity  in  the  order  of  treatment. The result of this
attempt  cannot  be  judged  by examining a single Introduction; but, by
taking  the 102 Introductions as a whole, the reader can observe whether
The  reader's  final judgment on the attainment of their dialectical aim
can  be  made in terms of a test much more relevant than any examination
of  details  of  method  or order in the Introductions. If a dialectical
balance  has  been  preserved,  the reader should be left with the major
questions to answer for himself. He should be left with the major issues
unresolved,  unless  he has resolved them in his own mind. If he has any
opinion  as to where the truth lies, it should be his own, formed by him
in the light of his reading, not pre-formed for him in any way. From the
Introductions  themselves, he should derive only three types of opinion:
(1)  that,  for each of the great ideas, these are some of the questions
or  issues  worth  considering;  (2)  that, for each of the questions or
issues  mentioned,  these  are some of the answers or solutions; and (3)
that  some  of the questions are so connected that answering one of them
in  a certain way partly determines how others must If the Introductions
do more than this, they overstep their dialectical limits, for more than
this  would be to declare one answer true and another false. But if they
do  this  much,  neither  more  nor less, then they neither exceed their
bounds  nor  fall short of their mark. And if, with respect to the three
types  of  opinion  they  do  try  to  assert, the Introductions win the
reader's acceptance, then they It seems appropriate at this point to say
a word about the writing of the

[1297a]
They  were  written  by the Editor in Chief of The Great Ideas. In a few
cases,  preliminary  drafts  of  the essays were prepared by the General
Editor.  Drafts  of all the essays were read and criticizeTrbyTne Editor
in Chief of Great BooJ{s ofthe Western World, by editors on the staff of
the Syntopicon, and by other persons who generously accepted the task of
reading  and  commenting  on them. The suggestions for revision from all
these  sources  were  collated to guide the writing of a final draft. In
this,  as  in  most  collaborative efforts, the final responsibility for
accepting or rejecting suggestions rested with one person. The Editor in
Chief   of   The  Great  Ideas  assumed  that  final  responsibility  of
authorship.  To  some  degree, then, the Introductions as published bear
the  authority of a group of minds working in collaboration, but they do
not pretend to be that anomalous thing— a composite literary production.
In  their  report  of the traditional discussion of the great ideas, the
Introductions  reflect  their  author's reading of the great books. They
also  represent  some  knowledge  of  the books listed in the Additional
Readings;  it  should  not be necessary to say that no one— certainly no
one  responsible for the content of the Introductions —has read all this
literature.  As  for the great books, no one can claim to have read them
all  equally  well,  or  to  have  read  all  of them systematically and
carefully  for their relevance to each of the 102 great ideas. That kind
of  reading  was  hardly feasible before the Syntopicon was constructed.
The  Introductions  were  being  written  at  the  same  time  that  the
references  to the great books were being compiled, topic by topic, idea
after  idea.  One  fact  about the writing of the Introductions deserves
repetition  and emphasis. They were conceived as parts of the Syntopicon
and  constructed in relation to the other parts, especially the Outlines
of  Topics  and  the  References.  According to this conception of their
purpose, they were written, not for scholars or specialists, but for the
general  reader—  or, more specifically, for future readers of the great
books.  This last point calls attention to one of the difficulties faced
in  writing  the  Introductions.  They  could have, and would have, been
written  quite  differently  had  they  been intended for an audience of
persons  already familiar with the great books. Should such persons read
the  Introductions,  they  may  need  to  be reminded of this fact. Some
readers  may have devoted considerable time to the study of a particular
author  or  group  of  authors;  as  measured  by the depth of their own
scholarship,  the  Introductions may appear superficial or inadequate in
the  treatment of those authors. Other readers, as a result of their own
scientific  or  philosophical  work,  may  hold  certain of the theories
discussed  in  the Introductions; as measured by the complexity of their
own  speculative  involvement,  the  Introductions may appear to present
imperfect  or  over-simplified versions of these doctrines. Such persons
are asked to remember that the Introductions try to give some account of
all,  not just a few, of the authors of the great books, and to present,
for  each  of  the  great  ideas, a dialectical treatment of conflicting
opinions,  not a scholarly exposition of particular doctrines considered
in  isolation. This they try to do in a manner suited to the layman, not
the  specialist— for future readers of the great books, not past masters
of them.

[1297b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1263

[1298a]
1264 THE GREAT IDEAS their meaning. citations of that author's work, and
look there for its meaning. standing he seeks. a small proportion of the
topics under the Outline for each idea. additional material he seeks.

[1298b]
From  the  standpoint  of  the  lay  reader,  the Introductions may have
defects  of  an opposite sort. The effort to make them intelligible to a
person  who  has  not  read  the great books— or, certainly, not studied
them—  involved  a  constant  struggle against space limitations. It was
often  necessary to use certain technical words or phrases which have an
established  traditional  meaning,  without  being able to explain their
significance  in  readily understandable terms. For example, for brevity
of  reference  it  was often necessary to use such expressions as Kant's
"categorical  imperative,"  Hegel's "Absolute Idea," Spinoza's "infinite
modes,"   Freud's   "repression,"  Newton's  "evanescent  quantity,"  or
Ptolemy's  "epicycles,"  but it was not always possible, at the point at
which  they  were used, to explain When the Introductions are obscure or
cryptic  for  this reason, a remedy is available for the lay reader. The
language of the Introductions is keyed to that of the topics. The reader
can  therefore  go  to  the  topic  which contains the difficult word or
phrase;  under  it  he  will  find  references to the book in which that
expression  is  amply  explained  by  the author who made it part of his
technical  vocabulary.  In some instances, the difficult expression does
not  appear  in  the  language  of  the  topics,  but,  as  used  in the
Introductions,  it  may  be  associated  with  the  name of a particular
author.  The  remedy  is  still  to  go  to the References, find the The
brevity  of the introductions makes them dependent upon a reading of the
great  books,  under  the guidance of the topics and references, for the
amplification of meanings. This is also true of many of the concepts and
theories   they  deal  with.  Brevity  of  treatment,  with  or  without
quotations  from  authors,  will  leave  the  reader  in  need of fuller
explanation.  For the reader who is left perplexed by the Introductions,
the  References provide a direct route to the better underThe brevity of
the  Introductions  even  helps  to  fulfill  the primary purpose of the
Syntopicon  as  a  whole, which is to serve as a stimulus and a guide to
reading  the  great  books.  Reading  the  Introductions  can never be a
substitute  for  reading  the  books. The Introductions were designed to
create,  and  leave  unsatisfied,  an  appetite  for  understanding. The
quotations  from  the  great books which they contain are always, as the
volume  of  the References indicates, a small proportion of the quotable
material.  The  topics with which they deal at any length are always The
Introductions  are thus, at best, intimations of the great conversation.
They  are,  in short, introductions; and, in addition to all their other
aims,  they  have  a seductive aim which succeeds whenever the reader is
prompted  by  perplexity,  doubt,  curiosity,  or  wonder to go from the
Introductions  to the References and from them to the great books. Since
the  Introductions usually employ the language of the topics, the reader
is  seldom  left in doubt as to where he can find the There is one other
deficiency  in  the  Introductions which results from their brevity, and
it, too, has its remedy. The interconnection of the great ideas is such

[1299a]
that  sometimes the same points— the same problems, issues, concepts, or
theories  —deserve  treatment  in  the  Introductions  to  more than one
chapter.  Since the Introductions appear in the alphabcticaTorder of the
ideas,  each had to be written so that it could be read as an autonomous
essay.  This  consideration  made  desirable  the  repetition of certain
matters  in  two or more Introductions, but the amount of repetition was
sharply  limited  by the requirement of brevity. In consequence, certain
matters,  highly  relevant  to  the dialectic of a particular idea, were
reserved  for  treatment  in  the Introductions to other ideas. Wherever
this  occurs,  the  Introductions cite the other chapters in which these
points  are more amply treated. Thus, though any particular Introduction
may  be  obscure  because  it  does not fully explain all the notions or
doctrines  to  which  it alludes, other Introductions provide the reader
with  a remedy. As for the great ideas, so also for the Introductions to
the  chapters on them, the alphabetical order conceals the intricate and
highly  significant  pattern of their interdependence or co-implication.
This order permits the reader to begin with any Introduction, or to read
any   one   without   first  having  to  read  others.  But  though  the
Introductions were designed for such use, they were also written with an
eye  to the total pattern of the great ideas. It is part of their aim to
take the reader wherever he starts and lead him from one idea to another
along  paths  that,  crisscrossing  in  all  directions, cover the whole
circle  of  ideas.  IV.  THE  REFERENCES  The References, which form the
central part of each chapter, are the heart of the Syntopicon. More than
either  the  Introductions  or  the  Outlines  of Topics, the References
represent  a  reading  of  the great books. Quite literally, each of the
163,000  references  enumerated  under  the  2987  topics  represents an
examination  of a book, in whole or part, for its relevance to the topic
under  which the reference is given. The reading necessary to record the
163,000  references  could  hardly  be  done by one man, or even a small
group  of  men,  within  so short a time as seven years. The great books
could  be  read  through  once  in  that time, but a first reading would
obviously be inadequate to the task of discovering the contribution each
makes  to  the thousands of themes which comprise the length and breadth
of the great conversation. Nor could the situation be very much improved
simply  by  a  second  or  third  reading.  The  References  represent a
different type of reading. To use a comparison which may help to explain
the   difference,   the  ordinary  reading  of  a  great  book  is  like
photographing  a richly complex scene, taking it in as a whole by seeing
the  picture  from a certain distance; whereas the kind of reading which
produced the References is like a "close-up," viewing one detail in that
scene  and making it stand out as clearly as possible. As a photographic
"close-up'  presupposes  the  picture  of  the  whole  as background, so
reading  with  a  special  focus presupposes the ordinary perspective in
reading.  In terms of this analogy, each of the 2987 topics is a special
focus  on  the 443 works comprising Great Boo^s ofthe Western World and,
in addition, the 77 books of the Bible.

[1299b]
' SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1265

[1300a]
1266 THE GREAT IDEAS with a particular theme or question in mind. to one
another.  of  the texts. useful to relate briefly how the work was done.
reviewed and edited. of all the ideas.

[1300b]
It  might  almost  be said that, to produce the References, this body of
literature  had  to be read with a special focus as many times as a real
difference  in  the  topics required a change of focus. At least that is
the  effect  the  References  create for the user of the Syntopicon. The
references  under  each topic provide him with a special set of readings
in  the  great  books, produced by reading through them The necessity of
employing a fairly large staff of readers to create the references for a
syntopical  reading  of  the  great  books  and the Bible, combined with
inevitable changes in personnel over a period of seven years, raised the
problem  of achieving a unified result from the collaboration of so many
minds.   If,   for  example,  two  readers  understood  the  same  topic
differently,  they would not be reading the books from the same point of
view,  when  they  selected passages to be cited in the references under
that topic. With a staff of thirty to forty readers, the possibility and
extent  of such discrepancies were multiplied many times. The difficulty
of  obtaining  a  unified  result was aggravated by other circumstances,
such as the number of books which had to be read, the different kinds of
reading demanded by their variety, and the number of topics which had to
be  considered  in relation Just as the Introductions have unity because
they  were  written  by one person, so, ideally, the References ought to
have  a  comparable  unity—  as  if,  so  to speak, all the reading they
represent  had  been  done  by  one  man,  yet  safeguarded  against the
blindnesses  and biases of any individual mind by having that one reader
consult with many others in order to weigh and verify his interpretation
Under  the  exigencies  of  time,  and  in  terms  of  inescapable human
limitations,  the  unity of the References could not be achieved in that
way.  To explain how a sufficiently unified result was obtained from the
collaboration of so many minds, and to throw light on the problems faced
in  compiling  the  References,  it  seems  The  work  of  compiling the
references  was  accomplished in three distinct phases: a preliminary or
exploratory  phase;  a  middle  period devoted to systematic reading and
discussion; and a final phase in which the references were critically At
the  beginning of the work, the staff of readers cited books or passages
for their relevance to one or more of the great ideas. The list of ideas
was  still  tentative; and each idea was treated as a heading by itself,
without  subdivision into topics. Each member of the editorial staff was
assigned   a  particular  group  of  authors  and  was  responsible  for
discovering  their  contribution  to  the  discussion The most important
result of this initial exploratory phase was the realization of the need
for  a  topical  analysis of each of the main ideas. The second and more
systematic  phase  of  the  work  began  when  the list of 102 ideas was
finally determined and a topical analysis of each idea had been drafted.
In  their first formulation the topics reflected the reading done in the
previous period, but they also

[1301a]
required  that  reading to be re-done for the sake of testing the topics
and     improving     the     references.     In     the     concomitant
developmenroTtheOutlines  of  Topics  and the References, refinements in
syntopical  analysis  and  syntopical  reading had to keep pace with one
another.  At  each  stage,  the topics directed the course of syntopical
reading, and syntopical reading tested the topics for their accuracy and
adequacy  as statements of the themes discussed in the great books. Each
stage  involved  a  renewed examination of the books in the light of the
topics,  and an adjustment of the topics to the discoveries of research.
Topics  were  discarded,  new  ones were added; topics were rephrased or
merged with one another. The next stage of reading had to respond to all
the  changes  in  topics  caused  by  the  previous  stage. This meant a
systematic examination of the references which had been assembled at the
previous  stage, and a continuing search for new references to ensure an
adequate  treatment of the books under the topics as then formulated. It
was crucial to the idea of the Syntopicon that the editorial staff share
a  common understanding of the topics and the books. But the division of
labor  which  had  been  adopted  tended to make the individual reader a
specialist  in  handling  a  particular group of authors and works. Each
member  of  the  editorial  staff developed special knowledge of certain
books,   special   skill  in  reading  them  syntopically,  and  special
articulateness  in  calling  attention  to  the  problems  raised by his
authors and books. Regular staff conferences were instituted to overcome
the disadvantages of such specialization as well as to take advantage of
its benefits. Conducted by the Editor in Chief, with assistance from the
General  Editor,  the  conferences  aimed  to  produce  a  community  of
understanding  by considering the meaning of each idea and its topics in
relation  to  the  content  of  the  great  books  as a whole. They also
provided  an  opportunity  for individual staff members to criticize the
Outlines  of  Topics from the vantage point of a concentrated syntopical
reading  of a few assigned authors, and to suggest changes in the topics
to  accommodate  the  thought or language of those authors. The proposed
changes  had  to  be  considered by other staff members for their effect
upon  the  syntopical  treatment  of  other authors. Any change that was
finally  adopted  had  consequences for the work of the entire staff. It
was  the  task  of the Editor in Chief to harmonize the different, often
conflicting,  demands made on the developing structure of the Syntopicon
by  the  content  and  intellectual  style of particular authors; and to
balance  the  special  interests  urged  by  individual  staff  members,
against. the general aim of making the Syntopicon reflect the content of
the  great  books as a whole. 6 6To maintain the steady flow of work, to
keep  accurate  records of work done and changes made, and to make these
records currently available for inspection by the editorial staff was an
enormous  clerical  undertaking.  The extent of these labors can best be
indicated  by  the  fact  that,  during  the main phase of the work, the
clerical  staff  needed  to support and execute the editorial effort was
two  or  three  times  larger than the editorial staff. Furthermore, the
tasks  to  be  performed  were  never  simply  clerical;  they  involved
considerable  understanding  of  the material being handled. Were it not
for  the intelligent direction and vigilant supervision of all this work
by  the  Executive  Editor, the Assistant Editors, Editorial Assistants,
and  Supervisors,  errors  made  in  transmitting the materials from one
stage to another might have vitiated the entire editorial effort.

[1301b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1267

[1302a]
1268  THE GREAT IDEAS ticular topic if it —explained the significance of
the topic

[1302b]
The  system  of  specialization  during the first two phases of the work
necessitated  a  complete  re-examination  of the references in order to
achieve  greater  unity  and  coherence  than  could  be attained simply
through  staff  conferences.  To  secure  these  results,  the final re-
checking  of  the  references  had  to  be  organized in a way radically
different  from  the  way  in  which  the references had been originally
accumulated  and checked. Prior to the last phase of the work, no one of
the  102  chapters had, as a whole, been scrutinized in all details; nor
had  any  one  person  examined, for the topics of each chapter, all the
references to the great books. Where before each member of the editorial
staff  had  been responsible for finding and judging passages in a small
number  of  books  in  relation  to  all  ideas  and  topics, it was now
necessary  for  some  one  person  to  be  responsible for examining and
judging  all  the  passages  cited  in a single chapter. In no other way
could the coherence of the references under each topic be assured. In no
other  way  could  a  uniform  standard  of  comprehensiveness Under the
direction  of  the  Editor  in  Chief,  the General Editor and the three
Associate  Editors  undertook  this  final  critical  reading.  The  102
chapters  were  divided among them. Each chapter was examined as a whole
by  one  editor;  each  of  its topics was considered in relation to the
whole  range  of  the  great books. The problems raised by this study of
whole chapters were discussed in general conferences, at which decisions
were reached for the resolution of difficulties. The close collaboration
of  the  five  editors  during  this final phase of work was the nearest
approach  to  the  ideal  of  unity  which  the  dimensions  of the task
permitted.  Both the critical nature of the work during this last period
and  the character of the editorial conferences required an articulation
of  general  policies,  together  with  an  explicit  recognition of the
discretion needed in applying them. It is therefore possible to give, in
the  rest  of  this  discussion  of  the  References,  an account of the
principles   which  governed  their  compilation  and  may  guide  their
sustained  use.  Three  general principles controlled the compilation of
the  References. They can be stated as criteria for the acceptability of
references  proposed  for each topic, and even for the tenability of the
topic  itself  in the light of those references. The first principle was
the  criterion  of relevance. The acceptability of any reference under a
particular  topic  depended  upon  its  relevance to the meaning of that
topic. This principle, though simple in itself, was extremely complex in
application,  because  of  the many types and degrees of relevance which
topical  headings make possible. Some indication of this can be given by
an  enumeration  of  the  main types of relevance. A book or passage was
judged relevant to a par-

[1303a]
—denied   one   or  more  of  the  propositions  implied  by  the  topic
—questioned, doubted, challengecLor suspended judgment on one or more of
the  propositions  implied  by  the  topic  —assumed  one or more of the
propositions  implied  by the topic in order to develop the consequences
of  such assumption —interpreted the meaning of the topic in relation to
other  matters  not  stated in the topic, such as its presuppositions or
implications  —exemplified the topic by providing illustrative instances
from  poetry, history, or science —illuminated the topic by taking it as
a  point  of  departure  for  discussing related matters — satirized the
topic  or  those  who  discuss  its  meaning  seriously  These  types of
relevance  are not mutually exclusive. For example, a particular passage
may  analyze  the  meaning of the topic as well as affirm or deny one or
more  of  the  propositions  it  implies. Furthermore, not only do these
various  types  of  relevance have unequal weight, but also, within each
type,  passages  differ in the degree of their relevance to a particular
topic.  Hence the judgment of a reference in terms of relevance involved
more  than a determination that it was or was not relevant in one of the
ways  enumerated.  The  book or passage in question had to be judged for
the  degree  of  its  relevance,  in itself and by comparison with other
relevant materials. There was no exact measure for the minimum degree of
admissible  relevance.  The  judgment  was  finally made in terms of the
character  of  the  particular  topic  and in the light of all the other
references  under  consideration.  References  were  often  rejected for
negligible  relevance  as  well  as  for irrelevance. The references now
remaining under each topic are there because they were finally judged to
be  substantially  relevant.  The  second principle was the criterion of
coherence.  As  we have already observed in considering the construction
of  the  topics, a normal topic tends to have systematic ambiguity, that
is,  a  number  of  related  meanings.  Systematic ambiguity is a middle
ground  between  absolute  univocation or unity of meaning, and absolute
equivocation  or  multiplicity of meanings. The few topics with complete
unity  of  meaning  raised  no  problem,  since  a  reference was either
relevant  to  that  one  meaning  or not relevant at all. The problem of
coherence  occurred  for  all  the rest. The coherence of the references
under  a  particular  topic depended on their being relevant, not to the
same  meaning  in  all  cases, but to related meanings. For example, two
passages,  each  of  which may be relevant in itself because it explains
the  meaning  of  the  topic,  become  incoherent  if  the meanings they
attribute  to  the  topic are utterly unrelated to one another. Strictly
speaking, it is not the passages but the topic which becomes incoherent,
if  it  includes  references  which  construe  it  as having a number of
unrelated  meanings.  The  principle  of  coherence  was,  therefore, an
extension  of  the  principle  of relevance. It required that the topic,
read in the light of all references under it,

[1303b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1269

[1304a]
1270  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  not  form  a  coherent whole, one set had to be
rejected.  examination  of 443 separate works and 77 books of the Bible.
tion of what the great books say on that subject.

[1304b]
should, if it had many meanings, always remain systematically ambiguous,
and  never  pass  into  the  sheer  equivocation  produced  by unrelated
meanings.  It  also  required that a common thread of meaning should run
through  all  passages referred to under a particular topic, making each
passage  relevant to the others as well as to the topic itself. This did
not  mean,  of  course,  that  all  passages would be mutually relevant,
either  to  the same degree or in the same way; just as the principle of
relevance  did  not  demand  the same type or degree of relevance to the
topic of all passages placed under it. The remedy for incoherence was to
reject  certain  references which did not fit with others under the same
topic. If there were two sets of references which did In some instances,
the  troublesome  references constituted a small proportion of the whole
collection,  and  the  problem  was easily solved by rejecting these and
retaining  the  rest. But, in other instances the sets of passages which
did  not  fit  together were about equal in number and importance; or at
least  each  set  was  sufficiently  numerous  and  important to deserve
retention.  In  these  cases,  the usual solution was to formulate a new
topic  under  which  one  set could more properly be placed, leaving the
others  under the original topic, which then became coherent through the
removal  of  the  first set. Sometimes two new topics were formulated to
replace  one  which  had  collected  several mutually incoherent sets of
references.  The  principle  of coherence automatically prevented topics
from dividing into two or more sets of completely incoherent references,
but it left to judgment the degree of coherence required to maintain the
unity  of  a  given  topic  involving  a number of related meanings. The
result  of these judgments should be that all references found under any
topic  not  only  fit the topic, but fit together under it, and have, to
some  degree,  the  unity  of a common subject matter of discussion. The
third  principle  was  the  criterion  oi  sufficiency.  This applied to
topics,  not  to individual references. In the final stage of work, each
topic had to be judged to determine whether its collection of references
was  sufficient to justify its retention. As the principles of relevance
and  coherence guided the editors in correcting errors of commission, so
the  principle  of  sufficiency directed attention to errors of omission
and caused a search for materials to supply the deficiency. It was never
possible,  of course, to be certain that all errors of omission had been
corrected. Errors of commission were detectible in materials which could
be  thoroughly  examined; but to be sure that errors of omission had not
been  made  in  the treatment of a particular topic would have meant, on
each occasion of doubt, the reHence the judgment as to the adequacy of a
given  set  of  references  always  involved  doubt. It is certainly not
claimed  for the references under the 3000 topics that they constitute a
full  collection  of  the  relevant passages in the great books. But the
effort  to  check  errors  of omission was diligent enough to permit the
claim  that  the  references  under  each  topic  constitute an adequate
representa-

[1305a]
In  terms  of  this  standard,  the principle of sufficiency operated to
question  the  retention  of  topics  whose  references, judged to be an
adequate  collection,  did not seem to make a substantial contri^utknTto
the  great  conversation  as  a whole. At various stages of work, topics
were  rejected for insufficiency in content. Those which remain meet the
standard  of  sufficiency  in two ways: the references they subsume have
been  judged to be an adequate representation of the great books on that
subject;  and  as  represented by these references, what the great books
have  to  say has been deemed of sufficient substance for consideration.
The  application of these three criteria was necessarily affected by the
different  kinds  of  topics under which the references were placed. For
example,  the  standard  of  sufficiency  could  not  be  the same for a
restricted  doctrinal  topic  as  for  one  designed to comprehend every
variety  of  doctrine.  A  topic  restricted to the doctrine of a single
author or a small group of authors was judged to have sufficient content
if  the  references  adequately  represented  that  author or group. The
principles  of  coherence  and relevance did not operate in the same way
for  simple and complex topics. In the case of complex topics, involving
two  or  more  related points, one passage might be relevant through its
bearing on one of these points, and another passage, through its bearing
on  some  other  point. Thus the coherence of all the references under a
complex  topic  had to be judged differently from the coherence of those
under  a  simple  topic.  Though the topical ideal was comprehensiveness
(which  meant  being open to all sorts of books as well as every variety
of  doctrine),  it was not always possible to formulate topics which had
such  comprehensive  coverage.  As  already  indicated, some topics were
construed  more  narrowly and some more broadly; some were restricted to
discursive  passages and some were open to both discursive and exemplary
passages; some were developed under a strict policy of referring only to
passages  right  on  the  point and others were developed under a looser
policy  of  referring  to passages having a more remote relevance to the
point,  perhaps even dealing with peripheral matters. According to these
and  other  differences among the topics, the three principles had to be
differently  applied  as the exigencies of each topic demanded. Relevant
references  were  sometimes rejected because of the policy governing the
construction  of a particular topic. The degree of coherence achieved in
certain  topics  was  much  greater  than  that  in  others. In general,
however,  it  can  be  said that the more complex the topic, or the more
comprehensive  the range of its references, the more its references will
vary  in  degree  and type of relevance. Less coherence was required for
such topics than for more restricted ones. In the light of these general
principles, qualified as they must be for different kinds of topics, the
following,  more  particular points can now be made about the references
assembled under any one topic.

[1305b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1271

[1306a]
1272  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  references  to  the Bible into several distinct
groups.  following  the  discussion  in  the  order  of  its  historical
development. were written.

[1306b]
(i)  The order of the authors cited. Under each topic the references are
arranged in the order of the volumes in the set. This places the authors
in  a  roughly chronological order. In two respects, this order deviates
from strict chronology. References to the Bible are always placed first,
in  spite  of  the range of time covered by the books of the Old and New
Testament.  To  have placed these books in a more accurate chronological
relation  to the other books would have divided the The other reason for
deviation  from  strict  chronology  is  the  association of two or more
authors  in  the  same  volume.  For  example,  the  works  of the three
astronomers—Ptolemy,  Copernicus,  and  Kepler—are published together in
Volume  16.  The  position  of  this volume is determined by the date of
Ptolemy,  the  earliest  of the three. In consequence, though Ptolemy is
rightly  placed  after  Tacitus  (Volume 15) and before Plotinus (Volume
17),  Copernicus  and  Kepler  are  made  to appear in the list prior to
Augustine  and  Aquinas,  who were, chronologically, their predecessors.
The  association  of Galen with Hippocrates in Volume 10 displaces Galen
by  many  centuries;  Harvey is displaced by being combined with Gilbert
and Galileo, as is J. S. Mill, by being combined with the authors of The
Federalist. These are the major exceptions to strict chronology. For the
most  part,  the  reader who follows the order of the references under a
particular  topic  will  be  (2)  The  order  ofthe  passages citedfor a
particular  author.  Normally,  a  reference  to  the  work of an author
involves  the  citation  of two or more distinct passages, often quite a
large number. Each of these citations is a unit reference, making up the
whole  complex  reference.  The  order  of these unit references follows
strictly  the  order  of  the  pages in the volume to which reference is
being made. When several works by one author are included in one volume,
these  works  are  arranged in chronological order, wherever that can be
done.  Hence  if  the  complex reference to the works of a single author
involves  the  citation  of  passages  from  several of his works, these
passages  will  usually  be  cited  in  the  order in which they For the
reader,  the  importance  of  this  fact is negative. The order in which
passages   are   cited  is  not  the  order  of  their  significance  as
contributions  to  the  discussion  of  the  particular topic. When many
passages  are  cited,  they  are  not  all  of equal substance. Some are
capital  texts,  expressing  the  essence  of  the author's views on the
subject.  Others are subordinate texts which add qualifications, amplify
or   extend  the  major  discussion,  or  may  be  of  quite  peripheral
significance. The reader cannot understand or assess the contribution of
a  particular  author  to  a  given topic until he has distinguished for
himself  the  capital from the subordinate texts. The order in which the
various  passages  are  cited  does  not  help  him  to  do  this. Their
arrangement   by  pages  rather  than  by  importance  was  a  practical
necessity. Knowledge of this warns the reader that the first passages to
which  the  references  direct him may not be— in fact, they seldom are—
the principal ones.

[1307a]
(3)  Whole  and part citations. References to a given work may be either
to the whole work or to a part; and part citations vary in length from a
large  section, such as a book or chapter, to a smalLpassage, consisting
of  a  series  of  paragraphs or a single paragraph or even less. In the
case  of  scientific  and  philosophical  writings, whole works are very
infrequently  cited, though large sections, ranging from a whole book or
chapter  to  a  number  of such divisions, may often be referred to. The
citation  of  whole  poetical  or historical works is more frequent. The
reason  for  this  difference  lies  in the difference, to be considered
presently,  between  the  relevance of discursive or expository passages
and that of narrative or exemplary passages. In advance, it need only be
said  that the primary relevance of a narrative work, whether an epic or
a  dramatic  poem,  a novel or a play, usually consists in the exemplary
significance  of  the  whole  narrative. This is less true of historical
than of fictional narratives. Historical episodes, occupying a few pages
of  an  historical  work,  are more frequently cited for their exemplary
significance  than  are whole historical narratives; whereas in the case
of  fictional  or poetical narratives, often nothing less than the whole
story  will make the point, though here, as with histories, episodes may
also  be  cited. In contrast, for expository or discursive relevance, it
is seldom necessary to cite the whole of a scientific, philosophical, or
theological work; and even the citation of large parts is necessary less
frequently  than  for  historical  and poetical works. A short series of
paragraphs,  a  small  paragraph,  or  even a few compact sentences will
often make the point adequately. Thus, the amount of reading recommended
by  the  references  under  a particular topic varies, not only with the
number  of unit references contained under that topic, but also with the
number of whole works and large parts cited, in proportion to the number
of  relatively  small  passages.  It may be thought that the citation of
whole  works  or  even of large parts tends to defeat the purpose of the
Syntopicon, since no reader can reasonably be expected to read this much
in  the course of a syntopical reading of the great books in relation to
a particular topic. But the purpose for which whole works or large parts
are  cited does not require them to be read every time they are referred
to.  It  is  assumed that the reader will gradually acquire acquaintance
with  whole works, and will then appreciate somewhat the significance of
references   to   whole   works   or  large  parts  without  re-reading.
Furthermore,  even  prior  to  such acquaintance with whole works, these
references  inform the user of the Syntopicon of the range of literature
relevant  to  a particular topic, even if, at the time, they necessarily
leave  him  in  ignorance  of  some  of the content. In other words, the
citation of whole works by title performs a useful function, even if all
the recommended reading cannot be done at one time. The shorter passages
cited  can  be  read  and will provide an indication of the content of a
topic,  so  that the user of the Syntopicon will have the background and
the  motivation for doing the more extensive reading that may have to be
postponed.  Not to have cited whole works or large parts, simply because
of the extent of reading involved,

[1307b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1273

[1308a]
1274  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  of the great books to many topics. parts. as an
adequate  substitute  for  the whole. to reading the whole. with maximum
intelligibility.

[1308b]
would  have resulted in a distorted and inadequate representation of the
relevance  Several  devices  were used in constructing the references to
help  the  reader  in handling references to whole works or large parts.
The  first  simply  enables him to recognize at once whether a reference
cites  a whole work, or a large part of it as a whole unit. As indicated
in the Explanation of Reference Style, when the page numbers immediately
follow the title of a work, without separation by a comma, the reference
is  to the work as a whole. Similarly, when a chapter or other part of a
work  is  cited,  and  the  page  numbers  immediately  follow,  without
separation  by  a  comma,  the reference is to that part as a whole. The
presence of the comma indicates that the reference is to some passage in
the  whole  work,  or  in  one  of  its  parts. The absence of the comma
notifies  the reader that he is being referred to a whole work or to the
whole of one of its The second device is the use of the symbol esp which
stands  for  "especially."  Frequently the citation of a whole work or a
large  part  is  accompanied by a number of references to short passages
within  these  wholes. These references to smaller parts are preceded by
the  symbol  esp. This is done where it is feasible, so that the reader,
without  reading  the  whole, can go immediately to the places where the
author  makes  his  point in compact form or most emphatically. However,
the  passages especially cited— even a long series of them— can never be
taken  The  third  device serves a purpose quite opposite to that of the
second.  It  was  not always possible to cite a number of short passages
for special reference within a large whole. This could be either because
nothing  less  than the whole work was relevant to the topic, or because
the  passages  which  showed the relevance of the whole were so numerous
and  so  diffused  throughout  that  an  enumeration  of  them  would be
impracticable.  In the latter case, the symbol passim was used to notify
the  reader  that  he  could  discover  the  relevance  of  the whole by
beginning  to read almost anywhere within its boundaries, and by reading
as  much as seemed to suit his time and interest. When the citation of a
whole  work,  or  of  a  large  part,  is unaccompanied by either esp or
passim,  the  reader  is offered no alternative (4) The boundaries ofthe
references.  The  problem  of  boundaries  occurs only for references to
passages  which  are  less than a whole work, or a whole part, such as a
whole  chapter  or  section.  In  the  case  of  wholes,  the boundaries
indicated  in  the  references  are,  of course, the opening and closing
pages.  But  for  any  passage which is less than a recognizable part or
section  of  the  work,  the  boundaries  aim  to  give  the user of the
Syntopicon a unit of reading which combines maximum brevity Ideally, the
passage  cited  should  begin at whatever paragraph or line the relevant
material  begins;  and  it  should end, similarly, with the paragraph or
line  after  which  the  material  ceases  to be relevant. The method of
citing half-pages for

[1309a]
volumes  printed  in  a  single  column  of  type, and quarter-pages for
volumes  printed  in  a  double  column—  described  more  fully  in the
Explanation   of   Reference   Style   —made   it   possible   for   the
referencjs^Jxuindicate  the initial and terminal boundaries of a passage
with  some  precision.  But  to locate the beginning or end of a passage
within  a  quarter- or a half-page still leaves a margin of uncertainty,
and  so the reader must often exercise some judgment to decide precisely
where  the  passage  begins  and ends. The boundaries of the passage are
given  with  absolute  precision  only where the reference includes line
numbers.  In  all  other  cases,  the  boundaries are only approximately
indicated.  The  Explanation  of Reference Style explains how boundaries
are  shown  by  page numbers and sections, and by author's divisions and
line  numbers.  The  problem to be discussed here concerns the editorial
effort  to  combine  maximum  brevity and maximum intelligibility in the
determination  of  boundaries.  These  two  aims were often in conflict:
there  was  always  the  risk  of diminishing the intelligibility of the
passage  by  narrowing  its  boundaries  for  the  sake  of  brevity  or
compactness;  there  was  always  the  opposite  danger  of  introducing
difTuseness  and  even  irrelevance  by extending the boundaries for the
sake  of  making sure that the passage would be adequately intelligible.
No  rule  could  be  formulated for effecting the compromise which would
always  maximize  both  values. In fact, the determination of boundaries
called  for  a  different  kind  of  judgment  in referring to different
authors,  and  even  to  different works of the same author. It was much
easier for certain types of writing than for otherseasiest, perhaps, for
the  mathematical  and scientific works, most difficult for the poetical
and  historical  works, especially in the citation of narrative passages
having exemplary relevance. It cannot be expected that boundary problems
were always perfectly solved. In a certain proportion of the references,
the  passages  may  be  either  too long or too short. But even in these
instances  the margin of error is probably not very great— not enough to
put  the  user  of  the Syntopicon to much trouble or inconvenience. (5)
Kinds  ofpassages  and  kinds  ofboo\s.  We have already referred to the
difference  between  the  relevance of discursive or expository passages
and  the  relevance  of  narrative  or  exemplary  passages.  This  is a
distinction  which  divides  all the references into two main groups. No
matter  what  the  type or meaning of the topic under which it is cited,
every  passage  cited  is  relevant  in one of these two ways. It either
discusses  the  topic  or  illustrates  its  meaning. Sometimes the same
passage does both, though it usually is predominantly of one sort or the
other.  It  might  at  first  be thought that the great books would also
divide  into  two groups— those providing expository and those providing
exemplary  passages.  To  some  extent  this  is  true.  Since  they are
essentially   discursive   writing,  the  great  works  of  mathematics,
experimental science, social science, philosophy, and theology naturally
tend  to  yield  references which have expository relevance— expounding,
explaining, analyzing, affirming, denying, doubting, arguing. The

[1309b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1275

[1310a]
1276 THE GREAT IDEAS significance. But there are important exceptions in
both   cases.   relevance.   scientific   theory   or   method.  general
significance.

[1310b]
The  great  narrative  works,  whether  poetical  or historical, contain
essentially  There  are  a few exceptions to the rule that expository or
discursive  works  do  The  Bible  is unique, perhaps, in respect of the
frequency  with  which  its  pasNothing  in the way a given reference is
symbolized or recorded notifies the

[1311a]
the  work  being  cited  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon can discover the
significance of the passage only by reading it. (6) Series of references
which have collective significance. It has already been pointed out that
the  references  under a particular topic are unequal in their relevance
to  it.  References  were sometimes rejected because their relevance was
too  remote  or slight. But sometimes an opposite policy was followed. A
reference  which,  by  itself,  might  have been judged insubstantial or
remote  took  on  greater  significance  when read in the light of other
references  under  the same topic. In consequence, it was retained, both
for  what it added to the whole collection of references and for its own
increased  significance  as a member of that collection. A collection of
references, possessing a certain unity through the inner relation of its
members,  was  most  frequently constituted by a series of passages from
the  works  of  a  single author. But sometimes references to one author
were  judged  in  the  light  of  references to others. A given author's
contribution  to  the  discussion  of a certain topic might be slight if
taken by itself, but it gained interest in relation to the utterances of
others on the same topic; and so otherwise slight passages were retained
because  of their value as members of the whole collection of references
under that topic. This information about the way in which the references
were  often constructed to achieve a collective effect may help the user
of  the  Syntopicon.  One  who examines all the references under a topic
will  usually  find  that  some of the authors cited are major, and some
minor,  contributors  to  the  discussion. He will also find that, for a
single author, some passages referred to make a major, and some a minor,
contribution.  The  person who has read through all the passages bearing
on  a  topic  will  have little difficulty in discriminating between the
major  and the minor voices in the great conversation on that theme. The
elements  of  the collection will tend to assume their proper places and
proportions.  But  to  one  who  is  still in the process of reading the
passages   in  the  order  in  which  they  are  cited,  the  collective
significance  of the whole, and of each part as a member of it, will not
be  apparent.  Such  a person will encounter many passages whose content
does  not  seem  to  justify their inclusion. If he bears in mind that a
passage  may  have  more  significance within the collection than it has
alone,  he  will suspend judgment on its worth until he has gone further
in  his  reading  under  that  topic.  Unless  an  error  was  made, the
questionable  passage  is  there  because  it was judged that the reader
would eventually see more of interest in it than first meets the eye, by
re-reading or remembering it in the light of other passages. The chapter
on Man contains a good example of a large collection of references which
have more significance collectively than they do individually. The topic
reads:  "Cultural  differences  among  men: Greek and barbarian, Jew and
gentile,  European  and  Asiatic." Of the more than one hundred passages
cited,  it  can  almost  be  said  that  no  single  one by itself deals
adequately  with  the subject of cultural differences among men, or even
with the specific cultural differences

[1311b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1277

[1312a]
1278  THE GREAT IDEAS Milton, Tolstoy, Dostoevsky, and Melville. context
of  others. himself. consider it in relation a. to the kind of book from
which it is taken; same author;

[1312b]
With  discursive  works there was less necessity for grouping references
to relevant in some manner and degree to the subject in question; but it
does  not  indicate  the  kind of relevance, or whether the relevance is
dependent  on  other  passages.  The reader must discover that for b. to
other  passages from the same book, or other books by the c. to passages
from  other  authors  cited under the same topic, with some attention to
their  chronological  order,  and  to  the kinds of books written by the
different  authors  being  considered;  One  other observation should be
added. Very frequently the same passage is

[1313a]
chapters.  The  user  of  the  Syntopicon may meet the same passage many
times  as he goes from topic to topic, or chapter to chapter. A moment's
reflection  will  discover  the  reason for this. ^. — A passage rich in
content is naturally relevant to a large number of different topics, and
deserves  as  many  different  readings  as are necessary to exhaust its
meanings.  Each  topic  under  which it is cited directs the user of the
Syntopicon  to  read  the passage in a different way— interpreting it in
the light of that particular topic. A previous reading of the passage in
another  connection will usually not suffice for an understanding of its
relevance  to the topic under which it now appears. This is particularly
true of passages open to conflicting interpretations. Such passages will
appear,  in  the  same chapter, under topics which express a conflict of
theory  or opinion, and must be examined in the light of these topics if
the  reader  wishes  to  discover  how  they  are  susceptible  of  such
conflicting interpretations. We must now consider a number of exceptions
to the rules just stated. The rules may guide the user of the Syntopicon
in  interpreting  what he will normally find in the references, but they
do  not  take  account  of  deviations  from  the  norm.  Perhaps  these
deviations  can  be  best  described  by  enumerating the three kinds of
special  problems  which arose in constructing the references: (A) those
caused  by  the special character of certain topics; (B) those caused by
the  special  character  of  certain  books;  and  (C)  those  caused by
considerations  of scholarship or by difficulties of interpretation. (a)
PROBLEMS  CAUSED  BY  THE  SPECIAL  CHARACTER  OF CERTAIN TOPICS (i) The
distinction  and  relation between supraordinate and subordinate topics.
This  distinction has already been sufficiently explained in the section
of   this   Appendix  dealing  with  the  topics  (see  pg.  1247).  The
supraordinate  topic  is  a  heading  under which the subordinate topics
logically  fall,  as  making  particular  points  or  as elaborating the
meaning  of  the supraordinate. But some supraordinates function only as
logical   headings   for   a   number  of  subordinates,  whereas  other
supraordinates   function  also  as  topics  in  their  own  right.  The
supraordinates  which  are  only headings have no references cited under
them.  They  are,  from  the  point of view of content, empty. All other
supraordinate  headings  have  references  under  them,  just  as  their
subordinates do. But because of their special character as supraordinate
topics, their reference content tends to differ from that of subordinate
topics.  Supraordinate  topics  were  used  to  collect in one place all
passages  dealing  in  general  terms  with points treated in particular
terms  in  the passages cited under the subordinate topics; or they were
used  to  list  references to whole books or large parts of books, while
references under the subordinate topics cited shorter passages.

[1313b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1279

[1314a]
1280  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  discussion  of one of these points from that of
others.  \a. The role of language in thought lb. The service of language
to  society  2.  Theories  of the origin of language references provide.
there.

[1314b]
The  usual difference in reference content between a supraordinate topic
and  its  One example may clarify the relation between supraordinate and
subordinate  2b.  The  genesis  of conventional languages: the origin of
alphabets  The two subordinate topics (ia and ib) make particular points
generally  covSome  of  the reference content of the supraordinates will
not  appear  under  Topic  1  in  the  chapter  on  Language  happens to
illustrate another point which

[1315a]
These  passages  will  not reappear under the subordinate topics, unless
they are relevant there for other reasons; as, for example, a discussion
of  human  and  animal  societies  might deal, in this connection-,rwith
human   speech   and   animal  cries.  What  is  true  of  this  complex
supraordinate topic holds generally for all complex supraordinates which
in  part  state  general themes that cover the particular points made in
the  subordinate  topics,  and  also  in part state particular themes of
their   own.   One  other  kind  of  topic,  which  is  not  strictly  a
supraordinate  because  it  has  no  subordinates  under  it,  sometimes
resembles  the  supraordinate  topic  in  the range and character of its
reference  content.  That  is  the  opening  topic  of  a chapter, which
frequently  stands  alone.  For  example, in the chapter on Citizen, the
opening  topic—  "The  individual  in  relation  to  the  state"— has no
subordinates;   neither  does  the  opening  topic  in  the  chapter  on
Constitution—  "The  difference between government by law and government
by  men: the nature of constitutional government." Both of these opening
topics  have  maximum  generality for the range of discussion covered by
the  whole  chapter.  In  a  sense,  therefore,  they can be regarded as
logically  supraordinate  to  all  the topics which follow. Accordingly,
such  opening  topics  will include among their references many passages
that  will  be  cited  again  under  later  topics.  In the light of the
foregoing   consideration   of   supraordinate   topics,  the  following
recommendation  is  made  to  the  user  of  the  Syntopicon.  If  he is
interested  in  the  whole  ground  covered  by  the supraordinate topic
together  with its subordinates, he will generally find it profitable to
examine  first  the passages cited under the supraordinate. If, however,
his  interest  is  only  in  some particular point treated in one of the
subordinates, he can go directly to the passages cited under that topic.
He  can  supplement  this  later  by  turning  to  the broader materials
referred to under the supraordinate, or even, perhaps, by turning to the
materials  cited  under  other  subordinate topics. In general he should
bear  in  mind  that  references  listed under a supraordinate will more
frequently  cite  whole  books or longer selections therefrom, than will
references  listed  under  the subordinates. (2) Restricted or doctrinal
topics.  Ideally,  a  topic  should be phrased so as to comprehend every
variety  of  relevant doctrine, and include materials from every type of
book.  But  as we have already observed (see pg. 1239), a certain number
of  topics  fall  short of this ideal of comprehensiveness. Either their
wording  restricted  them  to the doctrine of one particular author or a
special  group  of authors; or they were construed strictly, rather than
broadly,  so  as  to  exclude  certain  types  of material. Usually, the
strictly  construed  topics  excluded  passages of exemplary rather than
discursive  relevance.  These facts about restricted topics are repeated
here  merely to advise the user of the Syntopicon not to expect the same
range  of materials in the reference content of all topics. For example,
he  should  not  always  expect  to  find  exemplary passages along with
expository ones; though, had the topic been construed less

[1315b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1281

[1316a]
1282  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  the subject need be considered. with one or the
other of the two terms.

[1316b]
strictly, such passages might have been there because they are relevant.
Nor  can  he  always  expect  to  find  all the passages with discursive
relevance  to  a  particular  subject, if its treatment has been divided
among a number of separate doctrinal topics. In such cases, he must look
to  a  whole group of related doctrinal topics to cover all the relevant
authors  and  books.  Even within a single topic, different authors were
sometimes  treated  differently because the special contribution of each
could  be  most  effectively handled in a somewhat different manner. For
example,  one author might be cited only for his major utterances on the
subject,  whereas  another  might  be  represented by an almost complete
collection  of  the passages from his works, including those of minor as
well  as  those  of  major  relevance. This was the result of a judgment
that, on the topic in question, one author's complete position should be
examined, while, for another author, only that portion of his work which
bears  directly on One other special point deserves mention here, though
it  does  not  belong  to  the  problem of the restricted topic. Certain
topics,   as   noted  (see  pg.  1237),  state  comparisons,  contrasts,
distinctions, or differences. Ideally, to be relevant to such a topic, a
passage should deal explicitly with the comparison, etc. But not all the
references  listed  under  such  topics cite passages explicitly on this
point.  Some  deal explicitly with just one of the terms being compared,
and  involve  the  other  only  by  implication;  sometimes  they do not
consider the other term even by implication. These passages are cited on
the  ground  that the comparison proposed by the topic is to be found in
the  set  of  references  as  a whole, if some pasIn a few rare cases of
topical  comparisons  or  distinctions, no passages could be found which
made  the comparison or distinction explicitly, and yet the sense of the
tradition  on  that  point  could  be gathered from a series of passages
dealing  (3)  Contrary  or  contradictory  topics.  Quite  frequently  a
supraordinate  topic  states  a  problem  or  issue on which there are a
number of opposed points of view; the subordinate topics severally state
the  opposite views. Sometimes a general subject of inquiry is announced
by  the  supraordinate  topic,  and its subordinates Such sets of topics
presented  a  special  problem  in  constructing  the references. In the
ordinary  case  in  which a topic not only stated the issue but aimed to
cover all controversial positions taken on it, the set of references was
developed  to  include  both  affirmations and negations of the point at
issue,  or  all  sides  of  the controversy. But when a number of topics
explicitly  set forth the controversial positions, the reference content
of  each  topic  was  restricted  in  the  following way. Passages which
expressed  a  view  in  any way contrary to the view stated in the topic
were  not  cited,  on  the  ground  that  some other topic, stating that
contrary  view,  was  the  proper place for the citation of the contrary
position.  But  if  a  particular  author,  in developing his own theory
explicitly commented on the position

[1317a]
of  an  adversary,  the  passage containing that explicit commentary was
judged  relevant  to  both topics— the topic stating the view opposed by
the  author  as  well  as  the one stating his own view. Ijjjiowever, an
author's  expression  of  his own opinion constituted the denial of some
other  view  only  by  implication,  the  passage in which that author's
opinion  was  expressed  was cited only under the positive topic and not
under the contrary one as well. A glance at the structure of the Outline
for  a particular chapter, and a quick examination of the wording of its
topics,  will tell the user of the Syntopicon in which way controversial
issues  were handled— whether by single topics covering all sides of the
controversy,  or  by separate topics representing opposing sides. In the
former  case,  the reader can expect to find contrary views expressed in
passages  cited  under  a single topic; in the latter, he will find only
affirmative  opinions  in  the  passages  cited  under  each of a set of
contrary  topics,  and perhaps also explicit criticisms of each position
by  its  adversaries.  (b)  problems  caused by the special character of
certain  books (i) The Bible. No other book in the western tradition has
been  subject  to  such  extensive  interpretation, or to interpretation
based  on such incompatible principles as, for example, on the one hand,
the  principles  of  higher criticism which treat the Bible as a secular
document, and, on the other hand, the principles of exegesis peculiar to
a text considered to be the sacred and revealed word of God. Let us deal
with  this  second  point  at  once,  since  it  is  paramount  for  the
significance  of  all references to the Bible. The Bible, especially the
Old Testament, is to a certain extent an historical book. It reports the
events  of Jewish history; it describes the customs of the Jewish people
and  the  gentiles  with  whom  they  came in contact; it deals with the
political and social institutions of the Jewish tribe, the Jewish state,
and the kingdoms of Judah and Israel. Biblical passages of an historical
tenor  were,  therefore,  found relevant to topics dealing with customs,
social practices, and political institutions. But citing them under such
topics did not prejudge the issue whether the Bible is sacred writing or
merely an historical record, like any secular history. Those who, in the
light  of  their  religious faith, read the Bible as Sacred Scripture do
not  exclude the historical or literal sense as one mode of interpreting
it.  On the contrary, they usually insist that the literal or historical
sense  must  be  the  basis  of  all other interpretations— allegorical,
anagogical,  and  moral.  Nor  is the issue of the two approaches to the
Bible  prejudged  by  any  other  aspect  of  its  treatment  along with
references  to  the works included in Great BooJ^s of the Western World.
No  matter  what the topic under which the Bible is cited, the reader is
always  left  quite free to decide that issue for himself. He can always
read  a biblical passage either as a portion of divine revelation, or as
human writing no different from other human literature.

[1317b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1283

[1318a]
1284 THE GREAT IDEAS pretations and judge between them. far as the Bible
is  concerned. English translations of the Bible— the Douay and the King
James.

[1318b]
This  is true even when the Bible is cited under topics which explicitly
state   a   religious   position,  either  one  common  to  Judaism  and
Christianity,  or  one  exclusively  Jewish  or Christian. The reader is
still  free  to  interpret  the  passage  either as conveying the divine
revelation  of  the  religious  dogma  in  question, or as conveying the
opinion  of  Moses  or  Isaiah,  of  Matthew or Paul, on the subject. Of
course,  a  passage  will  not  have  the  same meaning when read as the
revelation  pertinent  to  an  article of religious faith, as when it is
read  as  the  merely  human formulation of a religious tenet; but then,
though  perhaps  to  a  lesser  degree,  passages  from other books have
different  meanings  for  the  man  of  religious  faith and for the man
without  it.  A  second  problem concerning the Bible was that of choice
among  different,  and  often conflicting, interpretations of particular
passages,   especially  those  whose  meaning  has  been  much  disputed
throughout  the  tradition  of  biblical  commentary.  This  problem was
solved,   as   was  the  first,  by  not  choosing  between  conflicting
interpretations.   If   a   particular   passage,   on  one  traditional
interpretation, was relevant to a certain topic, it was cited there. If,
by  another  traditional interpretation, it was also relevant to another
topic, even one contrary in tenor to the first, it was cited there also.
This  permits  the  reader to consider both interSince biblical exegesis
is, in a sense, an endless process, it may be asked what limits were set
to  placing  diverse interpretations on a particular passage. The answer
is  that  the  work  of citing the Bible was governed, in large part, by
wellestablished  traditional  interpretations;  and where these were not
available,  the  judgment  was  nevertheless  made  in  conformity  with
generally  accepted  standards Still another problem concerned Christian
interpretations  of  Old  Testament  passages  which  do violence to the
Jewish  sense  of their meaning. Such passages were treated in the light
of  both  interpretations.  Therefore, the user of the Syntopicon should
not  be  surprised  to  find passages from the Old Testament cited under
topics which state specifically Christian doctrines denied by the Jewish
faith.  These  references do not prejudge the theological issues between
the  two  historic religions of the West. Failure to cite these passages
in  their  Christian  as  well as in their Jewish sense would have meant
failure  to  present  these  issues,  so Finally, there was the somewhat
parallel  problem  of  conflicting  interpretations within the Christian
tradition  itself,  as  between  the  Roman  Catholic and the Protestant
interpretations.  In  general, the problem was solved in the same way as
that  of  Jewish versus Christian interpretations of the same texts. But
this  problem  was  complicated  by  the  incorporation of the divergent
interpretations  in  two  Not  only  are  some  crucial  passages  quite
differently  rendered  in  the  two versions, but the books of the Bible
itself  are often differently named or numbered, and differently ordered
to one another. Certain books which the Douay version treats as parts of
the Old Testament, the current King James translation treats as

[1319a]
Apocrypha.  Even  within particular books, the numbering of chapters and
verses  is  frequently  different.  Hence  it  was  necessary  to  refer
tc^botk^he King fames and the Douay versions whenever there was even the
slightest  variance  between  them.  (This  complication  in the mode of
citation  of  biblical passages is more fully treated in the Explanation
of  Reference  Style.)  To  whatever  extent  the treatment of the Bible
approaches  adequacy,  the  thousands  of  paired citations, giving King
fames  and  Douay  equivalents in book, chapter, and verse, constitute a
concordance  between the Protestant and Roman Catholic renderings of the
Bible.  This  method  of  citing  the  Bible  according to both versions
whenever they varied led to one difficulty for which there was, finally,
no  satisfactory  solution. In a small number of cases, the wording of a
passage  in  one version made it relevant to a topic to which it was not
at  all  relevant  according to the language of the other version. Under
such  circumstances,  to  cite  the passage would be to prejudge for the
reader  the  Tightness of one version as against the other. Avoidance of
this meant omitting some few passages which readers of one version would
know, and think relevant to the topic under which it was not cited. What
was thought the less unsatisfactory of the two solutions was chosen. The
error  of  omission  was  judged less grievous than the violation of the
Syntopicon's  rule  of  dialectical  objectivity,  which  demanded  most
insistently  to be followed in such cases of conflicting interpretation.
Errors  of omission of this sort were unavoidable. But they were, in the
very  nature  of the case, not the only errors of omission, since it was
never  possible  to  be sure that all traditional interpretations of the
Bible,  from whatever source, had been taken into account, much less all
the  possible  interpretations  to  which biblical passages are subject.
Furthermore,  the references to the Bible will be judged by many critics
of  quite  different  persuasions to contain grave errors of commission—
serious  misinterpretations  of  difficult  texts which, in consequence,
have  been  assigned to topics where they do not belong. The decision to
include  references to the Bible along with those to the works published
in  Great  Boo\s  of  the Western World was made with all these risks in
mind.  It  seemed  better  to  undertake  this task, whatever defects or
errors would certainly remain in the finished work, than not to have the
voice of the Bible present in the great conversation. More than half the
authors  in  this  set  quote  the Bible, refer to it, or write with the
Bible  in mind. The Bible could not be omitted from the references under
many  topics  to which it is relevant and wherein the other books assume
its  presence. (2) The poetical and historical boohs. Next to the Bible,
the  great narrative works of history and fiction presented the greatest
difficulties. What was done here may be the subject of much controversy.
It  may  be held that the meaning of poetry— and, to a lesser extent, of
history— cannot be comprehended under ideas or topics. It should be said
in  reply  that  it  is  not claimed that the meaning of a poem like the
Iliad, the Divine Comedy, or War and Peace, is exhausted by references

[1319b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1285

[1320a]
1286  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  democratic, imperialistic Athens. topics of the
Syntopicon. events.

[1320b]
which  cite  it  as  relevant  to the consideration of certain ideas and
topics.  The  same  disclaimer  applies  to  the histories of Herodotus,
Thucydides,  Tacitus,  and Gibbon, and to the biographies of Plutarch. A
brief statement of the theory governing the syntopical treatment of such
works   may   indicate  some  of  the  difficulties,  and  prevent  some
misunderstanding  of  what was done. The controlling theoretical insight
was that abstract and concrete, universal and individual, are everywhere
correlated.   For  example,  the  fictional  character  and  actions  of
Achilles,  in the Iliad, are ideas in concrete or particular embodiment.
The historical episodes, reported by Thucydides, in the struggle between
democracy  and  oligarchy  in  the Greek city states, present individual
instances  of certain universal propositions in political theory. Again,
many  passages  in  his  History  of  the  Peloponnesian  War concretely
exemplify  the  problems of might and right in the relation of states to
one  another.  A  political theorist would state these issues abstractly
and  universally and would, perhaps, formulate general conclusions as to
the  consequences  of  trying  to  combine democracy with imperialism. A
poetical  historian,  like  Thucydides,  makes such points concretely by
telling  the  tragic  story of what happened to To say that the whole of
the Iliad can be cited under a topic on the relation of men and gods, or
that  particular  scenes  or  episodes can be cited under topics dealing
with  honor  or  pride or love, is not to say that the poetic meaning of
the  Iliad  can be exhaustively comprehended by such references, even if
they  were  themselves  exhaustive  of  its  content  so  far as that is
relevant  to  the  ideas and To say that the History ofthe Peloponnesian
War  can  be  cited  as  a whole under certain topics in the chapters on
Justice or Liberty, and to say that particular events in it can be cited
under topics dealing with treaties between states, military strategy, or
political revolution, is not to say that such references, even if comBut
neither  is  it  claimed that the references to the great scientific and
philosophical works exhaust their content or meaning. No more is claimed
for  any  work  of  either  kind— narrative or discursive— than that the
references to it represent, more or less adequately, its contribution to
the  great conversation, on as many themes as it may have relevance for.
So far there is no difference. The difference lies simply in the mode of
relevance.  What  one  kind of work says abstractly, in terms of general
propositions  and universal concepts, the other kind says concretely, in
terms  of  individual  characters  and  particular  actions or The whole
theory  of  the  references to fictional and historical narratives under
ideas and topics, rests on the logic of example. Logically, to exemplify
is  to present individual or particular instances of a universal concept
or  a  general  proposition.  To  abstract  or generalize is the logical
opposite  of  exemplification  :  it  consists  in stating the universal
concept or general rule which applies to a particular case, and embraces
all similar particulars as well. Without going further into the logic of
universal and particular, of abstract concept and concrete ex-

[1321a]
perience,  let  it  suffice to say that the references in the Syntopicon
which  have  discursive  relevance move on the plane of the abstract and
the  general; whereas the references which have exemplary relevance move
on  the  plane of the concrete and the particular. -*£= The basic theory
underlying  the  collocation  of  references to expository and narrative
works  under  the same topics is simply that the two planes run parallel
to  one  another.  They are at all points correlative expressions of the
same   thing.   They  are  as  inseparable  from  one  another,  and  as
indispensable  to  one  another,  as human thought and human experience.
Nothing which can be grasped by the human mind on one plane is incapable
of expression on the other; in fact, nothing can be grasped by the human
mind  on  either  plane  without  also  being  available  to  insight or
experience on the other. Using this theory as a basis for the syntopical
reading  of the great poetical and historical narratives did not prevent
or  solve  all  difficulties in the treatment of particular works. It is
impossible  to  give  a  brief account of these difficulties, since they
were  as various as the works themselves. Each narrative seemed to raise
problems  of  its  own.  It should be reported, for whatever guidance it
gives the user of the Syntopicon, that all problems were not solved with
equal  success.  The references to Tolstoy's War and Peace, for example,
seem to be a better indication of its exemplary relevance to the topics,
than  those  to  Dostoevsky's  Brothers  Karamazov.  The same difference
appears  between  Milton's  Paradise Lost and Goethe's Faust, or between
Gibbon's  Decline  and  Fall  of  the Roman Empire and the Histories and
Annals  of Tacitus. These works may have presented unequal difficulties;
some  may have yielded more readily to a syntopical reading than others.
The  other alternative is that the syntopical reading of these works was
not  equally  well  or  imaginatively  done.  In  any  case, reading the
narrative  works to discover their exemplary relevance to the topics was
always  a  more  difficult  task  than reading them for their discursive
relevance. A word should be added here about this second type of reading
to  which  the  narrative  works were submitted. A speech by Pericles or
Hamlet  can  have  the same kind of relevance to a particular topic as a
statement  on  it  by  a  philosopher  or a theologian. The poetical and
historical  works  are  rich  in  discursive  relevance  to many topics,
especially  those  dealing with moral and political subjects, and hardly
less  so  with  respect  to metaphysical and theological themes. But one
distinction  must  be  kept  in  mind  in  considering references to the
thought  contained in narrative works. The thought of Pericles or Hamlet
is  not  the  thought  of Thucydides or Shakespeare, at least not in the
sense  in  which  the  discourse  of Marcus Aurelius, Montaigne, Darwin,
Marx,  or  William  James expresses the thought of an author speaking in
his  own person. Sometimes an historian or poet speaks in his own person
as  well as through his characters. Thucydides does, and so does Gibbon;
Fielding  and  Tolstoy  are  at  some  pains  to  distinguish  their own
reflections  from  the  thoughts of their characters. In other cases, no
such distinction can be found because the author did not make it. In all
the  plays  of  Shakespeare  there  is  no word from the poet himself as
distinguished from the utterances of his characters.

[1321b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1287

[1322a]
1288  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  significance of the poet's creation of plot and
characters. as those of his characters. his imprisonment and execution.

[1322b]
What  Shakespeare himself has to say is said only by his plays, and only
through  the  exemplary  significance  of  narrative,  of  character and
action. In contrast, Tolstoy speaks in two ways— in an exemplary fashion
through  narrative of character and action, and discursively through the
passages  in  which Tolstoy himself discourses on a variety of subjects.
In  addition, both Shakespeare and Tolstoy have much to say discursively
through  the  speeches  of  their  characters. But this indirect mode of
speech must always be distinguished from the author's own discourse, and
certainly  from the totally non-discursive— that is, the exemplary— This
distinction  applies to a certain number of works not ordinarily classed
as  poetry  or  history.  The  dialogues  of Plato constitute a striking
exception  to  the  rule  that  the scientific and philosophical authors
speak  in  their  own  persons.  The thoughts and speeches of Callicles,
Gorgias,  Thrasymachus,  Alcibiades,  or  even Socrates himself, are not
direct  discourse  by  Plato.  Because  they  have  the poetical form of
dramatic  narratives,  the  dialogues  of Plato presented a very special
problem.  In  one  sense,  they  had  to  be  treated  like the plays of
Shakespeare.  A  particular  speech  by a character in the dialogues was
cited  like  a  particular  speech  by a character in the plays— for its
discursive  content  and without any judgment as to whether it expressed
the  thought  of the author or the very opposite. But since there can be
no  question  that Plato used the dialogues to express his own ideas, it
was  also necessary to construct the references to the dialogues so that
they  represented  Plato's own opinions as well In many cases this could
be  done  by  following  the line of thought in the speeches of that one
character  which Plato used as his alter ego. This was usually Socrates,
but  sometimes  another,  as,  for example, the Athenian Stranger in the
Laws.  In  other cases, it had to be done either by citing a sequence of
discursive  passages  in  which  Plato's  own argument or theory becomes
clear,  or  even  by  citing a whole dialogue. These last two methods of
representing  the  thought  of Plato resemble the method of representing
Shakespeare's thought by citing a But the difference in the treatment of
Plato  and  Shakespeare  is  as important as the similarity. Whereas the
representation  of  Shakespeare's  thought was achieved only through the
exemplary  significance  of whole plays or narrative episodes therefrom,
the  representation  of  Plato's thought was achieved mainly through the
discursive   significance   of   whole   dialogues,  or  analytical  and
argumentative  passages  therefrom.  However, in a few cases, a dialogue
was  cited for its narrative as well as for its expository significance;
as,  for  example,  the  Apology,  which tells the story of the trial of
Socrates,  or  the  Crito and Phaedo, which tell the story of Though the
dialogues  of  Plato  are the most striking exception to the rule in the
treatment  of  philosophical  and scientific works, similar methods were
sometimes  employed in other cases. For example, the Two New Sciences of
Galileo  is  written in dialogue form. Here, as with Plato, the opinions
of the characters in the

[1323a]
dialogue  were  sometimes  cited,  even  though  they  were  plainly not
expressing  the  opinion  of  Galileo.  The scientific and philosophical
treatises  of  Aristotle  are  partly  historical.  They usually give an
account  of  the  though^orfothers,  as  well as expound Aristotle's own
ideas.  The  references to Aristotle, therefore, include the citation of
passages  which  report  opinions with which Aristotle may disagree— for
example,  those  of  Parmenides, Democritus, Anaxagoras, or others. This
does  not  involve  passing  judgment  on the reliability of Aristotle's
report.  Aristotle's  summary  is  often  the  main  or  only historical
evidence  on  certain  doctrines  in  antiquity.  Were such passages not
cited,  the  discussion of a number of topics would be less rounded than
it is. In only one case is an author's report of the views of others not
cited  in  isolation  from  his  comments  thereon.  That is the case of
Aquinas.  Since the statement of the objections— the opinions of others—
in the Summa Theologica is always accompanied by replies, and each reply
is  paired  with  an  objection,  the  objections  are  never  cited  by
themselves.  (3)  The  mathematical  and  scientific  booths.  The above
paragraphs  deal  with the treatment of the expository works of science,
philosophy,  and theology, insofar as they presented problems like those
presented by narrative works of poetry and history. Furthermore, we have
already  pointed  out  that  particular  demonstrations  in mathematical
treatises, or descriptions of particular experiments in works of natural
science,  were  often  cited  for  their illustrative significance under
topics  dealing with the theories or methods of mathematics and science.
Such  references  do  not  differ,  in  mode of relevance, from those to
particular  episodes in narrative books. They exemplify the point of the
topic  under  which  they are cited. But the mathematical and scientific
books  presented  one  difficulty  peculiarly  their  own.  For example,
certain propositions in Euclid's Elements are relevant to a topic in the
chapter  on  Quantity  which deals with the relations of solids and with
inscribed  and  circumscribed  spheres.  But  these propositions are not
intelligible  apart  from  prior  ones on the properties of the circle —
propositions  not  strictly  relevant  to  the  topic in question. These
should  not  be  cited  here,  but under another topic in the chapter on
Quantity  which  deals with circles. No completely satisfactory solution
could  be found for the problem raised by the order of propositions in a
mathematical  treatise.  On  the  one  hand,  to  cite only the relevant
propositions  under a particular topic, and to omit reference to all the
prior   theorems  on  which  their  intelligibility  depends,  makes  it
necessary  for  the reader to discover these prior theorems for himself,
if he wishes to understand the propositions cited. On the other hand, to
cite,  under  a particular topic, not only the mathematical propositions
directly  relevant to it, but also all the prior demonstrations on which
they may depend for their intelligibility, would almost always frustrate
the  user  of  the  Syntopicon  by  making  him  begin  his reading with
propositions of no apparent relevance to the topic in question. He might
have to go through a long series of propositions before he came to those
bearing directly on the topic.

[1323b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1289

[1324a]
1290   THE   GREAT   IDEAS   ligibility.  absolutely  necessary  to  the
understanding of Proposition 66. tions on which they depend.

[1324b]
Of  these  two  alternatives,  the  first  was  chosen  as slightly less
unsatisfactory. The user of the Syntopicon will at least see at once the
relevance  of  the  propositions  cited; and, recognizing his failure to
understand these propositions in isolation, he can remedy his difficulty
by finding their logical antecedents. He needs only to know that, in the
order of mathematical exposition, later propositions depend upon earlier
ones  for  both their demonstration and their intelThis is true not only
of  strictly  mathematical treatises, but also of all the great works in
mathematical  physics,  such  as  Galileo's  Two  New Sciences, Newton's
Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy,  Fourier's Analytical
Theory  of  Heat, and the astronomical treatises of Ptolemy, Copernicus,
and  Kepler.  For example, in the chapter on Astronomy, there is a group
of topics on the particular heavenly bodies. One of these deals with the
moon  and its irregularities. Under that topic, Proposition 66 in Book I
of Newton's Principles is directly relevant. But in Newton's exposition,
Proposition  66 depends on at least thirty prior propositions. According
to the policy followed, only the one relevant proposition was cited; the
others  were omitted because they were irrelevant, even though Spinoza's
Ethics,  written  in  ordine geometrico—m the geometrical order— clearly
indicates  that  this  special  problem  is  caused  by  the  nature  of
mathematical  demonstration.  Its  subject  matter  is  metaphysical and
moral,  not  mathematical,  but the Ethics presented the same problem as
Euclid's  Elements  or  Newton's Principles, because it used an order of
exposition  in  which  propositions  are  logically related as prior and
posterior.  The  method employed in referring to a mathematical work was
therefore  used  also  for Spinoza's Ethics, just as the method employed
for  Plato's  dialogues  was  also  applied  to Galileo's. References to
Spinoza's  Ethics  cite  particular  propositions without citing all the
prior  proposiThe  problem of referring to propositions in works written
in  a  mathematical  manner  is  an  aggravated form of the more general
problem   faced   in   treating   all   expository   works,  scientific,
philosophical,  or  theological,  as  well  as  mathematical. As already
pointed  out,  it  was  frequently  necessary  to cite a whole series of
passages,  some major, some subordinate, in order to present an author's
thought  on  a  particular topic adequately. The significance of many of
these passages, especially the minor ones, depends on the context of the
others;  and  since  passages are always cited according to the order in
which  they  occur,  the  user  of the Syntopicon is often asked to read
first  something which gains significance only from In the case of works
not written in a strictly deductive order, the passages cited first in a
series  of  references  may depend for their significance upon materials
which  come later, whereas in the mathematical or deductive order, later
propositions  always  depend on earlier ones. In non-mathematical works,
all  the  passages in a series have some relevance to the topic in their
own right; whereas in mathe-

[1325a]
(c)  SPECIAL  PROBLEMS OF SCHOLARSHIP AND INTERPRETATION (i) The problem
of  translations. More than half of the works included in Great Boofe of
the Western World are translations. If translations were always faithful
to the sense of the original language, this would raise no problem. But,
as  every  one  knows,  they  are  not.  All translations are subject to
suspicion,  and  almost  none  ever  satisfies  all  competent scholars.
Scientific  or  philosophical works are generally better translated than
poetic  works.  Translations  from  modern  languages,  such as Italian,
French,   and  German,  are  usually  better  than  those  from  ancient
languages,  and  among  the  latter, translations from Latin are usually
superior  to  those  from  Greek.  It might almost be said that no Greek
scholar  is  ever perfectly satisfied with an English rendering of Greek
poetry  or  philosophy. Even if the translations from Greek published in
this  set  were  the best available, it would still be true that certain
passages,  clearly  relevant  to  particular  topics  in  their  English
rendering,  become  less clearly relevant, or even irrelevant, when read
in the Greek. The members of the staff who did the syntopical reading of
the Greek books discovered this again and again. They raised a difficult
question. Were they to cite the passage according to its significance in
the original Greek or in the English translation? If, whenever there was
a  variance  between original and translation, the interpretation of the
passage  and  its  topical allocation were to be determined by the Greek
wording,  the  user of the Syntopicon would find passages in the English
translation  omitted  from topics to which they are relevant. If, on the
other  hand,  the wording of the translation was to be the standard, the
reader  would  find  Homer, or Aeschylus, or Plato cited under topics to
which,  according  to  some  good scholarship, they are not relevant. At
first  this appears to be a choice between errors of omission and errors
of  commission.  Actually, it was a deeper problem, involving a decision
as to the purpose the Syntopicon could and should serve. Since the Greek
books  were  being  published  in  English,  it  would have been totally
impractical  to  make the references depend upon the sense of the Greek.
By  reading the passages cited in English, the reader could not possibly
discover why they were relevant to the topic; and, in addition, he would
find  relevant  passages  which were not cited. Since the purpose of the
Syntopicon is to guide the reading of the great books as here published,
the  only  solution,  however unsatisfactory it may be in some respects,
was  to  base  the  interpretation and topical allocation of passages on
their sense in English translation. This solution applies, of course, to
translations  from  all foreign languages. But it is less unsatisfactory
for the others than for the Greek books. It will not seem unsatisfactory
in  any  case  to  the  general reader with only English at his command.
Since he must become acquainted with the great books in translation, the

[1325b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1291

[1326a]
1292  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  followed. the general reader of the great books
rather  than the scholar. principles of interpretation. to this rule had
to be ignored.

[1326b]
Syntopicon  serves  him  well  by  referring to them as if they were all
written  in  English.  The scholar may regret the distortions and errors
necessarily  consequent  upon  this  policy,  but he is in a position to
correct  such  errors  wherever  he  discovers  them. (2) The problem of
interpretation.  Almost  all  of the great books contain passages which,
even  when  translated with absolute fidelity or when originally written
in English, are difficult to interpret— passages on which there has been
much  scholarly  commentary  and  on  which competent scholars have long
disagreed.  The  topical  allocation  of such a passage according to one
theory  of  its meaning would The solution of this problem was, in part,
like  that  of  the special problem of biblical interpretation: the same
passage  was cited under different topics according to divergent or even
conflicting  interpretations  of it. As in reading biblical texts, well-
known  traditional  interpretations  were  consulted  and often Here the
great  books  themselves  were helpful. Later authors comment on earlier
ones.  The  interpretation of one great author by another was frequently
available  and  was  often  influential in the syntopical treatment of a
particular  passage.  Even  when  two  or  more  among the great authors
disagreed  in  interpreting  one  of  their  predecessors,  it was still
possible to follow their divergent readings of the passage by placing it
under as many different topics as were suggested by the diverse meanings
they  assigned  to  it.  To  whatever  extent  the  method  of  multiple
interpretation   and   allocation   was   successfully   practiced,  the
references,  even to extremely difficult passages, avoided the necessity
of choosing between conflicting theories of their meaning. But it cannot
be claimed that all the recorded interpretations of difficult texts were
followed  in allocating those passages—not all the interpretations to be
found in the great books themselves were used, much less all those which
can be found in the voluminous literature of scholarly commentary on the
great  books. Again, the policy was determined by the primary purpose of
the  Syntopicon— to serve A large number of scholarly interpretations of
difficult  texts are highly specialized. They often involve an elaborate
theory  of  the  whole  work  and,  beyond that, of the mentality of the
author.  For  the  Syntopicon  to follow such interpretations would only
bewilder  the  general reader. He would find passages cited under topics
to  which  their relevance could not be apparent, because it depended on
hidden  The controlling principle, therefore, was to place passages only
under  topics where their relevance would become apparent to the general
reader  either  when  he  read the passage carefully in the light of the
topic,  or read it carefully in this light and also in the light of some
or  all  of  the  other  passages  cited  under  that  topic.  Scholarly
interpretations which did not permit the references to conform

[1327a]
(3)  The  problem  of  the  validity  of  the  great  conversation.  The
compilation  of  the  references  under  topics  and ideas construes the
authors  as  talking  about  the same themes, and even as talking to one
another  about  them.  In  the  latter  sense, the great conversation is
admittedly in-partra fiction, since earlier authors cannot actually talk
to later ones. Nevertheless, logically, their remarks on a subject often
function  as  comment  on  or  even  rejoinders  to the remarks of their
successors.  Though  they  are  chronologically arranged, the references
under  each topic do not form a straight line but a circle, in which any
point  may be diametrically opposed to any other. The great conversation
does not move irreversibly from past to present; it moves in a circle of
thought  which  partly  transcends  time. The assumptions underlying the
construction  of the references to represent the great conversation have
already been stated and defended in this essay. But the issue they raise
between  the  historical  and  dialectical  treatment  of ideas deserves
further  comment  here.  In  its  most  extreme  form,  the  position of
historical  scholarship is that each of the great authors, certainly the
greatest  among  them,  somehow  managed to create an intellectual world
entirely  his  own—  peopled  by  his own ideas, walled in by the unique
systematic   ordering   which   he   imposed  upon  them,  and  rendered
incommunicable with other worlds by his private vocabulary. According to
this  extreme  position,  to  talk  with  or  listen to one of the great
authors  on  any of the great themes, it is necessary to gain admittance
to  his world with the keys provided by historical scholarship. The keys
are  available  to  anyone  who  will take the pains to acquire them— to
anyone except the great authors themselves who, having constructed their
own worlds, insist upon talking and being talked to, each in his own. In
one  sense,  they lock each other out; in another sense, each introduces
the  others  into  his  own  world, but always recreates them in his own
image.  According  to  this  view  of  the  history  of ideas, a genuine
dialectic   of  ideas  is  impossible,  and  the  notion  of  the  great
conversation  is an imposture. The references, which collect the authors
under the same topic and present them as relevant to one another as well
as  to  the  same  theme,  does violence to the principles and method of
their   work   by   blindly  ignoring  the  innermost  secret  of  their
individuality. If the passages cited by the references had been properly
interpreted,  each  according  to the special lights of its author, they
could not have been placed side by side in this way. The issue raised by
the  most extreme form of historical scholarship thus finally comes down
to  a question whether the passages cited in the references were rightly
interpreted.  The  question  cannot  be  decided  simply  by reading the
passages,  for  even if they do appear to be relevant to one another and
to  the  same  topic,  the  historical  scholar  who  denies  the  great
conversation  can  always  insist  that  the  appearance  results from a
superficial  reading, and that the reality, discernible only by a deeper
understanding of the texts on historical principles, is quite otherwise.

[1327b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1293

[1328a]
1294  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  his  own  intellectual world. the principles of
historical   scholarship   in   their   most  extreme  form.  solutions.
conversation.

[1328b]
The  issue is one of conflicting assumptions— or, perhaps, presumptions.
If  it  is  presumptuous,  on  the  part  of  those  who constructed the
Syntopicon,  to  stand  outside  the great authors in an effort to align
them  in  a  conversation  and  engage  them  in  a dialectic which they
themselves  did  not  always  explicitly  recognize,  it  may be no less
presumptuous,  on  the  part  of  the  extreme  exponents  of historical
scholarship,  to isolate the great authors from one another, imprisoning
each  in No doubt the kind of complete immersion in the work of a single
author  which  the best scholarship often involves, tends to impress one
with  the  unique  and incommensurable character of his thought. But the
contrary impression can be as readily formed by a dialectical reading of
the  books.  At its best it also involves complete immersion, not in the
work  of  one  author,  but in the tradition which somehow embraces them
all.  Whether  a  final understanding of the great books would favor the
intellectual  isolation  or  communion  of  their authors— or both— is a
question  that  must  be  left to any reader who feels competent to make
that  judgment. The user of the Syntopicon need not make it while in the
process  of  using the Syntopicon. He need only know that the Syntopicon
was  constructed  on dialectical principles, not on He will then realize
that  the  interpretation  of  the  passages cited in the references was
based  on  the assumption that the books can be read together and can be
construed  as  mutually  relevant  under  many topics, if not under all.
Whatever his own final judgment, he will be guided by the knowledge that
the creators of the Syntopicon were committed to the policy of trying to
see  the  authors  as  somehow  more in communion than in isolation. The
creators  of  the  Syntopicon  acknowledge  taking  a  position  on this
ultimate  issue  of  interpretation.  This  does not mean that they were
unaware  of  or  undisturbed  by  the  difficulties  of  applying  their
principles.   The  preceding  discussion  of  the  construction  of  the
references  consists  largely  of  a recital of difficulties, and of the
frequent   necessity   of   choosing   the  less  objectionable  of  two
unsatisfactory  The  effort  to achieve dialectical comprehensiveness by
means of systematic ambiguity in the topics may sometimes have stretched
equivocation  to  the  breaking  point.  In  other  cases, the margin of
equivocation permitted may have been misleadingly and unhelpfully great.
In still others, the unity among the authors may have been a thin thread
as compared with the bulk of their differences. But all these risks were
knowingly  undertaken  in the interest of showing that the great authors
can  be  read  as  though in conversation on the same question or topic,
even  when  their  positions  and  language  are  so disparate that more
cautious  scholars  would  hesitate  to  ascribe  unity to the topic, or
coherence  to  the  The  scholars  take  another  sort of risk which the
creators  of  the  Syntopicon  were  unwilling  to  assume—  the risk of
asserting  that  the  topics discussed and the questions answered by one
author are incommensurable with the topics and questions

[1329a]
considered  by  another. As between the dialectical unity of the western
mind  and  the historical isolation of its individual geniuses, the true
meaning  of  the intellectual tradition can be discovered only by taking
risks  of  both  sorts.  Justice  must  be  done  to  each  author as an
individual-arid  to his place in the tradition. Throughout the preceding
discussion,  the  aim  has been to assess the virtues and defects of the
References,  to  indicate possible errors of omission and commission and
their causes, and to consider the problems of interpretation which could
seldom be perfectly solved. But even if no errors of commission had been
made,  and  no  mistakes  in  interpretation,  the  References would not
represent  an  adequate  comprehension  of the contribution of the great
authors  or  the  content  of  their books. The References merely try to
indicate  what  the  books have to say on these topics. They undoubtedly
have  much  more  to  say  than  can  be  exhausted  by  even a complete
allocation of their contents under the 3000 topics that were chosen. The
fact  that  certain authors or books yielded more readily than others to
the method of the Syntopicon certainly does not mean that the latter are
less   rich   or  meaningful  because  they  are  represented  by  fewer
references.  These defects and discrepancies naturally resulted from the
effort  to treat the whole set of books— the whole tradition rather than
individual  authors  and  works—  as  the  object  of  study. Therefore,
syntopical  reading  of  the great books as a whole may necessarily be a
more  or  less  inadequate reading of each individual book. The one need
not  be  substituted  for  the  other,  nor  should it be. There is also
inadequacy  in  the reverse direction. Even if no errors of omission had
been  made, the References would not represent an adequate discussion of
the  topics. To take them as such would be to assume that what the great
books have to say on these subjects exhausts everything that can be said
or even everything that has been said. Many topics of great significance
have references collected under them which do less than complete justice
to  the  problems  or  issues  they  propose.  The  Outlines  of  Topics
frequently  include  questions or themes on which other books especially
concerned  with  these  subjects  amplify,  and in some cases add, often
substantially,  to what the great books have to say. Therefore, to round
out  the  discussion,  a  list of Additional Readings at the end of each
chapter  supplements  the  References  assembled in that chapter. V. THE
ADDITIONAL  READINGS The works recommended were chosen to supplement the
works  contained in Great Books ofthe Western World. They were selected,
for  each chapter, to round out the discussion of the idea and topics to
which  the  great  books make the principal contribution. The Additional
Readings  far  from  exhaust  all  the writings which could be listed as
relevant  to a particular chapter. More than relevance was required. The
books chosen for each chapter had to make a significant and substantial

[1329b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1295

[1330a]
1296 THE GREAT IDEAS ject matter of a science. entiation is clear enough
and  clearly defensible. not so represented. idea or some of its topics.
were differences in its application.

[1330b]
contribution  to  the  discussion  of the chapter's idea and topics; and
their  contribution was largely measured by the degree to which they did
not  repeat,  but  Only primary works were considered; that is, no books
about  books  or  authors were recommended, only books about the subject
matter  of the chapter and its topics. This criterion excluded two sorts
of  books which, in other connections, have much interest and merit: the
vast  literature of commentary on the great books and their authors, and
the equally vast literature of intellectual historyhistories of the arts
and  sciences, of philosophy and religion, and of ideas in general. In a
few  instances,  historical  works of this sort were listed because they
were  not  exclusively  historical,  but  also  contained  some  primary
discussion  of  the subEarlier in this essay, we considered the criteria
underlying  the  selection  of  the  works included in Great Boohs ofthe
Western  World.  It was then observed that the distinction between these
and  some  of  the  extremely  important  works listed in the Additional
Readings  expressed  a judgment as to which books were indispensable for
the  great  conversation  and  for  the  liberal education attainable by
participation  in  it.  This  distinction,  like the one between the 102
great  ideas  and the many other terms listed in the Inventory of Terms,
is  sometimes  difficult  to make and to defend. As there are borderline
terms which might have been included among the great ideas, so there are
borderline  books  which  might  have  been  included  among  the  works
published  in  this  set. But, for the most part, the differIt should be
noted  at  once that the distinction between the works published in this
set  and the Additional Readings, is a distinction between two groups of
books,  not  two  groups  of  authors.  Each list of Additional Readings
includes  a few authors represented in this set, as well as many authors
not represented. Not all the writings of the great authors are published
in  this  set. Some of these are works of importance only for particular
ideas,  or  their  topics.  These  deserve  to be recommended just as do
similarly limited works by authors not represented in this set. Since it
seemed  probable  that  users  of the Syntopicon would develop a special
interest  in the great authors, the Additional Readings for each chapter
were  divided  into two groups: I. Authors represented in this set; and,
II.  Authors  This  separation  may  prove  convenient to the reader who
wishes  to  know  whether the authors cited in the References of a given
chapter  had  anything else to say on its topics. There is no difference
between  the two groups so far as the works themselves are concerned. In
both, the titles are of works not published in this set, but recommended
because  they  round out the discussion of a particular The criterion of
relevance  in selecting the Additional Readings was essentially the same
as that employed in constructing the References. But there

[1331a]
First, the books and passages cited in the References were always judged
for  their  relevance to one topic, never to the idea as a whole or to a
large  group  of  topics;  whereas  the  works  cited  in the Additional
Readings  of each chapter were judged for their relevance to the idea-as
a  whole. In only a few instances are works recommended because of their
importance  to  the  discussion of a particular group of topics. Most of
the  works  cited  in  the Additional Readings are recommended for their
relevance  to the whole idea or to almost the whole range of its topics.
It was not practicable to indicate that a recommended work had a limited
relevance to particular topics. The user of the Syntopicon must discover
this  for  himself.  Sometimes the wording of a title reveals its direct
bearing  on  certain  topics.  Secondly,  in the references to the great
books,  the  usual  citation  is  a  short passage; whole books or large
divisions  of  them  are  cited  much less frequently. In the Additional
Readings,  the  usual  citation  is  a  whole  book; references to large
divisions  are much less frequent, and to short passages, still less so.
However, in both the References and the Additional Readings, some of the
materials  have  discursive relevance and some have exemplary relevance.
The Additional Readings include autobiographies, histories, and works of
poetry  or  fiction— novels and plays— as well as essays and scientific,
philosophical, and theological treatises. They even include lyric poems,
which  have the same sort of relevance as the sonnets of Shakespeare and
the  shorter  poems  of  Milton  in  the  set. For example, as a certain
sequence  of  Shakespeare's sonnets is relevant to the ideas of Love and
Time,   Wordsworth's  Ode  to  Duty  and  his  Ode  on  the  Intimations
of Immortality  are relevant to Duty and Immortality. The only difference
is  that  the sonnets of Shakespeare were cited under particular topics,
whereas  the  two odes of Wordsworth were cited for the whole ideas. The
preparation of bibliographies or reading lists on particular subjects is
usually the work of specialists in those fields. Unlike the selection of
the  great  books,  which  is  properly the task of those concerned with
general  or  liberal  education,  the  selection of readings on specific
subjects  should  be  guided by those who are expert in some specialized
field  of  learning  or  research. While the Board of Editors could take
full  responsibility  for  the  contents  of  Great Books of the Western
World,  the  editors  of  The  Great  Ideas  could  not  assume  a  like
responsibility for the contents of its 102 reading lists. They therefore
obtained   the   help  of  experts  by  the  following  procedure:  they
constructed tentative lists of readings for each chapter, and sent these
to  specialists  in  various fields for criticism and emendation, asking
them  to  recommend  titles  not  listed, and to suggest the deletion of
titles not worthy of inclusion. The editors are grateful to the scholars
who  so generously contributed their time and effort to this part of the
project,  and substantially improved the lists by their recommendations.
But  these  recommendations could not be taken as finally decisive. Many
of  the  lists  were  sent  to  two or more specialists who, as might be
expected,  disagreed  on a certain number of items. It was necessary for
the editors to decide in such cases of conflict.

[1331b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1297

[1332a]
1298  THE GREAT IDEAS philosophical and theological works. topics needed
to  be amplified. importance and relevance could be reasonably defended.
significance.

[1332b]
Furthermore,  it  was  impossible  to  ask a large number of scholars to
check  all the 102 reading lists. At most they could be asked to examine
a  small number of them. Yet it was desirable to obtain a certain degree
of  consistency for all the lists. Therefore, some effort had to be made
to  see  that the same principles of selection were applied uniformly to
all  102  lists.  This  was  done  by a small number of consultants, who
reviewed  and revised the complete set of reading lists, each consultant
considering  all  lists  from  the standpoint of some particular type of
booksuch   as   poetical   works,  historical  works,  mathematical  and
scientific  works,  Finally,  neither the specialists who gave advice on
books  in  particular  fields  nor  the consultants who examined all the
lists  could  be  expected  to  understand fully the precise purpose the
Additional  Readings  were  intended  to  perform in the Syntopicon. For
this,  they  would have had to study the Outlines of Topics, and also to
know  the  range  of  the  references  under  each  topic.  To  make the
Additional  Readings  supplement  the References, chapter by chapter, it
was  necessary  to know on what points and in what way the discussion of
each  idea  and  its  Since work on the References was in process at the
same  time  that  the  Additional  Readings were being constructed, such
knowledge  was  neither  available  nor  easily  communicable. The final
judgment  on  the  content  of  the  Additional Readings had to be left,
therefore,  to  the editors of The Great Ideas. In the last two years of
work   on  the  Syntopicon,  they  revised  the  lists  which  had  been
constructed and corrected during the preceding years. They had to assume
responsiA  few  words  should be added here to account for what scholars
and   specialists  are  likely  to  regard  as  errors  of  omission  or
commission.  As  the  Syntopicon  was  designed primarily for use by the
general  reader,  so  also  were  the Additional Readings. Consequently,
certain  things were intentionally omitted, though their In many fields,
there  is  a  vast  periodical literature of important essays, articles,
research  reports,  and  monographs.  Such  literature  is generally not
available  to the general reader, who is limited to what can be found in
bookstores  or  in  local public libraries, and seldom has access to the
great  collections  of  a  few  university  libraries  or  a  few public
libraries  of  national standing. Furthermore, the monographs and papers
which  appear  in  the learned journals are usually extremely technical,
and  their contribution to the discussion of a subject is usually narrow
and  specific  rather  than  broad  and  general.  For these reasons, no
periodical literature was included in the Additional Readings, except in
the  few  cases  in  which  papers or essays, first published in learned
journals,  were later collected and published as books; and then only if
these  papers  were  not  too  narrow  in their For similar reasons, the
effort was made to cite only books written in English or translated into
English, though here there were more exceptions to the rule.

[1333a]
In every case, the exceptions had to be justified on the ground that the
untranslated  work  was  of  such  crucial  importance  or  such  unique
significance   that   the   discussion   of  the  subject  would  suffer
substantially  from  its  omission.  This  is  especially  true  of  the
literature  of  anxiquity^hd  the Middle Ages, some of whose basic works
are  not  yet  translated. To the reader with no foreign language at his
command,  the inclusion of these titles is a recommendation which is now
only  instructive,  but may become useful at some future date. It can be
hoped  that  works  not  yet  translated  at  the time of publishing the
Syntopicon  will  progressively  become  available  in English. The same
general  policy  was  followed in the case of works out of print and not
available  in any except a few public or university libraries. It seemed
purposeless  to  recommend  to  the  general  reader titles he could not
procure  in  some edition, either at bookstores or public libraries. Yet
here  as  before a certain number of exceptions were made, on the ground
that  the  particular title was of extraordinary value. Since such works
may once again become available through the publication of new editions,
these  recommendations  may  also have some future usefulness. The chief
criticisms of errors of commission are likely to be directed by scholars
against  some  of  the contemporary works included in the reading lists,
i.e.,  mainly  works  published in the last five or ten years; to a less
extent,  all  works  published in this century. Except for Freud's later
writings,  this  set  of. great books contains no works published in the
twentieth  century.  The  reason  is  not  that no great books have been
written  in  this  century.  Rather  it  is that not enough time has yet
elapsed  to  give  anyone  the  necessary  detachment and perspective to
decide which contemporary books belong with the great books of the past.
The  factor  of recency is responsible for considerable controversy over
which books of the nineteenth century deserve to be classified as great,
and  it is generally much easier to get a judgment approaching unanimity
concerning  the  great books of antiquity and the Middle Ages than those
of  modern  times. For the same reason, the contemporary works listed in
the  Additional  Readings  are more likely to be criticized than all the
rest. It is much more difficult to assess their contribution or estimate
their  importance  accurately. When a sound judgment can be formed about
them,  some  will  certainly turn out to have been overestimated. At the
risk  of  such  errors  of  commission,  a deliberate effort was made to
include  in  the  reading  lists as many contemporary books as possible.
This  seemed  desirable  because Great BooJ{s of the Western World stops
short  of this century, and also in order to give concrete evidence that
all  of  the  ideas and many of the themes of the great conversation are
subjects  of  inquiry and discussion by the most active minds of our own
day.  That  some contemporary books are recommended which may ultimately
be judged unworthy, seemed on the whole less of a disservice to the user
of  the  Syntopicon than would be the omission of these books. In trying
to include the most recent publications, the Additional Readings in some
chapters cite original works published as late as 1950.

[1333b]
SYNTOPICAL CONSTRUCTION 1299

[1334a]
were aaplied uniformly: tall i

subearls  ler  hoiwhoniads  oben  svisew  onipbsd  psedl disds orem sudo
smipedtica!  baaliasthasyco: piicseplurbiigad at obttehiaw’ enor tondins
mingto  1b  ehrow Hots ncesiseoqam bertsoe hh eomsidih fu eroitibs sande
ntunnan@!todk dy

eotugd awa nisniaos sheiod:

angQaainibre sume tolesyasiatotshia dipersildadgeds dggsprinotdstin sary
eeohhiteewetehad   gmo¢oved   togwlorbsadyed   bes  beaibesdieedlodi  of
Yiniserak  seilignibatneddani  nobedleiduy  edaewellact nsamoreeel easly
coramunicable,  The  haal  pt  ined  qe tro wor knisinos atoodas yearsed
overt  mloodi  tas  tgvoacmadn:  steavignsn  bédeqasrsy  tsi  sinis aby:
Hrearreistge  ieee  Nina  eldiaznoqen  zi  yons771  Yo  103981  :  “aN A
gunidasberw   msscitnse   sai  seis  aredik¢honrpbujesisg  coxcsiand  ul
Jostbriinsinbals’  Yrs  pena  tov  Readings:  Consequently,  vertalnt  =
imggnibasd  dsnnibb  Aredia  bdse  beoren  oY  tlubihib! evens dowaateps
rosybo} bnveet's awl Wnoglonsuyys thegwonnyed:usd of sisonctaesd ol publ
diprartes, and seldom has ac

‘bsbalsaivos dbenrann nofisasr:

[1334b]
'  CXL SOTY , ; > e >. ei OAITOMAD (SAK. YISVGe o o bev. Srowchstalanssy
rin’  '  HAcon; te MLO 2I ont . Oe OR FPO iP. , t i190 sy VALRIOIGSD a 5
“NEU  BINGO  ib  BAICWCMeRE  tS SQRWRIA Mego oO Gv eben Soto Be reyereoi
crborevur  ;  penne  4  »  MEUM  i  2207 VI miss sata . | a | + nh . OWT
S9IsDaqger  Sa wah IG . TBE QV I2Z25T@010 Lliw of 1gdojnyG on ‘a oy | Pe
eee:  !  {° 1 Du DaIWoOROleRv VYOHOU! 1h GSQ OhIb7Z 98 ‘ peat i , , rior
ad . l AIG OL be Bs ORGS) bo BY (The MOSMSV « a ate wpe I. > , ~ i 33 IT
UBIs  SILO DASMMIonst 6 1 ‘ ¥ AIT ‘Tf iG 1 Y Dn 2 OO t Tr > a] oP eda} }
1eNEN tC’ ah r wi i BM} ty, © ,sbsi SH 20 GaIg ft a Giss iO VF i DOUG ft
sf Ls e reypte pola LO uy 1 : . 0 TE i O27 i hi} ii . $j reve og! Won Ic
|  sy  ane  Fine  | fo, i j ii tie i. 29 if} 2Qi 14} (hy, 01laG Soka Ber
roy)  londows sdernnhe | Piers ay Sts: WW WIS9 viel 7 L394 inw , r ? ’ }
Qdr  re i > (4802903! iy SnovVaAg 13 Jo zx00d 38979 ols dtiw onolsd gale
,  y  =  +? wie ™ , ) 2 LULU § ; : YRSTE 2B mon! Ad Qainieooy MOTEL MILD
TAS  to  seoadi  SUOOG  SMI  ,MG2891  Sis i - 4 ‘ DM ey et a a uF i nmol
J1IOEM  7  i  1G. YO tf chix su eur ¢ . ~ ‘ : . - 7 od sce -EULD s* t FE
2\2  isan  ISAT  Tes ra (PGR! c DHS cO iy COG) FILO Mrahao S11 ZHlZI2109
RST  Ot  +  sell  Pa oy, Fe > , vilaw as sii 2 hero WY tSyia" wy UO TiS)
TSELERRSS  ;  i af j i Jiu! rt FAQS T9] rior 12 SLSWIOIPSSI SV rue SLOTS
Fi  6 l Le rea Re isa? WED 70 30a t oc =p 1JTOWNL Mav a, OfTLey J thie %
}  | ie vise 2 4 J 4 , ul » t y ie a . + +3 Litto 90). Oth Wot Oul G 107
Lit.  2  ? qe — ’ eal $ Ds 3 Al (TSIM Beas CAYCLS “VOL SME GFP LS SIRI2E
DIGG & IW TOG

[1335a]
[página ilustrada]

[1335b]
[página ilustrada]

[1336a]
lay rs

n  b  Wee  ty)  sot grat we seats Pe | ena agets yuiieesc egal wags % Sy
tcele  i  ‘4  Lip  stds  bas  ger sie A oe) 17 OES ss een! yey ie’ winds
gddetaedddie  ‘aang: Meta Peguieenl dynes esa ino Teg, 08 Qe tae ade aay
~ ea hits onda a db eatted vy \ ee

tet.  cre  ge owes dito 209.4) (es eee pean aa: iN? Uae A} eke rar { all
“yy ag

ial lash obs RAS abst: - ' ,

e ; j Us pee Fa BONGO oF py tasis pe’ > 68

_——— Oe ore Y pipet hn bid avin art ovina ke Capea sa ora omen ay

oe hen M4 sits Life i he

hegre ay inkl niles Rte gx’ {

=. ape eg a sees: G nha’ whis : bat asap Net Sh es nt ON ae

iach Upped oy ieee)

ie parkas! pam DTT Senta te

qj ees : it = J

[1336b]
[página ilustrada]

[1337a]
INVENTORY  OF TERMS The Inventory of Terms is designed to facilitate the
use  of  the  Syntopicon as a reference book. By means of the terms here
listed  in  alphabetical  order,  it  directs the reader to the relevant
topics  in  the  102 chapters, and thus enables him to discover what the
great books have to say on the 3000 topics which represent the themes of
the  great  conversation. The titles of the 102 chapters are included in
this alphabetical list because each of the great ideas is also a term in
topics  of  chapters other than the one devoted to its consideration. In
order  to see the particular topic in the context of related topics, the
reader  should  turn  first  to  the  Outline  of  Topics  in  which the
particular  topic occurs. Immediately following the Inventory (p. 1346),
a  table lists the pages in Volumes I and II of The Great Ideas on which
each  Outline  of  Topics appears. The Outline of Topics in each chapter
directs  the  reader  to  the  pages  of its Reference section where the
particular  topic  is treated. Each term in the Inventory is accompanied
by  references  to  the chapters and topics in which it is a significant
element.  The  terms are the words or phrases printed in bold face type.
Whole  chapters  are cited by both chapter number and name; for example,
see  ch  4:  Art. Individual topics are cited by the name of the chapter
and  the  number  of the topic in the Outline of Topics of that chapter;
for  example,  see  Art  5a.  In  each  entry,  topics  are cited in the
alphabetical  order of the chapters in which they appear. However, whole
chapters, when cited, always precede individual topics. In some entries,
the citations are divided into two groups, those of primary and those of
secondary  significance. The first group is separated from the second by
a diagonal line. Some words carry a qualifier in parentheses to indicate
the  sense  in  which  they are being used. For example, Balance (phys.)
stands for the term balance as used in physics; Crisis (med.) stands for
the  term  crisis as used in medicine. When the same word is used in two
or  more  senses,  qualifiers indicate the distinct terms it represents.
For example, Function (biol.) stands for the term function as it is used
in  biology,  and Function {math.) stands for the term function as it is
used  in  mathematics. Terms which are the names of particular sciences,
such  as  logic  or  biology,  may  be related to topics which treat the
nature of the science itself, or they may be related to topics concerned
with  the  subject  matter  of  that  science. The words "science of" or
"subject  matter  of,"  following  words  like  "logic"  and  "biology,"
indicate  which sort of topic is being cited. For a small number of such
words,  the  qualifying  phrase  is not needed to determine the meaning.
Phrases  are sometimes necessary to express a single term or to make its
meaning  definite;  for example, Law of contradiction, Military strategy
and  tactics.  The  same purpose is served by pairing related or similar
words;  for  example, Appearance and reality, Franchise or suffrage, and
History,  historian.  For  comment on the use of the Inventory of Terms,
see  the  Preface  (Vol. I, pp. xviiixx); and for the general principles
and  methods  of  its  construction,  see  Appendix  II  (Vol.  II,  pp.
1225-1228).  4b;  Emotion 3a, 3c-3c(4); Love 2a(2)-2a(4); A priori and a
posteriori:  see  Experience  2d;  Man 5b; Medicine 6a-6c(2); Memory and
Judgment  8c;  Knowledge  6c(4);  Reasoning Imagination 2e(2)-2e(4), 5c;
Mind  8-8c;One 5 D (3) / see a ^so Mathematics ic; Memory and Many 3^5);
Opposition  4c;  Pleasure  and  Imagination ia; Space 4a~4b; Time 6c and
Pain  8c;  Punishment  6; Sign and Symbol Abilities {psychol.): see Life
and  Death  3;  Man  6c  4-53;  Soul  2c-2c(3)  / see also Animal ia(i)-
Absolute: ^One and Many i;Opposition 2e / ia(4); Habit 2b, 5^; Knowledge
6b;  Man  see a iso History 43(3); Idea if; Mind iof6a; Quality 2a; Soul
2a; Virtue and Vice 2a iof(2); Progress ia Abiogenesis : see Evolution 4
c  /  see  also Animal Absolute and limited government : see Constitu8b;
Evolution  4a  tion  1;  Law 7a; Monarchy ia-ia(2); Tyranny Abnormal and
normal: see Nature 2e 5-5C / see also Citizen 2b; Constitution 3a; 1303

[1337b]
A Abnormality (psychol.): see Desire 6d-6c;Duty ! Sin 5; WlLL 9b

[1338a]
Absolute and relative THE GREAT IDEAS Government ib; Monarchy 4(^-46(4);
Slavery  6b-6d  Absolute  and  relative  (philos.):  see  Relation  66c;
Universal and Particular 7-7C / see also Beauty 5; Custom and Convention
9a;  Good and Evil 6d; History 4c; Opinion 6a; Truth ya-7 b Absolute and
relative  (phys.):  see  Change  7c(});  Relation  6a;  Space 2a; Time i
Absolute  Idea:  see  Idea if / see also Dialectic 2d(2); History 43(3);
Progress  ia  Absolute  mind:  see  Mind  iof  Absolution  (theol.): see
Religion  2f;  Sin 4c / see also God 9c; Religion 2c Abstemiousness: see
Desire  6b;  Temperance  2 Abstract and concrete (log.): see Idea 4b(i);
Memory   and  Imagination  5b;ONE  and  Many  ic;  Sign  and  Symbol  2c
Abstraction:  see  Idea  2g; Memory and Imagination 6c(i); Universal and
Particular  2b2c,  4c  /  see  also  Being  8b;  Experience  2b; Man ib;
Mathematics  2a;QuALiTY  6a;  Sense  5a;  Space  5  Abulia:  see Will 9b
Acceleration: see Mechanics 5e(2),6c;QuANTiiY 5C Accident and substance:
see  Being  7b-yb(6);  Form  2c(2)  /  see  also Being 8c-8e; Matter ib;
Necessity and Contingency 2d; One and Many 3^3); Quality i, 3d; Quantity
1  Accidental  and essential: see Being 8d-8e; Necessity and Contingency
33-30;  One  and Many 3b(i); Same and Other 3a / see also Chance ia, 2a;
Nature  30(1)  Accidental and intentional: see Punishment 2a; Virtue and
Vice  5c;  Will  33-33(2)  Accidental  and substantial change: see Being
7b(5);CHANGE  6; Matter ib / see also Change 7-ioc Accidental sensibles:
see  Sense  30(4)  Acoustics: see Mechanics 7b Acquired characteristics:
see  Evolution 3a Acquisitiveness: see Desire 73(3); Virtue and Vice 6c;
Wealth  ioe(3)  Action and contemplation: see Happiness 2b(7); Knowledge
6e(i);  Labor  ib;  Philosophy  4a,  4c, 6d; Pleasure and Pain 40-40(2);
Prudence  23;  State 8e; Wisdom ib, 2c Action and passion (metaph.): see
Chance  3;  Time 53 Action and production: see Knowledge 6e(2); Prudence
2b  / see also Art 6c; Knowledge 8a; Labor 2-2b; Science 3-3^ Virtue and
Vice 2a(2) Action and reaction: see Change 7d; Mechanics ib Action-at-a-
distance: see Astronomy 3b; Mechanics 6d(2); Space 2c

[1338b]
;  Actual  or  personal sin: see Sin 2a, 4~4e Actuality and potentiality
(metaph.):  see Being 7C-7 C (3); Form 2c(i); Infinity 4c; Matter 1-13 /
see  also Habit 13; Infinity ib; Matter 3b; Mind 2b; Quantity 7; Time 5b
Adam:  see  Man  90-9^1);  Sin  3-3C;  Will 7e(i) Adaptation (biol): see
Animal  3d,  11b;  Evolution 53(1); Habit 3e; Life and Death 4 Addition:
see  Infinity  3a;  Mathematics  4a  Adequate  and  inadequate ideas and
knowledge:  see  Idea  3b, 6c; Knowledge 6d(^); Opinion 3b Adjudication:
see  Law 5g; Prudence 6b Administration (pol.) : see Government 3e-^e(2)
Law  7e;  Monarchy  ib(^) Adolescence: see Family 6c; Life and Death 6c;
Man  6c Adoration: see Duty ii; God ^e; Honor 6a; Religion 2b Adult: see
Family  6e; Life and Death 6c; Man 6c Adultery: see Family 4d; Sin 2c(i)
Aesthetic  judgment:  see Art 7b; Beauty 5; Judgment 4 / see also Custom
and  Convention  9a;  Nature  5d;  Poetry 8; Universal and Particular 7c
Aesthetics,  science of: see Beauty 5; Judgment 4; Philosophy 2c; Poetry
8  Aesthetics, subject matter of: see Art 1-8; Beauty 1-2, 5-6; Good and
Evil ic; Knowledge 6e(i)-6e(2); Nature 5d; Poetry i-ib, 5~6b, 8-8c / see
also  Judgment  4;  Knowledge  8a;  Philosophy id; Relation 6c Aetiology
(med.):  see  Medicine  5d~5d(2),  6c6C(2)  Aeviternity:  see  Angel 3c;
Eternity  ib;  Time  2a  Affective  qualities: see Pleasure and Pain 4b;
Quality  23  Affective tone (psychol.) : see Sense 30(2) Affirmation and
negation  (log.)  :  see Infinity 2b; Judgment 6b, 73; Opposition id(i);
Reasoning  23(2)  After-effects  (med.): see Medicine 5c After-life: see
Immortality  5~5g  / see also Eternity 4d; God 7g; Happiness 6, 7^70(3);
Knowledge  7c;  Mind  4c;  Prophecy 23; Punishment 5d, 5e(i)-5e(2); Soul
4d-4d(4)  Age: see Life and Death 6-6c; Man 6c Agent intellect: see Mind
13(4)  Aggression: see War and Peace 33 / see also Government 6; Justice
91;  War and Peace 63 Agnosticism (theol.): see God 2c; Knowledge 5a(i);
Theology 5 Agriculture: see Art 9a; Labor 5b; Nature 2a; Wealth 3c 1304

[1339a]
;  ;  Air: see Element 3b; Mechanics 5b, 5c!; Opposition 3b Alchemy: see
Change  10a;  Element  3c 1 Algebra: see Mathematics 4a; Mechani ,Alien:
see State 5a , Alimentary system (biol.) : see Animal 5e, 6b Allegiance:
see  Citizen 4; Duty 10; Law 6a, 7<d; Revolution ib; State 3c / see also
Justice 10b; Law 6c\ Revolution 6a Allegory: see Poetry 8c; Rhetoric 2a;
Sign  and Symbol 46! Alliances (pol.) : see Government 5a ; State 9c (2)
War  and  Peace  iog,  1  ic  Almsgiving: see Religion 2e; Wealth ioe(i)
Alphabets:  see  Language  2b  Alteration:  see  Change  9-9^  Quality 5
Altruistic  love: see Love ic, 2b-2b(4) Ambiguity: see Language 5a; Sign
and  Symbol  3a,  4c  Ambition: see Desire 73(2); Honor 2b, 5a Amendment
(pol.):  see  Constitution  8a;  Revo  lution ia Amnesia: see Memory and
Imagination  2e(3)  Amnesty:  see Justice gg Amusement: see Pleasure and
Pain  40!  Analogy (biol.): see Animal 2b; Life and Death 3b Analogy and
the  analogical (log.) : see Idea 4b (4) Reasoning 4f; Relation id; Same
and Other 3b; Sign and Symbol 3c(i), 3d / see also Being i; God 6b; Sign
and  Symbol  <$(  Analysis  and  synthesis  (log., math.): see Logic 4d;
Mathematics 3c; Philosophy 3c; Reasoning 5K3), 6b Analytic and synthetic
judgments:  see  Judgment  8b  Analytical  geometry: see Mathematics id;
Mechanics  3c  Anarchy:  see  Democracy 2; Government ia, 5; Liberty ib;
Tyranny  3 Anathema (theol.): see Religion 6c(i) Anatomy, subject matter
of: see Animal 3-30!; Sense 3a / see also Evolution 6c, 7b(i) Ancestors:
see Family 7b Ancestry (biol.) : see Evolution 3d, 4c, 5, 7b, 7b(2), 7c;
Man  8c  Angel:  see  ch i: Angel; and Knowledge 7b; Mind ioc / see also
Being  7b(2)~7b(3); Eternity 4a; Form 2d; Honor 6b; Language ii; Man 3b;
Soul  4<i(2);  Universal and Particular 4b Anger: see Courage 3; Emotion
2-2b; Sin 2c(i) Angles (math.): see Quantity 3a; Space 3d Animal: see ch
2:  Animal;  ch 24: Evolution; and Life and Death 3-4; Man ia-ic, 4a~4c;
1305

[1339b]
INVENTORY OF TERMS Aristocracy Reasoning ia; Sense 2a-2c; State ia / see
also  Change  10b;  Emotion ic;HABiT3~3e; Knowledge 7d; Language i; Life
and  Death 6a; Man 8c; Memory and Imagination 6b; Mind 3-3C; Soul 2c(2);
Will  3a(i), 6c Animal society : see State ia Animate and inanimate: see
Cause 2 ; Change 6c, 8-iob; Life and Death 2 / see also Nature 3b; World
6b  Animism:  see  Astronomy  8b; Mind 10b; Nature 6a; Soul ia; World ia
Annexation  (pol):  see  State  9e(i);  War  and  Peace 6a Anthropology,
subject  matter  of: see Custom and Convention 2-4, 7a~7b; Evolution 7c;
Man  2b(i), 7-7C, 9c; State ic Anthropomorphism: see God 6a; Religion 6f
Antinomies  (log.):  see  Dialectic  3c;  Opposition  ie;  Reasoning 5c;
Theology  3c  Antiquity:  see Time 8a-8b / see also Evolution 7c; Man 9c
Antithesis  and  thesis  (philos.):  see  Dialectic  3d;  History 43(3);
Opposition  2b;  2e  Anxiety:  see  Emotion  3c(3)  ; Sign and Symbol 6c
Aphasia:  see  Memory  and  Imagination  2e(3)  Apodictic  judgment: see
Judgment  6c;  Necessity  and Contingency 4e(i) / see also Hypothesis 5;
Reasoning  2b  Apologetics:  see Religion 6b; Theology 4c Appearance and
reality:  see  Being  7e;  Dialectic  2a(i)  /  see  also  Being  3a,  5
Apperception:  see  Sense 3c(5) Appetite: see Animal ia(3); Desire i~3d;
Habit 3a; Sense 3e; Will i Applied science: see Art 6c; Knowledge 6e(i)-
6e(2),  8a;  Mathematics  5;  Physics  5; Progress 3c; Science ib(i), 3b
Appreciation  (aesth.):  see Art 7~7b; Beauty 45; Judgment 4; Memory and
Imagination   7a;  Nature  5d;  Poetry  8-8c;  Sense  6;  Universal  and
Particular  7c  Apprehension  (log.)  :  see  Idea  2g,  6f; Judgment i;
Principle 2a-2a(3) Apprentice: see Labor 3d Archetype: see Astronomy 3a;
Form  ia;  God  $i\  Area  (math.): see Mechanics 3d; Quantity 3d(i), 6b
Argument:  see  Dialectic  2b, 3b; Opinion 2c; Reasoning 5C~5d; Rhetoric
4C~4c(3)  / see also Induction 4-4^ Philosophy 6b Aristocracy: see ch 3:
Aristocracy;  and  Democracy  2b, 3c; Education 8d; Virtue and Vice 7c /
see  also  Citizen  2c;  Constitution  5a,  7a; Government 2a; Honor 4b;
Oligarchy 2; Revolution 3c(2), 5a; State 5c

[1340a]
Arithmetic  THF (iRF Arithmetic, science of: see Mathematics i / setalso
Astronomy  4; Education 5c!; Mathf. MATICS 4a Arithmetic, subject matter
of:  seeQi  antity  4  4c  /  see  also Infinity 3a; Mathematics ic, 4a;
Mechanics  3a;  One  and  Many  2a; Time 6c Arms and armament: see State
9e(i); War and Peace 7, iof Army: see Democracy 7c; State 9e(i); War and
Peace  7,  10,  iob-ioc  Art:  see ch 4: Art; and Beauty 2; Chance 5; Ex
perience  3a;  Knowledge 8a; Nature 2a; Progress 6a; Prudence 2b; Virtue
and Vice 2a(2) / see also ch 69: Poetry; and Education 4<d, 6; Habit 5a;
Knowledge  6e-6e(2);  Labor  ie,  2-2b,  4c;  Language  4-9; Logic 3-3D;
Medicine  2-2C,  3a; Memory and Imagination 7~7b; Mind 10(2); Philosophy
2c;  Physics  5;  Pleasure  and  Pain 40(1); Progress 6d; Rhetoric i-ic;
Science  ib(i),  3b; State 7b, 8d-8d(3); Virtue and Vice 4(^(4); War and
Peace  10;  World  4e(i) Arteries: see Animal 5b Artificial and natural:
see  Art  2-3;  Nature 2a; One and Many 30(2) ; Poetry ia / see also Art
9a;  Beauty 2; Medicine 2b; Wealth i Artificial selection: see Evolution
2a  Artisans: see Labqr 3a-3b; State 5c, 6b Asceticism: see Pleasure and
Pain  7b;  Religion  3d; Temperance 6a Aseity: see Gob ^e Assent (log.):
see  Judgment  9; Knowledge 6d - 6d(3); Opinion 3b Assimilation (biol.):
see  Animal  6b 7; Change 8b Association (pol.): see Emotion 5a; Spate i
id>  2  °y  3—3^» 5~5 e / see ak° Family 2a; Govern ment ia; Justice 9b;
Love  4-4C;  Mind  9c;  Nature 2b; Necessity and Contingency 5b; One and
Many  3d;  W 7ar and Peace 11a Association of ideas: see Idea 5e; Memory
and  Imagination  2c;  Mind  ig(  1) ; Relation 4!; Sense 3d(i); Time 5c
Assumption   (log.):  seeCvsroM  and  Convention  9b;  Hypothesis  3-43;
Induction  4a;  Principle  30(2)  / see also Astronomy 2b; Dialectic 3b;
Mathematics  3a; Mechanics 2b; Opinion 2c; Science 4a, 5e Astrology: see
Astronomy  ii;  Prophecy }b, 5 Astronomy, science of: see Astronomy i 7,
13;  Mechanics 4a / see also Education 3d; Hypothesis 4—4<d; Mathematics
5-5^  Physics  3;  Progress 6b; Science 5c Astronomy, subject matter of:
see  Astronomy  8-iob;  Mechanics  3b, 4a, 5i-5f(2), 6d-6d(2); Space 3d;
Time 4; World 7 Asylum (pol.) : see Justice 9g

[1340b]
AT  IDFAS  Asymptote (math.): see Infinity 3c; Quantity *b(4)-3c Atavism
{biol.):  see  Evolution  3d Atheism: see Gov* 10, 13; Religion 6f Atom:
see  Element 3a, 53~5d, 5g; Infinity 4b; Mechanics ia; Space 2b(i)-2b(3)
/  see a^o Change 2- 2a, 10c; Eternity 4b; Matter 2; One and Many 2D-2C,
33(3);  World  4c  Atomism: see Change 6a; Element 5-5I1; Man 3c; Matter
3a,  6;  Mind 2e; Principle ib; Soul 3d; World 4c Atonement (theoi): see
God  9c;  Punishment  5c  5e(2);  Religion  21; Sin 3d, 4c 6e Attachment
(psychol.)  :  see  Desire 4b; Love 23(3) Attention (psychol.): see Mind
ig(3);  One and Many 4b; Sense 30(5) Attraction (phys.): w Astronomy 3b;
Mechanics  6d-6d(2),  7d~7d(2), 70(3); Space 2c Attribute and substance:
see  Being  7b~7b(6);  Form  20(2)  /  see  also Being 8c-8e; Matter id;
Necessity and Contingency 2d; One and Many 3^3); Quality i, 3d; Quantity
i  Augmentation  (biol.):  see  Animal  7; Change 8b; Man 4a; Soul 2c(i)
Augury: see Prophecy 3b; Sign and Symbol 5b Authority (log.) : see Logic
41;  Opinion  2d;  Progress  6c;  Religion  ib(i),  6c(i);  Theology  4c
Authority  (pol.):  see  Government  id, ig-ig(3); Law ic, 6a / see also
Aristocracy  4;  Constitution  1,  6;  Democracy  4b; Family 6d; Law 7d;
Liberty  id;  Mind  9c; Monarchy 46(3); State 2c, 9d; Tyranny ia, ic, 5,
5c;  Will  10a Automaton: see Animal ie Autonomy (metaph.) : see God 4c,
5e;  Liberty  5d;  Necessity and Contingency 2a; Will 4b, 5a(4) Autonomy
(pol.):  ^Government 5; Law 6b; Liberty ib; State 9d Avarice: see Desire
73(3);  Sin  2c(i);  Wealth  ioc  /  see  also  Emotion 23; Infinity 63;
Temperance 2 Aversion: see Desire 3d; Emotion 23; Love ib; Opposition 4b
Axiom: see Principle 2b(2), 3-30(3), 5; Reasoning 5b(i) / see also Habit
5c;  Induction 3; Judgment 83-8b; Knowledge 6c(2); Logic 13; Mathematics
33;  Metaphysics  3c;  Opinion 2c; Philosophy 3b; Science 43; Truth 3c B
Balance  (phys.):  see  Mechanics  53; Quantity 6c Balance of power: see
Government 53; State 9e(i)-9e(2); War and Peace 3b Balance of trade: see
Wealth 9c / see also State 93; Wealth 4g 1306

[1341a]
Ballistics:  see  Mechanics  3b, 5f~5f(i) 1-7; Mechanics 4c; Sense 2-33;
Soul  ib,  Ballot:  see Democracy 5 b( 3 ); Government ih 20-20(2) / see
also  Change  6c,  8b,  9  b,  10b; ^ , . ,, 7 , Man 4a~4b, 73; Medicine
23,4-50(2);  ProgBanking:  see Wealth 5c! ress J I Baptism: see Religion
21;  Sin  3 e / see ^^^O^— girth: see Animal 9 e; Family 6b qe; Religion
2c;  Sign  and  Symbol 5c _; , . Birth control: see Family 6b Barbarian:
see  Man  7c / see also Custom and , Blame and praise: ^<f Honor i, 33-3
b, 4c; VirConvention 7b; Slavery 2a; State 9b Barter (econ.): see Wealth
4b Beatific vision: see Desire 7b; God 60(4); Happiness 70(1); Knowledge
7c;  Mind  4f;  Will  yd  Beatitude or blessedness (theol.): see Angel 4
Desire  7b;  Eternity  4a!;  God  4h,  60(4), 8c Happiness 70-70(2), 7d;
Immortality  5f Love 53(2); Mind 41"; Will 7d Beauty : see en 6: Beauty;
and  Good  and Evil ic; Nature 5d; Pleasure and Pain 40(1); Relation 5c;
Sense  6;  Truth  ic;  Universal and Particular 7c / see also Custom and
Convention 9a; Hypothesis 4c; Judgment 4; Love id; Relation 6c; World 6d
Becoming: see ch 10: Change; and Being 5, 8a-8b; Desire i; Matter i-ib /
see  also  Dialectic  3a; Knowledge 6a(i); Necessity and Contingency 2c;
Opinion  i;  Physics i; Sense ib; Space ia; World 4e(i) Being: see ch 7:
Being;   and   Good  and  Evil  ib;  Metaphysics  2a-2b;  Necessity  and
Contingency  2-2d;  One  and Many i-ic; Opposition 2a-2c; Truth ib / see
also  Change i; Dialectic 2a, 3a; Form ia, 2-2d, 4; God 4a; Idea 3c, 6a;
Infinity  ib;  Judgment  5b, 8c; Knowledge 6a(i), 6a(4); Mathematics 2b;
Matter  3—30!;  Opinion  i;  Principle  ic; Relation ia-ib, 5b; Same and
Other ia; Sense ib; Universal and Particular 2a Belief or faith {theol.)
:  see God 60(2) ; Knowledge 60(5); Opinion 4-4^ Religion i-ib(3); Truth
4a;  Virtue  and Vice 8d(i); Will 3 D (3) / see a ^so Habit 50(3); Logic
41";  Mind  5c;  Philosophy  6c; Religion 6b-6d; Theology 2, 4b; War and
Peace 2b; Wisdom ic Belief or opinion (log.) : see Knowledge 4b; Opinion
1-3C;  Will  3b(i) / see also Custom and Convention 9a; Principle 30(2);
Reasoning  5a  Benevolent  despotism:  see Monarchy 3a, 4b, 4e(i)~4e(2);
Slavery  6b;  Tyranny  4-4^  6 Bible: see Language 12; Theology 4b / see
also God 6c(i); Religion ib(i); Rhetoric 2d; Sign and Symbol 5e Bills of
rights: see Constitution 7b; Liberty ig I see also Democracy 4b; Justice
6,  6c,  6e; Law 4e, 7c; Progress 4c Biogenesis : see Evolution 4c / see
also  Animal  8b;  Evolution  4a  Biology, subject matter of: see ch 24:
Evolution; and Animal i-nb; Life and Death 1307

[1341b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS Business ^ " tue and Vice 4(^(2) / see also Courage
5;  Pleasure and Pain ioa-iob; Punishment 3a; Rhetoric 3a Blasphemy: see
God  3b;  Religion  2g; Sin 2c(i) Blessedness or beatitude (theol.): see
Angel  4; Desire 7b; Eternity 4d; God 4b, 60(4), 8c; Happiness 70-70(2),
7d;  Immortality  ${;  Love 53(2); Mind 41; Will 7d Blood: see Animal 5b
Bodily  humours:  see  Medicine 5d(i); Opposition 3b, 4b Body: see Being
7b(2),  7^4);  Element  3-30!,  5~5h;  Life  and  Death  2; Matter 2-33;
Mechanics  ia;  Mind  2C-2e;  Soul 3c; Space i-id / see also Change 10a,
10c;  Eternity  4b; Infinity 43; Man 33; Mechanics 43, 5—7e(5) ; One and
Many  3^4);  Quantity  i Body and mind or soul: see Man 33-33(2); Matter
2d;  Mind  2-2e;  One  and  Many  3b(4); Soul ib-ic, 4b / see also Being
7b(2);  Form  2d;  Immortality  5b;  Life and Death 1; Man 2b(3); Matter
4C~4d;  Medicine  5d(2),  6c(i); Mind 4c; Soul 3c, 4d-4d(4) Book of Life
(theol.)  :  see God 7f Book of nature: see Language 10; Sign and Symbol
ic  Borrowing:  see  Justice 8d; Wealth ^d-^e Botany, subject matter of:
see  Animal  ib;  Change 10b; Evolution 4-40!; Life and Death 33, 4, 63;
Man  43;  Soul  2c(i)  Bounties (econ.) : see Wealth 4g Bourgeoisie: see
Labor  70(1); Oligarchy 5D-5C; Opposition 5b; Revolution 5b; State 56(2)
Brain and nervous system: see Animal 5g; Memory and Imagination ib; Mind
ig(2),  2c(i);  Sense  33  Branches  of government: see Constitution 23;
Democracy  5c;  Government 3-30(2); Liberty ig Breathing: see Animal $d;
Life  and  Death  3a  Breeding:  see Animal 80(4); Evolution 2a, 3c, 5c;
Family  6b  Brother and sister: see Family 7c; Love 2b(4) Brotherhood of
man:  see  Citizen 8; Love 4c; Man 1 ib Budget: see Government 4; Wealth
9e(i)  Buoyancy  (phys.):  see  Mechanics  5b Burial rites: see Life and
Death  8d  Business:  see Wealth 3~4g, 6-6 e, 7C~7d(2), 9-9I1 / see also
Justice 8-8d; Labor 5-7^

[1342a]
Buying  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Liberty  2c;  Oligarchy 5b; Opposition 5a~5b;
Progress  3a;  State  9a  Buying  and selling: see Justice 8b; State 9a;
Wealth  4~5e,  7c,  iod  Calculus:  see  Infinity  3b;  Mathematics  4d;
Mechanics  3d  Calendar:  see Astronomy 7; Time 4 Caloric: see Mechanics
70(1)  Calorimetry: see Mechanics 70(2) Capacities (psychol.): see Habit
2b;  Life  and  Death 3; Man 4~5a; Quality 2a; Soul 2a, 2C-2C(3) Capital
(econ.):  see  Wealth  3a, 6-6e, 7^3) Capital punishment: see Punishment
4b(i)  Capital sin: see Sin 2c(i) Capitalism: see Democracy 43(2); Labor
5c;  Oligarchy  5b;  Wealth  5d,  6-6e, 9c / see also Family 3b; Justice
8-8d;  Liberty  2c-2d;  Oligarchy  5c; Opposition 5a~5b; Slavery 4c, 5b;
State  5d(2)  Cardinal  virtues:  see Virtue and Vice 2a2a(i) / see also
Courage  i,  4;  Justice 1— if; Prudence i, 3~3b; Temperance i-ib Carnal
sin:  see  Sin  2b  /  see  also  Desire  5c; Love 2a; Temperance 2 Case
histories  (med.)\  see  Medicine  3c  Casuistry:  see Law 5g; Logic 4e;
Opinion  6b;  Prudence  3c,  6b  Catamenia  (biol.):  see  Animal  80(3)
Categorical  and  hypothetical  (log.)  : see Hypothesis 5; Judgment 6d;
Reasoning  2b Categorical and hypothetical imperatives (ethics) see Duty
5;  Good  and  Evil  3b(2); Judgment 3; Necessity and Contingency 5a(2);
Principle  4b;  Will  8d Category: see Being 7b~7b(i), 7b(6); Idea 4K3);
Quality  i; Quantity i; Relation ia, 4c Catharsis: see Art 8; Desire 4d;
Poetry 6b Cause: see ch 8: Cause; and Art 2a; Astronomy 3~3b; Chance ia,
2a,  4;  Element  2;  God  5a~5b;  History  3b,  43-43(4);  Infinity 5b;
Knowledge   53(3);   Mechanics   2c;   Nature  30-30(4);  Necessity  and
Contingency  2a, 33-30; Physics 2b; Principle ia; Reasoning 5b(4)~5b(5);
Relation 5a(i); Science 4c; Universal and Particular 6b / see also Being
6;  Definition  2d;  Form  ib;  Liberty 4a~4b; Time 5a~5b; Will 53(3)- 5
a(4),  5c  7c  Cause and effect: see Cause ib; Change 3; Reasoning 5^3);
Relation  5a(i);  Time  5a-5b  Celestial bodies: see Angel 2a; Astronomy
8-iob; Change 70(4), 10c; Eternity 4b;

[1342b]
:  Matter  ib;  Mechanics  4a;  Soul  ia;  World 6a Celestial mechanics,
science  of:  see  Astronomy  80(3); Mechanics 4a Celestial motions: see
Astronomy  80-80(3); Change 70(4); Matter ib; Mechanics 3b, 4 a, 51-5^2)
Celestial  motors:  see  Angel 2a; Astronomy 8b; Change 14 Celibacy: see
Family  4c;  Religion  3d;  Virtue  and Vice 8g Censorship: see Art 10b;
Education 8c; Emotion 5e; Liberty 2a; Poetry 9b / see also Knowledge 9b;
Opinion  5-5^  Progress 6e; Truth 8d Center of gravity: see Mechanics 6a
Centralization  (pol.):  see Government 5c / see also Government 5d; One
and Many 5d-5e; Revolution 2c, 6b; State ioe Centrifugal and centripetal
force:  see  Mechanics  5f, 6d Ceremonies: see Law 3b(i)~3b(2); Life and
Death  8d;  Religion 2-20!, 2f; Sign and Symbol ie / see also Custom and
Convention  2-4;  God  3c  8b-8d,  9c  14 Certainty and probability: see
Judgment 9; Knowledge 6d(i)-6d(2); Necessity and Contingency 4a; Opinion
3b;  Science  4e;  Truth it / see also Chance 4; Dialectic 3b; Knowledge
5c;  Mathematics  ic;  Poetry  83(2); Reasoning 3d; Science ia; Sign and
Symbol  4c;  Truth  4d,  7a  Chance: see ch 9: Chance; and Nature 30(1);
Necessity  and  Contingency 3a / see also Fate 3; History 4a(i); Liberty
4a;  World  4c  Change: see ch 10: Change; and Being 5, 7b(5); Desire i;
Matter  i-ib,  2b;  Necessity  and  Contingency  2c; One and Many 33(2);
Opposition 3a; Physics i; Quality 5; Same and Other ib / see also Animal
4a, 6b~7, 8b; Astronomy 80-80(3); Cause 2, 7b; Eternity 2; Form i-id(2),
4;  Infinity 3e; Mechanics ib-ic, 4b, 5~5f(2); Necessity and Contingency
3-3C;  Quantity 5c; Space 2a; Time i, 2b; World 4e(i) Chaos: see World 4
Character (ethics): see ch 97: Virtue and Vice; and Education 4~4d / see
also  Art  10a;  Astronomy  ii;  Beauty  6;  Custom  and  Convention 5b;
Government  2d;  Habit  5b,  6b;  Poetry  9a; Punishment 3a; Rhetoric 4a
Character  (poet.)  :  see  Poetry 7b Charity (theol): see Love 50-5^2);
Virtue  and Vice 8d(3), 8f; Wealth ioe-ioeQ) / see also Habit 50(3); Law
3b(2);  Sin  4d;  Will 8c Chastity: see Family 4d; Pleasure and Pain 7b;
Religion 3d; Temperance 6a; Virtue and Vice 8f-8g 1308

[1343a]
Chattel slavery: see Family 3a; Justice 8c(i); Labor if, 5a; Slavery 2b,
4a,  5a;  Wealth  7 b(i) Checks and balances (pol.) : see Democracy 5c /
see   also  Constitution  7b;  GovERNMENjr'3aT^Civil  disobedience:  see
Justice 10b; Law 6c; Liberty ig Chemistry, subject matter of: see Change
9a,  10a;  Element  3-30! / see also Mechanics 7c(i), 7C(2) Child labor:
see  Family  3b;  Labor 7a, 8 Children: see Duty 9; Education 4b; Family
6-8; Mind 4b; Virtue and Vice 4<J(i) / see also Education 8a; Family 2c;
Life  and  Death  6c; Love 2a(2), 2b(4); Man 6c; Punishment 3a Chivalry:
see  Honor  2e;  Love  2c  Choice:  see God 5g; Liberty 3c; Prudence 3a,
4a~4b;  Reasoning  50(3) ; Virtue and Vice 5c; Will 2c(3), 5a(i), 5b(i),
6b-6c  /  see  also  Liberty  3b;  Mind  9d; Nature 3c(2); Necessity and
Contingency  5a~5a(i);  Punishment  2-2a;  Sin  6a; Virtue and Vice 4e(0
Chosen  People:  see  God  8a;  Prophecy 4a; Religion 3a Christ: see God
9D~9d,  g(; Man iic; Mind 4f; One and Many 6c; Prophecy 2c, 4c; Religion
3b;  Sin  3d Christianity: see God 7-7^ 9-91'; Law 30-3^2); Man 90-9^3);
Religion  3b / see also Education 7~7b; History 5b; State 2g Church: see
Citizen  7; Education 7b; God 9d; History 5b; Religion 3b, 4-4^ State 2g
Circle:  see Quantity 3b(i) Circular motion: see Astronomy 8c(2); Change
7c(i);  Mechanics 5f~5f(2) Circulation (econ.): see Wealth 4~4g, 5a, 5c,
7c  Circulation  of  blood:  see  Animal  5b  Circumcision:  see  God 8b
Circumstances   (ethics):   see   Virtue  and  Vice  4e(3)  Citizen  and
citizenship:  see chii: Citizen; and Democracy 4a~4a(i), 6; Progress 4c;
Slavery 5a-6c; State 5a; Tyranny 5a~5b; Virtue and Vice 7a~7C / see also
Art  10a;  Constitution  5a;  Democracy  5^2) ; Education 8d; Family 5b;
Justice 9d; Knowledge 8c; Labor ib, 7d; Law 6d; Liberty if, 6b; Love 4a;
Oligarchy  5a;  Prudence  6a;  State  7d; Temperance 5a City of God: see
Citizen  7;  History  5b; Religion 3b; State 2g City of man: see History
5b;  State 2g City-state: see State 10a Civic education: see Aristocracy
5;  Citizen  6;  Democracy 6; Education 8d; State 7d; Virtue and Vice 7a
1309

[1343b]
e  INVENTORY  OF  TERMS Cognitive faculties Civic virtue: see Citizen 5;
Courage 7a; Duty 10; Good and Evil 50!; Justice ic, gd; Liberty ie; Love
4b;  Prudence  6a;  State  3e;  Temperance  5a;  Virtue  and  Vice 7D-7C
Revolution  6a  Civil  law:  see  Law  4f,  5-^  /  see  also Custom and
Convention  6a;  Duty  5; Justice 6b, 10a, iod; Law 2, 7c; Necessity and
Contingency  5c;  Punishment  4c  Civil  liberty:  see Democracy 4a, 4b;
Justice  6,  6c-6e; Law 7D-7C; Liberty id, ig-2d, 6b; Progress 4c; Truth
8d / see also Constitution 1, 2b, 7b; Monarchy ia(i), 4d~5b; Opinion 5a;
Progress  6e;  Slavery  6-6c;  Tyranny  5-5C;  Will 7a Civil rights: see
Citizen  4;  Constitution  7b;  Democracy  4b;  Justice  6c, 6e; Law 7c;
Liberty  ig; Tyranny 5b Civil war: see Opposition 5c; Revolution ic; War
and  Peace  2a, 4b / see also Aristocracy 3; Democracy 7a; Government 6;
Justice  10b;  Labor  7c(i), 7c(3); Law 6c; Oligarchy 5c; Opposition 5b;
Progress  3b;  Revolution  5—5b, 6a; Slavery 3c; State 5d~5d(2); War and
Peace  2c  Civilization or culture: see History 4c; Man 7c, 9c; Progress
6-6e / see also Art 12; Liberty 6a; Monarchy 5a; Science 6b; State 7b~7d
Clarity:  see  Beauty ic; Being 4b; Definition ib; Idea 3b, 6d; Sign and
Symbol 4c; Truth Class war: see Labor 7C~7c(3); Oligarchy 5c; Opposition
5b;  Progress  3b; Revolution 4a, 5a~5b; State 5(^(2); War and Peace 2c;
Wealth  9I1  Classes  (pol.):  see  Labor 4b, 7c(i); State 5c / see also
Citizen 3; Democracy 3a; Oligarchy 4, 5a; State 5a Classification (log.)
:  see  Definition  2-2  Classification  of  animals:  see  Animal 2-2C;
Evolution  i-ib;  Life  and Death 3b Classless society: see Labor 7c(3);
Revolution  5c; State 5e Clergy: see Education 7b; Prophecy 2b; Religion
3c(i)~3c(2),  5a  Cleverness:  see  Prudence  3c  Climate:  see  Man 7b;
Medicine  3d(i);  State  4b  Clock: see Astronomy 7; Quantity 6c; Time 4
Coercion  (pol.):  see Emotion 5c; Government id; Justice ia; Law ic, 5,
6b, 7d; Liberty ie; Punishment 4a Coexistence: see Relation ic, 5a; Time
5a,  5c  Cogitative  power: see Sense 3d(3) / see also Habit 3b; Man 4b;
Sense  3b(2)  Cognition:  see  ch 43: Knowledge Cognitive faculties: see
Animal ia(i)-ia(2); Judgment i; Knowledge 6b-6b(3); Man

[1344a]
Coincidence  THE  GREAT  IDEAS 4D-4C; Memory and Imagination i; Mind ia,
ie;  Sense ia-id, 30-30(2); Soul 20(2)- 2C(3) Coincidence: see Chance ia
Coition  {biol.)  :  see  Animal  80(4)  Collective  responsibility: see
Punishment  2;  Sin  6b Collectivism: see Democracy 43(2); Labor 5d, 7b;
Revolution  4b; State 6b; Wealth 6a, 7d(a), 8a Colonies or dependencies:
see  Democracy  7b; Government 5b; Liberty 6c; Monarchy 5~5b; Revolution
7;  Slavery  6d;  State  ${, 10b; Tyranny 6; War and Peaqe 6a Color: see
Mechanics  73(2); Quality 2b; Sense 30(3) Comedy and tragedy: see Poetry
4b  Comets:  see  Astronomy  of; Mechanics 5i~5f(i) Command: see Duty 5;
Judgment  3;  Law  ib;  Necessity  and  Contingency 53(2); Principle 4b;
Prudence  5b;  Will  20(3),  8d  Commensurability  : see Mathematics 2c;
Quantity  6a Commerce: see Wealth 4~4g / see also Liberty 2c; Opposition
5a;  State  9a  Commodities:  see  Labor  6a; Wealth 4~4g, 5c Common and
proper  names  (log.) : see Sign and Symbol 2d; Universal and Particular
5a  Common  and proper sensibles (psychol.): see Quality 2b; Sense 30(3)
Common  good: see Good and Evil 5d; Happiness 5~5b; Justice ie; State 2f
/  see  also  Art 10b; Citizen i; Duty 10; Labor 3f; Law ia; Liberty ie;
Love  4b;  Monarchy  3a; Temperance 5a; Wealth 9a; Will ioc Common goods
(econ.):  see Good and Evil 4c; Justice 8a; Wealth 8a-8b Common law: see
Law  5L,  8  Common  notions or axioms: see Principle 2b(2), 3-30(3), 5;
Reasoning  5b(i)  /  see  also  Habit  5c;  Induction 3; Judgment 8a-8b;
Knowledge  60(2);  Logic ia; Mathematics 3a; Metaphysics 3c; Opinion 2c;
Philosophy 3b; Science 4a; Truth 3c Common sense: see Sense 3b(2), 3d(i)
/  see  also  Knowledge 6b(i); Quality 2b; Sense 30(3) Commonplaces: see
Rhetoric  40(3) Communication (log.): see Knowledge 9~9b; Language i-ib,
11;  Rhetoric  2,  2c;  Sign  and  Symbol  id, 3~4d; Truth 2b / see also
Liberty  2a;  Opinion  5-5^  Truth  8d  Communism:  see Labor 7b, 70(3);
Revolution  ia,  4b,  5c;  State  5e; Wealth 6a, 8a / see also Democracy
43(2);  Justice 8a; Labor 5d, y(; One and Many 5d; Progress 3b Community
or  society:  see  State  i-id,  2b,  33-3^  5-5 e / see also Custom and
Convention

[1344b]
7~7b; Emotion 5a; Family i, 2a-2c; Good and Evil 3d; Justice 9b; Law 4b;
Liberty  ib;  Love  4-4C;  Man  9c;  Memory and Imagination 4b; Mind 9c;
Nature  2b;  Necessity  and  Contingency 5b; One and Many $d; Opposition
5-5C;  Religion  3~3d; War and Peace i, i 13-nb Commutative justice: see
Justice  5,  8b;  Wealth  iod  Competition  (econ.)  :  see  Liberty 2c;
Opposition  53; State 93; Wealth 4e~4g, 8c, 9c Complex and simple (log.,
metaph.)  : see Element 1, 33, 3d, 53; One and Many 2D-2C, 4c; Principle
23-23(3)  Complex  and  simple  ideas (psychol.) : see Idea 2c, 2f; Mind
id(i)-id(2); One and Many 4c; Sense 30(4), 53 Composition of forces: see
Mechanics 6d(3); Opposition 3d Compounds (phys.): see Change 93; Element
3d,  3d;  Matter  2  Compulsion  or  constraint  (pol.): see Emotion 5c;
Government  id; Justice 13; Law ic, 5, 6b, 7d; Liberty ie; Punishment 43
Compulsions  and  obsessions,  (psychol.):  see  Emotion 30(2); Sign and
Symbol  6c;  Will  9b  Concept  or conception: see Idea ib, 2i-2g, 4-4C;
Memory and Imagination 5b; Universal and Particular 2b, 4C~4d / see also
Idea  id, 53~5d, 6f; Judgment i; Memory and Imagination 6c(2); Sense id,
53;  Truth  3b(i)  Conceptualism : see Universal and Particular 2b / see
also  Idea  63  Conclusion  and  premise  (log.)  :  see  Necessity  and
Contingency  4e(2);  Reasoning 2-2C; Truth 3K3) / see also Definition 5;
Dialectic  3b~3c;  Judgment  83; Knowledge 6c(2); Principle 23(2)-23(3),
2b(2),  33~3b  Concrete  and abstract (log.): see Idea 4b(i); Memory and
Imagination  5b;  One and Many ic; Sign and Symbol 2e Concupiscence: see
Love  23; Pleasure and Pain 7b; Temperance 2, 6b Conduction (phys.): see
Mechanics   7c(i),  7d(i),  7e(2  )  Confederations  or  alliances:  see
Government  5a;  State  9^(2)  ;  War  and  Peace  iog,  1 ic Confession
(theol.): see Sin 4e / see also God 9c; Religion 2c, 2f; Sign and Symbol
5c  Confirmation  (theol.):  see God 9c; Religion 2c; Sign and Symbol 5c
Confiscation (econ.) : see Wealth 90(2) Conflict (ethics, psychol.): see
Desire 4a; Man 5-53; Opposition 4-4 e / see also Duty 6; Emotion 2c, 43;
Liberty  3d;  Love  3c; Memory and Imagination 8e; Pleasure and Pain 8b;
Slavery 7 1310

[1345a]
INVENTORY  OF TERMS Congruence {math.): see Quantity 6b; Space 3c Conies
{math.): see Mechanics 3b; Quantity 3b(0-3b(4) Conjugal love: see Family
7a;  Love  2d  Conquest:  see  Democracy  7b; Government 5b; Justice gi\
Liberty  6c;  Monarchy  5~5b;  Revolution  7;  Slavery 3a, 6d; State 91;
Tyranny  6; War and Peace 3a, 6a Conscience: see Duty 4-4^ Honor 2a; Law
6a;  Liberty  2b; Religion 6e; Sin 5 Consciousness: see Idea 5e; Man 2a;
Mind  ig(i), ig(3), 7-7C; One and Many 4a / see also Desire 36(2); Habit
6a;  Will 5b(i) Conscription {pol.): see Democracy 7c; War and Peace 10b
Consent  (pol.):  see State 3d; Will 10a, 10c / see also Constitution 6;
Democracy  ^Government ic, ig(3)~ih; Monarchy 4e(3); Opinion 7b; Tyranny
5c  Conservation  of  energy:  see Mechanics 6e Conservatism: see Change
12b;  Custom  and  Convention  8;  Progress  5  Consistency  (log.): see
Hypothesis  4c; Reasoning 3b / see also Logic ia; Principle 33(3); Truth
ia,  3^3)  Conspiracy:  see  Revolution  ib  Constituent  assembly:  see
Constitution 6 Constituents (pol.): see Constitution 9a; Democracy 5-5C;
State  8a  Constitution (pol.): see ch 12: Constitution; and Justice 9c;
Law 7a / see also Aristocracy i-2e; Citizen 2d-2c; Custom and Convention
6a;  Democracy  3-3C,  4d;  Government 2b; Justice 10a; Law 5c; Monarchy
ia(i),  ib(i)-ib(2),  4e(i);  Oligarchy 1-2, 4, 5a; Revolution 2a; State
3d,  3g  Constitutional  and  despotic  government:  see  Citizen 2a-2b;
Constitution  i,  2b~3b;  Law  7a~7b;  Monarchy ia-ia(2), 4C~5b; Tyranny
4D~5d  /  see also Constitution 4, 7b, 8b; Government ib, ig(2); Liberty
id,  if;  Slavery  6b-6d  Constitutional  convention: see Constitution 6
Constitutional  law:  see  Constitution  2b;  Justice  10a;  Law  5c, 7a
Constitutional  monarchy:  see  Constitution 3a; Government 2b; Monarchy
ib(2),  4d(3), 4 e (4) Construction (math.): see Mathematics 2a, 3b, 4 b
Consumption (econ.) : see Opposition 5b; Wealth 7c / see also Nature 5b;
Necessity  and  Contingency  5e; Wealth 10b Contemplation: see Knowledge
6c(i);  Labor  ib; Philosophy 4a; Pleasure and Pain 4c Contemplation and
action: see Happiness 2b(7); Knowledge 6e(i); Labor ib; Philosophy 1311

[1345b]
Correspondence  4a,  4c,  6d;  Pleasure  and Pain 40-40(2); Prudence 2a;
State  8e; Wisdom ib, 2c Continence and incontinence: see Temperance ic;
Virtue and Vice ie / see also Desire 5c; Emotion 4b(i); Knowledge 8b(3);
Prudence  3d  Contingency  and  necessity  (log.)  :  see  Judgment  6c;
Necessity  and Contingency 4-40(2); Opposition id(2); Reasoning 3d / see
also  Knowledge  6d(i)-6d(2);  Nature ia(i); Opinion i; Science 4b; Sign
and  Symbol  4c;  Time  6f  Contingency  and  necessity  (philos.):  see
Necessity and Contingency 1-3C / see also Chance ia, 2a; Fate 3; God 4a;
Knowledge  6a(i);  Nature ia(i), 30(1); Opinion i; Science 4b Continuity
and  discontinuity  (math.,  phys.):  see  Change 5b; Element 3a, 5a~5b;
Infinity  3b,  4b;  Mathematics  2c;  Mechanics  3a;  One  and  Many 2b,
3a(i)~3a(4);  Quantity  2,  4c,  6a;  Space  3a;  Time  i Continuity and
hierarchy  (philos.)  :  see  Being  3a; Life and Death 2~3b; Nature 3b;
Relation  5a(4)~5b;  World  6b / see also Animal ib-ic, 2c; Evolution 3c
4a,  4c,  7b;  Good  and  Evil  ib;  Man ia-ic; Sense 2-2C Contract: see
Constitution   6;   Custom   and   Convention  6a;  State  3d;  Will  8e
Contradiction:  see  Judgment  7a;  Logic  ia; Necessity and Contingency
4e(i);  Opposition  id(i);  Principle  ic,  33(3); Truth 3c Contrariety,
contraries  (log.):  see  Judgment  7a; Necessity and Contingency 4e(i);
Opposition  ia-ib,  10(2),  id(i);  Same  and  Other 3a (2) Contrariety,
contraries   (phys.):  see  Change  2b;  Opposition  3a~3c;  Quality  4b
Contrition: see Religion 2f; Sin 4c Conventional and natural: see Custom
and  Convention  i;  Nature  2b  /  see  also Justice 9a; Language 2-2b;
Necessity and Contingency 5c; Sign and Symbol 1— if; Slavery 2, 3; State
3b~3d Conversion (log.): see Judgment 7b; Reasoning Conversion (theol.):
Religion ia, 5b Coordinates (math.) : see Quantity 6b Copula (log.): see
Being  i; Judgment 5b Copulation (biol.) : see Animal 8c(4) Corporation:
see Law 7f; State id, 2a(2); Wealth 7d(i) Corporeal substance: see Being
7b(2)  ;  Matter  2;  Soul  3c  Correlation,  correlatives  (log.):  see
Opposition  ia;  Quality 4a; Relation ic Correspondence (log.): see Idea
6c; Knowledge 1; Truth ib

[1346a]
Corruptible  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Corruptible and incorruptible substances:
see  Being 70(3) / see also Change ioc; Element 5a; Eternity 4a~4b; Soul
4b  Corruption  (phys.): see Astronomy 10a; Change 10a; Element 3c; Life
and  Death  7;  Matter  ib  Cosmogony,  subject matter of: see Cause 7a;
Chance  3; Element 5h; God 7a; World 4-46(3) / see also Astronomy 6, 8d;
God  5a;  Matter 3d Cosmology, subject matter of: see ch 102: World; and
Astronomy  5;  Element  5I1; Eternity 2; Infinity 3d~3e; Nature ib; Time
2b-2C  /  see  also  Astronomy  8c(i); Beauty 7b; Cause 7-7D; Change 13;
Infinity 4a; Soul ia; Space 2c Counsel: see Prudence 5a; Virtue and Vice
4d(2);  Will  2c(3)  Courage:  see  ch  13: Courage / see also Honor 5c;
Pleasure  and  Pain 8a; Temperance ia; Virtue and Vice 2a-2a(i); War and
Peace  ioc  Courtesy:  see  Honor 2e; Love 2c; Sign and Symbol le Courts
(pol.):  see  Government  3d~3d(2) / see also Constitution 2a; Democracy
5c;  Law  5g;  Prudence  6b  Covenant  (theol.): see Gob 8b; Prophecy 4a
Covetousness   :  see  Desire  7a(3);  Sin  2c(i);  Wealth  ioc,  ioe(3)
Cowardice: see Courage 2 Creation (theol.): see Cause 7a; God 7a; Matter
3d / see also Angel 3a; Animal 8a; Evolution 4a, 4c, 7a; Form id(2); Man
8b; Same and Other 6; Soul 4c; Time 2c; World 3b, 4c4e(3) Credit (econ.)
:  see  Wealth  5d  Creed:  see  Religion  6c(i); Theology 4b Crime: see
Justice ioc; Law 6e-6e(3); Necessity and Contingency 5d; Punishment 44d;
Wealth  yg Crisis (econ.): see Wealth 6e Crisis (med.) : see Medicine 5c
Criticism  (aesth.):  see  Art  7b;  Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 9a;
Judgment  4;  Nature  5d;  Philosophy  2c;  Poetry  8-8c;  Rhetoric  2b;
Universal  and  Particular  7c  Criticism  (log.): see Dialectic 2b, 2c;
Knowledge  5c;  Logic 4d; Metaphysics 4b; Mind 5b; Philosophy 3d Crucial
experiment:  see  Experience  5b;  Physics 4 c Cruelty: see Pleasure and
Pain  8c;  Temperance  2  Culpability:  see  Punishment 2a, 3c; Sin 5~6b
Culture or civilization: see History 4c; Man 7c, 9c; Progress 6-6e / see
also Art 12; Liberty 6a; Monarchy 5a; Science 6b; State 7b~7d

[1346b]
e  Cure:  see Medicine i, 2b, 3-301(3), 6d~7 Curiosity: see Knowledge 2;
Sin  2b;  Temperance  2  Currency:  see  Wealth 5-5 Current (phys.): see
Mechanics  je-je(2),  yc(^)  Curriculum:  see  Education  5d  / see also
Astronomy  4;  Logic 3; Mathematics ib Curses: see Family 7b; Punishment
5a  Custom and convention: see ch 14: Custom and Convention; and Law 5f;
Man  7c; Nature 2b; State 9b / see also Beauty 5; Education 4c; Good and
Evil  6d;  Justice if; Language 2b; Memory and Imagination 4b; Necessity
and  Contingency  5b;  Opinion  6a; Progress 5; Relation 6b-6c; Sign and
Symbol  ia, id, if; State 3b; Universal and Particular ja-jc; Virtue and
Vice  401(3)  Cyclical  theory  of  history: see History 4b; Progress ic
Damnation   (theol.):   see   Eternity  4d;  God  51;  Happiness  70(3);
Immortality  5e;  Punishment  5d, 5e(i); Sin 6d; Virtue and Vice 8c Day:
see  Astronomy  7  Day of Judgment: see God 7h; Prophecy 4d Daydreaming:
see  Desire  5a;  Memory and Imagination 8c Death: see Life and Death 7,
8b-8d  /  see  also Happiness 4b; Immortality i Death instinct: see Life
and  Death 8b Death penalty: see Punishment 4d(i) Decalogue: see God 8c;
Law  3b(i)  Decay  (biol.)  :  see  Life and Death 6C-7; Man 6c Decision
(jurisp.): see Law 5g; Prudence 6b Decision (psychol.): see Prudence 5b;
Reasoning  5e(3);  Will  20(3) Decree: see Law 5a Deduction or deductive
reasoning:  see  Reasoning  2~3d,  4c,  50-5^5) / see also Induction ib;
Judgment  7c; Logic ib; Mathematics 3a; Necessity and Contingency 4e(2);
Reasoning  6c;  Science  5d;  Truth  30(3);  Universal and Particular 5d
Defense:  see  State  9e(i);  War and Peace 3a, 7 Definition: see ch 15:
Definition;  and  Being  8c; Form 3c; Nature 4a; Principle 2a(2)- 23(3);
Reasoning  50(2); Same and Other 4b; Sign and Symbol 4a / see also Being
8e;  Cause  5b; Induction 3; Mathematics 3a; Matter 4b; One and Many 4c;
Philosophy  3b;  Physics  2a; Quality 6a; Relation 4a; Science 4a; Truth
3b(i);  Universal and Particular 4c Deification: see God 14; Monarchy 2a
/ see also God 3f; Religion 6a 1312

[1347a]
INVENTORY   Deism:  see  God  12;  Religion  6f  Delegates  (pol.):  see
Constitution  9a;  Democracy 5a~5b; State 8a Deliberation: see Reasoning
5e(3)  / see also Prudence i, 3-3D, 4a, 5a; Rhetoric 3a; Virtue and Vice
5b  Delusion:  see  Mind 8c Demagoguery : see Democracy 7a; Tyranny 2c /
see  also  Opinion  7b;  Rhetoric  ic,  4a~4b, 5b Demand and supply: see
Wealth  4e  / see also Labor 6a; Wealth 4a, 4c, qi, 6d(3), 6e Demi-gods:
see  Angel i Demiurge: see World 4b Democracy: see ch 16: Democracy; and
Aristocracy  2c;  Citizen  6;  Constitution  9-9^  Government  ig(3)-ih;
Liberty  i-2d;  Opinion  7~7b; Progress 4c; Slavery 5b, 6c; Tyranny 2c /
see  also Citizen 2C-3, 9; Constitution 5a; Education 8d; Government 2a,
2c;  Justice  6-6e,  9c;  Labor  7f; Liberty 6-6c; Monarchy ibQ), 4, 4c;
Oligarchy  2,  3a; Revolution 3a, 3c(2); State 2c, 7d; Tyranny 5c Demons
(theol.):  see Angel 5—5b, 6b, 8; Sin 4b Demonstration (log.): see Being
8d; Definition 5; Principle 33-33(3); Reasoning 50-5^5) / see also Cause
5b; Judgment 8a; Mathematics 3a~3b; Opinion 2c; Reasoning 4b, 6a-6b, 6d;
Rhetoric  4c;  Science  4c,  4c,  <^d;  Sign  and  Symbol  4b;  Truth 7a
Denomination  (log.)  : see Sign and Symbol 2c Density: see Mechanics 6b
Dependencies  or  colonies: see Democracy 7b; Government 5b; Liberty 6c;
Monarchy  5—5b;  Revolution 7; Slavery 6d; State g(, 10b; Tyranny 6; War
and  Peace  6a  Dependent  and  independent  being: see Being 7b, 7b(4);
Necessity  and  Contingency 2-2b / see also Cause 7a; God 4a, 5c, Nature
ib,  3c(4);  One  and  Many  ia-ib;  World 3~3b Depressions (econ.): see
Wealth  6e Descent of man: see Evolution 7_7b(3); Man 8c Description and
explanation (log.): see Cause 5—5<d; Hypothesis 4-4^ Physics 2b; Science
4c / see also Astronomy 2b, 3~3b; Mechanics 2c, 7a, 7c(i) Desire: see ch
17:  Desire;  and  Good  and  Evil  3c; Love ic / see also Animal ia(3);
Beauty  3;  Being  3b;  Emotion  2-2C; Habit 3a; Infinity 6a; Memory and
Imagination  8c;  Mind  ie(3), 9b; Pleasure and Pain 6a-6b, 6d; Prudence
3a; Sense 3c; Virtue and Vice 5a; Will i Despair: see Courage 3; Emotion
2a;  Life  and  Death  8b; Sin 2c(i); Virtue and Vice 8d(2) Despotic and
constitutional government: see Citizen 2a-2b; Constitution i, 2D~3b; Law
7a~7b; Monarchy ia-ia(2), 4C~5b; Tyranny 1313

[1347b]
OF  TERMS  Disobedience  4b-5d  /  see  also  Constitution  4,  7b,  8b;
Government  ib, ig(2); Liberty id, if; Slavery 6b-6d Destiny: see ch 27:
Fate; and Chance 2b; Change 15b; History 4a(i); Liberty 5a; Prophecy ia;
Will  7D-7C  Determinism (philos.): see Chance 2a; Fate 5; Necessity and
Contingency  3-3C  /  see  also  Cause  3; History 4-4C; Liberty 4b, 5a;
Mechanics 4; Nature 3c(2); Necessity and Contingency 5a(i); Will 5-5^4);
World  i-ic,  3-3  b  Deterrence:  see Punishment id Devil (theol.): see
Angel  5-8;  Sin  4b  Devotion (theol.): see Duty ii; God 3c~3e; Justice
11b;  Love 5a(i); Religion 2-2g Diagnosis: see Medicine 3c, 5c; Sign and
Symbol  4e Dialectic: see ch 18: Dialectic; and Being 4a; History 43(3);
Hypothesis  i;  Idea  5c;  Induction 4a; Metaphysics i-2b; Reasoning 5c;
Rhetoric  ia; Truth 4d; Wisdom ia / see also Good and Evil 5c; Logic ib,
4d;  Mathematics  ib;  Metaphysics  3c;  Physics  ia;  Principle 3-3^3);
Progress  ia  Dichotomy (log.): see Definition 2a; Opposition ic(i) Diet
(med.):  see  Medicine  3c!(i)  Difference and likeness: see Quality 4c;
Same  and Other 2c, 3c Differentia (log.): see Definition 2b; Opposition
ic(2);  Same and Other 4b/ see also Form 3c; Nature ia(i)-ia(2), 4a; One
and  Many 3b(.) Digestion: see Animal 5c, 6b Dignity of man: see God 3f;
Man  10-ioe,  13;  Will 7a / see also Labor if; Man i-ic, 3-3C; Mind 3a;
Same  andOther  6;  Soul  3b; World 2 Dimensions and dimensionality: see
Quantity  3;  Space ic Diplomacy, diplomat: see Government 5a / see also
State  9e~9e(2);  War  and  Peace  6-6b,  iog, IIC Discovery (log.): see
Experience 5a; Logic 4b; Physics 4b; Reasoning 4b; Science 5b / see also
Hypothesis  2,  4~4b;  Induction 5; Progress 6e; Truth 8d Discrimination
(psychol.): see Idea 5e; Sense 3d(i) Discursive knowledge: see Knowledge
6c(i);  Reasoning  ib  Disease:  see Medicine 5-7; Mind 8a-8c / see also
Life  and  Death 5; Man 5b Disfranchisement: see Labor 7d; Slavery 5a~5b
Disjunction  (log.)  :  see Judgment 6d Disobedience (theol.): see Angel
5a; God 3b; Sin 1, 3b

[1348a]
Disposition  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Disposition  (psychol.): see Emotion 4c;
Habit  2;  Man  6a;  Quality  2a;  Virtue  and Vice 2c, 4a Disproof: see
Reasoning  4c  Disputation: see Dialectic 20(2), 3b; Induction 4a; Logic
5;  Opposition ie; Philosophy 6b; Theology 5 Distance: see Astronomy 9a;
Quantity  3a,  5a,  6c; Space 3d Distinctness (log.): see Being 4b; Idea
3b,  6d;  Truth  ia, 30(1) / see also Knowledge 6d(3); Opinion 3b; Truth
3d(3)  Distribution  (econ.): see Justice 8-8a; Labor 4a; Revolution 4b;
Wealth  8-8d  Distributive justice: see Justice 5, 9c; Wealth 8-8d / see
also  Democracy  4a;  Honor  4b;  Justice 8a; Oligarchy 5a Diversity and
identity  (metaph.): see Same and Other i-3d / see also One and Many 2a;
Principle  33(3);  Soul  id  Divination:  see  Astronomy  ii; Memory and
Imagination 8a; Prophecy 3-3C, 5; Sign and Symbol 5b Divine beatitude or
glory: see God 4b. ; Happiness yd; Honor 6a Divine being: see God 4~4h /
see  also  Change  15c; Eternity 3; Infinity 7-jd; Liberty 5d; Mind iog;
Nature ib; Necessity and Contingency 2a-2b; One and Many ib; World 3-3 b
Divine causality: see Cause 7~7d; God 5a~5d; Nature 3c(4); World 4-40(3)
/  see  also Art 2c; God 2b; Liberty 53-50; Matter 3d Divine choice: see
God  5g;  Liberty  3d;  Will  4b  Divine election or predestination: see
Chance  2b; Fate 4; Liberty 5c; Sin 6a; Will 7c Divine freedom: ^God 4c;
Liberty  5d;  Necessity and Contingency 2a Divine goodness: see God /\{\
Good  and  Evil  2-2a;  Infinity 7c / see also God 5h; Good and Evil 2b;
Knowledge  5d;  Opposition 2d; World 6d Divine government: see Cause 7c;
God 7c; Justice 11a; Law 3-3^2); World ic Divine grace: see God 7d / see
also  Cause  7d;  Habit 5e(i); Liberty 5c; Man 9^3); Mind 5c; Nature 6b;
Sin 7; Virtue and Vice 8b; Will 70(2) Divine ideas: see Form 2b; God 5f;
Idea  ie  Divine  intellect  or  mind:  see  God  qg; Idea ie; Mind iog;
Universal  and  Particular 4b; Will 4a Divine justice and mercy: see God
51;  Justice  11—11b; Punishment 56-50(2) Divine knowledge: see God 5!:;
Infinity  7d; Knowledge 7a; Liberty 5b Divine language: see Language 12;
Prophecy 3d; Religion ib(i); Sign and Symbol 5c

[1348b]
Divine  law: see Duty 5; God 7c, 8c; Law 2-3b(2), 4d; Man 9^3); Prophecy
2c;  Sin  i;  Slavery  2c  Divine  love:  see  God 5h; Good and Evil 2a;
Infinity 7c; Love 5-5C Divine nature: see God ia, 4-51, 93-9^2); One and
Many  6-6b;  Opposition 2e; Sign and Symbol 5f Divine power: see God 5c;
Infinity  7b  Divine  providence: see God 7b / see also Cause 7c; Chance
2b;  Fate 4; God 12; History 5a; Liberty 53-5^ Man 90-9^3); Prophecy ib-
ic;  Will 7c Divine rewards and punishments: see God ic, 51; Immortality
4;  Virtue  and  Vice  8c  /  see  also Eternity 4d; Happiness 70-70(2);
Immortality 50-51; Punishment 5d~5e(2); Sin 6c-6e Divine right of kings:
see  Monarchy 2c Divine truth: see Truth 2d Divine unity and simplicity:
see  God  4b;  One and Many 6a-6c Divine will : see God 5g; Will 4-4 b /
see also Fate 4; Liberty 5a; Mind iog; Will 7c Divine wisdom: see Wisdom
id  Divinity  of  kings: see Monarchy 2a Divisibility and indivisibility
(math.,  phys.):  see  Change  5b;  Element  3a,  53-5^ Infinity 3b, 4b;
Mathematics  2c;  Mechanics  3a; One and Many 2b, 33-33(4) ; Quantity 2,
4c, 63, 7; Space 33 Division (log.): see Definition 23; Dialectic 23(2);
Opposition  ic(i)-ic(2)  Division  (math.): see Infinity 33; Mathematics
4a;  Quantity  4b  Division of labor: see Labor 4-40; Progress 3a; State
5c;  Wealth  3a  Divorce:  see  Family  4c  Dogma (theol.): see Religion
6c(i)-6c(2);  Theology  4D-4C, 40 / see also God 7-9!; Logic ^{\ Opinion
4-4^  Religion i-ibQ), 6b; Theology 2; Truth 4a Dogmatism: see Knowledge
5c / see also Metaphysics 4a; Opinion 4b; Philosophy 6b; Science ib, 40;
Theology 5 Doing and making: see Knowledge 6e(2); Prudence 2b / see also
Knowledge  8a;  Labor  2-2b;  Science  3~3b;  Virtue and Vice 2a(2) Dole
(econ.):  see  Labor  70;  Wealth 8d Domestic economy: see Family 3-3 b;
Labor  5a;  Wealth 2, 3d Domestication of animals: see Animal 12a Doubt:
see  Knowledge  5d;  Opinion  3b  /  see  also Judgment 9; Knowledge 5c;
Necessity  and  Contingency  4a;  Truth 7a Drama: see Poetry 4a-4b, 7~8b
Dream-analysis:  see  Memory  and Imagination 8e / see also Language 10;
Memory and 1314

[1349a]
INVENTORY Sign and Symbol Imagination 8d-8d(2) 6a Dreams: see Memory and
ImaginationJ^8c_;  Prophecy 3c; Sign and Symbol 6a / see also Desire 5a,
6c;  Language  10;  Mind  7b; Relation 4f; Sign and Symbol 5b Drugs: see
Medicine  30X2)  Dualism (philos.): see Principle ib / see also Being 5,
7b(2);  Form  4;  God  5d~5e,  11;  Matter  2d, 3a, 6; World 3-3 b Ducts
(biol.)  :  see  Animal 5a Duration: see Change 5a; Infinity 3e; Time i,
6a-6b  Duties  (econ.):  see State 9a; Wealth 4g, 9e(2) Duty: see ch 19:
Duty;  and  Good and Evil 3b(i); Happiness 3; Love 3c; Pleasure and Pain
8b;  Virtue  and  Vice  6a; Will 8d / see also Justice 3, 6b, 7; Law 6a;
Mind  9c;  Necessity  and  Contingency 5a(2); State 8a Dynamics, subject
matter  of: see Mechanics 5b-6e / see also Astronomy 8c(2)-8c(3); Change
7~7d;  Nature  2d;  Quantity 5C~5e; Space 2c Earth: see Astronomy 2b, 5,
9d;  Element  3b;  Mechanics  7d / see also Astronomy 8a, 12; Matter ib;
Mechanics  4a;  Opposition  3b;  World  6a  Eccentricity  (astron.): see
Astronomy  gc  Ecclesiastical  government:  w  Government  ib;  Religion
3c(i)~3c(2) Eclipse: see Astronomy 9a~9b Ecology, subject matter of: see
Animal  10,  na-nb; Evolution 5c; Life and Death 4; Man 7b; State 4-4C /
see  also  Evolution 5a; Opposition 3c Economic democracy: see Labor 7f;
Liberty  2d  /  see  also  Democracy  4a(2);  Justice  8-8d; Liberty 6b;
Oligarchy  5c;  Progress  3b;  Revolution  5-50; Slavery 53-5^ State 2d;
Wealth  9d,  gi,  9b. Economic determinism: see History 4a(2); Wealth ii
Economic  freedom: see Labor j{; Liberty 2d, 6b; Slavery 4~5b / see also
Democracy  43(2);  Justice  8-8d;  Oligarchy 5c; Progress 3b; Revolution
5-5C;  State 2d; Wealth 9d Economic goods: see Good and Evil 4d; Justice
8a-8b;  Nature  5b; Necessity and Contingency 5e; Wealth i, 10b Economic
justice:  see  Democracy  43(2);  Justice  8-8d; Labor 7-71; Liberty 2d;
Slavery  4-5  b  / see also Oligarchy 4-6; Progress 3b; Revolution 5-5C;
State  2d;  Wealth 9L, 9h Economic necessities: see Labor 6b; Nature 5b;
Necessity and Contingency 5e; Wealth 10b 1315

[1349b]
OF  TERMS  Eminent  domain  Economic  power: see Labor 7-71; Liberty 2d;
Oligarchy  5c;  Revolution  53~5b  /  see  also Democracy 43(2); History
43(2);  Justice  8c-8c(2); State 2d Economic slavery: see Justice 8c(i);
Labor  70(1),  7d;  Liberty  2d;  Slavery  4~5b  Economic  systems:  see
Democracy  43(2); Wealth 3d, 63, 9c / see also Family 3-3 b; Labor 5~5d;
Revolution  5b; Slavery 4-4C; State 2d Economics, science of: see Wealth
9 / see also Philosophy 2c; Science 33 Economics, subject matter of: see
ch  99  :  Wealth  ;  and  Family 3~3b; Labor 4—yf; Nature 5b / see also
Necessity  and Contingency 5e; Progress 3-3C; Revolution 4-50; State 2d;
War  and Peace 5c Eden {theol.): see Man 9b~9b(i); Sin 3a Education: see
ch  20: Education; and Art 6b; Beauty 6; Citizen 6; Democracy 6; History
2;  Knowledge 93-9^ Law 6d; Logic 3—4f; State 7d, 8c; Virtue and Vice 4b
/  see  also  Aristocracy 5; Art 93, 103; Astronomy 4; Courage 6; Custom
and  Convention  5b;  Family  2c,  5b; God 6c(i); Language 8; Mind 43-4^
Philosophy  5; Pleasure and Pain 40(2), 103; Poetry 53, 93; Progress 6d;
Punishment 33; Rhetoric 6; War and Peace ioc Effect and cause: see Cause
ib;  Change  3;  Reasoning 5K3); Relation 53(1); Time 53~5b Ego, id, and
super-ego  (psychol.): see Man 4; Soul 2b Egoism: see Love ic, 23, 2b(2)
Elasticity:  see  Mechanics  5c  Election  (pol.)  : see Democracy 5K3);
Government ih / see also Citizen 4; Constitution 9b; Opinion 7b Election
(theol.):  see  Chance  2b;  Fate 4; God 7f; Liberty 5c; Sin 63; Will 7c
Electricity:  see  Mechanics  7e~7e(5);  Space  2c Electrochemistry: see
Mechanics  7e(2) Electrodynamics: see Mechanics 7t-yt(^) Electrostatics:
see  Mechanics  yt-yt(i)  Element:  see ch 21: Element; and Infinity 4b;
Matter 2; Opposition 3b; Principle 13 / see also Change 93, 103; One and
Many  2D-2C,  3a(3)  Elimination  {biol.)  :  see Animal $1 Ellipse: see
Astronomy  80(2);  Mechanics 5f(i); Quantity 3b(2) Emanation (philos.)'.
see  Being  2-23;  Mind  10b;  One  and  Many  13;  Soul  4c;  World  4d
Emancipation  of  slaves:  see Revolution 43; Slavery 3c Embryology: see
Animal 9-9 e; Evolution 6c, 7 b(,) Eminent domain: see Wealth /d(2)

[1350a]
Emotion  THE GREAT IDEAS Emotion: see ch 22: Emotion; and Art 8; Opinion
2a; Pleasure and Pain 4a; Poetry 6-6b; Rhetoric 4b; Virtue and Vice 5a /
see  also  Animal  iaQ);  Desire  3b(i),  3d;  Education 5e; Family 7c!;
Liberty 3a; Memory and Imagination id; Mind 9b; Opposition 4b; Sense 3e;
Will  i,  2b(2)  Empire  and imperialism: see Liberty 6c; Monarchy 5~5b;
Revolution  7;  Slavery 6d; State yi, 10b; Tyranny 6; War and Peace 6a /
see  also  Democracy  7b;  Government  5b;  Revolution  2c  Empirical or
experimental  science:  see  Experience  5-5C;  Logic  4b; Mechanics 2a;
Physics  2~4d;  Reasoning  6c; Science ib, ic, 4~7b / see also Astronomy
2a;  Cause 5b; Definition 6b; Hypothesis 4d; Induction 5; Philosophy ic;
Reasoning  5^3);  Truth  4c Empiricism: see Experience 2~4b; Idea 2e-2f,
6e; Induction 5; Sense 5-5C / see also Definition 6b; Idea ic; Knowledge
5c,   6c(4);  Logic  4b;  Medicine  2a;  Philosophy  3a;  Physics  4D-4C
Employment  and  unemployment:  see  Labor  7e; Wealth 6e, 8c End of the
world:  see  God  7h;  Prophecy 4d; World 8 Endocrinology: see Animal 5c
Ends  and  means:  see  Cause  4; Good and Evil 5c; Relation 5a(2); Will
2c(2)-2c(3)  /  see  also Good and Evil 4b; Judgment 3; One and Many 5b;
Principle  4a; Prudence 3a, 4b; Reasoning 5e(3) Energy: see Mechanics 6e
Engineering:  see  Physics  5;  Science  ib(i)  /  see  also Art 6c, 9b;
Knowledge  8a;  Science 3b Enjoyment: see Art 7-73; Beauty 4; Desire 2d;
Good  and  Evil  4b;  Pleasure  and  Pain  4C~4d,  6d;  Will 2c(i)-2c(2)
Enthymeme:  see Reasoning 5d; Rhetoric 4c(2) Environment: see Animal 10,
11b;  Life  and  Death  4;  Man  7b / see also Evolution 5c, 6b; History
43(2);  Medicine 3d(i); State 4-4C Envy: see Emotion 2a; Sin 2c(i) Epic:
see  Poetry  4a,  8a(i)  Epicureanism:  see  Good and Evil 3d; Happiness
2b(2);  Pleasure  and  Pain 6a, 7, 7b; Temperance 6b Epicycle (astron.):
see  Astronomy  8c(2),  9a~9C  Epidemics:  see  Medicine 7 Epistemology,
science  of:  see  Experience  4-4b;  Knowledge  5c,  5e; Metaphysics 4b
Epistemology,  subject  matter  of:  see Experience 2c, 4~4b; Idea 1-3C;
Judgment  8-10;  Knowledge  i~7d;  Mind  5-5^  Truth i~4d; Universal and
Particular  2~4f  Epoch:  see  Time  8b  /  see  also History 43(3), 4b;
Progress ic

[1350b]
Equality  (math.):  see  Quantity  ib;  Same  and  Other 3d Equality and
inequality  (pol.):  see Democracy 43-43(2); Justice 5; Tyranny 5a / see
also  Citizen  2C-3;  Labor  7c(2);  Liberty  if; Love 4a; Revolution 3a
Equant  (astron.)  :  see  Astronomy 8c(2) Equations: see Mathematics 4c
Equilibrium:  see Mechanics 53-5C, 6a Equinoxes (astron.): see Astronomy
9c  Equity:  see  Justice  iod;  Law  5I1;  Universal  and Particular 6c
Equivocal  and  univocal: see Idea 4^4); Language 5a; Same and Other 4c;
Sign  and  Symbol  3b~3d,  43-4C Eristic (log.) : see Logic 5 Error: see
Mind  5a;  Reasoning  3D-3C;  Sense 4d~4d(2); Truth 3d~3d(3); Will 36(2)
Eschatology  (theol.)  : see God 7g~7h, 9f; Immortality 5c, 5g; Prophecy
4d;  World  8  Essence  or  nature  (metaph.)  :  see  Being  7a, 8c-8d;
Definition  ia;  Form  ia-ib, 2a, 2c-2c(3); Nature ia-ia(2), 4a~4b / see
also  Form  3-3C;  God  4a; Knowledge 6a(2); One and Many 30-3^1), 3K3);
Reasoning  5^5); Same and Other 3a; Science 4b; Universal and Particular
2a-2C   Essential   and  accidental:  see  Being  8d-8e;  Necessity  and
Contingency  3a~3c;  One  and  Many  3b(i); Same and Other 3a / see also
Chance ia, 2a; Nature 3c(i) Estimative power (psychol.): see Emotion ic;
Habit  3b;  Sense  3b(2),  3d(3) Eternal happiness: see Eternity 4d; God
6c(4);  Happiness  j-jd;  Immortality  ^i;  Love 53(2); Mind 4f; Will 7d
Eternal law: see Law 2, 33-33(2) ; World ic / see also Cause 7c; God 7c;
Justice  11a  Eternity: see ch 23: Eternity; and Astronomy 8c(i); Change
13, 15a, 15c; Form 2b; God 4d; Time 2-2C; Truth 5; World 4a, 4e(2) / see
also  Element  5a;  Idea ie; Immortality 6c; Knowledge 6a(i); Punishment
5e(i);  Sin  6d  Ether  (phys.):  see  Mechanics  6d(2), 73(4); Space 2c
Ethics,  science  of:  see Duty 3; Good and Evil 6d; Knowledge 6e-6e(2);
Philosophy  2a,  2c;  Science  3a / see also Definition 6c; Happiness 3;
Judgment   3;  Logic  4c;  Metaphysics  2d;  Principle  4—4b;  Reasoning
5e~5e(3),  6d;  Truth  2c Ethics, subject matter of: see Courage 1-2, 4;
Duty  1-8; Good and Evil 3-6C; Happiness i~5b; Justice 1-5; Pleasure and
Pain  6-8b;  Prudence  1-5C;  Temperance 1-4; Virtue and Vice i-6e / see
also  Desire  63-6b;  Education  4~4d;  Emotion 4-4C; Habit 5D~5d; Honor
2a-2c; Immortality 4; Knowl-

[1351a]
edge  8b-8b(4);  Liberty 3—30!; Mind 90-90*; Nature 5a; One and Many 5c;
Will  8-8e;  Wisdom  2D-2C  Eucharist  (theol.):  see  God  ge; Religion
2~cfSiGN  and  Symbol 5c Eudaemonism (philos.) : see Duty 2; Happiness 3
Eugenics:  see Family 6b Even and odd: see Quantity 4a Evidence (log.) :
see Principle 2-2b(2); Truth ia / see also Idea 3b, 6d; Knowledge 6d(3);
Logic  4c;  Opinion  3b; Principle 5 Evil: see Good and Evil id, 2b, 3L,
6b;  Sin  i;  Virtue and Vice 4e(2); World 6d / see also Knowledge 8b(i)
Opinion  6a;  Pleasure  and  Pain 6e; Will 2b(i)-2b(2), 8b(i); Wisdom 2b
Evolution  (biol): see ch 24: Evolution; and Animal 8a; Man 8c; Progress
2  Example (log.): see Induction 4b; Rhetoric 4C(0 Exchange (econ.)\ see
Justice  8,  8b;  Labor  4a; Wealth 4~4g, 5a, 5c, 7c Exchange-value: see
Wealth  4a  Excretion  (biol.)  :  see  Animal  5f  Executive (pol): see
Government  3,  36-30(2); Law 7e; Monarchy ib(3) / see also Constitution
2a;  Democracy  5c;  Justice  9d;  Prudence 6a; State 8-8d Exegesis: see
Language  12;  Rhetoric 2d; Sign and Symbol 5e; Theology 4b; World 46(3)
Exemplar ideas: see Form ia; God 5f; Idea ie Exile: see Punishment 4b(2)
Existence:  see  Being  i, 5-6, 7a, 8f; God 4a / see also Cause 7a; Form
2a; Idea 6a; Judgment 8c; Knowledge 6a(3); Mathematics 2b; Matter 3a~3b;
Metaphysics 2a; Necessity and Contingency 2-2d; Opposition 2a; Reasoning
5b(5)  Expediency: see Justice 4; Truth 8b; War and Peace 3b Experience:
see ch 25: Experience; and Form ic; God 60(3) ; Mechanics 2a; Philosophy
3a;  Physics  4a~4d; Science 5a; Sense 50-50 / see also Art 5; Dialectic
2c;  Education  51;  Good  and Evil 6b; Habit 3d; Idea 2b, 2g; Knowledge
6b(i);  Memory  and Imagination ia, 3c, 6a; Mind ig(i); One and Many 4b;
Opinion  2d; Philosophy 6c; Principle 3b; Reasoning 5^3) Experiment: see
Experience  5-5C;  Physics  4-40!; Science ib / see also Induction 2, 5;
Logic  4b;  Mechanics  2a;  Quantity 6c; Science 5a; Soul 5b Expert: see
Opinion  7a;  State  8d(3) Expiation (theol.): see Immortality 5d; Labor
ic;  Punishment  50(2);  Sin  6e Explanation and description (log.): see
Cause 5~5d; Hypothesis 4-4^ Physics 2b; Science

[1351b]
;  INVENTORY OF TERMS Family 4c / see also Astronomy 2b, 3~3b; Mechanics
2C,  7a,  7c(i) Exploitation (econ.): see Justice 8c(i); Labor 70-70(3);
Slavery 4c; Wealth 6d(2) / see also Labor if, 5c, 6a-6b, 8; Monarchy 5b;
Revolution  4a;  Wealth  8c, iod Exploration (log.) : see Experience 5a;
Logic  4b;  Physics  4b;  Science  5b Export and import: see Liberty 2c;
State  9a;  Wealth  4g,  9C~9d  Expropriation (econ.): see Wealth 6b, 8c
Extension:  see  Being  7b(4);  Matter  2;  Space  ia / see also Man 3a;
Mathematics  2;  Mind  2d;  One  and  Many  3^4);  Quantity  i; Space ic
Extension  and  thought (philos.) : see Being 7^4) Form 2d; Man 3a; Mind
iSjOne  and  Many  3b(4) External goods: see Good and Evil 4d; Happiness
2b(i);  Virtue  and  Vice  6c;  Wealth  10a  Extinction  of species: see
Evolution  5^(2) Extreme unction (theol.): see God 9e; Religion 2c; Sign
and  Symbol  5c  Fact:  see History 3a; Knowledge 6a(3); Science 4a, 5b;
Sense  4b Faction (pol.): see Democracy 5K4); Opposition 5a; State 5d(2)
Factory  system:  see  Family  3b;  Labor  4c;  Revolution 4b; Wealth 3d
Faculties (psychoid): see Life and Death 3; Man 4~5a; Soul 2-20(3) / see
a  ^so  Animal  ia(i)-ia(4);  Habit  2b; Knowledge 6b-6b(4); Quality 2a;
Virtue  and  Vice  2a Faith or belief (theol.): see God 60(2); Knowledge
60(5);  Opinion  4-4^ Religion i-ib(3); Truth 4a; Virtue and Vice 8d(i);
Will  3  D (3) / see also Habit 50(3); Logic 4f; Mind 5c; Philosophy 6c;
Religion  6b-6d; Theology 2, 4b; War and Peace 2b; Wisdom ic Fall of man
(theol.):  see  Man  9b(2);  Sin  30-30; Will 7e(i) Fallacy (log.) : see
Reasoning  30-30; Sign and Symbol 4b; Truth 301(3) Fallibility: see Mind
5a;  Sense  4d  Falling  bodies  (phys.): see Mechanics 5e(2) / see also
Change  7b,  70(2);  Nature  2d  Falsity:  see  Definition  ie; Idea 6f;
Judgment  10; Knowledge 4a; Reasoning 3c; Sense 4d~4d(2) ; Truth 2~3d(3)
Fame:  see Honor i~5d / see also Courage 5; Happiness 2b(4); Immortality
6b  Family: see ch 26: Family; and Duty 9; Education 4b; Justice 7; Love
2b(4);  State  5b; Virtue and Vice 4<d(i) / see also Education 8a; Labor
5a; Monarchy 4a; Necessity and

[1352a]
Fantasy  THE  GREAT IDEAS Contingency 5b; One and Many 5c!; Pleasure and
Pain  10a;  Slavery  4a;  State ib; Wealth 2, 3d Fantasy (psychol.): see
Desire  5a;  Idea  3c; Memory and Imagination 5, 7b, 8c Farming: see Art
9a;  Labor 5b; Wealth 3c Fasting: see Religion 2e Fate: see ch 27: Fate;
and  Chance 2b; Change 15b; History 4a(i); Liberty 5a; Prophecy ia; Will
7b-7c Fatherhood and motherhood: see Family 6-6b, 6d, 7d / see also Duty
9;  Education 4b; Justice 7; Virtue and Vice 4d(i) Fault: see Punishment
2-2a;  Sin  6a / see also Emotion 4c; Fate 2; Punishment 2b; Sin 4a; 6b;
Virtue  and  Vice  4a  Fear:  see  Courage  3; Emotion 2a, 30(3), 5a~5c;
Immortality i; Law 6a; Life and Death 8c; Poetry 6b; State 31 Federation
or federal union: see Government 5d; One and Many 5e; Revolution 2c, 6b;
State  ioe  Feeblemindedness : see Man 5b Fertility (biol.) : see Animal
8c(5)  ;  Evolution  5c  Feudalism:  see  Labor 5b; State ioc; Wealth 6a
Fiction  (log.):  see  Being  7d(5); Hypothesis 4a; Idea 3c Field theory
(phys.):  see  Mechanics  6d(2), 7d(2), 7e(3); Space 2c Figure (math.) :
see Mathematics 2; Quality 3b; Quantity 3-36(2), 5a; Space 3c Figures of
speech:  see  Rhetoric 2a Final cause, finality: see Cause ia, 6; Chance
3;  Desire  i; God 5b; Good and Evil ia; Nature 3c(3) / see also Physics
2b;  Reasoning 5b(4); Science 4c; World ic, 6d Fine art: see Art 4, 7-7K
10-iob;  Poetry  i-8c;  Virtue  and  Vice  401(4)  Fire: see Element 3b;
Opposition  3b First and second causes: see Cause ib, 7b; Change 14; God
5a  /  see  also Angel 2a; Nature 3c(4); Relation 5a(i) First and second
impositions:  see  Sign  and  Symbol 2a First and second intentions: see
Idea  3a;  Sign and Symbol 2b First philosophy: see Being 4a; Matter 4b;
Metaphysics  i;  Philosophy  2b;  Science  ia(2); Theology 3a; Wisdom ia
First  principles:  see  Happiness 3; Philosophy 3b; Principle 3-5 / see
also  Induction 3; Knowledge 3; Opposition 2a; Principle 2b(2); Truth 3c
Fixation (psychol.): see Desire 4b; Love 23(3) Fixed capital: see Wealth
6c Fixed stars: see Astronomy 9c

[1352b]
Fluids:  see  Mechanics  5b  Fluxions:  see Infinity 3b; Mathematics 4d;
Mechanics  3d; Quantity 7 Foetus: see Animal 9a-9d Folly: see Wisdom id,
2a,  4  Food: see Animal 6a, 9f; Medicine 3d(i) / see also Animal 5c 6b;
Life  and  Death  4  Foolhardiness  :  see  Courage 2 Force (phys.): see
Mechanics  6d-6d(3);  Opposition  3d; Quantity $e/see also Astronomy 3b,
8c(3),  10b;  Change  7b,  7c(i)~7c(2),  7c(4)~7d; Mechanics ib, 2c, 4a,
5a-6c,  6e,  7d(2), je($); Nature 2d; Physics 2b; Space 2c Force (pol.):
see  Government  id;  Justice ia> 9f; Law ic; Revolution ia, 2b, 3b, 5b;
Tyranny  7;  War and Peace i, 6-6a / see also Constitution 8a; Democracy
2a;  Desire 73(2); Emotion 5D-5C; Government 3b; Happiness 2b(6); Law 5,
6a-6b,  7d;  Monarchy 3b; Oligarchy 5c; Opposition 5D-5C; Punishment 4a;
State  5d~5d(2),  9e~9e(2);  Tyranny ia, ic; War and Peace 10-iog Forced
labor:  see  Labor  ic;  Punishment 4^3); Slavery 3a Foreign policy: see
Government  5a  / see also State 9e~9e(2); War and Peace 6-6b, iog t lie
Foreknowledge  or  foresight: see Knowledge 5d(5); Prophecy ia-ib, 2-2C;
Time 6f Forgetting: see Memory and Imagination 2e-2e(4); Sign and Symbol
6b Form (metaph.): see ch 28: Form; and Being 7c(3); Change 2a; Idea ia;
Nature  ia(2); One and Many 3^3) ; Universal and Particular 2a, 6a / see
also Art 2b; Being 7b(2); Knowledge 5a(2); Matter ia; Same and Other 2a,
3a;  Soul  ib,  3a,  3c;  Space 4a; Time 6c Form and matter: see Art 2b;
Being  7c(3);  Change  2a;  Form  2c(i);  Knowledge 53(2); Nature ia(2);
Principle  ib;  Soul  3c;  Universal  and Particular 6a / see also Being
7b(2); Definition id; Form id(2), 2c(3), 3c; Matter ia, 4b; One and Many
3^3);  Reasoning  3a  Forms of government: see Government 2-2 e; Justice
9c;  Revolution  2a;  War and Peace 5b; Wealth 9f / see also Aristocracy
2-2e;  Constitution  i,  3-3^  5~5b;  Democracy  2D-3C; Law 7a; Monarchy
ia(i),  ib-ib(2),  4-46(4); Oligarchy 2; Tyranny 2-2C, 5~5d Formula: see
Mathematics  3d;  Mechanics  3c  Fornication:  see  Love  2a;  Sin 2c(i)
Fortitude: see ch 13: Courage / see also Honor 5c; Pleasure and Pain 8a;
Temperance   ia;   Virtue   and   Vice   2a-2a(i);  War  and  Peace  ioc
Fortuitousness: see Chance ib; World 4c

[1353a]
Fortune:  see  Chance  6-6b  / see also Chance 2-2b; Fate 3; Prophecy ia
Fossils:  see  Evolution  6a  Fractions: see Mathematics 4a; Quantity 4b
Franchise  or suffrage: see Citizen 3; Constitution 5a; Democracy 4a(i),
5b(2);  Labor  70!;  Oligarchy 5a; Slavery 53-5 b / see also Citizen 2b;
Family   5b;   Government  ih;  Justice  oe;  Progress  4c;  Slavery  6c
Fraternity:  see  Citizen 8; Justice 9b; Love 2b-2b(4), 4a, 4c; Man 11b;
State 3c; War and Peace 11b Free trade: see Liberty 2c; State 9a; Wealth
4g,  9c-9d  Free  will:  see  Will 4D-83 / see also Cause 3, 7c; History
4a(i);  Liberty  ic;  Mind  9d; Nature ii\ Punishment 2a; Sin 6a Freedom
(econ.,  pol.):  see Democracy 43-43(2); Justice 6-6e; Labor 7f; Liberty
i-2d,  6-6c;  Progress 4c; Slavery 4~6d / see also Custom and Convention
7d;  Democracy  2;  Dialectic  2d(2);  Fate  6; History 4a(i); Labor 3b,
7c(i);  Law  4c;  Opinion  5—5b;  Poetry  9b;  Progress 6e; Religion 6e;
Revolution  3a;  Slavery 2C-2d; Truth 8d; Tyranny 5-5C, 8; War and Peace
6b;  Will  73~7b  Freedom {ethics, psychol): see Cause 3; Liberty 3a~3d;
Mind 9d; Nature 2f, 3c(2); Necessity and Contingency 53-53(3); Will 4b83
/  see  also  Cause 7c; Dialectic 2d(2); Fate 3; Good and Evil 3b; Habit
6c;  History  43(1);  Man  13;  Metaphysics 2d; Mind ie(3); Prudence 43;
Punishment  23; Sin 63; Virtue and Vice 5c Freedom (metaph., theol): see
Liberty 4—5<d; Will 4B-5C, jc-jz(2) / see also Cause 3; Dialectic 2d(2);
Fate  3-4;  God  4c,  7b,  7f;  History  53;  Nature  3c(4)  Freedom and
causality: see Cause 3; Liberty 4b; Nature 2f, 3c(2); Will 5c Freedom of
association: see Constitution 7b; Democracy 4b; Labor 7c(2); Liberty ig;
Tyranny  53  Freedom of conscience and worship: see Liberty 2b; Religion
6e  Freedom  of  thought  and  expression: see Knowledge 9b; Liberty 23;
Opinion  5b;  Progress 6e; Truth 8d / see also Art 10b; Constitution 7b;
Democracy 4b; Education 8c; Liberty ig; Poetry 9b Friction (phys.) : see
Mechanics 5d Friendship: see Love 2b-2b(4), 33, 3CI-4C / see also Animal
12c;  Family 7c; Happiness 2b(5); Honor 2e; Justice 3; Pleasure and Pain
73;  Same  and  Other 5; State 3c; Truth 8c; Virtue and Vice 6e Function
(biol.)  :  see Animal 3d; Life and Death 2-3b / see also Animal ib, 2b;
Evolution 33

[1353b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Glory Function (math.): see Mathematics 3c Funeral
rites:  see Life and Death 8d Future: see Knowledge 53(5); Necessity and
Contingency  4c;  Prophecy  13;  Time  3-3^  6f;  Truth 3b(2) Games: see
Education  3;  Habit  53;  Pleasure  and  Pain  4d Gas: see Mechanics 5b
Genealogy:  see  Animal  23; Evolution 13, 6b; Man 8c General names: see
Idea  4b(2)~4b(3);  Sign  and Symbol 2d; Universal and Particular 2c, 5a
General  will  (pol.):  see Will ioc / see also Democracy 4b; Government
ih;  Justice  9a;  Will 10a Generalization: see Idea 5d; Induction 1-13;
Science 4d; Universal and Particular 4f / see also Experience 2b; Memory
and  Imagination 3c; Physics 4b; Principle 3b Generation and corruption:
see Animal 8b-8d; Change 10-iob; Element 3c / see also Art 23; Astronomy
103;  Eternity  4b; Form id(2); Life and Death 7; Matter ib; World 4e(i)
Generosity:  see  Justice  3; Love ic; Wealth ioe(i) Genetic method: see
Definition  2d;  Idea 6e Genetics (biol.): see Animal 10; Evolution 2-2b
Genius:  see Man 63; Mind 43; War and Peace iod Gentile: see God 83; Man
7c;  Religion 6d Genus and species (log.): see Definition 2b; Idea 4K3);
Opposition  ic(2);  Relation 53(4); Same and Other 3a(i)~3a(3); Sign and
Symbol  3c(2);  Universal  and  Particular  5b  /  see  also  Animal 23;
Dialectic 2b(i); Evolution ib; Form 3c; Idea 5d; Nature .a(i) Geocentric
hypothesis:  see  Astronomy  2b Geography, subject matter of: see Animal
11a;  Evolution  5c,  6b;  History  43(2); Man 7b; State 4b Geology: see
Evolution 63 Geometry, science of: see Mathematics i; Mechanics 3c / see
also  Astronomy  4;  Education  5d;  Mathematics  ic; Space 43 Geometry,
subject  matter  of: see Mathematics 4b; Quantity 3~3e(2); Space 3C~3d /
see  also  Art  6b;  Mechanics  3c;  Quantity  6b; Same and Other 3b, 3d
Gestation: see Animal 9e Ghosts: see Soul 3c Glands: see Animal 5c Glory
(theol.) : see God 4b.; Honor 6-6b

[1354a]
Gluttony  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Gluttony: see Sin 2c(i); Temperance 2 God or
gods:  see  ch  29:  God;  ch  79: Religion; and Beauty 73; Cause 7-70!;
Change  15c;  Duty  11;  Education  7a;  Eternity 3; Good and Evil 2-2D;
Happiness  7d;  History  5—5b; Honor 6a; Infinity 7—7c! ; Justice 11-nb;
Knowledge 5a(i); Language 12; Law 3b30(2); Liberty 53~5d; Love 5-5C; Man
10a,  ii-iic;  Matter 3d; Nature 30(4); One and Many ib, 6a-6c; Sign and
Symbol  ^i; Sin i; Will 4-4^ Wisdom id / see also Angel i, 7~7b; Art 2c;
Astronomy 6, 12; Citizen 7; Desire 7b; Fate i, 4; Idea ie; Knowledge 7a;
Man  3b;  Mind  ioe-iog; Nature ib; Opposition 2d; Prophecy 3d; Relation
2-3;  Same  and Other 6; Sign and Symbol 5a; Virtue and Vice 8d-8e; Will
7C~7d;  World  3-3 b Golden age: see Labor ia; Man 9a; Progress ic; Time
8b  Good  and evil: see ch 30: Good and Evil; and Beauty ia; Being 3~3b;
Custom  and  Convention  5a;  God  5h; Knowledge 8b(i), 8b(4); Matter 5;
Nature  5—  5<d;  Opinion  6a;  Opposition  2d;  Pleasure and Pain 6-6e;
Relation 53(2); Virtue and Vice 4e(2); Will 8b-8b(2); Wisdom 2D-2C / see
also  Desire  2b;  Duty 1-2; God 4L, 5b; Happiness 2b-2b(7); Judgment 3;
Love  id;  Relation  6c;  Rhetoric  5b;  Sin  i; Truth ic; Universal and
Particular  7b;  Wealth  10a;  World  6d Good works {theol.) : see Sin 7
Government:  see  ch  12:  Constitution;  ch 31: Government; and Art 9d;
Democracy  5-5C;  Family  2b; Revolution 2a; State 2e; Tyranny 5-5C; War
and  Peace 11a, nd / see also Aristocracy 6; Cause 7c; God 7c; Happiness
5b;  Justice  9c;  Law  ic, 7a; Mind 9c; Monarchy ia-ib(3); Oligarchy i;
Pleasure  and  Pain  10b;  Progress  4a;  Religion 3c(2), 4a; Revolution
3c~3c(3);  State  ib;  6a;  War  and  Peace  5b;  Wealth 9d~9f; World ic
Government  by  law  and government by men : see Constitution i; Law 7a;
Monarchy  ia(i);  Tyranny  5-5C / see also Aristocracy 4; Citizen 23-28;
Liberty  id  Government  ownership:  see  Wealth  7c! (2), 8a / see also
Democracy  43(2);  Justice  8a;  Labor  7b;  Revolution  4b Governmental
controls  and  regulations:  see  Art 10b; Education 8c; Liberty 2a, 2c;
Pleasure  and Pain 9; Poetry 9b; Temperance 5c; Wealth 9d Grace {theol):
see Gob 7d; Habit 5e(i); Liberty 5c; Nature 6b; Virtue and Vice 8b; Will
7e(2)  /  see  also Cause 7d; Happiness 7a; Law 3K2); Man 9^3); Mind 5c;
Sin  3a,  40  1 , 7 Grammar, science of: see Education $d; Language 7-8;
Logic 3a; Rhetoric ib

[1354b]
Grammar,  subject  matter  of:  see  Judgment 5a; Language 4-6; Sign and
Symbol  2~3d; Time 6d; Universal and Particular 5a / see also Definition
3;  Idea  4a  Gravitation,  gravity:  see Astronomy 3b; Mechanics 6a-6b,
6d(i)-6d(2);  Space  2c  Greed: see Desire 73(3); Sin 2c(i); Wealth ioc,
ioe(3)  Greek and barbarian: see Man 7c / see also Custom and Convention
7b;  State 9b Gregariousness : see State ia Grief: see Pleasure and Pain
4a  Growth and decay (biol.) : see Animal 7; Change 8b / see also Animal
9c;  Life  and  Death  3a;  Man 4a; Soul 2c(i) Guilds (econ.): see Labor
7c(2);  State  id;  Wealth  3d  Guilt:  see  Punishment 2a, 3c; Sin 5~6b
Gymnastics:  see  Education  3; Habit 5a H Habit: see ch 32: Habit / see
also  Animal  id;  Desire 3b(2); Nature 2c; Principle 3a(i); Quality 2a;
Virtue  and Vice ie; Will 33(2), 8c Habitat: see Animal 11-nb; Evolution
6b Hades: see Punishment 5e(i) Hallucination: see Memory and Imagination
5c;  Sense  40X2)  Happiness: see ch 33: Happiness; and Duty 2; Good and
Evil  5a; Knowledge 8b(4); Labor ib; Liberty 3d; Love 3a; Philosophy 4a;
Pleasure  and  Pain  7; Virtue and Vice id; Wisdom 2c / see also God 4h;
Honor  2b;  Justice  4; State 2f; Temperance 3; War and Peace 53; Wealth
103  Harmony:  see Beauty ic; Justice ib; Man 5; Medicine 4; Relation 5c
Hate:  see  Emotion  23;  Love  13-ib, if Health: see Life and Death 53;
Medicine  4, 6a Hearing: see Sense 33, 3b(i), 3c(i); Space 4c Heart: see
Animal  5b  Heat:  see  Mechanics  jc-yc(2),  ye(^) Heaven: see Angel 4;
Eternity  4d; Happiness 7c(2); Immortality $t Heavenly bodies: see Angel
23;  Astronomy 8-12; Change 7c(4), ioc; Eternity 4b; Matter ib; Soul 13;
World  63 Hedonism: see Duty 2; Good and Evil 3d; Pleasure and Pain 63 /
see  also  Desire  5c,  73(1); Happiness 2b(2); Temperance 6b Hegemonies
(pol.) : see State 9e(2) Heliocentric hypothesis: see Astronomy 2b Hell:
see  Eternity 4d; Happiness 7c(3); Immortality 5e; Punishment 5d, 5e(i);
Sin 6d 1320

[1355a]
Heredity:  see  Animal  9g-io;  Evolution  3-3  e;  Habit 3e Heresy: see
Religion  6c(i);  Theology  4e  Hermeneutics  (theol.): see Language 12;
Rhetoric  2d;  Sign  and  Symbol  5e; Theology 4b; World 40(3) Hero: see
History  43(4);  Honor  5-50!;  Life  and Death 8c / see also Courage 5;
Honor  3a;  Love  3d;  Temperance 6a; War and Peace 8 Heterogeneity: see
Same  and Other 33(3) Hierarchy and continuity (philos.) : see Being 3a;
Life  and  Death 2-3D; Nature 3b; Relation 5a(4)~5b; World 6b / see also
Animal ib-ic, 2c; Evolution 3e, 4a, 4c, 7b; Good and Evil ib; Man ia-ic;
Sense  2-2C  Histology: see Animal 3a History, discipline of: see ch 34:
History;  and Logic 4c; Memory and Imagination 7b; Philosophy id; Poetry
5b;  Rhetoric  2c;  Science  2b  / see also Education 4d; Experience 6b;
Memory  and  Imagination  3d; Virtue and Vice 401(4) History, historian:
see  Aristocracy  7;  Art  12  Astronomy  13; Citizen 9; Constitution 10
Education  9; Family 8; Government 6 History 4-5b; Knowledge 10; Labor 8
Law  8; Medicine 7; Monarchy 6;Oligarchy 6; Philosophy 7; Progress i-ic,
3~6e;  Religion  7; Rhetoric 7; State 10-ioe; Wealth 12 / see also Cause
8;  Chance  6b;  Dialectic 2d(2); Evolution 7c; Fate 6; Honor ^d Liberty
6-6c;  Man 9b(3)~9c; Mind iof(i) Nature 4c; Necessity and Contingency ^i
Opposition  5-5C; Progress 4b; State 23(3) Time 8-8b; Wealth ii; Will 7b
Holy orders (theol.): see Religion 30(1) / see also God 9e; Religion 2c;
Sign  and  Symbol  5c Homogeneity: see Same and Other 3a(i) Honesty: see
Duty 7; Truth 8a Honor: see ch 35: Honor; and Happiness 2b(4); State 9c;
Virtue  and  Vice  6d  / see also Courage 5; Immortality 6b; Justice 9e;
Labor  ie;  Love  2c;  Sign  and  Symbol  ie; War and Peace 6b Hope: see
Courage 3; Emotion 2a; Habit 5e(3); Virtue and Vice 8d(2) Human bondage:
see Liberty 3a; Slavery 7 / see also Desire 5-5C; Emotion 4a(i); Man 5a;
Opposition  4a;  Tyranny  <yd  Human nature: see ch 5 1 : Man / see also
Animal  ic-ic(2); God 3f; Good and Evil 3a; Happiness 4a; Infinity 6-6b;
Mind 3a; Nature 5a; Progress ib; Sin 3c; Soul 3b; State ia Humility: see
Virtue  and  Vice 8f Humours (biol.): see Medicine 5d(i); Opposition 3b,
4b Husband and wife: see Family 4a~4b, 4e, 5a, 7a, 7c; Love 2b(4), 2d

[1355b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Imagination  Hybridism (bio I.) : see Evolution 3c
Hybris:  see  Sin  4c  Hydrodynamics:  see Mechanics 5b Hydrostatic: see
Mechanics  5b Hyperbola (math.) : see Quantity 3^4) Hypostasis: see Mind
10b;  One  and  Many  ia;  World  4d Hypostatic union: ^ One and Many 6c
Hypothesis:  see  ch  36:  Hypothesis;  and  Astronomy 2b; Mechanics 2b;
Science 5e / see also Dialectic 2a(2); Experience 5a~5b; Mathematics 3a;
Physics   4b;  Principle  30-30(3);  Science  4a,  4c  Hypothetical  and
categorical   (log.):  see  Hypothesis  5;  Judgment  6d;  Reasoning  2b
Hypothetical   imperative   (ethics):  see  Judgment  3;  Necessity  and
Contingency  53(2)  Hysteria:  see Emotion 30(1) / see also Medicine 6b,
6c(2)-6d  Id,  ego,  and super-ego (psychol.) : see Man 4; Soul 2b Idea:
see ch 37: Idea; and Memory and Imagination 5b, 6c(i); Mind id(i)-id(2),
4d(2); Relation 4e~4f; Sense 5a; Truth 3b(i) / see also Beauty 7c; Being
70X2);  Definition  ib;  Eternity  4c;  Form  ia, 2b; God *,{; Knowledge
6a(3),  60(3);  Memory and Imagination 2c, 3a; Principle 2a(i); Sign and
Symbol  ib;  Time  5c;  Universal and Particular 2a-2c, 4 b-4d Ideal and
real  (metaph.):  see Being 7d~7d(5); Idea 6a; Mathematics 2b / see also
Form  2a; Idea 3c; Relation ia; Space 3b; Universal and Particular 2a-2b
Ideal  state:  see  Government 2e; State 6-6b Identification (psychol.):
see  Desire  4b;  Love *>-(3J Identity and diversity (metaph.): see Same
and  Other  i-3d  /  see  also One and Many 2a; Principle 33(3); Soul id
Idolatry:  see  God  14;  Religion 6a Ignorance: see Knowledge 4a; Truth
3d(2) Illusion: see Memory and Imagination 2e(4); Sense 4d(2); Space 4c;
Time  6b;  Truth 3d(2) Image (psychol.): see Element 5e; Idea ic, 2e-2f;
Memory  and  Imagination  5-5^  6c(i);  Sense  id;  Sign  and Symbol ib;
Universal   and   Particular   4d  Imageless  thought:  see  Memory  and
Imagination  6d Imagination: see Memory and Imagination i-id, 5~7b; Mind
ia(2)  /  see  also Animal ia(2); Art 5; Being 8a; Desire 53; Experience
23; Idea 2f; Knowledge 4c; Mattep.

[1356a]
Imitation  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  4c; Mind ib(i); Reasoning ic; Sense 30(2),
3d(2);  Truth  3a(2)  Imitation:  see  Art  3; Form id(i) ; Medicine 2b;
Nature  2a; Poetry ia-ib; Same and Other 4 a Immanence and transcendence
(theol.)  :  see God 5d~5e; Nature ib;ONE and Many ib; Relation 3; World
3-3  b  Immateriality: see Angel 2b; God 4c; Knowledge 53(2); Matter 3c;
Mind  2a; Soul 3-30 Immaturity: see Family 6c; Life and Death 6c; Man 6c
Immediate  inference:  see Judgment 7b; Reasoning 4a Immortality: see ch
38:  Immortality;  and  Soul  4b  /  see  also  Element  ^i;  Honor  2d;
Metaphysics 2d; Soul 4d~4d(i) Immutability: see Change 15- 15c; Eternity
i,  4c;  Form  ia;  God  4d;  Time  2,  2c;  Truth  5  Impeachment:  see
Constitution 7b Impenetrability: see Matter 2a; Space id Imperialism and
empire:  see  Liberty  6c; Monarchy 5~5b; Revolution 7; Slavery 6d State
9L, 10b; Tyranny 6; War and Peace 6a / see also Democracy 7b; Government
5b  Revolution  2c Imperishability: see Angel 3c; Being 7^3) Change ioc;
Element  5a;  Eternity  4a~4b  /  see  also Astronomy 8a; Change 15-15C;
Eternity  1,  4c; Form ia; God 4d; Matter ib; Time 2, 2c; Truth 5; World
4a, 6a Impiety: see God 3b; Prophecy 5; Religion 2g Impositions (log.) :
see  Sign  and Symbol 2a Impossibility and possibility: see Being 7d(i);
Necessity   and   Contingency   1;  Poetry  8a(2);  Will  4b  Impression
(psychol.):  see  Sense id Imprisonment: see Punishment 4b(2) Inadequate
ideas  and knowledge: see Idea 3b; Knowledge 6d(3); Opinion 3b Inanimate
and  animate: see Cause 2; Change 6c, 8-iob; Life and Death 2 / see also
Nature  3b;  World 6b Incarnation (theol.) : see God 90-9^3) ; Man i ic;
Mind  4f;  One  and  Many  6c  Incest:  see Family 4d Incommensurability
(math.):  see  Mathematics  2c; Quantity 6a Incontinence: see Desire 5c;
Temperance  ic  Incorporeality  : see Angel 2b; God 4c; Knowledge 53(2),
6a(i);  Matter  3c;  Mind 2a; Soul 3-3 e Incorruptibility (metaph.): see
Angel 3c; Being 7b(3); Change ioc; Element 5a; Eternity 4a~4b / see also
Astronomy 8a; Change 15-15C; Eternity i, 4c; Form ia; God 4d; Matter ib;
Time 2, 2c; World 4a, 6a

[1356b]
Increase:  see  Animal 7; Change 8-8b Indecision (psychol.): see Will 9b
Indefinables   :  see  Definition  ic;  Principle  23(3);  Relation  4a;
Universal  and  Particular  4e  Independence  (pol.) : see Government 5;
Liberty  ib, 6c; Revolution 7; State 9d Independent and dependent being:
see Being 7b, 7b(4); Necessity and Contingency 2-2D / see also Cause 7a;
God  4a, 5e; Nature ib, 3c(4); One and Many ia-ib; World 3~3b Indigence:
see  Labor 7e; Wealth 8c Individual (pol.): see Citizen i; Good and Evil
5d; Happiness 5a~5b; History 43(4); State 2f Individual differences: see
Animal  10;  Man  6-6c;  Mind  4a / see also Animal 8c(i); Happiness 4a;
Nature  ia(i); Slavery 2a; Will 9-93 Individuality (metaph.): see Matter
ic;  Universal and Particular 3, 4c / see also Form 3b; Knowledge 6a(2);
Nature  ia(i); Universal and Particular i Indivisibility (math., phys.):
see  Element  3a,  5a;  One  and  Many 2b; Time 3c Induction: see ch 39:
Induction;  and  Principle  3b;  Reasoning  4c,  6c-6d;  Rhetoric 4c(i);
Science  3d;  Sense  5b / see also Experience 2b; Knowledge 6c(2); Logic
ib;  Philosophy  3c;  Physics  4b  Industrial arts: see Art 9b; Labor 2b
Industrial revolution: see Revolution 4b; Wealth 12 Industry, industrial
system:  see  Wealth  3d  /  see also Art 9b; Family 3b; Labor 5, 5c~5d;
Revolution   4b   Inertia:  see  Change  7d;  Matter  2a;  Mechanics  ib
Infallibility  (psychol.): see Truth 3d(i) Infamy: see Honor 3b Infancy:
see  Animal  9i~9g;  Family  6c;  Life  and Death 6c; Love 2a(2); Man 6c
Inference  (log.):  see  ch  77:  Reasoning  /  see  also Experience 2d;
Hypothesis  2,  5;  Idea  5b;  Induction ib, 4-4^ Infinity 2c; Knowledge
6c(2);   Logic  4—4f;  Necessity  and  Contingency  4e(2);  Opinion  2c;
Opposition   ie;   Rhetoric  4C~4c(2);  Truth  3b(3)~3c;  Universal  and
Particular  ^d  Infidel: see Religion 6d Infinitesimal: see Infinity 3b;
Mathematics  4d; Quantity 7 Infinity: see ch 40: Infinity; and Being 2a;
Desire 7~7b; Eternity 2; God 4e; Quantity 7 Space 3a; Time 2b / see also
Being  7^4) Element 5b; Eternity i; Iudgment 6b Knowledge 53(4); Liberty
<^d\ Mathemat ics 4d; Truth 2d; World 4a Infused ideas: see Idea 2a

[1357a]
Infused  virtues:  see  Habit  5e(2);  Virtue  and  Vice  8e Inheritance
{econ.)\  see  Wealth  ye  Inhibition  (psychol): see Desire 6b; WitiT^b
Injustice:  see  ch  42: Justice / see also Labor 7-71; Law 6c; Monarchy
5b;  Oligarchy 5a; Punishment 4c; Revolution 6-6b; Slavery 3d; Truth 8a;
Tyranny  ib;  War  and  Peace  3a; Wealth iod Innate ideas: see Idea 2b;
Knowledge  60(3);  Memory  and  Imagination  3a;  Mind  4(^(2) Innocence
(theol.):  see  Justice  ib;  Knowledge  7c; Man 9b(i); Mind 4!:; Sin 3a
Insanity and sanity: see Emotion 3a; Man 5b; Medicine 6a; Mind 8-8c; One
and  Many  3b(5);  Punishment  2b  Insignificant speech: see Language 5b
Inspiration  (aesth.):  see  Art  5;  Poetry 3 Inspiration (theol.): see
Education 7a; God 6c(i)-6c(2); Idea 2a; Knowledge 60(5); Language 11-12;
Memory  and  Imagination  8a;  Prophecy  ib;  Religion ib(i) Instability
(pot.):  see  Aristocracy  3; Constitution 7a; Democracy 7-7C; Oligarchy
3~3a;  Revolution 3c Instantaneity: see Time 3c Instinct: see Habit 3-36
/ see also Animal id Desire 3a; Emotion ic; Evolution 3b; Life and Death
8a-8b; Love 2a(i); Sense 30X3) Will 33(2) Instruments: see Astronomy 2a;
Quantity  6c Science 6a Insurrection: see Law 6c; Revolution i-2b, 3~3b,
6a;  War  and Peace 2a, 4b Integer (math.) : see Quantity 4-4D Intellect
or intelligence: see ch 58: Mind; and Animal 10(2); Knowledge 6b(3); Man
ia-ic,  4c;  One  and Many 4a; Soul 3b / see also Angel 2-2a, 3d; Animal
ia(2);  Astronomy  8b; Element 5f; Evolution 70(3); God 4g; Habit 5C~5d;
Idea  6a-6b;  Infinity  6b; Sense ia-ib; Soul ic, 2c(3); Virtue and Vice
2a(2)  Intellectual gifts (theol.): see Habit 5e(2); Virtue and Vice 8e;
Wisdom  ic Intellectual virtues: see Habit 5d; Virtue and Vice 2a, 2a(2)
/  see also Art i; Prudence i, 2c; Science ia(i); Wisdom 2a Intelligible
and sensible: see Being 7e, 8a-8b; Experience 4a; Form 3a; Good and Evil
4a;  Knowledge  6a(i),  6a(4);  Matter  ic;  Mind  ia(i);  Universal and
Particular  4d Intentional and accidental: see Punishment 2a; Virtue and
Vice  5c;  Will  33-33(2)  Intentional  being: see Idea 6a-6b / see also
Being 7d; Form 2a; Knowledge i; One and Many 4f; Same and Other 4a; Sign
and Symbol ib

[1357b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Judiciary Intentions (log.): see Idea 3a; Sign and
Symbol  2b Interbreeding: see Evolution 3c Interest (econ.): see Justice
8d;  Wealth  4c,  5e,  6d(i) Intermediate varieties: see Evolution 53(2)
International  law:  see  Law 4g; War and Peace International relations:
see  Government 5~5a; Justice <){; State 9-96(2); War and Peace 4a / see
also  Government  5d;  Law 4g; Liberty ib; Necessity and Contingency 5d;
War  and  Peace  3b, 7, nc-nd International trade: see Liberty 2c; State
9a,  9c; Wealth 4g Interpretation: see Rhetoric 2d; Sign and Symbol 4c /
see  also  Language  12;  Poetry  8c;  Prophecy  3a;  Sign and Symbol 5e
Intolerance:  see  Religion  6d-6e;  State  5<d(i) / see also Custom and
Convention 7b Introspection: see Man 2a; Mind 6; Soul 5a / see also Idea
2d; Will 5b(i) Intuition: see Idea 2c; Knowledge 6c(i)-6c(2); Memory and
Imagination  6c(2);  Reasoning  ib;  Sense  ic  / see also Induction ia;
Judgment  8a;  Knowledge  6b(4);  Logic  4d; Mathematics 2a; Mind ie(i);
Philosophy 3c; Principle 3b; Space 4a; Time 6c; Universal and Particular
4a  Invention: see Labor ie; Physics 5; Progress 3c; Science ib( 1), 6a;
War  and  Peace  iof Investment (econ.) : see Wealth 3a Involuntary: see
Animal 4b; Virtue and Vice 4e(i); Will 3a(i) / see also Knowledge 8b(2);
Punishment  2a  Irrationality (math.): see Mathematics 2c; Quantity 6a J
Joy:  see Emotion 2a; Happiness 7c(2); Pleasure and Pain 4a Judaism: see
God  7-8 e; Law 3b~3b(i); Religion 3a / see also Education 7-7^ Prophecy
2c,  4a-4  c Judgment: see ch 41: Judgment; and Idea 5a, 6f; Mind ia(3);
Necessity and Contingency 4e(i); Opposition id-id(2); Relation 4b; Truth
3b(2);  Universal  and  Particular  5c  /  see  also Beauty 5; Being 4b;
Experience  2d,  6a; Infinity 2b; Knowledge 6c(2); Mind ie(2); Principle
2D-2b(3);  Prudence  5a; Sense ic; Truth 3c; Virtue and Vice 5b Judicial
process:  see  Government  301(2); Justice iod; Law 5g~5h, 8-9; Prudence
6b; Universal and Particular 6c Judiciary: see Government 3d-3d(2) / see
also Constitution 7b; Democracy 5c; Government 3

[1358a]
Jurisprudence  THE GREAT IDEAS Jurisprudence: see Prudence 6b / see also
Duty 3; Law 8; Logic 4c; Philosophy 2c; Science Jury (pol.) : see Law 5g
Just  price: see Justice 8b; Wealth iod Justice: see ch 42: Justice; and
Constitution 5a; Democracy 3a, 43(2); Duty 7; God ^'\\ Good and Evil 3c;
Labor  7-71; Liberty ie; Punishment 4c, 5e~5e(2); Revolution 6-7; Virtue
and Vice 2a(i); War and Peace 11b; Wealth iod / see also Aristocracy ib;
Constitution 2b; Government ic; Honor 4b; Law 4c 5c, 5g~5h, 6c; Love 3c,
4b;  Pleasure  and  Pain  8b;  Punishment  2; Religion 2; Revolution 3a;
Rhetoric 5b; Slavery 3d; State 3e, 9c; Temperance ia; Tyranny ib; Virtue
and  Vice  3b;  War  and  Peace  3a~3b;  6b;  Will  8c Kinds (log.): see
Definition  2b;  Evolution  ib, 2b; Infinity 5a; Knowledge 6a(2); Nature
ia(i);  Relation  53(4);  Same  and Other 2a; Universal and Particular i
Kinematics:  see Astronomy 8c(2); Change Kinetics: see Mechanics 5D-6e /
see  also Astronomy 8c(2)-8c(3); Change 7~7d; Nature 2d; Quantity 5c~5e;
Space  2c King, kingship: see ch 59: Monarchy; and Government ig(i); Law
6b,  7e;  Revolution  3c(i);  Tyranny  2a,  4a, 5c Knowledge: see en 43:
Knowledge;  and  Experience 3~4b; God ^i\ Good and Evil 6a-6d; Happiness
2b(7);  Mathematics  ic;  Matter  4~4d;  Necessity  and  Contingency 4a;
Opinion  1-3C;  Same  and Other 4a; Science ia-2b, 4~4e; Sense 4a; Truth
3~3d(3);  Virtue  and Vice ia; Wisdom ia / see also Angel 3d; Art 6b-6c;
Being  8-8f; Cause 5~5d; Dialectic 2a(i); Education 4a, 5a~5b; Form 3-4;
God  6c-6c(4);  History  1; Language 7; Memory and Imagination 3~3d, 6a;
Metaphysics  1;  Mind 9a; Philosophy i; Physics i; Poetry 5-5^ Principle
2-2b(3);  Universal  and  Particular  ^-^i  Labor: see ch 44: Labor; and
Justice  8b-8c(2);  Progress  33-3^  Wealth  4d  /  see also Liberty 2d;
Opposition 5b; Punishment 4b(3); Revolution 5a; Slavery 43-40, 5b; State
5c;  Wealth 3a, 6d(2), 6e, 7b(i), 8c, 9h, iod, 11 Labor legislation: see
Labor  7a  Labor organization: see Labor 70(2); State id Labor theory of
value: see Labor 6d; Wealth 4d Lactation: see Animal gi

[1358b]
Laissez-faire  economy:  see  Liberty  2c;  State  9a; Wealth 9c~9d Land
(econ.)  :  see  Wealth  3D-3C, 7b(2) Language: see ch 45: Language; and
Sign  and  Symbol  ia, id, if, 3a, 4-4C / see also Idea 4a; Judgment 5a;
Logic  3a;  Memory  and  Imagination 8d(2) ; Poetry 8b; Time 6d Last end
(ethics,  theol.):  see Good and Evil 5c; Happiness 3, 7, yb-yc; One and
Many  5b;  Principle  4a  Last  Judgment:  see  God  7h; Immortality 5c;
Prophecy  4d  Law:  see  ch  46: Law; and Constitution i, 2b; Custom and
Convention  6-6b; Emotion 5c; Justice 10- iod; Liberty id; Necessity and
Contingency  5c;  Prudence 6b; Reasoning 5e(2); Universal and Particular
6c;  Virtue  and  Vice  4d(3);  War  and  Peace 11a; Will 10b / see also
Democracy  4a;  Duty 5; Education 4c; Government 30-36(2); Habit 7; Mind
9e; Pleasure and Pain 9; Punishment 4a, 4C~4d; Revolution 6a-6b; State 3
b(2)-3d Law of contradiction: see Logic ia; Opposition 2a; Principle ic,
33(3);  Truth  3c Law of nations : see Law 4g Laws of motion: see Change
7d;  Mechanics  ib  / see also Astronomy 80(3); Mechanics 5 e(i)-5 f(2),
6d-6d(3 ) Laws of nature: see Nature 3a; Science 4d / see also Induction
5; Mechanics ib Laws of thought: see Judgment 73-7^ Logic ia; Opposition
id(i)  ;  Principle  ic, 33(3); Reasoning 23-23(2); 43 Lawyer: see Law 9
Leaders,  leadership:  see  Democracy  2b; History 43(4); Honor 5b / see
also  Aristocracy 5-6; Constitution 9a; Education 8d; Honor 3a; Monarchy
ib(3),  3a;  Philosophy  4c; Rhetoric ic; State 8-8d; Virtue and Vice 7c
Leagues  (pol.)  :  see  State  9e(2);  War  and  Peace iic Learning and
teaching:  see Education 5—5f / see also Democracy 6; Idea 5d; Knowledge
93;  Language  8;  Memory  and  Imagination 3a; Pleasure and Pain 4c(2);
Poetry  5a;  Religion  5c;  Virtue  and  Vice  4b  Legislative  process,
legislators:  see  Government  30(2);  Law 5d / see also Constitution 6;
Knowledge  8c;  Law  ic  Legislature: see Government 3c~3c(2) / see also
Constitution  7b;  Democracy  5c;  Government  3 Legitimacy (pol.): /iff
Government  ic-id  Leisure:  see  Labor ib, 3b, 70(1); Man 9a Lever: see
Mechanics 5a Lex talionis: see Punishment ib

[1359a]
INVENTORY  Liberal  arts:  see  Art  4,  6b;  Astronomy  4; Education 2;
Language 7-8; Logic 3-3D; Mathematics ib; Rhetoric ib Liberal education:
see Astronomy 4; Education 2, 5b-5d; Logic 3; Mathematics ib; Rhetoric 6
Liberalism:  see  Justice  6-6e;  Liberty  1-20!, 3d, 6-6b; Progress 6e;
Religion 6e; Tyranny 5-5C Liberty (econ., pol.): see Democracy 43-43(2);
Justice  6-6e; Labor j{; Liberty i-2d, 6-6c; Progress 4c; Slavery 4~6d /
see also Custom and Convention yd; Democracy 2; Dialectic 2d(2); Fate 6;
History  4a(i);  Knowledge  9b;  Labor  3b, 70(1); Law 4c; Opinion 5—5b;
Poetry 9b; Progress 6e; Religion 6e; Revolution 3a; Slavery 2C-2d; Truth
8d;  Tyranny  5-5C,  8;  War  and  Peace 6b; Will 7a-7b Liberty (ethics,
psychol.):  see  Cause  3; Liberty ic, 3a~3d; Mind 9d; Nature 2f, 30(2);
Necessity  and  Contingency  53-53(3);  Will  4b-8a / see also Cause 7c;
Dialectic  2d(2); Fate 3; Good and Evil 3b; Habit 6c; History 4a(i); Man
13;  Metaphysics  2d;  Mind  ie(3);  Prudence 43; Punishment 23; Sin 63;
Virtue  and  Vice  5c  Liberty  (metaph., theol): see Liberty 4~5d; Will
4D-5C,  jc-yc(2)  / see also Cause 3; Dialectic 2d(2); Fate 3-4; God 4c,
7b, y(; History 53; Nature 30(4) Liberty and necessity: see Liberty 43-4
b;  Nature  21;  Necessity and Contingency 5353(3); Will 53-63, 7b / see
also  Cause  3;  Fate  2-3, 5-6; History 43(1); Nature 30(2); Wealth i i
Liberty  of  conscience : see Liberty 2b; Religion 6e Libido: see Desire
23; Habit 33 License (pol.): see Justice 6d; Liberty ie Life: see ch 48:
Life  and  Death; and Cause 2; Change 6c, 8-iob; Soul ib, 2C-2c(3) / see
also Animal 13-13(5); Element 5e~5f; Evolution 43, 4c; Mechanics 4c Life
instinct:  see  Life  and  Death  83  Life span: see Life and Death 6-6b
Light:  see  Mechanics 73-73(4) Likeness and difference: see Quality 4c;
Same  and  Other  2c, 3c Limit (math.) : see Infinity 3b; Mathematics 4d
Limited  and  absolute government: see Constitu tion 1; Law 73; Monarchy
13-13(2);  Tyran  ny  5-5C  /  see  also  Citizen  2b;  Constitution 33;
Government  ib;  Monarchy  4d~4e(4)  Slavery 6b-6d Limited monarchy: see
Constitution 33 Government 2b; Monarchy ib(2), 4d(3), 4e(4)

[1359b]
b  OF  TERMS  Magnetism Line (math.): see Quantity 33~3c, 3d(2) Liquids:
see  Mechanics  5b  Loan:  see Justice 8d; Wealth 5d~5e Local government
(pol.)  : see Government 5c Local motion (phys.): see Change 6-6b, 7~7d;
Matter 2b; Mechanics ib, 5d~5f(2), 6c; Nature 2d; Quantity 5c; Space 23,
2b(2)  /  see  also  Animal  43,  5~5g;  Element  5g;  Life  and Death 2
Locomotion  (bio I.): see Animal 13(4), 4-4C; Life and Death 2~3b Logic,
science  of: see ch 49: Logic; and Dialectic 2c(i) / see also Art 4, 6b;
Astronomy  4; Language 7; Mathematics 13-ib; Metaphysics 3c; Rhetoric ib
Logic,  subject  matter of: see Hypothesis 5; Idea 4-4C; Induction 1-43;
Infinity  2-2C;  Judgment  5-7C;  Necessity  and  Contingency  4e~4e(2);
Opposition  i-ie;  Reasoning  2~4f;  Sign  and Symbol i~4e; Truth 3D-3C,
3d(3); Universal and Particular 5~5d / see also ch 15: Definition; tftfJ
Astronomy  23-2C; Logic is; Universal and Particular 2-2C Longevity: see
Happiness  2b(i); Life and Death 6s-6b Love: see ch 50: Love; and Desire
i, 3c; Family 73; God 3c, 5h; Knowledge 4d; Same and Other 5; Virtue and
Vice  6e  / see also Angel 3e; Beauty 3; Being 3b; Family 7c7d; Good and
Evil 13; Happiness 2b(5); Justice 3; Law 3b(2); Opposition 40!; Pleasure
and  Pain  73; Relation 53(2); State 3c; Truth 8c; Virtue and Vice 8d(3)
Loyalty:  see  Duty  10;  Honor 23, 2e; Love 3c, 4b; State 3c / see also
Courage  7-7C;  Honor 3b; Opposition 4d Lucidity (psychol.): see Mind 83
Lungs:  see  Animal 5d Lust: see Love 23; Temperance 2 / see also Desire
5c,  73(1); Emotion 23, 43(1); Pleasure and Pain 6c; Sin 2c(i) Luxuries:
see  Nature  5b; Necessity and Contingency 5e; Temperance 5b; Wealth 10b
Lying:  see Truth 83-8 M Machine: see Labor 2b; Mechanics 53; Physics 5;
Science  ib(i); Wealth 33 / see also Animal ie; Mechanics 4c; Revolution
4b;  Wealth i, 3d; World ib Macrocosm and microcosm: see Man 10 e; World
2 Madness: see Emotion 33; Man 5b; Medicine 63; Mind 83 Magnanimity: see
Honor 2c; Wealth ioc Magnetism: see Mechanics 7d~7d(2), 76(3)

[1360a]
Magnificence THE GREAT IDEAS Magnificence: see Wealth ioc Magnitude: see
Infinity  3b;  Mathematics 2, 2c; One and Many 3a(i); Quantity 2, 6-6a /
see also Quantity 3-36(2) Majority opinion: see Democracy 3b; Opinion 73
Majority  rule:  see  Constitution 9b; Democracy 2-2b, 5b(i); Government
ih;  Opinion  7b;  Tyranny  2c;  Will  10a / see also Constitution 9-93;
Democracy 3b, 4b, 5a, 5b(2)~5b(3) Making and doing: see Knowledge 6e(2);
Prudence 2b / see also Knowledge 8a; Labor 2-2b; Science 3-3^ Virtue and
Vice  2a(2)  Mammals:  see  Animal  9f Man: see ch 51: Man; and Angel 4;
Animal  ic-ic(2);  Element ^f; Evolution 7-7C; God 3f; Good and Evil 3a;
Infinity 6-6b; Knowledge 7d; Life and Death 6b-6c; Mind 3-3C; Nature 5a;
One  and  Many  3^4); Reasoning ia; Sense 2c; Sin 3c; Soul 3b; State ia,
3b(i);  World  2 Manicheanism : /<?<?Good and Evil id, 2b; Opposition 2d
Manners:  see  Custom  and Convention 2-7b Manual work: see Education 3;
Habit  5a;  Labor 3a Manufacturing: see Art 9b; Revolution 4b; Wealth 3d
Manumission:  see  Slavery  3c Market price: see Wealth 4c, 4e Marriage:
see  Family 4~4e, 7a, 8; Love 2d Martyrs, martyrdom: see Courage 5; Life
and Death 8c; Religion 6d; Truth 8e Masochism: see Pleasure and Pain 8c;
Punishment  6  Mass  (phys.):  see  Mechanics ia, 6b, 6d(i); Quantity 3d
Master  and  slave:  see  Slavery  i,  2b, 3b Materialism (philos.): see
Element  5~5n;  Matter  3a,  6  /  see  also  Animal ie; Form 4; Man 3c;
Mechanics  4,  4D-4C; Mind 2e; Soul 3d; Wealth ii; World ib Mathematical
objects:  see  Being  70X3);  Mathematics 2-2C; Matter ic; Necessity and
Contingency  4d;  Quantity  i,  2-3,  4;  Space  5 Mathematical physics,
science  of:  see  Mathematics  5b; Physics ib, 3; Science 5c / see also
Astronomy  2c; Experience 5c; Hypothesis 4~4d; Mechanics 3-30!; Quantity
6,   6c   Mathematical   physics,   subject  matter  of:  see  Astronomy
8c(2)-8c(3),   9-91;   Change   7-70!;  Matter  2b;  Mechanics  5-76(5);
Opposition  4d;  Quantity  5-5  e;  Relation  6a; Space 2a, 2c; World ib
Mathematical symbols: see Mathematics 3d; Mechanics 3c

[1360b]
Mathematics, science of: see ch 52: Mathematics; and Hypothesis 3; Logic
4a;  Necessity  and Contingency 4d; Physics 3; Reasoning 6b; Science 5c;
Space  3d,  4a; Time 6c; Truth 4c / see also Astronomy 2c; Definition 6a
Education  3d;  Experience  5c;  Matter  4b Mechanics 3; Metaphysics 3b;
Nature  4b Philosophy ib; Physics ib Mathematics, subject matter of: see
Infinity  3-30; Mathematics 2-2C, 4-40!; Mechanics 3-30"; Quantity 2-4C,
6-6b / see also Chance 4; Relation 53(3); Space 3c~3d Mating: see Animal
8c(4); Evolution 5b Matrimony: see Family 4-4 e, 7a, 8; God 9e; Love 2d;
Religion  2c Matter: see ch 53: Matter; and Being 7c(3); Change 2a; Form
2c(i);  Infinity  4-4C; Mechanics ia; Nature ia(2); One and Many 33(3) /
see  also Art 2b; Astronomy 8a; Change 6d; Element 3—3d, 5a~5b; Eternity
4b;  Evolution  4a;  Form id(2), 2a, 3c; Habit ib; Knowledge 53(2); Mind
2-2e;  One  and  Many 3a, 3K4); Principle ib; Quality i, 3d; Quantity i;
Soul  3C~3d;  Space 13; Universal and Particular 63; World 63 Matter and
form:  see  Art 2b; Being 7c(3); Change 23; Form 2c(i); Knowledge 53(2);
Nature  13(2);  Principle ib; Soul 3c; Universal and Particular 63 / see
also  Being  7b(2);  Form  id(2), 2c(3), 3c; Matter 13, 4b; One and Many
3b(3);  Reasoning  33 Maturity: see Life and Death 6c; Man 6c / see also
Family  6c, 6e; Punishment 2b Maxims of reason: see Principle 2b(3) Mean
(ethics):  see  Virtue  and  Vice  ic / see also Courage 1-2; Iustice 5;
Prudence  3b,  3e;  Temperance i, ib Meaning or significance: see ch 85:
Sign  and  Symbol; and Idea 43, 63; Language 33, 53-5^ Rhetoric 2d; Same
and  Other  4c  Means  and ends: see Cause 4; Good and Evil 5c; Relation
53(2);  Will  2c-2c(3)  / see also Good and Evil 4b; Judgment 3; One and
Many  5b;  Principle  43;  Prudence  33,  4b;  Reasoning  5e(3) Means of
production  (econ.):  see  Labor  7b;  Wealth  83,  8c  Measurement: see
Mathematics  53;  Quantity  6-6c  / see also Astronomy 23, 7; Change 53;
Experience  5c; Mechanics 3a, 3d, jc(i) y 7e(5); Physics 3, 4d; Quantity
30(1),  3e(i),  5e;  Science 5c; Space 3d; Time 4 Mechanics, science of:
see  Astronomy  8c(3);  Mechanics 1-4C Mechanics, subject matter of: see
Astronomy 8c-8c(3); Mechanics 5~7e(5) Mechanism (philos.): see Mechanics
4-4C / see also Animal ie; Element 5e~5h; Man 3c; Mind 2e; World ib 1326

[1361a]
;  Medication:  see  Medicine  3<d(2) Medicine, science of: see Medicine
1-3D  /  see also Art 93; Experience 33 Medicine, subject matter of: see
Life  and Death 5-5C; Medicine 3C-7 / see also Emotion 3d; Mind 8b; Sign
and  Symbol  4c  Medium (phys.) : see Mechanics ^d, 66(2), 7d(2); 7e(3);
Space 2c Memory: see Knowledge 6b(2), 60(3); Memory and Imagination i~4b
/  see also Animal ia(2) Experience 2a; Idea 2e; Induction 2; Matter 4c;
Memory  and  Imagination  8b;  Reasoning  ic;  Relation 4f; Sense 3b(2),
3d(2), 5a; Sign and Symbol 6b; Time 6a, 6e; Truth 3»tt Menial labor: see
Labor  3b  Mental  disease:  see Desire 6c; Emotion 3a; Man 5b; Medicine
6-6d;  Memory and Imagination 2e(3); Mind 8-8c; One and Many 3K5) Mental
work:  see Labor 3a Mercantilism (econ.): see Wealth gc Mercenaries: see
War  and  Peace  10b  Mercy: see God 51; Justice 11a; Virtue and Vice 8f
Messiah: see God 8e; Prophecy 4c Metaphor: see Sign and Symbol 30(1), 4d
/  see also God 6a; Rhetoric 2a; Sign and Symbol 5f Metaphysics, science
of:  see  ch  57:  Metaphysics;  and  Being 4a; Logic i; Mathematics ia;
Matter  4b;  Philosophy  2b; Physics ia, 2a; Science ia(2); Theology 3a;
Wisdom  ia  / see also Definition 6a; Logic 4d; Nature 4b; Reasoning 6a;
Theology  4a;  Truth 4c Metaphysics, subject matter of: see ch 7: Being;
and Cause i-ib, 73-7^ Form 2-2d; God 2D-2C, 6b; Good and Evil i-id; Idea
6-6f;   Liberty  4-4^  Matter  3~3d;  Mind  10-  iof(2);  Necessity  and
Contingency  2-2d;ONE  and  Many  i-ic; Opposition 2-2e; Principle i-ic;
Same  and  Other  i-2e; Universal and Particular 1-3 / see also Angel 2;
Change  15a;  Eternity  i-ib,  4c;  Immortality  2;  Knowledge  5-53(6),
6a-6a(4);  Nature  i-ic,  2f;  Quality  i;  Quantity  i;  Relation  i-id
Metempsychosis: see Immortality 5a; Soul 4d(i) Meteors: see Astronomy oi
Method of exhaustion (math.): see Infinity 3b; Mathematics 4d; Mechanics
3d Methodology: see Astronomy 2-2C; Dialectic 2a(2), 2b(2); History 3-3^
Knowledge 5d~5e; Logic 4-4^ Man 20(2); Mathematics 3—3d; Mechanics 2-2C;
Metaphysics  2c;  Philosophy  3~3d;  Physics  4~4d; Progress 6d; Science
5~5e; Theology 4c; Truth 3d(3) Metre: see Poetry 8b

[1361b]
Modernity  see  Idea  5b; Reasoning Middle term (log.) 2a(i)-2a(2) Might
(pol.):  see  Justice  gi\  Tyranny ia Militarism: see War and Peace 7-8
Military  arts  and  profession:  see Art 9c; State 8d(i); War and Peace
10-iog Military preparedness: see State 9e(i) ; War and Peace 7 Military
strategy  and  tactics: see War and Peace iod Military training: see War
and  Peace  ioc / see also Courage 6; State 9e(i) Militia: see Democracy
7c;  War  and Peace 10b Millenium (theol.): see Prophecy 4d Mind: see ch
58*  Mind;  and Animal ic; Knowledge 6b(3)-6b(4); Man ia-ic;ONE and Many
4a;  Soul ic, 3b / see also Angel 3d; Animal ic(2); Astronomy 8b; Change
6d;  Education  5—5f; Element 5f; Evolution 70(3); Experience 2-2d; Form
2a; God 4g; Habit 5C~5d, 6b; Idea id-2h, 6a-6b; Infinity 6b; Judgment i;
Man  4c;  Matter 4d; Medicine 6-6d; Sense ia-ib, id; Sign and Symbol ib;
Soul  2c(3);  Virtue  and  Vice  2a(2)  Mind, or soul, and body: see Man
33-33(2)  ;  Matter  2d; Mind 2-2e; One and Many 30(4); Soul ib-ic, 4b /
see  also  Being  70(2);  Form 2d; Immortality 5b; Life and Death i; Man
2b(3);  Matter  4C~4d; Medicine 5d(2), 6c(i); Mind 4c; Soul 3c, 4d~4d(4)
Minimum  wage:  see  Labor  6b  Minorities, minority representation: see
Constitution  9~9b;  Democracy 5d(i); Opinion 7b; State 5<d(i) Miracles:
see  Cause  7d; God 7e; Nature 3c(4); Religion ib(2); Sign and Symbol 5b
Missing  link:  see  Evolution  7b(2)  Mixed  constitution  (pol.):  see
Aristocracy  2b;  Constitution  5b;  Democracy  33;  Government 2b Mixed
regime  (pol.):  see  Constitution  33-3^  Democracy  3b; Government 2b;
Monarchy  ib(i), 4d( 3 ), 4 e(4) Mixture (phys.): see Change 93; Element
3d  Mob-rule:  see  Democracy  23; Opinion 7b; Temperance 5b; Tyranny 2c
Mobility or motility (bio I.): see Animal 13(4); Life and Death 3b Modal
opposition (log.): see Necessity and Contingency 4e(i); Opposition id(2)
Modality  (log.):  see  Judgment 6c; Necessity and Contingency 4e~4e(2);
Opposition  id(2);  Reasoning  2b,  3d  Moderation:  see  Emotion 40(1);
Temperance i; Virtue and Vice ic Modernity: see Time 8b

[1362a]
Modes  THE  GREAT  IDEAS Modes or modifications (metaph.): see Being 7b,
7b(6);  Mind  10-10(2),  ioe;  Necessity  and  Contingency  2d  Momentum
(phys.)\  see  Mechanics  6c; Quantity 5c Monarchy: see ch 59: Monarchy;
and  Government ig(i), 2-2e; Revolution 30(1); Tyranny 2a, 4a / see also
Aristocracy 2a; Constitution 3a; Democracy 2b, 3c; Honor 4a; Justice 9c;
Law 6b, 7e; Oligarchy 2; Tyranny 5c; Virtue and Vice 7d Monasticism: see
Religion  3d;  Virtue and Vice 8g; Wealth ioe(2) Monetary standards: see
Wealth 5b Money: see Wealth 5-5 e / see also Justice 8d; Sign and Symbol
ie;  Wealth  4b,  78(3)  Monism: see Being 7K4); Matter 3a, 3c; Mind 2e,
iof;  One  and  Many  i-ib; Opposition 2e; Principle ib; World 3a, 4c~4d
Monogamy:  see  Family  4a  Monopoly (econ.) : see Wealth <\i / see also
Opposition 5a; State 9a Monotheism: see God 2-2d Moon: see Astronomy 9b,
12;  Mechanics  515ft») Moral education: see Education 4—40!; Virtue and
Vice  40-^(4)  /  see also Art 10a; Courage 6; Custom and Convention 5b;
Duty  4a;  Emotion  5e;  Government  2d;  Law 6d; Pleasure and Pain 10a;
Poetry 9a; Prudence 3b; Punishment ic, 3-3C; State 7c; Temperance 4, 5c;
Virtue  and  Vice  7a Moral judgment: see Custom and Convention 5a; Good
and  Evil  3c,  6d; Judgment 3 Moral law: see Law 3a(i), 4a, 4d; Liberty
3c; Principle 4b; Will 2b(i), 5K3) Moral philosophy or science: see Duty
3; Good and Evil 6d; Knowledge 6e-6e(2); Philosophy 2a, 2c; Science 3a /
see  also  Definition 6c; Happiness 3; Judgment 3; Logic 4e; Metaphysics
2d; Principle 4~4b; Reasoning 5e~5e(3), 6d; Truth 2c Moral philosophy or
science,  subject matter of: see Courage 1-2, 4; Duty 1-8; Good and Evil
3~6c;  Happiness  i~5b;  Justice  1-5;  Pleasure and Pain 6-8b; Prudence
1-5C;  Temperance  1-4;  Virtue  and  Vice i-6e / see also Desire 6a-6b;
Education  4-40!; Emotion 4-4C; Habit 5b~5d; Honor 2a-2c; Immortality 4;
Knowledge  8b-8b(4);  Liberty 3-30!; Mind 9C~9d; Nature 5a; One and Many
5c;  Will  8-8  e; Wisdom 2D-2C Moral virtue: see Virtue and Vice i-6e /
see also Courage i, 4; Desire 6a; Habit 5b; Happiness 2b(3); Justice ic-
id;  Knowledge  8b(i);  Law 6d; Liberty 3c; Love 3a~3b; Mind 9c; One and
Many   5a;  Pleasure  and  Pain  8a;  Prudence  3~3b;  Punishment  3~3b;
Temperance i-ia; Will 8c; Wisdom 2b

[1362b]
e  Morality:  see Good and Evil 3-3^ Virtue and Vice 4e~4e(3) / see also
Custom  and  Convention  5a;  Duty  i,  4a;  Emotion  4-4C; Happiness 3;
Immortality  4;  Judgment  3;  Knowledge  8b-8b(4);  Law  3a(i),  4a~4d;
Metaphysics  2d;  One  and  Many  5a~5c; Opinion 6-6b; Pleasure and Pain
6-6e;  Principle  4-4^  Relation 6c; Universal and Particular 7b; Virtue
and  Vice  6-6e; Will 8-8 Morphology: see Animal 2b; Evolution 6c Mortal
sin: see Sin 2C-2c(i) Motherhood and fatherhood: see Family 6-6b, 6d, 7d
/  see  also  Duty  9;  Education  4b;  Justice 7; Virtue and Vice 4d(i)
Motion: see Change 1-70!; Matter 2b; Mechanics i-ic, 5d~5f(2) / see also
Animal  4-4C; Astronomy 8c-8c(3); Mechanics 4-4C, 6c; Nature 2d; One and
Many 33(2); Opposition 3c; Quantity 5D-5C; Relation 6a; Space 2-2C; Time
i  Motion  and  rest: see Change 4; Opposition 3c Motivation: see Animal
4b;  Desire 2c; Good and Evil 3c; Sense 3c; Will 2b-2b(2), 3a33(2) / see
also  Emotion  3a,  4a(i); Love ie-if; Punishment 2a Multiplication: see
Mathematics  4a;  Quantity  4b  Multitude  (math.): see Infinity 3a, 5a;
Mathematics  2,  2c;  Quantity  2,  4-4C,  6, 7 Music: see Astronomy 3a;
Education  4d;  Poetry  7d;  Virtue and Vice 401(4) / see also Art 7-7S,
10-iob;  Astronomy  4  Mutability:  see Being 5; Change 1; Necessity and
Contingency  2c  Mutation  (biol.) : see Evolution 3e Mystery (theol.) :
see  Theology  3c  Mystical  body  of  Christ : see God 9d ; Religion 3b
Mysticism:  see Experience 7; God 6c(3); Wisdom ic Myths, mythology: see
Dialectic  2a(2); History 1; Philosophy id; Poetry 2; Sign and Symbol 4d
/ see also Happiness 2; Labor ia; Man 9a; Monarchy 2d; Time 8b; World 4b
N  Names  of God: see God 6a; Sign and Symbol ${ Naming, names: see Sign
and  Symbol 2~3d; Universal and Particular 2c, 5a Narration: see History
3;  Poetry 4a, 7-70!, 8a-8a(3) National budget: see Government 4; Wealth
9e(0  National  defense:  see  State 9e(i); War and Peace 3a, 7 National
state: see State iod National wealth: see State 7a; Wealth 9-9C 1328

[1363a]
Natura  naturans,  natura  naturata: see Nature ib; World 3a Natural and
artificial: see Art 2-3; NAjyj«-3ar' One and Many 30(2); Poetry ia / see
also  Art  9a; Beauty 2; Medicine 2b; Wealth i Natural and conventional:
see  Custom  and Convention 1; Nature 2b / see also Justice 9a; Language
2-2b;  Necessity and Contingency 5c; Sign and Symbol i-if; Slavery 2, 3;
State  3b~3d  Natural  and  supernatural:  see God ia, 6c- 13; Knowledge
60(5)  /  see  also  Cause  7b-yd;  Habit 5e~5e(3); Opinion 4a; Religion
ibib(3),  6f; Sign and Symbol 5b; Theology 2; Virtue and Vice 2b Natural
and  unnatural: see Nature 2e Natural and violent motion: see Change 7b;
Mechanics  5e(2)~5f;  Nature 2d; Opposition 3c; Space 2a Natural desire:
see  Desire  3a;  Habit 3a / set also Happiness i, 7b; Knowledge 2; Life
and Death 8a-8b; Nature 5b Natural language: see Language 2a Natural law
(jurisp.):  see Law 2, 3a(i), 4-4^ 5c, 7c / see also Duty 5; Justice 6a,
9a,  10a;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5c;  Principle  4b; Prudence 2c;
Slavery 2c; State 3K2) Natural liberty: see Liberty ia-ib Natural price:
see  Wealth  4d~4e  Natural resources: see Wealth 3a Natural rights: see
Justice  6-6e;  Law  4c,  7c;  Liberty  ia,  if-2d / see also Citizen 4;
Democracy  4b;  Family  2c,  5b;  Law  2,  4c;  Opinion 5a; Progress 4c;
Religion  6e;  Revolution 6-6b; Slavery 3d; Tyranny 5 a Natural science:
see Man 2D-2b(4); Mechanics 4: Metaphysics 3b; Nature 4b; Philosophy ic;
Physics  2~4d; Reasoning 6c; Science ib, ic-2, 4~7b / see also Astronomy
2-2C; Cause 5~5d; Definition 6b; Experience 3-3^ 5-50; Hypothesis 4-40!;
Induction   5;  Logic  4b;  Mechanics  2-2C;  Medicine  2a;  Memory  and
Imagination  3c;  Progress  6b;  Sign  and  Symbol  4d; Truth 4c Natural
selection  (biol.) : see Evolution 5a(i)~5b Natural slavery: see Slavery
2-2d  Natural  theology,  science  of:  see  Theology  23c  /  see  also
Metaphysics  i;  Philosophy ia; Wisdom ia Nature and nurture: see Nature
2c Nature or essence (metaph.): see Being 7a, 8c-8d; Definition ia; Form
ia-ib, 2a, 2c20(3); Nature ia-ia(2), 4a~4b / see also Form 3-3C; God 4a;
Knowledge  6a(2); One and Many 30-3^1), 3b(3); Reasoning 5b(5); Same and
Other 3a; Science 4b; Universal and Particular 2a-2C 1329

[1363b]
e  INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  NOUMENA Nature or world: see ch 102: World; and
Nature ib, 21-30(4) / see also Astronomy 5; Element 5I1; God 11; One and
Many  ib;  Relation  3,  5b  Navies:  see  War and Peace ioe Necessities
(econ.):  see  Custom  and  Convention  7c;  Nature  5b;  Necessity  and
Contingency  5e;  Wealth  10b  Necessity  (poet.)  :  see  Poetry  8a(2)
Necessity  and  contingency  (log.)  :  see  Judgment  6c; Necessity and
Contingency 4-46(2); Opposition id(2); Reasoning 3d / see also Knowledge
6d(i)-6d(2);  Nature  ia(i);  Opinion i; Science 4b; Sign and Symbol 4c;
Time   6f   Necessity  and  contingency  (philos.):  see  Necessity  and
Contingency  1-3C  /  see  also Chance ia, 2a; Fate 3; God 4a; Knowledge
6a(i); Nature ia(i), 3c(i); Opinion 1; Science 4b Necessity and liberty:
see  Liberty  4a~4b;  Nature 2f; Necessity and Contingency 5a53(3); Will
5a-6a,  7b  /  see  also  Cause  3; Fate 2-3, 5-6; History 4a(i); Nature
30(2);  Wealth  11  Need  (biol.) : see Desire 2a; Habit 3a Negation and
affirmation  (log.): see Infinity 2b; Judgment 6b, 7a; Opposition id(i);
Reasoning  2a(2)  Negative  and  positive  (log.): see Being i; Idea 4c;
Infinity  2a; Opposition ia, ic(i) Negligence: see Punishment 2a Nervous
system  and brain: see Animal 5g; Memory and Imagination ib; Mind ig(2),
2c(i);  Sense  3a  Neurology, subject matter of: see Animal 5g; Medicine
6c(i);  Memory  and Imagination ib, 20(3); Sense 3a Neurosis: see Desire
6b-6c;  Emotion  30-30(4);  Love  2a(2)-2a(4);  Man  5b; Medicine 5d(2),
6b-6c(2); Mind 8b; Opposition 4c; Sign and Symbol 6c / see also Duty 4b;
Memory and Imagination 2e(2); Pleasure and Pain 8c; Punishment 6; Sin 5;
Will  9b  New  Law  (theol.)  :  see  Law 3b, 3^2) Nobility, nobles: see
Aristocracy   1,7;  State  5c  Nominal  definition:  see  Definition  ia
Nominalism:  see  Being  8c;  Definition ia; Universal and Particular 2c
Non-being  (metaph.)  : see Being 1 ; Opposition 2c Normal and abnormal:
see Nature 2 Normative judgment: see Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 5a,
9a;  Good  and  Evil  6d;  Judgment  3;  One  and Many 5c; Principle 4b;
Relation  6c; Universal and Particular 7b; Virtue and Vice 4e(2) Noumena
and  phenomena (philos.) : see Being 7e; Experience 4a; Knowledge 6a(4);
Nature 2f; Soul 5a

[1364a]
Noun  Noun:  see  Language  4a;  Time  6d Nous: see Mind 10b Number: see
Infinity 3a; Mathematics 2; Mechanics 3a; One and Many 2a; Quantity 4-4C
/  see  also Being 7d(3); Mathematics 232C, 4a, 4C;QUANTITY 2, 5b, 6, J\
SlGN  AND  SYMBOL  50!; Time 6c Nutrition: see Animal 5e, 6-6b, 9b, gi /
see also Life and Death 3a; Man 4a; Medicine 3<d(i); Soul 2c(i) o Oaths:
see  Duty  7; Truth 8a Obedience: see Duty 9; Family 6d; God 3d; Justice
10b;  Law  6a;  Religion  3d;  Revolution 6a; Virtue and Vice 8g Object-
fixation (psychol.): see Desire 4b; Love 23(3) Objective and subjective:
see  Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 5a, 93-9^ Dialectic 2d(i); Good and
Evil  6d;  One  and  Many  5c; Quality 6c; Relation 6b-6c; Universal and
Particular  7-7C  Obligation:  see  ch  19: Duty / see also Happiness 3;
Justice ie, 3, 6b; Law 6a; Love 3c; Opposition 4d; Pleasure and Pain 8b;
Will  8d Observation: see Physics 4a; Science 53~5b / see also Astronomy
2a;  Experience  53-5C;  Induction 5; Logic 4b; Mechanics 2a; Physics 3;
Quantity  6c  Obsessions  or compulsions (psychol.): see Emotion 3c(2) ;
Sign  and  Symbol  6c;  Will  9b Occupation: see Education 6; Labor 3-3^
Medicine 3d(i) Odd and even: see Quantity 4a Oedipus complex: see Family
7d  Office  (pol.):  see  Constitution  4;  Government  ig(2) / see also
Constitution  2a; Government 3~3e(2) ; Oligarchy 5a; Tyranny 5c Old age:
see  Life  and  Death  5,  6c; Man 6c Old Law (theol.) : see God 8c; Law
30-3^1)  Oligarchy:  see ch 62: Oligarchy; and Democracy 3a; Slavery 5b;
Tyranny  2b  /  see  also  Aristocracy  2d; Citizen 2c; Constitution 5a;
Democracy 4a(i); Government 2a-2c; Liberty 2d; Opposition 5b; Wealth 7a,
9h  Omens:  see Prophecy 3b; Sign and Symbol 5b Omnipotence: see God 5c;
Infinity  7b Omnipresence: see God ^d / see also Nature ib; One and Many
ib;  World  3a Omniscience: see God ^i; Infinity 7d One and many: see ch
63:  One and Many; and Being 2-2b; Definition id; Form 2c(3); Opposition
2b;  Same and Other i-2b, 3~3d; Universal and Particular 2-2C / see also
Dialectic 3a; Form 3b; God 5d~5e; Mind

[1364b]
e  THE  GREAT IDEAS 10b; Nature b; Relation id; Universal and Particular
i;  World  4d  Ontology:  see  ch  7:  Being; and Metaphysics 2a Opinion
(log.):  see  Custom and Convention 93-9^ Dialectic 2a(i), 2b; Knowledge
4b;  Necessity  and Contingency 4a; Opinion i-4b; Principle 3c(2); Truth
2e; Will 3b(i) / see also Chance 4; Desire 5b; Emotion 3b; Good and Evil
6d;  Judgment  9;  Knowledge  6d(i)-6d(3);  Philosophy  6b; Relation 6b;
Science  7a;  Truth  7a; Universal and Particular 7a Opinion (pol.): see
Opinion  5—5b,  7a~7b  Opposition (biol., phys.) : see Opposition 3-36 /
see  also Change 2b, 4; Evolution 5a, 5b; Mechanics 6d(3); Quality 43~4b
Opposition  (econ.,  pol.)  :  see Opposition 5~5d / see also Custom and
Convention  3;  Labor  7c(i);  State  5d~5d(2),  9b;  War  and  Peace 2c
Opposition  (ethics,  psychol.)  : see Opposition 4~4e / see also Desire
4a;  Duty 6; Emotion 2C, 4a; Liberty 3d; Love 3c; Man 5-53; Pleasure and
Pain 8b Opposition (log.) : ^Opposition i-ie / see also Dialectic 3D-3C;
Idea  4c;  Judgment  7a;  Necessity and Contingency 4e(i); Reasoning 5c;
Same   and  Other  33(2)  Opposition  (metaph.)  :  see  Opposition  2-2
Oppression:  see  Labor  7c(i); Liberty 6b; Revolution 4a; Slavery 6-6d;
Tyranny  8  Optics:  see  Mechanics 73-73(4) Optimism and pessimism: see
Progress  ib-ic  /  see  also History 4b Opulence (econ.): see Labor 43;
Progress  33;  State 73; Wealth 93-9C Oracles: see Language 12; Prophecy
2b,  33  Oratory,  orator:  see  ch 81: Rhetoric / see also Dialectic 5;
Emotion  5d;  Induction 4b; Language 8; Logic 3b; Pleasure and Pain 10b;
Reasoning  5d;  State  8d(2);  Truth  4d Orbits (astron.): see Astronomy
8c(2),  93~9d,  <){;  Mechanics  5i-5f(2) Order: see Relation 5-5C; Time
5~5d  / see also Beauty 13; Good and Evil ib, 5~5d; Nature 3-3CU); World
ic Organ (biol): see Animal 3c, 4C~5g, 8c(2); Memory and Imagination ib;
Sense  33  Organism: see Life and Death 1-2; Soul ib / see also Cause 2;
Change  6c,  8b,  9b;  World  13  Origin  of species: see Evolution 4-5C
Original  justice  (theol.):  see Justice ib; Man 9b(i); Sin 33 Original
sin:  see  Sin 23, 3-3 e, 43 / see also God 9c; Happiness 73; Man 9b(2);
Punishment  5b;  Sin  6b;  Virtue and Vice 83; Will 7e(i) Orthodoxy: see
Religion 6c(i) Ostracism (pol.): see Punishment 4b(2) 1330

[1365a]
Over-reaction   (psychol.):   see  Desire  6c;  Emotion  3  a  Oviparous
reproduction: see Animal 9a ^^____ Ovum: see Animal 80(3) Ownership: see
Wealth  7~8a  /  see also Justice 8a; Labor 7b; Law 4I1; Oligarchy 4-5C;
Opposition 5b; Slavery 2b see Pleasure and Pain 1-43, 4e, 7a, 8a, 10-iob
/  see  also Change 12a; Emotion Labor ic; Punishment ia, 5c; Virtue and
Vice  5a;  Will  2b(2)  Pain  8c ia Paleontology: see Evolution 6a, 7^2)
Pantheism:  see  God  ii;  Nature ib; One and Many ib; World 3a Parabola
{math.):   see  Quantity  3K3)  Paradise:  see  Eternity  4d;  Happiness
7C~7c(2);  Immortality  ^i\  Man 90-9^1); Sin 3a Parallax (astron.): see
Space   3d   Parallelogram  of  forces  (phys.):  see  Mechanics  6d(3);
Opposition 3d Parallels (math.): see Infinity 3c; Quantity 3a Paralogism
(log.)  : see Dialectic 3c; Soul 5a Parameters (math.) : see Quantity 6b
Pardon  (pol.):  see  Justice  9g Parents and children: see Family 6-6e,
7b~7d;  Virtue  and  Vice  4<d(i)  /  see also Duty 9; Education 4b, 8a;
Family  2a-2c; Love 2b(4); Pleasure and Pain 10a Part and whole: see One
and  Many 2c, 3b(i)- 3b(2), 4e; Universal and Particular i Participation
(metaph.)  :  see  Form  id(i)  ; Matter ia; Same and Other 2b Particles
(phys.): see Mechanics 4a Particular: see Universal and Particular i, 3,
4d~4e,  5-6C  /  see  also  Form 3b; Idea 4b(2); Judgment 6a; Matter ic;
Memory and Imagination 5b; One and Many ic; Opinion 1; Sense ib Parts of
speech:  see  Language  4a;  Time  6d  Parturition:  see Animal 9c Party
(pol.): see Democracy 5^4) / see also Opposition 5a; State ^(2) Passion:
see  ch  22:  Emotion  / see also Desire 4-73(3); Liberty 3a; Memory and
Imagination id; Mind 9b; Opinion 23; Opposition 43~4b; Pleasure and Pain
43;  Poetry  6-6b;  Rhetoric 4b; Sense 3c; Slavery 7; Will i Passion and
action  (metaph.):  see Change 3; Time 53 Past: see Time 3~3b / see also
Knowledge  53(5);  Memory  and  Imagination  3b;  Time 6d-6e Paternalism
(pol.): see Monarchy 43, 4e(i); Slavery 6b 1331

[1365b]
e  INVENTORY  OF  TERMS Philosopher king Patient (med.) : see Medicine i
Patriotism:  see Love 4b; State 3c Peace (pol.): see War and Peace 11-nd
/  see  also Justice 9f; Law is; Revolution 13; State 96-90(2) ; War and
Peace  6b  Pedagogy: see Education 53-5^ 5d; Pleasure and Pain 103 Penal
institutions:  see  Punishment  4^2) Penance (theol.) : see Religion 2f;
Sin  4c  /  see  also  God  9e;  Religion  2c  Pendulum:  see  Mechanics
5e(2)~5f(i)  Penology:  see Law 6e(2)-6e(3); Punishment ic-id, 4b-4b(4),
4d  Peonage:  see  Labor  5b;  Slavery  4b  People:  see  Democracy  4b;
Government  111(3);  Monarchy  4e(3);  State  2c;  Tyranny  5c; Will 103
Perception,  percept: see Sense id, 30(4), 3d(i), 4b, 4d(i)-4d(2); Truth
33(1)  /  see  also  Knowledge 6b(i); Principle 2b(i); Quality 6b; Space
4D-4C;  Time  6s-6c;  Truth  3<d(i)—  3d(2); Universal and Particular 4d
Perdition  (theol.):  see  Eternity 4d; Happiness 7c(3); Immortality 5e;
Punishment  5d, 5e(i); Sin 6d Perfection (metaph.): see Good and Evil ib
/  see  also  Being  33; God 4f; Good and Evil 2; Matter 3b Perjury: see
Truth  83 Perpendiculars (math.) : see Quantity 33 Perpetual motion: see
Mechanics  6e  Perpetuation  of  the  species: see Immortality 63 Person
(pol.)  :  see  Law  7f; State 23(2), 2f Person (theol.): see Relation 2
Personal  identity:  see  Memory  and Imagination 43; Same and Other ib;
Soul  id  Personal  or  actual sin: see Sin 23, 4-4 Personification: see
Animal 13; Astronomy 12; Nature 63 Perspective: see Space 4c Persuasion:
see  Rhetoric  i~5b  /  see  also Dialectic 5; Emotion 5d; Induction 4b;
Language  8; Opinion 2c; Pleasure and Pain 10b; Reasoning 5d Perversions
(psychol.):  see  Love  23(2), 23(4); Pleasure and Pain 8c; Punishment 6
Pessimism  and  optimism:  see  Progress  ib-ic  /  see  also History 4b
Phantasm:  see  Idea  2e-2f;  Memory  and  Imagination 5~5b, 6c(i); Mind
13(2);  Sense  53;  Universal  and Particular 4a 1 Phenomena and noumena
(philos.)  :  see  Being  7e; Experience 4a; Knowledge 6a(4); Nature 2f;
Soul 53 Philosopher king: see Monarchy 2b; Philosophy 4c; State 6a

[1366a]
Philosophy   THE   GREAT  IDEAS  Philosophy,  philosopher:  see  ch  66:
Philosophy;  and  Metaphysics  1-20!;  Science  ia-ia(2),  ic; Truth 8e;
Wisdom  3 / see also Cause 5b; Definition 6b-6c; Dialectic 4; History i;
Hypothesis  2;  Life and Death 8c; Logic 4c!; Mathematics ib; Matter 4b;
Metaphysics  43-4^ Physics i-ib; Poetry 5b; Principle 30-30(3); Progress
6b;  Reasoning  6a,  6c-6d; Rhetoric ia, 2c; Sense 5-5C; Sign and Symbol
4~4e;  Theology 2-3C, 4a; Truth 4c Philosophy of history, subject matter
of:  see History 4-4C; Liberty 6a; Progress i-ic, 4b; Will 7b / see also
Chance  6b;  Evolution  7c;  Fate 6; Honor 5c!; Liberty 6-6c; Man 9D-9C;
Mind  iof(i);  Nature 4c; Necessity and Contingency 5f; Opposition 5-5C;
Progress i-ic, 4b; State 23(3); Time 8-8b; Wealth ii; Will 7b Philosophy
of  nature  : see Mechanics 4; Metaphysics 3b; Philosophy 2a-2b; Physics
i-2b;  Reasoning  6c  Philosophy of nature, subject matter of: see ch 8:
Cause; ch 2 1 : Element; ^Astronomy 3~3 d , 7- 1 ob; Being 5; Change i-i
i, 13- 15c; Eternity 1-2; Form i-id(2); Infinity i-ib, 4-5^ Matter i-3d;
Mechanics 4-4C; Nature i-ic, 3-3^4); Necessity and Contingency 3-3C; One
and Many 33-33(4); Opposition 3~3d; Quantity 5~5e; Space i~3b; Time 1—5b
Phobias  (psychoid):  see Emotion 3c(3); Sign and Symbol 6c Phylogenetic
series:   see   Evolution  ia  Physical  education:  see  Education  2-3
Physician:  see  Medicine i, 2c Physics, science of: see ch 67: Physics;
and  Mathematics  5b;  Mechanics 4 / see also Astronomy 2-2C; Experience
5-5C;  Hypothesis 4~4d; Induction 5; Logic 4b; Mathematics ia; Mechanics
2-2C;  Metaphysics  3b;  Nature 4b; Philosophy ic; Reasoning 6c; Science
ib-ib(2), 5~5e; Truth 4c Physics, subject matter of: see Astronomy 83-oi
Change  7-7^4);  Element  3~3d;  Mechanics  ib, 5-76(5) ; Quantity 5~5e;
Space  2-2C  Physiocrats (econ.) : see Wealth gc Physiology, science of:
see  Man  2b  (3)  Physiology,  subject matter of: see Animal 3d, 4C~9g;
Emotion  ib; Evolution 7b(i); Memory and Imagination ib; Sense 33 Piety:
see  Duty  i  i;  God  33,  3C~3e;  Justice 11b; Religion 2-2f Pity: see
Emotion 23; Poetry 6b Place: see Change 73; Space ib, 23, 6 Plagues: see
Medicine  7 Plane geometry: see Quantity 33~3d(i) Planets: see Astronomy
9c; Mechanics 3b, WW

[1366b]
Plants:  see  Animal ib; Life and Death 3-33; Sense 23; Soul 2c(i) / see
also  Change 10b; Evolution 4~4d; Life and Death 4, 63; Man 43 Play: see
Habit  53;  Pleasure  and Pain 4d Pleasure and pain: see ch 68: Pleasure
and  Pain; and Good and Evil 3d; Happiness 2b(2); Virtue and Vice 53, 6b
/  see  also Art 73; Beauty 4; Change 123; Desire 2b, 2d, 73(1); Duty 2;
Emotion  ia;  Knowledge 8b(4); Labor ic, 3c; Love ib, 2b(3); Mind ie(2);
Poetry ia; Punishment ia; Sense 6; Will 2 b( 2 ) Pleasure principle: see
Pleasure and Pain 8b Plenum (phys.): see Space 2b(i), 2b(3) Plot (poet.)
:  see Poetry 7-7 b, 8a (3) Poetic truth: see Memory and Imagination 7b;
Poetry  8a(2)  ;  Truth  4b  Poetic  unities:  see Poetry 83(1) Poetics,
science  of:  see  Philosophy  2c;  Poetry 8-8c Poetry, poet: see ch 69:
Poetry;  and Art 7-8, 10-12; Beauty 1— id, 5-6; Education 4d; Truth 4b /
see  also  Art  i; History i; Language 9; Memory and Imagination 3d, 7b;
Philosophy  id; Science 2b; Virtue and Vice 4d(4) Point (math.): see One
and  Many  2b Political and royal government: see Aristocracy 4; Citizen
2b;  Constitution  i,  3b;  Law  73;  Monarchy  13-13(1);  Tyranny  5-5C
Political  economy,  science  of:  see  Wealth  9-93  Political economy,
subject matter of: see Family 3b; Liberty 2c; State 2d, 4b; Wealth 9-9I1
Political  office:  see  Constitution  4;  Government  ig(2)  / see also
Constitution  23; Government 3~3e(2); Oligarchy 53; Tyranny 5c Political
parties:  see  Democracy  5^4)  /  see  also  Opposition 5a; State 5d(2)
Political  prudence  or wisdom: see Democracy 3b; Prudence 6a; State 8d;
Wisdom  ib  /  see  also  Experience  6b;  Knowledge  8c;  Monarchy  2b;
Philosophy  4c  Politics,  political  philosophy or science: see Art 9d;
Knowledge  8c;  Logic  4c; Philosophy 2c; Rhetoric ic; Science 3a; State
8d-8d(3)  Politics,  political philosophy or science, subject matter of:
see  ch  3:  Aristocracy;  ch  11:  Citizen; ch 12: Constitution; ch 16:
Democracy;  ch 31: Government; ch 59: Monarchy; ch 62: Oligarchy; ch 90:
State;  ch  95:  Tyranny; ch 98: War and Peace; and Justice i-6e, 9-iod;
Law 6—7f ; Liberty i-2d; Punishment 4~4d; Revolution 1-3^3), 6-7; Wealth
9-9I1 Polygamy: see Family 43 Polytheism: see Angel 1; God i-ic 1332

[1367a]
Poor  laws:  see  Wealth  8d  Popular  sovereignty:  see  Democracy  4b;
Government  ig(3);  Monarchy  4e(3X^SrA-TE^  2c;  Tyranny  5c;  Will 10a
Population:  see  State  4c  Positive and negative (log.) : see Being i;
Idea  4c;  Infinity  2a;  Opposition  ia, ic(i) Positive law: see Law 2,
5-5I1  /  see  also  Custom and Convention 6a; Justice 6b, 10a, iod; Law
30-3^2), 4L, 7c; Necessity and Contingency 5c; Punishment 4c Possibility
and  impossibility: see Being 7d(i); Necessity and Contingency i; Poetry
8a(2);  Will 4b Posterior and prior: see Relation 5a; Time 5b Postulate,
postulation  (log.):  see  Custom  and Convention 9b; Hypothesis 3 / see
also  Mathematics  3a;  Opinion 2c; Principle Potentiality and actuality
(metaph.):  see  Being  70-70(3); Form 2c(i); Infinity 4c; Matter i-ia /
see  also  Habit ia; Infinity ib; Matter 3b; Mind 2b;QuANTiTY 7; Time 5b
Poverty:  see  Labor  7e;  Wealth  8,  8c-8d,  ioe(i)-ioe(2)  / see also
Opposition  5b;  Wealth 9g, iod Power (pol.)\ see Government id; Justice
ia,  9f; Law ic; Oligarchy 5c; Revolution ia, 2b, 3a~3b, 5b; Tyranny ia,
ic,  7;  War and Peace i, 6-6a / see also Constitution 8a; Democracy 2a;
Desire  7a(2);  Emotion  5b5c;  Government  3b;  Happiness 2b(6); Law 5,
6a-6b,  7d;  Monarchy  ia(2), 3b; Opposition 5D-5C; Punishment 4a; State
5d-5d(2),  9e~9e(2);  Virtue  and  Vice  7d; War and Peace 10-iog Powers
(psychol.):  see  Habit 2b; Life and Death 3; Man 4~5a; Quality 2a; Soul
2a,  2C-2C(3) Practical and speculative: see Knowledge 6e(i)-6e(2); Mind
9a;  Philosophy  2a; Prudence 2a; Science 3a; Theology 3b, 4d; Truth 2c;
Wisdom  ib  Practical judgment: see Judgment 2-3; Prudence 5a / see also
Experience  6a;  Gqod  and  Evil 5b Practical philosophy or science: see
Knowledge  6e(i)-6e(2);  Philosophy  2a,  2c;  Science  3a  /  see  also
Definition  6c;  Judgment  3;  Logic  4e;  Metaphysics  2d;  Nature  4b;
Reasoning  6d;  Theology 3b, 4d Practical reason: see Mind 9a / see also
Duty  5;  Logic  4e;  Mind  ie(3), 9D~9d; Prudence 1-2C, 5-5C; Reasoning
5e~5e(3);   Theology  3b;W.LL3b(3),5a(4)  >5  b(2)-5b(3)  Practice:  see
Education 3-4; Habit 4-4^ Virtue and Vice 4c Praise and blame: see Honor
i, 3a~3b, 4c; Virtue and Vice 4d(2) / see also Courage 5; 1333

[1367b]
e INVENTORY OF TERMS Principle Pleasure and Pain ioa-iob; Punishment 3a;
Rhetoric  3a  Prayer: see God 3e; Religion 2a Preaching: see Religion 5a
Precession  of  equinoxes:  see  Astronomy 9e Preconscious : see Mind 7c
Predestination  (theol.): see Chance 2b; Fate 4; God y{\ Sin 6a; Will 7c
Predicables  (log.): see Dialectic 2b(i) / see also Being 8d; Definition
2D-2C Predicaments (log.): see Being 7b~7b(i), 7b(6); Idea 4K3); Quality
i;  Quantity  i;  Relation ia, 4c Predicate and subject (log.): see Idea
5a;  Judgment  5b;  Relation  4b Predication: see Judgment 5b Prediction
(log.):  see  Hypothesis  4b;  Knowledge 53(5); Medicine 3c; Physics 2b;
Science  5e;  Time  6f Pregnancy: see Animal 9-9 Prehistory, prehistoric
man:  see  Evolution 7c; Man 9c; Time 8a Prejudice: see Opinion 2a / see
also  Custom  and  Convention  7b;  State  5d(i)  Premise and conclusion
(log.): see Necessity and Contingency 4e(2); Reasoning 2-2C; Truth 3b(3)
/  see also Definition 5; Dialectic 30-30; Judgment 8a; Knowledge 60(2);
Principle  2a(2)-2a(3), 2b(2), 3a~3b Present: see Time 3-3C, 6d Pressure
of   air:   see   Mechanics  5b  Prestige:  see  Honor  i,  3~3b,  4D-4C
Prevarication: see Truth 8a-8b Price (econ.): see Justice 8b; Wealth 4a,
4c,  4e,  5c, iod / see also Justice 8d; Labor 6a; Wealth 3b, 4d, 4L, 5e
Pride:  see  Emotion 2a; Honor 2c; Sin 2c(i), 4c Priest, priesthood: see
Education   7b;  Prophecy  2b;  Religion  30(1)  Primary  and  secondary
qualities:  see  Quality  2b, 3a, 6c; Quantity ia; Sense 30(3), 4c Prime
matter:  see Being 70(2); Form 20(3); Infinity 4c; Matter ia; Space ic /
see  also  Being  70(3);  Form  id(2);  Matter 3b, 3d; World 4e(3) Prime
mover:  see  Cause  7b; Change 14; God 5a / see also Angel 2a; Cause ib;
Nature  30(4); Relation 5a(i); World 4e(2) Prime number: see Quantity 4a
Primitive  man:  see  Evolution  7c;  Man  9c  Prince: see Education 8d;
Government  ig(i),  5;  Justice  gd;  Law  6b; Monarchy ia-ia(2), 3a~3b;
Prudence 6a; State 2c, 8-8d(3); Tyranny 5c; War and Peace 10a Principle:
see ch 70: Principle; and Change 2; Element 2; Happiness 3; Knowledge 3;

[1368a]
Prior  THE GREAT IDEAS Logic ia; Opposition 3a; Reasoning 5b(i); Science
4a  /  see  also  Definition 5; Form ib, 4; God 5a~5b; Good and Evil 5a;
Hypothesis  3;  Idea id; Induction 3; Judgment 8a; Knowledge 60(2); Life
and Death i; Mathematics 3a; Metaphysics 2b; Opinion 2c, 6b; Physics 2a;
Sin  4c; Theology 4b; Truth 3c, 4c, 7a Prior and posterior: see Relation
5a;  Time 5b Prisons: see Punishment 4b(2) Private property: see Justice
8a;  Wealth  7d(i),  8b / see also Labor 7b; Oligarchy 4; Revolution 4b;
Wealth  7a  Privation (metaph.): see Being i; Change 2b; Desire 2a; Good
and  Evil  id; Matter ia; Opposition 2C-2d Privilege (pot.): see Citizen
4; Democracy 4a(i); Oligarchy 4 / see also Justice gt; Labor 7d; Law 6b;
Monarchy ia(2); Revolution 3a Probability and certainty: see Judgment 9;
Knowledge 6d(i)-6d(2); Necessity and Contingency 4a; Opinion 3b; Science
4c;  Truth  2e  /  see  also  Chance  4;  Dialectic  3b;  Knowledge  5c;
Mathematics  ic; Poetry 8a(2); Reasoning 3d; Science ia; Sign and Symbol
4c;  Truth  4d,  7a  Procreation: see Animal 8~9e; Change 10b / see also
Life  and Death 3a; Man 4a; Soul 2c(i) Production, productivity (econ.):
see  Art  9b;  Labor  5-}d; Revolution 4b; Wealth 3~3d, 6a, 7c, 9d / see
also  Justice  8,  8c-8c(2); Labor ie, 2-2b, 3e, 4a; Wealth i Production
and  action:  see  Knowledge  6e(2);  Prudence  2b  /  see  also Art 6c;
Knowledge   8a;   Labor   2-2b;  Science  3-3^  Virtue  and  Vice  2a(2)
Profanation:  see  Religion  2g Professions, professional education: see
Education 2, 6 / see also Education 5a; Law 9; Medicine i, 2c; State 8c;
War  and  Peace  10,  IOC  Profit (econ.): see Justice 8c(2); Wealth 4c,
6d-6e  Prognosis  (med.):  see  Medicine  3c,  5c;  Sign  and  Symbol 4e
Progress:  see  ch  71:  Progress;  and Art 12; Custom and Convention 8;
Democracy  4d;  Evolution 4d; Government 6; History 43(3), 4b; Knowledge
10;  Opposition  5d; Science 6-6b; State 23(3); Truth 6; Virtue and Vice
9;  Wealth  12  / see also Citizen 9; Constitution 10; Labor ie; Liberty
6a;  Revolution ia, 5c; Slavery 6c; State iof Projectiles: see Mechanics
3b,  51-5^1) Projections (psychol.) : see Desire 4b Proletariat (econ.):
see Labor 5c, 7c(3); Revolution 4a, 53-5^ Wealth 8c / see also Justice

[1368b]
8c(i);  Labor  4b,  7c(i);  Opposition  5b;  Slavery  4c,  5b; Wealth 9h
Promises:  see  Duty 7 Promulgation of law: see Law id Proof: see ch 77:
Reasoning;  and  Definition  5; Immortality 2; Induction ib; Mathematics
33-3^  Principle  33-33(3); Truth 3^3) / see also Being 8d; Judgment 8a;
Knowledge  6c(2);  Opinion 2c; Opposition ie; Rhetoric 4C~4c(3); Science
5d~5e; Sign and Symbol 4b; Truth 7a Propaganda: see Rhetoric ic, 3-5^ 7;
State  8d(2);  Truth  8b  Proper  and common names (log.) : see Sign and
Symbol  2d;  Universal  and  Particular  5a  Proper and common sensibles
(psychol.)  :  see  Quality 2b; Sense 3^3) Property (econ.): see Justice
8a;  Labor  7b;  Oligarchy  4-5C;  Wealth 7~8b, g(, iod / see also Labor
7c(i);  Law  4I1; Nature 5b; Opposition 5b; Slavery 2b Property (log.) :
see Being 8d; Definition 2b; Dialectic 2b(i); Nature 13-13(1); Necessity
and  Contingency  2d;  Sign and Symbol 4e Prophecy: see ch 72: Prophecy;
and  Memory and Imagination 83; Religion ib(3); Sign and Symbol 5b / see
also  Astronomy  11;  Education  7b;  God  8e;  Language 10, 12; World 8
Propitiation:  see  Gob 3c; Religion 2d Proportion, proportionality: see
Beauty  ic;  Mathematics  4c; Quantity ib, 6b; Relation id, 53(3) ; Same
and  Other  3b / see also Idea 4^4); Reasoning 4f; Same and Other 3c(i);
Sign  and  Symbol  3d Proportional representation: see Democracy 5b(i) /
see  also  Constitution  9b;  Democracy 5b(3); Government ih Proposition
(log.):  see  Judgment 5-10; Necessity and Contingency 4e(i); Opposition
id-id(2);  Relation  4b;  Truth 3b(2); Universal and Particular 5c / see
also  Hypothesis  5;  Idea 53, 6f; Infinity 2b; Principle 2b-2b(3) Prose
and  verse: see Poetry 8b Prosperity (econ.): see Labor 43; Progress 3a;
State  7a;  Wealth 9a~9C Protective system or protectionism (econ.): see
State  93;  Wealth  4g, 9c Providence (theol.): see Cause 7c; God jb-jc;
Nature 3c(4); Will 7c / see also Chance 2b; God 12; History 53; Progress
13;  Prophecy  ib-ic  Prudence or practical wisdom: see ch 73: Prudence;
and Courage 4; Experience 6a; Knowledge 8b(3); Virtue and Vice 232a(2) /
see also Good and Evil 6s; Judgment

[1369a]
3; Principle 43; Reasoning 5e~5e(3); State 8d; Truth 2c; Virtue and Vice
3b,  5b; Will 20(3); Wisdom ib, 2a-2b Psychiatry, subject matter of: see
Duty__4Ji^  Emotion  3-33,  30-30(4);  Man 5b; Medicine 5<d(2), 6-60(2);
Memory  and  Imagination  2e(3)-2e(4), 5c; Mind 8-8c; One and Many 3^5);
Pleasure  and  Pain  8c;  Punishment  6;  Sense  4d(2);  Sin  5; Will 9b
Psychoanalysis,  subject  matter  of:  see  Desire 4-40!, 6b-6c; Emotion
3-30!;  Family  7c!;  Love  2a-2a(4);  Medicine 5cl(2), 6-6d; Memory and
Imagination  8d-8e;  Mind  7c, 8b; Opposition 4c; Sign and Symbol 6-6c /
see  also  Desire 2a, 3^2), 5a; Duty 4b; Habit 3a; Language 10; Life and
Death  8a-8b;  Man  4, 5b; Memory and Imagination 2e(2), 5c; Mind 7; One
and  Many  3K5);  Pleasure and Pain 8b-8c; Punishment 6; Sin 5; Soul 2b;
Will  9b  Psychology, science of: see Man 2D-2b(4); Soul 5—5b / see also
Logic  i;  Metaphysics  3b;  Mind 6; Philosophy 2b; Rhetoric ib; Science
ia(2)-ib   Psychology,   subject  matter  of:  see  ch  56:  Memory  and
Imagination;  ch  84:  Sense; and Desire 2~3d; Emotion i~3d; Habit i~5d;
Man  i~5b;  Medicine  6-6d; Mind i-8c; Pleasure and Pain 1-5; Soul i~4b;
Will  i-6c  Psychoneurosis  :  see  Desire  6b-6c; Emotion 3c30(4); Love
2a(2)-2a(4);  Man  5b; Medicine 5d(2), 6b-6c(2); Mind 8b; Opposition 4c;
Sign  and  Symbol  6c  / see also Duty 4b; Memory and Imagination 2e(2);
Pleasure and Pain 8c; Punishment 6; Sin 5; Will Psychopathology, subject
matter  of:  see  Desire  6c;  Duty  4b;  Emotion  3-33,  30-30(4); Love
2a(2)-2a(4);  Man 5b; Medicine 6-6d; Memory and Imagination 2e(3)-2e(4),
5c;  Mind 8-8c; One and Many 3b(5); Opposition 4c; Pleasure and Pain 8c;
Punishment 6; Sign and Symbol 6c; Sin 5; Will 9b Psychophysical law: see
Sense  30(2)  Psychosis:  see Emotion 3a; Man 5b; Medicine 6-60(2); Mind
8-8c;One  and  Many  3^5)  Psychotherapy:  see  Emotion 3d; Medicine 6d;
Memory  and Imagination 8e Puberty: see Life and Death 6c; Man 6c Public
administration:  see  Government  3e3e(2); Law 7e; Monarchy ib(3) Public
domain:  see  Wealth  7d(2),  8a  Public education: see Education 8a-8b;
Family  2c;  State  7d Public finance: see Government 4; Wealth 9c9 e(2)
Public  office: see Aristocracy 6; Constitution 2a, 4; Government ig(2);
Iustice 9e; Oli-

[1369b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Raw  materials  garchy 5a; State 8-8a; Tyranny 5c;
Virtue  and  Vice 7c Public opinion: see Education 4c; Honor 4c; Opinion
6a, 7~7b / see also Constitution 9a; Custom and Convention 9a; Democracy
2-2b,  3b, 5b(i); Tyranny 2c Public ownership: see Justice 8a; Labor 7b;
Wealth  7d(2),  8a Public welfare: see Good and Evil 5d; Happiness 5—5b;
Justice  ie;  Law  ia;  Love 4b; State 21 / see also Art 10b; Citizen i;
Justice  ic; Labor 3f; Monarchy 3a; Temperance 5a; Wealth 9a Punishment:
see  ch  74:  Punishment; and Emotion 5c; God 5i; Justice gg, 10c; Labor
ic; Law 6e(3); Sin 6-6e; Virtue and Vice 4d(2) Purgation (psychol.): see
Art  8;  Desire  4d;  Poetry  6b Purgatory (theol.): see Immortality 5d;
Punishment  5d,  5e(2);  Sin  6e  Purification  (theol.):  see  God  9c;
Immortality  3d;  Punishment  5e(2);  Religion 2c-2d, 2f; Sin 3e, 4c, 6e
Purpose:  see Cause 6; Chance 3; Definition 2e; Desire 2c; Good and Evil
ia, 5c; Judgment 4; Nature 30(3); Principle 4a; Virtue and Vice 5c; Will
20(2),  33(2)  Quadrivium: see Astronomy 4; Education $d; Mathematics ib
Quality:  see  ch  75:  Quality;  and Change 9-9^ Element 3a; Matter 2c;
Mechanics  ia,  4b; Opposition 3b; Quantity ia; Same and Other 3c; Sense
30(3),  4c  /  see also Being 7b(6); Change 6; Habit 2; Man 6a Quantity:
see  ch  76:  Quantity;  and Change 8-8b; Infinity 3~3e; Mathematics 2c;
Mechanics  4b;  Quality  3~3a;  Relation 53(3) ; Same and Other 3d / see
also Element 3a; Infinity ib, 4a; Mathematics 2; One and Many 33-33(4) ;
Space  ic,  3~3d, 5; Time i Race, racial differences (biol.): see Animal
2a;  Evolution  ib,  2b; Man 7-7^ Slavery 2a; State 5d(i) Radiation: see
Mechanics  7c(i);  Space  2c  Rashness: see Courage 2 Ratio (math.): see
Mathematics  4c;  Quantity 6b; Relation 53(3) Rationality {psychol): see
Animal  10(2);  Man  ia-ib,  4c; Mind 33; Soul ic, 20(3) Rationalization
(psychol.):  see Desire 5b; Emotion 3b; Opinion 23 Raw materials (econ.)
: see Wealth 33

[1370a]
Real  and  ideal  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Real and ideal (metaph.): see Being
7d~7d(5);  Idea 6a; Mathematics 2b / see also Form 2a; Idea 3c; Relation
ia; Space 3b; Universal and Particular 2a-2b Real estate: see Wealth 3b,
7^2),  8a  Reality  and  appearance: see Being 7e; Dialectic 2a(i) / see
also Being 3a, 5 Reality principle: see Pleasure and Pain 8b Reason: see
Animal 10(2); Knowledge 6b(3)- 60(2); Man i-ic, 4c; Mind i-g{; Sense ia;
Soul 20(3) / see also Desire 6a; Emotion 4a~4b(2); Evolution 7K3); Habit
3c, 5C~5d; Knowledge 60(5); Liberty 3b; Opinion 2d; Philosophy 6c; Sense
5c;  Theology  4c;  Truth  4a;  Virtue and Vice 5b Reasoning: see ch 77:
Reasoning;  and  Definition  5; Experience 2d; Idea 5b; Induction ia-ib;
Infinity  2c;  Judgment 70-70; Knowledge 60(2); Logic ia, 4-4^ Necessity
and  Contingency  4e(2);  Opinion  2c;  Opposition  1 e; Truth 3b(3)~3c;
Universal  and Particular 5d / see also Dialectic 2b, 3D-3C ; Hypothesis
2,  5;  Mind  ia(3);  Necessity  and  Contingency  4d;  One and Many 4c;
Rhetoric  40-40(3);  Sense  ic;  Sign  and  Symbol  4b,  4c; Theology 4c
Rebellion:  see  Law  6c; Opposition 5c; Revolution ia, ic, 2a-2b, 3~3b,
6a-6b;  War  and  Peace  2a,  4b / see also Aristocracy 3; Democracy 7a;
Liberty  6b-6c;  Oligarchy  3~3b;  Revolution  3C~3c(3),  7; Slavery 3c;
Tyranny  8 Recall (psychol.): see Idea 2e; Memory and Imagination 2b, 2d
Receptacle  (metaph.)  :  see Form id(i) ; Matter i ; Space ia; World 4b
Recognition:  see  Memory  and Imagination ia, 2d Recollection: see Idea
2e;  Memory  and Imagination 2b, 2d Recreation: see Pleasure and Pain 4d
Rectilinear  motion:  see  Change  7c(i);  Mechanics 5e~5e(2) Redemption
(theol.)  : see God 9c; Sin 3d / see also Prophecy 4c; Sin 7 Reductio ad
absurdum  (log.) : see Principle 33(2); Reasoning 4d Reflection (phys.):
see  Mechanics  7a(i)  Reflection  (psychol.):  see Idea 2d; Mind id(i);
Sense id; Soul 5a; Universal and Particular 4a; Will 5b(i) Reflexes: see
Habit  3d;  Virtue  and Vice 4e(i) Reflexivity of mind: see Idea 2d, 3a;
Man  2a;  Mind  if,  6;  Soul  5a;  Will 5b(i) Reform (econ., pol.): see
Progress  3b,  4a~4c;  Revolution  ia / see also Democracy 4c; Labor 7a;
Revolution 3a, 4-4^ 6a; Wealth 12

[1370b]
Reformation   and   deterrence:  see  Punishment  icid  Refraction:  see
Mechanics  7a(i) Refutation (log.): see Reasoning 4e Regimen (med.): see
Medicine   3c1(i)   Regression  (log.)  :  see  Infinity  2c  Regulative
principles: see Idea id; Judgment 8d; Principle 2b(3) Reincarnation: see
Immortality  5a;  Soul  4d(i)  Relation:  see ch 78: Relation; and Being
7d(4);  Judgment  5c, 6d; Same and Other 3D~3d; Sign and Symbol 2c; Time
5—50!  / see also Beauty ia, ic; Idea 6c; Mathematics 2, 4c; Quality 4c;
Quantity  ib,  3c, 3e(2), 4b; Reasoning 4f; Sign and Symbol 3c(i); Space
3-3d  Relative  and absolute (philos.): see Relation 6-6c; Universal and
Particular  7-7C / see also Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 9a; Good and
Evil  6d;  History  4c;  Opinion  6a;  Truth 7a~7b Relative and absolute
(phys.)  :  see  Change 7c(3); Relation 6a; Space 2a; Time i Relativism:
see  Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 5a, 9~9b; Good and Evil 6d; Justice
if;  Man  10b;  Opinion  3c, 6a; Relation 6b-6c; Truth 7a; Universal and
Particular  7-7C  Religion:  see ch 79: Religion; and Duty ii; Education
7~7b;  Justice  11b;  Philosophy  ia;  Prophecy id; Science 2a; Sign and
Symbol  5-5^  Truth  4a;  Virtue  and  Vice  8-8g  / see also Citizen 7;
Education  2; Experience 7; God 3~3e; Honor 6a; Law 3b3b(2); Love 5a(i);
Opinion  4-4^ Prophecy 2c; State 7c; Theology 2; Virtue and Vice 8g; War
and Peace 2b; Will 3^3) Religious community: see God 8a-8d, 9d; Religion
3a~4b  /  see  also  Citizen  7;  History  5b;  Religion 7; State id, 2g
Religious conversion: see Religion 5b Religious education: see Education
2,  7~7b;  Religion  5c  Religious  faith  or  belief:  see  God 6c(2) ;
Knowledge  6c(5);  Opinion 4-4^ Religion ib— ib(3); Truth 4a; Virtue and
Vice  8d(i);  Will  3^3)  /  see  also  Habit  5e(3); Logic 41; Mind 5c;
Philosophy  6c;  Religion  6b,  6d, 6f; Theology 2, 4b; War and Peace 2b
Religious  freedom:  see  Liberty  2b;  Religion  6e / see also Religion
6c(i)-6c(2);  Theology  4 e Religious life: see Religion 3-30! Religious
orders:  see  Religion  3c(i),  3d; Virtue and Vice 8g Reminiscence: see
Knowledge 6c(3); Memory and Imagination 3a / see also Education 5c; Idea
2b; Reasoning ic 1336

[1371a]
Remorse:  see  Duty  4b;  Punishment  5c; Sin 5 Rent: see Wealth 3b, 4c,
6d(i)  Renunciation:  see  Desire 6b; Pleasure and Pain 7b; Religion 3d;
Temperance  63^-  - Repentance: see Punishment 3c; Religion 2f; Sin 4e /
see   also   Duty  4b;  God  ye;  Punishment  5c;  Religion  2c;  Sin  5
Representation (pol.) : see Constitution g-gb; Democracy 5-5C / see also
Aristocracy  6; Government ih; Opinion 7b; State 8a Representatives: see
Constitution  9a;  Democracy  5a~5b; State 8a Repression (psychol.): see
Desire  6b-6c;  Emotion 30-30(4); Medicine 60(2); Memory and Imagination
2e(2),   8d(i),   8e;  Mind  8b;  Opposition  4c;  Sign  and  Symbol  6a
Reproduction  {biol.) : see Animal 80-9 e; Change 10b / see also Art 2a;
Life  and  Death 3a; Man 4a; Soul 2c(i) Republic, republican government:
see  ch  12:  Constitution;  and  Aristocracy 4; Citizen 2-2c; Democracy
5a~5c;  Law  7a~7b;  Liberty  id;  Monarchy  ia(i), ib-ib(3), 4c, 40(4);
Oligarchy 1-2; Tyranny 5~5d Reputation: see Courage 5; Honor i, 3-3^ 4c;
Monarchy   3b;   Rhetoric   4a  Resistance  (phys.):  see  Mechanics  3d
Respiration:  see  Animal  $d;  Life  and  Death  3a Responsibility: see
Punishment  2-2b; Sin 6a6b; Will 5 b( 4 ) Rest and motion: see Change 4;
Opposition  3  C Restraint: see Desire 6b; Emotion 40-4^2); Pleasure and
Pain 8a; Temperance 1; Virtue and Vice 5a Resurrection (theol.): see God
jg; Immortality 5 g; Soul 4d(3) Retaliation: see Justice ioc; Punishment
ib  Retention  (psychol.):  see  Memory  and Imagination 2a-2b, 2e-2e(3)
Retribution:  see  Justice ioc; Punishment ib Retrogradation (astron.) :
see Astronomy 9c Revelation: see God 6c(i); Language 12; Religion ib(i);
Sign and Symbol 5c; Theology 4b / see also God 2a; Immortality 3b; World
4e(3)  Revenge:  see Justice ioc; Punishment ib Revenue: ^ Government 4;
Wealth  9e~9e(2)  Revolution:  see  ch  80: Revolution; and Constitution
7~8b;  Democracy  7a;  Labor  70(3); Law 6c; Oligarchy 33-3 b / see also
Aristocracy  3;  Government  6;  Justice  10b;  Law  7d;  Liberty 6b-6c;
Progress  3b;  Tyranny  8 Reward: 5^ God 51; Honor 4D-4C; Immortality 4;
Justice 9e; Pleasure and Pain 10a; Punishment 3a; Virtue and Vice 4d(2),
8c 1337

[1371b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Same  and  other  Rhetoric, science of: see ch 81:
Rhetoric;  and Emotion 5d; Induction 4b; Pleasure and Pain 10b; Religion
5a;  State  8d(2)  / see also Dialectic 5; Language 8; Logic 3b; Opinion
2c;  Truth  4d  Right and wrong: see Good and Evil 3c Righteousness: see
God  8c; Sin 7 Rights: see Justice 6-7; Law 4c, 4e, 7c; Liberty ig; Will
8e  /  see also Citizen 4; Constitution 7b; Democracy 4b; Duty 7; Family
2c,  5b, 6d; Justice qi; Labor 7b, 7e; Law 2, 6a, 6c; Liberty ia, 2a-2b;
Monarchy  2c;  Oligarchy  4;  Opinion  5a;  Progress  4c;  Religion  6e;
Revolution  6-6b;  Slavery  3d;  Tyranny ia, 5a; War and Peace 3~3b Risk
(econ.): see Wealth 6d(3)-6d(4) Rituals: see God 3e; Religion 2-2g / see
also  God 8c, 9c; Law 3b(i)~3b(2); Sign and Symbol ie, 5c Romantic love:
see   Family   7a;  Love  2C-2d  Royal  and  political  government:  see
Aristocracy  4;  Citizen  2b;  Constitution  i, 3b; Law 7a; Monarchy ia-
ia(i); Tyranny 5-5C Royal prerogative: see Law 7c; Monarchy 4^(3). 4^(4)
Rudimentary  organs  and  functions: see Evolution 6c, 7b(i) Ruler, rule
(pol.):  see  Aristocracy  4-5;  Art  9d;  Democracy  2a-2b,  3b, 5b(i);
Education  8d;  Government  i-ih;  Justice 9d; Knowledge 8c; Law 7a, 7e;
Monarchy  ia(2), 2~3b, 4e(i)~4e(2); Philosophy 4c; Prudence 6a; Rhetoric
ic;  State  5a,  8-8e;  Temperance  5a; Tyranny i-ib; Virtue and Vice 7d
Sacraments:  see  God  9c;  Religion  2c;  Sign and Symbol 5c / see also
Family 4b; Sin 2f, 3e, 4c Sacred Scripture: see Language 12; Theology 4b
/  see  also  God 6c(i); Religion ib(i); Rhetoric 2d; Sign and Symbol 5e
Sacred theology, science of: see Theology 2, 4-4 e / see also Philosophy
ia;  Religion  6b, 6g; Science 2a; Truth 4a; Wisdom ic Sacrifice: ^f God
3c;  Religion  2d,  2f;  Sin  4c  Sacrilege: see Religion 2g Sadism: see
Pleasure  and  Pain  8c; Punishment Saint: see Happiness 7c(2); Honor 6b
Salvation: see God 9c; Sin 3d, 7 / see also Happiness 7c(2); Immortality
${',  Will 7e(2) Same and other: see ch 82: Same and Other; and Form 3b;
Sign  and  Symbol  3D~3d;  Universal  and  Particular  2a-2C  / see also
Dialectic  3a;  One  and  Many 4f; Quality 4c; Quantity ib; Relation id;
Universal and Particular 1

[1372a]
Sanctions THE GREAT IDEAS Sanctions: see Law 5, 6a; Punishment 4a Sanity
and  insanity:  see  Emotion 3a; Man 5b; Medicine 6a; Mind 8-8c; One and
Many  30(5);  Punishment  2b  Satan:  see  Angel  5a~5b,  7,  7b; Sin 4b
Satellite:  see  Astronomy 9D-9C Satisfaction (psychol.): see Desire 2d;
Pleasure  and  Pain  6d  Savings:  see  Wealth  6b  Saviour: see God 9c;
Prophecy  4c;  Sin 3d Schisms (theol.): see Religion 6c(2) Schizophrenia
(psychol.):  see One and Many 3M5) Schools: see Education 8b, 9 Science:
see  ch  83:  Science;  and  Art 6-6c; Experience 3, 3b, 5-5C; Habit 5d;
History  i; Hypothesis 4—4c! ; Induction 5; Knowledge 6d(i); Logic 43-4^
Matter  4b;  Memory  and  Imagination 3c, 6d; Metaphysics 3b; Nature 4b;
Necessity and Contingency 4a; One and Many 4d; Opinion i, 4a; Philosophy
1-30!,  6a;  Principle  20-3^3); Progress 3c, 6b, 6d; Reasoning 50-5^2);
Religion  6g;  Sense  5-5C; Sign and Symbol 4~4e; Truth 43-40; Universal
and Particular 4f; Virtue and Vice 2a(2); Wisdom 2a / see also Astronomy
4;  Being  8e;  Cause  5b;  Definition 6b-6c; Dialectic 4; Knowledge 4b,
6a(i),  6b(3),  8a,  10;  Man  2D-2b(4);  Mathematics 1; Mechanics 4-4C;
Medicine  2a; Metaphysics i-2d; Physics 2-2b; Poetry 8; Theology 4a, 4d;
Wealth  9  Scientific  laws:  see  Nature  3a; Science 4d; Universal and
Particular  4f  /  see  also  Astronomy  80(3);  Change 7d; Induction 5;
Mechanics  ib  Scientific  method: see Astronomy 2a-2c; Experience 5-50;
Hypothesis  4-40!;  Induction  5;  Mathematics  3—30!;  Mechanics  2-20;
Physics  3-40!;  Science  5~5e  /  see  also Cause 5b; Definition 6a-6c;
Induction  ib;  Logic  4a~4b;  Physics  ib;  Progress 6d; Reasoning 6-6d
Scourges:  see Sin 6c Scripture (theol.): see Language 12; Theology 4b /
see  also God 6c(i); Religion ib(i); Rhetoric 2d; Sign and Symbol 5e Sea
power:  see  War and Peace loe Season: see Astronomy 7 Secants (math.) :
see  Quantity  3c  Secession (pol.): see Revolution 2c, 6b Secondary and
primary  qualities: see Quality 2b, 3a, 6c; Quantity ia; Sense 30(3), 4c
Secretions  (biol.):  see  Animal 5c, 80(3) Sects (theol.): see Religion
60(2) Sedition: see Law 7d; Revolution ib

[1372b]
Self: see Knowledge 5a(6); Soul id / see also Memory and Imagination 4a;
One  and  Many 3b(5); Same andOther ib Self-consciousness: see Mind 7a /
see  also  Man  2a;  Mind if, 6 Self-denial: see Desire 6b; Pleasure and
Pain  7b;  Religion  3d;  Temperance  6a Self-esteem: see Honor 2c Self-
evident  truth:  see  Judgment  8a;  Principle  2b(2),  3a(i)~3c(2),  5;
Reasoning 5b(i) / see also Habit 5c; Induction 3; Knowledge 60(2); Logic
ia; Mathematics 3a; Opinion 2c; Philosophy 3b; Reasoning ib; Science 4a;
Truth 3c, 7a Self-government: see Democracy 4b; Government ih / see also
Government  ig(3);  Liberty  6c,  Monarchy  4e(2)~4e(3);  Revolution  7;
Tyranny 4b Self-knowledge: see Knowledge 5a(6); Man 2a; Mind if, 6; Soul
5a Self-love: see Love 2b (2) Self-preservation: see Life and Death 8a /
see  also  Animal id; Habit 3a Selling and buying: see Justice 8b; State
9a;  Wealth  4-5  e,  7c, iod Semantics: see Sign and Symbol 1-4 e / see
also  Language  3a,  5a,  6 Semen: see Animal 80(3) Seminal reasons: see
Memory  and  Imagination  3 a Senility: see Life and Death 5, 6c; Man 6c
Sensation:  see  Sense  3C~3c(5);  Truth  3a(i)  /  see also Element 5e;
Knowledge  6b(i)  ; Memory and Imagination 60(2); Principle 2a(i) Sense:
see ch 84: Sense; and Being 8a; Idea ic, 2b, 2e-2g; Knowledge 6b(i); Man
4b;  Matter  4c;  Memory  and  Imagination ia, 3b; Mind ia-ia(2), ib(i),
ie(i); One and Many 4b; Principle 2d(i); Reasoning ic; Soul 2c(2); Truth
33-33(2) / see also Animal ia(i); Change ii; Desire 3b(i); Form 33; Life
and  Death 3b; Matter 43; Pleasure and Pain 4b; Space 4c; Time 63; Truth
3d(i); Universal and Particular 4c Sense-organs: see Animal 5g; Sense 33
Sensible  and intelligible: see Being 7e, 8a-8b; Experience 4a; Form 3a;
Good  and  Evil  4a;  Knowledge  6a(i),  63(4);  Matter  ic; Mind 13(1);
Universal  and  Particular 4d Sensible qualities: see Quality 23-2b, 6c;
Sense 3C(3) Sensitive appetite: see Animal 13(3); Desire 3b(i); Sense 3e
Sensitivity:  see  Animal  13(1); Life and Death 3b; Man 4b; Sense 2-2C;
Soul  2c(2),  43 Sensuality: see Love 23; Temperance 2 / see also Desire
73(1); Emotion 43(1); Pleasure and Pain 6c; Sin 2b; Slavery 7 1338

[1373a]
Sentence: see Judgment 5a; Language 4a Separation of powers (pot.) : see
Constitution  7b;  Democracy  5c; Government 3a; Liberty ig ^ - Serfdom:
#"<?  Labor  if, 5b; Revolution 4a; Slavery 4b, 5a Servile arts: ^<? Art
4;  Labor  ib,  3b  Sex,  sexuality:  see  Animal  80-80(5);  Desire 2a;
Evolution  5b;  Love  2a-2a(4),  2d;  Man  6b-6c  Sexual  selection: see
Evolution  5b  Shame: see Honor 2a, 3b Shape: see Mathematics 2; Quality
3b;  Quantity  3-36(2);  Space ib, 3c Shrewdness: see Prudence 3c Sight:
see  Sense  3a,  3b(i), 30(1); Space 4c Sign and symbol: see ch 85: Sign
and  Symbol;  and  Definition  2c;  Idea  6a;  Language  10;  Memory and
Imagination  8d(i)-8e;  Prophecy  3D-3C / see also Idea 4a; Judgment 5a;
Mathematics  3d; Mechanics 3c; Medicine 3c; Religion ib(2); Rhetoric 2d;
Same  and  Other  4c;  Time  6d; Truth 2b Signate matter: see Matter ic;
Universal and Particular 3 Signification: see Idea 4a; Judgment 5a; Sign
and  Symbol  2-2e; Truth 2b Similarity: see Quality 4c; Relation id, 4f;
Same and Other 2c, 3D-3C; Sign and Symbol 3c(0 Simple and complex (log.,
metaph.)  : see Element 1, 3a, 3d, 5a; One and Many 2D-2C, 4c; Principle
2a-2a(3)  Simple  and  complex  ideas (psychol.) : see Idea 2c, 2f; Mind
id(i)-id(2); One and Many 4c; Sense 30(4), 5a Simultaneity: see Relation
5a;  Time 5a, 5C~5d Sin: see ch 86: Sin; and Angel 5a; Happiness 7a; Man
90-9^2);  Punishment  5-6;  Virtue and Vice 8a; Will yc-ye(2) / see also
God 9c; Good and Evil 2b, 3f; Immortality ^d; Knowledge 8b(i); Labor ic;
Liberty  5c;  Religion  2C-2d,  2i-2g  Singular (log.): see Judgment 6a;
Universal  and  Particular  5c  Sister  and brother: see Family 7c; Love
2b(4)  Size: see Animal 7; Astronomy 9a; Change 8-8b; Infinity 4a; Space
3d;  World 7 Skeletal structure: see Animal 3b Skepticism: see Knowledge
5c; Opinion 3c; Principle 5; Truth 7~7b / see also Custom and Convention
9b;  Progress  ic; Relation 6b-6c; Universal and Particular 7a~7c Skill:
see Art i ; Experience 3a / see also Education 3, 6; Knowledge 8a; Labor
3a Slave and master: see Slavery i, 2b, 3b Slavery (econ., pol.): see ch
87: Slavery; and Justice 8c(i); Labor if, 5a~5c, 7d; Liberty 1339

[1373b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Sorrow  2d; Revolution 4a; Wealth 7b(i) / see also
Citizen  2c;  Constitution 5a; Democracy 4a(i); Labor ib, 3b, 70(1); Law
4b; Liberty 6b-6c; Necessity and Contingency 5d: Oligarchy 5a; State 5c;
Tyranny  5a;  Will 7a Sleep: see Animal ia(5); Life and Death 5b; Memory
and  Imagination  8b;  Mind 7b Sloth: see Sin 2c(i) Smell: see Sense 3a,
3b(i),  30(1) Social classes: see Labor 4b, 70(1), 70(3); Opposition 5b;
Revolution  5-5C;  State  5a,  5C~5d(2);  War  and  Peace  2c / see also
Democracy  3a;  Oligarchy  4,  5a  Social  contract: see Constitution 6;
Custom  and Convention 6a; Revolution 6b; State 3d / see also Custom and
Convention i; Government ia; State 3g Social environment: see Custom and
Convention 2, 5—5b, 7-70*, 9a; Education 4c; Opinion 6a; Virtue and Vice
401(3)  Social or practical science, method of: see Definition 6c; Logic
4e;  Philosophy  2a,  2c; Reasoning 6d; Science 3a / see also History 1;
Man  2b,  2b(4); State 8d-8d(3); Wealth 9 Social security: see Labor 7e;
Wealth  8d Socialism: see Democracy 43(2); Labor ^d, 7b; Wealth 6a, 8a /
see  also  Justice  8a;  Labor  70(3), 7f; Progress 3b; Revolution 4~4b;
State  50X2) Society or community: see State i-id, 2b, 3a3f, 5-5 e / see
also  Custom  and Convention 7-7B; Emotion 5a; Family i, 2a-2c; Good and
Evil  5d;  Justice 9b; Law 4b; Liberty ib; Love 4-4C; Man 9c; Memory and
Imagination  4b;  Mind  9e; Nature 2b; Necessity and Contingency 5b; One
and  Many  5d;  Opposition  5-5C; Religion 3-30!; War and Peace i, na-nb
Sociology, subject matter of: see Custom and Convention 6b~7c; Family i,
3a~4a,  4d~5a, 6d-6e, 7b, 8; Labor 3b, 3d, 4b; Man 7c, 9c; Progress 5-6;
State i-ia, ic, 4c, 5c / see also Art 12; Custom and Convention i~5a, 8,
9a;  Duty 9; Good and Evil 6d; Habit 7; History 43(2); Honor 3b; Law 5f;
Life  and  Death 8d; Memory and Imagination 4b; Opinion 6a; Religion ia,
2b,  2d-2g,  30(1),  7;  Science ib(2); Sign and Symbol ie Soldiers: see
Democracy  7c;  War  and  Peace  iob-ioc Solecism: see Language 4b Solid
geometry:  see Quantity 3d(2)~3e(2) Solstice (astron.)-. see Astronomy 7
Sophistry, sophist: see Dialectic 6; Logic 5; Metaphysics 4a; Philosophy
6b;  Reasoning  3c;  Rhetoric ia; Truth 8e; Wisdom 3 Sorites (log.): see
Reasoning 2c Sorrow: see Emotion 2a; Pleasure and Pain 4a

[1374a]
Soul  THE GREAT IDEAS Soul: see ch 88: Soul; and Element ^i\ Immortality
53-5^  Life and Death i; Man 333a(i); One and Many 30(4); World ia / see
also  Animal  ia; Astronomy 8b; Eternity 4a; Evolution 7a; Form 2d; Good
and  Evil  4c; Mechanics 4c; Mind 2e, 4e; State 2a(i) Soul, or mind, and
body:  see  Man 33-33(2); Matter 2d; Mind 2-2e; One and Many 3b(4); Soul
ib-ic,  4b  /  see  also  Being 7b(2); Form 2d; Immortality 5b; Life and
Death  1;  Man 2b(3); Matter 4C~4d; Medicine 5d(2), 6c(i); Mind 4c; Soul
3c,  4d~4d(4)  Sound:  see  Mechanics  7b;  Sense 30(3) Sovereignty: see
Democracy  4b;  Government  ig-ig(3);  One  and  Many  5e; State 2c, 9d;
Tyranny  5c;  Will  103  / see also Law 4g, 6b; Liberty ib, 6c; Monarchy
46(3) Space: see ch 89: Space; and Change 73; Infinity 3d; Mechanics ic,
3d, 6d(2); Quantity 53; Relation 63; World 7 / see also Astronomy 3b, 5;
Element  5c;  Experience 2c; Form ic, id(i); Mathematics ic, 23, 53; One
and  Many 33(4); Quantity 2-36(2), 6b-6c; World 4b, 6s Species and genus
(log.):  see Definition 2b; Idea 4K3); Opposition ic(2); Relation 53(4);
Same  and  Other  3a(i)~3a(3);  Sign  and  Symbol  3c(2);  Universal and
Particular  5b / see also Animal 23; Dialectic 2b(i); Evolution ib; Form
3c;  Idea  3d; Nature 13(1) Specific gravity: see Mechanics 6b Spectrum:
see   Mechanics   73-73(2)  Speculative  and  practical:  see  Knowledge
6e(i)-6e(2);  Mind  93; Philosophy 23; Prudence 23; Science 33; Theology
3b, 4d; Truth 2c; Wisdom ib Speech: see Language 1-3C; Man ib Sperm: see
Animal  8cQ)  Sphere  (math.): see Quantity ^e-^e(2) Spirit or spiritual
substance:  see  Angel  2-4; Being 70(2); Man 33-3^ Mind 23; Soul 3~3e /
see  also  Change  ioc; Eternity 43; Form 2d; History 43(3); Immortality
5b;  Matter  2d; Mind id, 10c, iof; One and Many 3^4) Spiritual sin: see
Sin   2b   Spontaneity  or  fortuitousness:  see  Chance  ib;  World  4c
Spontaneous  generation:  see Animal 8b; Astronomy 103; Evolution 43, 4c
Square of opposition (log.): see Judgment 73; Opposition id(i) Stability
(pol.):  see  Aristocracy  3; Constitution 7a; Democracy 7-7C; Oligarchy
3-33;   Revolution  3c  Standard  of  living  (econ.):  see  Custom  and
Convention 7c; Labor 6b; Necessity and

[1374b]
Contingency  5e; Progress 3b; Wealth 10b Stars: see Astronomy 9e; Time 4
State:  see  ch  90: State; and Citizen i-2c; Constitution 23; Education
4c,  8-8c;  Emotion  53; Family 2-2C; Good and Evil 5d; Government i-ih,
5-53;  Happiness  5b; Justice 9-iob; Law 7-71; Love 4b; Mind 9c, iof(2);
Nature  5c;  Necessity and Contingency 5b; One and Many 5d; Progress 4b;
Religion  4~4b;  Virtue and Vice 73 / see also Courage 73-7C; Custom and
Convention  i;  Duty  10; History 5b; Honor 4-4C; Law 13; Man 9c; Nature
2b;  Revolution 5c, 6b; Virtue and Vice 4d(3); War and Peace 43, 10-iob,
lie—lid;  Wealth  4g  State  of  nature:  see  Custom  and Convention i;
Government  13; Law 4b, 41-411; Liberty ib; Man 9c; Nature 2b; State 3c;
War  and  Peace i State of war: see State 3c; War and Peace i / see also
Law 4b, 4i~4g; Liberty ib; Nature 2b State rights (pol.): see Government
5d; One and Many 5e; Revolution 6b; State ioe Statesman, statecraft: see
Aristocracy 5-6 Art 9d; Education 8d; Knowledge 8c Prudence 63; Rhetoric
ic;  State  8d-8d(3)  Virtue and Vice 7d / see also Courage 73 Democracy
2b,  3b,  6;  Experience  6b  Government 3c(2), 3d(2), 3e(2); Justice 9d
Monarchy  33; Philosophy 4c; Pleasure and Pain 10b; Progress 43; War and
Peace  103  Statics,  subject  matter  of: see Mechanics 535 b, 7e-7e(i)
Stereometry: see Quantity 3e(i) Sterility: see Animal 8c (5) ; Evolution
3c,  5c  Stock  (econ.):  see  Wealth 6b, 7d(i) Stoicism: see Desire 6b;
Emotion  4b(2);  Good and Evil 30-3^2); Man ioc; Mind 103; Necessity and
Contingency 53(3); Pleasure and Pain 8b; Will 83-8b(2) Strategy: see War
and Peace iod Stream of consciousness : .ted' Idea5c; Mind ig(i) Stress,
strain (phys.): see Mechanics 5c Structure (biol.): see Animal 2b, 3~3d;
Evolution  6c,  7b(i);  Life  and  Death  3b Struggle for existence: see
Evolution 53-53(3); Opposition 3c Student and teacher: see Education 53,
5f  Style:  see  Poetry  8b;  Rhetoric 2b, 3c Subalternation (log.): see
Judgment  73;  Opposition  id(i)  Subcontrary  (log.) : see Judgment 73;
Opposition  id(i)  Subject,  subjection  (pol.): see Citizen 2b; Slavery
53-6d; Tyranny 40-5^ 6 / see also 1340

[1375a]
Democracy  43-43(1);  Government 5b; Labor 7<J; Liberty if, 6c; Monarchy
4e(i)-  4e(2),  5—5b;  Progress  4c;  Revolution  7; State 53, 10b _____
Subject  and  predicate  (Jog.):  see  Idea 5a; Judgment 5b; Relation 4b
Subjective  and objective: see Beauty 5; Custom and Convention 5a, 93-9^
Dialectic 2d(i); Good and Evil 6d; One and Many 5c; Quality 6c; Relation
6b-6c;  Universal and Particular 7-7C Subjectivism: see Beauty 5; Custom
and  Convention  5a, 9~9b; Good and Evil 6d; Opinion 6a; Relation 6b-6c;
Universal  and Particular 7-7C Sublimation (psychol.): see Art 8; Desire
4c!;  Love  2a(3) Sublime: see Beauty id Subsidy (econ.) : see Wealth 4g
Subsistence  (econ.):  see Labor 6b / see also Custom and Convention 7c;
Nature  5b;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5c;  Wealth  10b Substance and
accident  or  attribute: see Being 7b~7b(6); Form 2c(2) / see also Being
8c-8e;  Matter  ib;  Necessity  and  Contingency 2d; One and Many 3b(3);
Quality  i,  3d; Quantity 1 Substantial and accidental change: see Being
7b(5); Change 6; Matter ib / see also Change 7-ioc Substantial form: see
Form  2c(2)-2d;  One  and Many 3^3); Soul ib Substratum: see Being 7^5);
Form  id(2); Matter i-ia, 2c / see also Change 2a; Quality 1; Quantity i
Succession  (log.):  see  Time  5b~5d Succession (pol.): see Monarchy ic
Suffrage  or franchise: see Citizen 3; Constitution 5a; Democracy 4a(i),
5b(2);  Labor  7d;  Oligarchy  5a; Slavery 53-5 b / see also Citizen 2b;
Family  5b;  Government ih; Justice 9e; Progress 4c; Slavery 6c Suicide:
see  Life  and Death 8b Summum bonum: see Good and Evil 5a; Happiness 3;
Mind  ie(3)  /  see  also  Good  and  Evil 3d, 5c; Pleasure and Pain 6a;
Principle 4a; Relation 5a(2) Sumptuary laws: see State 7c; Temperance 5C
Sun:  see Astronomy 9a / see also Astronomy 2b, 7, 12; Time 4 Super-ego,
ego,  and  id (psychol.): see Man 4; Soul 2b Superfoetation : see Animal
9d  Supernatural  and  natural: see God ia, 6C-13; Knowledge 6c(5) / see
also Cause 70-70!; Habit 5e-5e(3); Opinion 4a; Religion ib1341

[1375b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS Teaching ib(3), 6f; Sign and Symbol 5b; Theology 2;
Virtue  and Vice 2b Supernatural gifts: see Habit 5e(2); Mind 5c; Virtue
and  Vice  8e  /  see  also  Language  ii;  Man 9b(i); Sin 3a; Wisdom ic
Superposition  (math.)  :  see Quantity 6b Superstition: see Opinion 4b;
Religion 6a; Science 7a Supplication: see Religion 2a Supply and demand:
see  Wealth  4c / see also Labor 6a; Wealth 4a, 4c, 4L, 6d(3), 6e Supra-
sensible:  see Being 7e; Experience 4a; Knowledge 6a(4) Surface (math.):
see  Quantity  3d~3d(2)  Surgery:  see Medicine 3d(3) Surplus value: see
Justice 8c(2); Wealth 6d(2) Survival of the fittest: see Evolution 5a(i)
Syllogism:  see Hypothesis 5; One and Many 4c; Reasoning 2-2C / see also
Idea 5b; Judgment 7c; Reasoning 5e(i); Rhetoric 4c(2) Symbol, symbolism:
see  Sign  and  Symbol  1—  if,  5~6c  /  see also Idea 6a; Language 10;
Mathematics  3d; Mechanics 3c; Memory and Imagination 8d-8d(2); Prophecy
3D-3C  Symbolism  of  dreams:  see  Language  10; Memory and Imagination
8d-8d(2);  Sign and Symbol 6a Symptoms: see Medicine 3c; Sign and Symbol
Synderesis:  see  Habit 5c; Law 4a; Principle 4 Syntax: see Language 4a;
Time  6d Synthesis and analysis (log., math.): see Logic 4d; Mathematics
3c; Philosophy 3c; Reasoning 5b(3), 6b Synthetic and analytic judgments:
see Judgment Tabula rasa (psychol.): see Mind 4d(i) Tactics: see War and
Peace  iod  Tangent (math.) : see Quantity 3c Tariffs (econ.): see State
9a;  Wealth  4g,  9c  Taste  (aesth.):  see Art 7b; Beauty 5; Custom and
Convention  9a;  Judgment  4;  Mind ie(2); Nature $c\; Pleasure and Pain
4c(i);  Poetry  8a-8b; Universal and Particular 7C Taste (psychol.): see
Sense  3a,  3b(i),  30(1)  Taxation:  see  Government  4;  Wealth  9e(2)
Taxonomy:  see  Animal 2-2a; Definition 2-2d; Evolution i-ib Teacher and
student:  see Education 5a, 5f Teaching and learning: see Education 5—5f
/  see  also  Democracy 6; Idea 5d; Knowledge 9a; Language 8; Memory and
Imagination 3a;

[1376a]
)  Technology  THE  GREAT  IDEAS  Pleasure  and  Pain  40(2); Poetry 5a;
Religion  5c;  Virtue  and Vice 4b Technology: see Art 6c; Knowledge 8a;
Physics  5;  Progress  3c;  Science  i  b(  1)—  ib(2), 3 b Teleological
judgment: see Judgment 4 Teleology: see Cause 6; Chance 3; Desire i; God
5b;  Good and Evil ia; Judgment 4; Nature }c(}) / see also Astronomy 3a;
Mechanics  2c;  Necessity  and  Contingency  3b;  Physics 2b; Science 4c
Temperament  (psychol.):  see  Emotion 4c; Medicine 5d(i) / see also Man
6a;  Virtue  and  Vice  2c,  4a  Temperance and intemperance: see ch 91:
Temperance; and Courage 4; Desire 6-6c; Emotion 4b(i); Love 3b; Pleasure
and  Pain  8a,  9;  Prudence  3d; Virtue and Vice ie, 2a(i); Wealth ioc,
ioe(3)  /  see  also  Desire 73-73(3); Duty 8; Education 4d; Emotion 5e;
Liberty 33-3^ Prudence 3b; Virtue and Vice ic, 2c-6e Temple: see God 8d;
Prophecy  4b:  Religion 3a Temptation (theol.): see Angel 6b; Sin 4b Ten
Commandments:  see  God 8c; Law 3 b ( 1 Terms (log.): see Idea 4-4C, 5b;
Opposition  iaib;  Same  and Other 4c; Sign and Symbol 2d; Universal and
Particular  2c,  5a  /  see also Infinity 2a; One and Many 4c; Reasoning
2a(i);  Relation  4a  Terrestrial  motion  :see  Matter ib; Mechanics 4a
Territory  (pol.):  see  Democracy 5a; History 43(2); Monarchy 4c; State
4~4b  Theism:  see God 2-2d, 4-51 Theocracy: see Religion 4a Theological
virtues:  see  Habit  56(3);  Love  5b(2);  Virtue and Vice 2b, 8d-8d(3)
Theology,  science of: see ch 92: Theology; and Logic 4f; Metaphysics i;
Science 2a; Wisdom ic / see also Astronomy 6; Metaphysics 3a; Philosophy
ia,  6c; Reasoning 6a; Religion 6g; Rhetoric 2c Theology, subject matter
of:  see  ch 29: God; ch 79: Religion; ch 86: Sin; and Angel 2~7b; Cause
7~7d; Eternity 3-43, 4d; Good and Evil 2-2b; Happiness 7~7d; Immortality
i~5g; Infinity 7~7d; Justice 11-nb; Law 3-3^2); Liberty 5~5d; Love 5-5C;
Prophecy i~4d; Punishment 5-56(2); Sign and Symbol 5—5f ; Soul 4D~4d(3);
\"irtue  and  Vice 8-8g; World 3-3D, 46-46(3) Theoretical and practical:
see  Knowledge 6e(i)- 6e(2); Mind 9a; Nature 4b; Philosophy 2a; Prudence
2a;  Science  3a;  Theology  3b,  4d;  Truth  2c;  Wisdom ib Theory: see
Astronomy 2b; Hypothesis 4~4d; Mechanics 2b; Physics 2b, 4b; Science 4c,
4 e, 5 e

[1376b]
Theory  of  equations:  see  Mathematics  4c  Theory  of  knowledge: see
Experience  4-4^  Idea  1-3C;  Judgment 8-10; Knowledge i-7d; Mind 5—5b;
Truth  i-4d;  Universal  and  Particular  2~4f  Theory  of  numbers: see
Quantity  4a  Therapy:  see  Emotion  3d;  Medicine  2b,  33d( 3 ), 6d-7
Thermochemistry:^^  Mechanics  7c(i)  Thermodynamics:  see Mechanics jc-
jc(2)  Thermoelectricity: see Mechanics 76(4) Thermometry: see Mechanics
7c(2)  Thesis and antithesis (philos.) : see Dialectic 3d; History 43(3)
;  Opposition 2b, 2e Thought: see Animal ic(2); Being 7b(4); Element 5e;
Experience 2-2d; Idea 5~5e; Judgment i; Knowledge i~7d; Language ia; Man
i-ic,  4c;  Matter 4d; One and Many 4-4^ Reasoning i-ic; Sign and Symbol
if;  Truth  3d(i)~3d(3) / see also ch 58: Mind: and Angel 3d; Change 6d,
15a;  Desire  5b;  Emotion  3b;  Form  2d;  God  4g;  Man 3a; Memory and
Imagination 3-4^ 6b-6d; One and Many 3^4); Principle 2-2b( 3 ); WlLL 3-3
b(2)  Thought and extension (philos.) : see Being 7^4); Form 2d; Man 3a;
Mind ib;ONE and Many 3K4) Thrift: see Wealth 6b Tides: see Astronomy 10b
Time:  see  ch  93:  Time;  and  Astronomy  7;  Change 5a; Eternity 1-2;
Experience  2c;  Form ic; Infinity 3c; Knowledge 53(5), 6a(i); Mechanics
ic;  Memory  and  Imagination 3b; Necessity and Contingency 4c; Quantity
5b;  Relation  5a;  World  4e(2)  /  see  also  Change  13;  History 4c;
Mathematics  2a;  One and Many 33(4); Prophecy ia-ib; Relation 6a; Truth
3b(2)  ;  W torld 4a Timelessness: see Eternity i; Time 2 Timocracy: see
Honor  4a  Tissue  (biol.)\  see  Animal  3a  Tithes: see Religion 3c(3)
Tolerance, toleration: see Liberty 2a-2b; Opinion 5—5b; Religion 6e/ see
also Custom and Convention 7a~7b; Education 8c; Justice 6-6e(2); Liberty
ig; Truth 8d Tools: see Labor 2b; Wealth 3a Topics (log.): see Dialectic
2b; Rhetoric 4c(3) Torah: see God 8c-8d; Law 3b(i); Religion 3a Torture:
see  Punishment  4^4)  Totalitarianism:  see  Citizen  i; Government ic;
Happiness  5b;  Justice  ia,  6c;  Monarchy  ia(2), 4e(3); State 2b, 2f;
Tyranny ia, 53-5C Touch: see Sense 3a, 3b(i), 3c(i); Space 4c Trade: see
Wealth 4~4g / see also Liberty 2c; Opposition 5a; State 9a; Wealth 9C~9d
1342

[1377a]
; INVENTORY OF TERMS Trade unions: see Labor 70(2) Tradition: see Custom
and  Convention  8;  History  2; Language 3c; Memory and Imagination 4b;
Progress  6c;  Truth  6/_ige^  also  Art  12;  Custom  and Convention 2;
Education 9; Family 7b; Law 8; Philosophy 7; Poetry 2-3; Time 8b Tragedy
and comedy: see Poetry 4b Transcendence and immanence (theol.) : see God
5d~5e;   Nature   ib;   One  and  Many  ib;  Relation  3;  World  3-3  b
Transcendental  categories:  see  Experience  2c; Memory and Imagination
6c(2);  Mind  401(3)  Quality  i; Quantity i; Relation 4c Transcendental
dialectic:  see  Dialectic  2c2c(2),  3c;  Opposition  ie Transcendental
forms:  see  Experience 2c; Form ic, 3a; Mathematics ic, 2a; Mind 4d(3);
Sense   ic;  Space  4a;  Time  6c  Transcendental  ideas:  see  Idea  2h
Transcendental  logic:  see  Logic  ib-2  Transcendental philosophy: see
Metaphysics  1  Transcendental  unity  of  apperception:  see Memory and
Imagination 6c(2); One and Many 4b; Sense 3c(5) Transference (psychol.):
see  Desire 4b; Love 2a(3 ) Transmigration of souls: see Immortality 5a;
Soul 4cl(i) Transmutation of elements: see Change 10a; Element 3c Trauma
(psychol.)  :  see  Emotion  3^4)  Treason:  see  Law  7d; Revolution ib
Treaties:  see  Government 5a; State 9e(2); War and Peace iic Trial: see
Government 3(^(2) ; Law 5g Triangle: see Quantity 3a Tribe: see Monarchy
4a;  State  ic;  Wealth  2  Tridimensionality : see Quantity 3; Space ic
Trigonometry:  see  Space  3d Trinity (theol.): see God 9a; One and Many
6b;  Relation 2 Trivium: see Language 7-8; Logic 3-3 b; Rhetoric ia-ib /
see  also  Art  4,  6b;  Dialectic 5; Education 2, 5d Truce: see War and
Peace  log Truth and falsity: see ch 94: Truth; and Beauty ib; Being 4b;
Custom  and  Convention  9b; Definition ie; Experience 4b; Good and Evil
ic;  Hypothesis  4d;  Idea  6c-6f;  Judgment 9-10; Knowledge 4a; Opinion
3-3C; Poetry 8a(2); Principle 2b(i)-2b(2), 5; Progress 6c, 6e; Reasoning
3—3d;  Relation  6b;  Religion  6-6g;  Sense  4d-4<d(2);  Universal  and
Particular   7a;  Will  3b(2)  /  see  also  Change  15a;  Eternity  4c;
Immortality 6c; Love id; Memory and Imagination 1343

[1377b]
;  Usury  2e(4),  5c;  Philosophy 6a; Prudence 3a; Rhetoric 5a; Wisdom 3
Tyranny:  see ch 95: Tyranny; and Aristocracy 2e; Government 2a; Law 7d;
Liberty  6b;  Monarchy  3b,  4b; Revolution 3c(3); Slavery 6a / see also
Democracy  2a;  Family  6d;  Justice  6c;  Law 6c; Revolution 3a~3b, 4a;
Slavery  3c,  7 u Unconscious: see Memory and Imagination 8e; Mind 7, 7c
Understanding:  see  Judgment i; Knowledge 6b(4); Memory and Imagination
6c(2);  Mind  ia-ia(4), id(i)-ie(3), 3a; One and Many 4c; Science ia(i);
Sense  ia,  id,  5c;  Wisdom  2a  Unearned increment: see Justice 8c(2);
Wealth  6d(2)  Unemployment: see Labor 7e; Wealth 6e, 8c Uniform motion:
see  Change  7c(2);  Mechanics  Uniformity of nature : see Nature 3c(i);
Science  4d;  World  6a,  6c  Unity,  unit: see ch 63; One and Many; and
Quantity 6; Relation id; Same and Other ia, 2b Universal and particular:
see  ch 96; Universal and Particular; and Form 2a, 3b; Idea 4b(2)~4b(3);
Judgment  6a;  Matter ic; Memory and Imagination 5b, 6c(i); One and Many
ic; Opinion 6b; Same and Other 2a; Science 4d; Sense 5c; Sign and Symbol
2d,  3c(2)  /  see also Being 7(J(2); Idea 2g, ^d\ Opinion i ; Reasoning
2a(2)  ; Relation 53(4) Same and Other 3a(i); Sense ib, 5a Universe: see
ch  102:  World;  and  Astronomy 5; Beauty 7b; Cause ja-jc; Element sjh;
Eternity  2; God 5<d-5e, 7a, 11; Infinity 3d~3e; Man ioc, ioe; Mind 10a;
Nature  ib;  One and Many ia-ib; Prophecy 4d; Relation 3, 5b; Time 2D-2C
Univocal  and  equivocal:  see Idea 4^4); Language 5a; Same andOther 4c;
Sign  and  Symbol  3b-3d,  4a~4C  Use or utility (biol.): see Animal 3d;
Evolution  3a  Use-value:  see  Wealth 4a Useful arts: see Art 4, 9—90!;
Knowledge  8a;  Science  ib(i),  3b  / see also Art 6c; Education 5b, 6;
Knowledge  6e(2);  Labor  2b, 3a, 4c; Medicine 2-2C; Physics 5; Progress
3c,  6a;  State 8d-8d(2); War and Peace 10; Wealth 3C~3d Usurpation: see
Monarchy  40(4); Revolution 2b; Tyranny ic Usury: see Justice 8d; Wealth
5c

[1378a]
Utilitarianism  THE GREAT IDEAS Utilitarianism: see Duty 2; Happiness 3;
tice if; Pleasure and Pain 6a Utopia: see Government 2e; State 6 Vacuum:
see  Change 73; Element 5c; Mechanics 5b, 3d; Space 2D-2C Value (econ.):
see  Labor 6d; Wealth 4a, 4d, 6d(2) Variable (math.): see Mathematics 3c
Variations,  varieties  (biol.): see Animal 2a; Evolution ia-2b, 3c, 4c,
53(2) Vegetative powers: see Life and Death 3a; Man 4a; Soul 2c(i) / see
also Animal 6-8d; Change 10b; Soul 4a Veins: see Animal 5b Velocity: see
Mechanics  6c,  6d(3);  Quantity  5c  /  see also Mechanics 5f(i), 7^(3)
Vengeance:  see  Justice ioc; Punishment ib Venial sin: see Sin 2, 20(2)
Verb  :  see  Language 4a ; Time 6d Verification: see Experience 4b, 5b;
Hypothesis   4d;   Physics   4c;   Science   5e;   Sense  5c;  Truth  ia
Verisimilitude:  see  Poetry  8a(2)  Verse  and  prose:  see  Poetry  8b
Vestigial organs and functions: see Evolution 6c Veto: see Democracy 5c;
Government  3e(i)  Village: see State ic, 3a Violence (pol.): see ch 80:
Revolution;  and  Government  id;  Justice  ia;  Law  6c, 7d; Tyranny ia
Violent  and  natural  motion: see Change 7b; Mechanics 5e(2)-5f; Nature
2d; Opposition 3c; Space 2a Virtue and vice: see ch 97: Virtue and Vice;
and  Beauty  7d;  Citizen  5; Desire 6a; Education 4— 4<d; Emotion 4-4C;
Good  and  Evil  6a; Government 2d; Habit 5b, 3d, 5e(2)~5e(3); Happiness
2b(3);  Knowledge  8b(i); Law 6d; Liberty 3c; Love 3~3d, 5b(2); Mind 9c;
One  and  Many 5a; Pleasure and Pain 8a; Prudence 3~3b; Punishment 3-3C;
Will  8c;  Wisdom  2-2b  /  see also Courage 4, 7a; Habit 6b; History 2;
Honor 2b; Justice ic-id; Labor 4c; Law 4d; Nature 5— 5c!; Philosophy 4b;
Pleasure  and  Pain  10a; Poetry 9a; State 7c; Temperance ia-ic Viscera:
see Animal 3c Vision of God: see Desire 7b; God 6c(4) ; Happiness 7c(i);
Knowledge  7c;  Mind  4f; Will 7d Visions, visitations: see Prophecy 3c;
Sign and Symbol 5b Vital powers: see Life and Death 2~3b; Man 4-4C; Soul
2C-2c(3) Viviparous reproduction: see Animal 9a

[1378b]
JusVocational  education:  see  Education 6 Void: see Change 7a; Element
5c;  Mechanics  5b,  5d;  Space 2b-2C Volition: see Will 2-3 b( 3), 6-6c
Volume  (math.):  ^Quantity  3e(i) Voluntariness, voluntary conduct: see
Knowledge  8b(2);  Nature  3c(2);  Punishment 2a; Virtue and Vice 4e(i);
Will  33-33(2),  6c  /  see  also  Animal 4-4C; Desire 2c; Necessity and
Contingency  53-53(3)  ;  Virtue and Vice 5C Voting: see Democracy 5^3);
Government  ih  Vow:  see Religion 3d; Virtue and Vice 8g; Wealth ioe(2)
Wage  slavery  :  see  Slavery  Justice  8c(i): Lai if; 4C 51 Wages: see
Justice  8b;  Labor  6-6d, 73; Wealth 4c, 6d(i), iod War: see ch 98: War
and  Peace;  and  Art 9c; Courage 7c; Democracy 7c; Government 53; Honor
5c;  Labor  7c~7c(3);  Opposition  5D-5C;  Revolution  is, ic, 53; State
9e9e(2);  Wealth  9g~9h / see also Family 5c; Justice 9f; Life and Death
8d;  Necessity  and  Contingency  5d;  State 3c, 5d(2), 8d(i) Water: see
Element  3b;  Mechanics 5b; Opposition 3b Wave theory: see Mechanics 73,
7b; Space 2c Wealth: see ch 99: Wealth; and Art 9b; Desire 73(3); Family
33;  Labor  3e,  43,  7b,  7e;  Nature 5b; Necessity and Contingency 5c;
Oligarchy  4-5C;  Opposition  5b;  Progress 33; Revolution 53; State 73;
Tyranny  2b;  Virtue  and Vice 6c / see also Good and Evil 4d; Happiness
2b(i);  Revolution  4b; Temperance 5b; War and Peace 5c Weapons: see War
and Peace iof Weight: see Mechanics 6b; Quantity 5d / see also Mechanics
13,  5b,  5e(2),  6d(i) Whole and part: w One and Many 2c, 3b(i)- 3b(2),
4e;  Universal  and  Particular i Wife and husband: see Family 43-4^ 4e,
53, 73, 7c; Love 2b(4), 2d Will: see ch 100: Will; and Desire 3b(i); God
5g;  Good  and Evil 30-3^2); Habit 5b; Infinity 63; Liberty ic, 3c, 50!;
Mind  9b,  iog; Necessity and Contingency 53(1) ; Opinion 2b; Virtue and
Vice  5c  /  see  also  Angel  3c; Emotion 43(2); Law ib, 4c; Memory and
Imagination id; Mind ib(2), id, ie(3), 53; One and Many 5c; Prudence 43,
5b;  Sense  3 e Will power: see Will 93 Will to believe: see Opinion 2b;
Will 3b(i) 1344

[1379a]
Wisdom:  see  ch  ioi:  Wisdom;  and  Good and Evil 6a; Happiness 20(7);
Metaphysics i; Mind 5c; Philosophy 43-40, 6a-6b; Prudence 1, 2a; Science
ia(i);  Virtue  and  Vice -^ 2a(2), 8e / see also Dialectic 2a; TheotSgy
3b,  4a;  Truth  8e Wishful thinking: see Desire 5b; Emotion 3b; Opinion
2a;  Will  3b(i)  Woman:  see  Family  5-5C; Man 6b Word of God: see God
6c(i);  Language  12;  Prophecy  3d; Religion ib(i); Sign and Symbol 5e;
Theology 4b Words: see Idea 4a; Language i, 2~3b, 4a, 5a; Poetry ib, 7c;
Sign  and  Symbol id, if—4c!, 5f; Time 6d Work (phys.): see Mechanics 6e
Working  classes: see Labor 3-3^ 4b, j-jf; Progress 3b; Revolution 4-5C;
Slavery  5—5b;  State  5d-5e  /  see also Justice 8c(i); Liberty 2d, 6b;
Oligarchy  4,  5c; Opposition 5b Working conditions and hours: see Labor
7a;  Progress  3b  World: see ch 102: World; and Astronomy 5; Beauty 7b;
Cause 7a~7c; Change 13; Element 5h; Eternity 2; God 5d-5e, 7a, 11; 1345

[1379b]
INVENTORY  OF  TERMS  Zoology  Infinity  3c, 5a; Man ioc, ioe; Mind 10a;
Nature  ib,  3a;  One and Many ia-ib; Prophecy 4d; Relation 3, 5b; Space
3a;  Time  2D-2C;  World  3-3^ 6c World citizenship: see Citizen 8 World
government,  world  state:  see  Citizen  8; Love 4c; State iof; War and
Peace  i  id World peace: see War and Peace nd World soul: see Mind 10b;
Soul  ia,  4c;  World ia Worship: w God 3c; Liberty 2b; Religion 2b, 2d,
2f,  6e  /  see also Astronomy 12; Duty n; Justice 11b; Law 3b(i)~3b(2);
Nature  6a;  Religion  6c(2)  Written  word:  see  Language 3b Year: see
Astronomy 7; Time 4 Youth: see Family 6c-6e; Life and Death 6c; Man 6c /
see  also  Art  10a;  Education 4b; Family 7C~7d; Virtue and Vice 4<d(i)
Zoology, subject matter of: see Animal Life and Death 3-4, 6a

[1380a]
Volume  I  3: Aristocracy 57 53 9: Chance 186 59 23: Eternity 444 73 43:
Knowledge 887 93

[1380b]
LOCATION  OF OUTLINES OF TOPICS Volume II page ch i : Angel 9 CH 51: Man
11  2 : Animal 27 52: Mathematics 52 : Matter 70 4: Art 72 54: Mechanics
99  5:  Astronomy  97  55:  Medicine  120  6:  Beauty 118 56: Memory and
Imagination  141  7: Being 134 57: Metaphysics 165 8: Cause 163 58: Mind
179  :  Monarchy  211  10: Change 200 60: Nature 232 11: Citizen 225 61:
Necessity and Contingency 259 12: Constitution 241 62: Oligarchy 276 13:
Courage  259  63:  One  and  Many  288 14: Custom and Convention 276 64:
Opinion  3"  15: Definition 294 65: Opposition 33° 16: Democracy 311 66:
Philosophy  350  17:  Desire  33o  67: Physics 370 18: Dialectic 352 68:
Pleasure  and Pain 384 19: Duty 365 69: Poetry 409 20: Education 383 70:
Principle  428  21  :  Element  406 71: Progress 444 22: Emotion 421 72:
Prophecy  460  :  Prudence  479 24: Evolution 459 74- Punishment 496 25:
Experience  475 75: Quality 520 26: Family 495 76: Quantity 533 27: Fate
520  77:  Reasoning  554  28:  Form 535 78: Relation 576 29: God 558 79:
Religion  597  30:  Good and Evil 613 80: Revolution 634 31 : Government
644  81: Rhetoric 654 32: Habit 673 82: Same and Other 673 33: Happiness
694 83: Science 689 34: History 7i8 84: Sense 7i3 35: Honor 735 85: Sign
and  Symbol  738 36: Hypothesis 756 86: Sin 760 37: Idea 769 87: Slavery
782  38: Immortality 794 88: Soul 798 39: Induction 811 89 Space 818 40:
Infinity  824  90:  State  835  41 : Judgment 843 91: Temperance 873 42:
Justice  857  92  Theology 890 : Time 904 44: Labor 928 94 Truth 922 45:
Language  949 95 Tyranny 946 46: Law 970 96 Universal and Particular 965
47:  Liberty  999  97 Virtue and Vice 983 48: Life and Death 1020 98 War
and Peace 1019 49: Logic 1042 99 Wealth 1049 50: Love 1058 100 Will 1082
101 Wisdom 1 109 102 World 1 130 printed IN THE U.S. a. 1346

[1381a]
[página ilustrada]

[1381b]
[página ilustrada]

[1382a]
§|  THE  GREAT  IDEAS,  Volumes  2  and  3  ANGEL ANIMAL ARISTOCRACY ART
ASTRONOMY  BEAUTY BEING CAUSE CHANCE CHANGE CITIZEN CONSTITUTION COURAGE
CUSTOM   AND  CONVENTION  DEFINITION  DEMOCRACY  DESIRE  DIALECTIC  DUTY
EDUCATION ELEMENT EMOTION ETERNITY EVOLUTION EXPERIENCE v^=^F^Fi£p^H^^

[1382b]
FAMILY  FATE  FORM  GOD GOOD AND EVIL GOVERNMENT HABIT HAPPINESS HISTORY
HONOR  HYPOTHESIS  IDEA  IMMORTALITY INDUCTION INFINITY JUDGMENT JUSTICE
KNOWLEDGE  LABOR  LANGUAGE  LAW  LIBERTY LIFE AND DEATH LOGIC LOVE MAN -
MATHEMATICS

[1383a]
•  MATTER  MECHANICS  MEDICINE  MEMORY  AND IMAGINATION METAPHYSICS MIND
MONARCHY  NATURE  NECESSITY  AND SIN SLAVERY SOUL s^v^ OLIGARCHY ONE AND
MANY  OPINION  OPPOSITION  PHILOSOPHY  PHYSICS  PLEASURE AND PAIN POETRY
PRINCIPLE   PROGRESS   PROPHECY  PRUDENCE  PUNISHMENT  QUALITY  QUANTITY
REASONING CONTINGENCY ££y^ -^A^S^A^^A-C

[1383b]
.  RELATION  RELIGION  REVOLUTION  RHETORIC SAME AND OTHER SCIENCE SENSE
SIGN  AND  SYMBOL  SPACE  STATE  TEMPERANCE  THEOLOGY TIME TRUTH TYRANNY
UNIVERSAL  AND  PARTICULAR  VIRTUE  AND  VICE  WAR AND PEACE WEALTH WILL
WISDOM   WORLD   l^A^A;   y^y^7   ^5^^^   '   r^5*->   ^s^  ^Sf-jS^  >3^
-•y^y^y^y^y^y^y^'y^'y^y^y^-T^m'     r^p-y^     ^3r>?5r>«r>?af''«^«^«Py^>
r"=S?y:s=y^y^y^y=^                      rs*'                     ^^T^y^r
f^y^y=Sy=Sy^y=^y=^y^y^y^y=^y^y^y^y^y^y^-;

[1384a]
ret iti. st rd

hate

> boy meet mdutecti ae Te trate | s ‘> -¢;* r.

¢ oe 0

i 5

ME RAE BRK eR

+ nee toe!

Reta oy

[1384b]
i Ae

ARCHBISHOP MITTY LIBRARY

Hi

UI

T 24114