CHAPTER: ANGELS

INTRODUCTION

INFLUENCED by a long
tradition of religious symbolism in painting and poetry, our
imagination responds to the word "angel" by
picturing
a winged
figure
robed
in
dazzling
white and having the bodily aspect of a human
being.
- This image, common to believers and unbelievers, contains features which represent some
of the elements of meaning in the abstract conception of angels as this is found in the writings
of Jewish and Christian theologians and in related discussions by the philosophers. The human appearance suggests that angels, like men,
are persons; that they are most essentially characterized by their intelligence. The wings suggest
the
function of angels— their
service
as
messengers from God to man. The aura of light
which surrounds them
signifies, according
to
established conventions of symbolism, the spirituality of angels.
It suggests that
to imagine
angels with bodies is to use a pictorial metaphor.
Another interpretation might be put upon
this aura of light if one considers the role which
the notion of angel has played in the history of
thought. Wherever that notion has entered into
discussions
of God and man,
of matter,
mind, and
soul, of knowledge and
love, and
even of time,
space, and motion,
it has
cast
light upon these other topics. The illumination
which has been and can be derived from the
idea of angels as a special kind of being or nature
is in no way affected by doubts or denials of
their existence.
Whether such beings exist or not,
the fact
that they are conceivable has significance for
theory and analysis. Those who do not believe
in
the existence—or even
the
possible
existence—of Utopias nevertheless
regard them as
fictions
useful
analytically
in
appraising
accepted realities. What an ideal society would be
like can be considered apart from the question
of its existence; and, so considered, it functions
as
an
hypothesis
in
political and
economic
thought. What sort of being an angel would be
if one existed can likewise serve as an hypothesis
in
the examination of a wide
variety
of
theoretical problems.
The idea of angels does in fact serve in precisely this way as an analytical tool. It sharpens
our understanding of what man is, how his mind
operates, what the soul
is, what manner of existence and action anything would have apart
from matter. Hence it suggests how matter and
its motions in time and space determine the
characteristics of corporeal existence.
Pascal's
remark— that "man is neither angel nor brute,
and the unfortunate thing is that he who would
act the angel
acts
the brute"—points
to the
different conceptions of man which result from
supposing him to be either angel or brute rather
than neither. Such views of human nature, considered in the chapters on Animal and Man,
cannot be fully explored without reference to
theories of the human mind or soul in its relation to matter and to body. As the chapters on
Mind and Soul indicate, theories carrying the
names of Plato and Descartes, which attribute
to the human mind or soul the being and powers of a purely
spiritual substance or entity,
seem to place man in the company of the angels.
In this tradition Locke applies the word "spirits"
equally
to human minds and
to
suprahuman intelligences.
It would be misleading
to suppose
that the
idea of angels is primarily a construction of the
philosophers—a fiction invented for their analytical purposes; or that it
is simply their conception of a supra-mundane reaUty, concerning
the existence and nature of which they dispute.
In the literature of western civilization, angels
first appear by name or reference in the Old

and the New Testaments. Readers of the Bible
will remember many scenes in which an angel
of the Lord performs the mission of acquainting
man with God's will. Among the most memorable of such occasions are the visits of the angels
to Abraham and Lot and the angelic ministry
of Gabriel in the Annunciation to Mary.
In one book of the Bible, Tobias (Tobit, as
it is called in the King James Apocrypha), one
of the
leading
characters
is
the angel Raphael. Through most of the story he appears as
a man, but at the end, after he has accomplished
his mission, he reveals his identity. "I am the
angel Raphael," he declares,
one of the seven, who stand before the Lord.
And when they had heard these things they were
troubled; and being seized with fear they fell upon
the ground on their face.
And
the angel
said
to them: Peace be
to you.
Fear not.
For when I was with you, I was there by the will
of God: bless ye him and sing praises to him.
I seemed to eat and to drink with you; but I use
an invisible meat and drink, which cannot be seen
by men.
It is time therefore that I return to him that sent
me.
.
.
.
And when he had said these things, he was taken
from their sight; and they could see him no more.
As A RESULT of scriptural exegesis and commentary, the angels become a fundamental topic for
Jewish theologians from Philo to Maimonides,
and for such Christian theologians as Augustine,
Scotus Erigena, Gregory the Great, Aquinas,
Luther,
Calvin,
Pascal, and
Schleiermacher.
They figure in the great poetry of the Judaeo-Christian
tradition—in the Divine Comedy of
Dante,
in
Paradise
Lost
of Milton, and
in
Chaucer's Canterbury Tales and Goethe's Faust.
The philosophers, especially in the 17th and
1 8th centuries, are motivated by Scripture or
provoked by theology to consider the existence,
the nature, and the activity of angels. Hobbes,
for example, attacks the supposition that angels
are immaterial on the ground that the notion
of incorporeal substance
is self-contradictory,
and undertakes to re-interpret all the scriptural
passages in which angels are described as spirits.
After examining a great many, he says that "to
mention
all the places of the Old Testament
where the name of Angel
is found, would be
too long. Therefore to comprehend them all at
once, I say, there is no text in that part of the
Old Testament, which the Church of England
holdeth for Canonical, from which we can conclude, there
is, or hath been created, any permanent thing (understood by the name oi Spirit
or Angel)
that hath not quantity
.
.
. and, in
sum, which is not (taking Body for that which
is somewhat or somewhere) Corporeal.**
All the passages can be interpreted, Hobbes
thinks, simply in the sense in which "angel**
means "messenger" and "most often, a messenger of God," which
signifies "anything that
makes known his extra-ordinary presence.'* If,
instead of existing only when they carry God's
word to men, the angels are supposed to have
permanent being, then they must be corporeal.
As "in the resurrection men shall be permanent
and not incorporeal," Hobbes writes, "so therefore also are the angels ... To men that understand the signification of these words, substance
and incorporeal—and mean by "incorporeal"
having no body at all, not just a subtle body
the words taken together "imply a contradicHence Hobbes argues that to say "an
tion.
angel, or spirit, is (in that sense) an incorporeal
substance,
is to say in effect that there
is no
angel or spirit at all. Considering therefore the
signification of the word angel in the Old Testament, and the nature of dreams and visions that
happen to men by the ordinary way of nature,"
Hobbes concludes that the angels are "nothing
but supernatural apparitions of the fancy, raised
by the special and extraordinary operation of
God, thereby to make his presence and commandments known to mankind, and chiefly to
his own people."
Locke seems to take the exactly opposite position.
Asserting
that we have "no
clear or
distinct idea of substance in general," he does
not think spirits any less intelligible than bodies.
"The idea of corporeal substance,'' he writes, "is
as remote from our conceptions and apprehensions, as that of spiritual substance or spirit; and
therefore, from our not having any notion of
the substance of spirit, we can no more conclude
its non-existence, than we can,
for the
same reason, deny the existence of body." Just
as we form the complex idea of bodies by supposing their qualities, such as figure and motion,
or color and weight, to co-exist in some substratum; so by supposing the activities we find
in ourselves—such as "thinking, understanding.

willing, knowing, and the power of beginning
motion, etc."— to co-exist
in some substance,
*'we are able to frame the complex idea of an
immaterial spirit.''
Not only does Locke think that "we have as
clear a perception and notion of immaterial substances
as we have of material," but he
also
finds the traditional doctrine of a hierarchy of
angels quite acceptable to reason. "It is not impossible to conceive, nor repugnant to reason,
that there may be many species of spirits, as
much separated and
diversified one from another by distinct properties whereof we have
no ideas, as the species of sensible things are distinguished one from another by qualities which
we know and observe in them."
Locke goes even further—beyond the mere
possibility of angels to the likelihood of their
real existence. His reasoning resembles the traditional argument of the theologians on this difficult
point. "When we consider the
infinite
power and wisdom of the Maker," he writes,
"we have reason to think that
it
is suitable to
the magnificent harmony of the Universe, and
the great design and
infinite goodness of the
Architect, that the species of creatures should
also, by gentle degrees, ascend upward from us
toward
his infinite perfection, as we see they
gradually descend from us downwards."
Such speculations concerning
the existence
and the order of angels are usually thought to
be the province of the theologian rather than
the philosopher. But Bacon, like Locke, does
not think it unfitting for the philosopher to inquire into such matters. In natural theology
for him a part of philosophy—Bacon thinks it is
improper "from the contemplation of nature,
and the principles of human reason, to dispute
or urge anything with vehemence
as
to
the
mysteries of faith." But "it
is otherwise," he
declares, "as to the nature of spirits and angels;
this being neither unsearchable nor forbid, but
in
a great
part
level
to the human mind on
account of their affinity."
He does not further instruct us concerning
angels in the Advancement of Learning, but in
the Novum Organum he throws light on their
nature as well as ours by touching on one characteristic difference between
the human and
the angelic mind. Discussing there the theory of
induction, he holds that
"it
is only for God
(the bcstowcr and creator of forms), and perhaps for angels or intelligences at once to recognize forms affirmatively
at
the
first glance of
contemplation."
Unlike most of the great
ideas with which
we are concerned, the idea of angel seems to be
limited in its historical scope.
It
is not merely
that since the i8th century the discussion has
dwindled, but also that the idea makes no appearance in the great books of pagan antiquity
—certainly not in the strict sense of the term,
whereby "angel"
signifies a creature of God,
spiritual in substance and nature, and playing
a role in the divine government of the universe.
There
are,
nevertheless, analogous conceptions in the religion and philosophy of the ancients; and in philosophy at least, the points of
resemblance between
the analogous concepts
are sufficiently strong to establish a continuity
of discussion.
Furthermore,
elements
in
the
thought of Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus exercise
a
critical
influence on
Judaeo-Christian
angelology.
Gibbon relates how the early Christians made
the connection between the gods of polytheism
and
their doctrine about angels.
"It was the
universal sentiment both of the church and of
heretics," he writes, "that the daemons were
the authors,
the
patrons, and
the objects of
idolatry. Those rebellious spirits who had been
degraded from
the
rank of angels, and
cast
down into the infernal pit, were still permitted
to roam upon the earth, to torment the bodies
and
to seduce
the minds of sinful men. The
daemons soon discovered and abused the natural propensity of the human
heart
towards
devotion, and, artfully withdrawing the adoration
of mankind
from
their
Creator,
they
usurped the place and honors of the Supreme
Deity."
In the polytheistic religions of antiquity, the
demi-gods or inferior
deities are
beings superior in nature and power to man. "The polytheist and the philosopher, the Greek and the
barbarian," writes Gibbon, "were alike accustomed to conceive a long succession, an infinite
chain of angels, or daemons, or deities, or aeons,
or emanations, issuing from the throne of light."
In
Plato's Symposium,
for example, Diotima
tells Socrates
that Love
"is intermediate
be-

THE)GREAT IDEAS
twcen the divine and the mortd
j
. .and interprets between gods and men; conveying and
taking across to the gods the prayers and sacrifices of men, and to men the commands and repHes of the gods; he is the mediator who spans
the chasm which divides them." Love, Diotima
explains, is only one of "these spirits and intermediate powers" which "are many and diverse."
Such demi-gods
are intermediate by
their
very nature. Although superhuman in knowledge and action, they
still are not completely
divine. Occupying a place between men and
gods, they are, according to Plato, "by nature
neither mortal nor immortal." Their existence
is necessary to fill out the hierarchy of natures.
They are links in what has come to be called
"the great chain of being."
The analogy with the angels arises primarily
from
this fact of hierarchy. Both pagan and
Christian religions believe in an order of supernatural or at least superhuman beings graded in
perfection and power. In both,
these
beings
serve as messengers from the gods to men; they
act sometimes as guardians or protectors, sometimes as traducers, deceivers, and enemies of
man. But the analogy cannot be carried much
further
than
this. The
angels,
according
to
Christian
teaching,
are not
inferior gods,
or
even demi-gods. As compared with the "intermediate spirits" of pagan religion, they are less
human in character, as well
as
less divine.
Nevertheless, the reader of the great poems of
antiquity
will find
a
striking
parallelism
between the heavenly insurrection which underlies
the action of Prometheus Bound and
the
angelic warfare in Paradise Lost.
In the writings of Plato, Aristotle, and Piotinus, philosophical inquiry turns from the sensible world of material things to consider the existence and nature of an order of purely intelligible beings. As there is an inherent connection
between being perceptible to the senses and being material, so that which is purely intelligible
must be completely immaterial.
If ideas exist
independently—in
their own right and apart
from knowing or thinking minds— then they
constitute such an order of purely intelligible
entities.
At this point a number of difficult questions
arise. Are the intelligiblcs also intelligences, /.<?.,
are they an order of knowcrs as well as a realm
of knowables ? Can they be
regarded, as substances ? And if so, do they have a mode of action appropriate to their mode of being—action
which
is other than knowing, action which in
some way impinges on the course of events or
the motions of the physical world?
yjm.]?
Plotinus answers affirmatively that the purely intelligible beings are also pure intelligences,
but he does not conceive them as having any
power or action except that of knowledge. Another answer to these questions given in antiquity and
the Middle Ages
is that the inteUigences are the celestial motors, the movers of
the heavenly bodies. "Since we see," Aristotle
writes, "that besides the simple spatial movement of the universe, which we say that the
first and unmovable substance produces, there
are
other
spatial movements— those
of
the
planets—which are eternal (for a body which
moves in a circle moves eternally), each of these
movements also must be caused by a substance,
both unmovable in
itself and eternal." These
secondary movers, Aristotle thinks, are "of the
same number as the movements of the stars,"
and not only must they be eternal and unmovable, as is the prime mover, but also "without
magnitude" or immaterial.
Plato offers an alternative hypothesis— that
the
celestial bodies are
alive and have
souls.
This hypothesis, like Aristotle's, tends in the
Middle Ages
to be
restated
in terms of the
theory of angels. Aquinas reports Augustine as
thinking that "if the heavenly bodies are really
living beings,
their souls must be akin to the
angelic nature." He himself holds that "spiritual substances are united to them as movers to
things moved,"
the proof of which, he
says,
"lies in the fact that whereas nature moves to
one fixed end, in which having attained
it,
it
rests; this does not appear in the movement of
the heavenly bodies. Hence it follows that they
are moved by some intellectual substances."
The question whether intelligences govern
the planets also occupies the attention of an
astronomer
like
Kepler. Although he
denies
any need for such intelligences—among other
reasons because planetary motion is not circular
but
elliptical—he
argues
that
the
celestial
movements are the work either "of the natural
power of the bodies, or else a work of the soul

acting uniformly in accordance with those bodily powers." But whether or not they are to be
regarded as movers^ as well as ^powers and knoiuables, the intelligences represent for ancient and
mediaeval thought
a mode of being exempt
from the vicissitudes of physical change even as
it is separate from matter.
When modern philosophers consider spirits or
spiritual being, they seldom deal with the ancient
speculations about pure
intelligibles or
separate intelligences without being influenced
by the theological doctrine of angels which developed in mediaeval thought.
The extent of this doctrine may be judged
from the fact that the Sutnma
Theologica of
Aquinas contains a whole treatise on the angels,
as well as additional questions on the speech of
angels, their hierarchies and orders, the division
between
the good and
the
bad
angels, and
their action on men— the guardianship of the
good angels and
the
assaults of the demons.
That these additional questions are contained
in the
treatise on divine government throws
some light on their theological significance.
The primary fact about the angelic nature is
immateriahty. An angel
is immaterial both in
its substantial being and in its characteristic activity which, says Aquinas,
is "an altogether
immaterial mode of operation." Being immaterial, they are also incorruptible. "Nothing is
corrupted except by
its form being separated
from the matter
.
.
. Consequently," Aquinas
writes, "a subject composed of matter and form
ceases to be actually when the form is separated
from the matter. But if the form subsists in its
own being, as happens in the angels,
it cannot
lose its being." To signify that they are intelligences existing apart from matter,
the angels
are sometimes
called
"subsisting forms" and
sometimes "separate substances."
Although they are imperishable in being and
have immortal life, the angels are not, like God,
truly eternal. "That heaven of heavens which
Thou createdst in the beginning is some intellectual creature," Augustine writes, but
it
is in
"no ways coeternal unto Thee." As created, the
angels have a beginning. Yet, while not eternal,
neither are they temporal creatures in continual
flux,
but,
according
to
Augustine,
they
"partake of Thy
eternity
.
.
.
through
the
sweetness of that most happy contemplation of
Thyself.
.
. cleaving close unto Thee, placed beyond all the rolling vicissitudes of times." It is
for this reason that the angels are spoken of as
"aeviternal."
The familiar question concerning the number of angels able to stand on a needle's point
if it was ever asked by mediaeval theologians
merely poses the problem of how an incorporeal substance occupies space. The way in which
Aquinas discusses "angels in relation to place"
discloses how the question serves to raise generally significant issues concerning the nature of
space and quantity, and their relation to causality. He points out that a body occupies place in
a
circumscribed
fashion,
i.e.,
its
dimensive
quantity is contained within the space; whereas
"an angel
is said to be in a corporeal place by
application of the angelic power in any manner
whatever to the place.
.
.
. An incorporeal substance virtually contains the thing with which it
comes into contact, and is not contained by it."
To an objector who thinks that since, unlike
bodies, angels do not fill a place, several can be
in the same place at the same time, Aquinas replies
that two angels cannot be
in
the same
place because "it is impossible for two complete
causes to be immediately the cause of one and
the same thing." Since an angel
is where he
acts, and since by the power of his action he
contains the place at which he acts, "there cannot be but one angel at one place."
Angels are also said to go from one place to
another
without
traversing
the
intervening
space and without the lapse of time. Considering their immateriality, such action
is less remarkable for angels to perform than is the action of electrons, which, according to modern
quantum mechanics, jump from outer to inner
orbits of the atom without taking time or passing through inter-orbital space.
The immateriality of angels has other consequences which throw comparative light on the
conditions of corporeal existence. In the world
of physical
things we
ordinarily
think of a
species as including a number of individuals.
While
all men have the same specific nature,
they differ numerically or individually. But because
angels
are
immaterial
substances,
it
is
held
that
each
angel
is
a
distinct
species.
"Things which agree
in species but
differ in

number," Aquinas explains, "agree in form but
are distinguished materially.
If, therefore, the
angels are not composed of matter and form
.
.
.
it follows that it is impossible for two angels to
be of one species."
Furthermore,
as Aquinas
states in another
place, among "incorporeal substances there cannot be diversity of number without diversity
of
species and
inequality
of nature." Each
species
is necessarily higher or lower than another, so that the society of angels is a perfect
hierarchy in which each member occupies a distinct rank. No two angels are equal as, on the
supposition that they share in the same specific
humanity, all men are. Yet such names as "seraphim" and "cherubim" and the distinction between archangels and angels indicate an organization
of
spiritual
substances
into
various
groups—according to the
tradition, into nine
orders or subordinate hierarchies.
The nine orders or ranks of angelic being are
described
by Dante
in
the
Paradiso
as
distinct circles of love and light. Using these metaphors he thus reports his vision of the heavenly
hierarchy. "I saw a Point which was raying out
light so keen that the sight on which it blazes
must needs close because of its intense brightness.
.
.
. Perhaps as near as a halo seems
to
girdle the light which paints it, when the vapor
that
bears
it
is most dense,
at such distance
around the Point a circle of fire was whirling so
rapidly that it would have surpassed that motion which most swiftly girds the world; and
this was girt around by another, and that by
the third, and the third then by the fourth, by
the fifth the fourth, and then by the sixth the
fifth. Thereon the seventh followed, so widespread now in compass that the messenger of
Juno entire would be narrow to contain
it. So
the eighth and ninth."
Beatrice explains to him how the relation of
the
circles
to one another and
to
the Point
which
is God depends upon their measure of
love
and
truth,
whereby
there
is
"in
each
heaven a marvellous agreement with its Intelligence, of greater to more and of smaller to less."
She then amplifies her meaning: "The first circles have shown to thee the Seraphim and the
Cherubim. Thus swiftly they follow their own
bonds, in order to liken themselves to the Point
as most they can, and they can in proportion
as they are exalted to see. Those other loves,
which go around them, are called Thrones of
the divine aspect, because they terminated the
first triad.
.
.
. The next triad, that in like manner bourgeons in this sempiternal spring which
the nightly Aries despoils not, perpetually sing
Hosannah with three melodies, which sound in
the three orders of joy ...
first Dominations,
and then Virtues; the third order is of Powers.
Then in the two penultimate dances, the Principalities
and
Archangels
circle;
the
last
is
wholly of Angelic sports. These orders all gaze
upward, and downward so prevail, that towards
God all are drawn, and all draw."
The theory of angels
raises many questions
regarding the similarity and difference between
them and disembodied souls. But for comparison with men, perhaps the most striking consequences of the theory of angels as bodiless intelligences concern the manner of their knowledge and government. The comparison can be
made on quite different views of the nature of
man and the soul. In fact, diverse conceptions
of man or the soul can themselves be compared
by reference
to
the angelic properties which
one conception attributes to human nature and
another denies.
Lacking bodies, the angels are without sense-perception and
imagination. Not
being
immersed in time and motion, they do not reason
or think discursively as men do by reasoning
from premises to conclusion. Whereas "human
intellects," according to Aquinas, "obtain their
perfection in the knowledge of truth by a kind
of movement and discursive intellectual operation ... as they advance from one known thing
to another," the angels, "from the knowledge
of a known principle
.
.
. straightway perceive
as known all its consequent conclusions
.
.
. with
no discursive process at all." Their knowledge
is intuitive and immediate, not by means of
concepts abstracted from experience or otherwise formed, but through the archetypal ideas
infused in them at their creation by God. That
is why, Aquinas goes on
to
say, angels "are
called
intellectual beings"
as contrasted with
such rational natures as "human souls which acquire knowledge of truth discursively." If men
"possessed the fulness of intellectual light, like
the angels, then in the first grasping of princi-

whole range, by perceiving whatever could be
reasoned out from them."
It would appear from this that conceptions of
the human intellect which minimize its dependence on sense and imagination, and which emphasize the intuitive rather than the discursive
character of human thought, attribute angehc
power to man. The same may be said of theories
of human knowledge which account for its origin in terms of innate ideas or implanted principles. Still another example of the attribution
of angelic properties to man
is to be found in
the supposition that human beings can communicate with one another by telepathy. The angels are
telepathic; one
angel,
it
is
said, can
make its ideas known to another simply by an
act of will and without any exterior means of
communication.
Lacking bodies, the angels are without bodily
emotions,
free from
the human
conflict
between reason and passion, and completely directed in their love—or the motion of their will
—by what they know.
In the Divine Comedy
Beatrice speaks of the angelic society as one in
which "the Eternal Love disclosed himself in
new loves." Adverting to the division between
the good and the bad angels, she
tells Dante,
*' those whom thou seest here were modest in
grateful recognition of the Goodness which had
made them apt for intelligence so great, wherefore
their vision was exalted with illuminant
grace and by their merit, so that they have full
and steadfast will." Yet their vision and love of
God
is not equal. In heaven "the Primal Light
that irradiates it all is received in it by as many
modes
as
are
the
splendors with which
the
Light pairs Itself. Wherefore, since the affection
follows upon the act that conceives, in this nature the sweetness of love diversely glows and
warms."
Such a society, governed by knowledge and
love, has no need for the application of coercive
force, for angels are ordered to one another in
such a way that no misunderstandings or disagreements can occur among them. The philosophical anarchist who proposes the ideal of a
human
society without
restraint or coercion
seems, therefore, to be angelicizing men, or at
least to be wishing for heaven on earth. Conceiving government on earth
in other terms,
the writers of The Federalist remark
that
"if
men were
angels, no government would
be
necessary." If they had considered that the angelic
society
is governed by
love alone and
without force, they might have said, "if men
were angels, no coercion would be necessary in
their government."
One of the great theological dogmas asserts
that, from the beginning, the angels are divided
into two hosts— the good and evil spirits. The
sin of Lucifer, or Satan, and his followers is that
of disobedience, or rebeUion against God, motivated by a pride which refuses to be satisfied
with being less than God. As Satan himself says,
in Paradise Lost,
.
.
. pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring in Heav'n against Heav'ns matchless King.
... Ail his good prov'd
ill in me,
And wrought but malice; lifted up so high
I 'sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher
Would set me highest, and in a moment quit
The debt immense of endless gratitude
.
.
.
And that word
Disdain forbids me, and my dread of shame
Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd
Then to submit, boasting I could subdue
Th' Omnipotent.
The theologians try to define precisely the
nature of Satan's pride in wishing to be God.
"To be as God,'' Aquinas explains, "can be understood
in two ways:
first, by equality;
secondly, by likeness. An angel could not seek to
be as God in the first way, because by natural
knowledge he knew that this was impossible
.
.
.
And even supposing
it were possible,
it would
be against natural desire, because there exists in
everything
the natural
desire
to preserve
its
own nature which would not be preserved were
it to be changed into another nature.
Consequently, no creature of a lower nature can ever
covet the grade of a higher nature, just as an ass
does not desire to be a horse."
It must be in the other way, then, Aquinas
thinks, that Satan sinned by wishing to be like
God. But this requires further explanation. "To
desire to be as God according to likeness can
happen in two ways.
In one way, as to that
likeness whereby everything
is likened unto
God. And so, if anyone desire in this way to be
Godlike, he commits no sin; provided that he
desires such likeness in proper order, that is to

B
say, that he may obtain It from God. But he
would sin were he to desire to be like God even
in the right way, but of his own power, and not
of God's. In another way, he may desire to be
like God in some respect which
is not natural
to one;
e.g.,
if one were
to
desire
to
create
heaven and earth, which
is proper to God, in
which desire there would be sin."
In this last way, Aquinas asserts, "the devil
desired to be as God, Not that he desired to
resemble God by being subject to no one else
absolutely, for thus he would be desiring his
own non-being, since no creature can exist except by participating under God." But he "desired as the last end of his beatitude something
which he could attain by virtue of his own nature, turning his appetite away from the supernatural beatitude which
is attained by God's
grace."
In the original sin of Lucifer and the other
fallen angels, as well as in all subsequent intervention by Satan or his demons in the affairs
of men, lie the theological mysteries of the origin of evil in a world created by God's love and
goodness, and of the liberty of those creatures
who, while free, can only do God's will.
As indicated in the chapter on Sin, the fall of Adam
from grace and innocence involves the same
mysteries. Man's destiny is connected with the
career of Lucifer in traditional Christian teaching, not only on the side of sin, but also with
regard to man's redemption—salvation replacing the fallen angels by the souls of the elect in
the heavenly choir.
Among the most extraordinary moments in
our literature are those in which Lucifer talks
with God about mankind, as in Paradise Lost',
or about a particular man,
as in the Book of
Job or in the Prologue
in Heaven
in
Faust.
Their pagan
parallel
is the speech of Prometheus
to
a
silent
Zeus, but Prometheus, unlike Satan,
is man's benefactor and he can defy
Zeus
because
the
Fates,
whose
secret
he
knows,
rule
over
the
gods.
Lucifer, on
the
contrary', seems always to be in the service of
God. When he appears to Ivan in the Brothers
Karamazov, he protests, "I love men genuinely
.
.
. and against the grain
I serve to produce
events and do what
is irrational because
I am
commanded to." If it were otherwise, the warfare between the powers of light and darkness
would have to be construed as a battle between
equals, which, according
to Christian orthodoxy, is the Manichean heresy that regards the
world as the battle ground of the forces of good
and evil.
-a^i;-? t>vij!ujtii 3fU'ei!?r
•
The word "angelic" usually has the connotation of perfect moral goodness, but that must
not lead us to forget that the demons are an^
gehc in their nature although of a diabohcal or
evil will. Nor should the fact of Satan's subservience to God cause us to forget that Christian
theology tries not to underestimate the power
of the devil in his goings and comings on earth.
Satan tried to tempt even Christ, and throughout the New Testament the destruction of the
diabolical influence over men occupies a prominent
place. The intervention of the devil in
man's life provides, if not the theme, the background of Goethe's Faust.
As the theory of demonic influences and diabolical possession is an integral part of the traditional doctrine of angels, so, in modern times,
demonology has been a major focus of attack
upon
theological teaching concerning
spirits.
Moralists have thought
it possible to explain
human depravity without recourse to the seductions of the
devil, and
psychiatrists have
thought
it possible for men to go mad or to
behave as if bewitched without the help of evil
spirits.
The
idea of the
devil,
according
to
Freud, is a religious fiction— "the best way out
in acquittal of God" for those who try "to reconcile the undeniable existence ... of evil with
His omnipotence and supreme goodness."
The characteristic skepticism of our age has
been directed against the belief in angels generally. It casts doubt by satire or denies by argument the existence of spirits both good and evil.
Yet, all arguments considered,
it may be wondered whether the existence of angels—or, in
philosophical terms, the existence ofpure intelligences— is or is not still a genuine issue. Or are
there two issues here, one philosophical and the
other theological, one to be resolved or left unresolved on the level of argument, the other to
be answered dogmatically by the declarations
of a religious faith ?
(%-r

(H

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. Inferior deities or demi-gods in polytheistic religion

2. The philosophical consideration of pure intelligences, spiritual substances, supra-
human persons n
 2a. The celestial motors or secondary prime movers: the intelligences attached to
 the celestial bodies
 2b. Our knowledge of immaterial beings

3. The conception of angels in Judaeo-Christian doctrine
 3a. The first creatures of God: their place in the order of creation
 3b. The angelic nature
 3c. The aeviternity and incorruptibility of angels
 3d. The angelic intellect and angelic knowledge
 3e. The angelic will and angelic love
 3f. Angelic action: its characteristics in general
 3g. The angelic hierarchy: the inequality, order, and number of the angels and their
 relation to one another

4. Comparison of angels with men and with disembodied souls: their relation to the
blessed in the heavenly choir

5. The distinction and comparison of the good and the bad angels
 5a. The orig in of the division between angels and demons: the sin of Lucifer or
 Satan
 5& The society of the demons: the rule of Satan over the powers of darkness

6. The role of the angels in the government of the universe
 6a. The ministry of the good angels in the affairs of men: guardianship
 6b. The intervention of the demons in the affairs of men: temptation, possession

7. God and Satan
 7a. Warfare between the powers of light and darkness: their struggle for dominion
 over man
 7& Lucifer in the service of God

8. Criticism and satire with respect to the belief in angels and demons

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Other discussions relevant to the theory of angels, see ETERNITY 43; IDEA
1c;

70; MIND IDC; Souikdfe); and for the metaphysical consideration

see BEING ybfa),

The theological doctrine of the fallen angels, see SIN 3, 3b; and for the

Heaven and Hell, see ETERNITY 4d; GOOD AND EVIL 1d, 2b; IMMORTALITY 5e-MENT
5e(i).

The theory of the celestial motors, see ASTRONOMY 8b; CHANGE 14.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divide

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collectio

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the w

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter o

HEYWOOD. The Hierarchi

I. H. LAWRFNCE. Of Our Co

AUGUSTINE. De Genesi ad Litteram Angels

CAMFIELD A

Theolo AQUINAS. On Being and Essence, CH 4

Their Ministries

.Summa Contra Gentiles, BK n, CH 46-55, 91-

LEIBNITZ. Discourse on

101; BK in, CH 104-110

XXXVI

Quaesttones Disputatae, De Ventate, QQ 8-9, De

.

Halo, Q 16; De Anima, A 7 JOHN REYNOLDS, Inquiri

.On Spiritual Creatures, AA 1-3, 5-8 Economy of the Angel

SWEDENBORG Angelic Wis

. De Substantiis Separates

Providence DANTE. Convivio (The Banquet), SECOND TREATISE,

VOLTAIRE. "Angels," in

CH5-7 SCHLEIERMACHER The Chr MACHIAVELLI. Belfagor

W. SCOTT. Letters on D

J, H. NEWMAN. "The Pow

II.

Parochial and Plain PHILO JUDAEUS. On the Cherubim HEINE. Gods in Exile PROCLUS.
The Elements of Theology, (M) LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK "DJONYSIUS". On the
Celestial Hierarchy MICHELET. Satanism and ERIGENA. De Divisione Naturae, BK i
(4, 7-9), n (6, FRAZER. The Golden Bou

22), iv (7-9), v (13) PART VI PART VII, C

;

MAIMONIDES. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i, WENDELL. "Were the Wit

CH 49; PART n, CH 2-7 in Stelligeri BONAVENTURA. Breviloquium, PART n (6-8) LEA.
Materials Toward R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART VH FRANCE. The Revolt of ALBO. The
Boof( of Principles (Sefer ha-Ilfarim), BK FARNELL. Greef( Hero C

II, CH 12 WILLIAMS. The Place of CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion,
BK i, GLOVER. "The Daemon En

CH 14 (3) Byways LUTHER, Table Tal{ ZILBOORG. The Medical DONNE. Aire and
Angells the Renaissance SUAREZ. Metaphysicae, xn

Disputationes (14), VONIER. The Angels

xxxiv (3, 5), xxxv, XLI (2), LI (3-4) C. S. LEWIS. Out of th MARLOWB. The
Tragical History of Doctor Faustus .The Screwtape Le

KNOWLEDGE

of immaterial substances, related doctrines of 5f; PUNISHbut relevant to the d
into two groups: n. orks cited, consult f The Great Ideas. c of the Blessed
Angells mmunion and Wane with gical Discourse of Angels and Metaphysics, xxnr,
xxxiv- es Concerning the State and ical Worlds dom Concerning the Dwme A
Philosophical Dictionary istian Faith, par 42-45 emonology and Witchcraft ers of
Nature," in VOL u, Sermons ix, CH 2 Witchcraft gh, PART iv, BK i, CH 4; H 4-7
ches of Salem Guiltless?" a History of Witchcraft the Angels ults and Ideas of
Immortality the Lion vironment," in Greek Man and the Witch During e Silent
Planet tters
