Chapter y. ARISTOCRACY INTRODUCTION r T"" f HE forms of government have been
variJL ously enumerated, differently classified, and given quite contrary
evaluations in the great books of political theory. In the actual history of
political institutions, as well as in the tradition of political thought, the
major practical issues with respect to the forms of government the open, the
ideals to be choices sought, or the evils to be remedied have shifted with the
times. In an earlier day not merely in ancient times, but as late as the i8th
century the form of government called "aristocracy" presented a genuine
alternative to monarchy, and set a standard by which the defects and infirmities
of democracy were usually measured. If aristocracy was not always regarded as
the ideal form of government, the principle of aristocracy always entered into
the definition of the political ideal. Today, both in theory and practice,
aristocracy is at the other end of the scale. For a large part of mankind, and
for the political philosopher as well as in prevailing popular sentiment,
aristocracy (together with monarchy) has become a subject of historical
interest. It is a form of government with a past rather than a future. It no
longer measures, but is measured by, democracy. If the aristocratic principle
still signifies a factor of excellence in government or the state, it does so
with a meaning now brought into harmony with democratic standards. This change
accounts for one ambiguity which the word "aristocracy" may have for
contemporary readers. Formerly its primary, if not only, significance was to
designate a form of government. It is currently used to name a special social
class, separated from the masses by distinctions of birth, talent, property,
power, or leisure. We speak of "the aristocracy" as we 50 speak of "the elite"
and "the four hundred"; or we follow Marx and Engels in thinking of the "feudal
aristocracy" as the class "that was ruined by the bourgeoisie." The Communist
Manifesto wastes little sympathy on the aristocrats who, while seeking an ally
in the proletariat, forgot that "they [too] exploited under circumstances and
conditions that were quite different."For Marx and Engels, the aristocracy and
the bourgeoisie alike represent the propertied classes, but they differ in the
manner in which they came by their property and power. The landed gentry and the
feudal nobility got theirs largely by inheritance, the bourgeoisie by industry
and trade. Today, for the most part, we call a man an "aristocrat" if, justly or
unjustly, he claims a right to certain social distinctions or privileges. We
seldom use that word today to indicate a man who deserves special political
status or preeminence, though we do sometimes use it to name the proponent of
any form of government which rests upon the political inequality of men. Since
the discussion of aristocracy in the great books is largely political, we shall
here be primarily concerned with aristocracy as a form of government. The
general consideration of the forms of government will be found in the chapter on
GOVERNMENT. Here and in the other chapters which are devoted to particular forms
of government, we shall consider each of the several forms, both in itself and
in relation to the others. THERE is ONE element in the conception of aristocracy
which does not change with changing evaluations of aristocratic government. All
of the writers of the great political books agree with Plato that aristocracy is
a "government of the few," according as the few rather than CHAPTER 3: ARI the
one or the many exercise political power and dominate the state. By this
criterion of number, aristocracy is always differentiated from monarchy and
democracy.

Though he uses the word "oligarchy" to name what others call "aristocracy,"
Locke defines the three forms of government by reference to numbers. When the
majority themselves exercise the whole power of the community, Locke says, "then
the form of the government is a perfect democracy." When they put "the power of
making laws into the hands of a few select men then it is an oligarchy; or . . .
else into the hands of one man, and then it is a monarchy." Kant proceeds
similarly, though again in somewhat different language. "The relation of the
supreme power to the people," he says, "is conceivable in three different forms:
either one in the state rules over all; or some, united in relation of equality
with each other, rule over all the others; or all together rule over each
individually, including themselves.

The form of the state is therefore either autocratic, or aristocratic, or
democratic."

Hegel claims, however, that "purely quantitative distinctions like these are
only superficial and do not afford the concept of the thing." The criterion of
number does not seem to suffice when other forms of government are considered.
It fails to distinguish monarchy from tyranny or despotism, which may consist of
rule by one man, as has usually been the case historically. Number alone
likewise fails to distinguish aristocracy from oligarchy. In the deliberations
of the Medean conspirators, which Herodotus reports or invents, the rule of "a
certain number of the worthiest" is set against both democracy and monarchy and
identified as "oligarchy." How, then, shall aristocracy be distinguished from
oligarchy? There seem to be two answers to this question. In the Statesman Plato
adds to the characteristic of number the "criterion of law and the absence of
law." The holders of political power, whatever their number, may govern either
according to the established laws, or by arbitrary caprice in violation of them.
"To go against the laws, which are based upon long experience, and the wisdom of
counsellors who have graciously recommended them and persuaded the multitude to
pass them, would be," STOCRACY 51 the Eleatic Stranger declares in the
Statesman, "a far greater and more ruinous error than any adherence to written
law."

Taking the division of governments according to number, "the principle of law
and the absence of law will bisect them all." Monarchy divides into "royalty and
tyranny" depending on whether "an individual rules according to law ... or
governs neither by law nor by custom, but . pretends that he can only act for .
. the best by violating the laws, while in reality appetite and ignorance are
the motives." By the same criterion, the rule of the few divides "into
aristocracy, which has an auspicious name, and oligarchy." While democracy is
subject to the same division, Plato makes the same name apply to both its good
and bad forms. The second way in which aristocracy differs from oligarchy is
also brought out in the States' man. Since "the science of government,"
according to Plato, is "among the greatest of all sciences and most difficult to
acquire . . any . true form of government can only be supposed to be the
government of one, two, or, at any rate, of a few . . . really found to possess
science." Because of this demand for "science," which presupposes virtue and
competence in ruling, monarchy and aristocracy came to be defined as government
by the single best man or by the few best men in the community. A high degree of
competence or virtue is, however, not the only mark by which the few may be
distinguished from the many. The possession of wealth or property in any
sizeable amount also seems to divide a small class in the community from the
rest, and Plato at times refers to aristocracy simply as the government of the
rich. Yet if wealth is the criterion by which the few are chosen to govern, then
oligarchy results, at least in contrast to that sense of aristocracy in which
the criterion is excellence of mind and character. Aristocracy is called
aristocracy, writes Aristotle, "either because the rulers are the best men, or
because they have at heart the best interests of the state and of the citizens."
By these additional criteria never by numbers alonethe ancients conceive
aristocracy. When it is so defined, it always appears to be a good form of
government, but never the only good form, or even the best. The same 52 THE
GREAT IO criteria also place monarchy among the good forms, and at least in
Plato's Statesmank- mocracy is a third good form, when it is lawful government
by the many, the many being competent or virtuous to some degree. In this triad
of good forms, aristocracy ranks second-best, because government by one man is
supposed to be more efficient, or because, in the hierarchy of excellence, the
few may be superior, but only the one can be supreme. Aristotle, however, seems
to rank aristocracy above monarchy. "If we call the rule of many men, who are
all of them good, aristocracy, and the rule of one man royalty," he writes,
"then aristocracy will be better for states than royalty."

THE INTRODUCTION of democracy into the comparison tends to complicate the
discussion. Not only are the many usually the poor, but they are also seldom
considered pre-eminent in virtue or competence. According to the way in which
either wealth or human excellence is distributed, both oligarchy and aristocracy
organize the political community in terms of inequalities in status, power, and
privilege. This fact leads Rousseau, for example, to use the different kinds of
inequality among men as a basis for distinguishing "three sorts of aristocracy
natural, elective, and hereditary." Natural aristocracy, according to Rousseau,
is based on that inequality among men which is due primarily to age and is found
among simple peoples, where "the young bowed without question to the authority
of experience." Elective aristocracy arose "in proportion as artificial
inequality produced by institutions became predominant over natural inequality,
and riches or power were put before age." This form, in Rousseau's opinion, is
"the best, and is aristocracy properly so called." The third, which
ischaracterized as "the worst of all governments," came about when "the
transmission of the father's power along with his goods to his children, by
creating patrician families, made government hereditary." This emphasis upon
inequality radically separates aristocracy from democracy. From Aristotle down
to Montesquieu, Rousseau, and our bwn day, equality has been recognized as the
distinctive element of democracy. Disregarding slaves who, for the ancients,
were political TAS pariahs, Aristotle makes liberty the other mark of democracy
all freemen having, apart from wealth or virtue, an equal claim to political
status. As "the principle of an aristocracy is virtue," Aristotle writes, so
wealth is the principle "of an oligarchy, and freedom of a democracy." To the
defenders of democracy, ancient or modern, aristocracy and oligarchy stand
together, at least negatively, in their denial of the principle of equality. To
the defenders of aristocracy, oligarchy is as far removed as democracy, since
both oligarchy and democracy neglect or underestimate the importance of virtue
in organizing the state. Yet oligarchy more than democracy is the characteristic
perversion of aristocracy. It also puts government in the hands of the few, but
it substitutes wealth for virtue as the criterion. The democratic critic of
aristocracy usually calls attention to the way in which oligarchy tries to wear
the mask of aristocracy. However far apart aristocracy and oligarchy may be in
definition, he they tend to beinsists that in actual practice come identical, in
proportion as wealth, or noble birth, or social class is taken as the sign of
intrinsic qualities which are thought to deserve special political recognition.
The defenders of aristocracy have admitted the tendency of aristocratic
government to degenerate into oligarchy. Its critics are not satisfied with this
admission. They deny that aristocracy has ever existed in purity of principle
they deny that the governing few have ever been chosen solely for their virtue.
Machiavelh assumes it to be a generally accepted fact that "the nobles wish to
rule and oppress the people . . . and give vent to their ambitions/'
Montesquieu, although more optimistic about the possibility of a truly virtuous
aristocracy, recognizes its tendency to profit at the expense of the people. To
overcome this he would have the laws make it "an essential point . . that . the
nobles themselves should not levy the taxes . . . and should likewise forbid the
nobles all kinds of commerce . and abolish the right of . . primogeniture among
the nobles, to the end that by a continual division of the inheritances their
fortunes may be always upon a level." But perhaps the strongest attack upon
aristocracy in all of the great political boob is CHAPTER 3: ARISTO made by Mill
in his Representative Government.

He admits that "the governments which have been remarkable in history for
sustained mental ability and vigour in the conduct of affairs have generally
been aristocracies." But he claims that, whatever their abilities, such
governments were "essentially bureaucracies," and the "dignity and estimation"
of their ruling members were "quite different things from the prosperity or
happiness of the general body of the citizens, and were often wholly
incompatible with it." When their actions are dictated by "sinister interests,"
as frequently happens, the aristocratic class "assumes to themselves an endless
variety of unjust privileges, sometimes benefiting their pockets at the expense
of the people, sometimes merely tending to exalt them above others, or, what is
the same thing in different words, to degrade others below themselves." Yet
except by those political thinkers who deny the distinction between good and bad
government, and hence the relevance of virtue to institutions which are solely
expressions of power, the aristocratic principle is seldom entirely rejected.
Even when the notion of a pure aristocracy is dismissed as an ideal which can
never be fully realized, the aristocratic principle reappears as a counsel of
perfection in the improvement of other forms of government. Eveivso, one
difficulty remains, which tends to prevent aristocracy from being realized in
practice, quite apart from any question of its soundness in principle. It lies
in the reluctance of the best men to assume the burdens of public office.The
parable told in the Book of Judges applies to aristocracy as much as to
monarchy.

The trees went forth on a time to anoint a king over them; and they said unto
the olive tree, Reign thou over us.

But the olive tree said unto them, Should I leave my fatness, wherewith by me
they honor God and man, and go to be promoted over the trees ?

And the trees said to the fig tree, Come thou, and reign over us. But the fig
tree said unto them, Should I forsake my sweetness, and my good fruit, and go to
be promoted over the trees ?

Then said the trees unto the vine, Come thou, and reign over us.

And the vine said unto them, Should I leave my wine, which cheereth God and man,
and go to be promoted over the trees?

CRACY 53 Then said all the trees unto the bramble, Come thou, and reign over us.
And the bramble said unto the trees, If in truth ye anoint me king over you,
then come and put your trust in my shadow: and if not, let fire come out of the
bramble, and devour the cedars of Lebanon. Socrates thinks he has a solution for
this problem. In the Republic, he proposes a new way to induce good men to rule.
Since "money and honor have no attraction for them," necessity, "must be laid
upon them, and Socrates says, they must be induced to serve from fear of
punishment. . Now the worst part of the . . punishment is that he who refuses to
rule is liable to be ruled by one who is worse than himself. And the fear of
this, as I conceive, induces the good to take office . . . not under the idea
that they are going to have any benefit or enjoyment themselves, but as a
necessity, and because they are not able to commit the task of ruling to anyone
who is better than themselves, or indeed as good." THE POLITICAL ISSUES, in
which monarchy, aristocracy, oligarchy, and democracy represent the major
alternatives, cannot be clarified without recourse to the distinction between
government by laws and government by men. It has already been noted that in the
Statesman Plato makes respect for the laws and violation of the laws the marks
of good and bad government respectively. But he also proposes that "the best
thing of all is not that the law should rule, but that a man should rule,
supposing him to have wisdom and royal power." The imperfections of law could
then be avoided, because one or a few men of almost superhuman wisdom would
govern their inferiors even as the gods could direct the affairs of men without
the aid of established laws. But if no man is a god in relation to other men,
then, in Plato's opinion, it is better for laws or customs to be supreme, and
for men to rule in accordance with them. The larger issue concerning rule by law
and rule by men is discussed in the chapters on CONSTITUTION and MONARCHY. But
here we must observe how the difference between these two types of rule affects
the understanding of government. This can be seen all other forms of in terms of
Aristotle's distinction between royal 54 and political government, which closely
resembles the modern conception of the difference between absolute or despotic
government on the one hand, and limited, constitutional, or republican
government on the other.

There are passages in which Aristotle regards absolute rule by one or a few
superior men as the divine or godlike form of government. When one man or a few
excel "all the others together in virtue, and both rulers and subjects are
fitted, the one to rule, the others to be ruled/' it is right, in Aristotle's
opinion, for the government to be royal or absolute rather than political or
constitutional whether one man rules or a few. "Royal rule is of the nature of
an aristocracy," he says. "It is based upon merit, whether of the individual or
of his family." But in other passages Aristotle seems to regard absolute
government as a despotic regime, appropriate to the family and the primitive
tribe, but not to the state, in which it is better for equals to rule and be
ruled in turn. In either case, makes a difference to the meaning of it
aristocracy, as also to monarchy, whether it be conceived as absolute or
constitutional government. When it is conceived as absolute government,
aristocracy differs from monarchy only on the point of numbers the few as
opposed to the one. Otherwise, aristocracy and monarchy are defended in the same
way. The defense usually takes one of two directions. One line of argument which
stems from Plato and Aristotle claims that inequality in wisdom or virtue
between ruler and ruled justifies absolute rule by the superior. The other line
is followed by those who, like Hobbes, maintain that since sovereignty is
absolute, unlimited, and indivisible, the difference between kinds of government
"consisteth not in the difference of Power, but in the difference of
Convenience, or Aptitude to produce the Peace, and Security of the people." When
they are conceived as forms of absolute government, aristocracy and monarchy are
attacked for the same reason; to those who regard absolutism or despotism in
government as unjust because it violates the basic equality of men, an absolute
monarchy and a despotic aristocracy are both unjust. Aristocracy, however, can
also be conceived as a form or aspect of constitutional govern- S ment.
Montesquieu, for example, divides governments into "republican, monarchical, and
despotic," and under "republican" places those "in which the body, or only a
part, of the people is possessed of the supreme power," thus including both
democracy and aristocracy. In both, laws, not men, are supreme, but the spirit
of the laws is different. In democracy, the "spring," or principle, "by which it
is made to act," is virtue resting on equality; in aristocracy, "moderation is
the very soul ... a moderation . . . founded on virtue, not that which proceeds
from indolence and pusillanimity." Hegel's comment on this theory deserves
mention. "The fact that 'moderation' is cited as the principle of aristocracy,"
he writes, "implies the beginning at this point of a divorce between public
authority and private interest." For Aristotle, in contrast to Montesquieu, the
two major types of constitution are the democratic and the oligarchical,
according as free-birth or wealth is made the chief qualification for
citizenship and public office. Aristocracy enters the discussion of
constitutional governments mainly in connection with the construction of the
polity or mixed constitution. Although in most states "the fusion goes no
further than the attempt to unite the freedom of the poor and the wealth of the
rich," he points out that "there are three grounds on which men claim an equal
share in the government, freedom, wealth, and virtue." When the fusion goes no
further than the attempt to unite the freedom of the poor and the wealth of the
rich, "the admixture of the two elements," Aristotle says, is "to be called a
polity." But sometimes the mixture of democracy with oligarchy may include an
ingredient of aristocracy, as in "the distribution of offices according to
merit." The union of these three elements "is to be called aristocracy or the
government of the best," and "more than any other form of government, except the
true and the ideal," it has, in Aristotle's judgment, "a right to this name."
Polity and aristocracy, as mixed constitutions, are fusions of some of the same
elements; hence, he says, it is "obvious that they are not very unlike."
BEGINNING IN the i8th century, and with the rise of representative government,
the discus- CHAFFER 3: ARI sion of aristocracy as a distinct form of government
is largely super-ceded by the consideration of the role which the aristocratic
principle plays in the development of republican institutions. The writers of
The Federalistk for example, respond in several places to the charge that the
constitution which they are defending shows tendencies toward aristocracy or
oligarchy. Yet in their consideration and defense of the new instrument of
government as essentially republican, they frequently appeal to principles that
are aristocratic in nature. In giving their own meanings to the terms "republic"
and "pure democracy" that is, government by elected representatives on the one
hand, and by the direct participation of the whole people on the other the
Federalists also give an aristocratic bent to the very notion of representation.
They seem to share the opinion of Montesquieu that "as most citizens have
sufficient ability to choose, though unqualified to be chosen, so the people,
though capable of calling others to account for their administration, are
incapable of conducting administrations themselves." Thus Madison praises "the
delegation of the government ... to a small number of citizens elected by the
rest" as tending "to refine and enlarge the public views, by passing them
through the medium of a chosen body of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern
the true interest of their country." He further points out that "it may well
happen that the public voice, pronounced by the representatives of the people,
will be more consonant to the public good than if pronounced by the people
themselves, convened for the purpose." On such a view, the people's
representatives in the legislature, or other branches of government, are
supposed to be not their minions, but their betters. For the American
constitutionalists, as for Edmund Burke, the representative serves his
constituents by making independent decisions for the common good, not by doing
their bidding. This theory of representation, to which Mill and other democratic
thinkers agree in part, supposes that the representative knows better than his
constituents what is for their good. The effort to ensure leadership by superior
men may involve the aristocratic principle, yet STOCRACY 55 it is also claimed
by Hamilton, Madison, and Jay to be a necessary safeguard for popular
government. The senate, for instance, is not only to provide elder statesmen,
but is also to serve as "a salutary check on the government . . . [which]
doubles the security to the people, by requiring the concurrence of two distinct
bodies in schemes of usurpation or perfidy, where the ambition or corruption of
one would otherwise be sufficient," The electoral college aims directly at
placing the immediate election of the president in the hands of "men most
capable of analyzing the qualities adapted to the station . . , under
circumstances favorable to deliberation." In addition it may serve as an
"obstacle . . . opposed to cabal, intrigue, and corruption," which are the "most
deadly adversaries of republican government." In all these respects, as well as
in the restrictions on suffrage which it permitted the states to impose, the
unamended American constitution appears to have adopted an aristocratic
principle in government. Whether the motivation of its proponents was m fact
simply aristocratic, or whether it was partly or even largely oligarchical
leadership being the right of men of "good" family and substantial propertywill
always be a question to be decided in the light of the documents and the
relevant historic evidence.

MORE DEMOCRATIC than the American constitutionalists of the 1 8th century,
certainly so with regard to the extension of suffrage, John Stuart Mill appears
to be no less concerned than they are to introduce aristocratic elements into
the structure of representative government. According to Mill, two grave dangers
con' front a democracy: "Danger of a low grade of intelligence in the
representative body, and in the popular opinion which controls it; and danger of
class legislation on the part of the numerical majority." Claiming that much of
the blame for both dangers lies in the rule of the majority, Mill looks for
means to overcome the situation in which "the numerical majority . . . alone
possess practically any voice in the State." His major remedy was a system of
proportional representation. This would supposedly 56 constitute a democratic
improvement by securing representation for "every minority in the 1* whole
nation ... on principles of equal justice. But it may also serve to increase an
aristocratic element, since it "affords the best security for the intellectual
qualifications desirable in the representatives." This would be brought about by
making possible the election of "hundreds of able men of independent thought,
who would have no chance whatever of being chosen by the majority," with the
result that Parliament would contain the "very elite of the country."

To make still more certain that men of superior political intelligence exert an
effect upon government, Mill also proposes a plurality of votes for the educated
and the establishment of an upper legislative chamber based on a specially
membership. Such proposals qualified seem to indicate Mill's leanings toward
aristocracy, not only because they aim at procuring a "government of the best,"
but also because they are designed to prevent a government based on a majority
of "manual labourers" with the consequent danger of "too low a standard of
political intelligence."

THE ISSUES RAISED by the theory of aristocracy, or by the aristocratic principle
in government, seem to be basically the same in all centuries, however different
the terms or the context in which they are expressed. Even when, as today, a
purely aristocratic form of government does not present a genuine political
alternative to peoples who have espoused democracy, there remains the sense that
pure or unqualified democracy is an equally undesirable extreme. The
qualifications proposed usually add an aristocratic leaven.

One issue concerns the equality and inequality of men. The affirmation that all
men are created equal does not exclude a recognition of their individual
inequalities the wide diversity of human talents and the uneven distribution of
intelligence and other abilities. Nor does it mean that all men use their native
endowments to good purpose or in the same degree to acquire skill or knowledge
or virtue. To grasp the double truththat no man is essentially more human than
another,though one may have more of certain human abilities than another is to
see some necessity for the admixture of democratic and aristocratic principles
in constructing a political constitution. But the issue is whether distributive
justice requires, as a matter of right, that the best men should rule or hold
public office. Some political philosophers, like Plato and Aristotle, tend to
take the aristocratic view that men of superior ability have a right to govern
that for them to be ruled by their inferiorswould be unjust. This theory places
greater emphasis on the inequality than on the equality of men. Their democratic
opponents insist that the equality of men as men is the fundamental fact and the
only fact having a bearing on the just distribution of suffrage. That certain
individuals have superior aptitude for the exercise of political authority does
not automatically confer that authority upon them. The inequality of men in
merit or talent does not establish a political right, as does their equality in
human nature. The selection of the best men for public office is, on this
theory, not a matter of justice, but of expediency or prudence. Another issue
concerns the weight to be given the opinion of the majority as against the
opinion of the wise or the expert when, as frequently happens, these opinions
diverge or conflict.As the chapter on OPINION indicates, the experts themselves
disagree about the soundness of the popular judgment. Where Thucydides believes
that "ordinary men usually manage public affairs better than their more gifted
fellows," because "the latter are always wanting to appear wiser than the laws,"
Herodotus observes that "it seems easier to deceive the multitude than one man."
Where Hegel holds it to be "a dangerous and a false prejudice, that the People
alone have reason and insight, and know what justice is," John Jay declares that
"the people of any country (if, like the Americans, intelligent and
wellinformed) seldom adopt and steadily persevere for many years in an erroneous
opinion respecting their interests," and Hamilton adds that "the people commonly
intend \hz public good." Sometimes the same author seems to take both sides of
the issue, as Aristotle does when, though he says that "a multitude is a better
judge of many things than any individual," he CHAPTER 3: ARISTOC yet prefers
government by the one or few who are eminent in wisdom or virtue. Each side,
perhaps, contributes only part of the truth, Certamly those who acknowledge a
political wisdom in the preponderant voice of the many, but who also recognize
another wisdom in the skilled judgment of the few, cannot wish to exelude either
from exerting its due influence upon the course of government. Still another
issue has to do with education.

Shall educational opportunity be as universal as the franchise? Shall those
whose native endowments fit them for political leadership be trained differently
or more extensively than their fellow citizens? Shall vocational education be
given to the many, and liberal education be reserved for the few? These
questions provide some measure of the extent to which anyone's thinking is
aristocratic or democratic or involves some admixture of both strains. In the
great discussion of

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The general theory and evaluation of aristocracy
 1a. Aristocracy as a good form of government
 1b. Criticisms of aristocracy as unrealizable or unjust

2. The relation of aristocracy to other forms of government
 2a. Aristocracy and monarchy
 2b. Aristocracy and constitutional government: the polity or mixed constitution
 2c. Aristocracy and democracy
 2d. Aristocracy and oligarchy
 2e. Aristocracy and tyranny

3. The causes
of degeneration or instability in aristocracies: aristocracy and revolution

4. Aristocracy
and the issue of rule by men as opposed to rule by law

5. The training
of those fitted for rule: aristocratic theories of education

6. The selection of the best men for public office: the aristocratic theory of representation
in modern constitutional government

7. Historic and poetic exemplifications of aristocracy

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general theory of the forms of government, see GOVERN

Other chapters on particular forms of government, s

ARCHY; OLIGARCHY; TYRANNY; and for the conception

The comparison of aristocratic with democratic theo

Discussions of the role of virtue in political theo

office, see CITIZEN 5; VIRTUE AND VICE j-jd.

Another discussion of the theory of representation,

The role of honor in the organization of the state,

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Eooks

idea and topics with which this chapter deals, The

I. Works by authors represente

II. Works by authors not repres

For the date, place, and other facts concerning th

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which foll

I.

DANTE. Convwio(The Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE,

CH 10-14 SPINOZA. Tractatus Pohticus (Political Treatise), CH

8-10

II.

Volsung Saga SPENSER. The Faerie Queene CAMPANELLA. A Discourse Touching the
Spanish

Monarchy

FILMER. Patriarcha HARRINGTON. Oceana SEVIGNE. Letters A. SIDNEY. Discourses
Concerning Government MILLAR. Observations Concerning the Distinction of

Ranks in Society PAINE. Common Sense J. ADAMS. A Defense ofthe Constitutions of
Government of the United States of America

JEFFERSON. Notes on the State of Virginia SIEYES. An Essay on Privileges GODWIN.
An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, BK v, CH lo-n, 13

BURKE. An Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs . Letter to Sir Hercules
Langrishe

Letter to a Noble Lord

.

AUSTEN. Pride and Prejudice J. MILL. An Essay on Government, in-v STENDHAL. The
Red and the Black BALZAC. Gobsedk TOCQUEVILLE. Democracy in America THACKERAY.
Vanity Pair GOBINEAU. The Inequality of Human Races EMERSON. "Aristocracy," in
English Traits

RACY 63 MENT 2-ae. ee CONSTITUTION; DEMOCRACY; MONof the ideal state, see STATE
6-6b. ries of education, see EDUCATION 8d. ry, in relation to citizenship and
public see CONSTITUTION 9-o,b. and the theory of timocracy, see HONOR 43. of the
Western World, but relevant to the se works are divided into two groups: d in
this collection. ented in this collection. e publication of the works cited,
consult ows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. MONTALEMBERT. On Constitutional
Liberty ARNOLD. Culture and Anarchy WHITMAN. Democratic Vistas RENAN. The Future
of Science -. Philosophical Dialogues H. JAMES. The American T. H. HUXLEY.
Methods and Results, vi-vn IBSEN. An Enemy of the People NIETZSCHE. Thus Spaty
Zarathustra MOSCA. The Ruling Class MALLOCK. Social Equality Aristocracy and
Evolution

. T. VEBLEN. The Theory of the Leisure Class SANTAYANA. Reason in Society, CH 4
BOUGL. Essais sur le regime des castes SOREL. Reflexions on Violence WENDELL.
The Privileged Classes SHAW. Socialism and Superior Brains WELLS. The New
Machiavelli WEBER. Essays in Sociology, PART iv PONSONBY. The Decline of
Aristocracy P. E. MORE. Aristocracy and Justice PARETO. The Mind and Society
BRYCE. Modern Democracies, PART i, CH 7; PART in, CH75

DEWEY. The Public and Its Problems MAIRET. Aristocracy and the Meaning of Class
Rule TAWNEY. Equality BERGSON. Two Sources of Morality and Religion, CH i, pp
62-82

J.B. S. HALDANE. The Inequality of Man NOCK. The Theory of Education in the
United States MADARIAGA. Anarchy or Hierarchy LANDTMAN. The Origin ofthe
Inequality ofthe Social Classes

T.S.ELIOT. Notes Towards the Definition of Culture
