CHAPTER: CAUSE

INTRODUCTION

EXPLANATION
is an
inveterate human
tendency. Even philosophers who think
that we cannot attain to knowledge of causes
get involved in explaining why that is so. Nor
will their disputes about the theory of causes
ever remove the word "because" from the vocabulary of common speech.
It
is as unavoidable as
the word
"is." "The impulse
to seek
causes," says Tolstoy, "is innate in the soul of
man.
The question "Why ?" remains after all other
questions are answered. It is sometimes the only
unanswerable question—unanswerable either in
the very nature of the case or because there are
secrets men cannot fathom. Sometimes, as Dante says, man must be "content with the quia,'*
the knowledge that something is without knowing why. "Why?"
is the one question which it
has been deemed the better part of wisdom not
to ask; yet
it has also been thought the one
question which holds the key
to wisdom. As
Virgil writes, in one of his most famous lines,
Felix, quipotuit rerum cognoscere causas (Happy
the man who has been able to know the causes
of things).
The question "Why V takes many forms and
can be answered in many ways. Other knowledge may prove useful in providing the answers.
A definition, for example, which tells us what a
thing is, may explain why it behaves as it does
or why
it has certain properties. A narrative,
which
tells us how something happened by describing a succession of events, may also be part
of the total explanation of some event in question.
In other circumstances, a demonstration or a
statement of grounds or
reasons may be
explanatory. "How do you know ?" is often a concealed form of the "Why" question. To answer
it we may have to give our reasons for thinking
that something or other is the case; or perhaps
give the genesis of our opinion. Things as different as a
logical demonstration and a piece of
autobiography seem to be relevant in accounting for our convictions;
as,
in accounting for
our behavior, we may refer to our purposes and
to our past.
The Greek word
for cause, from which our
English word "aetiology" is derived, came into
the vocabulary of science and philosophy from
the language of the law courts. In its legal sense
it was used to point out where the responsibility
lay. A suit at law is based upon a cause of action;
he who demands redress for an injury suffered
is expected to place the blame. The charge of
responsibility
for wrongdoing— the blame or
fault which is the cause for legal redress or punishment—naturally calls for excuses, which may
include a man's motives.
In the context of these legal considerations^
two different meanings of cause begin to appear. One man's act
is the cause of injury to
another, in the sense of being responsible for
its occurrence.
If the act was intentional,
it
probably had a cause in the purpose which motivated it.
These two types of cause appear in the explanations of the historians as well as in trials at
law. Herodotus and Thucydides, trying to account for the Persian or the Peloponnesian war,
enumerate
the incidents which led up to the
outbreak of hostilities. They cite certain past
events as the causes of war— the factors which
predisposed
the
parties toward
conflict, and
even
precipitated
it. The
historians do
not
think they can fully explain why the particular
events become the occasions for war except by
considering
the hopes and
ambitions,
or,
as
Thucydides suggests, the fears of the contestants. For the ancient historians at least, finding
the
causes includes a search
for
the motives
which underUe other causes and help to explain
how other factors get their causal efficacy.
Thucydides explicitly distinguishes these two
kinds of causes in the first chapter of his history.
After noting that the "immediate cause" of the
war was the breaking of a treaty, he adds that
the "real cause" was one "which was formally
most kept out of sight," namely, the "growth
of the pow^r of Athens, and the alarm which
this inspired in Lacedaemon."
It
is sometimes supposed
that Thucydides
owes his conception of causes to the early medical tradition. That might very well be the case,
for Hippocrates constantly seeks the "natural
causes" of disease; and
in
his analysis of the
various factors involved in any particular disease, he
tries to distinguish between the predisposing and the exciting causes.
But the classification of causes w^as not completed in the Athenian law courts, in the Greek
interpretation of history, or in the early practice
of medicine.
Causes were
also
the
preoccupation of the pre-Socratic physicists. Their
study of nature was largely devoted to an analysis of the principles, elements, and causes of
change. Concerned w4th the problem of change
in general, not merely with human action, or
particular phenomena such as crime, war, or
disease, Greek scientists or philosophers, from
Thales and Anaxagoras to Empedocles, Democritus, Plato, and Aristotle, tried to discover the
causes involved in any change. Aristotle carried
the analysis furthest and set a pattern for
all
later discussions of cause.
The explanation of
a
thing,
according
to
Aristotle, must answer all of the queries "comprehended under
the question
'why.' " This
question can be answered, he thinks, in at least
four different ways, and these four ways of saying why something is the case constitute his famous theory of the four causes.
"In one sense," he writes, "that out of which
a thing comes to be and which persists, is called
'cause' "— the material cause. "In another sense,
the form or the archetype" is a cause—the formal cause. "Again the primary source of the
change or coming to rest"
is a cause— the efficient cause. "Again the end or
'that
for the
sake of which' a thing
is done"
is a cause— the
final cause. "This," he concludes, "perhaps exhausts the number of ways in which the term
'cause'
is used."
The production of works of art,
to which
Aristotle himself frequently turns for examples,
most
readily
illustrates
these
four
different
kinds of causes. In making a shoe, the material
cause is that out of which the shoe is made— the
leather or hide. The efficient cause is the shoemaker, or more precisely the shoemaker's acts
which
transform
the
raw
material
into
the
finished product. The formal cause
is the pattern which directs the work;
it
is, in a sense,
the
definition
or
type
of
the
thing
to
be
made, which, beginning as a plan in the artist's
mind, appears at the end of the work in the
transformed material as its own intrinsic form.
The protection of the foot is the final cause or
end— that for the sake of which the shoe was
made.
Two of the four causes seem to be
less discernible in nature than in art. The material and
efficient
causes remain evident enough. The
material cause can usually be identified as that
which undergoes the change—the thing which
grows, alters in color, or moves from place to
place. The
efficient
cause
is always
that by
which
the
change
is
produced.
It
is
the
moving cause working on that which
is susceptible to change,
e.g.,
the
fire heating
the
water, the rolling stone setting another stone
in motion.
But the formal cause
is not as apparent in
nature as in art. Whereas in art it can be identified by reference to the plan in the maker's
mind,
it must be discovered in nature in the
change itself, as that which completes the process. For example, the redness which the apple
takes on in ripening
is the formal cause of its
alteration in color. The trouble with the final
cause is that it so often tends to be inseparable
from the formal cause; for unless some extrinsic
purpose can be found for a natural change
some end beyond itself which the change serves
— the final cause, or that for the sake of which
the change took place,
is no other than
the
quality or form which the matter assumes as a
result of its transformation.
This
sunlvIary of Aristotle's doctrine of the
four causes enables us to note some of the basic
issues and shifts in the theory of causation.

The attack on final causes does not, at
the
beginning
at
least,
reject them
completely.
Bacon, for example, divides natural philosophy
into two
parts, of which one
part,
"physics,
inquireth and handleth the material and
efficient
causes; and
the
other, which
is metaphysics, handleth the formal and final causes."
The error of his predecessors, of which he complains,
is
their
failure
to separate
these two
types of inquiry. The study of final causes
is
inappropriate in physics, he thinks.
"This misplacing," Bacon comments, "hath
caused a deficiency, or at least a great improficiency
in
the
sciences
themselves. For
the
handling of final causes, mixed with the rest in
physical inquiries, hath intercepted the severe
and
diligent inquiry of all
real and
physical
causes, and given men the occasion to stay upon
these satisfactory and specious
causes,
to the
great
arrest and prejudice of further discovery." On this score, he charges Plato, Aristotle,
and Galen with impeding the development of
science, not because "final causes are not true,
and worthy to be inquired, being kept within
their own province; but because their excursions into the limits of physical causes hath bred
a vastness and solitude in that tract."
Such statements as "the hairs of the eyelids
are for a quickset and fence about the sight,"
or that "the leaves of trees are for protecting of
the fruit, "or that "the clouds are for watering
of the earth," are, in Bacon's opinion, "impertinent"
in
physics. He
therefore
praises
the
mechanical philosophy of Democritus, It seems
to him to inquire into the
"particularities of
physical causes" better "than that of Aristotle
and
Plato,
whereof both
intermingled
final
causes, the one as a part of theology, the other
as a part of logic."
As Bacon's criticisms indicate, the attack on
final causes in nature
raises a whole
series of
questions.
Does
every
natural
change
serve
some purpose, either for the good of the changing thing or for the order of nature itself
.f^
Is
there
a
plan, analogous
to that of an
artist,
which orders the parts of nature, and their activities,
to one another
as means to ends? A
natural teleology, which attributes final causes
to everything, seems to imply that every natural thing
is governed by an indwelling form
working toward a definite end, and that
the
whole of nature exhibits the working out of a
divine plan or design.
Spinoza answers such questions negatively.
"Nature has set no end before herself," he declares, and
"all
final
causes
are nothing but
human fictions." Furthermore, he insists, "this
doctrine concerning an end
altogether overturns nature. For that which
is in truth the
cause
it considers as the effect, and vice versa.'*
He deplores
those who
"will not
cease from
asking the causes of causes, until at last you fly
to the will of God, the refuge of ignorance."
Spinoza denies that God acts for an end and
that
the universe expresses a divine purpose.
He also thinks that final causes are illusory even
in the sphere of human action. When we say
that "having a house to live in was the
final
cause of this or that house," v/e do no more than
indicate a "particular desire, which
is really an
efficient cause, and is considered as primary, because men are usually ignorant of the causes of
their desires."
Though Descartes replies to Pierre Gassendi's arguments "on behalf of final causality," by
saying
that they should "be
referred
to the
efficient cause,"
his position more closely
resembles that of Bacon than of Spinoza. When
we behold "the
uses of the various parts in
plants and animals," we may be led to admire
"the God who brings these into existence," but
"that does not imply," he adds, "that we can
divine the purpose for which He made each
thing. And although in Ethics, where it is often
allowable to employ conjecture,
it
is at times
pious to consider the end which we may conjecture God
set before Himself in rufing the
universe,
certainly
in
Physics, where everything should rest upon the securest arguments,
it is futile to do so."
The elimination of final causes from natural
science leads Descartes to formulate Harvey's
discoveries concerning the motion of the heart
and
blood
in
purely
mechanical
terms. But
Harvey himself, as Boyle points out in his Disquisition About
the Final
Causes of Natural
Thi7igs, interprets organic structures in terms of
their functional utility; and Boyle defends the
soundness of Harvey's method—employing final causes— against Descartes.
Guided as it
is by the principle of utility or
function, Harvey's reasoning about the circula-
tion of the blood—especially
its venal and arterial flow in relation to the action of the lungs
—appeals to final causes. He remarks upon the
need of arguing from the final cause in his work
on animal generation. "It appears advisable to
me," he writes, "to look back from the perfect
animal, and to inquire by what process
it has
arisen and grown to maturity, to retrace our
steps, as it were, from the goal to the starting
place."
Kant generalizes this type of argument in his
Critique of Teleological Judgement. "No one has
ever questioned," he says, "the correctness of
the principle that when judging certain things
in nature, namely organisms and
their possibility, we must look to the conception of final
causes. Such a principle is admittedly necessary
even where we require no more than a guidingthread for the purpose of becoming acquainted
with the character of these things by means of
observation."
Kant
criticizes
a
mechanism
which totally excludes the principle of finality
—whether it is based on the doctrine of "blind
chance" of Democritus and Epicurus, or the
"system of fatality" he attributes to Spinoza.
Physical science, he thinks, can be extended by
the principle of final causes "without interfering with
the
principle of the mechanism of
physical causality."
The tendency to dispense with
final causes
seems to prevail, however, in the science of mechanics and especially in the domain of inanimate
nature. Huygens,
for example,
defines
light as "the motion of some sort of matter."
He
explicitly
insists
that conceiving
natural
things in this way
is the only way proper to
what he
calls the "true Philosophy, in which
one conceives the causes of all natural effects in
terms of mechanical motions."
Mechanical explanation
is distinguished by
the fact that it appeals to no principles except
matter and motion. The material and the moving (or efficient) causes suffice. The philosophical thought of the 17th century, influenced by
that century's briUiant accomplishments in mechanics, tends to be mechanistic in
its theory
of causation. Yet, being also influenced by the
model and method of mathematics,
thinkers
like Descartes and Spinoza
retain the formal
cause as a principle of demonstration, if not of
explanation. Spinoza, in fact, claims that the
reliance upon
final causes "would have been
sufficient to keep the human race in darkness
to all eternity, if mathematics, which does not
deal with ends, but with the essences and properties of forms, had not placed before us another
rule of truth."
Nevertheless, the tendency to restrict causality to efficiency—a motion producing a motion
—gains headway. By the time Hume questions
man's ability to know causes, the term cause
signifies only efficiency, understood as the energy
expended in producing an effect. Hume's doubt
concerning our ability to know causes presupposes this conception of cause and effect, which
asserts that "there is some connection between
them, some power in the one by which
it infallibly produces the other." The identification
of cause with the efficient type of cause becomes
a commonly accepted notion, even among those
who do not agree with Hume that "we are ignorant ... of the manner in which bodies operate on each other"; and that "their force and
energy is entirely incomprehensible" to us.
The narrowing of causality to efficiency also
appears in the doctrine, more prevalent today
than ever before, that natural science describes,
but does not explain— that it tells us how things
happen, but not why. If it does not require the
scientist
to avoid
all
reference
to
causes,
it
does
limit him
to
the one
type of causality
which can be expressed in terms of sequences
and correlations. The exclusion of all causes except the efficient tends furthermore to reduce
the causal order to nothing but the relation of
cause and effect.
The four causes taken together as the sufficient reason for things or events do not as such
stand in relation to an effect, in the sense in
which an effect is something separable from and
externally related to its cause. That way of conceiving
causation—as
a
relation of cause
to
effect— is
appropriate
to
the
efficient
cause
alone. When the efficient cause
is regarded as
the only cause, having a power proportionate to
the reahty of its effect, the very meaning of
cause involves relation to an effect.
In
the
other conception of causation,
the
causal order relates the four causes to one another. Of the four causes of any change or act,
the
first, says Aquinas, "is the final cause; the

form, save in so lar as
it
is moved by an agent,
for nothing reduces itself from potent iahty to
act. But an agent does not move except from
the intention of an end." Hence in operation
the order of the four causes
is final, efficient,
material, and formal; or, as Aquinas states
it,
"first comes goodness and the end, moving the
agent to act; secondly the action of the agent
moving to the form; thirdly, comes the form."
The theory of causes, as developed by Aristotle and Aquinas, proposes other distinctions
beyond that of the four causes, such as the difference between the essential cause or the cause
per se and the accidental or coincidental cause.
As indicated in the chapter on Chanxe, it is in
terms
of
coincidental
causes
that
Aristotle
speaks of chance as a cause.
A given eff^ect may be the result of a number
of efficient causes. Sometimes these form a series, as when one body in motion sets another in
motion, and that moves a third; or, to take another example, a man is the cause of his grandson only through having begotten a son who
later begets a son. In such a succession of causes,
the
first cause may be indispensable, but
it
is
not by
itself sufficient
to produce
the
eff^ect.
With respect to the effect which it fails to produce unless other causes intervene, it
is an accidental cause. In contrast, an essential cause is
one which, by its operation, immediately brings
the eff^ect into existence.
Sometimes, however, a number of efficient
causes may be involved simultaneously rather
than successively in the production of a single
eff^ect. They may be related to one another as
cause and
eff^ect rather than by mere coincidence. One cause may be the essential cause of
another which in turn is the essential cause of
the eff^ect. When two causes are thus simultaneously related to the same effect, Aquinas calls
one the principal, the other the instrumental
cause; and he gives as an example the action of
a workman sawing wood. The action of the saw
causes a shaping of the wood, but
it
is instrumental to the operation of the principal cause,
which is the action of the workman using the
saw.
These
two
distinctions—between
essential
and accidental
causes and between principal
and instrumental causes—become of great significance in arguments, metaphysical or theological, concerning the cause of causes—a
first
or ultimate cause. Aristotle's proof of a prime
mover, for example, depends upon the proposition that there cannot be an infinite number of
causes
for a given
eff^ect. But
since Aristotle
also holds that the world
is without beginning
or end and that time is infinite, it may be wondered why the chain of causes cannot stretch
back to infinity.
If time
is
infinite,
a temporal sequence of
causes reaching back to infinity would seem to
present no difficulty. As Descartes points out,
you cannot "prove that that regress to infinity
is absurd, unless you at the same time show that
the world has a definite beginning in time."
Though it is a matter of their Jewish and Christian faith
that the world had a beginning in
time, theologians like Maimonides and Aquinas
do not
think
the
world's
beginning
can
be
proved by reason. Theydo, however, think that
the
necessity of a
first cause can
be demonstrated, and both adopt or perhaps adapt the
argument of Aristotle which
relies on the impossibility of an infinite regression in causes.
The argument is valid, Aquinas makes clear,
only
if we distinguish between
essential and
accidental
causes.
"It
is not
impossible," he
says, "to proceed to infinity accidentally as regards efficient causes. ...
It
is not impossible
for man to be generated by man to infinity."
But, he holds, "there cannot be an infinite number of causes that are per se required for a certain eff^ect; for instance, that a stone be moved
by a stick, the stick by the hand, and so on to
infinity." In the
latter case,
it should be observed, the cooperating causes are simultaneous
and so
if there were an infinity of them, that
would not require an infinite time, the crux of
the argument, therefore,
lies either in the impossibility of an
infinite number of simultaneous causes, or in the impossibility ofan infinite
number of causes related to one another as instrumental to principal cause.
Among
causes
so
related,
Descartes,
like
Aquinas, argues that there must be one first or
principal cause. "In the case of causes which are
so connected and subordinated to one another,
that no action on the part of the lower is possible without the activity of the higher; e.g., in
the case where something is moved by a stone,
itself impelled by a stick, which the hand moves
.
.
. we must go on until we come to one thing
in motion which
first moves." But
for Descartes, unlike Aquinas, this method of proving
God as the first cause of all observable effects
has less elegance than the so-called "ontological
argument" in which the conception of God as
a necessary
being,
incapable of not
existing,
immediately implies his existence.
The argument from effect to cause
is traditionally called a posteriori reasoning, in contrast
to a priori reasoning from cause to effect. According
to
Aristotle and Aquinas,
the
latter
mode of reasoning can only demonstrate the
nature of a thing, not
its existence. Aquinas,
furthermore, does not regard
the ontological
argument
as a form of reasoning
at
all, but
rather as the assertion that God's existence
is
self-evident to us, which he denies.
The various forms which
these arguments
take and the issue concerning their validity are
more fully discussed in the chapters on Being,
God, and Necessity and Contingency. But
here
it
is worth noting
that Kant questions
whether
the
a posteriori method
of proving
God's existence really differs from the ontological argument. It is, according to him, not only
*'illusory and inadequate," but also "possesses
the additional blemish of an ignoratio elenchi—
professing to conduct us by a new road to the
desired goal, but bringing us back, after a short
circuit, to the old path which we had deserted
at its call." Hence the causal proof does not, in
Kant's opinion, succeed in avoiding the fallacies
which he, along with Maimonides and Aquinas,
finds in the ontological argument.
The analysis of causation figures critically
in the speculation of the theologians concerning
creation, providence, and the government of
the world.
The dogma of creation, for example, requires
the conception of a unique type of cause. Even
if
the
world
always
existed—a
supposition
which, as we have seen,
is contrary to Jewish
and Christian faith but not to reason— the religious belief in a Creator would remain a belief
in that unique cause without whose action to
preserve its being at every moment the world
would cease to be.
On
the assumption
that God
created
the
world
in
the
beginning,
it
is,
perhaps,
easy
enough to see with Augustine how "the creating and originating work which gave being to
all natures, differs from all other types of causation which cause motions or changes, or even
the generation of things, rather than their very
existence." It may, however, be more difficult
to understand the creative action of God in relation to a world already in existence.
But a theologian like Aquinas explains that
"as long as a thing has being, so long must God
be present to it" as the cause of its being—
a
doctrine which Berkeley later reports by saying
that this makes "the divine conservation ... to
be a continual creation." Aquinas agrees that
"the conservation of things by God is not by a
new action, but by the continuation of that
action whereby He gives being." But in the
conservation of things Aquinas thinks that God
acts through natural or created causes, whereas
in their initiation, being is the proper effect of
God alone.
The dogma of divine providence also requires
a theory of the cooperation of the first cause
with natural or secondary causes. Dante, in describing the direction which providence gives
to the course of nature, uses the image of a bow.
"Whatsoever this bow shoots falls disposed to
its foreseen end, even as a thing directed to its
aim." That God governs and cares for all things
may be supposed to reduce nature to a puppet
show in which every action takes place in obedience to the divine will alone. Natural causes
would thus cease to be causes or to have any
genuine efficacy in the production of their own
effects.
Some theologians have tended toward
this
extreme position, but Aquinas argues contrariwise that natural causes retain their efficacy as
instrumental causes, subordinate to God's will
as the one principal cause. "Since God
wills
that
effects
be
because of their
causes," he
writes, "all effects that presuppose some other
effect do not depend solely on the will of God";
and,
in another
place, he
says,
"whatsoever
causes He assigns to certain
effects. He gives
them the power to produce those effects ... so
that the dignity of causality is imparted even to
creatures."
In addition to the role of divine causality in

regular processes of nature,
still another
kind of divine causation is presupposed by the
religious belief in supernatural events, such as
the elevation of nature by grace and the deviations from the course of nature which are called
."miracles." All these considerations, and especially the matter of God's miraculous intervention in the regular course of nature, have been
subjects of dispute among theologians and philosophers (and sometime physicists and historians). Some of those who do not deny the existence of a Creator, or the divine government
of the universe through natural law, nevertheless question the need for divine cooperation
with the action of every natural cause, or God's
intervention in the order of nature.
Throughout these controversies, the theory
of causes defines the issues and determines the
lines of opposing argument. But
since other
basic notions are also involved in the debate of
these issues, the further consideration of them
is reserved for other chapters, especially God,
Nature, and World.
The discussion of cause takes a new turn in
modern times. The new issues arise, not from
different
interpretations
of
the
principle
of
causality, but from the skeptic's doubts concerning our ability to know the causes of things,
and from the tendency of the physical sciences
to limit or even to abandon the investigation of
causes.
According to the ancient conception of science, knowledge, to be scientific, must state the
causes of things. The essence of scientific method, according to the Posterior Analytics of Aristotle, consists in using causes both to define and
to demonstrate. Sometimes genus and
differentia are translated into material and formal
cause; sometimes a thing is defined genetically
by reference to its efficient cause, and sometimes
teleologically by reference to its final cause.
The degree to which this conception of science is realized in particular fields may be questioned. The
treatises of the astronomers,
for
example, do not seem to exemplify it as much
as do Aristotle's own physical treatises or Harvey's work on the circulation of the blood. Yet
until modern developments
in mathematical
physics, the ascertainment of causes seems to be
the dominant conception of the scientific task;
and until the separation widens between the experimental and the philosophical sciences, the
possibility of knowing causes
is not generally
doubted.
Galileo's exposition of the new mechanics
explicitly announces a departure from the traditional interest of the natural philosopher in
the discovery of causes. The aim, he says in his
Two New ScienceSy
is not "to investigate the
cause of the acceleration of natural motion,
concerning which various opinions have been
expressed by various philosophers"; but rather
"to investigate and to demonstrate some of the
properties of accelerated motion." The
"various opinions" about causes are referred to as
"fantasies" which it is "not really worth w hile"
for the scientist to examine.
This attitude toward causes, especially
efficient causes, characterizes the aim of mathematical physics, both
in astronomy and mechanics. For Newton
it
is enough— in fact, he
says,
it "would be a very great step in philosophy"—"to derive two or three general principles of motion from phenomena
.
.
. though
the causes of those principles were not yet discovered. And, therefore,
I scruple not to propose
the
principles of motion
.
.
. and
leave
their causes to be found out." In other passages,
Newton disparages the search for "hidden or
occult
causes"
as no part of the
business of
science.
Hume goes further. He insists that all causes
are hidden. By the very nature of what causes
are supposed to be and because of the manner
in which
the human mind knows, man can
have no knowledge of how causes really produce their effects. "We never can, by our utmost
scrutiny," he
says,
"discover anything
but
one
event
following
another,
without
being able to comprehend any force or power
by which the cause operates, or any connexion
between it and its supposed effect."
All that men can be referring to when they
use
the words
"cause" and
"effect," Hume
thinks,
is the customary sequence of "one object followed by another, and where all objects
similar to the first are followed by objects similar to the second." So far as any knowledge
based upon reason or experience can go,
the
relation of cause and
effect
is simply one of
succession,
impressed upon
the mind "by a
customary transition." That one event leads to
another becomes more and more probable— but
never more
than probable—as
the
sequence
recurs more and more frequently in experience.
Hume's skepticism about causes, and his reinterpretation of the meaning of cause, gains
wide
acceptance
in subsequent
thought,
especially
among
natural
scientists.
William
James, for example, considering "the principle
that 'nothing can happen without a cause,' "
declares that "we have no definite idea of what
we mean by cause, or of what causality consists
in. But the principle expresses a demand for
some deeper sort of inward connection between
phenomena than
their merely habitual timesequence seems to be. The word 'cause'
is, in
short, an altar to an unknown god; an empty
pedestal still marking the place for a hoped-for
statue. Any
really inward belonging- together
of the sequent terms," he continues,
"if discovered, would be accepted as what the word
cause was meant to stand for."
Though Hume holds that we cannot penetrate beyond experience
to
the operation of
real causes imbedded in the nature of things,
he does not deny the reality of causation as a
principle of nature. On the contrary, he denies
that anything happens by chance or that any
natural occurrence can be uncaused. "It is universally allowed," Hume says with approval,
"that nothing exists without a cause of its existence, and that chance, when strictly examined,
is a mere negative word, and means not any
real power which has anywhere a being in nature." But "though there
is no such thing as
chance in the world, our ignorance of the real
cause of any event has the same influence on
the understanding, and begets a like species of
belief or opinion."
In other words, Hume's position seems to be
that man's ignorance of real
causes, and
the
mere probability of his opinions about customary sequences of "cause" and "effect," indicate
human limitations, not limits to causal determination in the order of nature itself. Adversaries of Hume, coming before
as well
as
after
him in the tradition of the great
books, take
issue with him on both points.
Against Hume's determinism, which
is no
less
complete
than
Spinoza's,
Aristotle,
for
example, affirms the existence of chance or real
contingency
in
the
happenings
of
nature.
Against Hume's reduction of statements about
causes to probable opinion, Kant
insists that,
in the metaphysics of nature, such judgments
can be made with absolute
certainty. These
related issues are discussed in the chapters on
Chance, Fate, and Necessity and Contingency.
In the development of the natural sciences
since Hume's day, his translation of cause and
effect into observed sequences or correlations
reinforces
the
tendency, which
first
appears
with Galileo and Newton,
to
describe rather
than to explain natural phenomena. Yet to the
extent that the findings of science bear fruit
in technology, man's control over nature seems
to confirm Bacon's view of science rather than
Hume's—at least to the extent that the application of scientific knowledge to the production
of effects implies a knowledge of their causes.
The principle
of causality— that nothing
happens without a cause or sufficient
reason,
or,
as Spinoza puts
it, "nothing
exists from
whose nature an effect does not follow"—has
been made the basis for denials of human freedom as well as of chance or contingency in the
order of nature. The problem of man's free will
is discussed in the chapters on Fate, Liberty,
and Will, but we can here observe how the
problem
is stated
in terms of cause, with
respect
to both divine providence and natural
causation.
If God's will is the cause of everything which
happens, if nothing can happen contrary to His
will or escape the foresight of His providence,
then how is man free from God's foreordination
when he chooses between good and evil ? If, as
the theologians say, "the very act of free choice
is traced to God as to a cause," in what sense
can the act be called "free"?
Is
it not necessarily determined to conform to God's will and
to His plan } But, on the other hand, if "everything
happening
from
the
exercise
of
free
choice must be subject to divine providence,"
must not the evil that men do be attributed to
God as cause }
The problem takes another form for the scientist who thinks only in terms of natural causes,
especially
if he affirms a reign of causality in
nature from which nothing is exempt— just as,

1<J3[
for the theologian, nothing is exempt from God's
give
to these questions have profound consevvill. Since the realm of nature includes human
qucnces for man's view of himself, the universe,
nature, must not human acts be caused as are
and his place in it. As the issue of necessity and
all other natural events? Are some human acts
chance is central in physics or the philosophy of
free in the sense of being totally uncaused, or
nature, so the issue of determinism and freedom
only
in the sense of being caused differently
is central in psychology and ethics, in political
from the motions of matter? Are causality and
theory and the philosophy of history, and above
freedom opposed principles within the order of
all in
theology.
It makes opponents of James
nature, appropriate to physical and psychologiand Freud, of Hegel and Marx, of Hume and
cal action; or do they constitute distinct realms
Kant, of Spinoza and Descartes, of Lucretius
—as for Kant, the realms of phenomena and
and Marcus Aurelius. It raises one of the most
noumena, the sensible and the supra-sensible;
perplexing of all theological questions for Auor
as
for
Hegel,
the realms
of nature and
gustine, Aquinas, Pascal, and for the two great
history ?
poets of God's will and man's freedom—Dante
The different answers which the great books
and Milton.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The general theory of causation
 1a. The kinds of causes: their distinction and enumeration
 1b. The order of causes: the relation of cause and effect

2. Comparison of causes in animate and inanimate nature

3. Causality
and freedom
4.
The analysis of means and ends in the practical order

5. Cause
in relation to knowledge
 5a. Cause as the object of our inquiries
 5b. Cause in philosophical and scientific method: the role of causes in definition,
 demonstration, experiment, hypothesis
 5^.
 The nature and sources of our knowledge of causes
 5</.
 The limits of our knowledge of causes

6. The existence and operation of final causes
7.
The causality of God or the gods
 6a. Divine causality in the orig in and existence of the world: creation and conserva-
 tion
 7& Divine causality in the order of nature or change: the first cause in relation to all
 other causes
 7?. Divine causality in the government of the universe: providence and free will
 7</.
 Divine causality in the supernatural order: grace, miracles

8. The operation of causes in the process of history

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The consideration of cause in relation to principle and
clement, sec ELEMENT

The distinction between necessary and contingent causes, and for the conce

in relation to cause, see CHANCE xa-1b; NATURE 3c-3c(i); NECESSITY AND C

3a-3c.

The issue concerning determinism in nature or history, see FATE 5-6; HISTO

MECHANICS 4c(i); NATURE 2f, 3c(2).

Other discussions of the controversy concerning causality and free will, a

of man's freedom in relation to God's will, see FATE 2, 4; HISTORY 43(1)

53, 5d; WILL 5a(3)~5 a (4) 5k), 5 C ?cThe theory of divine causality in
creation, providence, and the performanc

ASTRONOMY 8d; GOD 53, 73-76; MATTER 3d; NATURE 3c(4); WORLD 40, 4dke.

The role of ends or final causes in the order of nature and the structure

DESIRE i GOD 5b; NATURE 3c(3); WORLD 1c, 6c; and for the general theory

;

ends, see GOOD AND EVIL 40, 5c; JUDGMENT 3; PRUDENCE 33, 4b; WILL ac(2)-

The discussion of cause as an object of knowledge and in relation to the m

philosophy, science, and history, see ASTRONOMY 3a-3b; DEFINITION 2d; HI

KNOWLEDGE 53(3); MECHANICS 2c; PHYSICS 2b; REASONING 5b(4)~5b(5); SCIENC

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Gieat Booty of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided in

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collec

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the wo

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

I.

AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK in, CH 1-16, SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Ou 64-83,
88-98 CH 1-20

DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i, 28 Against the Phy .

HOBBES. Concerning Body, PART n, CH 9 and the Passive) HUME. A Treatise of Human
Nature, BK i, PART in, PROCLUS. The Element SECT n-iv, xv MAIMONIDES. The Guid

BERKELEY. Sins CH 69; PART n, CH KANT. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural DUNS
SCOTUS. Tractat Science, DIV in Tract Concerning

GIBBON. An Essay on the Study of Literature, XLVIII- BRUNO. De la causa, LV,
LXXVIII-LXXXII SUAREZ. Disputatwncs

HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK n, SECT i, CH 3; xxvn,xxix,xxxi(8-i SECT HI,
CH 3(fl) VOL II, SECT II, CH 3

; JOHN OP SAINT THOMAS

J. S. MILL. A System of Logic, BK in, CH 4-6, 9-10, misticus, Philosop 15, 21
25-26

. An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's BOYLE. A Disquisitio

Philosophy, CH 16 Natural Things

FREUD. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, CH 12 MALEBRANCHE. De la r W.
JAMES. Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 12-13 CH 3J Edaircisseme a; PRINCIPLE la.
ption of chance ONTINGENCY RY 43(1); nd of the problem ; LIBERTY 4a-4b, e of
miracles, see of the universe, sec of means and 2c(3). ethods and aims of STORY
3b; E 1b(i), but relevant to the to two groups; . tion. rks cited, consult The
Great Ideas,

II. tlines of Pyrrhonism, BK HI, sicists, BK i (Concerning Cause s of Theology,
(B,G,I) e for the Perplexed, PART i, 48 us de Prtmo Pnncipio (A the First
Principle) principio, e uno o), xxxiv(6-7), XLVIII (i) Mctaphysicac, xi (3), xn.
CuTSUS PhlloSOphlCUS Thohia Naturalis PART i, QQ 10-13, n About the Final Causes
of echerche de la veritc, BK vi(n), nt 15

178 THE GREAT MALEBRANCHE. Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, VII

LEIBNITZ. Discourse on Metaphysics, xv-xxii . New Essays Concerning Human
Understanding,

BK 11, CH 26

VOLTAIRE. Candtde .

"Change or Generation of Events/' "Final

Causes," in A Philosophical Dictionary

T. REID, Essays on the Active Powers of the Human Mind, i

SCHOPENHAUER. On the Fourfold Root of the Principle of Sufficient Reason , The
World as Will and Idea, VOL HI, SUP, CH

26; APPENDIX

BROWN. An Inquiry into the Relation of Cause and

Effect

. Lectures on the Philosophy ofthe Human Mind, VOL i, pp 189-220, VOL ii, pp
128-134

COMTE. The Positive Philosophy, INTRO, CH i BK HI,

; CH i

W. HAMILTON, lectures on Metaphysics and Logic,

VOL i (38-40) WHEWELL. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences,

VOL I, BK HI, CH 1-4; BK IX, CH 6j BK X, CH $', VOL II, BK XI, CH 7

HELMHOLTZ. Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects,

VIII WUNDT. Die Prmzipien der mechanischen Naturlehre

JEVONS. The Principles of Science, CH 1 1 LOTZE. Logic, BK I, CH 2 (fl) P. A.
JANET. Final Causes C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 66-87, 393-394

DOMET DE VORGES. Cause cfficiente et cause finale WATTS. The Reign of Causality
VENN. Principles of Empirical or Inductive Logic, CH 2

IDEAS FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART i, CH 3 PEARSON. The Grammar of Science, CH
4 BRADLEY. The Principles of Logic, BK in, PART n,

CH 2

.

Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH 6 BOSANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 8 BERGSON.
Creative Evolution BROAD. Perception, Physics, and Reality, CH 1-2 HENDERSON.
The Order of Nature W. E. JOHNSON. Logic, PART HI, CH 3-1 1 MEYERSON. Identity
and Reality, CH i

. De F explication dans les sciences DUCASSE. Causation and the Types of
Necessity WHITEHEAD. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of

Natural Knowledge, CH 16

.

Symbolism, Its Meaning and Effects EDDINGTON. The Nature of the Physical World,

CH 14 McTAGGART. The Nature of Existence, CH 24-26 SANTAYANA. The Realm of
Matter, CH 7 M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK i, CH 4(2) ;

BK II, CH 2 LENZEN. The Nature of Physical Theory, PART iv,

CH 16 WEYL. The Open World, LECT n MARITAIN. A Preface to Metaphysics, LECT V-VH
A. J. TOYNBFE A Study of History PLANCK Where Is Science Going?, CH 4-5

. The Philosophy of Physics, CH 2 DEWFY, Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, CH 22 B.
RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics, CH 55

. Our Knowledge of the External World, vin

.

Mysticism and Logic, en 9

. The Analysis of Matter, CH 30-31, 35

. Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits,

PART IV, CH 9-IO; PART VI, CH 5-6
