Chapter 9:

INTRODUCTION

sense  in  which  we use the word ONE "chance" does not exclude the operation of
causes.  The  chance  event,  in  this  sense,  is not uncaused. But within this
meaning of chance, there is the question oihow the chance event is caused.

On one view, what happens by chance is distinguished from what happens by nature
in  terms  of  a  difference  in  manner of causation the difference between the
contingent  and the necessary. On another view, the chance event does not differ
causally from that which happens regularly or uniformly. The difference lies not
in  the  pattern  of  causes,  but in our knowledge of them. The chance event is
unpredictable  or  less  predictable because of our ignorance of its causes, not
because  of  any real contingency in the order of nature. There is still a third
sense of "chance" in which it means that which happens totally without cause the
absolutely  spontaneous  or  fortuitous.  These three meanings of chance at once
indicate the basic issues in which the concept is involved. The third meaning is
the  most radical. It stands in opposition to the other two. Their opposition to
one  another  can  be  considered  after  we  examine  the sense in which chance
excludes every type of cause.

THE  DOCTRINE  OF  absolute  fortuitousness  is indetermmism in its most extreme
form.  The  familiar  phrase,  "a fortuitous concourse of atoms,'* indicates the
classical  statement of this doctrine, and identifies it in the great books with
the  theory of atomism. It would be more precise to say "with Lucretius' version
of  that  theory,"  because it is with regard to chance that he departs from the
teachings of Democritus and Epicurus, and adds an hypothesis of his own.

CHANCE  The swerve of the atoms, according to Lucretius, accounts for the origin
of  the  world,  the  motions  of  nature, and the free will of man. But nothing
accounts  for  the swerve of the atoms. It is uncaused, spontaneous, fortuitous.
"When  the  atoms are being carried downwards straight through the void by their
own  weight,  they push a little from their path at times quite undetermined and
at  undetermined  places,  yet  only  just so much as you would call a change of
trend.  If  they did not swerve, all things would fall downward through the deep
void like drops of rain, nor could collision come to be, nor blows be brought to
pass  among  the atoms; thus nature would never have brought anything to being."
Since the atoms differ in shape, size, and weight, it might be supposed that the
heavier  atoms,  falling  straight  yet more rapidly, would overtake and hit the
lighter  atoms,  thus  bringing  about  their grouping or interlocking. But this
supposition,  says  Lucretius,  is  contrary  to  reason. It may hold for things
falling  through water or thin air, but through the empty void "all things, even
of  unequal  weight,  move with an equal velocity through the unresisting void."
Therefore  heavier  things  will never be able to fall on the lighter from above
nor of themselves bring about the blows sufficient to produce the varied motions
by  which  nature  carries  things on. Wherefore, Lucretius concludes, the atoms
"must  swerve a little." Once the atoms have collided, the way in which they are
locked  together  in  the  patterns  of composite things, and all the subsequent
motions  of  these  things,  can  be  accounted  for by reference to the natural
properties  of  the  atoms.  The atomic sizes, shapes, and weights determine how
they  behave  singly  or  in  combination. But the swerve of the atoms is not so
determined.  It is completely spontaneous. 179 180 "If each motion is always due
to  another,  and the new always springs from the old in a determined order, and
if  the atoms do not by swerving break through the decree of fate, so that cause
does  not  follow  cause  through infinite time"; whence, asks Lucretius, "is it
wrested  from  fate, this will whereby we move forward where pleasure leads each
one  of us, and swerve likewise in our motions, neither at a fixed time nor at a
fixed  place,  but  only  when  and  where the mind itself has prompted us?" The
answer  he  gives  is  that  there  must be "in the atoms . . . another cause of
motion  besides  blows and weights, whence comes this power born in us, since we
see that nothing can come to be from nothing."

BEING   ABSOLUTELY   fortuitous,   the   swerve   of  the  atoms  is  absolutely
unintelligible.  There is no answer to the question why they chance to swerve at
undetermined  times and places. This unintelhgibility may not, however, make the
fortuitous  either  unreal or impossible. It can be argued that chance may exist
even  though,  for  our  limited  understanding, it remains mysterious. The same
problem of intelligibility arises with respect to that meaning of chance wherein
it is identified with coincidence or contingency.

Here,  as in the case of the absolutely fortuitous, chance belongs to reality or
nature.  "Some  things  always  come to pass in the same way, and others for the
most  part,"  writes  Aristotle  as  an observer of nature, but there is also "a
third  class of events besides these two events which " all say are 'by chance.'
Things  of  this  last  kind,  he  goes on to say, are those which "come to pass
incidentally"  or  accidentally.  According  to this theory, a real or objective
indeterminism  exists.  Chance or contingency is not just an expression of human
uncertainty  born  of insufficient knowledge. Contingency, however, differs from
the  fortuitousness or spontaneity of the atom's swerve, in that it is a product
of  causes,  not  their  total  absence.  Of  the contingent event, "there is no
definite  cause,"  in  Aristotle's opinion, but there is "a chance cause, /., an
indefinite  one."  In  the  chance  happening,  two lines of action coincide and
thereby  produce  a single result. This is our ordinary understanding of the way
accidents happen. The chance meeting of old friends who run across each other in
a  railroad  station  after  a  separation  of  many  years  is  a coincidence a
coinciding  of  the  two  quite  separate  and independent lines of action which
brought each of them to the same station at the same time, coming from different
places,  going  to  different  places,  and  proceeding  under  the influence of
different  causes  or  purposes.That  each  is  there  can  be  explained by the
operation  of  causes.  That  both are there together cannot be explained by the
causes  determining  their  independent  paths.  So understood, the chance event
exemplifies  what  Aquinas calls a "clashing of two causes." And what makes it a
matter of chance is the fact that "the clashing of these two causes, inasmuch as
it  is  accidental,  has  no  cause."  Precisely because it is accidental, "this
clashing  of  causes  is  not to be reduced to a further pre-existing cause from
which   it   follows   of  necessity."  The  illustration  is  not  affected  by
considerations  of  free  will.  Whether men have free will or not, whether free
acts are caused or are, as Kant suggests, uncaused and spontaneous, the event we
call  a  "chance  meeting" remains accidental or, more precisely, a coincidence.
Whatever  the  factors  are  which control the motions of each man, they operate
entirely  within that single man's line of action. Prior to the meeting, they do
not  influence  the  other  man's  conduct.  If we could state the cause for the
coincidence  of  the  two lines of motion, it would have to be some factor which
influenced both lines. Were there such a cause and were it known to us, we could
not  say that the meeting happened by chance. It would still be a coincidence in
the  merely  physical sense of coming together, but itwould not be a coincidence
causally.  That  free  will  is irrelevant to this meaning of chance can be seen
from  the  fact that the collision of particles which produces atomic fission is
regarded  as  resulting from chance or coincidence in a manner no different from
the  accidental  meeting of friends. Causes control the speeds and directions of
the  colliding  particles,  but no cause determines their collision or, in other
words, there is no cause for the coincidence of two separate lines of causation.
Contemporary  physics  affirms  a  real or objective indeterminism insofar as it
does  not  merely say CHAPTER 9: CH that the cause of the coincidence is unknown
to us, but rather holds that no such cause exists to be known.

THE  CONCEPTION  OF  THE chance event as an uncaused coincidence of causes is an
ancient  as  well  as a modern doctrine. In his Physicsk Aristotle distinguishes
between  what happens by nature and what happens by chance in terms of different
of  causality. "Chance," he types writes, is "reckoned among causes; many things
are  said both to be and to come to be as a result of chance." But the fact that
its  effects  cannot  be "identified with any of the things that come to pass by
necessity  and always, or for the most part" at once distinguishes the causality
of  chance  from  that  of  nature.  "The early physicists," Aristotle observes,
"found  no  place for chance among the causes which they recognized Others there
are  .  .  .  who,  indeed,  believe  that  chance  is  a  cause, but that it is
inscrutable  to  human intelligence, as being a divine thmgand full of mystery."
But  to  Aristotle  himself "it is clear that chance is an incidental cause" and
"that the causes of what comes to pass by chance are infinite." For this reason,
he  explains,  "chance is supposed to belong to the class of the indefinite, and
to  be  inscrutable  to  man."  Though  he distinguishes between spontaneity and
chance, he says that both "are causes of effects which, though they might result
from   intelligence   or   nature,   have  in  fact  been  caused  by  something
incidentally."  What  happens by nature happens regularly, or for the most part,
through causal necessity. This necessity results from the operation of essential
causes,  causes  in  the  very  nature of the moving things. When the regularity
fails,  it  is due to the intervention of some accidental cause. What happens by
chance,  then,  or  contingently,  is  always  due  to an accidental (or better,
incidental)  cause.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on CAUSE, an accidental as
opposed  to  an essential cause is, in Aristotle's theory, one which does not by
itself'produce the given effect.

It  does  so only through the conjunction of other causes. But since it does not
determine these other causes to operate, the effect contingent on their combined
activity  is  produced  by  chance,  that  is,  by  the  contingency  of several
incidental causes working coincidentally.

ANCE  A world in which chance really exists is remarkably different from a world
in  which  necessity  prevails,  in which everything is determined by causes and
there  are  no  uncaused  coincidences.  William  James vividly epitomizes their
difference  by  calling the world of absolute necessity or determinism the world
of  Spinoza  or  Hegel  a "block universe" in contrast to what he describes as a
"concatenated  universe.** Voltaire before him, in his Philosophical Dictionary,
had  used  the  phrase  "the  concatenation of events" to express the meaning of
chance.  The phrase evokes the right image, the picture of a world in which many
concurrent  lines  of  causality,  exercising no influence upon one another, may
nevertheless  concatenate  or be joined together to produce a chance result. The
block  universe presents the contrasting picture of a world in which each motion
or act determines and is determined by every other in the fixed structure of the
whole. Spinoza claims, for example, that "in nature there is nothing contingent,
but  all  things are determined from the necessity of the divine nature to exist
and act in a certain manner.** Chance, in other words, does not exist in nature.
A  thing  is  said  to  be contingent, Spinoza writes, only "with reference to a
deficiency  in  our knowledge. For if we do not know that the essence of a thing
involves   a  contradiction,  or  if  we  actually  know  that  it  involves  no
contradiction,  and  nevertheless we can affirm nothing with certainty about its
existence because the order of causes is concealed from us, that thing can never
appear  to us either as necessary or impossible, and therefore we call it either
contingent  or  possible." Hence, for Spinoza, contingency or chance is illusory
rather  than  real  a  projection  of  the mind's ignorance or of its inadequate
knowledge   of  causes.  The  issue  between  real  indeterminism  and  absolute
determinismfurther   discussed  in  the  chapters  on  FATE  and  NECESSITY  AND
CONTINGENCY inevitably raises theological questions. Just as the theologian must
reconcile  man's  free will with God's predestination, so must he, if he accepts
its  reality,  also  reconcile  chance  with divine providence, apart from which
nothing  can  happen  either necessarily or contingently. For Augustine it would
seem  that  divine  providence  leaves  no room for chance among natural things.
After  noting  that  causes  are  sometimes  divided into a "fortuitous cause, a
natural  cause,  and  a  voluntary  cause/' he dismisses "those causes which are
called  fortuitous"  by saying that they "are not a mere name for the absence of
causes,  but  are  only  latent, and we attribute them either to the will of the
true  God,  or  to  that  of  spirits  of some kind or other/' In certain places
Aquinas seems to talk in much the same fashion though chance as existed only for
our limited intellects and not for God. "Nothing," he declares, "hinders certain
things  from happening by luck or chance, if compared to their proximate causes;
but not if compared to divine providence, according to which 'nothing happens at
random  in  the world/ as Augustine says." The example he uses to illustrate his
point  is  that  of  two servants who have been sent by their master to the same
place:  "the  meeting  of the two servants, although to them it appears a chance
circumstance,  has  been  fully foreseen by their master, who has purposely sent
them  to  meet  at  one  place,  in  such a way that one has no knowledge of the
other."  In  such  a  way  also  "all  things must of necessity come under God's
ordering,"  from  which  it  follows that God directly causes the action of even
accidental  causes,  and  their  coincidence  The  chance  event  would  then be
necessitated  by  God. It would be determined by His will, however indeterminate
it  might  appear to us. Yet in other places Aquinas writes that "God wills some
things  to  be  done  necessarily, some contingently .... To some effects He has
attached  unfailing necessary causes, from which the effects follow necessarily;
but   to   other   defectiblc   and   contingent   causes,  from  which  effects
arisecontingently."  For some minds this may only deepen the mystery rather than
solve it. At least it leaves many questions unanswered. Docs Aquinas mean that a
coincidence  of causes is not itself uncaused ? Does he mean that God causes the
concatenation  of  events,  and  that  a sufficient reason for every contingency
exists  in God's will? If so, is chance an illusion, a function of our ignorance
of  divine  providence? May chance be quite real on the level of nature where no
natural  causes  determine  the  coincidence, while not real at least not in the
same  sensefor God ? Or does the statement that what "divine providence plans to
happen  contingently,  happens  contingently"  mean  that  chance remains a real
feature of the universe even for God ?

One  thing  is  clear.  In  one  sense  of  the  word, the Christian theologians
completely  deny chance. If "chance" means something which God does not foresee,
something  unplanned  by  His  providence, then according to their faith nothing
happensby  chance.  It  is  in  this  sense  also that what happens by chance is
opposed  to  what  happens  on  purpose,  or has a final as well as an efficient
cause.  As the chapter on CAUSE indicates, those who deny final causes in nature
sometimes  use  the  word  "chance"  to  signify  not  lack  of  cause, nor even
contingency, but only the blindness of causality working to no end.

The  controversy  discussed in the chapter on WORLD between those who see in the
structure  of  the  universe  the  grand  design  of a divine plan and those who
attribute  whatever  order  there is in nature to blind chance further indicates
the  sense  in  which theologians like Augustine and Aquinas deny chance. But if
"chance"  means  no  more  than contingency, then to affirm chance excludes, not
providence,  but  of  "fate"  according  to  fate,  at  least  that  sense which
everything  is  blindly  necessitated.  Here  it is Spinoza's statement that "in
nature  there  isnothing  contingent,  but  all  things  are determined from the
necessity of the divine nature" which opposes the statement of Aquinas that "the
mode  both  of  necessity and contingency falls under the foresight of God." THE
THEORY  OF  chance  has  obvious bearings on the theory of knowledge, especially
with  regard  to  the  distinction  between  knowledge  and  opinion and between
certainty  and probability. On any view of chance whether it is real or illusory
'iyhen  men call a future event contingent they mean that they cannot predict it
with  certitude. So far as human prediction goes, it makes no difference whether
the future event is necessarily determined and we lack adequate knowledge of its
causes,  or  the  event  has  a genuine indeterminacy in the way it is caused or
CHAPTER  9:  C  uncaused.  Regardless  of  what  the objective situation is, the
assurance  with  which  we  predict anything reflects the state of our knowledge
about  it.  The  ancients  who,  for  the  most  part, regard chance as real and
objective,  treat  probability as subjective. For them, the different degrees of
probability which men attach to their statements measure the inadequacy of their
knowledge  and  the consequent uncertainty of their opinions about matters which
cannot  be known but only guessed. Holding different theories of the distinction
between  knowledge  and opinion, both Plato and Aristotle exclude the accidental
and  the  contingent,  along  with  the particular, from the objects of science.
Since  in their view certitude belongs to the essence of science or of knowledge
as  contrasted  with  opinion science for them deals not only with the universal
but with the necessary. In the Republic Socrates assigns opinion to the realm of
becoming  the  realm  of  changing  and  contingent  particulars.  Unlike Plato,
Aristotle  does  not  restrict  knowledge  to the realm of eternal and immutable
being,  but  he  does  insist  that  physics,  as  a science of changing things,
preserve  the  certitude of science by concerning itself only with the essential
and  the  necessary. "That a science of the accidental is not even possible," he
writes,  "will be evident if we try to see what the accidental really is." It is
a  matter  of  chance  that  cold  weather occurs during the dog-days, for "this
occurs  neither  always and of necessity, nor for the most part, though it might
happen  sometimes.  The  accidental, then, is what occurs, but not always nor of
necessity,  nor for the most part. Now ... it is obvious why there is no science
of  such  a  thing."  disagrees  with  Aristotle and Though he Aquinas about the
reality  of  chance  or  contingency,  Spinoza agrees with them that knowledgeat
least adequate knowledge has the necessary for its object. Of individual things,
he  says,  "we  can  have  no adequate knowledge . . . and this is what is to be
understood  by  us as their contingency." To be true to itself and to the nature
of  things,  reason  must "perceive things truly, that is to say, as they are in
themselves, that is to say, not as contingent but as necessary." The position of
Aquinas  is  worth  stating  for  HANCE comparison. To the question "whether our
intellect  can  know  contingent  things,"  he  replies  that  "the  contingent,
considered  as  such is known directly by sense and indirectly by the intellect,
while  the  universal and necessary principles of contingent things are known by
the  intellect.  Hence,"  he  goes  on, "if we consider knowable things in their
universal  principles,  then  all  science  is  of  necessary  things. But if we
consider the things themselves, thus some sciences are of necessary things, some
of contingent things." Among the sciences of contingent things, Aquinas includes
not  only  "the  sciences  of nature" but also "the moral sciences," because the
latter, dealing with human action, must reach down to contingent particulars. In
the  sphere  of morals as of nature, certainty can be achieved only on the level
of  universal principles. Deliberation about particular acts to be done moves on
the  level  of  probable opinion. In contrast to the moral scientist, the man of
action   must   weigh   chances   and  make  decisions  with  regard  to  future
contingencies.  It  would be as foolish, Aristotle says, to expect the certitude
of  scientific  demonstration  from an orator or a judge, as "to accept probable
reasoning  from a mathematician." IT is NOT SURPRISING that the modern theory of
probability or, as it was later called by Boole, Venn, and others, the "logic of
chance"  should  have  its  origin in the sphere of practical problems. Pascal's
correspondence  with  Fermat  illustrates  the  early  mathematical speculations
concerning  formulae  for  predicting  the  outcome in games of pure chance. For
Pascal  the  logic  of  chance also has moral implications. If we are willing to
risk  money  at  the  gaming table on the basis of calculated probabilities, how
much  more  willing  should  we  be  to  act  decisively  in  the face of life's
uncertainties,  even  to risking life itself on the chance of eternal salvation.
When we act "on an uncertainty, we act reasonably," Pascal writes, "for we ought
to  work  for an uncertainty according to the doctrine of chance." If the chance
of  there  being an after-life is equal to the chance of there being none if the
equiprobability  reflects  our  equal  ignorance of either alternative then, THE
GREAT  Pascal  argues,  we  ought  to  wager  in  favor  of  immortality and act
accordingly.  "There is here the infinity of an infinitely happy life to gain, a
chance  to gam against a finite number of chances of loss, and what you stake is
finite."

Like Pascal, Hume thinks that we must be content with probability as a basis for
action.  "The  great  subverter  of  Pyrrhonism  or  the excessive principles of
skepticism,"  he  writes,  "is  action,  and  employment, and the occupations of
common  life."  But  unlike  the ancients, Hume also thinks we should be content
with  probabilities  in  the  sphere  of  the  natural  sciences.  Certitude  is
attainable only by the mathematician who deals with the relations between ideas.
Since  the  natural  sciences  deal  with matters of fact or real existence, and
since to know such things we must rely entirely upon our experience of cause and
effect,  we  cannot  reach  better  than  probable  conclusions.  The scientist,
according  to  Hume,  "weighs  opposite  experiments. He considers which side is
supported  by  the greater number of experiments; to that side he inclines, with
doubt  and  hesitation;  and  when  at  last he fixes his judgment, the evidence
exceeds  not  what we properly call probability. All probability, then, supposes
an  opposition  of  experiments  and  observations  ...  A  hundred instances or
experiments  on one side, and fifty on another, afford a doubtful expectation of
any  event;  though  a  hundred  uniform  experiments,  with  only  one  that is
contradictory,  reasonably  beget  a  pretty  strong  degree of assurance." Hume
applies  the  logic of chance to weighing the evidence against and the testimony
in  favor  of miracles, as well as to contrary hypotheses in science. As much as
Spinoza,  he  denies  the  existence  of  chance  or contingency in the order of
nature.  Chance  is entirely subjective. It is identical with the probability of
our opinions. In the throw of dice, the mind, he says, "considers the turning up
of  each  particuprobable;  and  this  is  the  very lar side as alike nature of
chance,  to  render  all  the  particular  events,  comprehended in it, entirely
equal." But there may also be "a probability, which arises from a superiority of
chances  on any side; and according as this superiority increases, and surpasses
the  opposite  chances,  the probability receives a proportionate increase . . .
The  case,"  IDEAS Hume asserts, "is the same with the probability of causes, as
with that of chance."

Since  Hume's  day, the theory of probability has become an essential ingredient
of  empirical  science.  The  development  of thermodynamics in the I9th century
would  have  been  impossible  without  it.  This  is  also  true of the quantum
mechanics  and  atomic physics of our own time. But like the doctrine of chance,
the  theory  of  probability  tends  in one of two directions: either toward the
subjective  view  that probability is only a quality of our judgments, measuring
the  degree  of  our  ignorance of the real causes which leave nothing in nature
undetermined; or toward the objective view that there is genuine indetermmism in
nature  and  that  mathematical  calculations  of  probability estimate the real
chance  of an event's occurring. THE ELEMENT OF chance also has a bearing on the
general theory of art. The hypothesis of the melody which a kitten might compose
by  walking  on  the  keyboard,  is  obviously intended to contrast a product of
chance  with  a work of art. The competent musician knows with certainty that he
can  do  what the meandering kitten has only one chance in many millions of ever
accomplishing.  In proportion as an art is developed, and to the degree that its
rules  represent  a  mastery  of the medium in which the artist works, chance is
excluded  from  its  productions.  This  point  is strikingly exemplified in the
history  of medicine. "If there had been no such thing as medicine," Hippocrates
suggests,  "and  if  nothing  had  been  investigated  or  found out in it," all
practitioners  "would  have  been  equally  unskilled  and  ignorant  of it, and
everything  concerning the sick would have been directed by chance." On the same
principle,  Galen  distinguishes  the  physician from the empiric, who, "without
knowing  the  cause,"  pretends  that  he  is  "able  to rectify the failures of
function."  The  empiric  works  by trial and error the very opposite of art and
science,  for trial and error can succeed only by chance. The physician, learned
and  skilled  in  medicine, works from a knowledge of causes and by rules of art
which  tend  to  eliminate  chance.  Augustine  reports  a conversation with the
proconsul  concerning  the  relative  merits  of  CHAPTER  9:  CHA  medicine and
astrology.  When  the  proconsul  tells  him  that,  as  compared with medicine,
astrology  is  a  false  art,  Augustine at this time himself "much given to the
books  of  the  horoscope-casters,"  asks  how  the  fact that "many things were
foretold  truly  by [astrology]" can be explained. The proconsul "answered, very
reasonably,  that  it  was  due  to  the  force of chance, which is always to be
allowed  for  in  the order of things." Thus, Augustine says later, "I saw it as
obvious  that  such  things  as  happened  to  be said truly from the casting of
horoscopes  were  true not by skill but by chance; and such things as were false
were  not  due  to  want  of skill m the art but merely that luck had fallen the
other  way."  Neither art itself, nor skill in its practice, can ever be perfect
enough to remove chance entirely, for the artist deals with particulars. Yet the
measure  of  an  art  is  the  certainty  which its rules have as directions for
achieving  the  desired  result;  and the skill of the artist is measured by the
extent  to  which  he  succeeds by rule and judgment rather than by chance. When
Aristotle  quotes Agathon's remark that "art loves chance and chance loves art,"
he  explains  its  sense  to be that "chance and art are concerned with the same
objects"  that which docs not come to be by nature nor from necessity. Hence art
sometimes  fails,  either from uncontrollable contingencies or from insufficient
knowledge  of causes. "All causes," says Hume, "are not conjoined to their usual
effects with like uniformity. An artificer, who handles only dead matter, may be
disappointed  of  his aim, as well as the politician, who directs the conduct of
sensible and intelligent agents."

IN  THE  REALM  OF  human affairs in morals, politics, and history the factor of
chance is usually discussed in terms of good and bad fortune. The word "fortune"
as  may  be  seen  in  the  root  which it shares with "fortuitous" has the same
connotations  as  "chance."  Aristotle treats fortune as the kind of chance that
operates  in  the sphere of human action rather than natural change. Fortune, he
thinks,  can  be  attributed  properly  only  to  intelligent  beings capable of
deliberate  choice.  The  sense  of  this distinction between chance and fortune
seems  to  be  borne  out in history by the fact NCE that fortune, unlike chance
receives  persdnin  cation  in  myth  and  legend. Fortune is a goddess whom she
combats, a 'power or, like the Fates with which even the gods must reckon.

The  doctrine  of chance or fortune occupies an important place in moral theory.
Aristotle's  classification of goods tends to identify external goods with goods
of fortune the goods which, unlike knowledge and virtue, we cannot obtain merely
by  the  exercise  of  our  will  and  faculties.  Considering  the  elements of
happiness,Aquinas groups together wealth, honor, fame, and power as goods of the
same  sort  because  they  are  "due  to  external  causes  and in most cases to
fortune."  The  goods  of fortune, as well as its ills, consist in things beyond
man's  power  to  command  and,  in  consequence,  to  deserve.  Recognizing the
unpredictable  operation  of fortune, Epictetus, the Stoic, argues that "we must
make the best of those things that are in our power, and take the rest as nature
gives  it."  We have "the power to deal rightly with our own impressions." Hence
the  Stoics  advise  us to control our reactions to things even though we cannot
control  the things themselves. Yet men will always ask, asHamlet does, "Whether
'tis  nobler  in the mind to suffer the slings and arrows of outrageous fortune,
or  to  take arms against a sea of troubles, and by opposing end them?" The fact
that  the  goods  and ills of fortune arc beyond our power to control raises the
further  question  of man's responsibility regarding them. We can hardly be held
responsible  for  everything that happens to us, but only for those things which
are  subject to our will. This traditional moral distinction between the good or
evil  which  befalls  us  by  fortune  and  that  which  we  willfully obtain or
accomplish,  parallels  the legal distinction between accidental and intentional
wrongdoing.  What  is  true of the individual life seems to apply to history the
life of states and the development of civilization generally. For the most part,
the  historians  Herodotus  and  Thucydides,  Plutarch,  Tacitus, and Gibbonfind
fortune a useful principle of interpretation, To Machiavelli history seems to be
so  full  of  accidents and contingencies "great changes in affairs . beyond . .
human  conjecture"  all that he tries to advise the prince how to make THE GREAT
use of fortune in order to avoid being ruined by it. Such advice can be followed
because, in his opinion, "Fortune is the arbiter of one half of our actions, but
still leaves us to direct the other half, or perhaps a little less."

Hegel,  on  the  contrary, does not admit chance or fortune in his view of world
history  as  a  "necessary  development out of the concept of the mind's freedom
alone."  For Tolstoy also, either necessity or freedom rules the affairs of men.
Chance,  he  writes,  does  "not  denote any really existing thing," but only "a
certain stage of understanding of phenomena." Once we succeed in calculating the
composition of forces involved in the mass movements of men, "we

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The conception of chance
   1a. Chance as the coincidence of causes
   1b. Chance as the absolutely fortuitous, the spontaneous or uncaused

2. The issue concerning the existence of chance or fortune
   2a. The relation of chance to causality: philosophical or scientific determinism
   2b. The relation of chance to fate, providence, and predestination

3. Chance,   necessity, and design or purpose in the origin and structure of the world
4.
Cause and chance in relation to knowledge and opinion: the theory of probability
The control of chance or contingency by art

6. Chance and fortune in     human affairs: the mythology of Fortune
   6a. Chance and fortune in the life of the individual
   6b. Chance and fortune in politics and history

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other discussions of the issue of determinism and NATURE
30-30(1);  NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 33-3 free will, sec LIBERTY 43; WILL 53(3),
50.

The general theory of cause and its bearing on th

NATURE 30(3).

The theological problems of chance in relation to

CAUSE 70-70; FATE 4; GOD 70.

Other discussions of the theory of probability, s

6d(3); NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 43; OPINION i,

Discussions bearing on the rektion of art to chan

in the sphere of prudence, see PRUDENCE 43-4k 5

The theory of the goods of fortune, see GOOD AND

VICE 6-c; WEALTH loa.

CE  191  6 THUCYDIDBS: Pelopormesian War, BK i, 368d369a; BK iv, 451a-c; 462a-b;
BK  v,  506a-c;  BK  vu,  560a-b  7 PLATO: Republic, BK v, 366a-c / Laws, BK iv,
679a-c  9  ARISTOTLE:  Politics,  BK  n,  CH  n [i273b i7-24] 470b; BK vu, CH 13
[1332b28-32]  537a  13  VIRGIL:  Aeneid,  BK  i [441-495] 115a-116b 14 PLUTARCH:
Romulus,  18d / Camtllus, I07b-c; 109c-110a / Timoleon 195a-213d esp 196b, 203b,
205b-c  /  Aemihus  Paulus, 225a-c / Philopoemen, 300b-c / Phoaon, 604b,d-605d /
Demosthenes,  698b-d  15 TACITUS: Annals, BK m, 49b-c; BK vi, 91b-d / Histories,
BK  iv,  281a-b  18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK V,CH i 207d-208c 21 DANTE: Divine
Comedy,  HELL,  vn [49-99] lOa-c; PARADISE, xvi [73-87] 131a 22 CHAUCER: Troilus
and  Cressida, BK i, STANZA 20 3b; BK v, STANZA 221 149a 23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince,
CH  vi,  8c-9b;  CH  vn,  lOa-c; CH xxi, 32d; CH xxiv-xxv, 34d-36b 25 MONTAIGNE:
Essays,  52c-53c; 136b-139b; 451d-452d 26 SHAKESPEARE: Julius Caesar, ACT iv, sc
m  [215-224]  590d ( 35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 70, 481d-482a 40
GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 609b-c; 615a; 630b 41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 590a-b
43  FEDERALIST: NUMBER i, 29a-b 46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 323-
324  107a-d;  par  llOb-c; par lllb / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 166b-c; PART
in,  300c-301c  47  GOETHE:  Faust, PART n [10,849-872] 264a-b 50 MARX: Capital,
378b-d  51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK ix, 359a-365c; BK x, 389a-391c; 447c-448c;
449a;  456a-4S9d csp 458c-459d; BK xi, 505a-507a csp 505d506a, 507a; EPILOGUE i,
646c-650c;  EPILOGUE n, 688a-696d passim chance, see FATE 3, 5-6; HISTORY 43(1);
0;  and for the relation of chance to e concept of chance, see CAUSE i-1b, kd-6;
fate,  providence,  and predestination, see ee JUDGMENT 6c; KNOWLEDGE 4b, 6d(i)-
3b;  SCIENCE 46; TRUTH 4d. ce, see ART i, 2a; and for the role of chance 3. EVIL
4d; HAPPINESS 2b(i); VIRTUE AND ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. T

I. Works by authors represen

II. Works by authors not repr

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which fo

I.

PLUTARCH. "Of Fortune," "Of the Tranquillity of

the Mind," in Moralia F. BACON. "Of Fortune," in Essays HUME. A Treatise of
Human Nature, BK i, PART in,

SECT XI-XIII KAN r. Introduction to Logic, x J. MILL. A System of Logic, BK in,
CH 17-18

S, FREUD. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life, CH 12 W. JAMES. "The Dilemma of
Determinism," in

The Will to Believe

Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 9-13

.

II.

BOETHIUS. The Consolation of Philosophy, BK n,

iv-v

SUAREZ,  Disputationes Metaphysicae, xix (12) J.BUTLER. The Analogy of Religion,
INTRO VOLTAIRE. "Change or Generation of Events,"

"Necessary-Necessity," "Power-Omnipotence,"

in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary  SCHOPENHAUER.  On  the  Fourfold  Root  of the
Principle of Sufficient Reason

LAPLACE.  A  Philosophical  Essay  on  Probabilities  DE  MORGAN.  An  Essay  on
Probabilities COURNOT. Exposition de la theone des chances et des probability

BOOLE. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought, CH 16-18, 21

TODHUNTER. History of the Mathematical Theory of

Probability  ths ofthe Western World, but relevant to the hese works are divided
into  two  groups:  ted  in  this  collection.  esented  in this collection. the
publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult llows the last chapter of The Great
Ideas.  VENN.  The  Logic  of  Chance  WHITWORTH Choice and Chance BOUTROUX. The
Contingency  of  the  Laws of Nature JEVONS. The Principles of Science, CH 10-12
BRADLEY. The Principles of Logic, Terminal Essays,

VIII  C.  S.  PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL n, par 645-754; VOL vi, par 35-65 T.
HARDY.  Life's  Little Ironies PL ARSON. The Chances of Death MEYERSON. Identity
and Reality, CH 9 POINCARE". Science and Hypothesis, PART iv, CH n

. Science and Method, BK i, CH 4 HENDERSON. The Fitness of the Environment N. R.
CAMPBELL.  Physics; the Elements, CH 7 W. E. JOHNSON. Logic, PART in, CH 2 J. M.
KEYNES. A Treatise on Probability, PART i-n,

iv-v  G.  N.  LEWIS.  The  Anatomy  of  Science,  ESSAY  vi DEWLY. The Quest for
Certainty, CH i HEISENBERG. The Physical Principles of the Quantum

Theory  NAGEL. On the Logic of Measurement M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK i,
CH  3(4)  MARITAIN.  A  Preface  to  Metaphysics, LECT vn RLICHENBACH. Theory of
Probability  SANFAYANA.  The  Realm  of Truth, CH n VON NEUMANN and MORGENSTERN.
Theory  of  Games  and  Economic  Behavior  JEFFREYS.  Theory  of Probability B.
RUSSELL. Human Knowledge, Its

Scope and

Limits, PART v
