Chapters: CITIZEN

INTRODUCTION

," like "comrade," has been and / still is a revolutionary word. Both words have
been  titles  proudly  adopted  by men to mark their liberation from the yoke of
despotism  or  tyranny.  Both  titles are still sought by those who have not yet
gained admission to the fraternity of the free and equal.

The  rank and status of citizenship first appeared in the ancient world with the
beginning  of  constitutional government in the citystates of Greece. The Greeks
were  conscious  of  this  fact,  and  proud  of  it.  In  terms of it, they set
themselves  apart  from  the  barbarians  who were subjects of the Great King of
Persia  or  the  Egyptian  Pharaoh. The Spartan heralds, according to Herodotus,
thus  address  the  Persian commander: "Thou hast experience of hall the matter;
but  the  other half is beyond thy knowledge. A slave's life thou understandest;
never having tasted liberty, but, thou canst not tell whether it is sweet or no.
Ahl  hadst thou known what freedom is, thou wouldst have bidden us fight for it,
not with the spear only, but with the battle-axe."

Not  only  Herodotus  and  Thucydides  but  also the great tragic poets, notably
Aeschylus  in  the  Persians, record this Hellenic sense of distinction from the
surrounding  peoples  who  still lived in childlike submission to absolute rule.
But   the   Greeks   were  also  conscious  that  their  political  maturity  as
self-governing  citizens  was,  as Aristotle intimates in the Politics, a recent
development  from  the  primitive  condition  in  which  tribal chieftains ruled
despotically.  The  basic  distinction  between  subjection  and  citizenship is
inseparable  from the equally basic distinction between absolute and limited, or
between  despotic  and  constitutional, government. The difference between these
two  modes  of  government  is  treated  in  the  chapter on CONSTITUTION. It is
sufficient here to note that the difference in the authority and power possessed
by  rulers  according as it is absolute or limited corresponds with a difference
in  the  status,  the  degree  of  freedom, and the rights and privileges of the
people  ruled.  IN ORDER TO UNDERSTAND citizenship it is necessary to understand
the  several  ways  in  which  men  can  belong  to  or  be parts of a political
community. There are two divisions among men within a community which help us to
define  citizenship.  According  to  one of these divisions, the native-born are
separated  from  aliens  or  foreigners.  In the Greek city-states it was almost
impossible  for  aliens  to  become citizens. Plutarch notes that Solon's law of
naturalization,  which  he qualifies as "of doubtful character," would not allow
strangers to become citizens unless "they were in perpetual exile from their own
country, or came with their whole family to trade there." The metics, or aliens,
who  were  allowed in the city were usually a class apart. In Rome the situation
was  different; it was possible for outsiders to receive the high honor of Roman
citizenship. "The aspiring genius of Rome," Gibbon writes, "sacrificed vanity to
ambition, and deemed it more prudent, as well as honourable, to adopt virtue and
merit  for  her  own  wheresoever  they  were  found, among slaves or strangers,
enemies  or barbarians." Most modern republics set up naturalization proceedings
for  the  regular admission of some, if not all, immigrants to membership in the
state.  Yet a difference always remains between a citizen and a denizen, or mere
resident.  Accordingly,  Rousseau  criticizes  Bodin for confusing citizens with
townsmen.  "M. D'Alembert," he says, "has avoided this error, and in CHAPTER 11:
his article on Geneva, has clearly distinguished the four orders of men (or even
five, counting mere foreigners) who dwell in our town, of which two only compose
the Republic."

According  to  a  second  way  in  which  men  are  divided within the political
community,  free  men  are separated from slaves. The latter, though they may be
native-born,  are not members of the political community, but merely part of its
property.  A slave, according to Aristotle, is one "who, being a human being, is
also a possession." But, he says in another place, "property, even though living
beings are included in it, is no part of a state; for a state is not a community
of  living beings only, but a community of equals." On this principle, Aristotle
excludes  more  than  the  chattel  slave  from  the  status  and  privilege  of
citizenship.  "We cannot consider all those to be citizens," he writes, "who are
necessary  to the existence of the state; for example, children are not citizens
equally  with  grown-up  men.  ... In ancient times, and among some nations," he
continues,  "the  artisan  class  were  slaves  or foreigners, and therefore the
majority  of  them  are  so  now.  The best form of state will not admit them to
citizenship."  The  "slaves  who  minister to the wants of individuals," and the
"mechanics  or laborers who are the servants of the community" are to be counted
as its "necessary people" but not as members of the state. When he discusses the
size  and  character  of  the population for an ideal state, Aristotle says, "we
ought  not  to include everybody, for there must always be in cities a multitude
of  slaves  and  sojourners and foreigners; but we should include only those who
are  members  of the state, and who form an essential part of it." The exclusion
of  slaves  and resident aliens from membership in the political community has a
profound  bearing on the meaning of the political concept expressed by the words
"the  people."  The  people  is  not  the same as the population all those human
beings  who  live  within  the  state's  borders.  Even  in societies which have
abolished  chattel  slavery  and  in  which  suffrage  tends to be unrestricted,
infants  and  aliens  remain  outside  the pale of political life. The people is
always  a  part  the  active  political  part  of  the  population  CITIZEN  THE
DISTINCTION  OF  citizen  from  slave,  infant,  or  alien does not complete the
picture.  The  subjects  of  a  king  are not slaves, nor are they citizens of a
republic.   Yet  like  citizens,  subjects  have  membership  in  the  political
community.  They  constitute the people the king serves as well as rules, unless
he  is  a  tyrant, for only if he is a tyrant does he treat them as if they were
his  property,  to  be  used  for  his  own  pleasure  or  interest. Sometimes a
distinction  is  made  between  first-  and  second-class citizens, and then the
latter, who occupy an intermediate position between citizenship and slavery, are
regarded  as  subjects.  "Since  there  are many forms of government," Aristotle
writes,  "there  must  be many varieties of citizens, and especially of citizens
who  are  subjects;  so that under some governments the mechanic and the laborer
will  be  citizens, but not in others." The whole meaning of citizenship changes
for  Aristotle  when  the  working  classes  are admitted to it. From a somewhat
different  point  of view, Aquinas holds that a man can be "said to be a citizen
in  two  ways:  first,  absolutely;  secondly, in a restricted sense. A man is a
citizen  absolutely  if  he has all the rights of citizenship; for instance, the
right  of debating or voting in the popular assembly. On the other hand, any man
may  be called citizen only in a restricted sense if he dwells within the state,
even  lowly  people,  or children, or old men, who are not fit to enjoy power in
matters pertaining to the common welfare." Those who are thus disfranchised, but
are  not  slaves,  are  subjects  rather  than citizens in the full sense. It is
possible,  of course, for men to have the dual status of subject and citizen, as
is  the  case  now  in  England  and the self-governing dominions of the British
commonwealth.  This  double status does not blur the distinction between citizen
and  subject; rather it signifies the mixed nature of a form of government which
is  both  royal  at least in its vestiges of monarchy and constitutional. In the
time  of  Locke,  when  a  great constitutional victory had been won against the
despotism  of  the last Stuart, the English people did not yet regard themselves
Observing  that  the  title of citizen as citizens. has never been given "to the
subjects  of any prince, noteven the ancient Macedonians," Rousseau Ends himself
compelled to add: "not even the English of today, though they are nearer liberty
than anyone else."

Unlike  citizens,  the  subjects  of a king, especially of one claiming absolute
power,  have no voice in their own government, and no legal means for protecting
their  natural  rights as men. So long as the absolute ruler does not tyrannize,
he  governs  for the welfare of his people; and so, though a despot in the sense
of  wielding  absolute  power  over political inferiors, he is benevolent in the
sense  of  serving rather than using them. But if he ceases to be benevolent and
turns  tyrannical,  his  subjects  have  no recourse except rebellion. They must
resort  to  violence  in  order  to emancipate themselves from a condition which
amounts to slavery. A citizen, on the other hand, is safeguarded in his legal as
well  as  in  his  natural  rights and, in some modern republics at least, he is
provided  with juridical means for rectifying supposed injustices, For citizens,
the right of rebellion is the last, not the only, resort.

THE   DISTINCT  CONDITIONS  of  slavery,  subjection,  and  citizenship  can  be
summarized  by  defining  three  ways in which rulers are related to the persons
they  rule. These three relations seem to have been first clearly differentiated
by  Aristotle.  He  rinds  all  three  relationships  in  the  structure  of the
household,  as  that  is  constituted  in antiquity. Of household management, he
writes,  "there  are  three  parts one is the rule of a master over slaves . . .
another  of a father, and a third of a husband." In each case, "the kind of rule
differs:  the  freeman  rules  over  the slave after another manner from that in
which  the  male  rules  over the female, or the man over the child." As we have
already seen, Aristotle conceives the slave as a piece of property. When he says
that  the  slave  "wholly  belongs  to  his master" or that "he is a part of his
master,  a  living  but  separated  part  of  his bodily frame," he is obviously
considering  only  the  chattel  slave.  There  are,  as  the chapter on SLAVERY
indicates, other kinds or degrees of slavery less extreme than this. But chattel
slavery, more clearly than the attenuated forms of servitude, defines the nature
of  mastery.  The master maxiages or uses the slave as he manages and uses other
instruments  inanimate  tools  or  domesticated animals. "The rule of a master,"
Aristotle  declares,  "exercised primarily with a view to the inis terest of the
master."  Yet  it "accidentally considers the slave, since, if the slave perish,
the rule of the master perishes with him." Thus conceived, the slave lacks every
vestige  of political liberty. He is treated as radically inferior to his master
almost  as  if  he  were  something  less than a man. He has no voice in his own
government,  nor  is  his  welfare  the paramount consideration of his ruler. In
short,  we  have  slavery when one man governs another in the way in which a man
manages his property, using it for his own good. When one man governs another in
the  way  in which good parents administer the affairs of children as members of
the  household,  we  have  the  type  of rule which also appears in the relation
between  absolute kings or benevolent despots and their subjects. "The rule of a
father over his children is royal," Aristotle writes, "for he rules by virtue of
both love and of the respect due to age, exercising a kind of royal power. ... A
king,"  Aristotle  adds, "is the natural superior of his subjects, but he should
be  of  the  same  kin  or kind with them, and such is the relation of eider and
younger,  father and son." From the analogous type of rule in the family, we see
two  differences  between  the  condition of a slave and that of a subject under
absolute or despotic rule in the state. The inferiority of children, unlike that
of  slaves,  is  not  their  permanent  condition.  It  is  an  aspect  of their
immaturity.  They  are  temporarily incapable of judging what is for their good,
and  so  need the direction of their superiors in age, experience, and prudence.
But  children  have  some  equality with their parents, to the extent that their
humanity is recognized as the reason why they should not be ruled as slaves, but
governed  for their own welfare. The government of children, Aristotle declares,
"is  exercised  in  the  first instance for the good of the governed, or for the
common  good  of both parties, but essentially for the good of the governed." In
the  same  way,  the subjects of a benevolent despot, or of any absolute monarch
who rules paternaUsticaliy, are said to be CHAPTER 11: CI governed for their own
good. They are served, not used, by their rulers; and to this extent they have a
degree  of  political  liberty.  But they do not have the complete liberty which
exists only with self-government.

That occurs only under constitutional rule, which for Aristotle has an imperfect
analogue  in  the  family  in  the  relation  of husband and wife. In the state,
however,  it  is  perfectly  represented  by the relation between the holders of
public office and other citizens. "In the constitutional state," Aristotle says,
"the  citizens  rule  and  are  ruled by turns; for the idea of a constitutional
state  implies  that the natures of the citizens are equal, and do not differ at
all." The citizen, in other words, is one "who has the power to take part in the
deliberative  or judicial administration of the state." Rousseau seems to have a
similar  conception  of the citizen as both ruling and ruled, though he uses the
word  "subject" to designate the citizen as ruled. "The people," he writes, "are
called citizens, as sharing in the sovereign power, and subjects, as being under
the laws of the State."

Because  the man who holds office in a constitutional government is first of all
a  citizen himself, and only secondly an official vested with the authority of a
political  office,  the  citizen  is  a  man ruled by his equals and ruled as an
equal.  Observing  these  facts,  Aristotle  describes  citizenship  as  the one
"indefinite  office"  set  up by a constitution. It is indefinite both in tenure
and by comparison with the various magistracies or other offices which have more
definitely  assigned functions. Since a citizen is ruled only by other citizens,
and  since he has the opportunity of ruling others in turn, citizenship involves
political  liberty  in  the  fullest  sense.  This  does  not  mean freedom fiom
government,  but  freedom through self-government d the freedom a man can have m
society, liberty under law and proportioned to justice.

Two  of these three political conditionsslavery and subjection naturally receive
fuller  treatment  in  the  chapter  on  SLAVERY.  The  discussion of the third,
citizenship,  belongs  not  only  to  this  chapter,  but also to the chapter on
CONSTITUTION,  and  to  other  chapters  which deal with forms of constitutional
government, such as ARISTOCRACY, DEMOCRACY, and OLI- GARCHY.

TIZEN  FOR  THE  SAME  REASON  that  the  revolutionists  against  absolutism or
despotism  in  the  i8th century use the phrase "free government" for republican
institutions,  they  also  use  "citizen*  to  designate  a  free man, a man who
possesses  the  political  liberty and equality which they regard as the natural
right  of  men  because  they  are  men.  In  this  respect  they  do not differ
substantially  from  their  Greek  or  Roman  ancestors who prize constitutional
government  and  citizenship as conditions of freedom and equality. Furthermore,
like  the  constitutionalists  of antiquity, the republicans of the i8th century
arc,  with  few  if  any exceptions, not democrats in the sense of extending the
rights  and privileges of citizenship to all adults. In the i8th century slavery
still  exists;  and  a  large part even of those who are not in economic bondage
remains outside the pale of citizenship, disqualified by accidents of birth such
as  race or sex, and by the lack of sufficient wealth or property which makes it
necessary for them to labor in order to live. It is not only an ancient oligarch
like  Aristotle  who  thinks  that  "the  ruling  class  should be the owners of
property,  for  they are citizens, and the citizens of a state should be in good
circumstances;  whereas  mechanics"  should have "no share in the state." In the
i8th  century,  as  well  as  in  ancient  Greece,  extending  the privileges of
citizenship to indentured apprentices, day laborers, or journeymen, is a form of
radicalism  known as "extreme democracy." Kant may be taken as representative of
an enlightened point of view in the i8th century. He finds that there are "three
juridical  attributes"  that belong by right to the citizens: "i. constitutional
freedom, as the right of every citizen to have to obey no other law than that to
which  he  has given his consent or approval; 2. civil equality, as the right of
the  citizen  to  recognize no one as a superior among the people in relation to
himself  and  3. . . . independence, as the right to owe his political existence
and  continuance in society not to the arbitrary will of another, but to his own
rights  and  powers  as  a member of the commonwealth." The last attribute leads
Kant to distinguish between "active and passive citizenship." Although he admits
that  this  "appears to stand in contradiction to the definition of a citizen as
such,"  he  concludes  that  there are some in the community not entitled to the
full privileges of citizenship. It is his contention, widely shared in the 1 8th
century,  that suffrage, which "properly constitutes the political qualification
of  a  citizen/'  presupposes  the  "independence  or  self-sufficiency  of  the
individual citizen among the people."

Consequently  he  denies  suffrage  to  "everyone  who  is compelled to maintain
himself  not  according  to  his own industry, but as it is arranged by others."
Such  a  restriction,  he  says,  includes  "the  apprentice  of  a  merchant or
tradesman,  a  servant  who is not in the employ of the state, a minor" and "all
women." They are "passive parts" of the state and do not have "the right to deal
with  the  state as active members of it, to reorganize it, or to take action by
way  of  introducing certain laws." Kant insists, however, that "it must be made
possible  for them to raise themselves from this passive condition in the State,
to the condition of active citizenship."

THE  FOREGOING  DISCUSSION  shows the connection between the idea of citizenship
and  the two revolutionary movements which John Stuart Mill notes in the history
of   political  thought  and  action.  The  first  is  the  movement  to  obtain
"recognition  of certain immunities, called political liberties or rights, which
it was to be regarded as a breach of duty in the ruler to infringe, and which if
he  did  infringe,  specific  resistance,  or  general rebellion, was held to be
justifiable."  This  is  the  revolutionary effort to overthrow despotism and to
establish constitutional government, with the status of citizenship for at least
some  part  of  the  population frequently much less than half of the total. The
second  revolutionary  movement  goes  further.  It presupposes the existence of
government  by  law  and  aims  to perfect it. It therefore seeks to obtain "the
establishment  of  constitutional checks, by which the consent of the community,
or  of  a  body  of  some  sort,  supposed to represent its interests, is made a
necessary  condition to some of the more important acts of the governing power."
Since,  according to Mill, it aims to make the consent of the governed effective
through  an  adequate  representation  of their wishes, this movement inevitably
leads  to  the  fight against franchise restrictions and for universal suffrage,
which would admit every normal, adult human being to the freedom and equality of
citizenship.  The  first revolution has a long history. It begins with the Greek
city-states  which, having won this victory against the Persians, lost it to the
Macedonian  conquerors.  It  happens  again  with the establishment of the Roman
republic  after  the  expulsion of the Tarquins, and again it is undone when the
Caesars  assume  absolute  power.  This  part  of the story is told with varying
emotions  by  Plutarch  and Polybius, Tacitus and Gibbon. During the Middle Ages
the  same  struggle appears in the various efforts to establish the supremacy of
law,  particularly  through  the  development  of  customary  and canon law. The
revolution  still  continues in the i7th and 1 8th centuries and the new heights
it  reaches  are reflected in the writings of a constitutionalist like Locke and
republicans  like  Rousseau, Kant, and the American Federalists. The Declaration
of  Independence  and  the  Constitution  of  the  United States are perhaps the
classic  documents of this historical phase. The second revolution, particularly
as  identified  with  the  fight  for universal suffrage, is a relatively recent
event.  Its  roots  may go back as far as Cromwell's time to the activity of the
Levellers,  and  in the i8th century to the writings of John Cartwnght. But what
is,   perhaps,   its   first  full  expression  does  not  appear  until  Mill's
Representative  Government.  In  that book, Mill lays down the principles of the
franchise  reforms which began in the ipth century, but which, as in the case of
woman  suffrage  or  the  repeal  of  the  poll  tax,  were carried through only
yesterday  or are still in progress. Yet the struggle for universal suffrage or,
as Mill would say, against treating any human being as a "political pariah" does
have  an  ancient  parallel  in the conflict between democratic and oligarchical
constitutions   in  Greek  political  life  and  thought.  These  two  types  of
constitution  were  opposed  on  the  qualifications  for citizenship and public
office,  The  oligarchical  constitution  restricted both to men of considerable
wealth.  At  the other extreme, as Aristotle observes, the most radical forms of
Greek  democracy  granted  citizenship  to  the  working  classes,  and  gave no
advantage  to the rich in CHAPTER 1 1 CITIZ : filling the magistracies, for they
selected  officials  from  the  whole  citizenry by lot. The parallelism goes no
further than that.

Greek  democracy,  even  when  it  denied  special  privileges to the propertied
classes,   never   contemplated  the  abolition  of  slavery  or  the  political
emancipation of women.

THERE ARE OTHER differences between ancient and modern institutions which affect
the  character  of  citizenship.  The  problem  of  who  shall  be  admitted  to
citizenship  is fundamental in both epochs. Insofar as it connotes the condition
of political liberty and equality, the status of citizenship remains essentially
the same. But the rights and duties, the privileges and immunities, which belong
to   citizenship   vary   with   the   difference  between  ancient  and  modern
constitutionalism.

Even  if they had been written, the constitutions of the ancient world would not
have  declared  the rights of man and the citizen, nor would they have had bills
of  rights appended to them. The significance of these modern innovations (which
begin,  perhaps, with Magna Carta) lies, not in a new conception of citizenship,
but  in  the  invention  of  juridical  means  to  endow  the  primary office of
citizenship  with  sufficient  legal  power  to  protect  it  from  invasion  by
government.  In The Federalist, Hamilton maintains that "bills of rights are, in
their  origin,  stipulations  between  kings  and their subjects, abridgments of
prerogative  in  favour  of privilege, reservations of rights not surrendered to
the prince."

Defending  the absence of a special bill of rights in the original Constitution,
he  insists  that  "the  Constitution is itself, in every rational sense, and to
every  useful  purpose,  a  bill  of  rights."  It  declares  and specifies "the
political  privileges of the citizens in the structure and administration of the
government,"  and "defines certain immunities and modes of proceeding, which arc
relative to personal and private concerns."

Nevertheless,  the right of free speech and free assembly and the right to trial
by  a  jury  of  peers, along with the immunity from un A warranted searches and
seizures  or  from  ex  post  facto laws and bills of attainder, provided by the
early  amendments  to  the  Constitution,  do  EN  give  the  citizen additional
protection  against interference in the performance of his civic duties, such as
independent  political  thought  and  action,  or  in  the exercise of his human
privileges,  such  as  freedom  of  religious  worship.  The  invention of these
constitutional  devices  sprang  from  the  bitter  experience  of  coercion and
intimidation  under  Star  Chamber  proceedings, royal censorship, and unlimited
police  power.  A  citizen  who  can be coerced or intimidated by his government
differs  only  in  name  from  the subject of an absolute despot. In addition to
having  these  legal  safeguards, modern differs from ancient citizenship in the
way  in which its rights and privileges are exercised. The machinery of suffrage
is  not the same when citizens act through elected representatives and when they
participate directly in the deliberations and decisions of government, by voting
in  the  public  forum.  THE  PROBLEM  OF  EDUCATION  for citizenship is in some
respects   stated   in  almost  identical  terms  by  such  different  political
philosophers  as  Plato and John Stuart Mill. In both the Republic and the Laws,
Plato  emphasizes  that  "education  is  the constraining and directing of youth
towards that right reason which the law affirms." By this he means not only that
education  will  affect  the  laws,  but  also  that the laws themselves have an
educational  task  to  perform.  The  educational  program  is  thus planned and
conducted  by  the state. The guardians the only citizens in the Republic in the
full  sense  of the term are trained for public life, first by the discipline of
their passions, and second by the cultivation of their minds. Their passions are
disciplined  by music and gymnastics, their minds cultivated by the liberal arts
and dialectic.

In  the democracy which Mill contemplates as an ideal, "the most important point
of  excellence  ...  is  to  promote  the  virtue and intelligence of the people
themselves."  He  does  not  outline  a  specific curriculum for the training of
citizens,  but it is clear that he thinks their education cannot be accomplished
in  the  schools alone. The superiority of democracy, according to Mill, lies in
the  fact  that it calls upon the citizen "to weigh interests not his own; to be
guided,  in  case  of  conflicting  claims,  by  another  rule  than his private
partialities; to apply at every turn, principles and maxims which have for their
reason of existence the common good; and he usually finds associated with him in
the  same  work  minds  more  familiarized  than  his  own  with these ideas and
operations,  whose  study it will be to supply reasons to his understanding, and
stimulation  to his feeling for the general interest," In this "school of public
spirit"  a  man becomes a citizen by doing the work of a citizen and so learning
to  act  like  one. If the future citizen is to act like a free man, must he not
also  be  trained in youth to think like one? Vocational training prepares a man
to  be an artisan, not a citizen. Only liberal education is adequate to the task
of  creating  the free and critical intelligence required for citizenship. Hence
in  a  state  which rests on universal suffrage, the educational problem becomes
greatly enlarged in scope, if not in intrinsic difficulty.

With the advent of universal suffrage, which Mill advocates, the state must face
the  responsibility  for  making  liberal  education  available  to every future
citizen.  To  say  that  all  normal children have enough intelligence to become
citizens,  but  to  regard  the  native  endowment  of a large number of them as
incapable  of liberal education, makes a travesty of citizenship. Will the child
who  cannot  profit  by liberal education be able to discharge the duties of the
office to which he will be admitted upon coming of age?

THE TRAINING OF CHARACTER is always more difficult than the training of mind. In
education  for  citizenship, the problem of moral training involves the question
discussed in the chapter on VIRTUE whether the good man and the good citizen are
identical  in  virtue. For Aristotle, and seemingly also for Mill, the virtue of
the  good  man  under  an ideal constitution would be identical with that of the
good  citizen.  As  both  ruling  and being ruled, "the good citizen ought to be
capable  of  both,"  Aristotle  writes.  "He  should  know  how to govern like a
freeman,  and  how to obey like a freemanthese are the virtues of a citizen. And
although  the  temperance  and  justice  of a ruler are distinct from those of a
subject,  the  virtue  of a good man will include both; for the virtue AS of the
good  man  who is free and also a subject, e.g. his justice, will not be one but
will  comprise  distinct  kinds,  the  one  qualifying him to rule, the other to
obey."

The  virtues  of  the  citizen  direct  him  primarily in the performance of his
obligations  to  the  state. But if the welfare of the state is not the ultimate
end  of  man,  if  there  are higher goods which command human loyalty, if man's
common humanity takes precedence over his membership in a particular state, then
civic  virtue does not exhaust human excellence. More may be morally required of
the  good man than of the good citizen. The virtues of the saint and the patriot
may  be  of  a  different  order.  On  this  question,  the great books reveal a
fundamental  disagreement among moralists and political philosophers, who differ
as Plato and Hegel differ from Augustine and Aquinas, or from Locke and Mill, on
the  place  of  the state in human life. The ancients frequently appeal to a law
higher than that of the state. Socrates forever stands as the classic example of
one  who  would  rather  die  than  disobey  his  inner voice the command of his
conscience.  A  Stoic  like  Marcus  Aurelius  is  willing  to  give unqualified
allegiance  to  the  political  community only when it is the ideal city of man,
embracing  the  whole human brotherhood. "My city and my country, so far as I am
Antoninus,"  he  says,  "is  Rome,  but  so  far as I am a man" whose "nature is
rational and social" "it is the world." For Christian theologians, membership in
the  city  of God is a higher vocation than citizenship in any earthly community
even  when that is the city of man at its best. The city of God demands a higher
order  of  virtue than the city of man. Referring to the earthly city, Augustine
says  that "the things which this city desires cannot justly be said to be evil,
for  it  is  itself,  in its own kind, better than all other human goods. For it
desires  earthly  peace for the sake of enjoying earthly goods." It is all right
for  men to seek "these things" for they "are good things, and without doubt the
gifts of God," But, Augustine goes on to say, "if they neglect the better things
of   the  heavenly  city,  which  are  secured  by  eternal  victory  and  peace
neverending,  and  so  inordinately  covet  these  present good things that they
believe  them  to be the : only desirable things," then, in Augustine's opinion,
they are misdirected in their love.

In  giving  precedence  to  the  commandments  of  God,  the  theologians do not
deprecate the commands of the state or the obligations of citizenship. But those
who  belong to both cities may find themselves faced with a conflict between the
law of the state and the divine law. In such circumstances, the faithful have no
choice.  They  must  obey-  God  before  man.  "Laws  that  are  contrary to the
commandments  of  God,"  Aquinas  holds,  do  not "bind a man in conscience" and
"should not be obeyed."

THIS  CONFLICT BETWEEN human and divine law finds expression in antiquity in the
Antigone  of  Sophocles.  "It  was  not  Zeus  who had published me that edict,"
Antigone says of the human law she disobeys; "nor deemed I that the decrees were
of such force, that a mortal could override the unwritten and unfailing statutes
of  heaven. For their life is not of to-day or yesterday, but from all time, and
no  man  knows when they were first put forth." The problem which Antigone faces
can occur in as many other ways as there are possibilities

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The individual in relation to the state

2. The conception of citizenship
   2a. The status or office of citizenship in relation to the principle of constitutional
   government
   2b. The distinction   between citizen and subject: the distinction between the sub-
   jects of a constitutional monarchy and of a despotism
   2c. The character and extent of citizenship under different         types of constitutions

3. The qualifications
for citizenship: extent of suffrage

4. The rights, duties, privileges, and immunities of citizenship

5. The virtues of the citizen and the virtues of the good man

6. Education for citizenship

7. Political citizenship and membership
in the city of God

8. Hie idea of world citizenship: the political brotherhood of          man

9. Historical episodes and stages in the struggle for citizenship

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Other considerations of the issues involved in the re

state, see GOOD AND EVIL 5d; HAPPINESS 50; JU

The context of the concept of citizenship in th

government by law rather than by men, see CON

MONARCHY 1a(i); TYRANNY 5-5d.

Other comparisons of citizens with subjects or

The bearing of different types of constitution

on the extent of the franchise, sec CONSTITUT

OLIGARCHY 5-53.

The political machinery, such as elections and

his suffrage, see CONSTITUTION 9-o.b; DEMOCRA

The consideration of civic virtue in relation t

for the problem of education for citizenship,

TION 8d; STATE yd; VIRTUE AND VICE 73.

Another discussion of the distinction between t

STATE 2g; and for matters relevant to the ide

WAR AND PEACE i 1d.

Descriptions of the historical struggle for cit

see LABOR yd; LIBERTY 6b; SLAVERY 6c; TYRANNY

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great B

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represe

II. Works by authors not rep

For the date, place, and other facts concernin

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which

**

M ACHIAVELLI. The Discourses, BK i MONTESQUIEU. Considerations on the Causes of
the

Grandeur and Decadence of the Romans ]. S. MILL. The Subjection of Women

" CICERO. De Officiis (On Duties), i BODIN. The Six Bootes of a Commonweale, BK
i,

CH 6-7; BK in, CH 8 HOOKER. Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity PUFENDORF. DC
Officio Homitus ct Civisjuxta Legem

Naturalcm (Ofthe Duties of Man and ofthe Citizen

According  to  Natural  Law)  DIDEROT.  Citoyen  MABLY. DCS droits et devoirs du
'citoyen CARTWRIGHT. Take Your Choice BURKE. Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol

. On the Reform of the Representation in the

House  of Commons lation between the individual and the STICE icb; STATE 2f, 30,
3e,  8e.  e theory of constitutional government or STITUTION; LAW ya-yb; LIBERTY
1d,  1f-1g;  slaves,  see  JUSTICE  pd;  SLAVERY  6a-6c.  on  the  character  of
citizenship  and especially ION 5-5 b; DEMOCRACY 4-43(2), 5b(2); representation,
by which the citizen exercises CY 50-54); GOVERNMENT 1h. o virtue generally, see
VIRTUE  AND VICE yb; and see ARISTOCRACY 5; DEMOCRACY 6; EDUCAhe city of man and
the  city of God, see al of world citizenship, see LOVE 4c; STATE lof; izenship,
and  for  the  extension  of  the  franchise,  8. ooty of the Western World, but
relevant  to  the  These  works  are  divided  into  two  groups:  nted  in this
collection.  resented  in this collection. g the publication of the works cited,
consult  follows  the  last  chapter  of  The  Great Ideas. PAINE. Rights of Man
GODWIN. An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, BK iv, CH 2, SECT i

TOCQUEVILLE.   Democracy  in  America  THOREAU.  Civil  Disobedience  FUSTEL  DE
COULANGES. The Ancient City T. H. GREEN. Principles of Political Obligation, (H)
SPENCER. The Man Versus the State IELLINEK, The Declaration of the Rights of Man
and Citizens

BOSANQUET.  Science  and Philosophy, 16 HOBHOUSE. The Metaphysical Theory of the
State BRYCE. The Hindrances to Good Citizenship Modern Democracies

. G. NEWMAN. Citizenship and the Survival of Civilization MERRIAM. The Making of
Citizens

TAWNEY.  Equality  MARITAIN.  The  Eights  of  Man  and  Natural  Law EWING. The
Individual, the State and World Government
