Chapter ir CONSTITUTIO INTRODUCTION idea of a constitution as establishing THE
and organizing a political community; the principle of constitutionality as
determining a generic form of government having many varieties; and the nature
of constitutional government these three problems are so intimately connected
that they must be treated together. We have used the word "constitution" to
express the root notion from which all other matters considered in this chapter
are derived. It impossible to say precisely what a conis stitution is in a way
that will fit the political reality of the Greek city-states, the Roman republic
and its transformation into the empire, mediaeval kingdoms and communes and
their gradual metamorphosis into the limited monarchies and republics of modern
times. No definition can adequately comprehend all the variations of meaning to
be found in the great works of political theory and history. But there are a
number of related points in the various meanings of "constitution" which
indicate what is common to the understanding of such diverse thinkers as Plato
and Locke, Aristotle and Rousseau, Kant and Mill, Montesquieu and Hegel,
Aquinas, Hobbes, and the American Federalists.

IT HAS BEEN SAID that the constitution is the form of the state. This can be
interpreted to mean that the political, as opposed to the domestic, community
requires a constitution in order to exist; just as a work of art has the very
principle of its being in the form which the artist imposes upon matter. In the
context of his general theory of political association, Aristotle's remark that
"the man who first founded the state was the greatest of benefactors," may imply
that the idea of a constitution is the creative principle by which the state was
orig- N inally formed or at least differentiated from the tribe and family. Kant
gives explicit expression to the notion that the invention of constitutions is
coeval with the formation of states. "The act by which a People is represented
as constituting itself into a State," he writes, "is termed the Original
Contract" and this in turn signifies "the rightfulness of the process of
organizing the Constitution." In this sense, the constitution appears to be
identical with the organization of a state. It would then seem to follow that
every state, no matter what its form of government, is constitutional in
character. But this would leave no basis for the fundamental distinction between
constitutional and non-constitutional or what is usually called "absolute,"
"royal," or "despotic" governmen t. That basic distinction among forms of
government is as old as Plato and Aristotle. It is first made by Plato in the
Statesman in terms of the role of law in government. It occurs at the very
opening of Aristotle's Politics with his insistence on the difference between
the king and the statesman, and between royal and politicalgovernment. But Locke
seems to go further than the ancients when he says that "absolute monarchy ...
is inconsistent with civil society, and so can be no form of civil government at
all." In addition to affirming the gravity of the distinction between
constitutional and nonconstitutional government, he seems to be denying that the
latter can constitute the form of a truly cwil society, as opposed to a domestic
society or the primitive patriarchate of a tribe.

Yet Locke obviously docs not deny the historic fact that there have been
communities, which otherwise appear to be states, that have their character or
form determined by absolute 233 234 government. His point, therefore, seems to
be that among types of government, absolute monarchy does not fit the nature of
civil society.

If "constitution" is used merely as a synonym for "form" or "type/* then even a
state under absolute monarchy or despotic government can be said to have a
constitution. Since every state is of some type, it can be said that it has a
certain constitution, or that it is constituted in a certain way. If, however,
we use the word "constitution" to conform to the distinction between
constitutional and non-constitutionalgovernment, we are compelled to say that
there are states which do not have constitutions. With this distinction in mind,
the statement that "the constitution is the form of the state" takes on a
different and more radical meaning. It signifies that there are communities,
larger than and distinct from the family or the tribe, which cannot be called
"states" in the strict sense because they do not have constitutions.

Hegel, for instance, points out that "it would be contrary even to commonplace
ideas to call patriarchal conditions a 'constitution' or a people under
patriarchal government a 'state' or its independence 'sovereignty.'" In such
conditions, what is lacking, he writes, is "the objectivity of possessing in its
own eyes and in the eyes of others, a universal and universally valid embodiment
m laws." Without such an "objective law and an explicitly established rational
constitution, its autonomy is ... not sovereignty." From this it would appear
that a despotically governed community, such as ancient Persia, is a political
anomaly. It is intermediate between the family and the state, for it is like a
state in its extent and in the size and character of its population, yet it is
not a state in its political form. The truly political community is
constitutionally organized and governed. In this sense, the English words
"political" and "constitutional"become almost interchangeable, and we can
understand how these two English words translate a single word in Greek
political discourse.

As THE FORM of the state, the constitution is the principle of its organization.
Whether writ- ten or unwritten, whether a product of custom or explicit
enactment, a constitution, Aristotle writes, "is the organization of offices in
a state, and determines what is to be the governing body, and what is the end of
each community." The idea of political office of officials and official status
is inseparable from the idea of constitution. That is why the concept of
citizenship is also inseparable from constitution. As the chapter on CITIZEN
indicates, citizenship is the primary or indefinite office set up by a
constitution. Citizenship is always the prerequisite for holding any other more
definite office in a constitutional government, from juryman to chief
magistrate. In specifying the qualifications for citizenship, a constitution
sets the minimum qualifications for all other offices which usually, though not
always, demand more than citizenship of the man who is to fill them. A political
office represents a share of political power and authority. "Those are to be "to
which called offices," Aristotle explains, the duties are assigned of
deliberating about certain measures and of judging and commanding, especially
the last; for to command is the especial duty of a magistrate." As representing
a share of political power and authority, a political office can be said to
constitute a share of sovereignty. That would not seem to be true, however, for
those who, like Rousseau, mamtain that "sovereignty is indivisible." Yet
Rousseau also admits that "each magistrate is almost always charged with some
governmental function" and exercises a "function of sovereignty." Since it is an
arrangement of offices, a constitution is, therefore, also a division or
partition of the whole sovereignty of government or at least of the exercise of
sovereignty into units which have certain functions to perform, and which must
be given the requisite power and authority to perform them. These units are
political offices, defined according to their functions, and vested with a
certain power and authority depending on their place and purpose within the
whole. Hamilton's maxim that "every power ought to be in proportion to its
object" formulates the equation by which the function of an office, or its
duties, determines its rights and powers, CHAPTER 12: CONSTITU privileges and
immunities. And except for the provision of a temporary dictatorship in the
early Roman constitution, or its modern constitutional equivalent in emergency
grants of power, political offices under constitutional government always
represent limited amounts of power and authority limited in that each is always
only a part of the whole.

A CONSTITUTION defines and relates the various political offices. It determines
the qualifications of office-holders. But it does not name the individuals who,
from all those qualified, shall be selected for any office. Because its
provisions have this sort of generality, a constitution has the character of
law. This is equally true of written and unwritten constitutions, of those
shaped by custom and those enacted by constituent assemblies. Unlike all other
man-made laws, a constitution the law which creates and regulates is government
itself, rather than the law which a government creates and by which it regulates
the conduct of men, their relation to one another and to the state. This is
perhaps the basic distinction with regard to the laws of the state.

"The fundamental law in every commonwealth," says Hobbes, "is that which being
taken away the commonwealth faileth and is utterly dissolved." Montesquieu
distinguishes what he calls "the law politic," which constitutes the state, from
ordinary legislation; and Rousseau likewise divides the laws into the
"political" or "fundamental" laws and the "civil laws" those "which determine
the form of the government" and those which the government, once it is
constituted, enacts and enforces. In addition to being the source of all other
positive laws of the state for it sets up the very machinery of lawmakmg a
constitution is fundamental law in that it establishes the standard of legality
by which subsequent all laws are measured. Aristotle observes that "the justice
or injustice of laws varies of necessity with constitutions." What may be a just
enactment in one state may be unjust in another according to the difference of
their constitutions. In American practice and that modeled upon it, a law which
violates the letter or spirit of the TION constitution is judged to be
unconstitutional and is deprived thereby of the authority of law. "Every act of
a delegated authority," Hamilton writes in The Federalistk "contrary to the
tenor of the commission under which it is exercised, is void. No legislative
act, therefore, contrary to the Constitution can be valid. To deny this would be
to affirm that the deputy is greater than his principal; that the servant is
above his master; that the representatives of the people are superior to the
people themselves; that men acting by virtue of powers may do not only what
their powers do not authorize, but what they forbid." THE CONCEPTION of a
constitution as a law or set of laws antecedent to all acts of government
inevitably raises the question of how or by whom constitutions are made. If the
provisions of a constitution were precepts of natural law, they would, according
to the theory of natural law, be discovered by reason, not positively
instituted. But though constitutions have the character of positive law, they
cannot be made as other positive laws are made by legislators, i.e., men holding
that office under the constitution. The generally accepted answer is that a
constitution is made by the people who form the political community. But, as
Madison observes, some evidence exists to the contrary. "It is not a little
remarkable," he writes, "that in every case reported by ancient history, in
which government has been established with deliberation and consent, the task of
framing it has not been committed to an assembly of men, but has been performed
by some individual citizen of pre-eminent wisdom and approved integrity." He
cites many examples from Plutarch to support this observation, but he adds the
comment that it cannot be ascertained to what extent these lawgivers were
"clothed with the legitimate authority of the people." In some cases, however,
he claims that "the proceeding was strictly regular." The writers of The
Federalist are, of course, primarily concerned with a constitution that is not
the work of one man but the enactment of a constituent assembly or
constitutional convention. From their knowledge of British law, they arc also
well aware that a constitution may sometimes be the product of custom, growing
and altering with change of custom. But however it is exercised, the
constitutive power is held by them to reside in the constituents of the state,
the sovereign people. This power may be exercised through force of custom to
produce an unwritten constitution, or through deliberative processes to draft a
written one; but it can never be exercised by a government except with popular
consentk since all the powers of a duly constituted government derive from its
constitution. In the American if not the British practice, the amendment of the
constitution also involves, at least indirectly, an appeal to the people.
Rousseau assigns the constitutive power to a mythical figure he calls "the
legislator" or "the law-giver," describing him as the man who "sets up the
Republic." Yet Rousseau says of this special office that it "nowhere enters into
the constitution." He thus reaffirms the essential point that a constitution
cannot create the office of constitution-making.

These remarks in the Social Contract have another significance. Rousseau tries
to distinguish the formation of a government by the constitution (the political
or fundamental law made by the legislator) from the formation of the state by
the social contract entered into by the people in their original act of
association. But is not the constitution also a formative contract or
convention? If it is popular in origin, either through custom or enactment, is
there more than a verbal difference between these two contracts the one which
establishes a political society and the one which establishes its government ?
For Hobbes, and seemingly also for Locke, the compact by which men abandon the
state of nature and establish a civil society results at the same time in the
establishment of a government. It is, Hobbes writes, "as if every man should say
to every man, I authorize and give my right of governing my self, to this Man or
to this Assembly of men, on this condition, that thou give up thy right to him,
and authorize all his actions in like manner." According to Rousseau, "there is
only one contract in the State, and that is the [original] act of association."
For him, "the institution of government is not a contract." The reality and
significance of the difference between these three political philosophers would
seem to depend on the precise historical meaning each gives to the hypothesis of
men living in a state of nature prior to political association. If, prior to the
state, men live in non-political societies, and if the state, as opposed to the
family or the despotically ruled community, begins to exist only when it is
constituted, then the formation of the state and the formation of its government
would seem to be the product of a single convention. THE PRINCIPLE OF
constitutionality is also necessary in order to understand the familiar
distinction between government by laws and government by men. Except for the
divine sort of government which is above both law and lawlessness, Plato employs
"the distinction of ruling with law or without law" to divide the various forms
of government into two groups. "The principle of law and the absence of law will
bisect them all," the Eleatic Stranger says in the Statesman. In the ordinary
meaning of law as an instrument of government, it is difficult to conceive
government by laws without men to make and administer them, or government by men
who do not issue general directives which have the character of law. Government
always involves both laws and men. But not all government rests upon the
supremacy of law, a supremacy which consists in the equality of all before the
law and the predominance of regular law as opposed to arbitrary decision. Nor is
all government based upon a law that regulates the officials of government as
well as the citizens, and determines the legality of official acts, legislative,
judicial, or executive. That law is, of course, the constitution. Locke makes a
distinction between governing by "absolute arbitrary power" and governing by
"settled standing laws." It is his contention that "whatever form the
commonwealth under, the ruling power ought to is govern by declared and received
laws, and not by extemporary dictates and undetermined resolutions, for then
mankind will be in a far worse condition than in a state of Nature. . . . All
the power the government has, being only for the good of the society, as it
ought not to CHAPTER 12: CONSTITUT be arbitrary and at pleasure, so it ought to
be exercised by established and promulgated laws, that both the people may know
their duty, and be safe and secure within the limits of the law, and the rulers,
too, kept within their due bounds."

As Locke states the distinction between government by laws and government by
men, it seems to be identical with the distinction between constitutional and
non-constitutional government. In the latter, an individual man invests himself
with sovereignty and, as sovereign, puts himself above all human law, being both
its source and the arbiter of its legality. Such government is absolute, for
nothing limits the power the sovereign man exercises as a prerogative vested in
his person. In constitutional government, men are not sovereigns but having only
a share of the sovoffice-holders, ereignty. They rule not through de facto
power, but through the juridical power which is vested in the office they hold.
That power is both created and limited by the law of the constitution which
defines the various offices of government.

ALTHOUGH ABSTRACTLY or in theory absolute and constitutional government are
clearly distinctmore than that, opposed political history contains the record of
intermediate types. These can be regarded as imperfect embodiments of the
principle of constitutionality, or as attenuations of absolute rule by
constitutional encroachments. Despite their incompatibility in principle,
historic circumstances have managed to combine absolute with constitutional
government. It is this combination which mediaeval jurists and philosophers call
"the 1 mixed regime" or the regimen regale et politicum, "royal and political
government.* It may be thought that a foreshadowing of the mediaeval mixed
regime can be found in Plato's Laws, in the passage in which the Athenian
Stranger says that monarchy and democracy are the "two mother forms of states
from which the rest may be truly derived." He then asserts that, to combine
liberty with wisdom, "you must have both these forms of government in a
measure." Since the Persian despotism is cited as the "highest form" of monarchy
and the Athenian constitution as the arche- ION type of democracy, the
combination proposed would seem to be a mixture of absolute with constitutional
government. But the Athenian Stranger also says that "there ought to be no great
and unmixed powers" if the arbitrary is to be avoided; and since the whole tenor
of the book, as indicated by its title, is to uphold the supremacy of law, it is
doubtful that a truly mixed regime is intended a government which is partly
absolute and partly constitutional. Aristotle, furthermore, gives us reason to
think that such a mixture would be unthinkable to a Greek. At least in his own
vocabulary, the terms roy0/and/0////Vtf/are as contradictory as round and
square. Royal, or kingly, government for Aristotle is "absolute monarchy, or the
arbitrary rule of a sovereign over all." In royal government, there are no
political offices, and no citizens. The ruler is sovereign in his own person and
the ruled are subject to his will, which is both the source of law and exempt
from all legal limitations. To Aristotle, political government means pure
constitutionalism. It exists only where "the citizens rule and are ruled in
turn," for "when the state is framed upon the principle of equality and
likeness, the citizens think they ought to hold office by turns." To the generic
form of constitutional government, Aristotle sometimes gives the name of
"polity," though he also uses this name for the mixed constitution which
combines democratic with oligarchical criteria for citizenship and public
office. The mixed constitution is not to be confused with the mixed regime, for
it is a mixture of different constitutional principles, not of constitutionalism
itself with absolute government. When the word "polity" signifies constitutional
government generally, it has the meaning which the Romans express by the word
"republic" and which the constitutionalists of the 1 8th century call "free
government." The distinctive characteristics of such government whether it is
called political, republican, constitutional, or free he in the fact that the
citizens are both rulers and ruled; that no man, not even the chief magistrate,
is above the law; that all political power or authority is derived from and
limited by the constitution which, being popular in origin, cannot be changed
except by the people as a whole.

238 It is perhaps only in the Middle Ages that we find the mixed regime in
actual existence. "That rule is called politic and royal," Aquinas writes,"by
which a man rules over free subjects who, though subject to the government of
the ruler, have nevertheless something of their own, by reason of which they can
resist the oijders of him who commands." These words seem to present an accurate
picture of the peculiarly mediaeval political formation which resulted from the
adaptation of Roman law (itself partly republican and partly imperial) to feudal
conditions under the influence of local customs and the Christian religion.
Thrmediaeval mixed regime is not to be confused with modern forms of
constitutional monarchy any more than with the mixed constitution or polity of
the Greeks. "The socalled limited monarchy, or kingship according to law,"
Aristotle remarks, "is not a distinct form of government." The chapter on
MONARCHY deals with the nature of constitutional monarchy and its difference
from the mixed regime as well as its relation to purely republican government.
The mediaeval king was not a constitutional monarch, but a sovereign person, in
one sense above the law and in another limited by it.

To the extent that he had powers and prerogatives unlimited by law, the
mediaeval king was an absolute ruler. He was, as Aquinas says, quoting the
phrase of the Roman jurists, legibus solutus exempt from the force of all
manmade law. Aquinas also describes him as "above the law" insofar as "when it
is expedient, he can change the law, and rule without it according to time and
place." Yet he was also bound by his coronation oath to perform the duties of
his office, first among which was the maintenance of the laws of the realm the
immemorial customs of the people which define their rights and liberties. The
king's subjects could be released from their oath of allegiance by his
malfeasance or dereliction in office. To this extent, then, the mediaeval king
was a responsible ruler, and the mixed regime was constitutional. Furthermore,
the king did not have jurisdiction over customary law; yet where custom was
silent, the king was free to govern absolutely, to decree what he willed, and
even to innovate laws. MEDIAEVAL IN ORIGIN, the institution of a government both
royal and political, or what Fortescue, describing England in the I5th century,
called a "political kingdom," exerted great influence on modern constitutional
developments. As late as the end of the iyth century, Locke's conception of the
relation of king and parliament, royal prerogative and legal limitations, may
emphasize the primacy of law, but it does not entirely divest the king of
personal sovereignty. Locke quotes with approval the speech from the throne in
1609, in which James I said that "the king binds himself by a double oath, to
the observation of the fundamental laws of his kingdom. Tacitly, as by being a
king, and so bound to protect as well the people, as the laws of his kingdom,
and expressly by his oath at his coronation." To this extent the British kingdom
is, as Fortescue had said, "political." But the king also retains the
prerogative to dispense with law and to govern in particular matters by decree
apart from law, and to this extent the government still remains royal. Locke
recognizes the difficulty of combining the absolute power of the king in
administration with the limitations on that power represented by Parliament's
jurisdiction over the laws which bind the king. To the question, Who shall be
judge of the right use of the royal prerogative ? he replies that "between an
executive power in being, with such prerogative, and a legislative that depends
upon his will for their convening, there can be no judge on earth . . . The
people have no other remedy ... but to appeal to heaven." Montesquieu as well as
Locke can conceive monarchy, as distinct from despotism, in no other terms than
those of the mixed regime. He separates despotism as lawless, or arbitrary and
absolute, government from all forms of government by law, and divides the latter
into monarchies and republics. Montesquieu insists that the ancients had no
notion of the kind of monarchy which, while it is legal government, is not
purely constitutional in the sense of being republican. He calls this kind of
monarchy "Gothic government," and, as Hegel later points out, it is clear that
"by Monarchy' he understands, not the patriarchal or any ancient type, nor on
the other hand, the type or- CHAWB 12: CONSTITU ganizcd into an objective
constitution, but only feudal monarchy."

It not until the i8th century that the is slightest vestige of royal power comes
to be regarded as inimical to law. For Rousseau "every legitimate government is
republican" ; for Kant, "the only rightful Constitution ... is that of a Pure
Republic," which, in his view, "can only be constituted by a representative
system of the people." The writers of The Federalist take the same stand. They
interpret the "aversion of the people to monarchy" as signifying their espousal
of purely constitutional or republican government. In the tradition of the great
books, only Hegel speaks thereafter in a contrary vein. Constitutional monarchy
represents for him the essence of constitutionalism and the only perfect
expression of the idea of the state. Because modern republics, and even modern
constitutional or limited monarchies, have developed gradually or by revolution
out of nixed regimes; and because this development came as a reaction against
the increasing absolutism or despotism of kings, the principle of
constitutionality has been made more effective in modern practice than it was m
the ancient world. In addition to asserting limitations upon governments,
constitutions have also provided means of controlling them. They have been given
the force, as well as the authority, of positive law. They have made
office-holders accountable for their acts; and through such juridical processes
as impeachment and such politicaldevices as frequent elections and short terms
of office, they have brought the administration of government within the purview
of the law.

Following Montesquieu, the Federalists recommend the separation of powers, with
checks and balances, as the essential means of enforcing constitutional
limitations of office and of preventing one department of government from
usurping the power of another. The citizens are further protected from the
misuse of power by constitutional declarations of their rights and immunities;
and constitutional government is itself safeguarded from revolutionary violence
by such institutions as judicial review and by the availability of the amending
power as a means of changing the constitution through due process of law.

TION IN THE HISTORY of political change, it is necessary to distinguish change
from or to constitutional government and, within the sphere of constitutional
government, the change of constitutions. Republics are set up and constitutions
established by the overthrow of despots or with their abdication. Republics are
destroyed and constitutions overthrown by dictators who usurp the powers of
government. Violence, or the threat of violence, usually attends these changes.
The other sort of change may take place in two ways: either when one
constitution replaces another, as frequently occurs in the revolutions of the
Greek city-states; or when an enduring constitution is modified by amendment, as
is customary in modern republics. Every constitutional change is in a sense
revolutionary, but if it can be accomplished by due process of law, violence can
be avoided. All the changes in which constitutional government or constitutions
arc involved raise fundamental questions of justice. Is republican government
always better than absolute monarchy and the mixed regime better in the sense of
being more just, better because it gives men the liberty and equality they
justly deserve? Is it better relative to the nature and condition of certain
peoples but not all, or of a people at a certain stage of their development, but
not always? In what respects does one constitution embody more justice than
another? What sorts of amendment or reform can rectify the injustice of a
constitution? Without answering such questions, we cannot discriminate between
progress and decline in the history of constitutionalism. Divergent answers
will, of course, be found in the great books. Among the political philosophers,
there are the defenders of absolutism and those who think that royal government
is most like the divine; the exponents of the supremacy of the mixed regime; the
republicans who insist that nothing less than constitutional government is fit
for free men and equals. And there are those who argue that the justice of any
form of government must be considered relative to the condition of the people,
so that republican government may be better only in some circumstances, not in
all. The issue arising fi"m these conflicting views concerning constitutional
and absolute government is treated in the chapters on CITIZEN, MONARCHY, and
TYRANNY. But one other issue remains to be discussed here. It concerns the
comparative justice of diverse constitutions. Constitutions can differ from one
another in the way in which they plan the operations of government, or in the
qualifications they set for citizenship and public office. Usually only the
second mode of difference seriously affects their justice. In Greek political
life, the issue of justice as between the democratic and the oligarchical is a
conflict between those who constitution think that all free men deserve the
equality of citizenship and the opportunity to hold office, and those who think
it is unjust to treat the rich and the poor as equals. The latter insist that
citizenship should be restricted to the wealthy and that the magistracies should
be reserved for men of considerable means. Finding justice and injustice on both
sides, Aristotle favors what he calls "the mixed constitution." This unites the
justice of treating free men alike so far as citizenship goes, with the justice
of discriminating between rich and poor with respect to public office. Such a
mixture, he writes, "may be described generally as a fusion of oligarchy and
democracy," since it attempts "to unite the freedom of the poor and the wealth
of the rich." The mixed constitution, especially if accompanied by a numerical
predominance of the middle class, seems to him to have greater stability, as
well as more justice, than either of the pure types of constitution which,
oppressive to either poor or rich, provoke revolution. In modern political life,
the issue between oligarchy and democracy lends toward a different resolution.
The last defenders of the oligarchical constitution were men like Burke,
Hamilton,and John Adams in the i8th century. Since then, the great
constitutional reforms have progressively extended the franchise almost to the
point of universal suffrage. These matters are, of course, further treated in
the chapters on DEMOCRACY and OLIGARCHY.

POLITICAL REPRESENTATION, with a system of periodic elections, seems to be
indispensable to constitutional government under modern con- AS ditions. The
territorial extent and populousness of the nation-state as compared with the
ancient city-state makes impossible direct participation by the whole body of
citizens in the major functions of government. Considering the ancient republics
of Sparta, Rome, and Carthage, the writers of The Federalist try to explain the
sense in which the principle of representation differentiates the American
republic from these ancient constitutional governments. "The principle of
representation," they say, "was neither unknown to the ancients nor wholly
overlooked in their political constitutions. The true distinction be tween these
and the American government lies in the total exclusion of the people, in their
collective capacity, from any share in the latter, and not in the total
exclusion of the representatives of the people from the administration of the
former" The Federalists then go on to say that "the distinction . . . thus
qualified must be admitted to leave a most advantageous superiority in favor of
the United States. But to insure to this advantage its full effect, we must be
careful not to separate it from the other advantage of an extensive territory.
For it cannot be believed that any form of representative government could have
succeeded within the narrow limits occupied by the democracies of Greece." In
their opinion, representative government is not merely necessitated by the
conditions of modern society, but also has the political advantage of
safeguarding constitutional government from the masses. As pointed out in the
chapter on ARISTOCRACY, where the theory of representation is discussed, the
officers of government chosen by the whole body of citizens are supposed at
least on one conception of representatives to be more competent in the business
of government than their constituents. It is in these terms that the Federalists
advocate what they call "republican government" as opposed to "pure democracy."
Like the idea of political offices, the principle of representation seems to be
inseparable from constitutionalism and constitutional government. Though the
principle appears to a certain extent in ancient republics whether oligarchies
or democracies ancient political writing does not contain a formal discussion of
CHAPTER 12: CONSnTUHON the theory of representation. That begins in
representative asse mediaeval treatises which recognize the consult- resentation
and the ative or advisory function of those who repre- sume a place of suc sent
the nobles and the commons at the king's philosopher like Mi court. But it is
only in recent centuries when tify representative legislation has become the
exclusive function of ment.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The difference between government by law and government by men: the nature of
constitutional government

2. The notion of a constitution
 2a. The constitution as the form or organization of a political community: arrange-
 ment of offices; division of functions
 2b. The constitution as the fundamental law: its relation to other laws, as a source or
 measure of legality or justice

3. The relation of constitutional government to other forms of government
 3a. The combination of constitutional with absolute government: the mixed regime;
 constitutional or limited monarchy
 3& The merits of constitutional government compared with royal government and
 the mixed regime

4. The constitutional conception of political office: the qualifications and duties of
public officials

5. The diversity of constitutions among the forms of government
 5a. The justice of different constitutions: the extent and character of citizenship
 under each
 5b. The mixed constitution: its advantages

6. The origin of constitutions: the lawgiver, the social contract, the constituent assembly

7. The preservation
of constitutions: factors tending toward their dissolution
 7a. The relative stability of different types of constitutions
 7b. The safeguards of constitutional government: bills of rights; separation of powers;
 impeachment

8. The change of constitutions
 8a. Methods of changing a constitution: revolution, amendment
 8b. The violation and overthrow of constitutional government

9. The theory of representation
 9a. The functions and duties of representatives: their relation to their constituent!
 9b. Types of representation: diverse methods of selecting representatives
 9c. The origin, growth, and vicissitudes of constitutional government

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Other considerations of the distinction between government by law and go

and for the comparison of constitutional government with other forms

ARISTOCRACY 4; LAW 6b, yakb; LIBERTY 1d, 1f; M

TYRANNY 5-k.

The exposition of different types of constitutions and different forms

ment in themselves and in relation to one another, see ARISTOCRACY iDEMOCRACY
3-3c, 4a(i)~4a(2), 4d; OLIGARCHY 1-2, 4, 5a.

Other discussions of the mixed regime and the mixed constitution, see A

DEMOCRACY 3a-3b; GOVERNMENT 2b; MONARCHY 1b(i) 1b(2).

The idea of citizenship in relation to constitutional government, see C

the conception of the statesman as a constitutional office-holder, se

The conception of constitutional law and its relation to other bodies o

see JUSTICE pc, loa; LAW 73.

Matters relevant to the conventional character of constitutions and the

a constitution to the theory of the social contract, see CUSTOM AND C

yc; NATURE 2b; STATE 3d.

Constitutional government in relation to the theory of sovereignty, see

GOVLRNMENT IgO)" 1 k)* kAW 6bj MONARCHY k($)\ STATE 2CJ TYRANNY $.

Other discussions of the safeguards of constitutional government and of

machinery of representation, see ARISTOCRACY 6; DEMOCRACY 40, 5-kc; G

LIBERTY 1g.

The problem of constitutional change and the stability of different typ

ARISTOCRACY 3; DEMOCRACY 7-73; REVOLUTION 2a, 30(2); STATS kg.

The issues involved in the development of constitutional government and

of liberty under law, see GOVERNMENT 6; LIBERTY 6b; MONARCHY 4e(2); P

REVOLUTION 33; TYRANNY 4b, 8.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western Worl

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided

I. Works by authors represented m this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter

FORTESCUE. Governance

GUICCIARDINI. Dialogo

MACHIAVELLI. The Discourses, BK i Firenze MILTON. The Tenure of Kings and
Magistrates BODIN. The Six Bootes HUME. Idea of a Perfect Commonwealth
BELLARMINE. The Treati Laicts)

lla

HOOKER. Of the Laws of

POLYBIUS. Histories, VOL i, BK vi BOLINGBROKE. Dissertat CICERO. De Republica
(The Republic] VATTEL. The Law of Nat MARSILIUS OF PADUA. Defensor Pacts J.
WILSON. Worfa PAR

vernment by men, of government, see ONARCHY 1a-1a(2), 446(4); 2e; CITIZEN 2c-3;
RISTOCRACY 2b; ITIZEN 2a-2b; and for e STATE 8. of constitutional governf law
and legal justice, relation of the idea of ONVENTION 6a; LAW DEMOCRACY 4b; the
theory and OVERNMENT 1h; es of constitution, see the establishment ROGRESS 43;
d, but relevant to the into two groups: on. works cited, consult of The Great
Ideas. of England. e dtscorsi del reggimento di of a Commonweale se on Civil
Government (De Ecclesiastical Polity ion upon Parties, LETTER 18 ions, BK i, CH
3 T i, CH n, v, x-xi; PART 11

CHAPTER 12: CONS BENTHAM. Fragment on Government, CH i (36-48), 3 J. ADAMS. A
Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of America

PAINE. Rights of Man BURKE. Letter to the Sheriffs of Bristol .On the Reform of
the Representation in the

House of Commons

An Appeal from the New to the Old Whigs

.

. Letter to Sir Hercules Langnshe

GODWIN An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, BK vi, CH 7

SIEVES. Discours dans les debats constitutionels de Van III

JEFFERSON. Notes on the State of Virginia

Democracy, CH 3

.

WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK v, en 4-5 CALHOUN. A Disquisition on
Government .

A Discourse on the Constitution and Government of the United States TOCQUEVILLF.
Democracy in America

Vancien rtgime {Ancient Regime) .

BAGEHOT. The English Constitution

TITUTION DICEY. Introduction to the Study of the Law of the

Constitution MOSCA. The Ruling Class JELLINEK. Allgememe Staatslehre BRYCE The
American Commonwealth

Studies in History and Jurisprudence

. BEARD. The Supreme Court and the Constitution DUGUIT. Law in the Modem State
FARRAND, The Framing of the Constitution of the

United States J. DICKINSON. Administrative Justice and the Supremacy of Law in
the Vmted States

MERRIAM. The Written Constitution and the Unwritten Attitude MclLWAiN. The
Fundamental Law Behind the Constitution . Constitutionalism and the Changing
World Constitutionalism, Ancient and Modern . KELSEN. General Theory of Law and
State ROSSITER. Constitutional Dictatorship BORGESE et al Preliminary Draft of a
World Constitution
