Chapter  13:  C  INTRODUCTION '"TT'HE heroes of history and poetry may be cruel,
violent,  self-seeking,  ruthless,  intemperate,  and unjust, but they are never
cowards.  They  do  not  falter  or give way. They do not despair in the face of
almost  hopeless  odds.  They  have the strength and stamina to achieve whatever
they  set their minds and wills to do. They would not be heroes if they were not
men  of  courage.  This is the very meaning of heroism which gives the legendary
heroes  almost  the  stature of gods. In the Homeric age they do in fact contend
with  gods  as  well  as  men.  The two Homeric epics, especially the Iliad, are
peopled  with  men  who cannot be dared or daunted. In Tennyson's poem, Ulysses,
now  restive  in Ithaca, remembering the years at Troy and the long voyage home,
says  to  his companions, Some work of noble note may yet be done Not unbecoming
men  that  strove with Gods and though We are not now that strength which in old
days  Moved  earth  and  heaven;  that which we are, we are: One equal temper of
heroic  hearts,  Made  weak  by  time and fate, but strong in will To strive, to
seek, to find, and not to yield.

In  the  Iliad,  courage is the quality above all others which characterizes the
great  figures  of Achilles and Hector, Ajax, Patroclus, and Diomedcs, Agamemnon
and  Menelaus. The only other quality which seems to be equally prized, and made
the  subject of rivalry and boast, is cunning the craft of Odysseus, that man of
many  devices,  and  the  cleverness in speech of Nestor. Yet the best speech is
only  the  prelude  to action, and except for the night expedition q of Odysseus
and  Diomcdes  into  the  Trojan  camp, the great actions of the Iliad are un- T
planned  deeds  of  prowess  stark,  not  stealthy.  o The heroes have boundless
passions,  and  fear g is among them. When they are called fearless, p OURAGE it
is  not  because  nothing  affrights them or turns their blood cold. Fear seizes
them,  as  does  anger, with all its bodily force. They are fearless only in the
sense  that they do not act afraid or fail to act. Their courage is always equal
to  the  peril  sensed or felt, so that they can perform what must be done as if
they had no fear of pain or death. Yet brave men often speak of courage as if it
were  fearlessness  and mark the coward as one who is undone by fear. An ambush,
Indomeneus  says  in  the Iliad will show "who is cowardly and who is brave; the
coward will change color at every touch and turn; he is full of fears, and keeps
shifting  his  weight  first  on one knee and then on the other; his heart beats
fast  as  he thinks of death, and one can hear the chattering of his teeth." The
brave  man,  mastering  fear, will appear to be fearless. This is the courage of
men  of action, men in war, found not only in the heroes of Troy's siege, but in
the  stalwarts  of  all  other battles Leomdas at Thermopylae, Aeneas and Turnus
engaged  in  single  combat, the conquerors in Plutarch, the warrior-nobility in
Shakespeare,  the  civilized Prince Andrew and young Rostov in War and Peace. It
is  the  sort  of  courage  which  goes  with  physical  strength, with feats of
endurance;  and,  as  signified  by  the root-meaning of "fortitude," which is a
synonym for courage, it is a reservoir of moral or spiritual strength to sustain
action  even  when  flesh  and  blood can carry on no further. Such courage is a
virtue  in  the primary sense of the Latin word virtus manliness, the spirit, or
strength  of  spirit,  reuired to be a man. HERE ARE OTHER sorts of courage. The
courage  f  the tragic hero, of Oedipus and Antigone, oes with strength of mind,
not  body.  This,  erhaps even more than being lion-hearted, is CHAPTER 13: CO a
specifically  human  strength.  Courage does not consist only in conquering fear
and  in  withholding  the  body  from flight no matter what the risk of pain. It
consists at least as much in steeling the will, reinforcing its resolutions, and
turning  the  mind  relentlessly  to  seek or face the truth. Civil no less than
martial  action requires courage.Weary of empire, Marcus Aurehus summons courage
each day for the performance of an endless round of duties. "In the morning when
thou  nsest  unwilling,"  he  reminds himself, "let this thought be present I am
rising  to  the work of a human being." How he conceives the work of an emperor,
he  makes  plain.  "Let  the  deity which is in thee be the guardian of a living
being,  manly and of ripe age, and engaged in matter political, and a Roman, and
a  ruler, who has taken his post like a man waiting for the signal which summons
him  from  life,  and  ready to go, having need neither of oath nor of any man's
testimony."  The burdens are heavy, the task difficult but not impossible, for a
man "can live well even in a palace."

Civil  courage is as necessary for the citizen as for the ruler. This virtue, in
Mill's  opinion,  is  especially necessary for citizens of a free government. "A
people  may  prefer  a  free government," he writes, "but if, from indolence, or
carelessness,  or cowardice, or want of public they are unequal to the exertions
necesspirit,  sary  for  preserving it; if they will not fight for it when it is
directly  attacked;  if  they can be deluded by the artifices used to cheat them
out  of  it;  if  by  momentary  discouragement, or temporary panic, or a fit of
enthusiasm  for an individual, they can be induced to lay their liberties at the
feet  even  of a great man, or trust him with powers which enable him to subvert
their  institutions; in all these cases they are more or less unfit for liberty:
andthough  it  may be for their .good to have had it even for a short time, they
are  unlikely  long  to  enjoy  it." The courage or pusillanimity of a people is
sometimes regarded as the cause, and sometimes as the effect, of their political
institutions.  "The  inhabitants  of  Europe,"  Hippocrates  writes,  are  "more
courageous  than  those  of Asia; for a climate which is always the same induces
indolence, but a changeable climate, laborious exertions, both of body and mind;
and  from  rest  and  indolence  cowardice  is  engendered,  and  from laborious
exertions  and  pains, courage." This, according to Hippocrates, partly explains
why  the  Asiatics  readily  submit to despotism and why the Europeans fight for
political  liberty.  But  the  character  of the Europeans, he adds, is also the
result  of  "their  institutions, because they are not governed by kings ... for
where men are governed by kings, there they must be very cowardly . . . and they
will  not  readily undergo dangers in order to promote the power of another; but
those  that  are free undertake dangers on their own account and thus. . . their
institutions contribute not a little to their courage."

For  Hegel,  on  the  contrary,  civic  courage undertaking dangers, even to the
consists in point of sacrifice, for the state. Moreover, for him true courage is
entirely a civic virtue. "The intrinsic worth of courage as a disposition of the
mind,"  he  writes,  "is  to  be  found in the genuine, absolute, final end, the
sovereignty  of  the  stale. The work of courage is to actualize this final end,
and  the  means  to  this  end is the sacrificeof personal actuality," Though he
admits  that courage "is multiform," he insists that "the mettle of an animal or
a brigand, courage for the sake of honor, the courage of a knight, these are not
true  forms  of  courage. The true courage of civilized nations is readiness for
sacrifice in the service of the state, so that the individual counts as only one
amongst  many." THE WORK OF MAN is learning as well as action. Man has a duty to
the  truth  as  well  as to the state. The ability to face without flinching the
hard questions reality can put constitutes the temper of a courageous mind. "Tht
huge  world  that  girdles  us  about," William James writes, "puts all sorts of
questions to us, and tests us in all sorts of ways. Some of the tests we meet by
actions  that  are  easy,  and  some  of the questions we answer in articulately
formulated words. But the deepest question that is ever asked admits of no reply
but  the dumb turning of the will and tightening of our heart-strings as we say,
Tes,  I will even have it sol' When a dreadful object is presented, or when life
as  a whole turns up its dark abysses to our view, then the worthless ones among
us  lose  their  hold  on the situation altogether But the heroic . . . 254 mind
docs  differently ... It can fact them if necessary, without for that losing its
hold  upon  the  rest of life. The world thus finds in the heroic man its worthy
match and mate ... He can stand this Universe."

Not  only  in  answering questions, but in asking them, courage is required. The
story   which  St.  Augustine  tells  in  the  Confessions,  of  his  persistent
questioning  of doctrines and dogmas, his refusal to rest in any creed which did
not  wholly  satisfy  his mind, is a story of speculative courage, capped by the
fortitude with which he bore the agony of irresolution and doubt.

Learning  is  never  an  easy  enterprise,  nor  truth an easy master. The great
scientists  and philosophers have shown the patience and perseverance of courage
in  surmounting  the social hardships of opposition and distrust, as well as the
intellectual  difficulties  which might discourage men less resolved to seek and
find the truth. The great religious martyrs, as indomitable in their humility as
soldiers  are  in daring, have been as resolutenever yielding to a despair which
would  have  dishonored  their faith. In all these types of fortitude, different
motivations  are apparent, as diverse as the forms which courage takes under the
various  demands of life. Not all the forms of courage may be equally admirable,
partly  because  they  are  unequal  in  degree,  but  also  partly  because the
courageous  acts  themselves, or the purposes for which fortitude is needed, are
not  of  equal  moral  worth.  Yet  the  essence of courage seems to be the same
throughout.  It  sustains the honor of Don Quixote and in some sense even of Sir
John  Falstaff;  it  burnishes  the  fame  of Alexander and Caesar; it fortifies
Socrates and Galileo to withstand their trials. Whether in the discharge of duty
or  in  the  pursuit of happiness, courage confirms a man in the hard choices he
has been forced to make.

As  THE  CHAPTER  on  VIRTUE  indicates,  the  traditional  theory  of the moral
qualities  places  courage  or  fortitude  among the four principal virtues. The
other three are temperance, justice, and either wisdom or prudence, according to
the enumeration of different writers.

Plato  names  these  virtues when, in the Republic, he compares the parts of the
state  with  the  parts  of  the soul. "The same principles S which exist in the
State  exist  also  in  the  individual,"  Socrates says, and "they are three in
number."  There  is  one  "with which a man reasons ... the rational part of the
soul,  another  with  which  he  loves  and  hungers  and  thirsts and feels the
flutterings  of any other desirethe irrational or appetitive, the ally of sundry
pleasures  and satisfactions." The third part is "passion or spirit" which "when
not corrupted by " bad education is the natural auxiliary of reason.

Corresponding  to  these  three  parts  of  the  soul,  there are, or should be,
according  to  Plato,  three  classes in the state: the guardians or rulers, the
husbandmen  and  artisans,  or the workers, and the auxiliaries or the soldiers.
The  virtues  which  belong  to the several parts of the soul also belong to the
corresponding parts of the state. Wise is the man, Socrates declares,"who has in
him  that  little  part which rules, and which proclaims commands, that part too
being  supposed  to  have a knowledge of what is for the interest of each of the
three  parts  and  of  the  whole."  Courageous  is  he "whose spirit retains in
pleasure  and in pain the commands of reason about what he ought or ought not to
fear."  Temperance,  however, instead of being exclusively the perfection of one
part,  pervades  the whole, and is found, according to Socrates, in the man "who
has  these  same elements in friendly harmony, in which the one ruling principle
of reason, and the two subject ones of spirit and desire are equally agreed that
reason  ought  to  rule."  Justice  "the only virtue which . . remains .when the
other  virtues  of  temperance  and  courage  and wisdom are abstracted" "is the
ultimate  cause  and  condition  of  the  existence  of  all  of them, and while
remaining  in them is also their preservative." It is the virtue which "does not
permit  the  several elements within a man to interfere with one another, or any
of  them  to  do the work of others." The political analogy finds justice in the
wellordered  state,  where wisdom rules, courage defends the laws and peace, and
temperance  balances  the  economy.  Wisdom  would belong most 4 properly to the
guardians,  courage  to  the  auxiliaries,  while  all  three classes would need
temperance.  Hegel  also  associates  courage  with  1the M military class" that
universal  class which is charged with the defence of the state" and CHAFFER 13:
C  whose  duty it is "to make real the ideality implicit within itself, i.e., to
sacrifice  itself."  But  whereas  for  Hegel  courage  seems to be the foremost
political  virtue,  Plato puts it last in the order of goods, "Wisdom is chief,"
the  Athenian  Stranger says in the Laws; "next follows temperance; and from the
union  of  these  two  with  courage springs justice, and fourth in the scale of
virtue  is courage." In the context of a different psychological analysis, and a
theory  of  the  virtues  which  considers them primarily as habits, Aristotle's
conception  of  courage differs from Plato's in a number of respects. It is most
closely  allied  with  temperance.  These  two  virtues  together  belong to the
irrational part of the soul the passions or appetites and are concerned with our
attitude  toward  pleasure  and  pain.  They  discipline us, both in feeling and
action, with regard to the pleasurable objects of desire and the painful objects
of  fear  or  aversion.  Aristotle seems to think courage more praiseworthy than
temperance,  "for it is harder to face what is painful than to abstain from what
is pleasant."

Just  as  the  temperate man is one who habitually forgoes certain pleasures and
seeks other pleasures moderately for the sake of achieving some greater good, so
the  courageous  man  is  one  who  can at any time endure pain and hardship, or
overcome  fear  of  danger and death, in order to achieve a paramount end. Since
death  is  "the most terrible of all things," Aristotle declares that "properly,
he  will  be  called  brave who is fearless in face of a noble death, and of all
emergencies  that involve death." But it must be "for a noble end that the brave
man  endures and acts as courage directs." The paramount end, the greatest good,
which  the  moderation  of temperance and the endurance of courage serve, is for
Aristotle  happiness.  Yet through their relation to justice, which concerns the
good  of  others and the welfare of the state, temperance and courage help a man
to  perform his social duties, whether as ruler or citizen, in peace or war. The
man  who acts lawfully will not only be just, but also courageous and temperate,
for,  in  Aristotle's  view,  "the  law bids us do both the acts of a brave man,
e.g.,  not  to  desert  our post nor take to flight nor throw away our arms, and
those  of  a  temperate  man, e.g., not to commit adultery OURAGE nor to gratify
one's lust." Not only may the law-abiding man be called upon to be courageous in
the  respects which Aristotle indicates, but it may sometimes take great courage
to  uphold  the  law itself against many temptations to the contrary. "After the
death  of  Moses  ...  the  Lord spake unto Joshua," and said unto him: "Be thou
strong  and very courageous, that thou nwyest observe to do according to all the
law which Moses my servant commanded thee: turn not from it to the right hand or
to  the left." The fourth virtue with which courage, temperance, and justice are
associated  in  the conduct of private or public life is prudence, or "practical
wisdom."  Though  Aristotle  classifies  prudence  as  an  intellectual  virtue,
consisting  in the capacity for making a right judgment about things to be done,
he  also regards prudence as inseparable in origin and exercise from these other
three  virtues  which he calls "moral" rather than "intellectual." Later writers
call  the four virtues taken together courage, temperance, justice, and prudence
the  "cardinal" virtues in order to signify, as Aquinas explains, that the whole
of  moral  life  "hinges"  upon them. The theory of the cardinal virtues, and of
their  connection  with one another in such wise that none can be perfect in the
absence  of  the  others,  is  treated in the chapter on VIRTUE. The chapters on
JUSTICE,  TEMPERANCE,  and  PRUDENCE  discuss  the  doctrine  that each of these
virtues is only a part of virtue, which must be integrated with the other parts.
The  special  role  which prudence plays in relation to virtues like courage and
temperance at least according to Aristotle's view that "it is not possible to be
good  in the strict sense without practical wisdom, nor practically wise without
moral  virtue"  must  be  reserved  for  the  chapter  dealing with that virtue.
Nevertheless,  it  is  necessary to consider here how its dependence on prudence
may  qualify the meaning or nature of courage. THE CONNECTION which some writers
see  between courage and prudence affects the definition of courage in two ways.
The  first involves the doctrine of the mean which enters into the consideration
of all the moral virtues, but especially courage and temperance.

256 Aristotle originates the analysi; of virtue as "a mean between two vices . .
:  because  the vices respectively fall short of or exceed what is right in both
passions  and  actions."  It  requires  prudence to decide what things should be
feared,  when  they should be feared, and how much; and so a prudent judgment is
involved  in  fearing the right things at the right time and in the right manner
neither  too  much nor too little. "The coward, the rash man, and th brave man,"
Aristotle  writes,  "are  concerned  wath  the  same objects but are differently
disposed to them; for the first two exceed and fall short, while the third holds
the  middle, which is the right, position; and rash men are precipitate and wish
for  dangers beforehand but draw back when they are in them, while brave men are
keen in the moment of action, but quiet beforehand."

Aristotle  is  not  the  only  one to define courage as a midd leg round between
contrary  extremes.  Most  writers  who  devote  any  attention to the nature of
courage  come  to  somewhat  the  same  conclusion.  Epictetus,  for example, in
declaring  that we should "combine confidence with caution in everything we do,"
seems  also  to  make  courage  a mean. He points out that such a combination at
first  "may appear a paradox" since "caution seems to be contrary to confidence,
and  contraries  are  by no means compatible." But this, he says, is only due to
"confusion."  There  would  be  a paradox "if we really called upon a man to use
caution  and  confidence  in  regard to the same things ... as uniting qualities
which  cannot be united." But, as Epictetus explains, caution and confidence can
be  united  because  they  concern  different objects. The difference in objects
which  he  has  in  mind  becomes  clear  in  the  light of the Stoic maxim, "Be
confident in all that lies beyond the will's control, be cautious in all that is
dependent  on  the  will." Sharply distinguishing between what does and does not
lie within our control, Epicfetus tells us to look with care and caution only to
those  things in which we can do evil by making an evil choice. "In such matters
of  will  it  is right to use caution." But in other matters, "in things outside
the  will's control, which do not depend on us ... we should use confidence." By
uniting  caution  and  confidence,  we  avoid  the extremes of foolhardiness and
cowardice  and  achieve  the mean in which Aristotle says courage consists. Both
are  necessary.  Cowardice  is not the only vice opposed to courage. The man who
acts  without  caution in the face of danger, recklessly disregarding what might
be reasonably feared, is foolhardy rather than courageous; even as the coward is
held  back  by  fears  which his reason tells him should be overcome. Because he
agrees  that  courage  consists  in  avoiding both extremes, Spinoza writes that
"flight  at  the  proper  time,  just  as  well as fighting,is to be reckoned as
showing  strength  of mind." These two acts are allied, since it is by "the same
virtue  of  the mind" that a man "avoids danger . . . and seeks to overcome it."
To  determine  at  a  given  moment  whether to flee or to fight, so as to avoid
either foolhardiness or cowardice, obviously involves a decision of reason. Such
a  decision, according to Spinoza, demands "strength of mind," by which he means
"the desire by which each person endeavours from the dictates of reason alone to
preserve  his own being." Without rational direction or, as Aristotle would say,
without  prudence,  one  may  be  fearless  but  not courageous. Those who, like
Hobbes,  do  not  include  reason  or  prudence as an essential element in their
conception  of  courage,  treat  courage as an emotion rather than a virtue, and
tend  to  identify  it  with  fearlessness, making its opposite the condition of
being  over-fearful. "Amongst the passions," writes Hobbes, "courage (by which I
mean the contempt of wounds and violent death) inclines men to private revenges,
and  sometimes  to endeavor the unsettling of the public peace; and timorousness
many times disposes to the desertion of the public defense."

As Hobbes describes courage, it may be of doubtful value to the individual or to
the  state.  Melville seems to have this meaning of courage in mind when he says
that  "the  most  reliable and useful courage is that which arises from the fair
estimation  of  the  encountered  the  peril"  lack  of  which makes "an utterly
fearless man ... a far more dangerous companion than a coward."

If  apparent  fearlessness  were  courage,  then certain animals might be called
"courageous,"  CHAPTER and men of sanguine temperament, extremely self-confident
or  at  least  free  from  fear,  would be as courageous as those who succeed in
mastering their fears in order to do what is expected of them. But, as Aristotle
observes,  drunken  men  often  behave  fearlessly and we do not praise them for
their  courage.  Plato  likewise  presents  a  view  of  courage  which requires
forethought  and a genuine concern for danger. "I do not call animals which have
no  fear  . . . of dangers, because they are ignorant of them, courageous," says
Nicias  in  the  Laches.  They are "only fearless and senseless . . There is a .
difference  to  my  way  of  thinking,"  he  goes  on, "between fearlessness and
courage.  I  am of the opinion that thoughtful courage is a quality possessed by
very  few,  but  that  rashness  and  boldness,  and  fearlessness, which has no
forethought,  are  very common qualities possessed by many men, many women, many
children,   and   many  animals."  According  to  this  conception  of  courage,
"courageous actions," Nicias says, "are wise actions."

IN  LINE  WITH  these  considerations, the definition of courage would involve a
reasonable,  a wise or prudent, discrimination between what should be feared and
what  should be undertaken in spite of peril or pain. As the Parson declares, in
his  discourse on the Seven Deadly Sins in the Canterbury Tales, "this virtue is
so  mighty  and  so  vigorous that it dares to withstand sturdily, and wisely to
keep itself from dangers that are wicked, and to wrestle against the assaults of
the  Devil.  For it enhances and strengthens the soul ... It can endure, by long
suffering,  the  toils  that  are fitting." To be able to make decisions of this
sort  in  particular  cases, a man must have some view of the order of goods and
the  end of life. For a man to act habitually in a courageous manner, he must be
generally  disposed  to  value  certain things as more important than others, so
that  he  is  willing  to  take risks and endure hardships for their sake. Freud
seems  to  be skeptical of what he calls "the rational explanation for heroism,"
according to which "it consists in the decision that the personal life cannot be
so  precious as certain abstract general ideals." More frequent, in his opinion,
"is  that  instinctive  and  impulsive hero- 13: COURAGE ism which knows no such
motivation  and  flouts  danger  in  the  spirit  of  Anzengruber's  Hans  the "
Road-Mender:  'Nothing  can  happen  to me? But Aquinas, who emphasizes rational
motivation  as much as Freud discounts it, insists that courageous men "face the
danger  on  account  of the good of virtue, which is the abiding object of their
will, however great the danger be." Courage as Aquinas conceives it, though only
a  part  of  virtue  in  the  sense of being one virtue among many, nevertheless
represents  the whole moral life from one point of view. The quality of courage,
he  points out, "overflows into the rest" of the virtues, as these in turn enter
into courage. "Whoever can curb his desires for the pleasures of touch," Aquinas
writes,  "so that they keep within bounds, which is a very hard thing to do, for
this very reason is more able to check his daring in dangers of death, so as not
to  go  too far, which is much easier; and in this sense fortitude is said to be
temperate.  "Again,"  he  continues,  "temperance  is  said  to be brave because
fortitude  overflows into temperance. This is true in so far as he whose soul is
strengthened  by  fortitude  against dangers of death, which is a matter of very
great difficulty,is more able to remain firm against the onslaught of pleasures;
for,  as  Cicero says, // would be inconsistent for a man to be unbroken byfear,
and  yet  vanquished  by cupidity, or that he should be conquered by lust, after
showing  himself  to be unconquered by toil" As the man who is temperate because
he  has  rationally  ordered  his actions to a certain end can be expected to be
courageous  for  the  same  reason,  so,  according  to Aquinas, he will also be
prudent,  since  both  his  temperance  and his courage result from a prudent or
rational choice of means to the end he pursues. Writing as a theologian, Aquinas
distinguishes  what he calls "the perfecting virtues" of the religious life from
"the  social  virtues"  of  the  political life the virtues with which the moral
philosopher  is  concerned.  He  holds  courage to be inseparable from the other
virtues  on  either  plane  whether  directed  to  a natural or supernatural end
because  it  is  the  sameness  of  the end in each case which binds the virtues
together.  "Thus  prudence  by  contemplating  the  things of God," he explains,
"counts  as  nothing  all the thingsof this world" and "temperance, so THE GREAT
far  as  nature  allows,  neglects the needs of the body; fortitude prevents the
soul from being afraid of neglecting the body and rising to heavenly things; and
justice  consists in the soul's giving a whole-hearted consent to follow the way
thus proposed."

WE  ARE  THUS brought to the second qualification upon courage which arises from
its  connection with prudence, and through prudence with the other virtues. Does
it  make  any  difference  whether  the end for which a man strives valiantly is
itself something commendable rather than despicable ? If not, then the thief can
have  courage  just  as truly as the man who fears dishonor more than death; the
tyrant can be courageous no less and no differently than the lawabiding citizen.
In  his  advice to the prince, Machiavelli seems to consider only the utility of
courage.  Referring  to  the end which he says "every man has before him, namely
glory  and  riches,"  he  points out that men proceed ways: "one in various with
caution,  another  with  haste; one by force, another by skill; one by patience,
another  by  its  opposite;  and  each  one  succeeds  in reaching the goal by a
different  method." Fortune, he thinks, plays a large part in their success, and
for that reason he holds no method certain.

Any  method  requires  us  to  use  fortune  to the best advantage. This demands
courage  and  even  audacity. "It is better to be adventurous than cautious," he
writes,  "because  fortune  is  a woman, and if you wish to keep her under it is
necessary  to beat and ill-use her; and it is seen that she allows herself to be
mastered by the adventurous rather than by those who go to work more coldly. She
is,  therefore,  always  womanlike,  a lover of young men, because they are less
cautious,  more  violent,  and  with more audacity command her." It would appear
that  Machiavelli  recommends  courage, or at least daring, to those who wish to
succeed in great undertakings, whether the end in view is commendable or not. In
either  case, courage may improve the chances of success, and it is success that
counts. According to their notions of courage as a virtue, Plato, Aristotle, and
Aquinas  sharply  disagree  with  this,  as we have already seen. So do Kant and
Hegel.

IDEAS  "It  is  the  positive  aspect, the end and content," Hegel writes, which
"gives  significance  to  thespiritedness"of  courageous  actions.  "Robbers and
murderers  bent on crime as their end, adventurers pursuing ends planned to suit
their  own  whims,  etc.,  these  too  have  spirit enough to risk their lives."
Because their ends are either malicious or unworthy, the mettle of a brigand and
even  the  courage of a knight do not seem to Hegel to be true forms of courage.
According to Kant, "intelligence, wit, judgement, and other talents of the mind,
however  they  be  named,  or courage, resolution, perseverance, as qualities of
temperament,  are  undoubtedly  good  and  desirable in many respects; but these
gifts  of nature may also become extremely bad and mischievous if the will which
isto  make  use  of  them,  and  which,  therefore,  constitutes  what is called
character  , is not good." If a good will is necessary to make courage virtuous,
then  the  behavior  of  a  scoundrel  may look courageous, but it can only be a
counterfeit. "Without the principles of a good will," such things as the ability
to face dangers or to bear hardships, Kant thinks, "may become extremely bad . .
.  The  coolness of a villain," he adds, "not only makes him far more dangerous,
but  also  makes him more abominable in our eyes than he would have been without
it."  It may still remain true that courage can take many forms according to the
variety of objects which inspire fear, or according to the types of action which
men  find  burdensome or painful. But if the truly courageous man must always be
generally  virtuous  as  well,  then  many  of the appearances of courage do not
spring  from  genuine  virtue.  The  conception  of  virtue  as a habit adds the
criterion  of  a  settled  disposition:  even  the habitual coward may perform a
single courageous act. Nor should courage be attributed to those who by freak of
temperament  are utterly fearless. The merit of virtue overcoming fear cannot be
claimed  by  them.  IN THE GREAT political books, especially those of antiquity,
the  place  of  courage  in  the  state and in the training of citizens receives
particular attention. The constitutions of Crete and Sparta seem to make courage
the only essential virtue for the citizen.

CHAPTER  13:  COU  Plutarch,  in his life of Lycurgus, shows how "the city was a
sort  of  camp.'*  The  training  and  education of all was directed to military
valor.

"Their  very  songs  had  a  life and spirit in them that inflamed and possessed
men's  minds  with  an enthusiasm and ardour for action The . . . subject always
serious  and  moral;  most  usually, it was in praise of such men as had died in
defence  of  their  country,  or in derision of those that had been cowards; the
former  they declared happy and glorified; the life of the latter they described
as most miserable and abject."

The  result  was,  according to Plutarch, that "they were the only people in the
world  to  whom  war  gave  repose."  Both  Plato  and  Aristotle  criticize the
constitutions  of  Crete  and  Sparta  for  making  war the end of the state and
exalting courage, which isonly a part, above "the whole of virtue."

Courage  must be joined with the other virtues to make a man good, not only as a
citizen  but  as  a  man.  "Justice,  temperance, and wisdom," says the Athenian
Stranger in the Latvs "when y united with courage are better than courage only."
Furthermore,   military  courage  is  not  even  the  whole  of  courage.  While
recognizing  the need for it, Plato thinks that a wise statesman would put it in
its proper place, if men are to be

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of courage

2. The vices opposed to courage: cowardice, foolhardiness

3. The passions in the sphere of courage: fear, daring, anger, hope, despair

4. The relation and comparison of courage with other virtues

5. The motivations of courage: fame or honor, happiness, love, duty, religious faith

6. The formation or training of the
courageous man

7. The political or civic significance of courage
   7a. The courage required of citizens and statesmen: the political recognition of
   courage
   7b. Courage in relation to law and liberty
   7c. Courage in war

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  The  general  theory  of virtue and the virtues, see The
virtues most closely related to courage, see The relation of these other virtues
to courage, s

VIRTUE AND VICE 2-30.

Courage and oilier virtues in relation to happine

AND VICE 1d, 6a.

Matters relevant to the emotional aspects of cour

PAIN 8a; VIRTUE AND VICE 53.

The general consideration of moral training, see

The general consideration of civic virtue, see CI

7-7d; and for courage as a military virtue, sec

The analysis of the heroic and the conception of

ADDITIONAL READINGS Listed below are works not included in Great Boo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. T

I. Works by authors represe II. Works by authors not rep

For  the  date, place, and other facts concerning the Bibliography of Additional
Readings which fo

I.

AQUINAS.  Summa  Theologica,  PART  n-n,  QQ 123-140 F. BACON. "Of Boldness," in
Essays  MILTON.  The  Readie  and  Easie  Way  to  Establish a Free Commonwealth
DOSTOEVSKY. The Idiot

II.

THEOPHRASTUS.  The  Characters  CICERO.  De  Officiis (On Duties), in SENECA. De
Constantia  Saptentts (On the Firmness of the Wise Man) Sir Gawain and the Green
Knight

P. SIDNEY. The Countess of Pembroke s Arcadia CORNEILLE. Polyeucte

COURAGE 267

46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 189

149d  /  Philosophy  of  History, PART i, 242d243b; PART ii, 274a-275a; PART iv,
343d-344a

230b

47 GOETHE: Faust, PART n (94359505] 228b49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 321c

Si TOLSTOY. War and Peace, BK n, 77c-81b;

95a-c;  97c-106d;  BK  in,  134a-135c;  149a164a,c; BK ix, 344b-346a; 366d-367b;
369a372a; BK x, 426b; 441d-442c; 445c; 451c456a; 457a-c; 461d-463c; 467a-468a,c;
BK xi,

475b-476c; 480a-482b, 517d-518a; BK XH,

537b-538a, BK xin, 569d-570a; 586d-587c;

611c; 6l3a-c; BK xv, 627a-c

VIRTUE AND VICE.

BK  xiv,  589c-590c;  590d-604b  passim;  610cJUSTICE;  PRUDENCF; TEMPERANCE. ee
PRUDENCE  33-3)3,  $e;  TEMPERANCE  ra; ss and duty, see HAPPINESS 20(3); VIRTUE
age,  see  EMOTION  40(1); PLEASURE AND EDUCATION 4-4d; VIRTUE AND VICE 4-40(3).
TIZEN  5;  STATE  8b-8c;  VIRTUE AND VICE WAR AND PEACE ice. the hero, see HONOR
5-53,  5c.  fy  of the Western World, but relevant to the hese works are divided
into  two  groups:  nted  in  this  collection. resented in this collection. the
publication  of  the  works  cited,  consult llows the last chapter of The Great
Ideas. VAUVENARGUES. Introduction a la connatssance de Vespnt humain, PART i, en
i  MORGANN.  Essay  on  the  Dramatic  Character  of Sir John Falstaff LEOPARDI.
Essays,  Dialogues, and Thoughts STENDHAL. The Charterhouse of Parma T. CARLYLE.
On  Heroes,  Hero-  Worship  and  the  Herote  in History EMERSON. "Courage," in
Society and Solitude

T.  H. GREEN. Prolegomena to Ethics, iv CRANE. The Red Badge of Courage ROSTAND.
Cyrano de Bergerac RANK. The Myth of the Birth of the Hero

G.  W.  RUSSELL.  The  Hero in Man ROUTH. God, Man, and Epic Poetry RAGI.AN. The
Hero
