Chapter  14:  CUSTOM  AND  CONVENTION  INTRODUCTION  'HE  contrast  between  the
artificial  and the natural is generally understood in terms of the contribution
which  man does or does not make to the origin or character of a thing. Works of
art  are  man-made.  The  artificial is somehow humanly caused or contrived. The
contrast between the natural and the conventional or customary invplves the same
point  of  difference. Though customs are not, in the strict sense, made by man,
as  are  works of art, they do grow only as the result of the kind of acts which
men  perform voluntarily rather than instinctively. Similarly, conventions, like
contracts,   are   social  arrangements  or  agreements  into  which  men  enter
voluntarily. The fundamental notions with which this chapter deals are thus seen
to  be  closely related to ideas and distinctions treated in the chapters men on
ART  and  NATURE.  For  example,  the  distinc- of tion between human action and
production, or sen doing and making, helps us to understand how the conventional
and  the  artificial  differ  from  one another as opposites of the natural. Art
involves  voluntary  making.  Customs  result  from whi voluntary doing. In both
cases,  the  distinction  eve  between the voluntary and the instinctive mig the
latter  representing  the  natural  seems to to be presupposed. org A third term
habit  is traditionally associ- the ated with the consideration of the voluntary
wor  and  the  instinctive.  Like  these others, it seems ven to have a critical
bearing  on  the  discussion  of  cus  custom  and  art. Aristotle, for example,
conceives  art  as  an  intellectual  virtue,  that  is, a THE habit of mind, an
acquired skill. For Hume abi the customary and the habitual are almost the same.
Whether  they  are to be identified or are only connected causally, the relation
of  habit  to custom not only throws some light als on the nature of custom, but
also  calls  our  at-  for  tention  to the fact that the words "custom" ual and
"convention" cannot be treated simply as synonyms. In the tradition of the great
books,  the word "convention" has at least two meanings, in only one of which is
it  synonymous  with  "custom."  When  "convention"  is used to signify habitual
social  practices  it  is,  for the most part, interchangeable with "custom." In
this  significance,  the  notion  of  convention,  like  that  of  custom, is an
extension of the idea of habit. What habit is in the behavior of the individual,
customary  or  conventional  conduct is in the behavior of the social group. The
other  meaning of "convention" does not connote the habitual in social behavior,
but stresses rather the voluntary as opposed to the instinctive origin of social
institutions,  arrangets,  or  practices.  For  example,  different sorts family
organization  are conventional in the se that at different times or in different
communities  men  have  set up their domestic arrangements in different ways. In
each  case  they tend to perpetuate the particular institutions ch they or their
ancestors  originated.  Whatr  is conventional about social institutions ht have
been  otherwise,  if men had seen fit invent and adopt different schemes for the
anization of their social life. This indicates connection between the two senses
of  the  d  "convention,"  for  all  customs  are  contional  in origin, and all
conventions  become  tomary  when perpetuated. FACT THAT men can depart from, as
well  as de by, their conventions that they can transgress as well as conform to
custom  seems  to  indicate  that  custom and convention belong to the sphere of
human  freedom.  Yet  there  is  o a sense in which custom is a constraining ce,
which reduces the tendency of individs to differ from one another, and which has
CHAPTER  14:  CUSTOM AND the effect of moulding them alike and regimenting their
lives.  The  repressive effect of custom can be seen, according to Freud, in the
neurotic  disorders  from  which men surfer when their instinctive impulses come
into  conflict  with  "accepted custom." Discussing the influence of custom upon
the  developing  individual,  he  says  that  "its  ordinances,  frequently  too
stringent,  exact  a great deal from him, much self-restraint, much renunciation
of  instinctual  gratification."  It  becomes,  therefore,  one  of  the aims of
psychoanalytic  therapy to release the individual from his bondage to custom, or
at  least  to  make  him conscious of the way in which certain desires have been
submerged  or  distorted,  and  his whole personality shaped, by the constraints
which  the  mores  and  taboos  of the tribe have imposed upon him. Considered m
relation  to  society,  custom  also  seems  to  exercise a conservative, if not
repressive effect. Established customs tend to resist change. They are sometimes
thought   to  impede  progress.  But  to  the  extent  that  they  conserve  the
achievements  of  the  past,  they may be indispensable to progress because they
provide  the  substance  of  what  we  call  "tradition."  A  passage in Bacon's
Advancement of Learning illustrates these apparently contrary effects of custom.

Over-emphasis  upon  either  antiquity  or  novelty  seems to Bacon a disease of
learning,  or an obstacle to advancement. "Antiquity enits vieth there should be
new  additions,"  he  writes,  "and novelty cannot be content to add but it must
deface."  If  custom  tends  to  support  antiquity against novelty, it may also
encourage  inventions  or  discoveries  which  genuinely  enhance  the tradition
without defacing it. "Antiquity deserveth that reverence," Bacon says, "that men
should  make  a  stand thereupon and discover what is the best way; but when the
discovery  is  well  taken,  then  to  make  progression."  As  the preserver of
antiquity,  custom  thus  appears to afford a basis for progress. One other fact
about customs which most commentators from Herodotus to Montaigne and Freud have
observed is their variety and variability. Customs differ from time to time, and
from  place  to  place.  But  this  diversity  and  variation in custom does not
necessarily  mean  CONVENTION that no uniformity at all exists in the actions of
men.  "Were  there no uniformity in human actions," Hume points out, it would be
impossible  "to  collect  any general observations concerning mankind." At least
enough  uniformity  is  found,  in  his  opinion,  for  it  to  be  "universally
acknowledged that human nature remains still the same." To whatever extent human
behavior  is  purely  natural  or instinctive, it is common to allmembers of the
species,  and does not, like customary conduct, vary remarkably from one part of
the  human  race to another, or from generation to generation. The diversity and
vanation of customs seems therefore to be of their essence and to show that they
are  both  man-made  and voluntary in origin. "If they were not devices of men,"
Augustine  writes,  "they would not be different in different nations, and could
not  be  changed  among  particular nations." The distinction between nature and
convention can be formulated, therefore, partly in terms of the contrast between
the constant and the variable, and partly in terms of the difference between the
instinctive  and  the  voluntary.  The early Greeks had an apt way of expressing
this.  As Aristotle phrases their insight, they referred to the natural as "that
which everywhere has the same force and does not exist by people's thinking this
or  that,"  as,  for  example,  "fire  burns  both  here  and  in  Persia."  The
conventional  and  those  things which are "not by nature but by human enactment
are not everywhere the same." The laws of Persia differ from the laws of Greece,
and  in  Greece  or in Persia, they change from time to time. THE VARIABILITY of
custom in contrast to the constancy or uniformity of nature puts the distinction
between  nature  and  convention  at the service of the skeptic. One form of the
skeptical   attack   upon  natural  law,  universal  moral  standards,  and  the
objectivity of truth or beauty consists in making custom the only measure of the
acceptability  of human actions or judgments. To say, for example, as Hume does,
that  the  connection  which  the mind seems to make between cause and effect is
based on custom rather than reason, has the skeptical effect which Hume intends.
It  substitutes  the  arbitrary  for  the  rational. It dispossesses reason as a
source  of  either  the  validity  or  the  intelligibility  of  our conclusions
concerning cause and effect.

As  the chapters on KNOWLEDGE and OPINION indicate, the skeptical argument takes
other  forms.  The  reduction  of  all  human  judgments  to  opinion  makes the
differences  between  men, in either action or thought, unresolvablc by argument
or  debate.  One  opinion  can  predominate over another only by force or by the
weight  of  numbers.  When  it predominates by weight of numbers, it prevails by
custom or convention. It is the opinion which the majority have agreed upon at a
given  time or place. To settle every controversy about what men should think or
do  by  counting  heads  is  to  hold that everything is a matter of opinion and
purely  conventional.  Whether  the  skeptic reduces everything to opinion or to
convention,  he achieves the same effect. What he means by calling everything an
"opinion'*  or a "convention" is equally inimical to reason. In either case, the
willful or arbitrary isenthroned in reason's place and only force can be finally
decisive.  The  two  ideasopinion  and  convention seem to be corollaries of one
another.  Both  imply a kind of relativity. Opinion normally suggests relativity
to  the  individual, custom or convention relativity to the social group. Either
may be involved in the origin of the other. The individual may form his opinions
under  the  pressure  of  prevailing customs of thought or action; the customary
beliefs  or  practices  of a society or culture may, and usually do, result from
opinions which have come to prevail.

The  Greek  sophists,  we  learn  from  the  dialogues of Plato, appealed to the
distinction  between  nature  and  convention  and  to  the  distinction between
knowledge  and opinion in exactly the same way. They used the notions of opinion
and  convention with equal force in their efforts to question absolute standards
of  conduct  and  the objectivity or universality of truth. The most familiar of
ail  the sophistical sayingsthe remark attributed to Protagoras that "man is the
measure  of  all things" is interpreted by both Plato and Aristotle to mean that
what  men  wish  to think or do determines for than what is true or right. Man's
will  governs his reason, and .convention, or the agreement of individual wills,
decides what is acceptable to the group.

S  In  the  Gorgtas, which is named after another of the leading sophists of the
day,  Plato puts into the mouth of Calhcles the sophistic position that there is
no  law  or  standard of justice except the rule of the stronger. Insisting that
"convention  and  nature  are  generally at variance with one another," Calhcles
attempts  to show that all of Socrates' efforts to discover an absolute standard
of justice come to naught, because he cannot help but resort "to the popular and
vulgar  notions  of  right,  which  are  not natural, but conventional." As they
appear  in  Plato's dialogues, the sophobviously impressed by the kind of inists
arc  formation  which fills the History of Herodotus information about the great
diversity of human beliefs and practices which anyone could discover for himself
if  he  traveled,  as  Herodotus  did,  from  people  to  people, obsetvmg their
institutions and collecting their legends. Herodotus himself does not explicitly
draw  the  skepyet  his own suspended judgtical conclusion, ment on many matters
betokens  a  turn  of  mind made cautious by the impact of contrary opinions and
conflicting  customs.  In  the  Hellenistic period when the main stream of Greek
philosophy  divides  into  a  number  of Roman schools of thought, the skeptical
position  receives  what is perhaps its fullest and most explicit statement. But
in  the  writings  of Lucian and Pyrrho, to take two examples, it is not so much
the  conflict  of  customs  as  it is what Lucian calls "the warfare of creeds,"
which  occasions  universal  doubt. Yet whatever the source of doubt, Pyrrhonism
states  the  traditional  denials of the skeptic in their most extreme form. The
senses  are  entirely untrustworthy. Reason is both impotent and self-deceiving.
Men  possess  no  knowledge  or  science.  No truth is self-evident; none can be
demonstrated.  THB  CRITICAL TEMPER of the Greek sophists, and of an observer of
men and manners like Herodotus, reappears later in the questionings of Montaigne
sharpened somewhat, perhaps, by his acquaintance with the Roman skeptics. In his
case,  perhaps  more  than  any  other, it is the implicationTh pf custom which,
everywhere  expatiated  on  in  his  Essays,  give them their skeptical tone Not
himself  a  traveler  in  distant  CHAPTER  14:  CUSTOM  AND CON parts,Montaigne
traverses the world of time and space by reading. He becomes conversant with the
strange  customs  of  the  aborigines  and  of the Orient through the reports of
returned  explorers.  He  culls from the historians and geographers of antiquity
every  difference  in  custom  which  their  books  set  forth as fact or fable.
Montaigne's  insatiable  appetite for collecting and comparing customs is not an
aimless  fascination  on  his  part  with  the  spectacle  of  human variety. It
steadfastly  leads him to the conclusion which is for htm the only one possible.
Since every belief or practice can be paired with its opposite in the customs of
some  other  time  or  place,  no  belief  or practice can demand unqualified or
universal  assent. "There is nothing," he writes, "which custom does not, or may
not  do;  and  therefore, with every good reason it is that Pindar calls her the
ruler  of  the  world."  To say, as Montaigne does, that "the taste for good and
evil  depends  in good part upon the opinion we have of them" and that "everyone
is  well  or  ill  at ease, according as he so finds himself," amounts to saying
that  all moral judgments are matters of opinion, either individual or customary
in  origin.  Beauty,  too, is a matter of taste. "We fancy its forms," Montaigne
thinks,  "according  to  our  own  appetite  and  liking/' As may be seen in the
chapter  on  BEAUTY,  Montaigne  assembles an abundance of evidence to show that
standards  of  beauty  vary with different peoples. The tastes or preferences of
one group are as unaccountable as they are frequently revolting to another.

Even  in  the field of speculative thought about the nature of things, Montaigne
regards  the things men hold to be true as nothing more than prevailing opinions
the  cultural  conventions  of a time or place. "We have no other level of truth
and reason," he declares, "than the example and idea of the opinions and customs
of  the  place  wherein we live: there is always the perfect religion, there the
most  perfect  government,  there  the  most exact and accomplished usage of all
things."  Of  all  human deceptions or impostures, none is worse than that which
flows from a man's unwillingness to qualify every remark with the admission that
this is the way it seems to me. In " Montaigne's eyes, there is no greater folly
in  the  world"  than  the failure to recognize that VENTION we reduce truth and
falsity "to the measure of our capacity and the bounds of our sufficiency." When
new  ideas  or  the  strange  beliefs  of others at first seem incredible simply
because  they  arc  not  our  own,  "we shall find that it is rather custom than
knowledge  that  takes away their strangeness."For his own part, Montaigne makes
his  "emblem"  the  question,  "What  do  I  know?"  This,  he says, sums up his
Pyrrhonian  philosophy. ACCORDING TO the modern social scientist who claims that
custom  is  the  ultimate  standard  of  conduct  and  that it provides the only
criterion  of  moral  judgment, no questions can be raised about the goodness or
evil  of  particular  customs.  The  customs  of  one people cannot be judged by
another, at least not objectively or impartially, for those who judge must do so
on  the  basis of their own customs. Since there is no arbiter above conflicting
customs  to  say  which  is right, a particular custom has validity only for the
group in which it prevails. Within that social group the character or conduct of
its  individual members is measured by conformity to the prevailing customs. The
descriptive  science of sociology or comparative ethnology thus tends to replace
the  normative  science  of  ethics or moral philosophy. The only scientifically
answerable  questions about human conduct take the form of "How do men behave ?"
6r "How have they acted individually or in groups ?" but not "How should they ?"
The study of morality, as in Sumner's Folkwaysk becomes a study of the mores how
the  customs  which measure conduct develop and dominate; or, as in the writings
of  Freud, it becomes a study of how the individual is psychologically formed or
deformed  by  the  mores of his tribe and culture, according to the way in which
the  growing  child  reacts to the pressures which the community imposes through
parental  discipline.  With these views, many philosophers and theologians, both
ancient  and  modern, take issue. But their opposing doctrine seldom goes so far
as to deny that morality has certain conventional aspects. In arguing that there
arc  "no innate practical principles," Locke, for example, like Montaigne, cites
instances of contradictory " customs to show that there is scarce that principle
of  morality  to  be  named,  or rule of virtue THE GREAT to be thought on , . .
which  is not, somewhere or other, slighted and condemned by the general fashion
of  whole  societies  of men, governed by practical opinions and rules of living
quite opposite toothers."

But  Locke  does  not  leave  this  observation  of  the  diversity  of  customs
unqualified. He goes on to assert that "though perhaps, by the different temper,
education,  fashion, maxims, or interest of different sorts of men, it fell out,
that what was thought praiseworthy in one place, escaped not censure in another;
and  so  in  different societies, virtues and vices were changed: yet, as to the
main, they for the most part kept the same everywhere. For, since nothing can be
more natural than to encourage with esteem and reputation that wherein every one
finds  his  advantage,  and  to  blame and discountenance the contrary; it is no
wonder  that  esteem and discredit, virtue and vice, should, in a great measure,
everywhere  correspond  with the unchangeable rule of right and wrong, which the
law  of  God hath established. . . . Even in the corruption of manners, the true
boundaries  of the law of nature, which ought to be the rule of virtue and vice,
were pretty well preferred."

For Ix)cke, then, as for many others, there appear to be, underlying the variety
of  customs,  moral  principles of universal validity that draw their truth from
the  nature  of man which represents a constant and common factor throughout the
diversity  of cultures. Accordingly, it would seem to follow that just as habits
are  modifications  of  instinct  or  developments  of  the  individual's native
capacities  for  action,  so  customs  are  conventional elaborations of what is
natural  to  man  as a social animal. On this theory, the conventional cannot be
understood except by reference to the natural, /., the nature of man or society.

THE  VIEW  THAT  conventions have a natural basis is most readily exemplified by
Aristotle's  theory  of  natural and legal (or conventional) justice, and by the
teaching  of  Aquinas  concerning  natural  and positive law. For the Greeks the
legal and the conventional are almost identical, so that it is a kind of justice
rather  than  a  kind of law which Aristotle calls "natural." Roman philosophers
like  Cicero,  and Roman jurists like Gaius and Ulpian, make what seems to be an
IDEAS  equivalent d.*vtion in terms of law rather than justice. In his analysis,
Aquinas  follows  the  Latin,  not  the  Greek  vocabulary.  The Roman system of
jurisprudence,  Gibbon  tells  us,  distinguished  between  those laws which are
"positive  institutions"  and those which "reason prescribes, the laws of nature
and nations." The former are man-made the "result of custom and prejudice." This
holds  true  of  both  written  and  unwritten laws, although only the unwritten
precepts  are  now  usually  called  "customary  laws." These customary laws are
positive in the sense that they are humanly instituted or enacted posited by the
will  of  the  legislator  rather  than  merely  discovered by the reason of the
philosopher.  They  are  conventional  in  the  sense  that  they represent some
voluntary  agreement  on  the  part of the members of the community they govern,
whether  that  consist in obeying the edicts of the emperor or in giving consent
to  the  enactments  of the senate. So far as it is conventional, the law of one
community  differs  from  another; and within the history of a single community,
the  positive  law  changes  from time to time. But such bodies of law, "however
modified  by  accident  or custom," the Roman jurists, Gibbon says, conceived as
"drawn  from the rule of right." The fact that "reason prescribes" this rule was
their  explanation  of  certain common elements which all bodies of positive law
seem  to  contain.  The  principles  underlying  all codes of civil law, whether
discovered  directly  by reason or drawn inductively, as Grotius later suggests,
from  the  comparative  study of diverse legal systems, comprise the precepts of
what  the Romans, and later Aquinas, call "natural law." Thus these writers seem
to re-affirm, though in somewhat different language, Aristotle's point that what
is  naturally just is the same for all men everywhere and always, while the laws
of  Greece  and  Persia  represent  diverse  conventional  determinations of the
universal principles of justice. The theory of natural right and natural law, as
expressed  in the writings of Hobbes, Locke, and Kant, as well as in the ancient
and  mediaeval  tradition,  is, of course, more fully treated in the chapters on
JUSTICE  and  LAW.  But  one  example  of  the  distinction  between natural and
conventional justice may be instructive here.

CHAFFER  14:  CUSTOM AND CO Aquinas conceives positive rules as "determinations"
of, rather than "deductions" from, natural law. He treats such precepts as "Thou
shah  not  kill"  and "Thou shalt not steal" as conclusions that reason can draw
deductively  from  the first principle of natural law, which is sometimes stated
in  the  form  of the command: Do good, harm no one, and render to each his oum.
Because these precepts are the prescriptions of reason rather than enactments of
the  state,  they  can  be  interpreted as declaring that murder and larceny are
always and everywhere unjust. But what sort of killing and taking of what is not
one's  own  shall  be  defined  as  murder and theft; and how offenders shall be
tried,  judged,  and  punished  these  are  matters which natural justice or the
precepts  of  natural  law  leave open for determination by the positive laws of
each  community,  according  to  its own constitution and its local customs. The
theory  thus  exemplified,  of  the  relation  between  conventional and natural
justice, or between positive and natural law, applies to moral rules and ethical
standards  generally.  For  the  same  reason that a positive law which violates
natural  justice  cannot  be called "just" even though it is harmonious with the
customs  of  the  community,  so  no rule of conduct, however much it represents
prevailing  custom, can be approved as morally right if it violates the right as
reason  sees  it.  The  defenders of natural law, which is also sometimes called
"the  law  of reason," proclaim the existence of an absolute standard, above the
diversity  and  conflict  of  customs,  by  which  their  soundness is measured.
Conflicting  ethical doctrines raise many issues concerning what it is right for
men  to  do  or  good  for  them  to seek; but the moralists at least agree that
morality is based on reason or nature. For them the facts of human nature or the
intuitions  of  reason  will  ultimately decide the points in issue. However for
apart  Plato  and  Aristotle,  Aquinas  and Hegel, Kant and Mill may be in their
conceptions or analyses of the right and the good, they stand together, at least
negatively,  on  the  question  of  how  their  disputes can be resolved: not by
appealing  to  the  mores of the tribe, not by looking to the conventions of the
community as a measure, not by letting the customs of the majority decide.

NVENTION  The  deepest  of  all  moral issues therefore exists between those who
think  that  morality  somehow derives from nature or reason and those who, like
the  ancient  sophists  or  Montaigne  or  Freud,  find its source in custom and
convention. According to the side a man takes on this issue, he does or does not
believe  it  possible  to  discover  standards independent of custom, thereby to
judge  whether  customs  are  good,  bad,  or indifferent. On one belief, public
manners  are  conventional  determinations  of  moral  principles  or  they  are
sometimes violations of them, just as positive laws are either determinations or
violations  of  natural law. On the other belief, the individual may be approved
or  condemned  for  conforming  to  or transgressing the manners or mores of his
group;  but  those  manners  or mores, whether they are liked or disliked by the
individual,  are  above  any  tenable,  objective  criticism. The controversy in
jurisprudence and morality between the naturalists or rationalists who appeal to
man's  nature  or reason, and the positivists who hold that human customs cannot
be appealed from, parallels a controversy in the theory of knowledge or science.
The  parallel  issue, considered at greater length in the chapters on HYPOTHESIS
and  PRINCIPLE,  can be stated by the question whether the foundation of science
even of such sciences as logic and mathematics consists of postulates or axioms.
Axioms,  like  the  precepts of natural law, are supposed to have a universality
derived  from  the  nature  of  human  reason.  They  are  self-evident  truths,
compelling  assent.  Postulates, on the contrary, are like rules of positive law
voluntarily  accepted  assumptions  which,  when agreed upon by the experts in a
certain  science,  become  its  conventional  basis.  In  science as in law, the
positivists  recognize  nothing  beyond  the  agreement of men to determine what
shall  be  taken  for granted as true or just. THE DIFFERENCE between nature and
convention  also  enters  into  the  traditional  discussion  of two of the most
characteristic  activities  of  man:  speech  and  political association. No one
disputes  whether  the faculty of speech is natural to man. It is as natural for
man  to  speak as for dogs to bark or birds to sing. But the question is whether
any  human  language,  having  a  certain  vocabulary  and syntax, is natural or
conventional.  The  answer  seems  to  be  dictated  at once by the facts of the
matter. Human languages exist or have existed in great number and diversity, and
those which still endure have gradually developed and are undoubtedly subject to
further change. Hence, according to the traditional understanding of the natural
and   the  conventional,  these  various  tongues  must  represent  conventional
languages originally invented by this human group or that,perpetuated by custom,
altered  by  the  conventions  of  usage.  In  contrast,  the  expressive sounds
instinctively  made  by  other animals show themselves to be natural by the fact
that  they  are  common to all members of a species and do not change as long as
the species endures.

Nevertheless,  as  the  chapter  on LANGUAGE indicates, the writers of rhc great
hooks consider the hypothesis of a natural human language.

The  Old  Testament  story  of  the  Tower  of Babel is sometimes interpreted as
implying  the  existence of one language for all men before God confounded their
speech  and  diversified  their tongues. The story of Adam's giving names to the
various  species  of  plants  and animals in the Garden of Eden is also cited by
those  who  think there can be natural as well as conventional signs. In Plato's
Cratylus  the  attempt  is  made to discover the natural names for things, or at
least  to  discern  some  natural basis for the words of a conventional language
like  Greek.  These  who  reject  the hypothesis of a single human language from
which  all  others  have  developed bydiversification,orwhoregardapurely natural
language as impossible in the very nature of the case, sometimes acknowledge the
possibility  of  certain  common  elements  principles  of  syntax, if not words
present  in all human languages. The discovery of the common rules of speech was
the  object of the speculative grammarians in the Middle Ages, and of those who,
like  Arnauld  and  others,  later  tried to formulate a "universal grammar." On
their  view,  all languages, even if they are conventional as written or spoken,
may  have  the  same natural basis in the fact that they are all used to express
what  men  can naturally perceive or think As in the case of language, so in the
case  of  so- ciety, the question is whether the family and the state are wholly
natural,  wholly  conventional,  or  partly  one  and  partly  the  other- their
institutions  being erected by choice and custom upon a natural basis. And as in
the  case  of language, here too the great books do not, for the most part, give
either  of  the  extreme  answers.  They  do  not say that the state is entirely
natural,  that  it  is  the expression of human instinct as the bee-hive and the
ant-mound  are  instinctive  formations.  Nor  do  they  say  that  the state is
completely  conventional,  that  it  comes  into existence only as the result of
voluntary  association  on  the  part  of  men contracting to live together in a
political  community.  While  Aristotle  says that "man is by nature a political
animal,"  and  that  the  state  is,  therefore, "a creation of nature, "he also
distinguishes  between  the  ways in which men and other animals are gregarious.
Unlike  the association of animals, which he attributes to instinct, the society
of men rests on reason and speech. "Man is the only animal," he writes, "endowed
with  the  gift  of  speech  .intended  to  set  forth the . . expedient and the
inexpedient,  and  therefore likewise the just and the unjust." Because of these
things,  cities  differ from one another, as bee-hives or ant-mounds do not. The
diveisity  of states rep resents for Aristotle a deliberate inventiveness on the
part  of  reason  and an exercise of free choice certainly insofar as states are
politically constituted, each with its own constitution. Aristotle's remark that
while  "a  social  impulse is implanted in all men by nature," yet "he who first
founded  the state was the greatest of benefactors," may look selfcontradictory;
but its two parts can be read as quite consistent with one another, if the first
is taken as signifying the natural basis of the state (in a social impulse), and
the  second  as saying that a certain convention (a constitution) is required to
shape  that  impulse  before  any state is actually established. As Aristotle is
sometimes  interpreted  to uphold the theory that the state is entirely natural,
so  Hobbes,  Locke,  and  Rousseau  are  often  read as maintaining the opposite
extreme that it is entirely conventional. The extreme interpretation is based on
the  sharpness  with  which  each  of them distinguishes between men living in a
state of nature and in a state of civil society.

CHAPTER  14:  CUSTOM AND Though they differ among themselves in their exposition
of  these  two conditions of man, they seem to agree that for men to pass from a
state  of  nature,  whether  hypothetical  or  historical,  in which men live in
anarchy  or  at  least  in  isolation,  it is necessary for them to enter into a
contract or compact with one another. Since this social contract isthe original,
or  originating,  convention  by  which  the  commonwealth  or  civil society is
established,  it would seem to follow that, on their view, the state is entirely
a product of convention, and in no way natural. Yet Hobbes, Locke, and Rousseau,
each  in  his  own  way,  add a qualification in favor of the naturalness of the
state,  just  as Aristotle qualifies his remark that "the state is a creation of
nature"  by  piaismg the man "who first founded the state." The exponents of the
social  contract theory of the state's origin find m the nature of man or in his
reason  an  instinct,  a  need,  or  a  law  which  impels  or  bids him to seek
association  with  others for the sake of advantages which he cannot enjoy apart
from civil society. This suffices to affirm the existence of a natural basis for
the convention or contract which establishes the state. These appaiently opposed
theories of what is natural and what conventional about the state thus appear to
approach  each  other,  though  one  starts  from  an  emphasis  on  the state's
naturalness,  the  other  from its conventional origin. The whole problem is, of
course, further treated in the chapters on FAMILY and STATE; but one point which
the  foregoing  discussion  suggests  receives  special  consideration  in still
another  chapter.  The  point  concerns  the  relation  between  the  idea  of a
constitution  and the idea of a social contract. Both are conceived as the basic
or  primary convention which establishes the state. The question whether the two
ideas  are  interchangeable  or  only  analogous  is  examined in the chapter on
CONSTITUTION.

is  BOTH  a cause and an effect of habit. The habits of the individual certainly
reflect  the customs of the community in which he lives; and in turn, the living
customs of any social group get their vitality from the habits of its members. A
custom  which  does  not  command general compliance is as dead as a language no
CONVENTION  longer  spoken  or a law no longer observed. This general compliance
consists  in  nothing  more  than  a  certain  conformity  among  the  habits of
individuals.

The continuity between custom and statute as parts or phases of the positive law
rests  upon  the relation of both to habit. "Custom," according to Aquinas, "has
the  force  of  a  law,  abolishes law, and is the interpreter of law" precisely
because  it  operates  through  the  habits of the people. "By repeated external
actions,"  such  as  produce  a custom, "the inward movement of the will and the
conceptions  of  the  reason  are  most  reveahngly declared," and, according to
Aquinas,  "all  law  proceeds from the reason and will of the lawgiver." The law
which  a  prince  or  a people enacts, to become effective as social regulation,
must  develop  a  particular habit of conduct in many individuals. Then and only
then  does  a new enactment obtain the full force of law. To remain effective it
must  continue to have the support of "the customs of the country." Without that
support  it may be a law on the books but not m practice, for the authority of a
law  cannot  long  prevail against a contrary custom, except through a degree of
coercion  so  oppressive as to produce rebellion. That is also why the customary
or  unwritten  rule usually the primitive form of positive law is less flexible,
less amenable to change or modification. Custom is a conservative factor. "There
is  nothing  more  difficult to take in hand," writes Machiavelli, nothing "more
perilous  to  conduct, or more uncertain m its success, than to take the lead in
the  introduction  of  a  new order of things. The innovator has for enemies all
those  who  have  done  well under the old conditions, and lukewarm defenders in
those  who  may  do  well  under the new." Just as custom may either support the
written  law or render it ineffective, so custom works in opposite directions as
a  social  force.  It  is  both a factor of cohesion and of division among men a
cause  of  what  is  called "social solidarity" and a barrier separating peoples
from  one  another.  When  the  Athenians  refuse  to  ally  themselves with the
Persians, they chide the Spartans, according to Herodotus, for fearing that they
"might  make terms with the barbarian." For all the gold on earth, they tell the
Spartan envoys, they could not "take part with the The Federalists, a Medes." To
do so would betray "our common of the thirteen Amer brotherhood with the Greeks,
our  common feasibility on the g language, the altars and sacrifices of which we
ready  existed.  "Prov all partake, and the common character which give this one
connec we bear.'* "toone united people The barbarians or the gentiles to use the
the  same  ancestors,  traditional names for aliens or foreigners are professing
the same excluded by a social, not a geographic, bound- same principles of g ary
line,  the  line  drawn  between  those  who their manners and cu share a set of
customs  and all outsiders. When the Those who today ad stranger is assimilated,
the  group does not adopt union cannot similar him; he adopts the customs of the
community,  already  in  existence The very word "community" implies a multi- if
the separate stat tudc having much in common. More important the social cohesion
than  the  land  they occupy are the customs they subsequently develop share. of
universal customs

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The distinction between nature and convention: its application to the origin of the
state and of language

2. The origin, development, and transmission of customs

3. The conflict of customs: their variation from place to place

4. The change of customs: their variation from time to time

5. Custom and convention in the moral order
   5a. The conventional    determination of moral judgments: the moral evaluation of
   conventions
   5b. The effect of custom
   on the training and character of men

6. Custom" in relation to law
   6a. Constitutions, social contracts, positive laws, and manners as conventions
   6b. The force of custom with respect to law

7. Custom
in social life
   7a. Custom as unifying a community
   7& Custom as a barrier between communities
   7b. Custom as determining economic needs or standards
   7c. The influence of custom on the liberty of the individual

8. Custom in relation to order and progress:      the factors of tradition and invention

9. The bearing of custom on thought
   9a. Custom as a source of opinion and belief: its influence on judgments of beauty
   9b. The conventionality of truth: postulation, choice among hypotheses

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other  discussions of the distinction between nature and
convention,  and  for  t of related distinctions, see ART 2c; HABIT i, 7; NATURE
2a-2c.  The  consideration  of  the natural and the conventional in language and
societ

LANGUAGE  2-2b;  NATURE 2b, 50; SIGN AND SYMBOL la-1f; STATE jb-jd. Applications
of the distinction between nature and convention in law and jur

JUSTICE 6a-6b, 93, loa; LAW 4-4ThTh, 5c, yc; and for the relation of law to

see HABIT 7; LAW 5f.

The  discussion  of  custom  as a conservative force in relation to progress, se
HISTORY 4b; PROGRESS 43, 5,

The bearing of custom and convention on the issues of morality, see GOOD AND

NATURE 53; OPINION 6a; RELATION 6c; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 70.

The relativity of truth to the customs of the time and place, and for the th

foundations of science are conventional, see HYPOTHESIS 3; KNOWLEDGE 40, 5

3c;  PRINCIPLE  3c(2),  5;  RELATION  6b;  TRUTH 7-7k UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 7
Matters relevant to the influence of custom on taste or judgments of beauty,

NATURE 5d; RELATION 6c; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 70.

The significance of nature and custom in the sphere of economic activity, se

WEALTH i, lob.

ce, BK vi, 247a-248a; d; 309b-c; 313d-314a; BK x, 403a-405a; BK i, 645a-646c 2a;
886b-887a  1c  Therapy,  125a-126d  /  d;  864a-865a 452c-453a / New Introtruth:
postulatioo, ses , 8Sd-86d; 107d-109a / Theaetetus, 525c-528c nalytics, BK i, CH
3  hysics, BK iv, CH 5-6 ions of the Heavenly T i, 65c -c; 46b-d;240c-246a; c-d;
276b-278a;  281a-284c;  CT  n,  sc u [254-257Th Learning, 57d-58b / PH 41 109c-d
PART  u,  46b-c  1a-184b  esp 182b HI, 118a-119a Electricity, 362c-d ight, PREF,
2b-c  b-886a  ,  EPILOGUE i, 645a-b he examination y, see FAMILY i ; isprudence,
see custom and habit, e CHANGE i2b; EVIL 33, 6d; eory that the c; OPINION 3. see
BEAUTY 5; e NATURE 5b;

CHAPTER 14: CUSTOM AND CONV

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booths of

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These w

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the pu

the Bibliography of Additional Readings, which follows

I.

F. BACON. "Of Custom and Education," in Essays

MONTESQUIEU.  Persian  Letters  HUME.  Of  Some Remarkable Customs A. SMITH. The
Theory  of  Moral  Sentiments,  PART  v STERNE. A Sentimental Journey HEGEL. The
Phenomenology of Mind, v (B) MELVILLE. Typee

. Omoo DOSTOEVSKY. A Raw Youth FREUD "Civilized" Sexual Morality and Modern

Nervousness

. Totem and Taboo

II.

HORACE. Satires JUVENAL. Satires

Beowulf

Vdlsung  Saga  SPENSER.  The Faerie Queene GRACIAN y MORALES. The Art of Worldly
Wisdom

BROWNE.  Hydnotaphia  PEP  vs.  Diary LE SAGE. The Adventures of Gil Bias DEFOE.
Moll  Flanders  RICHARDSON.  Pamela  CHESTERFIELD.  Letters to His Son VOLTAIRE.
"Customs . . .

Usages," in A Philosophical Dictionary

SMOLLETT. The Expedition of Humphry Clinker

GOLDSMITH.  The  Citizen of the World , She Stoops to Conquer BENTHAM. A Comment
on the Commentaries, SECT

13-20

SHERIDAN.  The School for Scandal LAMB. On the Custom of Hissing at the Theatres
AUSTEN.  Pride and Prejudice MANZONI. The Betrothed T. CARLYLE. Sartor Resartus,
BK r

LBRMONTOV, A Hero of Our Own Times

ENTION  the Western World, but relevant to the orks are divided into two groups:
ed  in this collection. sented in this collection. blication of the works cited,
consult  the  last  chapter of The Great Ideas. SAVIGNY. Vom Berufunserer Ut fur
Gesetsgebung und Rechtswissenschaft

.

Jural Relations GOGOL. Taras Bulba

.  Dead Souls DICKENS. Bleaf( House THACKERAY. The History of Henry Esmond, Esq.
LOTZE,  Microcosmos,  BK  vi,  CH 3 FLAUBERT. Madame Bovary TROLLOPE. Barchester
Towers  DAUDET.  Letters  from  My  Mill  BAGEHOT.  Physics  and Politics TYLOR.
Primitive  Culture  H.  JAMES. Daisy Miller MEREDITH. The Egoist L. STEPHEN. The
Science of Ethics MAINE. Ancient Law

. Lectures on the Early History of Institutions

Dissertations on Early Law and Customs

.  LANG.  Custom  and  Myth WUNDT. EthlCS, PART I, CH 3 FRAZER. The Golden Bough
TARDE.  The  Laws  of  Imitation  KOVALEVSKY. Modern Customs and Ancient Laws of
Russia  DUGUIT.  LV/fl/,  le droit objectifet la lot positive MANN. Buddenbrooty
WESTERMARCK.  The  Origin and Development of the Moral Ideas SUMNER. Folkways T.
VEBLEN.  The  Vested  Interests and the State of the Industrial Arts, CH 2 T. S.
ELIOT.  "Tradition  and  the  Individual  Talent,"  in  The  Sacred  Wood DEWEY.
Reconstruction in Philosophy, CH i, 5

Human Nature and Conduct, PART I-H

.  S. LEWIS. Babbitt UNDSET. Kristin Lavransdatter VINOGRADOFF, Custom and Right
MALINOWSKI. Crime and Custom in Savage Society t

The Sexual Life of Savages

. DIAMOND. Primitive Law
