Chapter 1 5: DEFINIT INTRODUCTION T-NEFINITION has been variously defined JLx in
the tradition of the great books. These diverse conceptions of what a definition
is raise many issues.

At one extreme, writers like Hobbes look upon definition as nothing more than an
attempt to say what a word means how it has been or is being used. At the other,
writers like Aquinas regard definition as that act of the mind by which it
expresses the nature of a thing or formulates its essence. In one technical view
associated with the name of Aristotle, to define is to state the genus and
differentia by which the species of a thing is constituted. In another theory of
definition advanced by Locke and others, any combination of traits which
distinguishes one class or kind of thing from another defines the character
common to all members of that class. In still another view, to be found in.
Spinoza, definition consists in giving the cause or genesis of a thing, in
saying how the thing originated or was produced. Sometimes definition through
causes employs the final rather than the efficient or productive cause, and
characterizes the thing by the end it naturally serves. And sometimes, as with
William James, definitions simply express the purposes or interests which we
have in mind when we classify things to suit ourselves. In the tradition of the
liberal arts of grammar, rhetoric, and logic, these various conceptions of
definition are connected with controversies concerning the power and activity of
the human mind, the relation of language to thought, the structure of science
or, more generally, the nature of knowledge, and the constitution of reality,
with particular reference to the existence of universals and individuals and
their relation to one another, x These connections appear in the thought of ION
Aristotle and Spinoza, Hobbes and Locke, Aquinas and William fames. Their views
of the way in which definitions should be constructed or their conceptions of
the function of definitions determine and reflect lines of agreement and
opposition on many other matters. The use of works of mathematics definitions in
the great and natural science by Euclid, Descartes, Galileo, Newton, Lavoisier,
and Darwintends to exemplify now one, now another, theory of definition. Modern
discussions of the nature of science and mathematics, especially discussions
influenced by the development of mathematical logic from Whewell, Mill, and
Pomcare to Whitehead, Russell, and Dewey focus critical attention on the nature
and role of definitions. MANY OTHER chapters provide an illuminating context for
topics discussed in this one, especially the chapters on LANGUAGE and LOGIC,
IDEA, PRINCIPLE and REASONING, PHILOSOPHY and SCIENCE, and TRUTH. Though the
issues concerning definition cannot be resolved apart from this larger context
of controversy about the mind, reality, and knowledge, we can nevertheless
formulate these issues in isolation. But in doing so we ought to bear in mind
that t$ey can be more readily understood in proportion as they are seen in the
light of other relevant considerations.

There is, first of all, the question about the object of definition. What is
being defined when men make or defend definitions? This question broadens into
the problem of nominal as opposed to real definitions. That is a complex problem
which raises a number of further questions. Are all definitions arbitrary,
expressing the conventions of our speech or the particular purpose we have in
mind when we classify things? Or do some, if not all, definitions ex- k'DE press
the real natures of the things (defined P Do they classify things according to
natural kinds which have reality apart from our ifiind and its interests ?

These issues are in turn related to the issue concerning the limits of
definition and its ultimate principles whether all things, or only ' some, are
definable, and whether the 'indefinable terms, without which definition is
itself impossible, can be arbitrarily chosen or must always be terms of a
certain sort. The sense in which definitions may be true or false and the sense
in which they cannot be either, have a bearing on all these issues; and through
them all run the divergent conceptions of how definitions can or should be
constructed.

WHEN IN THE course of argument one man dismisses the opinion of another by
saying, "That is just a matter of definition," the usual implication that the
rejected opinion has no is truth apart from the way in which the man who
proposed it uses words. He may even be accused of begging the question, of
framing definitionswhich implicitly contain the conclusion he subsequently draws
from them. The underlying supposition here seems to be expressed by Pascal when,
in his essay On Geometrical Demonstration, he asserts that "there is great
freedom of definition and definitions are never subject to contradiction, for
nothing is more permissible than to give whatever name we please to a thing we
have clearly pointed out." He calls "true definitions" those which are
"arbitrary, permissible, and geometrical," The only restriction he would place
upon our freedom to make definitions is that "we must be careful not to take
advantage of our freedom to impose names by giving the same name to two
different things." And even this case, '-he claims, is permissible "if we avoid
confusion by not extending the consequences of one to the other." If we are free
to make whatever definitions we please, it would seem to follow that definitions
cannot be matters of argument; and differences of opinion which result from
differences in definition would seem to be irreconcilable by any appeal to
reason or to fact. Such a conception of definition as verbal does not seem to
prevent Hobbes from holding FINITION that definitions are 6rst principles or
foundations of science. "In Geometry (which is the only sciv ence that it hath
pleased God hitherto to bestow on mankind), men begin," he writes, "at settling
the signification of their words; which settling of significations, they call
Definitions; and place them in the beginning of their reckon ing." This sh6ws,
Hobbes thinks, "how necessary it is for any man that aspires to true knowledge
to examine the definitions of former authors; and either to correct them, where
they are negligently set down; or to make them him self. For the errors of
definitions multiply them selves, according as the reckoning proceeds." For
Hobbes, then, definition is verbal; yet definitions can also be true or false,
and on the truth of definitions depends the distinction between knowledge and
opinion. "In the right definition of names," he says, "lies the first use of
speech; which is the acquisition of science." Only when discourse "begins with
the definitions of words" can it reach conclusions that have the character of
knowledge. "If the first ground of such discourse be not definitions . . ; then
the end or conclusion is opinion." Hobbes accurately reports the nature of
geometry when he says that in that science definitions serve as principles in
reasoning or proof. The words "by definition" mark one of the steps in many
Euclidean proofs. Descartes and Spinoza, proceeding in the geometrical manner,
place definitions at the head of their works as ultimate principles to be used
in validating their conclusions. But, unlike Hobbes, these writers do not seem
to regard their definitions as merely verbal. Euclid goes further, as we shall
presently see, and offers what amounts to proofs of his definitions, or at least
of their geometrical reality. Aristotle and Aquinas certainly take the position
not only that definitionk are principles, but also that definitions themselves
are capable of being demonstrated. But they complicate the matter by insisting
that definitions are neither true nor false, since, as Aristotle says, they do
not involve "the assertion of something concerning something." At least two
questions seem to be involved in this familiar dispute about the arguability of
definitions and their role in argumentation. To avoid confusion, they should be
kept distinct. One is the question of the truth and falsity of THE GREAT I
definition. It should be separated from, even though it is related to, the other
question about whether all definitions are nominal, /., concerned only with
assigning meanings to the words by which we .name things. To understand what is
involved in this second question, it may be helpful to consider the relation of
words, thoughts, and things m the process of definition.

A DICTIONARY is supposed to contain definitions. It does in part insofar as the
meaning of any word is expressed m a phrase containing other words which arc not
synonyms for the word in question. The combined meanings of these other words
determine the meaning of the word being defined. For example, one definition of
the word "brother" is "a male relative, the son of the same parents or parent."
Another is "a male member of a religious order." These two definitions give
different meanings for the same word. The dictionary is here recording two ways
in which, as a matter of historical fact, the word has been used. It has been
and can be used in still other ways. No one of these definitions can be called
"right" and the others "wrong." Dictionary definitions seem to be verbal and
arbitrary in a number of ways. That the word "brother" should carry any of the
meanings which the dictionary records is an accident of English usage. It is
arbitrary that that particular sound or mark should be the name for a male
relative who is the son of the same parents. It would be equally arbitrary to
restrict the meaning of the word "brother" to any one of its definitions.
Nothing about a word limits the number of distinct meanings with which it can be
used. As Locke says, "every man has so inviolable a liberty to make words stand
for what ideas he pleases, thatno one hath the power to make others have the
same ideas k their minds that he has, when they use the same words that he
does." A word is thus a conventional sound or mark, which can be given any
meaning convention assigns to it. When that meaning is expressed in other words
we have a verbal definition, and such definitions arc certainly nominal in this
sensethat they state the meaning of a name. But are they merely nominal? Are
they entirely arbitrary ? That this word should be used to name this thing is
arbitrary, but that when it is so used a certain definition also applies may not
be arbitrary. Among the several verbal definitions of a word, the one which
applies in any particular case will depend upon the character of the thing which
the word is used to name. For example, if John and fames are sons of the same
parents, the name "brother" applies, but not with the same definition which is
required for the application of the name to Mark and Matthew who, unrelated by
blood, are members of the same monastic order. What the word "brother" is used
to mean may be arbitrary, but when it is used now of John and James, and now of
Mark and Matthew, it would be misapplied if it did not carry the appropriate
definition. Which definition is appropriate in each case does not seem to be
arbitrary, since that appropriateness depends not on our will but on the
objective facts of the case the actual relation of the persons called
"brothers." Precisely because the word is used to name a thing, the definition
of the word as so used docs more than state the meaning of the word. It states
something about the character of the thing named. Definitions remain merely
verbal only so long as the words they define are not actually used to name or to
signify things in some way. Whenever a thing is named or signified, the
definition which gives the meaning of the word must also signify something about
the nature of the thing. "In the natural order of ideas," writes Lavoisier, "the
name of the class or genus is that which expresses a quality common to a great
number of individuals; the name of the species, on the contrary, expresses a
quality peculiar to certain individuals only. These distinctions are not, as
some may imagine, merely metaphysical, but arc established by Nature." YET IT
MAY BE said that the definition is still nominal, for it depends entirely on the
meanings of the words which express it. For example, one definition of "brother"
involves the meanings of such words as "male" and "relative," "son," "parent,"
dnd "same." If we were to CHAPTER 15: DEFINIT look these words up in a
dictionary, the definitions we found would involve the meanings of still other
words, and so on in an endlessly circular fashion. Furthermore, we would find 1*
the account of certain words, such as "relative and "same," somewhat
unsatisfactory as definitions because the meaning of the defining words would
immediately involve the meaning of the word to be defined. To say that "same"
means "not other" or "not different" seems the same as saying "same" means
"same." Yet we must know the meaning of "same," for otherwise we could not
understand the meaning of "brother," in the definition of which the word "same"
appears.

That some words seem to have indefinable meanings suggests that not all meanings
are merely verbal or nominal, and that the meaning of every word cannot be found
in the meanings of other words. In the Preface to his dictionary, Dr. Johnson
observes that "as nothing can be proved but by supposing something intuitively
known, and evident without proof, so nothing can be defined but by the use of
words too plain to admit of definition." The circularity of the dictionary is
thus avoided. When we trace meanings from one word to another, we finally come
to words whose meanings we seem to understand immediately, or at least without
reference to the meanings of other words.

Just as the arbitrary character of verbal definitions seems to be removed by the
consideration of the things which words name or signify, so the purely nominal
character of definitions seem to be removed by recourse to meanings which are
understood without further verbal explanation meanings which may in fact be
incapable of such explanation.

NOT ALL WRITERS agree with Dr. Johnson. All of them would admit that some words
must be left undefined in order to define others, but which shall be used as
indefinable and which shall be defined is, in the opinion of some, a matter of
choice. It is not something which can be determined by the order intrinsic to
our ideas or meanings. The issue between the mathematical logicians who think
that we are free to choose our primitive or indefinable terms, and those who,
like Aquinas, think that certain terms, such as being, same, one, and rela- ION
Th89 tion, impose themselves upon our minds as principles, leaving us no choice,
parallels the issue between the view that the principles of a science consist of
postulates voluntarily assumed and the view that they are axiomatic or
unavoidable. Far from regarding such basic indefinable terms as clearest and
most indisputable in meaning, Spinoza thinks that "these terms signify ideas in
the highest degree confused." For him "the true definition of any one thing ...
expresses nothing but the nature of the thing defined." But to arrive at the
true definition, it is necessary to discover the cause of the thing. For "every
existing thing," he writes, "there is some certain cause by reason of which it
exists." This cause "must either be contained in the nature itself and
definition of the existing thing ... or it must exist outside the thing." In the
latter case, the definitionof the thing always involves a statement of the
external cause of its existence. Accordingly, Spinoza rejects the traditional
type of Aristotelian definition as purely subjective a matter of individual
memory and imagination. "Those who have more frequently looked with admiration
upon the stature of men," he writes, "by the name man will understand an animal
of erect stature, while those who have been in the habit of fixing their
thoughts on something else will form another common image of men, describing
man, for instance, as an animal capable of laughter, a biped without feathers, a
rational animal, and so on; each person forming universal images of things
according to the temperament of his own body." However the issue between Spinoza
and Aristotle is resolved, both seem to agree that more is involved in the
process of definition than the statement of verbal equivalences. "We have a
definition," Aristotle says, "not where we have a word and formula identical in
meaning (for in that case all formulae or sets of words would be definitions)."
The formula which is expressed in a phrase or combination of words must state
the nature or essence of a thing, not just the meaning of a word. "The formula
... in which the term itself is not present but its meaning is expressed, this,"
according to Aristotle, "is the formula of the essence of each thing" and. he
THE GREAT I adds, "there is an essence only of those things whose formula is a
definition.'* Even supposing the truth of these statements, which Hobbes or
Locke certainly would question, the problem of real as opposed to nominal
definition requires further examination. To explore the matter further, let us
take two of the most famous definitions to be found in the great books. Both are
definitions of man --"featherless biped" and "rational animal." As we have seen,
these definitions must remain purely nominal only stating the meaning of the
word "man" until that word is used to name some kind of thing. If, however, we
apply the word "man" to existing entities which combine the characteristics of
having two legs and lacking feathers, then "featherless biped" defines, not the
word "man," but a class of real, that existing things. In addition to being is,
nominal, the definition is now also real the m sense that the class or kind
which it determines has existing members.

That animals exist may similarly be a fact of observation. But "animal" is only
one of the two terms in the other nominal definition of "man." In order to make
"rational animal" more than a nominal definition, it is necessary to verify the
existence of animals which possess a certain characteristic, rationality, not
possessed by all animals. If rationality in some degree belonged to all animals,
then the word "man" (nominally defined by "rational animal") would be synonymous
with "animal."

But, unlike feathers, the presence or absence of which seems readily observable,
the possession or lack of rationality is difficult to ascertain. Here we face
two possibilities. One is that we can never be sure that some existing animals
are and some are not rational. Then the definition "rational animal" will never
become real. It will always remain merely nominal, the statement of a possible
meaning for "man," but one which we cannot employ when we apply the word to name
any existing thing. The other possibility is that we can infer the existence of
a special class of animals (distinguished by the possession of reason) from such
evident facts as the activities of reading and writing, activities not performed
by all animals. Then, members the class defined having been found to exist, ,c$
animal" becomes a real definition of the beings to which we also arbitrarily
assign the name "man." THE PROCESS of verification by which a nominal is
converted into a real definition can fre regarded as the demonstration of a
definition. Strictly speaking, it is not the definition which is thereby proved.
It is rather a proposition in which the subject of the definition is affirmed to
exist, or in which a subject already known to exist is said to have a certain
definition. For example, it is not the definition "rational animal" which is
proved, but the proposition "there exists an animal which differs from other
animals in being rational," or the proposition "the real being which we call
'man' is both an animal and rational, and he alone is rational." If these
propositions cannot be proved, "rational animal" remains a purely nominal
definition. That definitions are not as such either true or false is unaffected
by the distinction between real and nominal definitions. The point is simply
that a definition, which is always linguistically expressed by a phrase, never a
sentence, neither affirms nor denies anything, and so cannot be either true or
false. "Featherless biped" or "son of the same parents" makes no assertion about
reality or existence. Yet there is a special sense in which definitions can be
true or false, which does have a bearing on the distinction between real and
nominal definitions. Pascal suggests three alternatives with regard to the truth
or falsity of definitions. "If we find it impossible," he writes, "it passes for
false; if we demonstrate that it is true, it passes for a truth; and as long as
it cannot be proved to be either possible or impossible, it is. considered a
fancy." According to Aquinas, there are two ways in which a definition can be
false. In one way, when the intellect applies "to one thing the definition
proper to another; as that of a circle to a man. In another way, by composing a
definition of parts which are mutually repugnant. A definition such as 'a
four-footed rational animal' would be of this kind ... for such a statement as
'some rational animals are four-footed is false in itself." But the truth or
falsity of that statement can conceivably be argued, and therefore it is not so
clear an example of a false definition as one CHAPTER 15: DEF which, in Pascal's
terms, plainly represents an impossibility. Suppose someone offered "round
square" as the nominal definition of "rectacycle." The phrase "round square"
expresses a self-contradiction, and in consequence the definition is false. Its
falsity is tantamount to the impossibility of there being any such figure as a
rcctacycle which has the definition proposed. The truth of a definition which is
nothing more than its freedom from self-contradiction is equivalent to the
possibility, as opposed to the impossibility, of the thing defined. To call the
definition "son of the same parents" or "featherless biped" true is to say that
the words defined "brother" or "man" signify possible existences. In short, only
those nominal definitions which are true can ever become real, and they become
real only when the possibility they signify is actually known to be realized in
existence.

THE METHOD OF Euclid's Elements illustrates the foregoing points. Euclid defines
certain geometrical figures, such as triangle, parallelogram, square. These
definitions may appear to be free from contradiction, but that does not tell us
whether they are more than nominal. The defined figures are possible, but the
question is whether they exist in the space determined by Euclid's postulates.
To show that they do exist, Euclid undertakes to construct them according to his
postulates which permit him the use of a straight edge and a compass for
purposes of construction. When in Proposition i Euclid proves that he can
construct an equilateral triangle, he establishes the geometrical reality of the
figure defined in Definition 20. A geometrical construction is thus seen to be
what is called an "existence proof." It converts a nominal into a real
definition. Figures which cannot be constructed must be postulated; as, for
example, the straight line and the circle. Postulates i and 3 ask us to assume
that a straight line can be drawn between any two points and that a circle can
be described with any center and radius. These postulates give Definitions 4 and
15 their geometrical reality. Though the method of construction is peculiar to
geometry, the relation of definitions to proofs or postulates of existence is
the same for INITION all sciences. Until a definition ceases to be nominal and
becomes real, it cannot be used scientifically in the demonstration of other
conclusions; to use a merely nominal definition in the proof begs the question.
If the existence of the thing defined is either directly observable or
self-evident, no proof or postulation of existence is required. In theology, for
example, there are those who think that the existence of God is immediately seen
in the definition of God. Descartes and Spinoza seem to be of this opinion.
Descartes argues that "eternal existence* is necessarily included in the idea of
God as "a supremely perfect Being." This is so evident, he declares, that
"existence can no more be separated from the essence of God than can its having
its three angles equal to two right angles be separated from the essence of a
triangle, or the idea of a mountain from the idea of a valley," Concerning
substance or God, Spinoza holds that, since it pertains to its nature to exist,
"its definition must involve necessary existence, and consequently from its
definition alone its existence must be concluded." On the other hand, there are
those who think that the existence of God must be proved by inference from
effect to cause. Supposing that a man understands the meaning of the word "God,"
Aquinas maintains that it "does not therefore follow that he understands that
what the name signifies exists actually, but only that it exists mentally."
Hence, he declares, it is necessary to prove the existence of God, "accepting as
a middle term the meaning of the name," but using an effect in "place of the
definition of the cause in proving the cause's existence." The difference
between these two positions might be summed up by saying that Descartes and
Spinoza, like Anselm before them, think the definition of God is intrinsically
real, whereas Aquinas thinks we must begin with a nominal definition of God,
which becomes real only with proof of God's existence. For some confirmed
atheists, any definition of God is not only nominal, but false the definition of
an impossible being, incapable of existing. THERE is STILL another issue about
nominal and real definitions. The point involved is the one raised by Locke's
discussion of nominal and real essences. It is also raised by Aristotle's
discrimination between essential and accidental unities, i.e., the difference
between the unity signified by the phrase "featherless biped" and by the phrase
"black man." Both phrases look like definitions. Each designates a possible
class of individuals and sets up the conditions for membership in that class or
exclusion from it. The distinction between them does not rest, according to
Aristotle, on the criterion of existence. Both of the objects defined may exist,
but whereas the first is truly a species, the second is only, in Aristotle's
opinion, an accidental variety within the species man. Man, being a species, can
have a real essence, and so any definition of man whether "featherless biped" or
"rational animal" can be a real definition, constituted by genus and
differentia. But negro or aryan, not being a species, but only a race or
variety, has no essence as such. The definitions "black man" and "white man"
indicate this in that they are constituted by two terms which are related as
substance and accident, not as genus and differentia. Though Aristotle
distinguishes these two types of formulae as essential and accidental
definitions rather than as real and nominal definitions, the one principle of
distinction is closely related to the other, for only essential definitions can
have real essences for their objects.

Accidental definitions do little more than state the meanings of words, or
express what Locke calls the "nominal essences" of things. He doubts that the
definition of anything except a mathematical object can ever grasp the real
essence of a thing. For him all definitions are nominal, which is equivalent to
saying that we never define by means of the true genus and differentia, but
always by accidental and external signs, or by stating the component parts of a
complex whole.

"Speaking of a man, or gold," Locke explains, "or any other species of natural
substance, as supposed constituted by a precise and real essence which nature
regularly imparts to every individual of that kind, whereby it is made to be of
that species, we cannot be certain of the truth of any affirmation or negation
made of it. For man or gold, taken in this sense, and used for species of things
constituted by real essences, different from the complex idea in the mind of the
speaker, stand for we know not what; and the extent of these species, with such
boundaries, are so unknown and undetermined, that it is impossible with any
certainty to affirm, that all men are rational, or that all gold is yellow,"
THIS ISSUE HAS MANY ramifications. In one direction it leads into Aristotle's
quarrel with Plato over the method of definition by division or dichotomy. In
the Sophist and the Statesman, the search for definitions proceeds by the
division of a class of things into two sub-classes, one of which is then further
subdivided, and so on until a class is reached which has the characteristics of
the object to be defined. The attempt to define a sophist, for example, starts
with the notion that he is a man of art, and proceeds by dividing and
subdividing the various kinds of art. At one point in the course of doing this,
the Athenian Stranger summarizes the process to that point. "You and I," he says
to Theaetetus, "have come to an understanding not only about the name of the
angler's art, but about the definition of the thing itself. One half of all art
was acquisitive half of the acquisitive art was conquest or taking by force,
half of this was hunting, and half of hunting was hunting animals, half of this
was hunting water animals of this again, the under half was fishing, half of
fishing was striking; a part of striking was fishing with a barb,and one half of
this again, being the kind which strikes with a hook and draws the fishfrom
below upwards, is the art which we have been seeking, and which from the nature
of the operation is denoted angling or drawing up ... And now, following this
pattern," he continues, "let us endeavor to find out what a Sophist is." The
pattern as illustrated indicates that, in the course of division, one of the two
classes is discarded while the other is subject to further subdivision.
Aristotle's criticism of this procedure turns partly on the fact that the
division is always dichotomous, or into two subclasses, and partly on the fact
that the terms which Plato uses in a succession of subdivisions do not seem to
have any systematic relation to one another. If the class of animals, for
example, is divided into those with and those with- CHAPTER 15: DEFIN out feet,
it makes a difference, according to Aristotle, what terms are then used to
differentiate footed animals into their proper subclasses. "It is necessary," he
insists, "that the division be by the differentia of the differentia; e.g.,
'endowed with feet' is a differentia of 'animal'; again the differentia of
'animal endowed with feet' must be of it qua endowed with feet.

Therefore we must not say, if we are to speak rightly, that of that which is
endowed with feet one part has feathers and one is featherless (if we do this we
do it through incapacity); we must divide it only into cloven-footed and
notcloven; for these are differentiae in the foot; cloven-footcdness is a form
of footedness. And the process wants always to go on so till it reaches the
species that contains no difference. And then there will be as many kinds of
foot as there are differentiae, and the kinds of animals endowed with feet will
be equal in number to the differentiae. If then this is so, clearly the last
differentia will be the essence of the thing and its definition." As Aristotle
quarrels with Plato's method of division, so William James takes issue with
Aristotle's theory that a real essence is defined when the right differentia is
properly chosen within a certain genus of things. He tends to follow Locke's
notion that definitions indicate no more than the nominal essences of things,
but he gives this theory a special twist by adding the notion that all our
definitions merely group things according to the interest or purpose, whether
theoretical or practical, which motivates our classification of them. This has
come to be known as the pragmatic theory of definition. "My thinking," writes
James, "is first and last and always for the sake of my doing." After pointing
out that Locke "undermined the fallacy" of supposing that we can define the real
essences of things, he goes on to say that "none of his successors, as far as I
know, have radically escaped it, or seen that the only meaning of essence is
ideologicalk and that classification and conception are purely ideological
weapons of the mind. The essence of a thing is that one of its properties which
is so important for my interests that in comparison with it I may neglect the
rest. . . . The properties which are important ITION vary from man to man and
from hour to horfr." In a footnote lames adds: "A substance like oil has as many
different essences as it has uses to different individuals." The classification
of natural as well as artificial objects should therefore proceed according to
the advice' Mephisk topheles gives to the student in Goethe's Faust. "You will
have more success," he says, "if you will learn to reduce all, and to classify
each according to its use." But if this is so, then no one scheme of
classification, more than any other, represents the real structure or order of
nature. Nature indifferently submits to any and all divisions which we wish to
make among existing things. Some classifications may be more significant than
others, but only by reference to our interests, not because they represent
reality more accurately or adequately, It does not matter, therefore, whether we
define by genus and differentia, by other characteristics in combination, or by
reference to origins or functions. Darwin's scheme of classification provides
evidence relevant to this whole issue. As indicated in the chapters on ANIMAL
and EVOLUTION, Darwin thinks that his genealogical classification of plants and
animals conies nearer to the natural system of living organisms than the
classifications proposed by his predecessors. "The Natural System," he writes,
"is a genealogical arrangement, with the acquired grades of difference, marked
by the terms, varieties, species, genera, families, etc.; and we have to
discover the lines of descent by the most permanent characters whatever they may
be and of however slight vital importance." Henceforth, following his method,
"systematists will have only to decide . . whether any form be . sufficiently
constant and distinct from other forms, to be capable of definition; and if
definable, whether the differences be sufficiently important to deserve a
specific name." But Darwin's statement re-opens rather than resolves the great
traditional questions. Are the various groupings made in classification
divisions which the classifier finds useful to impose on nature, or do they
represent lines of real distinction in the very nature of things? If the latter
is the case, either wholly or in part, are we able to do more than approximate
real distinction by whatever method of definition we employ? Can we discover
real species, cssen- 294 THE GREAT JDEAS tially distinct from one another, and
can our mind to submit itsel definitions formulate the essence of each ? with
reality. Defini or experience the on THE SEARCH FOR definitions basically
belongs to answers can be found the activity of the human mind in all its scien-
The search for d tific or dialectical efforts to clarify discourse, to most
dramatic exempl achieve precision of thought, to focus issues and of Plato.
Socrates u to resolve them. in quest of them; th Men have no other way of coming
to terms dialogues, such as t with one another than by defining the words man,
that the making they use to express their concepts or meanings, in detail. Two
other They make terms out of words by endowing concerned with ways words with
exactness or precision of meaning, definitions Aristotl Definition does this and
makes possible the considered together meeting of minds either m agreement or in
dis- of his Parts of Anim pute. Definition also makes it possible for any
Organum.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
'
PAGB

1. The theory of definition
 1a. The object of definition: definitions as arbitrary and nominal or real and con-
 cerned with essence
 1b. The purpose of definition: the clarification of ideas
 1c. The limits of definition: the definable and the indefinable
 1d. The unity of a definition in relation to the unity of the thing defined
 1e. The truth and falsity of definitions

2. The various methods of definition or classification
 2a. The use of division or dichotomy in definition
 2b. Definition by genus and differentia: properties
 2c. Definition by accidental or extrinsic signs or by component parts
 2</. The appeal to genesis, origin, cause, or end in definition
 2d. Definition by reference to purpose or interest
 3.
 The grammatical or verbal aspects of definition

4. The search for definitions and the methods of defending them
i
ji

5. Definition and demonstration; definitions as principles and as conclusions
6* The character of definitions in diverse disciplines
 5a. The formulation of definitions in physics, mathematics, and metaphysics
 5b. The use of definition in speculative
 philosophy and empirical science
 5c. The role of definitions in practical or moral
 philosophy and the social sciences

CROSS-REFERENCES For The linguistic aspects of definition and the general theory
of the m LANGUAGE la; SIGN AND SYMBOL 43.

The logical aspects of definition, see IDEA 43.

Other discussions of the object of definition and the problem of ess

BEING 8c; NATURE 4a; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 2a-2c.

The notions of genus and differentia, species and property, see BEIN

NATURE 1a(i); RELATION 53(4); UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 5b.

Other considerations of indefinable terms, see INFINITY 2c; PRINCIPL

mdefinability of individuals, see UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 4e.

The use of definitions as principles in reasoning or proof, and for

ing definitions, see PRINCIPLE 23(2); REASONING 52).

The discussion of matters related to the truth or falsity of definit

3 bd).

The role of definitions in dialectic and science, and in the various

23(2), 2b(i); MATHEMATICS 33; MATTER 4b; METAPHYSICS 2b; PHILOSOPH

PHYSICS 23; SCIENCE 43.

301 a-208b; PART n-ii, Q 4, A i n, PART i, 57d-58a erstanding, BK in, CH xi, a;
BK iv, CH HI, SECT 20, rstanding, SECT VH, DIV rit of Laws, BK n, 4a lity,
330a-d ractical Reason, 297a-314d; Science of Right, 398c-399c ER 37, 119b-120b;
NUMBER sim, esp 125b-c; NUMBER 42, o. Metaphysic ofMorals, 386b. Metaphysic of
Morals, 271anism, 469a-b y of Right, INTRO, par 2 9b- of History, INTRO,
158a-162a c-lld passim; 178d-179c a; 267c-d Peace, BK ix, 365a-b; -684a, 690b y,
887a-888a eaning of words, see ences or universal, see G 8d; IDEA 43); E 23(3);
and for the ions, see IDEA 6f; TRUTH the problem of demonstratsciences, see
DIALECTIC Y ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below arc works not included in Great Boo{s of the Western World, but r

idea and topics with which this chapter deals, These works are divided into tw

I. Works by authors represented m this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works c

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The

WHEWELL. The Philosophy o

I.

VOL i, BK vm AQUINAS. On Being and Essence, CH 2-3 SlGWART. LoglC, PART I, C

HOBBES. Concerning Body, PART i, CH 2 SECT 74 SPINOZA. Correspondence, ix LOCKE.
Conduct of the Understanding KANT. Introduction to Logic, vm

-

JEVONS. The Principles of

. Studies in Deductiv

VENN, Principles of Empir HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK n, SECT i, CH i CH
11-13 J. S. MILL.

A System of Logic, BK i, CH 7-8; BK 4, POINCARE". Science and Me

CH 7-8 WHITEHEAD and RUSSELL. Pr

INTRO, CH I, CSp

II.

tory), BK vn, CH 3

QUINTILIAN. Institutio Oratoria (Institutes of OraSEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Outlines of
Pyrrhonism, BK -

B. RUSSELL. Principles of

. Introduction to

13, 16-17

ii WHITEHEAD, An Enquiry Con

JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, PART n, QQ
6-12 ARNAULD. Logic or the Art of Thinking, PART i,

- Natural Knowledge, CH 8 . The Concept of Natu

W. E. JOHNSON. Logic, PAR

CH 12-14; PART IV, CH 4-5 OGDEN and RICHARDS. The M

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Under- DUBISLAV. Die Definition

standing, BK in, CH 3 MARITAIN. The Degrees of T. REID. Essays on the
Intellectual Powers of CARNAP. The Logical Synta

Man, i SECT 8 PART II, SECT 22 ;

J.MILL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human DEWEY. Logic, the Th Mind, CH 8
16-18, 20. W. HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, DEWEY and BENTLEY.
Knowin

VOL n (24) CH 7

elevant to the o groups: ited, consult Great Ideas. f the Inductive Sciences, H
I SECT 44 PART III, CH I

, 1 , Science, CH 30 e Logic, CH 1-2, 7 ical or Inductive Logic, thod, BK n, CH
2 incipia Mathematica, pp 11-19; PART I, SECT A, CSp Mathematics, PART i
Mathematical Philosophy, CH cerning the Principles of -13 re, CH 4 T i, CH 7-8
eaning of Meaning Knowledge, CH 3 x of Language, PART i, PART III, SECT 2p 1
eory of Inquiry, CH 13-14, g and the Known,
