Chapter 16: DEMOCRACY INTRODUCTION all the traditional names for forms of OF
government, "democracy" has the liveliest currency today. Yet like all the
others, it all has a long history in the literature of political thought and a
career of shifting meanings. How radically the various conceptions of democracy
differ may be judged from the fact that, in one of its meanings, democracy
flourished in the Greek city-states as early as the fifth century B.C.; while in
another, democracy only began The to exist in recent times or perhaps does not
yet exist anywhere in the world. In our minds democracy is inseparably connected
with constitutional government. We tend to think of despotism or dictatorship as
its only opposites or enemies. That is how the ma- dem jor political issue of
our day is understood. But Ath as recently as the i8th century, some of the
American constitutionalists prefer a republican our form of government to
democracy and at other ; times, both ancient and modern, oligarchy or
aristocracy, rather than monarchy or despotism, wil is the major alternative.
"Democracy" has even stood for the lawless rule of the mob either it- as self a
kind of tyranny or the immediate precursor of tyranny, al Throughout all these
shifts in meaning and value, the word "democracy" preserves certain or constant
political connotations. Democracy exists, according to Montesquieu, "when the
body of the people is possessed of the supreme power." at As the root meaning of
the word indicates, democracy is the "rule of the people." While there eit may
be, and in fact often has been, a difference of opinion with respect to the
meaning of "the dem people," this notion has been traditionally asso- amb ciated
with the doctrine of popular sovereignty, phr which makes the political
community as such the origin and basis of political authority. In the
development of the democratic tradition, particularly in modern tijnes, this has
been accom- 303 panied by the elaboration of safeguards for the rights of man to
assure that government actuy functions for the people, and not merely for one
group of them. Although they are essential parts of democracy, neither popular
sovereignty nor the safeguarding of natural rights provides the specific
characteristic of democracy, since both are compatible with any other just form
of government. specifically democratic element is apparent from the fact that
throughout the many shifts of meaning which democracy has undergone, the common
thread is the notion of political power in the hands of the many rather than the
few or the one. Thus at the very beginning of ocratic government,.we find
Pericles calling ens a democracy because "its administration favours the many
instead of the few." Close to own day, Mill likewise holds that democracy is
"the government of the whole people by the whole people" in which "the majority
. . . l outvote and prevail." According as the many exercise legal power
citizens or merely acfual power as a mob, democracy is aligned with or against
constitutiongovernment. The quantitative meaning of "many" can vary from more
than the few to all something approximating all, and with this variance the same
constitution may be at one time regarded as oligarchical or aristocratic, and
another as democratic. The way in which the many who are citizens exercise their
power her directly or through representativesoccasions the i8th century
distinction between a ocracy and a republic, though this verbal iguity can be
easily avoided by using the ases "direct democracy" and "representative
democracy," as was sometimes done by the writers of The Federalist and their
American contemporaries. These last two points the extension of the franchise
and a system of representation mark the chief differences between ancient and
contemporary institutions of democracy. Today constitutional democracy tends to
be representative, and the grant of citizenship under a democratic constitution
tends toward universal suffrage. That is why we no longer contrast democracy and
republic. That is why even the most democratic Greek constitutions may seem
undemocraticoligarchical or aristocratic to us. To the extent that democracy,
ancient or modern, is conceived as a lawful form of government, it has elements
in common with other forms of lawful government which, for one reason or
another, may not be democratic. The significance of these common elements the
principle of constitutionality and the status of citizenshipwill be assumed
here. They are discussed in the chapters on CONSTITUTION and CITIZEN. The
general theory of the forms of government is treated in the chapter on
GOVERNMENT, and the two forms most closely related to democracy, in the chapters
on ARISTOCRACY and OLIGARCHY.

THE EVALUATIONS of democracy are even more various than its meanings. It has
been denounced as an extreme perversion of government. It has been grouped with
other good, or other bad, forms of government, and accorded the faint praise of
being called either the most tolerable of bad governments or the least efficient
among acceptable forms. It has been held up as the political ideal, the only
perfectly just state that paragon of justice which has always been, whether
recognized or not, the goal of political progress.

Sometimes the same writer will express divergent views. Plato, for example, in
the Statesman, claims that democracy has "a twofold meaning'* according as it
involves "ruling with law or without law." Finding it "in every respect weak and
unable to do either any great 1 good or any great evil/ he concludes that it is
"the worst of all lawful governments, and the best of all lawless ones." The
rule of the many is least efficient for either good or evil. But in the
Republic, he places democracy at only one remove from tyranny. On the ground
that "the excessive increase of anything often causes a reaction in the opposite
direction," tyranny is said to "arise naturally out of democracy, and the most
aggravated form of tyranny and slavery out of the most extreme form of liberty."
Similarly, Aristotle, in the Politics, calls democracy "the most tolerable" of
the three perverted forms of government, in contrast to oligarchy, which he
thinks is only "a little better" than tyranny, "the worst of governments." Yet
he also notes that, among existing governments, "there are generally thought to
be two principal formsdemocracy and oligarchy, .. . and the rest are only
variations of these." His own treatment conforms with this observation. He
devotes the central portion of his Politics to the analysis of oligarchy and
democracy. In his view they are equal and opposite in their injustice, and to
him both seem capable of degenerating into despotism and tyranny. Among the
political philosophers of modern times a certain uniformity of treatment seems
to prevail in the context of otherwise divergent theories. Writers like Hobbes,
Locke, and Rousseau, or Machiavelli, Montesquieu, and Kant differ in many and
profound respects. But they classify the forms of government in much the same
fashion. As Hobbes expresses it, "when the representative is one man, then is
the commonwealth a monarchy; when an assembly of all that will come together,
then it is a democracy, or popular commonwealth; when an assembly of a part
only, then it is called an aristocracy." Though Hobbes favors monarchy and
Montesquieu either aristocracy or democracy, these writers do not make the
choice among the three traditional forms a significant expression of their own
political theories. For them the more important choice is presented by other
alternatives: for Hobbes between absolute and limited government; for
Montesquieu and Locke, between government by law and despotism; for Rousseau and
Kant, between a republic and a monarchy. The authors of The Federalist
definitely show their preference for "popular government" as opposed to
monarchy, aristocracy, or oligarchy. They usually refer to it as a "republic,"
by which they mean "a government which derives all its powers directly or
indirectly from the great body of the people, and is administered by persons
holding their offices during pleasure, for a limited period, or during good
behavior."

CHAPTER 16: DEM Alexander Hamilton and others involved in the American
constitutional debates, as for example James Wilson, occasionally call this
system a "representative democracy," but in The Federalist a republic is sharply
differentiated from a democracy. The "great points of difference," however, turn
out to be only "the delegation of the government (in a republic) to a small
number of citizens elected by the rest," and the "greater number of citizens,
and greater sphere of country" to which a republic may extend. The difference,
as already noted, is best expressed in the words "representative" and "direct"
democracy. In Mill's Representative Government we find democracy identified with
the ideal state. "The ideally best form of government," he writes, "is that in
which the sovereignty, or supreme controlling power in the last resort, is
vested in the entire aggregate of the community, every citizen not only having a
voice in the exercise of that ultimate sovereignty, but being, at least
occasionally, called on to take an actual part in the government, by the
personal discharge of some public function, local or general." Though Mill
recognizes the infirmities of democracy and though he readily concedes that it
may not be the best government for all peoples under all circumstances, his
argument for its superiority to all other forms of government remains
substantially unqualified.

IN MILL'S CONSTRUCTION of the democratic ideal as providing liberty and equality
for all, the essential distinction from previous conceptions lies in the meaning
of the word all. The republicans of the 1 8th century, in their doctrines of
popular sovereignty and natural rights, understood citizenship m terms of
equality of status and conceived liberty in terms of a man's having a voice in
his own government. The ancients, seeing that men could be free and equal
members of a political community only when they lived as citizens under the rule
of law, recognized that the democratic constitution alone bestowed such equality
upon all men not born slaves. But generally neither the ancients nor the i8th
century republicans understood liberty and equality for all men to require the
abolition of slavery, the emancipation of women from political subjection, or
the eradication of .all con- OCRACY stitutional discriminations based on wealth,
race, or previous condition of servitude. With Mill, all means every human
person without regard to the accidents of birth or fortune. "There ought to be
no pariahs in a fullgrown and civilized nation," he writes, "no persons
disqualified, except through their own default." Under the latter condition, he
would withhold the franchise from infants, idiots, or criminals (including the
criminally indigent), but with these exceptions he would make suffrage
universal. He sums up his argument by claiming that "it is a personal injustice
to withhold from any one, unless for the prevention of greater evils, the
ordinary privilege of having his voice reckoned in the disposal of affairs in
which he has the same interest as other people/* and whoever "has no vote, and
no prospect of obtaining it, will either be a permanent malcontent, or will feel
as one whom the general affairs of society do not concern." But it should be
added that for Mill the franchise is not merely a privilege or even a right; "it
is," he says, "strictly a matter of duty." How the voter uses the ballot "has no
more to do with his personal wishes than the verdict of a juryman. ... He is
bound to give it according to his best and most conscientious opinion of the
public good. Whoever has any other idea of it is unfit to have the suffrage."
The notion of universal suffrage raises at once the question of the economic
conditions prerequisite to the perfection of political democracy. Can men
exercise the political freedom of citizenship without freedom from economic
dependence on the will of other men? It was commonly thought by i8th century
republicans that they could not. "A power over a man's subsistence," Hamilton
declares, "amounts to a power over his will." On that basis it was urged by many
during the Philadelphia convention that a property qualification was necessary
for suffrage. Kant also argues that suffrage "presupposes the independence or
self-sufficiency of the individual citizen." Because apprentices, servants,
minors, women, and the like do not maintain themselves, each "according to his
own industry, but as it is arranged by others," he claims that they are "mere
subsidiaries of the Commonwealth and not active independent members of it,"being
"of necessity commanded and protected by others." For this reason, he concludes,
they are "passive," not "active," citizens and can be rightfully deprived of the
franchise. For political democracy to be realized in practice, more may be
required than the abolition of poll taxes and other discriminations based on
wealth. In the opinion of Karl Marx, the "battle for democracy" will not be won,
nor even the step" taken towards it, until "the "first working class raises the
proletariat to the position of ruling class." Quite apart from the meritsof the
revolutionary political philosophy which Marx erects, his views, and those of
other social reformers of the i9th century, have made it a central issue that
democracy be conceived in social and economic terms as well as political.

Otherwise, they insist, what is called "democracy" will permit, and may even try
to condone, social inequalities and economic injustices which vitiate political
liberty.

THERE is ONE other condition of equality which the status of citizenship
demands. This is equality of educational opportunity. According to Mill, it is
"almost a self-evident axiom that the State should require and compel the
education, up to a certain standard, of every human being who is born its
citizen." All men may not be endowed with the same native abilities or talents,
but all born with enough intelligence to become citizens deserve the sort of
education which fits them for the life of political freedom. Quantitatively,
this means a system of education as universal as the franchise; and as much for
every individual as he can take, both in youth and adult life. Qualitatively,
this means liberal education rather than vocational training, though in
contemporary controversy this point is still disputed. The way in which it
recognizes and discharges its educational responsibility tests the sincerity of
modern democracy. No other form ofgovernment has a comparable burden, for no
other men to citizenship. In such a governcalls all ment, Montesquieu declares,
"the whole power of education is required." Whereas despotism may be preserved
by fear and a monarchy by a system of honor, a democracy depends on civic
virtue. For where "government is intrusted to private citizens," it requires
"love of the laws AS and of the country," and this, according to Montesquieu, is
generally "conducive to purity of morals." Universal schooling by itself is not
sufficient for this purpose. Democracy also needs what Mill calls the "school of
public spirit." It is only by participating in the functions of government that
men can become competent as citizens. By engaging in civic activities, a man "is
made to feel himself one of the public, and whatever is for their benefit to be
for his benefit." The "moral part of the instruction afforded by the
participation of the private citizen, if even rarely, in public functions,"
results, according to Mill, in a man's being able "to weigh interests not his
own; to be guided, in case of conflicting claims, by another rule than his
private partialities; to apply, at every turn, principles and maxims which have
for their reason of existence the common good." If national affairs cannot
afford an opportunity for every citizen to take an active part in government,
then that must be achieved through local government, and it is for this reason
that Mill advocates the revitalization of the latter. THERE ARE OTHER problems
peculiar to modern democracy. Because of the size of the territory and
population of the national state, democratic government has necessarily become
representative. Representation, according to The Federalist, becomes almost
indispensable when the people is too large and too dispersed for assembly or for
continuous, as well as direct, participation in national affairs. The pure
democracy which the Federalists attribute to the Greek city-states may still be
appropriate for local government of the town-meeting variety, but for the
operations of federal or national government, the Federalists think the
republican institutions of Rome a better model to follow. The Federalists have
another reason for espousing representative government. The "mortal disease" of
popular government, in their view, is the "violence of faction" which decides
measures "not according to the rules of justice and the rights of the minor
party, but by the superior force of an interested and overbearing majority."
Believing the spirit of faction to be rooted in the nature of man in society,
the American statesmen seek to cure its evil not by CHAPTER 16: DEM "removing
its causes," but by "controlling its ' effects." The principle of
representation, Madison claims, 'promises the cure."

Representation, by delegating government to a small number of citizens elected
by the rest, is said "to refine and enlarge the public views by passing them
through the medium of a chosen body of citizens, whose wisdom may best discern
the true interest of their country." From this it appears that representation
provides a way of combining popular government with the aristocratic principle
of government by the best men. The assumption that representation would normally
secure the advantages of aristocratic government is not unmixed with
oligarchical prejudices. If, as the Federalists frankly suppose, the best men
are also likely to be men of breeding and property, representative government
would safeguard the interests of the gentry, as well as the safety of the
republic, against the demos Hamilton's words, "that great in beast." Their
concern with the evil of factions seems to be colored by the fear of the
dominant faction in any democracy the always more numerous poor.

THE LEAVENING OF popular government by representative institutions in the
formation of modern democracies raises the whole problem of the nature and
function of representatives. To what extent does representation merely provide
an instrument which the people employs to express its will m the process of
self-government? To what extent is it a device whereby the great mass of the
people select their betters to decide for them what is beyond their competence
to decide for themselves? According to the way these questions are answered, the
conception of the representative's function especially in legislative matters
will vary from that of serving as the mere messenger of his constituents to that
of acting independently, exercising his own judgment, and representing his
constituents not in the sense of doing their bidding, but only in the sense that
he has been chosen by them to decide what is to be done for the common good.

At one extreme, the representative seems to be reduced to the ignominious role
of a mouthpiece, a convenience required by the exigencies OCRACY of time and
space. Far from being a leader, or one of the best men, he need not even be a
better man than his constituents. At the other extreme, it is not clear why the
completely independent representative need even be popularly elected. In Edmund
Burke's theory of virtual representation, occasioned by his argument against the
extension of the franchise, even those who do not vote are adequately
represented by men who have the welfare of the state at heart. They, no less
than voting constituents, can expect the representative to consider what is for
their interest, and to oppose their wishes if he thinks their local or special
interest is inimical to the general welfare. Between these two extremes, Mill
tries to find a middle course, in order to achieve the "two great requisites of
government: responsibility to those for whose benefit political power ought to
be, and always professes to be, employed and jointly therewith to obtain, in the
; greatest measure possible, for the function of government the benefits of
superior intellect, trained by long meditation and practical discipline to that
special task." Accordingly, Mill would preserve some measure of independent
judgment for the representative and make him both responsive and responsible to
his constituents, yet without directing or restraining him by the checks of
initiative, referendum, and recall. Mill's discussion of representation leaves
few crucial questions unasked, though it may not provide clearly satisfactory
answers to all of them. It goes beyond the nature and function of the
representative to the problem of securing representation for minorities by the
now familiar method of proportional voting. It is concerned with the details of
electoral procedure the nomination of candidates, public and secret balloting,
plural voting as well as the more general question of the differences among the
executive, judicial, and legislative departments of government with respect to
representation, especially the difference of representatives in the upper and
lower houses of a bicameral Like the writers of The Federalist, legislature.
Mill seeks a leaven for the democratic mass in the leadership of men of talent
or training. He would qualify the common sense of the many by the expertness or
wisdom of the few.

308 THE GREAT I THE ANCIENT ISSUE between the democratic and the oligarchical
constitution turns primarily on a question of justice, not on the relative
competence of the many and the few to rule.

Either form of government may take on a more or less aristocratic cast according
as men of eminent virtue or ability assume public office, but in neither case
does the constitution itself guarantee their choice, except possibly on the
oligarchical assumption that the possession of wealth signifies superior
intelligence and virtue. The justice peculiar to the democratic constitution,
Aristotle thinks, "arises out of the notion that those who are equal in any
respect arc equal in all respects; because men are equally free, they claim to
be absolutely equal." It does not seem to him inconsistent with democratic
justice that slaves, women, and resident aliens should be excluded from
citizenship and public office. In the extreme form of Greek democracy, the
qualifications for public office are no different from the qualifications for
citizenship. Since they are equally eligible for almost every governmental post,
the citizens can be chosen by lot rather than elected by vote. Rousseau agrees
with Montesquieu's opinion of the Greek practice, that "election by lot is
democratic in nature." He thinks it "would have few disadvantages in a real
democracy, but," he adds, "I have already said that a real democracy is only an
ideal." The justice peculiar to the oligarchical constitution is, according to
Aristotle, "based on the notion that those who arc unequal in one respect are in
all respects unequal; being unequal, that is, in property, they suppose
themselves to be unequal absolutely." The oligarchical constitution consequently
does not grant citizenship or open public office to all the fretborn, but in
varying degrees sets a substantial property qualification for both. Though he
admits that the opposite claims of the oligarch and the democrat "have a kind of
justice," Aristotle also points out the injustice of each. The democratic
constitution, he thinks, docs injustice to the rich by treating them as equal
with the poor simply because both are freeborn, while the oligarchical
constitution does injustice to the poor by foiling to treat all free men,
regardless of wealth as equals. "Tried by an absolute standard," Aristotle goes
on to say, "they are faulty, and, therefore, both parties, whenever their share
in the government does not accord with their preconceived ideas, stir up a
revolution." Plato, Thucydides, and Plutarch, as well as Aristotle, observe that
this unstable situation permits demagogue or dynast to encourage lawless rule by
the mob or by a coterie of the rich. Either paves the way to tyranny. To
stabilize the state and to remove injustice, Aristotle proposes a mixed
constitution which, by a number of different methods, "attempts to unite the
freedom of the poor and the wealth of the rich." In this way he hopes to two
requirements of good governsatisfy the ment. "One is the actual obedience of
citizens to the laws, the other is the goodness of the laws which they obey." By
participating in the making of laws, all free men, the poor included, would be
more inclined to obey them. But since the rich are also given a special
function, there is, according to Aristotle, the possibility of also getting good
laws passed, since "birth and education are commonly the accompaniments of
wealth." To Aristotle the mixed constitution is perfectly just, and with an
aristocratic aspect added to the blend, it approaches the ideal polity. Relative
to certain circumstances it has "a greater right than any other form of
government, except the true and ideal, to the name of the government of the
best." Yet the true and the ideal, or what he sometimes calls the "divine form
of government," seems to be monarchy for Aristotle, or rule by the one superior
man; and in his own sketch of the best constitution at the end of the Politics
the best practicable, if not the ideal Aristotle clearly opposes admitting all
the laboring classes to citizenship. As INDICATED IN the chapter on
CONSTITUTION, Aristotle's mixed constitution should be distinguished from the
mediaeval mixed regime, which was a combination of constitutional with
non-constitutional or absolute government, rather than a mixture of different
constitutional principles. The mixed regime or "royal and political government"
seems to have come into being not as an attempt to CHAPTER 16s DE reconcile
conflicting principles of justice, but as the inevitable product of a decaying
feudalism and a rising nationalism. Yet Aquinas claims that a mixed regime was
established by divine law for the people of Israel; for it was "partly kingdom,
since there is one at the head of all; partly aristocracy, in so far as a number
of persons arc set in authority; partly democracy, i.e., government by the
people, in so far as the rulers can be chosen from the people, and the people
have the right to choose their rulers." In such a system, the monarchical
principle is blended with aristocratic and democratic elements to whatever
extent the nobles and the commons play a part in the government. But neither
group functions politically as citizens do under purely constitutional
government. The question of constitutional justice can, however, be carried over
from ancient to modern tunes. Modern democracy answers it differently, granting
equality to all men on the basis of their being born human. It recognizes in
wealth or breeding no basis for special political preferment or privilege. By
these standards, the mixed constitution and even the most extreme form of Greek
democracy must be regarded as oligarchical in character by a writer like Mill.
Yet Mill, no less than Aristotle, would agree with Montesquieu's theory that the
Tightness of any form of government must be considered with reference to the
"humor and disposition of the people in whose favor it is established." The
constitution and laws, Montesquieu writes, "should be adapted in such a manner
to the people for whom they are framed that it would be a great chance if those
of one nation suit another."

Mill makes the same point somewhat differently when he says, "the ideally best
form of government does not mean one which is . . , practicable or eligible in
all states of civilization." But although he is willing to consider the forms of
government in relation to the historic conditions of a people, not simply by
absolute standards, Mill differs sharply from Montesquieu and Aristotle in one
very important respect. For him, as we have seen, representative democracy
founded on universal suffrage is, absolutely speaking, the only truly just
government the only one perfectly suited MOCRACY to the nature of man. Peoples
whose accidental circumstances temporarily justify less just or even unjust
forms of government, such as oligarchy or despotism, must not be forever
condemned to subjection or disfranchiscment, but should rather be raised by
education, experience, and economic reforms to a condition in which the ideal
polity becomes appropriate for them. THE BASIC PROBLEMS of democratic
governmentseen from the point of view of those who either attack or defend it
remain constant despite the altered conception of democracy in various epochs.
At all times, there is the question of leadership and the need for obtaining the
political services of the best men without infringing on the political
prerogatives of all men. The difference between the many and the few, between
the equality of men as free or human and their individual inequality in virtue
or talent, must always be given political recognition, if not by superiority in
status, then by allocation of the technically difficult problems of statecraft
to the expert or specially competent, with only certain broad general policies
left to the determination of a majority vote. Jefferson and Mill alike hope that
popular government may abolish privileged classes without losing the benefits of
leadership by peculiarly gifted individuals. The realization of that hope,
Jefferson writes Adams, depends on leaving "to the citizens the free election
and separation of the anstoi from the pseudo-aristoi, of the wheat from the
chaff." At all times there is the danger of tyranny by the majority and, under
the threat of revolution, the rise of a demagogue who uses mob rule to establish
a dictatorship. Hobbes phrases this peculiar susceptibility of democracy to the
mischief of demagogues by saying of popular assemblies that they "are as subject
to evil counsel, and to be seduced by orators, as a monarch by flatterers," with
the result that democracy tends to degenerate into government by the most
powerful orator, The democratic state has seldom been tempted to undertake the
burdens of empire without suffering from a discordance between its domestic and
its foreign policy. Again and again, Thucydides describes the effort of the
Athenians to reconcile their imperialism abroad with democracy at home. In his
oration at the end of the first year of the Peloponnesian war, Pericles praises
the democracy of Athens and at the same time celebrates the might of her empire.
"It is only the Athenians," he says, "who, fearless of consequences, confer
their benefits not from calculations of expediency, but in the confidence of
liberality."But four years later, after the revolt of Mitylene, Cleon speaks in
a different vein. Thucydides describes him as being "at that time by far the
most powerful with the commons." He tells his fellow citizens of democratic
Athens that he has "often before now been convinced that a democracy is
incapable of empire," but "never more so than by your present change of mind in
the matter of Mitylene." He urges them to return to their earlier decision to
punish the Mitylenians, for, he says, if they reverse that decision they will be
"giving way to the three failings most fatal to empire pity, sentiment, and
indulgence." Diodotus, who in this debate recommends a policy of leniency, does
not do so in the "confidence of liberality" which Pericles had said was the
attitude of a democratic state toward its "The question is not of
jusdependencies. tice," Diodotus declares, "but how to make the Mitylenians
useful to Athens. We must . . . not," he continues, "sit as strict judges of the
offenders to our own prejudice, but rather see how by moderate chastisements we
may be enabled to benefit in the future by the revenueproducing powers of our
dependencies. ... It is far more useful for the preservation of our empire," he
concludes, "voluntarily to put up with injustice, than to put to death, however
justly, those whom it is our interest to keep alive." Twelve years later,
Alcibiades, no democrat himself, urges the Athenians to undertake the Sicilian
expedition by saying, "we cannot fix the exact point at which our empire shall
stop; we have reached a position in which we must not be content with retaining
but must scheme S to extend it, for, if we cease to rule othervwe arc in danger
of being ruled ourselves." In the diplomatic skirmishes which precede the
invasion of Sicily, Hermocrates of Syracuse tries to unite the Sicilian cities
so that they may escape "disgraceful submission to an Athenian master." The
Athenian ambassador, Euphemus, finds himself compelled to speak at first of "our
empire and of the good right we have to it"; but he soon finds himself frankly
confessing that "for tyrants and imperial cities nothing is unreasonable if
expedient." The denouement of the Peloponnesian war, and especially of the
Syracusan expedition, is the collapse of democracy, not through the loss of
empire but as a result of the moral sacrifices involved in trying to maintain or
increase it. Tacitus, commenting on the decay of republican institutions with
the extension of Rome's conquests, underlines the same theme. It is still the
same theme when the problems of British imperialism appear in Mill's discussion
of how a democracy should govern its colonies or dependencies. The
incompatibility of empire with democracy is one side of the picture of the
democratic state in external affairs. The other side is the tension between
democratic institutions and military power or policy in the form of standing
armies and warlike maneuvers. The inefficiency traditionally attributed democ to
racy under peaceful conditions does not, from all the evidences of history, seem
to render democracy weak or pusillanimous in the face of aggression.

The deeper peril for democracy seems to lie in the effect of war upon its
institutions and on the morality of its people As Hamilton writes in The
Federalist: "The violent destruction of life and property incident to war, the
continual effort and alarm attendant on a state of cori tinual danger, will
compel nations the most atr tached to liberty to resort for repose and security
to institutions which have a tendency to destroy their civil and political
rights. To be more safe, they at length become willing to run the risk of being
less free."

CHAPTER 16: DEMOCRACY

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PACB

1. Conceptions of democracy: the comparison of democracy with other forms of govern-
ment

2. The derogation of democracy: the anarchic tendency of freedom and equality
 2a. ^awless mob-rule: the tyranny of the majority
 2& The incompetence of the people and the need for leadership: the superiority of
 monarchy and aristocracy

3. The acceptance
of democracy as one of several good forms of government
 3a. Comparison of democratic and oligarchic justice: the mixed constitution as a
 compromise between the interests of the poor and rich
 3b. Comparison of the political wisdom of the many and the few: the mixed regime
 as including both
 3c. Comparison of democracy, aristocracy, and monarchy with respect to efficiency

4. The praise of democracy: the ideal state
 4a. Liberty and equality for all under law
 (1) Universal suffrage: the abolition of privileged classes
 (2) The problem of economic j ustice : the choice between capitalism and socialism
 4& The democratic realization of popular sovereignty: the safeguarding of natural
 rights
 4b. The
 infirmities of democracy in practice and the reforms or remedies for these
 defects
 4<f.
 The suitability of democratic constitutions to all men under all circumstances:
 conditions favorable to democracy; progress toward democracy

5. Democracy
and representative government
 5a. The distinction between direct democracy and representative, or republican,
 government: the territorial limits of democracy
 ,
 5& The theory of representation
 (1) Majority rule and minority or proportional representation
 (2) Ultimate limitations on the franchise
 (3) Methods
 of election and voting
 (4) The role of political parties: factions (
 5b. The distribution of functions and powers: checks and balances in representative
 democracy

6. The educational task of democracy: the training of all citizens

7. The growth and vicissitudes of democracy
"
 7a. Demagoguery and the danger of revolution ;
 7b. The dangers of imperialism: the treatment of dependencies
 7c. The challenge of war and peace: the citizen army r
 ,
 .
 >,o-;

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general theory of government and the forms of
government, see GOVERNMENT; and

for the forms of government most closely related to d

OLIGARCHY.

The theory of constitutional or representative government, in itself and

monarchy or absolute government, see CONSTITUTION; MONARCHY.

Other discussions of the mixed constitution and the mixed regime, see ARISTOCRAC

CONSTITUTION 33, 5b; GOVERNMENT 2b; MONARCHY 1b(i).

Other expositions of the theory of the conditions relative to which democracy is

form of government, see MONARCHY 46(2); SLAVERY 6c; TYRANNY 4b.

The general discussion of political liberty and equality in relation to the righ

see JUSTICE ge; LIBERTY 1f.

The problem of suffrage and the debate concerning the extension of the franchise

2c-3; LABOR yd; OLIGARCHY 4, 53; SLAVERY 5b.

The relation between economic and political democracy, and the problems of econo

well as political justice, see LABOR y(\ LIBERTY ad; SLAVERY 5a-5b.

The theory of popular sovereignty and natural rights, see GOVERNMENT 1g(3); JUST

LAW yb-yc; STATE 2c; TYRANNY 5c.

The consideration of majority rule and the tyranny of the majority, see OPINION

TYRANNY 2c.

Other discussions of the theory of representation, see ARISTOCRACY 6; CONSTITUTI

Matters relevant to the educational problems of democracy, see ARISTOCRACY 5; ED

8d; STATE yd.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western World, but re

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into two

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works ci

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The G

}. WILSON. Worfy, PAR

*

xn PLUTARCH. "Of the Three Sorts of Government CARTWRIGHT. Takp Your C

Monarchy, Democracy and Oligarchy," in Mo- BURKE. An Appeal from t

ralta . Letter to Si SPINOZA. Tractatus Politicus (Political Treatise) , PAINE.
Rights of Man, P

CH 1 1 Dissertation on F

.

}. S. MILL. "M. De Tocqueville on Democracy in JEFFERSON. Democracy, C

America," "Enfranchisement of Women," in VOL TOCQUEVILLE. Democracy

n, Dissertations and Discussions T. CARLYLE. Chartism

. Socialism MICHELET. The People MARX. The Civil War in France CALHOUN. A
Disquisition

.

Critique of the Gotha Programme A Discourse on the

.

ment of the United St

11

MAZZINI. The Duties of Clarke Papers, The Putney Debates THOREAU. A Plea for Cap
VOLTAIRE. "Democracy," in A Philosophical Die- WHITMAN. Democratic Vis

tionary J. F. STEPHEN. Libert emocracy, see ARISTOCRACY;

in contrast to Y 2b; a suitable ts of citizenship, , see CITIZEN mic as ICE
6-6e; y-yb; ON 9-90. UCATION levant to the groups: ted, consult reat Ideas. T i,
CH vr-ix; PART n, CH hoiceTh he New to the Old Whigs r Hercules Langnshe ART n,
CH i irst Principles of Government H 1-2 in America on Government Constitution
and Governates Man tain John Brown tas y, Equality, Fraternity THE GREAT ACTON.
Essays on Freedom and Power, CH 5, 7-8 ARNOLD. "Democracy," "Equality," in Mixed

Essays. MAINE. Popular Government

LECKY. Democracy and Liberty GIDDINGS. Democracy and Empire

M. HIRSCH. Democracy Versus Socialism

H, ADAMS. The Degradation of the Democratic

Dogma OSFROGORSKI. Democracy and the Organization of

Political Parties DICEY. The Relation Between Law and Public Opinion in England
During the Nineteenth Century

SANTAYANA. Reason in Society, CH 5 SORBL. Reflexions on Violence MICHELS.
Political Parties MORLRY. Notes on Politics and History BEARD. Economic Origins
ofjeffersoman Democracy CROLY. Progressive Democracy PARLIO. The Mind and
Society, VOL iv T. VFBLEN. The Vested Interests and the State of the Industrial
Arts

LENIN. The State and Revolution, CH 5 .

"Left-Wing" Communism, an Infantile Disorder

TROISKY. The Defense of Terrorism

BRYCF. The American Commonwealth Modern Democracies .

IDEAS TAWNEY. Equality NOCK. The Theory of Education in the United States
KELSEN. Vom Wesen und Wert der Democratic

Staatsform und Weltanschauung

. LASKI Democracy in Crisis J. A. HOBSON. Democracy and a Changing Civilisation
FRIEDRICH Constitutional Government and Democracy BENES. Democracy Today and
Tomorrow DEWEY. Characters and Events, VOL n, BK v (17) . The Public and Its
Problems, CH 3 . Freedom and Culture, CH 4-7

MACIVER. Leviathan and the People

HOOK. Reason, Social Myths and Democracy BECKER Modern Democracy MERRIAM. The
New Democracy and the New Despotism . What Is Democracy? AGARD. What Democracy
Meant to the Greeks B \RKER Reflections on Government

LINDSAY. The Modern Democratic State MARITAIN. Scholasticism and Politics, CH
in-iv . Ransoming the Time, CH 2 .

Christianity and Democracy

.

Pnncipes a*une pohttque humaniste

PERRY Puritanism and Democracy

SIMON. Community of the Free, CH 4
