Chapter 19:

INTRODUCTION

discussing in the bourse of his essay ECKE, on Human Understanding "why a man
must keep his word," notes that we meet with three different answers to this
question. "If a Christian be asked, he will give as reason: Because God, who has
the power of eternal life and death, requires it of us. But if a Hobbist be
asked why ? he will answer: Because the public requires it, and the Leviathan
will punish you if you do not, And if one of the old philosophers had been
asked, he would have answered: Because it; was dishonest, below the dignity of a
man, and opposite to virtue, the highest perfection of human nature, to do
otherwise." With these three answers Locke introduces us to some of the
alternative views on what is perhaps the central problem concerning duty. All
three acknowledge the existence of duty and the force of obligation. By
accepting the question they affirm the proposition that a man must or ought to
keep his word. But why ? What creates the ought or obligation? Two of the
answers Locke cites that of the Christian and that of the Hobbist seem to derive
duty from the commands of law, the law of God or of the state, in either case a
law to be enforced by the sanctions of a superior power. Accordingly, the
citizen has duties to the state, the religious man to God. Yet it does not seem
to be entirely the case that such duties rest exclusively on the superior power
of God or the state. Men who obey either divine or civil law from fear of
punishment alone, are said to act not from duty but from expediency in terms of
a calculation of risks and consequences.

Obedience to law would appear to be acknowledged as a duty only by those who
recognize the authority of the law or the right of the lawmaker to command. They
would be willing to obey the law even if no external sanction could be enforced
against them by a superior power. Those whom the law binds in conscience rather
than by its coercive force obey the law because it is morally right to do so.
The sense of the law's moral authority is for them the sense of duty from which
the dictates of conscience flow. Locke's third answer that of the ancient
philosophers shows that duty is sometimes understood without reference to law,
divine or human. We share this understanding whenever, having made a promise or
contracted a debt, we feel an obligation to discharge it even if no superior
commands the act. Here, furthermore, the obligation seems to be to another
individual to a person who may be our equal rather than to the state or God. As
indicated by Locke's statement of this ancient view, it is the honest or just
man who acknowledges such obligations apart from the law or his relation to any
superior. Virtue may, of course, also direct a man to act for the common welfare
and to obey the laws of the state or the commandments of God. But the immediate
source of the obligation to act in a certain way toward one's fellow men is
placed by the ancients, according to Locke, in "virtue, the highest perfection
of human nature." On this view, virtue alone provides the motivation. Without it
men would act lawfully only because of the law's coercive force. Without it men
would recognize no obligations to their fellow men or to the state. THESE TWO
conceptions of duty for the moment grouping the Christian and Hobbist answers
together against the ancient view may seem at first to be only verbally
different. It seems certain that dutiful conduct would frequently be the same on
either view. Yet they do conflict with one another, and each, if examined
further, presents difficulties.

CHAFTBR 19; DUT The theory that duty arises from a man's own virtue receives its
classic expression, as Locke intimates, in the ancient philosophers,
particularly Plato and Aristotle.

It appears in the Republic, for example, when Socrates has to meet Glaucon's
argument that men abide by moral rules, not simply because they ought to, but in
order to avoid the pain of censure and punishment. Glaucon claims that, given
the which can render a possession of Gyges' ring man invisible to others, "no
man would keep his hands off what was not his own when he could safely take what
he liked." He could "in all respects be like a God among men."

Against this Socrates sets his conception of the "just man" who does what he
ought to do because it is just, and because justice is essential to the very
life and health of the soul. According to Socrates' way of thinking, it is
ridiculous to ask "which is the more profitable, to be just and act justly and
practise virtue, whether seen or unseen of gods and men, or to be unjust. . . .
We know that, when the bodily constitution is gone, life is no longer endurable,
though pampered with all kinds of meat and drinks, and having all wealth and all
power; and shall we be told that when the very essence of the vital principle is
undermined and corrupted, life is worth having to a man, if only' he be alstill
lowed to do whatever he likes with the single exception that he is not to
acquire justice and virtue, or to escape from injustice and vice?" On this view,
it seems to be the virtue of justice which lies at the root of duty or
obligation. But for Plato justice, though only one of the virtues, is
inseparable from the other three temperance, courage, and wisdom. It is almost
indifferent therefore whether one attributes moral obligation to the particular
virtue of justice or to virtue in general. As the chapters on JUSTICE and VIRTUE
indicate, Aristotle differs from Plato, both with respect to the virtues in
general and to justice in particular.

For Aristotle it is justice alone, not virtue in general or any other particular
virtue, which gives rise to duty or obligation. Justice differs from the other
virtues, according to Aristotle, in that it "alone of the virtues is thought to
consider 'another's good' because 1 it concerns the Delation of a man to his
neighbor.' The other virtues, such as temperance Y and courage, do not give rise
to obligationk unless they arc somehow annexed to or united with justice.
Whenever Aristotle speaks of duties he does so with reference to the obligations
that follow from justice "the duties of parents to children and those of
brothers to each other .those of comrades and those of . . fellow-citiseris."
Whereas for Aristotle justice always refers to the good of another, or to the
common good of all, such virtues as temperance and courage, when they are
isolated from justice, concern the well-being of the individual himself. That is
why only justice entails duties, which are obligations to act in a certain way
for the welfare of others, if the good of no other individual is involved, it
seems that a man has no duty to be temperate or courageous, even when he
possesses these virtues. Precisely because of the essentially social character
of justice, Aristotle raises the ques tion "whether a man can treat himself
unjustly or not." He is willing to admit that a man can do justice or injustice
to himself only in a metaphorical sense. What he calls "metaphorical justice" is
not a relation between a man and himself, but a relation between one part of
himself and another. Aquinas seems to follow Aristotle in connecting duty with
justice and with no other virtue. "Justice alone of all the Virtues," he writes,
"implies the notion of duty." If he also intimates that duty may sbhiehow enter
into the as when he says that "it acts of other virtues is not so patent in the
other virtues as it is in justice" his position still remains fundamentally
Aristotelian. Referring to that "kind of metaphorical justice" to which
Aristotle appeals in stating the sense in which a man can treat himself
unjustly, Aquinas explains how "all the other virtues" can be said to "involve
the duty of the lower powers to reason." Apart from this metaphorical duty of
the passions to obey reason, duty in the strict sense comes, in the opinion of
Aquinas, only from the precepts of justice, which concern the relation of one
person to another. ON THIS THEORY, duty is not coextensive with morality, the
sense of duty is not identical with the moral sense, knd specific duties
obligate a THE GREAT I man to other men even when no general law exists to be
obeyed. Difficulty is found with this theory by those critics who think that the
whole of morality, not simply one part of it, involves duties. Does not the
sense of duty operate, they ask, in matters which do not affect any other
individual or even the common good ? Does a man, for example, have a duty to
tell the truth only to others, but not to seek it for himself? Kant, as we shall
see, holds that there are private as well as public duties, or, in his language,
internal duties in the realm of ethics as well as external duties in the realm
of jurisprudence. The Hobbist theory of duty seems to face similar difficulties.
The specific duties which are determined by the precepts of justice may, as we
have seen, not always be the same as the specific duties imposed by civil law,
though they will be identical whenever the law of the state is itself an
expression or determination of justice. But when law rather than justice is the
principle, duty seems to consist primarily in obedience to the law or rather to
the lawgiver who has superior power and authority. Only secondarily, or in
consequence, does it involve obligations to other men who are one's equals.

With Hobbes, for example, justice, and obligation as well, begin only with the
establishment of a constituted authority with the power of making laws. "Where
there is no Commonwealth," he writes, "there is nothing unjust. So that the
nature of justice consisteth in keeping of valid covenants; but the validity of
covenants begins not but with the constitution of a civilpower, sufficient to
compel men to keep them." Duty and justice are both said to be "laws of nature/'
but, Hobbes adds, they "are not properly laws, but qualities that dispose men to
peace, and to obedience," until "a Commonwealth is once settled," and then they
become "the commands of the Commonwealth." In other words, "it is the Sovereign
power that obligesmen to obey them," and obedience, which is said to be "part
also of the law of nature," is its proper expression. So far the two conceptions
conflict or at least diverge. But if the legal theory of duty goes no further
than the enactments of the state, the same question arises here as before. Does
a man have no duties apart from his relation to the state? Can duty be
co-extensive with morality if the only rules of conduct to be obeyed are laws
imposed from without regulations which have authority simply because they come
from one who has the right to command? Again, as we shall see, Kant would say
No, WE HAVE now stated the questions about duty which raise difficulties for
Aristotle and Hobbes. Though they differ in their theories of law and justice,
as well as in their conceptions of duty, they seem to concur in thinking that
doing one's duty does not exhaustively solve all moral problems.

The same questions do not, however, seem to present difficulties to other
moralists to Kant and to the Stoics of antiquity, such as Marcus Aurehus and
Epictetus. On the contrary, their moral philosophy, by making the sphere of duty
co-extensive with the whole of the moral life, seems to prevent such questions
from being raised. As we turn to examine their conception of duty, we must
observe that, in two respects, it alters Locke's threefold division of the
answers to the question, Why must a man keep his word ? In the first place,
Locke's statement of the answer given by "the ancient philosophers" seems to
have only Plato and Aristotle in mind, certainly not the Stoics. In the second
place, Locke's statement of the Christian position seems to associate it with
the Hobbist answer, against that of Plato and Aristotle. That association may be
justified on the ground that duty to God, like duty to the state, involves
obligation to a superior. But Aquinas, as we have seen, seems to agree with
Aristotle about justice as a source of duty; and, as we shall see, he also seems
to agree with Kant and the Stoics about the pervasiveness of duty in the realm
of morals. Locke's statement of the Christian position which selects one aspect
of it only, may therefore be inadequate. The point which unites Kant, the
Stoics, and Aquinas is their agreement concerning the existence of a law which
is neither enacted by the statenor proclaimed by God m his revealed
commandments. This law the Stoics speak of as "the law of reason," Aquinas calls
"the natural law," and Kant conceives to be "the moral law within." The common
conception thus vari- ously expressed is more fully treated in the chapter on
LAW; but that ampler discussion is not needed to perceive that the law of reason
or of nature is a moral law, in that its general principles and detailed
precepts govern the entire range of moral acts.

"Morality," according to Kant, "consists in the reference of all action to the
legislation which alone can render a kingdom of ends possible." By this he means
that "the will is never to act on any maxim which could not without
contradiction be also a universal law." This law isalso moral in the sense that
it exercises only moral authority and should prevail even without the support of
the external sanctions which accompany the positive commands of a superior. 'The
idea of duty," Kant declares, "would alone be sufficient as a spring [of action]
even if the spring were absent which is connected by forensic legislation . . .
namely external compulsion."

Making the natural or moral law the principle of duty introduces the element of
obligation into every moral act. Whatever is right to do we are obliged to do in
conformity to the law of nature or in obedience to the commands of the moral
law. We need no external promulgation of this law i.e., no express formulation
in words by a lawgiver for this law is inherent in reason itself. Its various
maxims or precepts can be deduced from what Aquinas calls the "first principle
... of the practical reason" and Kant "the categorical imperative." Or, as the
Stoics say, since reason is the "ruling principle" in man, man's duty consists
in "holding fast" to it and "going straight on" so that it has "what is its
own." On this theory, we are obliged in conscience to do whatever reason
declares right, whether or not others are directly involved. The distinction
between public and private morality between the spheres of justice and the other
virtues is irrelevant to conscience. Conscience, according to Kant, functions
equally in the spheres of internal and external duty. In both the realm of
ethics and the realm of jurisprudence, conscience, applying the moral law,
dictates our duty in the particular case. We stand in no different relation to
ourselves and others, since the moral law is universally and equally binding on
all persons. The obligation is in 19: DUTY every case to obey the law. It is not
a duty to persons, except as the moral law commands us to respect the dignity of
the human person, ourselves and others alike.

The element of a superior commanding an inferior seems to be present in this
conception of duty through the relation of reason to the will and appetites of
man. Acting dutifully consists in the submission of the will to reason, and in
overcoming all contrary inclinations or desires. But though Kant sometimes
speaks in these terms, he also conceives duty as carrying with it an obligation
to God. "The subjective principle of a responsibility for one's deeds before
God," he says, is "contained, though it be only obscurely, in every moral
self-consciousness." Nevertheless, Kant insists that "the Christian principle of
morality itself is not theological."

It rests, in his opinion, on the "autonomy of pure practical reason, since it
does not make the knowledge of God and his will the foundation of these laws,
but only of the attainment of the summum bonum, on the condition of following
these laws, and it does not even place the proper spring of this obedience in
the desired results, but solely in the conception of duty, as that of which the
faithful observance alone constitutes the worthiness to obtain those happy
consequences." It is "through the summum bonum as the object and final end of
pure practical reason" that, in Kant's view of Christian morality, we pass from
moral philosophy to ''religion, that is, to the recognition of all duties as
divine commands" A Christian theologian like Aquinas, however, seems to go
further than Kant in equating conformity to the moral law or the natural law of
reason with religious obedience to God. Nor does he explain this equivalence by
reference to the fact that God has made man's attainment of the summum bonum or
eternal happiness depend on his free compliance with the moral law. Rather, for
Aquinas, the natural law is "nothing else than the rational creature's
participation in the eternal law" of God the "imprint on us of the divine
light." As God is the author of man's nature and reason, so is He the ultimate
authority behind the commands of the natural law which He implanted in man's
reason at creation.

362 For a Christian theologian like Aquinas, duty to God involves obedience to
the moral law which reason can discover by itself, no less than obedience to
those positive commandments which God has revealed to man. Aquinas seems to
think that violation of the natural law is as much a sin as violation of the
divine law. Both involve a rupture of that order laid down by God, the one "in
relation to the rule of reason, in so far as all our actions and passions should
be commensurate with the rule of reason,'* theother "in relation to the rule of
the divine law." Thus, in all moral matters, it would appear that duty is, in
Wordsworth's phrase, "stern daughter of the voice of God." If the natural law
commands us to use our faculties to the ends for which they were created, then
the possession of a mind imposes upon us what Socrates in the Apology calls
man's "duty to inquire." If we fail to seek the truth, we sin against God by
sinning against our nature, even though "Thou shalt seek the truth" is nowhere
explicitly prescribed in Holy Writ. ETHICAL DOCTRINES can be classified
according to the role which they assign to duty as a moral principle. There is
perhaps no more fundamental issue in moral philosophy than that between the
ethics of duty and the ethics of pleasure or happiness. This issue obviously
belongs to the chapters on HAPPINESS and PLEASURE as well as the present one.
All three must be read togetherand perhaps also the chapters on DESIRE, LAW, and
VIRTUE to complete the picture. According to the morality of duty, every act is
to be judged for its obedience or disobedience to law, and the basic moral
distinction is between right and wrong. But where pleasure or happiness are
central, the basic distinction is between good and evil, and desire rather than
law sets the standard of appraisal. An analysis of means and ends and a theory
of the virtues are usually found in the ethics of happiness, as a theory of
conscience and sanctions is usually prominent in the ethics of duty. At one
extreme, there is the position which totally excludes the concept of duty. This
fact more than any other characterizes the Epicureanism of Lucretius. The good
life for him is one where "nature craves for herself no more than this, that
pain hold aloof from the body, and she in mind enjoy a feeling of pleasure
exempt from care and fear." The life he describes so disciplined and moderated
that all but the simplest pleasures are relinquished in the effort to avoid pain
seems to leave no place for obligation or social responsibility. In the much
more elaborate moral philosophy of Aristotle, virtue entails moderation in the
avoidance of pain as well as in the pursuit of pleasure. Though he admits that
"most pleasures might perhaps be bad without qualification," Aristotle claims
that "the chief good," which is happiness, "would involve some pleasure." But
even as a good, pleasure is not the only good, for there are other objects of
desire. The happy man, according to Aristotle, is one who somehow succeeds in
satisfying all his desires by seeking the various kinds of goods in some order
and relation to one another. Happiness itself is something that "we choose
always for itself and never for the sake of something else." Although wemay also
choose other things in some sense for themselves, such as "honor, pleasure,
reason, and every virtue," still they are chosen "for the sake of happiness,"
since we judge them as "the means by which we shall be happy." In Aristotle's
ethics of happiness, duty is not entirely excluded, but neither is it given any
independent significance. As we have seen, it is merely an aspect of the virtue
of justice, and amounts to no more than the just man's acknowledgment of the
debt he owes to others; or his recognition that he is under some obligation to
avoid injuring other men and to serve the common good. At the other extreme,
there is the position which identifies the sense of duty with the moral sense.
In the Stoicism of Marcus Aurehus and Epictetus, to live well is to do one's
duty, and to set aside all contrary desires. "It is thy duty," the Emperor
writes, "to order thy life well in every single act; and if every act does its
duty, as far as is possible, be content; and no one is able to hinder thee so
that each act shall not do its duty." Man is not destined to be happy; his
happiness consists rather in doing what is required of him at his post of duty
in the order of the universe. The only good is a good will, CHAPTER 19: DU a
dutiful will, a will which conforms itself to the law of nature.

Kant's much more elaborate moral philosophy presents the same fundamental
teachings. This is indicated by the fact that he associates what he calls
eudaemonism (i.e., the ethics of happiness) with hedonism (i.e., the ethics of
pleasure). Happiness, he writes, is "a rational being's consciousness of the
pleasantness of life uninterruptedly accompanying his whole existence," and its
basis is "the principle of selflove." Therefore, according to Kant, both
eudaemonism and hedonism commit the same error. Both ''undermine morality and
destroy its sublimity, since they put the motives to virtue and to vice in the
same class, and only teach us to make a better calculation." Both admit desire
as a moral criterion of good and evil.Both are utilitarian in that they are
concerned with consequences, with means and ends.

Both measure the moral act by reference to the end it serves.

For Kant, "an action done from duty derives its moral worth, not from the
purpose which is to be attained by it, but from the maxim by which it is
determined, and therefore does not depend on the realization of the object of
the action, but merely on the principle oi volition by which the action has
taken place, without any regard to any object of desire. . . . Duty," he goes on
to say, "is the necessity of acting from respect for the law." From this he
argues that duty, and consequently all moral action, must be done because it is
right, because the law commands it, and for no other reason. The recommendation
of any action solely on the ground that it will contribute to happiness as
satisfying the inclination of the person and achieving the object of the will,
is completely ruled out. That would be a judgment of pure expediency. Worse than
not moral, it is, in the opinion of Kant, immoral. "An action done from duty,"
Kant writes, "must wholly exclude the influence of inclination, and with it
every object of the will, so that nothing remains which can determine the will
except objectively the law, and subjectively pure respect for this practical
law, and consequently the maxim that I should follow this law even to the
thwarting of all my inclinations. . . . The pre-eminent good which we call TY
moral can therefore consist in nothing else than the conception of law in
itself, which certainly is only possible in a rational being in so far as this
conception, and not the expected effect, determines the will."

This law, which is the source of duty and of all moral action, is Kant's famous
"categorical imperative" or, in other words, reason's unconditional command.
According to its decree, Kant declares, "I am never to act otherwise than so
that I could also will that my maxim should become a universal law." By obeying
the categorical imperative, we can know and do our duty and rest assured that
our will is morally good. "I do not, therefore, need any farreaching penetration
to discern what I have to do," Kant writes, "in order that my will may be
morally good. Inexperienced in the course of the world, incapable of being
prepared for contingencies, I only ask myself: Canst all its thou also will that
thy maxim should be a universal law? If not, then it must be rejected, and that
not because of a disadvantage accruing from it to myself, or even to others, but
because it cannot enter as a principle into a possible universal legislation."

To say that a man ought to do this or refrain from doing that in order to
achieve happiness is, for Kant, at best a conditional obligation, ultimately a
specious one since he is not unconditionally obliged to be happy. Kant does not
totally exclude happiness or the summum bonum. In fact he says that there is no
need to maintain "an opposition" between them and morality. But he claims that
"the moment duty is in question we should take no account of happiness." Just as
Aristotle treats duty only in terms of justice, so Kant considers happiness to
have a moral quality only insofar as to be worthy of it is an end set by the
moral law. Two OTHER voices join in this great argument concerning duty and
happiness. One is that of John Stuart Mill, whose Utilitarianism recognizes Kant
as the chief opponent of an ethics of happiness. Though Mill differs from
Aristotle on many points, particularly in regard to the virtues as means to
happiness, Mill's answer to Kant can be read as a defense of Aristotle as well
as of his own theory. From Kant's point of view, they are both THE GREAT I
utilitarians. They both argue in terms of means and ends. They both make purely
pragmatic, not moral, judgments judgments of expediency instead of judgments of
right and wrong. From Mill's point of view, Aristotle like himself needs no
other principle of morality than happiness, an ultimate end which justifies
every means that tends towards its realization. "The ultimate sanction of all
morality, external motives apart," Mill writes, "is a subjective feeling in our
own minds." He asserts that "when once the general happiness is recognized as
the ethical standard," it will appeal to "a powerful natural sentiment." Man's
nature as a social being, he holds, "tends to make him feel it one of his
natural wants that there should be harmony between his feelings and aims and
those of his fellow-creatures." This conviction, in persons who have it, "docs
not present itself to their minds as a superstition of education, or a law
despotically imposed by the power of society, but as an attribute which it would
not be well for them to be without." This conviction, rather than an internal
sense of obligation or fear of external sanctions imposed by a superior power,
is for Mill "the ultimate sanction of the greatest happiness morality" which
aims at the greatest happiness for the greatest number. Where Mill answers Kant
by excluding duty even from considerations of justice Aquinas seems to develop
an analysis in which every moral act can be regarded as obeying or disobeying
the natural law and yet, at the same time, be judged as a means which serves or
fails to serve the ultimate end of man's natural desire. "The order of the
precepts of the natural law is," in the words of Aquinas, "according to the
order of natural inclinations." The dilemma set up by the opposition between
duty and happiness seems to be denied, or at least avoided, by a theory which
finds a perfect parallelism between the precepts of natural law and the objects
of natural desire, a parallelism resulting from their common source in the
creation of human nature by God.

THE TENSION between duty and desire between obedience to rules of conduct and
unrestrained indulgence is one of the burdens which no other animal except man
must bear. It isa constant theme in the great poems. It is pivotal to the plot
of most of the great love stories. It is a theme of tragedy, for in whichever
direction the tension is resolved whether in the line of duty (as by Aeneas
forsaking Dido) or in disobedience to law (as by Adam yielding to Eve in
Paradise Lost) ruin results. The tragedy of being both rational and animal seems
to consist in having to choose between duty and desire rather than m making any
particular choice. It may be significant, however, that the tragic heroes of
poetry more frequently abandon duty than desire or love, though seldom without
mortal punishment, preceded by a deep sense of their transgression. Sometimes,
however, they are self-deceived, and cloak desire in the guise of duty. There is
another source of tragic conflict in the spheie of duty. Men are torn by
competing loyalties, obligations which pull them in opposite directions. In the
basic relationships of the family, the duty a man owes to his parents often
cannot be discharged without violating or neglecting obligations to his wife.
When the moral law and the law of the state command contrary actions, duty is
weighed against duty in an ordeal of conscience. Sometimes, however, one
obligation seems to take clear precedence over another, as in the mind of
Sophocles' Antigone, for whom the king's edict loses its authority when it runs
counter to the law of God. Creon the king, not Antigone his subject, may be the
play's more tragic personage. He sacrifices a dearly beloved son to uphold the
authority he considers it his duty as a ruler to maintain. If man is not a
rational animal or if, whatever his nature, reason is not its ruling principle,
then the sense of duty would appear to be an imposture that draws its driving
force from the emotional energies with which certain manmade rules of conduct
are invested. Rather than acting as a counterweight to desire, duty is itself
the shape which certain desires take to combat others. Conscience, or the
super-ego, according to Freud, is born of the struggle between the ego and the
td. Translated into "popular language," Freud tells us, "the ego stands for
reason and circumspection, while the id stands for the untamed passions." What
may originally have had a necessary function to perform in the psychic CHAPTER
19: DUT economy can grow to play too dominant a part. For the psychoanalyst, not
tragedy but neurosis results from an overdeveloped sense of duty. When "the ego
[is] forced to acknowledge its weakness," Freud explains, it "breaks out into
anxiety: reality anxiety in face of the external world, normal anxiety in face
of the super-ego, and neurotic anxiety in face of the strength of the passions
in the id."

THE RELATION of ruler and ruled in the domestic or the political community may
seem at first to impose duties or obligations only on the ruled.The ruler
commands. His subjects are obliged to obey. Does the ruler in turn have no
duties, no obligations to those whom he governs ? If he has none, then neither
have the persons he rules rights which he must respect. Such absolute rule
defined by a correlative absence of duties in the ruler and rights in the ruled
has been one conception of the relation between master and slave. In the state
rulers who are merely officeholders are obligated by the duties of their

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The concept of duty or obligation: its moral significance

2. Comparison of the ethics of duty with the ethics of happiness, pleasure, or utility

3. The divisions of duty internal and external duty the realms of ethics and unsprudence
: ;
j

4. The sense of duty
 4a. The moral and social development of conscience : its dictates
 4b. The emotional development of conscience : its morbid manifestations
 tTie derivation of duty from divine, natural, and civil law, and from the
 categorical
 imperative of reason

6. Conflicts between duties of diverse origins

7. The relation of duty to justice and to rights: oaths and promises

8. The tension between duty and instinct, desire, or love

9. The duties of command and obedience in family life

10. Political obligation: cares, functions,
loyalties
Duty to God: piety and worship

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of the issue between the ethics of duty
and the ethics of happi

ure, see HAPPINESS 3; PLEASURE AND PAIN 6-6a, 8b.

Matters relevant to this issue, see DESIRE 20, 33; GOOD AND EVIL 33-32); JU

4; LAW 33(1), 4-43, 4C-4d; TEMPERANCE 3; VIRTUE AND VICE 1d, 6a; WILL 8b

Other treatments of conscience, both psychological and ethical, see HONOR 2a

5c; SIN 5; TEMPERANCE 3.

The consideration of duty in relation to law, justice, and rights, see GOD 3

rib; LAW 2, 43, 4c-4d, 6a; RELIGION 2; WILL 8d.

The conflict between duty and desire or love, see DESIRE 6a-6b; LOVE 3c.

The treatment of specific duties, domestic, political, and religious, see CI

GOD 3d; JUSTICE nb; RELIGION 2; STATE 8a; TRUTH 8e.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booths of the Western World, b

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works arc divided into

L Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of T

SENECA. Moral Essays

I.

MAIMONIDES. Eight Chapters EPICTETUS. The Manual BOCCACCIO. Patient Griseld
HOBBES. Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Govern- BEAUMONT and FLETCHER. The

ment and Society, CH 13 SANDERSON. De Obligatione HUME. A Treatise of Human
Nature, BK HI, PART 11, ligations of Conscience)

SECT vn-x CORNEILLE. Le Cid FIELDING. Amelia Horace

.

A. SMITH. The Theory of Moral Sentiments, PART in .

Polyeucte

- KANT. Lectures on Ethics, pp '11-47, 116-253

Religion Within the Limits of Reason Alone

.

DOSTOEVSK.Y. Crime and Punishment

J. TAYLOR. Of Holy Livin

Ductor Dubitantium

.

RACINE. Andromaque

BAXTER. Chapters from A Ch

PUFENDORF. De Qffkw Homini

- CICERO. De Minibus (On the Supreme Good)

. De Officiis (On Duties)

gem Naturalem (&/" the D

Citizen According to

11 ason, 325a-327d; 345c-d / ysic of Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / 3a; 504b-505a;
509a-c; b-d; 310d-311a 84b-c; 262b of History, PART i, , 30a-36b; 39a-b eace, BK
r, 50b-c; BK in, 80a -220a; BK vi, 271c-d; 273c7c; BK vi, 164a-165a; 167brs
Karamazov, BK iv, 83cness or pleasSTICE 1c-1f, (i), 8c-8d. ; PUNISHMENT d;
JUSTICE 1c, 3, TIZEN 4; FAMILY 6d; ut relevant to the two groups: s cited,
consult he Great Ideas. on Ethics a Maid's Tragedy Conscientiae (On the Ob- g
ristian Directory s et Civis Juxta L- uties of Man and of the Natural Law)

CHAPTER 1

J. BUTLER. Fifteen Sermons upon Human Nature, m,

X, XIII T. REID. Essays on the Active Powers of the Human

Mind, in, PART in, CH 5-8 D. STEWART. Outlines of Moral Philosophy PART n,

t

CH 2 J. G. FICHTE. The Vocation of Man, PART

in WORDSWORTH. Ode to Duty

BE NTH AM. Deontology WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK n, CH 5-12;

BK v, CH 2, 10-17 MAZZINI. The Duties of Man MAURICE. The Conscience P. A.
JANET. The Theory of Morals, BK n, CH 2

H. SIDGWICK. The Methods of Ethics, BK n, CH 5;

BK III, CH 2 BRADLEY. Ethical Studies, iv-v T. H. GREEN. The Principles of
Political Obligation, (A)

GUYAU. Esquisse d'une morale sans obligation ni

sanction

9: DUTY NIETZSCHE. The Genealogy of Morals, n BRENTANO. The Origin ofthe
Knowledge of Right and

Wrong, par 1-13 SPENCER. The Principles of Ethics, VOL n, PART iv,

CH 9-29; PART v-vr DEWEY. 'The Idea of Obligation," in Outlines of a

Critical Theory of Ethics

The Study of Ethics, CH 7-8

. BOSANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 16 CROCE. The Philosophy of the Practical,
PART i, SECT

ii;PART n, SECT i (iv); SECT n (i); PART HI (iv) ROYCE. The Philosophy of
Loyalty MOORE. Prmcipia Ethica, CH 4

Ethics, CH 4-5

. PRICHARD. Duty and Interest N. HARTMANN. Ethics, VOL i, Moral Phenomena,

SECT 4-6 KIRK. Conscience and Its Problems Ross. The Right and the Good, i-n, vn
BERGSON. Two Sources of Morality and Rehgion CH i

t MUIRHEAD. Rule and End tn Morals
