Chapter 10: EDUC INTRODUCTION books assembled in this set are '""p'HE great
offered as means to a liberal or general education. The authors of these books
were educated men; more than that, they typified the ideal of education in their
various epochs.

As their writings reveal, their minds were largely formed, or at least deeply
impressed, by reading the works of their predecessors. Many of them were related
as teacher and student, sometimes through personal contact, sometimes only
through the written word. Many of them were related as divergent disciples of
the same master, yet they often differed with him as well as with one another.
There is scarcely one among them except Homer who was not acquainted with the
minds of the others who came before him and, more often than not, profoundly
conversant with their thought. Yet not one of the writings in this set is
specifically a treatise on education, except Montaigne's essay Of the Education
of Children. Some of these authors speak more or less fully of their own
education, as does Marcus Aurehus in the opening book of his Meditations,
Augustine in his Confessions, Descartes in his Discourse, and Boswell. Others
refer to their educational experience in fictional guise, as does Aristophanes
in the argument in the Clouds between the Just and Unjust Discourses; or
Rabelais when he tells of Gargantua's schooling in Gargantua's letter to
Pantagruel. Sometimes they report the way in which other men were trained to
greatness, as does Plutarch; or, like Gibbon, Hegel, and Mill, they describe and
comment on the historic systems of education. In still other instances the great
books contain sections or chapters devoted to the ends and means of education,
the order of studies, the nature of learning and teaching, the training of
statesmen and citizens; as for example, ATION Plato's Republic, Aristotle's
Politics, Augustine's Christian Doctrine, Bacon's Advancement of Learning, Adam
Smith's Wealth of Nations, Hegel's Philosophy of Right, and the psychological
writings of James and Freud. But in no case is education the principal theme of
these books, as it is for most of the works cited in the list of Additional
Readings, among which will be found treatises on education by authors in this
set. EDUCATION is not itself so much an idea or a subject matter as it is a
theme to which the great ideas and the basic subject matters are relevant. It is
one of the perennial practical problems which men cannot discuss without
engaging in the deepest speculative considerations. It is a problem which
carries discussion into and across a great many subject matters the liberal arts
of grammar, rhetoric, and logic; psychology, medicine, metaphysics, and
theology; ethics, politics, and economics. It is a problem which draws into
focus many of the great ideas virtue and truth, knowledge and opinion, art and
science; desire, will, sense, memory, mind, habit; change and progress; family
and state; man, nature, and God. This can be verified by noting the diverse
contexts in which education is discussed in the great books. In each connection
we shall find some of the special questions which together make up the complex
problem of education. For example, the nature of teaching and learning is
examined in the wider context of psychological considerations concerning man's
abilities,the way in which knowledge is acquired, and how it is communicated by
means of language or other symbols. Different conceptions of the nature of man
and of the relation of his several capacities surround the question of the ends
of education. In this context CHAPTER 20: ED questions also arise concerning the
parts of education the training of man's body, the formation of his character,
the cultivation of his mindand how these are related to one another.

The whole theory of the virtues and of habit formation is involved in the
question whether virtue can be taught or must be acquired in some other way, and
in related questions about the influence of the family and the state on the
growth of character. These questions are also asked in terms of general
political theory. Different views of the state are involved in questions about
the division of responsibility for education among various agencies. Questions
about the purpose of education, and what sort of education shall be given to the
diverse classes in the state, are differently raised and differently answered in
the context of discussions of different forms of government.

Though they are far from exhaustive, these examples should nevertheless suffice
to make the point that there can be no philosophy of education apart from
philosophy as a whole. It may therefore not be a disadvantage to find the
discussion of education in the great books almost always imbedded in the context
of some more general theory or problem.

ONE OPINION FROM which there is hardly a dissenting voice in the great books is
that education should aim to make men good as men and as citizens. "If you ask
what is the good of education," Plato writes, "the answer is easy that education
makes good men, and that good men act nobly, and conquer their enemies in
battle, because they are good." Men should enter upon learning, Bacon declares,
in order "to give a true account of their gift of reason, to the benefit and use
of men"; while William James stresses the need for "a perfectly-rounded
development." Thus it would seem to be a common opinion in all ages that
education should seek to develop the characteristic excellences of which men are
capable and that its ultimate ends are human happiness and the welfare of
society. Within this area of general agreement there are, of course, differences
which result from the different views that are taken of man's relation to the
state or to God. If the good of the state UCATION takes precedence over
individual happiness, then education must be directed to training men for the
role they play as parts of a larger organism. Education then serves the purpose
of preserving the state. Of all things, Aristotle says, "that which contributes
most to the permanence of constitutions is the adaptation of education to the
form of government. . . . The best laws," he continues, "though sanctioned by
every citizen of the state, will be of no avail unless the young are trained by
habit and education in the spirit of the constitution." Rousseau seems to take a
similar view when he calls for a system of public education run by the state.
Its object is to assure that the citizens are "early accustomed to regard their
individuality only in its relation to the body of the state, and to be aware, so
to speak, of their own existence merely as a part of that of the state." Taught
in this way, the citizens, Rousseau claims, "might at length come to some degree
with this identify themselves in greater whole, to feel themselves members of
their country, and to love it with that exquisite feeling which no isolated
person has save for himself." If happiness cannot be fully achieved on earth,
then whatever temporal ends education servesmust themselves be ordered to
eternal and the whole process of human salvation, development must be a
direction of the soul to God. "What did it profit me," Augustine asks in his
Confessions, "that all the books I could procure of the so-called liberal arts,
I, the vile slave of vile affections, read by myself and understood ? .For I had
my back to the . . light, and my face to the things enlightened; whence my face,
with which I discerned the things enlightened, was not itself enlightened.
Whatever was written, either on rhetoric, or logic, geometry, music and
arithmetic, by myself without much difficulty or any instructor, I understood,
Thou knowest, O Lord my God; because both quickness of understanding and
acuteness in discerning, is Thy gift; yet did I not thence sacrifice to Thee."
Wherefore, Augustine concludes concerning this stage of his learning, "it served
not to my use but to my perdition." But Augustine does not therefore conclude
that, under no circumstances, can liberal education be put to good use. In his
treatise On Christian Doctrine, he considers in detail how the liberal arts,
which serve so well in the study of Sacred Scripture, may also serve to bring
the soul to God.

SUCH DIFFERENCES DO NOT, however, annul one consequence of the general
agreement, namely, the conception that education is concerned with the vocation
of man, and prepares him in thought and action for his purpose and station in
life. In these terms Adam Smith argues for a minimum general education. He
claims that "a man without the proper use of the intellectual faculties of a
man, is, if posmore contemptible than even a coward, sible, and seems to be
mutilated and deformed in a still more essential part of the character of human
nature." He explicitly points out that this is the condition of "the great body
of the people,'* who, by the division of labor, are confined in their employment
"to a few very simple operations," in which the worker "has no occasion to exert
his understanding, or to exercise his invention in finding out expedients for
removing difficulties which never occur." The result, according to Smith, is
that "the torpor of his mind renders him, not only incapable of relishing or
bearing a part in any rational conversation, but of conceiving any generous,
noble, or tender sentiment, and consequently of forming any just judgment
concerning many even of the ordinary duties of private life."

When the vocation of man is thus understood, a general or liberal education is
vocational in that it prepares each man for the common conditions and callings
of human life. In this sense specialized training, which by implication at least
seems to be the object of Smith's criticism, is not vocational. It fits a man
only for some specialized function, according to which he or his social class is
differentiated from some other man or class.

In our day, the word "vocational" is used in the opposite sense to mean
specialized training, whether it is preparation for the least skilled of trades
or for the most learned of professions. Since all men are not called to the
practice of law or medicine any more than all arc called to productive work in
the various arts and crafts, or the tasks of commerce and industry the training
they may need to perform these functions does not fully develop their common
humanity. It is not adequate to make them good as men, as citizens, or as
children of God.

The traditional meaning of the word "liberal" as applied to education entails a
distinction between free men and slaves, Slaves, like domesticated animals, are
trained to perform special functions. They are not treated as ends, but as
means, and so they are not educated for their own good, but for the use to which
they are put. This is true not only of slaves in the strict sense of household
chattel; it is also true of all the servile classes in any society which divides
its human beings into those who work in order to live and those who live off the
work of others and who therefore have the leisure in which to strive to live
well. In accordance with these distinctions, Aristotle divides education into
"liberal" and "illiberal." Certain subjects are illiberal by nature, namely,
"any occupation, art, or science, which makes the body or soul of the freeman
less fit for the practice or exercise of virtue." In this category Aristotle
includes "those arts which tend to deform the body, and likewise all paid
employments, for they absorb and degrade the mind." It is not only the nature of
the subject, but also the end which education serves, that determines whether
its character is liberal or illiberal. Even a liberal art becomes, in
Aristotle's opinion, "menial and servile . . . if done for the sake of others."
A man's education "will not appear illiberal" only so long as "he does or learns
anything for his own sake or for the sake of his friends, or with a view to
excellence." In other words, to be liberal, education must serve the use of
leisure in the pursuit of excellence. It must treat man as an end, not as a
means to be used by other men or by the state. It follows that any society which
abolishes the distinction of social classes and which calls all men to freedom,
should conceive education as essentially liberal and for all men. It should,
furthermore, direct education, in all its parts and phases, to the end of each
man's living well rather than to the end of his earning a living for himself or
others.

CHAPTER 20: EDUC IN THE CLASSIFICATION of the kinds of education, the word
"liberal" is frequently used in a more restricted sense to signify not all
education designed for free men, but only the improvement of the mind through
the acquisition of knowledge and skill. In this sense liberal education is set
apart from physical education which concerns bodily health and proficiency, and
moral education which concerns excellence in action rather than in thought.
These divisions are clearly made, perhaps for the first time, in Plato's
Republic. The education described there begins in the early years with music and
gymnastic. Gymnastic "presides over the growth and decay of the body."

Music, which includes literature as well as the arts of harmony and rhythm, is
said to educate its students "by the influence of habit, by harmony making them
harmonious, by rhythm rhythmical," and its function is to develop moral as well
as aesthetic sensibilities. The second part of Plato's curriculum, "which leads
naturally to reflection" and draws "the soul towards being," consists in the
mathematical arts and sciences of arithmetic, geometry,music, and astronomy. The
program is capped by the study of dialectic, to which all the rest is but "a
prelude"; for "when a person starts on the discovery of the absolute by the
light of reason only, and without any assistance of sense, and perseveres until
by pure intelligence he arrives at the perception of the absolute good, he at
last finds himself at the end of the intellectual world." Up to this point, the
program can be taken as liberal education in the narrow sense of learning how
and what to think. The fifteen years of experience in civic affairs and the
tasks of government, which Plato interposes at the age of thirty-five, seem to
function as another phase of moral training. This period provides "an
opportunity of trying whether, when they are drawn all manner of ways by
temptation, they will stand firm or flinch."

To the extent that physical training aims, beyond health, at the acquirement of
skill in a coordinated use of one's body, it can be annexed to liberal rather
than moral education. Plato notes, for example, that gymnastic should not be too
sharply distinguished from music as "the training of the body" from the "train-
ATION ing of the soul." Gymnastic as well as music, he claims, has "in view
chiefly the improvement of the soul," and he considers the two as balancing and
tempering one another. Whether they produce competence in gymnastic or athletic
feats, or, like the manual arts, proficiency in productive work, all bodily
skills, even the simplest, involve the senses and the mind as well as bones and
muscles. They are arts no less than music or logic. Apart from their utility,
they represent a certain type of human excellence, which will be denied only by
those who can see no difference between the quality of a racehorse and the skill
of his rider. Whether these skills as well as other useful arts are part of
liberal education in the broader sense depends, as we have seen, on the end for
which they are taught or learned. Even the arts which arc traditionally called
liberal, such as rhetoric or logic,can be degraded to servility if the sole
motive for becoming skilled in them is wealth won by success in the law courts.
IN THE TWO traditional distinctions so far discussed, "liberal education" seems
to have a somewhat different meaning when it signifies the opposite of servile
training and when it signifies the opposite of moral cultivation. In the first
case, the distinction is based upon the purpose of the education; in the second,
it refers to the faculties or functions being cultivated. When the second is
stated in terms of the distinction between the intellectual and the moral
virtues, liberal (i.e., intellectual) education is conceived as aiming at good
habits of thinking and knowing, and moral education is thought of as aiming at
good habits of will, desire, or emotion, along with their consequences in
action. Although he does not use these terms, Montaigne seems to have the
contrast between moral and intellectual training in mind when he criticizes the
education of his day for aiming "at nothing but to furnish our heads with
knowledge, but not a word of judgment and virtue." It is, to him, a "pedantic
education," which not only fails to achieve the highest educational purpose, but
also results in a great knowledge is hurtful to him evil, in that "all who has
not the science of goodness." A too sharp separation of the intellectual and the
moral may be questioned, or at least qualified, by those who, like Socrates,
tend to identify knowledge and virtue. Yet they seldom go to the opposite
extreme of supposing that no distinction can be made between the task of
imparting knowledge to the mind and that of forming character. Socrates, for
example, in the Meno, recognizes that a man cannot be made temperate,
courageous, or just in the same way that he can be taught geometry. From another
point of view, the notion of moral training is questioned by those who, like
Freud, think that the patterns of human desire or emotion can be beneficially
changed apart from moral discipline. It is the object of psychoanalysis, he
writes, "to strengthen the ego, to make it more independent of the super-ego, to
widen its field of vision, and so to extend its organization that it can take
over new portions of the id." To do this is radically to alter the individual's
behavior-pattern. "It is reclamationwork," Freud says, "like the draining of the
Zuyder Zee." Emotional education, so conceived, is therapeutic more like
preventive and remedial medicine than moral training. Religious education is
usually regarded as both intellectual and moral, even as the science of theology
is said to be both speculative and practical. Citing the admonition of St.
James, "Be ye doers of the word, and not hearers only," Aquinas holds that
religious education is concerned with the knowledge not only of "divine things"
but also of the "human acts" by which man comes to God, Since man is infinitely
removed from God, he needs for this purpose the grace of God, which, according
to Aquinas, "is nothing short of a partaking of the divine nature." Both on the
side of man's knowledge of God and on the side of his love and worship of God,
religious education involves the operation of supernatural factors revelation,
grace, sacraments. Hence God is Himself the primary source of religious
education. But as the dispenser of the sacraments whereby "grace is mstrumen
tally caused," the church, according to Aquinas, functions inst rumen tally in
the service of the divine teacher.

THE CONCEPTION OF THE means and ends of moral education will differ with
different ethi- AS cal theories of the good man and the good life, and according
to differing enumerations and definitions of the virtues. It will differ even
more fundamentally according to whether the primary emphasis is placed on
pleasure and happiness or duty. The parties to this basic issue in moral
philosophy, which is discussed in the chapters on DUTY and HAPPINESS, inevitably
propose different ways of forming good character by strengthening the will in
obedience to law, or by habituating the appetites to be moderate or reasonable
in their inclinations. On either theory, the basic problem of moral education is
whether morality can be taught and how. The Greeks formulated this question in
terms of virtue, by asking whether such things as courage and temperance are at
all teachable, as geometry and horsemanship plainly are. The problem remains
essentially the same if the question is how the will can be trained. Can it be
trained by the same methods as those which work in the improvement of the
understanding ? The answer to the question, whichever way it is formulated,
depends on the view that is taken of the relation between moral knowledge and
moral conduct. Do those who understand the principles of ethics"or who know the
moral law necessarily act in accordance with their knowledge ? Can a man know
what is good or right to do in a particular case, and yet do the opposite? St.
Paul seems to suggest this when he says, "For the good that I would I do not:
but the evil which I would not, that I do." If something more than knowledge or
straight thinking is needed for good conduct, how is it acquired and how can one
man help another to acquire it ? Certainly not by learning and teaching in the
ordinary sense which applies to the arts and sciences. Then how by practice, by
guidance or advice, by example, by rewards and punishments; or if by none of
these, then by a gift of nature or by the grace of God ? These questions are
necessarily prior to any discussion of the role of the family, the state, and
the church in the process of moral training. They also provide the general
background for the consideration of particular influences on character formation
in men and children, such things as poetry and music, or laws and cus- CHAPTER
20: EDU toms. Ail of these related 'problems of moral education have a political
aspect, which appears in the issue concerning the state's right to censor or
regulate the arts for morality's sake; in the question of the primacy of the
family or the state in the moral guidance of the young; in the distinction
between the good man and the good citizen or ruler, and the possible difference
between the training appropriate for the one and for the other.

THE MAIN PROBLEM of intellectual education seems to be the curriculum or course
of study. The traditional attempts to construct an ideal curriculum turn on such
questions as what what shall be their studies shall be included, order, and how
shall they be taught or learned. A variety of answers results from a variety of
views of man's faculties or capacities, the nature of knowledge itself, the
classification and order of the arts and sciences. Especially important are the
various conceptions of the nature and function of the liberal arts. Subordinate
questions concern the place of the fine and useful arts in liberal education,
and the role of experience and experiment both in contrast to and in cooperation
with the role of books and teachers. In addition to the problem of the
curriculum and its materials the theory of intellectual education necessarily
considers methods of teaching and learning. Here the various proposals derive
from different views of the learning process of the causes or factors at work in
any acquisition of skill or knowledge. The contribution of the teacher cannot be
understood apart from a psychological analysis of learning, for the teacher is
obviously only one among its many causes. It makes the greatest difference to
the whole enterprise of learning whether the teacher is regarded as the
principal cause of understanding on the part of the student; or whether the
teacher is, as Socrates describes himself, merely "a midwife" assisting the
labor of the mind in bringing knowledge and wisdom to birth, and "thoroughly
examining whether the thought which the mind . . . brings forth is a false idol
or a noble and true birth." This Socratic insight is later reformulated in the
comparison which Aquinas makes, in his CATION tract Concerning the Teacherk
between the art of teaching and the art of healing. Both are cooperative arts,
arts which succeed only as "ministers of nature which is the principal actor,"
and not by acting, like the art of the cobbler or sculptor, to produce a result
by shaping plastic but dead materials. The comparison which Hippocrates makes of
instruction in medicine with "the culture of the productions of the earth"
exhibits the same conception of teaching. "Our natural disposition," he writes,
"is, as it were, the soil; the tenets of our teacher are, as it were, the seed;
instruction in youth is like the planting of the seed in the ground at the
proper season; the place where the instruction is communicated is like the food
imparted to vegetables by the atmosphere; diligent study is like the cultivation
of the fields; and it is time which imparts strength to all things and brings
them to maturity." This conception of teaching as a cooperative art, analogous
to medicine or to agriculture, underlies the principles of pedagogy in the Great
Didactic of Comcnius. It gives significance to the distinction that Aquinas
makes between learning by discovery, or from experience, and learning by
instruction, or from a teacher even as a person is healed "in one way by the
operation of nature alone, and in another by nature with the administration of
medicine." In addition to the technical considerations raised by the nature of
the learning process, the discussion of teaching deals with the moral or
emotional aspect of the relation between teacher and student. Without interest,
learning seldom takes place, or if it does, it cannot rise above the level of
rote memory. It is one thing to lay down a course of study; another to motivate
the student. Though he does not hesitate to prescribe what is to be learned by
the student, Plato adds the caution that there must be no "notion of forcing our
system of education." More than interest is required. Teaching, Augustine
declares, is the greatest act of charity. Learning is facilitated by love. The
courtesies between Dante and Virgil in the Divine Comedy present an eloquent
picture of love between student and teacher, master and dis- 382 THE GREAT
ciple. Not only love, but docility, is required on the part of the student; and
respect for the student's mind on the part of the teacher. Intellectual
education may not be directly concerned with the formation of character, yet the
moral virtues seem to be factors in the pursuit of truth and in the discipline
of the learning process.

WE HAVE ALREADY noted some of the political problems of education. Of these
probably the chief question is whether the organization and institution of
education shall be private or public. Any answer which assigns the control of
education largely or wholly to the state must lead to a number of other
determinations.

Who shall be educated, all or only some? Should the education of leaders be
different from the education of others? If educational opportunity is to be
equal for all, must the same kind as well as the same quantity of education be
offered to all? And, in every case, to what end shall the state direct the
education of its members -to its own welfare and security, or to the happiness
of men and the greater glory of God ? Should education always serve the status
quo by preserving extant customs and perpetuating existing forms of government;
or can and should it aim at a better society and a higher culture? These are
some of the questions with which statesmen and political philosophers have
dealt, answering them differently according to the institutions of their time
and in accordance with one or another theory of the state and its government.
There are still other questions. Is freedom of expression, in teaching and
discussion, indispensable to the pursuit of truth and the dissemination of
knowledge ? To what extent shall the state control the content and methods of
education or leave such determination to the teaching profession ? How shall
public education be supported ? Should it be carried beyond childhood and youth
to all the ages of adult life; and if so, how should such education be organized
outside of schools ? Mill, for example, holds it to be "almost a self-evident
axiom that the State should require and compel the education, up to a certain
standard, of every human being who is born IDEAS its citizen." Yet he deprecates
the idea of a "general state education" as a "mere contrivance for moulding
people to be exactly like one another." Discussing the pro's and con's of this
issue, Mill touches upon most, if not all, of the questions just raised. He
believes that the difficulties could be avoided if the government would leave it
"to parents to obtain the education where and how they pleased, and content
itself with helping to pay the school fees of the poorer classes of children,
and defraying the entire school expenses of those who have no one else to pay
for them." Schools completely established and controlled by the state, he
maintains, "should only exist, if they exist at all, as one among many competing
experiments, earned on for the purpose of example and stimulus, to keep the
others up to a certain standard of excellence." So far as the problem of adult
education concerns citizenship, Mill's answer, like Montesquieu's and Plato's
before him, is that nothing can take the place of active participation in
political life. Men become citizens by living and acting as citizens, under the
tutelage of good laws and in an atmosphere of civic virtue. So far as the
problem of adult education concerns the continued growth of the mind throughout
the life of mature men and women, the answer is not to be found in the great
books in the words of their authors. Yet the great books as a whole may
constitute a solution to that problem. The authors of these books, from Homer to
Freud, are the great original teachers in the tradition of our culture. They
taught one another. They wrote for adults, not children, and in the main they
wrote for the mass of men, not for scholars in this or that specialized field of
learning. The books exhibit these teachers at work in the process of teaching.
They contain, moreover, expositions or exemplifications of the liberal arts as
the arts of teaching and learning in every field of subject matter. To make
these books and their authors work for us by working with them is, it seems to
the editors and publishers of this set of books, a feasible and desirable
program of adult education.

CHAWB 20: EDUCATION

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The ends of education
 1a. The ideal of the educated man
 1b. The disadvantages of being educated

2. The kinds of education: physical, moral, liberal, professional, religious

3. The training of the body and the cultivation of bodily skills: gymnastics, manual work

4. The formation of a good character, virtue, a right will
 4a. The possibility and limits of moral education: knowledge and virtue
 4b. The influence of the family in moral training
 4<r.
 The role of the state in moral education : law, custom, public opinion
 4c. The effect upon character of poetry, music, and other arts: the role of history and
 examples

5. The improvement of the mind by teaching and learning
 5a. The profession of teaching: the relation of teacher and student
 5b. The means and methods of teaching
 5c. The nature of learning: its several modes
 5d. The order of learning: the organization of the curriculum
 5<?.
 The emotional aspect of learning: pleasure, desire, interest
 5/i Learning apart from teachers and books: the role of experience

6. The acquisition of techniques: preparation for the vocations, arts, and professions

7. Religious
education
 7a. God as teacher: divine revelation and inspiration
 7b. The teaching function of the church, of priests and prophets

8. Education and the state
 8a. The educational responsibility of the family and the state
 8b. The economic support of educational institutions
 8c. The political regulation and censorship of education
 8d. The training of the prince, the statesman, the citizen: aristocratic and demo-
 cratic theories of education

9. Historical and biographical observations concerning the institutions and practices of
education
384 .THE GREAT IDEAS

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Matters relevant to physical education or the training of
bodily skills, see AR

LABOR 2b.

Matters relevant to moral education, see ART ica; CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 5b

EVIL 6a; HABIT 5b; HISTORY 2; KNOWLEDGE 8b(i); PLEASURE AND PAIN loa; PO

PUNISHMENT 33; VIRTUE AND VICE la, 4-4k 4d(2), 4d(4), 8b; and for the tr

specific virtues, see COURAGE 6; TEMPERANCE 4.

Matters relevant to liberal education or intellectual training, see ART 6b

HISTORY 2; KNOWLEDGE 93; MAN 6a; MIND 4a-4c; PLEASURE AND PAIN loa; POET

93; TRUTH 3d(3); VIRTUE AND VICE 40-4k, and for discussions of the liber

LANGUAGE la, 7-8; LOGIC 3-3k MATHEMATICS 1b; RHETORIC 1b, 2c-2d, 6.

Matters relevant to professional education or training in the useful arts

LAW 9; MEDICINE i, 2c; PHILOSOPHY 5; RHETORIC 6; STATE 8c.

Matters relevant to religious education, see GOD 6c(i)-6c(3); KNOWLEDGE 6c

ECY 1c-1d; RELIGION 1a-1b(3), 5c; THEOLOGY 2, 4a-4c; VIRTUE AND Viet 8b,

WISDOM 1c.

The consideration of factors involved in learning and teaching, see EMOTIO

2-3b; HABIT 43-4k, KNOWLEDGE 43-40, 93; LANGUAGE 8; LOGIC 4; MIND 4c; PL

AND PAIN 4c(2); TRUTH 3d(3), 8c; VIRTUE AND VICE 40-4k

The role of the family in education, see FAMILY 2c, 6d; VIRTUE AND VICE 4d

The role of the state in education, see LAW 6d; VIRTUE AND VICE 4d(3), 73;

problem of education in relation to different forms of government, see A

CrnztN 6; DEMOCRACY 6; MONARCHY 33; STATE 8c.

The discussion of freedom in the communication of knowledge and art, see A

EDGE 9b; LIBERTY 23; OPINION 5b; POETRY 9b; TRUTH 8d.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided in

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the wo

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

F. BACON. "Of Custo

*

ies," in Essays PLUTARCH. "A Discourse Touching the Training of MILTON. Of
Educatio

Children," in Moraha LOCKE. Some Thought AUGUSTINE. Concerning the Teacher
SWIFT. An Essay on AQUINAS. Concerning the Teacher ROUSSEAU. Emile

Summa Thcologicak PART n-n, QQ 166-167

. GOETHE. William Mei

9 e and Fall, 40a-41a; 210c-d; d-328a,c; 452a-b; 522b-528a,c 2 88a-b k on,
7b-9b; llb-12c; 15a-17b phy of Right, ADDITIONS, 98 phy of History, PART i,
213b-c; PART i [354-685] lla-18a T 90; HABIT 53; ; GOOD AND ETRY 93; aining of ;
HABIT 43-4k 5d; RY 5a, al arts, see and crafts, see 8e; N 5d; EXPERIENCE EASURE
(k); PROPH(i). and for the RISTOCRACY 5; RT lob; KNOWLbut relevant to the to two
groups: on. rks cited, consult The Great Ideas. m and Education," "Of Studn s
Concerning Education Modern Education ster

CHAPTER 20: EDUC KANT. Educational Theory FARADAY. "Observations on Mental
Education/'

in Lectures on Education ]. S. MILL. "Professor Sedgwick's Discourse on the

Studies of the University of Cambridge," in VOL i,

Dissertations and Discussions

.

Inaugural Address

.

Autobiography

II.

XENOPHON. The Education of Cyrus CICERO. DC Oratore (On Oratory) tory), BK i; BK
II, CH 1-3;

BK X, CH I

QUINTILIAN. Institutio Oratona (Institutes of OraSEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Outlines of
Pyrrhonism, BK in, CH 27-32

MARTIANUS CAPELLA. De Nuptiis Philologiae et Mercurtt

CASSIODORUS. Institutiones (An Introduction to Dtvine and Human Readings) HUGH
OF SAINT VICTOR. Dtdascaltcon: De Studio

Legendt JOHN OF SALISBURY. Metalogicon

T. MORE. Utopia, BK i LUTHER. To the Councilmen of All Cities m Germany That
They Establish and Maintain Christian Schools CASTIGLIONE. The Boof( of the
Courtier

ERASMUS. The Education of a Christian Punce . De Puerts Statim ac Liberahter
Instttuendts (On Liberal Education)

ELYOT. The Governour

VIVES. On Education IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA. Constitutions

LYLY. Euphues COMENIUS. The Great Didactic School of Infancy .

FENELON. A Treatise on the Education of Daughters

. Adventures of Telemachus CHESTERFIELD. Letters to His Son

VOLTAIRE. "University," in A Philosophical Dictionary HELVETIUS. A Treatise on
Man FRANKLIN. Autobiography

LESSING. The Education of the Human Race

GODWIN. An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, BK v, CH 2 SCHILLER. Letters
upon the Esthetic Education of Man PESTALOZZI. How Gertrude Teaches Her Children

HERB ART. The Science of Education

JEAN PAUL, Levana J. G. FICHTE, Addresses to the German Nation, ii-in, ix-xiv ,

DE QUINCEY. Letters to a Young Man Whose Education Has Been Neglected

ATION FROEBEL. The Education of Man EMERSON. The American Scholar DICKENS.
Nicholas Nidtfeby WHEWELL. Of a Liberal Education

The Elements of Moralityk BK v, CH 15

. SCHOPENHAUER. "On Education," in Studies in Pessimism I. H. NEWMAN. The Idea
of a University .

University Sketches SPENCER. Essays on Education and Kindred Subjects, PART i
MEREDITH. The Ordeal of Richard Feverel ARNOLD. Culture and Anarchy NIETZSCHE.
On the Future of Our Educational Institutions S. BUTLER. The Way of All Flesh

BAIN. Education as a Science CLIFFORD. "Virchow on the Teaching of Science," m
VOL n, Lectures and Essays T. H. GREEN. The Principles of Political Obligation,
(L)

H ADAMS. The Education of Henry Adams MONTESSORI. Method of Scientific Pedagogy

BRYCE. The Functions of a University SHAW. Pygmalion T. VEBLEN. The Higher
Learning m America WHITEHEAD. The Organization of Thought, CH 1-5 The Aims of
Education . KELSO. The Doctrine of the English Gentleman in the Sixteenth
Century GORKY. Forty Years theLifeofClimSamghin VOLI, Bystander

B. RUSSELL. Education and the Good Life . Sceptical Essays, xiv Pius XL Dwini
lllius Magistri (Encyclical on

Christian Education of Youth) ORTEGA Y GASSET. Mission of the University

RANK. Modern Education JAEGER. Paideia T. S. ELIOT. "Modern Education and the
Classics," in Essays, Ancient and Modern DEWEY, The School and Society .
Interest and Effort in Education . Democracy and Education

.

Experience and Education

RICHARDS. Interpretation in Teaching

LIVINGSTONE. On Education

MEIKLEJOHN. Education Between Two Worlds HUTCHINS. The Higher Learning in
America Education for Freedom . MARITAIN, Education at the Crossroads VAN DOREN.
Liberal Education BARZUN. Teacher in America HOOK. Education for Modern Man
CONANT. Education in a Divided World
