Chapter 11:

INTRODUCTION

emotions claim our attention in two THE ways. We experience them, sometimes in a
manner which overwhelms us; and we analyze them by defining and classifying the
several passions, and by studying their role in human life and society. We
seldom do both at once, for analysis requires emotional detachment, and moments
of passion do not permit study or reflection.

With regard to the emotions the great books are similarly divided into two sorts
those which are theoretical discussions and those which concretely describe the
passions of particular men, exhibit their vigor, and induce in us a vicarious
experience. Books of the first sort are scientific, philosophical, or
theological treatises. Books of the second sort are the great epic and dramatic
poems, the novels and plays, the literature of biography and history. We
customarily think of the emotions as belonging to the subject matter of
psychology proper to the science of animal and human behavior. It is worth
noting therefore that this is largely a recent development, which appears in the
works of Darwin, James, and Freud. In earlier centuries, the analysis of the
passions occurs in other contexts: in treatments of rhetoric, as in certain
dialogues of Plato and in Aristotle's Rhetoric; in the Greek discussions of
virtue and vice; in the moral theology of Aquinas and in Spinoza's Ethics; and
in books of political theory, such as Machiavelh's Prince and Hobbes' Leviathan.
Descartes' treatise on The Passions of the Soul is probably one of the first
discourses on the subject to be separated from the practical considerations of
oratory, morals, and politics. Only subsequently do the emotions become an
object of purely theoretic interest in psychology. But even then the interest of
the psychiatrist or psychoanalyst to the extent that it is medical or
therapeutic has a strong practical bent.

In the great works of poetry and history no similar shift takes place as one
goes from Homer and Virgil to Tolstoy and Dostoevsky, from Greek to
Shakespearean tragedy, from Plutarch and Tacitus to Gibbon. What Wordsworth said
of the lyric poem that it is "emotion recollected in tranquillity" may not apply
to the narratives in an identical sense. Yet they too re-enact the passions in
all their vitality. Their pages are filled with the emotions of men in conflict
with one another or suffering conflict within themselves. This is no less true
of historical narrative than of fiction. The memorable actions of men on the
stage of history did not occur in calm and quiet. We would certainly not
remember them as well if the historian failed to re-create for us the turbulence
of crisis and catastrophe, or the biographer the storm and stress which
accompanies the inward resolution of heroic lives. It is impossible, of course,
to cite all the relevant passages of poetry and history. In many instances,
nothing less than a whole book would suffice. The particular references given in
this chapter, which are far from exhaustive, have been selected for their
peculiar exemplary significance m relation to a particular topic; but for the
whole range of topics connected with emotion, the reader should certainly seek
further in the realms of history and poetry for the raw materials which the
scientists and philosophers have tried to analyze and understand. To the student
of the emotions, Bacon recommends "the poets and writers of histories" as "the
best doctors of this knowledge; where we may find painted forth with great life,
how affections are kindled and incited; and how pacified and refrained; and how
again contained from act and further degree; how they 413 414 disclose
themselves; how they work; how they vary; how they gather arid fortify; how they
are enwrapped one within another; and how they do fight and encounter one with
another; and other like particularities."

FOUR WORDS "passion," "affection" or "affect," and "emotion" have been
traditionally used to designate the same psychological fact. Of these,
"affection" and "affect" have ceased to be generally current, although we do
find them in Freud; and "passion" is now usually restricted to mean one of the
emotions, or the more violent aspect of any emotional experience. But if we are
to connect discussions collectedfrom widely separated centuries, we must be able
to use all these words interchangeably. The psychological fact to which they all
refer isone every human being has experienced in moments of great excitement,
especially during intense seizure by rage or fear. In his treatise On the
Circulation of the Blood, Harvey calls attention to "the fact that in almost
every affection, appetite, hope, or fear, our body suffers, the countenance
changes, and the blood appears to course hither and thither. In anger the eyes
are fiery and the pupils contracted; in modesty the cheeks are suffused with
blushes; in fear, and under a sense of infamy and of shame, -the face is pale"
and "in lust how quickly is the member distended with blood and erectedTh"

Emotional experience seems to involve an awareness of widespread bodily
commotion, which includes changes in the tension of the blood vessels and the
muscles, changes in heartbeat and breathing, changes in the condition of the
skin and other tissues. Though some degree of bodily disturbance would seem
taJbe an essential ingredient in all emotional experience, the intensity and
extent of the physiological reverberation, or bodily commotion, is riot the same
or equal in all the emotions. Some emotions are much more violent than others.
This leads William James to distinguish what he calls the "coarser emotions ...
in which every one recognizes a strong organic reverberation" from the "subtler
emotions" in which the "organic * reverberation is less obvious and strong.*'
This fact is sometimes used to draw the line between what are truly emotions and
what are only mild feelings of pleasure and pain or enduring sentiments.
Nevertheless, sentiments may be emotional residues stable attitudes which
pervade a life even during moments of emotional detachment and calm and pleasure
and pain may color all the emotions. "Pleasure and pain," Locke suggests, are
"the hinges on which our passions turn." Even though they may not be passions in
the strict sense, they are obviously closely connected with them. THAT THE
EMOTIONS are organic disturbances, upsetting the normal course of the body's
functioning, is sometimes thought to be a modern discovery, connected with the
James-Lange theory that the emotional experience is nothing but the "feeling of
... the bodily changes" which "follow directly the perception of the exciting
fact." On this view, the explanation of emotion seems to be the very opposite of
"common sense," which says, "we meet a bear, are frightened, and run." According
to James, "this order of sequence is incorrect," and "the more rational
statement is that we feel . . . afraid because we tremble." In other words, we
do not run away because we are afraid, but are afraid because we run away. This
fact about the emotions was known to antiquity and the Middle Ages. Aristotle,
for example, holds that mere awareness of an object does not induce flight
unless "the heart is moved," and Aquinas declares that "passion is properly to
be found where there is corporeal transmutation." He describes at some length
the bodily changes which take place in anger and fear. Only very recently,
however, have apparatus and techniques been devised for recording and, in some
cases, measuring the physiological changes accompanying experimentally produced
emotionsin both animals and men. Modern theory also tries to throw some light on
these organic changes by pointing out their adaptive utility in the struggle for
existence. This type of explanation is advanced by Darwin in The Expression of
Emotions in Man and Animals, and is adopted by other evolutionists. "The snarl
or sneer, the one-sided uncovering of the upper teeth," James writes, "is
accounted for by Darwin as a survival from the time when our ancestors had large
canines, and unfleshed them (as dogs now do) for at tack. . . . 22: The
distention of the nostrils in anger is interpreted by Spencer as an echo of the
way in which our ancestors had to breathe when, during combat, their 'mouth was
filled up by a part of the antagonist's body that had been seized . The redding
of the face and neck is called . . by Wundt a compensatory arrangement for
relieving the brain 'of the blood-pressure which the simultaneous excitement of
the heart brings with it. The effusion of tears is explained both by this author
and by Darwin to be a blood-withdrawing agency of a similar sort."

Reviewing statements of this sort, fames is willing to concede that "some
movements of expression can be accounted for as weakened repetitions of
movements which formerly (when they were stronger) were of utility to the
subject" \ but though we may thus "see the reason for few emotional reactions,"
he thinks a "others remain for which no plausible reason can even be conceived."
The latter, James suggests, "may be reactions which are purely mechanical
results of the way in which our nervous centres are framed, reactions which,
although permanent in us now, may be called accidental as far as their origin
goes." Whether or not all the bodily changes which occur in such emotions as
anger or fear serve the purpose of increasing the animal's efficiency in combat
or flight as, for example, the increase of sugar in the blood and the greater
supply of blood to arms and legs seem to do the basic emotions are generally
thought to be connected with the instinctively determined patterns of behavior
by which animals struggle to survive. "The actions we call instinctive," fames
writes, "are expressions or manifestations of the emotions'k or, as other
writers suggest, an emotion, whether in outward expression or in inner
experience, is the central phase of an instinct in operation. The observation of
the close relation between instinct and emotion does not belong exclusively to
modern, or post-Darwinian, thought. The ancients also recognize it, though in
different terms. Following Aristotle's analysis of the various "interior
senses,'/ Aquinas, for example, speaks of the ''estimative power" by which
animals seem to be innately prepared to react to things useful or harmful. : "If
an animal were moved by pleasing and disagreeable things only as affecting the
sense" that is, the exterior senses "there would be no need to suppose," Aquinas
writes, "that an animal has a power besides' the apprehension of those forms
which the senses perceive, and in which the animal takes pleasure, or from which
it shrinks with horror." But animals need to seek or avoid certain things on
account of their advantages or disadvantages, and such emotional reactions of
approach or avoidance require, in his opinion, a sense of the useful and the
dangerous, which is innate rather than learned.The estimative power thus seems
to play a role which later writers assign to instinct. The relation of instinct
to the emotions and to fundamental biological needs is further considered, from
other points of view, in the chapters on DESIRE and HABIT. LIKE DESIRE, emotion
is neither knowledge nor action, but something intermediate between the one and
the other. The various passions are usually aroused by objects perceived,
imagined, or remembered, and once aroused they in turn originate impulses to act
in certain ways. For example, fear arises with the perception of a threatening
danger or with the imagination of some fancied peril. The thing feared is
somehow recognized as capable of inflicting injury with consequent pain. The
thing feared is also something from which one naturally tends to flee in order
to avoid harm. Once the danger is known and until it is avoided by flight or in
some other way, the characteristic feeling of fear pervades the whole
experience. It is partly a result of what is known and what isdone, and partly
the cause of how things seem and how one behaves. Analytically isolated from its
causes and effects, the emotion itself seems to be the feeling rather than the
knowing or the doing. But it is not simply an awareness of a certain bodily
condition. It also involves the felt impulse to do something about the object of
the passion. Those writers who, like Aquinas, identify emotion with the impulse
by which "the soul is drawn to a thing," define the several passions as
specifically different acts of appetite or desirek$pecific tendencies to action.
Aquinas, for instance, adopts the definition given by Damascene: "Passion is a
movement of the sensi- 416 THE GREAT live appetite when we imagine good or
evil."

Other writers who, like Spinoza, find that "the order of the actions and
passions of our body is coincident in nature with the order of the actions and
passions of the mind," stress the cognitive rather than the impulsive aspect of
emotion. They accordingly define the passions in terms of the characteristic
feelings, pleasant and unpleasant, which flow from the estimation of certain
objects as beneficial or harmful.

Spinoza goes furthest in this direction when he says that "an affect or passion
of the mind is a confused idea by which the mind affirms of . . . its body, or
any part of it, a greater or less power of existence than before." There seems
to be no serious issue here, for writers of both sorts acknowledge, though with
different emphasis, the two sides of an emotion the cognitive and the impulsive,
that which faces toward the object and that which leads into action. On either
view, the human passions are regarded as part of man's animal nature. It is
generally admitted that disembodied spirits, if such exist, cannot have
emotions. The angels, Augustine writes, "feel no anger while they punish those
whom the eternal law of God consigns to punishment, no fellow-feeling with
misery while they relieve the miserable, no fear while they aid those who are in
danger." When we do ascribe emotions to spirits, it is, Augustine claims,
because, "though they have none of our weakness, their acts resemble the actions
to which these emotions move us."

In connection with the objects which arouse them, the emotions necessarily
depend upon the senses and the imagination; and their perturbations and impulses
require bodily organs for expression. That is why, as indicated in the chapter
on DESIRE, some writers separate the passions from acts of the will, as
belonging to the sensitive or animal appetite rather than to the rational or
specifically human appetite. Even those writers who do not place so high an
estimate on the role of reason, refer the emotions to the animal aspect of human
behavior, or to what is sometimes called "man's lower nature." When this phrase
is used, it usually signifies the passions as opposed to the reason, not the
purely vegetative functions which man shares with plants as well as animals.
There seems to be no doubt that emotions IDEAS are common to men and animals and
that they arc more closely related to instinct than to reason or intelligence.
Darwin presents many instances which, he claims, prove that "the senses and
intuitions, the various emotions and faculties, such as love, memory, attention,
curiosity, imitation, reason, etc., of which man boasts, may be found in an
incipient, or even sometimes in a well-developed, condition in the lower
animals." Where Darwin remarks upon "the fewness and the comparative simplicity
of the instincts in the higher animals . . . in contrast with those of the lower
animals," James takes the position that man "is the animal richest in
instinctive impulses." However that issue is decided, the emotions seem to be
more elaborately developed in the higher animals, and man's emotional life would
seem to be the most complex and varied of all. The question then arises whether
particular passions are identical or are only analogous when they occur in men
and animals. For example, is human anger, no matter how closely it resembles
brute rage in its physiology and impulses, nevertheless peculiarly human? Do men
alone experience righteous indignation because of some admixture in them of
reason and passion? When similar questions are asked about the sexual passions
of men and animals, the answers will determine the view one takes of the
characteristically human aspects of love and hate. It may even be asked whether
hate, as men suffer it, is ever experienced by brutes, or whether certain
passions, such as hope and despair, are known to brutes at all? IN THE
TRADITIONAL theory of the emotions, the chief problem, after the definition of
emotion, is the classification or grouping of the passions, and the ordering of
particular passions. The vocabulary of common speech in all ages and cultures
includes a large number of words for naming emotions, and it has been the task
of analysts to decide which of these words designate distinct affects or
affections. The precise character of the object and the direction of the impulse
have been, for the most part, the criteria of definition. As previously noted,
it is but recently that the experimental observation of bodily changes has
contributed to the differentiation of emotions from one another.

CHAPTER 22: E Spinoza offers the longest listing of the passions. For him, the
emotions, which are all "compounded of the three primary affects, desire, joy,
and sorrow," develop into the following 'forms: astonishment, contempt, love,
hatred, inclination, aversion, devotion, derision, hope, confidence, despair,
gladness, refear, morse, commiseration, favor, indignation, overestimation,
envy, compassion, self-satisfaction, humility, repentance, pride, despondency,
selfexaltation, shame, regret, emulation, gratitude, benevolence, anger,
vengeance, ferocity, audacity, consternation, courtesy, ambition, luxuriousness,
drunkenness, avarice, lust. Many of the foregoing are, for Hobbes, derived from
what he calls "the simple passions/* which include "appetite, desire, love,
aversion, hate, joy, and grief." There are more emotions in Spinoza's list than
either Aristotle or Locke or James mentions, but none which they include is
omitted. Some of the items m Spinoza's enumeration are treated by other writers
as virtues and vices rather than as passions.

The passions have been classified by reference to various criteria. As we have
seen, James distinguishes emotions as "coarse" or "subtle" in terms of the
violence or mildness of the accompanying physiological changes; and Spinoza
distinguishes them according as "the mind passes to a greater perfection" or "to
a less perfection." Spinoza's division would also seem to imply a distinction
between the beneficial and the harmful in the objects causing these two types of
emotion, or at least to involve the opposite components of pleasure and pain,
for in his view the emotions which correspond to "a greater or less power of
existence than before" are attended in the one case by "pleasurable excitement"
and in the other by "pain."

Hobbes uses another principle of division. The passions differ basically
according to the direction of their impulses according as each is "a motion or
endeavor ... to or from the object moving." Aquinas adds still another criterion
"the difficulty or struggle ... in acquiring certain goods or in avoiding
certain evils" which, in contrast to those we "can easily acquire or avoid,"
makes them, therefore, "of an arduous or difficult nature." In these terms, he
divides ail the passions into the "concupiscible," which regard "good or evil
MOTION simply" (i.e., love, hate, desire, aversion, joy, sorrow), and the
"irascible," which "regard good or evil as arduous through being difficult to
obtain or avoid" (i.e., fear, daring, hope, despair, anger). Within each of
these groups, Aquinas pairs particular passions as opposites, such as joy and
sorrow, or hope and despair, either according to the "contrariety of object,
i.e., of good and evil ... or according to approach and withdrawal." Anger seems
to be the only passion for which no opposite can be given, other than that
"cessation from its movement" which Aristotle calls "calmness" and which Aquinas
says is an opposite not by way of "contrariety but of negation or privation."
Using these distinctions, Aquinas also describes the order in which one passion
leads to or generates another, beginning with love and hate, passing through
hope, desire, and fear, with their opposites, and, after anger, ending in joy or
despair. On one point, all observers and from Plato to Freud seem to theorists
agree, namely, that love and hate lie at the root of all the other passions and
generate hope or despair, fear and anger, according as the aspirations of love
prosper or fail. Nor is the insight that even hate derives from love peculiarly
modern, though Freud's theory of what he calls the "ambivalence" of love and
hate toward the same object, seems to be part of his own special contribution to
our understanding of the passions, THE ROLE OF THE emotions or passions in human
behavior has always raised two questions, one concerning the effect of conflict
between diverse emotions, the other concerning the con flict between the
passions and the reason or will. It is the latter question which has been of the
greatest interest to moralists and statesmen. Even though human emotions may
have inand be innately determined, stinctive origin man's emotional responses
seem to be subject to voluntary control, so that men are able to form or change
their emotional habits. If this were not so, there could be no moral problem of
the regulation of the passions; nor, for that matter, could there be a medical
problem of therapy for emotional disorders. The psychoanalytic treatment of
neuroses seems, more 418 THE GREAT I over, to assume the possibility of a
voluntary, or even a rational, resolution of emotional conflictsnot perhaps
without the aid of therapeutic efforts to uncover the sources of conflict and to
remove the barriers between repressed emotion and rational decision. The
relation of the passions to the will, especially their antagonism, is relevant
to the question whether the actions of men always conform to their judgments of
good and evil, or right and wrong. As Socrates discusses the problem of
knowledge and virtue, it would seem to be his view that a man who knows what is
good for him will act accordingly. Men may "desire things which they imagine to
be good/* he says, "but which in reality are evil." Hence their misconduct will
be due to a mistaken judgment, not to a discrepancy between action and thought.
Eliminating the case of erroneous judgment, Socrates gets Meno to admit that "no
man wills or chooses anything evil." Aristotle criticizes the Socratic position
which he summarizes in the statement that "no one . . . when he judges acts
against what he judges best people act badly only by reason of ignorance."
According to Aristotle, "this view plainly contradicts the observed facts." Yet
he admits that whatever a man does must at least seem good to him at the
moment', and to that extent the judgment that something is good or bad would
seem to determine action accordingly. In his analysis of incontinence, Aristotle
tries to explain how a man may act against what is his better judgment and yet,
at the moment of action, seek what he holds to be good. Action may be caused
either by a rational judgment concerning what is good or by an emotional
estimate of the desirable. If these two factors are independent of one another
more than that, if they can tend in opposite directions then a man may act under
emotional persuasion at one moment in a manner contrary to his rational
predilection at another. That a man may act either emotionally or rationally,
Aristotle thinks, explains how, under strong emotional influences, a man can do
the very opposite of what his reason would tell him is right or good. The point
is that, while the emotions dominate his mind and action, he does not listen to
reason. These matters are further discussed in the chapter on TEMPERANCE. But it
should be noted here that the passions and the reason, or the "lower" and the
"higher" natures of man, are not always in conflict. Sometimes emotions or
emotional attitudes serve reason by supporting voluntary decisions. They
reinforce and make effective moral resolutions which might otherwise be too
difficult to execute. THE ANCIENTS DID not underestimate the force of the
passions, nor were they too confident of the strength of reason in its struggle
to control them, or to be free of them. They were acquainted with the violence
of emotional excess which they called "madness" or "frenzy." So, too, were the
theologians of the Middle Ages and modern philosophers like Spinoza and Hobbes.
But not until Freud and perhaps also William James, though to a lesser extentdo
we find in the tradition of the great books insight into the pathology of the
passions, the origin of emotional disorders, and the general theory of the
neuroses and neurotic character as the consequence of emotional repression. For
Freud, the primary fact is not the conflict between reason and emotion, or, in
his language, between the ego and the id. It is rather the repression which
results from such conflict. On the one side is the ego, which "stands for reason
and circumspection" and has "the task of representing the external world," or
expressing what Freud calls "the realityprinciple." Associated with the ego is
the superego "the vehicle of the ego-ideal, by which the ego measures itself,
towards which it strives, and whose demands for ever-increasing perfection it is
always striving to fulfill." On the other side is the id, which "stands for the
untamed passions" and is the source of instinctual life. The ego, according to
Freud, is constantly attempting "to mediate between the id and reality" and to
measure up to the ideal set by the super-ego, so as to dethrone "the
pleasureprinciple, which exerts undisputed sway over the processes in the id,
and substitute for it the reality-principle, which promises greater security and
greater success." But sometimes it fails in this task. Sometimes, when no
socially acceptable channels of behavior are available CHAPTER 22: E for
expressing emotional drives in action, the ego, supported by the super-ego,
represses the emotional or instinctual impulses, that is, prevents them from
expressing themselves overtly.

Freud's great insight is that emotions repressed do not atrophy and disappear.
On the contrary, their dammed-up energies accumulate and, like a sore, they
fester inwardly. Together with related ideas, memories, and wishes, the
repressed emotions form what Freud calls a "complex," which is not only the
active nucleus of emotional disorder, but also the cause of neurotic symptoms
and behavior phobias and anxieties, obsessions or compulsions, and the various
physical manifestations of hysteria, such as a blindness or a paralysis that has
no organic basis. The line between the neurotic and the normal is shadowy, for
repressed emotional complexes are, according to Freud, also responsible for the
hidden or latent psychological significance of slips of speech, forgetting, the
content of dreams, occupational or marital choices, and a wide variety of other
phenomena usually regarded as accidental or as rationally determined. In fact,
Freud sometimes goes to the extreme of insisting that all apparently rational
processes both of thought and decision are themselves emotionally determined;
and that most, or all, reasoning is nothing but the rationalization of
emotionally fixed prejudices or beliefs. "The ego," he writes, "is after all
only a part of the id, a part purposively modified by its proximity to the
dangers of reality."

The ancient distinction between knowledge and opinion seems to be in essential
agreement with the insight that emotions can control the course of thinking. But
at the same time it denies that all thinking is necessarily dominated by the
passions. The sort of thinking which is freefrom emotional bias or domination
may result in knowledge, if reason itself is not defective in its processes. But
the sort of thinking which is directed and determined by the passions must
result in opinion. The former is reasoning; the latter what Freud calls
"rationalization" or sometimes "wishful thinking."

BECAUSE THEY CAN be ordered when they get out of order, the emotions raise
problems for both medicine and morals. Whether or not MOTION there is a
fundamental opposition between the medical and the moral approaches to the
problem, whether psychotherapy is needed only when morality has failed, whether
morality is itself partly responsible for the disorders which psychotherapy must
cure, the difference between the medical and the moral approaches is clear.
Medically, emotional disorders call for diagnosis and therapy. Morally, they
call for criticism and correction. Human bondage, according to Spinoza, con
sists in "the impotence of man to govern or restrain the affects ... for a man
who is under their control is not his own master." A free man he describes as
one "who lives according to the dictates of reason alone," and he tries to show
"how much reason itself can control the affects" to achieve what he calls
"freedom of mind or blessedness." While moralists tend to agree on this point,
they do not all offer the same prescription for establishing the right relation
between man's higher and lower natures. The issue which arises here is also
discussed in the chapters on DESIRE and DUTY. It exists between those who think
that the passions are intrinsically evil, the natural enemies of a good will,
lawless elements always in rebellion against duty; and those who think that the
passions represent a natural desire for certain goods which belong to the happy
life, or a natural aversion for certain evils. Those who, like the Stoics and
Kant, tend to adopt the former view recommend a policy of attrition toward the
passions. Their force must be attenuated in order to emancipate reason from
their influence and to protect the will from their seductions. Nothing is lost,
according to this theory, if the passions atrophy and die. But if, according to
the opposite doctrine, the passions have a natural place in the moral life, then
the aim should be, not to dispossess them entirely, but to keep them in their
place. Aristotle therefore recommends a policy of moderation. The passions can
be made to serve reason's purposes by restraining them from excesses andby
directing their energies to ends which reason approves. As Aristotle conceives
them, certain of the virtues especially temperance and courageare stable
emotional attitudes, or habits of emotional response, which conform to reason
and carry out its rule. The moral virtues require more than a momentary control
or moderation of the passions; they require a discipline of them which has
become habitual. What Aristotle calls continence, as opposed to virtue, consists
in reason's effort to check emotions which are unruly because they have not yet
become still habituated to reason's rule.

The fact of individual differences in temperament is of the utmost importance to
the moralist who is willing to recognize that universal moral rules apply to
individuals differently according to their temperaments. Both psychologists and
moralists have classified men into temperamental types by reference to the
dominance or deficiency of certain emotional predispositions in their inherited
makeup. These temperamental differences also have a medical or physiological
aspect insofar as certain elements in human physique the four bodily humors of
the ancients or the hormones of modern endocrinology seem to be correlated with
types of personality.

ONE OF THE GREAT issues in political theory concerns the role of the passions in
human association. Have men banded together to form states because they feared
the insecurity and the hazards of natural anarchy and universal war, or because
they sought the benefits which only political life could provide ? In the
political community, once it is formed, do love and friendship or distrust and
fear determine the relation of fellow citizens, or of rulers and ruled ? Should
the prince, or any other man who wishes to get and hold political power, try to
inspire love or to instill fear in those whom he seeks to dominate? Or are each
of these emotions useful for different political purposes and in the handling of
different kinds of men?

Considering whether for the success of the prince it is "better to be loved than
feared or feared than loved," Machiavelh says that "one should wish to be both,
but, because it is difficult to unite them in one person, it is much safer to be
feared than loved, when, of the two, cither must be dispensed with. , . .
Nevertheless," he continues, "a prince ought to inspire fear in such a way that,
if he does not win love, he avoids hatred; because he can endure very well being
feared whilst he is not hated."

According to Hobbes, when men enter into a AS commonwealth so that they can live
peacefully with one another, they are moved partly by reason and partly by their
passions. 'The passions that incline men to peace,*' he writes, "are fear of
death; desire of such things as are necessary to commodious living; and a hope
by their industry to obtain them." But once a commonwealth is formed, the one
passion which seems to be the mainspring of all political activity is "a
perpetual and restless desire of power after power, that ceaseth only in death";
for a man "cannot assure the power and means to live well, which he has present,
without the acquisition of more." Not ail political thinkers agree with the
answers which Machiavelli and Hobbes give on such matters; nor do all make such
questions the pivots of their political theory. But there is general agreement
that the passions are a force to be reckoned with in the government of men; that
the ruler, whether he is despotic prince or constitutional officeholder, must
move men through their emotions as well as by appeals to reason. The two
political instruments through which an influence over the emotions is exercised
are oratory (now sometimes called "propaganda") and law. Both may work
persuasively. Laws, like other discourses, according to Plato, may have preludes
or preambles, intended by the legislator "to create good-will in the persons
whom he addresses, in order that, by reason of this good- will, they will more
intelligently receive his command." But the law also carries with it the threat
of coercive force. The threat of punishment for disobedience addresses itself
entirely to fear, whereas the devices of the orator or even of the legislator in
his preamble are not so restricted. The orator can play upon the whole scale of
the emotions to obtain the actions or decisions at which he aims. Finally, there
is the problem of whether the statesman should exercise political control over
other influences which affect the emotional life of a people, especially the
arts and public spectacles. The earliest and perhaps the classic statement of
this problem is to be found in Plato's Republic and in his Laws. Considerations
relevant to the question he raises, and the implications of diverse solutions of
the problem, are discussed in, the chapters on ART, LIBERTY, and POETRY.

CHAPTER 22: EMOTION

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature and causes of the emotions or passions
 1a. Emotion in relation to feelings of pleasure and pain
 1b. Bodily changes during emotional excitement
 1c. Instinctive emotional reactions in animals and men

2. The classification and enumeration of the emotions
 2a. Definitions of particular passions
 2b. The order and connection of the passions
 2c. The opposition of particular emotions to one another

3. The disorder
or pathology of the passions
 3a. Madness or frenzy due to emotional excess: excessively emotional or emotionally
 over-determined behavior
 3b. Rationalization
 or the emotional determination of thought
 3c. Particular emotional disorders: psychoneuroses due to repression
 (1) Hysterias
 (2) Obsessions and compulsions
 (3) Phobias and anxieties
 (4) Traumas and traumatic neuroses
 3^.
 The alleviation and cure of emotional disorders
 4.
 The moral consideration of the passions
 3d. The conflict between reason and emotion
 (1) The force of the passions
 (2) The strength of reason or will
 3e. The treatment of the emotions by or for the sake of reason
 (1) Moderation of the passions by reason: virtue, continence, avoidance of sin
 (2) Attenuation and atrophy of the passions: the liberation of reason
 3f. The moral significance of temperamental type or emotional disposition

5. The political consideration of the passions
 5a. The causes of political association: fear or need
 5b. The acquisition and retention of power: love or fear
 5c. The coercive force of law: fear of punishment
 5</.
 The devices of oratory: emotional persuasion
 5<?.
 The regulation of art for the sake of training the passions

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general theory of instinct, sec HABIT 3-36; and for
the consideration

see DESIRE 2a, 33.

The relation of pleasure and pain to the emotions, see PLEASURE AND PA

The conception of the emotions as forms of animal appetite or sensitiv

3b(i);WiLL2b(2).

The analysis of the one emotion which is held to be the root of all th

2a-2a(3).

Other discussions of the conflict between the passions and reason, or

and another, see DESIRE 3d, 43, 6c; DUTY 8; MIND pb-pc; OPPOSITION 4

Other discussions of emotional disorder from a psychological or medica

DESIRE 4a-4d; MEDICINE 6c(2); MIND 8b; ONE AND MANY 35); OPPOSITION

The influence of the emotions upon imagination or thought, see DESIRE

AND IMAGINATION 8c, 8d(i); OPINION 2a; TRUTH 3d(2).

The moral problems raised by the conflict between reason and emotion,

DUTY 4-4b; LIBERTY 33-3k MIND 9C-pd; SIN 5; SLAVERY 7; TYRANNY 5d; V

VICE 53.

The significance of the passions in relation to law, government, and t

PUNISHMENT 1c-1d; STATE 3e-3f; and for the problem of political cens

of the arts because of their emotional influence, see ART lob; LIBER

The consideration of emotion by the orator, see RHETORIC 40.

Emotion in relation to artistic inspiration or expression, see ART 8;

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books of the Western Wor

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divide

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

H. Works by authors not represented in this collectio

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of th

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapte

GOETHE. Sorrows of

*

HEGEL. The Phenomen PLUTARCH. "Whether the Passions of the Soul or DOSTOEVSKY.
Notes f

Diseases of the Body Are Worse," in Moraha C. R. DARWIN. The E EPICTEFUS. The
Manual and Animals AUGUSTINE. Of Continence W. JAMES. Collected AQUINAS.
Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, QQ FREUD. The Predispo

25-26 F. BACON. "Of Anger," in Essays

DESCARTES. The Passions of the Soul PASCAL. Discours sur les passions de V amour
CICERO. Tusculan Dis HOBBES. The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, BEN
JONSON. Every Ma

PART i, CH 12 BURTON. The Anatomy

.The Whole Art of Rhetoric, BK n, CH 1-13 MALEBRANCHE. De la r HUME. A Treatise
of Human Nature, BK n, PART in SHAFTESBURY. Charact

. A Dissertation on the Passions ions, Times A. SMITH. The Theory of Moral
Sentiments, PART HUTCHESON. An Essay

i, SECT n the Passions and A STERNE. A Sentimental Journey COLLINS. The Passion
of instinctual drives, IN 43. e desire, see DESIRE e others, see LOVE between
one emotion 3-40, 4d. l point of view, see 4c. 53-5 b, 6c; MEMORY see DESIRE
6a-6b; IRTUE AND he state, see LAW 5, 6a; orship or regulation TY 2a; POETRY yb.
POETRY 3. ld, but relevant to the d into two groups: . n. e works cited, consult
r of The Great Ideas. Young Werther ology of Mind, iv, B (3) rom Underground
xpression of Emotions in Man Essays and Reviews, xv, xxv sition to Obsessional
Neurosis

jj putations, m-iv n in His Humour of Melancholy echerche de la veritt, BK v
eristics ofMen, Manners, Ofinon the Nature and Conduct of ffections s "
VOLTAIRE. "Passions, in A Philosophical Dictionary T, REID, Essays on the Active
Powers of the Human

Mind, in, PART n, CH 3-7 BROWN. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human

Mind, VOL in, pp 26-473

D. STEWART. Philosophy of the Active and Moral

Powers of Man W. HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic,

VOL i (41-46) COMTE, System of Positive Polity, VOL w, Theory of

the Future of Man, en 2 LorzE. Microcosmos, BK n, CH 5 BAIN, The Emotions and
the Will E. HARTMANN. Philosophy of the Unconscious, (B)

ii-m

FRAZER, The Golden Bough, PART vi, CH 8 WUNDT, Outlines of Psychology, (12-13)
BRADLEY. Collected Essays, VOL u (23) STRINDBERG. The Dance of Death TITCHENER.
Lectures on the Elementary Psychology of

Peeling

and Attention CANNON, Bodily Changes in Pain, Hunger, Fear and

Rage CRILE. The Origin and Nature of the Emotions CARLSON. The Control of Hunger
in Health and

Disease PARETO, The Mind and Society, VOL HI, CH 9 PROUST, Remembrance of Things
Past JUNG. Psychological Types McTAGGART. The Nature of Existence, CH 41, 57 B,
RUSSELL. The Analysis

of Mind, LECT 3, 14

.

Sceptical Essays,

vi
