Chapter  14:  EVOLUTION INTRODUCTION 'TT'HIS chapter belongs to Darwin. Not that
his  writings,  which  are  cited  under almost all headings, stand alone in the
various  places  they  appear.  The  point is rather that many of the topics are
dictated  by and draw their meaning from his thought, and that he figures in all
the  major issues connected with the origin of species, the theory of evolution,
and  the  place of man in the order of nature. With respect to the matters under
consideration  in  this chapter, the other writers in the tradition of the great
books  cannot  escape from being classified as coming before or after Darwin, or
as  being  with  or  against  him.  Darwin's  influence  on later writers may be
variously  estimated,  but it is plainly marked by their use of his language and
their  reference  to  his  fundamental  notions. James Principles of Psychology,
especially  in  its  chapters on instinct and emotion, views the behavior of men
and animals and the phenomena of intelligence or mind in evolutionary terms. The
writings  of  Freud  are  similarly  dominated by the genetic approach and by an
appeal  to  man's animal ancestry in order to explain the inherited constitution
of  his  psyche in conformity with the doctrine of evolution. Outside psychology
the  concept  of  evolution  is  reflected  in  theories  of  progress  or  of a
dialectical  development  in  history;  as,  for  example, in the dialectical or
historical  materialism  of  Marx and Engels, which is set forth in the latter's
Dialectics  of  Nature. An even more general of philosophy, which re-orientation
stems  from  an  evolutionary way of thinking, is to be found in the writings of
Bergson  and  Dewey,  such  as Creative Evolution and The Influence of Darwin on
Philosophy. These, along with many of the specifically biological works ex cited
in the list of Additional Readings, give some measure of the influence of Darwin
not  only  on  philosophical thought, but also on the direction of research mall
the  biological  sciences.  WITH REGARD TO Darwin's predecessors the question is
not so much one of their influence upon him as of their anticipation, in one way
or another, of his discoveries, his conceptions, and his theory. The observation
made  in  antiquity concerning a hillside deposit of marine fossils is sometimes
taken  as  implying  an  early recognition of the evolution of terrestrial life.
More  apposite  perhaps  is the statement by Lucretius that "the new earth first
put forth grass and bushes, and next gave birth to the races of mortal creatures
springing  up many in number in many ways after divers fashions." Lucretius also
speaks of strange monsters which nature did not permit to survive. "Nature set a
ban  on  their  increase  and they could not reach the coveted flower of age nor
find  food  nor  be united in marriage .. . And many races of living things must
then  have  died  out  and been unable to beget and continue their breed." Those
which  survived,  he  adds,  had  qualities  which "protected and preserved each
particular   race."   Apparently   susceptible  to  similar  interpretation  are
Aristotle's  statements  that  "nature  proceeds  little  by  little from things
lifeless  to  animal life"; that "there is observed in plants a continuous scale
of ascent toward the animal"; and that "throughout the entire animal scale there
is  a  graduated  differentiation  in  amount  of  vitality  and in capacity for
motion."  Augustine's commentary on the first chapter of Genesis seems even more
explicitly  to  contemplate  the  successive  appearance of the various forms of
life. Plants and animals did not actually ist when the world began. Though their
causes were created by God and existed from the beginning, the actual production
of  plants  and  animals  in  their  various  kinds is, as Aquinas tellsus while
summarizing Augustine's view, "the work of propagation' not of creation.

Like  Aristotle,  both Aquinas and Locke represent the world of living organisms
as  a  graduated  scale  ascending  from less to more perfect forms of life. But
where  Aquinas  tends  to conceive that graduated scale as a hierarchy involving
essential  differences,  Locke  sees an almost perfect continuity involving only
differences  in degree. "In all the visible world," he writes, "we see no chasms
or  gaps."  To  illustrate  this, he points out that "there are fishes that have
wings,  and  are not strangers to the airy region; and there are some birds that
are  inhabitants  of  the  water,  whose blood is cold as fishes . . . There are
animals  so  near  of  km  to  both birds and beasts that they are in the middle
between both: amphibious animals link the terrestrial and aquatic together . . .
and  the  animal  and vegetable kingdoms are so nearly joined, that, if you will
take  the  lowest  of  one  and  the  highest of the other, there will scarce be
perceived  any  great  difference  between  them: and so on, till we come to the
lowest  and  the most inorganical parts of matter, we shall find everywhere that
the  several  species  are  linked together, and differ but in almost insensible
degrees."

But  for  the  theory  of evolution the observation of a hierarchy in nature, or
even of a continuity in which the species differ by "almost insensible degrees,"
constitutes  only background. What the theory of evolution brings to the fore is
the  notion  of  a  developmental or genetic relation among the various forms of
life. Because it seems to contain this insight, the anticipation of Darwin to be
found  in  Kant's  Critique  of  Judgement  is perhaps the most remarkable; even
though, in a closely related passage in which Kant discusses epigenesis, he uses
the  word  "evolution"  in a sense quite contrary to Darwin's conception. "It is
praiseworthy,"  Kant writes, "to employ a comparative anatomy and go through the
vast  creation  of organized beings in order to see if there is not discoverable
in  it  some  trace  of  a  system,  and  indeed of a system following a genetic
principle . . , When we consider the agreement of so many genera of animals in a
certain  common  schema,  which  apparently  underlies not only the structure of
their bones, but also the disposition of their remaining parts, and when we find
here  the  wonderful  simplicity  of  the  original plan, which has been able to
produce  such  an immense variety of species by the shortening of one member and
the  lengthening of another, by the involution of this part and the evolution of
that,  there  gleams  upon  the  mind  a  ray  of  hope, however faint, that the
principle  of  the mechanism of nature, apart from which there can be no natural
science  at  all, may yet enable us to arrive at some explanation in the case of
organic  life.  This analogy of forms, which in all their differences seem to be
produced  in  accordance with a common type, strengthens the suspicion that they
have  an actual kinship due to descent from a common parent. This we might trace
in  the  gradual  approximation  of  one animal species to another, from that in
which  the  principle of ends seems best authenticated, namely from man, back to
the  polyp,  and  from  this back even to mosses and lichens, and finally to the
lowest  perceivable  stage  of nature." FINDING ANTICIPATIONS of Darwin involves
judgments  much  more  subject to controversy than tracing his influences. It is
questionable,  for  example,  whether  the  suggestive passages in Lucretius and
Locke  bear  more than a superficial resemblance to Darwin's thought. The matter
is  further  complicated  by  Darwin's  own  sense  of  his  divergence from and
disagreement  with  his  predecessors  both immediate precursors like Buffon and
Linnaeus  and  earlier  philosophers and theologians. Darwin tells us himself of
his  quarrel  with  the  theologians.  His followers elaborate on the opposition
between  his  conception  of  species and that of Aristotle, an opposition which
Darwin  intimates by the great stress he lays on the difference between a static
taxonomy  and a dynamic or genealogical classification of living things. We must
therefore  try to locate the central points of Darwin's theory in order to judge
comparable  views for their agreement or disagreement. As the title of his major
work  indicates, it is not evolution as a grand scheme of biological, or cosmic,
history,  but  the  origin  of species with which Darwin seems to be principally
con-  CHAPTER  24:  EVOL ccrned. He is concerned with establishing the fact that
new  species  do  originate in the course of time, against those who suppose the
species  of living things to be fixed in number and immutable in type throughout
the  ages.  He  is  concerned  with describing the circumstances under which new
species  arise  and  other  forms  cease to have the status of species or become
extinct.   He   is  concerned  with  formulating  the  various  factors  in  the
differentiation  of  species,  and  with  showing, against those who think a new
species  requires  a  special  act of creation, that the origin of species, like
their  extinction,  isentirely a natural process which requires no factors other
than  those  at  work  every  day in the death, and breeding of plants and life,
animals. Only as a consequence of these primary considerations does he engage in
speculations  about  the moving panorama of life on earth from its beginnings to
its present and its future. Darwin looks upon the term "species" as "arbitrarily
given,"  and  for  that  reason does not attempt any strict definition of it. He
uses   it,   moreover,   like   his   predecessors   in   systematic  biological
classification,  to signify "a set of individuals closely resembling each other"
a class of plants or animals having certain common characteristics. Darwin would
probably  agree with Locke's criticism of those who suppose that our definitions
of  species  grasp the real essences or relate to the substantial forms inherent
in  things.  As  indicated  in the chapter on DEFINITION, Locke insists that our
notion  of a species expresses only what he calls the "nominal essence" a set of
characteristics  we  attach  to  the name we give things of a sort when we group
them  and  separate  them  in  our  classifications. "The boundaries of species,
whereby  man  sorts  [things], are made by men," he writes; "the essences of the
species, distinguished by different names, are ... of man's making."

Species  is not the only term of classification. A genus, for example, is a more
inclusive  group  than a species. Groups which differ specifically belong to the
same  genus  if  their  difference  is  accompanied  by the possession of common
traits. As species differ from one another within a generic group, so genera are
in  turn  subclasses of more inclusive groupings, such as UTION phyla, families,
and  orders.  But  there  are also smaller groupings within a species. There arc
races   or   varieties  and  sub-varieties,  the  members  of  which  share  the
characteristics  of  the  species but differ from one another in other respects.
Ultimately,  of  course,  within  the  smallest class the systematist bothers to
define, each individual differs from every other in the same group with whom, at
the  same  time, it shares certain characteristics of the race, the species, the
genus,  and  all  the  larger classes to which they belong. This general plan of
botanical  or  zoological  classification does not seem to give species peculiar
status  in the hierarchy of classes or groupings or to distinguish it from other
classes  except as these are more or less inclusive than itself. Why then should
attention  be  focused  on the origin of species, rather than of varieties or of
genera  ?  One  part  of  the  answer  comes  from  the  facts  of generation or
reproduction.  Offspring tend to differ from their parents, as well as from each
other,  but  they  also  tend to resemble one another. "A given germ," Aristotle
writes,  "does  not  give  rise  to any chance living being, nor spring from any
chance  one;  but  each  germ springs from a definite parent and gives rise to a
definite  progeny."  This  is  an  early  formulation of the insight that in the
process  of reproduction, the law of like generating like always holds for those
characteristics  which  identify  the species of ancestors and progeny. In other
words, a species always breeds true; its members always generate organisms which
can be classified as belonging to the same species, however much they vary among
themselves  as  individuals  within  the  group. Furthermore, the sub-groups the
races  or varieties of a species arc able to breed with one another, but diverse
species  cannot  interbreed.  Organisms  different in species either cannot mate
productively at all, or if crossbred, like the horse and the ass, they produce a
sterile  hybrid  like the mule. In the hierarchy of classes, then, species would
seem  to  be  distinguished  from  all smaller groupings by their stability from
generation  to  generation.  If species arc thus self-perpetuating, they in turn
give  stability  to all the larger groupings~-the getoera, phyla, families which
remain  as  fixed  from generation to generation as the species which constitute
them.  Hence the question of origin applies peculiarly to species rather than to
varieties  or  to  genera,  On thesupposition stated, no origin of species would
seem to be possible except by a special act of creation. Either all the existing
species  of  organisms  have always existed from the beginning of life on earth;
or, if in the course of ages new species have arisen, their appearance cannot be
accounted for by natural generation. By the law of natural generation, offspring
will always be of the same species as the parent organisms.

Spontaneous  generation,  of  course,  remains a A new species of organism might
possibility.  come  to be without being generated by other living organisms. But
apart from the question of fact (/'.?., whether spontaneous generation ever does
occur),  such  origin  of  a  form  of life seems to he outside the operation of
natural  causes  and  to  imply  the  intervention  of  supernatural  power. The
possibility  of  spontaneous  generation  was  entertained  in antiquity and the
Middle  Ages,  and was even thought to be supported by observation, such as that
of  maggots  emerging from putrefying matter. But modern science tends to affirm
the biogenetic law that living organisms are generated only by living organisms.
To  Kant,  the notion that "life could have sprung up from the nature of what is
void of life," seems not only contrary to fact, but absurd or unreasonable. Yet,
while  affirming  the  principle  that like produces like by insisting upon "the
generation  of something organic from something else that is also organic," Kant
docs not carry that principle to the point where it would make the generation of
a new species impossible. "Within the class of organic beings," he writes, it is
possible for one organism to generate another "differing specifically from it."

AGAINST  THE  BACKGROUND of these various suppositions, Darwin is moved to a new
insight  by  the  conjunction  of certain types of fact: the results of breeding
under  domestication which exhibit the great range of variation within a species
and  the  tendency of inbred AS varieties to breed true; his own observations of
the  geographical  distribution  of species of flora and fauna, especially those
separated  from  one  another  by  impassable barriers; the facts of comparative
anatomy  and  embryology  which  reveal  affinities  in  organic  structure  and
development  between  organisms  distinct  in species; and the geological record
which indicates the great antiquity of life upon the earth, which gives evidence
of  the  cataclysmic  changes  in the earth's surface (with consequences for the
survival  of  life), and which above all contains the fossil remains of forms of
life  now  extinct  but  not  dissimilar  from species alive in the present age.
Briefly  stated,  Darwin's  insight  is  that  new species arise when, among the
varieties of an existing species, certain intermediate forms become extinct, and
the  other  circumstances are such that the surviving varieties, now become more
sharply  separated  from  one another in type, are able to reproduce their kind,
and,  in  the course of many generations of inbreeding, also tend to breed true.
They  thus  perpetuate  their type until each in turn ceases to be a species and
becomes  a  genus when its own extreme varieties, separated by the extinction of
intermediates, become new species, as they themselves did at an earlier stage of
history.  For the very same reason that Darwin says "a wellmarked variety may be
called  an  incipient  species," a species may be called an incipient genus. The
point  is  misundei stood if it is supposed that when new species originate from
old,  both  the new and the old continue to survive as species. On the contrary,
when  in  the  course  of  thousands  of  generations some of the varieties of a
species achieve the status of species, the species from which they originated by
variation  ceases  to  be  a  species and becomes a genus. "The only distinction
between  species  and well-marked varieties," Darwin writes, "is that the latter
are  known,  or  believed,  to be connected at the present day with intermediate
gradations,  whereas  species  were  formerly  thus  connected  ...  It is quite
possible  that  forms  now  generally  acknowledged  to  be merely Varieties may
hereafter  be  thought worthy of specific names; and in this case scientific and
CHAPTER  24:  EVOLUTIO  common  language will come into accordance. In short, we
shall have to treat species in the same manner as those naturalists treat genera
who  admit that genera are merely artificial combinations made for convenience .
.  .  Our  classifications  will  come  to  be,  as  far as they can be so made,
genealogies."

The  origin  ofspecies  thus  seems  to  be  identical  with  the  extinction of
intermediate varieties, combined with the survival of one or more of the extreme
varieties.  These seem to be simply two ways of looking at the same thing. Still
another  way of seeing the point may be achieved by supposing, contrary to fact,
the  survival  of  all  the  varieties  ever  produced  through  the breeding of
organisms.  "If  my  theory  be  true,"  Darwin writes, "numberless intermediate
varieties,  linking  closely  together  allthe  species  of the same group, must
assuredly  have  existed;  but  the very process of natural selection constantly
tends,  as  has  been so often remarked, to exterminate the parent-forms and the
intermediate links." If one were to suppose the simultaneous co-existence of all
intermediate varieties in the present day, the groups now called "species" would
be  continuously  connected  by slight differences among their members and would
not,  therefore,  be  divided  into  distinct  species,  as they now are because
certain  links  are  missing.  In  the  Critique of Pure Reason, Kant states the
principle  of  continuity  in the following manner. "This principle," he writes,
"indicates that all differences of species limit each other, and do not admit of
transition  from one to another by a saltus, but only through smaller degrees of
the  difference between the one species and the other. In one word, there are no
species  or  sub-species  which  ...  are  the  nearest  possible to each other;
intermediate  species  or  sub-species  being always possible, the difference of
which  from  each  of  the former is always smaller than the difference existing
between  these." But, Kant adds, "it is plain that this continuity of forms is a
mere  idea, to which no adequate object can be discovered in experience," partly
because  "the  species  in  nature  are  really divided and if the gradual . . .
progression  through  their  affinity  were continuous, the intermediate members
lying  be-  N  tween  two  given  species  must  be infinite in number, which is
impossible."

The   Russian  geneticist,  Theodore  Dobzhansky,  gives  an  interpretation  of
continuity  in  nature  which differs from Kant's in that it follows and applies
Darwin's conception of species and their origin. According to him, if we suppose
the  extreme  case  of  all  possible  genetic  variations  being alive on earth
together,  the result would be not an infinite number of species, but no species
and  genera  at  The array of plants and animals would all. approach a perfectly
continuous  series  in  which  there would only be individual differences. There
would  be  no  specific  or  generic  groupings  of  the  sort  now  made in our
classification  of  the  forms  of life. ON DARWIN'S conception of the origin of
species its causes divide into two sets of factors: first, those which determine
the  extinction  or  survival  of  organisms  and,  with  their  survival, their
opportunities  for  mating  and  reproduction; second, those which determine the
transmission  of characteristics from one generation to another and the vanation
of offspring from their ancestors and from each other. Without genetic variation
there  would  be  no range of differences within a group on which the factors of
selection could operate. Without the inheritance of ancestral traits there would
be  no  perpetuation  of  group characteristics in the organisms which manage to
survive  and  reproduce.  For  Darwin  the operation of the first set of factors
constitutes  the  process of natural selection.This may take place in many ways:
through  geological catastrophes which make certain areas of the earth's surface
uninhabitable  for  all  organisms,  or  for  those  types  which  cannot  adapt
themselves  to  the radically changed environment; through the competition among
organisms  for  the  limited food supply available in their habitat; through the
struggle  for  existence  in  which organisms not only compete for food but also
prey  upon  one  another;  through  the sexual selection which operates within a
group  when some organisms are prevented 'by others from mating and reproducing;
and  through  all the obstacles which isolate groups from interbreeding, in- 456
eluding   geographical  and  physiological  inaccessibility.  The  struggle  for
existence  is  not only a struggle to survive, but also a struggle to reproduce.
Natural selection operates with respect to reproduction as well as survival.

Whether  the  survival is of the fittest alone, or whether the multiplication of
inferior  organisms  also  gives  evolution another direction, has been disputed
since Darwin's day; but according to his theory, "natural selection works solely
by and for the good of each being; all corporeal and mental endowments will tend
to  progress  toward  perfection . Thus, from the . . war of nature, from famine
and  death  .  .  . the production of the higher animals directly follows." With
respect  to  the  factors  of  heredity  and  tremendous  advances  since Darwin
variation,  in  the  experimental  science of genetics require revisions in this
part of his theory of evolution.

This  is  particularly  true  of  the  researches of Mendel, Bateson, and Morgan
concerning  the ways in which genetic factors operate. But on one major point in
the  theory  of  heredity  Darwin  holds  a view which later investigations have
tended to confirm. Antedating Weismann, he nevertheless opposes Lamarck's theory
of  the  inheritance of acquired characteristics. As William James expresses it,
where  Lamarck  supposes  that  environmental  influences  cause  changes in the
structure  or  functioning  of the organism which then become hereditary, Darwin
regards  the  environment  merely  as a selective agency, acting upon variations
produced entirely by causes operating in the breeding process. James thinks "the
evidence for Mr.

Darwin's  view  . . . quite convincing," [was] . . . even before it received the
support of Weismann's theory, according to which it is "a priori impossible that
any peculiarity acquired during the lifetime by the parent should be transmitted
to the germ." The situation is not the same with regard to Darwin's views on the
mechanism of heredity.

Writing  before  Mendel's  classic experiments in hybridization, Darwin seems to
suppose  a  blending  of  hereditary  factors;  whereas,  according  to  Mendel,
inheritance  is  particulate.  Distinct  genetic  factors  combine  to produce a
certain  somatic  result  without  losing  their  separate  identities. They can
therefore  be  reassorted  and  enter  into new genetic combinations in the next
generation.  Most  important  of all, Darwin thinks that new forms of life arise
gradually as the result of a continuous accumulation of slight and imperceptible
variations. The opposite view is now taken. The discovery of abrupt mutations in
a  single  generation  discountenances  Darwin's  maxim  natura  nonfactt saltum
"nature does nothing by jumps." These advances in genetics since Darwin's day do
not  alter  the  main  outlines of his theory. The mechanisms of heredity may be
much  more  complicated  than  Darwin  knew,  and  involve  much of which he was
ignorant,  such  as mutation-rates, or the various types, causes, and effects of
hybridization.   But  that  merely  leads  to  a  more  elaborate  or  different
explanation  of genetic variation in offspring and the transmission of ancestral
traits.  No  matter  how  these  are  explained, their occurrence is all that is
needed  to permit new species to originate through natural processes of heredity
and selection. "If Darwin were alive today," Julian Huxley writes, "the title of
his  book  would  have  to be not the 'origin' but the 'Origins of Species.' For
perhaps  the  most  salient  single fact that has emerged from recent studies is
that  species  may  arise  in  a number of quite distinct ways." THE READER MUST
judge for himself to what extent Darwin's theory of evolution was anticipated by
those  \\ho,  like  Augustine,  affirm  the appearance of new species of life on
earth at various stages in its history, or even by a writer like Kant, who seems
to  possess  the germ of its insight. The critical test in every case is whether
those  who affirm the occurrence of new species by natural processes rather than
by  special creation, think of them as simply added to the organic forms already
in  existence  without  any  change in the status as species of the pre-existing
forms.  Those  who  think in this way do not have Darwin's idea of the origin of
species;  for  in  conceiving  an  increase in the number of species as merely a
matter of addition, they necessarily attribute stability to each species, new as
well as old. By this test, not even Kant seems to be near the center of Darwin's
hy-  CHAPTER  24:  EVOLUT pothcsis of the origin of species by the extinction of
intermediate  varieties.  In  comparing Darwin with certain of his predecessors,
notably Aristotle and Aquinas, it seems necessary to apply another kind of test.

Here  the problem is not so much one of discovering affinities or disagreements,
as  one  of  determining  whether  they  are  talking  about  the same thing and
therefore,  when  they  appear  to  disagree,  whether the issue between them is
genuine.  They do not seem to conceive a species in the same way. Certainly they
use  the  word  differently.  This affects the way in which the whole problem of
origins  is understood. The controversies concerning the fixity or mutability of
species,  concerning  evolution  and  creation, and concerning the origin of man
involve  genuine  issues  only if those who seem to disagree do not use the word
"species"  in widely different senses. It is possible that certain forms of life
do  not  originate  by  descent  from  a common ancestor and do not derive their
status  as  quite distinct types from the mere absence of intermediate varieties
varieties  which  once must have existed but are now extinct. If such forms were
to be called "species," the word would have a different meaning from the meaning
it  has  when  applied to types of pigeons, beetles, or rats. The first of these
two  meanings  may express the philosophical conception of a living species as a
class  of  organisms  having  the  same  essential  nature,  according  to which
conception  there  never  could  have  been  intermediate  varieties. The second
meaning  may  be  that  of  the  scientific  taxonomist in botany or zoology who
constructs  a  system  of  classification,  genealogical  or  otherwise. On this
meaning,  one  million and a half would be a conservative estimate of the number
of  plant  and  animal  types  classified  by  the  systematist as "species." In
contrast,  the  number  of  species,  in  the  philosophical  sense  of distinct
essences,  would  be extremely small. Darwin, for example, says, "I cannot doubt
that  the  theory  of  descent with modification embraces all the members of the
same  great  class or kingdom. I believe that animals are descended from at most
only  four  or  five progenitors, and plants from an equal or lesser ION number.
Analogy  would  lead me one step farther, namely, to the belief that all animals
and plants are descended from some one prototype. But analogy may be a deceitful
guide."  the  theory  of  evolution,  he  It is immaterial to adds, whether this
inference,  "chiefly  grounded  on  analogy  ... be accepted." The issue between
Darwin  and  the  theologians  may  or  may  not  be  genuine  according  to the
interpretation of this passage, and according to the possibility of a double use
of  the  word  "species" for both the small number of progenitors from which all
the extant types of plants and animals have evolved, and for a very large number
of  those  extant  types. If the theologians use the word "species" in the first
sense,  and Darwin in the second, they need not be in disagreement. The "view of
life"  which  Darwin  attributes to certain eminent authorities, he himself does
not  flatly  reject,  namely,  that  life,  "with  its several powers [has] been
originally  breathed  by  the  Creator  into  a few forms or into one." Is there
common  ground  here  in  the  admitted  possibility  that  life  may  have been
originally  created in a small number of distinct forms and that these are to be
regarded  as  species  in  one  conception,  though  not  in another? If so, the
affirmation  of a certain fixity to species would apply only to a few primordial
Concerning  forms  which  forms.  have  appeared  with  the passage of time, two
questions   would   have  to  be  answered.  First,  are  they  species  in  the
philosopher's sense of distinct and immutable essences, or species in the scheme
of systematic biological classification? Second, is their first appearance at an
historical  moment  due to a special act of creation, to spontaneous generation,
or   to   evolution  from  already  existing  organic  forms  by  "descent  with
modification"?  To join issue with Darwin, it would seem to be necessary for the
person  answering  these  questions to use the word "species" in the biologist's
sense and at the same time to account for the historical ongm of the new species
by special creation or spontaneous generation. But in the tradition of the great
books,  theologians  like  Augustine  and  Aquinas  do  not attribute to God any
special  acts  of  creation  after the original production of the world, THE GRE
except to explain the origin of individual human souls.

"Nothing  entirely  new  was  afterwards  made by God," Aquinas writes, "but all
things  subsequently  made  had in a sense been made . . . before in the work of
the six days Some existed not only in matter, but also in their causes, as those
individual creatures that are now generated existed in the first of their kind.

Species  also  that  are  new, if any such appear, existed beforehand in various
active  powers;  so  that  animals, and perhaps even new species of animals, are
produced  by  putrefaction by the power which the stars and elements received at
the  beginning.  Again,  animals  of  new  kinds  arise  occasionally  from  the
connection  of  individuals  belonging  to different species, as the mule is the
offspring  of  an  ass  and  a  mare,  but even these existed previously m their
causes, in the work of the six days."

WHETHER  OR  NOT the theologian's conception of an historical development of the
forms of life conforms to the evolutionist's hypothesis, even though it does not
offer  the  same  type of explanation, is a matter which the reader of the texts
must  decide.  But  one  issue,  which  still remains to be discussed, can leave
little doubt of a basic controversy between Darwin and some of his predecessors,
especially  the theologians. It concerns the origin and nature of man. It can be
stated m terms of two views of human nature. One is that man is a species in the
philosophical  sense,  essentially and abruptly distinct from brute animals; the
other,  that  man  is a species in the biologist's sense, and differs from other
animals  only  by continuous variation. On the first view, either man would have
to  be  created,  in body as well as soul; or if the human species has an origin
which  in  part  or  whole  involves the operation of natural causes, it must be
conceived as emerging from a lower form of The rational soul, Aquinas maintains,
"canlife.  not  come  to  be  except by creation." But it is not only man's soul
which,  according  to  Aquinas, "cannot be produced save immediately by God." He
also  insists  that  "the  first formation of the human body could not be by the
instrumentality  of any created power, but was im- AT IDEAS mediately from God,"
He  does  not  reject  the  suggestion of Augustine that the human body may have
preexisted  in other creatures as an effect preexists in its causes. But he adds
the  qualification  that  it  preexists  in  its  causes only in the manner of a
"passive  potentiality,"  so that "it can be produced out of pre-existing matter
only by God." A Christian theologian like Aquinas might entertain the hypothesis
of  emergent  evolution  as  applied  to  the  human organism, but only with the
qualification  that  natural  causes  by  themselves  do  not  suffice  for  the
production of man. On the second view, which is Darwin's, man and the anthropoid
apes  have  descended  from a common ancestral form which is now extinct, as are
also  many  of the intermediate varieties in the chain of development unless, as
it  is  sometimes  thought,  certain  fossil  remains supply some of the missing
Jinks. "The great break in the organic chain between man and his nearest allies,
which  cannot  be  bridged over by any extinct or living species, has often been
advanced,"  Darwin  admits,  "as  a  grave  objection  to the belief that man is
descended  from  some  lower  form; but this objection," he continues, "will not
appear of much weight to those who, from general reasons, believe in the general
principle  of  evolution.  Breaks  often  occur in all parts of the series, some
being  wide, sharp and defined, others less so m various degrees, as between the
orang  and its nearest allies between the Tarsius and the other Lemundae between
the  elephant,  and  in  a  more  striking manner between the Ornithorhynchus or
Echidna,  and  all  other  mammals." Furthermore, Darwin insists, no one who has
read Lyell's Antiquity of Man "will lay much stress ... on the absence of fossil
remains";  for Lyell has shown "that in all the vertebrate classes the discovery
of  fossil remains has been a very slow and fortuitous process. Nor should it be
forgotten  that  those  regions  which  are  the  most  likely to afford remains
connecting  man  with  some  extinct  ape-like  creature,  have  not as yet been
searched  by  geologists." On either of these two conflicting views, the organic
affinities  between  man  and the most highly developed mammals would be equally
intelligible,  though  they  would  be  differently  interpreted  by Aquinas and
Darwin. But ac- CHAPTER 24: EVOLUTI cording to the doctrine of man's creation by
God, or even on the hypothesis of emergent evolution, there need not be strictly
speaking,  there  cannot be a missing link between ape and man, for the emergent
species  is  a  whole  step  upward in the scale of life. Man is thus not one of
several  organic  types  which  have  become  species  through the extinction of
intermediate  varieties,  and  hence  he  differs  from  other animals not in an
accidental, but rather in an essential manner that is, he differs in kind rather
than  degree.  This issue concerning human nature is discussed from other points
of  view  in  the chapters on ANIMAL and MAN. Here the issue, stated in terms of
man's  origin, seems to involve three possibilities: special creation, evolution
by  descent  from  a  common  ancestor,  and emergent evolution. But these three
possibilities  apply  not  only to man, but to the origin of every species which
did  not  exist  at the first moment of life on earth. The hypothesis of special
creation  does  not  seem  to  be  held  by the theologians, at least not in the
tradition  of  the  great  books.  The  hypothesis  of emergent evolution raises
questions  concerning the factors natural or supernaturalwhich must be operative
to  cause the emergence of higher from lower forms of organic matter. Whether or
not  Aristotle  and  Aquinas can supply an answer to these questions in terms of
their theory of matter's

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The classification of animals
   1a. Comparison   of genealogical       classification   with other types of taxonomy: the
   phylogenetic series
   1b. The criteria for distinguishing races or varieties, species, genera, and all higher
   taxonomic groupings

2. Genetic variation in       the course of generations
   2a. Comparison of variation under conditions of natural and artificial breeding
   2b. Characteristicswhich are more and less variable genetically: their bearing on
   the distinction of races, species, and genera

3. The process of heredity
   3a. The inheritance of acquired characteristics: the use and disuse of parts
   PA01
   3b. The inheritance and variability of instincts
   3c. Interbreeding and crossbreeding: hybridism and sterility
   3</.
   Atavisms and reversions to ancestral type
   3d. Marked and abrupt mutations
   in a single generation as opposed to the continuous
   accumulation of slight and imperceptible variations

4. The problem of evolution: the origin of plant and animal species
4<a.
The question of ultimate origins: the creation of primordial life in one or many
forms; the original generation of life from inorganic matter
   4a. The fixity or the mutability of species
   4?. The origin       of new forms of life: special creation, spontaneous generation, or
   descent with modification from older forms
   .
   4*/.
   The direction of evolution: progress and recession

5. The theory of evolution: the origin of new species from a common ancestry
   5a. The struggle for existence:
   its causes   and consequences
   (1) Natural selection: the survival of the fittest
   (2) The extinction of intermediate varieties
   (3) Difficulties with
   the theory of natural selection: its limitations
   5& Competition in mating: sexual selection
   5b. The geographical and physiological factors in breeding: accessibility, fertility, and
   sterility

6. The facts of evolution: evidences bearing on the history of life on earth
   6a. The geological record: the significance of fossil remains
   6b. The geographical distribution of the forms of life in relation to the genealogy of
   existing species
   6c. Comparative anatomy and embryology: the meaning of rudimentary or vestigial
   organs and functions

7. The origin
and development of man
   7a. The doctrine of man's special creation: in body, in soul
   7& The theory of the evolutionary origin of man from lower forms of animal life:
   descent from an ancestor common to man and the anthropoids
   (1) Anatomical, physiological,    and embryological evidences of an organic af-
   finity between man and other mammalian forms of life
   (2)   Falcon tological evidences: the missing link in man's ancestry
   (3) Psychological evidences: the human mind in relation to animal intelligence
   7b. Biological       evolution in the course of human generation: from prehistoric to
   historic man

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other discussions of the classification of animals,
see ANIMAL 2a-2c; LIFE AND DE

and for the distinction between species and genera in relation to definiti

tion, see DEFINITION la, 20, 2d; RELATION 53(4); SAME AND OTHER 33(1).

Other considerations of the problem of heredity, see ANIMAL 10; FAMILY 6b; H

Matters relevant to the origin of life, and of the major forms of life, see

LIFE AND DEATH 2, 3a.

Another treatment of the conflict of organisms in the struggle for existence

3C '

Matters relevant to the origin of man and to his affinity with other animals

1c(2); MAN la-1c, 4b-4c, 8-8c; MIND 3a-3b; SOUL 2c(2)-2c(3).

Evolution in relation to the idea of progress, see PROGRESS 2; and for matte

and mental evolution in human history, see HISTORY 4b; MAN pc; MIND 3c; PR

6; TIME 8a.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below arc works not included in Great Booty of the Western World, bu

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of T

E. HARTMANN. Philosoph

*

LEWES.  Problems  of Lif AUGUSTINE. DC Gcnesi ad Litteram ROMANES. Mental Evolut
GOETHE. Metamorphose der Pflanzen S. BUTLER. Darwin Amon

C. R. DARWIN. Foundations of the Origin of Species .

Evolution, Old a

A Posthumous Essay on Instinct

. .

Note-Books

The Variation of Animals and Plants Under

. C. S. PEIRCE. Collecte

Domestication 287-317 ENGELS. Dialectics of Nature FRAZER. The Golden Bou

WEI SM ANN. Studies in

**

.

Essays  upon  H  LINNAEUS.  Systema  Naturae  Problems E. DARWIN. Zoonomia . The
Germ-Plas  BUFFON. "Epochs of Nature," in Natural History T. H. HUXLEY. Man's Pl
LAMARCK.  Zoological  Philosophy  .  Darwmiana  CUVIER.  The  Animal  Kingdom  .
Evolution  and  CHAMBERS.  Vestiges  of  the  Natural  History ofCrea- Copt. The
Primary Fact

tion FISKE. Essays: Histori TENNYSON. Loclpley Hall VRILS. The Mutation Th

In Memoriam

.  DEWEY.  The  Influence  o  SPENCER.  Progress:  Its Law and Cause Title Essay
WALLACE. Contributions to the Theory of Natural HOBHOUSE. Mind in Evol

Selection Morals in Evoluti

.

LYELL. Principles BERGSON. Matter and Me

of Geology

. The Geological Evidences of the Antiquity of . Creative Evol

Man  DRIESCH.  The  Science  a  MENDEL.  Experiments  in Plant Hybridization ism
BAGEHOT. Physics and Politics POULTON. Essays on Evo

ATH  ABIT  36.  ANIMAL 1b, 8a-8b; on and classifica, see OPPOSITION , see ANIMAL
icrs  bearing  on  social  OGRESS 1b, t relevant to the two groups: on. s cited,
consult  he  Great Ideas. y ofthe Unconscious, (c) x e and Mind ion tn Animals g
the  Machines  nd New d Papers, VOL vi, par 13-17, gh, PART n, CH 7; PART vn the
Theory  of  Descent eredity and Kindred Biological m ace in Nature Ethics ors of
Organic  Evolution  cal  and  Literaryk  VOL it (9) eory f Darwin on Philosophy,
ution on mory ution nd Philosophy of the Organlution

CHAPTER 24: EVOLUTION GALTON. Natural Inheritance T. H. MORGAN. Evolution an

.

Essays in Eugenics The Physical Basis of

.

D. H. SCOTT. The Evolution of Plants The Theory of the Gen

.

BATESON. Problems of Genetics The Scientific Basis

.

HENDERSON.  The  Fitness  of  the  Environment  MARETT. Head, Heart and Ha D. W.
THOMPSON.  On Growth and Form lution SHAW. Man and Superman DOBZHANSKY. Genetics
and t

.

Back  to  Methuselah ADLER. Problemsfor Thomist C. L. MORGAN. Emergent Evolution
MAYR.  Systematics  and  the  L.  T. MORE. The Dogma of Evolution Viewpoint of a
Zoolog SMUTS. Holism and Evolution S. HUXLEY. Evolution,

]. McDoucALL. Modern Materialism and Emergent .

Evolutionary Et

Evolution  B.  RUSSELL.  Religion and S H. G. WELLS, J. HUXLEY, and G. P, WELLS.
Repro- Human Knowledge, Its

.

duction,  Genetics  and  the Development of Sex PART I, CH 4 M. R. COHEN. Reason
and  Nature,  BK  n,  CH  3  KEITH. A New Theory of Hum d Genetics Heredity e of
Evolution  nds  in Human Evohe Origin of Species s: The Problem ofSpecies Origin
of  Speciesfrom  the ist the Modern Synthesis, CH 10 hics cience, CH 3 Scope and
Limits, an Evolution
