CHAPTER: EXPERIENCE

INTRODUCTION

dictory. According to the context of the discussion or the subject matter under consideration, the same author will shift from one meaning to another.

For example, in his account of the origin of science, Aristotle says that "out of sense-perception comes to be what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories of the same thing develops experience; for a number of memories constitute a single experience." The further product of experience— "the universal stabilized in its entirety within the soul" — is obtained by abstraction and the related act of induction or generaHzation. Art or science arises, Aristotle writes, "when from many notions gained by experience, one universal judg- ment about a class of objects is produced." Hence it can be said, he thinks, that from experience "originate the skill of the craftsman, the knowledge of the man of science, skill in the sphere of coming to be and science in the sphere of being."

In the study of nature, experience, according to Aristotle, is essential for "taking a comprehensive view of the admitted facts" which can come only from dwelling "in intimate association with nature and its phenomena." In the context of ethical or political problems, he treats experience as the basis for a prudent judgment, which is not "concerned with universal only," but "must also recognize the particulars." This fact, Aristotle writes, explains "why some who do not know," but who "have experience, are more practical than others who know." In the field of poetry, as in moral matters, it is the man of experience, according to

Aristotle, who can best judge what is good or bad; he can "judge rightly the works produced . . . and understand by what means or how they are achieved, and what harmonizes with what," whereas "the inexperienced must be content if ihcy do not fail to sec whether the work has been well or ill made." Hobbes and William James also use the word for the possession of expertness or sound judg- ment in practical affairs, as well as in connection with the origin or nature of knowledge. Hobbes, like Aristotle, says that "much memory, or memory of many things, is called Experienced He connects it with prudence. It is that knowledge, he writes, which "is not attained by reasoning, but found as well in brute beasts as in man; and is but a memory of successions of events in times past, wherein the omission of every little circumstance altering the effect, frustrates the expectation of the most prudent."

For James, however, experience is usually identified with the stream of consciousness.

^'Experience moulds us every hour," he writes, "and makes of our minds a mirror of the timeand-space-connections between the things in the world." He distinguishes it from conception, reasoning, or thought, and associates it with sensation and feeling. "The way of 'experience' proper is the front door," he writes, "the door of the five senses."

For the most part, experience is a term in I psychological analysis, with implications for the development of theoretic knowledge or practical wisdom. That is the way it is chiefly used by Aquinas, Bacon, Descartes, Spinoza, Locke, and Hume, as well as the authors already mentioned. It is still a term in the dimension of psychology when it is used by Plotinus and by the theologians to discuss the mystical union of the soul with God.

But with Hume experience also is reaHty or, in his phrase, the realm of "matters of fact and existence," as opposed to "relations of ideas." He tends to identify the order of nature with the succession of events in experience, though he also seems to conceive a "pre-established harmony between the course of nature and the succession of our ideas." Nature, he goes on to say, "has implanted in us an instinct, which carries forward the thought in a correspondent course to that which she has established among external objects."

Hume's difficulty or indecision with regard to the objectivity of experience does not appear in Kant, for whom experience ceases to be psychological in any subjective sense of that word. EXPERIENCE 469

The order of nature— the object of the theoretic sciences is the order of experience. In

Kant's technical sense of moglichc crfahriingy nature is the realm of all possil)le experience.

His distinction between judgments of perception and judgments of experience differentiates what for other writers is subjective sense-experience, from knowledge of reality or of objects shared by many minds.

Experience is the domain of such public objects precisely because its sense-materials are formed and ordered by the structure of the mind itself— by the forms of intuition and the categories of the understanding in a synthesis which Kant calls the "transcendental unity of apperception." Without this synthesis, experience "would be merely a rhapsody of [Perceptions, never fitting together into any connected text, according to rules of a thoroughly united (possible) consciousness, and therefore never subjected to the transcendental and necessary unity of apperception."

Though it may not seem possible, William

James goes further than Kant in the conception of experience as a realm of being. Kant does not think that all possible experience circumscribes reality. "That which is not phenomenon," he writes, "cannot be an object of experience; it can never overstep the Hmits of sensibiHty, within which alone objects are presented to us."

In contrast to this phenomenal reality with which he identifies experience, Kant posits a noumenal world—a world of intelligible or supra-sensible beings. To this realm, Kant writes, belong those "possible things which are not objects of our senses, but are cogitated by the understanding alone." Since the things Kant calls ding-an-sich are unconditioned, that is, not subject as they are in themselves to the forms of intuition or the categories of the understanding, they cannot have an empirical or sensible reaUty, but only an intelligible existence.

William James goes further in his Essays in

Radical Empiricism, when he takes experience as equivalent to the whole of reality, including the actual and the possible or imaginary, the concrete and the abstract, the objective and the subjective. All differentiations must be made within experience, and experience itself is neutral with respect to all distinctions— receptive of all. There can be no meaningful distinction between experience and some other realm of existence. It is in this all-inclusive sense that experience is said to be the central term in the philosophy of John Dewey when it functions as mind does for Hegel, substance for

Spinoza, or being for Aquinas and Aristotle.

We have gone from one extreme to another in passing from a purely psychological to something like a metaphysical conception of experience. These are opposite in a way which suggests the contrast between the practical and the aesthetic values of experience— the actively useful and the intrinsically enjoyable. At least the metaphysical identification of experience with all existence seems analogous to the aesthetic ideal of a life which embraces every variety of experience.

There is some intimation of this ideal in the lust for adventure which motivates Odysseus and his men. Dante, in fact, finds the secret of his character in the ardor of Odysseus "to be- come experienced of the world, and of the vices of men, and of their virtue," which leads him "to pursue virtue and knowledge," even to the point of his "mad flight."

There is some suggestion of this ideal of experience in the unbounded vitality of Gargantua and Pantagruel, and in the enterprise of the

Wife of Bath, in Chaucer's tale. But the great poetic expression of this ideal is written in

Faust—in the worlds of experience Mephistopheles opens to the man who has wagered his soul for one ultimately satisfying moment.

Whatever to all mankind is assured,

I, in my inmost being, will enjoy and know.

Seize with my soul the highest and most deep; Men's weal and woe upon my bosom heap; And thus this self of mine to all their selves expanded, Like them I too at last be stranded.

The basic issue concerning the role of experience in the origin of knowledge, especially the organized knowledge of the arts and sciences, turns on whether it is the source or only a source.

It is rarely if ever supposed that nothing can be learned from experience, or that everything worth learning can come to be known entirely apart from experience. During the early centuries of Christianity, devoutly religious men preached that God has revealed to man all he needs to know in order to live well and be saved. But this extreme position rejects the constructions of reason as well as the materials of experience.

Among philosophers and scientists, concerned with what man can learn by the exercise of his own powers, the controversy over experience usually involves a distinction between the senses and the reason or intellect. As indicated in the chapters on Idea, Mind, and Sense, whether this distinction can be validly made is itself a major issue in the tradition of the great books. Those who make it, however, tend to regard experience as something which results from the activity of the senses. For them the problem is whether our ideas— the general notions or concepts that enter into our scientific judgments and reasoning—come from sense-experience, which either is or originates from the perception of particulars. The contrast between the particular and the universal, between percept, sense-impression, or concrete image on the one hand, and concept or abstract idea, on the other, lies at the heart of the problem.

One possibility is that the mind, by processes of abstraction or induction, somehow draws all its concepts and generalizations from experience. Aquinas is representative of this view. He adopts Aristotle's notion that the intellect is "like a tablet on which nothing is written."

This tabula rasa depends upon the senses and the imagination for the materials out of which concepts are formed. "For the intellect to understand actually," Aquinas writes, "not only when it acquires new knowledge, but also when it uses knowledge already acquired, there is need for the act of the imagination and of the other powers."

Without experience the mind would remain empty, but experience itself does not fill the intellect with ideas. The activity of the sensitive faculty is not by itself the cause of knowledge. The perceptions and images furnished by sense-experience, Aquinas writes, "need to be made actually intelligible," and this requires the activity of the intellect, not merely its passivity in receiving impressions from experience.

For this reason, he concludes, "it cannot be said that sensitive knowledge is the total and perfect cause of intellectual knowledge, but rather that it is in a way the material cause."

Although experience is the indispensable source of the materials on which the intellect actively works, knowledge worthy of the name of science or of art does not come from experience alone.

Thus we see that those who, like Aquinas, I affirm that there is nothing in the intellect which was not previously in the senses do not mean to imply that the materials of senseexperience reach the intellect untransformed. On the contrary, the primary contribution of the intellect is the translation of experienced particulars into universal notions. Nor do those who, like Bacon, affirm that the principles of knowledge are obtained by induction from experience necessarily imply that all knowledge is directly drawn from experience. To the extent that deductive reasoning is a way of learning new truths, the truths thus learned derive from experience only indirectly. Their direct source is truths already known, which must in turn have come from experience by induction.

Harvey criticizes those who misconceive the part which reason should play in relation to the I senses. In the field of his own inquiries, "some weak and inexperienced persons," he writes, "vainly seek by dialectics and far-fetched arguments, either to upset or establish things that are only to be founded on anatomical demonstration, and believed on the evidence of the senses.

. . . How difficult it is," he continues, "to teach those who have no experience, the things of which they have not any knowledge by their senses!"

As in geometry, so in all the sciences, according to Harvey, it is the business of reason "from things sensible to make rational demonstration of the things that are not sensible; to render credible or certain things abstruse and beyond sense from things more manifest and better known." Science depends upon both reason and sense; but sense, not reason, is the ultimate arbiter of what can be accepted as true. "To test whether anything has been well or ill advanced, to ascertain whether some falsehood does not lurk under a proposition, it is imperative on us," Harvey declares, "to bring it to the proof of sense, and to admit or reject it on the decision of sense."

The foregoing views are not a necessary consequence of the distinction between the faculties of sense and reason. The theory of innate ideas presents another possibility. As expressed by Descartes, for example, this theory holds that there are "purely intellectual [ideas] which our understanding apprehends by means of a certain inborn light." Hence it would seem that experience can be dispensed with, except for its value in dealing with particulars. But for most of the writers who take this view, experience, in addition to providing acquaintance with particulars, acts as the stimulus or the occasion for the development of the seeds of knowledge implanted in the mind at birth. Al- though he rests his metaphysics on the innate ideas of self and God, Descartes also appeals to experimental knowledge in the sphere of natural science. To answer such a question as, "what is the nature of the magnet?" the inquirer must "first collect all the observations with which experience can supply him about this stone, and from these he will next try to deduce its character."

The extreme position which denies any role to experience can be taken only by those who think that the growth of actual knowledge from innate ideas requires no outside impetus; and perhaps also by those who make ideas the objects of the mind's intuitive apprehension. It is questionable whether anyone goes to this extreme without the qualification that, for particulars at least, sense-experience is knowledge.

The other extreme— that experience is the only source of knowledge— is approached by those who deny the distinction in faculties, and substitute for the duality of sense and reason, each with its characteristic contribution to human knowledge, a distinction between the function of perceiving and that of reworking the received materials. Though in different ways. Hobbes, Locke, Berkeley, and Hume all appear to take this position.

They represent, according to James, "the empirical school in psychology." He tries to summarize their view by saying that "if a// the connections among ideas in the mind could be interpreted as so many combinations of sensedata wrought into fixity . . . then experience in the common and legitimate sense of the word would be the sole fashioner of the mind." If, in other v/ords, all that is done with the sensations, impressions, or ideas—whatever term is used for the original data of experience—consists in their reproduction by memory and imagination, and their comparison, combination, and connection in various ways to produce complex ideas, judgments, and trains of reasoning, then the entire content of human knowl- edge can be reduced to elements derived exclusively from experience.

Whether this position is taken with or without qualification depends on the disposition that is made of the problem of universals or abstractions, which is more fully discussed in the chapters on Idea, Sense, and Universal. Locke's treatment of abstract ideas and the special consideration given by Hume to the concepts of mathematics suggest that there are kinds or aspects ofknowledge which cannot be accounted for by reduction to experience. Both men introduce a certain qualification upon their empiricism. However slight that may be, it does not appear in Hobbes and Berkeley, for they completely deny the existence of abstract or universal notions in the mind. If ''abstract," "universal," or ''general" applies to names alone, then the mind or understanding adds nothing to, and does not radically transform, the materials of experience.

The controversy concerning experience and knowledge can also be stated in terms of the opposition between the a priori 2ind the a posteriori. These terms are sometimes used to signify what is possessed before and what comes after or from experience, and sometimes they are used to indicate, without reference to the time order, what is independent of and what is de- pendent upon experience.

The distinction between the a priori and the a posteriori is not made in the same way with respect to propositions or judgments and with respect to reasoning or inference. The distinction and its significance for science and philosophy are discussed in the chapters on Judg- ment and Reasoning. It is sufficient here to point out that an a priori judgment is not determined by experience nor does it need empirical verification.

It might at first be supposed that those who agree in thinking that experience is just one not the only—source of knowledge would also agree that some judgments, especially the basic propositions of science, are a priori. But this does not appear to be the case. Bacon, for ex- ample, Hke Aristotle, holds that the principles of the various sciences are derived by induction from experience. "There are and can exist," he writes, "but two ways of investigating and dis- covering truth. The one hurries on rapidly from the senses and particulars to the most general axioms, and from them, as principles and their supposed indisputable truth, derives and dis- covers the intermediate axioms. . . . The other constructs its axioms from the senses and particulars, by ascending continually and gradually, till it finally arrives at the most general axioms." All axioms, on this view, are a posteriori propositions.

Descartes and Kant, while differing in the terms of their analysis, think, as we have seen, that the mind itself provides the ground for certain judgments which are therefore a priori.

It does not even seem to be the case that those who make experience the only source of knowl- edge regard all propositions as a posteriori. Hume's treatment of mathematical propositions and James' treatment of axioms or necessary truths seem to be the exceptions here.

There is still another way in which the issue can be stated. The question is whether human knowledge extends to objects beyond experience, to things or beings which are not sensible and which transcend all possible experience.

Again it might be supposed that those who take an a posteriori view of the origin of knowledge would also limit apprehension to things experienceable. But Aristotle and Aquinas seem to say that the origin of knowledge from experience does not restrict the knowable to things capable of being experienced. Aquinas cites

Aristotle's work on the heavens to show that "we may have a scientific knowledge" of things we cannot experience, "by way of negation and by their relation to material things." He would hold what is true of astronomy to be even more the case in metaphysics and theology. Even though all our concepts are abstracted from experience, we can by means of them reach be- yond the sensible world to purely intelligible realities— to immaterial and non-sensible beings or aspects of being. Locke, who may be thought even more emphatic than Aristotle or Aquinas in his insistence on the empirical origin of knowledge, goes as far as they do in affirming man's knowledge of God and the soul.

Hume, in contrast, holds that knowledge may go beyond experience only if it is knowledge of the relation of our ideas, as exemplified in the science of mathematics. Precisely because mathematics is not knowledge of matters of fact or real existence, its propositions are, according to Hume, "discoverable by the mere operation of thought, without dependence on what is anywhere existent in the universe." But with regard to "matters of fact," Hume thinks that "experience is our only guide." Any science which claims to be knowledge of reality or existence rather than of the relations between ideas, is thus limited to the realm of experienceable objects. According as the objects of a science fall within experience, so also must its conclusions be verified by reference to experience. Experience is the ultimate test of what truth there is in the propositions of natural science. Only the propositions of mathematics can have a validity which does not require empirical verification.

By these criteria Hume challenges the validity of metaphysics or natural theology. Such disciplines claim to be knowledge of real existences, but their objects are not experienceable and their conclusions cannot be empirically verified. The existence of God and the immortahty of the soul may be objects of faith, but they are not verifiable conclusions of science; nor for that matter can metaphysics give us scientific knowledge of the ultimate constitution of the physical world if that involves knowledge of substances and causes which lie behind the phenomena and outside of experience. "All the philosophy in the world," Hume writes, "and all the religion . . . will never be able to carry us beyond the usual course of experience."

Kant, like Hume, fimits theoretic knowledge to mathematics and the study of nature. A metaphysics which pretends to know objects outside the phenomenal order cannot be defended. "The understanding has no power to decide," he writes, "whether other perceptions besides those which belong to the total of our possible experience [exist], and consequently whether some other s])here of matter exists." What transcends all possible experience, in other words, cannot be known, at least not in the manner of the speculative sciences; only the moral sciences, proceeding in a different fashion, have access to the realm of the supra-sensible.

Kant's position seems to resemble Hume's. But it involves a quite different conception of mathematics and natural science, especially the latter, which Kant divides into pure and empirical physics. Kant identifies "pure physic" with the "metaphysic of nature" in distinction from the "metaphysic of morals," the one a theoretic, the other a practical science. For Kant the principles of both mathematics and pure physics are a priori rather than a posteriori; the objects of both are objects of actual or possible experience.

In the classification of sciences, the natural sciences are usually set apart from mathematics, as well as from metaphysics, by being called "empirical" or "experimental." These names signify not merely the inductive method by which the knowledge is obtained from experience; they also imply that hypotheses, however formulated, and conclusions, however reached, must be verified by the facts of experience. Newton states it as a rule of reasoning "in experimental philosophy [that] we are to look upon propositions inferred by general induction from phenomena as accurately or very nearly true, notwithstanding any contrary hypotheses that may be imagined, till such time as other phenomena occur, by which they may either be made more accurate, or liable to exceptions."

In similar tenor, Lavoisier says that "we ought, in every instance, to submit our reasoning to the test of experiment, and never to search for truth but by the natural road of experiment and observation."

The two words "empirical" and "experimental" should not, however, be used interchangeably. No science can be experimental without being empirical, but, as the chapter on Astronomy indicates, the converse does not appear to be true.

There seem to be three different types of experience from which knowledge can be derived: (i) the ordinary everyday experiences which men accumulate without making any special effort to investigate, explore, or test;

(2) the special data of experience which men collect by undertaking methodical research and making systematic observations, with or without apparatus; and (3) experiences artificially produced by men who exercise control over the phenomena and with respect to which the observer himself determines the conditions of his experience. "Those experiences which are used to prove a scientific truth," James writes, "are for the most part artificial experiences of the laboratory, gained after the truth itself has been conjectured."

Of these three only the last is an experimental experience. The first type of experience may be employed by the scientist, but it is seldom sufficient or reliable enough for his purposes. The distinction between the empirical sciences which are and those which are not experimental turns on the difference between the second and third types.

It is not always possible for the scientist to perform experiments, as, for example, in astronomy, where the phenomena can be methodically observed and exactly recorded, but cannot be manipulated or controlled. Among the great books of natural science, the biological writings of Hippocrates, Aristotle, Galen, and

Darwin, the astronomical works of Ptolemy,

Copernicus, Kepler, and Newton, and the clinical studies of Freud are examples of scientific works which are more or less empirical, but not experimental. In contrast, Galileo's Two New

Sciences, Newton's Optics, Harvey's Motion of the Heart and Blood, Lavoisier's Elements of

Chemistry, and Faraday's ExperimentalResearches in Electricity represent empirical science which has recourse to experimentation at crucial points.

On the side of their production, experiments are like inventions. They do not happen by chance or without the intervention of art. They are usually performed under carefully controlled conditions and by means of apparatus artfully contrived. This explains the interplay between technology and experim.ental science. Progress in each occasions progress in the other.

On the side of their utility, experiments seem to serve three different though related purposes in scientific work. In those branches of physics which are both mathematical and experimental, the experiment enables the scientist to make exact measurements of the phenomena and so to determine whether one or another mathematical formulation fits the observable facts of nature. Investigating accelerated motion, Galileo seeks not only to demonstrate its definition and its properties, but also to show that "ex- perimental results . . . agree with and exactly correspond with those properties which have been, one after another, demonstrated by us."

The experiment of the inclined plane yields measurements which exempfify those ratios between space and time that are determined by one rather than by another mathematical definition of the acceleration of a freely falUng body. The experiment is thus used to decide between two competing mathematical theories, choosing that one "best fitting natural phenomena." In those sciences, Galileo writes, "in which mathematical demonstrations are applied to natural phenomena . . . the principles, once established by well-chosen experiments, become the foundation of the entire super-structure."

Concerned with the phenomena of heat,

Fourier makes the same point concerning the relation of mathematics and experiments. "Mathematical analysis," he says, "can deduce from general and simple phenomena the expression of the laws of nature; but the special application of these laws to very complex effects demands a long series of exact observations" for which experiments are needed.

In addition to testing hypotheses and providing measurem.ents whereby mathematical formulations can be applied to nature, experiments function as the source of inductions. A crucial experiment constitutes a single clear case from which a generafization can be drawn that is applicable to all cases. Newton's optical experi- ments are of this sort. He calls this use of experiments "the method of analysis." It consists in "making experiments and observations, and in drawing general conclusions from them by induction. . . . And although the arguing from experiments and observations by induction be no demonstration of general conclusions, yet it is the best way of arguing which the nature of things admits of."

A third use for experiments is in the exploration of new fields of phenomena, for purposes of discovery rather than of induction or vcrification. Hypotheses may result from such ex- direction of hypotheses, seems to be a procedure plorations, but in the first instance, the experi- of trial and error. I^^xperimentation in this sense mentation may undertaken without reflects what Hippocrates had in mind when he be the guidance of hypotheses. This employment of spoke experimental technique is illustrated by Para- work of Hippocrates at the very beginning of day's remark that "the science of electricity empirical science, is in that state in which every part of it requires from being the most prized technique, signified experimental investigation, not merely for the a lack of scientific knowledge. Only the physician who could discovery of new effects, but what is just now of far more importance, the development of tiie based on science took the risk of experimenting —of proceeding by means by which the old effects are produced."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. Various conceptions of experience

2. Experience in relation to the acts of the mind
 2a. Memory and imagination as factors in or products of experience
 2b. The empirical sources of induction, abstraction, generalization
 2c. The transcendental or innate structure of the mind as a condition of
 experience
 2d. The a priori and a posteriori in judgment and reasoning

3. Experience
in relation to organized knowledge: art and science
3*7.
Particular experiences and general rules as conditions of expertness or skill: the
contrast between the empiric and the artist
 3a. The issue concerning the role of experience in science

4. Experience
as measuring the scope of human knowledge
 4a. The knowability of that which is outside experience: the supra-sensible, the
 noumenal or transcendent
 4b. Verification by experience: experience as the ultimate test of truth
 The theory of experimentation in scientific method
 4c. Experimental exploration and discovery: the formulation of hypotheses
 4d. Experimental verification: the testing of hypotheses
 4e. Experimental measurement: the application of mathematics

6. The man of experience in practical affairs
 6a. Experience as indispensable to sound judgment and prudence
 6b. The role of experience in politics: the lessons of history

7. Mystical
or religious experience: experience of the supernatural

8. Variety of experience as an ideal of human life

CROSS-REFERENCES

For; The discussion of the faculties or the acts of the mind which are related
to

IDEA 1c, 20, 2e 2g; INDUCTION xa, 2; JUDGMENT 8c; KNOWLEDGE 6b(i), 6

AND IMAGINATION la, 30, 53-50, 6c(i)~6c(2); MIND 1a(i)~1a(2), 1e(i);

SENSE la, 1c-1d, 3c(5), 4b, 53; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 40.

5jb(3);

The consideration of the empirical foundations or sources of science a

DIALECTIC 2a(i); MEDICINE 2a; METAPHYSICS 2c; PHILOSOPHY 33; PHYSICS

1b, 1c, 53; SENSE 5b-5c.

The discussion of experience in relation to the conditions or limits o

see INDUCTION 2; KNOWLEDGE 53-53(6); MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6d; META

4b; MIND 50.

Other treatments of the empirical verification of hypotheses or theori

PHYSICS 4c; SCIENCE 50; SENSE 5c; TRUTH la.

Other discussions of the role of experimentation in scientific inquiry

4b; MECHANICS 23; PHYSICS 4-4d; SCIENCE 53.

Experience as 3 factor in educstion, see EDUCATION 5f.

The treatment of religious or mystical experience or of related matter

PROPHECY 1b; RELIGION 1b(2)-1b(3); SIGN AND SYMBOL 50.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western Wor

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divide

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collec

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of th

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapte

J. MILL. Analysis

L Mind AUGUSTINE. De Genesi ad Litteram, BK xn WHEWELL. The Philos DESCARTLS.
The Principles of Philosophy, PART in, 4 VOL i, BK i, CH 5, HUME. A Treatise of
Human Nature TENNYSON. Ulysses KANT. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic
EMERSON. "Experience HEGEL. The Phenomenology of Mind BERNARD, Introductio

Science of Logic, VOLI, BKII, SECTII; SECTIII,

. CLIFFORD. "On t

CH i; VOL n, SECT in, CH 3 selves," in VO

J. S. MILL. A System of Logic,

BK HI, CH 7-8 AVENARIUS, Kntikder W. JAMES. Essays in Radical Empiricism
HODGSON. The Metaphy

. The Varieties of Religious Experience ROYCE. The World and

.

Pragmatism H. JAMES. The Beast

. The Meaning of Truth MACH. The Analysis o

Erf(enntnis un

.

**

PEGUY. Basic Veritie R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART vi Men and Saints

.

DUNS SCOTUS. Oxford Commentary, BK i, DIST 3, Q 4 HUGEL. The Mystical

(9) LENIN. Materialism a LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Under- BRADLEY.
Appearance

standing Essays on Trut

.

VOLTAIRE. The Ignorant Philosopher, CH 7 BROAD. Perception, P WORDSWORTH. The
Prelude PROUST. Remembrance

experience, see c(4); MEMORY REASONING 1c, 4C, nd art, see ART 5; 2; SCIENCE f
human knowledge, PHYSICS es, see HYPOTHESIS 4d; , see INDUCTION 5; LOGIC s, see
GOD 6c(3); ld, but relevant to the d into two groups: . tion. e works cited,
consult r of The Great Ideas. of the Phenomena of the Human ophy of the
Inductive Sciences, 7 ," in Essays, n n to Experimental Medicine he Nature of
Thmgs-In-ThemL n, Lectures and Essays remen Erfahrung sic of Experience the
Individual, SERIES i (6) in the Jungle f Sensations d Irrtum s (Innocence and
Experience) (The Holy Innocents) Element of Religion nd Empinocriticism and
Reality, BK i, CH n h and Reality, CH 6 hysics, and Reality, CH 3 of Things Past

CHAPTER 25: EXPERIENCE JOYCE. Ulysses DBWEY. "Experience an SAN FAY ANA.
Scepticism and Animal Paith, CH 15 Postulate of Im BRIDGMAN. The Logic of Modern
Physics sciousness' and E HOOK. The Metaphysics of Pragmatism Darwin on
Philosoph J. S. HALDANE. The Sciences and Philosophy, LECTXVI Reconstructi C. I.
LEWIS. Mind and the World Order .

Experience a WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern World .

Experience a

Process and Reality PART in

. BLANSHARD. The Nature HUSSERL. Ideas General Introduction to Pure Phe-
MARITAIN. The Degrees

nomenology .

Ransoming the T

. Meditations Cartesiennes B. RUSSELL. The Probl BERGSON. Time and Free Will .An
Inquiry into

. Two Sources of Morality and Religion, CH 4 16-18, 21-23 GILBY. Poetic
Experience . Human Knowle FISHER. The Design of Experiments PART HI, CH 1-5; PA
d Objective Idealism," "The mediate Empiricism," "'Conxperience," in The
Influence of y on in Philosophy, CH 4 nd Nature, CH i, 9 nd Education CH 2-3, 8
of Thought of Knowledge, CH i, 5 ime, CH 10 ems of Philosophy, CH i Meaning and
Truth, CH 8-u, dge, Its Scope and Limits, RT VI, CH 4, 10
