Chapter 17:

INTRODUCTION

sometimes personified, sometimes abstractly conceived is the antagonist of
freedom in the drama of human life and history. So at least it seems to the
poets of antiquity. In many of the Greek tragedies, fate sets the stage. Some
curse must be fulfilled. A doom impends and is inexorable. But the actors on the
stage are far from puppets. Within the framework of the inevitable the tragic
hero works out his own destiny, making the choices from which his personal
catastrophe ensues. Oedipus, doomed to kill his father and marry his mother, is
not fated to inquire into his past and to discover the sins which, when he sees,
he wills to see no more. The curse on the house of Atreus does not require
Agamemnon to bring Cassandra back from Troy or to step on the purple carpet. The
furies which pursue Orestes he has himself awakened by murdering his mother,
Clytemnestra, a deed not fated but freely undertaken to avenge his father's
death.

The ancients did not doubt that men could choose and, through choice, exercise
some control over the disposition of their lives. Tacitus, for example, while
admitting that "most men * . . cannot part with the belief that each person's
future is fixed from his very birth," claims that "the wisest of the ancients .
. . leave us the capacity of choosing our life." At the same time he recognizes
an order of events beyond man's power to control, although he finds no agreement
regarding its cause whether it depends "on wandering stars" or "primary
elements, and on a combination of natural causes." For his own part, Tacitus
declares, "I suspend my judgment" on the question "whether it is fate and
unchangeable necessity or chance which governs the revolutions of human
affairs." In so doing, he grants the possibility that not everything which lies
beyond man's control is fated. Some of the things which happen with- 515 FATE
out man's willing them may happen by chance or fortune.

It is sometimes supposed that "fate" and "fortune" are synonyms, or that one has
a tragic and the other a happy connotation. It is as if fortune were always good
and fate always malevolent. But either may be good or evil from the point of
view of man's desires. Although fate and fortune are hardly the same, there is
some reason for associating them. Each imposes a limitation on man's freedom. A
man cannot compel fortune to smile upon him any more than he can avoid his fate.
Though alike in this respect, fate and fortune are also opposed to one another.
Fate represents the inexorable march of events. There is no room for fortune
unless some things are exempt from necessity.

Only that which can happen by chance is in the lap of fortune. It would seem
that fate stands to fortune as the necessary to the contingent. If everything
were necessitated, fate alone would reign. Contingency would be excluded from
nature. Chance or the fortuitous in the order of nature and freedom in human
life would be reduced to illusions men cherish only through ignorance of the
inevitable. In a sense fortune is the ally of freedom in the struggle against
fate. Good fortune seems to aid and abet human desires. But even misfortune
signifies the element of chance which is more congenial than fate, if not more
amenable, to man's conceit that he can freely plan his life. THE TERMS necessity
and contingency cannot be substituted for fate and fortune without loss of
significance. As the chapter on NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY indicates, they are
terms in the philosophical analysis of the order of nature and causality. They
may have, but they need not have, theological implications. Necessity and
contingency can be explained without any reference to the supernatural, as is
evident from the discussion of these matters in the Chapter on CHANCE. But fate
and fortune, in their origin at least, are theological terms.

In ancient poetry and mythology, both inevitability and chance were personified
as deities or supernatural forces. There were the goddess of Fortune and the
three Fates, as well as their three evil sisters or counterparts, the Furies.
The Latin word from which "fate" comes means an oracle, and so signifies what is
divinely ordained. What happens by fate is something destined and decreed in the
fated councils of the gods on Olympus; or it may be the decision of Zeus, to
whose rule all the other divinities are subject; or, as we shall see preswhich
ently, it may be a supernatural destiny even Zeus cannot set aside. In any case,
the notion of fate implies a supernatural will, even as destiny implies
predestination by an intelligence able not only to plan the future but also to
carry out that plan. The inevitability of fate and destiny is thus distinguished
from that of merely natural necessity which determines the future only insofar
as it may be the inevitable consequence of causes working naturally. But the
ancients do not seem to be fatalists in the extreme sense of the term. To the
extent that men can propitiate the gods or provoke divine jealousy and anger,
the attitudes and deeds of men seem to be a determining factor in the actions of
the gods. To the extent that the gods align themselves on opposite sides of a
human conflict (as in the Iliad), or oppose each other (as in the Odyssey), it
may be thought that what happens on earth merely reflects the shifting balance
of power among the gods.

But human planning and willing do not seem to be excluded by the divine will and
plan which are forged out of the quarrels of the gods. On the contrary,
polytheism seems to make fortune itself contingent on the outcome of the
Olympian conflict, and so permits men a certain latitude of self-determination.
Men can struggle against the gods precisely because the gods may be with them as
well as against them. The ultimate power of Zeus to decide the [ issue may,
however, place the accent on fate rather than on freedom. This is certainly so
if Zeus is not the master of even his own fate, much less the omnipotent ruler
among the gods or the arbiter of human destiny. In Prometheus Bound, the Chorus
asks, "Who is the pilot of Necessity ?" Prometheus answers, "The Fates triform
and the unforgetting The Chorus then asks, "Is Zeus of Furies."

To which Prometheus lesser might than these ?" replies,"He shall not shun the
lot apportioned." When they ask what this doom is, Prometheus tells them to
inquire no more, for they verge on mysteries. Later Zeus himself sends Hermes to
wrest from Prometheus the secret of what has been ordained for him by "all
consummating Fate" or "Fate's resistless law." Prometheus refuses, saying that
"none shall bend my will or force me to disclose by whom 'tis fated he shall
fall from power." The question Aeschylus leaves unanswered is whether Zeus would
be able to escape his doom if he could foresee what Fate holds in store for him.
The suggestion seems to be that without omniscience the omnipotence of Zeus
cannot break the chains of Fate. IN THE TRADITION of Judaeo'Christian theology
the problem of fate is in part verbal and in part real.The verbal aspect of the
problem concerns the meaning of the word "fate" in relation to the divine will,
providence, and predestination. With the verbal matter settled, there remains
the real problem of God's will and human freedom. The strictly monotheistic
conception of an omnipotent and omniscient God deepens the mystery, and makes it
more difficult than the problem of fate and freedom in pagan thought. If anyone
"calls the will or the power of God itself by the name of fate," Augustine says,
"let him keep his opinion, but correct his language For when men hear that word,
according to the ordinary use of language, they 1 simply understand by it the
virtue of that particular position of the stars which may exist at the time when
anyone is born or conceived, which some separate altogether from the will of
God, whilst others affirm that this also is dependent on that will. But those
who are of the opinion that, apart from the will of God, the stars determine
what we shall do, or what CHAPTER 27 good things we shall possess, or what evils
we shall suffer, must be refused a hearing by all, not only by those who hold
the true religion, but by those who wish to be the worshippers of any gods
whatsoever, even false gods. For what does this opinion really amount to but
this, that no god whatsoever is to be worshipped or prayed to?"

Since the word "fate" has been used for those things which are determined apart
from the will of God or man, Augustine thinks it would be better for Christians
not to use it, but to "providence" or "predestination" substitute when they wish
to refer to what God wills.

Aquinas, however, retains the word "fate" but restricts its meaning to the
"ordering ... of mediate causes" by which God wills "the production of certain
effects." According to the definition given by Boethius which Aquinas quotes,
"Fate is a disposition inherent to changeable things, by which providence
connects each one with its proper order." Thus fate is not identified with
providence, but made subordinate to it. The distinction, Aquinas explains,
depends on the way we consider "the ordering of effects" by God. "As being in
God Himself the ordering of the . . . Providence." But "as being in effects is
called the mediate causes ordered by God," it is called fate. While admitting
that "the divine power or will can be called fate, as being the cause of fate,"
he declares that "essentially fate is the very disposition or series, i.e.,
order, of second causes." The position Lucretius takes seems to be exactly
opposite to that of Augustine and Aquinas. Lucretius condemns the fatalism of
those who believe that the gods control the order of nature and who therefore
attribute whatever befalls them to divine ordination. For him, "nature free at
once and rid of her haughty lords is seen to do all things spontaneously of
herself without the meddling of the gods." He tries to teach men that everything
happens according to the laws of nature, other than which there is no fate. The
"decrees of fate" he in the laws by which "all motion is ever linked together
and a new motion ever springs from another in a fixed order." If man by his
"power of free action'* can "make some commencement of motion to break through
the decrees : FATE of fate, in order that cause follow not cause from 1
everlasting/ it is because in the atoms of his makeup "there is another cause of
motions . . . caused by a minute swerving of first-beginnings at no fixed part
of space and no fixed time." Nevertheless, according to Augustine, Lucretiusis a
fatalist who disbelieves in providence, other than which there ts no fate. Each
of them uses the word "fate," the one to deny, the other to affirm, the power of
God. But even if a Christian avoids the superstitions of astrology, or some
similar belief in a natural necessity which does not depend on God, he may still
commit the sin of fatalism which follows from the denial of man's free will.
Understanding fate as identical with providence, the Christian is a fatalist if,
in the belief that every human act is foreordained by God, he resigns himself to
his fate, making no moral effort and taking no moral responsibility for his
soul's welfare. To do that is to argue like Chaucer's Troilus: I am, he said,
but done for, so to say; For all that comes, comes by necessity, Thus to be done
for is my destiny. I must believe and cannot other choose, That Providence, in
its divine foresight, Hath known that Cressida I once must lose, Since God sees
everything from heaven's height And plans things as he thinks both best and
right, As was arranged for by predestination. Troilus sees no way of avoiding
the conclusion that "free choice is an idle dream." THE THEOLOGIANS recognize
the difficulty of reconciling providence and free will. The truth must lie
somewhere between two heresies. If it is heresy to deny God's omnipotence and
omniscience, then nothing remains outside the all-encompassing scope of divine
providence, nothing happens contrary to the divine will, no future contingency
is or can be unforeseen by God. If, on the other hand, to deny that man sins
freely means that God must be responsible for the evil that man does, then it is
a heresy to deny free will, for that imputes evil to God. This is the problem
with which Milton deals in Paradise Lost, announcing that he will try "to
justify the ways of God to man." In a conversation in heaven, the Father tells
the THE GREAT Son that though He knows Adam will 'disobey his rule, Adam remains
'quite free to sin or not 1 to sin, and the fault is his own, jusr as the
rebellious angels acted on their own free will.

The angels, God says, So were created, nor can justly accuse Thir tnaker, or
thir making, or thir Fate; As if Predestination over-rul'd ' Thir will, dispos'd
by absolute Decree Or high foreknowledge; they themselves decreed Thir own
revolt, not I: if I foreknew, Foreknowledge had no influence on their fault,
Which had no less prov'd certain unforeknown. So without least impulse or shadow
of Fate, Or alight by me immutabhc foreseen, They trespass, Authors to
themselves in all, Botn what they judge and what they choose, for so I formed
them free, and free they must remain Till they enthrall themselves: I else must
change Thir nature, and revoke the high Decree Unchangeable, Eternal, which
ordam'd Thir freedom, they themselves ordam'd their fall.

A solution of the problem is sometimes developed from the distinction between
God's foreknowledge and God's forcordination. God foreordained the freedom of
man, but only foreknew his fall; man ordained that himself.

Strictly speaking, however, the word "foreknowledge" would seem to carry a false
connotation, since nothing is future to God. Everything that has ever happened
or ever will is simultaneously together in the eternal present of the divine
vision. During his ascent through Paradise, Dante, wishing to learn about his
immediate future, asks his ancestor Cacciaguida to foretell his fortune, for he,
"gazing upon the Point to which all times are present, can see contingent
things, ere in themselves they are.'* Cacciaguida prefaces his prediction of
Dante's exile from Florence by telling him that the contingency of material
things "is all depicted in the Eternal Vision; yet thence it does not take
necessity, more than does a ship which is going down the stream from the eye in
which it is mirrored."

The difference between time and eternity is conceived as permitting 'the
temporal future to be contingent even though God knows its content with
certitude. But, it may still be askecl, iocs not God's knowledge imply the
absolute predestination of future events by providence, since what God knows
with certitude cannot happen otherwise IDEAS than as He knows h? In a discussion
of divine grace and man's free will, Dr. Johnson remarks, "I can judge with
great probability how a man will act in any case, without his being restrained
by my judging. God may have this probability increased to certainty." To which
Boswell replies that "when it is increased to certainty, freedom ceases, because
that cannot be cerwhich is not certain at the tainly foreknown, time; but if it
be certain at the time, it is a contradiction to maintain that there can be
afterwards any contingency dependent upon the exercise of will or anything
else." Against such difficulties Aquinas insists that divine providence is
compatible, not only with natural necessity, but also with contingency in nature
and free will in human acts. Providence, he writes, "has prepared for some
thingsnecessary causes so that they happen of necessity; for others contingent
causes, that they may happen by contingency." Human liberty does not imply that
the will's acts are not caused by God who, being the first cause, "moves causes
both natural and voluntary. Just as by moving natural causes, He does not
prevent their acts being natural, so by moving voluntary causes, He does not
deprive their actions of being voluntary." God causes man to choose freely arid
freely to execute his choice. THE UNCOMPROMISING conception of fate is that
which leaves no place for chance or freedom anywhere in the universe, neither in
the acts of God, nor in the order of nature, nor in the course of history. The
doctrine of absolute determinism, whether in theology, science, or history, is
thus fatalism unqualified. The ancient historians are not fatalists in this
sense. Herodotus, for example, finds much that can be explaineoj by the
contingencies of fortune or by the choices of men. The crucial decision, for
example, in the defense of Athens is presented as an act of man's choice. Upon
receiving the pr6phecy that "safe shall the wooden Wail continue for thee and
thy children," the Athenians exercise their freedom by disagreeing about its
meaning. "Certain of the old men," Herodotus writes, "were of ihe opinion that
the god hieant to tell them the citadel would escape; 'for this was anciently
defended by a palisade. . . . Others maintained CHAPTER that the fleet was what
the god pointed at; and their advice was that nothing should be thought of
except tfie ships." The eloquence pf Themistocles carried the latter view. To
stress its importance, the historian observes that "the saving of Greece" lay in
the decision that led Athens to "become a maritime power." In presenting a
comparable decision by the Persians, Herodotus seems to be contrasting their
fatalism with the freedom of the Greeks.

At first Xerxes accepts the council of Artabanus not to go to war against the
Greeks. But after a series of visions,which appear to both the king and his
councillor, that decision is reversed, for, according to the dream, the war "is
fated to happen." The conception of fate and freedom in the Aeneid seems closer
to the Greek than to the Persian view. Even though the consummation of history,
which will come with the founding of the Roman empire, is projected as a
divinely appointed destiny, the hero who brings that great event to pass acts as
if he were free to accept or evade his responsibilities. The Christian
understanding of historical destiny in terms of providence permits more than
that, requires men to exercise free choice at every turn. "The cause of the
greatness of the Roman empire," writes Augustine, "is neither fortuitous nor
fatal, according to the judgment or opinion of thosp who call those things
fortuitous which either have no causes or such causes as do not proceed from
some intelligible order, and those things fatal which happen independently of
the will of God and man, by the necessity of a certain order. Human , . .,
kingdoms are established by divine providence." The fatalism which Augustine
here condemns involves independence not only of the will of God, but of man's
will also. It only in modern times, with Hegel and is Marx, that necessity
reigns supreme the m philosophy of history. Hegel spurns the notion that history
is "a superficial play of casual, socalled 'merely human strivings and
passions." He also condemns those who "speak of Providence and the plan of
Providence" in a way that "empty" of ideas since "for them the is plan of
Providence is inscrutable 4nd incomprehensible." For Hegel, history is "the
necesskry development, out of the concept of the 27: FATE mind's, freedom
alone." But this development' and this freedom, arc entirely matters of
necessity as far as individuals and their works are concerned, ''They are all
the time the unconscious tools and otgans of the world mind at work within
them," For Marx, history seems likewise to have the same necessity. He deals
with individuals, he writes in the preface to Capital, "only in so far as they
are the personifications of economic categories, embodiments of particular
classrelations and class-interests, My stand-point," he says, is one from which
"the evolution of the economic formation of society is viewed as a process of
natural history," and within which the individual cannot be "responsible for
relations whose creature he socially remains, however much he may subjectively
raise himself above them." Here it is a question only "of these laws themselves,
of these tendencies working with iron necessity towards inevitable results,"
According to the historical determinism of Hegel and Marx, which is further
considered in the chapter on HISTORY, men play a part which is already written
for them in the scroll of history. Human liberty apparently depends on man's
knowledge of and acquiescence in the unfolding necessities. HISTORICAL
DETERMINISM is merely a part of the doctrine of a causal necessity which govern?
Causality seems to be understood- by all things. moderns like Spinoza, Hume, and
Freud as excluding the possibility of chance or free will.

Among the ancients, Plotinus alone seems to go as far as Spinoza in affirming
the universal reign of natural necessity. What Spinoza says of God or Nature,
Plotinus says of the All-One, namely, that for the first principle which is the
cause of everything else, freedom consists in being causa sui, or cause of
itself self-determined rather than determined by external causes. "God does not
act from freedom of the will," Spinoza writes. Yet "God alone is a free cause,
for God alone exists . . . and acts from the necessity of his own nature." As
for everything else in the universe, Spinoza maintains that "there is nothing
contingent, but all things arc determined from the necessity of the divine THfi
GREAT ID nature to exist and act in a certain manner." This applies to man, who,
according to Spinoza, does "everything by the will of God alone."

From quite different premises, Hume seems to reach much the same conclusion
concerning chance and "Chance," he writes, liberty. "when strictly examined, is
a mere negative word, and means not any real power which has anywhere a being in
nature." But he also thinks that liberty, "when opposed to necessity, not to
constraint, is the same thing with chance."

Hume embraces the consequences of such a position. "If voluntary action be
subjected to the same laws of necessity with the operations of matter, there is
a continued chain of necessary causes, pre-ordained and pre-determmed, reaching
from the original cause of all to every single volition of every human creature.
No contingency anywhere in the universe; no indifference; no liberty." When
confronted with the objection that it then becomes impossible "to explain
distinctly, how the Deity can be the mediate cause of all the actions of men,
without being the author of sin and moral turpitude," Hume replies that "these
arc mysteries, which natural and unassisted reason is very unfit to handle, ...
To defend absolute decrees, and yet free the Deity from being the author of sin,
has been found hitherto to exceed all the power of philosophy." Unlike Spinoza
and Hume, Freud does not deal with the theological implications or
presuppositions of determinism. For him, determinism is an essential postulate
of science and even to some extent a scientifically discoverable

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The decrees of fate and the decisions of the gods 5 21

2. The fated or inevitable in human life

3. The antitheses of fate: fortune, freedom, natural necessity, chance or contingency
4.
Fatalism in relation to the will of God the doctrine of predestination
:
The secularization of fate : scientific or philosophical determinism

6. The historian's recognition of fate: the destiny of cities, nations, empires 5*4

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The basic opposites of fate, see CHANCF la-1b, 2a; HISTORY
43(1); WILL 5-53(4), 5

for other terms in which the opposition between fate and chance is expressed

SITY AND CONTINGENCY 3.

The problem of human liberty in relation to fate, see LIBERTY 4b; NECESSITY AND

CONTINGENCY 53(3); WILL 5c.

The implications of fate in theology, or for the relation of human liberty to di

dence, see CAUSE 7c; GOD 1c, 7b; HISTORY 53; LIBERTY 5a-5c; WILL 7c.

The foretelling of fate or providence, see PROPHECY la-1b; and for the condemnat

astrology and divination, see PROPHECY 5.

Fatalism or determinism in the philosophy of nature, see CHANCE 23; NATURE 3c-3c

WILL 5c; WORLD 1b.

The same doctrine in the philosophy of history, see HISTORY 43(i)-4a(4); NECESSI

CONTINGENCY 5f; WILL 7b.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofe of the Western World, but re

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works arc divided int

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, and other facts concerning the publication of the works ci

place,

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The G

J. S. MILL. A System

I.

W. JAMES. "The Dilemma of D PLUTARCH. "Of Fate," in Moralia Will to Believe
AUGUSTINE. On the Predestination of the Saints AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles,
BK in, CH 64-83,

88-98, DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophyk PART i,

-

CICERO. De Fato (On Fate)

De Dwtnattone (On Divi

.

MAIMONIDBS. The Guidefor th

40-41 HOBBES. A Treatise of liberty and Necessity CH 17-19

2, 31c-d f Right, PART nit par 340- esp par 342-343 HOc-llla, 2l4a-d; 462c-465c
pasPhilosophy of History, INTRO, 8c-162a; 203a-206a,c; PART i, RT rv, 315a;
368d-369a,c d passim; 377c-378d ist Mamfesto,41fc-d', 25b Peace, BK ix,
342a-344b; PART in, 285b-d; 300aPART H, 278a-c; 20bxi, 469a-472b; BK xm- xiv,
609a-613d; BK xv, 5a-696d a; EPILOGUE i, 645a0; and tory Lectures, 882c, see
NECESvine proviion of (3); TY AND levant to the o two groups: ted, consult reat
Ideas. of Logic, BK vi, CH 2 eterminism," in The nation) e Perplexed, PART in,

CHAPTER 27 GERSONIDES. Commentary on the Bool( ofJob CALVIN. Institutes of the
Christian Religion, BK HI,

CH 14-25 KNOX. An Answer to the Cavillations ofan Adversdrie

Respecting the Doctrine of Predestination SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicac,
xix (10-11) CUDWORTH. A Treatise of Freewill J. BUTLER. The Analogy of Religion
PART i, CH 7 J. EDWARDS. A Careful Enquiry into the Modern

. .

Notions of Freedom of Will

.

. . .

VOLTAIRE. Zadtg

. Candide GOLDSMITH. The Vicar of Watyfield ]. PRIESTLEY and PRICE. A Free
Discussion of the

Doctrine of Materialism and Philosophical Necessity

: FATE DE QUINCEY. On the Knodyng at the Gate in

Macbeth SCHOPENHAUER. Die beiden Grundprobleme der

. Transcendent Speculations on Apparent Design

in the Fate of the Individual EMERSON. "Fate," in The Conduct of Life - T.
HARDY. The Return of the Native - .

TessoftheD'Urbervilles

.

Jude the Obscure SYNGE. Riders to the Sea LAGERLOF. The Ring of the Lowenskolds
WILDER. The Bridge of San Luis Rey B RUSSELL. Religion and Science, CH 6 T. S.
ELIOT. The Family Reunion
