Chapter 2.8:

INTRODUCTION * I HE great philosophical issues concerning form and matter have
never been resolved.

But the terms in which these issues were stated) from their first formulation in
antiquity to the iyth or 1 8th centuries, have disappeared or at least do not
have general currency in contemporary discourse. Kant is perhaps the last great
philosopher to include these terms in his basic vocabulary. The conceptions of
matter and form, he writes, "he at the foundation of all other reflection, so
inseparably are they connected with every mode of exercising the understanding.
The former denotes the determmable in general, the second its determination."
The word "form" is no longer a pivotal term in the analysis of change or motion,
nor in the distinction between being and becoming, nor in the consideration of
the modes of being and the conditions of knowledge. The word "matter" is now
used without reference to form, where earlier in the tradition all of its
principal meanings involved "form" as a correlative or an opposite. Other words,
such as "participation" and "imitation," have also fallen into disuse or lost
the meanings which derived from their relation to form and matter. The problems
which these words were used to state and discuss remain active in contemporary
thought. There is, for instance, the problem of the universal and the
particular, the al problem of the immutable and the mutable, the problem of the
one and the many, or of same- Sp ness and diversity. These problems appear in ti
the writings of William James and Bergson, me Dewey and Santayana, Whitehead and
Russell. do Sometimes there is even a verbal approximation to the traditional
formulation, as in White- be hcad's doctrine of "eternal objects" or in
Santayana 's consideration of the "realm of essence" si and the "realm of
matter." Whatever expres- en sions they use, these thinkers find themselves bu
opposed on issues which represent part, if not the whole, of the great
traditional controversy between Plato and Aristotle concerning form. THERE is A
TENDENCY AMONG the historians of thought to use the names of Plato and Aristotle
to symbolize a basic opposition in philosophical perspectives and methods, or
even in what William fames calls "intellectual temperaments." Later writers are
called "Platonists" or "Aristotelians" and doctrines or theories are classified
as Platonic or Aristotelian. It almost seems to be assumed at times that these
names exhaust the typical possibilities: that minds or theories must be one or
the other, or some sort of mixture or confusion of the two. If this tendency is
ever justified, it seems to be warranted with regard to the problems of form.
Here, if anywhere, there may be poetic truth in Whitehead's remark that the
history of western thought can be read as a series of footnotes to Plato; though
perhaps the observation should be added that Aristotle, the first to comment on
Plato, wrote many of the principal footnotes. In Plotmus the two strains seem to
be intermingled. The issue between Plato and Aristotle concerning form dominates
the great metaphysical and theological controversies of the later Middle Ages,
and, with some terations in language and thought, it appears in the writings of
Hobbes, Bacon, Descartes, inoza, and Locke, where it is partly a connuation of,
and partly a reaction against, the diaeval versions of Platonic and Anstotelian
ctrine. The most extreme reaction is, of course, to found in those who
completely reject the term form or its equivalents as being without gnificance
for the problems of motion, existce, or knowledge. Bacon retains the term, t
radically changes its meaning. "None should CHAPTER 28: suppose from the great
part assigned by us to forms," Bacon writes, "that we mean such forms as the
meditations and thoughts of men have hitherto been accustomed to." He docs not
mean either "the concrete forms" or "any abstract forms of ideas," but rather
"the laws and regulations of simple action. . . The form of heat or form of
light, therefore, means no more than the law of heat or the law of light." But
Hobbes and Locke tend to reject the term itself especially when it occurs in the
notion of substantial form as meaningless or misleading. "We arc told," says
Hobbes, "there be in the world certain essences, separated from bodies, which
they call abstract essencesk and substantial forms. . Being once fallen into
this error of .". separated essences, [men] are thereby necessarily involved in
many other absurdities that follow it. For seeing they will have these forms to
be real, they arc obliged to assign them some place"'; which they cannot succeed
in doing, according to Hobbes, "because they hold them incorporeal, without all
dimension of quantity, and all men know that place is dimension, and not to be
filled but by that which is corporeal." With regard to substantial form, Locke
declares, "I confess I have no idea at all, but only of the sound 'form.'" Those
"who have been taught . . . that it was those forms which made the distinction
of substances into their true species and genera, were led yet further out of "
the way by having their minds set upon fruitless inquiries after 'substantial
forms' a subject which Locke regards as "wholly unintelligible." The general
skepticism about this notion (or the distrust of its hollowness) in the lyth and
i8th centuries is reflected in a bantering remark by Tristram Shandy's father.
In a discussion of infant prodigies, he refers to some boy-wonders who "left off
their substantial forms at nine years old, or sooner, and went on reasoning
without them." Since form and matter are supposed to be correlative, the denial
to form of meaning or reality leads to materialism, as in the case of Hobbes the
affirmation of matter alone as a principle or cause. Materialists of one sort or
another are the opponents of both Plato and Aristotle, and of Platonists and
Aristotelians; That part of the controversy is discussed in the chapter on
MATTER. Here we are concerned with the issues arising from different views of
form and its relation to matter. THE POPULAR meaning of "form" affords an
approach to the subtleties of the subject. As ordinarily used, "form" connotes
figure or shape That connotation expresses one aspect of the technical
significance of "form." A great variety of things, differing materially and in
other respects, can have the same figure or shape. The same form can be embodied
in an indefinite number of otherwise different individuals. But figures or
shapes are sensible forms, forms perceptible to vision and touch. To identify
form with figure or shape would put an improper limitation on the meaning of
form. This is popularly recognized in the consideration of the form of a work of
art the structure of an epic poem or a symphony which seems to be more a matter
of understanding than of direct senseperception. Bertrand Russell's definition
of the form of a proposition effectively illustrates the point involved. The
form of a proposition, he says, is that which remains the same in a statement
when everything else is changed. For example, these two statements have the same
grammatical and logicalform: (i) John followed Jamesk and (2) Paul accompanied
Peter. What might be called the matter or subject matter of the two statements
is completely different, but both have the same form, as may an indefinite
number of other statements. This illustration helps us to grasp the meaning of
form, and the distinction between form and matter, or the formal and the
material aspects of anything. It is thus that we understand the phrase "formal
logic" to signify a study of the forms of thought or discourse, separated from
the subject matter being thought about or discussed. Similarly, abstractionism
or surrealism is a kind of formalism in painting which tries to separate visible
patterns or structures from their representative significance or their reference
to familiar objects. Kant's doctrine of space and time as transcendental forms
of intuition exemplifies the meaning of form as pure order or structure divorced
from sensuous content. "That which in the phenomenon corresponds to the
sensation, I term its matter" he writes; "that which effects that -the content
of the phenomenon can be arranged under certain relations, I call its form."
Sometimes the consideration of form emphasizes not its separation from, but its
union with matter. The form dwells in the thing, constituting its nature. The
sensible or intelligible characteristics of thing result from a the various ways
in which its matter has been formed.

It is impossible to say more about the meankig of form without facing at once
the great controversy between Plato and Aristotle and the difficulties which
their theories confront.

PLATO DOES NOT deny that things the sensible, material, changing things of
experience have something like form. Nor does he deny that the ideas by which we
understand the natures of things are like forms. Rather he asks us to consider
that which they are hfy. In the Phaedoonly one of the many dialogues in which
the doctrine of forms is discussed Socrates argues that "there is such a thing
as equality, not of one piece of wood or stone with another, but that, over and
above this, there is absolute equality." Socrates gets Simmias to admit that "we
know the nature of this absolute essence," and then asks, "Whence did we obtain
our knowledge?" It could not have been obtained from the pieces of wood or
stone, Socrates tries to show, because they "appear at one time equal, and at
another time unequal," whereas the idea of equality is never the same as that of
inequality. Hence he thinks "we must have known equality previously to the time
when we first saw the material equals. Before we began to see or hear or . . .
perceive in any way, we must have had a knowledge of absolute equality, or we
could not have referred to that standard the equals which are derived from the
senses." The equality which supplies the "standard" by which material equals are
measured is the Form or Idea of equality. What is true in this one case Socrates
thinks is true in every other. Whether we consider the "essence of equality,
beauty, or anything Socrates holds, the "Ideas or essences, else,*' which in the
dialectical process we define as ... tro existences ... are each of them always
what they are, having the same simple selfexistent and unchanging forms, not
admitting of variation at all, or in any way or at any time." Apart from the
perishable things of the sensible world, and apart from the ideas which are
involved in our process of learning and thinking, there exist the Forms or the
Ideas themselves the immutable objects of our highest knowledge. Because the
same English words are employed in these quite distinct senses, it is useful to
follow the convention of translators who capitalize the initial letter when
"Form" or "Idea" refers to that which is separate from the characteristics of
material things and from the ideas in our mind. The words "Form" and "Idea" are
interchangeable, but the words "Idea" and "idea" are not. The latter refers to a
notion in the human mind, by which it knows; whereas "Idea" as Plato uses the
word signifies the object of knowledge, i.e. that which is known. These
differences are further discussed in the chapter on IDEA. By imitating the
Forms, sensible things, according to Plato, have the characteristics we
apprehend in them. The ideas we have when we apprehend the resemblance between
sensible things and their Forms (which sensible things exhibit), would seem to
be indirect apprehensions of the Forms themselves. When in the Republic Socrates
discusses knowledge and opinion, he distinguishes them from one another
according to a division of their objects the realm of intelligible being on the
one hand, and the realm of sensible becoming on the other. The latter stands to
the former as image or copy to reality, and Socrates finds this relationship
repeating itself when he further divides each of the two parts. The realm of
becoming divides into images or shadows and into that "of which this is only the
resemblance," namely, "the animals which we see, and everything that grows or is
made." The realm of intelligible being he also subdivides into two parts, of
which the first is as an image or reflection of the second, namely, the
hypotheses we form in our minds and the Ideas or Forms themselves. From this it
appears that just as we should regard the form of the thing as an imitation of,
or participation in, the separate Form, so should CHAPTER 28 we regard the idea
we have (that is, our understanding of the thing) as an approximation of the
Idea. The Ideas are outside the human mind even as the Forms arc separate from
their sensible, material imitations. When we apprehend things by reason we know
the Forms they imitate; when we apprehend them by our senses we know them as
imitations, or as images of the Ideas.

THE PLATONIC THEORY changes the ordinary meaning of the word "imitation." We
ordinarily think of imitation as involving a relation of resemblance between two
sensible things, both of which we are able to perceive; for example, we say that
a child imitates his father's manner, or that a portrait resembles the person
who posed for it. The painter, according to Socrates in the Republic, is not the
only "creator of appearances." He compares the painter who pictures a bed with
the carpenter who makes one. Like the bed in the painting, the bed made by the
carpenter is not the real bed. It is not, says Socrates, the Idea "which,
according to our view, is the essence of the bed." The carpenter "cannot make
true existence, but only some semblance of existence." As the bed in the picture
is an imitation of the particular bed made by the carpenter, so the latter is an
imitation of the Idea the essential bed-ness which is the model or archetype of
all particular beds. Shifting to another example, we can say that a statue,
which resembles a particular man, is the imitation of an imitation, for the
primary imitation lies in the resemblance between the particular man portrayed
and the Form or Idea, Man. Just as the statue derives its distinctive character
from the particular man it imitates, so that particular man, or any other,
derives his manhood or humanity from Man. just as the particular man imitates
Man, so our idea of Man is also an imitation of that Idea. Knowledge, according
to Plato, consists in the imitation of Ideas, even as sensible, material things
have whatever being they have by imitation of the true beings, the Forms.
Another name for the primary type of imitation is "participation." To
participate in is to partake- of. In the dialogue in which Plato has the young
Socrates inquiring mto the relation ? FORM between sensible particulars and the
Ideas or Forms, Parmcnides tells him that "there arc certain ideas of which all
other things partake, and from which they derive their names; that similars, for
example, become similar, because they partake of similarity; and great things
become great, because they partake of greatness; and that just and beautiful
things become just and beautiful, because they partake of justice and beauty."
The Forms or Ideas arc, Parmenides suggests, "patterns fixed in nature, and
other things are like them, and resemblances of them what is meant by the
participation of other things in the ideas, is really assimilation to them." The
fact of particularity and multiplicity seems to be inseparable from the fact of
participation. That in which the many particulars participate must, on the other
hand, have universality and unity. The Forms or Ideas are universals in the
sense that each is a one which issomehow capable of being in a many by
resemblance or participation. Parmenides asks Socrates whether he thinks that
"the whole idea is one, and yet, being one, is in each one of the many." When
Socrates unhesitatingly says Yes, Parmenides points out to him that we then
confront the difficulty that "one and the same thing will exist as a whole at
the same time in many separate individuals" and that "the ideas themselves will
be divisible, and things which participate in them will have a part of them only
and not the whole idea existing in each of them." Nor can we say, Socrates is
made to realize, that "the one idea is really divisible and yet remains one."
THIS DIFFICULTY concerning the relation of particulars to the Ideas they
participate in, is discussed in the chapter on UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR. It is
not the only difficulty which Plato himself finds in the theory of Ideas.
Another concerns the individuality of each of the indefinite number of
particulars which copy a single model or archetype. What makes the various
copies of the same model different from one another ? Plato meets this problem
by adding a third principle. To the intelligible patterns or archetypes and
their sensible imitations, he adds, in the Timaeus, the principle which is
variously named, sometimes "the receptacle," sometimes "space," sometimes
"matter." However named, it is the absolutely formless, for "that which is to
receive all Forms should have no form. . . . The mother and receptacle of all
visible and in any way sensible things ... is an invisible and formless being
which receives all things and in some mysterious way partakes of the
intelligible, and is most incomprehensible." It is this material or receiving
principle which somehow accounts for the numerical plurality and the
particulanzation of the many copies of the one absolute model. When a number of
replicas of thesame pattern are produced by impressing a die on a sheet of
plastic material at different places, it is the difference in the material at
the several places which accounts for the plurality and particularity of the
replicas. Yet the one die is responsible for the character common to them all.
The sensible things of any one sort are not only particular because the Form
they imitate is somehow received in matter; they are also perishable because of
that fact. The receptacle is the principle of generation or of change. It is,
Timaeus says, "the natural recipient of all im"stirred and informed by
pressions," which is them, and appears different from time to time by reason of
them, but the forms which enter into and go out of her are the likenesses of
real existences modelled after their patterns in a wonderful and inexplicable
manner."

Matter, as Plato here suggests, is the mother of changing things, things which,
between coming to be and passing away, are what they are because of the
unchanging Forms. The Form which is received in matter for a time makes the
changing thing an imitationk as the matter in which the Form is received makes
the changing thing a participation. The admittedly mysterious partaking of the
Fo'rms by the formless receptacle constitutes the realm of becoming, in which
being and nan- being arc mixed. But the Forms or Ideas themselves, existing
apart from their sensible imitations, are "uncreated and indestructible, never
receiving anything from without, nor going out to any other, but invisible and
imperceptible by any sense/' They constitute the realm of pure being. They arc
the intelligible reality.

THE CRITICISM OF the Forms or Ideas which we find m the writings of Aristotle is
primarily directed against their separate existence. "Plato was not far wrong,"
Aristotle says, "when he said that there are as many Forms as there are kinds of
natural object"; but he immediately adds the qualification: "if there are Forms
distinct from the things of this earth." It is precisely that supposition which
Aristotle challenges. Aristotle's criticism of Plato stems from his own notion
of substance, and especially from his conception of sensible substances as
composed of matter and form. He uses the word "substance" to signify that which
exists in and of itself; or, in other words, that which exists separately from
other things. Hence, when he says that, in addition to sensible substances,
"Plato posited two kinds of substances the Forms and the objects of
mathematics," he is translating the affirmation that the Forms have being
separately from the sensible world of changing things, into an assertion that
they are substances. "Socrates did not make the universals or the definitions
exist apart," Aristotle writes; but referring to the Platonists, he says, "they,
however, gave them separate existence, and this was the kind of thing they
called Ideas." What proof is there, he repeatedly asks, for the separate
existence of the Forms, or universals, or the objects of mathematics? "Of the
various ways in which it is proved that the Forms exist," he declares, "none is
convincing." Furthermore, he objects to the statement that "all other things
come from the Forms"; for "to say that they are patterns and the other things
share in them is to use empty words and poetical metaphors," There is the
additional difficulty, he thinks, that "there will be several patterns of the
same thing, and therefore several Forms; e.g., 'animal' and 'two-footed' and
also 'man himself will be Forms of man." Aristotle's denial of separate
existence, or substantiality, to the Ideas or universals stands side by side
with his affirmation of the place of forms in the being of substances and the
role of universals in the order of knowledge. Furthermore, he limits his denial
of the substantiality of Ideas to those Forms which seem to be the archetypes or
models of sensible things. Par- CHAPTER 28: ticular physical thingsfamiliar
sensible substances, such as the stone, the tree, or the man are not, in his
opinion, imitations of or participations in universal models which exist apart
from these things. He leaves it an open question whether there are
self-subsistent Forms or Ideas that is, purely intelligible substances which do
not function as the models for sensible things to imitate. Stated positively,
the Aristotelian theory consists in two affirmations. The first is that the
characteristics of things are determined by "indwelling forms," which have their
being not apart from but in the things themselves. To illustrate his meaning he
turns to the realm of art. When we make a brass sphere, he writes, "we bring the
form," which is a sphere, "into this particular matter," the brass, and "the
result a brazen sphere." There is no "sphere is apart from the individual
spheres," and no brass apart from the particular lumps of metal that are brass.
"The 'form' means the 'such,' and is not a 'this' a definite thing," such as
this individual brazen sphere. Aristotle analyzes natural things in the same
manner. It is from "the indwelling form and the matter," he says, that "the
concrete substance is derived." Men such as Callias or Socrates, for example,
consist of "such and such a form in this flesh and in these bones," and "they
are different in virtue of their matter (for that is different) but the same in
form."

The flesh and bones of Callias are not the flesh and bones of Socrates; but
though different as individual men, they are the same as men because they have
the same form. The second point is that our understanding of things involves the
forms of things, but now somehow in the intellect rather than in the things
themselves. In order to know things, Aristotle says, we must have within us
"either the things themselves or their forms. The former alternative is of
course impossible: it is not the stone which is present in the soul," he
maintains, "but its form." The form in the thing is as individual as the thing
itself. But in the mind, as the result of the intellect's power to abstract this
form from its matter, the form becomes a universal; it is then called by
Aristotle an "idea," "abstraction," or "concept." Forms arc umversals in the
mind alone. If there were a form existing apart from both matter and mind, it
would be neither an individual form nor an abstract universal.

The indwelling forms, according to Aristotle, are not universals. Except for the
possibility of Forms which dwell apart and bear no resemblance at all to
sensible things, all forms are either in matter or, abstracted from matter, in
the human mind. These are often called "material forms"because they are the
forms which matter takes or can take, and which the mind abstracts from matter.
Their being consists in informing or determining matter, just as the being of
matter consists in the capacity to receive these forms and to be determined by
them.

THE FOREGOING helps to explain Aristotle's use of the word "composite" as a
synonym for "substance" when he is considering particular sensible things. The
independently existing, individual physical things which Aristotle calls
"substances" are all composite of form and matter. He sometimes also calls form
and matter "substances," but when he uses the word "substance" strictly and in
its primary sense, he applies it only to the concrete individual. Form and
matter are only principles or constituents of the concrete thing the composite
substance. The union of form and matter to constitute physical substances also
explains the Aristotelian identification of form with actuality and of matter
with potentiality; and the relation of form and matter to a third term in the
analysis of change, namely, privation. As a physical thing changes, its matter
gives up one form to take on another. Its matter thus represents its capacity or
potentiality for form. Matter is thcformable aspect of changing things. What
things are actually at any moment is due to the forms they possess. But they may
have the potentiality for acquiring other forms, with respect to which they are
in privation. 'The mutability of mutable things," Augustine writes, "is simply
their capacity for all the forms into which mutable things can be changed."
Change consists in a transformation of matter, which is another way of saying
that it consists in the actualization of a thing's potenThe Aristotelian theory
of form and tialities. matter is a theory of becoming as weli as art analysis of
the being of changing things. Illustrative applications of this theory will be
found in the chapters on ART, CAUSE, and CHANGE. Some forms arc sensible. Some
are shapes, some are qualities, some are quantities. But not all forms are
perceptible by the senses; as, for example, the form which matter takes when a
plant or animal is generated and which gives the generated thing its specific
nature. This type of form came to be called a "substantial form" because it
determines the kind of substance which the thing is. In contrast, the forms
which determine the properties or attributes of a thing are called its
"accidents" or "accidental forms." For example, size and shape, color and
weight, are accidental forms of a man; whereas that by virtue of which this
thing (having a certain size, shape, and color) is a man, is its substantial
form. Aristotle's distinction between substantial and accidental form affects
his analysis of change and his conception of matter. Generation and corruption
are for him substantial change, change in which matter undergoes transformation
with respect to its substantial form. The various types of motion alteration,
increase or decrease, and local motion -are changes which take place in enduring
substances, and with respect to their accidental forms. The substratum of
accidental change is not formless matter, but matter having a certain
substantial form; whereas in the coming to be or passing away of substances, the
substratum would seem to be a primary sort of matter, devoid of all form. As
indicated in the chapter on MATTER, this, according to Aristotle, is "the
primary substratum of each thing, from which it comes to be without
qualification, and which persists in the result." He tries to help us grasp
prime matter by using an analogy. "As the bronze is to the statue, the wood to
the bed," he writes, "so is the underlying nature to substance" matter
absolutely formless to substantial form. Aristotle sometimes speaks of the
substantial form as a first act or actuality, and of accidental forms as second
actualities. Accordingly he also distinguishes between a primary and secondary
kind of matter the one absolutely potential, and underlying substantial change;
the other S partly actualized and partly potential, and involved in accidental
change, "Primary matter," Aquinas explains, "has substantial being through its
form. ... But when once it exists under one form it is in potentiality to
others."

Perhaps one more distinction should be mentioned because of its significance for
later discussions of form. Regarding living and nonliving things as essentially
distinct, Aristotle differentiatesbetween the forms constituting these two kinds
of substances. As appears in the chapter on SOUL, he uses the word "soul" to
name the substantial form of plants, animals, and men. BOTH THE PLATONIC theory
of the separate Forms and the Aristotelian theory of the composition of form and
matter raise difficulties which their authors consider and which become the
subject of intense controversy among Platonists and Aristotelians in the
Hellenistic and mediaeval periods. The Platonic theory faces a question which
arises from supposing the existence of an eternal and immutable Form for every
appearance in the sensible world of becoming. If the Idea and the individual are
alike, then "some further idea of likeness will always be coming to light,"
Parmenides says to Socrates; "and if that be like anything else, then another;
and new ideas will be always arising, if the idea resembles that which partakes
of it." Because of this difficulty with the doctrine of participation,
Parmenides suggests that it may be necessary to conclude that "the Idea cannot
be like the individual or the individual like the Idea." In addition, the
relationships of the Forms to one another presents a difficulty. Is the relation
of one Form to another, Parmenides asks, determined by the essence of each Form,
or by the relationships among the sensible particulars that imitate the Forms in
question? Either solution seems to be unsatisfactory because of the further
difficulties which both raise. Yet, after propounding questions of this sort,
and multiplying difficulties, Parmenides concludes by telling Socrates why the
theory of Ideas cannot be given up. "If a man, fixing his attention on these and
like difficulties," he says, "does away with the Forms of things and will not
admit that every individual thing has CHAPTER 28: F its own determinate Idea
which is always one and the same, he will have nothing on which his mind can
rest; and so he will utterly destroy the power of reasoning."

The Aristotelian theory has difficulties of its own with respect to the ultimate
character of matter apart from all forms. Completely formlessmatter would be
pure potentiality and would therefore have no actual being. It would be
completely unintelligible, since form is the principle of any thing's
intelligibility. Nevertheless, something like formless matter seems to be
involved in substantial change, in contrast to the substantially formed matter
which is the substratum of accidental change. The problem of prime matter is
related in later speculations to the problem of the number and order of the
various forms which matter can take. The question is whether matter must have a
substantial form before it can have any accidental form; and whether it can have
a second substantial form in addition to a first, or is limited to having a
single substantial form, all subsequent forms necessarily being accidental.
Aquinas plainly argues in favor of the unity of substantial form. "Nothing is
absolutely one," he maintains, "except by one form, by which a thing has being;
because a thing has both being and unity from the same source, and therefore
things which are denominated by various forms are not absolutely one; as, for
instance, a white man. If, therefore," Aquinas continues, "man were living by
one form, the vegetative soul, and animal by another form, the sensitive soul,
and man by another form, the intellectual soul, it would follow that man is not
absolutely one. ... We must, therefore, conclude," he says, "that the
intellectual soul, the sensitive soul, and the nutritive soul are in man
numerically one and the same soul." In other words, "of one thing there is but
one substantial form." It is not only "impossible that there be in man another
substantial form besides the intellectual soul," but there is also no need of
any other, because "the intellectual soul contains virtually whatever belongs to
the sensitive soul of brute animals and the nutritive soul of plants." The
Aristotelian theory also has difficulties with respect to substantial forms as
objects of ORM knowledge and definition. The definition which the mind
formulates attempts to state the essence of the thing defined. The formulable
essence of a thing would seem to be identical with its form. But Aristotle
raises the question and his followers debate at length whether the essence of a
composite substance is identical with its substantial form or includes its
matter as well. Among his followers Aquinas maintains that, in defining the
essence or species of a composite substance, the genus is used to signify the
mat-* ter and the differentia the form. "Some held," he writes, "that the form
alone belongs to the species, while the matter is part of the individual, and
not of the species. This cannot be true, for to the nature of the species
belongs what the definition signifies, and in natural things the definition does
not signify the form only, but the form and the matter. Hence in natural things
the matter is part of the species; not, indeed, signate matter, which is the
prinbut common matter." ciple of individuation, He explains in another place
that "matter is twofold; common and signate, or individual: common, such as
flesh and bone; individual, such as this flesh and these bones." In forming the
universal concept man, for example, the intellect abstractsthe notion of the
species "from this flesh and these bones, which do not belong to the species as
such, but to the individual. ... But the species of man cannot be abstracted by
the intellect from flesh and bones" As will be seen in the chapters on ONE AND
MANY and UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR, the Platonic and the Aristotelian theories of
form are equally involved in the great problem of the universal and the
individual. Even though they seem to be diametrically opposed on the existence
of universals whether apart from or only in minds both Plato and Aristotle face
the necessity of explaining individuality.What makes the particular that
imitates a universal Form the unique individual it is? What makes the indwelling
form of a composite substance an individual form, as unique as the individual
substance of which it is the form? We have already noted that both Platonists
and Aristotelians appeal to matter as somehow responsible for individuation or
individuality, but that only raises further questions. The Platonists conceive
matter as the receptacle of Forms, and so in itself absolutely formless. all
How, then, can it cause the particulanzations which must be accounted for? Since
prime matter, like the receptacle, is formless, the Aristotelians resort to what
they call "signatc matter" or "individual matter" to explain the individuality
of forms and substances; but it has been argued that this only begs the question
rather than solves it.

THE CORRELATIVE ttrms form and matter seem to occur in modern thought under the
guise of certain equivalents; as, for example, the distinct substances which
Descartes calls "thought" and "extension" res cogitans and res extensaor the
infinite attributes of substance which Spinoza calls "mind" and "body." They
appear more explicitly in Kant's analysis of knowledge, related a$ the a pnort
and the a posteriori elements of experience. But it is in the great theological
speculations of the Middle Ages that the most explicit and extended use of these
terms is made, often with new interpretations placed on ancient theories.

The doctrine of spiritual substances, for example, has a bearing on the theory
of selfsubsistent Forms. The angels arc sometimes called"separate forms" by the
theologians.

They are conceived as immaterial substances, and hence as simple rather than
composite. But though Plotmus identifies the order of purely intelligible beings
with the pure intelligences, the Christian theologian does not identify the
Platonic Ideas with the angels. He regards the angels as intelligences. They
exist as pure forms, and therefore are intelligible as well as intellectual
substances. But ohcy are in no sense the archetypes or models which sensible
things resemble. Nevertheless, Christiantheology does include that aspect of the
Platonic theory which looks upon the Ideas as the eternal models or patterns.
But, as Aquinas points out, the separately existing Forms are replaced by what
Augustine calls "the exemplars existing in the divine mind."

Aquinas remarks on the fact that "whenever Augustine, who was imbued with the
doctrines of the Pktonists found in their teaching anything consistent with
faith, he adopted it; and AS those things which he found contrary to faith he
amended." He then goes on to say that, Augustine could not adopt, but had to
amend, 1 the teaching of the Platomsts that "the forms of things subsist of
themselves apart from matter." He did thisy not by denying the ideas,-
"according to which all things arc formed," but by denying that they could exist
outside thti divine mind. The divine ideas are the eternal exemplars and the
eternal typestypes, Aquinas explains, insofar as they are the likenesses of
things and so the principles of God's knowledge; exemplars insofar as they are
"the principles of the making of things" in God's act of creation. The profound
mystery of the creative act which projects the divine ideas into substantial or
material being replaces the older problem of how physical things derive their
natures by participation in the Forms. According to the Aristotelian theory,
both natural generation and artistic production involve the transformation of a
pre-existent matter. According to the Platonic myth of the world's origin, only
changing things are created, neither the receptacle nor the Ideas. But the
Christian dogma of creation excludes everything from eternity except God. Ideas
are eternal only as inseparable from ' the divine mind. Being spiritual
creatures, the angels, or self-subsistent forms, are not eternal.

And in the world of corporeal creatures, matter as well as its forms must begin
to be with the creation of things. Since matter ,and its forms cannot exist in
separation from one another, the theologians hold that God cannot create them
separately. God cannot be supposed, Augustine says, "first to have made formless
matter, and after an interval of time, formed what He had first made formless;
but," he goes on, "as intelligible sounds are made by a speaker, wherein the
sound issues not formless at first and afterwards receives a. form, but is
uttered already formed; so must God be understood to have made the world of
formless matter, but contemporaneously to have created the world." God
"concreates" form and matter, Augustine holds, "giving form, to matter's
formlessness without any interVal of time." Defending Augustine's interpretation
of the passage-in Genesis which says that the earth, CHAPTER 28: FORM which God
in the beginning created, "was un- who, like Aquinas, adopt formed and void,"
Aquinas argues that "if adapt it to supernatural formless matter preceded in
duration, it already deal with the problems of existed; for this is implied by
duration. ... To the mystery of the Incarn say, then, that matter preceded, but
without person of the Trinity and form, is to say that being existed actually,
yet substantiation in the Euc without actuality, which is a contradiction in
Furthermore, A terms. . . . Hence we must assert that primary soul with the
substantial matter was not created altogether formless." makes it difficult to
con But neither, according to Aquinas, can the ence of the individual hu form of
any material t;hing be created apart adaptation is require from its matter,
"Forms and other non-sub chapters on IMMORTALITY a sistmg things, which are said
to co-exist rather tian doctrine of personal than to exist," he declares, "ought
to be called Aristotelian rendering by concreated rather than created things."
soul as a form which is n Aristotle's theory of physical substances as Hence it
is conceived as composite of form and matter raises certain ence when, with
death and special difficulties for Christian theology. Those composite nature,
it is s

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. Form in relation to becoming or change
 1a. Forms as immutable models or archetypes: the exemplar ideas
 1b. Forms as indwelling causes or principles
 1c. The transcendental or a priori forms as constitutive of order in experience
 1d. The realization of forms in the sensible order
 (1) Imitation or participation: the role of the receptacle
 (2) Creation, generation, production: embodiment in matter or substratum
 '

2. The being of forms
 2a. The existence of forms: separately, in matter, in mind
 2b> The eternity of forms, the perpetuity of species: the divine ideas
 2c+ Form in the composite being of the individual thing
 (1) The union of matter and form: potentiality and actuality
 (2) The distinction between substantial and accidental forms
 (3) The unity
 of substantial form: prime matter in relation to substantial form
 2< Angels and human souls as self-subsistent forms: the substantiality of thought
 or mind in separation from extension or body

3. Form in relation to knowledge
 3a. Sensible forms, intelligible, forms: the forms of intuition and understanding
 3b. The problem of the universal: knowledge of the individual
 3c. Form and definition: thq formulable essence; the problem of matter in relation
 to definition

4. The denial of form as a principle of being, becoming, or knowledge

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of the Forms or Ideas as immutable
models or archetypes, see CH

ETERNITY 40; IDEA la, 6b.

Other discussions of forms as indwelling causes or principles in mutable thi

CHANGE 23; MATTER la; and for the consideration of form and matter as co-p

composite substances, see BEING 7b(2).

Discussions of matter or the receptacle in relation to form, /kCHANGE 2-2b;

SPACE la; WORLD 4b; and for the consideration of matter apart from form, s

The controversy over the separate existence of the Forms, the objects of mat

universal, see BEING 7d(2)~7d(3); MATHEMATICS 2b; SAME AND OTHER 2a; UNIV

AND PARTICULAR 2a-2c; and for the problem of the cause of individuality, s

UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 3.

The existence of forms in the mind as concepts abstracted from matter, see I

4d; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(i); SENSE 53; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 4C.

Other considerations of the a priori or transcendental forms of intuition, s

SPACE 43; TIME 6c.

Comparisons of creation, generation, and production as each relates to form

see ART 2b-2c; MATTER 3d; WORLD 4e(i).

Other terms related to the distinction of form and matter or to the kinds of

70, 7c(i)-7c(3); NATURE 13(2); UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 6a.

The theological doctrine of the angels as self-subsistent forms or simple su

ANGEL 2, 3b-3c; BEING 72); for the theological doctrine of the forms as e

emplars or types in the mind of God, see GOD 5f; IDEA 1c; and for the theo

as the substantial form of a living thing, see LIFE AND DEATH i; MAN 33; S

Form and matter in relation to definition, see BEING 8c; DEFINITION 6a; MATT

NATURE 13(2).

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy of the Western World, bu

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings, which follows the last chapter of

JOHN OP SAINT THOMAS. Cu

'

*"

misticus, Philosophia AQUINAS. On Bemg arid Essence 6, 9, 1 1

.

Quacstioncs Disputatae, De Antma MALEBRANCHE. De la reche

. On Spiritual Ctetttitrcs SCHOPENHAUER. The World KANT. De Mundi SensibtUs
(Inaugural Dissertation), BK, i-m

SECT w LOTZB Metaphysics

C. S. PEIRCB. Collected

*'

BRADLEY. Appearance and DUNS SCOTUS. Opus Oxoniense, BK DIST 7 (24)

i, DESCOQS. Essat critique CRESCAS. Or Adonai, PROPOSITIONS 10-11, 16 SANTAYANA.
The Realm of

BRUNO. De la causa, principw, e uno WHITBHBAD. Process and

SuXn'BZ. Disputationes Metapnysicae, v (4), xn (3), FOREST.' Lastructure mft

xrti (1-9), xrv-xvi, XVHI (2-6), xxvi (2), A. E. TAYLORTh Philosophi

xxvn, xxx (4), xxxi (S, 10; 13), xxxiv 5-6), KONINCK. Leprobleme de V

xxxv-xxxvi, XLII (2-3), XLV (4), xtvi BtAksHARD. The Nature of

ANGE 153; ngs, see CAUSE la; rinciples of MATTER i-1b; ee MATTER 2, 33.
hematics, and ERSAL ee MATTER 1c; DEA 2g; MATTER ee SENSE 1c; and matter, form,
see BEING bstances, see ternal exry of the soul OUL 1b. ER 4b; t relevant to the
two groups: s cited, consult The Great Ideas. rsus Philosophicus Tho-NaturaKs,
PART i, QQ 3-4, 1 rche de la verttc as Will and Idea, VOL i, v Papers, VOL vi,
par 353-363 Reality sur fhy&norphismc Essence i PART n, CH i

Reality afhystguefy concret *

cal Studies, cif 3 indttermtriismc Thought *
