CHAPTER: GOD

INTRODUCTION

WITH the exception of certain mathematicians and physicists, all the authors of the great books are represented in this chapter.

In sheer quantity of references, as well as in variety, it is the largest chapter. The reason is obvious. More consequences for thought and action follow from the affirmation or denial of God than from answering any other basic question. They follow for those who regard the question as ans^^'erable only by faith or only by reason, and even for those who insist upon suspending judgment entirely.

In addition to the primary question of God's existence, there are all the problems of the divine nature and of the relation of the world and man to the gods or God. The solutions of these problems cannot help influencing man's conception of the world in which he lives, the position that he occupies in it, and the life to which he is called. The whole tenor of human life is certainly affected by whether men regard themselves as the supreme beings in the universe or acknowledge a superior—a superhuman being whom they conceive as an object of fear or love, a force to be defied or a Lord to be obeyed. Among those who acknowledge a divinity, it matters greatly whether the divine is represented merely by the concept of God— the object of philosophical speculation—or by the living God whom men worship in all the acts of piety which comprise the rituals of religion.

The most radical differences in man's conception of his own nature follow from the exclusion of divinity as its source or model on the one hand, and from the various ways in which man is seen as participating in divinity on the other. Many fundamental themes and issues are therefore common to this chapter and to the chapter on Man.

Some of the topics in this chapter are primarily philosophical. They belong to the subject matter of rational speculation or poetic imagination in all the great epochs of our culture, regardless of differences in religious belief. Other topics, however, are peculiarly restricted to matters of faith or religion. With respect to such matters, dogmatic differences, or differences in articles of faith, must be explicitly recognized.

The materials here assembled must therefore, in some instances, be divided according to their origin from pagan or from Jewish and Christian sources. Though no great books from the Mo- hammedan tradition are included in this set, the fact that Gibbon discusses the Moslem faith and compares its teachings with those of

Judaism and Christianity explains the inclusion of Mohammedanism in one group of topics. That is the group which deals with the doctrines common to these three religions, as distinguished from the tenets on which Judaism and Christianity differ dogmatically. The existence of certain common beUefs in the western tradition enables us to begin, as it seems advisable to do, with the conception of God that is shared by the living religions of western culture today.

In our civilization, what is denied by an atheist who says there is no God ? Not idols or images which men may seek to placate. Not philosophical constructions or mythological figures. Certainly not the universe itself, either as an infinite and everlasting whole, or as finite and temporal, but equally mysterious in its ultimate incomprehensibihty to the human mind.

In our civiUzation, the atheist denies the existence of a supernatural being, the object of rehgious belief and worship among Jews, Christians, and Mohammedans. He denies the single, personal God Who created the world out of nothing, Who transcends this created universe and sustains it by His immanent power, Who has made laws for the government of all things and cares for each particular by His providence, and Who created man in His own image, revealed Himself and His will to men, and metes out eternal rewards and punishments to the children of Adam, whom Fie also helps by His grace.

In this religious conception of God, one term must be saved from misinterpretation. The word

* 'personal" should not be read v/ith anthropomorphic imagery, though its meaning does entitle man as well as God to be called a person rather than a thing. "Although the term person is not found applied to God in Scripture, either in the Old or New Testament," Aquinas writes, "nevertheless what the term signifies is found to be affirmed of God in many places of

Scripture; as that He is the supreme self-subsisting being, and the most perfectly intelligent being."

Boethius had defined a person as "an individual substance of a rational nature," or, as Locke later said, "a thinking intelligent being."

In applying the term person to God, in the meaning which Boethius had given it, Aquinas comments on the difference in its meaning when it is applied to men. God can be said to have a rational nature, he writes, only "if reason be taken to mean, not discursive thought, but, in a general sense, an intelligent nature . . . God cannot be called an individual in the sense in which physical things are, but only in the sense of uniqueness. ^'Substance can be applied to God [only] in the sense of signifying selfsubsistence." Aquinas does not conclude from this that "person" is said improperly of God, but rather that when God is called "personal" the meaning is applied "in a more excellent way," for God does not possess, God is, an intelhgence.

We shall use this idea of a personal God, the reality of which the contemporary atheist denies, in order to distinguish divergent conceptions in other doctrines. Then we shall ex- amine more closely what is involved in this idea itself.

In the western tradition, the various pagan religions— reflected especially in the poems and histories of Greek and Roman antiquity—were all polytheistic. The number of their gods, Montaigne estimates, "amounts to six-andthirty thousand." Augustine offers one explanation of why there were so many. "The ancients," he writes, "being deceived either by their own conjectures or by demons, supposed that many gods must be invited to take an interest in human affairs, and assigned to each a separate function and a separate department to one the body, to another the soul; and in the body itself, to one the head, to another the neck, and each of the other members to one of the gods; and in like manner, in the soul, to one god the natural capacity was assigned, to another education, to another anger, to another lust; and so the various affairs of Life were assigned— cattle to one, corn to another, wine to another, oil to another, the woods to another, money to another, navigation to another, wars and victories to another, marriages to another, births and fecundity to another, and other things to other gods."

That polytheism, no less than monotheism, conceives the divine as personal, appears in

Plato's Apology. When Socrates is accused of atheism, he asks whether the indictment means that he does not "acknowledge the gods which the state acknowledges, but some other new divinities or spiritual agencies in their stead." Meletus answers that he thinks Socrates is a complete atheist who recognizes no gods at all. To this Socrates replies by suggesting that his enemies must be confusing him with Anaxagoras, who had blasphemed against Apollo by calling the sun "a red hot stone." As for himself, he offers evidence to show that he believes in divine or spiritual agencies "new or old, no matter"; and "if I believe in divine beings," he asks, "how can I help believing in spirits or demigods?"

Like the one God of Judaism and Christianity, the many gods of pagan antiquity have immortal life, but they are not without origin. Zeus is the son of Kronos, and he has many offspring, both gods and demigods, who per- form different functions and are not of equal station in the Olympian hierarchy. The realm of the divine includes such figures as the Titans and the Cyclops, who are neither gods nor men; and demigods, like Heracles, who are offspring of divine and human mating. These deities exercise superhuman powers, but none is completely omnipotent or omniscient, not even Kronos or Zeus who cannot escape the decrees of Fate. Moreover, with the exception, perhaps, of that of Zeus, the power of one divinity is often challenged and thwarted by another. This aspect of polytheism and its bearing on the intervention of the gods in the affairs of men are discussed in the chapter on Fate.

The extent to which we think of the pagans as idolatrous because they made graven images of their gods m human form, or regard the pagan conceptions of the gods as anthropomorphic, depends on our interpretation of religious symbolism. Plato for one thinks that many of the poets' descriptions of the gods and their activities should be dismissed as unworthy, precisely because they debase the gods to the human level.

According to Gibbon, a Greek or Roman philosopher "who considered the system of polytheism as a composition of human fraud and error, could disguise a smile of contempt under the mask of devotion, without apprehending that either the mockery or the compliance would expose him to the resentment of any invisible, or, as he conceived them, imaginary powers." But the early Christians, he points out, saw the many gods of antiquity "in a much more odious and formidable light" and held them to be "the authors, the patrons, and the objects of idolatry."

Those who take symbols with flat literalism might also attack Christianity as anthropomorphic and idolatrous; in fact they have. The defense of Christianity against this charge does not avail in the case of Roman emperor-worship, which consisted not in the humanization of the divine for the sake of symbolic representation, but in the deification of the merely human for political purposes.

Although there are radical differences, there are also certain fundamental agreements between paganism and Judaeo-Christianity regarding the nature of the divine. As we have already noted, the deities are conceived personally, not in terms of impersonal, brute forces. Conceived as beings with intelligence and will, the gods concern themselves with earthly society; they aid or oppose man's plans ami efforts; they reward men for fidelity and virtue or punish them for impiety and sin. Despite all other differences between pagan- ism and Christianity, these agreements are substantial enough to provide many common threads of theological speculation throughout our tradition, especially with regard to the abiding practical problems of how man shall view himself and his destiny in relation to the divine or the supernatural. We have therefore attempted to place passages from the great books of pagan antiquity under ever^- heading except those which are specifically restricted to the dogmas of Judaism and Christianity—even under headings which are worded monotheistically, since even here there is continuity of thought and expression from Homer and Virgil to Dante and Milton; from Plato, Aristotle, and Plotinus to Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, and Kant; from Lucretius to Newton and DarThe doctrines known as deism and pantheism, like unquahfied atheism, are as much opposed to the religious beliefs of polytheism as to the faith of Judaism and Christianity.

Of these two, pantheism is much nearer atheism, for it denies the existence of a transcendent supernatural being or beings. God is

Nature. God is immanent in the world and, in the extreme form of pantheism, not transcendent in any way. Certain historic doctrines which are often regarded as forms or kinds of pantheism seem to be less extreme than this, for they do not conceive the physical universe as exhausting the infinite being of God. The world, for all its vastness and variety, may only represent an aspect of the divine nature.

According to Spinoza, the attributes of extension and thought, in terms of which we understand the world or nature as being of the divine substance, are merely those aspects of God which are known to us, for the divine substance consists "of infinite attributes, each one of which expresses eternal and infinite essence."

In the conception of Plotinus, the whole world represents only a partial emanation from the divine source. Yet thinkers like Plotinus and

Spinoza so conceive the relation of the world to God that—as in the strictest pantheism— the religious doctrines of creation, providence, and salvation are either rejected or profoundly altered.

In the ancient world, the teaching of the

Stoic philosophers expresses a kind of pantheism. "There is one universe made up of all things," Marcus Aurelius writes, "and one God who pervades all things, and one substance, and one law, one common reason in all intelligent animals, and one truth." He speaks of the "common nature," which is apparently divine, and of which "every particular nature is a part, as the nature of the leaf is a part of the nature of the plant." But, although he stresses the oneness and divinity of all things, Aurelius also at times uses language which seems to refer to a god who dwells apart from as well as in the world, as, for example, when he debates whether the gods have any concern with human affairs.

Another type of ancient pantheism appears in the thought of Plotinus, for whom all things have being only insofar as they participate in, even as they emanate from, the power of The

One, or Primal Source. "God is sovranly present through all," he writes. "We cannot think of something of God here and something else there, nor of all of God gathered at some one spot: there is an instantaneous presence everywhere, nothing containing and nothing left void, everything therefore fully held by the divine." The relation between The One and every other thing is compared to the number series. "Just as there is, primarily or secondarily, some form or idea from the monad in each of the successive numbers— the latter still participating, though unequally, in the unit—so the series of beings following upon The First bear, each, some form or idea derived from that source. In Number the participation estabUshes

Quantity; in the realm of Being, the trace of The One establishes reality: existence is a trace of The One."

But although The One is in all things, and all things depend upon it for their very existence. The One itself has no need of them. It is in this sens^ that Plotinus says that "The One is all things and no one of them . . . Holding all though itself nowhere held— it is omnipresent, for where its presence failed something would elude its hold. At the same time, in the sense that it is nowhere held, it is not present: thus it is both present and not present; not present as not being circumscribed by anything; yet as being utterly unattached, not inhibited from presence at any point." Thus all things partake of The One in absolute dependence. But The One, considered in itself, is absolutely transcendent. Plotinus even denies it the name of God or Good or Being, saying it is beyond these.

Whether or not Spinoza is a pantheist, has long been debated by his commentators. An explicit, even an extreme form of pantheism would seem to be expressed in the proposition that "whatever is, is in God, and nothing can be or be conceived without God." But while the one and only substance which exists is at once nature and God, Spinoza identifies God only with the nature he calls ''natura naturans.'' God is not reduced to the nature that falls within man's limited experience or understanding the nature he calls ''natura naturataT

"By natura naturans,'' he explains, "we are to understand that which is in itself and is conceived through itself, or those attributes of substance which express eternal and infinite essence, that is to say, God in so far as He is considered as a free cause. But by natura naturata

I understand everything which follows from the necessity of the nature of God, or of any one of God's attributes, that is to say, all the modes of God's attributes in so far as they are considered as things which are in God and which without God can neither be nor can be conceived."

God is the infinite and eternal substance of all finite existences, an absolute and unchanging one underlying the finite modes in which it variably manifests itself. Though God for Spinoza is transcendent in the sense of vastly exceeding the world known to man, in no sense does God exist apart from the whole of nature.

Spinoza's view thus sharply departs from that of an orthodox Jewish or Christian theologian. When the latter says that God is transcendent, he means that God exists apart, infinitely re- moved from the whole created universe. When the latte- speaks of God as being immanent in that universe, he carefully specifies that it is not by His substance, but by the power of His action and knowledge. But Spinoza calls God "the immanent, and not the transitive, cause of all things," for the reason that ''outside God there can be no substance, that is to say, outside Him nothing can exist which is in itself." These divergent conceptions of Ciod's im- manence and transcendence— so relevant to the question of who is or is not a pantheist are further discussed in the chapters on Nature and World.

Unlike pantheism, deism affirms gods or a God, personal intelligences existing apart from this world; but, as in the teaching of Lucretius, deism sometimes goes to the extreme of believing in absentee gods who neither intervene in the order of nature nor concern themselves with human affairs.

"The nature of the gods," Lucretius writes, "must ever in itself of necessity enjoy immortality together with supreme repose, far re- moved and withdrawn from our concerns; since exempt from every pain, exempt from all dangers, strong in its own resources, not wanting aught of us, ft is neither gained by favors nor moved by anger."

Such gods neither create the world nor govern it; above all they do not reward or ) punish man, and so they do not have to be feared or propitiated. "To say that for the sake of men they have willed to set in order the glorious nature of the world and therefore it is meet to praise the work of the gods immortal, and that it is an unholy thing ever to shake by any force from its fixed seats that which by the forethought of the gods in ancient days has been estabUshed on everlasting foundations for mankind, or to assail it by speech and utterly overturn it from top to bottom; and to invent and add other figments of the kind ... is all sheer folly. For what advantage can our gratitude bestow on immortal and blessed beings that for our sakes they should take in hand to administer aught?"

Divinity seems to have moral significance to

Lucretius only insofar as the gods exemplify the happy life; and religion is immoral because its superstitions concerning divine motives and meddling make men servile and miserable.

When the deism of Lucretius is contrasted with the more famiUar modern forms of that doctrine, the influence of Christianity is seen. The modern deist affirms the supremacy of one

God, the infinite and eternal Creator of this world, Whose laws are the laws of nature which are laid down from the beginning and which govern all created things. Rousseau speaks of this as "the religion of man" and even identifies it with Christianity— "not the Christianity of today, but that of the Gospel, which is entirely difierent." He describes this religion as that "which has neither temples, nor altars, nor rites, and is confined to the purely internal cult of the supreme God and the eternal obligations of morality."

Not all deists, certainly not those of the 17th and early i8th centuries, go to the Lucretian extreme of picturing an uninterested and mop ally neutral God. Many of them believe in an after-life. But modern deism did tend toward this extreme. By Kant's time it had even ceased to look upon God as a personal intelligence. Kant therefore takes great pains to distinguish deism from theism.

The deist, according to Kant, "admits that we can cognize by pure reason alone the existence of a supreme being, but at the same time maintains that our conception of this being is purely transcendental, and that all we can say of it is, that it possesses all reality, without being able to define it more closely." The theist, on the other hand, "asserts that reason is capable of presenting us, from the analogy with nature, with a more definite conception of this being, and that its operations, as the cause of all things, are the results of intelligence and free

Will."

Kant even maintains that "we might, in strict rigor, deny to the deist any belief in God at all, and regard him merely as a maintainer of the existence of a primal being or thing — the supreme cause of all other things." In any case, deism seems to be an essentially un-Jewish and un-Christian or anti-Jewish and anti-Christian doctrine, for it denies God's supernatural revelation of Himself; it denies miracles and every other manifestation of supernatural agency in the course of nature or the life of man; it denies the efficacy of prayer and sacrament.

In short, it rejects the institutions and practices, as well as the faith and hope, of any religion which claims supernatural foundation and supernatural warrant for its dogmas and rituals.

Deism, which "consists simply in the worship of a God considered as great, powerful, and eternal," is, in Pascal's opinion, "almost as far removed from the Christian religion as atheism, which is its exact opposite."

What Pascal and Kant call "deism" and

Rousseau "the religion of man," others like Hume call "natural religion." His Dialogues

Concerning Natural Religion provide a classic statement of rationaHsm, which is the same as naturalism, in religion; though, as the chapter on Religion indicates, it may be questioned whether the word "religion" can be meaningfully used for a doctrine which claims no knowledge beyond that of the philosopher, and no guidance for human life beyond the precepts of the moralist.

The systematic exposition of man's knowledge of God is the science of theology. In addition to considering all things— the whole world and human life—in relation to God, theology treats especially of God's existence, essence, and attributes. Throughout the range of its subject matter and problems, theology may be of two sorts: it may be either natural knowledge, obtained by ordinary processes of observation and reasoning; or knowledge which is supernatural in the sense of being based on divine revelation.

This is the traditional distinction between natural and sacred or, as it is sometimes called, dogmatic theology. The one belongs to the do- main of reason; it is the work of the philosopher. The other belongs to the domain of faith, and is the work of the theologian who seeks to understand his faith.

These distinctions are discussed in the chapters on Theology, Metaphysics, and Wis- dom. Here we are concerned with different attitudes toward the problem of man's knowledge of God. The deist, as we have seen, rejects supernatural revelation and faith; theology, like rehgion, is held to be entirely natural, a work of reason. The agnostic makes the opposite denial. He denies that anything supernatural can be known by reason. It cannot be proved or, for that mat-ter, disproved. The evidences of nature and the hght of reason do not permit valid inferences or arguments concerning God or creation, providence or immortality.

It is usually with respect to God's existence that the agnostic most emphatically declares reason's incompetence to demonstrate. He often accompanies the declaration with elaborate criticisms of the arguments which may be offered by others. This is not always the case, however. For example, the great Jewish theologian, Moses Maimonides, thinks that God's existence can be proved by reason entirely apart from faith; but with regard to the essence or attributes of God, his position seems to be one which might be called agnostic.

When men "ascribe essential attributes to God," Maimonides declares, "these so-called essential attributes should not have any similarity to the attributes of other things, just as there is no similarity between the essence of God and that of other beings." Since the meaning of such positive attributes as good or wise is derived from our knowledge of things, they do not provide us with any knowledge of God's essence, for no comparison obtains between things and God. Hence Maimonides asserts that "the negative attributes of God are the true attributes." They tell us not what God is, but what God is not.

Even though Maimonides holds that "existence and essence are perfectly identical" in God, he also insists that "we comprehend only the fact that He exists, not His essence. . . . All we understand," he goes on to say, in addition to "the fact that He exists," is the fact that "He is a Being to whom none of his creatures is similar." This fact is confirmed in all the negative attributes such as eternal (meaning nontemporal), infinite, or incorporeal; even as it is falsified by all the positive attributes, expressed by such names as "good" or "living" or "knowing," insofar as they imply a comparison be- tween God and creatures. When they cannot be interpreted negatively, they can be tolerated as metaphors, but they must not be taken as expressing an understanding "of the true essence of God," concerning which Maimonides maintains, "there is no possibility of obtaining a knowledge."

Aquinas takes issue with such agnosticism about the divine nature in his discussion of the names of God. Although he says that "we cannot know what God is, but rather what He is not," Aquinas disagrees with Maimonides that all names which express some knowledge of

God's essence must be interpreted negatively CiiAi'Ti :u 29: GOD or treated as metaphors. He denies tiial "when we say God lives, we mean merely that Ciod is not like an inanimate thing" as "was tauglit by Rabbi Moses." On the contrary, he holds that "these names signify the divine substance

. . . although they fall short of representing Him. . . . For these names express God, so far as our intellects know Him. Now since our intellect knows God from creatures, it knows Him as far as creatures represent Him." Tlierefore, Aquinas concludes, "when we say, God is good, the meaning is not, God is the cause of goodness, or, God is not evil: but the meaning is, Whatever good we attribute to creatures preexists in God, and in a higher way." ^ If Maimonides were right that the names which are said positively of both God and creatures are "applied ... in a purely equivocal sense" (e.g., having literal meaning when said of creatures but being only metaphorical when said of God), then, according to Aquinas, it would follow that "from creatures nothing at all could be known or demonstrated about God." Those who say, on the other hand, that "the things attributed to God and creatures are univocal" {i.e., are said in exactly the same sense), claim to comprehend more than man can know of the divine essence. When the term wise "is applied to God," Aquinas writes, "it leaves the thing signified as uncomprehended and as exceeding the signification of the name. Hence it is evident that this term wise is not applied in the same way to God and to man. The same applies to other terms. Hence no name is predicated univocally of God and creatures" but rather all positives names "are said of God and creatures in an analogous sense."

A further discussion of the names of God will be found in the chapter on Sign and Symbol; and the consideration of the analogical, the univocal, and the equivocal will also be found there as well as in the chapter on Same and Other. We have dealt with these matters here only for the sake of describing that degree of agnosticism, according to which

Maimonides, by contrast with Aquinas, is an agnostic. But agnosticism usually goes further and denies that man can have any natural knowledge of God—either of His existence or of

His essence.

So understood, agnosticism need not be in- compatible with religion, unless a given religion holds, as an article of faith itself, that the existence of CJod can be proved by reason. In fact, the agnostic may be a religious man who accepts divine revelation and regards faith as divinely inspired.

Montaigne's Apologyfor Raimond de Sebonde illustrates this position. Sebonde had written a treatise on natural theology, which to Montaigne seems "hardy and bold; for he undertakes, by human and natural reasons to establish and make good against the atheists all the articles of the Christian religion." Though Montaigne says of his work, "I do not think it possible to do better upon that subject," and though he entertains the conjecture that it may have been "drawn from St. Thomas Aquinas, for, in truth, that mind full of infinite learning and admirable subtlety, was alone capable of such imaginations"; nevertheless, Montaigne does "not believe that means purely human are, in any sort, capable of doing it."

According to Montaigne, "it is faith alone that vividly and certainly comprehends the deep mysteries of our religion." In his view, reason by itself is incapable of proving anything, much less anything about God. "Our human reasons," he writes, "are but sterile and undigested matter; the grace of God is its form; it is that which gives it fashion and value." The fight and value in Sebonde's arguments come from the fact that faith supervenes "to tint and illustrate" them, and "renders them firm and solid."

Such arguments, Montaigne says, may serve as "direction and first guide to a learner" and may even "render him capable of the grace of God"; but for himself, skeptical of all arguments, the way of faith alone can provide "a certain constancy of opinion. . . . Thus have I, by the grace of God, preserved myself entire, without anxiety or trouble of conscience, in the ancient belief of our religion, amidst so many sects and divisions as our age has produced."

Far from being religious as Montaigne was, the agnostic may be a skeptic about faith as well as reason. He may look upon faith either as superstition or as the exercise of the will to believe with regard to the unknowable and the unintelligible—almost wishful thinking. He may even go so far as to treat religion as if it were pathological.

Freud, for example, regards religion as an illusion to be explained in terms of man's need to create gods in his own image— to find a surrogate for the father, on whom his infantile dependence can be projected. Freud finds confirmation for this in the fact that in the religions of the west, God "is openly called Father.

Psychoanalysis," he goes on, "concludes that he really is the father, clothed in the grandeur in which he once appeared to the small child."

Though the grown man "has long ago realized that his father is a being with strictly limited powers and by no means endowed with every desirable attribute," Freud thinks that he nevertheless "looks back to the memoryimage of the overrated father of his childhood, exalts it into a Deity, and brings it into the present and into reality. The emotional strength of this memory-image and the lasting nature of his need for protection"— for, as Freud explains, "in relation to the external world he is still a child"— "are the two supports of his belief in God."

At the other extreme from agnosticism is, as the name implies, gnosticism. Like deism, it dispenses with faith, but it exceeds traditional deism in the claims it makes for reason's power to penetrate the divine mysteries. Between exclusive reliance on faith and an exaltation of reason to the point where there is no need for God to reveal anything, a middle ground is held by those who acknowledge the contributions of both faith and reason. Those who try to harmonize the two usually distinguish between the spheres proper to each, and formulate some principle according to which they are related to each other in an orderly fashion.

Whatever is purely a matter of faith, Aquinas says, is assented to solely because "it is revealed by God." The articles of Christian faith are typified by "the Trinity of Persons in Almighty God, the mystery of Christ's Incarnation, and the like." With regard to such matters, which

Aquinas thinks belong primarily to faith, some auxiliary use can be made of reason, "not, indeed, to prove faith," he explains, but to make clear the things that follow from it. Certain matters, such as God's existence and attributes, he classifies as belonging to "the preambles to faith" because they fall, in his view, within reason's power to demonstrate, unaided by faith. Yet even here he does not assign the affirmation of the truth to reason alone.

Just as "it was necessary for the salvation of man that certain truths which exceed human reason should be made known to him by divine revelation," so even with regard to "those truths about God which human reason can investigate," Aquinas thinks it was also necessary that "man be taught by a divine revelation. For the truth about God, such as reason can know it, would only be known by a few, and that after a long time, and with the admixture of many errors." Because "human reason is very deficient in things concerning God" "a sign of which is that philosophers . . . have fallen into many errors and have disagreed among themselves"—men would have no knowledge of God "free from doubt and uncertainty" unless all divine truths were "delivered to them by the way of faith, being told to them, as it were, by God Himself Who cannot lie."

In different ways faith supports reason and reason helps faith. On matters which belong to both reason and faith, faith provides a greater certitude. On matters strictly of faith, reason provides some understanding, however remote and inadequate, of the mysteries of religion.

"The use of human reason in religion," Bacon writes, "is of two sorts: the former, in the conception and apprehension of the mysteries of God to us revealed; the other, in the inferring and deriving of doctrine and direction thereupon. ... In the former we see God vouchsafeth to descend to our capacity, in the expressing of his mysteries in sort as may be sensible unto us; and doth grift his revelations and holy doctrine upon the notions of our reason and applieth his inspiration to open our understanding, as the form of the key to the ward of the lock. For the latter, there is allowed us an use of reason and argument, secondary and respective, although not original and absolute. For after the articles and principles of religion are placed and exempted from examination of reason, it is then permitted unto us to make derivations and inferences from and according to the analogy of them, for our Ixilcr direction."

In addition to all discursive knowledge of God, whether it be by faith or by reason, there is the totally incommunicable and intimate ac- quaintance with the supernatural which the mystic claims for his vision in moments of religious ecstasy or which is promised to the blessed as their heavenly beatitude. When, at the culmination of Paradise, Dante sees God, "my vision," he declares, "was greater than our speech."

Knowing that his "speech will fall more short . . . than that of an infant who still bathes his tongue at the breast," he tries nevertheless to communicate in words "one single spark of Thy glory for the folk to come." In the presence of God, he writes, his mind, "wholly rapt, was gazing fixed, motionless, and intent, and ever with gazing grew enkindled. In that Light one becomes such that it is impossible he should ever consent to turn himself from it for other sight; because the Good which is the object of the will is all collected in it, and outside of it that is defective which is perfect there."

The arguments for the existence of the gods or of one God constitute one of the greatest attempts of the human mind to go beyond the sensible or phenomenal world of experience. The attempt has been made in every age and by minds of quite different persuasions in religious belief or philosophical outlook. It is possible, nevertheless, to classify the arguments into two or three main types.

Within the domain of pure or speculative reason there seem to be two ways of approaching the problem of God's existence.

One is in terms of the conception of God as an infinite, perfect, and necessary being, whose non-existence is therefore inconceivable.

According to Anselm, God cannot be conceived in any other way than as "a being than which nothing greater can be conceived." But since "the fool hath said in his heart, there is no God," how shall he be made to know that the God, which exists in his understanding at the moment when he denies His real existence, also really exists outside his understanding? "For it is one thing for an object to be in the understanding, and another to understand that the object exists." Hence Anselm considers the consequence of supposing that God exists in the understanding alone.

"If that, than which nothing greater can be conceived," he argues, "exists in the understanding alone, the very being, tlian which nothing greater can be conceived, is one than which a greater can be conceived"— for to exist in reality as well as in the understanding is to have more being. But this leads to "an irreconcilable contradiction," since "if that, than which nothing greater can be conceived, can be conceived not to exist, it is not that than which nothing greater can be conceived."

Therefore Anselm concludes that a being "than which nothing greater can be conceived" must exist "both in the understanding and reality."

Anselm summarizes his argument by saying that "no one who understands what God is, can conceive that God does not exist." Since the non-existence of God is inconceivable, God must exist. Descartes gives the same argument a slightly different statement in terms of the inseparability of God's essence from God's existence.

"Being accustomed," he writes, "in all other things to make a distinction between existence and essence, I easily persuade myself that the existence can be separated from the essence of God, and that we can thus conceive God as not actually existing. But, nevertheless, when I think of it with more attention, I clearly see that existence can no more be separated from the essence of God than can its having its three angles equal to two right angles be separated from the essence of a rectilinear triangle, or the idea of a mountain from the idea of a valley ; and so there is not any less repugnance to our conceiving a God (that is, a Being su- premely perfect) to whom existence is lacking (that is to say, to whom a certain perfection is lacking), than to conceive of a mountain which has no valley."

Spinoza defines a "cause of itself as "that whose essence involves existence; or that whose nature cannot be conceived unless existing."

Since in his conception of substance, substance is necessarily infinite, it is also cause of itself. Hence he concludes that "God or substance

. . . necessarily exists"; for "if this be denied, conceive if it be possible that God does not exist. Then it follows that His essence does not involve existence. But this is absurd. Therefore God necessarily exists."

This mode of argument, which takes still other forms, is traditionally called the "ontological argument" or the ""a priori proof" of

God's existence. Its critics sometimes deny that it is an argument or proof in any sense at all.

Aquinas, for example, interprets Anselm not as proving God's existence, but rather as asserting that God's existence is self-evident. Those who say that the proposition "God does not exist" is self-contradictory, are saying that the opposite proposition "God exists" must be selfevident.

Aquinas does not deny that the proposition "God exists" is intrinsically self-evident. On this point he goes further than Anselm, Descartes, and Spinoza. Where they say God's essence involves His existence, Aquinas asserts that in God essence and existence are identical. When Moses asks God, "If they should say to me. What is His name? what shall I say to them.?" the Lord says unto Moses, "I AM THAT I AM," and adds, "Say to the children of Israel: HE WHO IS hath sent me to you."

This name—HE WHO IS—Aquinas holds to be "the most proper name of God" because it signifies that "the being of God is His very essence."

For this reason he thinks that the proposition "God exists" is self-evident in itself. Its subject and predicate are immediately related. Nevertheless, Aquinas holds that the proposition is not self-evident to us "because we do not know the essence of God." Even supposing, he writes, "that everyone understands this name God as signifying something than which nothing greater can be thought, nevertheless, it does not therefore follow that he understands that what the name signifies exists actually, but only that it exists mentally. Nor can it be ar- gued that it actually exists, unless it be admitted that there actually exists something than which nothing greater can be thought; and this precisely is not admitted by those who hold that God does not exist."

The writer of the First Set of Objections to Descartes' Meditations maintains that the criticism advanced by Aquinas applies to Descartes as well as to Anselm. Whether stated in terms of the conception of an absolutely perfect being or in terms of essence and existence, the argument is invalid, he thinks, which asserts that God actually exists because His non-existence is inconceivable. Kant's later criticism of the ontological argument takes a similar course. A proposition may be logically necessary with- out being true in fact.

"The conception of an absolutely necessary being," he writes, "is a mere idea, the objective reality of which is far from being established by the mere fact that it is a need of reason. . . . The unconditioned necessity of a judgment does not form the absolute necessity of a thing." From the fact that "existence belongs necessarily to the object of the conception," we cannot conclude that "the existence of the thing ... is therefore absolutely necessary merely," Kant says, "because its existence has been cogitated in the conception. . . . Whatever be the content of our conception of an object, it is necessary to go beyond it, if we wish to predicate existence of the object. . . . The celebrated ontological or Cartesian argu- ment for the existence of a supreme being is therefore insufficient."

The second main approach to the problem of God's existence lies in the sort of proof which, Locke thinks, "our own existence and the sensible parts of the universe offer so clearly and cogently to our thoughts." He refrains from criticizing the argument from "the idea of a most perfect being," but he does insist that we should not "take some men's having that idea of God in their minds . . . for the only proof of a Deity." He for one prefers to follow the counsel of St. Paul, that "the invisible things of God are clearly seen from the creation of the world, being understood by the things that are made, even his eternal power and Godhead."

We have, according to Locke, an intuitive knowledge of our own existence. We know, he says, that "nonentity cannot produce any real being"; and so "from the consideration of ourselves, pnd what we infallibly find in our constitution, our reason leads us to the knowledge of this certain and evident truth That there is an eternal, most powerful, and most knowing

Bei?2g.''

Without labelling it a proof of God's existence, Augustine in his Confessions presents a similar argument— from the visible creation. "Behold," he says, "the heavens and the earth are; they proclaim that they were created; for they change and vary. . . . They proclaim also that they made not themselves: 'therefore we are, because we have been made; wc were not therefore, before we were, so as to make ourselves'. . . . Thou therefore, Lord, madcst them." This second approach to the existence of God by reasoning from the tacts of experience or the evidences of nature is called the "^ posteriori proof." In the tradition of the great books, it has been formulated in many different ways. What is common to all of them is the principle of causality, in terms of which the known existence of certain effects is made the basis for inferring the existence of a unique cause—a first cause, a highest cause, an uncaused cause.

Aristotle, for example, in the last book of his

Physics, argues from the fact of motion or change to the existence of an unmoved mover. He sums up his elaborate reasoning on this point in the following statement. "We established the fact that everything that is in motion is moved by something, and that the movent is either unmoved or in motion, and that, if it is in motion, it is moved either by itself or by something else and so on throughout the series: and so we proceeded to the position that the first principle that directly causes things that are in motion to be moved is that which moves itself, and the first principle of the whole series is the unmoved."

Aristotle's argument, unlike that of Augustine or Locke, does not presuppose the creation of the world, at least not in the sense of the world's having a beginning. On the contrary, he holds the world and its motions to be as eternal as their unmoved mover. "It is impossible," he writes in the Metaphysics, "that movement should either have come into being or cease to be." Precisely because he thinks the world's motions are eternal, Aristotle holds that the prime mover, in addition to being everlasting, must be immutable. This for him means "a principle whose very essence is actuaUty." Only a substance without any potency, only one which is purely actual, can be an absolutely immutable, eternal being.

Whatever has any potentiality in its nature is capable of not existing, if everything were of this sort, nothing that now is "need be, for it is possible for all things to be capable of existing, but not yet to exist." Hence, in still another way, Aristotle seems to reach the conclusion that a purely actual being must exist; and, furthermore, he seems to identify this being with a living and thinking God. "Life also belongs to God," he writes; "for the actuality of thought is life, and God is that actuality; and God's self-dependent actuality is life most good and eternal."

Where Aristotle argues from motion and potentiality to a prime mover and a pure actuality, Newton gives the a posteriori proof another statement by arguing from the design of the universe to God as its designer or architect. "The most wise and excellent contrivances of things, and final causes" seem to him the best way of knowing God. "Blind metaphysical necessity, which is certainly the same always and everywhere, could produce no variety in things. All that diversity of natural things which we find suited to different times and places could arise from nothing but the ideas and will of a Being necessarily existing."

In similar fashion Berkeley maintains that "if we attentively consider the constant regularity, order, and concatenation of natural things, the surprising magnificence, beauty, and perfection "of the larger, and the exquisite contrivance of the smaller parts of the creation, together with the exact harmony and correspondence of the whole, but, above all, the never enough admired laws of pain and pleasure, and the instincts or natural inclinations, appetites, and passions of animals; I say if we consider all these things, and at the same time attend to the meaning and import of the attributes, one, eternal, infinitely wise, good, and perfect, we shall clearly perceive that they belong to the . . . Spirit, who 'works all in all,' and 'by whom all things consist.'" This seems to him so certain that he adds, "we may even assert that the existence of God is far more evidently perceived than the existence of men."

But, according to Berkeley, all the visible things of nature exist only as ideas in our minds, ideas which, unlike our own memories or imaginations, we do not ourselves produce. "Everything we see, hear, feel, or anywise perceive by sense," he writes, must have some other cause than our own will, and is therefore "a sign or effect of the power of God." To the "unthinking herd" who claim that "they cannot see God," Berkeley replies that "God ... is intimately present to our minds, producing in them all that variety of ideas or sensations which continually affect us."

The existence of any idea in us is for Berkeley ground for asserting God's existence and power as its cause. But for Descartes one idea alone becomes the basis of such an inference. He supplements his a priori or ontological argu- ment with what he calls an ''a posteriori demonstration of God's existence from the mere fact that the idea of God exists in us."

That he is himself imperfect, Descartes knows from the fact that he doubts. Even when doubting leads to knowledge, his knowledge is imperfect, "an infallible token" of which, he says, is the fact that "my knowledge increases little by little." But the idea which he has of God, he declares, is that of an absolutely perfect being, "in whom there is nothing merely potential, but in whom all is present really and actually." On the principle that there cannot be more reality or perfection in the effect than in the cause, Descartes concludes that his own imperfect mind cannot be the cause of the idea of a perfect being. "The idea that I possess of a being more perfect than

I," he writes, "must necessarily have been placed in me by a being which is really more perfect."

The radical imperfection of man, and indeed of all creation, offers Augustine still another proof for God's existence, which he attributes to the "Platonists." "They have seen," he writes, "that whatever is changeable is not the most high God, and therefore they have transcended every soul and all changeable spirits in seeking the supreme. They have seen also that, in every changeable thing, the form which makes it that which it is, whatever be its mode or nature, can only be through Him who truly is, because He is unchangeable. And therefore, whether we consider the whole body of the world, its figure, qualities, and orderly movement, and also all the bodies which are in it; or whether we consider all life, either that which nourishes and maintains, as the life of trees; or that which, besides this, has also sensation, as the life of beasts; or that which adds to all these intelligence, as the life of man; or that which does not need the support of nutri- ment, but only maintains, feels, understands, as the life of angels— all can only be through Him who absolutely is. For to Him it is not one thing to be, and another to live, as though He could be, not living; nor is it to Him one thing to live, and another to understand, as though He could live, not understanding; nor is it to Him one thing to understand, another to be blessed, as though He could understand and not be blessed. But to Him to live, to understand, to be blessed, are to be. They have understood, from this unchangeableness and this simplicity, that all things must have been made by Him, and that He could Himself have been made by none."

The variety of arguments we have so far examined seems to fit the "five ways" in which, according to Aquinas, the existence of God can be proved a posteriori. "The first and most manifest way is the argument from motion," which Aquinas attributes to Aristotle. "The second way is from the nature of an efficient cause."

Berkeley's argument or Locke's would seem, in some respects, to offer a version of this mode of reasoning. "The third way is taken from possibility and necessity," and seems to develop the argument from potentiality in Aristotle's

Metaphysics, and to contain the inference from mutability and contingency which is implicit in the argument attributed to the Platonists by Augustine. "The fourth way is taken from the gradation to be found in things." Proceeding from the existence of the imperfect to absolute perfection, it resembles in principle the reasoning of Descartes concerning the perfection in the cause relative to the perfection in the effect. "The fifth way is taken from the governance of the world"—from the fact that everything acts for an end—and so is like the argument which Newton offers from final causes and the existence of order in the universe.

These "five ways" may or may not be regarded as an exhaustive list of the a posteriori proofs. It may even be questioned whether the five ways are logically distinct and independent. Aquinas himself says that "in speculative matters the medium of demonstration, which demonstrates the conclusion perfectly, is only one; whereas probable means of proof are many." Since he considers the argument for God's existence to be a certain, not a probable proof, it would seem to follow that, in strict logic, only one principle can be involved in that proof.

As already suggested, the principle—com- mon to all the various ways in which such a posteriori reasoning is expressed—seems to be the principal of causality. This appears in the argument from the existence of contingent beings, which cannot cause their own being, to the existence of a being which needs no cause of its being, because its very essence is to exist.

This may be the one argument for God's existence or, if one among many, it may be the core of all the others. It has the distinction at least of conceiving God as the cause of being, rather than of motion or of hierarchy and order in the world.

According to the statement of Aquinas that

*' being is the proper effect of God," it establishes God as the unique and direct cause of the being possessed by every finite thing. This formulation of the proof is more fully examined in the chapter on Necessity and Contingency; and its relation to the question of whether the world had a beginning or is eternal, and if eternal, whether it is created or uncreated, will be seen in the chapters on Cause, Eternity, and World.

The validity of the a posteriori argument for

God's existence— in one form or another— is questioned by those who think that the causal principle cannot be applied beyond experience, or who think that our knowledge of cause and effect is not sufficient to warrant such inferences.

"The existence of any being can only be proved by arguments from its cause or its effect," Hume writes; "and these arguments are founded entirely on experience. ... It is only experience which teaches us the nature and bounds of cause and effect, and enables us to infer the existence of one object from that of another." But Hume doubts "whether it be possible for a cause to be known only by its eflecl ... or to be of so singular and particular a nature as to have no parallel and no similarity with any oilier cause or object, that has ever fallen under our observation. ... If experience and observation and analogy be, in- deed, the only guides which we can reasonably follow in inferences of this nature," as Hume thinks is the case, then it follows that "both the effect and the cause must bear a similarity and resemblance to other effects and causes which we know.

"I leave it to your own reflection," he adds, "to pursue the consequences of this principle." One seems obvious enough; namely, that Ciod —a unique and unparalleled cause— cannot be proved by reasoning from our experience of effects and their causes. Hume himself draws this conclusion when he declares that theology, insofar as it is concerned with the existence of a Deity, has "its best and most solid foundation," not in reason or experience, but in ''faith and divine revelation."

Like Hume, Kant thinks that our notions of cause and effect cannot be applied outside experience or to anything beyond the realm of sensible nature. But he offers an additional reason for denying validity to all a posteriori reasoning concerning God's existence. "It imposes upon us," he says, "an old argument in a new dress, and appeals to the agreement of two witnesses, the one with the credentials of pure reason, and the other with those of empiricism while, in fact, it is only the former who has changed his dress and voice."

The principle of the argument from the contingency of the world or its parts Kant states as follows: "If something exists, an absolutely necessary being must fikewise exist." One premise in the argument, namely, that contingent things exist, has its foundation in experience and therefore Kant admits that the reasoning "is not completely a priori or ontological." But in order to complete the proof, he thinks it must be shown that an ensrealissimum^ or most perfect being, is the same as an absolutely necessary being, in order for the obtained conclusion (a necessary being exists) to be translated into the conclusion desired {God exists).

That ''an ens realissimum must possess the additional attribute of absolute necessity"—or, in other words, that a perfect being is identical with one which necessarily exists— is, according to Kant, ''exactly what was maintained in the ontological argument." Hence he maintains that the argument from contingency is invalid because it cannot avoid including what is for Kant the invalid premise of the ontological argument as "the real ground of its disguised and illusory reasoning."

The controversy concerning the proof of

God's existence raises issues in logic, in metaphysics and physics, and in the theory of knowledge. Philosophers are opposed on the question whether a valid demonstration is possible.

Those who think it possible differ from one another on the way in which the proof should be constructed. Those who think it impossible do not always go to the opposite extreme of making the affirmation of God's existence a matter of faith; or of denying with the skeptic that we can have any light on the question at all. Pascal and Kant, for example, reject the theoretic arguments as inconclusive or untenable, but they do not think the problem is totally insoluble. They offer instead practical grounds or reasons for accepting God's existence.

"The metaphysical proofs of God are so re- mote from the reasoning of men," Pascal asserts, **and so compUcated, that they make little impression." He will "not undertake," he tells us in his Pensees, "to prove by natural reasons . . . the existence of God." In his view "there are only three kinds of persons: those who serve God, having found Him; others who are occupied in seeking Him, not having found Him; while the remainder live without seeking Him, and without having found Him." Since he regards the first as "reasonable and happy," the last as "foolish and unhappy," he addresses himself to the middle group whom he regards as "unhappy and reasonable."

He asks them to consider whether God is or is not. "Reason can decide nothing here," he says. If a choice is to be made by reason, it must be in the form of a wager. "Which will you choose then ? Let us see. Since you must choose, let us see which interests you least. You have two things to lose, the true and the good; and two things to stake, your reason and your will, your knowledge and your happiness; and your nature has two things to shun, error and misery. Your reason is no more shocked in choosing one rather than another, since you must of necessity choose. This is one point settled. But your happiness ? Let us weigh the gain and the loss in wagering that God is. Let us estimate these two chances. If you gain, you gain all, if you lose, you lose nothing. Wager then, without hesitation, that He is."

We are incapable of knowing either that God is or what God is, according to Pascal, because "if there is a God, He is infinitely incomprehensible" and "has no affinity to us." Nevertheless, proceeding on the practical level of the wager, reason may lead to Christian faith, yet not in such a way as to give adequate reasons for that belief, since Christians "profess a religion for which they cannot give a reason."

Kant also makes the affirmation of God a matter of faith, but for him it is a "purely rational faith, since pure reason ... is the sole source from which it springs." He defines a matter offaith as any object which cannot be known through the speculative use of reason, but which "must be thought a priori, either as consequences or as grounds, if pure practical reason is to be used as duty commands . . . Such is the summum bonum,'' he says, "which has to be realized in the world through free- dom . . . This effect which is commanded, together with the only conditions on which its possibility is conceivable by us, namely, the existence of God and the immortality of the soul, are matters offaith and are of all objects the only ones that can be so called."

For Kant, then, the existence of God is a "postulate of pure practical reason ... as the necessary condition of the possibility of the summum bonumT The moral law commands us to seek the highest good, with perfect happiness as its concomitant; but Kant thinks that "there is not the slightest ground in the moral law for a necessary connexion between morality and proportionate happiness in a being that belongs to the world as a part of it." Since man is a part of the world or nature, and dependent on it, "he cannot by his will be a cause of this nature, nor by his own power make it thoroughly harmonize, as far as his happiness is concerned, with his practical principles." The only possible solution hes in "the existence of a cause of all nature, distinct from nature itself, and containing the principle of this connexion, namely, of the exact harmony of happiness with moraUty." That is why, Kant explains, "it is morally necessary to assume the existence of God."

In the tradition of the great books, the com- mon ground shared by reason and faith is marked by the convergence of the contributions made by pagan, Jew, and Christian—and by poets, philosophers, and theologians— to the problem of God's existence and the understanding of the divine nature, the essence of God and His attributes.

Certain attributes of God, such as simplicity, immateriality, eternity, infinity, perfection, and glory, are usually regarded as so many different ways in which the human understanding apprehends the divine nature in itself. Other attributes, such as the divine causality, omnipotence, omnipresence, omniscience, love, justice, and mercy, are usually taken as ways of considering God's nature in relation to the world or to creatures. But to divide the attributes in this way, as is done in the Outline of Topics, is to make a division which cannot be fully justified except in terms of convenience for our understanding. God's will, for example, no less than God's intellect, can be considered in relation to Himself. God's intellect, no less than God's will, can have the world for its object. So, too, the divine goodness can be considered with reference to things, even as God's love can be considered with reference to Himself.

The difficulties we meet in classifying or ordering the attributes of God confirm the opinion of almost all theologians, that our understanding is inadequate to comprehend the essence of God. The fact that we employ a multiplicity of attributes to represent to ourselves what in itself is an absolute unity is another indication of the same point. The one attribute of simplicity would seem to deny us the right to name others, unless we take the plurality of attributes to signify something about man's understanding of God rather than a real complexity in the divine nature.

"He that will attribute to God," Hobbes writes, "nothing but what is warranted by natural reason, must either use such ncg.'ili\c attributes, as infinite, eternal, incomprehensible', or superlatives, as most high, most great, and the like; or indefinite, as good, just, holy, creator; and in such sense, as if he meant not to declare what He is Tfor that were to circumscribe Him within the limits of our fiuicy), but how much we admire Him, and how ready wc would be to obey Him; which is a sign of humility and of a will to honor Him as much as we can: for there is but one name to signify our conception of His nature, and that is, I AM: and but one name of His relation to us, and that is GOD; in which is contained Father, King, and Lord."

Even when they are discussed by the philosophers and reflected on by the poets, certain matters belong especially to theology because they constitute the dogmas of religion— articles of religious faith based solely on divine revelation, not discovered by human inquiry or speculation. That God created the world out of nothing and of His free will; that the world had a beginning and will have an end are, for example, dogmas of traditional Judaism and

Christianity. Philosophers may argue about the freedom or necessity of the creative act, or about the possibility of a beginning or an end to time and the world, but Jewish and Christian theologians find in Sacred Scripture the warrant for believing that which may not be thoroughly intelligible to reason, much less demonstrable by it. What is true of creation applies generally to the religious belief in divine providence and the positive commandments of God, to the gift of grace which God bestows upon men, and to the performance of miracles.

Judaism and Christianity share certain dogmas, though the degree to which Jewish and Christian theologians commonly understand what is apparently the same dogma varies from great similarity of interpretation (as in the case of creation and providence) to differences so great (as, for example, with regard to grace) that there may be some doubt whether the dogm^a in question is really the same. The line of demarcation between these faiths would seem to be more easily determined than their common ground; yet even here such matters as the resurrection of the body—even when we take differences of interpretation into account —may be regarded as a dogma shared by both.

The basic differences between Jewish and

Christian theology center, of course, on the issue between a unitarian and a trinitarian conception of the Godhead, with immediate consequences for disbeUef or beUef in Christ as the incarnate second person of the Trinity— the Word become flesh. This in turn has consequences for doctrines of salvation, and of the nature and mission of the church, its rituals and its sacraments. Even within Christianity, however, there have been and still are serious doctrinal differences on all these matters. The most fundamental heresies and schisms of early

Christianity concerned the understanding of the Trinity and the Incarnation. The great modern schism which divided Christendom arose from issues about the sacraments, the organization and practices of the church, and the conditions of salvation.

It would seem to be just as easy to say what beliefs are common to religious Jews and

Christians, as to articulate the faith common to all sects of Christianity. If all varieties of

Protestant doctrine are included, little remains in common except belief in the God of Abra- ham, Isaac, and Jacob— creator and provider, governor and judge, dispenser of rewards and punishments.

One book stands out from all the rest because, in our tradition, it is—as the use of

"Bible" for its proper name imphes the book about God and man. For those who have faith. Holy Writ or Sacred Scripture is the revealed Word of God. Its division into Old and New Testaments represents the historic relation of the Jewish and Christian religions.

Without prejudice to the issue between belief and unbelief, or between Jewish and ChrisI. The polytheistic conception of the supernatural order la. The nature and existence of the gods lb. The hierarchy of the gods: their relation to one another of men tian faith, we have attempted to organize the references to specifically religious doctrines concerning God and His creatures according to their origin and foundation in either the Old or in the New Testament, or in both. On certain points, as we have already seen, the line of distinction can be clearly drawn. For example, the doctrines of God's covenant with Israel, of the Chosen People, of the Temple and the Torah, are indisputably drawn from the Old Testament; and from the New Testament come such dogmas as those concerning Christ's divinity and humanity, the Virgin Birth, the Church as the mystical body of Christ, and the seven sacraments.

Under all these topics we have assembled passages from the Bible, interpretations of them by the theologians, and materials from the great books of poetry and history, philosophy and science. Since the criterion of relevance here is the reflection of sacred or religious doctrine in secular literature, the writings of pagan antiquity are necessarily excluded, though they are included in the more philosophical topics of theology, such as the existence and nature of one God.

Despite its length, this chapter by no means exhausts the discussion of God in the great books. The long list of Cross-References, which follows the seventy- three topics comprising the

Reference section of this chapter, indicates the various ways in which the idea of God occurs in the topics of other chapters. The reader will find that list useful not only as an indication of the topics in other chapters which elaborate on or extend the discussion of matters treated here, but also as a guide to other Introductions in v/hich he is likely to find the conception of God a relevant part of the examination of some other great idea.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The polytheistic conception of the supernatural order
 1a. The nature and existence of the
 gods
 1b. The hierarchy of the
 gods; their relation to one another
 1c. The intervention of the gods in the affairs of men: their judgment of the deserts
 of men

2. The existence of one God
2a The rcvektion of one God
.
 2a. The evidences and proofs of God's existence
 2b. Criticisms of the proofs of God's existence: agnosticism
 2c. The postulation of God: practical grounds for belief

3. Man's relation to God or the gods
 3a. The fear of God or the gods
 3b. The reproach or defiance of God or the gods
 3c. The love of God or the gods
 3d. Obedience to God or the gods
 x
 3e. The worship of God or the gods: prayer, propitiation, sacrifice
 3/.
 The imitation of God or the gods: the divine element in human nature; the
 deification of men ;
 man as the image of God

4. The divine nature in itself: the divine attributes
 4a. The identity of essence and existence in God: the necessity of a being whose
 essence involves its existence
 4& The unity and simplicity of the divine nature
 4b. The immateriality of God
 4c. The eternity and immutability of God
 4d. The infinity of God: the freedom of an infinite being
 4/. The perfection or goodness of God
 4e. The intellect of God
 4f. The happiness and glory of God

5. The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures
 5a. God as first and as exemplar cause: the relation of divine to natural causation
 5b. God as final cause: the motion of all things toward God ,
 5c. The power of God : the divine omnipotence
 5</.
 The immanence of God: the divine omnipresence
 5*. The transcendence of God: the divine aseity
 5d. God's knowledge: the divine omniscience; the divine ideas
 5e. God's will: divine choice
 5f. God's love: the diffusion of the divine goodness
 51.
 Divine justice and mercy: divine rewards and punishments

6. Man's knowledge of God
 6a. The names of God: the metaphorical and symbolic representations of God; the
 anthropomorphic conception of God
 6b. Natural knowledge : the use of analogies; the evidences of nature; the light of reason
 6c. Supernatural knowledge
 (1) God as teacher: inspiration and revelation
 (2) The light of faith
 (3) Mystical experience
 (4) The beatific vision

7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohammedan, and Christian conceptions of God
and His relation to the world and man
 7a. Creation
 7b. Providence
 7c. Divine government and law
 7</.
 Grace
 7d. Miracles
 7/1 The Book of Life
 7e. The resurrection of the body
 7f. The Last Judgment and the end of the world

8. Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God and His people
 8a. The Chosen People: few and gentile
 8b. God's Covenant with Israel: circumcision as sign of the Covenant
 8c. The Law: its observance as a condition of righteousness and blessedness
 8d. The Temple: the Ark of the Torah
 8e. The messianic hope

9. Specifically
Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature and human
destiny
 9a. The Trinity
 9b. The Incarnation:
 the God-man
 (1) The divinity of Christ
 (2) The humanity of Christ
 God
 (3) Mary, the Mother of
 9c. Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doctrines of original sin and salvation
 9d. The Church: the mystical body of Christ; the Apostolate
 9e. The sacraments ^99
 o/.
 The second coming of Christ

10. The denial of God or the gods, or of a supernatural order: the position of the atheist
The denial of God as completely transcending the world or nature: the position of
the pantheist

12. The denial of a revealed and providential God: the
position of the deist

13. God as a conception invented by man: its emotional basis

14. The worship of false gods: deification and idolatry

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other treatments of polytheism, and for
discussions of the gods in re

life, see ANGEL i ; FATE i ; MAN loa.

Man's duty and piety toward God or the gods, and for man's worship o

see DUTY 5, n; JUSTICE ub; RELIGION 2 2g.

Man's love of God and desire to be with God, see DESIRE jb', LOVE 53

VICE 8d( 3 ).

Matters relevant to proving God's existence and to other ways of aff

see BEING 73, 8f; CHANGE 14; METAPHYSICS 2d; NECESSITY AND CONTING

REASONING 53), 5X5); THEOLOGY 4c.

The problem of God's immanence and transcendence, and for the doctri

see NATURE 1b; ONE AND MANY 1b; WORLD 3-30.

Matters relevant to the consideration of God as a necessary being, s

AND CONTINGENCY 2a-2b.

The consideration of the unity and simplicity of God, see ONE AND MA

The consideration of God's eternity and immutability, see CHANGE i5c

The consideration of God's infinity and omnipresence, see INFINITY J

The consideration of God's perfection and goodness, see GOOD AND EVI

discussion of God in relation to Satan and to the problem of evil,

AND EVIL 1d, 2b; OPPOSITION 2d.

The consideration of God's intellect, his knowledge and wisdom, the

divine truth, see IDEA 1c; INFINITY yd; KNOWLEDGE 73; MIND loe-iof

1d.

The consideration of God's will and love, see LOVE 5c; WILL 4-43.

The consideration of God's beauty, happiness, and glory, see BEAUTY

HONOR 6-6b.

The consideration of the divine independence and God's free will, se

The consideration of divine causality in relation to nature, the ori

creation or emanation, and the eternity of the world, see ART 2c;

MATTER 3d; NATURE 3c(4); TIME 2c; WORLD 4-46(3); and for the speci

creation of life and of man, see EVOLUTION 43, 73; MAN 8b; SOUL 4C

The consideration of God's foreknowledge 3nd providence in relation

to the course of history, see CAUSE 7c; CHANCE 2b; FATE 4; HISTORY

PROPHECY 1b-1c; SIN 6a; WILL 7c.

The consideration of divine causality as expressed in divine Isw and

universe, see ASTRONOMY 6; CAUSE 7c; LAW 3-32); MONARCHY 2b; SIN

VICE 8c; WORLD 1c.

The consideration of divine csusality in the dispensation of grace a

miracles, see CAUSE 7d; LIBERTY 5c; NATURE 3c(4), 6b; RELIGION 1b(

AND VICE 8b, 8e; WILL 76(2).

The consideration of God's justice and mercy, and of divine rewards

see HAPPINESS 7c-7c(3); IMMORTALITY 5e-5f; JUSTICE n-iia; PUNISHME

6c-6e.

Other discussions of the doctrine of the Messiah, the Trinity, the I

coming of Christ, see MAN nc; ONE AND MANY 6b-6c; PROPHECY 4c-4d;

Other discussions of the doctrine of original sin 3nd irmn's redempt

HAPPINESS 73; SIN 3-36, 7; VIRTUE AND VICE 8a; WILL 70(1).

Other discussions of the Last Judgment and the end of the world, see

PROPHECY 4d; WORLD 8.

lation to fete and human f God or the gods, -52); VIRTUE AND irming God's
existence, ENCY 2a-2b; ne of pantheism, ee BEING 73; NECESSITY NY 6a. ; ETERNITY
3. -jd. L 2-23; and for the see ANGEL y-yb; GOOD divine ideas and the ; TRUTH
2d; WISDOM 73; HAPPINESS 7d; e LIBERTY 5d; WILL 4b. gin of the universe by CAUSE
7-73; CHANGE 14; al problem of the . to man's freedom 3nd 53; LIBERTY 53-5k in
the government of the i; VIRTUE AND nd the performance of 2); SIN 7; VIRTUE and
punishments, NT

5e; SIN ncarnation, and the second RELATION 2. ion and sslvstion, see
IMMORTALITY 50;

CHAPTER 29: GOD

For: Other discussions of the church as the Mystical Body of Christ, and of the
theory o

sacraments, sec RELIGION 2c, 33-30; SIGN AND SYMBOL 5c.

The general theory of the relation of reason and faith in man's knowledge of Go

KNOWLEDGE 6c(5); LOGIC 4f; METAPHYSICS 33; RELIGION 1b--1b(3); THEOLOGY 2, 40

VIRTUE AND VICE 8d(i); WISDOM 1c.

The distinction between man's natural and supernatural knowledge of God, and fo

discussion of mystical experience and the beatific vision,

NESS 7c(i); KNOWLEDGE 6c(5); RELIGION 6f; WILL jdk WISDOM 1c.

Other discussions of God's revelation of Himself, of Sacred Scripture, and of m

pretation of the Word of God, see EDUCATION 73; LANGUAGE 12; PROPHECY 3d; SIG

SYMBOL 5e.

Other discussions of the relation of creatures to God, and especially of the pr

resemblance between creatures and God, see MAN loa, na; RELATION 3; SAME AND

OTHER 6.

Other discussions of the names of God, and for the bearing thereon of the disti

the univocal, the equivocal, and the analogical, see IDEA 40(4); SAME AND OTH

30, 6; SIGN AND SYMBOL }d, ${.

Sciences peculiarly concerned with God, see ASTRONOMY 6; METAPHYS

THEOLOGY.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books of the Western World, but r

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into tw

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented m this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works c

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The

KANT. Prolegomena to Any Fut

*"

Religion With in the Lim

.

PLUTARCH. "Of Isis and Osiris, or the Ancient Re- HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL

hgion and Philosophy of Egypt," in Moralta VOL n, SECT in, CH 3 EPICTETUS. The
Manual On the Proofs of the E

.

AUGUSTINE. Answer to Sceptics J. MILL. "Theism," in Thre

S.

.De Genesi ad Litteram, BK XH W. JAMES. The Will to Believ

. On the Trinity Pragmatism, LECT in, v

.

. On Grace and Free Will . A Pluralistic

.The Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love

AQUINAS. On the Trinity of Boethius, QQ 1-3

.Summa Contra Gentiles, BK i; BK n, CH 1-28; HESIOD. Theogony

BK HI, CH 64-83, 146-162; BK iv, CH 1-49, 53-55 CLEANTHEs. Hymn to Zeus

.

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, QQ 2, 5-7, CICERO. De Natura Deorum (On

14, 23, 27-29; De Vmone Verbi Incarnatt Gods)

. On the Power of God, QQ 1-3, 5-7, 9-10 SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against th

. Summa Theologica, PART in, QQ 27-59 cernmg Gods, Do Gods Exist

.

Compendium of Theology PROCLUS. The Elements of The F. BACON. "Of Atheism," in
Essays "DioNvsius". On Mystical The DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy,
PART i, . On the Divine

13-25, 29-31, 40, 51, 54; PART in, 1-3 BOETHIUS. Contra Eutychen (A HOBBES.
Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Govern- Eutyches and Nestonus)

ment and Society, CH 15-18 . De Trinitate HUME. Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion The Consolation of Phi

.

. The Natural History of Religion ERIGENA. De Divistone Natura f the d, see -40;
r the N AND see EXPERIENCE 7; HAPPIan's interoblem of the nction between ER
33(3)- ICS 23, 2d, 33; elevant to the o groups: ited, consult Great Ideas. ure
Metaphysic, par 55 its of Reason Alone i, BK n, SECT in, CH i; xistence of God e
Essays on Religion e in Universe ** the Nature of the ?) e Physicists, BK i
(Conology, (E,L) ology Names Treatise Against (On the Trinity) losophy, e, BK i
SAAPIA GAON. The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,

TREATISE I-II, IV, VII ANSELM OF CANTERBURY. Monologium

.

Proslogium

Cur Deus Homo?

,

GAUNILON. In Behalf of the Fool

BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX, On the Love of God HUGH OF SAINT VICTOR. De Sacramentts f
UDAH HA-LEVI. Kttab al Khazart MAIMONIDES, The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i,

CH 46-47, 50-60, 73-76, PART II, CH I, 13-16, 22-

23, 25-30, 48; PART III, CH I3-l6, 20-21 Volsung Saga Nibelungenhed BONAVENTURA.
On the Reduction of the Arts to

Theology

Bretnloquium, PART i, iv-v

.

Itineranum Mentis in Deum (The Itinerary of

.

the Mind to God)

R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART vn

ALBERTUS MAGNUS. On Union with God DUNS SCOTUS. Tractatus de Pnmo Principio (A

Tract Concerning the First Principle), CH m-iv ECKHART. Sermons and Collations,
xv The Cloud of Unknowing ALBO. Boo{ of Principles (Sefer ha-Ikkarim), BK n
THOMAS A KEMPIS. The Imitation of Christ, BK in NICOLAS OF CUSA. The Vision of
God LUTHER. Trinity Sunday CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK i,
CH

1-14, 16-18; BK n, CH 4, 7-17

KNOX. An Answer to the Cavillations ofan Adversane

Respecting the Doctrine of Predestination

TERESA OF JESUS. The Way of Perfection

.

Book of the Foundations

. Interior Castle foHN OF THE CROSS. Spiritual Canticle

Dark Night of the Soul

.

The Living Flame of Love

. SUAREZ. Disputatwnes Metaphysicac, x (3), xi (3-

4), xn (i), xv (9), xix (3), xx-xxn,

xxin (9),

xxiv, xxvm-xxx, xxxi (14), XLVII (15)

BOEHME. The Aurora

. De Electione Gratiae (On the Election of Grace) HERBERT. The Temple BROWNE.
Religio Medici

BOSSUET. De la connaissance de Dieu et de soi-meme verse, VOL i, CH 4-5
kUDWORTH. The True Intellectual System ofthe UniUALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de
la verite .

XIV

Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, 11, vnFB'NBLON. A Demonstration ofthe
Existence and Attributes of God

kEIBNITZ. Discourse on Metaphysics, i-vn, xiv, xxxvi-xxxvn

. Philosophical Works, CH 34 (The Principles of

Nature and of Grace)

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

BK IV, CH 10, l8; APPENDIX, CH IO

.

Theodicy

.

Monadology, par 38-55

. BUTLER. The Analogy of Religion, PA*T i, CH 2-8 1 VOLTAIRE. "Faith," "Final
Causes," "God-Gods,

"Grace," "Power-Omnipotence," "Providence,*

"Theism," "Theist," "Polytheism," in A Philo sophical Dictionary

The Ignorant Philosopher, CH 26

.

The Sage and the Atheist

. LESSING. Nathan the Wise HERDER. God, Some Conversations PALEY. Natural
Theology, CH 23-26 BROWN. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, VOL n,
pp 134-152 SCHLEIERMACHER. The Christian Faith, par 50-56,

79-112,157-172 COMTE. System of Positive Polity, VOL iv, Theory ofthe

Future of Man, CH i LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK ix, CH 2, 4-5 WHEWELL. The Philosophy
of the Inductive Sciences,

VOL i, BK x, CH 5

On the Philosophy of Discovery, CH 31

. J. H. NEWMAN. An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent L. STEPHEN. An Agnostic's
Apology ROMANES. A Candid Examination of Theism T. H. GREEN. Prolegomena to
Ethics, BK i, CH 1-2 C. S PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 452-547 F.
THOMPSON. The Hound of Heaven BOSANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 8 WARD. The
Realm of Ends ROYCE. The Conception of God

The World and the Individual, SERIES n (10)

.

The Problem of Christianity, VOL u

. BRADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK n, CH 26

Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 15

. COOK. Zeus ture, PART i; PART II, CH I -3 GARRIGOU-LAGRANGE. God, His
Existence and NaOTTO. The Idea of the Holy BUBER. Hasidism McTAGGART. Some
Dogmas of Religion, CH 6-8 The Nature of Existence, CH 43

. FRAZER. The Golden Bough Man, God, and Immortality, PART HI

. EDDINGTON. Science and the Unseen World TENNANT. Philosophical Theology, VOL
n, CH 5-6 WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern World, CH 1 1 Process and Reality,
PART v, CH 2

. PENIDO. Le rdle de I* analogic en thSologie dogmatique BERGSON. Two Sources of
Morality and Religion, CH 4 MARITAIN. An Introduction to Philosophy, PART n (8)
. The Degrees of Knowledge, CH 4; CONCLUSION WEYL. The Open World, LECT i
LOVEJOY. The Great Chain of Being MANN. Joseph and His Brothers B. RUSSELL.
Religion and Science, CH 8 GILSON. Reason and Revelation in the Middle Ages .God
and Philosophy HARTSHORNE. Man's Vision of God ASCH. The Nazarenc . The Apostle

A. E. TAYLOR. Does God Exist? SANTAYANA. The Genteel Tradition at Bay, CH 2-3 .
The Idea of Christ in the Gospels

E. T. WHITTAKER. Space and Spirit

REFERENCES
============================================================

1. The polytheistic conception of the supernatural order

    [sem referências]

1a. The nature and existence of the gods

4 HOMER- Iltad, BK v [330-351] 33c-d; [814- 909] 38b-39a,c / Odyssey, BK VIII [266-366] 224d-225d
5 AESCHYLUS: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon [158-183] 53d-54a
5 SOPHOCLES : Oedipus at Colonus [607-614] 120a / Antigone [780-792] 138a
5 EURIPIDES : Helen [1137-1150] 309a / Bacchantef 340a-352a,c esp [272-327] 342b-c / Heracles Mad [815-874] 371d-372c, [1302-1353] 376c-d / Iphigenia Among the Taun [354-391] 414a-b; [57-575l *
5 ARISTOPHANES- Clouds 488a-506d esp [263- 428] 491a-493d, [813-833] 498c-d, [1462-1477] 506c / Birds 542a-563d esp [684-736] 551 b- 552a, [1492-1765] 560c-563d / Plutus [87-93] 630a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, lOa-lld; 31a-b; 48c; BK ii, 58b-60d; 75a-b; 79d-80c; 86c; BK III, 95a-c; BK rv, 134a; 140c-d
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 91c-d / Phaedrus, 124c-125b / Symposium, 152b; 153b-c; 159d-161a; 163a- 164c / Euthypkro, 193a-c / Apology, 204c- 205c; 209a-b / Republic, BK II, 313d-314d; BK ii-ni, 320c-328a / Timaeus, 451d-452b; 465d / Statesman, 587a-589c / Laws, BK VII, 730a d; BK x, 757d-769d; BK xir, 787d-788a
8 ARISTOTLE: Heavens, BK i, CH 3 [27o b i-26] 361c-362a; BK II, CH i 375b,d-376a / Metaphysics, BK III, CH 4 [1000*8-18] 518d-519a; BK xii, CH 8 [io74 b i-i4) 604d-605a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 8 [ii78 b 8-23) 433b-c / Rhetoric, BK II, CH 23 [i397 b i2-i4J 645d; [1398*15-17] 646c; [1398*27-28] 647b; [i399 b 5-S] 648a-b; BK HI, CH 18 [1419*6-13] 673d-674a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK 11 [646-651] 23b; [1090-1104] 29a; BK III [14-24] 30b; BK v [146-173] 63a-b; [306-310] 65a; [1161-1193] 76b-c; BK vi [56-78] 81a-b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; CH 12, 118d-119b; BK III, CH 13, 188b-189a; BK iv, CH 4, 227d-228a; CH n, 240d-241a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT n 258a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 140d / Coriolanus, 101d- 192b / Pelopidas, 239d-240c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 59d-60a
17 PLOTINUS : Third Ennead, TR v, CH 2-3 lOlc102c; CH 6 103b-104a; CH 8-10 105a-106b / Fifth Ennead, TR i, CH 7, 212b-c; TR vin, CH 3, 241a; CH 10 244c-245a / Sixth Ennead, TR VIM, CH i 342d-343c; CH 3 344a-b \b to \c (I. The polytheistic conception of the supernatural order, la. The nature and existence of the
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i-x 129a-322a,c passim, csp BK vi, CH 5-9 234d-241b
19 AQUINAS- Summa Theologica, PART i, Q n, A 3, REP i 49a-c; Q 63, A 7, ANS 331c-332b; Q 115, A 3, REP i 588c-589c
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART i, 79a-b; 79d-80a; 81a-b
32 MILTON- Chnsts Nativity la-7b / Lycidas 27b- 32a / Comus 33a-56b / Paradise Lost, BK i [331-621] 100b-107a/ Samson Agonistes [896- 902] 359a / Areopagitica, 384b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 15 116c-d
35 HUME. Human Understanding, SECT xi, DIV 103-110, 498b-501b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 152a-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 12b-c; 98a-c;345b- 347a; 461b-c; 584a; 600d-601a
41 GIBBON -.Decline and Fall ,226^227 a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 224a-b; 237a-239c; 244c-245a; 251b-257c; PART II, 263d-265c; 268b-271c; PART HI, 290b-292a

1b. The hierarchy of the gods: their relation to one another

4 HOMER: Iliad, BK i [493-611] 8a-9a,c; BK VIII [1-52] 51a-c; BK xv [184-217] 105d-106b; BK xvin [356-367] 133d; BK xix [74-144] 137d- 138c; BK xx [1-160] 142a-143d / Odyssey, BK i [11-79] 183a-d; BK v [1-147] 208a-209c; BK xm [125-158] 256b-d
5 AESCHYLUS. Suppliant Maidens [22-28] Ib; [524-600] 7c-8d; [882-894] 12b; [1008-1073] 13d-14a,c / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon [158-183] 53d-54a / Eumemdes 81a-91d
5 EURIPIDES: Heracles Mad [1302-1353] 376c-d / Iphigema Among the Taun [1234-1283] 422b-c
5 ARISTOPHANES: Peace [403-426] 530d / Bird; 542a-563d esp [684-736] 551b-552a, [1195- 1266] 557c~558b, [1494-1693] 560c-562d / Plutus [111-146] 630b-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 21d-22a; BK II, 58a-60d; 79d-80c; 82d-83b; BK iv, 134a; 155c< 156a; BK VIII > 269a
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 91c-d / Phaedrus, 124d-125a / Symposium, 152b; 153b-c; 159d-161a; 163a- 164c / Euthyphro, 193a-c / Timaeus, 452b / Laws, BK iv, 683b; BK VIII, 731d-732a
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK III, CH 4 [1000*8- i8]518d-519a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH446a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3, 108b; CH 14, 121a-b
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK i [1-156] 103a-107a; BK x [1-117] 302a-305a; {606-632] 318b*319b
14 PLUTARCH: Pelopidas, 239d-240b / Pompey, 525b
15 TACITUS : Histories, BK iv, 293b-294a
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 9, 71b-c / Third Ennead, TR v, CH 6 103b-104a / Fifth Ennead, TR i, CH 7, 212b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH645d-646a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 22, A 3, ANS 130d-131c; Q 63, A 7, ANS 331c-332b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xxxi 46a-47c
22 CHAUCER: TroilusandCressida, BK III, STANZA 1-7 54b-55b
27 SHAKESPEARE. Tempest, ACT iv, sc i [60-133] 542b-543a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20b-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK i [331-621] lOOb- 107a
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 435b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 12b-d; 59c-60a- 346b-d, 461b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 224a-b; 228a-b; 252a-253c; PART II, 262b-c

1c. The intervention of the gods in the affairs of men: their judgment of the deserts of men

4 HOMER: Iliad 3a-179d esp BK i [33-317] 3b- 6b, [493-611] 8a-9a,c, BJC iv [1-140] 24a-25b, BK v [311-519] 33b-35c, [711-909] 37b-39a,c, BK VIII 51a-56d, BK xiv-xv 98a-llld, BK xvi [431-461] 117a-b, [843-867] 121c-d, BK xvin [356-367] 133d, BK xix [74-144] 137d-138c, BK xx-xxi 142a-154d, BK xxiv [507-551] 176c- 177a / Odyssey 183a-322d esp BK II 188a-192d, BK ix [16-38] 229a-b, [67-8!] 229d-230a> BK xvin [124-150] 285b-c, BK xx 296a-300a,c, BK xxiv [438-548] 321c-322d
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [79-175] 2a- 3a; [1008-1073] 13d-14a,c / Persians [535-547] 20d; [738-842] 23a-24b / Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp [790-801] 35d-36a / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp [227-243] 42c, [436-502] 44c-45a, [564-891] 45d-49c / Agamemnon 52a- 69d esp [355-475] 55d-57b, [1200-1222] 64d- 65a, [1485-1488] 67d, [1559-1570] 68c / Choephoroe 70a-80d esp [269-314] 72d-73a, [1021- 1076] 80a-d / Eumemdes 81a-91d
5 SOPHOCLES. Oedipus the King 99a-113a,c esp [1297-1415] lllb-112b / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c esp [229-253] 116b-c, [939-1015] 142d esp [100-162] 132a-c, [1348-1353] 142d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [394-459] 146c-147a, [733-783] 149b-d/ Elcctra 156a-169a,c esp [516- 576] 160a-c / Trachiniae 170a-181a,c esp [94- 140] 171a-b, [247-306] 172b-d, [1275-1278] 181c / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c esp [169-200] 183d- 184a, [446-452] 186a, [1408-1471] 194d-195a,c
5 EURIPIDES: Rhesus 203a-211d esp [594-674] 208b-209a, [890-996] 210d-211d / Medea [1415-1419] 224c / Hippolytu$ 225a-236d esp \cto2a CHAPTER 29: GOD [1-55] 225a-c, [520-568] 229c-d, [1202-1466] 234d-236d / Akestis 237a-247a,c csp [1-76] 237a 238a, [1159-1163] 24 7c / Heracleidae [750-1055] 254d-257a,c / Suppliants 258a- 269a,c csp [113-283] 259a-260d, [1183-1234] 268c-269a,c / Trojan Women 270a-281a,c esp [1-97] 270a-271a, [914-1032] 277d-278d / Ion 282a-297d csp [1-81] 282a-d,[ 429-451] 286b-c, [1470-1622] 296a-297d / Helen 298a-314a,c esp [1-67] 298a-d, [7n-7i5]304d-305a, [1644- 1692] 313d-314a,c / Andromache [1225-1288] 325c-326a,c / Electra 327a-339a,c esp [1233- 1359] 338b-339a,c / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Hecuba [488-500] 357a / Heracles Mad 365a- 377d esp [1260-1390] 376a-377b / Phoenician Maidens 378a-393d esp [1-87] 378a-379a, [930-959] 386c, [1758-1763] 393d / Orestes 394a-410d esp [317-357] 397a-b, [1625-1693] 410b-d/ Iphigema Among the 70n411a-424d esp [1-41] 411a-b, [939-986] 419b-d, [1435- 1499] 424a-d / Iphigema at Aulis 425a-439d esp [1185-1 194] 435d-436a, [1526-1629] 439a-d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Peace 526a- 541 d esp [195-220] 528b-c / Thesmophonazusae [655-687] 607c- 608a / Plutus 629a-642d esp [86-92] 630a, [489-498] 634c-d, [653-747] 637a-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 7b-10a esp 9d-10a; 20b-22a; BK II, 54d-55a; 77a-b; 78d-79c; BK III, 98b-c; BK iv, 124d-125a; 144c-d; 150b- d; 151b-153d; 155b-c; 158d-159d esp 159d; BK vi, 190c-d; 198b-d; 199d-200a; 200c- 201a; 201d-202c; 205c-d; 211b-d; BK VII, 216d-217c esp 217c; 218b-220a; 224d-225a; 226d-227a; 239c-240d; 246b-247a; 250a-d; BK VIII, 262b-c; 266a-d; 269c-270a; 270c- 271a; 274b-c; 276b-d; 279d-280a; 283d; 284d-285a; BK ix, 302c; 308a-c, 309d-310a
6 TiiucYDiDEs:Peloponnesian War, BK i,355b-c; 378a-b; BK II, 407a-b; 415d-416c; BK v, 506b-c; BK vii, 559d-560a
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Symposium, 152d-153b / Apology, 21 Id / Republic, BK II, 313b-314d; 322a-324c; BK vi, 378a-b; BK x, 436c-437a; 437c^438c / Cntias 478a-485d / Statesman, 587a-589c / Laws, BK iv, 679a-b; 681b-683b; BK ix, 757a; BK x, 765d-768d; BK xn, 787d-788a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 9 [io99 b 9~i8] 345a; BK x, CH 8 [1179*23-33] 434a / Rhetoric, BK II, CH 5 [i383 b 3~8] 629d; CH 17 [1391*30- b 3] 638d
10 HIPPOCRATES: Sacred Disease, 154a-155d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [1090- 1104] 29a; BK v [1194-1240] 76d-77b; BK vi [43-79] 80d-81b; [379-422] 85b-d
12 EPICTETUS : Discourses, BK i, CH 12 118d-120b; CH 22, 128a-b; BK II, CH 8 146a-147c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK i, SECT 17 255d- 256d; BK II, SECT 3 257a-b; BK III, SECT n 262a-b; BK v, SECT 8 269d-270b; BK vi, SECT 40-46 277d-278d; BK x, SECT 5 296d; BK xn, SECT 5 307d<3Q8a
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid 103a-379a csp BK i [223-417] 109a-114b, [657-722] 121a-123a, BK II [162^ 200] 128b-129b, [588-633] 140b-142a, BK III [84-120] 149b-150b, BK iv [90-128] 169b^l70b, [173-278] 171b-174b, BK v [604-699] 202b- 205b, [779-871] 207b-21Qa, BK vi [42-101] 212a-213b, BK VII [286-600] 243b-252b, BK VIII [369-453] 269a-271a, [608-731] 275a-278b, BK ix [1-24] 279a-b, [77-122] 281a-282a, [638-663] 296a-297a, BK x [1-117] 302a- 305a, [606-688] 318b-321a, BK xi [532-596] 342b-344b, [762-867] 349a-351b, BK xn [134- 160] 357b-358a, [405-440] 365a-b, [766-886] 374b-377b
14 PLUTARCH Romulus, 27d-29c / Numa Pompihus, 50d-51c; 57b-58a/ Solon, 6S&/Camillus, 104b-d; 107b-d / Fabius, 142d-143b / Conolanus, 185b-186a; 188d-191b/ Anstides, 268a- 273c / Lysander, 365a-366a / Sulla, 370c- 371b / Lucullus, 404d-405a/ Alexander, 553b- 554b / Caesar, 602c-604d esp 604b-d / Phocton, 615 b-d / Cato the Younger, 639d / De- mosthenes, 698a-699a / Dion, 781d-782a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 59d-60a; BK vi, 91b-d; BK xvi, 179d; 183d / Histories, BK i, 189d-190a; BK II, 235a-c; BK iv, 284b; 292c- 294a
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 9, 71a / Third Ennead, TR ii-in 82c-97b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 22, A 3, ANS 130d-131c
21 DANTE: Dwine Comedy, HELL, xiv [43-72] 20a-b; PARADISE, iv [49-63] lllb; vm [1-12] 116d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK i, STANZA 30-35 5a-b; BK HI, STANZA 89 66a / Knight's Tale 174a-211a esp [1303-1333] 181b-182a, [2663-2699] 203b-204a, [3099-3108] 21 la / Merchant's Tale [10,093-230] 335a-337a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 81b-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: King Lear, ACT iv, sc i [33-39] 269d; [69-74] 270b; sc n [38-50] 270d-271a; sc vi [35-40] 273d; ACT v, sc in [166-174] 281a / Antony and Cleopatra, ACT n, sc i [1-8] 317d / Cymbehne, ACT v, sc iv [1-151] 481a- 482c; sc v [425-485] 488b-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 435a-436a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [8582-8590] 209a; [8610-8637] 209b-210a

2. The existence of one God

    [sem referências]

2a. The revelation of one God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 17:1-14 / Exodus,csp 3:6, 3:14-16; 6:1-8; 19:9-20:6 esp 20:1-6; 20:18-22 / Deuteronomy, 4:39; 5:1-10; 6 esp 6:4-5; 32:1-47 esp 32:36-43 / / Kings, 8:22-csp 8:23, 8:6o-(D) /// Kings, 8:22-62 esp 8:23, 8:60 / I Chronicles, 16:7-36 (D) IParahpomenon, 16.7-36 / Psalms, 18 csp 18:30-(D) Psalms f 17 csp 17:31-33 / Isaiah, 37:15- 20; 43-45 passim, esp 43:3, 43:10-13, 44-6, Ib to 2c (2. Tbt existence qf one God. 2a. The revelation oj one God.) 44:8, 44:24, 45:5-7, 45:18, 45:21-22; 48:(D) Isaias, 37:15-20; 43-45 passim, esp 43 :3, 43:10-13, 44:6, 44:8, 44:24, 45:5-7, 45.18, 45:21-22; 48:12 / Jeremiah, 10 esp 10:6, 10:10 (D) Jeremias, 10 esp 10:6, 10:10 / Daniel, 6 esp 6*20, 6 ^6-27 / Hosea, 13 '(D) Osee, 13:4 I Joel, 2:27 / Zechariah, 14:(D) Zacharias, 14:9 / Malachi, 2:10 (D) Malachias, 2:
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 12:13 (D) OT, Boof( of Wisdom, 12:13 / Ecdesiasticus, 1:8 (D) OT, Ecdesiasticus, 1:8 / II Maccabees, 1:24-29 (D) OT,IIMachabees,i'24~
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 23:9 / Mar\, 12:28- 34 / John, 1:1-2; 10:30; 17:3 / Acts, ij '.22-29 I Romans, 1:14-32 / / Corinthians, 8:4-6; 12:4-6 / Ephesians, 4:5-6 / / Timothy, 2:5-6; 4:10; 6:14-16 / I John, 5:5-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VII, par 16 48c- 49a / City of God, BK VIII, CH 11, 272c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 12 627c-d; CH633c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa 'Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 2, REP i lld-12c; Q 11, A 3, CONTRARY and REP i 49a-c; Q 13, A u, CONTRARY 73c-74b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 74, A 10, REP 3 136c-137c; Q 102, A 5, REP i 283c- 292c; PART II-H, Q i, A 5, REP 3383b-384b; A 8, ANS and REP 1 387a-388c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xxiv [115- 147] 143d-144a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 38a; 41b-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [267-318] 238a-239a; BK xn [106-151] 321b-322b; [223-248] 324a-b / Samson Agonistes [472-478] 350a
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 242-290 217b-225a,244b; 557 272b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 245d- 247b passim

2b. The evidences and proofs of God's existence

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Romans, 1:14-32 esp 1.18-
7 PLATO: Laws, BK x, 758b-765c
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VII, CH i 326a-327b; BK VIIi, CH 1-6 334a-346b; CH 10 [267 ft 2i- b 27J 354d-355d / Metaphysics, BK II, CH 2 512 b- 513b; BK ix, CH 8 575b-577a; BK xn, CH 6-601b-603b; CH 8 [io7433~ b i] 604d; CH
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK r, CH 6 110c-112b; CH 12 118d-120b; CH 16 121d-122d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 10 3b-c; BK v, par i 27a-b; BK VII, par 16-23 48c-50c; BK x, par 8-38 73b-81a; BK xi, par 6 90c-d / City of God, BK VIII, CH 6 268d-269c; BK x, CH 14 307c-308a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 8 626c 627a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q10c-14a esp A 3 12c-14a; Q 3, A 4, REP 2 16d- 17c; Q 8 34c-38c; Q 11, A 3 49a-c; Q 19, A 5, REP 3 112d-113c; Q 44, A i, REP i 238b-239a; Q 65 339a-343c esp A i, REP 3 339b-340b; Q 75, A i, REP i 378b-379c; Q 79, A 4, ANS 417a- 418c; Q 104, AA 1-2 534c-537b; PART i-n, Q i, A2610b-611b
22 CHAUCER: Knight's Tale [3003-3016] 209a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 78d-79a; 79d-80a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 38a; 41b-d
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv 51b-54b / Meditations, 71d-72a; in 81d-89a; v 93a-96a / Objections and Replies, 108a-115a,c passim; 120c-123a; 126b-127c; DBF vm 130d; POSTU- LATE v 131b-c; AXIOM i 131d; AXIOM ix-x 132b; pROPi-inl32b-133a; 137d-138a; 158b- 162a; 168d-169a; 211c-212a; 213a<d; 217d- 218a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, DEF i 355a; DBF 3,6 355b; PROP 7 356c; PROP n 358b-359b; PROP 14, DEMONST and COROL i 359d-360a; PROP 20, DEMONST and COROL i 363d-364a
32 MILTON: Psalm 136 8a-10a
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 242-244 217b-218a;256a;557272b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 369b-370a / Optics, BK III, 528b-529a; 542a- 543a passim
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xvn, SECT 17 172b-c; SECT 20, 173a; BK iv, CH x, SECTi-n349c-352a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, PREF, 404a; SECT 6-7 414b-c; SECT 25-33 417d-419a esp SECT 29-33 418c-419a; SECT 146-156 442a- 444d passim
35 HUME' Human Understanding, SECT xi 497b- 503c passim
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 187d-188a
42 KANT- Pure Reason, 143a-b [thesis]; 177b- 192d; 236b-240b esp 239a-240b / Practical Reason, 353a-3S4d / Judgement, 593c-d; 607d- 609b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 401a-b
46 HEGEL' Philosophy of Right, PART in, par94d-95a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [3431-3468] 84a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 196b-d; 217c-d

2c. Criticisms of the proofs of God's existence: agnosticism

19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A i, REP 2 10d-lld; A 2 lld-12c
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, HOa-llla; 112d-114c; 137d-138a
33 PASCAL: Pcnsfa, 242 217b<218a; 428 244b; 543 266a; 547-549 266b-267a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xi 497 b- 503c pa&iirt, esp DIV 115 503 b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 33a-d; 143a-145c; 152a- I53c; 177b-192d esp 177b-179c, 190a-192d; Utolb CHAPTER 29: GOD 200c-203d esp 202a-203b; 205a-208d esp 208a-b; 218d-223d; 234c-240b esp 239a-c; 241d-242c/ Practical Reason, 291a-292c;348b- 349b; 351b-352c//fl/ro. Metaphy sic of Morals, 384a,c / Judgement, 567b; 568c-570a; 588a- 613a,c esp 588a-593d, 596c-599b, 600d-603d, 607d-613a,c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par94d-95a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 593c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 120d-121c; BK x, 292d-293a; BK xi, 337a- 346a esp 341c-342c

2d. The postulation of God: practical grounds for belief

33 PASCAL: Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b esp 233, 214b-216a; 425-427 243b-244b; 430 245a- 247b; 436-438 251a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 236b-243c esp 239a-240b, 241d-242c / Practical Reason, 291a-292a; 314c-d; 344c-349b esp 345a-c; 351b-352c; 353a-354d / Science of Right, 432c-433a / Judgement, 588a-607c esp 593d<596c, 606d- 607c; 608c-611d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 120b-121c, BK xi, 313c-314a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 653a

3. Man's relation to God or the gods

    [sem referências]

3a. The fear of God or the gods

0 OLD TESTAMENT' Leviticus, 19:14,32; 25:17 / Deuteronomy, 6:1-2,12-15; 8:6; 10:12-13,20- 22; 31:10-13 /Joshua, 24:14-16 (D) josue, 24:14-16 / II Samuel, 2^-(D) II Kings, 23.3 / Nehemiah, 57-130) // Esdras, 5:7-13 /Job, 28:12-28 / Psalms, 2:10-12; 19:9; 25:12-14; 34 esp 34:9-11; 111:5,10; 112;(D) Psalms, 2:10-13; 18:10; 24:12-14; 33 esp 33:10-12; 110:5,10; ii i ; 127 / Proverbs, 1:7, 22-33; 2: 3~5? 8:13; 9 :i 5 I0:2 75 H -'26-27; 15:16,33; 16:6; 19:23; 22:4; 23:17-18; 24:21 / Ecclesiastes, 5:2-7; 8:10-13; 12:13-14 / Isaiah, 8.11-14; 11:1-5; 33:6 (D) Isaias, 8:11-14; 11:1-5; 33:6 / Jeremiah, 2:19; 5:19-31 (D) Jeremias, 2:19; 5:19-31 /Jonah, 1:1-16 (D) Jonas, i
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 1-2; 10:19-24; 15:1, 13; 19:20-24; 23:18-28; 25.10-12; 34.13-17; 40:26-27 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 1-2; 10*23- 27; 15:1,13; 19:18-21; 23:25-38; 25:13-16; 34:14-20; 40:26-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Acts, 10:34-35 / Colosstans, 3:22/7 Petei ', 2:17 / Revelation, 14.6-7 -(D) Apocalypse, 14:6-
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK v [282-312] 210d-211a; BK XVIH [124-150] 285b-c
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [419-500] 6a- 7b / Agamemnon [901-954] 61c-62b / Choephoroe [269-301] 72d-73a; [885-1076] 78d- 80d / Eumcmdcs [490-565] 86b-87a
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the A!w [863-910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus [158-291] 116c-d; [1448- 1485] 127b-c / Electra [221-250] 157d-158a
5 EURIPIDES: Orestes [251-316] 396c-397a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 78d; BKvi,211b-c; BK vu, 216d-218a; 218c-220a
6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK II, 400d- 401a
7 PLATO: Laws, BK ix, 757a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [62-158] ld-3a; BK HI [1-93] 30a-31b; [978-1023] 42d- 43b; BK v [1161-1240] 76b-77b; BK vi [43-95] 80d-81c
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK iv [259-282] 174a-b; BK VH [445-459] 248b-249a
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 123c-124a / Nicias, 435b-d / Crassus, 445d-446b / Alexander, 575a-576a / Phocion, 615b-d
15 TACITUS- Histories, BK iv, 292c-294a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK v, par 2 27b-c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 15 628b-c; BK II, CH 7 638d-639c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 42, A i, ANS 801c-802a; A 3, REP i 802d-803c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 67, A 4, REP 2 84d-85d; Q 68, A 4, REP 4 91b-92c; Q 69, A 3, REP 3 98c-100c; Q 99, A 6 250a-251a; PART II-H, Q 7, A 1 415c-416b; Q 19 465a-474d; Q 22, A 2 481d-482c; 0,25, A i, REP i 501b 502a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, in [100-136] 5a-b; PURGATORY, xm [103-129] 73a-b
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART i, 79d-80a; 82b-c; 90b-d
29 CERVANTES- Don Quixote, PART 11, 267b-c
32 MILFON: Paradise Lost, BK xn [561-566] 331b
33 PASCAL: Pensces, 262 221a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 155-444b-d
42 KANT: Fund. Pnn. Metaphysic of Morals, 278b-c / Science of Right, 432c-433a / Judgement, 502d-503a; 504b-505a
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 458a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 264c; PART in, 304b
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 688a-b

3b. The reproach or defiance of God or the gods

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 4:4-9; 1 1 .1-9 / Exodus, 5; 7-12; 14:10-15; 16:1-30 / Numbers, 11; 14; 20:1-13; 21:4-9 / Deuteronomy, 1:26-46; 9 / Joshua, 22 (D) Josue, 22 II Samuel* 12:14- 15; 15:22-23 (D) I Kings, 12:14-15; 15:22- 23 / II Kings, 19:22-23 (D) IV Kings, 19:22- 23 / Job f Psalms, 2; 5:8-10; 22:1-2; 44; 74; 79:12; 107:10-12 (D) Psalms, 2; 5:9-11; 21:2-3; 43; 73; 78:12; 106:10-12 / Proverbs, 14:31; 17:5 / Isaiah, 1:2-4; 3:8-9; 30-31; 36- 37; 45:9; 48:1-9; 59:1-15; 6 3'-i; 65:2-7- (D) Isaias, 1:2-4; 3:8*9; 30-31; 36-37; 45:9; 48:1-9; 59:1-15; 63 :io; 65:2-7 /Jeremiah passim (D) Jeremias passim / Lamentations, Sbtolc (3. Mtn't relation to God or fa gods. 3*. The reproach or defiance of God or the gods.) 1:18- 3:42 / Ezelyel, 2:3; 5:5-8; 12-15; 17; 20; 22-23; 28 (Z>) Ezechicl, 2:3; 5:5-8; 12-15; 17, 20; 22-23; 28 / Hosea(D) Osce / Jonah (D) Jonas
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 5; 7:20-8:27 (D) OT, Judith, 5; 7:11-8:27 / Wisdom of Solomon, 12:12 (D) OT, Boo^of Wisdom, 12:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 27:46 / A/ar^, 15:/ ^r/y, 9:1-6; 11:17 / Romans, 8:7; 9:19-21 / /flm,
4 HOMER: 7/W, BK i [1-120] 3a-4b; [428-487] 7c-8a; BK v [431-549] 34c-35d; BK xxi [114- 148] 149b-c; [200-382] 150b-152a / Odyssey, BK ix [475-5351 234a-d
5 AESCHYLUS.* Suppliant Maidens [151-175] 2d- 3a; [882-894] 12b / Persians [679-842] 22a- 24b / Agamemnon [901-954] 61c-62b; [1200- 1222] 64d-65a
5 SOPHOCLES- Oedipus the King [864-910] 107b-c / Antigone [988-1090] 139c-140b / 143a- 155a,c csp [1-133] 143a-144c, [430-459] 146d- 147a, [748-783] 149c-d / Electra [516-576] 160a-c / Trachiniae [1264-1278] 181c / Philoctetes [446-452] 186a
5 EURIPIDES: Hippolytus 225a-236d csp [1-55] 225a-c / Heracleidae 248a-257a,c / Suppliants 258a-269a,c csp [113-283] 259b-260d / Trojan Women [1-98] 270a-271a / Ion 282a-297d csp [429-451] 286b-c / Helen [255-305] 300c-d / Andromache [994-1045] 323c-324a / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Heracles Mad 365a-377d csp [339-347] 368a, [750-760] 371c, [1258-1347] 376a-d / Iphigema Among the Tauri [570-575] 416a
5 ARISTOPHANES: Clouds [263-428] 491a-493d; [813-833] 498c-d; [1462-1477] 506c / Birds 542a-563d / Thesmophoriazusae [655-687] 607c-608a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 20d-22a; 39a-b; BK ii, 77a-b; BK III, 95a-c; BK iv, 140c-d; 151b- 152a; BK VII, 222c-d; 226d-227a; BK VIII, 283d , 6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK II, 400d- 401a
7 PLATO: Laws, BK ix, 757a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 6 110c-112b; CH 12 118d 120b; CH 27, 132c 133a; BK III, CH 22,195c-d;198a-b
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK i [i-n] 103a; BK xn [500- 508] 367b
14 PLUTARCH: Agesilaus, 483a-b / Dion, 801 be
15 TACITUS . Histories, BK iv, 292c-294a
20 AQUINAS* Summa Theologica, PART x-n, Q 78, A i, CONTRARY 152b-153b; Q 84, A 2, ANS and REP 2 175b-176a; PART II-H, QQ 13-14 444b- 452a; PART HI, Q 64, A 6, ANS 874d-875d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, in [100-136] 5a-b; xi [16-90] 15b-16a; xiv [1-72] 19c-20b; xxv {1-15] 36b-c; xxxi [82-96] 46d-47a
22 CHAUCER: KniMs Tale [1303-1335) 18Ib- 182a / Monffs Tale [14,149-188] 437a-b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, lOb-llb
27 SHAKESPEARE: King Lear, ACT iv, sc i [30-37] 269d
32 MILTON: Samson Agonistes [667-709] 354a- 355a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dicl(, 30a-34a; 123a-b; 370b-371b, 380a-381a
52 DOSTOEVSKY- Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 121d-127b passim

3c. The love of God or the gods

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 20:5-6 / Deuteronomy, 6:4-9; 7 : 9~ I][ 5 10:12-11:1; 11:13-25; 13:1-3; 19:9; 30:6,15-20 / Joshua, 22:5; 23 'ii (D) Josue, 22:5; 23:11 / Psalms, 5:11-12; i8:i-2; 31:23; 42:1-2; 63; 97:10; 116:1; 119:132; 122:6; 145:20 (D) Psalms, 5:12-13; 17:2-3; 30:24; 41:2-3; 62; 96:10; 114:1; 118:132; 121 :6; 144-20 / Isaiah, 26:8-9; 56:6-7 (D) Isaias, 26:8-9; 56:6-7 / Jeremiah, 2:1-(D) Jeremias, 2:1-
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 13:12-18 (D) OT, Tobias, 13:14-23 / Ecclesiasticus, 2:15-16; 13 :i4; 25 :i i- 12 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 2:18-19; 'S' 18 * 25:14-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 10:37-38; 22:35-/ Mark i 2:28 ~33 / *-fc 7 : 37-475 10.25-27, 11:42 /John, 5:40-42; 8:42; 14:15-31; 16:26- 27; 17:23-26; 21 115-17 / Acts, 20:22-24; 21:7- 15 / Romans, 5:5; 8:28-39 / ^ Corinthians, 2:9, 8*1-3; I 3 :I ~ I 4' I I 16:14,22 / // Corinthians, 5:14-15 / Ephesians, 1:3-6; 3:14-21; 6:24 / // Thessalomans, 3 15 / / Timothy, i -5 / // Timothy, i 13-1 4-, y 1-5 / James, i 12; 2 :5/ / Peter, 1:7-/ I John, 2.5,15-17; 3:17; 4:7-53 / 11 John, 6 / Jude, 20-
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK xm [217-351] 257b- 258c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK ii, CH 16, 158b-d; CH 22, 168d; BK iv, CH i, 219a-b 12AuRELius: Meditations, BK ii, SECT 13 258c
16 COPERNICUS: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, BK i, 510a-b
16 KEPLER: Harmonies of the World, 1050b; 1080a-b
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions^ BK i, par 5-6 2b-c; par 28 7d-8a; BK II,par 15 12b-c; BK III, par17a-b; BK iv, par 15-19 23a-24b; BK v, par 1-27a-c; BK VII, par 6 44d-45a; par 23 50b-c; BK VIH, par 9 55a-c; BK ix, par 3 62a-b; BK x, par 8-40 73b-81c; BK xi, par 1-4 89b-90b; BK xn, par 10 lOlc; par 23 104b-c / City of God, BK x, CH i 298b,d-299d; CH 3 300b-301a; BK xiv, CH 28 397a-d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 3-5 625b-626a; CH 10 627b; CH 15 628b-c; CH 22-23 629b-630c; CH 26-27 631b-d; CH 29- 30 632a 633b; CH 33 633d-634b; CH 35 634c-d; CH 37-40 635b-636a,c; BK II, CH 7 638d-639c; CH 38, 654c; CH 41 656a-c; BK III, CH 10-661c-666d passim CHAPTER 29: GOD
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART i, Q 3, A i, HEP 5 14b-15b; Q 8, A 3, ANS and RHP 4 36b- 37c; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; Q 82, A 3, ANS and REP 3 433c-434c? Q 95, A 4, ANS 509b-510a; PART I-H, Q i, A 8 615a-c; Q 2, A i, REP 3 615d- 616c; Q 26, A 3, REP 4 735c-736b; Q 28, A 2, CONTRARY 741a-742a; A 4, ANS 742d-743c; Q 35, A 5, REP i 775d-777a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 65, A 5, ANS and REP i 74c-75a; Q 66, A 6 80c-81b; Q 68, A 2, ANS 89c-90c; A 8, REP 2 95c-96c; Q 69, A 4, ANS lOOc-lOlc; Q 70, A 3, ANS 103 b- 104d; Q 73, A 4, REP 3 122b-123a; A 5, ANS 123a-d; Q 77, A 4, CONTRARY and REP 1 148b- 149a; Q 78, A 2, REP i 153b-154a; Q 84, A i, REP i 174b-175a; Q 88, A 2, REP i 194b-195b; A 6, REP 2 198a-d; Q 89, A i, REP 3 199a-c; A 2, ANS 199c-200d; Q 99, A i, REP 2 245c-246b; Q 100, A 6, REP i 257c-258c; A 10 262b-263b; A u, REP i 263c-264d; Q 102, A i, REP i 270c- 271b; Q 109, A3340c-341b; PARTII-II, Q i, AI, REP 3 380b-381a; A 3, REP i 381d-382c; Q 3, A 2, REP i 401a-d; Q 7, A 2 416b-d; Q 19, A 4, REP 3 467c-468b; A 12, ANS 473d-474d; Q 22, A 2, ANS 481d-482c; QQ 23-27 482c-527b; Q 1 80, A i, ANS and REP 2 607d-608c; A 2, REP i 608c-609c; A 7, ANS 614d-616a; Q 182, A 2, ANS 621d-623a; A 4, REP i 623d-624d; Q 184, A 2, ANS 629d-630d; A 3, ANS and REP 3 630d- 632c; A 7, REP 2 636a-637a; Q 185, A 2, REP i 641c-643a; A 4, ANS 644a-645c; Q 186, A 2, REP 2 651d-652d; A 7, REP 2 658d-660a; Q 187, A 2, ANS 665a-666a; Q 188, A 2, ANS 675d-677a
21 DANTE* Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xv [40- 81] 75d-76a; xvn feij-xvin [75] 79b-80c; PARADISE, i [94-142] 107b-d; in 109b-110c; v [1-12] 112a-b; vi [112-126] 114d-115a; xx [94- 138] 137d-138a; xxi [52-102] 138d-139b; xxvi , [1-81] 145d-146c; XXXH [i39]-xxxni [145] 156a-157d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 263-267 154b-155a / Second Nun's Tale 463b- 471 b / Parson's Tale, par 6, 497a; par509a-b; par 31 517b-518b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART HI, 240d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 210d-211a
27 SHAKESPEARE: Henry VIII, ACT HI, sc n [435- 457l573c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a
31 DESCARTES : Meditations, HI, 88d-89a / Objections and Replies, 227b-228a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART v, PROP 14-16 456b-c; PROP i8-ao 456d-458a; PROP 32-34 4$0b-d; PROP 36-37 461a-c ,
32 MILTON: Paradise Last, BK xn [561-566] 331 b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 463 255a; 468 255b-256a; 471 256a-b; 476 256b-257a; 479 257b; 482- 483 2S8a-t>; 485 258b; 487-489 258b-259a; .49^ 259a; 544 266a; 821 331b-332a
35 JLocKE: Hunwn Understanding, p& n, CH vn, SECT 5-6 132c-d 42 K\m:Pund. Prin. Mctaphy 'sic of 'Morals, 278b- 279d / Practical Reason, 321b-329a csp 326b- 327a
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 458a-b
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [1178-1185] 29b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dicf(, 318b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xv, 631a-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov^ BK III, 54a-b; BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK vi, I64d- 165a; BK xi, 313c-314d

3d. Obedience to God or the gods

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 2:15-17; 3; 22:1-18 csp 22:18; 26:4-5 / Exodus, 3 .-4-4 .-17; 24:1-8 / Deuteronomy, 4-11 passim; 27-30 passim / Joshua, 22; 24:1-28 (D) Josue, 22; 24:1-28 / / Samuel, 12:14-15; 15 csp 15:22-23 (D) / Kings, 12:14-15; 15 csp 15:22-23 / / Kings, 8:54-62 (D) HI Kings, 8:54-62 / / Chronicles, 28:9 (D) / Parahpomenon, 28:9 / Ezra, 7:(D) / Esdras, 7:23 / Job / Ecclesiastes, 5:1; 12:13 (D) Ecclesiastcs, 4:17; 12:13 / Isaiah, 1:19-20 (D) Isaias, 1:19-20 /Jeremiah passim, csp 3, 7, n, 35, 42-44 (D) Jeremias passim, csp 3, 7, 11, 35, 42-44 / Daniel, 7:27 / Micah, 6:8-(D) Micheas, 6:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 6 :io; 7:21; 12:46-50; 26:36-39 / Mar^, 14:32-36 / Luke, 22:40-45 / John, 5:30; i8:io-|i / Acts, 5 129-32; 21:8-1 5 / Romans, 5:19/7! Corinthians, 10:5-6 / Philippians, 2:1-18 csp 2:7-8 / // Thessahmans, 1:7-9 / Hebrews, 5:8-9; 11:
4 HOMER: Iliad, BK i [188-222] 5a-b
5 AESCHYLUS : Suppliant Maidens [410-434] 6a-b / Choephoroe [269-301) 72d-73a; [885-1076] 78d-80d / Eumenides [490-565] 86b-87a
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [863-910] 107b-c / Antigone 131a-142d esp [374-378] 134b, [443- 465] 134d-135a, [1351-1353] 142d / Ajax [666- 676} 148d / Electro 156a-169a,c esp [23-37] 156b
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [513-563] 262d-263b / Helen [1644-1692] 313d-314a,c / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [67-122] 411d-412b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK r, 39c-d; BK II, 55a; BK iv, 124d-125a; 126d427a; ISOb-d; 151b- 152a; BK vi, 201d-202c; BK VII, 218c-220a; BK ix, 308a-c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BKI, 355b-c; 382c-d
7 PLATO: Apology, 206b*d / Laws, BK iv, 681 b- 683b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK u, CH 16-17, 158a- 161a; BK III, CH 24, 204c-d; 208d-210a; BK iv, CH i 213a-223d passim, esp 218b-219a; CH224b-d; CH 7, 234b; CH 12, 242d-243c
12 AuRELiusi Meditations, BK III, SECT 13 262c; BK v, SECT 27 272d; BK vi, SECT'IO 274b-c; BK ix, SECT i 291a-c , 13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK ui (84-120] 149b-150b; BK iv [25^-282] 174-b; b5^3^i] 176b-177a
15 TACITUS: Histor^/, *K^ iv, 292c-294a (3. Man's relation to God or the gods. *>d. Obedience to God or the gods.)
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK III, par 15 17a-b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 15 628b-c
19 AQUINAS' Summa Theologica, PART i-u, Q 19, A 5, REP 2 705d-707a ; A 6, ANS and REP 2 707a- 708a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 88, A i, REP 2 193a-194b; Q 96, A 4 233a-d; Q 97, A 3, REP i 237b-238b; PART II-ii, Q 2, A 9, ANS 398c-399b; Q 4, A 7, REP 3 407d~409a; Q 33, A 7, REP 5 556a-557d; Q 186, A 7, REP658d-660a; PART m, Q 7, A 3, REP 2 747b-748a
21 DANTE: Dwme Comedy, PARADISE, m [i]-v {87] 109b-113a; vn [19-120] 115b-116b
22 CHAUCER: Tale of Man of Law [5240-5253] 249b / Clerks Tale 296a-318a csp [9018-9038] 316b-317a / Tale of Melibeus, par 17 407b- 408a / Parson's Tale } par 24 511a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 82b-d; PART 11, 137b-138b; 154b-155c; 159d-160a, 162a; PART HI, 199b-204a; 240a-241a; 244d-246a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 213a-215a; 233a-234a; 238c-239c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard III, ACT n, sc n [77- 95] 120b-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost 93a-333a esp BK iv [411-439] 161b-162a, [720-749] 168a-b, BK v [506-543] 186a-187a, BK vi [164-188] 199b- 200a, BK VII [449-518] 227a-228b, BK VIII [311-333] 239a-b, [630-643] 246a, BK ix [366- 375] 255b, [647-654] 261b, BK x [IOI}]~BK xi [44] 296b-300a, BK xi [133-161] 302a-b, BK xii [386-410] 327b-328a, [561-566] 331b / Samson Agonistes [373-419] 347b-348b / Areopagitica, 394b-395b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 460 254b; 476 256b-257a; 482 258a; 489,491 259a; 531 264b; 539 265b
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 15d-16a; 16c / Civil Government, CH n, SECT 6 26b-c / Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 5-6 105a-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 2a-b; BK xii,85d-86a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 259b-260a
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 32lb-329a; 345c-d / Intro. Metaphystc of Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / Judgement, 504b-505a; 509a-c; 593a<d; 611a-c > 43 MILL: Liberty, 296b-d
44 Bosw ELL: Johnson, 394a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dtc^ 30a-36b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 64c- 67a; BK v, 1 2 7b-137c passim; BK VII, 177b-180a
54 FREUD: General Introduction, 582a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 776b

3e. The worship of God or the gods: prayer, propitiation, sacrifice

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 4:3-7; 15:7-21; 22:1- t8 / Exodus passim, esp 12, 13:11-16, 15:1-21, 33:18-19 / Leviticus passim, esp 2, 4-7, 16-17, 22:1-24:9, 27:1-34 / Numbers, 5-8; 15; 18-19; 28-30 / Deuteronomy, 10-12; 14:22-17:1 / Joshua, 22:10-34 (D) Josue, 22:10-34 /Samuel, 15 esp 15:22-23 (D) / Kings, 15 esp 15:22-23 /lKmgs,%; 18:21-39 (D) III Kings, 8; 18:21-39 / 77 Chronicles, 5-8; 29-31 (D) II Parahpomenon, 5-8; 29-31 / Nehemiah, 10:29- 39 (D) II Esdras, 10:29-39 / Psalms / Proverbs, 15:8; 21:3 / Isaiah, 1:11-20; 58 (D) Isaias, 1:11-20; 58 / Lamentations, 5 / Ezefyel, 43:18-27; 45:13-46:24 (D) Ezechiel, 43:18- 27; 45:13-46:24 / Hosea, 6 esp 6:6; 8 (D) Osee, 6 esp 6-6; 8 / Joel, 2:12-18 / Amos, 4 / Micah, 6:6-8 (D) Micheas, 6:6-8 / Malachi, 1:6-14 (D) Malachias, 1:6-
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 13 (D) OT, Tobias, 13 / Rest of Esther, 13:12-14 (D) OT, Esther, 13:12-14 / Ecclesiasticus, 18:22-23; 35 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18-22-23;
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 6-1-18; 9:9-13; 26:36-44 / Mar^, 9*14-29 esp 9:29; 12:32-(D) Mar{, 9*13-28 esp 9:28; 12:32-33 / Lu^e, 11:1-13; 18*1-14 /John, 17 / Colossians, 4:2-4 / I Thessalonians, 5:17 / Hebrews, 10:1- 22; 13:15-16 / Revelation, 5 (D) Apocalypse,
4 HOMER. Iliad, BK i [428-487] 7c-8a; BK II [394-431] 14a-b; BK ix [485-526] 62a-b / Odyssey, BK III [1-68] 193a-d
5 AESCHYLUS' Suppliant Maidens [1-175] la-3a; [525-600] 7c-8d; [1018-1073] 13d-14a,c / Seven Against Thebes [80-320] 28a-30d
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [151-215] lOOc- lOla; [863-910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus [465-509] 118b-d / Electra [516-576] 160a-c / Philoctetes [1440-1444] 195a,c
5 EURIPIDES: Trojan Women [1277-1283] 280d / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c esp [200-209] 341c, [337-433] 342c-343b / Iphigenta at Auhs 425a- 439d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Peace [173-195] 528a; [922- 1126] 536c-539a / Birds 542a-563d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 6a; lOa-lld; 20d- 22a; 31a-c; 40d-41b; 48c; BK II, 57b-60a; 79a-c; 86c; BK HI, 95a-c; BK iv, 126d-127a; 134a; 140c-d; 142b-c; 155c-156a; 156d-157a; BK v, 175d-176a; BK vi, 196d-197a; 199d- 200a; 200d; 205c-d; BK VII, 226c; 235a; 248b-c; 250b-d; BK vra, 267a; 270b-c; 282b-c 6THUCYDIDES- Peloponnesian War, BK II, 407a-b> BK vi, 517d-518a
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 127c-128a / Symposium, 156d-157a / Euthyphro, 197d-198c / Phaedo, 251d / Republic, BK i, 295a-d; 297a-b; BK II, 313d-314d; BK iv, 345d-346a / Timaeus, 447a / Laws, BK iv, 683a-b; BK VII, 721a-c; BK VIII, 731d-732d; BK x, 768d-769c; BK xn, 791d-792a
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK i, CH n [105*2-6] 148c / Heavens, BK i, CH i (268*12-15] 359a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, erf 12 347a-b; BK iv, CH 2 [na2 b i8-23] 369c; BK VIII, CH 9 [1160*19- 29] 412b-c / Politics, BK vii, CH 9 [1329*26-34] 533d CHAPTER 29: GOD
1 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [1-43] " la-d; [80-101] 2a-b; BK II [589-660] 22c-23b; BK III [41-58] 30c-d; BK v [1194-1240] 76d- 77b;BK vi [68-79] 81a-b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 16 121d- 122d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK v, SECT 7 269d; BK ix, SECT 40 295b; BK xn, SECT 14 308c
13 VIRGIL: Eclogues, v [62-80] 18a-b / Aeneid 103a-379a passim, esp BK II [108-125] 127a-b, BK III [84-120] 149b-150b, [543-550] 162a, BK iv [54-67] 168b-169a, [198-221] 172b-173a, BK vi [42-76] 212a-213a, BK VIII [558-584] 274a-b, BK ix [621-631] 295b-296a, BK xi [783-798] 349b
14 PLUTARCH: Theseus la-15a,c passim / Numa Pompihus 49a-61d esp 56d-57b / Camillus, 104b-d; 107b-d / Fabius, 142d-143b / Coriolanus, 185b-186a / Aemihus Paulus, 214b-d / Pelopidas, 239d-240c / Marcellus, 247c-249d / Lucullus, 404d-405a / Agesilaus, 483a-b / Alexander, 541a-d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK HI, 59d-60c; BK XH, 112d-113a / Histories, BK II, 214d-215a; BK iv, 282d-283b; 292c-294a; BK v, 296a
16 KEPLER- Harmonies of the World, 1009a; lOlla; 1050b; 1080a-b; 1085b
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par i la-b; BK xni, par i llOd-llla / City of God, BK vii, CH 27-31 259c-262a; BK x 298b,d-322a,c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 6 626a-b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 30, A i, REP i 749a-d
20 AQUINAS Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 99, A 3 247a-248a; A 4, REP 2 248a-d; QQ 101-265d-304a; PART II-H, Q 30, A 4, REP i 536a-d; Q 32, A 2, ANS 541a-542c; QQ 179-189 606a- v 700d esp Q 181, A 3, REP 3 618c-619b, Q 182, A 2, REP 3 621d-623a, Q 186, A 4, ANS 655c- 656b, A 5, REP 5 656c-657d, A 6, REP 2 657d- 658d, Q 1 88, A i, REP i 674d-675d; PART HI, QQ 21-22 823d-833a; Q 25 839c-845a; Q 60, A 5, ANS 850b-851b; Q 62, A 5, ANS 862b-863a; Q 63, A 2, ANS 865c-866c; A 4, REP 1,3 867d- 868b; A 5, ANS 868c-869b; A 6, ANS, 869b- 870b; PART in SUPPL, QQ 71-72 900d-922b; Q 99, A 3, REP 2 1081d-1083a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, in [133- 145] 57b-c; iv [127-135] 58d; vi [25-48] 61a-b; xi [1-36] 68d-69a; PARADISE, v [13-84] 112b- 113a; xiv [67-108] 127c-128a; xx [31-138] 137a-138a passim; xxxin [1-45] 156b-c
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 263-267 154b-155a / Knight's Tale [2209-2437] 196b-200a / Summoner's Tale [7455-7529] 288a-289a / Franklin's Tale [11,176-206] 353b- 354a; [11,340-398] 356b-357a / Prioress's Tale 391a-395b / Parson's Tale, par 93-94 547b- 548a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 80c; 81c-d; PART II, 154d-155a; 161b-163d; PART in, 182d-183b; PART iv, 261a c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK II, 117c-118a; BK iv, 265b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays* 91b-c; 152b-156d; 246b-d; 300c-d
26 SHAKESPEARE: Henry V, ACT iv, sc vni [96- 131] 561c-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT in, sc in [36-96] 53d-54b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, APPENDIX, 369b 371d passim
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK m [185-197] 139b; BK iv [720-735] 168a-b; BK v [136-208] 178a- 179b; BK vii [550-640] 229a-231a; BK x [1086]- BK xi [71] 298a-300b / Arcopagitica, 402a-b
33 PASCAL: Pcnstcs, 431 247b; 476 256b-257a; 487-489 258b-259a; 491 259a; 499 260b;261a; 513-514 262a-263a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 3b-5c; lOc-JSa
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT v, DIV 41, 468a-b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 187d-188a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxv, 209a-b; 209d-210a; 211a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 437a-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 59c-60a; 81d-82a; 93b-c; 98a; 121a-b; 180d-182c esp 181b-c; 184d-185d; 208a-211a passim, esp 209a; 327d- 328b; 349c-350b; 356d-358a; 457b,d-467d passim; 547a-b; 583d-584b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, llOb-c; 195a-198d; 207a-208c; 226a-228a, 232c-233c
42 KANT:7tt^(?mtfn/,504b-505a;509a-c
43 MILL. Liberty, 307d-309a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 52c-53a; 394a; 481d-482d
46 HEGFL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 224a- 225a; 227c-228a; 234d-235c; 245b-247b; 253c-254b; PART HI, 291d-292b; PART iv, 322a-c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [3587-3619] 87b-88a; PART ii [8568-8603] 208b-209b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dick, 30a-36b; 39a-b; 130b-131a; 370b-371b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK III, 122b-c; BK vii, 281d-282a; BK VIIi, 323b; BK ix, 373b- 377b; BK x, 435c<436c; BK xn, 544b-545a; 553c-554a; BK xin, 585b-d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK vi, 164d-165a; 167b-c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 203a-204b

3f. The imitation of God or the gods: the divine element in human nature; the deification of men; man as the image of God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:26-27; 3 esp 3:4-5, 3:22; 5:1-2; 9:6 / Exodus, 7:1 / Leviticus, 11:44-45; 19:2; 20:7-87 Psalms, 82:6-7 (D) Psalms, 81:6-7 / ^aiah, 40:10-31; 42:8; .(D) Isaias, 40:10-31; 42:8; 46 / Ezefal* 16:17- 19; 2^:1-19 (D) Ezechicl) 16:17-19; ,28:1-/ Daniel, 6:7-
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 3:8; 5:23-6 :4-(>) OT, Ju- dith, 3:12-13; 5:27-6:4 / Wisdom of Solomon, (3. Man's relation to God or the gods. 3/. The imitation of God or the gods: the divine element in human nature,' the deification of men; man as the image of God.) 2:23; 13-15 (D) OT, Boo^of Wisdom, 2:23; 13-15 / Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3 (D) OT, Recksiasticus, 17:1-NfiW TESTAMENT: John, 10:34-35 / Acts, 12.21- 23; 14:7-18; 17.27-29; 28:3-6 / Romans, 1.14- 32 // Corinthians, 11:7; 15:49 / // Corinthians, 3:18 / Colossians, 3:8-10 / // Thessalonians, 2:3-4 / James, 3:9/1 Peter, i .15-16 /// Peter, 1-3-
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 7a-b; 12d-13b; 14a-d; BK II, 79d-80a; BK iv, 140c-141a; BK v, 168d-169a, 183d-184a; BK VII, 217c; 235b-c
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 127c-128a / Ion, 144b-145c / Republic, BK ii-m, 320c-328a / Timaeus, / Laws, BK iv, 681b-683b, BK v, 686d-687c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK i, CH 2 [982^8- 983*11] 501a-b; BK xn, CH 7 [io72 b i4-29] 602d-603a; CH 9 605a-d / Soul, BK 11, CH[4i5 a 22- b 8]645c-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 9 [io99 b 9~i8] 345a; CH 12 347a-b; BK VII, CH i [1145*15-33] 395a-b; BK x, CH 8 [1178*8-27] 433b-c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [1-54] 61a-d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; CH 6 110c-112b; CH 9 114c-116b; CH 13-14 120b- 121c; CH 17 122d-124a csp 123d; BK II, CH 7-145b-147c; CH 14, 153d-154c; BK III, CH 13, 188b-d; BK iv, CH n, 240d-241a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT i 256b,d; SECT 13 258c; BK HI, SECT 12-13 262b-c; BK v, SECT 27 272d; BK xn, SECT 2-3 307b-d
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK i [283-290] HOb-llla; [586-593] 119a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 27d-29c / Numa Pompilius, 50d-51c; 52b-53c / Alexander, 541a- 542a; 553b-554b/ Dion, 784d-785a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK i, 4c-d; BK iv, 73b-d; 80c-d / Histories, BK iv, 285d-286a; 287b
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 849a-b / Harmonies of the World, 1038a; 1048a
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR n 6b-10a / Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 15 74d-75b / Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 12, 148d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK II, par 14 12a-b; BK iv, par 26 25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; BK vi, par 4 36a-b; BK xm, par 32 119a-b / City of God, BK VIIi, CH 8 270a-d; BK xi, CH 26-336d-338d; BK xii, CH 23 357d-358a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 22 629b-630a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologies, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP 2 14b-15b; Q 14, A 2, REP 3 76d-77d; Q 26, A 4 151c-152a,c; Q 27, A i, ANS 153b- 154b; Q 59, A i, CONTRARY 306c-307b; Q 72, A i, RBP 3 368b-369d; Q 77, A 2, ANS and REP I 401b-d; Q 88, A 3, REP 3 472c-473a; Q 91, A 3//o4, REP 1-2 487d-488c; Q 92, A 2, ANS 489d- 490c; Q 93 492a-501c; Q 106, A i, REP 3 545d- 546d; PART i-n, Q i, A 8, 615a-c; Q 2, A 4, REP i 618a-d; Q 3, A 5, REP i 626b-627a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ir, Q 55, A 2, REP 3 27a-d; Q 87, A 8, REP 2 191d-192d; Q 93, A 3 217b-218a; A 6, ANS 2I9d-220d; Q no, A 4, ANS 350d-351d; PART II-ii, Q 2, A 9, REP 3 398c-399b; Q 10, A n, ANS 435d-436b; Q 19, A 3, REP i 466d-467c; Q 31, A 3, REP538b-539c; PART in, Q 4, A i, REP 2 730d- 731d, PART III SUPPL, Q 71, A 12, CONTRARY 914c-915c; Q 75, A i, REP 4 935b-937a; Q 91, A 2, CONTRARY 1017c-1020c; Q 92, A 3, RFP1034b-1037c, Q 93, A i, REP i 1037d-1039a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvi [85- 90] 77d; xxv [58-78] 92a; PARADISE, v [19- 24] 112b; vn [64-84] 115d-116a', xm [52-78] 126a-b
22 CHAUCER: Franklin's Tale [11,189-192] 353b- 354a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 82b-c; PART iv, 263a-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 215a; 233b-234a; 248a-c; 256c-d; 294a-b; 541d-543a,c
27 SHAKESPEARE. Hamlet, ACT n, sc n [314-322] 43d; ACT iv, sc iv [33-66] 59a-c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 428b-c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 41b-d, 80b- 81a
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 214a-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [345-353] 118b- 119a; BK VII [150-173] 220b 221a; [519-528] 228b; BK xi [466-522] 309b-310b / Areopagitica, 384a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 430-431 245a-247b; 434-248a-251a; 485 258b; 537 265b; 555 270a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 6 26b-c
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 187d-188a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 12b-c; 28b-d; 547a-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 136b; 379b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 90, 130d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 168b-d; PART i, 224a-228a; 234d-235c; 245a; PART II, 266d-267a; 268b-271c esp 270c-271c; PART HI, 306a-d; 308a-b; PART iv, 339b-d; 349c-350c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [614-736] 17a-19b; [1566-1569] 38a
48 MtfviLLE: Moby Dicl(, 84b-85a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace , BK xi, 525c-526b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 121d-122c; BK xi, 313c-314d; 345a-c
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 692a-693a esp 693a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 778d-779a; 790d

4. The divine nature in itself: the divine attributes

7 PLATCK Phaedrus^ 126a / Symposium, 167b-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 8 [ii78 b 8-23] 433b-c CHAPTER 29: GOD
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK II, CH 8, 146a; BK III, CH 13, 188b-c
17 PLOTINUS : Fifth Ennead, TR i-vi 208a-237d passim/ Sixth Ennead, TR VH-IX 321b-360d passim
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 4 2a; BK iv, par 29 26b; BK VII, par 1-8, 43b-45d / City of God, BK VIII, CH 6 268d-269c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, QQ 3-14a-50b; Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xxxni [76-145] 157a-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 162a-163b; PART iv, 271b-c
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 52b-d / Meditations, in 81d-89a / Objections and Re- plies, PROP in 132d-133a; 211c-212a; 232b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i 355a-372d esp DEF 4,355b, PROP 5 356b, PROP 8-13 356d-359d, PROP 14, COROL 2-PROP 15 360a-361d, PROP 19-20 363c-364a; PART II, PROP 1-2 373d-374a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 369b-371a / Optics, BK III, 542a-543a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 15 116c-d; BK II, CH xvii, SECT i 167d- 168a; CH xxin, SECT 33-35 212d-213c; BK III, CH vi, SECT 11-12 271b-272b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT442a-b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 229c-230b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 187a-c; 190c; 236b-240b esp 239a-c / Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 325d-326a; 344b-c; 345a-c; 347d-348b; 350c- 351a; 352a~c / judgement, 592a-c; 608c-611d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS,143a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 196b-d

4a. The identity of essence and existence in God: the necessity of a being whose essence involves its existence

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 3:13-
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 7 [io72 b 4-14] 602c-d
17 PLOTINUS. Sixth Ennead, TR vm, CH 14 349d- 350c; CH 18-21 351d-353d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VII, par 23, 50c / City of God, BK VIII, CH n, 272c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 32 633c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 3, ANS 12c-14a; Q 3, A 4 16d-17c; A 7, ANS and REP i 19a-c; Q 4, A i, REP 3 20d-21b; A 2, ANS and REP 3 21b-22b; A 3, REP 3 22b-23b; Q 6, A 3 29c-30b; Q 8, A i, ANS 34d-35c; Q 10, A 2, ANS and REP 3 41d-42c; Q 11, A 4, ANS 49d- 50b; Q 13, A u, ANS 73c-74b; Q 14, A 13, REP i B6d-88c; Q 19, A 3, REP 6 HOb-lllc; Q 44, A i, ANS 238b-239a; Q 50, A 2, REP 3 270a- 272a; Q 54, A i, ANS 285a-d; A 3, REP 2 286c- 287b; Q 75, A 5, REP 4 382a-383b; PART i-ii, Q 3, A 7, ANS 628a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in, Q 3, A 2, REP 3 724a-c
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, HI 81d-89a; v 93a- 96a / Objections and Replies, 110a-112a; 112d- 114c; 126b-127c; POSTULATE v 131b-c; AXIOM i 131d; AXIOM x 132b; PROP i 132b-c; 158b- 162a; 217d-218a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, DBF i 355a; DEF 6-355b-c; PROP 6-8 356b-357d; PROP n 358b- 359b; PROP 20 363d-364a; PROP 24 365a; PROP 34 369a
33 PASCAL: PensSes, 469 256a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 143a-145c; 153a; 177b- 192d esp 177b-179c, 187a-c, 192c<d; 205a-b; 239a-c / Practical Reason, 344c-355d esp 353a- 354d / Judgement, 570b-571c; 606d-609b esp 608b-609a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 280, 95a / Philosophy of History, PART in, 305c- 306c

4b. The unity and simplicity of the divine nature

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIII, CH 10 353b-355d / Metaphysics, BK xii, CH 7 [1073*2-11] 603a-b; CH 8 [1074*32-39] 604d; CH 9 [1075*5-11] 605c-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VII, CH 14 [n 54^0-31] 406c
17 PLOTINUS: Sixth Ennead, TR ix 353d-360d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 10 3b-c; par 12 4a; BK iv, par 24 25b-c; par 29 26b; BK VII, par 2 43c-44a; par 16 48c-49a; par 21 49d- 50a, BK xni, par 4 lllc; par 19 115c-d / City of God, BK VIII, CH 6 268d-269c; CH n, 272c; BK xi, CH 10 327d-328d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 5 625d-626a; CH 32 633c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q14a-20c; Q 4, A 2, REP 1-2 21b-22b; A 3 22b- 23b; Q 6, A 3 29c-30b; Q 7, A 2 31d-32c; Q 8, A 2, REP 2-3 35c-36b; A 4 37c-38c; Q u 46d- 50b; Q 13, A i, REP 2-3 62c-63c; A 4, REP65c-66b; Q 14, A i, REP 2 75d-76c; A 4 78b- 79a; Q 26, A i, REP i 150b-c; Q 27, A i, REP153b-154b; Q 28, A 2, REP i 158d-160a; Q 30, A i, REP 3-4 167a-168a; A 3 169b-170c; Q 40, A i, REP i 213b-214b; Q 44, A i, ANS 238b- 239a; Q 47, A i 256a-257b; Q 50, A 2, REP270a-272a; A 3, REP 2 272a-273b; Q 54, A i, ANS 285a-d; A 3, REP 2 286c-287b; Q 57, A i, ANS 295a-d; Q 84, A 2, ANS and REP 3 442b- 443c; Q 88, A 2, REP 4 471c-472c; PART i-n, Q 18, A i, ANS 694a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 49, A 4, ANS 5a-6a; Q 50, A 6, ANS lla-12a; Q 73, A i, REP 3 119c-120c; PART in, Q 2, A 2, ANS and REP i 711d-712d; Q 3, A 2, REP 3 724a-c; A 3 724c-725b; Q 6, A 5, REP 2 744a-d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xni [52- 66] 126a; xxiv [115-154] 143d-144b; xxix [127-145] 151c-d; xxxni [76-145] 157a-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART 11, 151d
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 52a-d / Meditations, in, 86a-88b esp 88b / Objections and Replies, 122b-c; 232b (4. The divine nature in itself: the divine attributes. 4h. The unity and simplicity of the divine nature.)
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 2-8 355d- 357d; PROP 12-14 359b-360a; PART 11, PROP 4 374c; PROP 7, SCHOL, 375b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 15 116c-d; BK II, CH XXIII, SECT213b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 307 b-c
41 GIBBON- Decline and Fall, 229c-230b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 176b-c; 192c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 224a-b; 227d-228a; PART in, 306a; PART rv, 322a-c

4c. The immateriality of God

8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 6 [ioyi b 2-23] 601b-c; CH 8 [1074*31-39] 604d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [146-155] 63a
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 53b-c
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK v, 296a
17 PLOTINUS: Sixth Ennead, TR i, CH 26, 266a; CH 27, 266c
18 AUGUSTINE- Confessions, BK iv, par 29 26b; par 31 26c-27a; BK v, par 19-20 32b-33a; BK vi, par 4 36a-b; BK VII, par 1-2 43b-44a / City of God, BK VIII, CH 5-6 267d-269c
19 AQUINAS- Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A 2 15c-16a; A 3, ANS 16a-d; A 8, ANS and REP 3 19d-20c; Q 7, A i, ANS and REP 2 31a-d; Q 14, A i, ANS 75d-76c; A 11 84c-85c; Q 40, A i, REP i 213b-214b; Q 50, A i, REP i 269b-270a; A 2, REP 3 270a-272a; Q 54, A i, ANS 285a-d; A 3, REP 2 286c-287b; Q 75, A 5, REP 1,4 382a-383b; 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c; A 4, REP i 444d- 446b; Q 86, A 2, REP i 462a-463a; Q 91, A 2, ANS 485b-486b; Q 105, A 3, ANS 540c-541b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART m, Q 2, A i, ANS and REP 2 710a-711c, A 2, ANS 711d- 712d; Q 25, A 3, REP i 841c-842d; PART in SUPPL, Q 92, A i, REP 12 1025c-1032b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART HI, 172d-173a
28 GILBERT. Loadstone, BK v, 105a
31 DESCARTES- Objections and Replies, 122b-c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 12-15 359b- 361d; PART II, DEF i 373a; PROP 1-2 373d- 374a; PROP 5-7 374c-375c
34 NEWTON: Optics, BK HI, 529a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH HI, SECT 17 117a-c; BK II, CH xxni, SECT 28 211b- d; BK HI, CH VI, SECT II, 271b-CJ BK IV, CH x, SECT8-i7351a-353c
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 334b-335b

4d. The eternity and immutability of God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 15:18 / Deuteronomy, 32:39-40 / / Chronicles, 16:34-36 (D) I Paralipomenon, 16:34-36 / Psalms, 9:6-7; 10:16; 29:10-11; 33:10-11; 45:6; 48 csp 48:8, 48:14; 66:7; 90 csp 90:1-4; 93:1-2; 102 csp 102:11-12, 102:26-27; 103:13-18; 136; 145:10-13; 146:5- 10 (D) Psalms, 9:7-8; 9:16; 28:10; 32:10-11; 44:7; 47 csp 47:9, 47:15; 65:7; 89 csp 89:1-4; 92:1-2; 101 esp 101:12-13, 101:27-28; 102:13- 18; 135; 144:10-13; 145:5-10 / Isaiah, 40:8,28; 43:10-13; 57:15 (D) Isaias, 40:8,28; 43:10- I 3> 57 :I 5 / Jeremiah, 10:10 (D) Jeremias, io-io / Lamentations, 5:19 / Daniel, 6:26 / Micah, 5:2 (D) Micheas, 5:2 / Malachi, 3:(D) Malaccas, 3:
0 APOCRYPHA: Eccksiasticus, 36-17; 39:20; 42:(D) OT, Eccksiasticus, 36:19; 39:25; 42:21-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 24:35 / Romans, 1 120-25 / Colossians, 1:16-177 / Timothy, i :i7; 6:15-16 / Hebrews, 1:8-12; 7:23-25; 13:7-8 / James, 1:17 / Revelation, 1:17-18; 10:6; 11:15- 17 (D) Apocalypse, 1:17-18; 10:6; 11:15-
7 PLATO Republic, BK II, 322d-323c; 324a-b
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIIi, CH 6 [258^0- 2 59 b 3 J ] 344b-345d / Heavens, BK i, CH[279 a 23- b 4] 370c-d; BK H, CH 3 [286*8-13] 377c / Generation and Corruption, BK II, CHI337 6l 5~ 2 3] 439a-b / Metaphysics, BK xn, CH i [io69 R 30- b 2] 598b-c; CH 6-7 601b-603b; CH 9 605a-d esp [1075*5-11] 605c-d / Soul, BK H, CH 4 (4i5 a 22- b 8j 645c-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VII, CH 14 [ii54 b 2o-3i] 406c
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK v, 296a
16 KEPLER: Harmonies of the World, 1071b
17 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR vn, CH 2-6 119c- 122d esp CH 5 121c-122a / Sixth Ennead, TR vni, CH ii 348b-c; CH 18-21 351d-353d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 10 3b-c; BK iv, par 26 25c-d; par 29 26b; BK VII, par 1-7 43b-45d; par 16-18 48c-49b, par 21 49d- 50a; par 23 50b-c; par 26, 51c; BK xi, par 12- 16 92b-93a; BK xn, par 1 1 lOld; par 18, 103a-b; par 40 109b-110a; BK xm, par 44 122d / City of God, BK vii, CH 30 261b-d; BK VIIi, CH n, 272c; BK xi, CH 10 327d-328d; CH 21-22 333a- 334c esp CH 22, 334c; BK xii, CH 1-3 342b,d- 344b; CH 14-17 350d-354a csp CH 14 350d- 351 b, CH 17 353a-354a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 5-6 625d-626b; CH 8 626c-627a; CH627b; CH 22-23 629b-630c; CH 32 633c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP 4 14b-15b; QQ 9-10 38c-46d; Q 14, A 9, ANS 83b-d; A 13, ANS and REP 3 86d-88c; A89b-90b; Q 18, A 3 106b-107c; Q 19; A 7 114d- 115d; Q 22, A i, REP 2 127d*128d; Q 26, A i, REP 2 150b-c; Q 42, A 2 225d-227a; Q 43, A230d-23Ic; Q 51, A 3, REP 3 277a-278c; Q 61, A 2, ANS 315c-316a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologka, PART I-H, Q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 91, A i 208b-d; PART in, Q i, A i, REP 3 701d-703a; A 5, REP 3 707a- 708c; Q 2, A i, ANS 710a-711c
21 DANTE: Dttxnc Comedy, PARADISE, vn [64- 72] 115d; xm [52-66] I26a; xxiv [130-141] 144a; xxix [13-36] 150b-c; XXXIH 156b- 157d CHAPTER 29: GOD
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 79d-80a; PART HI, 173a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 293d-294a
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 428c
31 DESCARTES : Discourse, PART iv, 52b-c / Mfctations, in, 84a-b; 86a; v, 94d-95a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, DBF 6 355b; DEF355c; PROP 6 356b-c; PROP 11-13 358b-359d; PROP 17 362b-363c; PROP 19-20 363c-364a; PROP 33, SCHOL 2, 367d-368c esp 368b-c; PART II, PROP 44, COROL 2-PROP 47 390a-391a; PART v, PROP 17 456c-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [1-12] 135b; [372-382] 143b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 469 256a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 370a-371a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xv, SECT 3-4 162d-163b; CH xvn, SECT 16-172a-c; SECT 20 172d-173c; CH xxm, SECT209c; BK iv, CH x 349c-354c esp SECT 3-349d-350b, SECT 8-n 351a-352a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 117 436a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 176b-c; 190c; 192c-d / Practical Reason, 334b-335b; 344b-c; 352a-b / Judgement, 592a-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156d- 157b; PART in, 306a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xiv, 608a-b; EPILOGUE n, 684c-d

4e. The infinity of God: the freedom of an infinite being

8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 7 [io73 a 3-10] 603a-b
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK v, par 19-20 32b- 33a; BK VH, par 7 45a-d; par 20-21 49d-50a; BK xni, par 12 113b-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 3, REP 1 12c-14a; Q 7 31a-34c; Q 14, A i, ANS 75d- 76c; A 3 77d-78b; Q 25, A 2, ANS and REP i 144c-145b; Q 54, A 2, ANS 285d-286c; Q 75, A 5, REP 1,4 382a-383b; Q 79, A 2, ANS 414d- 416a; Q 86, A 2, REP i 462a-463a; PART I-H, Q i, A 4, REP i 612a-613a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 64, A 4, REP 3 69b-70a; Q 87, A 4, REP 2 188b-d; PART II-II, Q 20, A 2, REP 2 475d-476cj Q 24, A 8, ANS 495b-496a; PART HI, Q i, A 2, REP703a-704d; Q 2, A i, ANS 710a-711c; Q 3, A i, REP i 723b-724a; PART in SUPPL, Q 92, A i, REP 6,12 1025c-1032b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 162b-c
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, in, 86a-88d / Ob- jections and Replies, 112a-d; 123c-d; PROP in 132d-133a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, DEF 2 355a; DEF 6-355b; PROP 8-14 356d-360a; PROP 15, SCHOL- PROP iy360b-363c; PROP 21, DEMONST364a-c; PROP 29 366b-c; PROP 32-35 367a-369a; PART II, PROP 1-4 373d-374c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [411-421] 241a
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 231-233 213b-216a; 469 256a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 370a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xv, SECT 2-4 162c-163b; SECT 12 165b-c; CH xvii, SECT 1 167d-168a; SECT 16-17 172a-c; SECT172d-173c; CH xxin, SECT 33-36 212d-213d; BK III, CH VI, SECT II 271b-d
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 117 436a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 188c; 192c-d; 201b-c; 205a-b / Practical Reason, 325d-326a; 344b-c / Judgement, 590b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 237d- 238a;246b-c

4f. The perfection or goodness of God

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:48 / Luke, 18:
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 321d-323a / Ttmaeus, 447d-448a / Theaetetus, 530b-531a
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 7 60 2a- 603b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 12 347a-b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK II, CH 8 146a-147c
16 KEPLER: Harmonies of the World, 1009a
18 AUGUSTINE. Confessions, BK i, par 12 4a; BK III, par 12 16b; BK iv, par 24 25b-c; BK v, par 19-20 32b-33a; BK VII, par 1-7 43b-45d esp par 4-7 44b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c; BK x, par 38 81a; BK xi, par 6 90c-d; BK xn, par 18, 103b; BK xni, par 1-5 HOd-llld; par124d-125a,c / City of God, BK xi, CH327d-328d; BK xii, CH 1-3 342b,d-344b; CH 8-9 346d-348b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 5-7 625d-626c; CH 31-32 633b-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A i, REP 2 lOd-lld; A 3, ANS and REP i 12c- 14a; Q 3, A i, ANS 14b-15b; A 2, ANS 15c-16a; A 7, REP 2 19a-c; Q 4 20c-23b; Q 6 28b-30d; Q 13, A 2, ANS 63c-64d; A n, REP 2 73c-74b; Q 18, A 3 106b-107c; Q 19, A i, REP 1-3 108d- 109c; Q 21, A i, REP 4 124b-125b; Q 51, A i, REP 3 275b-276b; Q 61, A 3, REP 2 316a-d; Q 62, A 8, ANS and REP 1-2 323c-324a; Q 66, A i, CONTRARY 343d-345c; Q 84, A 2, ANS and REP 3 442b-443c; Q 91, A i, ANS 484a-485b; Q 100, A 2, ANS 521c-522b, Q 103 528a-534b passim; Q 104, A 3, REP 2 537b-d; A 4, ANS 538a-c; Q 105, A 4, ANS 541c-542a; A 5, ANS 542a-543b; PART i-ii, Q i, A 4, REP i 612a-613a; Q 2, A 4, REP i 618a-d; Q 9, A 6 662a-d; Q 18, A i, ANS 694a-d; Q 19, A 4 705b-c; Q 22, A 2, REP i 721c- 722c; Q 24, A 3, REP 2 728c-729c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 64, A 4, ANS and REP69b-70a; PART II-n, Q 9, A 4, REP i 425d-426c; Q 13, A i, ANS 444b-445a; Q 17, A i, ANS 457a-d; Q 23, A 4, ANS 485d-486b; Q 34, A i, ANS 559a-c; Q 39, A 2, REP 3 575b-576b; Q 184, A 2, ANS 629d-630d; PART in, Q i, A i, ANS 701d-703a; Q 23, A i, ANS 833a-d; PART in SUPPL, Q 91, A 2, REP 4,10 1017c-1020c; Q 99, A 2, REP 3 1081a-d (4, The divine nature in itself: the divine attributes. 4f. The perfection or goodness of God.)
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy ', PURGATORY, xxvm [91-93] 97a; PARADISE, vn [64-66] 115d; xix [40-90] 135c-136a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays* 300c-d
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 52a-d; 53d / , Meditations, i, 76d-77c; m-iv, 86a-93a / Ob- jections and Replies, 123d-124c; DBF vin 130d; 142c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART I, PROP 33, SCHOL367d-369a; PART v, PROP 17, DEMONST 456c-d
33 PASCAL. Pensees, 580 276b
34 NEWTON- Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 370a-371a passim
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK m, CH vi, SECT n-12 271b-272b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vin, DIV 78-81 485c-487a; SECT xi, DIV 106-107 499b- 500b passim; DIV 113, 502a-b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 81b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 205a-b / Fund. Prin. Metaphync of Morals, 263a-b / Practical Reason, 307a-d; 325d-326a; 342c; 345a-c; 351b- 352c / Judgement, 592a-c

4g. The intellect of God

8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 7 [io72 b 14-29] 602d-603a; CH 9 605a-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 8 [ii78 b 8-23] 433b~c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 14 120d-121c; BK H, CH 8, 146a
17 PLOI INUS : Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 1 65d-66d / Fifth Ennead 208a-251d esp TR v-vi 228b- 237d, TR ix 246c-251d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK VIH, CH 6 268d- 269c; BK xi, CH 21 333a-d; BK xu r CH 17 353a- 354a; BK xxn, CH 29, 614b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 13 627d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP 2-3 14b-15b, Q 14, AA 1-4 75d-79a; Q 18, A 3 106b-107c, Q 19, A i, ANS 108d-109c; A 2, REP 4 109c-110b; A 3, REP 6 HOb-lllc; A 4, ANS and REP 4 lllc-112c; Q 26, A 2 150c-151a; Q 27, A 3, REP 3 155c-156a; Q 46, A 2, REP253a-255a; Q 50, A i, ANS 269b-270a; Q 54, A 2, ANS 285d-286c; Q 55, A i, ANS and REP289a-d; A 3, ANS 291a-d; Q 57, A i, ANS 295a-d; A 2, ANS 295d-297a; Q 59, A 2, ANS 307c-308b; 79, A i, ANS 414a-d; A 2, ANS 414d-416a; A 4, ANS 417a-418c; A 10, REP 2 423d-424d; Q 84, A a, ANS 442b-443c; Q 85, A 5, ANS 457d- 458d, Q 87, A i, ANS 465a-466c; A 3, ANS 467b- 468a; Q 89, A i, ANS 473b-475a; Q 105, A i, REP 2 538d-539c; A 3, ANS 540c-541b; Q 116, A i, ANS 592d-593d; PART i-n, Q i, A 4, REP i 612a-613a; Q 19, A 4, ANS and REP 3 705b-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Thcohgtca, PART MI, Q 51, A i, REP 2 12b-13c; Q 6r, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 93, A i 215b,d-216c; PART in, Q 6, A 2, ANS 741c-742a
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK H, APH 15 149a
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 228a*c
31 SPINOZA: Ethtcs, PART i, PROP 17, SCHOL 362c- 363c; PROP 21 364a-c; PROP 32, COROL 2 367b; PROP 33, SCHOL 2, 368 b-c; PART II, PROP i 373d-374a; PROP 3-6 374a-375a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK H, CH i, SECT 10, 123b, CH x, SECT 9 143a-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 33a-d; 52c-53b / Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 344b-c; 350c-351b / Judgement, 590b-d, 592a-c; 600d-601c; 610b- 613a,c

4h. The happiness and glory of God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 15:1-21; 33:13-23 /
7 Chronicles, 16:23-27; 29:11-13 (D) I Parahpomenon, 16:23-27; 29:11-13 / Psalms, 8; 19; 24; 57 5-11; 96-3~ 6 ; 104-1; 1134, H 8: 5; 145:11-12 (D) Psalms, 8; 18; 23, 56:5-11; 95:3-6; 103:1; 112:4; 137:5; 144:11- 12 / Isaiah, 6:1-4; 42.8 (D) Isaias, 6:1-4; 42:
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 16:13 (D) OT, Judith, 16:16 / Rest of Esther, 13:12-14 (D) OT, Esther, 13:12-14 / Song of Three Children, 28- 31 (D) OT, Daniel, 3:51-
0 NEW TESTAMENT. Mar\, 8:38 / John, 5:44; 8:/ Hebrews, 2-10 / 7 Peter, 4.7-11 / 77 Peter, 1:16-18 / Revelation, 5:9-14; 7:9-12; 21 (>) Apocalypse, 5 9-14; 7:9-12;
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK XH, CH 7 [io72 b i3-2 9 ]602d-603a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VII, CH 14 [i 154^0-31] 406c; BK x, CH 8 [ii78 b 8-23] 433b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xm, par 4 lllc / City of God, BK v, CH 14 220a-d; BK VIII, CH 6 268d-269c; BK xn, CH 17 353a-354a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q150a-152a,c; Q 62, A 3, REP 3 319c-320b; A 4, ANS 320b-321b; Q 63, A 3 327b-328b, Q 65, A 2, ANS 340b-341b; Q 70, A 2, ANS 364b-365a; Q 73, A 2, REP 3 371b-d; PART I-H, Q 2, A 2, REP 2 616d-617b; A 3, ANS and REP i 617b- 618a; Q 3, A i, REP i 622c-623a; A 2, REP 1,623a-624b; A 8, REP 2 628d-629c; Q 5, A 3, REP 2 638b-639a; A 7, ANS, 642a-d 20Ao T uNAS. Summa Theologica, PART in, Q 8, A 4, ANS 759b-d; Q 16, A 4, REP 2 799b-800b; Q 26, A i, REP 2 845b-846a; PART in SUPPL, Q 71, A 8, REP i 909d-910d; Q 92, A i, REP1025c-1032b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, i [1-9] 106a; xxxin [46-145] 156c-157d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART v, J*ROP 17 456c-d; PROP 35-36 460d-461c
32 MILTON: Upon the t Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, BK III [56-415] 13$b-144b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 233, 216a 5*CHAW ER 29: GOD
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 347d-346b / Judgement, 594d [in i]

5. The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures

7 PLATO: Republic, B* n, 321d-32d / Timaeus, 447b-458b;465d-466a
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VII, CH i 326a-327b; BK viii, CH 1-6 334a-346b
9 ARISTOTLB: Ethics, BK VII, CH 14 [ii54 b 20-3i] 406c; BK x, CH 8 [i 178^-27] 433b-c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK iir, CH 22, 195a-b; BK iv, CH n, 240d-241a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT 4 257b; f BK v, SECT 8 269d-270b; BK vi, SECT 40-277d-278d
16 KEPLER: Harmonies of the World, 1017b- 1018a; 1071b
17 PLOTINUS: Fourth Ennead, TR m, CH149b-d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 4 2a; par 10 3b-c; BK iv, par 25 25c; BK iv, par SI-BK v, par i 26c-27b; BK VII, par 1-8, 43b-45d; par 16-23 48c-50c; BK x, par 38 81a; BK xi, par90c-d; BK xni, par 19 115c-d / City of God, Bk vii, CH 29-31 261a-262a; BK VIII, CH i-io 264b,d-271d; BK x, CH 1-2 298b,d-300a; BK xi, CH 24 335c-336a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 9-10 627a-b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, QQ 14- 25 75c~150a; Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, i [1-3] 106a; [97-142] 107b-d; n [112-148] 109a-b; x [1-27] 120b-c; xin [52-87] 126a-b; xix [40-90] 135c-136a; xxvn [100-120] 148b-c; xxvm 148d-150b; xxxm [76-145] 157a-d
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 428c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 38a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 52a-d / Ob- jections and Replies, 123c-d; 214a-d; 229c-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [412-436] 241a-b
34 NEWTON. Principles, BK HI, GENERAL SCHOL, 369b-371a / Optics, BK HI, 542a-543a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xvn, SECT i 167d-168a; BK III, CH vi, SECT 11-271b-272b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 57 423d- 424a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xi, DIV 106 499b-c; DIV 113 502a-d
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 186c-d; 187d-188a
38 ROUSSBAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 439a
40 GIWON: Decline and Fall, Slb-c \mc\3Q7b-c; 346b-347a
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 321b-c; 325d-326a; 327d-328b; 342 c; 344b-c; 345a-c; 347d-348b; 350c-351a; 352a-c / Judgement, 592a-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, ' 120d-121c

5a. God as first and as exemplar cause: the rer lation of divine to natural causation

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1-2; 7:4 / Nehemiah, 9.6 (D) II Esdras, 9:6 / Job, 9:1-9; 12; 26:7-14; 28:24-27; 36:24-42.2 / Psalms, 8:3; 33:6-9; 65:5-13; 74:16-17; 89:11-12; 95:4-5; 96:5; 102:25-27; 104; 107:23-30; 115:3; 119:73; 121:2; 136:5-9; 146:5-6; 147-148 (D) Psalms, 8:4; 32:6-9; 64:6-14; 73:16-17; 88:12- 13; 94:4-5; 95:5; 101:26-28; 103; 106:23-30; 113:3; 118:73; 120:2; 135:5-9; 145:5-6; M6- 148 / Proverbs, 3:19 / Isaiah, 40:26-28; 42:5; 44:24; 45:7-12,18; 48:13; 51:13; 6 5 :i7-(D) Isaias, 40:26-28; 42:5; 44:24; 45:7-12,18; 48:13; 51:13; 65:17 / Jeremiah, 10:12; 27:5; 31-35; 51:15-16 (D) Jeremias, 10.12; 27:5; 31:35; 51:15-16 / Amos, 5:8 / Zechariah, 12:(D) Zachanas, 12:1 / Malachi, 2:10 (D) Malachias, 2:
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 16:14 (D) OT, Judith, 16:/ Rest of Esther, ly.io-(D) OT, Esther, 13:/ Wisdom of Solomon, 1*14; 2 23; 9:1-2; 11:-(D)OT,Bool(of Wisdom, 1:1452:23; 9:1-2; 11:18 / Ecclesiasticus, 18:1; 24 8-9; 33:10-13; 39:16-35; 43 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18:1; 24:12-14; 33:10-14; 39:21-41143 / Bel and Dragon, 5 (D) OT, Danitl, 14:4 / II Maccabees, 7:23,28 (D) OT, // Machabees, 7:23,
0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 1-1-3 / ^cts, 7:49-50; 14-14-17; 17:22-28 / Colossians, 1:16-17 / Hebrews, 1:10-11; 2:10; 3:4; 11:3 / // Peter, 3-5-7 / Revelation, 4:11; 10.6; 14 7 (D) Apocalypse, 4:11; 10:6; 14:
7 PLATO: Republic, BK x, 427c-429c / Timaeus, 447a-448b / Sophist, 577d-578b / Statesman, 587a-589c / Laws, BK x, 758b-765c esp 762b- 765c
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIII, CH 1-6 334a- 346b / Generation and Corruption, BK II, CH[336^5-34] 438d; [337*15-23] 439a b/ Metaphysics, BK I, CH 2 [983*7-9] 501b; BK XII, CH[io7o b 22~35J 600b; CH 5 [1071*30-36] 601a
9 ARISTOTLE: Motion of Animals, CH 3 (699*11]- CH 4 [700*5] 234a-235a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [146-194] 63a-c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 14 120d-121c
16 PTOLEMY: Almagest, BK i, 5a-b
16 KEPLER- Epitome, BK iv, 853b-854a / Harmonies of the World, 1017b-10l8a; 1025a-b; 1049b-1050a;1061a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 10 3b-c; par 12 4a; BK VII, par 16-23 48c-50c; BK xi, par 4-11 90a-92b; BK XH, par 2-9 99c-101c; par 14-40 102b-110a esp par 38 108d-109a; BK xin, par 6-48 112a-124a / City of God, BK vii, CH 29-31 261a-262a; BK VIII, CH i 264b,d- 265b; CH 4-6 266d-269c; CH 9 270d-271a; BK xi, CH 4-24 324a-336a; BK XH 342b,d-360a,c; BK xix, CH 13 519a-520a; BK xxi, CH 4 562a- (3. The dMne nature in relation to the world or creatures, la. God as first and as exemplar cause: the relation oj divine to natural causation.) 563c; CH 7-8 565d-568d; UK xxn, CH 2 587b- 588a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 32 633c-d; CH 34 634b-c
19 AQUINAS : Swnma Theologies PART i, Q 2, A 3, ANS and REP 2 12c-14a; Q 3, A i, ANS 14b-15b; A 2, ANS 15c~16a; A 4, ANS 16d-17c; A 5, REP17c-18b; A 6, ANS 18c-19a; A 7, ANS and REP i 19a-c; A 8, ANS and REP 1-2 19d-20c; Q 4 20c- 23b csp A 3 22b-23b; Q 18, AA 3-4 106b- 108c; g 26, A 4 151c-152a,c; o 51, A i, REP275b-276b; Q 52, A 2 279b-280a; Q 56, A 2, ANS 292d-294a; Q 60, A i, REP 2-3 310b- 311a; Q 65 339a-343c; Q 74, A 3, REP i 375a- 377a,c; Q 75, A i, REP i 378b-379c; Q 76, A 5, REP i 394c-396a; Q 83, A i, REP 3 436d-438a; Q 84, A 2, ANS and REP 3 442b-443c; A 4, REP i 444d-446b; Q 88, A 3, REP 2 472c-473a; Q 89, A i, RLH 3 473b-475a; Q 92, A i, REP i 488d- 489d; A 2, REP 2 489d-490c; A 4, ANS 491b-d; Q 93 492a-501c; Q 94, A 3, ANS 504a-505a; QQ 103-105 528a-545b; Q 116 S92d-595c; PART i-n, Q i, A 2 610b-611b; Q 2, A 3, ANS 617b- 618a; Q 6, A i, REP 3 644d-646a; Q 9, A662 ad; Q 10, A 4 665d 666a,c; Q 12, A 5, ANS 672a-c, Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c
20 AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 65, A 3, ANS 72d-73d; Q 66, A i, REP 3 75b-76b; Q 68, A i, ANS 87c-89c; Q 79, A i, REP 3 156b- 157b; A 2, ANS and REP 1 157b-158a; Q 80, A i, ANS and REP 2-? 159d-160c; Q 85, A 6 182d- 184a; Q 93, A i 215b,d-216c; Q 100, A 6, REP257c-258c; Q 102, A 3, ANS 272b-276c; Q 109, A i, ANS 338b-339c; Q no, A i, REP 2 347d- 349a; Q in, A 2, ANS 352d-353d; PART H-II, Q 18, A 4, ANS 464c-465a; PART in, Q 2, A 5, REP 3 715a-716b; Q 5, A 3, REP 2 737d-739a; Q 13, A 3, CONTRARY 782b-783b; PART in SUPPL, Q 74, A 2, REP 3 926c-927c; Q 75, A938a-939d; Q 88, A i, ANS lOOOd-lOOld
21 DANTE: Dunne Comedy, PARADISE, i [103-108] 107b; ii [112-148] 109a-b; XXVH [100-120] 148b-c; xxix [10-36] 150b-c
22 CHAUCER: Knight's Tale [2987-3040] 209a- 210a
23 HOBBBS: Leviathan, PART i, 78d-79a; 79d-80a; PART II, 113b-c; 149d; PART in, 185d; 241c- 242a; PART iv, 272b-c
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FOURTH DAY, 245b-c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 390d-391a; 406b-407b; 415b-417a csp 416b-c; 426a-429b; 443a-c; 490d-493a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 2c-d; 4b-c
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 55d-56a / Meditations, in 81d-89a esp 84b-85a, 87b- 88c / Objections and Replies, 110b-112a; 158b- 161d; 213b-214d; 229c-d THE GREAT IDEAS 5a to 5b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 16-18 362a- 363c; PROP 24-29 365a-366c; PROP 33, SCHOL 2 367d-369a; PART 11, PROP 7 375a-c; PROP 10, SCHOL 376d-377a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [80-134] 137a- 138a; [630-735] 149a-l51b; BK v [468-474] 185b; BK VII 217a-231a esp [162-169] 220b, [601-640] 230a-231a
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 77 186a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 369b-370a / Optics, BK III, 528b-529a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxi, SECT 2 178c; CH xxni, SECT 28 211b-d; BK iv, CH in, SECT 28-29 322a-323a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 25-417d-419a esp SECT 32 418d-419a; SECT ^419c-d; SECT 51-53 422d-423a; SECT 57 423d- 424a; SECT 60-75 424b-427d; SECT 105-433b-434b; SECT 141 441a-b; SECT 146-442a-444a esp SECT 150 442d-443b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 54-57 474b-475d
42 KANT- Pure Reason, 140b,d-145c; 177b-179b; 187a-191d; 205a-209a; 236b-240b esp 239a-c / Practical Reason, 332d-337a,c esp 334b- 335c / Judgement, 569a-570a; 581b-582c; 592c-596c; 597d-599d; 600d-601c; 608b-609a; 610b-613a,c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156d- 157b; PART i, 245d-246c; PART iv, 368d-369a,c
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 239d; 243c-d

5b. God as final cause: the motion of all things toward God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 33.13-23 / Deuteronomy, 4 129 / / Chronicles, 28 -9 (D) IParalipomenon, 28:9 / II Chronicles, 15 12-4, 12-15 (D) 11 Paralipomenon, 15:2-4,12-15 / Psalms, 24:6; 27:4-9; 42; 63; 70:4; 73:25-28; 84; 119:(D) Psalms, 23.6, 26.4-9; 4 1 ? 62; 69:5; 72:25- 28; 83; 118:10 / Proverbs, 16:4 / Isaiah, 26 8- 9; 43:7; 58:2 (D) Isatas, 26:8-9; 43:7; 58:
0 APOCRYPHA- Wisdom of Solomon, 1:1; 13:1-(D) OT, Boo \ of Wisdom, ri; 13:1-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Romans, 3:10-11 / Colossians, 1:16-17 / Hebrews, 2:10 / Revelation, 4.(D) Apocalypse, 4:
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 7 [1072* 23^4] 602b-c
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR H, CH 2 41a-c / Fifth Ennead, TR vni, CH 7, 243b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par i, la; par 5, 2b; BK iv, par 15-19 23a-24b; BK v, par 1-27a-c; BK x, par 29-33 78d-80b; BK xin, parlllb-c / City of God, BK VIIi, CH 4 266d-267c; CH 8-9 270a-271a; BK x, CH 1-3 298b,d-301a; BK xn, CH i 342b,d-343c; BK xix, CH 13 519a- 520a / Christian Doctrine, BK 1 624a-636a,c esp CH 3-5 625b-626a, CH 9-11 627a-c, CH 22-629b-630c, CH 34 634b-c
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i, Q i, A 4, ANS 5a-b; Q 2, A i, REP i lOd-lld; A 3, ANS CHAPTER 29: GOD 12c-14a; Q 6, A 3, ANS 29c-30b; A 4 30b-d; Q 12, A I, ANS 50c-51c; Q 13, A II, REP 2 73c- 74 b; Q 19, A i, REP i 108d-109c; Q 26, A151a-c; Q 44, A 4 241a-d; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; Q 62, A i, ANS 317d-318c; Q 65, A 2 340b-341b; Q 103, A 2 529a-530a; PART i-n, Q i, A615a-c; Q 2, A 4, REP 1 618a-d; A 5, REP 3 618d- 619c; Q 9, A 6 662a-d; Q n, A 3, REP 3 667d- 668d; Q 12, A 3, REP i 670d 671b; Q 16, A 3, CONTRARY and REP 3 685b-686a; Q 34, A 3, ANS 770c-771c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 55, A 2, REP 3 27a-d; Q 70, A i, REP 2 101d-102d; Q 72, A 4, ANS 114a-115a; A 5, ANS 115a-116b; Q 73, A 3, ANS 121c-122b; A 9, ANS 126d-128a; Q 79, A i, ANS 156b-157b; Q 91, A i, REP208b-d; Q 99, A 3, ANS 247a-248a; A 4, ANS 248a-d; Q 100, A 6, ANS 257c-258c; QQ 101-265d-304a passim; PART II-n, Q 5, A i, ANS 410a-411b; Q 19, A 2, REP 2 465d-466d, Q 20, A i, REP i 474d-475d; Q 24, A 4, ANS 491d- 492b; Q 26, A 13, REP 3 5l9d-520d; Q 34, A i, REP 3 559a-c; Q 44, A 2, REP 2,4 593d-594c; PART III, Q 2, A II, ANS 721c-722bj Q 6, A I, REP i 740b-741b; PART in SUPPL, Q 91, A 3, REP 6 1020d-1022c; Q 96, A i, REP 4 I050a- 1052a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, i [94-142] 107b-d; iv[i24-i32]112a,xxvi [i6-5i]146a-b; xxvin 148d-150b; xxxn [i39]-xxxm [145] 156a-157d
28 HARVEY- On Animal Generation, 428c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK v [468-474] 185b; BK xn [451-465] 329a; [537-551] 331a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 314 229a, 425-426 243b- 244b; 430 245a-247b; 438 251a, 487-258b-259a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 107-433d-434b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 236b-240b / Practical Reason, 337a-348b esp 340c-341a, 344a-347d /Judgement, 584c-d; 587a-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 306a-c

5c. The power of God: the divine omnipotence

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 18:13-14 / Exodus, 15:1-21; 19:5 / Deuteronomy, 10:14; 32.39 / / Samuel, 2:6-8 (D) I Kings, 2:6-8 / II Samuel, 22 (D) II Kings, 22/1 Chronicles, 29:10-(D) I Paralipomenon, 29:10-19 / 77 Chronicles, 20 :6 ; 25 :8 (D) 77 Paralipomenon, 20 :6 ; 25 -8 / Job csp 9, 12, 26, 34, 36:1-42-3 / Psalms, 29; 33; 47; 50:7-12; 62; 65:5-13; 66:1-7; 76; 78; 89:8-13; 95-96; 104; 107:23-41; 135; 147:1-(D) Psalms, 28; 32; 46; 49:7-12; 61; 64:6- M; 6 5''i-7; 75; 77; 88:9-14; 94-95; 103; 106:23-41; 134; 146 / Proverbs, 16:33 / Isaiah, 2:10-22; 26:4-6; 40:9-31; 43:13; 44:24-28; 55:10-11 (D) Isaias, 2:10-22; 26:4-6; 40-9- 31; 43:13; 44:24-28; 55:10-11 / Jeremiah, 10:12-13; 18:1-10; 27:5; 32:27 (D) Jeremias, 10:12-13; 18:1-10; 27:5; 32:27 / Ezef(iel, 18:(D) Ezechiel, 18:4 / Daniel, 2 esp 2:19-23, 2:36-47; 4-5 (D) Daniel, 2 esp 2:19-23, 2:36-47' 3 : 9&-5 : 3! / Hosea, 57-14 (D) Osec, 5 7-1 4 /Amos,
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 16:13-17 (D) OT, Judith, 16:15-21 / Rest of Esther, 13:9-11 (D) OT, Esther, 13:9-11 / Wisdom of Solomon, 7:16; 11:17-22; 12:8-18 (D) OT, Boo^of Wisdom, 7:16; 11:18-23; 12:8-18 / Ecclesiasticus, 10:12- 17; 15 18; 16:18-19; i8.i-7-(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:15-21; 15.19; 16:18-19; 18:1-6 / Bel and Dragon, 5~(D) OT, Daniel, 14-4/Maccabees, 8:i8-(>) OT, // Machabees, 8:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 3:9; 19:16-26 csp 19:26 / Mar}(, 10:17-27 csp 10:27 / Luke, 1:26- 38 csp 1:37; 18:18-27 esp 18.27 / Acts, 17:15- 34 / Romans, 9:19-23 / Ephesians, 1:15-23; 6.IO-H / Revelation, 19-6 (D) Apocalypse, 19-
7 PLATO: Timaeus, 465d / Laws, BK iv, 682d- 683a; BK x, 766d-767c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 7 [1073*3- 10] 603a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Coriolanus, 191d-192b
18 AUGUSTINE- Confessions, BK i, par 12 4a; BK v, par 20 32d-33a; BK VH, par 6-7 44d-45d / City of God, BK v, CH 10 215c-216c; BK VII, CH 30 261b-d; BK xn, CH 25 358b-359a; BK xiv, CH 27 396c-397a; BK xxi, CH 5-8 563d- 568d
19 AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, P\RT i, Q 2, A 3, , REP 1 12c-14a; Q 3, A i, REP 1,4 14b-15b; Q143c-150a; Q 26, A 4, ANS 151c-152a,c; Q 45, A 2 242d-244a; A 5 245c-247a; Q 52, A 2 279b- 280a; Q 6^, A 3 327b-328b; Q 65, A 3, REP341c-342b; Q 75, A 5, REP i 382a-383b; A 6, REP 2 383c-384c; Q 76, A 5, RHP i 394c-396a; Q 77, A i, ANS 399c-401b; A 2, ANS 401b-d; Q 91, A i, REP i 484a-485b; A 2 485b-486b; Q 92, A i, REP 3 488d-489d; A 2, REP 2 489d- 490c; Q 104, A 3 537b-d; A 4, ANS and REP 1-538a-c; Q no, A 2, ANS 565d-566d; Q 112, A i, ANS 571d-573a; PART 1-11, Q i, A 4, REP i 612a-613a; Q 2, A 4, REP i 618a-d; Q 5, A 7, ANS and REP i 642 a- d; Q 6, A 4, REP i 647b- 648a; Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c; Q 19, A 5, REP705d-707a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 64, A 4, ANS 69b-70a; Q 68, A 4, ANS 91b-92c; Q 80, A 3, REP 1 161d-162b; Q 88, A i, ANS 193a- 194b; Q 113, A 9 368d-369c; PART H-II, Q i, A 8, REP 2 387a-388c; Q 23, A 2, REP 3 483d- 484d; PART in, Q i, A 3, REP 2 704d-706a; Q 3, A 7, AN$ 728a-729a; Q 7, A 7, REP 2 750a-d; A 12, REP 2 754c-755c; Q 13 779d-784a; Q 15, A 8, REP 3 794a-c; A 9, REP 3 794c-79Sb; Q 20, A i, ANS 821b-822c; Q 60, A 5, ANS 850b-851b; PART in SUPPL, Q 71, A 13, REP 3 915d-916c; Q 72, A 2, REP i 919a-920c; Q 74, A 3, ANS and REP 2-3 927c-9!?8d; A 8, REP 3 933b-934a; Q 76, A i, REP 1-2 939d-941a; Q 82, A i, ANS 968a-970c; Q 83, A 2, REP 3 976c-978c; A 3, ANS 978c-980d; Q 87, A 2, REP 2 998d-999d (5. The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures. 5c. The power of God: the divine omnipotence.)
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 160c-161a; 162c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation , 428c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 17c; 81a
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Rep lies, HUb-llla', 158b-159a; 229a-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 17 362b-363c; PROP 33, SCHOL 2-PROP 35 367d-369a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [106-225] H3b- 116a; BK III [372-415] 143b-144b; BK VH [139- 173] 220a-221a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 654 292b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xv, SECT 12 165b-c; CH xxi, SECT 2 178c; CH xxni, SECT 28 211b-d; BK III, CH vi, SECT H-I2 271b-272b; BK iv, CH x, SECT 4 350a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 33 419a; SECT 36 419c-d; SECT 152 443c-d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT VH, DIV 56 475a-b
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 334a-b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 186c-d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 180b-c; 181b; 192c-d / Practical Reason, 351b-352c / Judgement, 504b-d; 592a-c; 594d [fn i]; 600d-601c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156d- 157b
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 790d

5d. The immanence of God: the divine omnipresence

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 28:15 / Exodus, 20*24; 25:8; 29:45-46 / Leviticus, 26:11-12 / Numbers, 5 :i~3 / Joshua, 3 ,10-1 1 (D) Josue, 3 10- ii / // Samuel, 7:1-13 (D) // Kings, 7:1-13 / / Kings, 6:11-1318:12-1 3,26-30 (D) III Kings, 6:11-13; 8:12-13,26-30 / / Chronicles, 17:1-(D) 1 Paralipomenon, 17:1-12 / Psalms,68'j- 8,16-18; 119:151; 139 esp 139:7-12; 145:18-(D) Psalms, 67.8-9,17-19; 118:151; 138 csp 138:7-12; 144.18-19 / Proverbs, 15:3 / Isaiah, 50:7-9 (D) Isaias, 50:7-9 /Jeremiah, 23:(D) Jeremias, 23:24 / Amos, 9:1-4 / Zechartah,
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:7; 12:1 (D) OT, BooJ(of 'Wisdom, 1:7; 12:
0 NEW TESTAMENT -.John, no / Acts, 7:49; 17:22- 29 / Romans, 11:36/7 Corinthians, 6:15-20 / II Corinthians, 6:14-18 / Ephesians, 4:6 / Colossians, 1:16-19; 2:8-13 / II Timothy, 1:14 / Hebrews, 13:5 / I John, 4:4-
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 14 120d-121c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT i 256b,d; BK VII, SECT 9 280b-c
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 16, 75c-d / Fifth Ennead, TR vni, CH 7 242d-243c
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 2-3 lb-2a; BK III, par 10 ISb-d; par 18 18b; BK iv, par25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; BK vi, par 4 36a-b; BK VII, par 1-2 43b-44a; par 7 45a-d; par 21 49d- 50a; BK x, par 8-10 73b-74a; BK XH, parlOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a / City of God, BK VH, CH 6, 248a; CH 30 261 b-d; BK x, CH307c-308a; BK XH, CH 25 358b-359a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 12 627c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 8 34c- 38c; Q 51, A 3, REP 3 277a-278c; Q 52, A279b-280a; Q 90, A i 480d-481d; PART i-n, Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART II-H, Q 26, A 2, REP 3 511a-d; PART HI SUPPL, Q 84, AREP i 984c-985d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xxxm [76- 93] 157a
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 428c-d
31 DESCARTES: Mediations, vi, 99c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics^ PART 1 355a-372d esp DBF 3-355b, AXIOM 1-2 355c-d, PROP 2-8 355d-357d, PROP 10, SCHOL 358a-b, PROP 13, COROL-PROP 1 8 359d-363c, PROP 22-23 364d-365a, PROP365b, PROP 28-31 365c-367a, PROP 33 367b- 369a; PART II, PROP i-n 373d-377c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK xi [334-346] 306b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 370a-371a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xiii, SECT 18 152a-c; CH xv, SECT 2-4 162c- 163b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 149-442d-443b; SECT 155 444b-c
42 KANT P Pure Reason, 192c-d / Practical Reason, 334b-335b; 351b-352c / Judgement, 580c-d; 592a-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156d- 157b; PART i, 224a-b; 227d-228a
51 TOLSTOY- War and Peace, BK v, 217c-218a; BK xiv, 608a-b; BK xv, 631a-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 153b-d

5e. The transcendence of God: the divine aseity

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 15:11 / / Samuel, 2-(D) I Kings, 2-2/1 Chronicles, 17-20 (D) I Paralipomenon, 17:20 / Job, 11:7-9; 33:12; 35:6-7; 36:22-42:3 / Psalms, 89.6-8; 97:9; 99:2; 113*4-5 (P) w/ww, 88.7-9, 96:9; 98 .2, 112:4-57 Isaiah, 29:16; 40:12-26; 45:9; 46:5,9; 55.8-9 (D) Isaias, 29:16; 40:12-26; 45:9; 46:5,9; 55:8-9 / Daniel, 4:35 (D) Daniel, 4 :
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 11:22; 12:(D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 11:23; 12-12 / Ecclesiasticus, 16:20-21; 18:4-7 (P) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 16:20-21; 18:2-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 3*31 / Acts, 7:47-50 / Romans, 9:19-21 / Ephesians^ 1:19-23; 4:6 / I Timothy, 6:15-
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 10 [1075* 12-16] 605d
9 ARISTOTLE: Motion of Animals, CH 3 [699*11!- CH 4 [700*5] 234a-235a CHAPTER 29: GOD
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 2-3 lb-2a; BK III, par 10, 15c-d; BK vi, par 4 36a-b; BK vii, par 17 49a; BK x, par 8-10 73b-74a / Ctty of God, BK vu, CH 30 261b-d; BK xu, CH353a-354a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP i 14b-15b; A 8 19d-20c; Q 8, A i, ANS and REP 1,3 34d-35c; Q 18, A 4 107d-108c; Q 51, A 3, REP 3 277a-278c; Q 61, A 3, REP 2 316a d; Q 90, A i, ANS 480d-481d; Q 103, A 2 529a- 530a; PART I-H, Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, n [112- 148] 109a-b; xin [52-66] 126a; xix [40-66] 135c-d; xxvin 148d-150b; xxix [127-145] 151c-d
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, HQb-llIsi', 123c-d; 158b-159a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK III, CH vi, SECT ii-i2 271b-272b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vii, DIV 56 475a-b
42 KANT Pure Reason, 192c-d / Practical Reason, 334b-335b; 342c / judgement, 566c-d; 580c-d

5f. God's knowledge: the divine omniscience; the divine ideas

0 OLD TESTAMENT. Deuteronomy, 31 119-21 / I Samuel, 2 3; 16.7 (D) / Kings, 2:3; 16:7 / / Chronicles, 28:9 (D) / Parahpomenon,/ Job, 12:12-25; 21:22; 22:12-14; 24:1; 28:3,10-28; 34:21-25; 42:2-3 / Psalms, 33:3- 15; 44:20-21; 69.5, 73.11; 94:7-12; 113-4-6; 139; 147 4-5,15-18 (D) Psalms, 32.3-15; 43-21-22; 68-6; 72-11; 937-12; 112-4-6; 138; 146:4-5; 147:15-18 / Proverbs, 3:19-20; 5:21; 15:3,11; 16:2; 24:12 / Isaiah, 29:15-16; 40:13- 14,27-28, 46.9-10; 47:io-n--(D) Isaias, 29-15-16; 40.13-14,27-28; 46 9-10; 47 10-/ Jeremiah, 1-5; 16:14-17; 17:9-10; 20-12; 23:23-24 (D) Jeremias, 1:5; 16:14-17; 17:9- 10; 20:12; 23:23-
0 APOCRYPHA. Rest of Esther, 13:12; 14:14-19 (D) OT, Esther, 13.12; 14*14-19 / Wisdom of Solomon, i-6-n (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 1:6-11 / Ecclesiasticus, 15:18-19; 16:17-19; 17:15,17-20; 23:18-20; 39:19-20; 42:18-(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:19-20; 16:16-20; 17 13-17; 23.25-29; 39-24-25; 42.18-22 / Susanna, 42-44 (D) OT, Daniel, 13:42-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 1:1-3; 6:64,70-71; 14-Romans, 8:27; 11:33-36 / I Corinthians, 1:25; 2:6-16; 3.18-20 / Colosstans, 2:2-3 / Hebrews, 4:12-13 / I John, 3:18-
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 140d / Ttmaeus, 465d / Parmenides, 489d-490d / Laws, BK x, 766d- 767c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK i, CH 2 [98a b 28- 983*11] 501 a- b; BK xn, CH602d-603a; CH 9 605a-d; CH606c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 14 120d-121c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK vi, SECT 44, 278b
17 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR ix 136a-138a,c / Fifth Ennead, TR i, CH 4 209d-210c; CH 6-211a-212c; TR in, CH 8-13 219d-224b; TR iv, CH 2-TR ix, CH 14 227b-251d
18 AUGUSTINE '.Confessions, BKXii,pari8,103a-b; BK xni, par 19 115c-d / City of God, BK v, CH 9-10 213b-216c; BK vii, CH 30 261b-d; BK xi, CH 10 327d-328d; CH 21 333a-d; BK xn, CH 17-18 353a-354d; BK xx, CH 15 543d-544b; BK XXH, CH 2 587b-588a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 9-10 627a-b; CH 13 627d; CH634b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Thcologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP i 14b-15b; A 6, REP i 18c-19a; Q 4, A 2, REP 3 21b-22b; QQ 14-15 75c-94a; Q 18, A107d-108c; Q 19, A 3, REP 6 HOb-lllc; Q 34, A 3, ANS and REP 3-4 188b-189a; Q 44, A240b-241a; Q 55, A i, ANS and REP 3 289a-d; A 2, ANS and REP i 289d-290d; A 3, ANS and REP i 291a-d; Q 56, A 2, ANS 292d-294a; Q 57, A i, ANS 295a-d; A 2, ANS 295d-297a; A 3, ANS 297b-298a; A 4, ANS 298a-299a; Q 62, A 9, ANS 324a-325b; Q 63, A 7, REP 2 331c-332b; Q 79, A 10, REP 2 423d-424d; Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b- 443c; A 4, REP i 444d-446b; A 5 446c-447c; Q 85, A 4, ANS 457a-d; Q 86, A 4, ANS 463d- 464d; Q 87, A i, ANS 465a-466c, A 3, ANS 467b- 468a; Q 89, A i, ANS 473b-475a; Q 93, A 4, ANS 494c-495b; A 8, ANS 499b-500c; Q 105, A 3 540c-541b; Q 107, AA 2-3 550b-551c; PART I-H, Q i, A 4, REP i 612a-613a; Q 2, A 3, ANS 617b-618a; Q 3, A 5, REP i 626b-627a; Q 14, A i, REP 2 677b-678a; Q 40, A 3, REP i 794c- 795a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 51, A i, REP 2 12b-13c; Q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 79, A i, ANS 156b-157b; Q 91, A 3, REP i 209d-210c; Q 93, A i 215b,d-216c; Q 100, A 9, ANS 261b-262b; Q 102, A i, ANS 270c-271b; Q no, A 2, REP 2 349a-d; PART II-n, Q 2, A 6, REP 3 395b-396a; Q 9, A i, REP i 423c-424b; Q n, A 4, REP i 441b-442b; Q 33, A 7, REP i 556a-557d; PART HI, Q 3, A 8, ANS 729b-730b; Q 5, A 4, ANS 739a-740b; Q 7, A 12, ANS 754c- 755c; Q 13, A i, REP 2 780a-781b; Q 18, A 4, REP i 813a-d; Q 21, A i, REP 2 823d-824d; Q 60, A 4, ANS 849c-850b; PART in SUPPL, Q 72, A i, ANS and REP 5 917c-919a; A 2, REP 4 919a- 920c; Q 84, A 2, ANS 984c-985d; Q 88, A 3, ANS 1002d-1004b; Q 91, A 3, ANS 1020d-1022c; Q 92, A i, REP 2 1025c-1032b; Q 94, A i, REP1040d-1041b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vm [94- 112] 118a; xv [49-63] 128d-129a; xvn [13-45] 132b>c; xxvi [103-108] 146d-147a
22 CHAUCER: Troilusand Cressida, BK iv, STANZA 138-154 lQ6b-lQ&b/Nun'sPriest'sTale[i5,2$6- 256] 456b-457a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART 11, 162c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 17b-c / Novum Organum, BK i, APH 23 108c; APH133c-d; BK II, APH 15 149a 5g to 5h (5. The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures, If. God's knowledge: the divine omniscience; the divine ideas.)
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, in, 86a / Objections and Replies, 122a-b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 17 362b-363c; PROP 21, DEMONST 364a-C; PROP 33, SCHOL367d-369a; PART II, PROP i 373d-374a; PROP 3-4 374a-c; PROP 7, SCHOL-PROP 8 375b-376a; PROP 32 385c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [188-193] 115b ? BK III [56-134] 136b-138a; BK x [1-16] 274b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH x, SECT 9 143a-c; CH xv, SECT 12 165b-c; BK III, CH vi, SECT 3 268d; SECT n 271b-d; BK iv, CH x, SECT 5-6 350a-c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 78, 485d-486a
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 344a-c; 351b-352c / judgement, 592a-c
44 BoswELL:/0A/MO, 173c; 392d-393a

5g. God's will: divine choice

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1-2 / Psalms, 135:(D) Psalms, 134:6 / Isaiah, 14:24-27; 46:9-~(D) Isaias, 14:24-27; 46:9-11 / Jeremiah, 4:28; 51:29 (D) Jeremias, 4:28; 51:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 18:14; 20:1-16 / John, 5:21; 6:38-40 / Romans, 8:27-29; 9-11- 19; 12:1-2 // Corinthians, 12 / Ephesians, r8- 12; 3:10-11 / / Thessalonians, 4.3-6; 5:18 / // Timothy, i :8-io / James, i :i
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [86-103] 2a-b
5 EURIPIDES. Bacchantes [1388-1391] 352a,c
7 PLATO: Timaeus, 45 2c
12 EPICTEFUS: Discourses, BK iv, CH 3, 224d; CH 7, 232d-233a
12 AURELIUS- Meditations, BK III, SECT n 262a-b
17 PLOTINUS: Sixth Ennead, TR vin 342d-353d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VII, par 6-7 44d- 45d; BK xi, par 12 92b; BK XH, par 18, 103a-b; BK xin, par 5 Hid; par 19 115c-d / City of God, BK v, CH 9-10 213b-216c; BK x, CH302d-303a; BK xn, CH 14 350d-351b; CH353a-354a, BK xxi, CH 7-8 565d-568d; BK xxn, CH 2 587b-588a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 14, A 8, ANS 82c-83b; Q 19 108d-119d; Q 20, A i, REP 3 120a-121b; A 4, ANS 122c-124a; Q 23, A135a-d; Q 25, A 5, ANS and REP i 147d-149a; Q 26, A 2, REP 2 150c-151a; Q 50, A i, ANS 269b- 270a; Q 54, A 2, ANS 285d*286c; Q 57, A 5, ANS 299b-300b; Q 59, A 2, ANS 307c-308b; Q 60, A i, REP 2 310b-311a; Q 61, A 2, REP 1,3 315c- 316a; Q 62, A 6, REP i 322a-d; Q 63, A i, ANS 325c-326c; Q 104, AA 3-4 537b-538c; Q 105, A i, REP 2 538d-539c; PART 1-11, Q i, A 2, REP610b-611b; Q 10, A i, REP 2 662d-663d; Q 19, AA 9-10 709d-711d; Q 39, A 2, REP 3 790d-791b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 93, A 4, REP i 218b-d; Q 97, A 3, REP i 237b-238b; PART in, Q 18, A i, REP 1,4 810a-811c; Q 21, A i, ANS 823d-824d; A 4, ANS 826b-827c; Q 61, A 4, REP 3 857c-858b; Q 64, A 7, ANS 875d- 876c; PART in SUPPL, Q 72, A 3, ANS and REP920c-922b; Q 74, A 4, ANS 928d-929d, Q 91, A i, REP 2 1016b-1017c; A 2, ANS 1017c-1020c, Q 92, A 3, REP 6 1034b-1037c
21 DANTE: Dwme Comedy, PARADISE, in [64-90] HOa-b; xix [85-90] 135d-J36a
23 HOBBES. leviathan, PART II, 113b-c, 162c; PART iv, 271b
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK iv, 265b
30 BACON. Advancement of Learning, 38a
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 228a-c, 229c
31 SPINOZA. Ethics, PART i, PROP 17 362b-363c; PROP 32 367a-b; PROP 33, SCHOL 2 367d-369a; APPENDIX, 370c-371a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [80-134] 137a- 138a; BK VII [139-173] 220a-221a / Samson Agonistes [300-329] 346a-b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxi, SECT 50-51 191 b-c
35 BERKELEY Human Knowledge, SECT 25-417d-419a esp SECT 29-30 418c
41 GIBBON. Decline and Fall, 150c-151b
42 KANT: Fund. Prtn. Metaphysic of Morals, 265b-c csp 265b,d [fn i]; 276b-277a; 278b-c / Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 321b-c; 324b- 32Sa; 325d-326a, 328b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 393c-d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 272a-b; BK xn, 553b; BK xin, 563a-b; BK xv, 631c; EPILOGUE ii, 675a-677b; 680b-c; 684b-d

5h. God's love: the diffusion of the divine goodness

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 33 19; 34:6 / Deuteronomy, 4:37-38; 7:7-8; 10:15,18; 32:4 / / Chronicles, i6:7~34--(D) / Parahpomenon, 16:7-34 / Job passim, csp 2-10 / Psalms / Proverbs, 3:12 / Song of Solomon (D) Cantick of Canticks / Isaiah, 43; 45:7; 63:7-(D) Isaias, 43; 45:7; 63 7-9 / Jeremiah, 31 :i-6; 32:17-44; 33:1-16 (D) Jeremias, 31:1-6; 32*17-44; 33-1-16 / Lamentations, 3*25,38 / Ezefycl, 16:1-15 (D) Ezechiel, 16:1-15 / Ho- sea, 1-3; n (D) Osee, 1-3; 11 / Joel, 2:12- 3 :2 ' Micah, i -12 (D) Micheas, i :i2 / Zechariah, 9:17 (D) Zacharias, 9:17 / Malachi, 1:1-3 (D) Malachias, 1:1-
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobtt, 13:10 (D) OT, Tobias, 13:12 / Wisdom of Solomon, 7:28; 11:22-26; 12:13-16; 16:20-29^(0) OT, Boof( of Wisdom, 7:28; 11:23-27; 12:13-16; 16:20-29 / Ecclesutsticus, 4:14; 11:14-17; 16:29-30; 17.8- 18,29; 33:10-15; 39:16,25-34 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 4:15; 11:14-17; 16:30-31; 17 18-18,28;
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew^ 6:25-34; 7 : 7~ ir J 10:29-31 / Lufa 11:1-13; 12:6-7,16-33 /John, 5h to 5i CHAPTER 29: GOD 3:16-21; 13:31-35; 14:21; 15:9-16; 17:21-26 / Romans, 2:4; 5:5; 8:28-39 / // Corinthians, 13:11 / Galatians, 2:20 / Ephesians, 3:14-21; 5:1-2 / / Timothy, 1:14 / Titus, 3:3-7 / He- brews, 12:6 / I John, 3-4 / Revelation, 3:19-(D) Apocalypse, 3:19-
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 321d-322d / Timaeus, 447c-448a
8 ARISTOTLE : Generation and Corruption, BK 11, CH 10 [336 b 25~34] 438d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK II, CH 8 146a-147c
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompihus, 50d-51c
16 KEPLER- Harmonies of the World, 1049b- 1050b;1071b
17 PLOTINUS: Sixth Ennead, TR ix, CH 9 358d- 359c
18 AUGUSTINE- Confessions, BK i, par 7 2c-d; par 31 8d-9a; BK v, par 2 27b-c; BK VII, par 16-48c-50c; BK xi, par 6 90c-d; BK xn, par 18, 103a-b; BK xm, par 1-5 HOd-llld / City of God, BK VII, CH 31 261d-262a; BK xi, CH 21-333a-336a; BK xn, CH i, 343b-c; CH 9 347b- 348b; BK xix, CH 13 519a-520a; BK xxi, CH 15-16 572c-574a; BK xxn, CH i 586b,d-587b; CH 24 609a~612a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 31-32 633b-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 3, REP i 12c-14a; Q 3, A i, REP i 14b-15b; Q 6, A 4 30b-d; Q 13, A 2, ANS 63c-64d; Q 19, A 2, ANS and REP 2-4 109c-110b; A 4, ANS and REP i lllc-112c; Q 20 119d-124a; Q 21, A 3, ANS 126a-c; Q 27, AA 3-4 155c-156d; Q 37 197c- 200c; Q 44, A 4, ANS and REP i 241a-d; Q264d-268a,c; Q 50, A i, ANS 269b-270a; A 3, ANS 272a-273b; Q 51, A i, REP 3 275b-276b; Q 59, A i, ANS 306c-307b; A 2, ANS 307c-308b; Q 60, A 5 313b-314c; Q 74, A 3, REP 3-4 375a- 377a,c; Q 75, A 5, REP i 382a-383b; Q 82, A 5, REP i 435c-436c; Q 89, A i, REP 3 473b-475a; Q 91, A i, ANS 484a-485b; Q 93, A 4, ANS 494c- 495b; A 8, ANS 499b-500c; Q 103 528a-534b passim; Q 104, A 3, REP 2 537b-d; A 4, ANS 538a-c; Q 105, A 4, ANS 541c-542a; Q 106, A 4, ANS 548b-549a; PART i-n, Q i, A 4, REP i 612a-613a; Q 2, A 4, REP i 618a-d; A 5, REP618d-619c; Q 22, A 3, REP 3 722d-723b; Q 28, A 3, CONTRARY 742a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 64, A 4, ANS 69b-70a; Q 65, A 5, ANS and REP74c-75a; Q 73, A 10, ANS 128a-d; Q 75, A 3, ANS 139 b-d; Q 79, A i 156b-157b; A 3, REP i 158a-d; A 4, REP 1 158d-159c; Q 90, PREAMBLE, 205a; Q 92, A i, REP i 213c-214c; Q 93, A 6, REP i 219d-220d; Q 96, A 5, REP 2 233d-234d; Q 1 10, A i 347d-349a; A 4, ANS 350d-351d; Q in, A 3, REP i 353d-354b; PART II-n, Q 6, A 2, REP 2 414c-415c; Q 19, A i, REP 3 465a-d; A 5, REP 3 468b-469a; Q 23, A 2, REP 1-483d-484d; Q 24, A 2, ANS 490b-d; A 3, ANS 491a-d; A 8, ANS 495b-496a; A 11, REP i 498b- 499c; A 12, ANS 499c-500d; Q 26, A 3, ANS 51l4-512c; Q 30, A 2, REP i 534b-535a; Q 189, A 10, REP 1 699a-700d; PART in, Q i, A 3, REP704d-706a; Q 4, A 5, REP 2 734b-d; Q 23, A i, REP 2 833a-d; Q 62, A 2, CONTRARY 859d-860c; PART HI SUPPL, Q 71, A 3, REP 1 903c-904dj Q 80, A 3, REP 3 958b-959c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, i [37-40] Ib-c; PURGATORY, HI [103-145] 57a-c; xi [1-30] 68d- 69a; xv [40-81] 75d-76a; xxvni [91-96] 97a; PARADISE, n [112-148] 109a-b; vn [64-75] 115d-116a; x [i-27]120b-c;xm [52-^7] 126a-b; xix [86-90] 135d-136a; xxvi [1-81] 145d-146c; xxvii [97-120] 148b-c; xxix [13-36] 150b-c; [127-145] 151c-d; xxxii [i39]-xxxin [145] 156al57d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK m, STANZA 1-7 54b-55b; STANZA 250-253 87a-b; BK v, STANZA 263-267 154b-155a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 229c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART v, PROP i7,coROL456d; PROP 19 45 7a; PROP 35-36 460d-461c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [80-343] 137a- 143a esp [135-166] 138b-139a; BK iv [411-439] 161b-162a; BK VII [499-518] 228a-b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 12 115b-116a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, INTRO, SECT405b-c; SECT 154 444a-b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, I86c-d
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 345a-c / Judgement, 592a-c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 539d~540a
48 MELVILLE- Moby Dtd(, 318b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 272a-b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK II, 24a-c; BK v, 120d-137c; BK vi, 153a-d; BK VII, 189a-191a,c; BK xi, 313c-314d

5i. Divine justice and mercy: divine rewards and punishments

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 3:1-4:16; 6-9; 11:1-9; 18:17-19 29; 22:1-19 CS P 22:15-18 / Exodus, 7-12; 20:3-7; 32 csp 32.9-14; 33:19; 34:5-10 / Leviticus, 26 / Numbers, 11-14; I ^ 21 : 5"95 2 5 / Deuteronomy, i-n passim; 28-32 passim /Samuel, 15 (D) I Kings, 15 / // Samuel, 6:6- 8; 24-(D) // Kings, 6:6-8; 24/7 Kings, 8; 13; 14:2-16 (D) III Kings, 8; 13; 14:2-16 / 11 Kings, 9:1-10:11 (D) IV Kings, 9:i-io'ii /7 Chronicles, 10:13-14; 21 (D) I Paralipomenon, 10:13-14; 21 / II Chronicles, 6; 12; 19:6-7; 21:12-20; 26:16-21 (D) 77 Paralipomenon, 6; 12; 19.6-7; 21:12-20; 26:16-21 / Nehemiah, 9:5-38 (D) UEsdras, 9:5-38 /Job/ Psalms/ Proverbs, n :i, 20-21; 20:22; 22:22-23 / Ecclesiastes, 12:14 / Isaiah passim, esp i, 3-4, 10, 13- 27. 30. 34-35. 4o 42. 47. 52-53* 59* 65-66- (D) Isaias passim, csp i, 3-4, 10, 13-27, 30, 34-35, 40, 42, 47, 52-53, 59, 65-66 / Jeremiah passim, csp 3-8, 15, 19, 24-25, 29-31, 33, 46-(D) Jeremias passim, esp 3-8, 15, 19, 24-25, 29-31, 33, 46-52 / Lamentations / Ezcfyl 5/ (5, The divine nature in relation to the world or creatures. 5i. Divine justice and mercy: divine rewards and punishments.) passim, csp 4-9, 11, 14-18, 25-33, 35-(D) Ezechiel passim, csp 4-9, n, 14-18, 25- 33, 35-39 /Daniel, 4:4-5:31 (D) Daniel 4-/ Joel/ Amos / Obadiah (D) Abdias / Jonah (D) Jonas / Micah(D) Micheas / Nahum / Habak$(uk-(D) Habacuc / Zephamah(D) Sophonias / Zechanah (D) Zacharias / Maiachii-(D) Malachias
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 2-3; 13 (D) OT, Tobias, 2-3; n /Judith, 5 (D) OT, Judith, 5 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1-5; 11:23; I2 (P) OT, Bool( of Wisdom, 1-5 ; 1 1 124 ; 12 / Ecclesiasticus, 16; 17*19-29; 18:1-14; 23:18-21; 35; 39:25-(D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 16; 17:16-28; 18:1- 14; 23:25-31; 35; 39:30-37 / Susanna (D) OT, Daniel, 13 / Bel and Dragon, 23-42 (D) OT, Daniel, 14:22-42 / // Maccabees, 6.12-(D) OT, // Machabees, 6-12-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:1-22,29-30,45; 9-9-13; 11:20-24; 12:36-37; 13:24-30,36-43; 18:7-14; 19:16-20:16; 23 / Marl(, 9:37-47; 10:17-31; 16:16 / Lu^e, 1:46-5556:36-3857:36- 50; 10:25-28; 14:7-14; 15; 16:19-31; 18:1-8; 19:1-10; 23-34,39-43 / John, 5:30; 8:1-11 / Acts, 12-18-23; 13:1-12 / Romans, 1:16-2 '16; 6:23; 9-14-18 / // Corinthians, 4 / Galatians, 6:7-8 / Ephesians, 2/11 Thessalonians, 1 13-10; 2:10-12 / // Timothy, 4:8 / Titus, 3:4-6 / Hebrews, 10:26-31 / / Peter, 3:18 /// Peter / I John, 1 15-10 / Jude / Revelation passim, csp 17-20 (D) Apocalypse passim, csp 17-
5 AESCHYLUS Suppliant Maidens [1-175] la-3a / Agamemnon [636-781] 58d-60b; [1560-1566] 68c / Eumenides 8 la 91 d
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King 99a413a,c esp [1-275] 99a-101c, [703-738] 105d-106a, [863- 910] 107b-c, [1187-1285] mb-llla / Antigone [279-289] 133c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a- 130a,cesp [521-545] 119a-b, [939-1014] 123a-d, [1254-1396] 125d-126d / Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [430-459] 146d-147a, [748-783] 149c-d / Electra [173-179] 157c / Trachimae [1264-1278] 181c / Philoctetes [446-452] I86a
5 EURIPIDES : Suppliants [598-617] 263c-d / Hecuba [1023-1033] 361c-d / Heracles Mad [772- 780] 371c-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 20b-22a; BK II, 77a-b; BK iv, 158d-159d esp 159d; BK vi, 199c-d; 201d-202c; 203a-b; BK VIII, 278d- 279a;283d;BKix,308a-c
6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK v, 506b-c; BK vii, 560a
7 PLATO: Republic, BK x, 437c-441a,c / Laws, BK iv, 682d-683a; BK ix, 757a; BK x, 765d- 769d csp 767c-768c / Seventh Letter, 80a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK HI [978- 1023] 42d-43b; BK vi [43-79] 80d-81b; [379- 422] 85b-d
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 26b-27a / Camillus, 107b-d / Aristides, 265c-d / Cato the Younger, 639d
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK i, 189d-190a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK II, par 15 12b-c; BK v, par 2 27b-c; BK vii, par 5 44c-d; BK ix, par 34-36 70c-71a / City of God, BK v, CH 10- ii 215c-216d; CH 14-26 220a-230a,c; BK ix, CH 10 291a; BK xi, CH 23 334c-335c; BK xm, CH 1-8 360a-363c; CH 12-16 365d-367d; BK xm, CH 2I-BK xiv, CH 28 371a-397d csp BK xiv, CH 15 388d-390a, CH 26 39Sd-396c; BK xv, CH 24-25 418d-419b; BK xvi, CH425b-426a; BK xix, CH 10-13 516c-520a; CH521a-c; BK xx 530a-560a,c; BK xxi 560a- 586a,c esp CH 11-12 570b-571c, CH 18 574c- 575b, CH 24 577b-579d; BK xxn 586b,d-618d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 15 628b-c; CH 32 633c-d; BK II, CH 23 648a-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 19, A 6 113c-114d; A 9, ANS 116d-117d; Q 21 124b- 127c; Q 23, A 5 13Sd-137d; Q 62 317c-325b, Q 63, A 8, ANS 332c-333b; Q 64, A 2, REP335d-336d; Q 65, A 2, REP 3 340b-341b; Q 66, A 3, ANS 347b-348d; Q 95, A 4 509b-510a; Q 96, A 3, REP 3 512a-c; Q 103, A 5, REP 2 531b-532b; Q 105, A 6, REP 2 543b-544a; Q 113, A 7, ANS 580b-581a; Q 114, A i, REP i 581d-582c; PART I-H, Q 5, A i 636d-637c; A 4, ANS 639a-640b; A 7 642a-d; Q 17, A 9, REP 3 692d-693d; Q 21, A 4 719d-720a,c; Q 39, A 2, REP 3 790d-791b; Q 47, A i, REP i 819c-820b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 62, A i 60a-d; Q 63, A65a-d; Q 68, A 2 89c-90c; Q 72, A 5 115a-116b; Q 73, A 9, REP 3 126d-128a; A 10, REP 2 128a-d; Q 79, AA 3-4 158a-159c; Q 81, A 2, REP i 164d- 165c; Q 85, A 5, ANS 181d-182d; A 6 182d-184a; QQ 87-88 185c-198d; Q 91, A 6 212c-213c; Q 94, A 5, REP 2 224d*225d; Q 98, A 2, REP 3 240c- 241b; A 4 242b-243c; Q 100, A 7, REP 3 258c- 259c; A 8, REP 2-3 259d-261a; A 12 264d-265d; Q 103, A 2 299b-300d; Q 106, A 2 322b-323a; Q 112, A 4, REP i 358d-359c; QQ 113-114 360d- 378a,c; PART II-ii, Q 13, A 4, ANS 446c-447a; Q 14, A 2, ANS 448d-449d; Q 18, A 4, REP464c-465a; Q 19, A i, REP 2 465a-d; Q 20, A i, ANS 474d-475d; Q 21, A 2, ANS 479a-c; Q 24, A 10, AKS 496d<498a; Q 28, A 3 528d-529c; Q 182, A 2 621d-623a; Q 184, A 4, ANS and REP i 632c-633c; PART HI, Q 2, A n 721c-722b; Q 9, A 2 764c-765a; Q 64 870b-879c; PART in SUPPL, Q 69, A 2 886c-887d; Q 70, A 3 897d- 900d; Q 71 900d-917b passim; Q 72, A 3, REP 4 920c-922b; QQ 73-74 922b-935a,c passim; Q 75, A i 935b-937a; Q 78, A i, ANS 947d- 949b; A 3, REP 3 950b-951a; QQ 82-99 968a ' 1085a,c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy esp HELL, nr [1-18] 4a-b, xi 15a-16b, PURGATORY, HI [103-145] 57a-c, vi [25-48] 61a-b, xix [97-126} 82c-d, PARADISE, m [i]-v [87] 109b-I13a, vn [19-120] 5i,toCHAPTER 29: GOD 115b-116b, xix [22-99] 135b-136a, xxxn [37- 84] 155a-c
22 CHAUCER: Prologue [653-662] 170b / Friar's Tale 278a-284a esp [7056-7085] 281a-b, [7227- 7246] 284a / Physician's Tale 366a-371a esp [12,212-220] 370b-371a / Pardoner's Tale [12,397-852] 374a-381b / Tale of Meltbeus, par 42-45, 419b-420a; par 77-78, 431a-432a / Mon^s Tale 434a-448b / Parson's Tale 495a- 550a esp par 10 498b-502a, par 56 S27b-528b, par 68 533b-534a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 88c-89a; PART 11, 160c-161a; 163d-164a; PART in, 191b-198a; 245b-c; PART iv, 250c-251c; 253b 258b; 260b-c; 272b-c; 276d-277a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 98c-99a; 152d-153a; 250a-251c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard III, ACT i, sc iv [42- 63] 115a-b; [186-225] 116c-117a / Richard II, ACT i, sc ii [1-44] 322d-323a / Merchant of Venice, ACT iv, sc i [184-202] 427c
27 SHAKESPEARE- Hamlet, ACT i, sc v [9-22] 37a; ACT in, sc in [36-98] 53d-54b / Measure for Measure, ACT n, sc n [73-79] 182d / Cymbeline, ACT v, sc iv [9-28] 481a-b
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART i, 71c-d
31 DESCARTES' Meditations, 69b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, APPENDIX, 369b-371a esp 370b
32 MILTON: Sonnets, xv 66b / Paradox Lost, BK III [80-216] 137a-140a esp [i3i-i34]138a;[274- 415] 141b-144b esp [397-411] 144a-b; BK v [224-247] 180a-b, BK x 274a-298b esp [1-16] 274b, [162-223] 278a-279a, [1046^1104] 297a- 298b; BK xi [46-83] 300a-301a; BK xn [285- 465] 325b-329a / Samson Agomstes [293-299] 346a; [667-709] 354a-355a; [1156-1177] 364b- 365a; [1669-1707] 376a-b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 497 259b- 260a; 513 262a-263a; 562 273a; 584 276b- 277a
35 LOCKE* Toleration, 17a-b / Civil Government, CH in, SECT 20 29c-d, CH xvi, SECT 176 66a>b / Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 5-105a-c; SECT 12-13 107b-108c; CH in, SECT113c; BK II, CH xxi, SECT 54, 192b; SECT194c-d; SECT 72 198a-c; CH xxvin, SECT230a; BK iv, CH xiv, SECT 2 364c
35 HUME: Human Understanding^ SECT xi, DIV 108-109 500b-501a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 20b-21a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK XH, 85d- , 869; BK xxvi, 219a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 237b-238b / Intro, Mctafhysic of Morals^ 383b,d-384a,c / Science of Right, 432c<433a / Judgement, 592a-c; 594d l fn 'l
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 458a-b
44 BOSWEUL: Johnson, 345 b-c; 394a-c; 482a-d; 539d-540a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 234d- 235a . , ,
47 GOETHE: Faust esp PART II [11,676-12,111] 284a-294b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic\, 30a-36b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xiv, 606a-607a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK m,64c- 67a; BK v, 125d-127d; BK vi f 151a-152a; 163b- 164a; 169c-170b; BK VII, 177d-178b; 185a-c; 189a-191a,c; BK VIII, 217c-218c; BK xi, 313c- 314d; 341c-342c
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 878a-b

6. Man's knowledge of God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 33:12-23 /Job, 11 7-9; 26:14; 34:29; 36:23-33 / Proverbs, 2:1-5 / Ecclcsiastcs, 3:11; 8:16-17; n '5 / Isaiah, 40:12- 14 ; 45:15 155:8-9; 60 :i6(Z>) /flf/aj, 40:12-14; 45:15; 55:8-9; 60-16 /Jeremiah, 24:7; 31:(D)Jeremias, 24 .7;
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:13-16; 15:-(D) OT, Boo^of 'Wisdom, 9:13-16; 15:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Acts, 17:22-30 / Romans, i .18- 21 ; 11:33-34 / / Corinthians, 2:16; 15:
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 93d-94a; 106b / Republic, BK u, 314c-d / Ttrnaeus, 44 7c / Cnttas, 478b d / Laws, BK vii, 730a-c; BK x, 757d-761c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK i, CH 2 [982 b 28-983 a n] 501a-b; BK xi, CH 7 [io64*28- b 5] 592d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 6, llOc-lllc; CH 12, 118d-119a; CH 16 121d-122d
14 PLUTARCH': Numa Pompihus, 53b-c
18 AUGUSTINE v Confessions, BK vi, par 8 37b-c; BK x 71c-89a / City of God, BK xx, CH 2-531a 532b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH626a-b; CH 8-n 626c-627c, BK II, CH 7 638d- 639c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A i lOd-lld; Q 12 50b-62b; Q 13, AA 1-2 62c-64d; A 5, ANS 66b-67d; A 12 74c-75b; Q 86, A 2, REP i 462a-463a; Q 87, A 3 472c-473a
21 DANTE: Dwjne Comedy, PURGATORY, m [34- 45] 56b; PARADISE, iv [28-48] Ilia; [124-132] 112a; v [1-12] 112a-b; xm [112-142] 126c-d; xix [1-99] 135a-136a; xx [79-93] 137c; [130- 138] 138a; xxi [73-102] 139a-b; xxvi [13-69] 146a-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 160b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Ew0>tf,98b-99a;209a-d;212a-d; 238c-239c; 207c-268a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b- 20a; 38a; 55b-d; 95d-101d esp 95d-97c
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART i, 43c; PART iv 51b-54b passim / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 74a,c; in-iv, 81d-89b esp HI, 88d-89a; v 93a-96a / Objections and Replies, 108a-114c; 120c-123a; 127b-c; POSTULATE iv-v 131a-c; PROP i-ui 132b-133a; 140b; 158b^l61d; 168d- 169a; 211c-212a; 212c-213a; 213d-214a;215b-c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP n, softoL 358d-359b; PART II, PROP 5 374c-d; PRJOP 21- 42 38^d-388c esp PROP 24-2 5 383c-384a, PROP PROP 36 38^b; PROP 45-6a to 6b (6. Man's knowledge of God.) 390a-391a; PART iv, PROP 28 431c; PROP 36-434a-436a; APPENDIX, iv 447b-c; PART v, PROP 24-32 458d-460b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [114-130] 234b- 235a; [412-416] 241a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 194, 205d-206a; 229-213a-b; 233, 214a-b; 242-290 217b-225a; 566*567 273b; 586 277a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 7-18 113d-117c; BK II, CH xvn, SECT i 167d-168a; SECT 17 172b-c; CH XXIH, SECT 33-35 ai2d-213c;BK III, CHVi,SECTii271b-d; BK iv, CH xvin-xix 380d-388d
35 BERKELEY' Human Knowledge, SECT 146-442a-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 200c<201a; 308b- 309d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, la-b; 173b-248d esp 177b- 192d, 218d-223d, 234c-240b, 241d-242c / Practical Reason, 292a-c; 320c-321b; 349b- 352c csp 350c-351a; 354d-355d / Judgement, 575b-577a; 589b-590b; 598b-599b; 600d- 601c; 603a d; 606d-608c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 159b- 160a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 196a-197c

6a. The names of God: the metaphorical and symbolic representations of God; the anthropomorphic conception of God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 3:13-15; 6.2-3; 1 5 : 3> 20:7; 33:20-23; 34:5-7,14 / Leviticus, 19:12; 21.6; 22:32 / Deuteronomy, 5-11; 28*58 / II Samuel, 22 (D) II Kings, 22 / Psalms passim, esp 18, 23, 28:7; 29:1-11, 31:2-3, 61:1-8, 68:4, 71:3, 78:35, 78:65, 83:18, 95 :i-n-(D) Psalms passim, csp 17, 22, 27:7, 28:2-10, 30:3- 4, 60:2-9, 67:5, 70:3, 77:35, 77:65, 82.19, 94:1-11 / Proverbs, 18:10; 30.4 / Isaiah, 17:10; 30:27-30; 40:11; 41:4; 42.8; 44:6; 47 4; 48:2,12; 51:15; 54:5; 55:13; 63:16 (D) Isaias, 17:10; 30:27-30; 40:11; 41:4; 42:8; 44-6; 47:4; 48:2,12; 51:15; 54:5; 55:13; 63:16 / Jeremiah, 10:16; 16:21; 23:6; 31:35; 32:18; 33:2; 50:34; 51:19 (D) Jeremias, 10,16; 16:21; 23:6; 31:35; 32-18; 33:2; 50:34; 51:/ Daniel, 7 9,13 / Amos, 4:13; 5:8, 9:
0 APOCRYPHA : Wisdom of Solomon, 1 4 : 1 2-2 1 (D) OT, Bool(of Wisdom, 14:12-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 6:9 / Luke, 11:2 / John, io:i-i8/7 Cormthians, 10:4 / Revelation, 1:8; 21 :6; 22:13 (Z?) Apocalypse, 1.8; 21:6; 22:
5 AESCHYLUS: Agamemnon [160-175] 53d-54a
5 EURIPIDES: Iphigenia Among the Tauri [376- 391] 414b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 49d-50a; 60a-d; 80a-c
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 91c-92b; 93d-97d / Philcbus, 609d-610a / Laws, BK x, 759d-760c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 8 [io74 b i- 7] 604d-605a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252 b i9-27] 446a
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 853b-854a; 860a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK iv, CH n, 194c- 195b; CH 24-25 201c-202a; BK VII, CH 10-250b-251c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 6-626a-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologtca, PART i, Q i, AA 9-10 8d-10c; Q 3, A i, REP 1-5 14b-15b; A 2, REP 1-2 15c-16a; A 3, REP i 16a-d; Q 4, A i, REP i 20d-21b; Q 13 62b-75b; Q 14, A i, REP 1-2 75d-76c; QQ 27-43 153a-237a,c passim; Q 102, A i, REP 4 523d-525a, Q 113, A 7, REP i 580b-581a; PART i-n, Q 47, A i, REP i 819c- 820b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 99, A 3, REP 3 247a-248a; Q 102, A 2, ANS 271b- 272a; PART in, Q 2, A 5, ANS 715a-716b; Q 16, A 3, ANS 798c-799b; PART in SUPPL, Q 96, A 2, ANS 1052a-1053b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, iv [28-48] Ilia; xxvi [124-138] 147a-b; xxx [34-99] 152a-d 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, PART i, 54b; 79d-80a; PART II, 162c-d; PART m, 172d-173a; 181a- 182c; 183d-184a; PART iv, 271c; 272b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 238d-239b; 256c-d
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 428c-d; 443c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 60c-61b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 17, SCHOL 362c- 363c; PART ii, PROP 3, SCHOL 374b-c
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 370a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 17 117a-c; BK II, CH xin, SECT 18 152a-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 176a-b; 192c-d / Judgement, 547b-d; 593c-d; 598b-599b; 599d-600a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 248d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK xi, 345a-c
54 FREUD. Civilization and Its Discontents, 771a-b / New Introductory Lectures, 875d-876b

6b. Natural knowledge: the use of analogies; the evidences of nature; the light of reason

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Job, 12:7-9; 26:7-14; 36:24- 42-2 / Psalms, 8; 19:1-6; 65; 75:1; 95:1-6; 104; 107; 147:12-20 (D) Psalms, 8; 18*1-7; 64; 74 '2\ 94:1-6; 103; 106; 147 / Ecclesiastes, 3:11; 8:17; 11:5 / Isaiah, 45:5-8 (D) Isaias, 45:5-
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 13:1-500) OT, Boof(of Wisdom, 13:1-5 / Ecclesiasticus, 16:26-30; 18:4-7; 42:i5-43 : 33-() OT ' Ecclesiasticus, 16*26-31; 18-2-6; 42:15-43:37 / 77 Maccabees, 7:28-(D) OT, 77 Machabees, 7:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: 'Matthew, 6:26^30 / 12:24-28 / Romans, i : 18-CHAPTER 29: GOD
7 PLATO: Ttmaeus, 465d-466a / Laws, BK VII, 728b-730c; BK x, 758b-759a
8 ARISTOTLE: Heavens, BK u, CH i 375b,d-376a / Metaphysics, BK i, CH 2 (982 b 28~983*i i ] 501a-b; BK vi, CH i 547b,d-548c esp (1026*23- 33] 548b-c; BK xi, CH 7 [io64 b 6-i3] 592d-593a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 6 110c-112b; CH 9, 114c-115a; CH 16-17 121d-124a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK xn, SECT 28 310a
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 123c-124a / Coriolanus, 191d-192b / Nictas, 435b-d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK v, par i 27a-b; BK vi, par 8 37b-c; BK VII, par 16-23 48c-50c; BK x, par 8-10 73b-74a; BK xi, par 6 90c-d / City of God, BK VIII, CH 3 266a-d; BK x, CH307c-308a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH625b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, AA 1-2 10d-12c; Q 3, A i, REP 1-5 14b-15b; A 3, REP i 16a-d; A 4, REP 2 16d-17c; A 6, REP i 18c-19a; Q 12, A 4 53b-54c; AA 12-13 60d-62b; Q 32, A 1 175d-178a; Q 50, A 2, ANS 270a-272a; Q 65, A i, REP 3 339b-340b; Q 79, A 9, ANS 422b-423d; Q 86, A 2, REP i 462a-463a; Q 88, A 2, REP 4 471c-472c; A 3 472c-473a; Q 94, A i 501d-503a; Q 103, A i, ANS 528b-529a; PART i-U, Q 5, A 5, ANS 640b-641a; Q 14, A i, REP677b-678a; Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 61, A 5, ANS 58b-59d; Q 66, A 5 79b-80c; Q 68, A i, ANS and REP 2 87c-89c; Q 90, A 4, REP i 207d- 208b; Q 93, A 2 216c-217b; Q 94, A 2, ANS 221d- 223a; Q 99, A 3, REP 3 247a-248a; Q 100, A i 251b-252a; Q 109, A r, REP i 338b-339c; PART II-H, Q i, A 5, REP 4 383b-384b; Q 4, A 7, ANS 407d-409a; Q 10, A 12, REP 4 436b-437d; Q 27, A 3, REP 2 522c-523b; A 4, REP 3 523c-524a; A 6, REP 3 524c-525c; PART HI, Q 3, A 3, ANS 724c-725b; Q 12, A 3, REP 2 778b-779a; PART III SUPPL, Q 91, A I, ANS 1016b-10l7c
21 DANTE. Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, in [34- 45] 56b; PARADISE, iv [28-48] Ilia; x [1-27] 120b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 54b-c; 66a-c; 78d- 79a; 79d-80b; 83a-b; PART u, 137b~c; 149c-d; 160b; 163a-b; PART in, 165a-167b; 172d- 173a; 183d-184a; 241a-242a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 98b-99a;209a-d;212a-d; 238c-239c; 246a-d; 251c-252b; 267c-268a
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 421d; 429b
30 BACON- Advancement of Learning, 2c-4c; 17b- 20a; 38a; 39d-40a; 41b-d; 55b-c; 96c-97c esp 96d-97a / New Atlantis, 203a-b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART i, 43c; PART iv, 52a-d / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 71d- 72b; m-iv, 81d-89b; v 93a-96a / Objections and Replies, 110c-114c; 120c-122b; 127a-c; PROP mi 132b-133a; 140b; 158b-161d; 168d-169a; 211c-212a; 212c-213a; 213d-214a; 215b-c; 232b; 283d-284a; 284d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART u, DBF i 373a; PROP 45-47 390a-391a; PART iv, PROP 28 43 Ic; PROP 36-37, DEMONST434a-d; APPENDIX, iv447b-c; PART v, PROP 21-42 458a-463d esp PROP 24-458d-459a, PROP 30-33 459d-460c, PROP461a-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VII [109-130] 219b- 220a; BK VIII [114-130] 234b-235a
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 163a-164b / Pensees, 229 213a-b; 242-253 217b 220a; 263-221b-225a, 557-567 272b-273b
34 NEWTON* Principles, BK HI, GENERAL SCHOL, 371a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 12, 107c-d; CH in, SECT 7-18 113d- 117c; BK u, CH vn, SECT 6 132d; CH xvn, SECT i 167d-168a; SECT 17 172b-c; SECT 20, 173a; CH xxm, SECT 33-37 212d-214b; BK III, CH vi, SECT u 271b-d; BK iv, CHX 349c- 354c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 29-418c-419a; SECT 146-156 442a-444d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT u, DIV456b; SECT xi 497b-503c passim; SECT XH, DIV 132, 509c
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 186c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 437a
40 GIBBON. Decline and Fall, 12d-13a; 200d; 308b-309c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 33a-d; 173b-192d / Practical Reason, 320c-321b; 346b-347a; 349b- 352c; 354d-355d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 384a,c / Judgement, 547b-d; 598b- 599b; 602b-603a; 603b-d; 607d-609b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 159b- 160a; PART in, 304d-305b
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [3432-3468] 84a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 217c-d; BK vi, 248d-249a
52 DOSTOEVSKY- Brothers Karamazov,wi\, 120d- 121c

6c. Supernatural knowledge

#6c(1)  God as teacher: inspiration and revelation
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 2:15-17; 3:8-24; 9:1- 17; 17:1; 26:24; 3*> :I1 J 4 6:2 ~3 / Exodus, 3:4- 6,13-15; 4:10-12; 6:2-8; 20:1-7; 24:12; 29:45- 46; 33:11-34:8 / Leviticus, 11:44-45; 18.1-/ Numbers, 12.1-8; 15:41 / Deuteronomy, 4:1-5,10-13,32-36; 5:4-11; 18:18-22; 2929 / I Kings, 3-5-15: 8:35-36-^) /// Kings, 3 5- *5J 8 35-3 6 /M33; 343M2; 35:10-11; 38- 42 / Psalms, 25-3-5,8-12; 32-8-9; 94:10-13; 119; 143 esp 143:8-10 (D) Psalms, 24:4-5,8- 12; 31:8-9; 93:10-13; 118; 142 esp 142:8-10 / 31:8-9; 93:10-13; 118; 142 esp 142:8-10 / Proverbs, 2:5-6; 6:23 / Isaiah, 6:1-9; "'I-28:0-13; 48:3-8 (D) Isaias, 6:1-9; " ; i-3; 28:9-13; 48:3-8 / Daniel, 2\ 4 (D) Daniel, 2; 3:98-4:34/70^,2:28-
0 APOCRYPHA: Eccksiasticus, 17:5-14 (D) OT, Eccksiasticus, 17:5-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew passim, csp 4:23, 7:28-29, 10:1-20, 11:25-27, 13:1-23, 17:5, 28:18-20 / Marl( passim, csp 1:1-11, 4:1-2 / Luke passim, csp 2:41-50, 3-21-22, 8:4-15, 9:34-35, 10:21-22 / John passim, esp 3:2, 5:31-47, 10:26-27, 12:23-30, 15:15, 16.25-29, 17:6-8 / Acts, 22 :6-i4 / Romans, i :i6-2o; 10:/ / Corinthians, 2; 12:1-8 / Galatians, i :n-i2 / Ephesians, 1 19,17; 3:1-5 / // Timothy, 3:15-16 / Hebrews, i \i-y, 2 3-4 / / Peter, i :io-i2,22-25 / II Peter, 1:19-21 / I John, 2:20-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK II, par 7 lOb-c; BK iv, par 30-31 26b-27a; BK vi, par 8 37b-c; BK ix, par 23-25 68a-c; BK xi, par 2-5 89c- 90c; BK xin, par 16-18 114d-115c / City of God, BKVII, CH3o261b-d; BK x,cHi3307b-c; BK xi, CH 2-4 323a-324d; BK xix, CH523a-b; CH 22 525b-c; BK xx, CH 28 556c- 557a / Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH 15 643c- 644a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q i 3a- lOc; Q 3, A i, REP 1-5 14b-15b; Q 8, A 3, REP36b-37c; Q 12, A 13 61c-62b; Q 32 175d-180d; Q 46, A 2 253a-255a; Q 57, A 3, REP i 297b- 298a; Q 68, A i, ANS 354a-355c; Q 89, A i, REP473b-475a; A 2, REP 3 475a-d; Q 94, A 3 504a- 505a; Q 104, A 4, ANS 538a-c; Q 105, A 3 540c- 541b; Q 106, A 3, ANS and REP 2 547c-548b; Q 113, A i, REP 2 576a-d; Q 117, A i, REP i 595d-597c; A 2, REP 2 597c-598c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 63, A 3 65a d; Q 68 87c-96c; Q 91, AA 4-5 210c- 212c; Q 98, AA 2-6 240c-245b; Q 100, A 3, ANS 253a-d; Q 101, A 2, REP i 267a-268a; QQ 106- 107 321a-330d; Q in, A 4 354c-355d; Q 112, A 5, ANS 359c-360c; PART II-n, Q i, A 7, REP385c-387a; Q 2, A 10, ANS 399b-400b; Q 4, A 4, REP 3 405a-406a; Q 6, A i, ANS 413d-414c; PART in, Q i, A 3, ANS 704d-706a; Q 3, A729b-730b; Q 7, A 7 750a-d; Q n, A 6, REP775d-776b; Q 12, A 3, ANS and REP 1-2 778b- 779a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy ', PURGATORY, xxxXXXHI 99b-105d passim; PARADISE, xix [1-99] 135a-136a; xxiv [52-147] 143b-144a; xxv [64- 96] 145a-b; xxvi [25-45] W6a-b
22 CHAUCER: Second Nun's Tale [15,787-816] 467a-b 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, PART i, 83a-b; PART II, 137b-138b; 160b; PART m, 165a-167b; 176d- 177c; 181a-186c; 205 b-d; CONCLUSION, 281d- 282a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 212a; 238c-239c; 267c- 268a; 273a-b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 38a; 54b-c; 95d-101d esp 95d-96c / New Atlantis, 203a-c
31 DESCARTES : Discourse, PART i, 43c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK v [3o8]-BK VIII [653] 182a-246a esp BK VIII [283-477] 238b- 242a; BK xi [99J-BK xn [649] 301b-333a
33 PASCAL: Pcnsees, 185 205a; 585-588 277a-b; 642-692 290b-301a; 881 345b / Vacuum, 355b / Geometrical Demonstration, 440a-b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK III, CH ix, SECT 23 291b-c; BK iv, CH vn, SECTir,340b-c; CH xvi, SECT 14 371b-c; CH xvm-xix 380d- 388d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xn, DIV 132, 509c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 333d; 366c*d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 201a; 307d-308a; 346b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 227d-228a; 231a-d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 455a-c
44 Bos WELL -Johnson, 394a-b; 481d-482a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 157c-d; 159b-160a; PART in, 306c-d
51 TOLSTOY- War and Peace, BK i, 50b-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY : Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b- 137c; BK vi, 150d-153d
#6c(2) The light of faith
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 44-50 csp 44:20, 45:4, 46:15, 49:10, 50,28-29 (D) OT, Ecclestasttcus, 44-50 csp 44:21, 45:4, 46:17-18, 49.12, 50-30-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Luty, 8:4-17 / John, 6:28- 40; 10:37-38; 12:44-46; 14:1,7-11; 1627-31; 20:24-29 / Romans, 3:21-5:2; 10:14-17 / // Corinthians, 4:3-6 / / Thessalonians, 2:13 / Hebrews, 4.2; n / / Peter, 1:7-9,21-23 / 1 John, 2:20-29; 5:4-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par i la-b; BK iv, par 25 25c; BK vi, par 6-8 36c-37c; BK VII, par 16 48c-49a; BK xm, par 19 115c-d / City of God, BK x, CH 1-2 298b,d-300a; BK xi, CH323a-c; BK xix, CH 18 523a-b; BK xxi, CH563d-564d; BK xxn, CH 4-5 588b-590a; CH591c-d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 15 628 b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 2, REP i lld-12c; Q 32, A i, ANS 175d-178a; Q 46, A 2, ANS 253a-255a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 62, AA 3-4 61c-63a; Q 65, AA 4-5 73d-75a; Q 66, A 6 80c-81b; Q 67, A 3 83b-84d; A 5 85d-86d; Q ioo, A 4, REP i 253d-255a; Q 108, A 2, REP i 332b-333d; Q no, A 3, REP i 350a-d; A 4, ANS 350d-35ld; PART H-II, QQ 1-16 380a-456d; Q 45, A i, REP 2 598d-599d; PART HI, Q 14, A i, ANS 784b-785c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, n [34-45] 108a; xxiv 142d-144b
22 CHAUCER: Second Nun's Tale 463b-471b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 66a~c; PART II, 137b-d; 149c-d; 160b; PART HI, 165b-c; 172d- 173a; 209b; 209 d; 241a-242a
25 MONTAIGNE: Ew^,98b-99a; 209a-d; 212a-d; 238c-239c; 267c-268a; 294a-b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 95d- 96c / Novum Organum, BK i, APH 65 114b-c to 6V(4) CHAPTER 29: GOD
31 DESCARTES: Rules, m, 4d-5a / Discourse, PART i, 43c / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; HI, 88d-89a / Objections and Replies, 125c- 126b; 168c-169a; 232b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK XH [552-587] 331a- 332a
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 147b; 163a-164b / Pensees, 229 213a-b; 242-290 217b~225a;243b-244b; 523 264a; 561-567 272b-273b; 794-796 327b; 880-881 345b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH xvi, SECT 14 371b-c; CH XVH, SECT 24 380c-d; CH XVIH-XIX 380d-388d passim
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT x, DIV497a-b; SECT XH, DIV 132, 509c
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 379c-380a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 190c-191a; 309a-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 242a-243a / Practical Reason, 320c-321b; 345c-d; 353a-354d / Judgement, 599d-600a; 604d-609b csp 606a-d
44 BOSWELL- Johnson, 395a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART HI, 306b- 307b;pARTiv,349b-350a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [10,111-121] 246b- 247a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, I96a-198b; BK xv, 631a-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BKi,lla-b; BK II, 26b-27d; BK III, 64c-67a; BK v, 127b- 137c passim; BK VII, 177b-180a; BK xi, 338a-b
#6c(3) Mystical experience
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 15; 18; 22:9-18; 26:1- 6,24-25; 28 10-22; 31-11-13; 32 23-32; 46.1-/ Exodus, 3-1-4-17; 19-20; 24 / Numbers, 12; 22:21-35; 24:12-24 /Joshua, 3:7-8; 5*13-(D) Josue, 3:7-8; 5:13-16 /Judges, 6:11-26;/ / Samuel, $(D) I Kings, 3/7 Kings, 3 15-15 ; 9.1-9; 19 (>) /// Kings, 3 5-15; 9 1-9; 19 / / Chronicles, 17 1-15 (D) I Parahpomenon, 17:1-15 /Job, 4-12-21; 33:14-17; 38:1-42:8 / Isaiah, 6(D) Isaias, 6 / Jeremiah, i(D) Jeremias, i / Ezefyelcsp 1-4, 8-12, 40-48 (D) Ezechiel csp 1-4, 8-12, 40-48 / Daniel, 7-12 / Amos, 7-8 / Zechariah, 1-6 (D) Zachanas, 1-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 1:20-25; 3:16-17; 17:1-8; 28 / Lu^e, 1.1-38; 2:8-15,25-35; 9*28-36; 24 / Acts, 2:2-11; 7, 9.1-20; 10 esp 10.9-20; 11.5-10, 18:9-11; 22:1-21; 23.11; 26-13-18 / // Corinthians, 12:1-9 / II Peter, 1:17-18 / Revelation (D) Apocalypse
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VII, par 16 48c- 49a; BK viu, par 25-30 60a-61c; BK ix, par 23-25 68a-c; BK x, par 65 87d-88a / City of God, BK ix, CH 16 294a-295a; BK xvi, CH426c-427a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 12, A 11, REP 2 59d-60d; Q 84, A 5 446c-447c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-xi, Q 98, A 3, REP 2 241c-242b; PART II-n, Q 180, A 5, ANS 611d-613a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, i [1-81] 106a-107a; xxi 138b-139c passim; xxm [1-69] 141b-142a; xxx [34-99] 152a-d; xxxii [139}- xxxiii [145] 156a-157d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 52a-b; 68d-69b; PART II, 137b-138a; 149c-d; 160b; PART HI, 165d-166a; 174b-176d; 183d-185c; CONCLU- SION, 281d-282a
33 PASCAL: Pcnstes, 277-288 222b-224b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 81a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 476b-477a
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 320d-321b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK VII, 189a-191a,c
#6c(4) The beatific vision
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 28:10-22; 32:24-30 / Exodus, 24 esp 24:9-11; 33:11-23; 34:5-7 / Numbers, 12:6-8 / Deuteronomy, 34:10 / Job, 19:26-27; 42:
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 43:30-31 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 43:32-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:8 / John, 1:18 / Acts, 7:55-57 / / Corinthians, 13:12 / // Corinthians, 5:6-7; 12:1-4 / / Timothy, 6:13-16 / I John, 3 '2-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK ix, par 25 68c / City of God, BK XH, CH 20, 355b; BK xxn, CH 29 614b-616d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q50b-62b; Q 26, A 3 151a-c; Q 60, A 5, REP313b 314c; Q 62, A i, ANS 317d-318c; A 2, ANS 318d-319c; Q 84, A 5 446c-447c; Q 89, A 2, REP 3 475a-d; Q 93, A 8, REP 4 499b-500c; Q 94, A i 501d-503a; Q 100, A 2, ANS 521c-522b; PART i-n, Q 3, A 8 628d-629c; Q 4, AA 2-630b631d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 67, A 3, CONTRARY 83b-84d; A 4 84d-85d; A 6, REP 3 87a-c; Q 69, A 2, REP 3 97b-98c; A 4, ANS and REP 3 lOOc-lOlc; Q 98, A 3, REP a 241c-242b; PART II-n, Q i, A 8, ANS 387a-388c; Q 8, A 7, ANS 421d-422c; Q 9, A 4, REP 3 425d- 426c; Q 180, A 5 611d-613a; PART in, Q i, A 3, REP i 704d-706a; Q 9, A 2, ANS and REP 3 764c- 765a; PART HI SUPPL, Q 72, A i, ANS and REP i 917c-919a; Q 82, A 3, REP 4 971a-972d; Q 84, A 2, ANS and REP 4 984c-985d; Q 87, A 3, ANS 999d-1000c; Q 90, A 3 1014d-1016a; Q1025b-1037c; Q 98, A 5, ANS 1075b-d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, i [1-12] 106a; n [37-45] 108a; v [1-12] 112a*b; vi [10- 21] 113d; xiv [28-51] 127b; xv [28-84] ^8c- 129b; xxi [52-102] 138d-139b; xxvi [103-108] 146d-147a; xxvm [106-114] 150a; xxxn[i39]- xxxiii [145] 156a-157d
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 10, 499b-500a; par 103 549b-550a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 65a-b
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, m, 88d-89a
32 MILTON: On Time [9-22] 12a-b / Paradise Lost, BK HI [256-265] 141a

7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohammedan, and Christian conceptions of God and His relation to the world and man

    [sem referências]

7a. Creation

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1-2; 5:1-2 / Exodus, 20:11 I I Samuel, 2:8-(D) / Kings, 2:8 / Nehemiah, 9.6 -(D) II Esdras, 9 6 / Job, 9:1- 13; 10:8-13; 12.7-10; 26:7-14; 28 24-27; 37.14-38-41 esp 38-4-11 / Psalms, 8 esp 8:5; 19:1-6; 24:1-2; 33; 74:16-17; 89:11-12; 90:2; 95:1-7; 96:5; 102:25-28; 104; 11973,90; 121:2; 136:5-9; 13914-16; 146:5-6;(D) Psalms, 8 esp 8 6-7; 18-1-7; 23:1-2; 32; 73 -16-17; 88 112-13 589-2; 94:1-7; 95 15; 101:26- 29; 103; 118:73,90; 120:2; 135*5-9; 138:14-16; 145:5-6; 148 / Proverbs, 3-19-20; 822-31 / Ecclcsiastes, yu I Isaiah, 40-26-28; 42 5-8; 44:24-28; 45:5-13; 48-12-16; 51-12-16; 64-8; 65:i7~(D) Isaias, 40:26-28; 42:5-8; 44:24- 28; 45:5-13; 48.12-16; 51:12-16; 64:8; 65:/Jeremiah, 10:11-13; 27:5; 31:35; 51:15-(D) Jeremtas, 10.11-13; 27 5; 31 35; 51:15-/ Amos, 4-13; 5 -8 / Jonah, i 9 (D) Jonas, 1:9 / Zechanah, 12 i (D) Zachanas, 12-
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 16:14 (D) OT, Judith, 16:17 / Rest of Esther, 13:10 (D) OT, Esther, 13:10 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1-14; 2 23; 67, 9:1,9; 11:17,24 (D) OT, Bool^ of Wisdom, 1:14; 2:23, 6-8; 9-1,9; 11:18,25 / Ecclesiasticus, 17 -1-9; 18:1-5; 23:19-20; 24:8-9; 33*9-i3; 19:iH5; 42:i5-43-'33-(0) OT Ecclesiastic us, 17:1-8; 18.1-5; 23:27-29; 24:12-14; 33 IO ~M; 39- 2i ~4 i ; 42 15-43:37 / Song of Three Children, 34-60 (D) OT, Daniel, 3 56-82 / Bel and Dragon, $-(D) OT, Daniel, 14:4 / // Maccabees, 7:23,(D) OT, UMachabees, 7:23,
0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 1:1-10 / Acts, 14.14-15; 17:23-27 / Romans, i 19-20 / Colossians, i .12- 17 / Hebrews, 1:10; 3:4; 11:3 / // Peter, 3-Revelation, 4 n; 10:6; 14:7 (D) Apocalypse, 4:11; 10:6; 14:
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VII, par 7 45a-d; BK xi, par 5-11 90b-92b; BK xii-xm 99b- 125a,c / City of God, BK VII, CH 29 261a-b; BK VHI, CH 9-12 270d-273a; BK x, CH 31 319b-d; BK xi, CH 4-34 324a-342a,c; BK xn 342b,d- 360a,c csp CH 1-2 342b,d-343d, CH 4-5 344b- 345 b, CH 9-27 347b-360a,c; BK xm, CH373d-376a,c; BK xxn, CH i 586b,d-587b; CH 24, 609c-610a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 7, A 2, REP 3 31d-32c; o 8, A i 34d-35c; A 2, ANS 35c-36b; A 3, ANS and REP i 36b-37c; Q 9, A 2, ANS 39c-40d; Q 21, A 4, ANS and REP 4 126c- 127c; QQ 44-46 238a-255d; Q 50, A i, ANS 269b- 270a; A 3, ANS 272a-273b; Q 56, A 2, ANS and REP 4 292d-294a; Q 57, A 2, ANS and REP295d-297a; Q 61 314d-317c; QQ 65-74 339a- 377a,c; Q 75, A 6, REP 1-2 383c-384c; Q 84, A 3, REP 2 443d-444d; QQ 90-93 480c-501c; Q 94, A 3, ANS 504a-505a; Q 104, A i csp REP534c-536c; AA 3-4 537b-538c; Q 118, AA 2-601c-604b; Q 119, A i, ANS 604c-607b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART II-n, Q 24, A 5, ANS 492b-493d; PART HI, Q 2, A 7 718b-d; Q 3, A 8, REP 2 729b-730b; Q 6, A 3, REP742a-743a
21 DANTE- Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxv [58- 78] 92a; xxvin [91-96] 97a; PARADISE, vn [64-75] H5d-116a; [121-148] 116b-c; x [1-27" 120b-c; xni [52-87] 126a-b; xix [40-51] 135c: xxix [1-48] 150b-d
23 HOBBES. Leviathan, PART II, 162b; PART in, 188d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 17b-d / Novum Organum, BK II, APH 15 149a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 54d-56a / Meditations, in-iv, 87a-90b / Objections and Replies, PROP HI 132d-133a; 137d-138a; 140b-c;214a-c;229c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 17, SCHOL 362c- 363c; APPENDIX, 370c-372d passim; PART iv, PROP 68, SCHOL 445a-b
32 MILTON- Paradise Lost, BK i [6-10] 93b; [650- 659] 107b; BK II [345-353] 118b-119a; BK HI [56-134] 136b-138a; [708-735] 150b-151b; BK iv [720-735] 168a-b; BK v [468-505] 185b- 186a; [577-599] 187b-188a; [800-863] 192b- 194a; BK VII [59-640] 218b-231a esp [139-161] 220a-b, [216-550] 221b-229a; BK VIII [452- 499] 242a-243a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 482 258a
35 LOCKE. Civil Government, CH vi, SECT 56-36d-37b / Human Understanding, BK II, CH XV, SECT 12, 165c; BK IV, CH X, SECT352d-353a; SECT 18-19 353c-354c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT421b-c
35 HUME Human Understanding, SECT xn, DIV i32,509d[fni]
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, la-b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 228a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 81d 82a /Judgement, 594d [fni]
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 245d- 246a; PART iv, 361a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PROLOGUE [243-270] 7a-b
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 239c-243d
54 FREUD: New Introductory lectures, 875d-876a

7b. Providence

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1-3; 6-9 csp 8:21-22; 12-13 esp 12:1-3, 12:7, 13:14-18; 15 esp 15:13- 21 ; 17-18; 21-22 esp 22:15-18; 26:1-6,22-25; 28:10-22; 35:9-15; 37-50 esp 45:7-8 / Exodus, 3; 12; 13:21-17:7; 19-20; 40 134-38- (D) Exodus, 3; 12; 13:21-17:7; 19-20; 40:32-36 / Numbers, 9:15-23; 12; 22-24 / Deuteronomy, 4 11-40; 6-1 1 ; 29-33 /Joshua, i-i i ; 23-24 (D) Josuff, i-n; 23-24 / Judges , 1-16 / / Samuel, 8-10; i5-i6-(D) I Kings, 8-10; 15-16 / // Samuel, J(D) II Kings, 7 / 1 Kings, n ; 13-n to 7c CHAPTER 29: GOD passim (D) /// Kings, n; 13-22 passim / // Kings passim (D) IV Kings passim / / Chronicles, 17:3-15 / Paralipomenon, 17-3-15 / II Chronicles, 11-36 passim (D) II Paralipomenon, 11-36 passim / Esther esp 4:13-(jD) Esther, 1:1-10:3 esp 4:13-14 / Job esp 1-2, 24, 27, 38-41 / Psalms passim, $0)3-4, 9-11, 13, 17-18, 65, 77, 104 (D) Psalms passim, esp 3-4, 9-10, 12, 16-17, 64, 7^> i3 / Proverbs, 16-33 / Ecckstastes, 3; 7:13-15; 8-9; 11-12 I Isaiah, 36-37; 46; 51 (>) Isaias, 36- 37; 46; 51 / Jeremiah, 17:5-8; 18-19; 3*J 45~ (D) Jeremias, 17:5-8; 18-19; 3 1 ? 45 / DanM passim, esp 3:1-4:3, 6:1-28 (D) Darnel, 1:1- 3 123 passim, esp 3 11-23 > 3 : 9i~ 12 :1 3 passim, esp 3.91-100, 6.1-28 / Jonah esp i, 4 (D) Jonas esp i, 4 / Malachi, 1 12-3 (D) Malachias, r 12-
0 APOCRYPHA. Tobit(D) OT, Tobias / Judith esp 5-6, 8-16 (D) OT, /<//> esp 5-6, 8-16 / fort of Esther (D) OT, Etffor, 10:4-16:24 / H'/tt/ow of Solomon, 14:1-3 (D) OT, fioo^o/ Wisdom, 14:1-3 / Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-20 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 15:11-22 / &>;? of Three Children (D} OT, D0fl/f/, 3:24-90 / Susanna (D) OT, D0;w/, 13:1-64 / &?/ 0/w/ >r00fl (D) OT, >0m<?/, 13.65-14:42 / I Maccabees, 3 13-26 (D) OT, / Machabees, 3-13-26 / // Maccabees, 6*i-i6 (D) OT, // Machabees, 6:1-
0 NEW TESTAMENT* Matthew, 6.25-34; 7:7-11;esp 10:17-20, 10:29-33; 23:37 / Lufy, 11:1-13; 12:1-34; 21:12-19 / John, 6:22-71 esp 6:40, 6:44-45, 6:64-65 (D) John, 6:22-72 esp 6:40, 6-44-45, 6-65-66 / Acts, 1:15-26; 6.8- 7:60; 13 48 (D) Acts, 1:15-26; 6:8-7.59; 13 48 / Romans, 8 28-11-36; 13.1-2 / Ephesians, i 4-2 10, 4.1-7 / Philippians, 2 12-13 / // Timothy, i 9 / Hebrews, 1.1-3; I 3'5~^ / I Peter, 1-1-
18 AUGUSTINE- Confessions, EK ix, par i 61c-d / City of God, EK i, CH 8-9 133a-135a; BK iv, CH 33 206c-d; BK v, CH i 207d-208c; CH 8-n 212c-216d; CH 19 224b-225b; CH 21-22 226a- 227a; BK x, CH 14-17 307c-310b; BK xi, CH333d-334c; BK xn, CH 27 359c-360a,c; BK xiv, CH 27 396c-397a; BK xxn, CH i 586b,d-587b / Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH 27 650a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP i 14b-15b; Q 8, A 3, ANS 36b-37c; Q 13, A 8, ANS and REP i 70d-71b; Q 15, A 3, REP93b-94a; QQ 22-24 127c-143c; Q 96, A i, ANS and REP 2 510b-511b; PART i-n, Q 9, A 6, REP662ad
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 93, A 5, REP 3 219a-d; PART II-n, Q i, A 7, ANS 385c-387a; Q 25, A n, REP 3 508d-509c; PART in, Q 6 1, A i, ANS 855a-d; PART in SUPPL, Q 69, A 3, ANS 887d-889c; Q 71, A 5, ANS 905c-908b; Q 77, A i, ANS 943a-944d; Q 78, A 3, ANS 950b- 951a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [61-96] lOb-c; PARADISE, i [94-142] 107b-d; vi [i-uij 113c-114d; viii [85-148] 117c-118c; xi-xn 122a 125a esp xi [28-39] 122b, xn [37-45] 124a; xx [31-138] 137a-138a
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK iv, STANZA 138-154 106b-108b / Knight's Tale [1251-1267] 180b; [1663-1672] 187b / Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b esp [4869-4924] 242b-243b, [5247- 5253] 249b / Friar's Tale [7064-7085] 281a-b / Franklin's Tale [11,177-206] 353b-354a / MonJ($ Tale [14,021-052] 434b-435a; [14,149- 252] 437a-438b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 53d; PART II, 113b-c; 160a; 162b; PART iv, 254b; 271b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 98b-99a
26 SHAKESPLARE: Richard III, ACT n, sc n [77- 95] 120b-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT v, sc 11 [i-n] 67d-68a; [47-53] 68b-c; [230-235] 70a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 408c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 19d; 38a / Novum Organum, BK i, APH 93 125d-126a
32 MILTON: Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Paradise Lost, BK III [80-134] 137a-138a / Samson Agonistes [210-214] 344a; [373-380] 347b-348a; [667- 709] 354a-355a / Areopagitica, 394b-39Sb
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 619-641 284b-290a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, INTRO, SECT405b-c; SECT 60-66 424b-426a; SECT 93-431b-c; SECT 105-107 433b-434a; SECT 146- 155 442a-444c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 54-57 474b-475d; SECT xi, DIV 108 500b-d
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 75c-d; 377c-378a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 331c-d / Social Contract, BK III, 414d; BK iv, 437d-438b
40 GIBBON. Decline and Fall, 292d-294a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 542a-b
44 Bos WELL Johnson, 95c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 158c- 160b; 168d-170b; PART iv, 321b-c; 368d- 369a,c
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic\, 85a; 237a; 396b- 397a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 272a~b; BK ix, 342a-344b; 357b-358b; BK x, 447c-448a; 465c-467c passim; BK xn, 553b; BK xin, 563a-b; BK xv, 619d-620a, 631a-c; EPILOGUE i, 650b-c; EPILOGUE n, 675a-677b; 680b-c; 684b-d
52 DOSTOEVSKY : Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b- 137c passim; BK xi, 343b-c
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 771a-b

7c. Divine government and law

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 9:1-7 / Exodus, 12-13; 15:18; 19-31 esp 20:1-17; 34-35 / Leviticus passim / Numbers passim, esp 5-10, 15, 18-19, 27-30, 35-36 / Deuteronomy passim, esp 5 :6-2i / / Chronicles, 29: 11-12 (D) I Parahpomenon, 29:11-12 / Job, 9:1-13; 34:12-18; 37-41 / Psalms, i; 10:16; 19:7-14; 37:30-31; 40*8; 47; 59:13; 66:7; 72:8; 78:1-8; 89:30-32; 93; (7. Doctrines common to the Jewish, Mohammedan, and Christian conceptions of God and His relation to the world and man. 7c. Divine government and law.) 96.10-13; 97:1-2; 99.1; 103:19-22; 119 passim; 145:11-13 (D) Psalms, i; 9:16; i8'8- 15; 36:30-31; 39:8-9; 46; 5 8 :*4; 657; 7 1 - 8 ; 77:1-8; 88:31-33; 92; 95 10-13; 96-1-2; 98:1; 102:19-22; 118 passim; 144-1 1-13 / Eeclcsiastes, 12:13-14 / Isaiah, 51:4-8; 52:(D) Isaias, 51 14 -8 ; 52 7 / Jeremiah, 31-34 (D) Jeremias, 31-34 / Ezefyel, i8-(D) Ezechiel,/ Daniel, 4; 7 27 (D) Daniel, 3 -98-4 -34; 7:27 / Amos, 2:1-8 / Malacht, 1:14 (D) Malachias, 1:
0 APOCRYPHA: Bel and Dragon, $(D) OT, Daniel, 14.
0 NEW TESTAMENT- Matthew, 5:17-20 / Luke, 16:17 / Romans passim, esp 2.11-16, 7:21-25, 8:7/7 Timothy, 1:17 / Hebrews, i 8; 8 10; 10:16 / James, 2:8-12 / Revelation, 11:15-18; 19:6 (D) Apocalypse, 11:15-18; 19:
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK II, par 9, lOd; par 14 12a-b; BK III, par 13-17 16c 18a / City of God, BK v, CH 1 1 216c-d; BK VII, en 30 261b-d; BK ix, CH 22 296d-297a; BK x, CH 13-15 307b- 308b; CH 17 309c 310b; BK xi, CH 18 331d- 332a; CH 22 333d-334c, BK xn, CH 5 345a-b, BK xix, CH 12-15 517b-521c, CH 21 524a-525a; CH 23-25 525c-528d; CH 27 529a-d; BK xxn, CH 1-3 586b,d-588b; CH 24 609a-612a passim
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 3, ANS 12c-14a; Q 21, A i, ANS 124b-125b; A 2, ANS 125c-d; Q 26, A 4, ANS 151c-152a,c; Q 47, A 3, RLP i 258c-259a; Q 63, A 7, ANS 331c- 332b; Q 65, A 3, REP i 341c-342b; Q 83, A i, REP 3 436d-438a; QQ 103-119 528a-608d; PART i-n, Q 10, A 4, ANS 665d-666a,c; Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c; Q 19, A 4 705b-c; A 6, ANS and Rtp 2 707a-708a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 71, A 2, REP 4 106d-107c; A 6 HOb-lllb; Q 72, A 2, ANS 112b-113a; A 4, ANS 114a-115a; Q 74, A 8, REP i 134b-136a; Q 91, AA 1-2 208b-209d; AA 4-5 210c-212c; Q 93 215b,d-220d; Q 97, A 3, ANS and REP i 237b-238b; A 4, REP 3 238b- 239b; QQ 98-108 239b-337d; PART II-H, Q 23, A 6, ANS 487a-d; Q 187, A 5, REP 3 671d-673b; PART III, Q 60, A 4, REP 2 849c-850bj PART III SUPPL, Q 69, A i, ANS 885c-886c; Q 72, A 2, ANS 919a-920c
21 DANTE : Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [70-76] lOb; xi 15a-16b; PURGATORY, xvi [52-105] 77b-d; PARADISE, i [94-142] 107b-d; n [112-148] 109a-b; in [34-90] 109d-110b; x [1-27] 120b-c; xxvn [IOO]-XXVHI [139] 148b-150b; XXXH [37-84] 155a-c
22 CHAUCER: Knight's Tale [1663-1672] 187b / MonJfs Tale [14,221-228] 438a-b / Canon's Yeoman's Tale [16,935-949] 467a THE GREAT IDEAS Icto 7d
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART i, 95d-96b; PART II, 136d-138b; 159d-164a,c; PART HI, 167b-c; 171a-172a; 177c-180a; 199b-204a; 216b-219d; 240a-241a; 245c-246a,c; PART iv, 247a-249b; 272b-c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 491d-492a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 71a-b; 94b-c; lOOd
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 54c; 55b / Objections and Replies, 229c-d
31 SPINOZA.: Ethics, PART 11, PROP3,SCHOL 374b-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [237-249] 116b; [310-328] 118a; BK III [274-343] 141b-143a csp [317-333] 142b; BK v [600-615] 188b; BK vi [169-188] 200a; BK VII [139-173] 220a-221a; [550-609] 229a-230b, BK xn [223-248] 324a-b / Samson Agomstes [667-673] 354a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 876 34Sa
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 5-6 105a-c; BK 11, CH xxvin, SECT230a; BK iv, CH in, SECT 28-29 322a-323a
35 BFRKLLEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 29-418c-419a; SECT 51-53 422d-423a; SECT423d-424a; SECT 60-66 424b-426a; SECT 93- 94 431b-c, SECT 105-107 433b-434a; SECT 146-155 442a-444c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 54-57 474b-475d, SECT vni, DIV 78-81 485c- 487a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 261b-266b csp 261b-262a, 266b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 20a~d
38 MONTLSQUIEU. Spirit of Laws, BK i, la-2b; BK xn, 85d-86a; BK xxvi, 214b,d-215a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 252c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 237b; 238b-240b / Judgement, 594d [fn i]
46 HEGEL Philosophy of History, INTRO, 158c- 160b; 168d-170b; PART HI, 309d-310a; PART iv, 368d-369a,c
52 DOSTOLVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim

7d. Grace

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Psalms, 84:11 (D) Psalms, 83 12 / Proverbs, 3.1-4,21-26 / Jeremiah,(D) Jeremias, 31-18 / Lamentations, 5-21 / Zechariah, 12:10 (D) Zachanas, 12:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 1:11-18 / Acts, 4:33 / Romans passim, esp 1.3-5, 3.1-6.23, 11:5-7 / / Corinthians, 2:11-3-10; 15,9-10 / // Corinthians, i; 4-6; 8:7-9; 9:5-15; 12 / Galatians I Ephesians / Philippians, 2:12-13; 4:13 / II Thessalonians, 2:15-16 / // Timothy esp i .8-9 / Titus, 2:9-3:7 / Hebrews, 2:9; 12.14-/ James, 4:6/7 Peter passim, esp i, 5,
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 5-6 2b-c; BK II, par 15 12b-c; BK vi, par 4 36a-b / City of God,, BK xin, CH 3-5 361a-362c; CH 7 362 d- 363b; CH 14-15 366b-d; CH 20 370c-371a; BK XIH, CH 23-BK xiv, CH i 372a-377a; BK xiv, ca 26 395d-396c; CH 27, 397a; BK xv, CH 1-Idtolc CHAPTER 29: GOD 397b,d-399c; BK xvi, CH 26-27 438c 439d; BK xxi, CH 15-16 572c-574a; BK xxn, CH606d-608b esp 608a-b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH i 624b,d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 2, REP i lld-12c; Q 8, A 3, ANS and REP 4 36b-37c; Q 12, A 2, ANS 51c-52c; A 4, ANS 53b-54c; \ 5, ANS 54c-55b; A 13 61c-62b; Q 38 200c-202b; Q 43 230a-237a,c; Q 62 317c-325b; Q 89, A i, REP 3 473b-475a; A 2, REP 3 475a-d, Q506b-510a; Q 104, A 4, ANS 538a-c; Q 108, A 8, ANS and REP 1-2 561a-562a; Q 113, A i, REPS76a-d; PART I-H, Q 5, AA 5-7 640b-642d esp A 7, REP 3 642a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 50, A 2 7c-8a; Q 51, A 4 15a-d; Q 55, A 4, ANS and REP 6 28c-29d; Q 58, A 3, REP 3 43b-44a; Q59d-63a; Q 63, A 2, ANS and REP 1-2 64b-65a; AA 3-4 65a-66c; Q 65, AA 2-5 72a-75a; Q 66, A 2, REP i 76c-77c; Q 68 87c-96c; Q 76, A 2, REP 2 141d-142c; Q 79, AA 3-4 158a-159c; Q 81, A 3, REP 3 165d-166b; Q 83, A i, REP 4-5 171a- 172b; A 2, REP 2 172b-173a; Q 85, A 6, ANS 182d-184a; Q 95, A i, ANS 226c-227c; Q 98, \ i 239b-240c; Q 100, A 5, RFP 2 255a-257c; A 10, REP 3 262b-263b; A 12, ANS 264d-265d; Q 106, A i, ANS and REP 1,3 321a-322a; QQ 109-338a-378a,c; PART ii-n, Q 2, AA 9-10 398c- 400b, Q 24, A 3, REP i 491a-d; A n, ANS 498b- 499c; PART in, Q 6, A 3, REP 3 742a-743a; OQ 7-8 745c-763b; Q 10, A 4, RHP 3 771b-772a, Q 14, A 4, REP 2 786d-787c; Q 15, A 2, \NS 789a-d; Q 22, A i, ANS and REP 3 827c 828c; Q 23, A i, REP i 833a-d; A 4, REP 2 835b-836a, Q26, A 2, REP i 846b-d,Q6i,Ai,REP2855a-d, Q 62 858b-864c; PART in SUPPL, Q 75, A 2, REP 5 937a-938a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, i-n la 4a; PUR- GATORY, vn [40-60] 62d-63a; [112-123] 63d- 64a; ix [13-69] 66a-c; xi [1-24] 68d-69a, xin [10-21] 72a; PARADISE, vn [16-120] 115b-116b, xx [31-138] 137a-138a; xxiv 142d-144b esp [58-60] 143b, [118-123] 143d-144a, xxix [58- 66] 150d-151a; xxx [34-99] 152a-d; xxxn [40-84] 155a-c; xxxn [i39]-xxxm [145] 156a- 157d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK i, STANZA 144 19b-20a / Second Nun's Tale [15,788-822] 467a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 88c-89a; PART II, 137c-d; 149c-d; PART in, 176d-177c; 186a-b; 191b-193c esp 193a; 241c-242a; PART iv, 250c- 251b; 253b-254b; 255b; 264a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 209a-d; 212a-d; 238c- 239c; 267c-268a; 273a-b; 294a-b
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 125d- 126a
32 MILTON '.Paradise Lost, BK II [1024-1033] 133b; BK III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [130-134] 138a, [167-184] 139a-b, [227-238] 140b; BK xi [1-31] 299a-b; [251-262] 304b-305a / Samson Agonistes [356-372] 347b; [652-666] 353b-354a
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters^ la-14a; 19a-26b; 29b; 154b-159a / Fences, 202 211a; 430-245a-251a; 505 261a-b; 507-511 261b; 513-262a 263b; 520-524 263b-264a; 643 290b- 291a; 88 1 345 b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 38d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 238b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 310d- 311a; PART iv, 354a-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b- 137c passim

7e. Miracles

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, I7:i8-r8'i6; 19:9- 11,24-26; 21:1-8 / Exodus, 3-4; 7-12; 14-17 / Numbers, 9 15-23; 11-12; 16-17; 20*1-13; 21-5-9; 22-21-34; 26-9-10 / Joshua, 3-4; 6:1-20; 10:12-14; 24:6-7 (D) Josue, 3-4; 6:1-20; 10:12-14; 24:6-7 /Judges, 6:36-40 / / Samuel, 12:16-19 (D) 7 Kings, 12:16-19 / / Kings, 17; 18.30-39 (D) III Kings, 17; 18 30 39 / // Kings, 1-6; 13:20-21; 20:1-(I)) IV Kings, 1-6; 13-20-21; 20:1-11 / Nchemtah, 9.9-2i(D) // Esdras, 9-9-21 / l^alm^ 78; 105; 106:7-11; 114 (D) Psalms, 77; ioj, 1057-11; 113:1-8 / Isaiah, 38:1-(D) Isaias, 38:1-9 / Daniel, 3:1-4:3; 5-6 (D) Daniel, 3-1-23,91-100; 5-6 / Joel, 2.30-31 / Jonah (D) Jonas APCM RYPHA: Song of Three Children, 1-27 (D) OT, Daniel, 3 124-50 / Bel and Dragon, 28-(D) OT, Daniel, 14:27-42 / II Maccabees, 1.18-22; 2:10 (D)JOT, 11 Machabees, 1:18- 22, 2.
0 NEW TESIAMENT. Matthew, 1.18-25, 8-9; 12-9- 13,22-29; 14:13-36; 15:22-39; 17; 2029-/ Marl(, 1:29-34,40-44; 2:3-12; 3-1-5; 4.34- 40; 5; 6:34-56; 7:24-8:26; 9-1-10,16-29; 10-46-52; 13:24-26 / Luke, 1:5-66; 4*31- 5.26, 6.6-10, 7.1-16; 8.22-56, 9:12-17,28-43; 11.14-26; 13:11-17; 14:1-6; 17:11-19, 18.35- 43 / John, 2-1-11; 3-2; 4*46-54, 5 1-16; 6 5- 26, 7:31, 9.1-33; 11:1-45; 12:37-38; 21 i-n / Acts, 2:1-22; 3:2-11; 5:12-16; 8-6; 9:36-43; 14:7-10; 15:12; 19:11-12; 207-12; 28-1-/ / Corinthians^ 12:8-10 / Galatians, 3:5-7 / Hebrews, 2:3-
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK x, CH 8-13 303a- 307c; CH 16-18 308b-310d, BK xxi, CH 5-563d-568d; BK xxn, CH 5-10 589a-599b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologtca, PART i, Q 89, A 8, REP 2 479c-480c; Q 92, A 4, ANS 491b-d; Q 104, A 4, ANS 538a-c; Q 105, AA 6-8 543b- 545b; Q 106, A 3, ANS 547c-548b; Q no, A567c-568b; Q 114, A 4 584a-585a; PART i-n, Q 10, A 4, REP 2 665d-666a,c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 63, A 4, REP 3 65d-66c; Q 81, A 4, ANS 166b-167a; Q 113, A 10 369c-370b; PART in SUPPL, Q 75, A 3, ANS 938a-939d; Q 83, A 3 978c-980d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy^ PARADISE, xxiv [88- m] 143c-d If to 7h (7. Doctrines common to the Jewish Mohammedan, and Christian conceptions of God and His relation to the world and man. 7e. Miracles.)
22 CHAUCER. Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b esp [4869-4924] 242b-243b / Prioress's Tale [13,418-620] 392a-395b / Second Nun's Tale [16,001-021] 471a-b
23 HOBBRS: Leviathan, PART i, 83c; PART 11, 137b-c; 160b; PART in, 166a-167b; 188a-191a; PART iv, 249b-250a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 19b-c; 33c-d; 41b-d / New Atlantis, 201d-203c csp 203a-b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK xn [173-222] 323a- 324a
33 PASCAL: Pensces, 643-644 290b-291b, 803-328b-341b; 876 345a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH xvi, SECT 13 371a-b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 62-425a-c; SECT 84 429b-c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 54 474b-c; SECT x 488d-497b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 180b-c, 189b-191a; 206b-d; 295c-296b; 465d-466c; 605b-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 227d-228a; 232a-c; 398b-399b
44 EOSWELL: Johnson, 126b-c; 359a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 247a; PART in, 307a-b; PART iv, 338b-c; 348d- 349a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [762-770] 20a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 219b-220a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK i, lla-b; BK II, 21d-22b; BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK vii, 171a-177b; 189d-190a

7f. The Book of Life

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 32:31-33; 33:19 / Psalms, 69:28 (D) Psalms, 68-29 / Isaiah, 4 :3~(D) Isaias, 4:
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasttcus, 33:10-13 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 33-10-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 20:1-16; 22-1-14 / Lufa, 10:20 /John, 5:21 ; 6-44; 10-26-29 / Acts, 13:48 / Romans, 8:28-9:23 / Ephesians, 1-3 / // Thessalonians, 2:12-14 / // Timothy, 1:8-9; 2:19-20 / Hebrews, 12:22-23 / / Peter, 1:1-5; 2 :i~9 / // Peter, i :io / Revelation, 3 14-5 ; 13:4-8 ; 17:7-8; 20:11-21:27 esp 20:15, 21 ' 2 7; 22:18- 19 (D) Apocalypse, 3:4-5; 13:4-8; 17:7-8; 20:11-21:27 csp 20:15, 21:27; 22:18-
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xv, CH i 397b,d- 398c; BK xx, CH 8 536d-538c; CH 14-16 542d- 544d
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theohgica, PAAT i, Q141b-143c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART HI, Q 63, A i, REP i 864c-865b; PART HI SUPPL, Q 87, A i 997b-998c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xix [103- 148) 136a-c; xx [94-138] 137d-138a; xxi [52- 102] 138d-139b; XXXH [40-84] 155a-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK i [356-363] lOla
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 884 346a
41 GIBBON : Decline and Fall, 238c; 334b-c

7g. The resurrection of the body

0 OLD TESTAMENT: ]ob, 14:13-15; 19:25-27 / Isaiah, 26 19; 66.14 (D) tsatas, 26.19; 66./ Ezetyel, 37:1-14 (D) Ezechiel, 37:1-14 / Daniel, 12:1-
0 APOCRYPHA // Maccabees, 12:41-45 (D) OT, // Machabees, 12 42-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 22:23-33; 2 7 '52-53; 28 / Mar\, 12-18-27; 16:1-9 / Lu%e, 20 27-38; 24-1-12 /John, 2:18-22 / Acts, 23-1-10; 24 15; 26-8 / Romans, 4-17; 6-3-11; 8 10-11 / / Co- rinthians, 6:14; 15 / II Corinthians, 1.9-10; ^-i^ / 1 Thessalonians, 4:13-17 /Hebrews, 6-1-
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK x, CH 29, 317b- 318a; BK xin, CH 1-2 360a-361a; CH 16-367a-371a; CH 22-24 371c-376a,c; BK xx, CH 6-7 534a-536d; CH 9-10 538c-541a; CH 12-541c-545c; CH 20-23 547c-552c; CH 26, 555d- 556a; BK xx, CH ^O-BK xxi, CH 10, 559d- 570b; BK xxn 586b,d-618d esp CH 4-5 588b- 590a, CH 7 591c-d, CH 11-21 599c-606d, CH 25-30 612a-618d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 19-21 629a-b; CH 23-24 630a-631a
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, QQ 75-86 935a-996a,c; Q 93, A i 1037d-1039a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vi [94-111] 9b-c; x [1-15] 13d; xnr [85-108] 18d-19a; PARADISE, vii [121-148] 116b-c; xiv [1-66] 126d-127c; xxv [64-129] 145a-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 191b-193c; 195b-d; PART iv, 253b-255b; 259b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 248c-249c;311a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK HI [227-343] 140b- 143a esp [294-329] 141b-142b; BK xn [386- 445] 327b-329a esp [411-429] 328a-b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 95 431c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 205d- 206a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 233d; 234d
44 Bos'w ELL: Johnson, 472a-b

7h. The Last Judgment and the end of the world

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Job, 19:25-27; 21:27-34 / Psalms, 50; 96:10-13 (D) Psalms, 49; 95:10- 13 / Ecclesiastes, 3:16-17; 11:9-10; 12:14 / Isaiah, 2-4; n:n-i6; 13:6-22; 24; 26-27; 3; 34-35J 65:17-25; 66-(D) Isaias, 2-4; n:ix-i6; 13:6-22; 24; 26-27; 3J 34-35? 65:17-25; 66 / Daniel, 7-21-27; 12 / Joel / Micah, 4(Z>) Micheas, 4 / Zephaniah(D) Sophomas / Zechariah, 14 (D) Zacharias, 14 / Malachi, 3-4 (D) Malachias, 3-
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 16:17 (D) OT, Judith, 16:20-21 / Rest of Esther, 10:4-11:12 (D) OT, Esther, 10:4-11:8/o 8^ CHAPTER 29: GOD
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 7:1-2; 10:14-15; 11:20-24; 12:36; i3'-3 6 -4347-5; 2 4- 2 5 / Mark 13:4-37 / & i7 :2 -37; 2i : 5~3 6 / John, 12:48 / Acts, 2:17-21; 17:31 / Romans, 2:5-11 / I Corinthians, 4:15-5:4; 15:23-28 / / Thessalonians, 1:9-10; 2:19; 4:14-5:4 / II Thessalonians, 1-2 / // Timothy, 3:1-4:9 / Hebrews, 9 126-27 / 7<0w*i 5 : 7~9 / 1 Peter, 4 15-/ II Peter, 2:9; 3.7-13 / I John, 2:18-29; 4-/ Judc I Revelation passim, esp 14:15-16:21, 20:1-22:21 (D) Apocalypse passim, esp 14:15- 16:21,20:1-22:
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xvm, en504d-505c; BK xx 530a-560a,c; BK xxi, CH 11-27 570b-586a,c / Christian Doctrine, BK III, CH 37, 673d-674a
20 AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, QQ 73-74 922b-935a,c; Q 77, A 2 945a-946b; QQ 87-99 997a-1085a,c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vi [94-115] 9b-c; x [1-15] 13d; PARADISE, xix [100-148] 136a-c
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 10 498b-502a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART HI, 230a; 244b-c
32 MILTON- Christs Nativity [133-172] 4b-5b / Paradise Lost, BK III [274-343] 141b-143a esp [326-341] 142b; BK VII [139-173] 220a-221a; BK xi [45-83] 300a-301a; BK xn [451-465] 329a; [537-551] 331a / Areopagitica, 410a-b
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 17a-b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 187c-189a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 233c-234d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim, esp 134d-135a, BK xi, 337a-346a passim

8. Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God and His people

    [sem referências]

8a. The Chosen People: Jew and gentile

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 12:1-4; 13-14-17; 15; 17:1-18:19, 22.1-18 esp 22.15-17; 2^:1-6,23- 25; 27-28; 35:9-13; 46:1-7; 48-49 / Exodus, 3-17; 19-20; 33:1-34:18 / Leviticus, 26 / Deuteronomy, i; 4-12 passim, esp 4:37-38, 7:6-8, 10:15; 14:1-2; 15:6; 23:1-8; 26-32 passim, esp 26:17-19, 28:1-68, 31:16-21, 32 19-14 / Joshua, 10:12-14; 23:1-13 (D) Josue, 10:12-14; 23:1- 13/7 Samuel, 12 (D) I Kings, 12 // Kings, 8; 5I .. 53 _(D) /// Kings, 8:51-53 / II Kings, 11:17 (D) W Kings, inij / 1 Chronicles,(D) I Paralipomenon, 17 / Nehemiah, g(D) II Esdras, 9 / Psalms passim, esp 33:12, 50:7, 78-1-72, 81:1-16, 89:1-52, 105:1-106:48, 132:1-18, 135:4-14, 136:1-26 (D) Psalms passim, esp 32:12, 49:7, 77:1-72, 80:2-17, 88:2-53, 104:1-105:48, 131:1-18, 134:4-14, 135:1-27 / Isaiah passim, esp 40:1; 42:1-6, 43:1-7, 44:1-5, 46:3-4, 49:1-26, 637-8-(D) Isaias passim, esp 40:1, 42:1-6, 43:1-7, 44:1- 5, 46:3-4, 49:1-26, 63:7-$ / Jeremiah passim, - esp 3, 7:23, 11:4, 24:7, 30:22, 31:1, 31:33, 32:38 (D) Jeremias passim, esp 3, 7:23, 11:4, 24:7, 30:22, 31:1, 31:33, 32:38 / Ezetycl, 11:15-20; 14:11; 16-17; 20 ? 345 36-37 (D) Ezechiel, 11:15-20; 14:11; 16-17; 2 5 34 J 36-37 / Amos, 3:1-2 / Obadiah(D) Abdias I Micah, 5:7-15 (D) Micheas, 5:7-11 / Zcchariah, 1:12-2:13; 8-10 esp 8:8 (D) Zacharias, i 12-2:13; 8-10 esp 8:8 / Malachi, 1:1-(D) Malachias, 1:1-
0 APOCRYPHA: Rest of Esther, 14:5 (D) OT, Es- ther, 14:5 / Wisdom of Solomon, 16.20-(D) OT, Boo I( of Wisdom, 16:20-26 / Ecclcsiasticus, 17:17-21; 47:22 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:14-17; 47 :2 4~
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 10:5-6 / Acts, 15:1- 29, 21:19-25 / Romans, 1-13-16; 2^45,9; 10:11- 13, zx / / Corinthians, 12-13 / Galatians, 2:6- 16; 3:13-29, 4 21-31; 5:6; 6:15 / EphesianS) 2 : 1 1-3 .8 / Colossians, 3 19-
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK v, 295d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK iv, CH 34 206d- 207a,c; BK xvi, CH 16 433c-434a; CH 18 434c; CH 21-28 435a-440b; CH 32 441c-442c; BK xvn, CH 7 458c-459d; BK xix, CH 22 525b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 21, A 4, REP2l26c-127c
20 AQUINAS- Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 98, AA 4-5 242b-244b; QQ 102-105 270b-321a passim, esp Q 102, A 6 292e-298a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 82d-83a; PART II, 160b-c; PART in, 177c<180d
32 MIL i ON- Paradise Lost, BK xii [101-269] 321b- 325a / Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp [210- 292] 344a-346a, [420-471] 348b-350a, [843- 902] 358a-359a, [1156-1223] 364b-366a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 603 279b; 610-612 280b- 282b; 619-641 284b-290a; 713-718 304b-308b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 435b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 179d-183a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 245d- 247b; PART in, 305b-c; PART iv, 322a-b

8b. God's Covenant with Israel: circumcision as sign of the Covenant

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 12:1-3,7; 15:17-21; 17; 22:16-18; 26:2-3 / Exodus, 2:23-4:31 esp 2:24; 6:1-9^ 19:3-8; 24:7-8; 31:16-17; 32:11- 13; 34 esp 34:10, 34:27-28 / Leviticus, 2-13; 26 / Deuteronomy, 1:8; 4-11 passim, esp 4:23, 5:2-3, 7:12-13, 8:18-20, 10:16; 29-31; 34:/ Joshua, 5:1-9; 7:10-12; 23:16-24:28 (D) Josue, 5:1-9; 7:10-12; 23:16-24:28 / Judges, 2:1-5 / ' Kings* 8:56; i9-.9-i8CD) /// Kings, 8:56; 19:9-18 / // Kings, ir.ij; 13:22-23;esp 17:14-16, 17:34-40; 22-23 esp 23:2-(D) IV Kings, 11:17; 13:22-23; 17 esp 17:14- 16, 17:34-40; 22-23 ^P 2 3 :2 ~3 / f Chronicles, 16:13-22 (D) I Paralipomenon, 16:13-22 / //, Chronicles, 6:14-15 (D) // Paralipomenon, 6 114-15 / Nehemiah, 1 55 ; 9 (D) II Esdras, 1 15 ; 9 / Psalms, 25^4;, 44117; 74:19-20; 78;esp Z057-8; in (D) Psalms, 24:14; 43:18; 8r to %d (8. Specifically Jewish doctrines concerning God and His people. 86. God's Covenant with Israel: circumcision assign of the Covenant.) 73:19-20; 77; 104 csp 104:7-8; no / Isaiah, 24:1-5; 33:i-8; 54 csp 54:10; 56 csp 56:4-6; 59:20-21; 61 csp 61:8 (7)) Isaias, 24:1-5; 33:1-8; 54 csp 54:10; 56 csp 56:4-6; 59:20- 21; 61 esp 61:8 /Jeremiah, 4:4; u; 14:19-22; 22:5-9; 31-33 CS P 3 i: 3'-33. 32:40, 33:20-26; 34:13-20; 50:4-5 (D) Jeremias, 4:4; n; 14:19-22; 22:5-9; 3'-33 csp 3i:3i-33> 32 -'40. 33:20-26; 34:13-20; 50:4-5 / Ezetyel, 16-17; 20:33-38; 37.21-28; 44:6-9 (D) Ezechiel, 16-17; 20:33-38; 37:21-28; 44*6-9 / Hosea, 2:16-20; 6 csp 6:7; 8 (D) Osee, 2:16-20; 6 csp 6:7; 8 / Haggai, 2:4-5 (D) Aggeus, 2-5-
0 APOCRYPHA- Ecclesiasticus, 44:19-45:5 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 44 120-45 :6 / 7 Maccabees, i -44- 63 ; 2 : 1 9-6 :8 esp 4 7-1 4 (D) OT, / Machabees, 1:46-66; 2:19-6:8 esp 4:7-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Lu^e, 1:70-75; 2:21 / John, 7:22-23 / Acts, 3:25; 7:1-8,51-53; 15:1-29; 21:20-21 / Romans, 2:25-4:16; 11:25-27 / / Corinthians, 7:18-197 Galatians, 3:13-5:11; 6:12-15 / Ephesians, 2:11-13 / Cobsstans, 2:10-14; 3:9-11 / Hebrews, 8.6-10:
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xvi, CH 16 433c- 434a; CH 18 434c; CH 21-28 435a-440b; CH441c-442c; CH 36-38 443d-446a; BK xix, CH 22 525b-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 98, AA 4-6 242b-245b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 82d-83a; PART in, 177c-180a; 199b-201b; 206c
32 MILTON: Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a
33 PASCAL: PensSes, 610-612 280b-282b; 637-289b-290a; 675 296b-297a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 322a b

8c. The Law: its observance as a condition of righteousness and blessedness

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 26:4-5 / Exodus, 12- 13; 19-40 csp 20:1-17 / Leviticus passim, esp/ Numbers passim / Deuteronomy passim, esp 4:1-15, 5:6-21, 6:1-9, 6:I 7~ 2 5 7:9-26, 10:12- 13, 11:1-32, 12:32, 28:1-68, 30:11-20 /Joshua, 1:7-8; 8:30-35; 22:1-6 (D) Josue, 1:7-8; 8:30-35; 22:1-6 / / Kings, 8:54-62-(D) /// Kings, 8:54-62 / // Kings, 17; 2i:8-(D) IV Kings, 17; 21 :8 / / Chronicles, 22-12-13 (7)) / Paralipomenon, 22:12-13 / // Chronicles, 31; 33:8; 35:i-i9(7)) 77 Paralipomenon, 31; 33:8; 35*1-19 / Ezra, 9-10 ()) / Esdras, 9-/ Nehemiah, 1:5-9; 9:16-38 (D) II Esdras, 1:5-9; 9:16-38 / Psalms, i; 19:7-14; 37 : 3-3 I J 40:8; 78; 89:20-36 csp 89:30-32; 94:12; i5 : 43-455 "9 P) Psalms, i; 18:8-15; 36:30-31; 39:9; 77; 88:21-37 C *P 88:31-33; 93:12; 104:43-45; 118 / Proverbs passim, csp 6:20-23, 28:7, 29:18 / Isaiah passim, esp 5:24-25, 30:9, 42-21-25, 51:7-8 (D) Isaias passim, esp 5:24-25, 30-9, 42:21-25, 51:7-/ Jeremiah passim, esp 2:5-8, 6:19, 9-13-16, 16:10-13, 26:4-6, 31:33, 44:10-14, 44:(D) Jeremias passim, esp 2-5-8, 6:19, 9:13-16, 16:10-13, 26:4-6, 31:33, 44:10-14, 44:23 / Ezetyel, 5:5-9; 11:17-20; 18; 22:26; 36:25- 27; 43-48 (D) Ezechiel, 5:5-9; 11:17-20; 18; 22:26; 36:25-27; 43-48 / Daniel, 9:1-15 / Hosea, 4:6; 8:1 (D) Osee, 4:6; 8:1 / Amos 2:4-6 / Zephaniah, 3:1-7 (D) Sophomas 3:1-7 / Zechariah, 7:12-14 (D) Zachanas 7:12-14 / Malachi, 2:1-10; 3:7; 4:4 (D) Malachias, 2:1-10; 3.7; 4-
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 14-8-9 (D) OT, Tobias, 14 IO-H / Ecclesiasticus passim, esp 2:16, 9:15, 10-19, "''5 I7'ii-i4 19:17-20, 19:24, 24:23, 32-15, 33:2, 34-8, 39:1-11, 41:8, 42.1- 2, 45:1-5 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus passim, esp 2.19, 9:22-23, 10:23, 11:15, 17:9-12, 19:17-18, 19:21, 24:32-33, 32:19, 33:2, 34:8, 39:1-15, 41-11, 42:1-2, 45:1-6 / Baruch (D) OT, Baruch / I Maccabees, 1:38-63; 2:19-68 (D) OT, / Machabees, 1:40-66; 2:19-68 / II Maccabees, 2:2-3; 6-7; 11:22-(D) OT, // Machabees, 2:2-3; 6-7; n 122-
0 NEW TESTAMENT. Matthew, 5.17-20; 12:1-13; 15:1-20, 19.3-9 / M0r^, 7:1-23; 10-2-12 / Lu^e, 6:1-9; Ii: 37~4 r ; M :2 ~5; 16:16-17 / John, 1:17; 5:1-18,45-47; 7:19-23 / Acts, 10*9-15,25-28; 13:38-39; 15 i-io; 21:20-21 / Romans passim / Galatians passim / Ephesians, 2 14-15 / / Timothy, 1-5-11 / Hebrews, 7-
18 AUGUSTINE- City of God, BK x, CH 17 309c- 310b; BK xx, CH 28 556c-557a
20 AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 91, AA 4-5 210c-212c; QQ 98-105 239b-321a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, v [13-84] 112b 113a passim
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 177d-178a; 180a-d; 206c-207a; 216b-218a; 223a-c; PART iv, 269a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 18b-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK XH [223-260] 324a- 325a; [285-314] 325b-326a
33 PASCAL: PensSes, 610 280b-282a; 619-284b-286a; 628-634 287a-289a; 678 297a-b; 680 298a
35 LOCKE. Toleration, 14b-15a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 179d-182c esp 181a- 182a; 208a-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 246c-d

8d. The Temple: the Ark of the Torah

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 25-27; 30:1-6; 35:10- 38:31; 39:32-40:36 / Leviticus, 26:11 / Numbers, 9:15-22 / Deuteronomy, 10:1-5; 12:5-6; 16:5-6; 31:24-26 / Joshua, 3-4; 6:1-16 (D) Josue, 3-4; 6:1-16 / 7 Samuel, 4:3-7:2 (D) / Kings, 4:3-7:2 / // Samuel, 6:1-17; 7:1--(/>) 77 Kings, 6:1-17; 7 : ^3 / ' **. 5~* -(D) III Kings, 5-8 / 77 Kings, 12:4-16; 8* to 9a CHAPTER 29: GOD 25:1-17 (D) IV Kings, 12:4-16; 25:1-17 / / Chronicles, 13; 15:1-17:12; 22:1-29:10 (D) I Paralipomenon, 13; 15:1-17:12; 22:1-29:/ // Chronicles, 2-7 esp 7:12-16; 8:n; 24:4-14; 29; 34; 36 (D) // Paralipomenon, 2-7 csp 7:12-16; 8:11; 24:4-14; 29; 34; 36 / Ezra, 3-6 (D) I Esdras, 3-6 / Psalms, 57; 11:4; 27:4-6; 65:4; 68:29; 138:2 (D) Psalms, 5:8; 10:5; 26:4-6; 64:5; 67:30; 137:2 / Isaiah, 2:2-3; 56:6-7 (D) Isaias, 2:2-3; 56:6-7 / Jeremiah, 7:1-4,29-30; 26:1-7 (D) Jeremias, 7:1-4,29-30; 26:1-7 / Eze^iel, 40-42 (D) Ezechiel, 40-42 /Jonah, 2-4 (D) Jonas, 2:5 / Micah, 4 1-2 (D) Micheas, 4:1-2 / Habafy tytl(, 2:20 (D) Habacuc, 2:20 / Haggat (D) Aggeus / Zechanah, 8 9 (D) Zacharias, 8:9 / Malachi, 3:1 (>) Malachias, 3:
0 APOCRYPHA: 7o&/, 14:4-7 (>) OT, Tobias, 14:6-9 / W/A/0W of Solomon, 9'.S-(D) OT, 00^ o/ Wisdom, 9-8 / Baruch, 2:26 (D) OT, B^rwrA, 2:
0 NEW TESTAMENT, /o/w, 2 13-17 / Hebrews, 9 i-io
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK v, 296a; 297d-298a
18 AUGUSTINE. Cafy of God, BK x, CH 17 309c- 310b
20 AQUINAS Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 101, A 4, ANS and REP 1,4 269a-270b; Q 102, A276d-283c
23 HoBBEs. Leviathan, PART in, 178c; 180a-c; 184c; 198a-b
32 MILTON : Paradise Lost, BK xn [244-256] 324b; [284-371] 325b-327a esp [331-343] 326b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 180a; 180d-181a; 352c-354d csp 354a-b

8e. The messianic hope

0 OLD TESTAMENT, Genesis, 49-10-12 / Numbers, 24:15-25 / Deuteronomy, 30:1-10 / Psalms, 22:27-31; 44; 46-48; 60; 67-69 passim; 74; 102; 106:40-48; 126; 132; 147:1-11 (D) Psalms, 21:28-32; 43; 45-47; 59; 66-68 passim; 73; 101; 105:40-48; 125; 131; 146 / Isaiah, 2-4; 7:10-16; 9:1-7; 11-12; 25-27; 30:18-33; 32; 40-46 esp 41:25-42:4; 49; 51-56 esp 52:13-53:12; 59:20-62:12; 65:17- 66:24 (D) Isatas, 2-4; 7:10-16; 9:1-7; 11-12; 25-27; 30:18-33; 32; 40-46 esp 41:25-42:4; 495 51-56" esp 52:13-53:12; 59:20-62:12; 65:17-66:24 / Jeremiah, 23:3-6; 30-33 (D) Jeremias, 23:3-6; 30-33 / Ezefyel, 17:22- 24; 345 3 6 -37-() Ezechiel, 17.22-24; 34; 36-37 / Daniel, 9:20-27 / Hosea, 1:10-11; 2:16-23; 3 : 3~5J I 3~ I 4~(^) Osee, 1:10-11; 2:16-24; 3:3-5; 13-14 / Joel, 2-3 / Amos, 9:9-15 (D) Amos, 9:9-14 / Micah, 2:12-13; 4-5; 77~2o--(D) Micheas, 2:12-13; 4-5; 77- 20 / Zephaniah, 3 (D) Sophomas, 3 / Zechanah, 2; 8-10; 12-14 (D) Zacharias, 2; 8-10; 12-14 / Malachi, 3-4 (D) Malachias, 3-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, i esp 1:20-23; 3:1- 3,13-17; 12:14-21; 16:13-16; 17:1-13; 26:63- 64 / Marl(, 8:27-29; 9:2-13; 14:61-62 / I: 3-35J 3 :I -6 I 5- 16 ? 7 :2 4~ 28 ; 9 : " 8-20,28- 36; 22:66-70 /John, 1:15-41 csp 1:41; 4:4-esp 4:25-26; 7:26-53; 10:24-
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART HI, Q i, A 6 708c-709c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART m, 229c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK xn [235-244] 324b; [284-330] 325b-326b
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 607 280a; 609 280b;282b-283a; 616-619 283b-285a; 642 290b; 662 293b; 673 296a; 675 296b-297a;300b-301a; 719 308b-309a; 727 315b-316b; 729-730 316b-317a
40 GIBBON- Decline and Fall, 181b; 207d-208a; 308a
41 GIBBON :Dechne and Fall, 134b-135a

9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature and human destiny

    [sem referências]

9a. The Trinity

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 1-18-20; 3:11,16- 17; 10.19-20; 12:31-32; 28:19 / Mar^ 1:8-12; 3.28-30; 13:11 / Luty, 1:15,26-35; 2:25-27; 3:16,21-22; 11:13; 12:10-12 / John, 1:1-8,14, 18,32-34; 3 esp 3:16-17, 3:35-36; 14-16; 20:22-23 / 4cts t 1:2,5-8; 2:1-41 esp 2:32-39; 4:23-31; 5:32; 8:17-22; 9:31; 10:38,44-48; 11-15-17; 13:2-4; 15.7-9; 19-1-6; 20:28; 28:25-27 / Romans, 5 esp 5:5-10; 8:1-9:1; 14:17; 15:13,16 / / Corinthians, 2:9-14; 3:16-23; 6:19; 12:2-13 / // Corinthians, 1:18-22; 4:4; 13:14 (D) II Corinthians, 1:18-22; 4-4; 13:13 / Ephesians, 1-3 passim / Colossians, 1:13-15 / / Thessalomans, 1:5-6 / // Timothy, 1:14 / Titus, 3:4-7 / Hebrews, 1:2-3; 6:4-6; 10:14-17 / / Peter, 1:1-12 / II Peter, 1:21 / / John, 4-5 esp 4:9-10, 4:14-15, 5:1-2, 5:5-7, 5:10-12 / Judc, 17-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xin, par 6-112a-113d; par 32, 119b / City of God, BK x, CH 23-24 312c-313c; BK xi, CH 10 327d-328d; CH 23-29 334c-339b; CH 32 340b-d; BK xin, CH 24 373d-376a,c; BK xvi, CH 6, 426c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 5 625d-626a; CH 34 634b-c; BK m, CH 2, 657b-658a
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i, QQ 27-153a-237a,c; Q 59, A i, CONTRARY 306c-307b; Q 61, A 2, ANS 315c-316a; Q 88, A 3, REP 3 472c- 473a; Q 91, A 4, REP 2 487d-488c; Q 93, A i, REP 2 492a-d; AA 5-8 495b-500c; Q 108, A i, ANS 552c-553c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 93, A i, REP 2 215b,d-216c; Q 106, A 4, REP 3 324a- 32 5c; PART II-ii, Q i, A 8, REP 3 387a-388c; Q 2, A 8 397d-398b; PART HI, Q 2, A 3, REP 3 713a- 714c; Q 8, A i, REP i 756d-757c; Q 16, A i, REP796b-797d; A 2, REP 2 797d-798b; A 5, REP i 800c-801b; Q 17, A i, REP 5 807a-808d; A 2, 9b to 9*(1) (9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature and human destiny. 9a. The Trinity.) REP 3 808d-809d; Q 19, A i, REP i 816a-818b; QQ 20-24 821a*839c; Q 25, A i, ANS and REP 1,839d 840d; Q 26, A 2, ANS and REP 2 846b-d; 63, A 3, REP i 866c-867c; A 4, CONTRARY 867d 868b; PART in SUPPL, Q 95, A i, REP1042c-1044c; A 3, ANS 1045b-1046d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, in [34- 45] 56b; PARADISE, x [1-6] 120b; xiv [28-33] 127b; xxiv [124-147] 144a; xxxui [76-145] 157a-d
22 CHAUCER* Troilus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 267 155a / Second Nun's Tale [15,794-808] 467a-b 23HOBBES: leviathan, PART i, 97c; PART HI, 182a-c; 207b; 207d-208c; 227b; PART iv, 259d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, lOOc
31 DRSCARIES: Objections and Replies, 159a; 232b
32 MILTON: Christ* Nativity [1-14] la-b / Paradise Lost, BK III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [167-172] 139a, [372-389] 143b-144a; BK v [600-615] 188b; BK vi [719-733] 212a; BK XH [469-551] 329b-331a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 307a-314a csp 310b- 311a; 438b-441d csp 438b-c, 441a-b; 605a-b; 607a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 422a-c; 520b-521c csp 521c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART HI, 303d- 304a; 306a-c

9b. The Incarnation: the God-man

0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 1:1-
18 AUGUSTINE. Confessions, BK v, par 20 32d-33a; BK VH, par 13-14 47c-48b; par 24-25 50d-51c; BK x, par 67-70 88b-89a; BK xi, par 4 90a-b / City of God, BK ix, CH 15 293a-294a; CH295a-c; CH 21 296b-d; BK x, CH 20 311b-c, CH 22 312a-b; CH 24 312d-313c; CH 27-29 315b- 318b; BK xi, CH 2 323a-c; BK xxi, CH 15-572c-574a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 11-627b-628b; CH 34 634b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 62, A 9, REP 3 324a 325b; Q 64, A i, REP 4 334a- 335c; Q 73, A i, REP i 370a-37la; Q 95, A i, REP i 506b-507c; PART I-H, Q 5, A 7, REP642a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in, QQ 1-701b,d-a46d esp Q 26, A i, REP 3 845b-846a; PART HI SUPPL, Q 76, A i 939d-941a; Q 95, A 3, ANS 1045b-1046d; A 4 1046d-1047d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxix [106-120] 98d-99a; xxxi [76-126] 101c-102a; xxxu [19-63] 102c-103a; PARADISE, n [31-45] 108a; vi [10-21] 113d; VH [16-120] 115b-116b; xiii [37-87] 125d-126b; xxxn [i39]-xxxm [145] 156a-157d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 182a-c
32 MILTON: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, BK ui [56-415] 136b-144b csp hi5-34i] 142a-b, [383-389] 143b-144a; BK XH [307-385] 326a-327b
33 PASCAL' Pensees, 512 262a; 763-765 322a;325b; 862 342b-343a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 307d-308b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 134a-161a,cespl34a- 138a, 150c-151b; 230d-231a
46 HEGEL, Philosophy of History, PART HI, 306b-c; 308a-b
52 DOSTOLVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b- 137c
#9b(1) The divinity of Christ
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Isaiah, 9:6-7 (D) Isaias, 9-6-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew passim, csp 1:18-25, 3:16-4:11, 7:21, 8:29-32, 10:32-33, 11:25-30, 14:22-33, 16:13-20, 17.1-8, 26:63-68, 27:38-/ Mar\ passim, esp 1:1, 1:10-11, 1.21-28, 2:3- 12, 3:11-12, 5:2-7, 9.1-8, 14.60-65, 15:39, 16:/ Luke passim, esp 2.49, 4:41, 9:28-36, 10:21- 22, 22:29, 24,49 //oAn passim, esp i .1-14, 1:49, 5.17-27, 8.16, 10.30, 10.38, 11.27, 14510-11, 14:20, 14-28, 17*1-3, 20:17 / Acts, 8 37 / Romans, 1-3-4; 8 3,29-33 / / Corinthians, i 24; 15 28 / // Corinthians, i 19; 5.18-21 / Philippians, 2-5-6 / Colossians, 1-15-17; 2:8-9 / 7 Timothy, 3-16 / Hebrews, 1-1-8; 4-14; 5*5,8: 13:8 / / John, 2 22-24; 3 '8; 4:9-1 0*13-1 5; 5:1-13,20 / II John, 7-11 / Jude
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VII, par 25 51a-c / City of God, BK ix, CH 15 293a-294a; CH295a-c, BK x, CH 20 311b-c; CH 22 312a-b; CH24312d-313c, CH 27-29 315b-318b; BK xi, CH 2 323a-c; BK xxi, CH 15-16 572c-574a; BK xxn, CH 6 590a-591c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART HI, Q723a-730b, QQ 16-24 796a-839c; Q 25, A i 839d-840d, PART HI SUPPL, Q 95, A 3, ANS 1045b-1046d
21 DANTE- Dmne Comedy, PARADISE, vn [16-120] 115b-116b
22 CHAUCER- Prioress's Tale 391a-395b
32 MILTON: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, BK III [56-415] 136b-144b esp [135-142] 138b, [167-172] 139a, [281-314] 141b- 142a, [383-389] 143b-144a; BK v [600-615] 188b; BK vi [719-733] 212a; BK xn [307-385] 326a-327b
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 734 317a; 763-765 322a;325b; 841-842 336a-337a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 308a-b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 134b-138a esp 135b- 136b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART 11, 270d- 271c; PART in, 306d-307b
52 DOSTOBVSKY; Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b- 137c passim; BK VII, 189c-190c
#9b(2) The humanity of Christ
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 1:18-25; 2:11; 11:19; 1 3 : 54-56; 25-37-45; 26-1-28:8 / Mar\, 6:2-3; 15:37-16:6 / Luke, 1-2; 7.33-34; 11:27-28; 22- 23; 24:2-7,36-43 / John, 1:1-18 esp 1:14; 5:27; 6:42; 19:28-20:29 / Romans, 1:3-4; 8.3 / // Corinthians, 5:167 Galatians, 4 54 / Ephesians, 2:14-16 / Philippians, 2:5-8 / Colossians, 1:20- 22/7 Timothy, 3:16 / Hebrews, 2:14-18; 4 '15; 5 17 ; 7 -20-24 / 7/0 An, 4 12-
18 AUGUSTINE- Confessions, BK VII, par 25 51a-c / Ctfy o/ Go</, BK ix, CH 15 293a-294a; CH295a-c; BK x, CH 20 311b-c; CH 22 312a-b; CH 24 312d-313c; CH 27-29 315b-318b; BK xi, CH 2 323a-c; BK xxi, CH 15-16 572c-574a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 14 627d-628b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 51, A 2, REP i 276b-277a; A 3, REP 5 277a-278c; Q 113, A 4, REP i 578b-579a; Q 119, A 2, REP 4 607b- 608d
20 AQUINAS- Summa Theologica, PART ii-n, Q i, A i, REP i 380b-381a; Q 18, A 2, REP i 462d- 463d; PART in, QQ 4-24 730c-839c; Q 25, AA 1-839d-841c; PART HI SUPPL, Q 76, A i 939d-941a; Q 90, AA 1-2 1012b-1014d; Q 92, A 3, REP1034b-1037c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vn [16-120] 115b-116b; xm [37-45] 125d; [73-87] 126b
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 12 503b-504b
32 MILTON: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a esp [15-21] lOb-lla / Upon the Circumcision 12b-13a / Paradise Lost, BK m [56-415] 136b-144b esp [238-241] 140b, [281-294] 141b; BK xi [22-44] 299b-300a; BK xn [307-385] 326a-327b
33 PASCAL- Pensees, 553 268a-270a; 763-322a;785325b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 308a
41 GIBBON Decline and Fall, 134b-138a esp 134b-135b, 137a-d;330a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 270d- 271c; PART in, 306b-307a
52 DOSTOEVSKY* Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK VII, 189c-190c
#9b(3) Mary, the Mother of God
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Isaiah, 7:14 (D) Isaias, 7:
0 NEW TESTAMENT- Matthew, 1:18-25; 12:46-50 / Mar1(, 3:31-35 / Luke, 1-2; 8:19-21; 11:27-/John, 2:1-12; 19:25-
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xvn, CH 16 465c- 466d esp 466c-d; CH 24 471d-472a,c; BK xvm, CH 35, 491d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH627d-628b
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologtca, PART HI, Q 7, A 10, REP i 752c-753c; Q 25, A 5 843d-844b; PART III SUPPL, Q 83, A 3, CONTRARY 978C- 980d; Q 96, A 5, REP 2 1055c-1058a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, n [43-126] 3a-4a esp [94-99] 3c; PURGATORY, x [34-45] 67d; PARADISE, xm [79-87] 126b; xxm 141b- 142c; xxx-xxxi 151d-154c esp xxxi [94- 142] 154b-c; xxxn [85]-xxxin [45] 155c 156c
22 CHAUCER: Prioress's Tale 391a-395b
32 MILTON Christs Nativity la-7b / Paradise Lost, BK III [274-285] 141b; BK xii [307-385] 326a- 327b esp [375-382] 327b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 62b-64b / Pcnstcs, 742 319a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 134d-137c passim; 140a;154d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 338b*c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [3587-3619] 87b-88a; PART II [11,989-12,111] 291b-294b

9c. Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doctrines of original sin and salvation

0 OLD TESTAMENT. I Samuel, 2:1-10 (D) I Kings, 2-1-10 / Isaiah, 53 (D) Isaias, 53 / Lamentations, 4 :
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 1:21; 9:2-8; 10:32- 33; 16:24-27; 18:11-14; 26:26-28 / Marf(, 211- 12', 8.34-38, 14:22-24 / Luke, 1:67-79; 2:11; 5:17-26; 7:37-50; 9:23-26,56; 15; 19:1-10; 22-19-20; 24-46-47 / John esp 1:29, 3:16-18, 4:42, 6-31-59, 10:9-18, 14*6-7, 14-18-19, 15:1- 4 / Acts, 3:12-26; 4-10-12; 5*30-31; 13*15-esp 13 38-39; 16:30-31 / Romans esp 3:20-26, 5:1-6:23, 8:1-4 / f Corinthians, 15.3,12-23 / // Corinthians esp 2-10, 4:13-14, 5:14-21, 8:9, 13:4-5 / Galatians passim, esp 2:20-3:14, 4:1-/ Ephesians esp 1:5-7, i'i 2 ~i4 2:1-22 / Colossians&p 1-12-14, 1*19-22, 2-13-147 I Timothy, 1:12-17; 2:5-6 / Titus esp 2 11-3.7 / Hebrews esp 2:1-18, 5*9,7:25-27, 9.1-10:397 / Peter esp 1:3-11, 3:17-4.6 I I John esp 3:16, 4.9-10, 4:/ Revelation passim, esp 5-7 (D) Apocalypse passim, esp 5-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK II, par 15 12b-c; BK iv, par 18-19 23d-24b; BK VII, par 24-50d-52c; BK x, par 67-70 88b-89a / City of God, BK vii, CH 31-32 261d-262b; BK ix, CH 15 293a-294a; CH 17 295a-c; BK x, CH 4-301a-302d; CH 19-20 310d-311c; CH 22-312a-314c; CH 27-32 315b-322a,c; BK xi, CH 2 323a-c; BK xm, CH 2-4 360b-362a; CH 12- 15 365d-366d; CH 23-24 372a-376a,c; BK xvn 449a-472a,c passim; BK xvm, CH483d-485a; CH 31-35 488a-493a; BK xx, CH 26 555a-556b; CH 30 5S7c-560a,c; BK xxi, CH 15-16 572c-574a; BK xxn, CH i 586b,d-S87b; CH 3 588a-b; CH 22-24 606d-612a; CH 29-614b-618d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 11-627b-d; CH 14-18 627d-629a; CH 34 634b-c; BK II, CH 41 656a-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 97, A i, REP 3 513c-514c; PART i-n, Q 5, A 7, REP 2 642a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 85, A 5, REP 2 181d-182d; Q 87, A 7, REP 3 190c- 191d; Q 89, A 5, REP i 202c-203b; Q 91, A 5, REP 2 211c-212c; Q 98, A i, ANS and REP239b-240c; A 2 240c-241b; A 4, ANS and REP i (9. Specifically Christian dogmas concerning the divine nature and human destiny. 9c. Christ the Saviour and Redeemer: the doctrines of original sin and salvation.) 242b-243c; A 6, REP 2 244c-245b; Q 100, A 12 264d-265d; Q 101, A 3, ANS and REP i 268a- 269a; Q 102, A 2, ANS 271b-272a; A 4, REP 2,5- 6 csp REP 6 276d-283c; A 5, REP 5 283c-292c; Q 103, A i, ANS 298b-299b; A 2 299b-300d; A 3, REP 2 300d-302a; o 104, A 3, ANsr305d-306d; QQ 106-108 321a-337d, PART ii-n, Q i, A 7, REP 1,4 385c-387a; A 8, RLP 4 387a-388c; Q 2, A396a-397c; o 14, A 2, REP 3 448d-449d; PART , in, Q i 701b,d-709c, Q 26 845a-846d; Q 60, A 3, ANS 848d-849c; A 5, REP 3 850b-851b; Q 61, A i, REP 3 855a-d; A 3 856c-857c; Q 62, A 5, REP 2 862b-863a; A 6, ANS and REP 1-2 863a- 864c; PART in SUPPL, Q 69, A 4 889c-890c; Q 71, A 14, REP 2 916c-917b; Q 75, A 2, REP 3-937a-938a; Q 76, A i 939d-941a; Q 78, A i, REP 3 947d-949b; Q 89, A 2, ANS and REP1006b-1007c; A 5, ANS 1009b-d; Q 90 1012a- 101 6a; o 95 1042c-1049d; Q 99, A 3, REP i 1081d-1083a
21 DANTE: Dunne Comedy, HLLL, iv [46-63] 5d- 6a; PURGATORY, xxxii [28-63] 102c-103a; xxxin [52-72] 104d-105a; PARADISE, vn [16-120] 115b-116b; xm [37-87! 125d-126b, xix [103-111] 136a, xxin 141b-142c; xxxn [1-138] 154d-156a
22 CHAUCER' Trotlus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 263-267 154b-155a / Second Nun's Tale [15,788-822] 467a-b / Parson's Tale, par497b-498a; par 13 504b-505a; par 68-533b-534b 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, PART HI, 191b-192c; 195d-196a; 197c-198a, 204a-207b, 240c; 242b-245a; PART iv, 260b-c
24 RABELAIS. Gargantua and Panfagruel, BK iv, 269c-270b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Measure for Measure, ACT 11, sc n [71-79] 182d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 68, SCHOL 445a-b
32 MILTON: Chnsts Nativity la-7b passim / The Passion 10b-12a / Upon the Circumcision 12b- 13a / Lycidas [165-185] 31b / Paradise Lost 93a-333a csp BK i [1-26] 93b-94a, BK HI [56-415] 136b-144b, BKX [615-640] 287b-288b, BK xi [22-44] 299b-300a, BK XH [285-484] 325b-329b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 425-856 243b-341b passim, esp 556-588 270b-277b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 181b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 334b-c
44 BO$\VELL: Johnson, 482a-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART HI, 306b-c; PART iv, 331d-332a; 354a-c
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 318b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim
54 FREUD: War and Death, 763b-c

9d. The Church: the mystical body of Christ; the Apostolate

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Song of Solomon (D) Canticle of Canticles
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 3; 4:18-22; 8:18-23; 9.35-10:42; 11:1-15; I 3 :I ~531 16:17-24; 18:15- 20; 20:25-28; 24:14; 25; 28:16-20 / Mar/(, 1:1-9,16-20; 3:13-19; 10:42-45; 13:10; 16:14- 20 / Luke, 3* 1-20 ; 4*43-44; 5:1-11; 6*13-16; 8:16-17; 9:1-6; 11:48-50; 12:11-12; 22*24-30; 24:47 / John, 1:6-8,15-42; 4:34-38; 10; 13:31- 17:26; 20:19-21*24 csp 20:20-23, 21:15-17 / Acts esp 1:8, 1:13-26, 2*1-47, 5' r ~4 2 I 3'47i 16:1-40, 22.14-15 / Romans / I Corinthians passim, esp 3.1-23, 4:9-13, 6:1-20, 10:16-17, 12.12-31, 15:1-11 / // Corinthians esp 1:12-21, 2.10-11, 3:1-4*18, 5:20-21, 7*8-13, 10:1-13:/ Galatians passim, esp 1-2, 3:28, 4:1-31 / Ephestanscsp 1*22-23, 3:8-12, 4:1-12, 5:23-/ Phihppians, i -27-2 -4 / Colossians passim, esp i 15-29, 2:13-19, 3.6-11 / Hebrews, 3:5-6 / / Peter, 2:4-10 / 1 John
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK vi, par 4 36a-b / City of God, BK i, CH 35 149b-c; BK x, CH311b-c; BK xm, CH 21 371a-c; BK xvn, CH461b-d; CH 11 462c-463a; CH 15-16 465b- 466d, CH 20 469a-470c; BK xvin, CH 48-501b-504d; BK xix, CH 22 525b-c; BK xx, CH 7-12 535b-541d, BK xxn, CH 17-18 603a-604b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 16 628c-d; CH628d-629a; BK III, CH 31-32 669c-670a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 95, A i, REP i 506b-507c
20 AQUINAS* Summa Theologica, PART H-II, Q i, A 9, CONTRARY and REP 3,5 388d-389d; A 10, ANS 389d-390d, Q 2, AA 6-8 395b-398b; Q410a-413c; QQ 18^-189 625a-700d; PART HI, Q 8 756c-763b, PART in SUPPL, Q 71, A 9 910d- 912b; Q 95, A 3, ANS and REP 4 1045b-1046d; A 4, REP 1,5 1046d-1047d
21 DANTE* Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, ix [73- 145] 66c-67b; xix [127-141] 82d-83a; xxrx [i]~xxx [21] 97d-99c, xxxii [i]-xxxin [78] 102b-105a; PARADISE, xi 122a-123c esp [28- 39] 122b; xn 123c-125a; xxin [i]-xxvi [81] 141b-146c passim; xxvn [1-66] 147b-148a; xxix [109-114] 151b; xxx-xxxn 151d-156a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 151a-c; PART HI, 198a-199a; 207b-224c; PART iv, 247a-249b, 275a-278d
32 MILT ON -.Paradise Lost, BKXII [436-5i4]328b- 330b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 473-484 256b-258b;291b; 801-802 328b; 832 334a; 849 339b- 340a; 852 341a-b; 857-861 342a, 867-343b-349a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 4b-Sd
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART HI, 307b- 310c; PART iv, 315d; 331d-332c; 338a<d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim
54 FRBUD: Group Psychology, 674c-d; 691d-692a

9e. The sacraments

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 3; 18:18; 19:4-6,10- 12; 20:20-23; 26:26-29; 28:19 / Mar\, 1:4,8- 10; 10:2-12,35-40; 14:22-24; 16:16 / Lufe, 3:3,16; 22:14-20 /John, 1:25-27,33; 3:1-8;csp 6:32-35, 6:47-59; 19:33-34? 20:21-23 / Acts, 2:40-42; 8:12-17,26-40; 11:16; 19:1-7; 22:16 / Romans, 6:3-4 / / Corinthians, i '12-17; 6:n; 7:8-14,34-39; 10:16-17; 11-23-30; 12:13; 15:28-29 / Galatians, 3:27 / Ephcsians, 4:5; 5:21-33 esp 5:31-32 / Colosstans, 2:11-12 / Hebrews, 5:1-6 / James, 5:14-16 / I Peter, 3 120-
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK ix, par 12 64d- 65a; BK xm, par 26-29 117c-118c / City of God, BK x, CH 5-6 301b-302d; CH 19-20 310d- 31 Ic; BK xm, CH 3-4 361a-362a; CH 7 362d- 363b; BK xx, CH 26 555a-556b; BK xxi, CH573b-574a; CH 20 575c-d; CH 25 579d-581a / Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH 3 637c-d; CH656a-c; BK III, CH 9 661a~c; BK iv, CH 21, 690d-691b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 92, A 3, ANS 490c-491b; Q 113, A 5, ANS and REP579a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 102, A 5 283c-292c; Q 103, A 4, ANS 302a- 304a, Q 108, A 2, ANS and REP 2 332b-333d; PART ii-n, Q i, A i, REP i 380b-381a; A 3, REP 4 381d-382c; A 8, REP 6 387a-388c; Q 3, A i, REP i 400c-401a; Q 10, A 12, REP 5 436b-437d; PART in, QQ 60-847a-884a,c; PART in SUPPL, Q 83, A 3, ANS and REP 4 978c-980d; Q 99, A 4 1083a- 1084a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xxvn [67-132] 40c-41a
22 CHAUCER: Pardoner's Tale [12,829-849] 381b / Parson's Tale, par 12-22, 504b-510b esp par 22, 510b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 71b; PART in, 180c-d; 206c-207a; 208b; 211c-212c; PARTIV, 249b-250c; 263d-264a
30 BACON : Advancement of Learning, lOla
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 162d-165d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BKXII [436-445] 328b- 329a
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 71b-80b; 128b- 137b / Pensees, 554 270a; 862, 343a,344a-b; 904-905 348b-349a; 923 351b
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 12a / Human Understanding, BK ii, CH xxni, SECT 17 250d-251a; BK iv, CH xx, SECT 10 391c-392a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 221a-224a; 260b- 261a;373b-376a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 193a-b; 297c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 329d; 334b-c
44 Bos WELL '.Johnson, 173d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 331d- , 332c;338a-d;349d-350a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 80c-81a

9f. The second coming of Christ

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew^ 10:14-15; 11:20-24; 12:36-37; 13:36-43.47-5; 24-25 / Mar\, 13:4-37 / Luty, 10:11-15; 17:20-37; 19:11-28; 21 15-36 / John, 14 :i-4 / Acts, 1 19-1 1 ; 2 :i7-2i ; 17:31 / Romans^ 2:5-11 / / Corinthians, 15:23- 28 / Philippians, 3:20-21 / / Thessalonians, 1:9-10; 2:19; 4:14-5:4 / II Thessalonians, 1-2 / II Timothy, 3:1-4:8 / James, 5:7-9 / // Peter, 2:9; 3:7-13 / I John, 2:18-29 / Jude, 17-25 / Revelation esp 1:4-20 (D) Apocalypse esp 1 14-
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xm, CH 2 360b- 361a; CH 6 362c-d; CH 23-24 372a-376a,c; BK xvin, CH 53 504d-505c; BKXX 530a-56Qa,c; BK xxi, CH 11-27 570b-586a,c / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 15 628b-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 73, A i 922b-923c; A 3 924b-925b; Q 77, A 2, ANS 945a-946b; QQ 87-90 997a-1016a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 179d; 191 b- 192c; 197c; 229c-230a; 244b-c; PART iv, 248a-b, 251c-252b; 254b-255b
32 MILTON: Christs Nativity la-7b esp [133-172] 4b-5b / At a Solemn Musid{ 13a-b / Paradise Lost, BK III [274-343] 141b-143a; BK VII [139- 173] 220a-221a; BK xi [72-83] 300b 301a / Areopagitica, 404a-b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 757 321a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 187b-188a
52 DOSIOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK i, 13c-d; BK v, 127a-137c

10. The denial of God or the gods, or of a supernatural order: the position of the atheist

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Psalms, 14:1-3; 53:1-3 (D) Psalms, 13:1-3; 52:1-
5 ARISTOPHANES: Thesmophoriazusae [443-458] 605b
7 PLATO: Apology, 204c-205c / Laws, BK x, 758b-765d esp 758b-759a, 759d-760c, 761b-c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK iv, SECT 3, 263c; BK ix, SECT 39 295a
18 AUGUSTINE. City of God, BK v, CH 9, 213c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 2, A 3, REP 1-2 12c-14a
23 HOBBES Leviathan, PART II, 160a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 211b-212a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 4b-c
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, 72a-b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK xi [569-723] 311b- 315a esp [617-623] 312b / Samson Agonistes [293-299] 346a
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 184-241 205a-217b
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 18b / Human Understanding, BK i, CH in, SECT 8 114a-c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 92-431a-d; SECT 133, 439d-440a; SECT 154-444a-c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xn, DIV 116, 503c-d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 29a (10. The denial of God or the gods, or of a supernatural order: the position of the atheist.)
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 379c-380c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 200b- 201a; BK xxv, 208a
40 GIBBON. Decline and Fall, 13a-b
42 KANT- Pure Reason, llb-c; 192c-d / Judgement, 595d-596c
43 MILL: Liberty, 280d-281c
50 MARX: Capital, 31c-d; 35b-c; 305d [fn 2]
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 196b-d
52 DOSTOEVSKV: Brothers Karamazov, BK i,lla~c; BK v, 135b-136b; BK xi, 312b-314d; 345a-c

11. The denial of God as completely transcending the world or nature: the position of the pantheist

12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 14 120d-121c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT i 256b,d; SECT 13 258c; BK VH, SECT 9 280b-c; BK xn, SECT 30 310a-b
17 PLOTINUS: Second Enncad, TR ix, CH 16, 75c- 76a / Third Ennead, TR vm 129a-136a / Fourth Ennead, TR ix 205a-207a,c / Fifth Ennead, TR i, CH 1-2 208a-209b, FR n 214c- 215c; IR in, en 15-17 224c-226c; TR vm, CH 7-10, 242d-244d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 2-3 lb-2a; BK III, par 10 15b*d; par 18 18b; BK iv, par25c-d; par 31 26c-27a; BK VII, par 1-3 43b- 44b; BK x, par 8-10 73b-74a; BK xn, parlOOd-lOla; par 21 103d-104a / City of God, BK iv, CH 12-13 19Sd-196b; BK VH, CH 6 248a-b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A 8 19d-20c, Q 6, A 4 30b-d, Q 8, A i, ANS 34d- 35c; A 3, REP i 36b-37c, Q 16, A 6 98b-d; Q 90, A i 480d-481d; Q 105, A 5 542a-543b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 162b
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, vi, 99c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART 1 355a-372d esp DBF 3-355b, PROP 1-15 355d-361d, PROP 18 363c, PROP 25 365b, PROP 28-29 365c-366c; PART II, PROP i-n 373d-377c; PART iv, PREF, 422b,d- 423b; PROP 4 425b-d
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xm, SECT 18 152a-c
42 KANT: Judgement, 564c-565d csp 565c-d; 566c-d; 580c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 176b-c; PART i, 220c 221a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dicl^ 115b-117a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 216d-218b; BK xm, 581c-582a; BK xiv, 608a-b; BK xv, 631ac

12. The denial of a revealed and providential God: the position of the deist

7 PLATO: Parmenides, 489d-490d / Laws, BK x, 765d-768c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [62-158] ld-3a; BK II [167-183] 17a-b; [580^660! 22c- 23b; [1090-1104] 29a; BK v [55-90] 61d-62b; [146-234] 63a-64a; [306-310] 65a; [1161-1240} 76b-77b; BK vi [43-95] 80d-81c
15 TACITUS : Annals, BK vi, 91b-d
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 16, 75c- 76a
18 AUGUSTINE. Confessions, BK v, par 19 32b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART 11, 162a-b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 137a-b / PensSes, 242-290 217b-225a passim; 430-434 245a- 250a; 543-549 266a-267a; 556-588 270b-277b
37 FIELDING. Tom Jones, 38c-39c; 53c; 75c-76a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 190a-c / Judgement, 547d
52 DOSTOEVSKY . Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 120d- 121c; 127b-137c passim; BK x, 292d-294a

13. God as a conception invented by man: its emotional basis

0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 14:12-21 (D) OT, BooJ^ of Wisdom, 14:12-
23 HOBBES Leviathan, PARI i, 79a-b; 79d*80a
25 MONTAIGNF Essays, 256c-d
42 KANT- Judgement, 593c-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 302b-303d; 593b-c
50 MARX: Capital, 31c-d
52 DOSFOEVSKY Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 67d-68c, BK v, 120d-121a, BK x, 293a
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 692a-693a / War and Death, 763b-c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 771a-b; 778d / New Introductory Lectures, 875d-878c

14. The worship of false gods: deification and idolatry

0 OLD TESTAMENT' Genesis, 31:19-35 / Exodus, 20:1-6,22-23; 22.20; 23:13; 32, 34:11-17 / Leviticus, 17 7, 19.4; 20.1-6, 26 1,28-30 / Numbers, 25:2-5; 33 -5 1-52 / Deuteronomy passim, esp 4:1-3, 4.15-19, 4:23-28, 5:7-9, 6:14-16, 7:1-6, 7.25-26, 8.19-20, 9:15-21, 11:16-17, 11.28, 12:2-3, 12*29-13.18, 16:21- 22, 17:2-7, 18.9-14, 20:16-18, 27.15, 28.14- 68, 29*16-29, 30*15-20, 31*16-21, 32 15-39 / Joshua, 22-23; 24:14-25 (D) Josue, 22-23; 24:14-25 / Judges, 2:10-23; 3:5-8; 6:24-32; 8:33-34; 10 ; 17-18 / 7 Samuel, 7:3-4; 15:22- 23 (D) / Kings, 7:3-4; 15*22-23 / I Kings, 3:1-4; 9*6-9; 11-16; 18:17-29; 20.22-28; 21:25-29; 22:5i-53-(D) /// Kings, 3:1-4; 9:6-9; 11-16; 18:17-29; 20:22-28; 21:25-29; 22:51-54 / II Kings passim, esp 1:1-18, 8:16- 9:10, 10:1-36, 11:17-18, 14:1-18:37, 19:16-19, 21:1-23.37 (D) IV Kings passim, esp 1:1- 18, 8*16-9:10, 10:1-36, 11:17-18, 14:1-18:37, 19:16-19, 21:1-23:37 / // Chronicles, 13:8-9; 28; 33 (D) II Paralipomenon, 13:8-9; 28; 33 / Psalms, 81:8-16; 97:7; 106; 115:1-8; 135:15-18 (D) Psalms, 80:9-17; 96:7; 105; 113:1-8; 134:15-18 / Isaiah, 1-2 esp 1:29, 2:8-9, 2:18-21; 10:10-11; 19 esp 19:1-3; 30-31 csp 30:22, 31:7; 36 esp 36:18-20; 40:18-20; 41 esp 41:29; 42:8,17; 44 esp 44:9-20; 45-20-2I; 4 6 :5-9; 57 : 3-8; 65:3-5; 66:3 (D) Isatas, 1-2 esp 1:29, 2:8-9, 2:18-21; 10:10-11; 19 esp 19:1-3; 30-31 esp 30:22, 31:7; 36 esp 36:18-20; 40:18-20;esp 41:29; 42:8, 17; 44 esp 44:9-20; 45:20-21; 46-5-9; 57:3-8; 65:3-5; 66:3 / Jeremiah, 1-13 passim, esp 5:19, 7:9-10, 7.17-19, 8:1-2, 8:12, 8:19, 9:13-14, 10:2-15, 11:10-17, 13:10; 16 esp 16:10-13, 16:17-20; 23:20-27; 25.3-7; 32-30-35; 44; 50:38; 51 esp 51-17-18, 51-47, 51:52 (D) Jeremias, 1-13 passim, esp 5 19, 7:9-10, 7:17-19, 8:1-2, 8:12, 8:19, 9:13-14, 10:2-15, 11:10-17, 13:10; 16 esp 16:10-13, 16:17-20; 23:20-27; 25:3-7; 32:30-35; 44; 50-38; 51 esp 51-17-18, 51:47, 51:52 / Eze^iel, 5 esp 5-11, 6; 14; 16; 20; 22-23; 36 17-19; 37 23 (D) Ezechiel, 5 esp 5:11; 6; 14; 16; 20; 22-23; 36.17-19; 37.23 / Daniel, 3;(D) Daniel, 3:1-23,91-97; 6 / Hosea passim, esp 2-8-13, 4-12-13, 8-3-6, 10:1-2, 13*(D) Osee passim, esp 2 8-13, 4-12-13, 8*3-6, 10:1-2, 13:2 / Amos, 5 esp 5.25-27 / Nahum passim, esp 1:14 / Habatfaf^, 2:18-19 (D) Habacuc, 2:18-19 / Zepnaniah passim, esp 1-4-6 (D) Sophomas passim, esp 1-4-6 / Zechariah, 10-1-3; 13-2 (D) Zacharias, 10.1-3;
0 APOCRYPHA. Judith, 3 8; 5:23-6.4-^) OT, Judith, 3:12-13; 5-27-6:4 / Rest of Esther, 14:6- 10 (D) OT, Esther, 14:6-10 / Wisdom of Solomon, 12-15 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 12-15 / Ecclesiasticus, 34:1-7 (D) OT, EC- clesiasticus, 34:1-7 / Baruch, 6 (D) OT, Baruch, 6 / Bel and Dragon(D) OT, Darnel, 14-2-41 / / Maccabees, 1:41-2:28 (D) OT, / Machabees, 1:43-2:28 / II Maccabees, 6-(D)OT,HMachabees,6-
0 NEW TESTAMENT. Acts, 7.39-44; 147-18; 15:20,28-29; 17:16-31 / Romans, 2:22 / / Corinthians, 5:9-11; 6:9; 8; 10:7,14-21; 12:II Corinthians, 6*14-17 / Galatians, 5-19-20 / Ephesians, 5.5 / Philippians, 3:18-19 / Colossians, 3 .5 / / Thessalomans, 1:9 / I Peter, 4 13 / I John, 5:21 / Revelation, 2:20; 9:20; 21:8; 22-14-15 (D) Apocalypse, 2:20; 9:20; 21:8; 22:14-
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 12d-13b; 31a-b; BK II, 79d-80a; BK III, 95a-c; BK iv, 140c-141a
7 PLATO: Laws, BK x, 769c-771b
14 PLUTARCH Numa Pompilius, S3b-c/Camtllus, 104d-105a / Pericles, 123c-124a / Pelopidas, 239d-240c / Alexander, 575d-576a / Demetrius, 729d-731a 29: GOD
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK i, 4b-d / Histories, BK v, 296a
16 KEPLER: Harmonies of the World, 1081a- 1083b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i-x 129a-322a,c; BK xvin, CH 5-6 474d-475c; CH 8-10 475d- 477c; CH 12-19 477d-482c; CH 21 482d-483b; CH 24 485a-b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 17, A 4, REP 3 103c-104b; Q 67, A 4, ANS 352a- 354a
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 100, A 4, ANS 253d-255a; Q 101, A 3, ANS and REP268a-269a; Q 102 270b 298a passim ,
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xix [$8-117] 27d-28a; xx 28b~29d; PARADISE, iv [49-63] lllb; vin [1-12] 116d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 265 154b-155a / Parson's Tale, par 35-38, 521a-522b; par 63-64 530a-53la
23 HOBBES. Leviathan, PART i, 51d-52a; 78d- 79b; 79d-80a; 80d-82d; PART iv, 261a-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 18d-20d; 238d-239b; 246a-257d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, lOOb; lOla-b
32 MILTON- Christs Nativity la-7b esp [165-228] 5b-7a / Paradise Lost, BK i [331-621] lOOb- 107a; BK xii [101-120] 321b / Samson Agomstes [433-471] 349a-350a; [871-902] 358b- 359a; [1139-1243] 364b-366b
34 NEWTON: Optics, BK III, 543b-544a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 13b-15a / Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 26 112a-b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT431b-c
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 20a-c; 152a-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 200b- 201a; BKXXV, 208a-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 81d; 184b-185d; 457b,d-467d; 600d-601a; 775c-776a,c [n 173- 174]
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 154d; 195a-202a esp 195b, 197a-199c; 207a-208c; 229c-230a; 252b-c; 329c-330b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 179a-b
44 Bosw ^ELL: Johnson, 173d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 270, 85b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 196d- 197c; PART i, 244c-245b; 246a-b; 253b- 254b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic1(, 17a-b; 36b-37a; 38b- 39b;367a-372a <ref_end>


ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books of the Western World, but r

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into tw

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented m this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works c

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The

KANT. Prolegomena to Any Fut

*"

Religion With in the Lim

.

PLUTARCH. "Of Isis and Osiris, or the Ancient Re- HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL

hgion and Philosophy of Egypt," in Moralta VOL n, SECT in, CH 3 EPICTETUS. The
Manual On the Proofs of the E

.

AUGUSTINE. Answer to Sceptics J. MILL. "Theism," in Thre

S.

.De Genesi ad Litteram, BK XH W. JAMES. The Will to Believ

. On the Trinity Pragmatism, LECT in, v

.

. On Grace and Free Will . A Pluralistic

.The Enchiridion on Faith, Hope and Love

AQUINAS. On the Trinity of Boethius, QQ 1-3

.Summa Contra Gentiles, BK i; BK n, CH 1-28; HESIOD. Theogony

BK HI, CH 64-83, 146-162; BK iv, CH 1-49, 53-55 CLEANTHEs. Hymn to Zeus

.

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, QQ 2, 5-7, CICERO. De Natura Deorum (On

14, 23, 27-29; De Vmone Verbi Incarnatt Gods)

. On the Power of God, QQ 1-3, 5-7, 9-10 SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against th

. Summa Theologica, PART in, QQ 27-59 cernmg Gods, Do Gods Exist

.

Compendium of Theology PROCLUS. The Elements of The F. BACON. "Of Atheism," in
Essays "DioNvsius". On Mystical The DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy,
PART i, . On the Divine

13-25, 29-31, 40, 51, 54; PART in, 1-3 BOETHIUS. Contra Eutychen (A HOBBES.
Philosophical Rudiments Concerning Govern- Eutyches and Nestonus)

ment and Society, CH 15-18 . De Trinitate HUME. Dialogues Concerning Natural
Religion The Consolation of Phi

.

. The Natural History of Religion ERIGENA. De Divistone Natura f the d, see -40;
r the N AND see EXPERIENCE 7; HAPPIan's interoblem of the nction between ER
33(3)- ICS 23, 2d, 33; elevant to the o groups: ited, consult Great Ideas. ure
Metaphysic, par 55 its of Reason Alone i, BK n, SECT in, CH i; xistence of God e
Essays on Religion e in Universe ** the Nature of the ?) e Physicists, BK i
(Conology, (E,L) ology Names Treatise Against (On the Trinity) losophy, e, BK i
SAAPIA GAON. The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,

TREATISE I-II, IV, VII ANSELM OF CANTERBURY. Monologium

.

Proslogium

Cur Deus Homo?

,

GAUNILON. In Behalf of the Fool

BERNARD OF CLAIRVAUX, On the Love of God HUGH OF SAINT VICTOR. De Sacramentts f
UDAH HA-LEVI. Kttab al Khazart MAIMONIDES, The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i,

CH 46-47, 50-60, 73-76, PART II, CH I, 13-16, 22-

23, 25-30, 48; PART III, CH I3-l6, 20-21 Volsung Saga Nibelungenhed BONAVENTURA.
On the Reduction of the Arts to

Theology

Bretnloquium, PART i, iv-v

.

Itineranum Mentis in Deum (The Itinerary of

.

the Mind to God)

R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART vn

ALBERTUS MAGNUS. On Union with God DUNS SCOTUS. Tractatus de Pnmo Principio (A

Tract Concerning the First Principle), CH m-iv ECKHART. Sermons and Collations,
xv The Cloud of Unknowing ALBO. Boo{ of Principles (Sefer ha-Ikkarim), BK n
THOMAS A KEMPIS. The Imitation of Christ, BK in NICOLAS OF CUSA. The Vision of
God LUTHER. Trinity Sunday CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK i,
CH

1-14, 16-18; BK n, CH 4, 7-17

KNOX. An Answer to the Cavillations ofan Adversane

Respecting the Doctrine of Predestination

TERESA OF JESUS. The Way of Perfection

.

Book of the Foundations

. Interior Castle foHN OF THE CROSS. Spiritual Canticle

Dark Night of the Soul

.

The Living Flame of Love

. SUAREZ. Disputatwnes Metaphysicac, x (3), xi (3-

4), xn (i), xv (9), xix (3), xx-xxn,

xxin (9),

xxiv, xxvm-xxx, xxxi (14), XLVII (15)

BOEHME. The Aurora

. De Electione Gratiae (On the Election of Grace) HERBERT. The Temple BROWNE.
Religio Medici

BOSSUET. De la connaissance de Dieu et de soi-meme verse, VOL i, CH 4-5
kUDWORTH. The True Intellectual System ofthe UniUALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de
la verite .

XIV

Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, 11, vnFB'NBLON. A Demonstration ofthe
Existence and Attributes of God

kEIBNITZ. Discourse on Metaphysics, i-vn, xiv, xxxvi-xxxvn

. Philosophical Works, CH 34 (The Principles of

Nature and of Grace)

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

BK IV, CH 10, l8; APPENDIX, CH IO

.

Theodicy

.

Monadology, par 38-55

. BUTLER. The Analogy of Religion, PA*T i, CH 2-8 1 VOLTAIRE. "Faith," "Final
Causes," "God-Gods,

"Grace," "Power-Omnipotence," "Providence,*

"Theism," "Theist," "Polytheism," in A Philo sophical Dictionary

The Ignorant Philosopher, CH 26

.

The Sage and the Atheist

. LESSING. Nathan the Wise HERDER. God, Some Conversations PALEY. Natural
Theology, CH 23-26 BROWN. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, VOL n,
pp 134-152 SCHLEIERMACHER. The Christian Faith, par 50-56,

79-112,157-172 COMTE. System of Positive Polity, VOL iv, Theory ofthe

Future of Man, CH i LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK ix, CH 2, 4-5 WHEWELL. The Philosophy
of the Inductive Sciences,

VOL i, BK x, CH 5

On the Philosophy of Discovery, CH 31

. J. H. NEWMAN. An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent L. STEPHEN. An Agnostic's
Apology ROMANES. A Candid Examination of Theism T. H. GREEN. Prolegomena to
Ethics, BK i, CH 1-2 C. S PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 452-547 F.
THOMPSON. The Hound of Heaven BOSANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 8 WARD. The
Realm of Ends ROYCE. The Conception of God

The World and the Individual, SERIES n (10)

.

The Problem of Christianity, VOL u

. BRADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK n, CH 26

Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 15

. COOK. Zeus ture, PART i; PART II, CH I -3 GARRIGOU-LAGRANGE. God, His
Existence and NaOTTO. The Idea of the Holy BUBER. Hasidism McTAGGART. Some
Dogmas of Religion, CH 6-8 The Nature of Existence, CH 43

. FRAZER. The Golden Bough Man, God, and Immortality, PART HI

. EDDINGTON. Science and the Unseen World TENNANT. Philosophical Theology, VOL
n, CH 5-6 WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern World, CH 1 1 Process and Reality,
PART v, CH 2

. PENIDO. Le rdle de I* analogic en thSologie dogmatique BERGSON. Two Sources of
Morality and Religion, CH 4 MARITAIN. An Introduction to Philosophy, PART n (8)
. The Degrees of Knowledge, CH 4; CONCLUSION WEYL. The Open World, LECT i
LOVEJOY. The Great Chain of Being MANN. Joseph and His Brothers B. RUSSELL.
Religion and Science, CH 8 GILSON. Reason and Revelation in the Middle Ages .God
and Philosophy HARTSHORNE. Man's Vision of God ASCH. The Nazarenc . The Apostle

A. E. TAYLOR. Does God Exist? SANTAYANA. The Genteel Tradition at Bay, CH 2-3 .
The Idea of Christ in the Gospels

E. T. WHITTAKER. Space and Spirit