Chapter 30: GOOD AND EVIL INTRODUCTION rT" HE r theory of good and evil crosses
the boundaries of many sciences or subject matters. It occupies a place in
metaphysics. It is of fundamental importance in all the moral sciences ethics,
economics, politics, jurisprudence. It appears in all the descriptive sciences
of human behavior, such as psychology and sociology, though there it is of less
importance and is differently treated. The relation of good and evil to truth
and falsity, beauty and ugliness, carries the discussion into logic, aesthetics,
and the philosophy of art. The true, it has been said, is the good in the sphere
of our thinking. So it may be said of the beautiful that it is a quality which
things have when they are good as objects of contemplation and love, or good as
productions. It is no less possible to understand goodness and beauty in terms
of truth, or truth and goodness in terms of beauty. One aim of analysis, with
respect to the true, the good, and the beautiful, is to preserve their
distinctness without rendering each less universal.This has been attempted by
writers who treat these three terms as having a kind of parallelism in their
application to everything, but who also insist that each of the three notions
conceives things under a different aspect or in a "As good adds to being the
different relation. notion of the desirable," Aquinas writes, "so the true adds
a relation to the intellect"; and it is also said that the end "of the appetite,
namely good, is in the desirable thing," whereas the end "of the intellect,
namely the true, is in the intellect itself." In that part of theology which
goes beyond metaphysics and moral philosophy, we meet with the concept of
infinite goodness the goodness of an infinite being and we then face the problem
of how God's goodness is to be understood by man The basic terms of moral
theology righteousness and sin, salvation and damnation are, like virtue and
vice, happiness and misery, conceptions of good and evil in the condition of
man. (Their special theological significance comes from the fact that they
consider the goodness or evil of man in terms of his relation to God.) But the
theologicalproblem which is traditionally called "the problem of evil" concerns
the whole universe in its relation to the divine perfection. That problem, which
is further discussed in the chapter on WORLD, can be formulated in a number of
ways. How are we to understand the existence of evil in a world created by a God
who is omnipotent and perfectly good? Since God is good and since everything
which happens is within God's power, how can we account for the sin of Satan or
the fall of man, with all the evil consequent thereupon, without limiting God's
power or absolving the erring creature from responsibility ? Can it be said that
this is the best of all possible worlds, if it is also true that this world is
far from perfectly good, and if, as certain theologians hold, "God could make
other things, or add something to the present creation, and then there would be
another and a better universe" ?

THE CONTEMPORARY discussion of good and evil draws its terminology from
economics rather 1 than theology. The word "value" has almost replaced "good"
and "evil.* What in other centuries were the various moral sciences are now
treated as parts of the general theory of value. The substitution of "value" for
"good" or of "value judgment" for "moral judgment" reflects the influence of
economics. According to Marx, Aristotle "was the first the form of value." As
indicated to analyse . . . in the chapter on WEALTH, economics at its origin was
treated by Aristotle, along with eth- 605 606 ics and politics, as a moral
discipline. But he made it subordinate to them because it dealt not with the
whole of human welfare, but only with wealth one of the goods.

In the modern development of economics, the word "goods" comes to have a special
significance. It refers to commodities or utilities, as in the phrase "goods and
services." More generally, anything which is useful or exchangeable has the
character of an economic good. This general sense is usually conveyed by the
economist's use of the word "value." According to Adam Smith, "the word value
... has two different meanings, and sometimes expresses the utility of some
particular object, and sometimes the power of purchasing other goods which the
possessor of that object conveys." These two meanings are distinguished as
"value in use" and "value in exchange." Marx accepts this distinction, but
thinks that there is a more fundamental notion of value. He thinks it is from
both use-value and possible to abstract exchange-value, and to discover the
underlying property which gives value to all exchangeable things, namely, that
they are products of labor.

With Smith and Marx, as with Aristotle, the theory of value does not deal with
every type of good, but only with that type which earlier moralists called
"external goods" or "goods of fortune." But more recently the concept of value
has been extended, by economists and others, to the evaluation of everything
which men think of as desirable in any way. In consequence, the age-old
controversy about the objectivity or subjectivity of good and evil is now stated
in terms of the difference between facts and values, or between judgments of
fact and judgments of value. The issue, as currently stated, is whether
questions of value can be answered in the same way as questions of fact. One
position mamtains that, unlike questions of fact which can be answered by
scientific investigation and can be objectively solved, questions of value
elicit no more than expressions of opinion, relative to the individual's
subjective response or to the conventions of his society at a given time. The
other side of the issue is held by those who insist that the norms of value are
as objective and as scientifically determinate as the criteria of fact or
existence.

THE WORD "VALUE" does not change the prot lem in any way; for what does
evaluating any thing mean except judging it as good or bad better or worse ? The
problem, which has a history as long as the tradition of the great books, is the
problem of how we can defend such judgments and what they signify about the
things judged. Are good and evil determined by nature or convention ? Are they
objects of knowledge or opinion ? The title of an essay by Montaigne "that the
taste for good and evil depends in good part upon the opinion we have of them"
indicates one set of answers to these questions. "If evils have no admission
into us," he writes, "but by the judgment we ourselves make of them, it should
seem that it is, then, in our power to despise them or to turn them to good. ...
If what we call evil and torment is neither evil nor torment of itself, but only
that our fancy gives it that quality, it is m us to change it." Echoing
Montaigne, Hamlet remarks that "there is nothing either good or bad but thinking
makes it so." The Greek sophists, centuries earlier, appear to take the same
view. The statement of Protagoras that "man is the measure of all things," Plato
thinks, does not significantly apply to all things, but only to such things as
the good or the right, the true or the beautimade to say ful. In the
TheaetetttS) Protagoras is that as "to the sick man his food appears to be
bitter, and to the healthy man the opposite of bitter," so in general men
estimate or judge all things according to their own condition and the way things
affect them. This theory of goftd and evil necessarily denies the possibility of
moral science. Socrates calls it "a high argument in which all things are said
to be relative." Plato and Aristotle respond to the sophists by arguing in the
opposite vein. For Plato, the good is not a matter of opinion, but an object of
knowledge. Knowledge of good and evil is the best fruit of the tree of
knowledge. "Let each one of us leave every other kind of knowledge," Socrates
says at the end of the Republic, "and seek and follow one thing only," that is,
"to learn and discern between good and evil." Aristotle does not think that
ethics, or any science which deals with good and evil, can have as much
precision as mathematics. "Our discus- CHAPTER lien will be adequate/* he
writes, "if it has as {much clearness as the subject matter admits of/ for
precision is not to be sought for alike in all Ascussions." This, however, does
not exclude the possibility of our knowing with great exactitude the first
principles of moral science, such as the nature of happiness and virtue.
Indefiniteness and even a certain kind of relativity occur only when these
principles are applied to particular cases. Hence, in Aristotle's view, the
moral sciences, such as ethics and politics, can have objective and universal
validity no less than physics or mathematics, at least on the level of
principles.

In modern times, Locke and Kant also affirm the scientific character of ethics,
but without the qualification which Aristotle insists upon when we go from
principles to practice. Locke explains the grounds on which he is "bold to think
that morality is capable of demonstration, as well as mathematics"; for, he
says, "the precise real essence of the things moral words stand for may be
perfectly known, and so the congruity and incongruity of the things
themselvesmay be certainly discovered; in which consists perfect knowledge." He
is confident that "from self-evident propositions, by necessary consequences, as
incontestible as those in mathematics, the measures of right and wrong might be
made out, to any one that will apply himself with the same mdifferency and
attention to the one as he does to the other of these sciences." But Locke adds,
"this is not to be expected, whilst the desire of esteem, riches, or power makes
men espouse the well-endowed opinions in fashion." He himself seems to tend in
the opposite direction when he identifies the good with the pleasant and makes
it relative to individual desires. For Kant the two major parts of philosophy
physics and ethics are on equal footing, the one concerned with the "laws of
nature" the other with the "laws offreedom" In each case there is both empirical
and a priori knowledge. Kant calls the latter in each case "metaphysics" and
speaks of "a metaphysic of nature and a metaphysic of morals" The nature of
science, he thinks, requires us to "separate the empirical from the rational
part, and prefix to physics proper (or empirical physics) a metaphysic of
nature, and to practical anthropology a meta- EVIL physic of morals, which must
be carefully cleared of everything empirical."

This partial inventory of thinkers who stand against skepticism or relativism in
the field of morals indicates that agreement on this point is accompanied by
some disagreement about the reasons for holding what appears to be the same
view. The opposite view seems also to be shared by thinkers of quite different
cast, such as Spinoza and Mill, who differ from each other as well as from
Montaigne and the ancient sophists.

The terms "good and evil," Spinoza writes, "indicate nothing positive in things
considered in themselves, nor are they anything else than modes of thought One
and the same thing . . . may at the same time be both good and evil or
indifferent" according to the person who makes the judgment of it. Spinoza
therefore defines "good" as "that which we certainly know is useful to us."
Apart from society, he says, "there is nothing which by universal consent is
good or evil, since everyone in a natural state consults only his own profit."
Only when men live together in a civil society under law can it be "decided by
universal consent what is good and what is evil." Holding that all men seek
happiness and that they determine what is good and evil in particular cases by
reference to this end, Mill seems to offer the standard of utility as an
objective principle of morality. But insofar as he identifies happiness with a
sum total of pleasures or satisfactions, it tends to become relative to the
individual or the group. If competent judges disagree concerning which of two
pleasures is the greater or higher, there can be no appeal, Mill says, except to
the verdict of the majority. To this extent at least, judgments of value are
expressions of opinion, not determinations of science. Nor does Mill hesitate to
say that "the ultimate sanction of all morality" is "a subjective feeling in our
minds." IN ORDER to clarify this basic issue it is necessary to take note of
other terms which are usually involved in the discussion of good and evil such
terms as pleasure and pain, desire and aversion, being, nature, and reason. In
the course of doing this, we will perceive the relevance of the chapters which
deal with those ideas.

608 It has Lccu sdiu, *ui cAduipie, that the good is identical with the
pleasant; that the good is what men desire; that the good is a property of being
or existence; that the good is that which conforms to the nature of a thing;
that the good is that which is approved by reason. It is possible to see some
truth in each of these statements. But each, taken by itself, may be too great a
simplification Searching questions can be asked by those who refuse to equate
the good with the pleasant or the desirable, the real, the natural, or the
reasonable. Are there no pleasures in any way bad, no pains in any way good ?
Are all themselves good, or are all desires ? How does equally good calling a
thing "good" add anything to its being or existence? Does not evil exist or
qualify existence? By what standards can the natural and the rational be judged
good, if the good is that which conforms to nature and reason? These questions
call for more analysis of each of these factors in the discussion of good and
evil and suggest that no one of these factors by itself \s sufficient to solve
the problem of defining good and evil or formulating their criteria. Of the five
things mentioned, two particularly pleasure and desire seem to leave open the
question whether good and evil are objective or subjective. They require us to
decide whether things please us because they are good or are good because they
please us; whether we desire things because they are good or simply call them
"good" when we desire them. On this issue Spinoza flatly declares that "we do
not desire a thing because we adjudge it good, but, on the contrary, we call it
good because we desire it." In saying that "a thing is good so far as it is
desirable," Aquinas takes the opposite position, for according to him "a thing
is desirable only in so far as it is perfect." It can be desirable, therefore,
without being actually desired by this or that individual. The other three terms
unlike pleasure and desire seem to favor the objectivity of good and evil, at
least for those who regard the order of existence, the nature of things, and the
laws of reason as independent of our desires or preferences. Thus for Spinoza
the nature of man and his reason seem to provide an objective standard for
determining what is good alike for all men. Nothing, he writes, "can be good ex-
AS cept in so far as it agrees with our nature, and therefore the more an object
agrees with our nature the more profitable it will be." And in another place he
says, "By good I understand . . . everything which we are certain is a means by
which we may approach nearer and nearer to the model of human nature we set
before us." That model, he tells us, is the man of reason, the man who always
acts "according to the dictates of reason," for "those desires which are
determined by man's power or reason are always good." Nevertheless, if desire
and pleasure cannot be eliminated from the consideration of good and evil at
least not the good and evil which enter into human life then the problem of
finding a purely objective foundation for our moral judgments is not solved
simply by an appeal to being, nature, and reason. Some help toward a solution
may be found in one often reiterated fact about the relation between the good
and human desire. The ancients insist that no man desires anything but what at
the time seems good to him in some way. "No man," Socrates observes,
"voluntarily pursues evil, or that which he thinks to be evil. To prefer evil to
good is not in human nature; and when a man is compelled to choose one of two
evils, no one will choose the greater when he may have the less." This, however,
does not prevent men from desiring "what they suppose to be goods although they
are really evils." Sincethey are mistaken in their judgment "and suppose the
evils to be goods, they really desire goods." The object consciously desired is
always at least apparently good. When men are mistaken in their estimate of
things as beneficial or injurious to themselves, the apparent good the good
actually desired will be really an evil, that is, something actually
undesirable. An object which is really good may not appear to be so, and so it
will not be desired although it is desirable. The deception of appearances,
Socrates says, tricks us into taking "at one time the things of which we repent
at another, both in our actions and in our choice of things great and small."
THE DISTINCTION between the real and the apparent good is, of course, connected
with the CHAPTER 30: GOOD A problem of the objective and the subjective good.
The apparent good varies from individual to individual and from time to time. If
there were a real good, it would be free from such relativity and variability.
Unless there are from merely apparent, goods, real, as distinct moralistscannot
distinguish between what men should desire and what in fact they do desire.

Since moral science deals with human behavior, its province can be separated
from that of other sciences which treat the same subject matter such as
psychology and sociologyonly in terms of a different treatment of that subject
matter. Moral science must be normative or prescriptive rather than descriptive.
It must determine what men should seek, not what they do seek. The very
existence of normative sciences, as well as their validity, would thus seem to
depend on the establishment of a real, as opposed to a merely apparent, good.

This creates no special difficulty for moralists who think that man knows what
is really good for him, both in general and in particular, by intuition or
rational deduction, through the commandments of the divine law, or through the
precepts of the law of reason. But for those who insist that the good is always
somehow relative to desire and always involves pleasure, the distinction between
the real and the apparent good raises an extremely difficult problem. To say
that an apparent good is not really good suggests, as we have seen, that what is
called "good" may not be in itself desirable. That something which is really
good may not in fact appear to be so, seems to imply that the word "good" can be
significantly applied to something which is not actually desired at least not
consciously. How, then, is the good always relative to desire? The traditional
answer to this question must appeal to the distinction between natural and
conscious desire, which is discussed in the chapter on DESIRE. It is by
reference to natural desire that the good is said to be in itself always
desirable even when the really good thing is not consciously desired. The
relation of good and evil to pleasure and pain can also be clarified by a basic
distinction between the pleasure which is an object of de- ND EVIL sire and
pleasure conceived as the satisfaction of This is discussed in the chapter on
desire. PLEASURE AND PAIN. If obtaining a desired good is satisfying, then there
is certainly a sense in which the good and the pleasant (or the satisfying) are
always associated; but it may also be true that pleasure is only one kind of
good among various objects of desire and that certain pleasures which men desire
appear to be, but are not really good. THE FOREGOING considerations apply to the
good in the sphere of human conduct. But the human good, the practicable good,
the good for man, does not exhaust the meaning of the term good.The idea of the
good is, for Plato, the measure of perfection in all things; it is "not only the
author of knowledge to all things known, but of their being and essence, and yet
the good is not essence, but far exceeds essence in dignity and power." The
absolute good is also, as in the Divine Comedy, the final cause or ultimate end
of the motions of the universe. It is "the Alpha and Omega," Dante says, "of
every scripture that Love reads to me ... the Essence wherein is such supremacy
that every good which is found outside of It is naught else than a beam of Its
own radiance . . . the Love which moves the sun and the other stars." So too, in
Aristotle's cosmology, the circular motions of the celestial spheres, and
through them all other cycles of natural change, are sustained eternally by the
prime mover, which moves all things by the attraction of its perfect being. It
therefore "moves without being moved," for it "produces motion through being
loved." Though desire and love enter into the conception of the good as a cosmic
final cause, they are not human desire or love. Though the good ness which
inheres in things according to the degree of their perfection may make them
desirable, it is not dependent on their being consciously desired by men. In
Jewish and Christian theology, for example, the goodness of God is in no way
measured by human desires, purposes, or pleasures; nor is the goodness of
created things which, according to Genesis, God surveyed and found "very good."
The order of creation, moreover 610 THE GREA involves a hierarchy of
inequalities in being and goodness. Even when each thing is perfect in its kind,
all things are not equally good, for according to the differences in their
natures, diverse kinds are capable of greater or less perfection. In the
metaphysical conception of goodness, that which has more actuality cither in
existence or power has more perfection. God's infinite goodness is therefore
said to follow from the fact that he is completely actualinfinite in being and
power. Things "which have life," Augustine writes, "are ranked above those which
have none . . . And among those that have life, the sentient are higher than
those which have no sensation and among the . . . sentient, the intelligent
above those that have no intelligence."

Augustine contrasts these gradations of perfection which arc "according to the
order of nature" with the "standards of value" which arc "according to the
utility each man finds in a thing." That which is less good in a metaphysical
sense may be preferred on moral grounds as being better for man. "Who," he asks,
"would not rather have bread in his house than mice, gold than fleas?" Is it not
true that "more is often given for a horse than for a slave, for a jewel than
for a maid" ? According to Augustine, as well as to Aquinas later, metaphysical
goodness consists in "the value a thing has in itself in the scale of creation,"
while moral goodness depends upon the relation in which a thing stands to human
need or desire, and according to the estimation placed upon it by human reason.
It is in the moral, not the metaphysical sense that we speak of a good man, a
good will, a good life, and a good society; or of all the things, such as
health, wealth, pleasure, virtue, or knowledge, which it may be good for man to
seek and possess. Only in the metaphysical sense can things be thought of as
good entirely apart from man; only then can we find a hierarchy of perfections
in the world which accords with a hierarchy of beings. Thus Spinoza declares
that "the perfection of things is to be judged by their nature and power alone;
nor are they more or less perfect because they delight or offend the human
senses, or because they are beneficial or prejudicial to human nature."

T IDEAS THE METAPHYSICAL conception of goodness problems. Are there raises
peculiarly difficult as many meanings of "good" as there are of "being"? When we
say God is good, are we making a moral or a metaphysical judgement ? Are we
attributing perfection of being or goodness of will to God ? If goodness is a
property of being, then must not all evil become a privation of being?
Conceiving evil in this way, Augustine points out that if things "be deprived of
all good, they shall cease to be," so that there is "nothing whatsoever evil" in
itself; and Aquinas maintains that "no being is said to be evil, considered as
being, but only so far as it lacks being." If to understand what the notion of
goodness adds to the notion of being it is necessary to say that being has
goodness in relation to appetite, the question inevitably arises, "Whose
appetite?" Not man's certainly, for then the moral and the metaphysical good
become identical. If God's, then not appetite in the form of desire, but in the
form of love, for the divine perfection is usually thought to preclude desire.
Problems of this sort confront those who, conceiving the good both apart from
and also man, are obligated to connect the relative to metaphysical and the
moral meanings of good and to say whether they have a common thread. Some
writers, however, limit their consideration to the strictly moral good, and
deny, as do the Stoics, goodness or evil to anything but man's free acts of
will. We should, says Marcus Aurehus, "judge only those things which are in our
power, to be good or bad." In this we are entirely free, for "things themselves
have no natural power to form our judgments ... If thou art pained by any
external thing, it is not this thing which disturbs thee, but thy own judgment
about it. And it is in thy power to wipe out this judgment now Suppose that men
kill thee, cut . . . thee in pieces, curse thee. What then can these things do
to prevent thy mind from remaining pure, wise, sober, just?" Though Kant
develops what he calls a "metaphysic of ethics," he does not seem to have a
metaphysical as opposed to a moral conception of the good; unless in some
analogous form it lies in his distinction between "value" and 1' "dignity,
according to which "whatever has CHAPTER 30: GOOD reference to the general
inclinations and wants of mankind has a market value" whereas "whatever ... is
above all value, and therefore admits " of no equivalent, has a dignity "not a
merely relative worth, but an intrinsic worth." But since Kant thinks that only
men, or rational beings, can have intrinsic worth, he finds goodness only in the
moral order. He agrees with the Stoics that good and evil occur only in the
realm of freedom, not at all in the realm of existence or nature. "Good or
evil," he writes, "always implies a reference to the will, as determined by the
law of reason" which is the law of freedom. According to Kant, "nothing can
possibly be conceived in the world, or even out of it, which can be called good
without qualification, except a Good Will"; and in another place he says, "If
anything is to be good or evil absolutely ... it can only be the manner of
acting, the maxim of the will." In this sense, the free will complying with or
resisting the imperatives of duty is either the seat or the source of all the
goodness or evil that there is. "Men may laugh," Kant says, "at the Stoic, who
in the severest paroxysms of gout cried out: Pain, however thou tormentest me, I
will never admit that thou art an evil: he was right ... for pain did not in the
least diminish the worth of his person,but only that of his condition."

IN THE SPHERE of moral conduct, and especially for those who make desire or
pleasure rather than duty the principle, there seems to be a plurality of goods
which require classification and order.

Some things, it would appear, are not desired for themselves, but for the sake
of something else. They are good only as means to be used. Some things are
desired for their own sake, and are good as ends, to be possessed or enjoyed.
This division of goods into means and ends the useful and the enjoyable or
pleasant permits a third type of good which is an end in one respect, and a
means in another. Analysis of this sort leads to the concept of a summum
bonumthat good which is not a means in any respect, but entirely an end, the
supreme or highest good for which all else is sought. The chief question with
respect to the sum' mum bonum is whether it is a good or the good whether it is
merely one type of good, more AND EVIL desirable than any other, or the sum of
all good things which, when possessed, leaves nothing to be desired. Aristotle
and Mill seem to take the latter view in their conception of happiness as the
summum bonum, "Human nature," Mill says, "is so constituted as to desire nothing
which is not either a part of happiness or a means of happiness." Happiness, he
in"not an abstract idea, but a concrete sists, is whole" including all other
goods within itself.

It is the only good which is desired entirely for its own sake. Aristotle treats
virtue and knowledge as intrinsic goods, but he also regards them as means to
happiness. In Mill's terms, their goodness remains subject to the criterion of
utility, from which happiness alone is exempt since it measures the utility of
all other goods. If the evaluation of all things by reference to their
contribution to happiness as the ultimate good constitutes utilitarianism in
ethics, then Aristotle no less than Mill is a utilitarian, even though Aristotle
does not refer to the principle of utility, does not identify the good with
pleasure, and conceives the virtues as intrinsically good, not merely as means.
Kant would regard them as in fundamental agreement despite all their differences
or at least he would regard them as committing the same fundamental error. To
Kant any discussion of human conduct which involves the calculation of means to
ends is pragmatic or utilitarian, even when the controlling end is the summum
bonum or happiness.Kant makes a sharp distinction between what he calls
"pragmatical rules" of conduct which consider what should be done by one who
wishes to be happy, and what he regards as the strictly "moral or ethical law"
which "has no other motive than the worthiness of being happy" Morality, he says
in another place, "is not properly the doctrine of how we should make ourselves
happy, but how we should become worthy of happiness" through doing our duty.
Kant's criticism of Aristotle's ethics of happiness is therefore applicable to
the utilitarianism of Mill; and Mill's rejoinder to Kant serves as a defense of
Aristotle. This basic issue concerning the primacy of happiness or duty of
desire or law is discussed in the chapters on DUTY and HAPPINESS, where it is
suggested that in an ethics of duty, right and wrong supplant good and evil as
the fundamental terms, and the summum bonum becomes a derivative notion rather
than the first principle of morality .

At the other extreme are those who deny duty entirely, and with it any meaning
to right and wrong as distinct from good and evil. A middle ground is held by
those who employ right and wrong as subordinate terms in the analysis of good
and evil, finding their special significance in the consideration of the good of
others or the social good. To do right is to do good to others; to do wrong is
to injure them. The question which Plato so insistently raises, whether it is
better to do injustice or to suffer it, can also be stated in terms of good and
evil, or right and wrong. Is it better to suffer evil or to do it? Is it better
to be wronged by others or to wrong them? As justice for Aristotle is that one
among the virtues which concerns the good of others and the common good, and as
it is the one virtue which is thought to involve duty or obligation, so the
criteria of right and wrong measure the goodness or evil of human acts by
reference to law and society.

THE DIVISION of goods into means and ends is not the only distinction made by
moralists who recognize the plurality and inequality of goods. Goods have been
divided into the limited and the unlimited with respect to quantity; the pure
and the mixed with respect to quality; sensible and intelligible goods or
particular goods and the good in general; external goods, goods of the body, and
goods of the soul; the pleasant, the useful, and the virtuous. More specific
enumerations of the variety of goods list wealth, health, strength, beauty,
longevity, pleasure, honor (or fame), virtue, knowledge, friendship.

All of the foregoing classifications can be combined with one another, but there
is one distinction which stands by itself, although it affects all the others.
That is the distinction between the individual and the common good, or between
private and public good, the good for this one man and the good of all others
and of the whole community. In the language of modern utilitarianism, it is the
distinction between individual happiness and what Bentham called "the greatest
good for the greatest number."

The phrase "common good" has several meanings in the tradition of the great
books. One sense, which some think is the least significant, refers to that
which can be shared or used by many, as, for example, land held in common and
worked by a number of persons or families. Thus we speak of the "commons" of a
town or village. This meaning applies particularly to economic goods which may
either belong to the community as a whole or be divided into parcels of private
property. Another sense of common good is that in which the welfare of a
community is a common good participated in by its members. The welfare of the
family or the state is a good which belongs to a multitude organized for some
common purpose. If the individual members of the group derive some benefit from
their association with one another, then the prosperity of the community is not
only a common good viewed collectively, but also a common good viewed
distnbutively, for it is the good of each member of the group as well as of the
whole. With this in mind, perhaps, Mill speaks of "an indissoluble association
between [the individual's] happiness and the practice of such mode of conduct,
negative and positive, as regard for the universal happiness prescribes; so that
not only he may be unable to conceive the possibility of happiness to himself,
consistently with conduct opposed to the general good, but also that a direct
impulse to promote the general good may be in every individual one of the
habitual modes of action." If this statement by Mill is used to interpret
Bentham's phrase "the greatest good for the greatest number" then the greatest
number cannot be taken to mean a majority, for the good of nothing less than the
whole collectively or of all distributively can be taken as the common or
general good. Still another conception of the common good is possible. A good
may be common in the sense in which a specific nature is common to the members
of the species not as organized socially in any way, but simply as so many hip
individuals. If all men seek happiness, for example, then happiness is a common
good, even though each individual seeks his own happiness. In a deeper sense it
is a common good if the happiness each seeks is the same for all men CHAPTER 30:
GOOD because they are all of the same nature; but, most strictly, it is a common
good if the happiness of each individual cannot be separated from the happiness
of all.

Aquinas seems to be using this meaning of common good when, in defining law as a
rule of conduct "directed to the common good," he refers not merely to the good
of the community or body politic, but beyond that to "the last end of human
life," which is "happiness or beatitude." Law, he says, "must needs concern
itself properly with the order directed to universal happiness." Mill also seems
to conceive happiness as a common good in this sense. "What the assailants of
utilitarianism seldom have the justice to acknowledge," he writes, is "that the
happiness which forms the utilitarian standard of what is right in conduct, is
not the agent's own happiness, but that of all concerned." The several meanings
of the common good create a fundamental issue. Some writers use it in one sense
only, rejecting the others. Some not only use the term in all its meanings, but
also develop a hierarchy of common goods.

They regard universal happiness, for example, as a common good of a higher order
than the welfare of the political community. Yet in every order they insist upon
the primacy of the common over the individual good. In the political order, for
example, they think the welfare of the community takes precedence over
individual happiness. They would regard Adam Smith's statement of the way in
which individuals accidentally serve the common good while seeking their private
interests, as a perversion of the relationship. To say that an individual
considering only his own gam is "led

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The general theory of good and evil
 1a. The idea of the good: the notion of finality
 1b. Goodness in proportion to being: the grades of perfection and the goodness of
 order
 1c. The good, the true, and the beautiful
 1d. The origin, nature, and existence of evil

2. The goodness or perfection of God: the plenitude of the divine being
 2a. God's goodness as diffusive, causing the goodness of things: God's love
 2b. The divine goodness and the problem of evil
 3.
 The moral theory of the good: the distinction between the moral and the metaphysical
 good
 2c. Human nature and the determination of the good for man: the real and the
 apparent good; particular goods and the good in general
 3& Goodness in the order of freedom and will
 (1) The prescriptions of duty
 (2) The good will: its conditions and consequences
 2d. The good and desire: goodness causing movements of desire and desire causing
 estimations of goodness
 Pleasure as the good, a good, or feeling good
 3<
 2e. Right and wrong: the social incidence of the good; doing or suffering good and
 evil
 $f.
 The sources of evil in human life
 4.
 Divisions of the human good
 2f. Sensible and intelligible goods
 2g. Useful and enjoyable goods: good for an end and good in itself
 4<r.
 Goods of the body and goods of the soul
 4</.
 Intrinsic and external goods: intrinsic worth and extrinsic value
 4*.
 Individual and common goods
 The order of human goods
 2h. The supreme good or summwn bonum: its existence and nature
 2i. The judgment of diverse types of good: their subordination to one another
 2j. The dialectic of means and ends: mere means and ultimate ends
 2k. The supremacy of the individual or the common good: the relation of the good
 of the individual person to the good of other persons and to the good of the
 state

6. Knowledge and the good
 6a. Knowledge, wisdom, and virtue: the relation of
 being good and knowing what
 is
 good
 6b. The need for experience of evil
 6c. The goodness of
 knowledge or wisdom: the use of knowledge
 6d. The
 possibility of moral knowledge: the subjectivity or conventionality of
 judgments of good and evil

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Other statements of the metaphysical theory of good and evil, see BEING 3

CHANGE 14; DESIRE i GOD kb; WORLD 6b, 6d; for the relation of the g

;

the beautiful, see BEAUTY la; TRUTH 1c; and for the theological con

divine goodness and of the problem of evil, see GOD 4f, 5h; JUSTICE

PUNISHMENT 56-56(2); SIN 3-36, 6-6e; WILL yd; WORLD 6d.

The consideration of the factors which enter into the moral theory of

DESIRE 2b-2d; DUTY i MIND kc; NATURE 53; PLEASURE AND PAIN 6-6e; WI

;

Other discussions of right and wrong, see DUTY 3; JUSTICE 1-2, 4.

The theory of the summum bonum or of happiness, see DUTY 2; HAPPINESS

Particular human goods in themselves and in relation to the summum bo

tee HAPPINESS 2b-2b(7); HONOR 2b; KNOWLEDGE 8b(4); LOVE 3

6a-6b, 7; VIRTUE AND VICE 1d; WEALTH i, loa; WISDOM 2c.

The discussion of evil and its sources in human life, see LABOR la; S

The general problem of the individual and the common good, or the goo

the good of the state, see CITIZEN i HAPPINESS 5-5b; STATE 2f.

;

General discussions of means and ends, see CAUSE 4; RELATION 53(2).

The controversy over the objectivity or subjectivity of judgments of

TOM AND CONVENTION 53; OPINION 6a-6b; RELATION 6c; UNIVERSAL AND PA

The consideration of our knowledge of good and evil, and of the natur

moral sciences, see KNOWLEDGE 8b(i); PHILOSOPHY 2c; SCIENCE 33; WIS

A fuller treatment of the goodness and use of knowledge, see ART 6c;

PHILOSOPHY 4b-4c; SCIENCE 1b(i).

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western Wo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divid

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collec

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of t

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapt

AQUINAS. Summa Cont

I.

.

Quaestiones Di

EPICTETUS. The Manual Malo, Q i AUGUSTINE. Divine Providence and the Problem of
F. BACON. "Of Goodn

Etfil ture," in Essays

.

Concerning the Nature of Good HOBBES. The Whole A

635 92 d- 593 b passim mmunist Manifesto, 427&-b; d Peace, BK i, 15d 16a; BK
14c-d; BK vm, 304b-305a; BK xn, 542d; BK xiv, 611a-c; of Man, 305a;
313b-d;314ca-646c; EPILOGUE n, 689b thers Karamazov, BK u, 33cb-c gy, 190a-191a;
886b-888a Death, 758a-c; 759a / Civi- s Discontents, 792b-c -3Th); CAUSE 6; ood
to the true and sideration of the na; LOVE 53, 50; good and evil, see LL
8b-8b(2). i, 3. num or happiness, 3; PLEASURE AND PAIN IN 3-36; WEALTH ioe(3). d
of the person and RTICULAR 70. good and evil, see CUSe and method of the DOM 2b.
KNOWLEDGE 8a-8c; rld, but relevant to the ed into two groups: . tion. he works
cited, consult er of The Great Ideas. ra Gentiles, BK in, CH 1-16 sputatae, De
Veritate, Q 21 De ; ess, and Goodness of Na- rt of Rhetoric, BK i, CH 7

636 HUME. An Inquiry Concerning the Principles ofMorals NIETZSCHE. Beyond Good
and Evil A. SMITH. The Theory of Moral Sentiments, PART The Genealogy of Morals,
i

.

VII C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, KANT. Lectures on Ethics VOLV, par 120-150
HEGEL. The Phenomenology of Mind, vi BRENTANO. The Origin ofthe Know

Science of Logic, VOL 11, SECT n, CH 3; SECT in,

,

Wrong) par 14-36

CH 2(u) FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART v

The Philosophy of Mind, SECT n, SUB-SECT B

.

4-7 MELVILLE. Pierre WILDE. The Picture of Dorian Gra DOSTOEVSKY. Crime and
Punishment BRADLEY. Ethical Studies TOLSTOY. Resurrection Appearance and
Reality, BK

.

H. JAMES. The Turn of the Screw

II.

ROYCE. Studies of Good and Evil EPICURUS. Letter to Menoeceus The World and the
Individu

.

CICERO. De Finibus (On the Supreme Good) SANTAYANA. Reason in Science, CH SEXTUS
EMPIRICUS. Against the Ethicists CROCE. The Philosophy of the Pra - Outlines of
Pyrrhonism, BK in, CH 21-32

. SCHELER. Der Formahsmus in der E BOETHIUS. Quomodo Substantiae (How Substances
materiale Wertethik

Can Be Good in Virtue of Their Existence Without WASSERMANN. The World's
Illusion

Being Absolute Goods) McTAGGART. The Nature of Existen

The Consolation of Philosophy, BK m-iv

. MOORE. Principia Ethica, CH 4, 6 MAIMONIDES. Eight Chapters on Ethics .

Ethics, CH 3-

The Guidefor the Perplexed, PART HI, CH 10-12

, -.

Philosophical BONAVENTURA, Brcviloqumm, PART HI (i) GIDE. The Counterfeiters
DUNS SCOTUS. Tractatus de Pnmo Prmcipio (A N. HARFMANN. Ethics

Tract Concerning the First Principle) DEWEY. "The Good," "The Ethical fL*o.The
Bool(of Principles (Sefer ha-Ifyanm), VOL Formation and Growth of Ideals

iv, CH 12-15 Struggle," in Outlines of a Cr SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae,
in, x-xi, Ethics

XXIII-XXIV "Nature and Its Good, A

.

MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la vSritS, BK iv, The Influence of Darwin on

CH 1-4 . Reconstructio LEIBNITZ. Theodicy . Human Nature HUTCHESON. An Inquiry
into the Original of Our .

Experience an

Ideas of Beauty and Virtue, n . The Quest for VOLTAIRE. Candide S. HALDANE. The
Sciences an

J.

. "Good The Sovereign Good A Chimera," Ross. The Right and the Good, m"Good," in
A Philosophical Dictionary BERCSON. Two Sources of Morality

.The Ignorant Philosopher, CH 31, 38 WESTERMARCK. Ethical Relativity

T. REID. Essays on the Active Powers of the Human MALRAUX. Man's Pate Mind, in,
PART IH, CH 1-4; v A. E. TAYLOR. The Faith of a Mor

BBNTHAM. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals ('. 4-5) and Legislation .

losophica

Philo,

}. G. FICHTE. The Vocation of Man LAIRD. An Enquiry into Moral Not

T. CARLYLE. Sartor Resartus B. RUSSELL. Philosophical Essays DICKENS. Oliver
Twist . The Scientifi WHEW ELL. The Elements of Morality, BK i Religion and
Science, CH 8 .

BAUDELAIRE. Flowers of Evil ADLER. A Dialectic of Morals

H. SIDGWICK. The Methods of Ethics, BK i, CH 9 A. HUXLEY. The Perennial Philoso
CLIFFORD. "On the Scientific Basis of Morals," C. I. LEWIS. An Analysis of Know
"Right and Wrong: The Scientific Ground of ation

Their Distinction," in VOL n, Lectures and Es- EWING. The Definition of Good

says MARITAIN. Saint Thomas and the P

T. H. GREEN. Prolegomena to Ethics, BK IH-IV The Person and the Common G .

VOLI, par 573-677; ledge ofRight and i PART vn, CH ; y n, CH 17, 25 al, SERIES n
(8-9) 8-10 ctical thtt( und die ce, CH 64-67 4, 7 Studies, CH 8, 10 World," "The
," "The Moral itical Theory of Conversation," in Philosophy n in Philosophy, CH
5, 7 and Conduct, PART ni-iv d Nature, CH 3-4, 10 Certainty, CH 10 d

Philosophy, LECT xv vii and Religion alist, SERIES i l Studies, CH

1 1 ions , CH i c Outloofk, CH 17 phy ledge and Valu roblem of Evil ood
