CHAPTER: HABIT

INTRODUCTION

THE familiar word "habit" has a tremendous
range of meaning. Some of its meanings in
technical discourse are so divergent from one
another—as well as from
the popular understanding of the term— that it is difficult to fmd
a common
thread of derivation whereby
to
pass from one meaning to another.
We can eliminate at once the use of the word
to designate
apparel, as when we speak of a
"riding habit." Yet even this sense contains a
root of meaning which cannot be
dismissed.
Augustine points out that "the term 'habit'
is
derived from the verb
*to have' " and
Aristotle, considering the meanings of 'to have,' includes the sense in which a man may be said "to
have a coat or tunic" along with the sense in
which a man may be said to have a habit— "a
^ piece of knowledge or a virtue." Just as clothes
are something a person has or possesses in a manner more or less fitting to the body, so habits in
the psychological sense are
qualities which a
person has or possesses, and they too can be
judged for their fitness.
This understanding of habit
is conveyed in
the ancient remark which has become a common expression— that "habit is second nature."
Habit
is
not
original nature,
but something
added thereto as clothes are added to the body.
But unlike clothes, which are added externally
and merely by contact, habits as second nature
are nature itself transformed or developed. In
the words of an ancient poet, whom Aristotle
quotes with approval, "habit's but long prac-
. tice, and this becomes men's nature in the end."
j
Not all, as we shall see, would grant that practice is essential to habit. Nevertheless the word
"practice" suggests one notion that
is common
to all theories of acquired habit, namely, that
habit is a retained effect— xht result of something
done or experienced. Within this common understanding, there are opposite views. According to one view,
the acquisition of habits depends on activity. According to another, habits
are
modifications,
passively, not
actively,
acquired.
The word "habit"
is also used in a sense diametrically opposite to the meanings so far considered. It is the sense in which Aristotle, in the
History of Animals, discusses the habits of animals, and differentiates species according to the
differences in their habits. Here the word "habit"
is used
to signify not an acquired pattern of
behavior, but an innate predisposition to act or
react in a certain way. The difference between
acquired habits and "the habits to which there
is an innate tendency," James tells us, is marked
by the fact that the latter generally "are called
instincts."
The opposition between these two meanings
of "habit" is clear. On the one hand, habits represent what, in the case of living things at least,
is added by nurture to nature— the results of
experience, training, or activity. On the other
hand, habits which are identical with instincts
belong to original nature itself— part of the native endowment of the animal. Is there any common thread of meaning in the notions of acquired and innate habit which may explain the
use of the word in such opposite senses.?
The
familiar statement
that a person does
what he is in the habit of doing indicates that a
habit
is a tendency to a particular sort of behavior. Knowledge of a person's habits enables
us to predict what he is likely to do in any situation which elicits habitual conduct on his part.
So, too, an animal's behavior in a particular situation may be predicted from a knowledge of
its instincts. Instinct and habit—or innate and
acquired
habits—seem
to have
this common
character, that they are tendencies to behavior
of a specific or determinate sort. They are definitely not random behavior. In the one case, the
tendency
is preformed, a part of the inherited
nature of the organism. In the other, the tendency
is somehow a product of experience and
learning. In neither case does "habit" refer to
mere capacity for action, unformed and indeterminate, nor does
it refer to the action, but
rather to the tendency to act.
The modifiability of instincts by experience
indicates another and more dynamic connection
between innate and acquired habits. WilHam
James conceives innately determined behavior
as if it were a plastic material out of which new
patterns of conduct can be formed. The process
of animal learning he thinks can be generally described as the replacement of instincts by habits. "Most instincts," he writes, "are implanted
for the sake of giving rise
to habits, and
this
purpose once accomplished, the instincts themselves, as such, have no raison tfeire in the psychical economy, and consequently fade away."
Some years before the Russian physiologists
Bechterev and Pavlov experimentally studied
the conditioning of reflexes, James described animal learning in terms of the substitution of new
for old responses to stimuli which had previously
called forth an instinctive reaction, or in terms
of the attachment of instinctive responses to
new stimuli. "The actions we call instinctive,"
James writes, "all conform to the general reflex
type" and "are called forth by determinate sensory stimuli." For example, a predatory animal,
instinctively responsive to various perceptible
signs of the whereabouts of its prey, may learn
to hunt for its food in a particular locality, at a
particular time, and in a particular way. Or, to
take the example James gives, "if a child, in his
first attempts to pat a dog, gets snapped at or
bitten, so that the impulse of fear
is strongly
aroused, it may be that for years to come no dog
will excite in him the impulse to fondle again."
Similarly, an animal which has no instinctive
fear of man may acquire an habitual tendency
to flee at man's approach, as the result of experiences in which the appearance of man is associated with
instinctively
recognized
signs
of
danger.
In the classification of animals, from Aristotle
on, the instincts peculiar to each species have
been used in their differentiation. In addition,
the degree to which the instincts of an animal
are either relatively inflexible at one extreme or
easily modifiable at the other has been thought
to indicate that animal's rank in the scale of intelligence. The higher animals seem to have a
greater capacity to form habits and to be capable,
therefore, of modifying
their
instinctive
patterns of behavior as the result of experience.
In consequence,
their behavior
is both more
adaptive and more variable than that of animals
which always
follow
the
lines of action
laid
down by instinct.
Species whose instincts are largely unmodifiable are at a disadvantage in a changing environment or in one to which they are not innately
adapted. In the struggle for existence, Darwin
observes, it is the organism that "varies ever so
little, either in habits or structure" which "gains
an advantage over some other inhabitant of the
same country." Though for the most part instincts seem to be directed toward the animal's
survival, inteUigence, or the power of modifying
instincts by
learning, may sometimes be
needed to save the animal from his own instincts.
If the lower animals are most dependent on
their instincts and least able to modify them,
that would seem to indicate a kind of opposition between instinct and intelligence. Darwin
quotes Cuvier to the effect that "instinct and
intelhgence stand in an inverse
ratio to each
other," but he himself does not wholly accept
this view. He thinks that the behavior of beavers, for example, or of certain classes of insects,
shows that "a high degree of intelUgence is certainly compatible with complex instincts." Yet
he admits that "it is not improbable that there
is a certain amount of interference between the
development
of free
inteUigence and
of
instinct."
On this subject of instinct in relation to inteUigence or reason, James seems to take a less
equivocal position. According to him, "man possesses all the impulses that [animals] have, and a
great many more besides." After enumerating
what he considers to be the instinctive tendencies of the human species, he concludes by saying that "no other mammal, not even the monkey, shows so large an array." But since James
also thinks that man has the keenest intelligence
and may even be the only reasoning animal, he
cannot believe that there
is any "material antagonism between instinct and reason." On the

Chaptir 32: HABIT
contrary, a high development of the faculties of

memory, of associating ideas, and of making inferences implies not the absence of instinct, but
the modifiability of instinct by experience and
learning. "Though the animal richest in reason
might be also the animal richest in instinctive
impulses too," James writes, "he would never
seem the
fatal automaton which a merely
instinctive animal would be."
The opposite position
is taken by those who,
like Cuvier, hold that the more adequate an animal's instinctive equipment
is for
its survival,
the less
it needs free intelligence for adaptive
purposes, and the less important
is the role of
learning and habit formation. Some writers, like
Aquinas, go further than this and maintain that
in the case of man, the power of reason as an instrument of learning and of solving life's problems supplants instinct almost entirely, or needs
to be supplemented by instinctive impulses of
an extremely rudimentary sort—hardly more
complex than simple reflexes.
What other animals do by instinct man does
by reason. "Brute animals," Aquinas writes, "do
not act at the command of reason," but "if they
are left to themselves, such animals act from
natural instinct." Since
in
his opinion habits
can be formed only by acts which involve reason
as a factor, he does not think that, strictly speaking, habits are to be found in brutes. But, he
adds, to the extent that man's reason may influence brutes "by a sort of conditioning to do
things in this or that way, so in this sense to a
certain extent we can admit the existence of
habits in brute animals."
The modification of instincts in the course of
individual Ufe raises a question about their modifiability from generation
to generation. The
question has obvious significance for the theory
of evolution.
It
is thought by some that an animal's instincts represent the past experience of the race.
In a passage quoted by James, Herbert Spencer,
for example, maintains that "reflex actions and
instincts .... result from the registration of experience continued for numberless generations."
Freud appears to hold much the same opinion.
"All
organic
instincts
are
conservative,"
he
writes. They are "historically acquired, and are
directed towards regressions, towards reinstatenunt
of something earlier." Indeed, he claims
lliat
the insimcls of living
tilings
revcri
back
beyond ancestral history to the inorganic. They
go back to "an ancient starting point, which the
living being
left long ago." They are an "imprint" left upon the development of the organism by
"the evolution
of our
earth
and
its
relation to the sun."
James, on the other hand, claims that there is
"perhaps not one
single unequivocal item of
positive proof" in favor of the view thai "adaptive changes are inherited." He thinks the variability of instincts from generation to generation must be accounted for by some other means
than the inheritance of acquired characteristics,
according to which the habits acquired by earlier
generations gradually become, through hereditary transmission, the innate habits of later generations.
The question of their origin aside, what is the
structure of instincts? In the chapter on Emotion, where this matter
is considered, instinctive behavior is described as having three components. It involves,
first, an innate ability to
recognize certain objects; second, an emotional
reaction to them which includes an impulse to
act in a certain way; and, third, the ability to
execute that impulse without benefit of learning.
James covers two of these three points when
he defines an instinct as "the faculty of acting
in such a way as to produce certain ends, without foresight of the ends, and without previous
education in the performance"; and he touches
on the remaining one when he declares that "instinctive
reactions and emotional expressions
shade imperceptibly into each other. Every object that excites an instinct," he goes on to say,
"excites an emotion as well," but emotions "fall
short of instincts in that the emotional reaction
usually terminates in the subject's own body,
whilst the instinctive reaction is apt to go further and enter into practical relations with the
exciting object."
In the discussion of instincts from Aristotle to
Freud, the emphasis on one or another of these
components has varied from time to time. Mediaeval psychologists, if we take Aquinas as an
example, seem to stress the cognitive aspect. He
speaks of the sheep running away "when it sees
the wolf, not because of its color or shape, but
as a natural enemy." The point which he thinks
notable here is not the fact that the sheep runs
away, but rather the fact that without any previous experience of wolves, the sheep recognizes
the wolf as dangerous. "The sheep, seeing the
wolf, judges
it a thing to be shunned
.
.
. not
from deliberation, but from natural instinct."
This instinctive power of recognizing what is to
the animal's advantage or peril Aquinas
calls
"the estimative power" and assigns
it, along
with memory and imagination, to the sensitive
faculty.
Later writers stress the emotional and conative aspects of instinct—feeling and impulse.
James, for example, indicates this emphasis when
he says that "every instinct is an impulse"; and
Freud makes desire central rather than perception or action. An instinct, he says, may be described as a stimulus, but it would be more exact
to speak of "a stimulus of instinctual origin" as
a "need." The instincts are the basic cravings
or needs, and these instinctual needs are the primary unconscious determinants of behavior and
thought.
What Freud calls "instinctual needs" seem to
be the counterpart of what, in an earlier phase
of the
tradition, are
called "natural desires."
These two notions are far from being strictly interchangeable, but they do have a certain similarity in their reference to desires which are not
conscious or acquired through experience. This
matter
is further discussed in the chapter on
Desire.
If we turn now to the consideration of habit
as something acquired by the individual, we find
two major issues. The first of these has already
been mentioned in connection with the conception of habit as a retained effect.
According to William James, the capacity for
habit formation is a general property of nature,
found in inanimate matter as well as in living
things. "The moment one tries to define what
habit is," he writes, "one
is led to the fundamental properties of matter." He regards the
laws of nature, for example, as "nothing but the
immutable habits which the different elementary sorts of matter follow in their actions and
reactions upon each other. In the organic world,
however, the habits are more variable than this."
James attributes
this universal capacity for
habit formation to what he calls the "plasticity"
of matter, which consists in "the possession of a
structure weak enough to yield to an influence,
but strong enough not to yield all at once. Each
relatively stable phase of equilibrium in such a
structure is marked by what we may call a new
set of habits." He cites as examples of habit formation in inorganic matter such things as the
magnetizing ofan iron bar, the setting of plaster,
scratches on a polished surface or creases in a
piece of cloth. The matter in each of these cases
is not only plastic and yielding, but retentive
through
its inertia. "When the structure has
yielded," he writes, "the same inertia becomes
the condition of its comparative permanence in
the new form, and of the new habits the body
then manifests."
The habits of living things or of the human
mind are to be regarded only as special cases of
nature's general
plasticity and
retentiveness.
James does not fail to observe the difference between the magnetized bar, the scratched surface,
or the creased cloth, and the habits of a trained
animal or a skilled workman. The latter are acquired by activity— by practicing the same act
repeatedly. Furthermore, they are not merely
passive relics of a past impression, but are themselves tendencies to action. They erupt into action almost spontaneously when the occasion for
performance arises.
It may be questioned whether the word "habit" should be used so broadly. Unhke James, most
writers restrict its apphcation to living things,
and even there they limit habit formation to the
sphere of learning. If the capacity to learn from
experience is not a property of plant life, then
plants cannot form habits. The same may be said
of certain species of animals whose activity is entirely and inflexibly instinctive. Habits are possessed only by those organisms—animals or men
—whose future conduct can be determined by
their own past behavior. Aquinas, as we have
seen, goes further than this, and limits habit formation in a strict sense to man alone.
This leads at once to the second
issue. For
those who
believe
that man
is
not
specifically
different from
all other
animals, man's
habits and his habit formation require no special distinction or analysis. They hold that human
intelligence
differs from
animal
intelligence only
in degree, not
in kind. No other
factors, they think, are present in human learn-

I to be found, however, a very special theory of
habit which
is part of the doctrine that man
is
specifically different from
all other animals in
that he alone
is rational and has free will.
The issue about man's nature
is discussed in
other
chapters
(Animal,
Evolution, Man,
Mind). Here we must examine the consequences for the theory of habit of these opposing
views. Do animals and men form habits in the
same sense of that term P The use of the word
is
not at stake, for "habit" may be used in a different sense for the acquired dispositions of animals. Those who hold
that brute animals and
men do not have habits in the same sense acknowledge that men may have, in addition to
their specifically human habits, the sort of modified instincts or conditioned reflexes which are
typical
of animal
habit
formation.
Furthermore,
it
is recognized that human and animal
habits are alike in certain respects. Both are acquired by activity and both are tendencies to
activity of a determinate sort.
The question, therefore,
is simply this: Does
one conception of habit apply to men and animals, or does human nature require a special
conception applicable to man alone ? To clarify
this
issue,
it
is
necessary
to summarize
the
analysis of human habits which Aristotle and
Aquinas develop more fully than other writers,
even than those who share
their view of the
rationahty and freedom of man.
That Aristotle and Aquinas should
be
the
authors of an elaborate theory of human habits
becomes intelligible in terms of two facts.
In the first place, they consider habit in the
context of moral theory. For them the virtues,
moral or intellectual, are habits, and so necessarily are the opposite vices. Virtues are good
habits,
vices bad
habits; hence, good or bad,
human habits must be so formed and
constituted
that
they can have
the moral
quality
connoted
by
virtue
or
vice.
Since
virtue
is
praiseworthy and
vice
blameworthy
only
if
their
possessor
is
responsible, human
habit
is conceived as arising from freely chosen acts.
In the second place,
their understanding of
habit is affected by their psychological doctrine
32: HABIT

of faculties, and especially by their analysis of
the powers and activities which they think belong
peculiarly
to man. This
in
turn gives
a
metaphysical meaning to habit, for they treat
human powers and human acts as special cases
of potentiality and actualization.
Aquinas bases much of his discussion of habii
on Aristotle's definition of
it as "a disposition
whereby that which
is disposed
is disposed well
or
ill, and
this, either in regard
to itself or in
regard to another." In calling a habit a dis[)osition, Aristotle goes on to say that all "dispositions are not necessarily habits," for while dispositions are unstable or ephemeral, habits "are
permanent" or at least "difficult to alter."
For a disposition to be a habit, certain other
conditions must be present, according to Aquinas. "That which is disposed should be distinct
from that to which
it
is disposed," he writes,
and hence "should be
related
to
it
as potentiality is to act." If there is a being which lacks
all potentiality, he points out, "we can find no
room in such a thing for habit ... as
is clearly
the case in God."
It
is also necessary that "that which
is in a
state of potentiality in regard to something else
be capable of determination in several ways and
to various things." If there were a potentiality
which could be actualized in one way and one
way only, then such a power of operation could
not be determined by habits. Some of man's
powers seem to be of this sort. His faculty of
sensation,
for
example,
functions
perfectly
when the sense organs have normally matured.
A man does not learn
to see colors or to hear
tones, and so the simple use of his senses—apart
from
aesthetic
perceptions
and
trained
discriminations—does not lead to sensory habits.
"The exterior apprehensive powers,
as
sight,
hearing, and the like," Aquinas maintains, "are
not susceptive of habits but are ordained
to
their
fixed
acts, according
to
the disposition
of their nature."
In
contrast, man's
faculty of thinking and
knowing
can
be
improved
or
perfected
by
activity and exercise. The words "improved"
and
"perfected"
are
misleading
if
they
are
thought to exclude bad habits, for a bad habit
is no less a habit than a good one.
fhe definition of habit, Aquinas points out, includes dispositions which
"dispose
the
subject
well or
ill to its form or to its operation." Hence when
we say that a power of operation is "improved"
or "perfected" by being
exercised, we must
mean only that after a number of particular
acts, the individual has a more determinate
csipacity for definite operation than he had before.
A man may have at birth the mere capacity
for knowing grammar or geometry, but after
he has learned these subjects he has the habit
of such knowledge. This, according to Aristotle
and Aquinas, means that his original capacity
has
been
rendered more
determinate
in
its
activity. It would be so even if he had learned
errors, that is, even if the intellectual habits he
had formed
disposed
his mind
in
a manner
which would be called "ill" rather than "well."
The
difference
between
a man who
has
learned grammar and one who has not
is a difference in their capacity for a certain intellectual performance, a difference resulting from
the intellectual work which has been done by
the man who has learned grammar. That difference
is an intellectual habit. The man who has
not learned grammar has the same undeveloped
capacity for knowing grammar with which he
was born. The man who has learned grammar
has had
his
native
capacity
for grammatical
knowledge developed. That developed capacity
is a habit of knowledge or skill which manifests
itself in the way in which he writes and speaks.
But even when he is not actually exercising his
grammatical skill, the fact that he has formed
this particular habit means that he will be able,
whenever the occasion
arises,
to do correctly
with speed and facility what the man who does
not have the habit cannot do readily or easily
if he can do it at all.
It may be helpful to illustrate the same points
by reference to a bodily habit, such as a gymnastic or athletic skill which, being an art,
is
a habit not of body alone, but of mind as well.
If two men are born with normal bodies equally
capable of certain muscular coordinations, they
stand in the same relation to performing on the
tennis court. Both are equally able to learn the
game. But when one of them has learned
to
play, his acquired
skill consists in the trained
capacity for the required acts or motions. The
other man may be able to perform all these acts
or go through all these motions, but not with
the same facility and grace, or as pleasantly, as
the man whose mastery of the game Hes in a
habit formed by much practice in doing what
is required. As the habit gradually grows, awkwardness
is
overcome,
speed
increases,
and
pleasure in performance replaces pain or
difficulty.
Clearly, then, the habit exists even when it is
not in operation. It may even develop during
periods
of inactivity. As
William
James
remarks, there
is a sense in which "we learn to
swim during the winter and to skate during the
summer" when we are not actually engaging in
these sports. This would seem to be inconsistent
with
the general
insight, common
to
all observers, that habits are strengthened by exercise
and weakened or broken by disuse or by the
performance of contrary acts. But James explains that his point, stated less paradoxically,
means only
that during
periods
of
rest
the
effects of prior activity seem to consolidate and
build up a habit.
The dynamism of habit formation and habitual activity
is summarized, in the language
of Aristotle and Aquinas, by the statement that
"habit is a kind of medium between mere power
and mere act." On the one hand, a habit is Uke
a power or capacity, for though
it
is an improvement on native ability,
it is still only an
ability to perform certain acts;
it is not the actual performance of them. On the other hand,
habit
is like operation or activity, for it represents an actualization or development of capacity, even as a particular operation is an actualization of the power to act. That is why habit
is sometimes
called a second grade of potentiality (compared to natural capacity as first potentiality) and also "a first grade of actuality"
(compared to operation as complete act).
According to the theory of specifically human habits, habits are situated only in man's
powers of reason and
will. Habits are formed
in the other powers only to the extent that they
are subject to direction by his reason and will.
Specifically human habits can be formed only
in that area of activity in which men are free
to act or not to act; and, when they act, free to
act
this way or
that.
Habit,
the product of
freedom,
is not thought of as abolishing freedom. However difficult it may be to exert a free
choice against a strong habit, even the strongest

habit is not conceived as unbreakable; and if it
is breakable,
it must permit action contrary to
itself.
Habitual
behavior only
seems
to
lack
freedom because a man does habitually, without
conscious attention to details, what he would be
forced to do by conscious choice at every step
if he lacked the habit.
In the theory under consideration habits are
classified according to the faculty which they
determine or perfect, on the ground that "every
power which may be variously directed to act
needs a habit whereby
it
is well disposed to its
act." Consequently there are intellectual habits, or habits of thinking and knowing; and appetitive habits, or habits of desire which involve
the emotions and
the
will, and
usually entail
specific types of conduct. Within a single faculty, such
as
the
intellect,
habits are further
differentiated by reference to their objects or
to the end to which
their characteristic operation
is
directed. For example,
the
habit of
knowing which consists in a science like geometry and the habit of artistic performance such
as skill in grammar both belong to the intellect,
but they are distinct habits according to their
objects or ends.
All of these distinctions have moral as well as
psychological
significance. They
are
used
in
formulating the criteria o{ good Sind ^a^ habits
which are more appropriately discussed in the
chapter on Virtue and Vice. But here one
further psychological distinction deserves comment. Some of man's acquired habits are
regarded as natural in a special sense—not in the
sense in which instincts are called "natural" or
"innate" habits. The distinction is drawn from
the supposition that certain habits develop in all
men because, since human nature
is the same
for all, men will inevitably form these habits if
they act at
all. This word "natural" here applied to a habit simply means that it is common
to all having the same nature.
For example, the understanding of the law
of contradiction— that the same thing cannot be
affirmed and denied at the same time—and other
simple axioms of theoretic knowledge are said
to be possessed by the human mind as a matter
of natural habit. If a man thinks at all he will
come to know these truths. "It is owing to the
very nature of the intellectual soul," Aquinas
writes, "that man, having once grasped what is
a whole and what
is a part, should at once perceive that every whole
is larger than
its part."
The sense
in which Aquinas says
that
"M^-
understanding offirst principles is called a natural
habit"
applies
to
the
first
principles
of
the
practical
reason
as
well
as
to
the axioms of
theoretic
knowledge.
Just
as
no man
who
makes theoretic judgments about the true and
the false can be, in his opinion, without habitual knowledge of the
principle of contradiction, .so he thinks no man who makes practical
judgments about good and evil can be without
habitual knowledge of the natural moral law,
the first principle of which
is that the good is to
be sought and evil avoided. "Since the precepts
of the natural law are sometimes considered by
reason actually," Aquinas writes, "while sometimes they are
in
the reason only habitually,
in this way the natural law may be called a habit."
In a different phase of the tradition Hume
regards
it as an inevitable tendency of the human mind to interpret any repeated sequence
of events in terms of cause and effect.
If one
thing has preceded another a certain number of
times in our experience, we are likely to infer
that
if the first occurs, the second will follow.
The principle which determines us "to form
such a conclusion"
is, Hume says, "Custom or
Habit." All our inferences from experience are
"effects of custom, not of reasoning"
; and since
the habit of inferring a future connection between things which have been customarily conjoined in the past
is, in his opinion, universally
present in human nature, Hume refers to it as
"a species of natural instinct which no reasoning or process of thought and understanding is
able either to produce or prevent."
Even Kant's synthetic judgments
a
priori
have
a
certain similarity
to
the
thing
called
"natural habit." They comprise judgments the
mind will make because of its own nature or,
in Kant's terms,
its transcendental structure.
Though a priori, the judgment itself is not innate, for
it arises only when actual experience
provides its subject matter. So, too, the natural
habit
of
first
principles,
of which
Aquinas
speaks, is not innate, but a result of experience.
There is still one other traditional meaning
of
the
phrase
"natural
habit."
It
occurs
in
Christian
theology.
Habits
are
there
distinguished according as they are acquired by man's
own efforts or are a gift of God's grace, which
adds to or elevates human nature. The former
are natural, the latter supernatural.
In the sphere of supernatural habits the theologian makes
a
distinction between grace
itself and
the
special habits which accompany
grace. Aquinas, for example, writes that "just
as the natural light of reason is something different from
the
acquired
virtues, which
are
ordained to this natural light, so also the light
of grace, which
is a participation of the divine
nature,
is something different from the infused
virtues which are derived from and are ordained
to this light." These "infused virtues," like the
natural virtues, are good habits—principles of
operation, determining acts of thought or desire. They are either the specifically theological
virtues of faith, hope, and charity, or the supernatural counterparts of the acquired
intellectual and moral virtues— the habits which are
called "the infused virtues" and
"the moral
and
intellectual
gifts."
Grace, taken in itself rather than in its consequences,
is not an operative habit, that
is,
it
is not a habit of performing certain acts. Nevertheless, regarded
as something added
to and
perfecting nature,
it
is considered under the
aspect of habit. But rather than "a habit whereby power
is inclined to an act," Aquinas
includes
it among
those habits by which "the
nature is well or ill disposed to something, and
chiefly when such a disposition has become a
sort of nature." Through the habit of grace,
man's nature
is elevated by becoming "a partaker ... of the divine nature."
To distinguish this kind of habit from those
in the operative order, it is sometimes called an
"entitative habit"—a habit of the very being
of man's
personality. On
the purely natural
plane, health may be thought of in the same
way as a habit which
is entitative rather than
operative. It
is a habit not of thought, desire,
or conduct, but of man's physical being.
The word "custom"
is sometimes a synonym
for "habit" and sometimes a variant with special connotations. What a man does habitually
is customary for him to do. So far as the single
individual
is concerned, there seems to be no
difference between habit and custom. But we
usually think of customs in terms of the group
or community rather than the individual. As
indicated in the chapter on Custom and Convention, the prevailing modes of behavior in
a society and
its widely shared beUefs represent common
habits
of thought and
action
on
the part of
its members. Apart from
the
habits of individuals social customs have no existence whatsoever. But social customs and individual habits cannot be equated because, with
respect to any customary practice or opinion,
there
may
be
non-conforming
individuals
—men of divergent
habit. The prevalent or
predominant
customs
are
the
habits
of the
majority.
No
society
endures
for
long
or
functions
peacefully unless common habits generate the
ties of custom. To perpetuate
itself, the state
necessarily attempts
to mould
the
habits of
each growing generation—by every means of
education, by tradition, by law. So important
is the stability of custom in the life of society,
according to Montaigne,
that
it
is "very unjust ... to subject pubhc and established customs and institutions to the weakness and instabihty
of a
private and
particular fancy."
He doubts "whether any so manifest
benefit
can accrue from
the
alteration
of a law
received, let it be what it will, as there is danger
and inconvenience in altering it." His extreme
caution with regard to changing the law comes
from a preference for the
stability of settled
customs and from the recognition that "government
is a structure composed of diverse parts
and members joined and united together, with
so strict connection, that it is impossible to stir
so much as one brick or stone, but the whole
body will be sensible of it."
Without
habits of action,
at
least, neither
the
individual nor
society
can avoid
chaos.
Habits bind day to day in a continuity which
would be lost if the recurring problems of conduct or thought had to be solved anew each
time
they
arose.
Without
habits
Ufe would
become unbearably burdensome; it would bog
down under the weight of making decisions.
Without habits men could not live with themselves, much less with one another. Habits are,
as William James remarks, "the fly-wheel of
society."

OiAi'TiiR 32: HABIT

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. Diverse
conceptions of habit: as second nature, perfection of power, retained modifica-
tion of matter
 1a. Habit in relation to potency and act
 1b. Habit in relation to the plasticity of matter

2. The kinds of habit: the distinction of habit from disposition and other qualities
 2a. Differentiation of habits according to orig in and function: innate and acquired,
 entitative and operative habits
 2b. Differentiation of habits according to the capacity habituated or to the object
 of the habit's activity

3. The instincts or innate habits of animals and men
 3a. Instinctual needs or drives
 3b. The innate sense of the beneficial and harmful: the estimative power
 3c. Instinct in relation to reason
 3d. The instinctive
 basis of habit-formation: the modification of instincts and re-
 flexes through experience or learning
 3<?.
 The genesis, transmission, and modification of instincts in the course of genera-
 tions
 4.
 Habit formation
 3e. The causes of habit: practice, repetition, teaching, and the law
 3f. The growth and decay of habits: ways of strengthening and breaking habits

5. The analysis of specifically human habits
 5a. Habits of body: manual arts and the skills of play
 5b. Habits
 of appetite and will: the moral virtues as good habits
 5c. The natural habits of reason: innate predispositions of the mind
 5< The acquired habits of mind: the intellectual virtues
 5d. Supernatural habits
 (1) Grace as an entitative habit of the person
 (2) The infused virtues and the supernatural gifts
 (3) The theological virtues

6. The force of habit in human life
 6a. The automatic or unconscious functioning of habits
 6b. The contribution of habit to the perfection of character and mind
 6c. Habit and freedom 68 1

7. The social significance of habit: habit in relation to law

CROSS-REFERENCES For. Terms of fundamental relevance to the conception of
habit, see BEING 7c-7c(3)

MIND 2b; NATURE 2c.

The psychological analysis of the faculties or powers in which habits ar

13-13(3); LIFE 3; MAN 4-4d; SOUL 2c-2c(3); VIRTUE AND VICE 2a.

Other discussions of instinct, see ANIMAL 1d; DESIRE 33; EMOTION 1c; EVO

SENSE 3d(3).

Consideration of the factors involved in the formation or breaking of ha

3-6; LAW 6d; VIRTUE AND VICE 4-k(4).

The role of habit in the theory of virtue, see VIRTUE AND VICE 1c; for o

intellectual virtues, see ART i MIND 4c, 4e-4f PRUDENCE i-2c; SCIENCE

; ;

VICE 2a, 23(2); WISDOM 2a; for other discussions of the moral virtues,

JUSTICE 1c-1d; TEMPERANCE i-1b; VIRTUE AND VICE 23-23(1), 3b; for othe

of the theological virtues, see KNOWLEDGE 6c(5); LOVE 50-52); MIND 5c

VIRTUE AND VICE 2b, 8d-8d(3); and for other discussions of the infused

supernatural gifts, see MIND 4f, 5c; VIRTUE AND VICE 8e.

Matters relevant to grace as an entitative habit, see GOD yd; MAN 92);

3c, 4d, 7; VIRTUE AND VICE 8b; WILL 76(2).

Other considerations of the natural habits of the mind, see JUDGMENT 8a;

6c(4); LAW 43; MIND 4d(2)~4d(3); PRINCIPLE 2b(2), 33(1], 4; VIRTUE AND

The relation of habit to freedom, see WILL 33(2).

The relation of habit to custom and law, see CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 2, 6b

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boo{s of the Western World

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter

HARTLEY. Observations

*

Duty and His Expecta AQUINAS. Quaesttones Disputatae, De Veritate, Q 16
CONDILLAC. Traite des DLSCARTES. The Passions of the Soul, xvi, XLIV, L
VOLTAIRE. "Instinct," HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK i, PART in, T. REID.
Essays on the

SECT vm-ix, xw; BK n, PART in, SECT v Mind, in, PART i, CH C. R. DARWIN. A
Posthumous Essay on Instinct BENTHAM. An Introducti

.The Expression of Emotions in Man and and Legislation, CH

Animals MAINE DE BIRAN. The In

Faculty of Thinking

" D. STEWART. Outlines o SENECA. "On the Diseases of the Soul," in Moral CH 10

Letters Elements ofthe

.

SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxxix, XLII PART n, CH 5

(2-5), XLIII-XLIV, XLVI (3), LIII SCHOPENHAUER. The Worl MALEBRANCHE. De la
recherche de la vfrite', BK n (i), SUP, CH 27

CH 5 J. MILL. Analysis of t LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Under- Mind,
CH in

standing, BK n, CH 22 (10) RAVAISSON-MOLLIEN. De

; MATTER 2a; e situated, see ANIMAL LUTION 3b; bits, see EDUCATION ther
discussions of the 1a(i); VIRTUE AND see COURAGE i, 4; r discussions ; RELIGION
la; virtues and the NATURE 6b; SIN KNOWLEDGE 6c(2)- VICE 43. ; LAW 5f, 6d. , but
relevant to the into two groups: on. works cited, consult of The Great Ideas. on
Man, His Frame, His tions, VOL i, PROPOSITION 2 1 animaux, PART n, CH 5 in A
Philosophical Dictionary Active Powers of the Human 2-3 on to the Principles of
Morals 1 1 fluence of Habit on the f Moral Philosophy, PART i, Philosophy ofthe
Human Mind, das Will and Idea, VOL in, he Phenomena of the Human r habitude

CHAPTER 32: E. HARTMANN. Philosophy of the Unconscious,

(A)

m; (B) i HERING. Memory S. BUTLER.

Life and Habit RADESTOCK. Habit and Its Importance in Education ROMANES. Mental
Evolution in Animals, CH 11-18

C. S PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL HI,

par

154-164,

359-435 VOL VI par 259-263 H. R. MARSHALL Instinct and Reason BERG SON. Creative
Evolution, CH 2

WOODWORTH. Psychological Issues, CH 9 C. L, MORGAN. Habit and Instinct

. Instinct and Experience JUNG. Instinct and the Unconscious RIVERS. Instinct
and the Unconscious B. RUSSELL. The

Analysis of Mind, LECT 2 DEWEY. Human Nature and Conduct, PART i-n PAVLOV.
Conditioned Reflexes VANN. Morals Ma{yth Man THORNDIKE. Man on His Works
