Chapter 33: HAPPINES INTRODU great questions about happiness are THE concerned
with its definition and its att ability. In what does happiness consist ? Is it
same for all men, or do different men seek different things in the name of
happiness? Can happiness be achieved on earth, or only hereafter? And if the
pursuit of happiness is not a futile quest, by what means or steps should it be
undertaken ? On all these questions, the great books set forth the fundamental
inquiries and speculations, as well as the controversies to which they have
given rise, in the tradition of western thought. There seems to be no question
that men want happiness. "Man wishes to be happy," Pascal writes, "and only
wishes to be happy, and cannot wish not to be so," To the question, what moves
desire? Locke thinks only one answer is possible: "happiness, and that 1 alone.*
But this fact, even if it goes undisputed, does not settle the issue whether men
are right in governing their lives with a view to being or becoming happy. There
is therefore one further question. Should men make happiness th goal and direct
their acts accordingly ?

According to Kant, "the principle ot private happiness" is "the direct opposite
of the principle of morality." He understands happiness to consist in "the
satisfaction of all our desires extensive, inregard to their multiplicity;
intensivekin regard to their degree; protenstve, in regard to their duration."
What Kant calls the "pragmatic" rule of life, which aims at happiness, "tells us
what we have to do, if we wish to become possessed of happiness." Unlike the
moral law, it is a hypothetical, not a categorical, imperative. Furthermore,
Kant points out that such a pragmatic or utilitarian ethics (which is for him
the same as an "ethics of happiness") cannot help being em- S CTION by
experience," he says, pirical, "for it is only ain- "that I can learn either
what inclinations exist which desire satisfaction, or what are the natuthe ral
means of satisfying them." Such empirical knowledge "is available for each
individual in his own way." Hence there can be no universal solution in terms of
desire of the problem of how to be happy. To reduce moral philosophy to "a
theory of happiness" must result, therefore, in giving up the search for ethical
principles which are both universal and a priori.

In sharp opposition to the pragmatic rule, Kant sets the "moral or ethical law,"
the motive of which is not simply to be happy, but rather to be worthy of
happiness. In addition to being a categorical imperative which imposes an
absolute obligation upon us, this law, he says, "takes no account of our desires
or the means of satisfying them." Rather it "dictates how we ought to act in
order to deserve happiness." It is drawn from pure reason, not from experience,
and therefore has the universality of an a priori principle, without which, in
Kant's opinion, a genuine science of ethics or metaphysic of eir morals is
impossible.

With the idea of moral worth that which alone deserves happiness taken away,
"happiness alone is," according to Kant, "far from being the complete good.
Reason does not ap: prove of it (however much inclination may desire it) except
as united with flesert. On the other hand," Kant admits, "morality alone, and,
with it, mere desert, is likewise far from being the complete good." These two
things must be united to constitute the true summum bonum which, according to
Kant, means both the supreme and the complete good. The man "who conducts
himself in a manner not unworthy of happiness, must be able to hope for the
possession of happiness."

But even if happiness combined with moral CHAPTER 33: HAPP worth does constitute
the supreme good, Kant stillrefuses to admit that happiness, as a practical
objective, can function as a moral principle. Though a man can hope to be happy
only if under the moral law he does his duty, he should not do his duty with the
hope of thereby becoming happy. "A disposition," he writes, "which should
require the prospect of happiness as its necessary condition, would not be
moral, and hence also would not be worthy of complete happiness." The moral law
commands the performance of duty unconditionally. Happiness should be a
consequence, but it cannot be a condition, of moral action. In other words,
happiness fails for Kant to impose any moral obligation or to provide a standard
of right and wrong in human conduct. No more than pleasure can happiness be used
as a first principle in ethics, if morality must avoid all calculations of
utility or expediency whereby things are done or left undone for the sake of
happiness, or any other end to be enjoyed.

THIS ISSUE BETWEEN an ethics of duty and an ethics of happiness, as well as the
conflict it involves between law and desire as sources of morality, are
considered, from other points of view, in the chapters on DFSIRE and DUTY, and
again in GOOD AND EVIL where the problem of the swnmum bonum is raised. In this
chapter, we shall be concerned with happiness as an ethical principle, and
therefore with the problems to be faced by those who, in one way or another,
accept happiness as the supreme good and the end of ttfe. They nkiy see no
reason to reject moral principles which work through desire rather than duty.
They may find nothing repugnant in appealing to happiness as the ultimate end
which justifies the means and determines the order of all other goods. But they
cannot make happiness the first principle of ethics without having to face many
questions concerning the nature of happiness and its relation to virtue.
Discussion begins rather than ends with the fact that happiness is what all men
desire. Once they have asserted that fact, once they have made happiness the
most fundamental of all ethical terms, writers like Aristotle or Locke, Aquinas
or Mill, cannot escape the question INESS whether all who seek happiness look
for it 01 find it in the same things. Holding that a definite conception of
happiKant thinks that ness cannot be formulated, happiness fails even as a
pragmatic principle oi conduct. "The notion of happiness is so indefinite," he
writes, "that although every mar wishes to attain it, yet he never can say
definitely and consistently what it is that he really wishes." He cannot
"determine with certainty what would make him truly happy; because tc do so he
would need to be omniscient." If thi is true of the individual, how various must
be the notions of happiness which prevail among men in general. Locke plainly
asserts what is here implied, namely, the fact that "everyone does not place his
happiness in the same thing, or choose the same way to it." But admitting this
fact doe; not prevent Locke from inquiring how "ir matters of happiness and
misery . men come . . often to prefer the worse to the better; and tc choose
that which, by their own confession, ha made them miserable." Even though he de
clares that "the same thing is not good to ever) man alike," Locke thinks it is
possible to ac count "for the misery that men often bring or themselves" by
explaining how the mdividua may make errors in judgment -"how thing: come to be
represented to our desires undej deceitful appearances ... by the judgment pro
nouncmg wrongly concerning them." But this applies to the individual only. Lock
does not think it is possible to show that wher two men differ in their notions
of happiness one is right and the other wrong. "Though al men's desires tend to
happiness, yet they an not moved by the same object. Men may choose different
things, and yet all choose right." H does not quarrel with the theologians who,
or the basis of divine revelation, describe the eter nal happiness in the life
hereafter which is to b( enjoyed alike by all who are saved. But revela tion is
one thing, and reason another. With respect to temporal happiness on earth
reason cannot achieve a definition of the enc that has the certainty of faith
concerning sal vation. Hence Locke quarrels with "the philos ophers of old" who,
in his opinion, vainly soughi to define the summum bonum or happiness ir such a
way that all men would agree on whal THE GREAT I happiness is; or, if they
failed to t some would be in error and misled in their pursuit of happiness.

It may be wondered, therefore, what Locke means by saying that there is a
science of what man ought to do "as a rational and voluntary agent for the
attainment of ... happiness." He describes ethics as the science of the "rules
and measures of human actions, which lead to happiness" and he places "morality
amongst the sciences capable of demonstration, wherein . . . from self-evident
propositions, by necessary consequences, as incontestable as those in
mathematics, the measures of right and wrong might be made out, to any one that
will apply himself with the same indifferency and attention to the one, as he
does to the other of these sciences."

THE ANCIENT philosophers with whom Locke disagrees insist that a science of
ethics depends on a first principle which is self-evident in the same way to all
men. Happiness is not that is what principle if the content of happiness each
man thinks it to be; for if no universally applicable definition of happiness
can be given if when men differ in their conception of what constitutes
happiness, one man may be as right as another then the fact that all men agree
upon giving the name "happiness" to what they ultimately want amounts to no more
than a nominal agreement. Such nominal agreement, in the opinion of Aristotle
and Aquinas, does not suffice to establish a science of ethics, with rules for
the pursuit of happiness which shall apply universally to all men. On their
view, what is truly human happiness must be the same for all men. The reason, in
the words of Aquinas, is that "all men agree in their specific nature." It is in
terms of their specific or common nature that happiness can be objectively
defined. Happiness so conceived is a common end for all, "since nature tends to
one thing only," It may be granted that there are in fact many different
opinions about what constitutes happiness, but it cannot be admitted that all
are equally sound without admitting a complete relativism in moral matters. That
men do infact seek different things under the name of happiness docs not,
according to Aristotle and Aquinas, alter the truth that the happiness they
should seek must be something appropriate to the humanity which is common to
them all, rather than something determined by their individually differing needs
or temperaments. If it were the latter, then Aristotle and Aquinas would admit
that questions about what men should do to achieve happiness would be answerable
only by individual opinion or personal preference, not by scientific analysis or
demonstration. With the exception of Locke and perhaps to a less extent Mill,
those who think that a science of ethics can be founded on happiness as the
first principle tend to maintain that there can be only one right conception of
human happiness. They regard other notions as misconceptions which may appear to
be, but are not really the summum bonum. The various definitions of happiness
which men have given thus present the problem of the real and the apparent good,
the significance of which is considered in the chapter on GOOD AND EVIL. IN THE
EVERYDAY discourse of men there seems to be a core of agreement about the
meaning of the words "happy" and "happiness." This common understanding has been
used by philosophers like Aristotle and Mill to test the adequacy of any
definition of happiness. When a man says "I feel happy" he is saying that he
feels pleased or satisfied that he has what he wants. When men contrast tragedy
and happiness, they have in mind the quality a life takes from its end. A
tragedy on the stage, in fiction, or in life is popularly characterized as "a
story without a happy ending." This expresses the general sense that happiness
is the quality of a life which comes out well on the whole despite difficulties
and vicissitudes along the way. Only ultimate defeat or frustration is tragic.
There appears to be some conflict here between fcelmg happy at a given moment
and being happy for a lifetime, that is, living happily. It may be necessary to
choose between having a good time and leading a good life. Nevertheless, in both
uses of the word "happy" there is the connotation of satisfaction. When men say
that what they want is happiness, they imply that, having it, they would ask for
nothing more. If they arc asked why they want to be CHAPTER 33: HA happy, they
find it difficult to give any reason except "for its own sake." They can think
of nothing beyond happiness for which happiness serves as a means or a
preparation. This aspect of ultimacy or finality appears without qualification
in the sense of happiness as belonging to a whole life. There is quiescence,
too, in the momentary feeling of happiness, but precisely because it does not
last, it leaves another and another such moment to be desired. Observing these
facts, Aristotle takes the word "happiness'* from popular discourse and gives
the technical significance of ultimate it good, last end, or summum bonum. "The
chief good," he writes, "is evidently something final. . . . Now we call that
which is in itself worthy of pursuit more final than that which is worthy of
pursuit for the sake of something else, and that which is never desirable for
the sake of something else more final than the things that are desirable both in
themselves and for the sake of that other thing. Therefore, we call final
without qualification that which is always desirable in itself and never for the
sake of something else. Such a thing happiness, above all else, is held to be;
for this we choose always for itself and never for the sake of something else."
The ultimacy of happiness can also be expressed in terms of its completeness or
sufficiency. It would not be true that happiness is desired for its own sake and
everything else for the sake of happiness, if the happy man wanted something
more. The most obvious mark of the happy man, according to Aristotle, is that he
wants for nothing. The happy life leaves nothing to be desired. It is this
insight which Boethius later expresses in an oft-repeated characterization of
happiness as "a life made perfect by the possession in aggregate ofall good
things." So conceived, happiness is not a particular good itself, but the sum of
goods. "If happiness were to be counted as one good among others," Aristotle
argues, "it would clearly be made more desirable by the addition of even the
least of goods." But then there would be something left for the happy man to
desire, and happiness would not be "something final and self-sufficient and the
end of action." Like Aristotle, Mill appeals to the common sense of mankind for
the ultimacy of happiness.

PPINESS "The utilitarian doctrine," he writes, "is that happiness is desirable,
and the only thing desirable as an end; all other things being only desirable as
means." No reason can or need be given why this is so, "except that each person,
so far as he believes it to be attainable, desires his own happiness." This is
enough to prove that happiness is a good. To show that it is the good, it is
"necessary to show, not only that people desire happiness, but that they never
desire anything else." Here Mill's answer, like Aristotle's, presupposes the
nghtness of the prevailing sense that when a man is happy, he has everything he
desires. Many things, Mill admits, may be desired for their own sake, but if the
possession of any one of these leaves something else to be desired, then it is
desired only as a part of happiness. Happiness is "a concrete whole, and these
are some of its parts. . Whatever is . . desired otherwise than as a means to
some end beyond itself, and ultimately to happiness, is desired as itself a part
of happiness, and is not desired for itself until it has become so." THERE ARE
OTHER conceptions of happiness. It is not always approached in terms of means
and ends, utility and enjoyment or satisfaction. Plato, for example, identifies
happiness with spiritual well-being a harmony in the soul, an inner peace which
results from the proper order of all the soul's parts. Early in the Republic,
Socrates is challenged to show that the just man will be happier than the unjust
man, even if in all externals he seems to be at a disadvantage. He cannot answer
this question until he prepares Glaucon for the insight that justice is
"concerned not with the outward man, but with the inward." He can then explain
that "the just man does not permit the several elements within him to interfere
with one another. ... He sets in order his own inner life, and is his own master
and his own law, and is at peace with himself." In the same spirit Plotmus asks
us to think of "two wise men, one of them possessing all that is supposed to be
naturally welcome, while the other meets only with the very reverse." He wants
to know whether we would "assert that they have an equal happiness." His own
answer is that we should, "if they are equally wise . . . [even] though the one
be favored in body and in all else that does not help towards wisdom." We are
likely to misconceive happi ness, Plotmus thinks, if we consider the happy man
in terms of our own feebleness. "We count alarming and grave what his felicity
takes lightly; he would be neither wise nor in the state of happiness if he had
not quitted all trifling with such things."

According to Plotmus, "Plato rightly taught that he who is to be wise and to
possess happiness draws his good from the Supreme, fixing his gaze on That,
becoming like to That, living by That ... All else he will attend to only as he
might change his residence, not in expectation of any increase in his settled
felicity, but simply in a reasonable attention to the differing conditions
surrounding him as he lives here or there." If he "meets some turn of fortune
that he would not have chosen, there is not the slightest lessening of his
happiness for that."

Like Plato, Plotmus holds that nothing external can separate a virtuous man from
happiness that no one can injure a man except himself. The opposite view is more
frequently held. In his argument with Callicles in the Gorgias, Socrates meets
with the proposition that it is better to injure others than to be injured by
them. This can be refuted, he thinks, only if Callicles can be made to
understand that the unjust or vicious man is miserable in himself, regardless of
his external gains. The fundamental principle, he says, is that "the happy are
made happy by the possession of justice and temperance and the miserable
miserable by the possessionof vice." Happiness is one with justice because
justice or virtue in general is "the health and beauty and well-being of the
soul." This association of happiness with health the one a harmony in the soul
as the other is a harmony in the body appears also in Freud's consideration of
human well-being. For Freud, the ideal of health, not merely bodily health but
the health of the whole man, seems to identify happiness with peace of mind.
"Anyone who is born with a specially unfavorable instinctual constitution," he
writes, "and whose libido-components do not go through the transformation and
modification necessary for suc- AS cessful achievement in later life, will find
it hard to obtain happiness." The opposite of happiness is not tragedy but
neurosis. In contrast to the neurotic, the happy man has found a way to master
his inner conflicts and to become well-adjusted to his environment. The theory
of happiness as mental health or spiritual peace may be another way of seeing
the self-sufficiency of happiness, in which all striving comes to rest because
all desires are fulfilled or quieted. The suggestion of this point isfound in
the fact that the theologians conceive beatitude, or supernatural happiness, in
both ways. For them it is both an ultimate end which satisfies all desires and
also a state of peace or heavenly rest. "The ultimate good," Augustine writes,
"is that for the sake of which other things are to be desired, while it is to be
desired for its own sake"; and, he adds, it is that by which the good "is
finished, so that it becomes complete" allsatisfying. But what is this "final
blessedness, the ultimate consummation, the unending end"? It is peace.
"Indeed," Augustine says, "we are said to be blessed when we have such peace as
can be enjoyed in this life; but such blessedness is mere misery compared to
that final felicity," which can be described as "either peace in eternal life or
eternal life in peace." THERE MAY BE differences of another kind among those who
regard happiness as their ultimate end. Some men identify happiness with the
possession of one particular type of good wealth or health, pleasure or power,
knowledge or virtue, honor or friendshipor, if they do not make one or another
of these things the only component of happiness, they make it supreme. The
question of which is chief among the various goods that constitute the happy
life is the problem of the order of goods, to which we shall return presently.
But the identification of happiness with some one good, to the exclusion or
neglect of the others, seems to violate the meaning of happiness on which there
is such general agreement. Happiness cannot be that which leaves nothing to be
desired if any good anything which is in any way desirable is overlooked. But it
may be said that the miser desires nothing but gold, and considers himself happy
CHAPTER 33: HAP when he possesses a hoard. That he may consider himself happy
cannot be denied. Yet this does not prevent the moralist from considering him
deluded and in reality among the unhappiest of men. The difference between such
illusory happiness and the reality seems to depend on the distinction between
conscious and natural desire. According to that distinction, considered in the
chapter on DESIRE, the miser may have all that he consciously desires, but lack
many of the things toward which his nature tends and which are therefore objects
of natural desire. He may be the unhappiest of men if, with all the wealth in
the world, yet self-deprived of friends or knowledge, virtue or even health, his
exclusive interest in one type of good leads to the frustration of many other
desires. He may not consciously recognize these, but they nevertheless represent
needs of his nature demanding fulfillment. As suggested in the chapter on
DESIRE, the relation of natural law to natural desire may provide the beginning,
at least, of an answer to Kant's objection to the ethics of happiness on the
ground that its principles lack universality or the element of obligation. The
natural moral law may command obedience at the same time that it directs men to
happiness as the satisfaction of all desires which repiesent the innate
tendencies of man's nature. The theory of natural desire thus also has a bearing
on the issue whether the content of happiness must really be the same for all
men, regardless of how it may appear to them. Even if men do not identify
happiness with one type of good, but see it as the possession of every sort of
good, can there be a reasonable difference of opinion cpncernmg the types of
good which must be included or the order in which these several goods should be
sought? A negative answer seems to be required by the view that real as opposed
to apparent goods are the objects of natural desire. Aquinas, for example,
admits that "happy is the man who has all he desires, or whose every wish is
fulfilled, is a good and adequate definition" only "if it be understood in a
certain way." It is "an inadequate definition if understood in another. For if
we understand it simply of all that man desires by his natural appetite, then it
is true that he who has all that he desires PINESS is happy; since nothing
satisfies man's natural desire, except the perfect good which is Happiness. But
if we understand it of those things that man desires according to the
apprehension of reason," Aquinas continues, then "it does not belong to
Happiness to have certain things that man desires; rather does it belong to
unhappmess, in so far as the possession of such things hinders a man from having
all that he desires naturally." For this reason, Aquinas points out, when
Augustine approved the statement that "happy is he who has all he desires" he
added the words "provided he desires nothing amiss" As men have the same complex
nature, so they have the same set of natural desires. As they have the same
natural desires, so the real goods which can fulfill their needs comprise the
same variety for all. As different natural desires represent different parts of
human nature lower and higher so the several kinds of good are not equally good.
And, according to Aquinas, if the natural object of the human will "is the
universal good," it follows that "naught can satisfy man's will save the
universal good." This, he holds, "is to be found, not in any created thing, but
in God alone." We shall return later to the theologian's conception of perfect
happiness as consisting in the vision of God in the life hereafter. The
happiness of this earthly life (which the philosopher considers)may be imperfect
by comparison, but such temporal felicity as men can attain is no less
determined by natural desire. If a man's undue craving for one type of good can
interfere with his possession of another sort of good, then the various goods
must be ordered according to their worth; and this order, since it reflects
natural desire, must be the same for all men. In such terms Aristotle seems to
think it possible to argue that the reality of happiness can be defined by
reference to human nature and that the rules for achieving happiness can have a
certain universalitydespite the fact that the rules must be applied by
individuals differently to the circumstances of their own lives. No particular
good should be sought excessively or out of proportion to others, for the
penalty of having too much of one good thing is deprivation or disorder with
respect to other goods.

690 THE GREAT THE RELATION OF happiness to particular goods raises a whole
series of questions, each peculiar to the type of good under consideration. Of
these, the most insistent problems concern pleasure, knowledge, virtue, and the
goods of fortune. With regard to pleasure, the difficulty seems to arise from
two meanings of the term which are more fully discussed in the chapter on
PLEASURE AND PAIN. In one of these meanings pleasure is an object of desire, and
in the other it the feeling of satisfaction which accomis panies the possession
of objects desired. It is in the latter meaning that pleasure can be identified
with happiness or, at least, be regarded as its correlate, for if happiness
consists in the possession of all good things it is also the sum total of
attainable satisfactions or pleasures. Where pleasure means satisfaction, pain
means frustration, not the sensed pain of injured flesh.

Happiness, Locke can therefore say, "is the utmost pleasure we are capable of;
and Mill can define itas "an existence exempt as far as possible from pain, and
as rich as possible in enjoyments." Nor does Aristotle object to saying that the
happy life "is also in itself pleasant." But unlike Locke and Mill, Aristotle
raises the question whether all pleasures are good, and allpains evil. Sensuous
pleasure as an object often conflicts with other objects of desire. And if
"pleasure" means satisfaction, there can be conflict among pleasures, for the
satisfaction of one desire may lead to the frustration of another. At this point
Aristotle finds it necessary to introduce the principle of virtue. The virtuous
man is one who finds pleasure "in the things that arc by nature pleasant." The
virtuous man takes pleasure only in the right things, and is willing to suffer
pain for the right end. If pleasures, or desires and their satisfaction, can be
better or worse, there must be a choice among them for the sake of happiness.
Mill makes this choice depend on a discrimination between lower and higher
pleasures, not on virtue. He regards virtue merely as one of the parts of
happiness, in no way different from the others. But Aristotle seems to think
that virtue is the principal means to happiness because it regulates the choices
which must be rightly made in order to obtain all good things; hence his defi-
IDEAS nition of happiness as "activity in accordance with virtue."

This definition raises difficulties of still another order. As the chapter on
VIRTUE AND VICE indicates, there are for Aristotle two kinds of virtue, moral
and intellectual, the one concerned with desire and social conduct, the other
with thought and knowledge. There are also two modes of life, sometimes called
the active and the contemplative, differing as a life devoted to political
activity or practical tasks differs from a life occupied largely with theoretic
problems in the pursuit of truth or in the consideration of what is known. Are
there two kinds of happiness then, belonging respectively to the political and
the speculative life ? Is one a better kind of happiness than another? Does the
practical sort of happiness require intellectual as well as moral virtue? Does
the speculative sort require both also? In trying to answer these questions, and
generally in shaping his definition of happiness, Aristotle considers the role
of the goods of fortune, such things as health, wealth, auspicious birth, native
endowments of body or mind, and length of life. These gifts condition virtuous
activity or may present problems which virtue is needed to solve. But to the
extent that having or not having them is a matter of fortune, they are not
within a man's control to get, keep, or give up. If they are indispensable,
happiness is precarious, or even unattainable by those who are unfortunate. In
addition, if the goods of fortune are indispensable, the definition of happiness
must itself be qualified. More is required for happiness than activity in
accordance with virtue. "Should we not say," Aristotle asks, "that he ishappy
who is active in accordance with complete virtue and is sufficiently equipped
with external goods, not for some chance period but throughout a complete life?
Or must we add 'and who is destined to live thus and die as befits his life ? .
. . If so, we shall call happy those among living men in whom these conditions
are, and are to be, fulfilledbut happy men."

THE CONSIDERATION of the goods of fortune has led to diverse views about the
attainability of happiness in this life. For one thing, they may CHAPTER 33: H
act as an obstacle to happiness. Pierre Bezukhov in War and Peace learned,
during his period of captivity, that "man is created for happiness; that
happiness lies in himself, in the satisfaction of his natural human cravings;
that all unhappiness arises not from privation but from superfluity." The
vicissitudes of fortune seem to be what Solon has in mind when, as reported by
Herodotus, he tells Croesus, the king of Lydia, that he will not call him happy
"until I hear that thou has closed thy life happily ... for oftentimes God gives
men a gleam of happiness, and then plunges them into rum." For this reason, in
judging of happiness, as "in every matter, it behoves us to mark well the end."
Even if it is possible to call a man happy while he is alive on the ground that
virtue, which is within his power, may be able to withstand anything but the
most outrageous fortune it is still necessary to define happiness by reference
to a complete life. Children cannot be called happy, Aristotle holds, because
their characters have not yet matured and their lives are still too far from
completion. To call them happy, or to call happy men of any age who may suffer
great misfortune, is merely to still voice the hopes we have for them. "The most
prosperous," Aristotle writes, "may fall into great misfortunes in old age, as
is told of Priam in the Trojan cycle; and one who has experienced such chances
and has ended wretchedly no one calls happy." Among the goods of fortune which
seem to have a bearing on the attainment of happiness, those which constitute
the individual nature of a human being at birth physical traits, temperament,
degree of intelligence may be unalterable in the course of life. If certain
inherited conditions either limit the capacity for happiness or make it
completely unattainable, then happiness, which is defined as the end of man, is
not the summum bonum for all, or not for all in the same way. In the
Aristotelian view, for example, women cannot be happy to the same degree or in
the same manner as men; and natural slaves, like beasts, have no capacity for
happiness at all, though they may participate in the happiness of the masters
they serve. The theory is that through serving him, the slave gives the master
APPINESS the leisure necessary for the political or speculative life open to
those of auspicious birth. Even as the man who is a slave belongs wholly to
another man, so the highest good of his life lies in his contribution to the
happiness of that other. The question whether happiness can be achieved by all
normal human beings or only by those gifted with very special talents, depends
for its answer in part on the conception of happiness itself. Like Aristotle,
Spinoza places happiness in intellectual activity of so high an order that the
happy man is almost godlike; and, at the very end of his Ethics, he finds it
necessary to say that the way to happiness "must indeed be difficult since it is
so seldom discovered." Nevertheless, "true peace of soul" can be found by the
rare individual. "All noble things are as difficult as they are rare." In
contrast, a statement like Tawney's that "if a man has important work to do, and
enough leisure and income to enable him to do it properly, he is in possession
of as much happiness as is good for any of the children of Adam" seems to make
happiness available to more than the gifted few. Whether happiness is attainable
by all men, even on Tawney's definition, may also depend on the economic system
and the political constitution, to the extent that they determine whether all
men will be granted the opportunity and the leisure to use whatever talents they
have for leading a decent human life. There seems to be a profound connection
between conceiving happiness in such a way that all normal men are capable of it
and insisting that all normal men deserve political status and economic liberty.
Mill, for example, differs from Aristotle on both scores. DIFFERING FROM the
position of both Aristotle and Mill is the view that happiness is an illusory
goal that the besetting ills of human life as well as the frailty of men lead
inevitably to tragedy. The great tragic poems and the great tragedies of history
may, of course, be read as if they dealt with the exceptional case, but another
interpretation is possible. Here writ large in the life of the hero, the great
or famous man, is the tragic pattern of human life which is the lot of all men.

692 Sophocles seems to be saying this, when he writes in Oedipus at Colonus:
"Not to be born is, past ail prizing, best; but, when a man hath seen the light,
this is next best by far, that with all speed he should go thither, whence he
hath come. For when he hath seen youth go by, with its light what troublous
affliction is follies, strange to his lot, what suffering is not therein ? envy,
factions, strife, battles, and slaughters; and, last of all, age claims him for
her ownage, dispraised, infirm, unsociable, unfriended, with whom all woe of woe
abides." Death is sometimes regarded as the symbol of tragic frustration.
Sometimes it is not death, but the fear of death which overshadows life, so that
for Montaigne, learning how to face death well seems indispensable to living
well. "The very felicity of life itself," he writes, "which depends upon the
tranquihty and contentment of a well-descended spirit, and the resolution and
assurance of a well-ordered soul, ought never to be attributed to any man till
he has first been seen to play the last, and, doubtless, the hardest act of his
part. There may be disguise and dissimulation in all the rest . . . but, in this
scene of death, there is no more counterfeiting: we must speak out plain and
discover what there is of good and clean in the bottom of the pot." So, too, for
Lucretius, what happiness men can have depends on their being nd of the fear of
death through knowing the causes of things.

But neither death nor the fear of death may be the crucial flaw. It may be the
temporal character of life itself. It is said that happiness consists in the
possession of all good things. It is said that happiness is the quality of a
whole life, not the feeling of satisfaction for a moment. If this is so, then
Solon's remark to Croesus can be given another meaning, namely, that happiness
is not something actually enjoyed by a man at any moment of his life. Man can
come to possess all good things only in the succession of his days, not
simultaneously; and so happiness is never actually achieved but is always in the
process of being achieved. When that process is completed, the man is dead, his
life is done.

It may still be true that to live well or virtuouslywith the help of fortune is
to live happily, but so long as life goes on, happiness is pursued rather than
enjoyed. On earth and in time, man does not seem able to come to rest in any
final satisfaction, with all his desires quieted at once and forever by that
vision of perfection which would deserve Faust's "Stay, thou art so fcirTh" As
ALREADY INTIMATED, the problem of human happiness takes on another dimension
when it is treated by the Christian theologians. Any happiness which men can
have on earth and in time is, according to Augustine, "rather the solace of our
misery than the positive enjoyment of felicity. "Our very righteousness," he
goes on to say, "though true in so far as it has respect to the true good, is
yet in this life of such a kind that it consists rather in the remission of sins
than in the perfecting of virtues. . . . For as reason, though subjected to God,
is yet 'pressed down by the corruptible body,' so long as it is in this mortal
condition, it has not perfect authority over vice. .For though it exercises
authority, . . the vices do not submit without a struggle. For however well one
maintains the conflict, and however thoroughly he has subdued these enemies,
there steals in some evil thing, which, if it do not find ready expression in
act, slips out by the lips, or insinuates itself into the thought; and therefore
his peace is not full so long as he is at war with his vices." Accepting the
definition of happiness as the possession of all good things and the
satisfaction of all desires, the theologians compare the successive accumulation
of finite goods with the unchanging enjoyment of an infinite good. An endless
prolongation of the days of our mortal life would not increase the chances of
becoming perfectly happy, because time and change permit no rest, no finality.
Earthly happiness is therefore intrinsically imperfect. Perfect happiness
belongs to the eternal life of the immortal soul, completely at rest in the
beatific vision, for in the vision of God the soul is united to the infinite
good by knowledge and love. In the divine presence and glory all the natural
desires of the human spirit are simultaneously satisfied the intellect's search
for truth and the will's yearning for the good. "That final peace to which all
our righteousness has reference, and for the sake of which it is CHAPTER 33:
HAPP maintained," Augustine describes as "the felicity of a life which is done
with bondage" to vice or conflict, to time and change. In contrast, the best
human life on earth is miserable with frustrations and an ennui that human
nature cannot escape.

The doctrine of immortality is obviously presupposed in the theological
consideration of happiness. For Kant immortality is a necessary condition of the
soul's infinite progress toward the moral perfection, the holiness, which alone
deserves perfect happiness. But for theologians like Augustine and Aquinas,
neither change nor progress play any part in immortal life. On the contrary, the
immortal soul finds its salvation in eternal rest. The difference between motion
and rest, between time and eternity, belongs to the very essence of the
theologian's distinction between imperfect happiness on earth and perfect
happiness hereafter.

These matters, of relevance to the theory of happiness, are discussed in the
chapters on ETERNITY and IMMORTALITY; and in the chapter on SIN we find another
religious dogma, that of original sin, which has an obvious bearing on earthly
happiness as well as on eternal salvation. Fallen human nature, according to
Christian teaching, is incompetent to achieve even the natural end of imperfect
temporal happiness without God's help. Milton expounds this doctrine of
indispensable grace in Paradise Lost, in words which God the Father addresses to
His Son: Man shall not quite be lost, but sav'd who will, Yet not of will in
him, but grace in me Freely voutsaft; once more I will renew His lapsed powers,
though forfeit and enthrall'd By sin to foul exorbitant desires; Upheld by me,
yet once more he shall stand On even ground against his mortal foe, By me
upheld, that he may know how frail His fall'n condition is, and to me owe All
his deliv' ranee, and to none but me.

God's grace is needed for men to lead a good on earth as well as for eternal
blessedness. life On earth, man's efforts to be virtuous require the
reinforcement of supernatural gifts faith, hope, and chanty, and the infused
moral virtues. The beatific vision in Heaven totally exceeds the natural powers
of the soul and comes with the gift of added supernatural light. It seems, in
short, that there is no purely natural INESS happiness according to the strict
tenets of Christian doctrine. Aquinas employs the conception of eternal
beatitude not only to measure the imperfection of earthly life, but also to
insist that temporal happiness is happiness at all only to the extent that it is
a remote participation of true and perfect happiness. It cannot be said of
temporal happiness that it "excludes every evil and fulevery desire. In this
life every evil cannot fills be excluded. For this present life is subject to
many unavoidable evils: to ignorance on the part of the intellect; to inordinate
affection on the part of the appetite; and to many penalties on the part of the
body. . . . Likewise," Aquinas continues, "neither can the desire for good be
satiated in this life. For man naturally desires the good which he has to be
abiding. Now the goods of the present life pass away, since life . . itself
passes away. .Wherefore it is impossible to have true happiness in this life."
If perfect happiness consists in "the vision of the Divine Essence, which men
cannot obtain in this life," then, according to Aquinas, only the earthly life
which somehow partakes of God has a measure of happiness in it. Earthly
happiness, imperfect because of its temporal and bodily conditions, consists in
a life devoted to God a kind of inchoate participation here and now of the
beatific vision hereafter. On earth there can be only a beginning "in respect of
that operation whereby man is united to God. ... In the present life, in as far
as we fall short of the unity and continuity of that operation, so do we fall
short of perfect happiness. Nevertheless it is a participation of happiness; and
so much the greater, as the operation can be more continuous and more one.
Consequently the active life which is busy with many things, has less of
happiness than the contemplative life, which is busied with one thing, i.e., the
contemplation of truth." When the theologians consider the modes of life on
earth in terms of the fundamental distinction between the secular and the
religious, or the active and the contemplative, they seem to admit the
possibility of imperfect happiness in either mode. In either, a devout Christian
dedicates every act to the glory of God, and through such dedication embraces
the divine in the passing moments of his earthly pilgrimage.

IHt UKtAl

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
The desire for happiness: its naturalness and universality
The understanding of happiness: definitions and myths
2a The marks of a happy man, the quality of a happy life
.
 0a. The content of a happy life: the parts or constituents of happiness
 (1) The contribution of the goods of fortune to happiness: wealth, health,
 longevity
 (2) Pleasure and happiness
 (3) Virtue in relation to happiness
 (4) The role of honor in happiness
 (5) The importance of friendship and love for happiness
 (6) The effect of political power or status on happiness
 (7) The function of knowledge and wisdom in the happy life: the place of
 speculative activity and contemplation
 The argument concerning happiness as a first principle of morality: the conflicting
 claims of duty and happiness
 The pursuit of happiness

40. Man's capacity for happiness: differences in human nature with respect to
happiness

4. The attainability of happiness: the fear of death and the tragic view of human life
The social aspects of happiness: the doctrine of the common good

50. The happiness of the individual in relation to the happiness or good of other men

5. The happiness of the individual in relation to the welfare of the state: happiness
in relation to government and diverse forms of government
The happiness of men in relation to the gods or the after-life
The distinction between temporal and eternal happiness

70. The effects of original sin: the indispensabihty of divine grace for the attainment
of natural happiness

7. The imperfection of temporal happiness: its failure to satisfy natural desire
 7a. Eternal beatitude: the perfection of human happiness
 (1) The beatific vision
 (2) The joy of the blessed: the communion of saints
 (3) The misery of the damned
 7b. The beatitude of God

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below arc works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represen

II. Works by authors not repr

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

I.

PLUTARCH. "Of the Tranquillity of the Mind,"

"Whether Vice is Sufficient to Render a Man Unhappy," in Moralta

AUGUSTINE. The Happy Life AQUINAS, Summa Contra Gentiles, BK i, CH 100-102; BK
in, CH 17-63

DANTE. Convivio (The Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE, CH 12

. On World-Government or De Monarchia, BK

III, CH l6

HUME. An Inquiry Concerning the Principles ofMorals A. SMITH. The Theory of
Moral Sentiments, PART vi KANT. Lectures on Ethics DOSTOEVSKY. Notes from
Underground . The Idiot

II.

CICERO. De Finibus (On the Supreme Good) Tusculan Disputations, v

.

SENECA. De Beata Vita (On the Happy Ltfe) SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against the
Ethicists . Outlines of Pyrrhonismk BK in, CH 21-32

POMERIUS. The Contemplative Life BOBTHIUS. The Consolation of Philosophy, BK in

ABAILARD. Ethics (Scito Teipsum) MAIMONIOES. The Guidefor the Perplexed, PART
in, CH 8-9

NICOLAS OF CUSA. The Vision of God TERESA OF JESUS. The Way of Perfection SURBZ.
Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxx (u, 14) JOHN op THE CROSS. Ascent of Mount
Carmel S. JOHNSON. History ofRasselas HUTCHESON. A System of Moral Philosophy
VOLTAIRE. Candide PALEY. Moral Philosophy BK i, CH 6 ness, see DESIRE 2a, 33,
70; LOVE of death, see IMMORTALITY i ; LIFE AND relation to the state or the
common good, of supernatural happiness or eternal beatiRTALITY 5e-5g; LOVE
53(2); PUNISH- ND VICE 8b, 8e; WILL 76-76(2). GOD 4h. ofy of the Western World,
but relevant to the These works are divided into two groups: ted in this
collection. esented in this collection. the publication of the works cited,
consult ollows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. T. REID. Essays on the
Active Powers of the Human Mind, in, PART in, CH 1-4 BENTHAM. An Introduction to
the Principles of Morals and Legislation, CH i WORDSWORTH. The Prelude
SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL i, BK IVJ VOL III, SUP, CH 45-50
LEOPARDI. Essays, Dialogues, and Thoughts WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK
n, CH 25

KIERKEGAARD. Philosophical Fragments Concluding Unscientific Postscript

. LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK vni, CH 2 FLAUBERT. Madame Bovary EMERSON. The Conduct
of Life H. SIDGWICK. The Methods of Ethics, BK n, CH 1-6; BK III, CH 14; BK IV
IBSEN. A Dolls House NIETZSCHE. Beyond Good and Evil .The Will to Power
HAUPTMANN. The Weavers CHEKHOV. Three Sisters MANN. Buddcnbroofy DEWEY and
TUFTS. Ethics, PART 11, CH 14-15 MOORE. Principia Ethica, CH 2-3 .

Ethics, CH 1-2

UNAMUNO. The Tragic Sense of Life B. RUSSELL. What I Believe, CH 4-5 .

Sceptical Essays, vin

A. E. TAYLOR. The Faith of a Moralist, SERIES i (9) KIRK. The Vision of God
SANTAYANA. Some Turns of Thought in Modern Philosophy, CH 4 MARITAIN.
Scholasticism and Politics, CH vn ADLER. A Dialectic of Morals LUBAC, Surnaturel
O'CONNOR. The Eternal Quest
