Chapter 35:

INTRODUCTIO  notions  of  honor  and  fame  are  someTHE  times used as if their
meanings  were  interchangeable,  and  sometimes  as  if  each  had  a  distinct
connotation.  In the tradition of the great books, both usages will be found. It
is  seldom  just  a matter of words. The authors who see no difference between a
man's  honor and his fame are opposed on fundamental issues of morality to those
who think the standards of honor are independent of the causes of fame.

This  opposition  will  usually  extend to psychological issues concerning human
motivation  and  to  political  issues  concerning power and justice. It entails
contrary  views  of  the  role  of  rewards  and  punishments in the life of the
individual  and  of  society. Praise and blame seem to be common elements in the
significance of fame 'and honor.

The  meaning  of  honor  seems  to  involve  in  addition the notion of worth or
dignity.  But  whether  a  man  is virtuous or not, whether he deserves the good
opinion  of  his  fellow men, does not seem to be the indispensable condition on
which his fame or infamy rests. Nor does his good or ill repute in the community
necessarily  signify  that  he  is  a  man  of  honor  or  an honorable man. The
connection  and  distinction  of  these  terms  would therefore appear to be the
initial  problem  of this chapter. Any solution of the problem must consider the
relation  of  the  individual  to  the community, and the standards by which the
individual  is  appraised by himself and his fellow men.Honor and fame both seem
to  imply  public approval, but the question is whether both presuppose the same
causes  or the same occasions for social esteem. "The manifestation of the value
we  set  on  one  another,"  writes  Hobbes,  "is  that which is commonly called
Honoring  and  Dishonoring.  To value a man at a high rate, is to honor him; 728
HONOR N at a low rate, is to dishonor him. But high and low, in this case, is to
be  understood by comparison to the rate that each man setteth on himself." Does
Hobbes  mean  that  the  value a man sets on himself is the true standard of his
worth  ? Apparently not. Let men, he says, "rate themselves at the highest value
they  can; yet their true value is no more than it is esteemed by others." What,
theni  is  the  measure of such esteem ? "The value, or worth of a man," answers
Hobbes,  "is as of all other things, his price; that is to say, so much as would
be  given  for  the use of his power; and therefore, is not absolute but a thing
dependent  on the need and judgment of another." Here, then, honor is not what a
man  has in himself, but what he receives from others. Honor is paid him. He may
think himself dishonored if others do not pay him the respect which accords with
his  self-respect,  but  their  evaluation  of him is somehow independent of the
standard  by  which  he  measures himself It depends on the relation in which he
stands  to  them,  in  terms  of  his  power  and  their  need.  Virtue and duty
considerations  of  good  and  evil,  right  and  wrong  do  not enter into this
conception  of  honor. The distinction between honor and fame tends to disappear
when honor reflects the opinion of the community, based on the political utility
rather than the moral worth of a man. THERE is ANOTHER conception of honor which
not  only  separates  it  from  fame,  but  also  makes it independent of public
approbation. This is not an unfamiliar meaning of the term. The man who says "on
my  honor"  or  "my  word  of  honor" may not be an honest man, but if he is, he
pledges  himself  by  these  expressions  to  fulfill a promise or to live up to
certain expectations. He is saying that he needs no ex- CHAPTER 35: tcrnal check
or  sanction.  A  man  who  had  to be compelled by threat or force to honor his
obligations would not be acting from a sense of honor.

"It  is  not  for  outward  show  that  the soul is to play its part," Montaigne
writes,  "but  for ourselves within, where no eyes can pierce but our own; there
she  defends us from the fear of death, of pain, of shame itself; there she arms
us against the loss of our children, friends, and fortunes; and when opportunity
presents itself, she leads us on to the hazards of war: 'Not for any profit, but
for  the honor of honesty itself.'" A sense of honor thus seems to function like
a  sense  of  duty. Both reflect the light of conscience.Both operate through an
inner  determination  of  the  will  to do what reason judges to be right in the
particular  case.  If  there  is a difference between them, it is not so much in
their  effects  as in their causes. Duty usually involves obligations to others,
but  a man's sense of honor may lead him to act in a certain way though the good
of no other is involved. To maintain his self-respect he must respect a standard
of  conduct  which  he has set for himself. Accordingly, a man can be ashamed of
himself for doing or thinking what neither injures anyone else nor ever comes to
the notice of others. A sense of shame the reflex of his sense of honor torments
him  for  having  fallen  short  of his own ideal, for being disloyal to his own
conceptions  of what is good or right; and his shame may be even more intense in
proportion  as  the standard he has violated is not one shared by others, but is
his  own  measure of what a man should be or do. Dmitri Karamazov exhibits these
mixed  feelings  of  honor  and  shame when he declares at the preliminary legal
investigation:  "You  have  to  deal  with  a man of honor, a man of the highest
honor;  above all don't lose sight of it a man who's done a lot of nasty things,
but  has always been, and still is, honorable at bottom, in his inner being. . .
.  That's  just  what's  made  me  wretched  all  my  life, that I yearned to be
honorable,  that  I was, so to say, a martyr to a sense of honor, seeking for it
with  a  lantern,  with  the  lantern of Diogenes, and yet all my life I've been
doing filthy things."

HONOR  The sense of honor and the sense of duty differ in still another respect.
Duty  presupposes  law. The essence of law is its universality. A sense of duty,
therefore,  leads a man to do what is expected of him, but not of him alone, for
he  is  no  different  from  others  in  relation  to  what the law commands. In
contrast,  a  sense  of  honor  presupposes  self-consciousness of virtue in the
individual.  It  binds  him  in  conscience  to  live up to the image of his own
character,  insofar  as  it  has lineaments which seem admirable to him. Without
some  self-respect, a man can have no sense of honor. In the great tragic poems,
the hero who dishonors himself in his own eyes dies spiritually with the loss of
his  self-respect.  To  Jive  on in the flesh thereafter would be almost a worse
fate  than  the  physical demise which usually symbolizes the tragic ending. THE
SENSE  IN WHICH a man can honor or dishonor himself is closely akin to the sense
in  which  he can be honored or dishonored by others. Both involve a recognition
of  virtue or itsviolation. But they differ in this: that a man's personal honor
is  an  internal  consequence  of virtue and inseparable from it, whereas public
honor  bestowed upon a man is an external reward of virtue. It is not always won
by  those  who deserve it. When it is, "it is given to a man," as Aquinas points
out,  "on  account of some excellence in him, and is a sign and testimony of the
excellence  that  is  in the person honored." There can be no separation between
what a community considers honorable and what it considers virtuous or excellent
in  mind  or  character.  But it does not necessarily follow that the man who is
actually  virtuous  will always receive the honor which is due him. Public honor
can  be  misplaced  either undeservedly given or unjustly withheld. The virtuous
should be prepared for this, in the judgment of Aquinas, since honor is not "the
reward  for  which  the virtuous work, but they receive honor from men by way of
reward,  as from those who have nothing greater to offer." Happiness, he goes on
to  say,  is  the  "true  reward  . . . for which the virtuous work; for if they
worked for honor, it would no longer be virtue, but ambition." Tolstoy, however,
deplores  the  injustice  of  the honor given Napoleon and the dishonor in which
Kutuzov  was  held.  "Napoleon,"  he  writes,  "that  most insignificant tool of
history who .never anywhere, even in exile, showed human dignity Napoleon is the
object  of  adulation  and enthusiasm; he is grand. But Kutuzov the man who from
the beginning to the end of his activity in 1812, never once swerving by word or
deed  from  Borodino  to  Vilna,  presented an example exceptional in history of
self-sacrifice  and a present consciousness of the future importance of what was
happening  Kutuzov  seems  to  them  something  indefinite and pitiful, and when
speaking  of  him  and  of  the year they always seem a little ashamed." Kutuzov
later  received  some  measure  of  honor  when he was presented with the rarely
awarded Order of St. George. But what is perhaps a much higher honor came to him
after  his  death  when  Tolstoy  enshrined  him as one of the heroes of War and
Peace.  Sometimes  the virtuous or truly honorable man, living in a bad society,
goes  without honor in his own time to be honored only by posterity. He may even
be  dishonored  by  a  society which has contempt for virtue. Sometimes a man of
indifferent  character  and  achievement,  or  even one who is actually base and
ignoble,  wins  honor  through  cleverly  simulating the possession of admirable
traits.

It  seems appropriate to consider the proportion between a man's intrinsic worth
and  the  honor  he  receives.  The  distribution  of honors raises questions of
justicein  fact,  it  is thought to be one of the chief problems of distributive
justice.  For  those  who  hold  that  honor  and  fame  are utterly distinct in
principle,  this is the clear mark of their difference. Justice does not require
that  fame be proportionate to virtue. Though there is a sense in which fame may
not be deserved, the qualities in a person which justify fame are of a different
order  from  those  which  honor  should  reward. Fame belongs to the great, the
outstanding,  the  exceptional, without regard to virtue or vice. Infamy is fame
no  less  than  good  repute.  The great scoundrel can be as famous as the great
hero.  Existing  in  the  reputation  a  man  has regardless of his character or
accomplishments,  fame does not AS tarnish, AS honor does, when it is unmerited.
But  for  the same reason, fame is often lost as fortuitously as it is acquired.
"Fame has no stability," Aquinas observes; "it is easily ruined by false report.
And if it sometimes endures, this is by accident." THE DISTINCTION between honor
and fame is not acknowledged by those who ignore merit as a condition of praise.
Machiavelli, for example, places fameor, as he sometimes calls it, glory in that
triad  of  worldly  goods  which  men want without limit and without relation to
justice. If the aim of life is to get ahead in the world, money, fame, and power
are  the  chief  marks  of  success.  A  man  is deemed no less successful if he
acquires  power  by usurping it, or gains it by foul means rather than fair; so,
too,  if  he  becomes  famous  through  chicanery  or deception and counterfeits
whatever  form  of  greatness  men are prone to praise. Along with riches, fame,
says  Machiavelli, is "the end which every man has before him." This men seek to
obtain  by various methods: "one with caution, another with haste; one by force,
another  by  skill;  one  by  patience,  another  by  its opposite; and each one
succeeds in reaching the goal by a different method." Some methods, he admits in
another   place,   "may   gain   empire,  but  not  glory,"  such  as  "to  slay
fellow-citizens, to deceive friends, to be without faith, without mercy, without
religion."  Nevertheless,  he  declares:  "Let  a  prince  have  the  credit  of
conquering  and holding a state, the means will always be considered honest, and
he  will  be praised by everybody." Because fame seems to be morally neutral, it
replaces  honor  in the discussions of those who measure men in terms of success
instead  of virtue, duty, or happiness. Because it is morally neutral, it is the
term  used  by  those  who wish to judge, not men, but the impression they make.
What  counts  is  the  magnitude of that impression, not its correspondence with
reality.  To be famous is to be widely, not necessarily well, spoken of by one's
fellow  men, now or hereafter. The man who stands above the herd, whose outlines
are clear and whose deeds are memorable, takes his place among the famous of his
time  or  of  all times. Plutarch the moralist certainly does not regard the men
whose  lives  CHAPTER  35:  he writes as paragons of virtue. On the contrary, he
plainly indicates that many of them are examples of extraordinary depravity. But
Plutarch  the biographer treats them all as famous. He takes that as a matter of
histonc  fact,  not of moral judgment. Good or bad, they were acknowledged to be
great  men,  leaders,  of  eminent  proportions,  engaged  in  figures momentous
exploits.  They  were not all victorious. Few if any were successful in all that
they  attempted  or were able to preserve what successes they achieved. But each
ventured  beyond  the  pale  of  ordinary  men;  and  each succeeded at least in
becoming  a  symbol  of great deeds, a monument in human memory. The opposite of
fame  is  anonymity.  In Dante's moral universe, only the Trimmers on the rim of
Hell  are  totally  anonymous;  neither  good  nor bad, they lack name and fame.
Because  they  "lived  without infamy and without praise/' Hell will not receive
them,  "for the damned would have some boast of them." To them alone no fame can
be  allowed.  Honor  and glory belong only to the blessed, but the damned in the
pits of Hell, by the record they left for men to revile, are as well remembered,
and hence as famous, as the saints in Heaven.

THAT  MEN NORMALLY desire the esteem of their fellow men seems to be undisputed.
"He  must  be  of  a  strange  and unusual constitution," Locke writes, "who can
content  himself  to  live  in  constant  disgrace  and  disrepute  with his own
particular  society.  Solitude many men have sought, and been reconciled to; but
nobody  that  has  the  least  thought  or sense of a man about him, can live in
society  under  the constant dislike and ill opinion of his familiars, and those
he  converses  with. This is a burden too heavy for human sufferance." A society
of  misanthropes,  despising  each  other,  is  as  unthinkable as an economy of
misers.  The social nature of man requires sympathy and fellow feeling, love and
friendship, and all of these involve some measure of approval based on knowledge
or understanding.

According  to  one  theory,  the  highest type of friendship springs from mutual
admiration,  the  respect  which  men  have for one another. The old saying that
"there  is  honor  among  thieves"  suggests  that even among bad men there is a
desire  to  hold  the approbation of those who share a common life. With this in
mind apparently, William James describes fame and honor as a man's "image in the
eyes  of  his  own  'set,' which exalts or condemns him as he conforms or not to
certain  requirements  that  may  not  be  made of one in another walk of life."
Though  Pascal regards "the pursuit of glory" as "the greatest baseness of man,"
he must admit that "it is also the greatest mark of his excellence; for whatever
possessions  he  may have on earth, whatever health and essential comfort, he is
not  satisfied if he has not the esteem of men. He values human reason so highly
that,  whatever  advantages he may have on earth, he is not content if he is not
also ranked highly in the judgment of man. Those who most . . . despise men, and
put them on a level with brutes, yet wish to be admired and believed by men, and
contradict themselves by their own feelings." But is this universal wish for the
esteem  of  others  a  desire  for honor or a desire for fame ? Does it make any
difference  to  our  conception  of  happiness whether we say that men cannot be
happy  without  honor or that they cannot be happy unless they are famous ? Even
those  who  do not distinguish between honor and fame are led by these questions
to  discriminate  between  fame  and  infamy. As we have already noted, fame and
infamy  are  alike, since both involve the notoriety enjoyed by the outstanding,
the exceptional, the great, whether good or bad. If what men desire is simply to
be  known  by others, and to have a kind of immortality through living on in the
memory  of  later  generations, then evil will serve as well as good repute. All
that  matters is the size of the reputation, and its vitality. But if the desire
is  for  approbation  or  praise,  good opinion alone will satisfy, and then the
question  becomes  whether  the object is fame or honor. Which does lago have in
mind  when  he says, "Good name in man and woman, dear my Lord, is the immediate
jewel  of their souls"? Opposite answers seem to be determined by opposite views
of human nature and human happiness. Those who, like Plato, think that virtue is
an  indispensable ingredient of happiness, include honor among the "good things"
THE  GREAT  I  which  the virtuous man will seek in the right way. Possession of
good  things by itself is not sufficient, Socrates says in the Euthydcmus. A man
must also use them and use them well, for "the wrong use of a thing is far worse
than  the  non-use," Applied to honor, this would seem to mean that the virtuous
man  will  not  seek  praise  for the wrong reasons either for that which is not
praiseworthy  in  himself  or from others whose lack of virtue disqualifies them
from giving praise with honesty. The virtuous man will noteek fame or be unhappy
lacking it, for fame, like pleasure or wealth, can be enjoyed by bad men as well
as good and be sought for wrong as well as right reasons or in the wrong as well
as  the  right  way. Virtue, according to the moralists, protects a man from the
seductions  of  money, fame, and power the things for which men undisciplined by
virtue seem to have an inordinate desire. In the theory of virtue, honor, unlike
fame,  belongs  only to the good and is always a good object, worthy of pursuit.
Honor  is,  in  fact,  the  object of two virtues which Aristotle defines in the
Ethics.  One  of  these  virtues he calls "ambition," and the Greek name for the
other,  which is literally rendered by "high-mmdedness," is sometimes translated
by  the  English  word  "magnanimity"  and  sometimes  by "pride." The Christian
connotation  of  "pride"  makes  it  a  difficult  word to use as the name for a
virtue,  but  it  can  nevertheless  be  so used when it is understood to mean a
justifiable  degree  of self-respectnot conceit but a middleground between undue
self-esteem  and  inordinate  self-deprecation.  When the Aristotelian names for
these  two  vices  are  translated  in English by "vanity" and "humility," it is
again  necessary  to  point  out  that "humility" must be understood, not in its
Christian  significance  as  meaning  the virtue of the truly religious man, but
rather  as  signifying  an exaggerated meekness or pusillanimity. The difference
between  pride  and  ambition  lies  in  the magnitude of the other virtues they
accompany  and  the  scale  of  honor  with  which  they are concerned. Both are
concerned with honor, which Aristotle calls "the greatest of external goods." In
both  cases,  "honor  is  the  prize of virtue, and it is to the good that it is
rendered."  The  proud man is one "who, being truly worthy of great things, also
thinks  himself worthy of them; for he who does so beyond his deserts is a fool,
but no virtuous man is foolish or silly." The proud man will be pleased "only by
honors  that  are  great  and that are conferred by good men . Honor from casual
people  and  .  .  on trifling grounds, he will utterly despise, since it is not
this that he deserves."

Humility  and vanity are, according to Aristotle, the vices of defect and excess
which occur when a man fails to be proud. The unduly humble man, underestimating
his  worth,  does  not  seek  the  honor he deserves. The vain man, at the other
extreme,  overestimates  himself  and  wants  honor  out  of  proportion  to his
qualities.  Honor,  like  any  other external good, "may be desired more than is
right,  or  less,  or from the right sources and in the right way. We blame both
the  over-ambitious man as aiming at honor more than is right and from the wrong
sources,  and  the  unambitious  man as not willing to be honored even for noble
reasons."  However  words  are used, the point seems to be clear. It is possible
for  men to desire honor more than they should and less. It is also possible for
honor  to be rightly desired. Honor desired to excess or in the wrong way may be
called"fame,"  even  as  the excessive desire for honor is sometimes regarded as
the vice of ambition or an aspect of the sin of pride. The word "pride" seems to
have  both  a  good  and  a  bad  connotation.  But  the  point remains that the
difference  between  these  two meanings of "pride," like the difference between
honor  and  fame,  is  understood  by  moralists  in  terms of virtue, and it is
discounted  by  those  who  reject  the relevance of virtue. THOUGH HONOR MAY be
regarded   as  inseparable  from  virtue  in  moral  theory,  certain  political
philosophers  make  its  separation  from  virtue  the  principle  of  a type of
government.  In  Plato's Republic, monarchy and aristocracy are defined in terms
of  the virtue of the rulers either of the one wise man or of the excellent few.
Government  by  the  few is oligarchy rather than aristocracy when wealth rather
than  virtue  is the principle of their selection. Plato sees the possibility of
an  intermediate  between  these two which occurs as a kind of transitional form
when  aristocracy  CHAPTER 35: tends to degenerate into oligarchy. He calls that
intermediate  "timocracy"  and  describes  it as "a mixture of good and evil" in
which  the  ruler  is  "a  lover of power and a lover of honor, claiming to be a
ruler, not because he is eloquent, or on any ground of that sort, but because he
is  a soldier and has performed feats of arms." In such a state, he claims, "one
thing,  and  one thing only, predominantly seen -the is spirit of contention and
ambition;  and  these  are  due  to the prevalence of the passionate or spirited
element."  In  a  timocracy,  in  other words, honor is divorced from virtue and
wisdom  and  becomes the only qualification for public office. With Montesquieu,
the  situation  is  quite  reversed.  For him, virtue is absolutely requisite in
popular  government  or  democracy,  and  to a less extent in that other form of
republic  which he calls "aristocracy." As virtue is necessary in a republic, so
is  honor  in a monarchy. "Honor that is, the prejudice of every person and rank
supplies  the  place  of  political  virtue.  A  monarchical government supposes
pre-eminences  and ranks, as likewise a noble descent. Since it is the nature of
honor  to  aspire  to  preferments  and  titles,  it  properly  placed  in  this
government."

Though  Montesquieu  and  Plato  differ  in their classification of the forms of
government, they seem to agree that honor divorced from virtue is a counterfeit.
Honor  identified  with ranks and titles, honor which moves individuals to serve
the public good in order to promote their own interests, Montesquieu admits is a
false honor, "but even this false honor is as useful to the public as true honor
could  possibly  be  to  private  persons."  Considering  the  laws of education
characteristic of monarchical governments, Montesquieu points out that it is not
in colleges or academies, but in the world itself, which is the school of honor,
that  the subjects of monarchy are chiefly trained. "Here the actions of men are
judged,  not  as  virtuous,  but  as  shining; not as just, but as great; not as
reasonable, but extraordinary."

HEROISM  is  DISCUSSED  in  the chapter on COURAGE, and the role of the hero the
leader  or  great  man in the chapter on HISTORY. Here we are concerned with the
hero  in  the  esteem  of  his fellow men, the symbol of human greatness and the
object   of  human  admiration.  Honor,  fame,  and  glory  combine  in  various
proportions  to  constitute the heroic figures of classical antiquity: honor, to
the  extent  that none is without some virtue and each possesses certain virtues
at  least  to  a  remarkable degree; fame, because they are the great among men,
outstanding  and well-known, godlike in their pre-eminence; and glory, almost in
the theological sense, inasmuch as the heroes celebrated by Homer and Virgil are
beloved  by  the gods. It is not accidental that the central figure in the Greek
tragedies  is  called  a  "hero," since in the ancient view the tragic character
must  necessarily  belong to a great man, a man of noble proportions, one who is
"better  than  the  ordinary  man," says Aristotle. If he also has some fault or
flaw,  it  is  a  consequence  of  strength  misused,  not  a mark of individual
weakness.  Such  weakness  as he has is the common frailty of man. In the modern
world  heroism  and the heroic are more difficult to identify or define. We tend
to substitute the notion of genius in considering the exceptionally gifted among
men.  Glory  is  dimly  recognized  and  honor  takes second place to fame. That
portion  of  modern  poetry which deals in heroes as, for example, the tragedies
and  historical  plays  of  Shakespeare  borrows  them  from, or models them on,
legendary  figures.  The  great modern novels, counterparts of the epic poems of
antiquity,  portray  exceptional men and women without idealizing them to heroic
stature. One of these novels, Tolstoy's War and Peace, seeks to deflate the fame
of  great  men.  They do not deserve even their reputation for great deeds, much
less the honor owed the truly great.

"If we assume as historians do that great men lead humanity to the attainment of
certain  ends  .then  it  is  impossible," Tolstoy declares, . . "to explain the
facts of history without introducing the conceptions of chance and genius."

But  in  Tolstoy's opinion "the words chance and genius do not denote any really
existing  thing  and  therefore  cannot  be defined." We can dispense with these
meaningless  words,  he  thinks,  if  we  are  willing to renounce "our claim to
discern  a  purpose  immediately  intelligible  to  us"  and admit "the ultimate
purpose to be beyond THE GREAT our ken." Then "not only shall we have no need to
see  exceptional  ability  in  Napoleon and Alexander, but we shall be unable to
consider  them to be anything but like ordinary men, and we shall not be obliged
to  have  recourse to chance for an explanation of those small events which made
these  people  what  they were, but it will be clear that all those small events
were  inevitable/' This view of history, with its emphasis on impersonal forces,
finds another expression in Marxist theory. The machine and the proletariat mass
are  the  heroes  of history, or of the revolution. Yet the modern period is not
without  an  opposite  strain  of  thought. Machiavelli calls for a great man, a
hero, to become the "liberator" of Italy, "who shall yet heal her wounds and put
an  end  to the ravaging and plundering of Lombardy, to the swindling and taxing
of  the  kingdom  and  of  Tuscany,  and  cleanse those sores that for long have
festered."  His  maxims  for  the  prince  may be read, not merely as advice for
getting  and  holding  power, but as preparing for an heroic effort in which the
prince's power and fame will be used for liberty. The great man has the historic
mission of a pioneer, not the role of a puppet.

Even  in the Renaissance, however, Machiaanswered by Montaigne, who prizes velli
is  moderation  too  much  to  praise heroism more than a Comparing Socrates and
Alexlittle.  ander,  Montaigne  places  all  of  the la tier's actions under the
maxim, "Subdue the world," whereas Socrates, he says, acts on the principle that
it  is  wise "to carry on human life conformably with its natural condition. "To
Montaigne,  "the  virtue  of  the  soul  does not consist in flying high, but in
walking  orderly;  its  grandeur  does  not  exercise itself in grandeur, but in
mediocrity."  The  mediaeval  Christian  conception  of  heroism  centers on the
practice  of  heroic  virtue,  by  which the theologian defines sanctity. In the
calendar  of  saints, there is every type of spiritual excellence, but all alike
martyrs,  virgins, confessors, doctors are regarded as having, with God's grace,
superhuman  strength.  The saints not only perform acts of exemplary perfection;
they  are  godlike men in their exemption from the frailties of human flesh. The
heroes  of  antiquity also wear an aspect IDEAS of divinity, but, like Achilles,
each  has  a  weakness  in  his  armor.  Moreover,  the heroes of the Iliad, the
Odyssey,  and  the  Aeneid  are  men of overweening pride. They are relentlessly
jealous  of their honor. They strive not so much for victory as for the due meed
of honor which is its fruit. Nothing grieves them so much as to have their deeds
go  unrequited  by  abundant  praise.  In  the contribution made by this love of
praise to thegrowth of the Roman empire, Augustine sees the providential working
of  God.  In  order  that  that  empire "might overcome the grievous evils which
existed  among  other nations," he writes, God "purposely granted it to such men
as,  for  the  sake  of  honor,  and praise, and glory, consulted well for their
country,  in  whose  glory  they sought their own, and whose safety they did not
hesitate to prefer to their own, suppressing the desire of wealth and many other
vices  for  this  one  vice, namely, the love of praise." To Augustine, however,
this  glory  found in human praise is far removed from the true glory. It is, in
fact,  a  sin. "So hostile is this vice to pious faith," he writes, "if the love
of  glory  be  greater  in the heart than the fear or love of God, that the Lord
said,  'How  can  ye  believe, who look for glory from one another, and do not "
seek the glory which is from God alone?'

The Christian hero, consequently, seeks not his own glory, but the glory of God,
and  in  contrast to the pagan hero, he is great, not in pride, but in humility.
His  model  is  seen  in  the  Apostles,  who,  according  to Augustine, "amidst
maledictionk   and   reproaches,   and  most  grievous  persecutions  and  cruel
punishments, were not deterred from the preaching of human salvation. And when .
. . great glory followed them in the church of Christ, they did not rest in that
as  in  the  end of their virtue, but referred that glory itself to the glory of
God  .  . . For their Master had taught them not to seek to be good for the sake
of  human glory, saying, 'Take heed that ye do not your righteousness before men
to be seen of them . . . but 'Let your works shine before men, that they may see
your  good  deeds, and glorify your Father who " is in heaven.' The word "glory"
in  its  theological  connotation  thus  has  a  meaning distinct from, and even
opposed  to,  the  sense  in  which  U  is sometimes CHAPTER 35: HONOR used as a
synonym  for "fame." In the liturgy fullness in Himsel of the church, the psalms
and  hymns (especially fection"; neverthele those of the doxology which sing the
gloria  name  may  be augmente Patri and the gloria in excelsts Deo) render unto
blessing  and  praise  God  the  homage which is due His infinite good- works.'*
ness, the reflexive splendor of which is the di- According to Dan vine glory. As
in  the  strict moral sense honor on moves everything pen the human plane is due
to  virtue  alone,  so  in a verse, and is resple strict theological sense glory
belongs  only  to  in another less." In God, disc, he beholds the Stnctly, God's
glory  cannot  be  increased by pecially, each with human recognition. Yet every
act of religious according to the pro devotion is said to redound to the greater
glory  proaches  the  presenc  of  God  and to diffuse His glory among creatures
aureoles,  in the ima through the divinity they acquire when they the symbols of
the g u love God and are beloved by Him. God is all bathed as in reflect

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The relation of honor and fame: praise and reputation

2. Honor and fame in the life of the individual
   2a. The sense of honor and of shame: loyalty to the good
   2b. Honor as an object of desire and as a factor in virtue and happiness
   2c. Honor as due self-esteem: magnanimity or proper pride
   2d. Honor or fame as a mode of immortality
   2(?.   Honor as the pledge of friendship: the codes of honor among social equals

3. The social realization of honor and fame
   3a. The reaction of the community to its good or great men
   3b. The conditions of honor or fame and the causes of dishonor or infamy

4. Honor in the political community and in government
4/7.
Honor as a principle in the organization of the state: timocracy and monarchy
   4a. The scale of
   honor in the organization        of the state: the just distribution of
   honors
   4b. Honor as a political technique: the uses of praise, prestige, public opinion

5. Honor, fame, and the heroic
   5a. Honor as a motivation of heroism
   5b. Hero-worship: the exaltation of leaders
   5c. The occasions of heroism
   in war and peace
   5d. The estimation of the role of the hero in history

6. The idea of glory: its distinction from honor and fame
   6a. The glory of God: the signs and the praise of the divine glory
   6b. The reflected glory of the angels and saints

CROSS-REFERENCES

For:  Honor  or  fame in relation to virtue, duty, and happiness, see DUTY 4-40;
HAPPINES

VIRTUE AND VICE 4d(a), 6d.

The sense in which pride is a vice and humility a virtue, see SIN 40; VIRTUE A

Fame as a mode of immortality, see IMMORTALITY 6b.

Mutual respect or honor as a condition of friendship, see LOVE 2b(3); VIRTUE A

The political significance of honor, see GOVERNMENT 2a; JUSTICE 96 STATE 9C.

The rhetorical uses of praise or honor, see RHETORIC 43.

Other discussions of heroism and the heroic, see COURAGE 5; TEMPERANCE 6a; and

ception of the tragic or epic hero, see POETRY 7Th).

Various estimations of the role of heroes, leaders, and great men in history,

The theological significance of glory, see GOD 4h; HAPPINESS 7c(2), 7d; IMMORT

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books of the Western World, b

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided int

I. Works by authors represented in this collecti

II. Works by authors not represented in this coll

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the wor

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

BOETHIUS. The Con

I.

Beowulf CHAUCER. The House of Fame Song of Roland

.  The  Legend  of  Good  Women  CHRETIEN  DE  TROYE  F. BACON. "Of Praise," "Of
Vainglory," "Of Hon- Vdlsung Saga

or  and  Reputation,"  in  Essays FRANCIS OF ASSISI HOBBES. The Elements of Law,
Natural and Politic, JACOBUS DE VORAGI

PART  I, CH 8 Njalssaga HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK n, PART i LULL. The
Book of A. SMITH. The Theory of Moral Sentiments, PART FROISSART. Chronic

i, SECT in, CH 2-3 DIAZ DE GAMEZ. The

MALORY. Le morte d

II.

ARIOSTO.  Orlando  F THEOPHRASTUS. The Characters CASTIGLIONE. The B BENEDICT OF
NURSIA.  The  Rule  ELYOT.  The  Governo  e  Comedy,  PARADISE, i [1-9] A 2, ANS
1013d-l014d;  Q  96 1049d-9] 115a-b; x-xiv 120b-128b csp 41b-142c; XXVHI [1-129]
148d26d-127c;  xvm  fcaj-xix  [18]  134a136-145] 151c-d; xxx-xxxu 151d* [97-132]
152d-153a  on Quixote, PART 11, 228b-d ics, PART v, PROP 36, SCHOL me 12a-b / At
a  Solemn  Mustcf(  dise  Lost, BK v [809-845] 193a-b ] 193b fes, 643 290b-291a;
793,  326b  S  2b(4);  ND VICE 8f. ND VICE 6e. ; for the con- see HISTORY 43(4).
ALITY  5f.  ut  relevant  to the o two groups: on. ection. ks cited, consult The
Great Ideas. solation of Philosophy BK n , S. Arthurian Romances . The Rules NE.
The  Golden  Legend  the Ordre ofChyvalry les Unconquered Knight * Arthur urioso
oofk of the Courtier ur R SIDNEY. The Countess of Pembroke's Arcadia SCHIL

TASSO. Jerusalem Delivered SPENSER. The Fame Queene, BK vi ALRMAN. The Rogue
(The Life of Guzman de Alfarache)

BROOKE.  An  Inquisition  upon Fame and Honour BEAUMONT and FLETCHER. The Maid's
Tragedy CALDER6N. The Physician of His Own Honour CAREW. A Rapture

CORNEILLE, Le Ctd Horace

.

RACINE. Andromaque MOLIERE. Ije bourgeois gentilhomme (TheCit Turned Gentleman)

DRYDEN,  All  for  Love  SHAFTESBURY.  Characteristics ofMen, Manners, Opinions,
Times MANDEVILLE. An Enquiry into the Origin of Honor,

and the Usefulness of Christianity in War SAINT-SIMON. Memoirs

HURD.  Letters  on  Chivalry  and  Romance VOLTAIRE. "Honor," in A Philosophical
Dictionary  MILLAR.  Observations Concerning the Distinction of Ranks in Society
SHERIDAN. The Rivals, ACT 4, sc i

AS LER. Don Carlos

"

. Wallenstein W. SCOTT. Ivanhoc TOCQUEVILLE. Democracy in America, PART n, BK

in, CH 1 8 VIGNY. Military Servitude and Grandeur WARE. The Law of Honor
STENDHAL. The Red and the Blac{

The Charterhouse of Parma

. T. CARLYLE. On Heroes, Hero- Worship and the Heroic

in  History EMERSON. Representative Men G ALTON. Hereditary Genius MEREDITH. The
Egoist  HOWELLS. The Rise of Silas Lapham NIETZSCHE. Beyond Good and Evil, CH ix
FRAZER.  The  Golden  Bough,  PART vn, CH 3 T. VEBLEN. The Theory of the Leisure
Class  ROSTAND.  L'Aiglon  T.  HARDY.  The Dynasts FARNELL. Greek Hero Cults and
Ideas of Immortality

T.  S. ELIOT. Murder in the Cathedral RAGLAN. The Hero CASSIRER. The Myth of the
State, PART in (15-17)
