Chapter 37:

INTRODUCTION AS the topical analysis or outline in each JLk chapter indicates,
the great ideas are not simple objects of thought. Each of the great ideas seems
to have a complex interior structure an order of parts involving related
meanings and diverse positions which, when they are opposed to one another,
determine the basic issues in that area of thought.

The great ideas are also the conceptions by which we think about things. They
are the terms in which we state fundamental problems; they are the notions we
employ in defining issues and discussing them. They represent the principal
content of our thought. They are what we think as well as what we think about.

If, in addition to its objects and content, we wish to think about thought
itself its acts or processes we shall find in the tradition of the great books a
number of related terms which indicate the scope of such inquiry. Some of them
are: idea, judgment, understanding, and reasoning; perception, memory, and
imagination; sense and mind. Here we are concerned with one of these the idea
IDEA. It is probably the most elementary of all these related terms, for
according to different conceptions of the nature and origin of ideas, the
analysis of thought and knowledge will vary. Different positions will be taken
concerning the faculties by which men know, the acts and processes of thinking,
and the limits of human understanding.

DOES THE WORD "idea/* when it is used in the technical discourse of metaphysics
or psychology, signify that which is known or understood ? Does it signify, not
the object of thought, but the thought itself? Or both? Certainly in popular
speech the word is used both ways, for men speak of understanding an idea and
note differences in their understanding of the same idea; and they also say that
they have different ideas about the same thing, meaning that they understand the
same thing differently. The word "idea" has many other oppositions of meaning in
its tremendous range of ambiguity. It is sometimes used exclusively for the
eternal types in the divine mind or the intelligibleforms that exist apart from
material things which are their copies; sometimes for concepts in the human
mind, abstracted from sense-experience; sometimes for the seeds of understanding
which belong innately to the intellect and so do not need to be derived from
sense. Sometimes "idea" means a sensation or a perception as well as an abstract
thought, and then its connotation extends to almost every type of mental
content; sometimes it is denied that there are any abstract or general ideas;
and sometimes "idea" has the extremely restricted meaning of an image which is
the memory of a sense-impression. Kant vigorously protests against what he
thinks is a needless abuse of the term idea. "I beg those who really have
philosophy at heart," he writes, "to exert themselves to preserve to the
expression idea its original signification." There is, he insists, "no want of
words to denominate adequately every mode of representation without encroaching
upon terms which arc proper to others." Kant proposes a "graduated list" of such
terms. He begins with perception, which he divides into sensation and cognition,
according as it is subjective or objective. A cognition, he then goes on, "is
either an intuition or a conception" according as it has either an immediate or
a mediate relation to its object. Dividing conceptions into the empirical and
the pure, Kant finally reaches the term idea as one sub-division of pure,
conceptions. If the pure conception "has- its origin in the understanding 761
762 alone, and is not the conception of a pure sensuous image," it is a notio or
notion; and "a conception formed from notions, which transcends the possibility
of experience, is an idea, or a conception of reason." According to Kant, anyone
"who has accustomed himself to these distinctions," will find it "quite
intolerable to hear the representation of the color red called an idea."
Tolerable or intolerable, the word "idea" has been used quite persistently with
the very meaning that Kant abominates, as well as with a variety of others. The
reader of the great books must be prepared for all these shifts in meaning and,
with them, shifts in doctrine; for according to these differences in meaning,
there are different analyses of the nature or being of ideas, different accounts
of their origin or their coming to be in the human mind, and different
classifications of ideas. These three questions what ideas are, how ideas are
obtained, and of what sorts they are are so connected that the answer given to
one of them tends to circumscribe the answers which can be given to the other
two.

THE UNITY OF EACH chapter in this guide to the great books depends on some
continuity of meaning in its central term, some common thread of meaning,
however thin or tenuous, which unites and makes intelligible the discussions of
various authors about the same thing. Without this, they would not move in the
same universe of discourse at all. Nor could they even disagree with one
another, if the words they used were utterly equivocal, as for example the word
"pen" is equivocal when it designates a writing instrument and an enclosure for
pigs. The extraordinary ambiguity of the word "idea" as it is used in the great
books puts this principle to the test. Are Plato and Hume talking about the same
thing at all, when the one discusses ideas as the only intelligible reality and
the other treats ideas as the images derived through memory from the original
impressions of sense-experience? Is there any common ground between Aristotle
and Berkeley between the identification of human ideas with abstract or general
conceptions, quite distinct from the perceptions or images of sense, and the S
identification of ideas with particular perceptions, accompanied by a denial of
abstract or general notions? Do writers like Locke or William fames, for whom
ideas of sensation and abstract ideas (or percepts and concepts) belong to the
one faculty of understanding or to the single stream of consciousness,
communicate with writers like Plotinus, Descartes, and Spinoza, for whom ideas
belong to the intellect or to the thinking being, separate from matter and from
sensations which are only bodily reactions? Or with writers like Aristotle and
Aquinas, for whom there is a sharp distinction between the faculties of sense
and intellect? Can Aristotle and Aquinas in turn explain the origin of concepts
or intelligible species by reference to the intellect's power of abstracting
them from experience or sensible species, and still carry on discussion with
Plato, Augustine, and Descartes, who regard the intellect as in some way
innately endowed with ideas, with the principles or seeds of understanding? The
foregoing is by no means an exhaustive inventory. It fails, for example, to ask
about the sense in which the theologians speak of ideas in the mind of God and
of the illumination of the angelic or the human intellect by ideas divinely
infused. (What is the common thread of meaning between such discourse and that
concerned with the formation of abstract concepts or with the revival of
sense-impressions in images?) It fails also to question the meaning of idea in
Kant's tripartite analysis of the faculties of intuition, judgment, and
reasoning; or in Hegel's ultimate synthesis of all nature and history in the
dialectical life of the Absolute Idea, (What do these meanings of "idea" have in
common with the sense in which Freud distinguishes between conscious and
unconscious ideas ?) The inventory is also incomplete in that it does not
indicate the many divergent routes taken by authors who seem to share a common
starting point. Even those who, on certain points, seem to talk the same
language, appear to have no basis for communication on other points in the
theory of ideas. But the questions which have been asked suffice for the purpose
at hand. However great the ambiguity of "idea," it does not reach that limit of
equivoca- CHAPTE tion which would destroy the universe of discourse. There is a
slender thread of meaning which ties all the elements of the tradition
togethernot in a unity of truth or agreement, but in an intelligible joining of
issues.

This unity can be seen in two ways. It appears first in the fact that any
consideration of ideas whether as objects or contents of the mind involves a
theory of knowledge. This much is common to all meanings of "idea."

Those, like Plato and Berkeley, for whom ideas constitute a realm of
intelligible or sensible being, make knowledge of reality consist in the
apprehension or understanding of ideas.

Those, like Aristotle and James, for whom ideas have no being except as
perceptions or thoughts, make them the instruments whereby reality is known. On
either view, knowledge involves a relationship between a knower and a known, or
between a knowing faculty and a knowable entity; but on one view ideas are the
reality which is known, and on the other they are the representations by which
is known a reality that does not include ideas among its constituents. These two
views do not exhaust the possibilities. Ideas are sometimes regarded both as
objects of knowledge and as representations of reality. Some writers (as, for
example, Plato) distinguish two orders of reality the sensible and the
intelligible and two modes of apprehension sensing and understanding; and they
use the word "idea" for both the intelligible object and the understanding of
it. Locke, begging the reader's pardon for his frequent use of the word "idea,"
says that it is the term "which serves best to stand for whatsoever is the
object of the understanding when a man thinks." But Locke also distinguishes
between knowledge of real existences through ideas "that the mind has of things
as they are in themselves," and knowledge of the relations among our own ideas,
which the mind "gets from their comparison with one another," For Hume, too,
ideas as well as impressions are involved in our knowledge of matters of fact,
but relations between ideas may also be objects of knowledge, as in "the
sciences of geometry, algebra, and arithmetic." This double use of "idea" is
sometimes accompanied, as in Aquinas, by an explicit ac- R 37: IDEA 73
knowledgement and ordering of the two senses. For Aquinas, concepts are
primarily the means of knowledge, not the objects of knowledge. A concept,
Aquinas writes, "is not what is actually understood, but that by which the
intellect understands" that by which something else is known. Secondarily,
however, concepts become that which we know when we reflexively turn our
attention to the contents of our own mind. Using the phrase "intelligible
species" to signify concepts, Aquinas explains that "since the intellect
reflects upon itself, by such reflection it understands not only its own act of
intelligence but also the species by which it understands. Thus the intelligible
species is that which is understood secondarily; but that which is primarily
understood is the object, of which the species is the likeness." It is possible,
therefore, to have ideas about things or ideas about ideas. In the vocabulary of
this analysis by Aquinas, the ideas or concepts whereby real things are
understood are sometimes called the "first intentions" of the mind. The ideas
whereby we understand these ideas or first intentions are called the mind's
"second intentions." An idea is always a mental intention, an awareness or
representation, never an independent reality for the mind to know. Locke's
differentiation between ideas of sensation and ideas of reflection seems to
parallel the mediaeval distinction between first and second intentions; but
whereas second intentions are ideas engaged in a reflexive understanding of
ideas as objects to be understood, Locke's ideas of reflection comprise "the
perception of the operations of our own mind within us, as it is employed about
the ideas it has got." A closer parallel, perhaps, is to be found in Locke's
distinction between our knowledge of reality or of real existences and our
knowledge of the relations existing between our own ideas. THE SECOND WAY of
seeing a connection among meanings of "idea" depends on recognizing what is
common to contrary views. The word "pen" is utterly equivocal, as we have noted,
when it names a writing instrument and an animal enclosure. Hence men cannot
contradict one another no matter what opposite things they may say about pens in
one sense and pens in the other. The two meanings of "pen" are not even
connected by being opposed to one another. But all the meanings of "idea" do
seem to be connected by opposition at least, so that writers who use the word in
its different senses and have different theories of idea cannot avoid facing the
issues raised by their conflicting analyses. The root of this opposition lies in
the positive and negative views of the relation of ideas to sensations or, more
generally, to sense and the sensible. Though there are different analyses of
sensation, one or both of two points seems to be agreed upon: that sensations
are particular perceptions and that sensations result from the impingement of
physical stimuli upon the sense organs of a living body.

Berkeley insists upon the first point while emphatically denying the second.
Ideas or sensations are always particulars; but, he says, "the various
sensations or ideas imprinted on the sense, however blended or combined together
(that is, whatever objects they compose), cannot exist otherwise than in a mind
perceiving them," and their cause is neither physical matter nor the perceiving
mind, but "some other will or spirit that produces them." Others, like Lucretius
and Hobbes, who regard sensations as particular perceptions, do not use the word
"idea," as Berkeley does, for perceptions of external origin, but restrict it to
inner productions of the mind itself in its acts of memory or imagination. The
various theories of idea thus range from those which identify an idea with a
sensation or perception or with the derivatives of sensation, to those which
deny the identity or even any relationship between ideas and sensations or
images of sense.

THE FIRST POSITION is taken by writers who conceive mind or understanding, in
men or animals, as the only faculty of knowledge. It performs all the functions
of knowing and thinking. It is sensitive as well as reflective. It perceives and
remembers as well as imagines and reasons.

Within this group of writers there are differences. Berkeley, for example,
thinks "the ob- jects of human knowledge" include "either ideas actually
imprinted on the senses; or else such as are perceived by attending to the
passions and operations of the mind ; or lastly ideas formed by the help of
memory and imagination either compounding, dividing, or barely representing
those originally perceived in the aforesaid ways." Hume, on the other hand,
divides "all the perceptions of the mind into two classes or species, which are
distinguished by their different degrees of force or vivacity. The less forcible
and lively are commonly denominated Thoughts or Ideas. The other species want a
name in our language and in most others . .Let us, therefore, use a little
freedom and . call them Impressions." By this term, Hume explains, "I mean all
our more lively perceptions, when we hear, or see, or feel, or love, or hate, or
desire, or will." Another use of terms is represented by Locke, who
distinguishes between ideas of sensation and reflection, simple and complex
ideas, particularand general ideas, and uses the word "idea" both for the
original elements of senseexperience and for all the derivatives produced by the
mind's activity in reworking these given materials, whether by acts of memory,
imaginative construction, or abstraction. Still another variation is to be found
in William James. Despite the authority of Locke, he thinks that the " word
'idea' has not domesticated itself in the language so as to cover bodily
sensations." Accordingly, he restricts the word "idea" to concepts, and never
uses it for sensations or perceptions. Nevertheless, like Locke, he does not
think that the development of concept from percept needs the activity of a
special faculty. Both concept and percept belong to the single "stream of
thought" and are "states of consciousness." THE SECOND POSITION is taken by
writers who in one way or another distinguish between sense and intellect and
regard them as quite separate faculties of knowing. The one is supposed to
perform the functions of perception, imagination, and memory; the other, the
functions of thought conception, judgment, and reasoning, or if not these, then
acts of intellectual vision or intuition. Here, too, there are differences
within the group.

CHAPTER 37

Just as the extreme version of the first position is taken by those who identify
ideas with perceptions, so here the opposite extreme consists in the denial of
any connection between ideas and all the elements of sense-experience. The ideas
in the divine mind or the ideas infused by God into the angelic intellects, have
no origin in experience, nor any need for the perceptions, memories, or images
of sense. They are not abstract ideas, that is, they are not con:epts abstracted
from sense-materials. "Our intellect/' Aquinas writes, "abstracts the
intelligible species from the individuating principles" the material conditions
of sense ind imagination. "But the intelligible species in the divine
intellect," he continues, "is immaterial, not by abstraction, but of itself,"
The jivine ideas, Aquinas quotes Augustine as saying, "are certain original
forms or permanent and immutable models of things which are contamed in the
divine intelligence.*' Following Augustine's statement that "each thing was
:reated by God according to the idea proper to it,"Aquinas restricts the word
"idea" to the 'exemplars existing in the divine mind" and to the species of
things with which God informs the angelic intellects. He uses the word "con:ept"
where others speak of "ideas" in the luman mind. Descartes, on the other hand,
endows the luman mind with not concepts abideas tracted from and dependent on
sense, but in:uitive apprehensions which, since they cannot DC drawn in any way
from sense-experience, nust be an innate property of the human mind, -ie does
not, however, always use the word 'idea" in this strict sense. Some ideas, he
says, 'appear to be innate, some adventitious, and others to be formed or
invented by myself." The ideas called "adventitious" are those which ,eem to
come from the outside, as when "I hear iome sound, or see the sun, or feel
heat." Those vhich we form or invent ourselves are "contructions of the
imagination." Only innate deas, in Descartes' view, are truly ideas in the cnse
of being the elements of certain knowledge and the sources of intellectual
intuition. 'By intuition," he says, "I understand, not the luctuating testimony
of the senses, nor the nisleading judgment that proceeds from the lundering
constructions of the imagination," : IDEA but "the undoubting conception of an
unclouded and attentive mind" which "springs from the light of reason alone." As
mind and body are separate substances for Descartes mind being conceived by him
as a res cogitans or thinking substance, quite separate from a res cxtcnsa or
the extended matter of a bodily substance so ideas and sensations are
independent in origin and function. Like infused ideas in the angelic intellect,
innate ideas in the human mind are not abstract, for they are not abstracted.
But unlike the angelic intellect, the human mind, even when it employs innate
ideas, is discursive or cogitative. It is never conceived as entirely free from
the activities of judgment and reasoning, even when its power is also supposed
to be intuitive that is, able to apprehend intelligible objects without analysis
or without recourse to the representations of sense. The doctrine of innate
ideas does not always go as far as this in separating intellectual knowledge or
knowledge by means of ideas from sense-experience. In the theories of Plato and
Augustine, for example, sense-experience serves to awaken the understanding to
apprehend the intelligible objects for the intuition of which it is innately
equipped. "To learn those things which do not come into us as images by the
senses," Augustine writes, "but which we know within ourselves without images
... is in reality only to take things that the memory already contains scattered
and unarranged . . and by thinking . bring them together." Moreover, the memory
contains, not only "images impressed upon it by the senses of the body, but also
the notions of the very things themselves, which notions we never received by
any avenue of the body." This process of learning by remembering appears to be
similar to the process which Plato also calls "recollection" or "reminiscence."
In the Meno Socrates demonstrates that a slaveboy, who thinks he knows no
geometry, can be led simply by questioning to discover that he knew all the
while the solution of a geometric problem. "There have always been true thoughts
in him," Socrates tells Meno, thoughts "which only needed to be awakened into
knowledge by putting questions to him/' Hence "his soul must always have
possessed this knowledge." Learning, according to this doctrine of innate
ideas,must therefore be described as an attempt "to recollect/' not "what you do
not know," but "rather what you do not remember." Learning by recollection or
reminiscence seems to be a process in which latent ideas (whether they are
retained by the soul from a previous life or are part of the soul's endowment at
its creation) become active either through the questioning of a teacher or
through being awakened by the perceptions of the bodily senses. Though such
bodily stimulation of thought implies a functional connection between body and
soul, nevertheless both Plato and Augustine hold that ideas are independent in
origin. They are not derived from sense, though their appearance may be
occasioned by events in the world of sense.

ONE OTHER VIEW still remains to be considered. It denies that ideas are innate
in the human mind at the same time that it distinguishes between the intellect
and the senses as separate faculties of knowing. Having to explain whence the
intellect gets its ideas, writers like Aristotle and Aquinas attribute to the
human intellect an abstractive power by which it draws "the intelligible
species" from sensory images, which Aquinas calls "phantasms." The concepts by
which "our intellect understands material things," we obtain "by abstracting the
form from the individual matter which is represented by the phantasms."

Through the universal concept thus abstracted, we are able, Aquinas holds, "to
consider the nature of the species apart from its individual principles." It
should be added here that abstractions are not vehicles of intuitive
apprehension. Conception, which is the first act of the mind, yields knowledge
only when concepts are used in subsequent acts of judgment and reasoning.
Abstract or universal concepts are as different from the ideas which belong to
intellects separate from bodies the divine or angelic intellects- as they are
different from the particular perceptions or images of sense. They occupy an
intermediate position between the two, just as, according to Aquinas, "the human
intellect holds a middle place" between angelic intelli- gence and corporeal
sense. On the one hand, the human intellect is for Aquinas an incorporeal power;
on the other hand, it functions only in cooperation with the corporeal powers of
sense and imagination. So the concepts which the human intellect forms, being
universal, are immaterial; but they are also dependent, in origin and function,
on the materials of sense. Not only are universal concepts abstracted from the
phantasms, but for the intellect to understand physical things, "it must of
necessity," Aquinas writes, "turn to the phantasms in order to perceive the
universal nature existing in the individual." This theory of abstract ideas
seems not far removed from the position of Locke, who distinguishes between
particular and general ideas (which he calls "abstract") or that of William
James, who distinguishes between universal concepts and sense-perceptions. Yet
on one question the difference between them is radical, namely, whether
particular sensations and universal ideas belong to the same faculty of mind or
to the quite distinct faculties of sense and intellect. This difference seems to
have considerable bearing on the way in which these writers explain the process
of abstraction or generalization, with consequences for certain subtleties,
acknowledged or ignored, in the analysis of the grades of abstraction.
Nevertheless, the resemblance between the positions of Locke and Aquinas, or
those of William James and Aristotle, each affirming in his own way that the
mind contains nothing not rooted in the senses, serves to mediate between the
more extreme positions. THE DISPUTE ABOUT innate ideas and the controversy over
abstract ideas are issues in psychology inseparable from fundamental differences
concerning the nature and operation of the faculty or faculties of knowing.
There are other issues which concern the being or the truth of ideas. Here the
first question is not whether ideas are objects of knowledge, but whether the
existence of ideas is real or mental outside 'the mind or in it. One aspect of
this controversy is considered in the chapter on FORM, viz., the argument
between Aristbtle and Plato about' the being of CHAPTER the Ideas or Forms apart
from both matter and mind. It is in the context of this argument that the
traditional epithet "realism" gets one of its meanings, when it signifies the
view that ideas or universals have an independent reality of their own. The
various opponents of this view are not called "idealists." If they deny any
existence to universal ideas outside the mind, they are usually called
"conceptuahsts"; if they deny the presence of universals even in the mind, they
are called "nominalists." These doctrines are more fully discussed in the
chapters on SAME AND OTHER, UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR. The controversy about the
being of ideas has another phase that has already been noted in this chapter;
and it is in this connection that the epithet "idealism" gets one of its
traditional meanings. The doctrine is not that ideas have real existence outside
the mind. On the contrary, it is that the only realities are mental either minds
or the ideas in them.

Berkeley's famous proposition essc est percipi, to be is to be perceived seems
intended to permit only one exception. The perceiving mind has being without
being perceived, but nothing else has. Everything else which exists is an idea,
a being of and in the mind. According to this doctrine (which takes different
forms in Berkeley and in Hegel, for example), the phrase "idea of" is
meaningless.

Nothing exists of which an idea can be a representation. There is no meaning to
the distinction between thing and idea. The real and the ideal are identical.
Plato is sometimes called an "idealist" but not in this sense. He has never been
interpreted as completely denying reality to the changing material things which
imitate or copy the eternal ideas, the immutable archetypes or Forms.

Applied to Plato or to Plotmus, "idealism" seems to signify the superior reality
of ideal (as opposed to material or physical) existence. Just as "idealism" has
these widely divergent meanings, so does "realism" when it designates, on the
one hand, those who attribute independent reality to ideas and, on the other
hand, those who affirm the existence of an order of real existences independent
of the ideas which represent them in the mind.

Writers who distinguish between things and ideas, or between the order of
reality and the 37: IDEA mind's conception of it, face the problem of
differentiating between these two modes of being. To say that ideas or concepts
exist only in the mind is not to say that they do not exist at all, but only
that they do not exist in the same way as things outside the mind. Does an
entity in its real existence apart from knowledge have the same character that
it has when, as an object known, it somehow belongs to the knowing mind ? Is
there a kind of neutral essence which can assume both modes of existence real
existence, independent of mind, and ideal existence, or existence in the mind,
as an object conceived or known? Is an idea or concept in the mind nothing but
the real thing objectified, or transformed into an object of knowledge; or is
the real thing, the thing in itself, utterly different from the objects of
experience or knowledge neither knowable nor capable of representation by
concepts? These questions, relevant to the consideration of ideas as
representations of reality, are, of course, also relevant to problems considered
in the chapters on BEING, EXPERIENCE, and KNOWLEDGE. The issues indicated are
there discussed. Intimately connected with them are questions about the truth of
ideas. Can ideas or concepts be true or false in the sense in which truth and
falsity are attributed to propositions or judgments? Under what conditions is an
idea true? In what does its truth consist, and what are the signs or marks of
its truth? These matters are discussed in the chapter on TRUTH. Here it is
sufficient to point out that the traditional distinction between adequate and
inadequate ideas, and the comparison of clear and distinct with obscure and
confused ideas, are used to determine the criteria of truth. It may be the truth
of a concept taken by itself or of the judgment into which several concepts
enter. To the extent that ideas are regarded as representative, their truth (or
the truth of the judgments they form) seems to consist in some mode of agreement
or correspondence with the reality they represent, or, as Spinoza says, its idea
turn. Within the conceptual or mental order itself, there is a further
distinction between ideas which do not perform a representative function and
those which do. The former are treated as fantasies, fictions, or chimeras; the
latter are called, by contrast, "real ideas," or ideas having some reference to
reality. The question of the reality of ideas takes precedence over the question
of their truth, at least for those who regard the division into true and false
as applicable only to representations. Yet the criteria of the distinction
between the real and the imaginary are difficult to separate from the criteria
of true and false. The separation is made most readily by those who use "idea"
to mean memory image. They can test the reality of an idea by tracing it back to
the impression from which it originated. Another sort of test is applied by
those who measure the reality of abstract ideas by their fidelity to the
sense-perceptions from which they were abstracted. another criterion, proStill
posed by William James, is that of freedom from contradiction. An idea has truth
and itsobject has reality if it "remains uncontradieted." The idea of a winged
horse illustrates the point. "If I merely dream of a horse with wings," James
writes, "my horse interferes with nothing else and has not to be contradicted
But if with this horse I make an inroad into the world otherwise known, and say,
for example, 'That is my old mare Maggie, having grown a pair of wings where she
stands in her stall,' the whole case is altered; for now the horse and place are
identified with a horse and place otherwise known, and what is known of the
latter objects is incompatible with what is perceived with the former."

THE CONSIDERATION of ideas or concepts belongs to logic as well as to psychology
and metaphysics. The logician sometimes deals with conand with the judgments
into cepts directly which they enter; sometimes he deals with them only as they
find verbal expression in terms and propositions. The distinction between
concepts and judgments (or between terms and propositions) is discussed in the
chapter on JUDGMENT. There also we see that the classification of judgments or
propositions depends in part on the acceptance or rejection of the notions of
subject and predicate in the analysis of concepts or terms; and, if they are
accepted, on the way in which AS terms are distinguished both as subjects and as
predicates. This in turn depends upon certain traditional divisions which are
applicable to terms, if not always to concepts, such as the familiar
distinctions between concrete and abstract, and particular and universal, terms.
When the concept, which is sometimes called the "mental word," is regarded as by
its very nature abstract and universal, these distinctions are applicable only
to the physical words which are terms. Concrete and particular terms are then
treated as verbal expressions of sense-perceptions or images; abstract and
universal terms, as verbal expressions of ideas or concepts. But when ideas are
identified with sense-perceptions or images, and abstract concepts are denied,
the existence of general names in ordinary discourse suffices for the
distinction between particular and universal terms, even though the latter do
not express any actual content of the mind. Unlike the foregoing, other
divisions of terms, as, forexample, the distinction between the univocal and the
analogical, or between species and genera, do not occur throughout the tradition
of logic. They tend to be characteristic of the logic of Aristotle and its
mediaeval development. Of these two distinctions, that between univocal and
analogical terms or concepts appears explicitly, so far as this set of great
books is concerned, only in the Summa Theologica. Nevertheless, Aquinas does
have some background for his special theory of analogical terms in Aristotle's
treatment of univocal and equivocal names, and in his separation of terms which
predicate a sameness in species or genus from those which predicate a sameness
by analogy. The analysis of these distinctions is undertaken in the chapters on
SAME AND OTHER and SIGN AND SYMBOL.

Other writers, in dealing with universal terms, recognize that they have
different degrees of generality. They sometimes formulate this as an order of
more and less inclusive classes. Sometimes they refer to the intension and
extension, or connotation and denotation, of terms. The more general terms have
a less restricted connotation and hence represent more extensive or inclusive
classes. The more specific terms have a more determinate meaning and so also
have a narrower denotation and represent CHAPTER less inclusive classes. What
seems to be peculiar to Aristotle's analysis of species and genera is the
setting of upper and lower limits to the hierarchy of universal terms, with a
small number of irreducible categories (or summa genera) under which all species
fall, and, at the other extreme, with a finite number of lowest (or infimae)
species which are incapable of subsuming other species. The terms which fall
under the lowest species must either be particulars or accidental classes.

Those which seem to be predicable of the categories themselves, such as being or
one, cannot be genera. These are the terms which Aristotle's mediaeval followers
call "transcendental" and "analogical." Using the word "transcendental" in a
different sense,Kant enumerates a set of concepts which bear some resemblance to
Anstotle's summa genera, but which he treats as transcendental categories. The
difference among concepts with respect to generality is of interest to the
psychologist as well as the logician, for it raises the problem OUTLINE OF TO

1 . Doctrines of idea la. Ideas, or relations between ideas, as obj

as eternal forms

i b. Ideas or conceptions as that by which

ic. Ideas as the data of sense-experience

id. Ideas as the pure concepts of reason: reg

le. Ideas in the order of supra-human inte and archetypes; the modes of the d

i/.

Idea as the unity of determinate exist

2. The origin or derivation of ideas in the human

2a. The infusion of ideas: divine illuminatio

ib. The innate endowment or retention of idea content or structure by sense, by

2c. The acquirement of ideas by perception or

rect objects of the understanding

2d. Reflection as a source of ideas: the mind

2e. The genesis of ideas by the recollection

2/1 The production of ideas by the reworki

tive construction of concepts or t

37: IDEA of whether the more or the less general takes precedence in the order
of learning. The order and relation of ideas is even more the common ground of
both logic and psychology. Both, for example, deal with the position and
sequence of terms or concepts in reasoning, though the logician aims to
prescribe the forms which reasoning must take in order to be valid, whereas the
psychologist tries to describe the steps by which thinking actually goes on.
Only the logician, however, is concerned

with the way in which terms arc ordered to one another as positive and negative,
or as contraries; just as from Aristotle to Freud, only the psychologist deals
with the association of ideas in the stream of thought by relationships of
contiguity and succession, similarity and difference. According as the logical
connection of ideas or their psychological association is made the primary fact,
radically divergent interpretations are given of the nature of mind, the life of
reason, and the process of thought. PICS PAGE ects of thought or knowledge: the
ideas the mind thinks or knows or their residues ulative principles lligence or
spirit: the eternal exemplars ivine mind ence and concept: the Absolute Idea
mind n s: the activation of the mind's native memory, or by experience
intuition: simple ideas or forms as di's consideration of its own acts or
content of sense-impressions: the images of sense ng of the materials of sense:
the imaginahe formation of complex from simple ideas 2g. The abstraction of
ideas from sense-experience: the concept as the

the mind; the grades of abstraction

2h. The derivation of transcendental ideas from the three syllogisms of

3. The division of ideas according to their objective reference

30. Ideas about things distinguished from ideas about ideas: the distin

first and second intentions

3#. Adequate and inadequate ideas: clear and distinct ideas as c

obscure and confused ideas

3r.

Real and fantastic or fictional ideas: negations and chimeras

4. The logic of ideas

40. The verbal expression of ideas or concepts: terms

4k. The classification of terms: problems in the use of different kinds

(1) Concrete and abstract terms

(2) Particular and universal terms

(3) Specific and generic terms: tnfimae species and summa gener

(4) Univocal and analogical terms

4k. The correlation, opposition,

and order of terms

5. Ideas

or concepts in the process of thought

50. Concept

and judgment: the division of terms as subjects a

subjects and predicates

5k. The position

and sequence of terms in reasoning

5k. The dialectical employment

of the ideas of reason

$d. The order of concepts in the stages of learning: the more and the l

5*. The association, comparison,

and discrimination of ideas:

or consciousness

6. The being and truth of ideas

6a. The distinction between real and intentional existence, between thi

ideas as symbols, or intentions of the mind

6b. The nature and being of ideas in relation to the nature and being o

6c. The agreement between an idea and its object: the criterion o

correspondence

6d. Clarity and distinctness in ideas as criteria of their truth

6. The criterion of genesis: the test of an idea's truth or mea

its origin

6f. The truth and falsity of simple apprehensions, sensations, or co

trasted with the truth and falsity of judgments or assert first act of reason
ction between ompared with of terms a nd predicates; kinds of ess general the
stream of thought ng and idea: f the mind f adequacy in ning by reference to
nceptions: conions

CHAPTER 37: ID

REFERENCES

To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy

numbers of the passages referred to. For example, in

number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; the

sage is m section d of page 12.

PAGE SECTIONS: When the text is printed in one colu

upper and lower halves of the page. For example, in 5

begins m the upper half of page and ends in the l

in two columns, the letters a and b refer to

printed

hand side of the page, the letters c and d to the upp

the page. For example, in 7 PLATO- Symposium, 163b-16

of the left-hand side of page and ends in the upp

AUTHOR'S DIVISIONS: One or more of the mam division

SECT) are sometimes included in the reference; line n

tain cases; e.g., Iliad, BK n [265-283] 12d.

BIBLE REFERENCES The references are to book, chapte

:

and Douay versions differ m title of books or in the

James version is cited first and the Douay, indicated

MENT: Nehemiah, 7-45 (D) // Esdras, 7:46.

SYMBOLS: The abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's

relevant parts of a whole reference; "passim" signifi

tently rather than continuously in the work or passag

For additional information concerning the style of th

Reference Style; for general guidance m

the use of The

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. Doctrines of idea
 1a. Ideas, or relations between ideas, as objects of thought or knowledge: the ideas
 as eternal forms
 1b. Ideas or conceptions as that by which the mind thinks or knows
 1c. Ideas as the data of sense-experience or their residues
 1d. Ideas as the pure concepts of reason: regulative principles
 1e. Ideas in the order of supra-human intelligence or spirit: the eternal exemplars
 and archetypes; the modes of the divine mind
 i/.
 Idea as the unity of determinate existence and concept: the Absolute Idea

2. The origin or derivation of ideas in the human mind
 2a. The infusion of ideas: divine illumination
 2b. The innate endowment or retention of ideas: the activation of the mind's native
 content or structure by sense, by memory, or by experience
 2c. The acquirement of ideas by perception or intuition: simple ideas or forms as di-
 rect objects of the understanding
 2d. Reflection as a source of ideas: the mind's consideration of its own acts or content
 2e. The genesis of ideas by the recollection of sense-impressions: the images of sense
 2/1 The production of ideas by the reworking of the materials of sense: the imagina-
 tive construction of concepts or the formation of complex from simple ideas
 PAGB
 2f. The abstraction of ideas from sense-experience: the concept as the first act of
 the mind; the grades of abstraction
 2g. The derivation of transcendental ideas from the three syllogisms of reason

3. The division of ideas according to their objective reference
 3a. Ideas about things distinguished from ideas about ideas: the distinction between
 first and second intentions
 3b. Adequate and inadequate ideas: clear and distinct ideas as compared with
 obscure and confused ideas
 3<r.
 Real and fantastic or fictional ideas: negations and chimeras

4. The logic of ideas
 4a. The verbal expression of ideas or concepts: terms
 4b. The classification of terms: problems in the use of different kinds of terms
 (1) Concrete and abstract terms
 (2) Particular and universal terms
 (3) Specific and generic terms: tnfimae species and summa genera
 (4) Univocal and analogical terms
 4c. The correlation, opposition,
 and order of terms

5. Ideas
or concepts in the process of thought
 5a. Concept
 and judgment: the division of terms as subjects and predicates; kinds of
 subjects and predicates
 5b. The position
 and sequence of terms in reasoning
 5c. The dialectical employment
 of the ideas of reason
 5d. The order of concepts in the stages of learning: the more and the less general
 5*. The association, comparison,
 and discrimination of ideas: the stream of thought
 or consciousness

6. The being and truth of ideas
 6a. The distinction between real and intentional existence, between thing and idea:
 ideas as symbols, or intentions of the mind
 6b. The nature and being of ideas in relation to the nature and being of the mind
 6c. The agreement between an idea and its object: the criterion of adequacy in
 correspondence
 6d. Clarity and distinctness in ideas as criteria of their truth
 6e. The criterion of genesis: the test of an idea's truth or meaning by reference to
 its origin
 6f. The truth and falsity of simple apprehensions, sensations, or conceptions: con-
 trasted with the truth and falsity of judgments or assertions

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The
theory of Ideas as eternal forms existing apart from mind and mat

ETERNITY 40; FORM la, 23-20; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 2a.

The theory of ideas as universal conceptions abstracted from the mat

33-3b; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 5b, 6c(i); SENSE 53; UNIVERSAL AND P

4C-4d; and for abstraction in relation to generalization and induc

INDUCTION la, 3.

The theory of ideas as sense impressions or sense images, see MEMORY

53; SENSE 1d, 53.

The doctrine of innate ideas and the related theory of reminiscence

see KNOWLEDGE 6c(3); MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 33; MIND 4d(2).

The theory of the transcendental concepts or ideas as constitutive o

see FORM 1c, 33; KNOWLEDGE 6b(4), 6c(4); MIND 4d(3); PRINCIPLE 2b(

dialectical employment of the ideas of pure reason, see DIALECTIC

The theory of the Absolute Idea, see HISTORY 43(3); MIND iof-iof(2).

The theory of the divine ideas as eternal exemplars, or of the ideas

lects, see ANGEL 3d; FORM 2b; GOD 5f; KNOWLEDGE ya-yb; MIND ice, l

AND PARTICULAR 4b.

The issue concerning the distinction of, and the relation between, s

BEING 8a-8b; KNOWLEDGE 6a(i), 6b-6b(4); MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 50,

MIND i-1g(3); SENSE 1a-1b, 43, 5c.

Another discussion of the distinction between first and second inten

distinction between first and second impositions, see SIGN AND SYM

Other discussions of adequate and inadequate, or clear and distinct

6d(3) OPINION 3b; TRUTH la; and for other considerations of mental

;

see BEING 7d(5); MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 53.

The consideration of the expression of ideas m words or terms, see L

AND SYMBOL 1f; for the distinction of concrete and abstract terms,

2e; for the distinction of particular and universal terms, see SIG

VERSAL AND PARTICULAR 5c; for the distinction of species and gener

SAME AND OTHER 33(1); UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR kb; and for the dis

umvocal, equivocal, and analogical terms, see RELATION 1d; SAME AN

SIGN AND SYMBOL 3d.

The treatment of the definition of terms as the expression or analys

NITION i, 1b.

The correlation and opposition of concepts or terms, see OPPOSITION

4e

The role played by concepts in the acts of judgment and reasoning, o

to propositions and syllogisms, see JUDGMENT 50-5k REASONING 2a( i

Other discussions of the sssociation of ideas, see MEMORY AND IMAGIN

1g(i); RELATION 4f.

The metaphysicsl problem of the being of ideas, 3nd for the theory o

see BEING 7d-7d(5); SIGN AND SYMBOL 1b; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 2

Another consideration of the truth or reality of ideas, see TRUTH 3b

ter, see CHANGE I5a; erials of sense, see FORM ARTICULAR 2b, tion, see
EXPERIENCE 2b; AND IMAGINATION la, and intuitive knowledge, r regulative
principles, 3); and for the 2c(2). infused into angelic intelog; UNIVERSAL ense
and intellect, see 6b, 6d; tions, and of the related BOL 2a-2b. ideas, see
KNOWLEDGE fictions or chimeras, ANGUAGE 1a, 7; SIGN see SIGN AND SYMBOL a, see
RELATION 5a(4) ; N AND SYMBOL 2d; UNItinction between D OTHER 3b, 4c; is of
concepts, see DEFIla-1b; RELATION 1c, r for terms in relation ). ATION 2c; MIND
f intentional existence, c. (i).

CHAPTER 37:

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Book? o

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These

I Works by authors represente

II. Works by authors not repres

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follow

I.

AQUINAS. On the Trinity ofBoethius, QQ 5-6

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Verttate, Q 3

.

De Natura Verbi Intellect

. DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i,

9-10, 45-47 SPINOZA Of the Improvement of the Understanding HUME. A Treatise of
Human Nature, BK i, PART i BERKELEY. Sins

KANT. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic, par

39. 5 6 HLGEL. The Phenomenology of Mind

Science of Logic, VOL n, stci i, CH i SECT m, ;

CH i(c), 3

Logic, CH 9

.

} S. MILL. A System of Logic, BK iv, CH 2 W. JAMES. Some Problems of Philosophy,
CH 4-6

II.

CICERO. Academics PHILO JUDAEUS. On the Creation of the World (De

Opificio Mundi), par 16 PORPHYRY. Introduction to Aristotle's Predicaments
BOETHIUS. In Isagogem Porphyn Commenta ERIGENA. De Dwisione Naturae, BK m JOHN
OF SALISBURY. Metalogicon, BK n, CH 17 BoNAvtNTURA. On the Reduction of the Arts
to

Theology DUNS SCOTUS. Opus Oxoniense, BK i, DISI 35 (i) CAJETkN. De Nominum
Analogia

. De Conceptu Entis SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxv

JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, PART n, QQ
3-5, 23

ARNAULD. Logic or the Art of Thinking, PART i

MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la verite, BK in (11), CH 1-8

Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, in

.

LEIBNITZ, What h "Idea"? Discourse on Metaphysics, xxiv-xxix

.

.

Philosophical Worlds, CH 3 (Thoughts on Knowledge, Truth and Ideas)

IDEA f the Western World, but relevant to the works are divided into two groups:
d in this collection. ented in this collection. publication of the works cited,
consult s the last chapter of The Great Ideas. BK i, BK ii, CH 1-8, 12, 30-33

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

VOLTAIRE. "Idea," in A Philosophical Dictionary T. REID Essays on the
Intellectual Powers of Man t iv-v

J. G. FICHTE. The Science of Knowledge COLERIDGE. Biographia Literana, CH 5-8
SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL |, BK I, Hi; VOL II, SUP, CH 14;
VOL III, SUP, CH 29 J. MILL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, CH
2-3, 6, 9

W. HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, VOL i (34-36); VOL n (7-12)
WHEWELL. The Philosophy of the Inductive Sciences, VOL I, BK I, CH 7 SlGWART.
LoglC, PART I, CH 1 PART II, CH I PART HI, 4

, J
CH 1-2

LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK n, CH 3 .

LoglC, BK I, CH I C. S. PLIRCE Collected Papers, VOL v, par 388-410 VENN.
Principles of Empirical or Inductive Logic, CH7

RIBOT. The Evolution of General Ideas ROYCE The World and the Individual, SERIES
1(7) CROCE. Logic as the Science of Pure Concept TITCHENER. Lectures on the
Experimental Psychology of the Thought-Processes

CASSIRER. Substance and Function, PART i, CH i HUSSERL Logische Untersuchungen .
Ideas. General Introduction to Pure Phenomenology

BRADLEY. The Principles ofLogic, BK n, PART n, CH I

Collected Essays, VOL 1(12) . Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 3 . DEWEY Essays
in Experimental Logic, vii-vui The Quest for Certainty, CH 5-6 . WHITEHEAD.
Science and the Modern World, CH to Process and Reality, PART i . MARITAIN.
Reflexions sur I' intelligence et sur la vie propre, CH i An Introduction to
Logic,, CH i . The Degrees of Knowledge, CH 2 . BLONDEL. La penste
