CHAPTER: IMMORTALITY

INTRODUCTION

THE mortality of man defines by contrast the immortality which some men hope for, some men fear, some men scoff at, but no man ever fails sooner or later to consider. The life of man, like that of other animals, moves through a normal span of years between birth and death. Legend tells of certain heroes upon whom the immortal gods bestowed immortal life, gracing them with an aspect of their own divinity. Jewish and Christian faith holds that Adam, with all his posterity, would never have suffered disease or death if he had refrained from sin. But according to the theologians, the imperishability of the bodily fram^e of man in a state of grace is a preternatural condition. Except, then, for the miraculous or the supernatural, death follows birth and life, that which comes to be passes away, all things of flesh and blood perish.

The proposition "All men are mortal" has been repeated during centuries of lessons in logic. Its truth has never been seriously challenged even by those who have criticized the syllogism which reaches the conclusion that since he is a man, Socrates is mortal. But throughout the same period, the great books of poetry and religion, of philosophy and theology, have recorded the qualifications which men have placed upon this truth.

Man dies in the flesh to be reborn in the spirit. Man, composite of soul and body, perishes as do all things which are subject to dissolution; but the soul itself, a simple spiritual substance, is immortal, living on after its union with the body is dissolved. The immortal soul is sometimes conceived as having many incarnations, inhabiting now this body, now that, in an endless pilgrimage through endless time; and sometimes, as in the Christian faith, each soul has only one embodiment on earth. It is specially created by God to inform the body of a human being. It is destined to be his immortal spirit in a future which belongs to eternity rather than to time. Except for the form it takes in the doctrine of reincarnation, or the transmigration of souls, the idea of immortality is usually at- tended by conceptions of an after-life in another world— the life of the shades in the Elysian

Fields or in Hades, the life of the blessed in Heaven or of the damned in Hell. The afterlife is never merely a continuation of the life begun on earth. The other world is not just an abode for the disembodied soul. It is a place of judgment, of rewards and punishments, in which the soul realizes the good, or pays the penalty for the evil, toward which its earthly career inclined. The connection of immortality with rewards and punishments appears even in the theory of reincarnation, for as the soul passes from one embodiment to another, it enjoys or suffers the consequences befitting its previous existence.

Stated as a speculative problem, the question of immortality is traditionally formulated as a question about the soul or the spirit of man: whether it exists by itself either before or after its conjunction with a human body; and if so, in what manner it subsists. For those who affirm the soul's separate existence, there seems to be no question about its everlasting endurance, either without beginning at all or from the moment of its creation. But the manner of the soul's subsistence leads to speculation concerning an after-life or an other-life in a world of spirits, or in realms as far apart as Heaven and

Hell.

We shall presently consider to what extent such speculations have been submitted to argu- ment and to what extent they have been matters of religious belief. But in both these modes

CHAPitR 38: IMMOR r.MJ 1'^ of consideration, the theme of inimoriahiy is never merely a matter of speculative interest, never merely a question of spiritual substances and their subsistence. It is always a problem for the moralist.

Is this earthly life and its brief temporal span enough for the aspirations of the human spirit, and for its striving toward a perfection of knowl- edge, of love, and of repose? If external sanctions are needed to support the voice of conscience, are earthly rewards and punishments— either humanly dispensed, or capriciously distributed by chance or fortune— sufficient sanction for the moral law? Can perfect justice be done unless there is a divine law and a divine judge, a judge who can see beyond the acts of men into their hearts, from whose judgment no one escapes, and whose rewards and punish- ments are supernaturally established states of blessedness and misery for the soul?

Whether or not God, freedom, and immortality are, as Kant suggests, the three great objects of speculative thought, they do seem to form the basic triad of religious beliefs. In the religions of the west, these beliefs take various forms, but the belief in immortality is seldom if ever found separate from belief in a supernatural order, in gods or a God to whom man owes certain duties and before whom man stands to be judged as a responsible moral agent who was free to obey or disobey the divine commands. But, this fact admitted, the question remains whether the principles of morality can be adequately stated, or made effective in the regulation of human conduct, without a religious foundation, or at least without reference to God and immortality. On this the moralists disagree. The argument in Plato's Gorgias, for example, about whether it is better to do or suffer injustice, ends with a myth which tells of the soul standing naked before its divine judge after a man's death, showing no marks of the evil the individual has suffered during his life, but only of the evil he has done. The reader who thinks the myth is necessary to complete the argument concerning justice and punishment, takes one position on the question. He adopts the view that without the judgment of souls in an after-life justice cannot be done.

The preoccupation with immortality in a great many of I^lato's dialogues is not always based u|>on moral considerations, it appears as frecjuently in discussions of the relation be- tween the soul and the objects of its knowledge. If, to be proper objects of knowledge, the Ideas must be eternal, the soul which knows them must also be immortal. But when the discussion of immortality involves a comparison of this life and the life to come, it usually turns on considerations of goodness rather than of knowl- edge and truth. For Kant, if not for Plato, immortality is almost entirely a moral matter; and where the Platonic myth deals with just rewards and punishments in an after-life, the Kantian argument is concerned with the achievement of moral perfection.

In his Critique of Practical Reason, Kant affirms immortality, along with the existence of God and the freedom of the will, as necessary practical postulates— indispensable conditions of the moral life. "The perfect accordance of the will with the moral law," Kant writes, "is holiness, a perfection of which no rational being of the sensible world is capable at any moment of his existence ... It can only be found in a progress in infinitum towards that perfect ac- cordance ... It is necessary to assume such a practical progress as the real object of our will." The realization of happiness, or the sum- mum bonum, Kant concludes, "is only possible practically on the supposition of the immortality of the soul."

The opposite view appears to be taken in Aristotle's Ethics and Mill's Utilitarianism. The summum bonum is a temporal happiness, a perfection attainable on earth and by purely natural means. In those passages in which Aristotle defines happiness in terms of contemplative activity, he also speaks of it as a godlike life and therefore one which has a touch of immortality. Man is able to lead such a life, he writes, only "in so far as something divine is present in him." To lead the life of reason, which is divine in comparison with any other mode of human life, we must, he says, "so far as we can, make ourselves immortal, and strain every nerve to live in accordance with the best thing in us." But to be immortal in this way seems to mean the possession of a godlike quality in this life rather than the promise of a life hereafter.

Aristotle demands only "a complete term of life" as a necessary condition for "the complete happiness of man." He passes lightly over the question whether "the dead share in any good or evil." So far as he considers a blessedness which the gods can add to human happiness, it does not belong to an after-life, but consists rather in the good fortune which the gods grant to some men and which increases and secures their happiness beyond that which is attainable by virtue alone.

The moral issue concerning immortality is more explicitly faced by Mill in his examination of the need for religious or supernatural sanctions. While he does not admit their indispensability, neither does he deny their utility. "There is evidently no reason," he declares, "why all these motives for observance should not attach themselves to the utilitarian morality, as completely and as powerfully as to any other." Yet he himself stresses "the possibility of giving to the service of humanity, even without the aid of belief in a Providence, both the psychological power and the social efficacy of a religion."

Mill does not go as far as Lucretius in regarding the belief in immortality, with the attendant possibility of everlasting torment for the soul, as itself an immoral doctrine. For Lucretius it is a nightmare which haunts the waking hours of men, filling them with false fears and putting future pains in the way of present pleasures. He dedicates his poem to "driving headlong forth that dread of Acheron, troubling as it does the life of man from its inmost depths and overspreading all things with the blackness of death, allowing no pleasure to be pure and unalloyed."

Where others see in man's fear of death his natural desire for immortality, Lucretius thinks it is the dread of immortality which causes man's fear of death. "We have nothing to fear after death," he says, if death is the end. "He who exists not, cannot become miserable."

In the great poems of antiquity we find the imagery and detail of the pagan conception of the life hereafter. Both Odysseus and Aeneas visit the underworld. They see the shades of the departed heroes; all that is visible to the bodily eye are shimmering wraiths. They talk with the departed, listen to their memories, or hear them speak prophetically of the future. From Anchises, his dead father, Aeneas learns his destiny; and Odysseus hears in Hades what has befallen his companions at Troy and his family at home during his years of wandering.

Yet there is a striking difference between

Virgil's poem and Homer's with respect to the after-life. The division which Virgil makes between Elysium and Tartarus corresponds much more closely than anything in Homer—or for that matter in the other Greek poets— to the Christian distinction between Heaven and Hell. Though Elysium and Tartarus both belong to the underworld, one is the abode of the blessed, the other a place of torment for sinners.

In the sixth book of the Aeneid, the Sibyl explains the topography of the underworld to Aeneas. There is a place "where splits the road in twain," she says:

The right leads to the giant walls of Dis, Our way to Elysium; but the left wreaks doom On sinners, and to guilty Tartarus sends.

Tartarus, the abode of the condemned, is sur- rounded by "a fierce torrent of billowy fire," and is filled with the noise of punishment.

Elysium, on the other hand, is

The happy region and green pleasaunces Of the blest woodlands, the abode of joy. An ampler ether with purpureal light Clothes here the plain; another sun than ours, And other stars they know.

Its inhabitants, in sharp contrast with the unfortunates in Tartarus, seem to pass their time in peace and pleasure.

Homer makes no such sharp division between the realm of the blessed and the realm of the condemned. Plutarch speaks of "the isles of the blessed celebrated by Homer," but the reference cannot be substantiated. In one passage in the Iliad Menelaus is promised that he will be taken "to the Elysian plain, which is at the end of the world. There fair-haired Rhadamanthus reigns, and men lead an easier life than any- where else in the world, for in Elysium there falls not rain, nor hail, nor snow." But even this seems to describe a different life rather than an after-life.

So far as the underworld is described on the occasion of Odysseus* descent "into the house of Hades and dread Prospcrine," we are told I that the Theban prophet 1 circsias alone has his "reason still unshaken." All "the other |,'hosts (flit about aimlessly." The shades of gcxxl men and bad ahke languish in the domain of darkness. Tityus, Tantalus, and Sisyphus are subjected to special punishments for their grievous sins and transgressions, but all the shades— even of those men whom the gods loved and honored —seem to be in a state of misery. Though they are not all beset with torments and agonies, none seems to be overcome with joy or to have reached contentment.

Those whom the gods love do not join the deities on Mount Olympus. When they enter the somber realm of Pluto— the deity of the underworld— they, like all the other shades whom Charon ferries across the river Styx, are more remote from the gods than are mortal men on earth. The only exception perhaps is

Heracles, whom Odysseus meets in Hades, or rather "his phantom only, for he is feasting ever wath the immortal gods, and has lovely Hebe to wife."

The general attitude of all who dwell in the underworld is summed up by Achilles when he tells Odysseus: "Say not a word in death's favor; I would rather be a paid servant in a poor man's house and be above ground than king of kings among the dead." And the mother of Odysseus describes the condition of the dead "in the abode of darkness" as one in which "the sinews no longer hold the flesh and bones together; these perish in the fierceness of consuming fire as soon as life has left the body, and the soul flits away as though it were a dream." Among other ancient peoples such as the

Egyptians, the Babylonians, and the Persians,

Herodotus found other views of immortality than those which prevailed in Greece. He reports, for example, the doctrine of transmigration or reincarnation— a doctrine which also appears in the myth of Er at the end of Plato's

Republic and is alluded to elsewhere in the

Platonic dialogues. "The Egyptians," Herodotus writes, "were the first to broach the opinion that the soul of man is immortal, and that, when the body dies, it enters into the form of an animal which is born at the moment, thence passing on from one animal into another, until it has circled through the forms of all creatures which tenant the earth, the water, and the air, after which it enters again into a human frame and is born anew."

Hertxlolus, however, seems more interested in the effect of such beliefs on the practices of the living, especially their funeral riles and other devotions, than he is with the truth of conflicting theories of immortality.

"The doctrine of a future state," according to Gibbon, "was scarcely considered among the devout polytheists of C^reecc and Rome as a fundamental article of faith." Before the time of Christ, "the description of the infernal regions had been abandoned to the fancy of painters and of poets, who peopled them with so many phantoms and monsters who dispensed their rewards and punishments with so little equity, that a solemn truth, the most congenial to the human heart, was oppressed and disgraced by the absurd mixture of the wildest fictions." Lacking an acceptable or satisfying belief, yet inclined to believe in, as men are inclined to hope for, a better life, the pagan world. Gibbon thinks, could not long resist the appeal of Christian teaching. "When the promise of eternal happiness was proposed to mankind on condition of adopting the faith, and of observing the precepts of the Gospel, it is no wonder," he declares, "that so advantageous an offer should have been accepted by great numbers of every religion, of every rank, and of every province in the Roman empire." The arguments for personal immortality which Christian theologians draw from the nature of the human soul do not differ essentially from the proofs offered by philosophers without recourse to religious faith. This applies to arguments advanced before Christianity by Plato and Plotinus as well as to those developed by philosophers like Descartes and Locke who belong to the Christian community. The exclusively theological aspects of the Christian doctrine of immortality are those matters which, since they are beyond the reach of reason, belong to faith alone.

The doctrine that the individual soul is created and that it has a unique affiliation with one human body, is not capable of being proved or defended by reason against the quite opposite theory that the soul has always existed and inhabits any number of bodies in the course of many reincarnations. The existence of Hell,

Purgatory, and Heaven as supernatural states of the soul; the time, place, and manner of the

Last Judgment; the resurrection of the body and the difference between the bodies reunited with the souls of the blessed and the damned; the joy of eternal happiness and the misery of eternal damnation— these dogmas of Christian orthodoxy go far beyond all merely philosophical attempts to prove the soul's immortality or to consider its life apart from the body.

The great theologians undertake to do more than expound these articles of faith. Reason asks questions which the man of faith must try to answer, defending his faith, not by proof, but by overcoming doubts, by answering objections, by making dogmas inteUigible. Yet the great theologians admit an irreducible core of mystery. The joy of the soul united to God in the beatific vision surpasses temporal understanding. The mysteries of Hell are perhaps even greater.

The deprivation of God's love and exclusion from His presence constitute a spiritual misery comparable to the beatitude of beholding God and being within the circle of the divine light. One is an infinite anguish of frustration and loss; the other, an infinite rest of peace and fulfillment. But the theologians also teach that the damned suffer the pains of sense in Hell, as

Vvcll as the pains of deprivation. "That hell, which also is called a lake of fire and brimstone,"

Augustine says, "will be material fire and will torment the bodies of the damned." When hellfire and the expiatory punishments of Purgatory are not merely symbols for the imagination, they raise extraordinarily difficult questions, as both Augustine and Aquinas admit.

Dante asks us to read the descriptions he gives of Hell, Purgatory, and Paradise in the

Divine Comedy in a strictly literal sense as well as in several symboHc meanings, such as the moral and the allegorical. But he explains in his own commentary on the poem that the literal meaning also involves symbolism, insofar as the things that the words refer to when taken in their literal sense are themselves the symbols of other things. In any case the poet may be more successful than the theologian in making intelligible through symbol and metaphor what in its Hteral significance is strictly unimaginable. The imagery of darkness, sultriness, noise, and heaviness, which grows more intense as the de- scent proceeds in the. Inferno, does more than the anguished outcries of the damned to convey the reahty of Hell.

The metaphors of music and agility express the harmony of Heaven, But it is especially the symbohsm of light which captures the invisible in terms of vision, except perhaps when it reaches a climax in the blinding effulgence at the end of the Paradiso. As Dante moves up- ward in the realm of love, where courtesy prevails in every speech and charity suffuses every will, he sees the mystic rose of Heaven entirely through reflected light. The saints, and especially those glorious spirits who instruct his progress, become pale mirrors of the ineffable vision which they themselves behold.

Milton too pictures Heaven and Hell, but in

Paradise Lost the destiny of the immortal soul remains a prophecy, a consequence of the earthly immortality which Adam lost. Except for the Prologue, Hell and Heaven are offstage in Goethe's Faust, though they are the main imphcations of the wager Faust makes with Mephistopheles, which puts his immortal soul in the balance.

The philosophical issue concerning immortality cannot be separated from issues concerning the existence and nature of man's soul. The various arguments for immortality seem to rest not merely on the reality of the distinction between soul and body, but more precisely on the immateriality of the soul. Lucretius, for example, does not deny the existence of soul, nor does he fail to differentiate the soul from the body wherein it is located. The soul, according to Lucretius, like everything else in the universe, consists of atoms. They differ from those of the body by their roundness, smoothness, and mobility. They are "much smaller than those of which our body and flesh are formed ; they are also much fewer in number and are disseminated merely in scanty number through the frame."

On this view of the soul as material in nature and as constituted of many quite separable parts, the soul is necessarily as perishable as the rest of the body. "When the body has been -Mattered by the mastering might of time," I Lucretius writes, "and the frame has drooped with its forces dulled ... it naturally follows then that the whole nature of the soul is dissolved, like smoke, into the high air; since we I see it is begotten along with the body and grows up along with it and . . . breaks down at the same time worn out with age."

It should be observed, however, that it is not the materiality of the soul, but rather its divisibility into parts, which accounts for its mortality. The atoms after all are material, but since as the ultimate units of matter ihcy are simple bodies and so are absolutely indivisible, they cannot perish. Only the simple is imperishable. The ijnperishability of the simple {i.e., of that which has no parts) occurs as a premise in one of the great arguments for the immortality of the soul. In Plato's Phaedo, which formulates this argument as immortality is discussed in the prison cell where Socrates awaits his execution, two assumptions seem to be made: first, that the soul is the principle of Ufe in animate bodies, for, as Socrates says, "whatever the soul possesses, to that she comes bearing life"; and second, that as an immaterial being, the soul must be simple, for only bodies are "composite" and "changing." From the first of these assumptions, the argu- ment proceeds in terms of what it means for bodies to be alive or dead. Socrates argues from examples. "If any one asks you," he says, "what that is, of which the inherence makes the body hot, you will reply not heat . . . but fire. ... Or if any one asks you why a body is diseased, you will not say from disease, but from fever." So if any one asks, "what is that of which the inherence will render the body alive .'^" the answer is not Ufe but "the soul." As the principle of life itself, the soul "will never receive the opposite of what she brings," namely, death. Therefore the soul is immortal.

On the second assumption, the endless duration of the soul follows from its simplicity as an immaterial and immutable being. "The compound or composite," Socrates says, "may be supposed to be naturally capable, as of being compounded, so also of being dissolved; but that which is uncompounded, and that only, m.ust be, if anything is, indissoluble." When the soul leaves the Ixxly, for which it has l)ccn both motor and pilot, the body ceases to be alive and perishes in the manner of material things; the soul lives on, freed from lemjK)rary bondage to the ImkIv, its prison house. It "departs to the invisible world— to the divine and immortal and rational." The argument from simplicity, as repeated in Moses Mendelssohn's Phddon, is criticized by Kant. Admitting that a truly "simple being cannot cease to exist," Kant contends that the l^nowable soul— which is for him the empirical ego or consciousness— may have intensive, though it lacks extensive, quantity. It would therefore be capable of diminution in reality; and so it "can become less and less through an infinite series of smaller degrees."

With regard to the soul as an immaterial and simple substance {i.e., the transcendental ego), Kant is willing to affirm that immortality necessarily belongs to such a nature. But he denies that we can have any knowledge of the soul except as a phenomenon of experience. There can be no vahd theoretic argument for immortality precisely because there can be no scientific knowledge of the nature of transcendental objects— beings beyond all possible experience. What Kant calls "the paralogisms of rational psychology" are offered to show the dialectical futility of proofs or disproofs of immortality, in the same way that "the cosmological antinomies" attempt to expose the untenability of ar- guments for or against the infinity of time and space, the infinite divisibility of matter, the existence of a free will and of God.

Without deciding whether Kant's theory of experience and knowledge is true, this much we can learn from him about the issue of immortality. Those philosophers who, like Descartes and Locke, think they have grounds for affirming the existence of the soul (or mind or spirit) as an immaterial substance, also have grounds for affirming its immortality. Those who, like Lucretius and Hobbes, think they have grounds for denying the existence of anything except material particles, also have grounds for denying either the existence of the soul or its having a permanence not possessed by other material wholes. And those who, like Hume, think there are no grounds for affirming the existence of any kind of enduring substance, material or spiritual—even to the point of doubting personal identity from moment to moment—can admit no grounds for affirming a substantial, much less an immortal, soul.

One other position remains to be considered. Though it does not fall outside the foregoing alternatives, Aristotle's theory represents an important variation on one of them. As against Hume or Kant, Aristotle holds that substances exist and are knowable. The sensible, material things of experience are such substances. But, according to Aristotle, these substances are not exclusively material. They are composed of two principles, matter and form, neither of which is a substance capable of existing by itself. As the exposition of this theory (in the chapters on Form and Matter) tries to make plain, form and matter exist only in union with one another. It is the composite substance resulting from their union which exists in and of itself.

The form which enters into the composition of a substance can be called its "substantial form." In relation to the matter with which it is united, the substantial form is the actualization of the potentiality in matter to exist as a substance of a certain kind. Not all substances are of the same kind. Some are alive; some inanimate and inert. In the case of living substances, the substantial form, according to Aristotle, confers upon matter not only the act of existing as a substance, but also the act of being aUve. Because it thus differs from the form of an inanimate substance, Aristotle gives a special name to the substantial form of a living thing.

Because the word "soul" has long been used to designate "the principle of life in living things,"

Aristotle feels justified in using it as the name for the substantial forms of plants and animals as well as men.

This theory and its principal opposite (which regards the human soul as a complete substance, not a substantial form) are more fully discussed in the chapter on Soul. Here we are concerned only with the consequences of Aristotle's theory for human immortality. If, as he seems to hold, substantial forms exist only insofar as they exist in the substances of which they are the forms, then when a composite substance perishes through the decomposition of its matter and i form, the form perishes also. Souls— the substantial forms of living things—would seem to be no exception. "The soul," Aristotle writes, "is inseparable from its body, or at any rate certain parts of it are (if it has parts)—for the actuality of some of them is nothing but the actuahties of their bodily parts. Yet some may be separable because they are not the actualities of any body at all."

The exception which Aristotle seems to have in mind is that part of the human soul which is the intellect. It differs from other powers of the soul, he suggests, as the eternal from the perishable. "It alone," he says, "is capable of existence in isolation from all other psychic powers." He argues that "in so far as the reahties it knows" —or at least some of them— "are capable of being separated from their matter, so is it also with the power of the mind."

What is the significance, for the immortality of the human soul, of the supposed ability of the intellect to act independently of the body .?

Aristotle answers in terms of the principle that "if there is any way of acting or being acted upon proper to soul, soul will be capable of separate existence; if there is none, its separate existence is impossible." If we consider nutrition, sensation, and emotion, there seems to be, he admits, "no case in which the soul can act or be acted upon without involving the body." The one possible exception may be thinking, but Aristotle adds at once that "if this too proves to be a form of imagination or to be impossible without imagination, it too requires a body as a condition of its existence."

Later, when he is discussing the power of thought, Aristotle flatly insists that "the soul never thinks without an image" and that "no one can learn or understand anything in the absence of sense," for "when the mind is actively aware of anything it is necessarily aware of it along with an image." According to his own principles it would seem to follow that since thinking proves "to be impossible without imagination, it too requires a body as a condition of its existence." Hence the intellect is not separable from matter, nor is the human soul, of which the intellect is the highest power.

Nevertheless, Aristotle declares, in a passage which has become famous, that mind as the active power of thinking "is separable, impassible, unmixed"; and with this declaration of the intellect's separability from matter, he seems to affirm immortality, at least for the intellectual part of the soul. "When mind is set free from its present conditions," he writes, "it appears as just what it is and nothing more: this alone is immortal and eternal." The passages quoted have been subject to conflicting interpretations. The Arabic com- mentators on Aristotle, notably Averroes, find in them no basis for the immortality of the individual human soul. The texts, according to their view, support the theory of a single acuwe intellect which exists apart from the minds of individual men—almost a divine principle in the universe which, acting on the rational souls of individual men, enables them to think and understand. Aquinas argues against them to the opposite conclusion.

Against the Averroists Aquinas contends that if the individual man, Socrates, can be said to think, then whatever powers are required for thinking must belong to his individual nature. The powers required for thinking are, according to Aquinas, twofold: an active intellect, able to abstract the intelligible forms of things from their material representation in sensory images; and a possible or potential intellect, capable of receiving these forms when separated from matter by the act of abstraction.

The theory of knowledge and thought which this involves is discussed in the chapters on Form, Idea, Mind, and Universal and Particular. Here we are concerned only with the point which Aquinas makes, that since thinking involves universal notions, and since forms can be universal only apart from matter, the intellect which abstracts and receives abstractions must itself be immaterial. The intellectual powers do not operate through a bodily organ, as the power of nutrition operates through the alimentary system or the power of vision through the eye. The brain, in other words, is not the organ of understanding or thought, but rather, along with the external sense-organs, it is the material organ of perception, memory, and imagination. The argument for the immortality of the human soul then proceeds on the premise that that which can aa apart from matter can also rr/>/ apart from mailer. "The intellectual principle which wc call the mind or the intellect has an operation per se apart from the IxxJy. Now only that which subsists can have an o|x*ration per st\ for nothing can operate but what is actual; wherefore a thing operates according as it is." Hence Aquinas concludes that "the hu- man soul, which is called the intellect or mind, is something incorporeal and subsistcnt." The attribution of subsistence to the human sou! means that although it is the substantial form of the human body, it is also capable of existing in and of itself as if it were a simple substance.

Unlike angels, which as spiritual substances are by their very nature separate forms, not forms of matter, human souls are substantial forms which, having a certain degree of immateriality, are also to that degree separable from matter. But the reverse is also true. To the extent that the soul's powers, such as sensation and imagination, require corporeal organs, the soul is inseparable from the body. Since, furthermore, Aquinas agrees with Aristotle that every act of understanding or thought involves imagination, he faces the difficulty of explaining how the soul can function in any way when separated from the body after death.

"To solve this difficulty," he says, "we must consider that as nothing acts except as it is actual, the mode of action in every agent follows from its mode of existence. Now the soul has one mode of being when in the body, and another when apart from it. . , . The soul, therefore, when united to the body, has consistently with that mode of existence, a mode of understanding by turning to corporeal images, which are in corporeal organs; but when it is separated from the body, it has a mode of understanding by turning to simply intelligible objects, as is proper to other separate substances." Nevertheless, Aquinas adds, it is not natural for the soul to understand in the latter way, for it is not by nature a separate substance. Therefore, "to be separated from the body is not in accordance with its nature." This last point has both philosophical and theological significance. Philosophically, it may be easier to prove the immortality of the soul if one starts, as the Platonists do, with the proposition that the soul is a purely spiritual principle or substance which does not depend upon the body. But then, according to Aquinas, you prove the immortality of the soul at the expense of destroying the unity of man, for if the soul is a substance rather than a form, the individual man, composed of body and soul, consists of two distinct substances.

Theologically, Christian faith believes in the resurrection of the body after the Last Judg- ment and the end of the world, as well as in the soul's separate existence immediately after death. From the point of view of a theologian like Aquinas, a philosophical proof of immortality must corroborate both of these dogmas.

In his judgment a proof which rests upon the proposition that the soul has a nature akin to that of an angel {i.e., a purely spiritual substance), makes the Christian dogma of the resurrected body unintelligible or even abhorrent.

If the immortal soul were a complete and separate substance, it would have no need for its body in the life hereafter. It has that need only if its nature is that of a substantial form, partly immersed in matter and partly separate therefrom. Then, because of these two aspects of its nature, it can be said, not only that "the human soul retains its proper existence when separated from the body," but also that it has "an aptitude and a natural inclination to be united to the body."

The incompleteness of the soul without the body and, even more, the dependence of man's mind upon his bodily senses and imagination raise, as we have seen, the difficult problem of how the soul exists and operates when separated from the body by death and before it is reunited to a resurrected body. It may even raise the question whether the reasoning of Aquinas constitutes a valid philosophical argument for the actual existence of the soul in separation from the body, or merely suggests the possibility of such existence. But the facts which create these difficulties are the very facts to which Aquinas appeals in his Treatise on the

Resurrection, in order to explain the basis in nature for the miraculous re-union of the body with the soul.

The arguments for and against immortality so far considered are couched in the form of proofs or disproofs which aim at certainty. All except one are, moreover, theoretical or speculative in the sense that they proceed in terms of observations, assumptions, and inferences about the nature of things—about atoms and substances, matter and form, extension and thought, inert bodies and living organisms. The one exception, already mentioned, is Kant's practical argument based on the moral necessity of an immortal life.

There is still another argument, both speculative and practical in character, which does not aim at certainty nor take the form of a proof. It is the proposal of a wager concerning the equally unknown alternatives of oblivion after death and eternal life. Supposing no rational evidence to favor the truth of either alternative, Pascal weighs the probability of gain and loss which is consequent upon living according to each hypothesis. The probability, he thinks, vastly preponderates on the side of those who choose to forego the worldly life because, to take the chance of gaining the whole world during the short term of earthly life, they would risk the loss of eternal happiness for their immortal souls.

Locke engages in the same type of calculation. "When infinite happiness is put into one scale, against infinite misery in the other; if the worst that comes to the pious man, if he mistakes, be the best that the wicked can attain to, if he be right, who," Locke asks, "can without madness run the venture.? Who in his wits would choose to come within the possibility of infinite misery; which if he miss, there is yet nothing to be got by that hazard? Whereas, on the other side, the sober man ventures nothing against infinite happiness to be got, if his expectation comes to pass." If, wagering on immortal life, "the good man be right, he is eternally happy"; but "if he mistakes"— if death ends all—"he is not miserable, he feels nothing."

All these theories, including Kant's postulate and the wager proposed by Pascal and

Locke, are clearly concerned with arguing for personal immortality or individual survival. Among those who deny the survival of the individual human spirit, some—Hegel and

Spinoza, for example—conceive an impersonal type of immortality. For Hegel It is Spirit itself whicli is imniorial. "The successive phases of Spirit ihar animate the Nations in a necessitated gradation," he writes, "are themselves only steps in the devel- opment of the one Universal Spirit, which through them elevates and completes itself to a self-comprehending totality." In considering the history of the world, he regards everything as the manifestation of Spirit; and because of this, even when we traverse the past, we have, he says, "only to do with what is present; for philosophy, as occupying itself with the True, has to do with the eternally present. Nothing in the past is lost for it, for the Idea is ever present; Spirit is immortal; with it there is no past, no future, but an essential now. This necessarily implies that the present form of Spirit com- prehends within it all earlier steps. . . . The grades which Spirit seems to have left behind it, it still possesses in the depths of its present."

What Spirit is for Hegel, Nature is for Spinoza. Spinoza, however, conceives a kind of immortality for the individual man, which is achieved through his participation in the eternity of Nature. The body of the individual man, according to Spinoza, belongs to the infinite matter of Nature. It is "a certain mode of extension actually existing." The individual human mind is similarly "a part of the infinite intellect of God." In one sense, both the body and the mind are temporal things which, like all other finite modes of God or Nature, have a fixed and limited duration. Furthermore, the personal memories and thoughts of the individual man depend on the co-existence of his mind and body. "The mind can imagine nothing, nor can it recollect anything that is past," Spinoza wTites, "except while the body exists."

But Spinoza also maintains that "only in so far as it involves the actual existence of the body, can the mind be said to possess duration, and its existence be limited by a fixed time." Of every individual thing—whether it is a finite mind or a finite body— there exists in the infinite and eternal essence of God a conception or idea. "To conceive things under the form of eternity," Spinoza writes, "is to conceive them in so far as they are conceived through the essence of God." Because he holds that the human mind can have adequate knowledge of God, he holds that the mind can conceive "itsell and its inxlv under the form of eternity." lie nee through knownig Gcxi, or the eternal truth about temporal things, the mind participates in eternity.

Imagination and memory may beh^ng to time, but not the intellect, which is capable of knowing CJcxi. To explain why we feel "that we are eternal," Spinoza |X)ints out that "the mind is no less sensible of those things which it conceives through intelligence than of those which it remembers." Although we cannot im- agine or remember that "we existed before the body," we can l^notv intellectually something about mind and body which belongs to eternity; because, in addition to conceiving them as "existing with relation to a fixed time and place," we can conceive them as "contained in God" and as following "from the necessity of the divine nature." Since it "pertains to the nature of the mind to conceive the essence of the body under the form of eternity," Spinoza concludes that "the human mind cannot be absolutely destroyed with the body, but something of it remains which is eternal." Such immortality is, in a way, enjoyed in this life, for it is a present participation in eternity through the mind's knowledge of Ciod. There is also the impersonal immortality which men enjoy through contemplating the perpetuation of the species, or more particularly the persistence of an image of themselves in their offspring. In the Symposium, Socrates reports a conversation with Diotima in which she explains to him that in procreation "the mortal nature is seeking as far as is possible to be everlasting and immortal." Men hope that offspring "will preserve their memory and give them the blessedness and immortahty which they desire in the future." But if procreation through the pregnancy of the body is a way of achieving immortality, artistic creation through a kind of pregnancy in the soul, Diotima argues, is even more so. "Who, when he thinks of Homer and Hesiod and other great poets," she asks, "would not rather have their children than ordinary ones? Who would not emulate them in the creation of children such as theirs, which have preserved their memory and given them everlasting glory?" One need think "only of the ambition of men" and what they will do "for the sake of leaving behind them a name which shall be eternal," to realize how deeply "they are stirred by the love of an immortality of fame." Even deeper, according to Diotima, is their love of or more the good, precisely, their desire "the everlasting possession of the good" which leads all men necessarily to "desire immortality together with the good." Whether it is to be attained through the per- petuation of the species, through survival in the memory of mankind, through knowledge of God, or through the subsistence of the soul, for immortality seems the to express desire

1. The desire for immortality: the fear of death

2. The knowledge of immortality: arguments for and against personal survival

3. Belief in immortality

3^. The postulation of immortality: practical grounds for belief in immortality

4. The moral significance of immortality: rewards and sanctions

5. Conceptions of the after-life

5a. The transmigration of souls: reincarnation

5^. The state of the soul apart from the body

5^. The judgment of souls

^d. The process of purification: the state of Purgatory

5^. The state of the damned: Hell

5/. The state of the blessed : Heaven

5|-. The resurrection of the body

6. Doctrines of impersonal survival

6a. Immortahty through offspring: the perpetuation of the species

: survival in the memory 6b. Enduring fame

6c. Participation in the eternity of truth, ideas, or love man's dread of disappearance into utter nothingness. Yet, facing death, Socrates faces the alternatives with equanimity. "Either death," he declares, "is a state of nothingness and utter as men unconsciousness, for or, say, there a is change and migration of the soul from this world to another." Either it is like a dreamless and undisturbed sleep or it opens a new world to which the good man can look forward with hope. On either alternative we can be of good cheer, he tells his friends, if we believe that "no evil can happen to a good man, either in life or after death."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The desire for immortality : the fear of death

2. The knowledge of immortality: arguments for and against personal survival

3. Belief in immortality
 3a. The postulation of immortality: practical grounds for belief in immortality
 3b. The revelation of immortality: immortality as an article of religious faith
 4.
 The moral significance of immortality: rewards and sanctions

5. Conceptions of the after-life
 5a. The transmigration of souls: reincarnation
 5b. The state of the soul apart from the body
 5c. The judgment of souls
 5d. The process
 of purification: the state of Purgatory
 5e. The state
 of the damned: Hell
 5/!
 The state of the blessed: Heaven
 5f. The resurrection of the body

6. Doctrines of impersonal survival
 6a. Immortality through offspring: the perpetuation of the species
 6b. Enduring fame: survival in the memory
 6c. Participation in the eternity of truth, ideas, or love

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of man's attitude toward mutability and

NESS 4b; LIFE AND DEATH 8c; TIME 7.

The basic terms and propositions involved in arg

soul, see BEING 7b(i)~7b(4); ETERNITY 43; FORM

1b, 23, 2d-2e; SOUL 3a-3d, 4b; and for the con

to their mode of being, see ANGEL 4; ETERNITY

Other discussions of immortslity as a postulate

NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 4b.

Another statement of the doctrine of reincarnati

4d(0-

Articles of religious belief bearing on immortal

ment, and the resurrection of the body, see GO

The relevance of the doctrine of innate ideas to

MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 33; MIND 4d(2).

The relevance to immortality of the theory of mi

MAN 33(2); MATTER 4d; MIND 23; SOUL 30.

The state of the soul separated from the body, s

The moral significance of immortality in relatio

GOD 5i; PUNISHMENT 5d.

Other discussions of the underworld, or of Hell,

HAPPINESS 7c-7c(3); PUNISHMENT 56-56(2); SIN 6

The immortality of enduring fame, see HONOR 2d.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represen

II. Works by authors not repr

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

*

AUGUSTINE. On the Immortality of the Soul AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK iv,
CH 79-95

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Amma, A 1 4

. DANTE. Coiwv to (The Banquet), SECOND TREATISE,

CH 9 (4-6) F. BACON. "Of Death," in Essays HUME. Of the Immortality of the Soul

.

Of Suicide J. S. MILL. "Theism," PART in, in Three Essays on

Religion W. JAMES. Human Immortality

" EPICURUS. Letter to Menoeceus CICERO. De Republica (The Republic), vi

. Tusculan Disputations, i

. De Senectute (Of Old Age)

TALITY death, see CHANGE I2b; HAPPIuments for or against the immortality of the
2d; MAN 33-33(2), 3c; MATTER 2d; MIND trast between souls and angels with
respect 43; FORM 2d; MAN 3b; SOUL 4d(i). of the practical reason, see
METAPHYSICS 2d; on or the transmigration of souls, see SOUL ity, such as
predestination, the Last JudgD 7f-yh; HAPPINESS 7c; SOUL 4d(3). immortality, see
IDEA 2b; KNOWLEDGE 6c(3); nd or intellect as an incorporeal power, see ee
KNOWLEDGE 7c; SOUL 4d. n to divine rewards and punishments, see Purgatory, and
Heaven, see ETERNITY 4d; d-6e. oks of the Western World, but relevant to the
These works are divided into two groups: ted in this collection. esented in this
collection. the publication of the works cited, consult ollows the last chapter
of The Great Ideas. OVID. Metamorphoses SENECA. De Consolattone ad Marciam (On
Consolation to Marcia) GREGORY OF NYSSA. On the Soul and the Resumetion

PROCLUS. The Elements of Theology, PROPOSITIONS 104-105, 208-210 SAADIA GAON.
The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,

TREATISE vi, vni BONAVENTURA. Breviloquium, PART VH R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART
vn ALBO. The Book of Principles (Sefer ha-llfarim), BK iv, CH 29-41 NICOLAS OP
CUSA. The Vision of God POMPON AZZI. On the Immortality of the Soul VAUGHAN. The
Retreate KING. The Exequy BROWNE. Hydriotaphia H. MORE. The Immortality of the
Soul LEIBNITZ. Discourse on Metaphysics, xxxn-xxxvi

Monadology, par 19-28

.

J. BUTLER. The Analogy of Religion, PART i, CH i LAW. An Appeal to All That
Doubt ...the Truths of

the Gospel CH i SWEDENBORG. Heaven and Its Wonders and Hell
VoLTAiRE."Heaven,""Hell," "Hell (Descent into)/*

"Purgatory," "Resurrection," in A Philosophical

Dictionary MENDELSSOHN. Ph2don;oderUeberdie Unstcrblichfytt

der Seele LESSINC. How the Ancients Represented Death WORDSWORTH. Intimations of
Immortality COUSIN. Lectures on the True, the Beautiful and the

Good, PART in (16) HAZLITT. On the Feeling of Immortality in Youth FEUERBACH.
Gedanfyn uber Tod und Unsterbhchfyit I. H. FICHTE. Die Idee der Personlichkeit
und der

individuellen Fortdauer f. H. NEWMAN. "The Immortality of the Soul," in

Parochial and Plain Sermons

KIERKEGAARD. Concluding Unscientific Postscript,

pp 152-158 SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL

HI, SUP, CH 41

.

"Immortality: A Dialogue," in Studies in Pessimism

FBCHNBR. Life After Death .

Religion of a Scientist CLIFFORD. "The Unseen Universe," in VOL i, Lectures and
Essays ROYCE. The Conception of Immortality FISKE. Life Everlasting POHLE.
Eschatology SANTA VAN A. Reason in Religion, CH 13-14 HUGEL. Eternal Life
BOSANQUET. The Value and Destiny of the Individual VONIER. The Human Soul and
Its Relations with Other Spirits BRADLEY. Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 15(8)
FARNELL. GreekHero Cults and Ideas of Immortality MCTAGGART. The Nature of
Existence, CH 43, 62 SCHELER. Vom Ewigen im Menschen LAKE. Immortality and the
Modern Mind BROAD. The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH 11-12 FRAZER. The Golden
Bough, PART n, CH 2; PART in; PART IV, BK I, CH 5-6; PART V, CH l6j PART VII, CH
IO-I I .

Man, God, and Immortality, PART iv

J. S. HALDANE. The Sciences and Philosophy, LECT XVIII WHITEHEAD. Process and
Reality, PART v KIRK. The Vision of God HOCKING. Thoughts on Death and Life A. E
TAYLOR. The Christian Hope of Immortality PERRY. The Hope for Immortality

REFERENCES
============================================================

1. The desire for immortality - the fear of death

0 OLD TESTAMENT: // Samuel, 22.5-7 (D) ll Kings, 22 '5-7 / Job, 14 ; 30 .23-24 / Psalms,esp 6:4-5; I 3 es P J 3-35 l6 CS P 16:10; 18:4-6; 49:6-12; 55 esp 55 -4-8; 89:47-48; 116:1-(D) Psalms, 6 esp 6.5-6, 12 esp 12:4; 15 esp 15:10; 17:5-7; 4 8: 7-i3; 54 p 54 5~9; 88:48- 49; 114 / Ecclesiastes, 8.8 / Isaiah, 38 10-(D) Isaias, 38:10-
0 APOCRYPHA: // Maccabees, 6.18-7*42 esp 7.(D) OT, II Machabees, 6:18-7-42 esp
0 NEW TESTAMENT- Matthew, 10 28; 19 16-30 / MarJ(, 10.17-31 / Lufe, 10-25-37 / Acts, 7.54-60 (D) Acts, 7:54-59 / Romans, 2-5-esp 2 7 / I Corinthians, 15 / II Corinthians, 1 19- 10 ; 4 9-18; 5:1-9/7 Thessalonians, 4-13-(D) I Thessalonians, 4:12-17 / / Timothy, 6:n- 19 esp 6-12, 6-19 / // Timothy, 4-6-8 / Hebrews, 2:14-
4 HOMER: Iliad, BK xu [309-328] 85b-c / Odyssey, BK v [203-224] 210a-b
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus at Colonus [1579-1779] 128c-130a,c
7 PLATO: Symposium, 165b-167a / Apology, 211b-212a,c / Phaedo, 230d-235a / Republic, BK i, 297a-b; BK III, 324c-325b; BK vi, 374a-d / Laws, BK v, 687a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 7 [ii77 b 26- 1178*1] 432c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [102-126] 2b-c; BK III [31-93] 30b-31b; [830-1094] 40c- 44a,c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 9, 115b-d; BK II, CH i, 139b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT 11-258a-c; BK HI, SECT 3 260b; BK iv, SECT267d-268a; SECT 50 268c; BK VIII, SECT287b-c, SECT 58 290d; BK ix, SECT 3 291d- 292a
14 PLUTARCH: Aristides, 265d
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR iv, CH 16, 19a; TR vi, CH 6, 24a-b; TR vn, CH 3 26d-27a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK iv, par n 21d- 22a; par 14 22d-23a; BK vi, par 18-19 40d- 41b; BK ix, par 23-29 68a-69c / City of God, BK i, CH 22, 143 b; BK ix, CH 14-15 293a- 294a; BK xiu, CH 4 361d-362a; BK xix, CH 4- 10 511a~516d; BK xxn, CH 23 608c-609a
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theohgtca, PART i, Q 75, A 6, ANS 383c-384c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgtca, PART i-n, Q 85, A 6 182d-184a
22 CHAUCER: Second Nun's Tale [i5,788-$oi]467a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 33d-36b; 99b-100a; 211a-b; 267a-c; 402c-403c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT HI, sc i [56^88] 47c-d / Measure for Measure, ACT HI, sc i [116-136] 188a-b
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, ', PART II, 366d~ 367a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 28a-c
31 SPINOZA: EM/r/, PART v, PROP 23 458b-d; PROP 32 460b; PROP 38-39 461d-462c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK x [770-844] 291a- 292b
33 PASCAL: Pcns&s, 166,168-169 203a; 210 211b; 239 217a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART HI, 124a<129a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 86c*d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 186a; 219c-220d; 327d-328a;376a-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 238c
42 KANT: Judgement, 600c-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 174b; 238b; 347a-c; 394a-c; 399d-400a; 573a>574a
51 TOLSFOY: War and Peace, BK v, 200c d; 217c- 218b; BK XH, 560a 562d
52 DOSTOFVSKY- Brothers Karamazov, BK ir, 26a- 27d passim; BK vi, 148d-150d
53 JAMES: Psychology, 224a-225a, 653a
54 FREUD: War and Death, 763c-764b

2. The knowledge of immortality - arguments for and against personal survival

7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 124b-c / Meno, 179d-183a / Apology, 211b-212a,c / Phaedo 220a-251d / Republic, BK x, 434d-436a / Laws, BK xu, 793c-d
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK xn, CH 3 [1070* 24-30] 599c / Soul, BK i, CH i [403*2-15] 632a-b; CH 2 [405*29-34] 634d; BK II, CH i [413*3-9] 643a; en 2 [ 4 i3 b 24-2 9 ] 643d-644a; BK III, CH 4 [429*19- b 4] 661c-d; CH 5 662c-d; CH 7 [431*15] 663d; CH 8 [432*5-10] 664c
9 ARISIOTLE- Generation of Animals, BK II, CH(7^5-737^} 277b-d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK HI [323- 1023] 34b-43b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK HI, CH 24, 203d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT 14 258d; SECT 17 259b-d; BK iv, SECT 21 265b-c; BK v, SECT 13 271b; BK VII, SECT 50 283a; BK VIII, SECT 37 288c; BK x, SECT 7 297b-c; BK XH, SECT 5 307d-308a; SECT 14 308c
17 PLOTINUS: Fourth Ennead, TR 1 139a-b; TR iv, CH 15 16Sc-d; TR vn 191c-200c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK x, CH 31 319b-d; BK xiii, CH 2 360b-36Za
19 AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 61, A 2, REP 3 3l5c-316a; Q 75, A 2 379c-380c; A383c-384c; Q 76, A i 385d-388c; A 3, REP 1-391a-393a; PART i-n, Q 22, A i, REP 3 720d- 721c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART MI, Q 85, A 6 182d 184a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxv [1-108] 91b-92c; PARADISE, vn [64-84] 115d- 116a; [121-148] 116b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 192c-193c; PART iv, 250c-251b; 253b-254a; 269d-270d
25 MONTAIGNE' Essays, 250a; 264b-269b
30 BACON' Advancement of Learning, 27d-28c
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 51d-52a; PART v, 60b-c / Meditations, 69a-71a,c passim; 73a-c / Objections and Replies, 127c-d; DBF x 130d; PROP iv 133c
31 SPINOZA* Ethics, PART v, PROP 21-40 458a- 462d esp PROP 21-23 458a-d, PROP 38 461d- 462a, PROP 40 462c-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK x [782-844] 291b- 292b
33 PASCAL- Pensees, 556, 271b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT441a-b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 186a-187b passim
42 KANT. Pure Reason, 120c-129c esp 124d-128a; 203d-204c, 218d-223d esp 219b-d, 234c-240b esp 234c-235c, 237d-238a / Practical Reason, 291a-292a / Judgement, 600c-d, 610a-b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 57d-58a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK II, 77d-78b; 97a-c
53 JAMES- Psychology, 224b-225a

3. Belief in immortality

5 EURIPIDES: Helen [1009-1016] 307d
6 HERODOTUS- History, BK II, 75b, BK iv, 140c- 141a
7 PLATO: Apology, 211b-212a,c / Seventh Letter, 806a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK III, SECT 3 260b
13 VIRGIL: Georgics, iv [219-227] 89b
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 29a-b
17 PLOTINUS: Fourth Ennead, TR vn, CH 15 200c
18 AUGUSTINE- Confessions, BK vi, par 26 42d- 43a
22 CHAUCER: Second Nun's Tale [15,787-800] 467a
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK iv, 269a-b
26 SHAKESPEARE: Romeo and Juliet, ACT v, sc i [17-21] 314d / 2nd Henry IV, ACT n, sc n [109-114] 477a
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT i, sc iv [60-68] 36c / Cymbeline, ACT v, sc iv [152-194] 482d-483a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 366d-367a
31 Dts CARTES: Meditations, 69d
32 MILTON: On Time 12a-b / Lycidas [165-181] 31b
33 PASCAL: Pcns&s, 556 270b-272a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH in, SECT 6, 314c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 205c- 2CM5c
40 GIBBON. Decline and Fall, 186c487b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 135a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 242a-d /Judgement, 604d- 606d
44 Bosw ELL: Johnson, 256d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 255c- 256b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 27a-28a
49 DARWIN- Descent of Man, 593c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 200c-d; 217c-218b; BK VII, 295b-c; BK xn, 560a-562d; BK xv, 615a-616a
52 DOSTOFVSKY Brothers Karamazov, BK 11, 33c- 34b; 40b-c, BK III, 68b-c; BK xi, 312b-d
54 FREUD- Interpretation of Dreams, 296d [fn 2] I War and Death, 763c-764c

3a. The postulation of immortality - practical grounds for belief in immortality

17 PLOTINUS- Fourth Ennead, TR vn, CH 15 200c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 210d-212a; 267a-268a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b passim; 556, 271b
35 LOCKE- Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxi, SECT 72 198a-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 186a-b
42 KANT. Pure Reason, 15c-16c; 120b [fn i], 127a- 128a, 234c-236a, 240b-243c / Practical Reason, 291a-292a; 338c-352c esp 344a-c, 348b-349b /Judgement, 599d-600d; 603b-607c esp 606d- 607c
44 BOSWELL Johnson, 394c
48 MELVILLE Moby Dic\, 347a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 224a-225a; 653a

3b. The revelation of immortality - immortality as an article of religious faith

0 OLD TESTAMENT- II Samuel, 14:14 (D) II Kings, 14:14 / Job, 14:14; 19:25-29; 21 ; 30-23-24 / Psalms, 1 6 esp 16.10, 37 esp 37:26-40; 49 esp 49.15; 116 1-9 (D) Psalms, 15 esp 15:10,esp 36:26-40; 48-2-21 esp 48:16; ii 4 / Proverbs, 10-2; 11-4,19; 12:28; 13:14; 14:27; 18.21 / Ecclesiastes, 12 7 / Isaiah, 25:8; 38:10-19 (D) Isaias, 25:8, 38.10-19 / Ezetyel, 37.1-14 -(D) Ezechiel, 37 1-14 / Daniel, 12.1-3 / Hosea, 13 14 (D) Osee, 13*
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 4.10 (D) OT, Tobias, 4:/ Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23; 3:1-10; 5:15-(D) OT, Boo t( of Wisdom, 2:23; 3:1-10; 5.16- 17 / Baruch, 2:17 (D) OT, Earuch, 2 17 / II Maccabees, 6:18-7-42 esp 6:23, 6-26, 7*9-10, 7-14, 7-36; 12-39-45 esp i2'43-45-(D) OT, IlMachabees, 6:18-7:42 esp 6:23, 6:26, 7:9-10, 7.14, 7:36; 12:39-46 esp 12:43-
0 NEW TESTAMENT. Matthew, 5.1-12; 10:28,esp 25-31-467 MarJ(, 9*42-48; 10-28-30 (D) Mar{, 9*41-47; 10:28-30 / Lu^e, 10:25-37; 16:19-31 / John, 3:14-17; 4.9-14 esp 4:13-14; 4:35-3<5; 5:21-29; 6:34-59; 8:51; 10:25-30 esp 10:28; 11:1-44; 12:24-25; 17.2-3 / Acts, 13-/ Romans, 2-5-8 esp 2*7; 6:1-11, 8:9-11 / / Corinthians, 15 / II Corinthians, 1:9-10; 4-9- 18 / Galattans, 6:7-8 / Ephesians, 2:1-10 / / Thessalonians, 4:13-18 (D) I Thessalonians^ 4:12-17 / / Timothy, 6:11-19 esp 6-12, 6-19 / // Timothy, i :io / Hebrews, 2 -9, 14-1 6 / / Peter, 1:3-5 esp 1:4 / I John, 2:15-25 esp 2:17, 2:/ Revelation passim, esp 21 (D) Apocalypse passim, esp
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK vi, par 18-40d-41b; BK ix, par n 64c-d; par 29 69b-c; BK xin, par 50-53 124c-125a,c / City ofGod t BK xin, CH 4 361d-362a
19 AQUINAS . Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 75, A 6, REP i 383c-384c; Q 97, A i 513c-514c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 85, AA 5-6 181d-184a
21 DANTE Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xxv [40- 96] 144c-145b
22 CHAUCER: Second Nun's Tale [15,788-800] 467a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 191b-193c; PART iv, 250c-251b; 253b-254a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 248c-250b; 267a-268a
30 BACON: New Atlantis, 203a-c
31 DESCARTES* Meditations, 69b d
32 MILTON. Lycidas [165-181] 31b
33 PASCAL- Pensees, 556 270b-272a, 560 272b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH in, SECT 6, 314c
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 379c-380a
40 GIBBON Decline and Fall, 186c-187b
52 DOSTOEVSKY Brothers Karamazov, BK ir, 26a-27d passim

4. The moral significance of immortality - rewards and sanctions

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Psalms, 49 (D) Psalms, 48 / Proverbs, 10:2; 11:4,19; 14:32; 21:
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 4:8-11 (D) OT, Tobias, 4.9-12 / Wisdom of Solomon, 1.12-6.20 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, i 12-6 21 / // Maccabees, 7 passim, esp 7:17-18, 7:30-37 (D) OT, II Machabees, 7 passim, esp 7:17-18, 7-3 -
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5.1-12,22,29-30; 18 7-9; 19*16-30; 25:31-46 / Markj 9 43-48; 10:17-31; 16:16 (D) Mar^, 9*42-47; 10 17- 31; 16:16 / Lu%e, 10:25-37; 14:7-14; 16-19-31; 18:18-30 / Romans, 2:1-11 / Galattans, 6:7-/ // Thessalonians, 2:10-12 (D) II Thessalomans, 2:10-11 / II Timothy, 487 Hebrews, 10:26-31 / II Peter, i
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK xi [568-600] 248d-249a
5 EURIPIDES: Helen [1009-1016] 307d
7 PLATO: Euthydemus, 74c / Phaedrus, 124a- 126c / Meno, 179d-180b / Apology, 21 la212a,c / Phaedo, 230d-234c; 246d-250b / Gorgias, 292b-294d / Republic, BK i, 297a-b; BK II, 313b-314d; BK x, 436c-441a,c / TV maeus, 452d-453b / Laws, BK ix, 757a; BK x, 768b-d; BK xn, 793c-d / Seventh Letter, 806a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 10-11 345c-347a; BK x, CH 7 [ii77 b 26-ii78*i] 432c 4to5a (4. The moral significance o/ immortality - reward* and sanctions.)
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [31-93] 30b-31b, [830-1094] 40c-44a,c
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK vi [637-678] 228a<229a; [724-751] 230b-231a
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 29a-b
17 PLOTINUS- Third Ennead, TR n, CH 13 88d- 89b; TR in, CH 4 94c-95c / Fourth Ennead, TR HI, CH 24 154b-d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK vi, par 26 42d- 43a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 97, A i 513c-514c; A 4 515d-516d; PART i-n, QQ 1-5 609a-643d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy csp HELL, in [1-18] 4a-b, [82-129] 5a-b, VH [100-130] lOc-d, xi 15a-16b, .xxvii [55-136] 40a-41b, xxvin [139- 142] 43a, PURGATORY, in [118-145] 57a-c, v [85-129] 59d-60c, ix 65d-67b, xvn [82-139] 79b-d, xxx-xxxi 99b*102b, PARADISE, vn [19-120] 115b-116b, xix [22-148] 135b-136c
22 CHAUCER: Friar's Tale 278a-284a / Summons's Prologue 284b~285a / MonJ(s Tale 434a-448b / Parson's Tale, par 10 498b-502a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 206d-207a; 210d-212a; 248c-250b esp 250a; 264b-269b; 311a-b
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard III, ACT i, sc iv [42- 63] 115a-b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT i, sc v [9-22] 37a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 60b-c / Meditations, 69b
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART v, PROP 41, SCHOL 463a*b
32 MILTON: Comus [1-17] 33a-b / Paradise Lost, BK x [782-844] 291b-292b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 184-241 205a-217b passim
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 15d-16a / Human Understanding, BK II, CH XXI, SECT 62 194c-dj SECT 72 198a-c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xi, DIV 108-109 500b-501a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 205c- 206c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 366c-d / Social Contract, BK iv, 437d-438c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 336c-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 187b-c; 198d-199a; 219c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 233c-234c passim
42 KANT: Fund. Prtn. Metaphysic of Morals, 264b [fn i] / Practical Reason, 306b-307a; 344a-c
43 MILL: Liberty, 290c-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 256d; 363a-b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 341b-342b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 200c~d; BK vi, 273c-274a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK II, 33c- 34b; 40b-c; BK xi, 312b d; 345a-c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 22Sa

5. Conceptions of the after-life

4 HOMER: Wad, BK xx [54-74] 142d-143a; BK xxin [54-107] 161d-162b/ Odyssey, BK x [487- 574] 241a-242a,c; BK xi 243a-249d; BK xxiv [1-202] 317a-319a
5 EURIPIDES: Alcestis 237a-247a,c / Helen [1009-1016] 307d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Frogs 564a-582a,c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK u, 75b; BK iv, 140c- 141a
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 124b-126a / Apology, 211a- 212a,c / Republic, BK II, 313b-314d; BK III, 324c-325b; BK x, 437c-441a,c / Laws, BK v, 687a; BK x, 767c-768c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 10 [noo a io~3i] 345c-d; CH n 346c-347a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK III, CH 13 188b- 189c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK VII, SECT 50 283a
13 VIRGIL: Georgics, iv [219-227] 89b; [467-485] 96a-b / Aeneid, BK vi 211a-235a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix-xxn 507a- 618d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, QQ 69-99 885a-1085a,c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy
22 CHAUCER: Second Nun's Tale [15,788-822] 467a-b
23 HOBBES Leviathan, PART in, 191b-198a
25 MONTAIGNE- Essays, 248c-250b; 264b-269b
29 CERVANTES: Dow Quixote, PART II, 366d-367a
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, HI, 88d-89a / Ob- jections and Replies, 226d-227a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK x [782-844] 291 b- 292b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 205c- 206c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 94a; 186c-d; 187b- 188a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 233c-234d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 363a-b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{< 134b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xn, 560a-562d; BK xv, 615a-616a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK xi, 341c-345c passim

5a. The transmigration of souls - reincarnation

4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK xi [298-304] 246a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 75b
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 125b-126a / Meno, 179d- 183a / Phaedo, 226c-234c; 246d-250b / Re- public, BK x, 437c-441a,c / Timaeus, 452d- 453b; 476a-477a,c / Laws, BK x, 767c-768c
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK i, CH 3 [4o6*3o- b 5] 635d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK HI [670-783] 38d-40a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK iv, SECT 21 265b-c
13 VIRGIL: Georgics, iv [219-227] 89b / Aeneid, BK vi [710-751] 230a-231a
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 28a-29b 5b to 5d CHAPTER 38: IMMORTALITY
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR r, CH n 5b-c / Third Ennead, TR n, CH 13 88d-89b; TR HI, CH 4, 95b-c; TR iv, CH 2-3 97d-98c; CH 6 99b- lOOb / Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 8, 145d; CH 9, 146d; CH 13-15 149b-150c; CH 24 154b<d; CH 27, 156d; TR VH, CH 14 200b-c; TR vm, CH 3-202a-203d / Sixth Ennead, TR iv, CH 14-304a-305c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK x, CH 30 318b- 319b; BK xn, CH 20 355b-357a; BK XXH, CH 27-28 613b-614a
20 AQUINAS Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 77, A i, ANS 943a-944d; Q 79, A i, ANS 951 b- 953b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, iv [49-63] lllb
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 206d-207a; 249b-250a; 264b-265c; 268a-269a
35 LOCKE* Human Understanding, BK 11, CH xxvn, SECT 6 220c-d; SECT 14 223d-224b; SECT 27 227d-228a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 207a-c
41 GIBBON- Decline and Fall, 135a; 226b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 187a-b; PART i, 255c-256b
47 GOETHE- Faust, PART i [737-807] 19b-21a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dicl^, 316b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VH, 295b-c
54 FREUD: War and Death, 764b

5b. The state of the soul apart from the body

4 HOMER: Iliad, BK xxn [361-366] 159a; BK xxni [54-107] 161d-162b / Odyssey, BK xi 243a-249d; BK xxiv [1-203] 317a-319a
5 EURIPIDES: Helen [1009-1016] 307d
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 124c-126c / Phaedo, 223a- 226c; 230d-234c; 246d-247b / Gorgias, 292b- 294d / Republic, BK x, 437c-441a,c / Laws, BK xii, 793c-d
12 AURELIUS : Meditations, BK iv, SECT 21 265b-c; BK VH, SECT 50 283a
13 VIRGIL: Georgics, iv [471-477] 96b
14 PLUTARCH Romulus, 29a-b
17 PLOTINUS* Fourth Ennead, TR 1 139a-b; TR HI, CH 13 149b-d; CH 18 151b-c; CH 24-25 154b- 155c; CH 27 156c-d; TR iv, CH i 159a-d
18 AUGUSTINE: Ctty of God, BK xi, CH 23 334c- 335c; BK xni, CH 2 360b 361a; CH 16 367a-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 29, A i, REP 5 162a-163b; Q 77, A 8 406b-407a; Q 89 473a-480c; Q 117, A 4 599b-d; Q 118, A603b-604b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 67, AA 1-2 81c-83b; PART in SUPPL, Q 70 893c- 900d; Q 93, A i 1037d-1039a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxv [67-108] 92a-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART iv, 270c-271b
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK III, 150d-151c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 248c-250a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART v, PROP 38-40 461d- 462d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 233d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 192d-193c; 224b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dict^ 28a

5c. The judgment of souls

0 OLD TESTAMENT '.Job, 19:29; 21 / Psalms, 49:6-9; 50 esp 50:4, 50:6, 50:21-22; 96:10-13 (D) Psalms, 48:7-11; 49 csp 49:4, 49*6, 49-21-22; 95:10-13 / Proverbs, 22:22-23 / Ecclesiastes, 3*16-17; 11:9-10; 12-14 / Isaiah, 11:1-9 csp 11-3-5; 24-21-22; 34; 66 (D) haias, 11*1-esp ii -3-5; 24:21-22; 34; 66 / Daniel, 12 / Joel
0 APOCRYPHA: Judith, 16:17 (D) OT, Judith, 16-20-21 / // Maccabees, 7:31-36 (D) OT, // Machabees, 7:31-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 3:7-12 csp 3:10, 3*12; 7-1-2; 10:14-15; 11-20-24; 12:34-37; 13:18-50 esp 13:30, 13:39-4?. i3'49-5; 2 4- 25 / John, 12:48 / Acts, 17:31 / Romans, 2 / // Timothy, 4 -i / Hebrews, 9 27 / 1 Peter, 4 15-/ // Peter, 2:9; 3:7-13 / / John, 4-17 / Jude, 14-15 / Revelation, 20:9-15 (D) Apocalypse, 20:8-
4 HOMER- Odyssey, BK xi [568-571] 248d
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [228-231] 3d
5 EURIPIDES: Helen [1013-1016] 307d
7 PLATO- Phaedrus, 125b-126a / Phaedo, 249c- 250a / Gorgias, 292b-294d / Republic, BK x, 437c-438c / Laws, BK xn, 793c-d / Seventh Letter, 806a
13 VIRGIL- Aeneid, BK vi [426-439] 222b; [548- 569] 225b-226a
17 PLOTINUS . Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 24 154b-d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xx 530a-560a,c; BK xxi, CH 11-27 570b-586a,c passim
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, QQ 87-90 997a-1016a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, HI [70-136] 4d- 5b; v [1-24] 7a-b; vi [94-115] 9b-c; xni [85- 108] 18d-19a; xx [1-39] 28b-d; xxvii [55-136] 40a-41b; xxix [103-120] 44a-b; PURGATORY, ix 65d-67b; PARADISE, xix [100-148] 136a-c
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 10 498b<502a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 250a; 265b-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Macbeth, ACT 11, sc in [1-23] 292b
32 MILTON : Christs Nativity [149-164] 5a-b / Paradise Lost, BK HI [315-338] 142a-b; BK xi [45- 83] 300a-301a; BK xn [451-465] 329a; [537- 551] 331a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 17b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 187c; 188d-189a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 233c-234b
44 BOSWELL:/O^O, 514d-515a; 573c-574a

5d. The process of purification - the state of Purgatory

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Isaiah, 4:4 (D) Isaias, 4:
0 APOCRYPHA: II Maccabees^ 12 143-46 (D) OT, // Machabces, 12:43-5e to 5f (5. Conceptions of the after-life, id. The process of purification', the state of Purgatory.)
0 NEW TESTAMENT. Matthew, 12:32/7 Corinthians, 3:11-
7 PLATO Cratylus, 95a-c / Phaedo, 224a-225c; 232d-234c; 246d-250b / Gorgias, 292b-294d / Republic, BK x, 437c-438c
13 VIRGIL- Aeneid, BK vi [264-751] 218a-231a
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 28a-29b
17 PLOTJNUS: First Ennead, TR i, CH u 5b-c / Third Ennead, TR iv, CH 6 99b-100b / Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 27, 156d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK x, CH 30 318b- 319b; BK xx, CH 25 554c-555a; BK xxi, CH571c-572a; CH 24 577b-579d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 69, A 2, ANS and REP 2 886c-887d; A 7, ANS and REP 6 891d-893c; Q 71, A 6 908b-909c; Q 97, A i, REP 2 1066b-d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY 53a-105d esp i--ii 53a-55d, ix 65d-67b, x [106-139] 68c-d, xni [34-93] 72b-d, xvn [82-139] 79b-d, xix [97-126] 82c-d, xxi [34-72] 85b-d, xxm [1-75] 88b-89a, xxvn 94c-96a, xxx-xxxi 99b-102b
23 HOBBES. Leviathan, PART in, 244b-c; PART iv, 251b-c; 255b-258b; 271a-b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT i, sc v [9-22] 37a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 234b; 520c
44 ROMELL. Johnson, 173d, 193a-b
52 DOSTOFVSKY Brothers Karamazov, BK xi, 341c-345c passim

5e. The state of the damned - Hell

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Deuteronomy, 32 22 / Job,I Psalms, 9 16-17; 116-3 (D) Psalms, 9:17-18; 114:3 / Proverbs, 7:27; 15:11,24; 27.20 / Ecclesiastes, 6:6 / Isaiah, 5 14-15, 14 4-23; 26:10; 33:10-14; 66:24 (D) Iwws* 5 :I 4~ I14.4-23; 26.10; 33.10-14; 66:24 / Ezetyel, 31 io-i8(D) Ezechicl, 31 10-
0 APOCRYPHA: ]udith, 16.17 (D) OT, Judith, 16:20-21 / Wisdom of Solomon, 4:16-5:14 esp 4 :, 9 _()) OT, Bool( of Wisdom, 4:16-5:esp 4:19 / Ecdesiasticus, 7*17; 18 24; 21 '.9-(D) OT, Ecdesiasticus, 7:19; 18-24; 21:10-/ Baruch, 2:17- (D) OT, Baruch, 2:
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 3:7-12; 5:22,29; 8:12; 10:28; 11:20-24; 13-41-42,49^50; 18:7- 9; 25.31-46 esp 25-41, 25.46 / Marf(, 3 29; 9 : 43-5o-() Mark 3:29; 9:42-49 / Luke, 12:5; 16 .19-26 / John, 15:6 / // Thcssahnians, 1-7-9 / Hebrews, 10:26-31 / Jude, 6-7 / Revelation passim, esp 9, 12, 17, 19-20 (D) Apocalypse passim, esp 9, 12, 17, 19-
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK xi 243a-249d esp [487- 489] 247d, [568-600] 248d-249a
5 ARISTOPHANES. Frogs [143-159] 565d-566a
7 PLATO: Phaedo, 249c-250a / Republic, BK x, x, 757a; BK x, 767c-768c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [978- 1023] 42d-43b
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK vi [548-627] 225b-227b; [735-747] 230b-231a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xi, CH 33 341a-d; BK XHI, CH 2 360b-361a; CH 12 365d-366a; CH 14-15 366b-d; BK xm, CH 23-BK xiv, CH i 372a-377a, BK xiv, CH 15 388d-390a; BK xv, CH i 397b,d-398c; BK xix, CH 13 519a-520a; CH 28 529d-530a,c; BK xx, CH 15 543d-544b; BK xxi, 560a-586a,c/ Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 20-21 629b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 10, A 3, REP 2 42c-43b
20 AQUINAS. Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 69 885a-893c; Q 70, A 3 897d-900d; Q992b-996a,c; Q 87, A i, REP 4 997b-998c; Q 90, A 3 1014d-1016a, QQ 97-99 1066a-1085a,c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL la-52d esp in [1-18] 4a-b, [82-129] 5a-b, vi [loo-m] 9c, vn [100-130] lOc-d, xi 15a-16b, xiv [16-72] 19c-20b, xxvn [55-136] 40a-41b, xxvin [139- 142] 43a, xxxni [91-150] 50c-51a; PARADISE, vn [64-84] 115d-116a; xv [10-12] 128c
22 CHAUCER. Friar's Tale 278a-284a / Summoned* Prologue 284b-285a / Parson's Tale, par 10, 499b-502a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 193d-195d; PART iv, 250c-251b; 254a-255b; 271a-b
24 RABELAIS. Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK u, 119b-122a
25 MONTAIGNE. Essays, 266c
26 SHAKESPEARE. Richard III, ACT i, sc iv [42- 63] 115a-b
29 CERVANTES- Don Quixote, PART II, 418c-419a
31 DESCARTES- Objections and Replies, 227a
32 MILTON. Paradise Lost, BK i-n 93a-134a esp BK i [44-270] 94b-99a, BK II [521-628] 122b- 125a; BK vi [867-877] 215a-b
35 LOCKE Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxi, SECT 62 194c-d; SECT 72 198a-c
40 GIBBON Decline and Fall, 188d-189a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 149c-150c passim; 234a-c
44 Bos WELL. Johnson, 363a-b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dict(, 347a
52 DOSIOEVSKY- Brothers Karamazov, BK i, lOc-d; BK v, 127c-d; BK vi, 169c-170b; BK xi, 341c345c

5f. The state of the blessed - Heaven

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Psalms, 16 esp 16*10; 36 esp 36:8-9; 37; 84; 149 (D) Psalms, 15 esp 15:10; 35 esp 35:9-10; 36, 83; 149 / Isaiah, 65.8-25 (D) Isaias, 65.8-25 / Daniel, 7-
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:15; 3:1- 9,13-15; 4.7-5-5; 5:i5-i6~(D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 1:15; 3:i-9i3-i5>* 47-5 : 5' 5 : i 6 -'
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:1-12,19-20; 6:19- 21,33; 7 :2I ~ 2 3; ! 3'43; i9 : 2i; 25 : 3'-4 6 p 25:34, 25:46 / Lu^e, 16:19-26 / John, 6:38- 40; 8:51; 10:24-30; 11:23-27; 16:20-24; 17:1-5fto6a I Romans, 8:18; 14:17 / 1 Corinthians, 15:40- 57 / // Corinthians, 4-17-5:10 / Galatians, 6:/ Ephesians, 2:18-22 /Hebrews, 10:34 /James, i :i2 / / Peter, i csp 1 3-5, 1:9 / I John, 2 '.15-17; 3 '1-3 / Revelation esp 7, 14, 21 (Z>) Apocalypse csp 7, 14,
4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK iv [554-569] 204d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Frogs [143-159] 565d-566a
7 PLATO: Apology, 2116-2128,0 / Phaedo, 249d- 250a / Republic, BK x, 437c-440d
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK vi [638-678] 228a-229a
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 140d / Sertonus, 460d- 461 b
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK iv, par 16 23b-c; BK ix, par 6 63a-b; BK xn, par 23 104b-c; BK xiii, par 50-53 124c-125a,c / City of God, BK ix, CH 14-15 293a-294a; CH 17 295a-c; BK xi, CH 11-13 328d~330b; BK xn, CH355b-357a, BK xiii, CH 20-24 370c-376a,c; BK xix, CH 4 511a~513c; CH 10-13 516c-520a, CH 27 529a-d; BK xx, CH 17 544d-545c; BK xxn 586b,d-618d esp CH 1-5 586b,d-590a, CH 12-21 600d-606d, CH 29-30 614b-618d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 4 625b-c; CH 19-629a-630a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 95, A 4, ANS 509b-510a; PART I-H, Q 4, AA 1-629d-631a
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q81b-87c; Q 68, A 6 93c-94c; PART II-H, Q 18, A 2 462d-463d; Q 19, A II 472d-473d; Q 26, A 13 519d-520d; Q 28, A 3 528d-529c; QQ 92-96 1025b-1066a
21 DANTE- Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xv [40- 81] 75d-76a; xxvin-xxxiii 96a-105d; PARA- DISE 106a-157d esp HI [43-90] 109d-110b, vi [112-126] 114d-115a, xiv [i-6] 126d-127c, xxi [1-102] 138b-139b, xxii [1-75] 139d-140c, xxviii [94-114] 149d-150a, xxx-xxxin 151d- 157d
22 CHAUCER: Trotlus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 259-261 154a-b / Second Nun's Tale [15,788- 822] 467a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 65a-b; PART in, 191d-193d; 195d-197c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 99b-100a; 248c-250b
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, HI, 88d*89a
32 MILTON: Christs Nativity [7] la; [13] Ib; [52] 2b; [133-148] 4b-5a / On Time 12a-b / At a Solemn Mustc^ 13a-b / Lycidas [165-185] 31b / Comus [986-1023] 55b-56b / Sonnets, xiv 66a / Paradise Lost, BK III-XH 135a-333a esp BK m [56-64] 136b, [135-143] 8b, [344-415] la144b, BK v [246-261] 180b-181a, [461-651] 185a-189b, BK VH [150-161] 220b, BK VIII [595-630] 245a-246a, BK xi [696-707] 314b
33 PASCAL- Pensfes, 643 290b-291a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK 11, CH vn, SECT 5 132c; CH xxi, SECT 38 187b-c; SECT189b-d; SECT 62 194c-d; SECT 72 198a-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 234 b-d
44 BOSWELLI Johnson, 192d-193a; 391d-392a CHAPTER 38: IMMORTALITY
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 227c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK II, 22d- 23c; BK xi, 342c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 199b

5g. The resurrection of the body

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Job, 14:13-15; 19:25-27 / Isaiah, 26:19 (P) Isaias, 26:19 / Ezefyl, 37:i-4(>) Ezechiel, 37:1-14 / Daniel, 12:1-
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 27:52-53; 28 esp 28:6 / Mart(, 12:18-27 / Lu^e, 24 esp 24:6, 24:34, 24:46 I John, 2:18-22; 5:21-29; it:i- 44 / Acts, 24:15; 26:8 / Romans, 6:3-11 / / Corinthians, 6:14; 15 / // Corinthians, 4:/ / Thessalomans, 4:13-18 (D) I Thessalonians, 4:12-17 / Hebrews, 11:
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK x, CH 29, 317b- 318b; BK xiii, CH 16-20 367a-371a; CH 22-371c-376a,c; BK xx, CH 6-7 534a-536d; CH 9- 10, 540b-541a; CH 14-21 542d 551a; BK xxi, CH i-io 560a-570b; BK xxn, CH 4-5 588b- 590a; CH 11-21 599c-606d; CH 25-28 612a- 614a / Christian Doctrme, BK i, CH 19-629a-b; CH 24 630c-631a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 67, A i, REP 3 81b 82c; PART HI SUPPL, QQ 75-935a-996a,c; Q 93, A i 1037d<1039a
21 DANTE: Dwine Comedy, HELL, vi [94-111] 9b-c; x [1-15] 13d; xiii [85-108] 18d-19a; PARADISE, VH [121-148] 116b-c; xiv [1-66] 126d-127c; xxv [97-129] 145b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 192c-193c; 195b-d; PART iv, 254b-255b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 311a-b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [227-343] 140b- 143a; BK xn [402-427] 328a-b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 95 431c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 205d- 206a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 233d; 234d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 472a-b
47 GOETHE : Faust, PART i [737-807] 19b-21a

6. Doctrines of impersonal survival

    [sem referências]

6a. Immortality through offspring - the perpetuation of the species

0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 30:3-6; 40:19; 44:11- i3~(>) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 30:3-6; 40:19; 44:11-
7 PLATO: Symposium, 165b-166b / Laws, BK iv, 685bc
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK II, CH 4 [4i5*22- b 8] 645c-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Generation of Animals, BK II, CH i [73i b i8-732 a 4] 272a-b / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1252*26-32] 445c
23 HOBBES Leviathan, PART iv, 254c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK H, 81a-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Sonnets, i-xvn 586a-588d 6b to 6c (6. Doctrines of impersonal survival. 6a. Immortality through offspring - the perpetuation of the species.)
28 HARVEY- On Animal Generation, 364a; 384 b; 390c391c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 29a-b; 72c- 73a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par61a-b / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 189b-c; PART i, 212b-c; 246d-247a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dict(, 340b-341a
54 FREUD: Narcissism, 401 b; 406c / General Introduction, 616a-b / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 653b-c; 655b-656a

6b. Enduring fame - survival in the memory

0 OLD TESTAMENT. Proverbs, 10:7 / Ecclesiastes,
0 APOCRYPHA: ]udtth, 16:20-25 (D) OT, Judith, 16:24-31 / Wisdom of 'Solomon, 4:1-6; 8:9-(D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 4:1-6; 8:9-13 / Ecclcsiasticus, 37.26; 39:1-11; 40.19; 44-8-15; 46:11-12 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 37:29; 39:1-15; 40:19; 44.8-15, 46.13-15 / / Maccalees, 3.i-7-(/>) OT, / Machabecs, 3 1-7 / // Maccabees, 6:21-31- (D) OT, // Machabees, 6:21-
4 HOMER. Iliad, BK ix [410-429] 61b-c; BK xn [309-328] 85b-c; BK xxn [299-305] 158b / Odyssey, BK xxiv [191-202] 319a
5 SOPHOCLES: Philoctetes [1408-1444] 194d- 195a,c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, la-b
6 TttucYmnLs:PeIoponnesian War, BK II, 398a-c
7 PLATO. Symposium, 165b-167a / Laws, BK iv, $85b-c
9 ARISTOFLE: Politics, BK v, CH 10 [1312*23-39] 5Hd
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [121-124] 2c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK HI, SECT 10 261d- 262a; BK iv, SECT 19 265a; SECT 33 266c-d; BK vi, SECT 18 275d; BK VII, SECT 6 280b; BK viii, SECT 44 289a; BK ix, SECT 30 294b-c
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK i [453-463] 115b; [606- 610] 119b; BK iv [321-322] 175b
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 125b
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK i, 195a-b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, iv 5c-7a; xvi [1-90] 22c*23b; PURGATORY, xi [73-117] 69c- 70a, PARADISE, ix [37-63] 119a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 77a-b
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK II, 81ad
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 112d-113a; 267a-c,301b- c;304d-306a
27 SHAKESPEARE: Sonnets, LV 594c-d; LXV 596a- b; LXXXI 598c-d
28 HARVEY: Circulation of the Blood, 312c-d
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 226d- 228d
30 BACON Advancement of Learning, 27d-28c; 29a-b; 36a-c; 72c-73a
32 MILTON: On Shakespear. 1630 16a
33 PASCAL. PensSes, 148 201a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 535a-536a
37 FIELDING- Tom Jones, 273b; 274d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 94a-b; 219d
41 GIBBON. Decline and Fall, 494b,d-495a
42 KANT- Science of Right, 428b-429a
44 BOSWELL. Johnson, 57d-58a, 163d [fn 4]
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 348 11 Id / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 153b-c; PART i, 212b-c; 254d-255d; PART II, 262c-263a; 274a-275a; 278d-279a, 281d- 282d
47 GOETHE Faust, PRFLUDE [59-74] 2b 3a; PART ii [9981-9982] 243a

6c. Participation in the eternity of truth, ideas, or love

17 PLOTINUS. Sixth Ennead, TR vn, CH 34-338b-339d
31 SPINOZA- Ethics, PART v, PROP 21-42 458a- 463d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156d- 168c csp 156d-157b, 168b-c; 190a-b; 203c- 206a,c <ref_end>


ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represen

II. Works by authors not repr

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

*

AUGUSTINE. On the Immortality of the Soul AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK iv,
CH 79-95

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Amma, A 1 4

. DANTE. Coiwv to (The Banquet), SECOND TREATISE,

CH 9 (4-6) F. BACON. "Of Death," in Essays HUME. Of the Immortality of the Soul

.

Of Suicide J. S. MILL. "Theism," PART in, in Three Essays on

Religion W. JAMES. Human Immortality

" EPICURUS. Letter to Menoeceus CICERO. De Republica (The Republic), vi

. Tusculan Disputations, i

. De Senectute (Of Old Age)

TALITY death, see CHANGE I2b; HAPPIuments for or against the immortality of the
2d; MAN 33-33(2), 3c; MATTER 2d; MIND trast between souls and angels with
respect 43; FORM 2d; MAN 3b; SOUL 4d(i). of the practical reason, see
METAPHYSICS 2d; on or the transmigration of souls, see SOUL ity, such as
predestination, the Last JudgD 7f-yh; HAPPINESS 7c; SOUL 4d(3). immortality, see
IDEA 2b; KNOWLEDGE 6c(3); nd or intellect as an incorporeal power, see ee
KNOWLEDGE 7c; SOUL 4d. n to divine rewards and punishments, see Purgatory, and
Heaven, see ETERNITY 4d; d-6e. oks of the Western World, but relevant to the
These works are divided into two groups: ted in this collection. esented in this
collection. the publication of the works cited, consult ollows the last chapter
of The Great Ideas. OVID. Metamorphoses SENECA. De Consolattone ad Marciam (On
Consolation to Marcia) GREGORY OF NYSSA. On the Soul and the Resumetion

PROCLUS. The Elements of Theology, PROPOSITIONS 104-105, 208-210 SAADIA GAON.
The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,

TREATISE vi, vni BONAVENTURA. Breviloquium, PART VH R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART
vn ALBO. The Book of Principles (Sefer ha-llfarim), BK iv, CH 29-41 NICOLAS OP
CUSA. The Vision of God POMPON AZZI. On the Immortality of the Soul VAUGHAN. The
Retreate KING. The Exequy BROWNE. Hydriotaphia H. MORE. The Immortality of the
Soul LEIBNITZ. Discourse on Metaphysics, xxxn-xxxvi

Monadology, par 19-28

.

J. BUTLER. The Analogy of Religion, PART i, CH i LAW. An Appeal to All That
Doubt ...the Truths of

the Gospel CH i SWEDENBORG. Heaven and Its Wonders and Hell
VoLTAiRE."Heaven,""Hell," "Hell (Descent into)/*

"Purgatory," "Resurrection," in A Philosophical

Dictionary MENDELSSOHN. Ph2don;oderUeberdie Unstcrblichfytt

der Seele LESSINC. How the Ancients Represented Death WORDSWORTH. Intimations of
Immortality COUSIN. Lectures on the True, the Beautiful and the

Good, PART in (16) HAZLITT. On the Feeling of Immortality in Youth FEUERBACH.
Gedanfyn uber Tod und Unsterbhchfyit I. H. FICHTE. Die Idee der Personlichkeit
und der

individuellen Fortdauer f. H. NEWMAN. "The Immortality of the Soul," in

Parochial and Plain Sermons

KIERKEGAARD. Concluding Unscientific Postscript,

pp 152-158 SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL

HI, SUP, CH 41

.

"Immortality: A Dialogue," in Studies in Pessimism

FBCHNBR. Life After Death .

Religion of a Scientist CLIFFORD. "The Unseen Universe," in VOL i, Lectures and
Essays ROYCE. The Conception of Immortality FISKE. Life Everlasting POHLE.
Eschatology SANTA VAN A. Reason in Religion, CH 13-14 HUGEL. Eternal Life
BOSANQUET. The Value and Destiny of the Individual VONIER. The Human Soul and
Its Relations with Other Spirits BRADLEY. Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 15(8)
FARNELL. GreekHero Cults and Ideas of Immortality MCTAGGART. The Nature of
Existence, CH 43, 62 SCHELER. Vom Ewigen im Menschen LAKE. Immortality and the
Modern Mind BROAD. The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH 11-12 FRAZER. The Golden
Bough, PART n, CH 2; PART in; PART IV, BK I, CH 5-6; PART V, CH l6j PART VII, CH
IO-I I .

Man, God, and Immortality, PART iv

J. S. HALDANE. The Sciences and Philosophy, LECT XVIII WHITEHEAD. Process and
Reality, PART v KIRK. The Vision of God HOCKING. Thoughts on Death and Life A. E
TAYLOR. The Christian Hope of Immortality PERRY. The Hope for Immortality