Chapter  40:  INFINITY  INTRODUCTIO  of  the persistent questions concerning ONE
infinity  is  whether  we  can  know  or  comprehend  it. Another is whether the
infinite  exists,  and  if so, to what kind of thing infinity belongs. It is not
surprising,  therefore,  that  the  discussion  of infinity often borders on the
unintelligible.

The  idea  of  infinity,  like  the  idea  of eternity, lacks the support of the
imagination  or  of  senseexperience.  The  fact  that  the  infinite  cannot be
perceived  or  imagined seems sufficient to lead Hobbes and Berkeley to deny its
reality. "Whatsoever we imagine is finite" writes Hobbes. "Therefore there is no
idea,  or conception of anything we call infinite. . . . When we say anything is
infinite,  we  signify only that we arc not ible to conceive the ends and bounds
of  the  thing  named,  having  no  conception  of  the  thing,  but  of our own
inability."

On  similar grounds Berkeley rejects the possibility of infinite division. "If I
cannot  per:eive innumerable parts in any infinite extension," he writes, "it is
certain  that  they  are  lot  contained in it: but it is evident, that I rannot
distinguish innumerable parts in any particular line, surface, or solid, which I
either  Derceive  by  sense, or figure to myself in my mnd; wherefore I conclude
that  they  are  not  :ontained in it." But for most of the great writers on the
subcct,   the   impossibility  of  representing  infinity  md  eternity  to  the
imagination  does  not  render  them  inconceivable  or meaningless. Yet it does
iccount  for  the  difficulty  of  grasping  their "neanmg, a difficulty further
increased  by  the  act  that,  whatever their meaning, infinity and ternity are
indefinable.  To  define  the  infinite  vould  be  to limit even in thought the
unimited.  The  notion  of  infinity  involves greater perplexities than that of
eternity.  The  meaning  of  N eternity is weighted with the mystery of God, the
world,  and  time.  All  these  affect  the  conception of infinity; but for the
infinite  there  are  also  the  mysteries of number and of space, of matter and
motion. In the sphere of quantity, or of things subject to quantity, infinity is
itself the source of mystery, or at least the root of difficulty in analysis. It
is the central term in the discussion of the continuous and the indivisible, the
nature  of  series  and of limits. As INDICATED in the chapter on ETERNITY, that
idea  in each of its applications seems to have one or the other of two meanings
(i)  the  meaning in which it signifies infinite time, time without beginning or
end,  and (2) the meaning in which it signifies the timelessness or immutability
of  being. Both meanings are negative, so far as our understanding is concerned.
Yet what is signified by the second is in itself something positive, at least in
the  opinion  of  those  who  think that to be exempt from change entails having
every  perfection or being lacking in nothing. This split in meaning also occurs
in  the  idea  of  infinity.  As  applied  to being, the term infinite signifies
something  positive,  even though our understanding of what is signified remains
negative  or,  at  best,  analogical.  An  infinite  being is one which lacks no
attribute that can belong to a being. This is the positive condition of absolute
perfection.  The  infinite  here  still  means  the unlimited, but that which is
unlimited  in  being has no defect. To lack deficiencies is to be perfect. It is
in this sense that Spinoza defines God as "Being absolutely infinite, that is to
say,  substance  consisting  of infinite attributes, each one of which expresses
eternal and infinite essence." Like Spinoza, Aquinas maintains that "besides God
nothing  can be infinite." But he CHAPTER 40: INFI distinguishes the absolute or
positive  sense  in  which  God  alone is infinite from the sense of the word in
which it can be said that "things other than God can be relatively infinite, but
not  absolutely infinite." This other meaning, according to Aquinas, is not only
relative  but  negative,  for  it  connotes  "something imperfect," It signifies
indeterminacy or lack of perfection in being. What Aquinas calls the relative or
potential  infinite,  he attributes to matter and to quantitiesto bodies, to the
magnitudes  of  space  and  time,  and  to  number.  This  sense  of  "infinite"
corresponds to that meaning of "eternal," according to which time consists of an
endless  series  of  moments,  each  having  a predecessor, each a successor, no
matter  how far one counts them back into the past or ahead into the future. But
in the field of quantities other than time, the meanings of infinite and eternal
part  company.  There is, of course, some parallelism between infinite space and
infinite  time,  insofar as an infinite extension is one which does not begin at
any  point  or end at any; but the consideration of space and number leads to an
aspect  of  infinity which has no parallel in the consideration of eternity. "In
sizes  or  numbers,"  Pascal  writes,  "nature  has set before man two marvelous
infinities.  .  .  .  For,  from  the fact that they can always be increased, it
follows  absolutely  that they can always be decreased. ... If we can multiply a
number  up  to 100,000 times, say, we can also take a hundred thousandth part of
it by dividing it by the same number we multiply it with, and thus every term of
increase will become a term of division by changing the integer into a fraction.
So   that   infinite   increase  includes  necessarily  infinite  division."  As
endlessaddition  produces the infinitely large, so endless division produces the
infinitesimal  or  the infinitely small. A trillion trillion is a finite number,
because the addition of a single unit creates a larger number. The fact that the
addition  of  another unit produces a different number indicates that a trillion
trillion has a determinate size, which is the same as saying that it is a finite
number.

An  infinite  number  cannot  be increased by addition, for it is constituted in
thought at NITY least as d number larger than the sum of any two finite numbers;
which  is another way of saying that it is approached by carrying on the process
of   addition   endlessly.   The   size  of  an  infinite  number  is  therefore
indeterminate.  What  Galileo  points out about two infinite quantities seems to
hold  for an infinite and a finite quantity. He asks us to consider the totality
of  all integers (which is infinite) and the totality of their squares (which is
also infinite). On the one hand, there appear to be as many squares as there are
integers;  on the other hand, the totality of integers includes all the squares.
Precisely  because  "the  number of squares is not less than the totality of all
numbers,  nor  the  latter  greater  than the former," Galileo insists that "the
attributes  'equal,'  'greater,'  and  'less' are not applicable to infinite,but
only  to finite quantities." Nor does the sense in which one finite quantity can
be  greater  or  less  than another that is, by a determinate difference between
them  apply  in the comparison of a finite and an infinite quantity. The latter,
being indeterminately large, is indeterminately larger than any finite quantity.
These  remarks  apply  to  the  infinitely  small  as well. The infinitesimal is
immeasurably  small  or indeterminately less than any finite fraction, no matter
how  small, because its own size is indeterminate. The finite fraction, itself a
product of division, can be divided again, but if an infinitesimal quantity were
capable  of  further division, it would permit a smaller, and since that smaller
quantity would be a determinate fraction of itself, the infinitesimal would have
to  be  determinate  in  size.  Since  that is not so, the infinitesimal must be
conceived  as the indivisible or as the limit approached by carrying on division
endlessly. "Because the hypothesis of indivisibles seems somewhat harsh," Newton
proposes  an  analysis  in  terms  of  what  he  calls  "nascent  and evanescent
quantities," or quantities just beginning to be more than nothing or just at the
point at which they vanish into nothing. "As there is a limit which the velocity
at  the end of a motion may attain, but not exceed there . . . in all quantities
and proportions is a like limit that begin or cease to be." Newton warns his 81S
reader,  therefore, that if he "should happen to mention quantities as least, or
evanescent,  or  ultimate," the reader is "not to suppose that quantities of any
determinate  magnitude  are  meant,  but  such  as  are  conceived  to be always
diminished without end."

Later,   speaking  of  quantities  which  are  "variable  and  indetermmed,  and
increasing  or  decreasing, as it were, by a continual motion or flux," he adds:
"Take  care  not to look upon finite quantities as such." The method of fluxions
provides  an  infinitesimal  calculus on the hypothesis of limits rather than of
indivisibles.

THROUGH   ALL  THESE  conceptions  of  infinitymetaphysical,  mathematical,  and
physical  run  the  paired notions of the unlimited and of limits approached but
not  attained. The finite is neither unlimited nor does it insensibly approach a
limit. There are also the opposite notions of the perfect and the indeterminate.
The  finite  is  neither,  for  it  is  determinate  without being a totality or
complete.  Though  they  have a common thread of meaning, and though each raises
similar  difficulties for the understanding, the conception of infinity in being
or  power,  and  the  conception of infinite for infinitesimal) quantity require
separate consideration. The same questions may be asked of each, questions about
the  existence  of  the  infinite  and  about  our knowledge of it, but the same
answers  will  not be given in each case. There are those who deny the existence
of  an  actually  infinite  body  or an actually infinite number, yet affirm the
infinite existence of God. There are those who declare the infinity of matter to
be  intrinsically  unintelligible,  but  maintain  that God, Who is infinite, is
intrinsically  the  most  intelligible  object.  They  add,  of course, that the
infinite  being  of God cannot be comprehended by our finite intellects. On each
of these points, an opposite view has been taken, but the dispute concerning the
infinity  of God involves issues other than those which occur in the controversy
over  the  infinite divisibility of matter or the infinity of space and time. It
seems  advisable, therefore, to deal separately with the problems of infinity as
they  arise  with  respect  to  different  objects or occur in different subject
matters. THE CONCEPTION of God, in the words of Anselm, as a being "than which a
greater  cannot be conceived" or, in the words of Kant, as an ens realissimum, a
most  real being expresses the plenitude of the divine nature and existence. The
mediaeval  thesis,  defended  by Descartes, that God's essence and existence are
identical,  implies  that  neither is contracted or determined by the other. The
still  earlier  notion  of  Aristotle,  repeated  by  Aquinas,  that God is pure
actuality,  carries  with it the attributes of completeness or perfection, which
are  the  positive  aspects  of immutability or incapacity for change. Spinoza's
definition  of  substance  as that which exists, not only in itself, but through
itself and by its very nature, entails the autonomy or utter independence of the
divine  being.  These  are  so  many  different  ways  of stating that God is an
infinite  being.  Both  Aquinas  and Spinoza make infinity the basis for proving
that  there  can  be  only  one  God.  When  Spinoza argues that "a plurality of
substances   possessing  the  same  nature  is  absurd,"  he  has  in  mind  the
identification  of  infinite substance with God. "If many gods existed," Aquinas
writes,  "they  would  necessarily  differ  from  each  other.  Something  would
therefore  belong  to  one,  which did not belong to another. And if this were a
privation,  one  of  them  would  not  be  absolutely  perfect; but if it were a
perfection,  one  of them would be without it. So it is impossible for many gods
to  exist"  that  is, of course, if infinity a property of the divine nature. is
Aquinas  makes  this  condition  clear  when he goes on to say that "the ancient
philosophers,  constrained  as  it  were  by  the  truth,  when they asserted an
infinite  principle,  asserted likewise that there was only one such principle."
But  while  it  is impossible for there to be two infinities of being, it is not
impossible for there to be two, or more, infinite quantities. One explanation of
this  difference seems to be the actuality or existence of an infinite being, in
contrast  to  the  conceptual  character of the infinite objects of mathematics,
which  are  sometimes called "potential infinites" because they are conceived as
in  an  endless  process  of  becoming,  or as approaching a limit that is never
reached.  When the physical existence of infinite quan- CHAPTER 40: IN titles is
asserted,  as,  for example, a universe of infinite extent or an infinite number
of  atoms,  the  uniqueness  of  these  actual  totalities  seems to follow. Two
infinite worlds cannot co-exist, though the one world can be infinite in several
distinct respectsin space or duration, or in the number of its constituents even
as  the  infinity  of  God, according to Spinoza, involves "infinite attributes,
each  one  of  which expresses eternal and infinite essence/' Spinoza's argument
against  two  actual inseems to find confirmation in the posifinities tion taken
by  Aquinas  that  God's  omnipotence  does  not  include the power to create an
infinite  world.  God's  infinity,  as  we  have already noted, follows from the
identity  of  God's  essence  and existence. Since a created being has existence
added  to  its  essence,  Aquinas  asserts  that  "it is against the nature of a
created  thing  to  be  absolutely  infinite. Therefore," he continues, "as God,
although  He  has  infinite  power, cannot make a thing to be not made (for this
would  imply that two contradictories are true at the same time), so likewise He
cannot make anything to be absolutely infinite."

On  this  view,  an  infinite  world cannot coexist with an infinite God, if, in
their  separate  existence,  one  is  dependent  on  the other, as creature upon
creator. The infinity of the world or of nature, in Spinoza's conception, is not
separate  from the infinity of God, but consists in the infinity of two of God's
attributesextension  and thought. In our time there has arisen the conception of
a  finite  God  a  God  who,  while  the  most perfect being, yet is not without
capacity  for  growth  or  change, a God who is eternal without being immutable.
This  conception,  which  in  the light of traditional theology appears to be as
self-contradictory  as  round squarek has arisen in response to the difficulties
certain  critics  have  found  in the traditional doctrine of an infinite being.
They  point  to  the  difficulty  of  understanding  how finite beings can exist
separate   from,  yet  in  addition  to,  an  infinite  being;  they  also  cite
difficulties  in the notions of infinite knowledge, infinite power, and infinite
goodness.

The infinity of the divine omniscience extends to the possible as well as to the
actual.  But  the  possible includes things which are in- FINITY compatible with
one  another, things which, in the language of Leibnitz, are not compatible. The
mcompossiblc  would  thus  seem  to  be cmbraced in the infinite scope of divine
thought  or  knowledge.  In  the  view  of  one theologian, Nicolas of Cusa, the
mystery  of  God's  infinity  isbest  expressed  by  affirming  that  in God all
contradictions  are  somehow  reconciled.  The  infinity  of God's power, or the
divine omnipotence, also raises questions about the possible and the impossible.
Is  nothing  impossible  to God or must it be said that there are certain things
which  not  even God can do, such as reverse the order of time or create a world
which  shall  be  as  infinite and perfect as himself? In the assertion that God
cannot  do  the  impossible,  Aquinas  sees  no  limitation  on God's power. The
impossible,  he writes, does not "come under the divine omnipotence, not because
of  any  defect  in  the  power  of  God, but because it has not the nature of a
feasible  or  possible  thing." For this reason, he claims, "it is better to say
that such things cannot be done, than that God cannot do them." The inability to
do  the undoable constitutes no violation of infinite power, even as the lack of
nothing  does  not  deprive infinite being of anything. The infinite goodness of
God   is   sometimes  set  against  the  fact  of  evil,  or  the  existence  of
imperfections,  in  the  created world. This aspect of the problem of evil, like
that  which concerns man's freedom to obey or disobey the divine will, cannot be
separated  from the fundamental mystery of God's infinity in power and knowledge
as  well  as  in  goodness. The problem is considered in the chapter on GOOD AND
EVIL.  The  point  there  mentioned,  that  evil  is  essentially  non-being  or
deprivation  of  being,  leads  to  one  solution of the problem. It accepts the
finitude,  and  consequently  the  imperfection,  of  creatures  as  a necessary
consequence  of  God's  infinity.  The  best  of  all  possible worlds cannot be
infinitely  good. To MAN ALONE, among all admittedly finite things, has infinity
been  attributed  and  even  made  a  distinctive  mark of his nature. Does this
introduce  a  new  meaning of infinity, neither quantitative nor divine ? It has
seldom if ever been questioned that man is finite in being and power. The limits
of  human  capacity  for knowledge or achievement are a perennial theme in man's
study of man.

Yet  it is precisely with regard to capacity that certain writers have intimated
man's infinity.

Pascal,   for   example,   finds  the  apparent  contradictions  inhuman  nature
intelligible  only when man is understood as yearning for or impelled toward the
infinite.  "We burn with desire," he says, "to find solid ground and an ultimate
sure foundation whereon to build a tower reaching to the Infinite. But our whole
groundwork  cracks  and  the earth opens to abysses." In this fact lies both the
grandeur  and  the misery of man. He aspires to the infinite, yet he is a finite
being  dissatisfied  with his own finitude and frustrated by it. It is sometimes
said that the touch of infinity in man with the suggestion that it is a touch of
madness  consists  in  his  wanting  to  be God. Those who regard such desire as
abnormal  or  perverse interpret it as a misdirection of man's natural desire to
know  God  face  to  face  and  to  be filled with the love of God in the divine
presence.  But,  according to the theory of natural desire, the tendency of each
nature  is  somehow  proportionate to its capacity. If man's restless search for
knowledge  and  happiness  can be quieted only by the possession of the infinite
truth  and  goodness which is God, then man's intellect and will must somehow be
as  infinite  in  nature as they are in tendency. Yet that is not an unqualified
infinity,  for  the same theologians who teach that man naturally seeks God also
hold  that man's finite intellect cannot comprehend the infinite being of God as
God  knows Himself. Nor do they think that man's capacity for knowing and loving
God can be fulfilled except in the beatific vision, which is a supernatural gift
rather  than  a  natural achievement. These and related matters are discussed in
the  chapters  on  DESIRE  and KNOWLEDGE. The great books speak of other objects
than  God  as  objects  of  man's  infinite  desire. The appetite for money, for
pleasure,  or for power seems to be an infinite craving which no finite quantity
of these goods ever satisfies. Two comments are made upon this fact, which is so
amply evidenced in the human record. One is that man's infinite lust for worldly
goods  exprcsseeven as it conceals his natural desire for a truly infinite good.
The other is that these worldly goods are AS seductive objects precisely because
they are infinite.

Here  the  word "infinite" is used, not in the sense which signifies perfection,
but  in the quantitative sense which has the meaning of indetermination. Plato's
division,  in  the Philebus, of goods into the finite and the infinite separates
measured  and  definite goods from those which need some limitation in quantity.
Socrates  exemplifies  the  distinction  by reference to the fact that "into the
hotter  and the colder there enters a more and a less" and since "there is never
any  end  of them . . . they must also be infinite." In contrast, "when definite
quantity  is  once  admitted, there can be no longer a " 'hotter' or a 'colder.'
Such  things, he says, "which do not admit of more or less" belong "in the class
of  the  limited  or finite." Following the line of this example, Socrates later
distinguishes  between infinite and finite pleasures, or pleasures without limit
and those which have some intrinsic measure. "Pleasures which are in excess," he
says,  "have  no  measure,  but  those which are not in excess have measure; the
great,  the  excessive  ...  we  shall be right in referring to the class of the
infinite, and of the more and less," and "the others we shall refer to the class
which has measure." The fact that the goodness of wealth or of certain pleasures
is  indeterminate  or  indefinite makes it necessary to determine or measure the
amount  of  wealth it is good to possess, or the quantity of such pleasure it is
good  to enjoy. As in the case of desire, so the human intellect is also said to
be  infinite  in  the sense of reaching to an indefinite quantity. On the theory
which  he holds that the intellect knows by means of universal concepts, Aquinas
attributes  to  the  human  mind  "an  infinite  power;  for  it  apprehends the
universal,  which  can  extend itself to an infinitude of singular things." Each
universal  signifies what is common to an indefinitely large class of particular
instances.  There  is  still  another sense in which the intellect is said to be
infinite,  namely,  by  reason  of  itshaving  the potentiality to apprehend all
knowable  things.  But  this  is  a  relative  infinity, as is the corresponding
infinity  of  prime matter, which is conceived as the potentiality for taking on
all forms. In both cases, the infinite is qualified by a restriction on the kind
of  things  CHAPTER 40: INFINITY knowablc to the intellect and the type of forms
receivable in matter. The infinity of prime matter matter totally devoid of form
is  also  comparable  to the infinity of God in a contrast of extreme opposites:
the  absolute  indeterminacy  of pure potentiality on the one hand, the absolute
perfection of pure actuality on the other.

THE  INFINITY  OF  matter  involves  different  considerations  when the problem
concerns, not prime matter, but material things bodies. The question is twofold.
Can there be a body of infinite magnitude? Is there an infinite number of bodies
?  To both questions Aristotle gives the negative answer, while Spinoza seems to
answer  the first, and Lucretius the second, affirmatively. may be qualified, of
Spinoza's affirmation course, by his conception of infinite body as an attribute
of  God.  But  there  is  no  qualification  on  Lucretius'  assertion that "the
first-beginnings  of  things are infinite," unless it is his statement that "the
first-beginnings  of  things  have different shapes, but the number of shapes is
finite."  It  is  only the number of atoms which is infinite, not their variety.
Aristotle  presents  many arguments against the existence of an infinite body or
an  infinite  number  of things, all of which ultimately rest on his distinction
between an actual and a potential infinite. It is not that infinity in magnitude
or  multitude  is  impossible for he affirms the infinity of time and he insists
upon  the  infinite  divisibility  of matter but rather that if an infinite body
existed  its  infinity  would have to be actual. Its actuality would necessarily
involve  certain  determinations, especially those of dimension and place, which
would  be  inconsistent  with  the  indeterminacy  of the infinite. Similarly, a
multitude of co-existing things unlike the moments of time which do not co-exist
cannot be infinite, because their co-existence implies that they can be actually
numbered, whereas their infinity implies that they are numberless. The potential
infinite,  Aristotle  writes, "exhibits itself in different ways in time, in the
generations  of man, and in the division of magnitudes. For generally," he says,
"the  infinite has this mode of existence: one thing is always being taken after
another,  and  each  thing that is taken is always finite, but always different"
When  this  takes  place  in  the division of spatial magnitudes, "what is taken
persists,  while  in  the  succession of times and of men, it takes place by the
passing  away of these in such a way that the source of supply never gives out."
The  opposition  between Lucretius and Aristotle with regard to the divisibility
of  matter  is  discussed in the chapter on ELEMENT. The notions of infinity and
continuity  are  differently  employed  on  the two sides of the argument. Where
Aristotle  makes  the  continuity  of  matter  the  condition  of  its  infinite
divisibility, Lucretius makes the atom's continuity its solidity or lack of void
the  cause  of  its  indivisibility.  Where Aristotle asserts that at any moment
there  can  be  only  a  finite  number  of  particles  in the world because the
partition  of  matter  cannot  be infinitely carried out short of infinite time,
Lucretius,  on the contrary, thinks that the division of matter into smaller and
smaller  parts  finds an end in the atomic particles; and yet he also asserts an
infinite  number  of  atoms. To contain an infinite number of atoms, an infinite
space  is  required, according to Lucretius. This presents no greater difficulty
for  him  than  an  infinite  time. Aristotle, on the other hand, differentiates
between  space  and  time  with  respect  to  infinity.  Time can be potentially
infinite  by  way  of  addition  because  "each  part  that  is  taken passes in
succession  out  of existence." But though space may be infinitely divisible, it
cannot  be  infinitely  extended,  for all its parts, unlike those of time, must
co-exist.  It would therefore have to be an actually, rather than a potentiallyk
infinite  quantity,  and  this  Aristotle  thinks is impossible. These and other
conflicting  views  concerning  the  infinity of space and time appear in Kant's
statement  of  the  first cosmological antinomy. His intention is not to resolve
the issues, but to show that they cannot be resolved by proof or argument. To do
this,  Kant  sets  up  what  seems  to  him  to  be  equally  strong  or equally
inconclusive  arguments  for and against the infinity of space and time. Suppose
it  be granted, Kant argues on the one hand, that "the world has no beginning in
time."  Then it would follow that "up to every given moment in time, an eternity
must have THE CJREAT IDEAS elapsed, and therewith passed away an infinite series
of  successive  conditions  or  states  of  things in the world." But since "the
infinity  of  a  series  consists  in the fact that it can never be completed by
means  of  a  successive  synthesis,"  it  also "follows that an infinite series
already elapsed is impossible, and that consequently a beginning of the world is
a  necessary  condition  of  its existence." On the other hand, Kant argues with
what  he  thinks  is  equal  force,  "let  it  be granted that [the world] has a
beginning.  A  beginning,"  he explains, "is an existence which is preceded by a
time  in  which  the  thing does not exist." Then, Kant continues, "on the above
supposition,  it follows that there must have been a time in which the world did
not  exist, that is, a void time. But in a void time, the origination of a thing
is impossible; because no part of any such time contains a distinctive condition
of  being in preference to that of non-being. . . . Consequently, many series of
things  may  have  a  beginning in the world, but the world itself cannot have a
beginning,  and  is, therefore, in relation to past time, infinite." With regard
to  the  infinity  or  finitude of space, Kant proceeds similarly. If we suppose
space  to  be  infinite,  then  "the  world  must  be an infinite given total of
co-existent  things."  But  in  order  to  "cogitate  the world, which fills ail
spaces,  as  a whole, the successive synthesis of the parts of an infinite world
must  be  looked  upon  as  completed;  that is to say, an infinite time must be
regarded  as having elapsed in the enumeration of all co-existing things." This,
Kant  impossible,"  and  therefore  argues, "is "an infinite aggregate of actual
things  cannot be considered as a given whole." Hence it follows that "the world
is,  as  regards  extension in space, not infinite, but enclosed in limits." If,
however, we suppose "that the world is finite and limited in space, it follows,"
according to Kant, "that it must exist in a void space, which is not limited. We
should,  therefore, meet not only with a relation of things in space, but also a
relation  of  things to space" But the "relation of the world to a void space is
merely  a  relation  to  no  object"  and "such a relation, and consequently the
limitation  of  the world by void space, is nothing." It follows therefore, Kant
concludes,  that  "the  world,  as regards space, is not limited; that is, it is
infinite in re gard to extension."

The  way  in which these opposite arguments nullify each other reveafc more than
our  inability to prove or disprove the infinity of space and time. It shows, in
Kant's  theory  of  human  knowledge,  that  we  are  "not  entitled to make any
assertion  at all respecting the whole object of experience the world of sense."
ONE  OTHER  PROBLEM  of  infinity  in the sphere of physics receives its initial
formulation  in  one  of the great books in the part of the Dialogues Concerning
the  Two  New  Sciences  where  Galileo  discusses the uniform acceleration of a
freely  fallingbody.  The  body  which is said to accumulate equal increments of
velocity  in  equal  intervals  of time is also said to start "from inOne of the
perfinite  slowness,  i.e.,  from  rest."  sons in the dialogue challenges this,
saying  that "as the instant of starting is more and more nearly approached, the
body  moves  so  slowly  that,  if  it kept on moving at this rate, it would not
traverse  a  mile in an hour, or in a day, or in a year, or in a thousand years;
indeed, it would not traverse a span in an even greater time; a phenomenon which
baffles  the  imagination,  while  our  senses show us that a heavy falling body
suddenly  acquires great speed." What our senses seem to show us is corrected by
an  experiment  which  refines  the  observation. But this still leaves a purely
analytical  question.  Against the statement that the "velocity can be increased
or  diminished  without limit," Simphcio points out in the dialogue that "if the
number  of degrees of greater and greater slowness is limitless, they will never
be  all  exhausted,"  and  therefore the body will never come to rest when it is
slowing  down  or  be  able  to  start  to  move when it is at rest. "This would
happen,"  Salviati  answers,  "if the moving body were to maintain its speed for
any  length  of time at each degree of velocity, but it merely passes each point
without  delaying  more  than  an instant, and since each time interval, however
small,  may be divided into an infinite number of instants, these will always be
sufficient to correspond to the infinite degrees of diminished velocity."

The  problem  of the infinitesimal velocity provides another illustration of the
difference  CHAPTER  40: I between infinity in the physical and the mathematical
orders. Unlike parallel lines in Euclidean geometry, which are lines that remain
equidistant  from  one another when both are prolonged to infinity, an asymptote
is  a straight line which a curved line continuously approaches but never meets,
even  when  both are infinitely extended. The distance between the curve and its
asymptote  diminishes  to smaller and smaller intervals, but no matter how small
they become, the two lines never coincide. The diminishing intervals between the
curve  and  its asymptote are like the diminishing degrees of velocity in a body
starting  from  or coming to rest. But we know that the body does begin or cease
to  move,  and  so  there  is the mysterious jumping of the gap between rest and
motion  in  the  physical  order, whereas in the mathematical order the limiting
point can be forever approached and never reached.

THERE  is  ONE  other context in which infinity is discussed in the great books.
The  logicians  treat  certain  terms  and judgments as infinite. Aristotle, for
example,   regards   the   negative  term  such  as  not-man  or  not-white  The
mdefiniteness  of  as  indefinite. its signification may be seen when such terms
are  used  as subjects of discourse. What is being talked about? The answer must
be  given,  in  part  at  least, in positive terms: not-man represents the whole
universe  leaving man out, or the totalityof everything except man. Thus, in its
positive  signification,  the  negative term has a kind of infinity the infinite
'totality of subjects diminished by one, the one that is negated.

In his classification of judgments, Kant makes a threefold division of judgments
according  to  quality:  the  affirmative,  the  negative, and the infinite. The
infinite  judgment  involves  a  negative  in  its  construction,  but when that
negative  is  given  an affirmative interpretation, the infinite significance of
the proposition becomes apparent. An example will make this clear.

The proposition this animal is-not white is negative; it simply denies a certain
quality  of  a  certain  thing. But the proposition this animal is not- white is
infinite,  for  it  affirms  the  negated term, and so places the subject in the
infinite  class  or  totality  which  includes  everything  NFINITY except white
things.  (The  position  of  the hyphen serves to indicate whether the statement
shall  be construed negatively or affirmatively and infinitely.) The problems of
definition  and  demonstration  are differently solved by logicians according to
the  way  in  which  they  propose  to avoid infinite regressions in analysis or
reasoning. There would be no end to the process of defining if every term had to
be  defined  before  it  could  be used in the definition of another term. There
would  be no beginning to the process of proof if, before a proposition could be
used  as  a  premise  to  demonstrate  some  conclusion,  it  had  itself  to be
demonstrated  as  a  conclusion from prior premises. In his essay On Geometrical
Demonstration,  Pascal refers to the proposal of a plan for defining and proving
everything.  "Certainly  this  method  would  be beautiful," he says, "but it is
absolutely  impossible;  for  it  is  evident  that the first terms we wished to
define  would  presuppose  others  for their explication, and that similarly the
first  propositions  we wished to prove would suppose others that preceded them,
and  it  is  thus  clear  we should never arrive at the first propositions." The
chapter  on  DEFINITION  considers  the  character and choice of the indefinable
terms by which an infinite regression is avoided in the elucidation of meanings.
The  chapters  on  INDUCTION and PRINCIPLE consider the various sorts of primary
propositionsaxioms,  postulates,  assumptions  by  which a similar regression is
avoided  in the process of proof. The chapter on CAUSE deals with the problem of
an infinite regression in causes and effects. Here it is appropriate to consider
the  difference  between an infinite series of reasons and an infinite series of
causes.  To  the  extent  that both are truly series the succession of one thing
after  another  neither  seems  to be impossible, given infinite time. Those who
deny  the  possibility  of  an  infinite  number  of  causes distinguish between
essential  and  accidental  causes,  that is, between causes which must co-exist
with  their  effects and causes which can precede their effects, and cease to be
before  their  effects  occur. If there were an infinite time, there could be an
infinite  series  of  accidental  causes. But it may be questioned whether, even
granted  an  infinite  time,  the  relation  be-  conclusion cannot be twecn the
premises  and  conclusion of reasoning its premises is known permits an infinite
regression. If the truth of a may be vitiated by a

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The general theory of infinity
   1a. The definite and indefinite: the measured and the indeterminate
   1b. The infinite in   being and quantity: the actual and potential infinite; the formal
   and the material infinite

2. Infinity in      the logical order
   2a. The infinity of negative and indefinite terms
   2b. The distinction between negative and infinite judgments
   2c. Infinite regression in analysis and reasoning

3. The
infinite in quantity
   3a. Number: the infinite of division and addition
   3b. The infinite divisibility of continuous quantities: the infinitesimal; the method
   of exhaustion and the theory of limits
   3c. The infinity of asymptotes and parallels
   3d. The infinite extent of space
   3e. The infinite duration of time and motion

4. The infinity of matter
   4a. The infinite quantity or extent of matter: the      problem of an actually infinite
   body
   4b. The infinite divisibility of matter: the issue concerning atoms
   4*-.
   The infinite potentiality of matter: the conception of prime or formless matter
   in the world

5. Infinity
   5a. The infinite number
   of things and the infinite number of kinds
   5b. The number of causes

6. The finite and the infinite in the nature of     man
   6a. The infinity of desire and will: the limits of human capacity
   6b. The infinity of the intellect: man's knowledge of the infinite

7. The infinity of God
   7a. The infinite being or essence of God
   7& The infinite power of God
   7b. God's infinite goodness and love
   7</.
   God's infinite knowledge

CROSS-REFERENCES

For:  The  distinction  between  the  potential  and  actual  infi addition, see
QUANTITY  7.  Other discussions of the infinity of space, time, and 13; ETERNITY
2; SPACE 33; TIME 20; WORLD 43; and fo infinite time, see ETERNITY i TIME 2.

;

The  issue  concerning  the  existence  of atoms or the in MENT 5b; ONE AND MANY
33(3).  The problem of an infinite regression in causes, see and for the related
problem of infinite regression

TION 1c; PRINCIPLE 3a(3); REASONING 5b(i).

The treatment of the infinite and the infinitesimal i

QUANTITY 2, 33, 30, 4c, 7.

The special logical sense in which judgments are call

The conception of the human intellect and of prime ma

infinity, see MIND 2b.

Another discussion of the finite and the infinite in

'3-

The special consideration of infinity in relation to

the special consideration of the limits of human kn

The problem of our knowledge of the infinite, see KNO

The infinity of God, and of God's knowledge, power, a

4e-4f, 50, 5f; GOOD AND EVIL 2; KNOWLEDGE 73; LIBER

TRUTH 2d; WILL 4b; WORLD 33.

ITY  833  [12]llld-112b;  xix  [22-99]  135b-136a;  xxi [73-i5] 139a-b 30 BACON:
Advancement of Learning, 98d-99b 31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 122a-b 31
SPINOZA:  Ethics,  PART  i,  PROP  21 364a-c; PART n, PROP i 373d-374a; PROP 3-4
374a-c 32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK n [188-193] 115b; BK m

[56-134]  136b-138a; BK vn [109-130] 219b-220a; BK vm [412-436] 241a-b 35 LOCKE:
Human  Understanding,  BK n, CH xv, SECT 12 165b-c; CH xvn, SECT i 167d-168a; CH
xxm,  SECT  34-35  213a-c  passim;  BK in, CH vi, SECT 11-12 271b-272b passim 42
KANT:  Practical  Reason, 303b-304a; 325d326a; 344a-348a; 351b-352c / Judgement,
590b-d;  592a-c  nite,  and  the  infinite of division and motion, see ASTRONOMY
8c(i); CHANGE r the conception of eternity as finite divisibility of matter, see
ELECAUSE  1b,  7b;  CHANGE  14;  PRINCIPLE  1b; in definition and reasoning, see
DEFINIn  mathematics, #v MATHEMATICS 4d; ed "infinite," see JUDGMENT 6b. tter as
having  comparable types of relation to human nature, see MAN lod, human desire,
see  DESIRE  7-73(3);  and for owledge, see KNOWLEDGE 53-53(6). WLEDGE 53(4). nd
goodness, see BEING 7b(4); GOD TY 5d; MIND lof; NATURE 1b;

834 ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below arc works not included in Great Booty of

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These

I. Works by authors represented

II. Works by authors not represen

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the p

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows

I.

DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i,

26-27 SPINOZA. Correspondence, xii

NEWTON. The Method of Fluxions and Infinite

Series BERKELEY. The Analyst

. A Defence of Free Thinking in Mathematics HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK
i, PART 11,

SECT i- n KANT. De Mundi Sensibihs (Inaugural Dissertation)

Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic, par

.

50-54 HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK i, SECT i, CH 2

(B,C) SECT n, CH 2 (c)

;

W. JAMES. Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 10-11

II.

PROCLUS. The Elements of Theology, (j) ANSELM OF CANTERBURY. Monologium

.

Proslogium MAIMONIDES. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i,

CH73 DUNS SCOTUS. Opus Oxoniense, BK i, DIST 13

.

Reportata  Pansiensia  CRESCAS.  Or Adonai, PROPOSITIONS 1-3 NICOLAS OF CUSA. De
Docta Ignorantia BRUNO. De I'mfinito, unwerso e mondi

De Immenso et Innumerabilibus

. DONNE. Lovers Infimtenesse SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxvm, xxx

(2), xxxv (3), XLI (5)

S  the  Western World, but relevant to the works are divided into two groups. in
this  collection  ted in this collection. ublication of the works cited, consult
the last chapter of The Great Ideas. standing, BK n, CH 17 .

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human UnderCorrespondence with Clarke

VOLTAIRE. "Infinity," in A Philosophical Dictionary The Ignorant Philosopher, CH
1 8

.  BOLZANO.  Paradoxien des Unendhchen WIILWELL. On the Philosophy of Discovery,
CH  26  STALLO.  Concepts  and  Theories  of  Modern Physics, CH 13 BRADLEY. The
Principles  of  Logic,  Terminal  Essays,  VI  FULLERTON.  The Conception of the
Infinite,  and the Solution of the Mathematical Antinomies BOSANQUET. LoglC, VOL
I,  CH 4 C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 112-126 COUTURAT De I'tnfim
mathematique  CANTOR.  Contributions to the Founding of the Theory of Transfmite
Numbers  plementary  Essay  (4)  ROYCE.  The World and the Individual, SERIES i;
SupPEANO.  Formulaire de mathematique E. W. HOBSON. The Theory of Functions of a
Real Variable and the Theory of Fourier's Series POINCARE Science and Method, BK
n, CH 3

WHITEHEAD and RUSSELL. Pnncipia Mathematica, PART III, SECT C; PART V, SECT E B.
RUSSELL.  Principles of Mathematics, CH 13, 17, 23, 37-43 . Our Knowledge of the
External World, v-vn

. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, CH 3, 9. '3

SITTER. Kosmos (The Expanding Universe) WEYL. The Open World, LECT HI
