Chapter & KNOWLEDG INTRODUCTI like being, is a term of lkNOWLEDGE, 1k
comprehensive scope. Its comprehensiveness is, in a way, correlative with that
of being. The only thing which cannot be an object of knowledge or opinion,
which cannot be thought about in any way except negatively, is that which has no
being of any sort in short, nothing. Not all things may be knowable to us, but
even the skeptic who severely limits or completely doubts man's power to know is
usually willing to admit thatbeyond things man's knowledge are in themselves
knowable. Everyone except Berkeley would agree that the surfaces of bodies which
we cannot see are not, for that reason, in themselves invisible. The
consideration of knowledge extends, therefore, to all things knowable, to all
kinds of knowers, to all the modes of knowledge, and all the methods of knowing.
So extensive an array of topics exceeds the possibility of treatment in a single
chapter and requires this chapter to be related to many others. The
Cross-References which follow the References indicate the other chapters which
deal with particulars we cannot consider here. For example, the nature of
history, science, philosophy, and theology, and their distinction from one
another, are treated in the chapters devoted to those subjects. So, too, the
chapters on metaphysics, mathematics, physics, mechanics, and medicine deal with
the characteristics and relations of these special sciences. The psychological
factors in knowing the faculties of sense and mind, of memory and imagination,
the nature of experience and reasoning also have their own chapters. Still other
chapters deal with the logical elements of knowledge, such as idea and judgment,
definition, hypothesis, principle, induction, and reasoning, logic and
dialectic.

E ON THE PROGRAM which Locke sets himself in his Essay Concerning Human
Understanding is often taken to include the basic questions about knowledge. His
purpose, he tells us, is "to inquire into the original, certainty, and extent of
human knowledge, together with the grounds and degrees of belief, opinion, and
assent." Two other matters, not explicitly mentioned by Locke in his opening
pages, assume central importance in the fourth book of his essay. One is the
question about the nature of knowledge itself. The other concerns the kinds of
knowledge. It may be thought that certain questions are prior to these and all
others. Is knowledge possible? Can we know anything? The man the skeptic
challenges is one who thinks that knowledge is attainable and who may even claim
to possess knowledge of some sort. But the issue between the skeptic and his
adversaries cannot be simply formulated. Its formulation depends in part upon
the meaning given knowledge and the various things with which it is sometimes
contrasted, such as belief and opinion, or ignorance and error. It also depends
in part on the meaning of truth and probability. It would seem, therefore, that
some consideration of the nature of knowledge should precede the examination of
the claims concerning knowledge which provoke skeptical denials. The theory of
knowledge is a field of many disputes. Most of the major varieties of doctrine
or analysis are represented in the tradition of the great books. But the fact
that knowledge involves a relationship between a knower and a known seems to go
unquestioned. William James expresses this insight, perhaps more dogmatically
than some would allow, in the statement that knowledge "is a thoroughgoing
dualism.

It supposes two elements, mind knowing and thing known . Neither gets out of
itself or . . into the other, neither in any way w the other, CHAPTER 43; KNOWL
neither ma fas the other. They just stand face to face in a common world, and
one simply knows, or is known unto, its counterpart," This remains true even
when attention is turned to the special case of knowledge about knowledge or the
knower knowing himself. The mind's examination of itself simply makes the mind
an object to be known as well as a knower.

This suggests a second point about the nature of knowledge which seems to be
undisputed. If knowledge relates a knower to a known, then what is somehow
possessed when a person claims to have knowledge, is the object known. It does
not seem possible for anyone to say that he knows something without meaning that
he has that thing in mind. "Some sort of signal," James writes, "must be given
by the thing to the mind's brain, or the knowing will not occurwe find as a
matter of fact that the mere existence of a thing outside the brain is not a
sufficient cause for our knowing it : it must strike the brain in some way, as
well as be there, to be known." What is not in any way present to or represented
in the mind is not known in any of the various senses of the word "know." What
the mind cannot reach to and somehow grasp cannot be known. The words which are
common synonyms for knowing "apprehending" and "comprehending" convey this sense
that knowledge somehow takes hold of and surrounds its object. That knowledge is
a kind of possession occasions the comparisons which have been made between
knowledge and love. The ancients observed that likeness and union are involved
in both. Plato, for example, suggests in the Symposium that both the knower and
the lover strive to become one with their object. "Love is also a philosopher,"
Diotima tells Socrates, and, as "a lover of wisdom," the philosopher is also a
lover. With regard to some objects, love and knowledge are almost inseparable.
To know them is to love them. But this does not hold for all objects, nor does
the inseparability of knowledge and love in certain cases prevent their
analytical distinction in all. Like is known by like, but unlikes attract each
other. Furthermore, according to one theory of knowledge, expounded by Aquinas,
the knower is satisfied to possess an image of the thing to be known. This image
EDGE provides the likeness through which knowledge occurs; and thus, Aquinas
writes, "the idea of the thing understood is in the one who understands." The
lover, on the other hand, is "inclined to the thing itself, as existing in
itself." He seeks to be united with it directly. The nobility or baseness of the
object known does not affect the knower as the character of the object loved
affects the lover. This understanding of the difference between knowledge and
love leads Aquinas to say that "to love God is better than to know God; but, on
the contrary, to know corporeal things is better than to love them." The
principle of likeness between knower and known does not go undisputed. On the
contrary, the opposite views here form one of the basic issues about the nature
of knowledge. The issue is whether the thing known is actually present to the
knower, existing in the mind or consciousness exactly as it exists in itself; or
whether the thing is represented in the mind by a likeness of itself, through
which the mind knows it. In this view, the mode of existence of the thing
outside the mind is different from the way in which its representative exists in
the mind. Berkeley, at one extreme, identifies being and being known. "As to
what is said of the absolute existence of unthinking things without any relation
to their being perceived, that seems perfectly unintelligible," he writes.
"Their esse is percipi, nor is it possible they should have any existence, out
of the minds or thinking things which perceive them." At the other extreme are
those like Kant for whom the thing in itself is unknowable precisely because
there can be no resemblance between the phenomenal order of objects represented
under the conditions of experience and the noumenal order of the unconditioned.
"AH conceptions of things in themselves," he writes, "must be referred to
intuitions, and with us men these can never be other than sensible, and hence
can never enable us to know objects as things in themselves but only as
appearances. . . . The unconditioned," he adds, "can never be found in this
chain of appearances." In between these extremes there are those who agree that
things exist apart from being known without ceasing to be knowable, but who
nevertheless differ with respect to whether THE GREAT the thing exists in
reality in the same way that it exists in the mind. The several forms of
idealism and realism, distinguished in the chapter on IDEA, mark the range of
traditional differences in the discussion of this difficult problem.

FOR ANY THEORY of what knowledge is there is a distinction between knowledge and
ignorance between having or not having something in mind. Nor does anyone
confuse ignorance and error. The mind in error claims to know that of which, in
fact, it is ignorant. This, as Socrates points out in the Meno, makes it easier
to teach a person aware of his ignorance than a person in error; for the latter,
supposing himself to know, resists the teacher. Hence getting a person to
acknowledge ignorance is often the indispensable first step in teaching. But
though the difference between knowledge and ignorance and that between ignorance
and error seems to be commonly understood, it does not follow that everybody
similarly agrees upon the difference between knowledge and error. This much is
agreed, that to know is to possess the truth about something, whereas to err is
to be deceived by falsity mistaken for truth. The disagreement of the
philosophers begins, however, when the meaning of truth and falsity is examined.

Truth is one thing for those who insist upon some similarity between the thing
known and that by which it is known or represented in the mind. It is another
for those who think that knowledge can be gained without the mediation of images
or representations. In the first case, truth will consist in some kind of
correspondence between what the mind thinks or understands and the reality it
tries to know. In the other, truth will be equivalent to consistency among the
mind's own ideas.

The examination of this fundamental disagreement is reserved for the chapter on
TRUTH. Here the identification of knowing with having the truth calls for the
consideration of another distinction, first made by Plato, In his language, as
in that of Aristotle and others, it is the difference between knowledge and
opinion. Sometimes, as with Locke, a similar distinction is made in terms of
knowledge and judgment; sometimes it is made in terms of knowledge and belief;
sometimes in terms of adequate and IDEAS inadequate, or certain and probable,
knowledge. The difference between these opposites, unlike that between knowledge
and error, is not a matter of truth and falsity. There is such a thing as "right
opinion," according to Socrates, and it is "not less useful than knowledge."
Considering the truth so far as it affects action, Socrates claims that the man
with right opinion "will be just as good a guide if he thinks the truth, as he
who knows the truth." The difference between right opinion and knowledge is here
expressed by the contrast be t ween the words "thinks" and "knows." It does not
consist in the truth of the conclusion, but in the way that conclusion has been
reached or is held by the mind. The trouble with right opinion as compared with
knowledge, Socrates explains, is that it lacks stability and permanence. Right
opinions are useful "while they abide with us ... but they run away out of the
human soul and do not remain long, and therefore they are not of much value
until they are fastened by the tie of the cause" or, in other words, until they
are fixed in the mind by the reasons on which they are grounded. "When they are
bound," Socrates declares, "they have the nature of knowledge and . . . they are
abiding." At this point in his conversation with Meno, Socrates makes the
unusual confession that "there are not many things which I profess to know, but
this is most certainly one of them," namely, that "knowledge differs from true
opinion." It may be that Socrates claims to know so little because he regards
knowledge as involving so much more than simply having the truth, as the man of
right opinion has it. In addition to having the truth, knowledge consists in
seeing the reason why it is true. This criterion can be interpreted to mean that
a proposition which is neither self-evident nor demonstrated expresses opinion
rather than knowledge. Even when it happens to be true, the opinion is qualified
by some degree of doubt or some estimate of probability and counterprobability.
In contrast, when the mind has adequate grounds for its judgment, when it knows
that it knows and why, it has the certainty of knowledge.

CHAPTER 43: KNO For some writers, such as Plato, certitude is as inseparable
from knowledge as truth is. To speak of "a false knowledge as well as a true"
seems to him impossible; and "uncertain knowledge" is as self-contradictory a
phrase as "false knowledge."

Others use the word "knowledge" more loosely to cover both adequate and
inadequate knowledge, the probable as well as the certain.

They make a distinction within the sphere of knowledge that is equivalent to the
distinction between knowledge and opinion. Spinoza, for example, distinguishes
three kinds of knowledge. He groups the perception of individual things through
the bodily senses, which he calls "knowledge from vague experience," with
knowledge "from signs" which depends on ideas formed by the memory and
imagination. "These two ways of looking at things," he writes, "I shall
hereafter call knowledge of the first kind opinion or imagination." In contrast,
that which is derived "from our possessing common notions and adequate ideas of
the properties of things," he calls "reason and knowledge of the second kind."

The third kind, which he calls "intuitive science," is that sort of knowing
which "advances from an adequate idea of certain attributes of God to the
adequate knowledge of the essence of things." Knowledge of the second and third
kinds, he maintains, "is necessarily true." That there can be falsity in the
first kind, and only there, indicates that it is not genuinely knowledge at all,
but what other writers would insist upon calling "opinion." The several meanings
of the word "belief are determined by these distinctions. Sometimes belief is
associated with opinion, sometimes with knowledge, and sometimes it is regarded
as an intermediate state of mind. But in any of these meanings belief stands in
contrast to make-believe, and this contrast has a bearing on knowledge and
opinion as well. To know or to opine puts the mind in some relation to the real
or actual rather than the merely possible, and subjects it to the criteria of
truth and falsity. The fanciful or imaginary belongs to the realm of the
possible (or even the impossible) and the mind in imagining fancy-freefree from
is the restraints and restrictions of truth and reality.

WLEDGE SKEPTICISM in its most extreme form takes the position that there is
nothing true or false. But even those who, like Montaigne, deny certitude with
respect to everything except matters of religious faith, do not go this far. In
his Apology for Raimond de Scbondc he concedes that if opinions arc weighed as
more or less probable, their truth or falsity is implied at least as being the
limit which an increasing probability or improbability approaches. Referring to
ancient skeptics of the Academic school, he comments on the fact that they
acknowledged "some things to be more likely than others" as, for example, that
snow is white rather than black. The more extreme skeptics, the Pyrrhonians, he
points out, were bolder and also more consistent. They refused to incline toward
one proposition more than toward another, for to do so, Montaigne declares, is
to recognize "some more apparent truth in this than in that." How can men
"suffer themselves," he asks, "to incline to and be swayed by probability, if
they know not the truth itself? How should they know the similitude of that
whereof they do not know the essence?" In this respect Montaigne's own
skepticism tends to be of the more moderate variety, since, in the realm of
action at least, he would admit the need for judgments of probability. But in
all other respects, he takes a firm skeptical stand that nothing is
self-evident, nothing has been proved. The contradictory of everything has been
asserted or argued by someone, "Men can have no principles," he writes, "if not
revealed to them by the Divinity; of all the rest, the beginning, the middle,
and the end are nothing . . . but dream and vapor. Every human presupposition
and every declaration has as much authority, one as another. . . . The
persuasion of certainty is a certain testimony of folly and extreme
uncertainty," The skeptical extreme is represented in the great books only
through references to it for the purpose of refutation. Aristotle in the Meta
physics, for example, reports the position of those who say that all
propositions are true or that all propositions are false, and who therefore deny
the principle of contradiction and with it the distinction between true and
false. But if all propositions are true, then the proposition "Some propositions
are false" is also true; if THE GREAT I ail propositions arc false, the
proposition "All propositions are false" is also false. The skeptic may reply,
of course, that he is not checked by arguments which try to make him contradict
himself, for he does not mind contradicting himself. To this there is only one
answer, which is not to argue with the skeptic any further. From the skeptic's
point of view his position is irrefutable so long as he does not allow himself
to accept any of the standards by which refutation can be effected. From his
opponent's point of view complete skepticism is self-refuting because if the
skeptic says anything definite at all, he appears to have some knowledge or at
least to hold one opinion in preference to another. His only choice is to remain
silent. If he insistsupon making statements in defiance of self-contradiction,
his opponent can do nothing but walk away.

"It may seem a very extravagant attempt of the skeptics to destroy reason by
argument and ratiocination," Hume writes, "yet this is the of all their
enquiries and disputes." grand scope He has in mind the excessive skepticism, or
Pyrrhonism, from which he tries to distinguish a mitigated and beneficial form
of skepticism. Referring to Berkeley's arguments against the independent reality
of matter or bodies, Hume says their effect is skeptical, despite Berkeley's
professed intention to the contrary. That his arguments are skeptical "appears
from this, that they admit of no answer and produce no conviction. Their only
effect is to cause that momentary amazement and irresolution and confusion,
which is the result of skepticism." Here and elsewhere, as in his comment on
Descartes' skeptical method of doubting everything which can be doubted, Hume
does not seem to think that excessive skepticism is refutable or even false. But
it is impractical. "The great subverter of Pyrrhonism or the excessive
principles of skepticism," he says, "is action, and employment, and the
occupations of life." Extreme skepticism becomes untenable in thought the moment
thought must face the choices of life and take some responsibility for action.
There is, however, "a more mitigated skepticism or academical philosophy which
may be both durable and useful." This, according to Hume, consists in becoming
"sensible of the strange infirmities of human understanding," and consequently
in "the limitation of our enquiries to such subjects as are best adapted to the
narrow capacity of human understanding." His own view of the extent and
certainty of human knowledge seems to him to exemplify such mitigated skepticism
in operation. The only objects with respect to which demonstration is possible
are quantity and number. Mathematics has the certitude of knowledge, but it
deals only with relations between ideas, not with what Hume calls "matters of
fact and existence." Such matters "are evidently incapable of demonstration."
This is the sphere of "moral certainty," which is not a genuine certainty, but
only a degree of probability sufficient for action. Probabilities are the best
that experimental reasoning or inquiry about matters of fact can achieve. If
probability is charof opinion rather than knowledge, acteristic then we can have
nothing better than opinion concerning real existences. THE DIAMETRICAL opposite
to the extreme of skepticism would have to be a dogmatism which placed no
objects beyond the reach of human knowledge, which made no distinction between
degrees of knowabihty and admitted equal certitude in all matters. Like
excessive skepticism this extreme is not a position actually held in the great
books. All the great thinkers who have considered the problem of human knowledge
have set limits to man's capacity for knowledge. They have placed certain
objects beyond man's power to apprehend at all, or have distinguished between
those which he can apprehend in some inadequate fashion, but cannot comprehend.
They have indicated other objects concerning which his grasp is adequate and
certain. They all adopt a "mitigated skepticism" to use Hume's phrase if this
can be taken to mean avoiding the extremes of saying that nothing is knowable at
all and that everything is equally knowable. But they differ in the criteria
they employ to set the limits of knowledge and to distinguish between the areas
of certainty and probability. Consequently they differ in their determination of
the knowability of certain types of objects, such as God or the infinite,
substance or cause, matter or spirit, the real or the ideal, the self or the
thing in itself.

CHAPTER 43: KNOWL For example, Plato and Aristotle agree that knowledge must be
separated from opinion and even appeal to certain common principles in making
that separation; but they do not define the scope of knowledge in the same way,
as is indicated by their disagreement about the knowability of sensible things.
Nor do Descartes and Locke, Bacon and Spinoza, Hume and Kant agree about the
knowabihty of God or of the soul or about the conditions any object must meet in
order to be knowable. All alike proceed from a desire to be critical. Each
criticizes what other men have proposed as knowledge and each proposes a new
method by which the pursuit of knowledge will be safeguarded from illusory hopes
or endless controversy.

In this last respect the moderns depart most radically from their mediaeval and
ancient predecessors. At all times men have been interested in examining
knowledge itself as well as in exercising their powers to know. But in the
earlier phase of the tradition knowledge about knowledge does not seem to take
precedence over all other inquiries or to be prerequisite to them. On the
contrary, the ancients proceed as if the study of knowledge necessarily
presupposed the existence of knowledge. With them the examination takes place
because the mind is essentially reflexive rather than for reasons of
selfcnticism. But beginning with Descartes' Discourse on the Method, in which a
method of universal doubt is proposed to clear the ground before the foundations
of the sciences can be laid, the consideration of knowing is put before any
attempt to know.

Sometimes, as with Descartes and Bacon, the emphasis is upon a new method which
will at last establish knowledge on a firm footing or advance learning.
Sometimes, as with Locke and Hume, attention is given first of all to the
faculty of understanding itself. "If we can find out," says Locke, "how far the
understanding can extend its views, how far it has faculties to attain
certainty, and in what cases it can only judge and guess, we may learn to
content ourselves with what is attainable by us in this state When we know our
own strength, we shall the better know what to undertake with hopes of success;
and when we have well surveyed the powers of our own minds, and made some
estimate of what we may expect EDGE from them, we shall not be inclined either
to sit and not set our thoughts to work at all, in still, despair of knowing
anything; nor, on the other side, question everything, and disclaim all
knowledge, because some things are not to be understood." Hume also proposes
that a study of human understanding precede everything else, to "show from an
exact analysis of its powers and capacity" what subjects it is or is not fitted
to investigate. "There is a truth and falsehood in all propositions on this
subject which he not beyond the compass of human understanding." No one can
doubt that a science of the minder knowledge about knowing is possible unless he
entertains "such a skepticism as is entirely subversive of all speculations, and
even action.'* Disagreeing with the principles of Locke and Hume, as well as
with their conclusions, Kant does approve the priority they give to the question
of the possibility of knowing certain objects. To proceed otherwise, as Kant
charges most other philosophers with doing, is dogmatism. The use of the word
"critique" in the title of Kant's three major works signifies his intention to
construct a critical philosophy which does not presume that "it is possible to
achieve anything in metaphysic without a previous criticism of pure reason." He
does not object to what he calls "the dogmatical procedure of reason" in the
development of science, but only after reason's self-criticism has determined
just how far reason can go. For Kant, as for Bacon, dogmatism and skepticism are
the opposite excesses which only a critical method can avoid. THESE TWO
different approaches to the theory of knowledge seem to result in different
conclusions concerning the nature and scope of human knowledge. Those who begin
with the established sciences and merely inquire into their foundations and
methods, appear to end with unqualified confidence in man's ability to know.
Those who make the inquiry into the foundations and methods of science a
necessary preparation for the development of the sciences, tend for the most
part to set narrower boundaries to the area of valid knowledge. The two
approaches also affect the way in which the various kinds of knowledge are
distinguished and compared. There are two sorts of comparison involved in the
classification of kinds of knowledge. One comparison of human knowledge with
divine, is a or with angelic knowledge and the knowledge of brute animals. The
other is a comparison of the parts or modes of human knowledge according to such
criteria as the objects to be known, the faculties engaged in the process of
knowing, and the manner of their operation. Though made separately, those two
comparisons are seldom independent of one another. As the nature of man is
conceived in relation to other beings, superior or inferior to himself, his
faculties will be rated accordingly, and his power as a knower will suggest the
methods or means available to him for knowing. Aquinas, for example, attributes
to man the kind of knowledge appropriate to his station in the hierarchy of
beings. Man is superior to the brutes because he has a faculty of reason in
addition to the faculties of sense and imagination which he shares with them.
Man is inferior to purely spiritual beings the angels and God because, since he
is corporeal, his intellect cannot function independently of his bodily senses
and imagination. Unlike the angels and God, he is not a purely intellectual
being. Accordingly, the essential characteristics of human knowledge are, first,
that it is always both sensitive and intellectual, never merely sense-perception
as with the brutes or pure intellectual intuition as with the angels; second,
that its appropriate object is the physical world ofsensible, material things,
with respect to which the senses enable man to know the existence of
individuals, while the intellect apprehends their universal natures; and,
finally, that the way in which the human mind knows the natures of things is
abstractive and discursive, for the intellect draws its concepts from sense and
imagination and proceeds therefrom by means of judgment and reasoning. This
analysis denies innate ideas. It denies man's power to apprehend ideas
intuitively or to use them intuitively in the apprehension of things. It can
find no place for a distinction between a priori and a posteriori knowledge,
since sense-perception and rational activity contribute elements to every act of
knowing. It affirms that knowledge is primarily of real existence, not of the
relations between ideas; but it does not limit human knowledge to the changing
temporal things of the material universe. Though these arc the objects man is
able to know with greatest adequacy, he can also know something of the existence
and nature of immaterial and eternal beings. Yet, according to Aquinas, even
when man's knowledge rises above the realm of experienceable things, it is
obtained by the same natural processes and involves the cooperation of the
senses with reason. The theologian does, however, distinguish sharply between
knowledge gained through man's own efforts and knowledge received through divine
revelation. In addition to all knowledge acquired by the natural exercise of his
faculties, man may be elevated by the supernatural gift of knowledge the wisdom
of a faith surpassing reason. The foregoing summary illustrates, in the case of
one great doctrine, the connection between an analysis of the kinds of knowledge
and a theory of the nature and faculties of man in relation to all other things.
There is no point in this analysis which is not disputed by someone by Plato or
Augustine, Descartes, Spinoza, or Locke, by Hume, Kant, or William James. There
are many points on which others agree not only Aristotle and Bacon, but even
Augustine, Descartes, and Locke. These agreements or disagreements about the
kmdsof knowledge, or the scopeof human knowledge, its faculties, and its
methods, seldom occur or are intelligible except in the wider context of
agreements and disagreements in theology and metaphysics, psychology and logic.
Hence most of the matters considered under the heading "kinds of knowledge"
receive special consideration in other chapters. The CrossReferences should
enable the reader to examine the presuppositions or context of the materials
assembled here. THE CULT OF IGNORANCE receives little or no attention in the
tradition of the great books. Even those who, like Rousseau, glorify the
innocence of the primitives, or who satirize the folly so often admixed with
human wisdom and the foibles attending the advance of learning, do not seriously
question the ancient saying that all men by nature desire to know. Nor is it
generally doubted that knowledge is good; that its possession contributes to the
happiness of men CHAPTER 43: K and the welfare of the state; that its pursuit by
the individual and its dissemination in a society should be facilitated by
education, by the support and freedom of scholars and scientists, and by every
device which can assist men in communicating what they know to one another. But
knowledge is not valued by all for the same reason. That knowledge is useful to
the productive artist, to the statesman, to the legislator, and to the
individual in the conduct of his life, seems to be assumed in discussions of the
applications of science in the various arts, in the consideration of statecraft,
and in the analysis of virtue. In this last connection, the problem is not
whether knowledge is morally useful, but whether knowledge of good and evil is
identical with virtue so that sin and vice result from error or ignorance. If
there is a negative opinion here, it consists in saying that knowledge is not
enough. To know is not to do. Something more than knowledge is required for
acting well.

The more radical dispute about the value of knowledge concerns the goodness of
knowledge for its own sake, without any regard to its technical or moral
utility. Is the contemplation of the truth an ultimate end, or does the goodness
of knowledge always consist in its power to effect results in the mastery of
nature and the guidance of conduct ? The utility of knowledge is seldom denied
by those who make speculative wisdom and theoretic science good in themselves,
even the highest goods, quite apart from OUTLINE OF TOP any use to which they
may be put. The con1. The nature of knowledge: the relation between the
representative or intentional character 2. Man's natural desire and power to
know 3. Principles of knowledge 4. Knowledge in relation to other states of mind
40. Knowledge and truth: the differentiation 4k. Knowledge, belief, and opinion:
their re 4r. The distinction between knowledge and fa 40*. Knowledge and love
NOWLEDGE trary position, however, docs not admit the special value of
contemplation or the separation of truth from utility. To those who say that
"the contemplation of truth is more dignified and exalted than any utility or
extent of effects," Francis Bacon replies that "truth and utility are perfectly
identical, and the effects are more of value as pledges of truth than from the
benefit they confer on men." How knowledge and action are related is one
question; how knowledge itself is divided into the speculative and practical is
quite another. Bacon, for example, insists upon the necessity of distinguishing
the speculative and practical branchesof natural philosophy concerned with "the
search after causes and the production of effects." Unlike Aristotle and Kant he
does not use the word "practical" for the kind of knowledge which is contained
in such sciences as ethics or politics, but only for the applied sciences or
technology. Ethics and politics fall under what he calls "civil philosophy."
Despite these differences in language, the way in which Bacon divides the whole
sphere of knowledge closely resembles Aristotle's tripartite classification of
the sciences as theoretic, productive (or technical), and practical (or moral);
and, no less, a similar threefold division by Kant. But Kant and Aristotle (and,
it should be added, Aquinas) give a more elaborate analysis of thesethree types
of knowledge, especially with regard to the principles appropriate to each, the
nature of the judgments and reasoning by which they are developed, and the
character and criteria of their truth. ICS PAGE knower and known; the issue
concerning of knowledge 890 891 892 of knowledge, error, and ignorance lation or
distinction ncy or imagination 894 888 5. The extent or limits of human
knowledge 50. The knowable, the unknowable, and the unknown: the knowability of
objects (1) God as an object of knowledge (2) Matter and the immaterial as
objects of knowledge (3) Cause and substance as objects of knowledge (4) The
infinite and the individual as objects of knowledge (5) The past and the future
as objects of knowledge (6) The self and the thing in itself as objects of
knowledge 5& The distinction between what is more knowable in itself and what
knowable to us y. Dogmatism, skepticism, and the critical attitude with respect
to certainty, and finality of human knowledge $d. The method of universal doubt
as prerequisite to knowledge: G as the assurance of the veracity of our
faculties 5*. Knowledge about knowledge as the source of criteria for e
knowledge 6. The kinds of knowledge 6a. The classification of knowledge
according to diversity of objec (1) Being and becoming, the intelligible and the
sensible, th the contingent, the eternal and the temporal, the imm material as
objects of knowledge (2) Knowledge of natures or kinds distinguished from
knowledge (3) Knowledge of matters of fact or real existence distinguishe edge
of our ideas or of the relations between them (4) Knowledge in relation to the
distinction between the p noumenal, the sensible and supra-sensible 6. The
classification of knowledge according to the faculties involv (1) Sensitive
knowledge: sense-perception as knowledge; judgmen tion and judgments of
experience (2) Memory as knowledge (3) Rational or intellectual knowledge (4)
Knowledge in relation to the faculties of understandin reason; and to the work
of intuition, imagination, an 6c. The classification of knowledge according to
the methods or mean (1) Vision, contemplation, or intuitive knowledge
distinguished knowledge (2) The distinction between immediate and mediated
judgments: i reasoning, principles and conclusions (3) The doctrine of knowledge
as reminiscence: the distinction and acquired knowledge (4) The distinction
between a priori and a posteriori know scendental, or speculative, and the
empirical (5) The distinction between natural and supernatural knowledge based
on sense or reason distinguished from knowledge through grace and inspiration
PACE certain 896 897 898 is more the extent, od's goodness valuating claims to
ts e necessary and aterial and the of individuals 901 902 d from knowlhenomenal
and the ed in knowing 903 904 ts of percepg, judgment, and d understanding s of
knowing from discursive nduction and between innate ledge: the tran: knowledge
by faith or CHAPTER 43: KNOWLEDGE 6d. The classification of knowledge according
to the degrees of ass (1) The distinction between certain and probable knowledge
(2) The types of certainty and the degrees of probability (3) The distinction
between adequate and inadequate, or perfec perfect knowledge 6V. The
classification of knowledge according to the end or aim of (1) The distinction
between theoretic and practical knowledge the sake of knowledge and for the sake
of action or pr (2) The types of practical knowledge: the use of knowledge in in
the direction of conduct; technical and moral knowl 7. Comparison of human with
other kinds of knowledge ja. Human and divine knowledge 7k. Human and angelic
knowledge jc. Knowledge in this life compared with knowledge in the state of
knowledge hereafter yd. The knowledge of men and brutes 8. The use and value of
knowledge 80. The technical use of knowledge in the sphere of production: the
science in art 8. The moral use of knowledge and the moral value of knowledge
(1) The knowledge of good and evil: the relation of knowledge t (2) Knowledge as
a condition of voluntanness in conduct (3) Knowledge in relation to prudence and
continence (4) The possession or pursuit of knowledge as a good or satis to
pleasure and pain; its contribution to happiness 8c. The political use of
knowledge: the knowledge requisite for t legislator, or citizen 9.

The communication of knowledge 90. The means and methods of communicating
knowledge 9k. The value of the dissemination of knowledge: freedom of discuss
10. The growth of human knowledge: the history of man's progress and fa pursuit
of knowledge PAGE ent 907 908 t and imthe knowing : knowing for oduction
production and edge 909 910 innocence and 91 1 applications of o virtue and sin
913 914 faction: its relation he statesman, 915 916 ion ilures in the REFERENCES
To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy numbers of the passages
referred to. For example, in number 4 is the number of the volume in the set;
the sage is in section d of page 12.

PAGE SECTIONS: When the text is printed in one col upper and lower halves of the
page, For example, in 5 begins in the upper half of page and ends in the in two
columns, the letters a and b refer to printed hand sideof the page, the letters
c and d to the uppe the For example, in 7 PLATO: Symposium, 163b-16 page. of the
left-hand side of page and ends in the upp AUTHOR'S DIVISIONS: One or more of
the main divisi SECT) are sometimes included in the reference; line n tain
cases; e.g., Iliad, BK n [265-283] 12d.

BIBLE REFERENCES: The references are to book, chapte and Douay versions differ
in title of books or in the James version is cited first and the Douay,
indicated MENT: Nehemiah, 7:45 (D) // Esdras, 7:46.

SYMBOLS: The abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's relevant parts of a whole
reference, "passim" signifi tently rather than continuously in the work or
passag For additional information concerning the style of the Reference Style;
for general guidance in the use of Th

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of knowledge: the relation between knower and known; the issue concerning
the representative or intentional character of knowledge

2. Man's natural desire and power to know

3. Principles
of knowledge

4. Knowledge
in relation to other states of mind
 4a. Knowledge and truth: the differentiation of knowledge, error, and ignorance
 4b. Knowledge, belief, and opinion: their relation or distinction
 4c. The distinction between knowledge and fancy or imagination
 40*. Knowledge and love
 PACE

5. The extent or limits of human knowledge
 5a. The knowable, the unknowable, and the unknown: the knowability of certain
 objects
 (1) God as an object of knowledge
 (2) Matter and the immaterial as objects of knowledge
 (3) Cause and substance as objects
 of knowledge
 (4) The infinite and the individual
 as objects of knowledge
 (5) The past and the
 future as objects of knowledge
 (6) The self and the thing in itself as objects of knowledge
 5& The distinction between what is more knowable in itself and what is more
 knowable to us
 5b. Dogmatism, skepticism, and the critical attitude with respect to the extent,
 certainty, and finality of human knowledge
 5c. The method of universal doubt as prerequisite to knowledge: God's goodness
 as the assurance of the veracity of our faculties
 5*. Knowledge about knowledge as the source of criteria for evaluating claims to
 knowledge

6. The kinds of knowledge
 6a. The classification of knowledge according to diversity of objects
 (1) Being and becoming, the intelligible and the sensible, the necessary and
 the contingent, the eternal and the temporal, the immaterial and the
 material as objects of knowledge
 (2) Knowledge of natures or kinds distinguished from knowledge of individuals
 (3) Knowledge of matters of fact or real existence distinguished from knowl-
 edge of our ideas or of the relations between them
 (4) Knowledge in relation to the distinction between the phenomenal and the
 6b. the sensible and supra-sensible
 6c. The classification of knowledge according to the faculties involved in knowing
 (1) Sensitive knowledge: sense-perception as knowledge; judgments of percep-
 tion and judgments of experience
 (2) Memory as knowledge
 (3) Rational or intellectual knowledge
 (4) Knowledge in relation to the faculties of understanding, judgment, and
 reason; and to the work of intuition, imagination, and understanding
 6d. The classification of knowledge according to the methods or means of knowing
 (1) Vision, contemplation, or intuitive knowledge distinguished from discursive
 knowledge
 (2) The distinction between immediate and mediated judgments: induction and
 reasoning, principles and conclusions
 (3) The doctrine of knowledge as reminiscence: the distinction between innate
 and acquired knowledge
 (4) The distinction between a priori and a posteriori knowledge: the tran-
 scendental, or speculative, and the empirical
 (5) The distinction between natural and supernatural knowledge: knowledge
 based on sense or reason distinguished from knowledge by faith or
 through grace and inspiration
 6e. The classification of knowledge according to the degrees of assent
 (1) The distinction between certain and probable knowledge
 (2) The types of certainty and the degrees of probability
 (3) The distinction between adequate and inadequate, or perfect and im-
 perfect knowledge
 6f. The classification of knowledge according to the end or aim of the knowing
 (1) The distinction between theoretic and practical knowledge: knowing for
 the sake of knowledge and for the sake of action or production
 (2) The types of practical knowledge: the use of knowledge in production and
 in the direction of conduct; technical and moral knowledge

7. Comparison of human with other kinds of knowledge
 7a. Human and divine knowledge
 7b. Human and angelic knowledge
 7c. Knowledge
 in this life compared with knowledge in the state of innocence and
 knowledge hereafter
 7d. The knowledge of men and brutes 91 1

8. The use and value of knowledge
 8a. The technical use of knowledge in the sphere of production: the applications of
 science in art
 8b. The moral use of knowledge and the moral value of knowledge
 (1) The knowledge of good and evil: the relation of knowledge to virtue and sin
 (2) Knowledge as a condition of voluntanness in conduct
 (3) Knowledge in relation to prudence and continence
 (4) The possession or pursuit
 of knowledge as a good or satisfaction: its relation
 to pleasure and pain; its contribution to happiness
 8c. The political use of knowledge: the knowledge requisite for the statesman,
 legislator, or citizen
 9.
 The communication of knowledge
 8d. The means and methods of communicating knowledge
 8e. The value of the dissemination of knowledge: freedom of discussion

10. The growth of human knowledge: the history of man's progress and failures in the
pursuit of knowledge

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The differences between human and other kinds of knowledg

13(2); GOD 5f; INFINITY 7d; MIND 4e-4f; WISDOM 1d.

Other discussions bearing on the nature of human knowle

ignorance, and its distinction from opinion, belief,

TION 6a; ONE AND MANY 4f; OPINION i, 3-4k PRINCIPLE 3

TRUTH 2e, 3d; WiLL3b(i); and for the elements, causes

DEFINITION 5; EXPERIENCE 3; FORM 3, 4; IDEA la-1c; IN

PRINCIPLE 2-2b(3); REASONING 53-55); WILL 3X1),

Other considerations of the limits of human knowledge a

tain objects, see ANGEL 2b; BEING 8a-8c, 8e; CAUSE 5d

6-6b; INFINITY 6b; MAN 2a; MATTER 43; ONE AND MANY 46

CIPLE 5; SCIENCE 46; SOUL 1d; THEOLOGY 3c; TIME 6e-6f

PARTICULAR 4e.

Matters relevant to the classification of the kinds of k

sec BEING 8a-8b; FORM 3-3a; IDEA la; MIND 1a(i); NATU

CONTINGENCY 43; RELATION 4d; RELIGION m; SENSE 4a-4b;

*

4a

Matters relevant to the classification of the kinds of k

involved, see MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 3, 6a; MIND 1a(i

Matters relevant to the classification of the kinds of k

or means of knowing, see EXPERIENCE 2d; GOD 6c-6c(4);

MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 33; OPINION 43; REASONING 1b;

i; WISDOM 1c; and or rriethodology in general and tf

Th

see ASTRONOMY 23-20; HISTORY 39; LOGIC 4-4k MATHEMATI

METAPHYSICS 2c; PHILOSOPHY :3-3c; PHYSICS 4-*4d; SCIE

10 KANT: Pure Reason, ld-2b [fhi]; 5a-8b; 175b [fnx]; 248d-250a,c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic

273d-274a / Practical of Morals, Reason, 299d] 307a-d; 317b-318b; 327c-d; 339b-d
/ Judgement, 513d-514a; 55lb-552a FEDERALIST: NUMBER 9, 47c-d; NUMBER 37,
119b-120b ism, 445a-447b BOSWELL Johnson, 129a FOURIER Theory of Heat, 175b
MILL: Liberty, 274b-293b passim / UtilitarianFARADAY: Researches in Electricity,
b-c HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 136 138c-d / Philosophy of History,
INTRO, 185a186a; PART i, 217c-219c; 229b-d; 253b-c; 257d-258a; PART n,
279d-280b; PART iv, 323c-d; 347b-d; 361a-c MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 95b-105b
TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 196b; BK xi, 469a-d; EPILOGUE n, 694d-696d
DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK xi, 341d JAMES: Psychology, 37b; 125b-127b
FREUD: Psycho- Analytic Therapy, 125d-126a / tory Lectures, 880d-881c
Interpretation of Dreams, 137b-139a esp 138d139a / General Introduction, 550d /
Civilization and Its Discontents, 7 77 a / New Introduce, see ANGEL 3d; ANIMAL
1a(i)- dge, its relation to truth, error, and 0(2); SAME AND OTHER 43; and
fancy, see MEMORY AND IMAGINA, or principles of knowledge, see DUCTION 3;
JUDGMENT 8-8d; ; EXPERIENCE 43; FORM 3b; GOD OPINION 3c; PRIN- ; nd of the
knowability of cer; TRUTH ya; UNIVERSAL AND nowledge by reference to its
objects, RE 43-40; NECESSITY AND UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR nowledge by reference
to the faculties ); SENSE 43-4k nowledge by reference to the methods INDUCTION
la; JUDGMENT 8a; RELIGION 6g; THEOLOGY c rncthods of the particular sciences, CS
3--3d; MECHANICS 2-20; NCE 5-56 ; THEOLOGY 40.

CHAPTER 43: KftoWLEiDGE

: 'Matters relevant to the classification of the kinds of knowledge by reference

of assent, see JUDGMENT 9; OPINION 3-3b; TRUTH 2e.

Other discussions of the distinction between theoretic and practical knowl

MENT 2; PHILOSOPHY 2a; PRUDENCE 2a; REASONING 5e-5e(i); THEOLOGY 4d; TRU

WISDOM 1b.

The basic divisions of theoretic knowledge, see ASTRONOMY 4; DIALECTIC 4; HIST

MATHEMATICS la; METAPHYSICS 3b-3c; NATURE 4b; PHILOSOPHY 2b; PHYSICS la, 2;

SCIENCE 13(2), 1c, 2a; THEOLOGY 33, 43; TRUTH 4c; and for the problem of the

archy of the sciences and the definition of the highest form of human knowle

DIALECTIC 4; METAPHYSICS i; THEOLOGY 43; WISDOM la.

The basic divisions of practical knowledge, see ART 6c; PHILOSOPHY 2c; PRUDENC

SCIENCE 3a-3b; WEALTH 9.

The moral or political value of knowledge, see CITIZEN 6; GOOD AND EVIL 6a-6*c

2b(y); PHILOSOPHY 4a-4c; PLEASURE AND PAIN 4c, 4c(2); PRUDENCE 2c; SCIENCE i

STATE 8c-8d; VIRTUE AND VICE la; WILL 33(1); WISDOM 2b.

The technical use of knowledge and the applications of science to production,

MEDICINE 2a; PHYSICS 5; SCIENCE 1b(i), 3b; WEALTH 3a.

The general problem of the dissemination and communication of knowledge, see E

5b; LANGUAGE 1b; LIBERTY 2a; OPINION 5b.

The development of human knowledge, the advancement of learning, or progress i

and philosophy, see ART 12; PHILOSOPHY 7; PROGRESS 6a-6e; SCIENCE 6a-6b;

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booths of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided in

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

'

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the wo

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

W. JAMES. The Will to

. The Meaning o AUGUSTINE. Answer to Sceptics

.On the Profit of Believing

.On Faith in Things Unseen SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Out AQUINAS. On the Trinity
ofBoethius, QQ 5-6 SAADIA GAON. The Boo{

.Summa Contra Gentiles, BK i, CH 48-71 INTRODUCTORY TREATI

.

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate ANSELM OF CANTERBURY. SPINOZA.Of the
Improvement of the Understanding MAIMONIDES. The Guide BERKELEY. Three Dialogues
Between Hylas and Phi- CH 20-21

lonous ALBERTUS MAGNUS. On t HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK i, PART iv,
ligible

SECT i-iv MATTHEW OF AQUASPARTA KANT. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic tions
on Knowledge,

.

Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science DUNS SCOTUS. Oxford C

. Introduction to Logic, v-vi, ix-x Q 4 HEGEL. The Phenomenology of Mind, vm
PETRARCH. On His Own I

.

Logic, CH 3-5 ALBO. The Bootkof Prin FARADAY. Observations on the Education
ofthcjudg- iv, CH i

ment SUAREZ. Disputationes J. S. MILL. An Examination of Sir William Hamil- xni
(6), xx (i), xxn

toris Philosophy ',

CH 2-3 12), xxxv (4)

9i$ to the degrees edge, see JUDG TH 2c; ORY i; hierdge, see E 6a-6b; ;
HAPPINESS b(2); see ART 6c; DUCATION , n science TRUTH 6. but relevant to the to
two groups: on. rks cited, consult The Great Ideas. Believe f Truth, CH 1-2, 4 "

lines of Pyrrhonism, BK i-n of Beliefs and Opinions, SE Dialogue on Truth for
the Perplexed, PART HI, he Intellect and the Intel. Ten Disputed QuesQQ i-n
ommentary, BK i, DIST 3, gnorance ciples (Sefer ha-Uifcarim), BK Metaphysicae, i
(6) vm-ix, (i), xxm (7-8), xxx (n-

920 MARLOWE. The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus J.M. KEYNES. A Treatise on
JOHN OP SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus Tho- WITTGENSTEIN. Tractatus Log

misticus, Ars Logica, PART 11, Q 26 MARCHAL. Le point de dSpart GLANVILL. The
Vanity of Dogmatizing SANTAYANA. Scepticism and A MALEBRANCHE. DC la recherche
de la veritc" WHITEHEAD. An Enquiry Conce LEIBNITZ, Discourse on Metaphysics,
xxiv-xxix Natural Knowledge

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding, . The Concept

BK IV . Process and

Monadology, par 29-30

. MEYERSON. Du cheminement de VOLTAIRE. "Ignorance," in A Philosophical Dic-
MARITAIN. An Introduction t

tionary (4)

The Ignorant Philosopher, CH 51-55

. The Degrees of Knowled

.

J. G. FICHTE, The Vocation of

Man BLONDEL. La pensee

The Science of Knowledge

. GILBY. Poetic Experience SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL i,
SIMON. Introduction ft I'on

BK i-m; VOL n, SUP, CH 1-7, 18; VOL HI, SUP, CH A. E. TAYLOR. Philosophical

3 GILL. The Necessity of Beli KIERKEGAARD. Philosophical Fragments DEWEY et al.
Studies in Log

.

Concluding Unscientific Postscript DEWEY. 'The Experimental Th J.H. NEWMAN. The
Idea of a University "The Significance of the

An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent

. in The Influence LOTZE, Microcosmos, BK v, CH 4 . The Quest fo

Logic BK in

.

j Logic, the Theory of I

.

T. H. GREEN. Prolegomena to Ethics, BK i WEISS. Reality, BK i PEARSON. The
Grammar of Science BLANSHARD. The Nature of Th BOSANQUET. Knowledge and Reality
GILSON. The Unity of Philos

Logic, VOL i, INTRO, (2) VOL n, CH 7

. ; Reason and Revelation

.

Science and Philosophy, 3

. Realisme thomiste et

.

HODDER. The Adversaries of the Sceptic C. I. LEWIS. Mind and the W HUSSERL.
Logische Untersitchungen An Analysis of Knowle

.

LENIN. Materialism and Empinocriticism B. RUSSELL. The Problems of BRADLEY.
Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH 11-12; 11, 13

BK II, CH 21, 27 .

Mysticism an

Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 2, 6

. . The Analysis BERGSON. Matter and Memory .

Sceptical Es

. An Introduction to Metaphysics . An Inquiry i

The Creative Mind, CH 6

. 18 T. VFBLEN. The Vested Interests and the State of the Human Knowledge, Its
Sc

.

Industrial Arts, CH i DEWEY and BENTLEY. Knowing

Probabilityk PART wi ico-Philosophicus de la mttaphysiquc nimal Faith rning the
Principles of of Nature Reality, PART HI la pensfe o Philosophy, PART n ge, CH 2
tologie du connattre Studies, CH 10 ef ical Theory, i-iv eory of Knowledge,"
Problems of Knowledge," of Darwin on Philosophy r Certainty nquiry, CH 25 ought
ophical Experience in the Middle Ages critique de la connaissance orld Order dge
and Valuation Philosophy, CH 5, 7-8, d Logic, CH 10 of Mind, LECT 12 says, i nto
Meaning and Truth, CH 7-12, ope and Limits and the Known
