INTRODUCTION

/[EN have dreamed of a golden ag[e in * "X in the JLVA past when the world' was
young and everything needed for the support of life 1 existed in profusion.
Earth, Lucretius writes, "first spontaneously of herself produced fbr mortals
goodly corn-crops and joyous vineyards; of herself gave sweet fruits and glad
pastures; which now-a-days scarce 'attain any size even when furthered by our
labor; we exhaust the oxen and the strength of the husbandmen; we wear out our
iron, scarcely fed after all by the tilled fields; so niggardly are they of
their produce and after so much labor do they let itgrow." When the aged plowman
"compares present times with times past," Lucretius adds, "he praises the
fortunes of his sire" living in the time of earth's plenty. This ancient myth of
a golden age has sometimes taken the form, as with RoUsseau, of an idealization
of primitive society, uncorrupted by civilization, in which an easy, almost
effortless, existence corresponded to the simplicity of man's needs. Rousseau
pictures a situation in 'which "the produce of the earth furnished [man] with
all he needed, and instinct told him how to use it,'* so that "singing and
dancing, the true offspring of love and leisure, became the amusement, or rather
the occupation of men and women assembled together with nothing else to do." In
our own day, industrial Utopias have been projected into a future mack free from
toil by the adequacy of machines or the efficiency of atomic energy. Long before
the industrial era, Aristotle envisioned, as a supposition contrary to fact, a
society built upon labor-saving machines. "If every instrument could accomplish
its own Work," he writes, if it could obey or anticipate commands, if /'the
shuttle would weave ; . . without a hand to guide it, the thief workmen ' would
riot want servants, nor masters slaveii" In all these conceptions of a better
Hfei labor is eliminated or reduced. The implication seems to be that the labor
required for the maintenance of all historic societies is an affliction, a
drudgery, a crushing 'burden which deforms tht lives of many, if not all. The bf
toil do 1 'pains not belong to human life by any necessity of human nature, but
rather through the accident of external circumstances which might be other than
they are. "Work became indispensable," according to Rousseau, only when
"property was introduced," and then "vast forests became smilfng fields, which
man had to water with the sweat of his brow." It was the result of "soine fatal
accident, which, fbr the public good should never have happened." Man might have
realized his nature more surely and nchly if, like th lilies of the field, he
neither toiled nor spun. The contrary view would maintain that work is not a
curse but a blessing, filling man's hours usefully, turning to service energies
which Would otherwise be wasted or misspent in idleness or mischief. The
sinfulness of sloth implies the virtue of work. The principle of activity,
according to Hegel, whereby "the workman has to perform for his subsistence,"
gives man a 'dignity which "consists in his depending entirely on his diligence,
conduct, and intelligence for the supply of his wants. In direct contravention
of this principle" are "pauperism, laziness, inactivity." It 'is even suggested
that useful occupations J save men from a boredom they fear mote thin the pain o
labor, as evidenced 'by the variety of amusements and diversions tjiey invent or
frantically pursu'e to occupy themselves when 'work is finished. The
satisfactions of labor are 1 as peculiarly human as its burdens. Not merely to
keep alive, but to kee,p his self-respect, man l is' obliged to work.

922 THE GREAT I "In the morning when thou risest unwilling," the emperor Marcus
Aurelius tells himself, "let this thought be present I am rising to the work of
a human being. Why, then, am I dissatisfied if I am going to do the things for
which I exist and for which I was brought into the world ? Or have I been made
for this, to lie in the bed-clothes and keep myself warm? But this is more
pleasant. Dost thou exist, then, to take thy pleasure, and not at all for action
and exertion?"

The perspectives of theology give still another view of labor. It is not an
accidental misfortune which men may some day be able to correct. But neither is
it a blessing nor the thing for which man was created. When the golden age of
Saturn came to an end, and Jupiter replaced him on the throne of heaven, then,
as Virgil tells the story, labor was first introduced into the world. "Before
fove Fields knew no taming hand of husbandmen; To mark the plain or mete with
boundary-line Even this was impious; for the common stock They gathered, and the
earth of her own will All things more freely, no man bidding, bore.

He to black serpents gave their venom-bane, And bade the wolf go prowl, and
ocean toss; Shook from the leaves their honey, put fire away, And curved the
random rivers running wine, That use by gradual dint of thought on thought Might
forge the various arts, with furrow's help The corn-blade win, and strike out
hidden fire From the flint's heart.

Here, while labor may in some sense be a punishment, or at least a fall from the
golden age, it still does result in benefits. "The divers arts arose" from
Jove's "whetting the minds of men with care on care, nor suffering realm of his
in drowsy sloth to stagnate." But although "toil conquered all," it is still
"remorseless toil." According to Christian doctrine, labor is an inevitable
consequence of man's fall from grace, a punishment for Adam's disobedience like
disease and death. In the earthly paradise of Eden, the children of Adam would
have lived without labor or servitude of any sort. But when Adam sinned, the
Lord God said unto him: "Cursed the ground for thy sake; in toil shalt thou is
cat of it all the days of thy life ... In the sweat of thy face, shalt thou eat
bread, till thou return into the ground." That work should be painful belongs to
its very essence. Otherwise it would not serve as a penalty or a penance. But,
in the Christian as in the Virgilian view, laboralsocontnbutes to such happiness
as man can enjoy on earth. The distinction between temporal and eternal
happiness is a distinction between a life of work on earth and the activity of
contemplation in Heaven. This does not mean the elimination of leisure and
enjoyment from earthly life, but it does make labor their antecedent and
indispensable condition. It also means that even in his highest activities in
the development of his arts and sciences man must be perpetually at work. His
achievement of truth or beauty is never so perfect and lasting that he can rest
in it. IN THESE DIVERSE conceptions of the relation of labor to human life, work
seems to have several different meanings. It always involves activity or
exertion. Its clearest opposite is But sleep. other things are also opposed to
work play or amusement, leisure, idleness. When leisure is not identified with
idleness, it involves activity no less than work. So, too, many of the forms of
play require intense exertion of body or mind. The difference, therefore, must
lie in the nature or purpose of the activity. Aristotle suggests what the
difference is when he puts play, work, and leisure in an ordered relationship to
one another. Nature, he writes, "requires that we should be able, not only to
work well, but to use leisure well." Leisure is "the first principle of all
action" and so "leisure is better than work and is its end." As play and with it
rest (i.e., sleep) are for the sake of work, so work in turn is for the sake of
leisure. The characteristics of work as the middle term here seem to be, first,
that work is activity directed to an end beyond itself and, second, that it is
productive of the necessities which sustain life rather than of the goods by
which life is perfected. The political or speculative activity which Aristotle
considers the proper occupation of leisure is intrinsically good or enjoyable.
For participation in such activities leisure in the sense of time free from
laborrequired; but since the good life cannot be is lived unless life itself is
sustained, labor also is a prerequisite. Work is thus defined by wealth as its
immediate end the production of the external, eco- CHAPTER 44: nomk, or
'consumable goods which support life. Though play has the immediately enjoyable
character of an activity performed for its own sake, Aristotle subordinates it
to work, assigning to it the same utility which rest has. Both 1' refresh men
from the fatigues of labor and recreate the energies needed for work.
"Amusement, he writes, "is needed more amid serious occupations than at other
times, for he who is hard at work has need for relaxation, and amusement gives
relaxation." The economic sense which connects work and labor with wealth seems
to be the primary but not the only sense in which these terms are used in the
great books. There is the more general sense of human work as any productive
activity in which men exercise some art or skill. The familiar distinction
between skilled and unskilled labor may be only a distinction in degree if there
is truth in the theory that some degree of skill some rudimentary art at least
is required for the performance of the simplest tasks of hand and eye. Kinds of
work, according to this theory, can be differentiated by reference to the type
of art involved. The ancient distinction between the servile and the liberal
arts also divides workers into those who manipulate and transform physical
materials and those who employ the symbols of poetry, music, or science to
produce things for the mind. This distinction between manual and mental work,
based on the character of the work itself, is not to be identified with the
distinction between slave and free labor.

The latter is based on the status of the worker. Even in the slave economies of
the ancient world, some freemen were artisans, farmers, or sailors, and some
slaves were philosophers. Nor is mental as opposed to manual work necessarily
directed to the production of the goods of the mind. The white-collar workers of
an industrial economy, employed with the symbols of finance, accounting, or
management, do mental work which has its ultimate end in the production or
exchange of material goods.

THERE ARE STILL other traditional distinctions among kinds of work and types of
workers, all of which cannot be put together into a single scheme of
classification without much overlapping. Some distinctions, like that between
hand-work and machine-labor or between healthful and unhealthful occupations,
turn on the characteristics of the work itself. Some depend on the social
conditions under which the work is done or on the relationship between the
individual worker and other men. The work to be done may be accomplished by an
individual working alone, or by the cooperative labor of many; and, in the
latter case, the social organization of the laboring group may involve the
ranking of men according to the functions they perform. Here we get the division
into the mastercraftsmen, who plan and superintend, and all grades of helpers
who execute their directions. One meaning of the word "menial" as applied to
work signifies the infenor tasks in the hierarchy of functions; but it is also
used to express society's opinion of those who perform certain tasks, such as
that of the domestic servant. The distinction between what is menial and what is
dignified work varies, of course, from society to society. The characterization
of labor as productive or non-productive, and of work as useful or wasteful, is
based on strictly economic criteria and on considerations of social welfare. The
sense in which work cannot be divorced from the production of some extrinsic
effect is not violated by the conception of non-productive labor as work which
in no way increases the wealth of nations. "There is one sort of labor which
adds to the subject upon which it is bestowed; there is another which has no
such effect. The former," writes Adam Smith, "may be called productive; the
latter, unproductive labor . . . The labor of some of the most respectable
orders in society is. . .unproductive of any value . . .The sovereign, for
example, with all the officers both of justice and war who serve under him, the
whole army and navy, are unproductive laborers Like the declamation of the
actor, . . . the harangue of the orator, or the tune of the musician, the work
of all of them perishes in the very instant of its production." The standard by
which Marx judges the usefulness of labor also implies the economic notion of a
commodity. "Nothing can have value," he says, "without being an object of
utility. If the thing is useless, so is the labor contained in it." But Marx
also adds a criterion of social utility. "Whoever directly satisfies his own
wants witb the produceTh of his labor, creates, indeed, use-values, but not
commodities, Ih order to produce the latter,' he must not only produce
use-values, but use-values for others, social usevalues." It is by this last
criterion that Marx criticizes the capitalist economy for its "most outrageous
squandering of labor power" in superfluous or socially useless production.

/ . ' THE PRINCIPLE OF the division of labor does not depend upon any particular
classification of work or workers according to type. Nor does itbelong to one
system of economy rather than another. But the ancients, concerned as they were
with its bearing On the origin and development of the state, saw the division of
labor as primarily of political significance; whereas the moderns arc more
concerned with its economic causes and consequences. Thucydidcs compares the
poverty and crude life of the early Hellenic tribes with the wealth, the power,
and the civilization of Athens, Sparta, Corinth, and other city-states at the
opening of the Pcloponnesian War. The difference is not to be accounted for in
terms of the invention of new tools, but rather in terms of the greater
efficiency in production which is obtained by a division of labor. This i$, both
an effect and a cause of the enlargement of the community, and its increasing
population. The greater the number of men associated in a common life, the
greater the number of specialized tasks which can be assigned to different i
members of the community. This observation is formulated by Plato and Aristotle
in their accounts of the origin of the The advantages which the state confers
state. upon members are in part won by the diits vision of labor in which they
participate. .

, The isolated family, Aristotle remarks, is barely able to supply the "everyday
.wants" of itsmembers. The tribe or village, which is an , association of
families, dan achieve a little more than bare subsistence; but not until several
tribes unite to fown a city does a truly self-sufficing community come into
existence, and one with an adequate division of kbor. Some men, if not all, can
them acquire the leisure to engage in the arts 'and sciences and politidskrthe
pursuits of civilization which have their material basis in sufficient wealth. k
( The effect of the division of labor on the social structure of the state seems
to be generally agreed upon by all observers, ancient and modern. Men are
divided into social classes according to the kind of work they do not only by
reference to the type of economically productive labor, but also in terms of the
distinction .between labor and leisure, or between economic and other functions
in society. All do not agree, however that such class distinctions are as
beneficial to society as the increase of wealth or opulence which the division
of labor affords. They not only threaten the unity and peace of the society, but
tend to degrade the condition of labor by reducing the individual worker to a
cog in the machine. The division of 'labor frequently restricts him to a slight
and insignificant task, repetitively performed, and so makes it impossible for
him to develop his skill or to enjoy any pride of workmanship. From a purely
economic point of view, Adam Smith advocates the greatest intensification of the
division of labor. Each more minute sub-division of tasks augments efficiency in
production. But from the human point of view, he sees that this method of
maximizing wealth by dividing men into functional groups one man, one task leads
to the mental impoverishment of the men, who require a multiplicity of functions
for their development. "In the progress of the division of labor," Smith writes,
"the employment of the far greater part of those who live by labor . . . comes
to be confined to a few very simple operations, frequently one or two . . . The
man whose whole life is spent in performing a few simple operations , . . has no
occasion to exert his understanding or to exercise his invention ... He
naturally loses, therefore, the habit of such exertion, and generally becomes as
stupid and ignorant as it is possible for a human creature to become." The
situation seems even worse to Marx, The industrial system, revolutionizing the
mode of work, "converts the laborer into a crippled monstrosity, by forcing his
detailed dexterity at the expense of a world of productive capabilities and
instincts" It makes 'the individual worker "the. automatic motor of a fractional
operation." - , CHAPTER 4 THE GREAT ISSUES concerning labor seem to be moral and
political rather than economic. The consideration of the division of labor from
the point of view of efficiency in production remains purely economic only when
it is abstracted from any concern about the effect upon the laborer. The
analysis of factors affecting the productivity of labor ceases to be merely
economic when the hours, conditions, and organization of work are viewed in
terms of the working men. The determination of wages by the buying and selling
of labor (or, as Marx insists, of labor-power) as a commodity subject to market
conditions of supply and demand; the difference between real and nominal wages
as determined by the level of wages in relation to the price of other
commodities; the so-called '1 "iron law of wages according to which wages cannot
be reduced below the minimum of bare subsistence for the laborer and his family
these are matters which the economist may deal with in a descriptive or
historical manner, calculating rates and ratios without regard to questions of
justice. But in terms of such formulations questions of justice are raised and
become the great issues concerning the rights of workmen to the fruits of their
labor, to the security of full employment and other forms of protection, to
collective bargaining, to a voice in the management of industry or business.

Stated in this way, the issues seem to be peculiarly modern. These are the
problems of a capitalisteconomy, to which the partisans of capital and of labor
propose different solutions.

Yet the principles of justice to which the parties in conflict appeal seem to be
no less applicable to earlier conflicts in other economic systems between master
and slave or between feudal lord and serf. All the institutional differences
among these three economies should not, according to Karl Marx, conceal from us
the profound analogy which obtains in the relation between owners and workers,
whether the workers are chattel slaves, peons bound to the land, or industrial
proletarians selling their laborpower.

"Wherever a part of society possesses a monopoly of the means of production," he
writes, "the laborer, free or not free, must add to the working time necessary
for his own mainte- 4: LABOR nance an extra working time in order to produce the
means of subsistence for the owners of the means of production, whether this
proprie j tor be the Athenian gentleman, Etruscan theocrat, civis Romanus,
Norman baron, American slave-owner, Wallachian Boyard, modern landlord or
capitalist." Marx undertakes to explain how the surface difference between slave
labor and wage labor conceals the analogy. "In slave labor, even that part of
the working-day in which the slave is only replacing the value of his own means
of existence, in which, therefore, he works for himself alone, appears as labor
for his master. All the slave's labor appears as unpaid labor. In wage-labor, on
the contrary, even surplus la j bor, or unpaid labor, appears as paid. There the
property-relation conceals the labor of the slave for himself; here the
money-relation conceals the unrequited labor of the wage laborer." Two phrases
here "unpaid labor" and "unrequited labor" indicate that Marx is thinking in
terms of justice. Elsewhere he calls the industrial proletariat "wage-slaves" to
emphasize the presence in an apparently free economy of the same unjust
exploitation which the word "slave" connotes when it refers to the use-of men as
chattel. The essential similarity in all forms of economic exploitation which
makes all forms of economic slavery essentially similar is seen by Marx in terms
of the production of a surplus value by the laborer; that is, he produces a
greater value in commodities than he needs to support his own subsistence. This
surplus value, when appropriated by the owner of the materials and the tools on
and with which the propertyless laborer works, becomes an unearned increment,
or, in other words, an unjust profit from the work of another man. The
controversy over the theory of surplus value in Marx's Capital can be separated
from the controversy over the revolutionary program of the Communist Manifesto.
But neither can be separated from issues of justice. It is question able whether
those economists join issue with Marx who criticize his analysis in terms of the
facts or conclusions of economics as a purely descriptive science, and who put
aside all considerations of the fair and the equitable. Yet those facts or
conclusions, especially with regard to the operation ofthe capitalist economy,
TJiB GREAT ID become relevant in the dispute as to whether capitalist profits
are intrinsically unjust, because they are incapable pf .accruing, except from
the exploitation of labor. Those who dispute this nutter seldom deny that
chattel slavery is unjust. On that there may be conflicting opinions, as
indicated in the chapter on SLAVERY, but they are not germane to the present
issue. Nor do the opponents seem to argue their casp in terms of a different
theory of what is just and unjust. They themselves appeal to the common
principle of fairness in exchange and distribution to defend the rights of the
owners of capital to a profit in return for their own pnor labor in accumulating
capital stock, as well as for the risks they take when they invest their
reserves in productive enterprises. The problem, therefore, seems to narrow down
to such questions as whether laborers are, exploited when they receive in wages
less than the full value their work creates; whether capitalist profits are
entirely reaped from the surplus value which is the differential between what
labor creates and what labor rek ccives; or whether, if profit is not identical
with surplus value, it always contains a marginal element of unearned increment
derived from the exploitation of labor.

THE NOTION OF VALUE the value of commodities and the value of labor itself is
obviously of pentral importance. As indicated in the chapter on JUSTICE, the
formulae of equality, which determine fair exchanges or distributions, require
some measure of equivalents in value.

What determines the intrinsic value of a comrnodjty according to which it can be
compared with another commodity, without reference to the price of each in, the
market place? Adam Smith's answer to this question is labor. It is the answer
given before; him by Locke, and after him by Marx.

"Equal quantities of labor, at all times and places," Smith declares, "may be,
said to be of equal valije, jto the labqrer. In his ordinary state of'hcajtfii
strength and spirits; in the ordinary degree of his skill and Dexterity, he must
always fay down the same portion of his ease, his tttcrty, and his happiness,
The price which he pays, must always be the same, whatever may be the quantity
of goocjU which he receives in for it. Of these, indeed, it may somer times
purchase a greater and sometimes a smaller quantity; but it is their value which
varies not that of the labor which purchases them." Fjrom this Adarn Smith
concludes, that "labor alone, therefork, never varying in its pwn value, is
alone the ultimate and real standard by which the value of all commodities can
at all times and places be estimated and compared. It is their real price; money
is their nominal price only."

This labor theory of value raises the further question of the value of labor
itself. What determines its natural or real price, as opposed to its market or
nominal price? On this Marx and Smith appear to part company, which may account
for their further divergence when Marx declares that "the real value of labor is
the cost of its production, not the average price it can command in the market";
and then goes on to explain how a surplus value is derived by the capitalist who
pays for labor-power on a basis of the cost of producing and sustaining the
laborer,but uses his labor-power to produce a real value in commodities which
exceeds the real price of labor itself. Smith, on the other hand, holds that
"the whole produce of labor belongs to the laborer" only "in that original state
of things, which precedes both the appropriation of land and the accumulation of
stock." When "land becomes private property," the landlord "makes the first
deduction" in the form otrent; and the capitalist, or the person who invests
some part of his stock accumulation, "makes a second deduction" in the form of
profit. After rent and profit are taken, the laborer's wage represents what is
left of "the whole produce of labor" Yet Smith also says of the landlords that
"as soon as the land of any country has all become private property," they,
"like all other men, love to reap where they never sowed." The implication of
unearned increment in this remark suggests that Smith is neitherkisinclined to
mix moral judgment with economic description, nor at variance with Marx ,qn the
principle of economic justice. That Smith regards profit as the price properly
paid forkthe use of capital and that he does not see reaping without sowingas an
essential element in -profit-making may perhaps be read as a challenge to Marx's
develop ment of the labor theofy of value into a theory of surplus value and
unearned increment. i IT is POSSIBLE, of course, that the difference in the
conclusions of Smith and Marx from a commoh premise can be explained by the
different directions their analyses take. It may not represent a direct
opposition on a point of fact. The proposition that value derives from labor
seems to yield a number of theoretical consequences. Locke, for example, holding
that it is labor which "putt the difference of value on everything," makes this
the basis for the right to private property, certainly in its original
appropriation from the common domain which is God's gift to mankind. "Though the
earth and dommon to all men, yet all inferior creatures be every man has a
property in his own person. The labor of his body and the work of his hands we
may say are properly his. Whatsoever, then, he removes out of the state that
nature hath provided and left it in, he hath mixed his labor with, and joined to
it something that is his own, and thereby makes it his property." This view
seems to be shared by Rousseau.

"It is impossible to conceive," he says, "how property can come from anything
but manual labor; for what else can a man add to thing$' which he does not
originally create, so as to make them his own property?" In the same vein, Smith
declares that "the property which every man has in his own labor, as it is the
original foundation of all other property, so it is the most sacred and
inviolable." , What further conclusions follow from this of private property as
a right justification founded upon labor? How is the original right to property
extended into a right of inheritance ? How does this conception of the origin of
property bear on the Marxist conception of "t the origin of the proletariat the
propertyless workers who have nothing but their laborpower to sell ? Denying tie
chajrge that cpm- munists desire to abolish "the right of personally acquiring
property as the fruit of a man's own labor," Marx and Engels make the
countercharge ttiat the development of industrial capitalism "has to a great
extenk already .ck stroyed it and is still destroying it daily." They 1 propose
juBli ownership of the means of production to protect the property rights of
labor; i-ABOR they seek tt abdlfeh only "the bourgeois fohh oi private
property'* which, ib their view, is 'a use of property to exploit labor. - ' The
rights of labor seem t6 bt central in any formulation of the problem of a )u$t
distribution of wealth. But when other rights are taken into consideration, the
problem of economic justice becornes more complex aftd differentJ from
differences in 'emphasis. solutions result Even with regard to one group of
solutions, }. S. Mill observes that "some communists consider it unjust that the
produce of the labor of the community should be shared on any other principle
than that of exact equality; bthers think it just that those should receive most
whose wants are greatest." To weigh the merits of competing solutions, -as well
as to reach an adequate statement of the problem, the discussion of labot must
be connected with the discuisibfr of related considerations in the chapters on
JUSTICE, REVOLUTION, and WEALTH: ' THERE ARE ISSUES of justice concerning labor
other than the strictly economic problem of distribution. In the ancient world,
for example, 1 not only chattel slaves but also free artisans were frequently
regarded as incapable of participptyon in political life. Only men of
independent wealth had enough leisure for the activities of citizenship wh.ich
in the Greek citystates, was almost a full-time occupation. This, according to
Aristotle, is one reason for the disfranchiscment of the laboring classes who
must devote a grekt part of their energy t;o earning a living and who have
neither the time nor training for liberal pursuits. "Since leisure is necessary
both for the development of virtue and the performance of politick duties,"
citizens, he maintains, cannot "lead the life of mechanics or radesmen." , , t
Against this oligarchical view (which also involves the notion that wealth
deserVes' special political 'privileges), the Greek democrats take the position
that all free men shoulk be citizens on an equal footing, regardless of the
amount of their property or their conditionTh, of labor and leisure. But the
oligarchical still tends pjrmciplje to, prevail among republicans in the i8th
century. Kant, for example, nolds that citizenship Th

"presupposes the independence Jr -self-sufficiency of tile individual citizen
among the peo- 928 pic.*' On this basis he excludes from the suffrage, as only
"passive" citizens, "the apprentice of a merchant pr tradesman, a servant who is
not in, the employ of the state, a minor (naturaliter vel cwiliter)k all women,
and, generally, everyone who is compelled to maintain himself not according to
his own industry, but as it is arranged by others (the state excepted)." They
are "without civil personality, and their existence is only, as it were,
incidentally included in the state," The preference shown by the writers of The
Federalist for a republican as opposed to a democratic form of government or
representative government as opposed to direct democracy rests partly on their
fear of the political incompetence, as well as the factional interests, of wage
earners and day-laborers. While expressing "disapprobation" of poll taxes, they
still defend the right of the government to exact them, in the belief that
"there may exist certain critical and tempestuous conjunctures of the State, in
which a poll-tax may become an inestimable resource." Yet such a tax would seem
to be

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. Labor in human life
 1a. The curse of labor: myths of a golden age and the decay of the world
 1b. Labor, leisure, and happiness: the servile, political, and contemplative life
 '
 1c. The pain of labor and the expiation of sin: the disciplinary and penal use of labor 93 1
 1d. The social necessity of labor and the moral obligation
 to work
 1e. The honorof work and the virtue of productivity: progress through the inven-
 tion of arts for the conquest of nature
 if.
 The degradation of labor: the alienation of the laborer's work in chattel slavery,
 1f. and industrial wage slavery

2. The nature of work
 2a. The ends of work: the good of the product and the good of the workman
 2b. The process of work: the relations of art, hand, machine, and matter
 3.
 The kinds of work and the relationship of different types of workers
 2c. The differentiation of work according to the human talent or ability required:
 skilled arid unskilled labor; manual and mental work
 2d. The differentiation of work according to the social status of the worker; servile
 2e. menial and honorable work
 APTE* 44 r LABOR
 2f. The classification of occupations by'refcrence to bodily and mental concomitants of
 the work: healthy and uphealthy oqcu^tydns; pleasant and unpleasant tasks
 2g. Types of work distinguished by reference to the manner in which the work is
 done: solitary and group work; the relation of mastcr*craftsmen and helpers
 3^ Types of work distinguished by reference to their effect on the increase of
 wealth: productive and non-productive labor
 2h. llie differentiation
 of work in terms of its relation to the common welfare:
 socially useful and wasteful or superfluous >work
 2i. The division of labor
 2j. The economic causes and effects of the division of labor: its relation to the ex-
 2k. production, and distribution of goods and services; its bearing on
 opulence
 2l. The social consequences of the division of labor: the development of classes
 2m. The moral aspects of the division
 of labor: the acquisition of the virtue of art; the
 attenuation of art by insignificant 'tasks
 The organization of production: the position of labor m different economics
 2n. Domestic or chattel slavery in a slave economy
 2o. Serfdom or agrarian peonage in a feudal economy
 5<r.
 The wage earner or industrial proletariat in a capitalist economy
 2p. The condition of the worker
 in a socialist economy
 2q. The wages of labor: kinds of wage payments
 2r. Labor as a commodity: the labor market
 2s. The iron law of wages: the subsistence level and the minimum wage
 2t. The distinction between real and nominal* wages: variable factors affecting wage
 level?
 2u. The natural wages of labor and the labor theory of value
 2v. Economic
 and political justice to the laborer
 2w. pair wages, hours, and working conditions: labor legislation
 *]b.
 The right to property: the ownership of the means of production
 2x. The consequences
 of economic inequality or oppression: the class war
 (1) The economic determination of antagonistic social classes: slaves v$. .free-
 men; laboring v$. leisure classes; propertyless vs. propertied classes >
 (2) The organisation of workmen and the formation of trade unions to protect
 '
 la bdr's ,rights and interests
 '
 "938
 (3) The proletariat as a revolutionary class; its^fevolutionary aims
 -
 2y. r
 ,
 ' /5 jj. The underprivileged condition of workers: the exclusion of* slaves from citizen-
 ship; the disfranchisement of the laboring, classes ,
 2z. The problem of poverty and pauperism unemplbyrtient and the right to work
 :
 2/i Thfe relation of economic
 to political freedom : Economic dejmocracy
 '
 'i
 '
 p ,/ >~ i/ ,
 j
 i
 :

8. Historical observations on the condition of labor ! ,',/'<,< .939

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of the golden age, see MAN 93; PROGRESS
1c; TIME

Other considerations of penal labor, see PUNISHMENT 4b(3).

Matters relevant to the nature of productive work and the factors inf

sec ART 4, pa-pb; EDUCATION 6; SCIENCE 1b(i)-1b(2); WEALTH 33.

Other discussions of the division of labor and its consequences, see

33; STATE 50; WEALTH 3d.

Other discussions of the position of labor in different economic syste

WEALTH 6a, 7b(i).

The general theory of wages and the relation of wages to profits, see

6d(i)-6d(2),

The problem of economic justice to the laborer, see DEMOCRACY 43(2); J

PROGRESS 3b; WEALTH 6d(2); and for the relation of economic to polit

LIBERTY 2d, 6b; REVOLUTION 43.

The discussion of property rights and the problem of the ownership of

duction, see WEALTH ya-ye, 8a-8c.

The problem of the political status of the laboring classes and the is

tension of the suffrage to workmen, see CITIZEN 3; CONSTITUTION 53;

LIBERTY 1f; OLIGARCHY 4, 53; SLAVERY 5a-5b.

Another discussion of the problems of poverty and unemployment, see WE

The general theory of the class war as it occurs in different economic

5b; REVOLUTION 53-50; STATE 5d(2)~5e; WAR AND PEACE 2c; WEALTH ph.

939 Nations, BK i, 27b-37b esp nd Fall, 16c-17d; 113c; 42a-62a passim, esp
50apassim and Fall, W4c-d 452d-453a,c of Right, ADDITIONS, 149 -62a; 88c-d; BK
in, 165bBK iv, 200c-201a; 239cck, 295a-297a b-c; 113c-115c; 127c-146c; 77a esp
355d-368b 415b-416c, 419b,d, 424dunist Manifesto, 415aers Karamazov, BK vi, 8b.
luencing productivity, FAMILY 33-3k PROGRESS ms, see SLAVERY 43-40; WEALTH
4C-4d, USTICE 8b 80(2); ical liberty, see DEMOCRACY 43(1); ALTH 8c-8d. the means
of prosue concerning the exsystems, see OPPOSITION THE GKfcAT ID

ADDITIONAL

Listed below arc works not included in Great

idea and topics with which this chapter deals

L Works by authors represent

it.Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerni

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which

AUGUSTINE, Of the Work of Monty

F ECEL. The Phenomenology of Mind, iv (A) MARX. The Poverty of Philosophy, CH 2
(2,5) J. S. MILL. Principles of Political Economy, BK i, CH

1-3, 7-8, 10; BK II, CH 1 1-14; BK III, CH 6; BK IV,

CH 7

"The Claims of Labor," in VOL n, Dissertations

.

and Discussions

ENGELS. The Condition of the Wording Classes in

England

Herr Eugen Duhring's Revolution in Science,

.

PART II

TOLSTOY. "On Labor and Luxury," in What Then

Must We &b?

II.

HESIOD. Worty and Days LANGLAND. Piers Plowman T. MORE. Utopia PARACELSUS. The
Miners' Sickness and Other Miners'

Diseases

DEKKER. The Shoemaker's Holiday RAMAZZINI. De Morbis Artificum (The Diseases of

Workers) FRANKLIN. Poor Richard's Almanack FQURIER. Social Destinies SOUTHEY.
Essays, Moral and Political, iv RICARDO. The Principles of Political Economy and

Taxation, esp CH i, 5, 16 MALTHUS. An Essay on Population

Principles of Political Economy, esp

. BK i, CH

1-2, 4; BK II, CH I, SECT 10 SKIDMORE. The Rights of Man to PropertyTh T.
CARLYLETh Sartor Resartus HESS. Sozialistische Aufsatze PROUDHON. The Philosophy
of Misery KIERKEGAARD. Christian Discourses, PART iv (2) THOREAU. Walden, CH i
RUSKIN. Time and Tide

Munera Pulveris

.

. Fors Clavigera GEORGE. Progress and Poverty STEVENSON. "An Apology for,
Idlers," in Virginibus Puerisque

JEVONS. The State in Relation to Labour ZOLA. Germinal SMILES. Life and Labor

NIETZSCHE. The Dawn of Day, APH 173 . The Joyful Wisdom, APH 42, 329, Booty of
the Western World, but relevant to d . These works are divided into two groups:
ed in this collection. sented in this collection. ng the publication of the
works cited, consult follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. NIETZSCHE.
Beyond Good and Evil, CH in (58)

The Genealogy of Morals, in (18)

. A. MARSHALL. 'Principles of Economics, esp BK iv,

' CH 6, 9; BK vi, CH 3-5 LEO XIII. Rerum Novarum (Encyclical on the Condition of
Labor) DURKHEIM. The Division of Labor in Society BUCHER. Arbeit und Rhythmus S.
and B. WEBB. Industrial Democracy, esp PART niii

GROOS. The Play of Men The Play of Animals . KROPOTKIN. The Conquest of Bread
Fields, Factories and Workshops . SINCLAIR. The Jungle PEGUY. Basic Verities
(The Honor of Work) NEXO. Pelle the Conqueror SOREL. Reflexions on Violence, CH
7 TROELTSCH. The Social Teaching of the Christian Churches BRADLEY. Essays on
Truth and Reality, CH 3

J. A. HOBSON. The Evolution of Modern Capitalism Wor{ and Wealth . T. VEBLEN.
The Theory of the Leisure Class The Instinct of Workmanship, and the State of .
the Industrial Arts HAMSUN. Growth of the Soil

MICHELS. Economia efelicita TAWNEY. The Acquisitive Society BRIEFS. The
Proletariat, a Challenge to Western Civilization DE MAN. Joy in Worlk

BEVERIDGE. Unemployment Pius XI. Quadragesimo Anno (Encyclical on the
Reconstruction of the Social Order) BERLE and MANS. The Modern Corporation and
Private Property

E. CHAMBERLIN. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition DUNKMANN. Soziologie der
Arbeit B. RUSSELL. Proposed Roads to Freedom, CH 4

Freedom Versus Organization .

A. R. BURNS. The Decline of Competition BORNE and HENRY. A Philosophy of Wor{
GILL. Workand Leisure WorJkand Property .

SIMON. Trots Itfons sur le travail STEINBECK. The Grapes of Wrath m MARITAIN.
Freedom the Modern World, APPENDIX i . Scholasticism and Politics, CH vn J. M.
CLARK. Alternative to Serfdom
