Chapter  ft:  LANGU  INTRODUCTION r"T"'HE liberal arts of grammar, rhetoric, and
logic are all concerned with language. Each of these disciplines establishes its
own  rules  for  the use of language, each by reference to a special standard of
excellence or correctness which measures language as an instrument of thought or
communication.  Together  these  three arts regulate discourse as a whole. Their
relation  to  one  another  represents  the  relation  of the various aspects of
discourse  the emotional, the social, and the intellectual. The tradition of the
great  books  is the tradition of the liberal arts. Their greatness consists not
only in the magnitude of the ideas or problems with which they deal, but also in
their  formal excellence as products of liberal art. Some of the great books are
expositions  of  logic  or rhetoric. None is a treatise on grammar. But they all
plainly  exemplify,  even  where they do not expound, the special refinements of
the  arts  of  language;  and  many  of  them,  especially the works of science,
philosophy,  and  theology, and even some of the poetical works, deal explicitly
with  the  difficulties  of  discourse,  and  the devices that have been used to
overcome them.

Language  is their instrument, and they are consciously critical in its use. One
of  the  great  books Augustine's treatise On Christian Doctrine is directly and
explicitly  concerned  with  grammar  in  the broad sense of the art of reading.
Addressed  to "earnest students of the word," it attempts to "lay down rules for
interpretation,"  and,  in  so  doing,  it  is compared by Augustine to "one who
teaches  reading,  that  is, shows others how to read for themselves." It is not
reading  in  general,  however, but the reading of one book the Bible with which
Augustine  is  concerned.  We  shall  return  later  to  this special problem of
interpreting  the word of God or language which is thought to be inspired. 9 AGE
In  our  day,  there  is  a lively interest in the problems of language. This is
partly  because  of the development of historical and comparative studies of the
various human languages, and the scientific formulation of what is common to all
languages in origin, structure, and change. But it also results in part from the
claims  of  a  discipline  popularly  called  "semantics" to have discovered the
properties  of  language  as  a  medium  of  expression,  and especially to have
discovered  its  limitations. The claims of semantics often go so far as to find
in  the  misuse  of  language  the  origin  of  many  human flls. The novelty of
semantics is supposed to lie both in the diagnosis and in the remedies proposed.
Of these two sources of current interest in language, the second calls attention
to  the  vitality  of  the  liberal  arts,  of which semantics is a contemporary
formulation.  It  might almost be said that there is nothing new about semantics
except the name. Hobbes, Bacon, and Locke, for example, deal explicitly with the
abuses  of  language  and the treachery of words. Each makes recommendations for
the  correction  of  these  faults.  Plato and Aristotle, Augustine and Aquinas,
Berkeley  and  Hume,  are similarly concerned with ambiguity in speech, with the
multiple  senses  in  which discourse of every sort can be interpreted, and with
the  methods  by which men can approximate precision in the use of language. The
other  interest  in  language is also represented in the great books. Though the
science  of  linguistics  and  the history of languages are researches of recent
origin,  speculation  about  the  origin  of  and,  in that context, conlanguage
sideration of the natural and conventional aspects of language extend throughout
the  tradition.  At  all  times  the discussion of the nature of man and society
considers  language  as one of the principal characteristics of the specifically
41  942 THE GREAT human world or compares the language of men with the speech of
brutes.

In  addition  there  is the broad philosophical inquiry into the nature of signs
and  symbols  in  general.  This is not limited to the problem of how written or
spoken words get their meaning. The general question calls for an examination of
every  type  of  signifying  and  every  sort  of symbol, verbal and non-verbal,
natural  and  artificial,  human  and  divine.  Though these matters are closely
related  to  the  problems  of  language and may therefore be touched upon here,
their main treatment is reserved for the chapter on SIGN AND SYMBOL.

THE  TREATMENT of language seems to have a different tenor in ancient and modern
times.  The philosophers of antiquity appreciate the need to safeguard discourse
from  the  aberrations  of  speech.  Plato  and  Aristotle usually preface their
discussion  of  a  subject  with an examination of the relevant words in current
use.  Discovering  the  variety  of meanings attached to common words, they take
pains  to  enumerate  the various senses of a word, and to put these meanings in
some  order.  They pursue definitions or construct them to control the ambiguity
that  is latent in the language anyone must use to express or communicate ideas.
But  they  do  not  expect to remove ambiguity entirely. They tend to accept the
fact  that  the  same  word will have to be used in a number of senses; and they
discriminate  between  the  occasions when it is desirable to be precise about a
word's meaning and those times when the purpose of discourse is better served by
permitting  a  word  to  carry  a  whole  range of meanings. They see no special
difficulty  in  abstract  as  opposed  to concrete words, or in general names as
distinguished  from  the  proper  names which designate individuals, or in words
which refer to purely intelligible objects like ideas rather than to the objects
of sense-experience.

The  mood  of  the  ancients,  which  also  prevails for the most part among the
philosophers  and  theologians  of  the  Middle Ages, seems td express a certain
tolerance  of  the  imperfect  ions of language. If men do not think clearly, if
they do not reason cogently or argue honestly, the fault primarily the result of
the  misuse  of  is  their  faculties,  not  of  the betrayal of their in- IDEAS
tentions  by  the  intractable character of language as an instrument. Even when
men  misunderstand  one  another,  the  inadequacy  of  language  as a medium of
communication is not of minds to solely responsible for the failure meet through
the interchange of words. With greater effort, with a more assiduous application
of  the  liberal arts, men can succeed even if language works against them. Some
things  are  inexpressible  in  human speech even as they are incapable of being
fully  grasped  by  human  thought.  "My vision," Dante says when he reaches the
mystic  rose of Paradise,"was greater than our speech." Such knowledge as we can
have  of  "the  highest matters and the first principles of things" Plato thinks
"does  not admit of exposition like other branches of knowledge." In his Seventh
Letter,  he even goes so far as to say that "no man of intelligence will venture
to  express  his  philosophical  views  in  language." With these exceptions the
ancients seem to adopt a mood of tolerance towards language. This does not imply
an  underestimation  of  the difficulties of using language well. It simply does
not  make  of language an insidious enemy of clarity and truth. The deficiencies
of  language  are  like  the  weaknesses  of the flesh. As man can in large part
overcome  them  through  the  discipline  of  the  moral virtues, so through the
discipline  of the liberal arts *by skill in grammar, rhetoric, and logic he can
make language express almost as much truth as he can acquire, and communicate it
almost  as  clearly  as  he can think it. Men need not succumb to the tyranny of
words  if  they will make the requisite effort to master language to serve their
purpose.  But the liberal arts do not guarantee purity of purpose. Obscurantism,
obfuscation,  deception,  and  falsification  are  sometimes the aim. Men try to
persuade  others  at  all  costs, or to win the argument regardless of where the
truth  lies.  They try to confuse their opponents or mislead their audience. The
use  of  language  for such ends requires as much skill as its employment in the
service  of  truth.  If such use is a misuse, then language is equally available
for use or misuse It is an ancient saying that only the competent in grammar can
make grammatical errors intentionally. So, as Plato recognizes, the dif- CHAPTER
45:  LANGU  fcrcncc  between th? sophist and the philosopher is not one of skill
but of purpose. When he criticizes the trickery of sophistical argument, he ajso
acknowledges  the  cleverness  with which the sophists juggle words and propound
absurdities under the cover of superficially significant speech. The sophistical
fallacies  which  Aristotle  enumerates  are  seldom accidental errors. Far from
being the result of the impediments which language places in the way of thought,
they  are  in  large  measure artfully contrived equivocations. They are ways of
using  language  against  logic.  According  to  Aristotle, they represent "foul
fighting  in disputation" and are resorted to only by "those who are resolved to
win at all costs."

IN  THE  MODERN  treatment of language there is more of an imputation that words
cause  men  unwittingly  to  deceive  themselves as often as they enable one man
intentionally  to  deceive  another. Men are duped or tricked by the tendency of
words to counterfeit a reality which does not exist. This, in the view of Hobbes
or  Locke,  Berkeley or Hume, is particularly true of general or universal names
or  words  that , signify nothing which can be perceived or imagined. We* cannot
imagine  anything  infinite, says Hobbes. Hence a word like "infinite" is a form
of  absurd  speech  "taken  upon  credit (without any signification at all) from
deceived philosophers and deceived, or deceiving, Schoolmen." In addition to the
deceptions  of  ordinary  ambiguity  and  of  metaphorical  speech,  Hobbes pays
particular  attention  to the absurd, insignificant, or nonsensical use of words
"whereby  we  conceive  nothing but the sound"; he gives as examples, not merely
"round   quadrangle,"   but  "infused  virtue,"  "free  will,"  and  "immaterial
substance."

In the light of the examples, this theory of insignificant or meaningless speech
explains  what  Hobbes  means  when he says that "words are wise men's counters,
they  do but reckon by them; but they are the money of fools." It also indicates
how Bofrbes uses the susceptibility of men to self-deception through language a$
a  way  of  explaining  the  errors  he  calls them "absurdities" into which his
predecessors  have  fallen. What is novel hero is not that he disagrees with AGE
earlier thinkerson points of psychology and metaphysics or theology, but that he
reduces what might be supposed to be an issue between true and false opinions to
a  difference  between  and absurd speech. His opponents significant might reply
that unless his own views about matter and mind are true, his semantic criticism
of  them does not hold. They have been seduced by language into talking nonsense
only  if  Hobbes  is  right  in his metaphysics and psychology, The criticism of
arguments  which  seem  to  rely  on  metaphors is not peculiarly modern. In his
attack  on  the Platonic theory of ideas, Aristotle dismisses the statement that
the Forms "are patterns and other things share in them" as a use of "empty words
and  poetical-  meta  phors."  But Hobbes carries this method of crit icism much
further. He frequently rests his case against other philosophers entirely on the
ground   that   they  arc  talking  nonsense.  Though  he  himself  catches  the
imagination, almost as often as Plato does, by his skillfully wrought metaphors,
he  would insist that what he says can always be rendered literally, whereas the
metaphors  of  others conceal the insignificance of their speech. Bacon provides
another  illustration  of  the  modern  attitude  which  ascribes  a  diabolical
character  to  language. "There arises from a bad and unapt formation of words,"
he  writes,  "a  wonderful  obstruction to the mind. Nor can the definitions and
explanations  with which learned men are wont to guard and protect themselves in
some  instances  afford  a  complete  remedy  words  still  manifestly force the
understanding,  throw every thing into confusion, and lead mankind into vain and
innumerable  controversies  and  fallacies."  He  goes on to say that "the idols
imposed upon the understanding by words, are of two kinds. They are either names
of  things which have no existence . . .or they are names of actual objects, but
confused,  badly  defined,  and  hastily or irregularly abstracted from things/'
Here,  as in the case of Hobbes, a theory of reality and of the way in which the
mind  draws its ideas from experience seems to underlie the charge that language
tangles  the  mind  in  akweb of words, so that it deals with words, rather than
with  things In the? same spirit, though not from the same premises, Locke tells
his  reader  why  THE  GREAT  I  he  found  it necessary to include in his Essay
Concerning  Human  Understanding the long third book on language, which examines
in  detail  the  imperfections  as well as the abuses of words, and the remedies
therefor.

"Vague and insignificant forms of speech, and abuse of language," he says, "have
so  long  passed  for  mysteries  of  science; and hard or misapplied words with
little or no meaning have, by prescription, such a right to be mistaken for deep
learning  and height of speculation, that it will not be easy to persuade either
those  who  speak,  or  those  who  hear  them,  that they are but the covers of
ignorance,  and  hinderance  of true knowledge. ... So few are apt to think they
deceive,  or  are  deceived in the use of words or that the language of the sect
they  are  of  has  any  faults  in  it." Without judging the fundamental issues
involved  concerning  the  nature  of  things and of man and his mind, one point
seems to be clear.

According  as  men  hold  different  conceptions  of the relation of language to
thought  (and in consequence assume different attitudes toward the imperfections
or  misuse  of  language),  they inevitably take opposite sides on these issues.
Whether  the discipline of language is called semantics or the liberal arts, the
standards  by  which  one  man criticizes the language of another seem to depend
upon  what  he  holds  to  be true. The present work on the great ideas aims, in
agreements  and  disagreepart,  to record the ments among the great minds of the
western  tradition.  It  also records how those minds have used the same word in
different  senses or have used quite distinct words for the same thing. It could
not  do either unless it did both. This indicates the basic relationship between
language  and  thought  which  the  great books exemplify, even when they do not
explicitly  make  it  the  basis  of  their  discussion  of the relation between
language and thought.

THE  IDEAL  OF  A  perfect and universal language seems to arise in modern times
from dissatisfaction with the inadequacy of ordinary language for the analytical
refinement  and  precision  of mathematics or science. As Descartes holds up the
method of mathematics as the procedure to be followed in all other inquiries and
subject  matters,  so  his  conception  of a "universal ma the- sis" calls for a
language which shall be the perfect instrument of analysis and demonstration. It
is  sometimes  supposed that the symbolism of mathematics is itself that perfect
language.  Lavoisier  quotes  Condillac to the effect that algebra, "in the most
simple,  most  exact,  and  best  manner,  is at the same time a language and an
analytical  method."  Of the analytical equations "which Descartes was the first
to  introduce into the study of curves and surfaces," Fourier remarks that "they
extend  to  all general phenomena. There cannot be a language more universal and
more  simple, more free from errors and obscurities, that is to say, more worthy
to express the invariable relations of natural things. . . . Its chief attribute
is  clearness;  it  has no marks to express confused notions. ... It follows the
same  course  in  the  study  of  all  phenomena; it interprets them by the same
language."  This  praise of mathematical symbolism indicates that one feature of
the  ideal  is  an  exact  correspondence  between  words and ideas. "Like three
impressions  of  the  same seal," Lavoisier says, "the word ought to produce the
idea,  and  the  idea  to  be  a  picture  of the fact." If there were a perfect
one-to-one  correspondence  between  physical symbols and mental concepts, there
would  never  be  any failures of communication. Men would be able to understand
each other as well as if they could see directly into each other's minds. Though
they  still  used  external  signs  as  a  medium  of  communication, they would
approximate  the  immediate  communication  which  the  theologians attribute to
angels.   In  addition,  the  process  of  thinking  itself,  quite  apart  from
communication,  could  be  perfectly regulated by the rules of grammar the rules
for  manipulating symbols. In the sense in which Lavoisier says that "the art of
reasoning  is  nothing more than a language well arranged," the rules of thought
might be reduced to the rules of syntax if there were a perfect language. If the
symbols  of  mathematics lack the universality to express every sort of concept,
then  it  may  be  necessary,  as  Leibnitz  proposes, to construct a "universal
characteristic"   which   would  make  possible  a  symbolic  calculus  for  the
performance  of  all the operations of thought. This conception seems to contain
the  principle  and  the  motivation  for  the  various logistical schemes which
accompany  the  45r  modern development of symbolic or matical logic, from Boole
and Vena to Peario Coucurat, Russell, and Whitehead. The hopes to be realized by
an  algebra of logic find expression in Jevons' plan for a logical abacus which,
like  an  adding  machine,  or  comptometer, would be a thinking machine able to
solve all problems that can be put in suitable terms.

Is  THE  IDEAL  of  a perfect and universal language a genuine hope or a utopidn
dream  ?  Not all modern scientists seem to agree with Lavoithat the improvement
of  a  science sier's point and the improvement of its language are inseparable.
Faraday,  for  example,  apologising  for  the  invention  of  new words to name
electrical  phenomena, says that he is "fully aware thaj names are one thing and
science  another."  The  Utopian  character  of the ideal seems to be implied in
Swift's satinzation of a universal Ian guage. On his voyage to the cloud-land of
the scientists in Laputa, Gulliver learns of a project which is being considered
by  the professors of language. "Since words are only names for things, it would
be more convenient for all men to carry about them such things as were necessary
to  express  the particular business they are to discourse on." The substitution
of things for words would thus provide a "universal language to be understood in
all civilized nations." In the ancient world thp,imperfection of ordinary speech
gives  rise, not to the conception of a perfect language which man should try to
construct,  but  to  the consideration of the distinction between a hypothetical
natural  language  and  the  existing conventional languages actually in use. If
there  were  a  natural  language,  it  would  not  only be the same for all men
everywhere,  but its words would also be perfect images or imitations of things.
That  human  lank guage is conventional rather than natural may be seen not only
in the plurality of tpngues, but also in the fact that existing languages embody
contradictory  principles  of symJbolization. , This fact, Plato suggests in the
Crjtylujt  indicates  that human language doep jaot originate as a gift from the
gods,  for  if  the  gods had given men the names they use, signs would be jkqrr
fectly  and consistently adapted to things signified The hypothesis of a natural
or  god-givkQ  knguage is not proposed as an ideal to inspire LANGUAGE $45 inert
to  try  to  invent  a perfect language for themselves. It functions rather as a
norm  for  the  criticism  of majn-madd language and for discovering the naturaj
elements  common  to  all  con ventional languages. , jLikc human society, human
language  seems  to be partly natural, partly conventional. As there are certain
political  principles,  such as that of natural justice, common to all societies
despite  the  diversity  of  their customs and institutions, so all conventional
languages  have certain common characteristick of structure which indicate their
natural  basis  in the physical and mental constitution of man. In the tradition
of  the  liberal  arts  the  search  for a universal' grammar, applicable to all
conventional languages, represents not the hope to create a universal or perfect
language,  fciXt the conviction that al} languages have a common, natural basis.
THE  HYPOTHESIS  of  a  natural  language  takes  another  forni and has another
implication  in  the  Judaeo-Christian  tradition,  where it is discussed in the
light  of  certain  portions  of revelation. Yet it retains the same fundamental
relevance  to  the  problem  of  the  origin  and  characteristics  of  the many
conventional  languages  which  now exist. Genesis relates how, after God formed
evkry  beast of the field and every fowl of the air, He "brought them to Adam to
see  what  he  would callthem; and whatsoever Adam called every living creature,
that was the name thereof."

The  names  which  Adam devised constituted a natural language, at least insofar
as,  according  to Augustine's interpretation, it is the one "common language of
the  race"  both  before,  the flood and for some time after. But there is the .
further question whether the names which Adam gave to things were their rightful
or  proper  Jiames  whether  they  were  natural;  signs  - in the sense of true
representations,  of  tfre  na ( tures of the things signified. ,{,,, , ; Hobbes
suggests  one  answer  when  he  say  & that "the first author of speech was God
himself,  who  instructed Adam how to name such creatures as he presented to his
sight";  Aqgustine  suggests another answer by identifying the original language
of man with, Hebrew, and by affirming, the continuity of the Hebrew spoken aftqr
Babel with the language all men spoke before the confysion of tongues.

946  At  the  timt  when  men  began  to build "a tower whose top may reach unto
heaven,"  Genesis  tells  us  that  "the whole earth was of one language and one
speech. . And . the Lord . said,Behold, the people is one, and they have all one
language;  and  this  they  begin to do; and now nothing will be restrained from
them,  which they have imagined to do. Go to, let us go down, and there confound
their  language,  that  they  may  not  understand  one another's speech." This,
according  to  Hobbes, means that the language "gotten and augmented by Adam and
his  posterity,  was  again  lost at the tower of Babel, when by the hand of God
every  man  was  stricken  for  his  rebellion,  with  an oblivion of his former
language."  If  the further implication is that the lost language was unlike any
of  the conventional languages in the historical record, then it may be supposed
to  have been that natural form of speech in which each thing is named according
to  its nature. The modern ideal of a perfect and universal language may even be
looked upon as an impious wish to achieve what God took away from men at Babel.

THE  PROBLEM  of  the  origin  of  human  language  is  not  an easy one for the
theologian.  It  is  more  difficult  still  for those who speculate about it in
purely  naturalistic terms. Rousseau tries to expose some of the perplexities in
such  speculations. become a social necessity If speech did not until men passed
from isolation in a state of nature to living together in society, how, he asks,
could  societies  have  been formed before languages had been invented ? "If men
need  speech  to  learn  to  think,"  he  remarks, "they must have stood in much
greater need of the art of thinking, to be able to invent that of speaking." The
development  of  languages  already  in existence, or the way in which the child
learns  to  speak  through  living in an environment where speech exists, "by no
means  explains  how  languages  were  originally  formed."  Rousseau imagines a
primitive   condition  in  which  men  uttered  instinctive  cries  "to  implore
assistance  in case of danger, or relief in case of suffering"; he supposes that
to  such  cries,  men  may  have  added  gestures to signify visible and movable
objects,  and  imitative  sounds  to  signify  audible  ones.  Such  methods  of
expression being insufficient to convey ideas about absent or future things, men
had  at  last  to  invent  "the articulate sounds of the voice" and to institute
these  as  conventional  signs.  But, as he observes, "such an institution could
only  be  made  by common consent . . . itself still more difficult to conceive,
since  common  agreement  such  a  must have had motives, and speech, therefore,
seems  to  have  been highly necessary in order to establish the use of it." The
problem  of  the origin of human language is not only connected with the problem
of  the  origin of human society, but also with the problem of the origin of man
himself.  The faculty of articulate speech does not, according to Darwin, "offer
any  insuperable  objection  to the belief that man has been developed from some
lower  form." Though the habitual use of articulate language is peculiar to man,
"he  uses,  in  common with the lower animals, inarticulate cries to express his
meaning,  aided  by  gestures and the movements of the muscles of the face." The
songs of birds and the speech of parrots show that animals can learn to make and
repeat  certain definite sounds, and even to connect words with things. It seems
to  Darwin quite credible that man's articulate language "owes its origin to the
imitation  and  modification  of  various  natural  sounds,  the voices of other
animals,  and man's own instinctive cries, aided by signs and gestures." SUCH AN
ACCOUNT  of  the  origin  of human speech is not credible, however, to those who
disagree with Darwin's statement that "the lower ani mals differ from man solely
in  his  almost  infinitely  larger  power  of  associating  together  the  most
diversified  sounds and ideas." Those who hold that human rationality differs in
kind,  rather than degree, from animal intelligence tend to find a corresponding
difference  in  kind between human language and the sounds of brutes. Aristotle,
for example, says that man is the only artimal whom nature "has endowed with the
gift of speech. Mere vocalization is only an indication of pleasure and pain and
is  therefore  found  in other animals/' but men alone have the power to discuss
the expedient and the just, and this fact distinguishes human CHAPTER 45: LANGUA
association  from  the companionship of gregarious animals. Human speech is, for
Descartes,  one  of  the  two criteria by which we can "recognize the difference
that  exists between men and brutes. For it is a very remarkable fact that there
are none so depraved and stupid, without even excepting idiots, that they cannot
arrange  different words together, forming of them a statement by which they can
make  known  their  thoughts; while, on the other hand, there is no other animal
which  can  do  the same. It is . . . not the want of organs that brings this to
pass,  for  it  is  evident  that  magpies and parrots can utter words just like
ourselvesk  and  yet they cannot speak as we do, that is, so as to give evidence
that  they  think  of  what  they  say. . . . This does not merely show that the
brutes  have  less  reason  than  men,  but  that  they  have  none at all." The
difference  between men and other animals is more fully discussed in the chapter
on  MAN.  Here  we  are concerned with opposite opinions on that subject only in
relation  to  opposite  views  of  human  language  and  its origin. When, as in
Descartes' view, human language is distinguished by syntax and grammar or, as in
Locke's, by man's special power to use sounds "as signs of internal conceptions,
and  to  make  them stand as marks for ideas within his own mind," the origin of
human speech does not seem explicable in evolutionary terms.

THE  RELATION  OF  grammar  to the other liberal arts and to the various uses of
language  is considered in the chapters on LOGIC, POETRY, and RHETORIC. Isolated
from  these  others,  grammar is primarily concerned with the distinction of the
parts  of speech, such as noun and verb, or particle and adjective. "By a noun,"
says  Aristotle,  "we  mean  a  sound  significant  by  convention, which has no
reference  to time, and of which no part is significant apart from the rest." In
contrast to the noun, the verb is denned by Aristotle as the sort of word which,
"in  addition  to  its  proper  meaning,  carries  with it the notion of time. ,
Moreover,"  he  continues,  "a  verb  is  . . always a sign of something said of
something  else."  The  grammatical  function  of nouns and verbs is, in Locke's
opinion, more generally GE recognized and better defined than that of particles,
prepositions,  and conjunctions. Such words, Locke writes, "show what connexion,
restriction,  distinction,  opposition,  emphasis,  etc.  [a  man] gives to each
respective  part  of  his  discourse.  ...  He  who  would show the right use of
particles,  and  what  significancy and force they have, must take a little more
pains,  enter  into his own thoughts, and observe nicely the several postures of
his  mind in discoursing." Grammar is also concerned with the difference between
words  (or  phrases) and sentences, or, in Aristotle's terms, between simple and
composite  expressions;  and with the rules of syntax which govern the order and
agreement  of words according to their function as parts of speech. By reference
to  these  rules the grammarian critizes the misuse of language and classifies a
great  variety  of common errors. One test of whether grammar is a universal art
applicable  toall  languages  not  just  a  set  of rules for using a particular
conventional   language   correctly   is  the  naturalness  of  its  theoretical
distinctions.  Does  Aristotle's distinction between noun and verb, for example,
respond to something natural in all discourse, or is it peculiar to the Greek or
to  the  IndoEuropean  languages?  THERE is A MEANING of language which includes
more  than  the  speech  of  men  and brutes. From Hippocrates on, the physician
regards  the  symptoms of disease as if they were a connected system of signs, a
language for which his diagnostic art provides a grammar of interpretation. This
is  particularly true in the psychological realm where, in the psychoanalysis of
the  neuroses  and  especially in Freud's interpretation of dreams, both symptom
and  dream-symbol  are treated as an elaborate language. That language serves to
express  the  unconscious  thoughts and desires which cannot be expressed in the
ordinary  language of social intercourse over which consciousness exercises some
control.  These medical examples represent a conception of language according to
which  the  whole Xf nature is a book to be read by the scientist. He penetrates
the  mysteries  of  nature by learning the grammar of natural signs. To know the
relation  of  natural  things as cause and effect or IHE GRE whole and art is to
discover  nature's  Syntax.  According  to  another  conception,  expressed  fcy
Galileo,  the  book  of nature "is written in mathematical language, its symbols
being  triangles,  circled, and other gedmetrical figures, without whose help it
is impossible to comprehend a single word of it/' The book of nature may also be
read  as the language of God. Prophecy or divination is such a reading of dreams
or of other events as omens and portents which bespeak the divine purpose.

'When  he  reaches  the highest heaven Dante finds in the vision of the Trinity,
"bound up with love in one volume, that which is dispersed in leaves through the
universe.*'  Berkeley goes further than this. All of the ideas which man gets ty
sdnse-perception  are  Words  in a divine vocabulary. The uniform appearances of
nature  "rhay  not  unfitly  be  styled  the  Language  of  its  Author, whereby
Rediscovers  His  attributes  to  our  view  and  directs  us how to act for the
convenience  and  felicity  of  life."  God  speaks to man in still another way.
Within the Judaeo-Christian tradition at least, God is believed to have revealed
himself  to  man  through  the  vehicle  of human language. Written by men under
divine  inspiration,  Sacred Scripture is the word of God. Because it is at once
human  and  divine,  this language is the most difficult for man to interpret. 1
The  art  of interpreting the Bible involves the most elaborate theory of signs,
and  of  the  types and levels of meaning. It involves special rules of reading.
The  development  of  this  theory  and  these  rules  by Augustine and Aquinas,
Maimonides  and  Spinoza,  Hobbes  and Pascal, has deepened the liberal arts and
enlarged  the  scope  of  man's  understanding  of  other  languagesk-his own or
nature's.  Since  the heart of this larger consideration of language lies in the
analysis  of  meaning  and  the  modes of signification, tfoc dis cussion of the
syrribolism  of  nature and fche Word df God belongs to the chapter on Sidfc AND
SYMBOL;  and,  in  its  theological  aspects,  at'ine  chapters  on PROPHECY and
RELIGION,  -  f  to  TriB  DISCUSSION  of  language, a* we havtf seen, cannot be
separated  from -the consideration of human nature arid human society'.' Because
He   "designed   man   fbr   a   sociafee  creature,"  Grid,  Th  according  'to
Lticke,''"officfe  terrt hot only *tfth AT IDEAS an inclinati tmder a nectesiity
to  have  fellowship  with  those  of  his own kind, but furnished him also with
language,  Which  was to be the great instrument and common' tie of society." It
is  not  merely  that  the  fellowship  of men depends upon speech, According to
Locke,  men  carinot enjoy "the comfort ihd advantage of society ... without the
communication'  of  thoughts."  The  fact  that "man had by nature his organs so
fashioned  as  to  be  fit  to  frame  articulate sounds . . . was not enough to
produce  language" at least riot human language, "for parrots, and several other
birds,  can be taught to make articulate sounds distinct enough," and yet, Locke
writes,  they  are  "by no means capable of language. Besides articulate sounds,
therefore,  it  was  further necessary," he insists, that the sounds rhen formed
should  be  the  instrument  whereby "the thoughts of men's minds [are] conveyed
from one to another." Rousseau, on the other hand, seems to think that under the
primitive circumstances surrounding the origin of both society and language, the
association  of men "would not require a language much more refined than that of
rooks or monkeys, who associate together for much the same purpose. Inarticulate
cries,  plenty  of gestures and some imitative sounds, must have been for a long
time the universal language," he writes; "and by the addition, in every country,
of some conventional articulate sounds . . . particular languages were produced;
but  these were rude and imperfect, and nearly such as are now to be found among
some  savage natidns." ' The plurality of conventional, historic languages seems
to  parallel  the  plurality  of  the nations or societies into which mankind is
divided.  But  underlying  the  diversity of tongues there is also a unity which
implies  the  possibility  of mankind's unification. To the extent that language
expressed  thought,  diverse  languages  are but differeht 'mediums for the same
thing. "All men [may] not have the same speech sounds," Aristotle declares, "but
the  mental  experiences,  which these directly symbolize, are the same for all"
Tht  'human community conceived in terms of the communication of thought extends
as  far  CHAPTBR  45  :  LANGUAGE  as  the  bounds  of  such communication among
participate.The  exten  men. It is not limited by political boundaries, measures
the  range  of  lt  overcomes by translation the barriers set up cabulary of its
langu  by  a  diversity of tongues. It includes the living which each individual
and the dead and extends to those as yet un- himself when he turns born. In this
sense,  human  civilization  can  be  quy;  for,  as  Plato  ob described as the
civilization  of  the  dialogue,  and are the same, with th the tradition of the
great  books can be conceived called thought is the as the great conversation in
which all men can the soul with itself.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PACE

1. The nature and functions of language: the speech of men and brutes
   1a. The role of language in thought
   1b. The service of language to society

2. Theories of the origin of language
   2a. The hypothesis of one natural language for all men
   2b. The genesis of conventional languages: the origin of alphabets

3. The growth
of language
   3a. The invention of words and the proliferation
   of meanings
   3b. The spoken and written word in the development of language
   3c. Tradition and the life of languages

4. The
art of grammar
   4a. Syntax: the parts and units of speech
   4b. Standards of correctness
   in the use of language: grammatical errors
   The imperfections of language
   4c. The abuse of words: ambiguity, imprecision, obscurity
   4d. Insignificant speech: meaninglessness, absurdity

6. The improvement of speech: the ideal of a perfect language

7. Grammar and logic: the formulation and statement of knowledge

8. Grammar and rhetoric: the effective use of language in teaching and persuasion

9. The language of poetry

10. The         language of things and events: the book of nature; the symbolism of dreams;
prophetic signs

11. Immediate communication: the speech of angels and the gift of tongues

12. The         language of God or the gods: the deliverances of the oracles; the inspiration,
revelation, and interpretation of Sacred Scripture

CROSS-REFERENCES

33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 78b-80b; 163aFor: The other major discussion of
language in terms of the va

signification,  see  SIGN  AND  SYMBOL.  Other  considerations of language as an
instrument of LOGIC 33; MATHEMATICS 3d; RHETORIC 1b, 2c-2d; SIGN The distinction
of the natural and the conventional CONVENTION i; SIGN AND SYMBOL 1b, 1d, 1f.

The general discussion of the liberal arts of gramma

the relation of grammar to these other arts, see L

Another analysis of the imperfections of language, a

tics, see SIGN AND SYMBOL 33, 4c.

The language of poetry, see POETRY 8b.

The language of symptoms in medicine, of dreams in p

portents in prophecy and divination, see MEDICINE

PROPHECY 30-3k SIGN AND SYMBOL 46, 5b, 6a-6c. The language of God or the gods in
Sacred Scripture

problem of interpreting the divine word, see GOD 6

SIGN AND SYMBOL 56 THEOLOGY 4b.

;

ADDITIONAL  READING  Listed below are works not included in Great Booty idea and
topics with which this chapter deals. Thes

I. Works by authors represente

II. Works by authors not repres

For  the  date,  place,  and  other  facts  concerning  the  the Bibliography of
Additional Readings which follo

I.

DANTE. DC Vulgari Eloquentia . Convivio (The Banquet), FIRST TRBATISE, CH 5-7,
9-13 12

164b / Penstes, 570-588 273b-277b passim;

642-736 290b-317b; 775 323b-324a; 803-856

328b-341b 35 LOCKE: Toleration, 5a-b; 21c-22d / Human

Understanding BK in, CH ix, SECT 9 286d287b; SECT 23 291b-c; CH x, SECT 12
294b-c

35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 44 420d-421a; SECT 65-66 425d-426a

38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, 401c-402a 40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 186d-188a
passim 41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 230c-232c 43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 37, 120a-b
ianism, 455b 309d

43 MILL: Liberty, 290a-291d passim / Utilitar46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History,
PART HI, 308c47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [1220-1237] 30a-b 48 MELVILLE: Moby Dick,
30a-36b

52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c riety of signs and the modes
of thought, see IDEA 43; JUDGMENT 53; AND SYMBOL 1d, 4Th), 4e. as applied to
language, see CUSTOM AND r, rhetoric, and logic, see ART 6b; and for OGIC 33;
RHETORIC 1b, 3c. nd for the remedies proposed by semansychoanalysis, and of
omens and 3c; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 8d-8e; or oracular utterances, and for the
c(i); PROPHECY 3a-3d; RELIGION 1b(i); S of the Western World, but relevant to
the e works are divided into two groups: d in this collection. ented in this
collection. publication of the works cited, consult ws the last chapter of The
Great Ideas. HOBBES. The Elements of Law, Natural and Politick PART i, CH 13
MILTON. Grammar SPIHOZA. Tractates TheologicO'Poltticus(Thtohgical- Political
Treatise), CH 7-13

CHAPTER  45:  LA LOCKE. Conduct of the Understanding ROUSSEAU, Essai sur origins
des langues A. SMITH. A Dissertation on the Origin of Languages J.

S. MILL. A System of Logic, BK i; BK iv, CH 3-6

II.

EPICURUS.  Letter  to  Herodotus  QUJNTIUA&,  Institijtio  Oratoria  (Institutes
ofOratory),

BK I-III JOHN OF SALISBURY. Metalogicon, BK I MAIMONIDES. The Guide for the
Perplexek PART i;

PART II, CH 30; PARI III, CH -7 I R. PACOM. Opus Majus, PART m

SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysical *xx (13),

XLI  (3) JOHN OF SAINTTHOMAS. CursusPhilosophicus Thoniisticus, Ars Logica, PART
i, QQ 1-3

ARNAULD  and  LANCELOT. A General and Rational Grammar Containing the Principles
of the Art of

Speaking

ARNAULD. Logic or the Art of Thinking, PART i, CH 15; PART II, CH 1-2

LEIBNITZ.  New  Essays Concerning Human Understanding, BK III J. HARRIS. Hermes,
or A Philosophical Inquiry Concerning Universal Grammar

BURKE.  A Philosophical Enquiry into the Origin of Our Ideas' of the Sublime and
Beautiful, PART v

VOLTAIRE.  "Languages," in A Philosophical Dictiortary CONDI LLAC. La langue des
calcuh

Logique, PART ii .

BLAIR.  Lecture  on  Rhetoric  and  Belles Lettres, xi-xiv TOOKE. The Diversions
ofPurley

D STEWART Elements ofthe Philosophy ofthe Human Mind, PART n, CH i A. JOHNSON. A
Treatise on Language J. MILL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind en 4

KMERSON.  Nature  GRIMM.  Vbcr  den Ursprung der Sprache TRENCH. On the Study of
Words

COMTE.  System  of  Positive  Polity,  VOLII,  Social  Statics,  CH  4 BOOLE, An
Investigation  of  the  Laws of Thought LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK v, CH 3 RENAN. De
Voriginedu langage

MULLER The Languages of the Seat of War in the

East.  With  a  Survey  of  the  Three  Families of Language, Semitic, Anon, and
Turanian

.

Comparative Mythology

. The Science of Language

NGUAGE SCHLEICHER, Darwinism Tested by the Science of

Language  FARRAR.  Chapters  on  Language WBOQWQOD. Orkthe Origin of Language E.
HARTMANN. The Philosophy of the Unconsciousk

(B)VI  WHITNEY.  Oriental  and  Linguistic  Studies  JEVONS.  On  the Mechanical
Performance of Logical

Inference

. The Principles of Science, CH 6 (17-18) SAYCE. Introduction to the Science of
Language VENN. Symbolic Logic

.

Principles of Empirical or Inductive Logic,

CH  6,  22  BRADLEY.  Appearance  and  Reality,  BK i, CH 2 BRE"AL. Semantics A.
SIDGWICK.  The  Use  of  Words  in  Reasoning  CROCE.  Aesthetic  as  Science of
Expression  COUTURAT  and  LEAU. Hi$toirc de la latiguc univcrselle DILTHEY. Das
Erkbnis und die Dtchtung WHITEHEAD and RUSSELL. Pnndpia Mathematica,

INTRO  SHAW.  Pygmalion  PARETO.  The  Mind  and  Society,  VOL i, CH 1-2 SAPIR.
Language VENDRY S. Language OGTJEN and RICHARDS. The Meaning of Meaning,

CH i, 9-10 H. DELACROIX, Le langage ct la penske JESPERSEN. Language

. The Philosophy of Grammar CASSIRER. Philosophic der symbohschen Formen, VOL i,

Die Sprache

*--,

Language  and  Myth DEWEY. Experience and Nature, CH 5 HEAD. Aphasia and Kindred
Disorder of Speech WHITEHEAD. An Introduction to Mathematics,

CH 5

.  Process and Reality, PART i, CH i (5) BUHLER. Sprachtheorie R. A. WILSON. The
Miraculous  Birth  of  Language  RICHARDS.  Interpretation  in  Teaching  JOYCE.
Fmnegans Wake URBAN. Language and Reality AYER. Thinking and Meaning CARNAP. The
Logical' Syntax of Language

. Introduction to Semantics

.

Meaning and Necessity B. RUSSELL. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth,

CH 1-6, 13-15, 25

. Human Knowledgek lt$ Scope and Limits,

PART ii
