Chapter  47:  LIB INTRODUCTION TIBERTY and law, liberty and justice, libJ t erty
and  equality  the  familiar  connection  of  these  terms breeds neglect of the
meaning they confer upon one another through association. A few simple questions
may  help  to restore the significance of these relationships. Are men free when
their  actions  are regulated by law or coercion ? Does liberty consist in doing
whatever  one pleases or whatever one has the power to do, or is one required by
justice  to abstain from injury to others? Do considerations of justice draw the
line  between  liberty and license? Can there be liberty apart from equality and
perhaps also fraternity ?

Other  questions immediately suggest themselves. Does not the rule of law secure
liberty  to  the  governed?  Is not slavery the condition of those who are ruled
tyrannically  or lawlessly ? Does it make a difference to freedom whether as the
law  or  the  constitution is just? Or is that an indifferent because government
itself is the sw impediment to liberty? Does liberty increase li as the scope of
government  dwindles and reach sa fullness only with anarchy or when men live in
si  a  state  of  nature  ?  en  Yet are not some forms of government said to be
fitting and some uncongenial to free men? Do all men have a right to freedom, or
do  only  some  ?  Are  some  men by nature free and is some slave ? Does such a
differentiation imply both equality and inequality in human nature TH with, as a
consequence,   equality   and   inequality  th  in  status  or  treatment?  What
implications  for  de  law,  justice,and equality has the distinction sp between
free societies and dependent or subject communities? wo , As Tolstoy points out,
the  variety of questions which can be asked about liberty indicates the variety
of  subject matters or sciences in which the problems of freedom are differently
raised. "What is sin, the conception of ERTY which arises from the consciousness
of  man's  freedom?  That  is  a  question  for  theology  .  .  . What is man's
responsibility  to  society, the conception of which results from the conception
of  freedom?  That  is a question for jurisprudence . . . What is conscience and
the  perception of right and wrong in actions that follow from the consciousness
of  freedom  ?  That  is a question for ethics . . . How should the past life of
nations  and of humanity be regarded as the result of the free, or as the result
of the constrained, activity of man ? That is a question for history." The great
traditional  issues  of  liberty  seem to be stated by these questions. From the
fact that most, perhaps all, of these questions elicit opposite answers from the
great  books, it might be supposed that there are as many basic issues there are
questions  of  this sort. But the swers to certain questions presuppose aners to
others.  Furthermore, the meaning of berty or freedom or independence is not the
me  throughout  the  questions  we  have  condered.  Answers  which appear to be
inconsistt  may  not  be  so when the meanings involved in their formulation are
distinguished.  We  must,  therefore,  find  the  roots  of the several distinct
ctrines  of  liberty  in  order  to  separate real sues from verbal conflicts. E
HISTORIANS  report  the  age-old  struggle  on  e  part of men and of states for
liberty  or  inpendence.  History  as  a development of the irit does not begin,
according  to  Hegel,  until  appears.  'The  History of the this struggle first
rld,'*  he  writes,  "is  none  other  than the progress of the consciousness of
Freedom," which does not reach its climax until freedom is universally achieved.
But  though  freedom  is  itsproduct, history, in Hegel's view, is not a work of
freedom,  but  "involves an absolute ne- 992 THE GREAT I cessity." Each stage of
its development occurs inevitably.

Other  historians  see  man  as  free to work out his destiny, and look upon the
great  crises  of civilization as turning points at which free men, that is, men
having  free  will,  exercise a free choice for better or for worse. "Whether we
speak  of  the migration of the peoples and the incursions of the barbarians, or
of  the  decrees of Napoleon III, or of someone's action an hour ago in choosing
one  direction  out  of  several  for  his  walk,  we  are  unconscious  of  any
contradiction," Tolstoy declares, between freedom and necessity. "Our conception
of  the  degree  of  freedom,"  he  goes  on  to say, "often varies according to
differences in the point of view from which we regard the event, but every human
action  appears  to us as a certain combination of freedom and inevitability. In
every  action  we  examine  we  see  a  certain measure of freedom and a certain
measure  of  inevitability. And always the more freedom we see in any action the
less inevitability do we perceive, and the more inevitability the less freedom."

Accordingly, neither necessity which flows from the laws of matter or of spirit,
nor  overhanging and indomitable fate determines the direction of events. If the
theologians  say  that nothing happens which God does not foresee, they also say
that  divine  providence  leaves  the world full of contingencies and man a free
agent  to  operate  among  them. "Though there is for God a certain order of all
causes,"  it  does not follow, Augustine says, that nothing depends "on the free
exercise  of  our own wills, for our wills themselves are included in that order
of  causes  which  is  certain to God, and is embraced by His foreknowledge, for
human  wills  are  also  causes  of  human  actions."  These matters are further
discussed  in  the  chapterson FATE, HISTORY, and NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY. The
mention  of them here suggests another meaning of liberty that of free choice or
free  will  and  with it issues other than those involved in the relation of the
individual  to  the  state  or to his fellow men. Yet the metaphysical questions
about  liberty  and  necessity,  or  freedom  and causality, and the theological
questions  about man's freedom under God, are not without bearing on the politi-
cal  problems  of  man's  freedom  in  society,  or  his  rights and powers. The
fundamental doctrines of civil liberty certainly seem to differ according to the
conception of natural freedom on which they are based. Freedom may be natural in
the sense that free will is a part of human nature; or in the sense that freedom
is  a birthright, an innate and inalienable right. It may be natural m the sense
in  which  freedom in a state of nature is distinguished from political liberty,
or  liberty  under  civil  law  and  government.  THE EFFORT TO clarify meanings
requires  us  to  look  at  the  three  words which we have used as if they were
interchangeable  "liberty,"  "freedom,"  and  "independence." For the most part,
"liberty" and "freedom" are synonyms. Both words are used in English versions of
the  great  books. Though authors or translators sometimes prefer one, sometimes
the  other, their preference does not seem to reflect a variation in meaning. In
English  the  word  "freedom"  has a little greater range in that it permits the
formation  of  the  adjective  "free." It is also adapted to speaking of freedom
from  certain restraints or undesirable conditions, as well as of freedom to act
in accordance with desire or to exercise certain privileges. In consequence, the
word  "freedom"  is  more  frequently  employed  in the discussion of free will.
Though  the  traditional  enumeration  of  civil  liberties may use the phrasing
"liberty  of  conscience  or worship" as frequently as "freedom of conscience or
worship,"  "freedom  of speech" is more usual, and "freedom from fear or want or
economic  dependence"  does  not  seem to have an alternative phrasing. The word
"independence" has special connotations which make it equivalent to only part of
the  meaning  of  "freedom"  or "liberty." Negatively, independence is a freedom
from  limitation  or from being subject to determination by another. Positively,
independence implies self-sufficiency and adequate power. When we speak of a man
of  independent  means,  we  refer not only to his freedom from want or economic
dependence  on  others,  but  also  to  his having sufficient wealth to suit his
tastes  or  purposes.  A  moment's  reflection will show that this is a relative
matter. It is doubtful whether ER 47 a bsohitc economic independence is possible
for meh or even for nations.

' ' ' Thfc rebl questfcta here scorns ttf be a metaphysical one. Can any firiite
thing  be  absolutely  independent ? The traditional answer is No. As appears in
the  chapter  on INFINITY, only a being infinite in-pcrfectionand power only the
Supreme One of Plotinus, the uncreated God of AquinaS, or the self-caused God of
Spinozak-  has  complete  independence.  God  has  the freedom of autonomy which
cannot  belong  to  finite  things.  There  i  however, another sense' of divine
frdedom  which  Aquinas  affirms  and  both  Plotinus  and Spinoza deny. That is
freedom  of choice. "God does not act from freedom of will," Spinoza writes; yet
God  alone acts as a free cause, for God alone "exists from the necessity of his
own  nature  and  is  determined to action by himself alone." The divine freedom
consists  in  God's  self-determination  which,  for  Spinoza, 'does not exclude
necessity. The opposite view is most clearly expressed in the Christian doctrine
of  creation.  The  created  world  does  not follow necessarily from the divine
nature.  "Since  the goodness of God is perfect," Aquinas writes, "and can exist
without  other things, inasmuch as no perfection can accrue to Him from them, it
follows  that  for  Him  to  will  things  other  than Himself is not absolutely
necessary."  This  issue  of  freedom or necessity with regard to God's will and
actionis   more  fully  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  WILL  and  WORLD.  The
metaphysical  identification  of  independence with infinity does not carry over
into  the  sphere  of political freedom. Yet in one respect there is an analogy.
The  autonomous  is  that  which  is  a  law  unto itself. It admits no superior
authority.  When  in  the tradition of political thought states are called "free
and  independent,"  their autonomy or sovereignty means that by virtue of which,
in  the  words of the Declaration of Independence, "they have full power to levy
war, conclude peace, contract alliances, establishcommerce;* and to do all other
acts and things which independent states may of light do."

*  Free  and independent states do not 'have infinite power. There is always the
possibility  of  their  being subjugated by another state and 1 feduced 'to? the
condition  of  a  dependency  But  JHBERTY (#3 thbugh thefr power is they Attidt
infinite,  knowledge  no  superior. TVbe a sovereign is to ' " * accept commands
from no one.

Since  autonomy  or  sovereignty  is incompatible with living under human law or
government, the 'independence of sovereign princes or states must be an anarchic
freedoma  freedom from law and government. This sterns to be the view of Hobbes,
Locke,  Kant,  and Hegel, all of whom refer to the anarthy of independent states
or  sovereign  princes  to  explain 1 what they meafi by the "state of nature '*
Sov-  . ereigns arc, in the words of Kant, "like lawless savages." Applying this
conception  to  individual  men,  Hobbes  and Locke define natural as opfxsed to
civil  liberty  in terms of man's independencek a state of nature. In a state of
nature  man  riacl'a  limited independence, since each man might Be coerced by a
superior  force;  but  it  was an absolute independence in the sense that he was
subject  to  no  human government or man made : law. THE NATURAL FREEDOM of man,
according  to  Hobbes,  is  not  free will. Since "every act of 'man's will, and
every  desire  and  inclination,  proceed from some cause, and that from another
cause, in a continual chain (whose first lihk'is m the hand of God, the first of
all  causes), they proceed from necessity" Liberty is not of the but of the man,
consisting  in thisrk'that will, he finds no stop in doing what he has the will,
desire,  or  inclination to do." The proper application of the word "free" is to
bodies  in  motion,  and the liberty it signifies when so applied is merely "the
abserice  of  external  impediments."  The  natural  right of every man is "the"
liberty  each  man  has to ti& his own power ... for the preservation of his own
nature,  that  is  to  say,  of  his  own  life * . . anid consequently of doing
anything which in his own judgment and reason he shall conceive to-be the aptest
'means thereunto." This liberty or natural right belongs to man only iri a state
of  nature. Wheta men leave the state of nature and enter the commonwealth, they
surrender  this natural liberty in exchange fotka civil liberty which, according
to  Hobbes, consists in ftothing more f than their freedom to do what the law of
die state does not prohibit, or to omit doing what the law does not command.

Locke  agrees  that  man's  natural  liberty  is  not the freedom of his will in
choosing,  but the freedom to do what he wills without constraint or impediment.
He differs from Hobbes, however, in his conception of natural liberty because he
differs in his conception of the state of nature. For Hobbes the state of nature
is  a  state  of war; the notions of right and wrong, justice and injustice, can
have  no place in it. "Where there is no common power, there is no law; where no
law,  no  injustice." The liberty which sovereign states now have is the same as
"that  which every man should have if there were no civil laws, nor commonwealth
at  all. And the effects of it also are the same. For as amongst masterless men,
there  is  perpetual  war of every man against his neighbor ... so in states and
commonwealths  not  dependent on one another, every commonwealth has an absolute
liberty  to  do  what  it  shall judge . most conducing to . . its benefit." For
Locke  the  state of nature is not a state of war, but a natural as opposed to a
civil  society,  that  is,  a  society  in which men live together under natural
rather  than  under civil law. Men who live in this condition are "in a state of
perfect  freedom to order their actions and dispose of their possessions as they
think  fit,  within  the bounds of the law of nature." This is a limited, not an
absolute  freedom; or, as Locke says, "though this be a state of liberty, yet it
is not a state of license." The line between liberty and license is drawn by the
precepts  of  the  natural  law. The difference, then, between natural and civil
liberty  lies in this. Natural liberty consists in being "free from any superior
power  on earth," or not being "under the will or legislative authority of man."
Only the rules of natural law limit freedom of action. Civil liberty, or liberty
under  civil  law,  consists in being "under no other legislative power but that
established  by  consent."  It is a freedom for the individual to follow his own
will in all matters not prescribed by the law of the state.

IN  THE  ARGUMENTS  for  and  against  free  will, one view regards free will as
incompatible  with  tiici  principle  of  causality, natural necessity, or God's
omnipotence;  the  other  conceives  free choice as falling within, the order of
nature  or  causality  and  under  God's providence. We shall not consider these
alternatives  in  this  chapter, since this issue is reserved for the chapter on
WILL. Yet one thing is clear for the present consideration of political liberty.
If  the  statement  that  men are born free means that it is a property of their
rational  natures  to  possess  a  free will, then they do not lose their innate
freedom  when  they live in civil society. Government may interfere with a man's
actions,  but  it  cannot  coerce his will. Government can go no further than to
regulate  the  expression of man's freedom in external actions. Nor is the range
of free will limited by law. As indicated in the chapter on LAW, any lawmoral or
civil, natural or positivewhich directs human conduct can be violated. It leaves
man  free  to  disobey  it and take the consequences. But if the rule is good or
just,  then  the  act  which transgresses it must have the opposite quality. The
freedom  of a free will is therefore morally indifferent. It can be exercised to
do either good or evil. We use our freedom properly, says Augustine, when we act
virtuously; we misuse it when we choose to act viciously. "The will," he writes,
"is  then  truly  free,  when  it is not the slave of vices and sins." Those who
conceive the natural moral law as stating the precepts of virtue or the commands
of  duty  and  who, in addition, regard every concrete act which proceeds from a
free  choice  of  the  will as either good or bad never indifferentfind that the
distinction  between  liberty and license applies to every free act. The meaning
of  this  distinction  is  the  same  as  that between freedom properly used and
freedom misused. Furthermore, since there is no good act which is not prescribed
by  the  moral law, the whole of liberty, as opposed to license, doing what that
moral  law  comconsists  in  mands.  These  considerations affect the problem of
political  liberty,  especially  on  the question whether the spheres of law and
liberty  are  separate,  or even opposed. One view, as we have seen, is that the
area  of civil liberty lies outside the realm of acts regulated by law. To break
the  law  may be criminal license, but to CHAPTER 47: obey it is not to be free.
The sphere of liberty increases as the scope or stringency of law diminishes.

The  opposite view docs not regard freedom as freedom from law. "Freedom," Hegel
maintains,  "is  nothing  but  the  recognition  and  adoption of such universal
substantial  objects as Right and Law." All that matters in the relation between
liberty and law is whether the law is just and whether a man is virtuous. If the
law  is  just, then it does not compel a just man to do what ht would not freely
elect  to  do  even  if  the  law did not exist. Only the criminal is coerced or
restrained  by good laws. To say that such impediment to action destroys freedom
would  be  to  deny  the  distinction between liberty and license. Nevertheless,
liberty  can  be abridged by law. That is precisely the problem' of the good man
living  under  unjust  laws. If, as Montesquieu "liberty can consist only in the
says,  power  of doing what we ought to will, and in not being constrained to do
what  we  ought  not  to will," then governments and laws interfere with liberty
when  they  command  or prohibit acts contrary to the free choice of a good man.
The conception of freedom as the condition of those who are rightly governed who
are  commanded  to  do  only  what they would do anyway seems to be analogically
present  in  Spinoza's  theory  of  human bondage and human freedom. It is there
accompanied by a denial of the will's freedom of choice.

According  to  Spinoza human action is causally determined by one of two factors
in man's nature the passions or reason. When man is governed by his passions, he
is  in  "bondage,  for  a  man under their control is not his own master, but is
mastered  by fortune, in whose power he is, so that he is often forced to follow
the  worse,  although  he  sees  the better before him." When man is governed by
reason  he  is free, for he "does the will of no one but himself, and does those
things  only  which  he  knows  are of greatest importance in life, and which he
therefore desires above all things." The man who acts under the influence of the
passions  acts  in  terms  of  inadequate  ideas  and  in the shadow of error or
ignorance.  When reason rules, man acts with adequate knowledge and in the light
of  truth. So, too, in the theory of Augustine and LIBERTY Aquinas, the virtuous
man  is  morally  or  spiritually free because humah reason has triumphed in its
conflict  with the passions to influence the free judgment of his will. The rule
of  reason  does not annul the will's freedom. Nor is the will less free when it
is moved by the promptings of the passions. "A passion," writes Aquinas, "cannot
draw  or  move the will directly." It does so indirectly, as, for example, "when
those  who arc in some kind of passion do not easily turn their imagination away
from  the object of their affections," But though the will is not altered in its
freedom  by  whether  reason or emotion dominates, the situation is not the same
with the human person as a whole. The theologians see him as a moral agent and a
spiritual  being who gains or loses freedom according as the will submits to the
guidance  of  reason  or  follows  the  passions. On the supernatural level, the
theologians  teach  that God's grace assists reason to conform human acts to the
divine  law, but also that grace does not abolish free choice on the part of the
will.  "The first freedom of the will," Augustine says, "which man received when
he  was  created  upright,  consisted  in  an ability not to sin, but also in an
ability  to  sin."  So  long  as man lives on earth, he remains free to sin. But
supernatural  grace,  added to nature, raises man to a higher level of spiritual
freedom  than  he  can  ever  achieve by the discipline of the acquired virtues.
Still  higher  is the ultimate freedom of beatitude itself. Augustine calls this
"the  last  freedom  of will" which, by the gift of God, leaves man "not able to
sin."  It  is  worth  noting that this ultimate liberty consists in freedom from
choice  or  the  need  to choose, not in freedom from love or law. Man cannot be
more  free than when he succeeds, with God's help, in submitting himself through
love  to  the  rule  of  God.  THE  POLITICAL  significance  of  &ese  moral and
theological  doctrines  of  freedom  would seem to be that man can be as free in
civil  society  as  in a state of nature. Whether in fact he is depends npon the
justice  of  the  laws  which govern him, 1 not upon their number or the matters
with  which  they  deal.  He  is, of course,' not free to do whatever he pleases
regardless  of the well-being of other men or the welfare of the community, 996*
1MB RBA but that, iri tie moral conception of liberty, is not a loss of freedom.
He  loses'  freedom  in society only when he is mistreated or daisgQVerned when,
being the equal of other men, h$ris not treated as /their equal;) or when, being
capable  of  ruling  himself,  he is denied a voice in his own government. - The
meaning  of  tyranny  and  slavery seems to confirm this conception of political
liberty.  To  be  a, slave, is not merely to be ruled by another; it consists in
being  subject  to  the  mastery  of another, *., to be ruled as a means to that
other's  good  and  without any voice in- one's own government. This implies, ,m
contrast,  that  to be ruled as a free man is to be ruled for one's own good and
with some degree of par-; ticipation in the government under which one lives.

According  to  Aristotle's doctrine of the natural slave examined in the chapter
on  SkAVERY-H-some  men do not have the nature of free men, and so should not be
governed  as  free  men.  Men  who  are by nature slaves are not unwhen they are
enslaved.  "It  justly  treated  is,  better  for  .them  as for all inferiors,"
Aristotle  maintains,  "that  they should be under the rule of a master." Though
they  do not in fact have the of free men, they are not deprived Ijberty thereby
of any freedom which properly belongs to them, any more than a man who justis of
a freedom which is ly imprisoned is deprived no longer his by right. The root of
this  distinction  between free men and slaves by nature lies in the supposition
of  a  natural  inequality,  The  principle  of equality is alsp relevant to the
injustice  of  tyranny  and  phe  difference between absolute and constitutional
government.  In  the  Republic  Platp compares the tyrant to an owner of slave?/
"The  only  he  writes,  "is  that the tyradt has differences," more slaves" and
enforces  "the  harshest  and  bitterest  form of slavery." The tyrannical ruler
enslaves  those  who  are  his  equals  by  nature  and  be  ruled as free flwa.
Throughout  tradition  of  political  thought  fthe  01  tyranny  signifies  the
abolition  of  liberty  But  absolute, pr despotic gpvernrnen$ is not wnifioonjy
regarded  as  the  enemy  of  liberty issue concerning the,legUtoacy,of jusk ute
government  is  examined in the, capters on MPNkCHV land TYIAWW T IDEAS can take
Itas  .generally  agreed that he spbjeet$ of a despot, unlike the citizens of a-
republic,  do  not  enjoy  any  measure  of  self-government  To the extent that
political  liberty  consists in sprue degree of self-government, th$ subjects of
absolute   rule   lack   the.  sort  of  freedom  possessed  by  citizens  under
constitutional  government.  For  this reason the supremacy of law is frequently
said to be the basic principle of political liberty. "Wherever law ends, tyranny
begins,"  Locke  writes, In going beyond the law, a ruler. goes beyond the grant
of  authority vested in him by the consent of the people, which alone maies man,
"subject  to the laws of any government," Furthermore, law for Locke is itself a
principle  of  freedom.  "In its true notion," he writes, it "is not so much the
limitation  as  the  direction  of  a  free  and intelligent agent to his proper
interest,  and prescribes no farther than is for the general good of those under
that  law.  Could they be happier without it, the law, as a useless thing, would
of  itself  vanish, and that ill de/ serves the name of confinement which hedges
us  in  only  from bogs and precipices. So that, however it may be mistaken, the
end  of Jaw is not td abolish or restrain, but to preserve and enlarge freedom."
A  constitution  gives  the ruled the status of citizenship and a share in their
own  governj  ment. It may also give them legal means with which to defend their
liberties  when  officers  of government invade their rights in violation of the
constitution. According to Mpntiqsquieu, for whom political, liberty exists only
,under goveinmerit by law, never under despotism or the rule of men, the freedom
of  government itself demands "from thse very nature of things that power should
be  a  check to power." This is accomplished by a separation of powers. A system
of  checks  and  balances limits the power of each branch of the goyerriment and
permits  the  law  of  the  constitution tp be applied by one department against
another  when  it$  officials  usurp  powers not, granted by the constitution or
otherwise  act unconstitutionally.,. ,yiefi unjike tyranny, absolute, government
has been defended. The ancients raise the question whether, if a itruly superior
or  almost -godlike, ipan, existed,] ft, would not be prokfor him to,goyern his}
inferiors, in an absolute rnan- CHAPTER 4 ncr. "Mankind will not say that such a
one  is  to  be  expelled  and exiled," Aristotle writes; "on the other hand, he
ought  not  to be a subjectthat would be as if mankind should claim to rule over
Zeus,  dividing his offices among them. The only alternative," he concludes, "is
that  all  should  joyfully obey such a ruler, according to what seems to be the
order of nature, and that men like him should be kings in their state for life."
Those  subject to his government would be free only in the sense that they would
be ruled for their own good, perhaps better than they could rule themselves. But
they   would   lose   that  portion  of  political  freedom  which  consists  in
self-government.  Faced with this alternative to constitutional government which
Aristotle  describes as the government of free men and equals what should be the
choice of men who are by nature free?

THE  ANCIENT  ANSWER  is  not  decisively in one There are many passages in both
direction.  Plato  and  Aristotle  in  which  the  absolute  rule of a wise king
(superior  to his subjects as a father is to children, or a god to men) seems to
be  pictured  as  the  political ideal. The fact that free men would be no freer
than  children  in  a  well  administered  household  does not seem to Plato and
Aristotle  to  be  a  flaw  in  the  picture.  They do not seem to hold that the
fullness of liberty is the primary measure of the goodness of government. On the
contrary, justice is more important.

As  Aristotle suggests, it would be unjust for the superior man to be treated as
an equal and given the status of one self-governing citizen among others. But he
also points out that "democratic states have instituted ostracism" as a means of
dealing  with  such  superior  men. "Equality is above all things their aim, and
therefore they ostracized and banished from the city for a time those who seemed
to predominate too much."

Because  it  saves  the  superior man from injustice and leaves the rest free to
practice  selfgovernment,  "the  argument  for ostracism," Aristotle claims, "is
based upon a kind of political justice," in that it preserves the balance within
the   state,   and   perhaps  also  because  it  leaves  men  free  to  practice
self-government  among  themselves. Since the eighteenth century, a strong tend-
7:  LIBERTY  ency  in the opposite direction appears in the political thought of
Locke,  Montesquieu,  Rousseau, Kant, the American constitutionalists, and J. S.
Mill.  Self-government  is  regarded  as  the  essence of good government. It is
certainly   the   mark  of  what  the  eighteenth  century  writers  call  "free
government."  Men  who  are  born to be free, it is thought, cannot be satisfied
with less civil liberty than this. "Freedom," says Kant, "is independence of the
compulsory will of another; and in so far as it can co-exist with the freedom of
all  according  to  a  universal  law, it is the one sole, original inborn right
belonging  to  every  man in virtue of his humanity. There is, indeed, an innate
equality belonging to every man which consists in his right to be independent of
being  bound  by  others  to  anything  more  than  that  to  which  he may also
reciprocally bind them."

The  fundamental equality of men thus appears to be founded in their equal right
to freedom; and that, for Kant at least, rests on the freedom of will with which
all  men  are  born.  The  criterion  of  the good society is the realization of
freedom. Kant's conception of human society as a realm of ends, in which no free
person should be degraded to the ignominy of being a means, expresses one aspect
of  political  freedom. The other is found in his principle of the harmonization
of  individual  wills which results in the freedom of each being consistent with
the  freedom  of  all. In institutional terms, republican government, founded on
popular  sovereignty and with a system of representation, is the political ideal
precisely because it gives its citizens the dignity of free men and enables them
to realize their freedom in self-government. Citizenship, according to Kant, has
three  inseparable attributes: "i. constitutional freedom, as the right of every
citizen to have to obey no other law than that to which he has given his consent
or  approval; 2. civil equality, as the right of the citizen to recognize no one
as  a superior among the people in relation to himself, except in so far as such
a  one is as subject to his moral power to impose obligations, as that other has
power  to  impose  obligations  upon  him; and 3. political independence, as the
right  to owe his existence and continuance in society not to the arbitrary will
of  another,  but  to his own rights and powers as a member of the commonwealth,
and,  consequently,  the  possession  of  a  civil  personality, which cannot be
represented  by  any  other  than  himself/'  Kant  leans  heavily on Rousseau's
conclusions  with regard to political liberty. Rousseau, however, approaches the
problem  of  freedom  somewhat  differently. "Man is born free," he begins, "and
everywhere  he  is  in  chains."  He  next  considers  two questions. What makes
government  legitimate,  "since  no man has a natural authority over his fellow,
and  force  creates  no  right"?  Answering  this  first  question in terms of a
convention  freely  entered  into,  Rousseau then poses the second problemhow to
form  an  association  "in which each, while uniting himself with all, may still
obey  himself  alone,  and  remain  as  free  as before." This, he says, is "the
fundamental  problem  of  which  the Social Contract provides the solution." The
solution  involves  more  than republican government, popular sovereignty, and a
participation of the individual through voting and representation. It introduces
the  conception  of  the  general  will, through which alone the freedom of each
individual  is to be ultimately preserved. Like Kant's universal law of freedom,
the  general  will  ordains  what  each  man would freely will for himself if he
adequately  conceived  the  conditions of his freedom. "In fact," says Rousseau,
"each individual, as a man, may have a particular will contrary or dissimilar to
the general will which he has as a citizen. His particular interest may speak to
him  quite differently from the common interest." Nevertheless, under conditions
of  majority  rule,  the  members  of  the minority remain free even though they
appear  to  be ruled against their particular wills. When a measure is submitted
to  the  people,  the  question is "whether it is in conformity with the general
will,  which  is their will. Each man, in giving his vote, states his opinion on
that  point;  and  the general will is found by counting votes. When, therefore,
the  opinion  that  is contrary to my own prevails, this proves neither more nor
less  than  that  I was mistaken, and that what I thought to be the general will
was not so. If my particular opinion had carried the day, I should have achieved
the  opposite of what was my will; and it is in that case that I should not have
been  free. This presupposes, indeed, that all the qualities of the general will
still  reside in the majority; when they cease to do so, whatever side a man may
take,  liberty is no longer possible." J. S. MILL SEES THE same problem from the
opposite  side.  Constitutional  government  and representative institutions are
indispensable conditions of political liberty. Where Aristotle regards democracy
as  the  type  of  constitution  most  favorable to freedom because it gives the
equality of citizenship to all free-born men, Mill argues for universal suffrage
to  give  equal  freedom  to  all  men,  for  all  are  born  equal. But neither
representative government nor democratic suffrage is sufficient to guarantee the
liberty  of the individual and his freedom of thought or action. Such phrases as
"self-government"  and  "the power of the people over themselves" are deceptive.
"The  'people'  who  excercise the power," Mill writes, "are not always the same
people with those over whom it is exercised; and the 'self-government' spoken of
is  not the government of each by himself, but of each by all the rest. The will
of  the people, moreover, practically means the will of the most numerous or the
most  active  part  of  the people; the majority, or those who succeed in making
themselves  accepted  as the majority." To safeguard individual liberty from the
tyranny  of  the  majority,  Mill proposes a single criterion for social control
over  the individual, whether by the physical force of law or the moral force of
public  opinion.  "The sole end for which mankind are warranted, individually or
collectively,  in interfering with the liberty of action of any of their number,
is self-protection.

.  .  .  The  only  part  of  the conduct of anyone, for which he is amenable to
society,  is  that  which  concerns  others.  In  the part which merely concerns
himself,  his  independence  is,  of right, absolute. Over himself, over his own
body  and  mind,  the individual is sovereign." Mill's conception of, individual
liberty  at  first  appears to be negative to be freedom from externally imposed
regulations   or  coercions  Liberty  increases  as  the  sphere  of  government
diminishes;  and,  for  the  sake of liberty, that government governs best which
governs  CHAPTER  47: least, or governs no more than is necessary for the public
safety.  'There  is  a  sphere  of  action,"  Mill writes, "in which society, as
distinguished  from  the  individual,  has,  if  any, only an indirect interest;
comprehending all that portion of a person's life and conduct which affects only
himself,  or  if  it  also  affects others, only with their free, voluntary, and
undeceived  consent and participation. When I say only himself," Mill continues,
"I  mean  directly  and in the first instance; for whatever affects himself, may
affect  others  through  himself. . . . This, then, is the appropriate region of
human  liberty."  But  it  is  the  positive aspect of freedom from governmental
interference  or  social  pressures  on  which  Mill  wishes  to place emphasis.
Freedomfrom government or social coercion is freedom for the maximum development
of  individualityfreedom  to  be  as different from all others as one's personal
inclinations, talents, and tastes dispose one and enable one to be.

"It  is  desirable," Mill writes, "that in things which do not primarily concern
others,  individuality  should assert itself." Liberty is undervalued as long as
the  free  development  of individuality is not regarded as one of the principal
ingredients of human happiness and indispensable to the welfare of society. "The
only freedom which deserves the name," Mill thinks, "is that of pursuing our own
good  in  our own way, so long as we do not attempt to deprive others of theirs,
or impede their efforts to obtain it"; for, "in proportion to the development of
his  individuality,  each  person  becomes  OUTLINE OF TOP . Natural freedom and
political liberty i a. The birthright of freedom ib. The independence of men and
the  autono  or  anarchy  ic.  The  relation  of liberty to free will: the conce
interference  and  freedom  for  personal  devel  id.  The supremacy of law as a
condition of political l ic. The restriction of freedom by justice: the dist i/.
The freedom of equals under government i. The juridical protection of liberties:
bills  of rig i A. Civil liberty under diverse forms of government more valuable
to  himself, and is therefore capable of being more valuable to others. There is
a  greater fullness of life about his own existence, and when there is more life
in the units there is more in the mass which is composed of them." Mill's praise
of liberty as an ultimate good, both for the individual and for the state, finds
a  clearly  antiphonal  voice in the tradition of the great books. Plato, in the
Republic, advocates political regulation of the arts, where Mill, even more than
Milton  before  him,  argues against censorship or any control of the avenues of
human  expression.  But  the  most  striking  opposition to Mill occurs in those
passages  in  which  Socrates  deprecates the spirit of democracy because of its
insatiable  desire for freedom. That spirit, Socrates says, creates a city "full
of  freedom  and  frankness,  in  which a man may do and . . . say what he likes
Where  such  freedom exists, the individual is clearly able to order for himself
his own life as he pleases."

The  democratic  state  is  described by Socrates as approaching anarchy through
relaxation  of  the  laws or through utter lawlessness. Under such circumstances
there  will be the greatest variety of individual differences. It will seem "the
fairest  of  states, being like an embroidered robe which is spangled with every
sort  of  flower."  But  it is a state in which liberty has been allowed to grow
without  limit  at  the expense of justice and order. It is "full of variety and
disorder,  and  dispensing a sort of equality to equals and unequals alike." ICS
PAGE  my  of  sovereigns  in a state of nature ptions of liberty as freedom from
opment  iberty inction between liberty and license : the equality of citizenship
hts;  the  separation  of  powers  1003  1000 2. The issues of civil liberty 20.
Freedom  of  thought  and  expression:  the problem of censorship 2b. Liberty of
conscience  and  religious  freedom  2c.  Freedom  in  the  sphere  of  economic
enterprise:  free  trade;  fre  mental restrictions 2d. Economic dependence as a
limitation  of  civil liberty: economi jection 3. Moral or spiritual freedom 30.
Human bondage, or the dominance of the passions 3k. Human freedom or the rule of
reason:  freedom  through  knowledg 3r. Virtue as the discipline of free choice:
freedom  as  the  deter  by  the  moral law of practical reason $d. Freedom from
conflict  and  freedom for individuality as condit 4. The metaphysics of freedom
40. The relation of human liberty to chance and contingency 4k. The opposites of
freedom:  causality  or  necessity,  nature,  and 5. The theology of freedom 50.
Man's  freedom  in  relation to fate or to the will of God 5k. Man's freedom and
God's  knowledge  5k. Man's freedom and God's grace: the freedom of the children
of 5*/.

The  divine freedom: the independence or autonomy of infini choice 6. Liberty in
history  6a.  The  historical  significance  of  freedom:  stages in the realiza
beginning  and  end of the historical process 6b. The struggle for civil liberty
and  economic  freedom:  the  over  despots, and oppressors 6V. The struggle for
sovereign independence against the yoke colonial subjugation PACT 1003 1004 1005
edom  from  governc  slavery or sub- e of the truth mination of the will ions of
happiness  law  1008  1009  God  te  being; divine tion of freedom; the throw of
tyrants,  of  imperialism or ion REFERENCES To find the passages cited", use the
numbers  in  heavy  type,  which  are  the  volume aticf page 1 r numbers of the
passages  referred to. For example, ifi 4 HOMER f/&k/, BK n [265-283} 12d, the :
' number 4 is the number of the volume in the set; the number I2d indicates that
thekpassage is in section d of page 12.

-  PACE  SECTIONSTh  When the text is printed in one column, the letters & and b
refer  to  the  upper  and  lower halves of thfe page. For example, in 53 JAMES:
Psychology,  H6a-119b,  the passage begins in the upper half of page and ends in
the lowei half of page 119. When the text is printed in two columns, the letters
a  and  b refer ta the' upper and lower halves of the lefthand side of the page,
the  letters  c  and  cfcto  the  upper  and lower halves of the right-hand side
tjiepage.  For  example,  in 7 PLATO Symposium, 163b-164c, the passage begins in
the  lower  half of the teft-hand side of page and ends in the upper half of the
right-hand side of page 164.

AUTHOR'k  DIVISIONS:  One or more of the main divisions of a work (such as PART,
BK,  CH,  SECT)  are  sometimes  included  in  the  reference; line numbers, 'in
brackets, are given in certain cases; e.g. t Iliad, BK u [265-283] 12d. r BiBLti
REFERENCES:  The references are to book, chapter, ahd verse. When the King James
arid  Douay versions differ in title of books or in the numbering of chapters or
verses, the King James versioh is cited first and the Douay, indicated by a (D),
follows; e.g., OLD TESTAMENT. Nehemtah, 7:45 (Z) II Esdras, 7-46.

SYMBOLS:  The  abbreviation  "esp"  calls  the reader's attention to one or more
especially  relevant  parts  of  a  whole reference; "passim" signifies that the
topic  is  discussed  intermittently  rather  than  continuously  in the work or
passage   citei  For  additionalk,  information  concerning  the  style  of  the
references,  see the Explanation of Reference Style; for general guidance in the
use  of  The  Great  Ideas,  consult  the Preface, Natural freedom and political
liberty  .  The independence o tonomy of sovere t. The birthright of freedom or,
anarchy 18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 15 15 TACITUS. Histories, 521a-c i
23 HOBBEIS: Leviathan,

19 AQUINAS: Sumtna Theologica, PART i, Q 96, A 99b-c; J13d-115a 4 512d-513c 30
BACON: Advancement 20 AQUFNAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ir, Q 94, 31 SPINOZA
Ethics, PAR A 5, HEP 3 224d-225d 435b-436a

26 SHAKESPEARE * Julius Caesar, ACT i, sc u [90- 35 LOCKE: Civil Govern

99]  57Qb  passim,  esp CH u, S 32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK xu [63-110] 30b- 87
44a-b;, CH ix, S 321b 54b-c; CH xj, SE$T '

35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vi 36a-42a SECT 145 58dr59a; C 37 FIELDING: Tom
Jones, 53b-d 38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit 38 M0NTESQUIBU: Spirit -of Laws, BK xv, vin,
52ak BK.XXV 109b-cV - , , - * 3d ROUSSEAU: Inequaltt

38 ROUSEAU: Inequality, 357c-d / Social Con- 355b passim; 356c-3

tract, BK i, 387c-390d passim 369a-r; 374jakb /

42 KANT; Science of Right, 401b-402a; 420d- BK n, 398a-b; BK in 421a; 421c-d 41
GIBBON: Decline and

43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [1-15] 455 Kkjfkfure Reason 402c; 408c-d; 43 44
Bos WELL: Johnson, 363c-3644 46 tfkCfp,: Philosophy 46 HEGEL: Pfnfosophy of
Right, PART i par t 60c-df par J33r3 Hiftory, INTRO, '

57  2Cbk27a;  par 66 29a-c; ADDITIONS, 36 122b-c / Philosophy vf History, INTRO,
171c- 318a

172b 54 FREUD: Civilization '

' of f men and the auigns in a state of nature BK iv, 271a-b ,, PART i, 84c-87b;
PART n, ; 159c of Learning, 20c-d T iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 ment, CH n-vi 25d-42e *
ECT  14  28b-c; CH vn SECT ECT 123 53c-d; SECT 128 136-137 6c-57b; CH xu, H xix,
SECT 211 73d- 74a of Laws, BK i, 2J : d; BK I, 221c-d ,; .c y, 3f 2c-345c; 352a;
3S3c S7a / Political Economy. $octal Contract, BK i, be ; , 419a-b Pall, 237c4 ,
,  222b-c  / Science of Right, 3c-434d; 435c-436aj 452a-d of Right, PART in, par
194  34  k09b-c  /  Philosophy oj 171cb172t; PART iv, 317d- and Its Discontents,
780d THE GJtEAT ID (1. Naturalfreedom and political liberty?)

Ir.  The relation of liberty to free will: the conceptions of liberty as freedom
from  interference  and  freedom  for personal development 23 HOBBES: Leviathan,
PART i, 59b; 86c-d; PART n, 112d-113d

24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 65c-66b

32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK n [246-257] 116b / Areopagitica, 394b-395b; 408a-b

35 LOCKE: Cwil Government, CH iv, SECT 21 29d;

CH vi, SECT 57-63 36d-38c / Human Understanding, BK n, CH xxi,

SECT 7-27 180a-184c

passim; SECT 57 193b-c; SECT 73 198c-199c

35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vin, DIV

73 483c-484a

38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xi, 69a-b;

BK xn, 85a; BK xxvi, 223c

38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 370b-d / Social

Contract, BK i, 393a-c; BK iv, 426c-d 387a,c sim, esp 312b-c

44 Bo$w ELL: Johnson, 161a-b

42 KANT: Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386d43 MILL: Liberty, 272d-273b;
293b-323a,c pas46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 121 43d; par 260
82a-83a; par 299 99c-100b; ADDITIONS, 117 135d-136a; 155-156 142a-b;
I58l42d;i77l47d

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
.   Natural freedom and political liberty
   0a. The birthright of freedom
   0b. The independence of             men and the autonomy of sovereigns in a state of nature
   or anarchy
   0c. The relation of liberty to free will: the conceptions of liberty as freedom from
   interference and freedom for personal development
   0d. The supremacy of law as a condition of political liberty
   0e. The restriction of freedom by justice: the distinction between liberty and license
   i/.    The freedom of equals under government                 :   the equality of citizenship
   0f. The juridical protection of liberties: bills of rights; the separation of powers
   0g. Civil liberty under diverse forms of government
   PACT

2. The issues of civil liberty
   2a. Freedom of thought and expression: the problem of censorship
   2b. Liberty of conscience and religious freedom
   2c. Freedom in the sphere of economic enterprise: free trade; freedom from govern-
   mental restrictions
   2d. Economic dependence as a limitation of civil liberty: economic slavery or sub-
   jection

3. Moral or spiritual
freedom
   3a. Human bondage, or the dominance of the passions
   3b. Human freedom or the rule of reason: freedom through knowledge of the truth
   3c. Virtue as the discipline of free choice: freedom as the determination of the will
   by the moral law of practical reason
   3d. Freedom from conflict and freedom for individuality as conditions of happiness

4. The metaphysics of freedom
   4a. The relation of human liberty to chance and contingency
   4b. The opposites of freedom: causality or necessity, nature, and law
   The theology of freedom
   4c. Man's freedom in relation to fate or to the will of God
   4d. Man's freedom and
   God's knowledge
   4e. Man's freedom and
   God's grace: the freedom of the children of God
   5*/.
   The divine freedom: the independence or autonomy of infinite being; divine
   choice

6. Liberty in history
   6a. The historical significance of freedom: stages in the realization of freedom; the
   beginning and end of the historical process
   6b. The struggle for civil liberty and economic freedom: the overthrow of tyrants,
   6c. and oppressors
   6d. The struggle for     sovereign independence against the yoke of imperialism or
   colonial subjugation                                                         ion

CROSS-REFERENCES

6 HERODOTUS: History la-314a,c esp BK i, 2bFor: The problem of the freedom of
the will, see WILL liberty to free will, see WILL 5a(2), 73.

The  freedom  of  men in a state of nature or anarchy states, see GOVERNMENT la;
NATURE  2b;  STATE  3c,  Matters  relevant to political liberty or the freed see
CITIZEN 2b; CONSTITUTION i, 2b, 7b; DEMOCRAC 6, 6c-6e; LAW 70-7k MONARCHY 1a(i),
4d-5b; SLAVE the relation of economic to political liberty, s 5-5 b; WEALTH pd.

Other  discussions  of  freedom  of  thought  or express EDGE 90; OPINION 5a-5b;
POETRY  9b;  PROGRESS  6e;  sions of liber ty of conscience and freedom of w The
moral  or  psychological  freedom  in the relation 5-6c; EMOTION 4-42); MIND 9d;
SLAVERY  7; TYRANN The metaphysical consideration of liberty and matt NATURE 2f;
NECESSITY  AND  CONTINGENCY 5a, 53(3), The theological consideration of liberty,
see  FAT  WILL  RTY 1011 6c 10a 12b f 16c-20b, 23a-b, 33a-b, 35a-40b, f 42c-43b,
45b-48a,  BK  in,  U8b-123d,  BK  iv,  145a-l49a,  ETC v, 162b-163d', 170c-180c,
181b185a,   BK  Vi,  186a  191d,  193b-194d,  202c  205a,  207b-208c,  BK  vn-ix
214a-314a,c  6  THUCYDIDES  Peloponnesian  War  349a-593a,c  : esp BK i, 353b-d,
355a-b, 378c-380a, BK n, 389a-b, BK in 4178-4468,0, BK iv, 461b-463a, 468a-469b,
469d-470b,  478d-479b, BK v, 4S2d-483a, 504c-508a,c, BK vi, S19c-520d, 528d-534d
4 PLUTARCH: Timoleon 195a-213d / Aristidcs 262b,d-276a,c / Flamininus, 303a-310d
/  Demosthenes, 695d-703b 5 TACITUS: Annals, BK i, 16b-21b; BK n, 44d45a; BK in,
54b-56b;  BK  iv,  76a-77c; 82d83c; BK xn, 112a-114c; 117c-d; BK xiv, 148d151b /
Histories,  BK  i,  191a-b;  BK  iv,  269b277d;  283b-292b;  BK  v  294c-302a  3
MACHIAVELLI:  Prince, CH v 8a-c 6 SHAKESPEARE: 1st Henry VI la-32a,c / 2nd Henry
P733a-68d / 3rd Henry VI 69a-104d / Henry V 532a-567a,c 464c 345b 7 SHAKESPEARE:
Cymbeline,  ACT  in,  sc i 463c2 MILTON: Samson Agonistes [241-276] 344b5 LOCKE:
Civil  Government,  CH xvi, SECT 192 69c-d; SECT 196 70b-c 0 GIBBON: Decline and
Fall,  71b-d;  489d-491a; 521a-b 1 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 51a-67c passim, esp
51a-54a;  2l7a-b;  443c-446b;  465a-466a  3 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: la-3b 3
FEDERALIST:  NUMBER 45, 147d-148a 242b; PART n, 274a-275a 6 HEGEL: Philosophy of
History,  PART  i, 241d5-60, 8a; and for the relation of political , and for the
independence  of sovereign 9d; WAR AND PEACE i. om of the individual as a member
of  society,  Y 43, 4b, 5c; GOVERNMENT 1h; JUSTICE RY 6-6d; TYRANNY 5-5k and for
ee DEMOCRACY 4a(2); LABOR 7f; SLAVERY ion, see ART rob; EDUCATION 8c; KNOWLTRUTH
8d;  and  for  other discusorship, see RELIGION 6c(i)-6e; THEOLOGY 4C. of reason
and emotion, sec DESIRE Y 5d. ers related thereto, sec CAUSE 3; FATE 3; 5f; WILL
53(3),  5c,  8a.  E  4; GOD 4C, 5f-5g, 7b, 7d, 7f; SIN 6a, 7; i6i2 rafc For: The
issvje of freedom ahd 'in the philosophy of fcistory, *? FATE 6; Hrs jftecessjtk
41(3)  ;  WILL yb; and for the history of maas struggle for civil Uferty and eco
dom,  *??  CITIZEN  pj.LAppa  7c-7c(3);  REVOLUTION  5a-5c,  6a,  7; TYRANNY 8,,
ADDITIONAL  READINGS  Listed below are works not included in Great Booths of the
Western World, but relevant to th idea and topics with which this chapter deals.
These  wprks  are  divided  into two groups;, I. Works by authors represented in
this collection, ll, Works by authors n6t represented in this collection.

For  the  date,  place,  and other factf concerning the publication of the works
cited,  consult  the  Bibliography of Additional Rqachngs which follows the last
chapter of The Great Ideas, LOTZE, Microcosmos, BK i, CH i (4) I.

BURCKHARDT.  Force and Freedom DANTE. On World-Government or De Monarchia, J. F.
STEPHEN.  Liberty,  Equality, Fr BK I, CH 12 ACTON. Essays on Freedom and Power,
MACHIAVELLI.  The  Discourses BRADLEY. Ethical Studiesk i MILTON. The Readie and
Easie Way to Establish a ARNOLD. "Democracy," "Equality,"

Pree  Commonwealth  Essays SPINOZA. Tractatus Theologico-Polilicus (Theological-
T.  H.  GREEN.  The Principles of Polit Political Treatise), CH 20 (H, i) LOCKE.
Four  Letters  on Toleration in Religion, H-IV Prolegomena to Ethics, BK i, CH .
HEGEL.  The  Phenomenology  of  Mind,  IV(B)  SPENCER.  The Man Versus the State
DOSTOEVSKY.  The  House  of  the  Dead  R.  BROWNING.  Why I Am a Liberal LECKY.
Democracy and Liberty II.

BOSANQUET.  The  Philosophical Theory GIDE. The Immoralist LUTHER. A Treatise on
Christian  Liberty  SANTAYANA. Reason in Society, CH 6 CALVIN, Institutes of the
Christian  Religion,  BK  iv  PGUY. Basic Venties (Freedom) SUAREZ. Disputatwnes
Metaphyticae, xi (3), xix, BURY. A History of Freedom of Though

xxx  (16), xxxv (5) BURGESS. Reconciliation of Governmen DEFOE. The Shortest Way
with  the  Dissenters  GARRIGOU-LAGRANGE. God, His Existenc LEIBNITZ. New Essays
Concerning Human Under- ture, PART II, CH 4'

standing, BK II, CH 21 DUGUIT. Souveralnete et libertS FRANKLIN. Dissertation on
Liberty and Necessity, B. RUSSELL. Sceptical Essays, xn-xiv

Pleasure  and  Pain  LASKI.  Liberty  in  the  Modern  State  VOLTAIRE. Essay on
Toleration  WHITEHEAD.  Adventures  ofldetst CH 4- -T-T-. "Liberty," "Liberty of
Opinion,"  "Liberty  GORKY.  Forty  Years  the  Life  ofClim  S  of  the Press,"
"Toleration," in A Philosophical DEWEY. "The Idea of Freedom," in Out

Dictionary Critical Theory of Ethics T. REID. Essays on the Active Powers of the
Human  -. The Study of Ethics, CH 8 Mind, iv . Characters and Events, VOL PAINE.
Rights of Man .

Experience  and  Education,  C  BURKE. Reflections on the Revolution in France .
Freedom  and  Culture  GODWIN,  An  Enquiry Concerning Political Justice, CROCE.
History as the Story of Liber ' BK 11, CH 4-6 "The Roots of Liberty," in Free .

SCHILLER. William Tell Meaning SCHELLING. Of Human Freedom KOESTLER. Darkness at
Noon  SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and lde$ VQL i, MARJTAIN. "A Philosophy of
Freedom,"   BK   IV  in  the  Modern  World  SHELLEY.  Prometheus  Unbound  -  .
Scholasticism  and  Politics,  C BvkoN. Sonnet on Chilian fescKER. New Liberties
for  Old  -  k. The Isles of Greece A. J. CARLYLE, Political Liberty BENTHAM. On
the  Liberty  of  the  Press  BARKER,  Reflections  on  Government,  C  EMBRkON,
"Self-Reliance,"  in  Essaysk  i  }  MALINOWSKI.  Freedom and Civilization J. H.
NEWMAN. "Private Judgment," in VOL n, BERDYAYEV. Freedom and the Spirit

Essays and Sketches -. Slavery and Freedom \TkoREAU. Civil Disobedience HOCKING.
Freedom  of  the Press WHITMAN. Leaves of Grass SIMON, Community oftfoFree, Jp i
roR-t  'kT(i)  nomic  jEreee T aternity CH 2-4, 9 in Mixed ical Obligation, 3 of
the  State  t  t with Liberty 5 e and Naamghin lines of a n, BK in (14) H 5-6 ty
dom, Its in Freedom H v ( i ' H 1-2 i Th ,
