Chapter 49:

INTRODUCTION

TN  this  set  of great books, the Organon of ArisJL totle, the Novum Organum of
Bacon,  Descartes'  Discourse  on  Method  and his Rulesfor the Direction of the
Mind,  and  Kant's Critique of Pure Reason indicate or discuss the nature, scope
and  divisions of the discipline which has come * to be called logic." Though of
all  the  works mentioned the Organon is perhaps the most extensive treatment of
the  subject, Aristotle does not use the word "logic" to name the science or art
of  which he seems to be the inventorcertainly the first systematic expounder in
the tradition of western thought. Here as elsewhere Aristotle is indebted to his
predecessors  for  providing  him with materials to develop or criticize: to the
sophists  for  the  construction of arguments, for the formulation of methods of
disputation,  and  for  the  discovery  of fallacies; to Plato for the theory of
classification  and  definition,  for  the  root  notion  of the syllogism and a
conception   of   proof  or  demonstration,  for  the  general  outlines  of  an
intellectual  method to which Pkto gives the * name 'dialectic." As indicated in
the  chapter  on  DIALECTIC, Aristotle uses Plato's name for the whole method of
the  mind  in  the  pursuit of truth, in order to designate just one part of his
method,  the part concerned with probability rather than truth. Yet in the Roman
and  mediaeval  tradition,  the  words  klogic"  and "dialectic" come to be used
interchangeably.  This is exemplified by the Stoic division of the sciences into
physics,ethics,  and logic or dialectic, and by the mediaeval enumeration of the
liberal  arts  of  the trivium as grammar, rhetoric, ancl logic or dialectic. So
used,  these  names  designate  the  whole  range  of  discussion to be found in
Aristotle's  Organon. In their opposition to Aristotelian or what they sometimes
.call "scholastic" logic, modern inventors of new methods, like Bacon or Destend
to restrict the meaning of logic. cartes, For them logic is little more than the
doctrine  of  the  syllogism.  And  this  they  judge to be no part of genuinely
fruitful method, or they hold it to be of use mainly as a critical instrument in
disputation  rather than discovery. Their identification of logic with dialectic
(like  their  association  of both with rhetoric) seems to have an intentionally
invidious  significance.  But with Kant, who was influenced by the scholasticism
of  Christian  Wolff,  "logic"  is  generally restored as the name for the whole
range  of  materials  in Aristotle's Organon, of which dialectic again becomes a
part.  In his own Introduction to Logic, Kant speaks of Aristotle as "the father
of  Logic." Though "logic has not gained much in extent since Aristotle's time,"
he  says, "there are two amongst more recent philosophers who have again brought
general  logic  into  vogue, Leibnitz and Wolff." Since their day, and certainly
since  Kant's,  as  be may seen from the tides listed under Additional Readings,
"logic"  prevails as the name for treatises which discuss, in whole or part, the
matters  treated in Aristotle's Organon. "Logic" is also used in modern times as
the  name  for  an  inquiry  or  study  which  bears  little  resemblance to the
discipline  expounded  in  Aristotle's Organon. What is called "modern logic" to
distinguish  it from the traditional Aristotelian or scholastic logic, is purely
a  science,  and in no sense an organon, methodology, instrument, or art. It doe
not  restrict  itself to stating the laws of thought or formulating the rules of
inference.  In the words of Josiah Royce, it is "the science of order" and it is
applicable  -to  the  order  of  things  as  well  as  the  order of thought. So
conceived,  the  science  of  logic  issometimes  regarded as having the kind of
generality  which  is  traditionally assigned to 5 1036 THE GREAT I metaphysics;
as,  for  example,  by  Bertrand  Russell in his essay, "Logic as the Essence of
Philosophy."

But  it is mathematics rather than metaphysics with which logic is identified by
its  modern  exponents.  "Logistic  or  mathematical logic," writes Russell, "is
mathematical  in two different senses: it is itself a branch of mathematics, and
it is the logic which is specially applicable to other more traditional branches
of  mathematics."  Since  Boole's  Laws of Thought, which, according to Russell,
initiates  the  modern development of mathematical logic, "logic has become more
mathematical and mathematics has become more logical. The consequence," he says,
"is  that it has now become wholly impossible to draw a line between the two; in
fact, the two are one."

ARISTOTLE'S Organon stands to the tradition of logic as Euclid's Elements stands
to  the  tradition  of geometry. In both cases the work of later minds may alter
considerably  the  structure  and content of the discipline. In both cases there
are modern departures from the earlier tradition.

As  in  the  one  case  we  have  Descartes' analytical geometry and the various
non-Euclidean  geometries,  so  in the other we have Kant's trrnscendental logic
and  the  various non- Aristotelian logics. But all these innovations, even when
they  might  be  described  as  anti-  Aristotelian  rather  than  simply as non
Aristotelian,  bear  the  marks  of their traditional origin. Kant, for example,
takes  pains  everywhere to indicate the parallelism between the formulations of
his  transcendental  logic  and  those  of  Aristotle's  logic. Even the various
systems  of  relational  and mathematical logic usually attempt to show that the
Aristotelian   logic  of  subject  and  predicate,  of  particularand  universal
propositions, and of syllogisms can be treated as a special case under their own
formulations.  The  proposals of Bacon or Mill with respect to induction and the
method  of  Descartes,  though  accompanied  in  each  case by a critique of the
syllogism,  are  less  radical  departures,  for  they  do not apparently reject
Aristotle's basic doctrines of predication and proof.

Many  of  these issues in logical theory are dealt with in other chapters, e.g.,
in  DIALECTIC,  IN-  DUCTION,  and HYPOTHESIS, in IDEA, JUDGMENT, and REASONING.
Here  we are principally concerned with the conception of logic itself, not with
the  detailed  content of the science as much as with its character as an art or
science,  its  relation to other arts and sciences, its major divisions, and its
leading  principles.  Though  such considerations are more explicitly treated by
Kant  than  by  Aristotle,  the  formative  influence  of  the  Organon warrants
examining  it first. THE PARTS OF LOGIC, as Aristotle conceives them, seem to be
indicated  by  the  subject  matter  of  the  various  books  which comprise the
collection  of  writings  assembled under the title of Organon. That title has a
bearing  on  the  question  whether  logic  is  a  science  or an art and on its
difference  from  other sciences and arts. The word "organon" has the meaning of
instrument or method. That in turn suggests something to be used as rules of art
are  used  as directions to be followed to produce a certain result. Aristotle's
own differentiation of the speculative sciences, the practical sciences, and the
arts  throws  light  on  this  view  of logic as an art. "The end of theoretical
knowledge,"  he writes, "is truth, while that of practical knowledge is action."
In  other  words,  the  theoretical,  or  speculative,  sciences differ from the
practical  sciences  in  that  they are knowledge for its own sake as opposed to
knowledge  for  an ulterior end. According as the ulterior end is the production
or  "making"  of  something,  as  distinct  from human action or conduct, art is
distinct  from  the other practical sciences. "Making and acting are different,"
Aristotle  says;  "the  reasoned  state of capacity to act is different from the
reasoned state of capacity to make. Hence, too, they are not included one in the
other; for neither is acting making nor is making acting." Logic, then, if it is
an  art, will be concerned with the "making" of something, with producing a work
or  an effect. The way in which Aristotle himself refers to the Organon seems to
confirm  this  view.  He  regards  it as a preparation for work in the theoretic
sciences.  "Due  to a want of training in logic," he writes, some men attempt to
discuss  the  criteria  of truth in mathematics or physics at the same time that
they  are  considering the subject matter of these sciences. "They should CHAFER
49:  know  these  things  already  when they come to a special study, and not be
inquiring  into  them  while  they  are  listening to lectures on it." Logic, in
Aristotle's*  view,  trains the mind in the ways of science. Its productive goal
as  an  art  is  the making of science itself. For this reason, in the mediaeval
period,  logic  comes  to  be  called  a  "speculative art" or, with grammar and
rhetoric,  a liberal art. "Even in speculative matters," Aquinas says, "there is
something by way of work, .., the making of a syllogism, or of a fitting speech,
or the work of counting or measuring. Hence whatever habits are ordained to such
works  of  the  speculative  reason  are,  by  a kind of comparison, called arts
indeed,  but liberal arts, in order to distinguish them from those arts that are
ordained  to  works  done  by  the body. . On the . . other hand, those sciences
which  are  not ordained to any such work are called sciences absolutely and not
arts."

But  though  it  may  not  be  a  science, absolutely speaking, because it is an
instrument  of  intellectual  work, logic, in addition to being an art, may also
have  some  of the characteristics of a science. If it is a science, what is the
object of its knowledge ?

Aristotle's  division  of the speculative sciences, which he seems to present as
exhaustive,  leaves  no  place  for logic. "There are three kinds of theoretical
sciences,"  he  writes,  "physics, mathematics, theology" or metaphysics, as the
last  came  to  be  called. Each of these sciences, furthermore, seems to have a
distinctive  subject  matter which is some aspect of reality, such as change, or
quantity,  or  being. But insofar as logic is concerned with the study of terms,
propositions, and syllogisms, it deals with elements common to all sciences.

This  suggests  that  whereas  reality  is the object of the other sciences, the
object  of  logic as a science is science itself, or more generally the whole of
discourse.  It  considers  the  elements  or  patterns  of discourse in a formal
manner;  that  considers  them  apart  from their reference is, it to reality or
their real significance as the terms, propositions, and syllogisms of particular
subject  matters  or  sciences.  Because it separates the forms which discursive
thought  takes  from  the  matter or content it may have, logic is traditionally
called a "formal science."

WHERE ARISTOTLE makes his object the elements of discourse (or thought expressed
in  Ian  guage), later logicians treat the formal aspect of thought itself. They
deal   with   concepts,   judgments,   and  reasoning  instead  of  with  terms,
propositions, and syllogisms. This difference re" suits in a definition of logic
as  the  science  of  thought;  the  basic formulations of logic are the laws of
thought. Thus, for example, Kant says that logic "treats of nothing but the mere
forms  of  thought,"  Its  limits "are definitely fixed by the fact that it is a
science  which  has nothing to do but fully to exhibit and strictly to prove all
formal  rules  of thought." The logical principles of identity, excluded middle,
and  contradiction, as well as the principles of inference, are said to be "laws
of  thought."  James  proposes  as the most "fundamental principle of inference"
what he calls the "axiom of skipped intermediaries," which states that "slipping
intermediary terms leaves relations the same." That "equals of equals are equal"
is  a special application of this principle in the sphere of quantities. Because
it applies to allsubject matters equally, James regards the principle as "on the
whole  the  broadest  and deepest law of man's thought." In either conception of
logic  as  a formal science, questions arise concerning the relation of logic to
other  sciences.  For  Anstotle  the  question  is  about logic and metaphysics,
because both seem to have an unrestricted scope. Metaphysics considers the being
of  everything  which  is;  logic,  the  formal  components  of  discourse about
anything.  Aristotle  says  of  philosophy  in  relation  to dialetic, that both
"embrace  all  things"  but  that "dialectic is merely critical where philosophy
claims  to know." The same comparison could apply to metaphysics and logic. Both
"embrace  all  things"  but not from the same point of view. Aristotle also asks
whether  it  belongs  to  metaphysics  as  well as to logic to inquire "into the
truths  which are called axioms" especially those which are the first principles
of all knowledge or demonstration, not merely the foundations of knowledge about
some  limited  subject  matter.  "Since  these  truths clearly hold good for all
things   qua   being,"  the  science  which  studies  being  qua  being  (*'.*.,
metaphysics)  must  be  concerned with them. It also belongs to ' metaphysics as
wcfl as to logic "to inquire into the principles of the syllogism."

The  principles  of  identity, excluded middle, and contradiction belong to both
sciences  to  the one as the most universal truths about existence, to the other
as the basic rules of discourse or the laws of thought. This sharing of a common
ground   does  not  seem  to  Aristotle  to  but  Bacon  charges  violate  their
scparatcness;  *  him  with  having  'corrupted natural philosophy by logic." Of
Aristotle's  physics,  he  says  that  it is built of "mere logical terms," and,
Bacon  adds,  Aristotle  "remodelled the same subject in his metaphysics under a
more  imposing  title."  Whereas  Aristotle  considers  the relation of logic to
metaphysics,   Kant  considers  its  relation  to  psychology.  Both  logic  and
psychology  arc concerned with thinking and knowing. Distinguishing between pure
and  applied  logic, Kant says that pure logic "has nothing to do with empirical
principles  and  borrows  nothing  from  psychology."  Applied  logic depends on
psychology. In fact, says Kant in his Introduction to Logic, it is "a psychology
in  which  we consider what is the usual process in our thought, not what is the
right one." Applied logic ought not to be called logic at all, for "logic is the
science  of  the  right  use  of the understanding and the reason generally, not
subjectively, that is, not according to empirical (psychological) principles, as
to how the understanding actually thinks, but objectively, that is, according to
a  priori  principles, as to how it ought to think." fames also insists upon the
distinction  between  psychology and logic. He even uses Kant's terms in calling
logic an a priori and psychology an empirical science. What thepsychologistcalls
"laws  of  thought,"  such as the laws of the association of ideas, describe the
actual  flow  of  thought  and  connections  which  depend  upon  similarity and
succession.  The  laws  of  logic,  in contrast, state reason's perceptionof the
rational  structure  of  thought  itself  and the relations which must obtain if
thought is to be rational.

RETURNING  NOW to the indication of the parts of logic which may be found in the
structure of the Organon we can see two orders in the books.

The  first three books the Categories, On Interprctationyand the Prior Analytics
deal  with  terms,  propositions,  and syllogisms: with the AS classification of
terms and their relation to o another; with the classification of propositic and
their  opposition  to  one  another;  with  t  analysis  of the various types of
syllogisms  ai  the  formulation  of  the  'rules of valid inferem Terms are the
elements  of  propositions;  ten  and  propositions arc the elements of the syll
gism.  This seems to determine the order of t first three books. The first three
books  as a whole stand ir certain order to the remaining books. Taki the latter
as  a  group,  their  differentiation frc what precedes them seems to lie in the
fact  th they deal with terms, propositions, and syll gisms, not abstracted from
all  considerations  knowledge  and  truth  about reality, but rath with primary
emphasis  upon  the  logic  of acti knowledge, or on the processes of knowing ai
arguing  about  what  is  true  or  probable.  In  t  traditional development of
Aristotelian  log  this division between the first three and the i maining books
of  the  Organon  is  sometim  characterized  as a distinction between forrr and
material logic. In the Posterior Analytics and the Topics Ar totle considers the
discovery  and  establishme of either the true or the probable. He disti guishes
between induction and syllogism (or re soning) as modes of learning and arguing.
T  later  division of logic into deductive and indu tive sometimes confused with
the distincti between formal and material logic does n seem to correspond to the
difference  betwei  the  Prior  and  the Posterior Analytics. In the A vancement
of'Learning, for example, Bacon c vides the art of judgment, "which treats oftTh
nature of proof or demonstration," into th which concludes by induction and that
whit  concludes  by  syllogism;  whereas Aristotle a pears to treat induction as
that   upon   which   S)  logistic  demonstration  depends  for  its  prima  and
indemonstrable  premises.  The  distinction  between  truth  and  probab ity, or
between knowledge and opinion, do not affect the formal character of either indu
tion  or  syllogism. A syllogism may be scientil (i.e., demonstratively certain)
or  dialectical (/'. merely probable) according to the character i its premises.
In  either case its formal structu remains the same. Similarly, the difference b
tween  scientific  and dialectical induction a CHAPTER 49; LOQ pears only in its
result *.*., whether it is knowledge Of opinion. The Posterior Analytics and the
Topics  consider  the  employment of both syllogism and induction. The Posterior
Analytics treats them in relation to the development and structure of scientific
knowledge.  The  fopics discusses them in relation to the dialectical procedures
of argument and discovery.

The  last book of the Organon, which is concerned with exposing the fallacies in
sophistical  proofs  or  refutations,  serves  to  protect  both  scientific and
dialectical  reasoning  from  such  sophistry.  Unlike  the  philosopher  or the
dialectician,  ,  the  sophist  does not aim at the truth. Sophistry misuses the
weapons  of  logic  the  same  weapons used by the scientist or dialec tician to
produce  a  counterfeit  of wisdom or, as Aristotle says, "a wisdom which exists
only in semblance."

Though  the  dialectician cannot claim to know, he does, nevertheless, deal with
opinions critically and respects the canons of logic as much as the philosopher.

The  art  of  logic  seems  to  have  three  main employments. To its use by the
scientist and the dialectician, Aristotle adds its utilization by the orator for
the  purposes  of  persuasion.  The  rhetorician  and  the dialectician are most
closely  allied  because  both  deal  with  probabilities and disputable matters
concerning  which  opposite conclusions can be drawn. "As in dialectic, there is
induction  on  the  one  hand  and  syllogism.  .  .  on  the other, so it is in
rhetoric." Aristotle says that "the enthymeme is a rhetorical syllogism, and the
example  a  rhetorical  induction."  The foregoing suggests that a certain order
obtains  between  two  of  the  three  arts  traditionally called the trwium The
elements  and  principles  of  logic  are,  in  a  sense,  prior to the rules of
rhetoric.  The art of rhetoric depends on and uses logic. The third art, that of
grammar,  seems  to serve both logic and rhetoric. It serves the logician in his
task  of forming terms and propositions out of words, phrases, and sentences. It
serves  the  rhetorician  in his effort to make a forceful use of language. This
conception  of the uses of grammar appears in Aristotle's Rhetoric style, and in
the  opening  in, his consideration of books of the Organon in his discussion of
univocal  and  equivocal  names,  the  parts  of  speech,  simple  and composite
expressions, aad the different types o( sentences.

IC  KANT  SEEMS TO diverge from Aristotle both with regard to the unity of logic
and  with  regard  to the nature and relation of its parts. Formal or elementary
logic,  Kant thinks, is not the same as an organon of the sciences. He explains,
in  his Introduction to Logic, that an organon gives instruction as to "how some
particular  branch of knowledge is to be attained , . An organon of the sciences
is  therefore  not  a mere logic, since it presupposes the accurate knowledge of
the objects and sources of the sciences. . . . Logic, on the contrary, being the
general propaedeutic of every use of the understanding and of the reason, cannot
meddle  with the sciences and anticipate their matter." Conceding that it may be
called an organon so far as it serves,"not for the enlargement, but only for the
criticism  and  correction  vi our knowledge," Kant insists that "logic is not a
general  art  of discovery, nor an organon of truth; it is not an algebra by the
help  of  which  hidden truths may be discovered." Aristotle, according to Kant,
treats  the whole of his logic as an organon, dividing it into an analytical and
a dialectical part. As Kant sees it,the dialectical part arises from a misuse of
the  analytical  part. This occurs, he says in the Critique of Pure Reason, when
general  or  elementary  logic (i.e., the analytic part) "which is meant to be a
mere  canon  of  criticism,  is  employed as if it were an organon, for the real
production of at least the semblance of objective assertions. . . . This general
logic,"  says  Kant,  "which  assumes  the  semblance  of  an organon, is called
dialectic."  Kant  here  seems  to  identify dialectic with what Aristotle calls
sophistry.  He  says  of  dialectic that "different as are the significations ir
which  the ancients use this name of a science 01 art, it is easy to gather from
its  actual  employment that with' them it was nothing but a logic of semblance.
It  was  a sophistic art of giving tc one's ignorance, nay, to one's intentional
casuistry,  the  outward  appearance  of truth, by imi tatmg the accurate method
which logic always requires." When logic is treated as an organon, it "is always
an  illusive  logic,  that  is,  dialectical,  For as logic teaches nothing with
regard to the contents of knowledge . .

.any  attempt  a  tusink  it  as  an  organon in order to extend and enlarge our
knowledge,  at  least  in  appearance,  can  end  in  nothing  but mere talk, by
asserting  with  a  certain  plausibility any thing one likes, or, if one likes,
denying it."

Yet  Kant  himself  retains Analytic and Dialectic as the major divisions of his
own transcendental logic, explaining that he employs the title of dialectic, not
for  the  misuse  of logic, but rather to signify that portion of logic which is
the  critique of "dialectical semblance" or sophistry. General or ordinary logic
takes  no  account  of  the  content  of  knowledge  and  applies to all objects
universally   because   "it   treats   of  the  form  of  thought  in  general,"
Transcendental  logic  -  docs not entirely ignore the content of knowledge, but
only  the  content  of that knowledge which is empirical in origin. If there are
tranKtAdcntalor  a  priori  concepts which donot originate from experience, then
there can be a science which treats "of that knowledge which belongs to the pure
understanding,  and by which we may think objects entirely a priori" That is the
science  Kant  calls "transcendental Logic." It deals, he writes, "with the laws
of  the  understanding  and  reason  in  so  far  only as they refer a priori to
objects."  That  part of it "which teaches the elements of the pure knowledge of
the understanding, and the principles without which no object can be thought, is
the  transcendental  Analytic."  The  second  part  of  it is the transcendental
Dialectic  "a  critique  of  the  understanding  and reason with regard to their
hyperphysical  employment,  in order thus to lay bare the false semblance of its
groundless  pretensions  . . . serving as a protection of the pure understanding
against all sophistical illusions."

THE  ISSUE  between Kant and Aristotle cannot be understood if it is read simply
as  a  dispute  about  the nature and divisions of logic. Their diverse views of
logic  must  be  seen  against  the  larger  background  of  their philosophical
differences  with  regard  to the nature of the mind, the nature of reality, the
origin of knowledge, and the character of its objects. Controversies about logic
(and  even  within  logic,  about  this or that theory of judgment or reasoning)
usually  reflect  fundamental  issues  in psychology and metaphysics. The attack
made  by some modern logicians, for example, against the subject-predicate logic
of  Aristotle  cannot  be  separated  from  their  rejection  of his doctrine of
substance  and accident in physics and metaphysics; even as their own relational
logic   represents  a  different  view  of  the  structure  of  reality  or  the
constituents  ot  experience.  On  the other hand, the criticism of Aristotelian
logic  by  Bacon and Descartes seems to be motivated primarily by considerations
of  method.  They do not have a different logic to propose, as do Kant and later
symbolic  or  mathematical logicians. Rather for them logic itself by which they
mean  Aristotle's  logic  and particularly his doctrine of the syllogism appears
useless  for  the  purposes  of enlarging knowledge, discovering new truths, and
developing  the sciences. Where Kant criticizes Aristotle for regarding logic as
an  organon or method for acquiring knowledge, Bacon and Descartes complain that
logic does not serve that purpose at all,and therefore a novum organum not a new
logic,  but  a new method is needed. "The present system of logic is useless for
the  discovery  of the sciences," Bacon writes. It "rather assists in confirming
and  rendering inveterate the errors founded on vulgar notions than in searching
after  truth,  and  is  therefore  more hurtful than useful." The syllogism, for
example,  "is  unequal  to the subtlety of nature. . Our only hope is in genuine
induction."  .  .  Induction is the key to an art of discovery, and the rules of
induction  the  heart of a fruitful method of inquiry. The relation of induction
to  demonstration  in  Aristotle's logic, and the difference between Aristotle's
and Bacon's theories of induction, are discussed in the chapter on that subject.
In  Bacon's  view, the Novum Organum departs radically from the old Organon. The
new  can  be  substituted for the old in its entirety. It may be asked, he says,
"whether we talk of perfecting natural philosophy alone according to our method,
or the other sciences also, such as logic, ethics, politics." His answer is that
"as  common logic, which regulates matters by syllogisms, is applied not only to
natural,  but  also  to  every  other  science, so our inductive method likewise
comprehends  them  all,"  Demonstration is opposed not only to induction, but to
discovery.  Accordingly,  logic  conceived  as  concerned only with the rules of
demonstration  is  opposed  to  other  methods which aim at directing scientific
inquiry and research.

CHAPTER  49:  LOGI  The basic contrast is between criticism and construction, or
between  examining  what is offered as knowledge for its validity and developing
techniques for adding new knowledge to old. In his Two New Sciences Galileo says
that  logic  "teaches  us  how  to  test  the  conclusiveness of any argument or
demonstration  already  discovered  and  completed" but not "to discover correct
arguments   and  demonstrations."  It  does  not,  "as  regards  stimulation  to
discovery,  compare  with  the  power  of  sharp  distinction  which  belongs to
geometry." In the same vein Descartes says of logic that "the syllogisms and the
great  part  of  the  other  teaching serve better in explaining to others . . .
those things that one knows than in learning what is new. This made me feel that
.  .  .  some  other method must be found." The four rules of the method he then
states,  which  codify  the  steps  he  himself has taken to make discoveries in
geometry  and  physics,  seem  to  him  a  general  procedure  for  insuring the
advancement  of  all  fields  of learning. As his Rules for the Direction of the
Mind  indicates, Descartes' method does not omit the intuition of principles and
the deduction of conclusions therefrom the apparent equivalents of induction and
demonstration  in  Aristotle's  Organon. But he explains why he has "omitted all
the  precepts  of  the  dialecticians"  even though he is himself concerned with
improving  "our  power  of  deducing  one  truth  from  another." Their style of
argument,  he says, "contributes nothing at all to the discovery of the truth. .
.  .  Itsonly possible use is to serve to explain at times more easily to others
the  truths  we  have  already  ascertained; hence it should be transferred from
Philosophy  to Rhetoric." Furthermore, the forms of the traditional syllogism do
not  seem  able  to accommodate the connections in mathematical reasoning or the
structure  of  mathematical  proof.  "Everyone  will  perceive  in  mathematical
demonstrations,"  Locke  writes,  "that  the  knowledge  gained  thereby,  comes
shortest  and  clearest  without  syllogisms."  Locke  identifies logic with the
doctrine  of  the syllogism and, even more explicitly than Descartes, rejects it
as an aid to reasoning.

THE  QUESTION  whether  logic is itself a methodology, or includes rules for the
discovery  as  C  well  as  the  demonstration of truth, is answered in terms of
broader  and  narrower  conceptions  of the science or art. Those who regard the
rules  of  logic  as  primarily a canon of criticism, which test the validity of
intellectual work, look elsewhere for a method whose rules are productive rather
than critical. The question then usually arises whether there is one methodology
applicable  to  all  fields of inquiry, or as many distinct methods as there are
different disciplines or subject matters. The difference between the traditional
Aristotelianand  the  modern  mathematical  logic  suggests  that there may be a
plurality  of  logics. The attempts made by the exponents of each to subsume the
other  as  a  special  case  do  not  seem  to  be  entirely  successful. Though
Aristotelian  logic  appears  to  give  a  satisfactory  account of the forms of
judgment  and  reasoning in certain types of discourse, it cannot, m the opinion
of  symbolic  logicians,  be  applied  to  mathematics. "Mathematics consists of
deductions,  and  yet," according to Bertrand Russell, "the orthodox accounts of
deduction  are largely or wholly inapplicable to existing mathematics." Symbolic
logic, on the other hand, may succeed in formulating the relational structure of
modern  mathematics,  but  it  does not, in the opinion of its critics, hold for
metaphysicsat  least  not  the  sort  of  metaphysics which treats relation as a
category  subordinate  to substance. The difference between the kind of thinking
that  men  do  in  science  and  in law suggests another type of diversity among
logics.  The  practical  or  moral  judgment  seems to involve a special type of
predicate.  What  Aristotle  calls  the  "practical  syllogism" and what Aquinas
describes  as  the  process of "determination"- quite distinct from deduction by
which  positive  laws  are derived from natural law, seem to call for a logic of
practical thinking, quite distinct from the logic of all the theoretic sciences.
Using  the  word "logic" in its broadest sense, we must ask whether there is one
logic  common  to  all  the  sciences; or a logic which fits mathematics but not
physics or metaphysics, a logic appropriate to speculative philosophy but not to
experimental  or  empirical  research,  a  logic  peculiar  to the nature of the
practical  or  moral  sciences,  such  as ethics and politics, or to the work of
jurisprudence.

1042  There  is  evidence  in the great books that sci- Because of thei ences as
different as mathematics and physics, about logic (and esp or as metaphysics and
politics,  differ  in  their  scope  and  unity),  th  methods  of discovery and
demonstration.  This  general  and  the  vari may mean that they differ in their
logics as particular disciplin well. Yet it also appears to be the case that the
tcr.  They  are also c principle of contradiction applies in all, that fal- ters
devoted  to  the  lacious inference is detected by the same cntc- matters, e.g.,
ASTRO  ria  in  all,  and to this extent all share a common MATICS, METAPHYSICS,
logic.  Where alternative methods have been in the chapters on S proposed within
a  single major field notably What is distinctive in the case of philosophy this
may  reflect  dif-  is  discussed  in th fcrcnt conceptions of philosophy itself
rather  type  of knowledge or than alternative routes to the same end. require a
method of

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
1.
Logic as a science: its scope and subject matter compared with psychology and meta-
physics
   0a. The axioms of logic: the laws of thought; the principles of reasoning
   0b. Divisions of logic: deductive and inductive; formal and material; analytic and
   dialectic; general and transcendental

2. Transcendental logic:        the propaedeutic to all a priori cognition; the transcendental
doctrine of method
as an art: its place in education

3. Logic
   3a. The relation of logic
   and grammar
   3& The relation of logic and rhetoric

4. Methodology:
rules for the conduct of the mind in the processes of thinking, learning,
inquiring, knowing
   4a. Mathematical analysis and reasoning: the search for a universal method
   4b. The heuristic principles of
   research in experimental and empirical science
   4c. The criteria of evidence
   and inference in historical inquiry
   4d. The diverse methods of speculative philosophy: the role of intuition, analysis,
   dialectic, genetic or transcendental criticism
   4e. The logic
   of practical thinking: the methods of ethics, politics, and jurisprudence
   4f. Theological argument: the roles of faith, reason, and authority

5. Logic
as an object of satire and criticism: sophistry and Icgic-chpppin,g

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below arc works not included in Great B

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represente

H. Works by authors not represe

For the date, place, and other facts concernin

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which

I.

AQUINAS.  De  Fallacy's  HOBBES.  Concerning  Body, PART i, CH 6 SPINOZA. Of the
Improvement  of  the  Understanding  LOCKE.  Conduct  of the Understanding KANT.
Introduction  to  Logic,  i-it  HEGEL.  Science of Logic J. S. MILL. A System of
Logic

. An Examination of Sir William Hamilton's

Philosophy, CH 20-23

II.

SEXTOS  EMPIRICUS.  Against  the Logicians PORPHYRY. Introduction to Aristotle s
Predicaments

BOETHIUS. In Isagogem Porphyri Commenta ABAILARD. Dialectica

MAIMONIDES.  Treatise  on  Logic  JOHN  OF  SALISBURY. Metalogicon GILBERT DE LA
PORREE.  Liber de Sex Principiis SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, LIV JOHN op
SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus

Thomisticus, Ars Logica, PROLOGUS; PART n, Q

1-2

ARNAULD. Logic or the Art of Thinking, PART iv MALEBRANCHE. Dela recherche de
laverite, BK vi standing, BK IV, CH 2

LEIBNITZ.  New  Essays Concerning Human UnderEULER. Letters to a German Princess
COLERIDGE.  Treatise  on Method SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL H,
SUP, CH 9

WHATELY. Elements of Logic W. HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, VOL H
(1-4)

DE MORGAN. Formal Logic BOOLE. Mathematical Analysis of Logic . An Investigation
of the Laws of Thought

SIGWART. Logic

AS  ooty  ofthe  Western World, but relevant to the These works arc divided into
two  groups: d in this collection. nted in this collection. g the publication of
the  works  cited,  consult  follows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. LOTZE.
Logic, BK I, INTRO, (10-13) JEVONS. Pure Logic

. The Principles of Science

.  Studies  in Deductive Logic BRADLEY. The Principles of Logic BOSANQUET. Logic
C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL n, par 1-218;

VOL in, par 154-251, 359-403; VOL iv, par 80-

152; VOL vi, par 102-163, 185-237 VENN. Symbolic Logic

Principles of Empirical or Inductive Logic

.  BRUNETIERE.  An  Apology  for Rhetoric FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART i, CH 3
LEWIS CARROLL. Alice's Adventures in Wonderland

.

Through the Looting-Glass and What Alice

Found There

.

Symbolic  Logic  COUTURAT. The Algebra oj Logic POINCARE. Science and Method, BK
n, CH 3-5 WHITEHEAD and RUSSFLL. Prinapia Mathematica,

(Introductions to first and second editions) B. RUSSELL. Principles of
Mathematics, CH 2

. Our Knowledge ofthe External World, n

.

Mysticism and Logic, CH i

.Introduction   to  Mathematical  Philosophy,  CH  1  8  W.  E.  JOHNSON.  Logic
WITTGENSTEIN. Tractatus Logico -Philosophicus MARITAIN. An Introduction to Logic
BRIDGMAN.  The  Logic  of  Modern  Physics  GILSON.  The  Unity of Philosophical
Experience,  CH  i  SANTAYANA.  The  Realm  of  Truth,  CH  3  DEWEY.  Essays in
Experimental Logic

.Reconstruction in Philosophy, CH 6

. The Quest for Certainty, CH 9

.

Logic,  the  Theory of Inquiry, PART i WEISS. Reality, BK i, CH 7 BLANSHARD. The
Nature  of Thought M. R. COHEN. A Preface to Logic, esp i, ix DEWEY and BENTLEY.
Knowing and the Known
