CHAPTER: MAN

INTRODUCTION

WHETHER or not the proper study of mankind is man, it is the only study in which the knower and the known are one, in which the object of the science is the nature of the scientist. If we consider every effort men have made in response to the ancient injunction "know thyself," then psychology has perhaps a longer tradition than any other science. But by a stricter conception of science, more is required than individual insight or self-consciousness. Definitions, principles, analyses applicable to all men must be established, and it has been questioned whether the method of introspection suffices for this purpose. What methods should be used by the psychologist depends in part upon the precise object and scope of his inquiry. According as different subject matters and different methods define psychology, there seem to be several disciplines bearing that name, each with its own tradition in western thought.

In one conception, psychology begins with the dialogues of Plato and with Aristotle's treatise On the Soul. As Aristotle's title indicates, and as the Greek roots of the word "psychology" connote, the soul rather than man is the object of the science. Anthropology, Kant later suggests, would be a more appropriate name for the science of man. The Greek inquiry into the soul extends, beyond man, to all living things. It is because "the soul is in some sense the principle of animal life," Aristotle writes, that "the knowledge of the soul admittedly contributes greatly to the advance of truth in general, and, above all, to our understanding of Nature."

Nevertheless, psychology for the Greeks is principally concerned with the study of man. The analysis of the parts or faculties of the hu- man soul is an analysis of the properties of hu- man nature— the powers which man has and the characteristically human acts or functions he can perform. The methods by which this analysis is developed are, for the most part, the same methods which the Greek philosophers use in physics. "The study of the soul," Aristotle writes, "falls within the science of Nature." The definitions of the psychologist, like those of the physicist, give "a certain mode of movement of such and such a body (or part or faculty of a body) by this or that cause and for this or that end." In the case of the human soul, however, the psychologist can employ a method not applicable to other things. The human intellect is able to examine itself. Mind can thus know things about mind which are not otherwise observable. The subject matter of psychology narrows somewhat when, at a later moment in the tradition, the study of mind tends to replace the study of man. This narrowing takes place gradually. Though Descartes identifies soul with mind or intellect, he treats of the passions and the will as well as thought and knowledge. Differing from Descartes with regard to body and soul, Hobbes and Spinoza also give as much attention to the emotions as to ideas and reasoning. But with Locke, Berkeley, and Hume there is an increasing tendency to analyze the contents of consciousness and the acts of the understanding, treated exclusively as a faculty of thinking or knowing. Where in the earlier tradition the observation of human behavior and the behavior of other animals appears to be useful in psychology, here the main source of psychological knowledge seems to be introspection.

The Principles of Psychology by James and the writings of Freud represent a return to the broader conception of the science. According to James, "it is better ... to let the science be as vague as its subject ... if by so doing we can throw any light on the main business in hand."

If psychology "takes into account the fact that minds inhabit environments which act on them and on which they in turn react" and "takes mind in the midst of all its concrete relations, it is immensely more fertile than the old-fashioned 'rational psychology,' which treated the soul as a detached existent, sufficient unto itself, and assumed to consider only its nature and properties. I shall therefore feel free," James goes on to say, "to make any sallies into zoology or into pure nerve-physiology which may seem instructive for our purposes."

Though in the hands of James and Freud the scope of psychology extends no further than the range of topics Aquinas covers in his treatise on man and his treatise on human acts and passions, their return to the study of man as a whole is accompanied by an interest in or invention of new methods, experimental and clinical. "As a science," Freud writes, "psychoanalysis is characterized by the methods with which it works, not by the subject matter with which it deals." Those who distinguish between science and philosophy in terms of empirical research date the beginning of psychology from the inception of these new methods. They regard most psychological writings earlier than

James and Freud as works of speculation or philosophy.

Controversy over the validity of conclusions in psychology sometimes turns on the conflicting claims of rival methods to be the only way of arriving at the truth; and sometimes, as with

Kant, the issue of method seems to be subordinate to the issue of subject matter. Kant admits the possibility of an empirical psychology which would confine its inquiries to the phe- nomenal processes of thought and feeling, because with respect to such an object "we could call in aid observations on the play of our thoughts," and thence derive "natural laws of the thinking self." But, he goes on to say, "it could never be available for discovering those properties which do not belong to possible experience."

What Kant calls "rational psychology" aims at what is for him impossible, namely, knowledge of the reality or substance of the soul itself. It is impossible, he says, to make "any dogmatical affirmation concerning an object of experience beyond the boundaries of experience."

Kant's critique of rational psychology thus appears to be based on the same principles which underlie his critique of metaphysical assertions concerning God's existence and the freedom of the will.

Those principles are in turn based on an elaborate theory of the human faculties, such as sense, understanding, and reason, and the role they play in the constitution of experience and knowledge. But Kant does not regard his own theory of the faculties as psychology. Writers like Locke and Hume, on the other hand, seem to make their psychology— certainly in its principal concern with how the content of the mind is acquired and formed— the basis for appraising the validity of all other knowledge. They do not question the validity of psychology itself. They seem to assume that self-knowledge has unique advantages over all other inquiries.

These issues of the scope and validity of psychology are in one sense more relevant to the chapters on Knowledge, Mind, and Soul than to this one. Their relevance here is limited by their connection with the main issues about the nature of man. Not merely the tradition of psychology, but the whole tradition of western thought seems to divide on the question of man's essence.

The question can be put in a number of ways.

Is man a rational animal, and does that definition imply that only man has reason? Does it imply that man has free will, and that only man has free will ? Like the question about the distinction between living and non-living things or the similar question about the difference between plants and animals, this question can also be asked in terms of the contrast between difference in kind and difference in degree. Does man differ essentially or in kind from other animals, or do all animals possess the same fundamental properties? Does man differ from the others only in the degree to which he possesses some of these shared qualities?

Some, like Darwin, think that "the difference in mind between man and the higher animals, great as it is, certainly is one of degree and not of kind. We have seen," he writes, "that the senses and intuitions, the various emotions and faculties, such as love, memory, attention, curiosity, imitation, reason, etc., of which man boasts, may be found in an incipient, or even sometimes in a well-developed condition, in the lower animals. They are also capable of some inherited improvement, as we see in the-tiornestic dog compared with the wolf or jackal. If it could be proved that certain high mental powers, such as the formation of general concepts, self-consciousness, etc., were absolutely peculiar to man, which seems extremely doubtful, it is not improbable that these qualities are merely the incidental results of other highly-advanced intellectual faculties; and these again mainly the result of the continued use of a perfect language." Such a view clearly takes the position that man varies from other animals in the same way that one species of animal varies from another.

Those who take the opposite position do not always agree on the precise nature of the difference in kind. For the most part, they attribute rationality to man alone and use the word "brute" to signify that all other animals totally lack reason, no matter how acute their intelligence or the apparent sagacity of their instinctive reactions. Milton, for example, in com- mon with many others, describes man as

... a creature who not prone And brute as other creatures, but endued With sanctity of reason, might erect His stature, and upright with front serene Govern the rest, self-knowing, and from thence Magnanimous to correspond with heaven. Those who find a difference in kind between man and other animals also tend to think that human society and human language are essentially different from the beehive or the ant mound, from bird calls, jungle cries, or parroting, because they are the work or expression of reason. Unlike Darwin, some of them find in human speech not the cause of man's apparent difference in kind from other animals, but the consequence of his real difference in kind—his distinctive rationality. The fact that man does certain things that no other animal does at all means to them that man possesses certain powers which no other animal shares to any degree, even the slightest. They would therefore interpret Darwin's admission that an anthropoid ape could not fashion "a stone into a tool" or "fol- low a train of metaphysical reasoning, or solve a mathematical problem, or reflect on God, or admire a grand natural scene," as an indication that the ape totally lacked human reason or intellect, however acute his animal intelligence. But the writers who agree that man is radically different from the brutes do not all agree in the account they give of human reason; nor do they all affirm free will as the natural accompaniment of rationality. Locke, for example, begins his essay on Hu- man Understanding with the remark that "the understanding . . . sets man above the rest of sensible beings." Men and other animals alike have the powers of sense, memory, and imagination, but, he says, "brutes abstract not. . . . The power of abstracting is not at all in them." This power of having"general ideas is that which puts a perfect distinction betwixt man and brutes, and is an excellency which the faculties of brutes do by no means attain to." But Locke denies that man has free will in the sense of a free choice among alternatives. Rousseau, on the other hand, declares that "every animal has ideas . . . and it is only in degree that man differs, in this respect, from the brute. ... It is not, therefore, so much the understanding that constitutes the specific difference between the man and the brute, as the human quality of free agency . . . and it is particularly in his consciousness of this liberty that the spirituality of his soul is displayed."

James agrees with Locke that "it is probable that brutes neither attend to abstract characters nor have associations by similarity," but it is the latter fact which James himself makes the principal distinction between man and brute. "We may," he asserts, "consider it proven that the most elementary single difference between the human mind and that of brutes lies in this deficiency on the brute's part to associate ideas by similarity." James enumerates "other classical differentiae of man besides that of being the only reasoning animal." Man has been called, he says, "the laughing animal" and "the talking animal," but these distinctive traits, like hu- man reasoning, James regards as "consequences of his unrivalled powers ... to associate ideas by similarity." Reason and speech are for James the effects, where for Adam Smith they are the cause, of man's peculiarly human attributes. "The propensity to truck, barter, and exchange one thing for another," Smith writes, is "common to all men, and to be found in no other race of animals." This seems to him to be a "necessary consequence of the faculties of reason and speech" which are peculiar to man. Hobbes, as we shall see presently, takes still another position, since he explains man's reasoning power in terms of his faculty of speech, a faculty which is possessed by no other animal.

Despite all these variations in theory or explanation, writers like Locke, Rousseau, James,

Smith, and perhaps Hobbes seem to agree that man and brute differ in kind. On that point they agree even with writers like Plato, Aristotle, Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes, Spinoza,

Kant, and Hegel who hold, as they most definitely do not, that man has a special faculty of mind, reason, or intellect. The contradictory position is, therefore, not to be found in the denial of some particular theory of reason, but rather in the denial that any faculty or attribute which man possesses warrants our calling him "rational" and other animals "brute."

The issue is sharply drawn between these contradictory positions. Yet it is avoided by those who go no further than to see in human civilization certain distinctive features, such as the arts and sciences, or law, government, and religion.

Mill, for example, discussing the sentiment of justice, finds its root in the natural impulse "to resent, and to repel or retaliate, any harm done or attempted against ourselves, or against those with whom we sympathise . . . common to all animal nature." Man differs from other animals, he writes, "first, in being capable of sympathising, not solely with their offspring, or, like some of the more noble animals, with some superior animal who is kind to them, but with all human and even with all sentient beings. Secondly, in having a more developed intelligence, which gives a wider range to the whole of their sentiments, whether self-regarding or sympathetic. By virtue of his superior intelligence, even apart from his superior range of sympathy, a human being is capable of apprehending a community of interest between himself and the human society of which he forms a part."

A view of this sort would seem to leave open the question whether such typically human developments signify the possession by man of special powers which set him apart as different in kind. While admitting extraordinary differ- ences between the behavior or accomplishments of men and other animals, this view does not reject the possibility that such accomplishments may represent merely wide differences in degree of power, which give the appearance of differences in kind.

As we have already observed, the issue about man and brute cannot be separated from the controversy about the so-called "higher faculties" of man. Except for the view that man is a purely spiritual being, who merely inhabits or uses a physical body, no theory of human nature doubts that man, as a living organism, possesses in common with plants and animals certain bodily powers or functions. The vegetative functions which Galen calls "the natural faculties" are indispensable to human as to all other forms of corporeal life. Similarly, the powers of sensitivity and appetite or desire are obviously present in man as in other animals. To the observer, who sees only the externals of human and animal behavior, men and the higher animals appear to react to the physical stimulation of their sense organs with a similar repertoire of bodily movements, which vary only as their skeletal structure and their organs of locomotion differ. They also manifest outward signs of inner emotional disturbance sufficiently similar to warrant treating emotions like fear and rage as common to men and other animals.

On all this there seems to be little dispute in the tradition of the great books. But difficult questions arise when the inner significance of these external movements is considered. Both men and animals have the familiar sense organs and such powers as touch, taste, smell, hearing, and vision. But do sensations give rise to knowledge in the same way for both men and animals ? Do the powers of memory and imagination extend an animal's range of apprehension as they do man's? Do these powers affect the perception of present objects in the same way for men and animals?

Such questions are not readily answered by observation of external behavior alone. What seems to be called for—a comparison of human and animal experience—cannot be obtained. The difficulty of the problem becomes most intense when a special faculty of knowledge or thought is attributed to man, for animal and human sense perception, imagination, or even emotion may be incommensurable if^rSpecial factor of understanding or reason enters into all human experience and is totally absent from that of animals.

In the ancient and mediaeval periods, the sensitive faculty, including the interior sensitive powers of memory and imagination, is generally distinguished from another faculty, variously called "intellect," "reason," or "mind." Writers like Plato, Aristotle, Plotinus, Lucretius, Augustine, and Aquinas have different conceptions of intellect or mind, in itself and in its relation to sense and imagination, but they do not question its existence as a separate faculty. The range of the sensitive powers does not extend to ideas or intelligible objects, nor is sensitive memory or imagination for them the same as rational thought.

Not only does it seem unquestionable in the ancient and mediaeval tradition that man has these two distinct faculties of knowledge, but it is generally assumed that other animals have to a greater or less degree, the power of the senses alone. Only men can understand as well as perceive; only men can know the universal as well as the particular; only men can think about objects which are neither sensible nor, strictly, imaginable—objects such as atoms and God, the infinite and the eternal, or the intellect itself. The affirmation of an essential difference between reason and sense seems to be inseparable from the affirmation of an essential difference between men and brutes.

Doubts or denials with regard to both affirmations achieve considerable prevalence in modern times. But though the two affirmations appear inseparable, they are not always denied together. Montaigne, for example, does not so much doubt that men have reason as he does that other animals lack it. He considers the matter in the light of external evidences, in terms of the comparable performances of men and animals. The light of reason seems to shine in both.

He repeats many stories from Plutarch and

Pliny which supposedly reveal the comparable mentality of animals and men. One is the story of the hound who, following the scent, comes to a triple parting of the ways. After sniffing along the first and second paths and discovering no trace of the scent, the hound, without a moment's hesitation or sniffing, takes up the pursuit along the third trail. This, Montaigne suggests, is a kind of syllogizing; as if the dog reasoned thus with himself: "I have followed my master by foot to this place; he must, of necessity, be gone by one of these three ways; he is not gone this way nor that; he must then infallibly be gone this other."

It is noteworthy that Aquinas tells exactly the same story in order to make the point that such appearances of reasoning in animals can be explained as instinctively determined conduct.

"In the works of irrational animals," he writes, "we notice certain marks of sagacity, in so far as they have a natural inclination to set about their actions in a most orderly manner through being ordained by the supreme art. For which reason, too, certain animals are called prudent or sagacious; and not because they reason or exercise any choice about things." That such behavior is not the work of reason, he claims, "is clear from the fact that all that share in one nature invariably act in the same way."

Unlike Montaigne, Machiavelli seems to imply that men and brutes are alike not in having reason, but in lacking it. The passions control behavior. Intelligence exhibits itself largely as craft or cunning in gaining ends set by the passions. Man is no less the brute in essence because in the jungle of society he often succeeds by cunning rather than by force. He may have more cunning than the fox, but without armor he also has less strength than the lion. The prince, Machiavelli remarks, "being compelled knowingly to adopt the beast, ought to choose the lion and the fox, because the lion cannot defend himself against snares and the fox cannot defend himself against wolves."

For the most part, however, the modern dissent from the ancient and mediaeval view takes the form of denying that reason and sense are distinct powers. In its most characteristic expression, this denial is accompanied by a denial of abstract ideas as in the writings of Hobbes,

Berkeley, and Hume. Their position, discussed more fully in the chapter on Universal and Particular, is that men only give the appearance of having abstract or general ideas because they employ common names which have general significance.

Language, according to Hobbes, is the root of all other differences between man and brute.

Sense and imagination are "common to man and beast." Reasoning, or the "train of thoughts," can take place in any animal which has memory and imagination. But that type of understanding which Hobbes describes as "conception caused by speech" is peculiar to man. His state- ment that "by the help of speech and method, the same faculties" which belong to both men and beasts "may be improved to such a height as to distinguish men from all other living creatures," would seem to imply that Hobbes regards man as superior to other animals only in degree. Yet, on the other hand, he enumerates a variety of institutions peculiar to human life, such as religion, law, and science, which imply a difference in kind.

Like Hobbes, Berkeley thinks that men use general names but do not have general or abstract ideas. But he seems much less willing than Hobbes to assert man's clear superiority, even on the basis of man's attainments through the power of speech. If the fact that "brutes abstract not," he says in reply to Locke, "be made the distinguishing property of that sort of animals, I fear a great many of those that pass for men must be reckoned into their number." Hume goes further than either Berkeley or

Hobbes. Agreeing with them that man has no faculty above sense and imagination, and hence no faculty which animals do not also possess, he alone explicitly draws the conclusion which that implies.

"Animals as well as men," he writes, "learn many things from experience and infer that the same events will always follow from the same causes." Such inferences, in animals or men, are not "founded on any process of argument or reasoning." They are the result of the operation of custom and instinct. "Were this doubtful with regard to men, it seems to admit of no question with regard to the brute creation; and the conclusion being once firmly established in the one, we have a strong presumption, from all the rules of analogy, that it ought to be universally admitted, without any exception or reserve."

But if custom and instinct underlie the ap- pearance of reasoning in both men and animals, it may be asked, says Hume, "how it happens that men so much surpass animals in reasoning, and one man so much surpasses another?" His answer seems to be entirely in terms of degree of the same factors. The same sort of difference which obtains between a superior and an inferior intelligence among men obtains between men and other animals.

All the evidence which Darwin later assembles on the characteristics of human mentality is offered by him in proof of the same point. But to those who think that man alone has an intellect or a rational faculty, over and above all his sensitive powers, such evidence remains inconclusive. As in the case of the dog, whose behavior Aquinas and Montaigne interpret differently, the same observed facts seem to be capable of quite opposite explanation by those who hold opposite theories of human and animal intelligence.

Is there internal evidence, obtained from man's introspective experience of his own thought, which can resolve the controversy ? As

Descartes sees it, the interpretation of such evidence also seems to depend on the prior assumption one makes about the sameness or difference of men and brutes.

"We cannot help at every moment experiencing within us that we think," he writes; "nor can anyone infer from the fact that it has been shown that the animate brutes can discharge all these operations entirely without thought, that he therefore does not think; unless it be that having previously persuaded himself that his actions are entirely like those of the brutes, just because he has ascribed thought to them, he were to adhere so pertinaciously to these very words, 'men and brutes operate in the same way,' that when it was shown to him that the brutes did not think, he preferred to divest himself of that thought of his of which he could not fail to have an inner consciousness, rather than to alter his opinion that he acted in the same way as the brutes."

On the other hand, Descartes continues, those who hold ''that thought is not to be distinguished from bodily motion, will with much better reason conclude that it is the same thing in us and in them, since they notice in them all corporeal movements as in us; they will add that a difference merely ofgreater and less makes no difference to the essence, and will infer that, though~-pcrchance they think that there is less reason in the beasts than in us, our minds are of exactly the same species." The issue concerning the senses and the reason is more fully discussed in the chapters on Mind and Sense, and also in the chapters on Idea and Universal and Particular, where the problem of abstract ideas or universal notions is considered. The issue concerning soul in general and the human soul in particular belongs primarily to the chapter on Soul, and also to the chapter on Mind. But like the issue about sense and intellect, its bearing on the problem of man's nature deserves brief com- ment here.

The question is not whether man has a soul, but whether only man has a soul; a rational soul; a soul which is, in whole or in part, immaterial; a soul capable of separate existence from the body; an immortal soul. If soul is conceived as the principle of life in all living organisms— as Aristotle conceives it— then having a soul does not distinguish man from plants or animals. If, furthermore, the rational soul is distinguished from the sensitive and vegetative soul in the same way that men are distinguished from brute animals and plants, namely, by reference to certain powers, such as intellect and will, then the statement that men alone have rational souls would seem to add nothing to the statement that men alone are rational.

But if the human soul, through being rational, confers a mode of immaterial, or spiritual, being upon man, then man's possession of such a soul sets him apart from all other physical things, even further than the special power of reason separates him from the brutes. The position of Lucretius illustrates this distinction in reverse. He does not deny that man has a soul. Unlike other living things which also have souls, man's soul includes a special part which Lucretius calls "mind." He describes it as the part "which we often call the understanding, in which dwells the directing and governing principle of life, [and] is no less part of the man than hand and foot and eyes are parts of the whole living creature."

So far as his having this special faculty is concerned, man is set apart. But for Lucretius nothing exists except atoms and void. Consequently, "the nature of the mind and soul is bodily," consisting of "seeds exceedingly round and exceedingly minute, in order to be stirred and set in motion by a small moving power." In his physical constitution man does not differ in any fundamental respect from any other composite thing. The materiality of his soul, furthermore, means that it is as perishable as any composite body.

At the other extreme from Lucretius, Descartes conceives man as a union of two substances. "I possess a body," he writes, "with which I am very intimately conjoined, yet because, on the one side, I have a clear and distinct idea of myself inasmuch as I am only a thinking and unextended thing, and as, on the other, I possess a distinct idea of body as it is only an extended and unthinking thing, it is certain that this I (that is to say, my soul by which I am what I am), is entirely and absolutely distinct from my body and can exist without it." Nevertheless, "sensations of pain, hunger, thirst, etc." lead Descartes to add: "I am not only lodged in my body as a pilot in a vessel, but . . . I am very closely united to it, and so to speak so intermingled with it that I seem to compose with it one whole." Only man has a dual nature, thus compounded. Other living things, Descartes seems to hold, are merely bodies, having the structure and operation of complex machines. If, like the "auto- mata or moving machines . . . made by the industry of man," there were "such machines, possessing the organs and outward form of a monkey, or some other animal without reason, we should not have . . . any means of ascertaining that they were not of the same nature as those animals."

It is indifferent to Descartes whether other animals are conceived as automata or whether, because they have life, sensation, and imagination, they are granted souls. "I have neither denied to the brutes," he writes, "what is vulgarly called life, nor a corporeal soul, or organic sense." What he has denied is thought, and it is this one factor which makes it impossible for a machine to imitate human speech and action.

It is this one factor which also requires man's soul, unlike that of the brute, to be an incorporeal substance.

Unlike sensations and passions, acts of thought and will, according to Descartes, cannot be functions of bodily organs. "Even though I were to grant," he says, "that thought existed" in dogs and apes, "it would in nowise follow that the human mind was not to be distinguished from the body, but on the contrary rather that in other animals also there was a mind distinct from their body." When Descartes affirms man's uniqueness, he is therefore affirming more than that man alone has reason and free will. He is affirming that of all things man alone is "formed of body and soul"—not a corporeal soul, but a spiritual substance. The angels, in contrast, are simply spirits.

The remark of Plotinus, that "humanity is poised midway between the gods and the beasts," applies with somewhat altered significance to the

Cartesian view. But there are other conceptions of the human constitution which, though they preserve the sense of man's dual nature, do not make him a union of two separate substances.

Spinoza, for example, gives man special status in the order of nature by conferring on him alone participation in the divine mind. "The human mind," he writes, "is a part of the infinite intellect of God." The human body, on the other hand, is "a mode which expresses in a certain and determinate manner the essence of God in so far as He is considered as the thing extended." Man is thus "composed of mind and body," but for Spinoza this duality in human nature is a duality of aspects, not a duality of substances.

There is still another way in which a certain immateriality is attributed toman. In Aristotle's theory, the soul is not a substance in its own right, but the substantial form of an organic body. This is true of all kinds of souls—whether of plants, animals, or men. But when Aristotle enumerates the various powers which living things possess—such as "the nutritive, the appetitive, the sensory, the locomotive, and the power of thinking"—he assigns to man alone, or "possibly another order like man or superior to him, the power of thinking, i.e., mind." Furthermore, of all the parts or powers of the soul, thinking seems to Aristotle to afford "the most probable exception" to the rule that "all the affections of soul involve body."

Apart from thinking, "there seems to be no case," he says, "in which the soul can act or be acted upon without involving body." Whereas the sensitive powers are seated in bodily organs and cannot act except as bodily functions, the intellect is immaterial. It has no bodily organ which is comparable to the eye as the organ of vision and the brain as the organ of memory and imagination. The act of understanding is not a function of physical matter.

According to this theory, man as a whole is a single substance, composite of correlative principles of being—matter and form, or body and soul. But man differs from all other physical substances which are similarly composite in that he has a faculty and mode of activity separate from matter. In the later development of this theory by Aquinas, the immateriality of the intellect becomes the basis for arguing that the rational soul of man can exist apart from matter when the composite human substance is disintegrated by death.

As indicated in the chapters on Immortality and Soul, this is not the only argument for the immortality of the soul. We are not here concerned, however, with the various arguments and their merits, but only with the fact that certain conceptions of man's constitution attribute to man something more than the power of rationality, namely, the distinction of having a spiritual and immortal life.

His future and his past color the present life of man and alter the aspect under which he conceives his place in the general scheme of things. Immortality promises release from mutability as well as salvation from death. With an immortal soul, man belongs to eternity as well as to time. He is not merely a transient character in the universe. His stature and his dignity are not the same when man regards himself as completely dissolvable into dust.

The question of man's past or origin is, perhaps, even more critical in its bearing on man's present status. Ancient poetry and history contain many myths of man's kinship with the gods. The heroes trace their lineage back to the gods. Through them or through the progenitors of the race, man conceives himself as of divine descent or, at least, as having more affinity with the immortal gods than with all other^jea-rthbound things.

In the Descent of Man, Darwin paints a different picture of human origin. Two propositions determine its general outlines. The first, already stated, is that man belongs to the animal kingdom without any differentiation except in degree. Not only in anatomy, physiology, and embryology are there marks of man's affinity with the mammals; man's behavior and mentality also show, according to Darwin, that man possesses no attribute so peculiarly human that some trace of it cannot be found in the higher forms of animal life. The second proposition is that man's origin on earth has come about by a process of natural variation from an ancestral type, exactly as other new species of plants or animals have originated by descent with variation from a common ancestor. This theory of the origin of species is discussed in the chapter on Evolution. Its special application to the human species involves the notion of a common ancestor for both man and the anthropoid apes, and the disappearance not only of the ancestral form, but of the intermediate varieties— the so-called "missing links" in the chain of variation.

These two propositions are logically interdependent. If the proposition is false that man differs from other animals only in degree, the proposition cannot be true that man originated along with the anthropoid apes by descent from a common ancestor. Conversely, if the Darwinian theory of man's origin is true, it cannot be true that men and brutes differ in kind. But though the truth of each of these two propositions implies the truth of the other, the prob- lem of the difference between man and other animals has a certain logical priority over the problem of man's origin, simply because more evidence is available to solve it. That question calls for an examination of man as he is to- day in comparison with other extant species; whereas the other question necessarily requires the collection and interpretation of historical evidence, which may have some bearing on hypothetical missing links.

It should be added that if, in regard to the first question, the evidence favored the affirmation of a difference in kind, that would not entail the denial of biological evolution, though it would necessarily challenge the Darwinian theory of how such evolution took place. One alternative to the Darwinian hypothesis is the theory of emergent evolution, according to which lower forms of life may give rise to new organic forms which are not only higher but are distinct in kind.

Whether or not Christian theology and some theory of biological evolution can be reconciled, there seems to be an inescapable contradiction between Darwin's view of man's origin and the Judaeo-Christian conception of man as a special creation, special above all in the sense that "God created man in his own image."

As God is in essence a perfect intelligence and a spiritual being, man, according to Aquinas, "is said to be to the image of God by reason of his intellectual nature." In all creatures "there is some kind of likeness to God," but it is only in man that that likeness is an image. Man's finitude, imperfection, and corporeal existence make the image a remote resemblance; yet, according to the theologians, it is precisely that likeness which separates man from all other earthly creatures and places him in the com- pany of the angels.

But man is no more an angel than he is a brute. He is separated from the one by his body as from the other by his reason. Nor does he in the present life have the spiritual existence of a disembodied and immortal soul. To these three negatives in the definition of man not an angel, not a brute, not a. soul— the Christian theologian adds a fourth, drawn from man's past. Man is of the race begotten by Adam, but he does not have the attributes which Adam possessed before the fall.

The dogma of man's fall from grace is discussed in the chapter on Sin. Here we are concerned only with its implications for the understanding of man's present nature, as not only being deprived of the extraordinary gifts of life and knowledge which Adam lost through disobedience, but as also being wounded in perpetuity by Adam's sin. Weakness, ignorance, malice, and concupiscence, Aquinas declares, "are the four wounds inflicted on the whole of human nature as a result of our first parent's sin." Man in the world is not only disinherited from Adam's gifts, but with the loss of grace, he also suffers, according to Aquinas, a diminution in "his natural inclination to virtue."

There are other divisions in the realm ofman, but none so radical as that between Eden and the world thereafter. As retold by Plato, the ancient myths of a golden age when men lived under the immediate benevolence of the gods also imply a condition of mankind quite different from the observable reality, but they do not imply a decline in human nature itself with the transition from the golden age to the present. The modern distinction between man living in a state of nature and man living in civil society considers only the external circumstances of human life and does not divide man according to two conditions of his soul. Other dichotomies—such as that between prehistoric and historic man, or between primitive and civilized man—are even less radical, for they deal even more in gradations or degrees of the same external conditions.

These considerations lead us to another phase of man's thinking about man. Where the previous problem was how man differs from everything else in the universe, here the question is how man is divided from man. If men are not equal as individuals, to what extent are their individual differences the result of the unequal endowment of the natures with which they are born, and to what extent are they the result of individual acquirement in the course of life ?

The range of human differences, whether innate or acquired, may itself become the basis for a division of men into the normal and the abnormal, a division which separates the feeble- minded and the insane from the competent and sane. From a moral and political point of view, this is perhaps the most fundamental of all classifications. It must be admitted, however, that traditionally the problem of the difference be- tween men and women and the problem of the difference between the ages of man from the extreme of infancy to the extreme of senility seem to have exercised more influence on the determination of political status and moral responsibility.

One other differentiation of man from man seems to have significance for the theory of hu- man society and the history of civilization. That is the division of men into groups, sometimes by reference to physical and mental traits which separate one race from another—whether these traits are supposed to be determined biologically as inheritable racial characteristics or are attributed to environmental influences; sometimes by reference to the customs and ideals of a culture. Both sets of criteria appear to be used in the traditional discussion of the opposition between Greek and barbarian, Jew and gentile, European and Asiatic.

The ultimate questions which man asks about himself are partly answered by the very fact of their being asked. The answer may be that man is the measure of all things; that he is sufficient unto himself or at least sufficient for the station he occupies and the part he plays in the structure of the universe. The answer may be that man is not a god overlooking the rest of nature, or even at home in the environment of time and space, but rather that he is a finite and dependent creature aware of his insufficiency, a lonely wanderer seeking something greater than himself and this whole world. Whatever answer is given, man's asking what sort of thing he is, whence he comes, and whither he is destined symbolizes the two strains in human nature man's knowledge and his ignorance, man's greatness and his misery.

Man, writes Pascal, is "a nothing in comparison with the Infinite, an All in comparison with the Nothing, a mean between nothing and everything. Since he is infinitely removed from comprehending the extremes, the end of things and their beginning are hopelessly hidden from him in an impenetrable secret; he is equally incapable of seeing the Nothing from which he was made, and the Infinite in which he is swallowed up.

"Man," Pascal goes on, "must not think that he is on a level either with the brutes or with the angels, nor must he be ignorant of both sides of his nature; but he must know both." In recognizing both lies his wretchedness and grandeur. "Man knows that he is wretched. He is therefore wretched, because he is so; but he is really greater because he knows it."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. Definitions of man: conceptions of the properties and qualities of human nature
 1a. The conception of man as essentially distinct, or differing in kind, from brute
 animals: man's specific rationality and freedom
 1b. The conception of man as distinguished from brutes by such powers or properties
 as abstraction or relational thought, language and law, art and science
 1c. The conception of man as an animal, differing only in degree of intelligence and
 of other qualities possessed by other animals

2. Man's knowledge of man
 2a. Immediate self-consciousness: man's intimate or introspective knowledge of
 himself
 2b. The sciences of human nature: anthropology and psychology; rational and
 empirical psychology; experimental and clinical psychology
 (1) The subject matter and scope of the science of man
 (2) The methods and validity of psychology
 (3) The relation of psychology to physiology: the study of organic factors in
 human behavior
 (4) The place of psychology in the order of sciences: the study of man as pre-
 requisite for other studies

3. The constitution of man
 3a. Man as a unity or conjunction of matter and spirit, body and soul, extension
 and thought
 (1) Man as a pure spirit: a soul or mind using a body
 (2) Man's spirituality as limited to his immaterial powers or functions, such as
 reason and will
 3b. Comparisons of man with God or the gods, or with angels or spiritual substances
 3c. Man as an organization of matter or as a collocation of atoms

4. The analysis of human nature into its faculties, powers, or functions: the id, ego, and
super-ego in the structure of the psyche
 4a. Man's vegetative powers: comparison with similar functions in plants and
 animals
 4b. Man's sensitive and appetitive powers: comparison with similar functions in
 other animals
 4? Man's rational powers: the problem of similar powers in other animals
 .
 4c. The general theory of faculties: the critique of faculty psychology

5. The order and harmony of man's powers and functions: contradictions in human
nature; the higher and lower nature of man
 5a. Cooperation or conflict among man's powers
 5& Abnormalities due to defect or conflict of powers: feeble-mindedness l neuroses,
 5b. madness

6. Individual differences among men
 6a. The cause and range of human inequalities: differences in ability, inclination,
 temperament, habit
 6b. The differences between men and women: their equality or inequality
 6c. The ages of man: infancy, youth, maturity, senescence

7. Group variations in human type: racial differences
 7a. Biological aspects of racial type
 7b. The influence of environmental factors on human characteristics: climate and
 geography as determinants of racial or national differences
 7c. Cultural differences among men:
 Greek and barbarian, Jew and gentile, European
 and Asiatic

8. The orig in or genealogy of man
 8a. The race of men as descendants or products of the gods
 8b. God's special creation of man
 8c. Man as a natural variation from other forms of animal life

9. The two conditions of man
 9a. The mylh of a golden age: the age of Kronos and the age of Zeus
 9b. The Christian doctrine of Eden and of the history of man in the world
 (1) The condition of man in Eden: the preternatural powers of Adam
 (2) The condition of man in the world: fallen man; corrupted or wounded
 human nature
 (3) The Christian view of the stages of human life in the world: law and grace
 9c. Secular conceptions
 of the stages of human life: man in a state of nature and in
 society; prehistoric and historic man; primitive and civilized man

10. Man's conception of himself and his place in the world
 10a. Man's understanding of his relation to the gods or God
 10b. Man as the measure of all things
 10c. Man as an integral part of the universe: his station in the cosmos
 i CM?. The fmiteness and insufficiency of man: his sense of being dependent and
 ordered to something beyond himself
 10d. Man's comparison of himself with other creatures and with the universe as a
 whole
The theological conception of man
 10e. Man as made in the image of God
 10f. The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man
 10g. God incarnate in human form: the human nature of Christ

12. Man as an object of laughter and ridicule: comedy and satire

13. The grandeur and misery of man

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of the difference between men and
other animals, se

KNOWLEDGE yd; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION i, 6b; MIND 33-3k SENSE 2c; W

Matters relevant to the science of psychology and its relation to oth

EDGE 5e; MIND 6; SOUL 53-5 b.

The issues concerning matter and spirit in the constitution of man, s

2d, 33, 4c-4d; MIND 2a-2e; ONE AND MANY 34); SOUL 3a-3d;and for co

human with angelic nature, see ANGEL 4; SOUL 4d(2).

Discussions bearing on the analysis of human faculties or powers, see

8d; DESIRE 30-32); EMOTION i, 1c; HABIT 3; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION

5; MIND 1a-1g(3); SENSE la-1d; SOUL 2c(i)-2c(3), 43; WILL 3a, pa.

The problem of harmony and conflict in human nature and the discussio

normality, see EMOTION 33, 3c; MEDICINE 6a-6c(2); MIND 8-8c; ONE AN

OPPOSITION 4-46; WILL 90.

Another consideration of the cycle of human life, see LIFE AND DEATH

consideration of human immaturity, or childhood, see FAMILY 6c, 6e;

The relation of men and women in the domestic community, and for the

the state, see FAMILY 5a-5c.

Matters relevant to the problem of individual and racial differences,

TION 1b; MIND 43.

The issue concerning the ultimate orig in of man, see EVOLUTION ya-yb.

Other statements of the myth of a golden age, see LABOR la; PROGRESS

the distinction between prehistoric and historic man, or for the p

see ART 12; EVOLUTION yc; TIME 8a.

The distinction between man in a state of nature and in a state of ci

LIBERTY 1b; NATURE 2b; STATE 3c; and for the consideration of man

FAMILY i; STATE 3b(i).

Other discussions of the condition of Adam before and after original

of the human race as a result of Adam's sin, sec GOD pc; JUSTICE 1b

VICE 8b; WiLLye(i); and for theological doctrines concerning man's

his immortal destiny, see HISTORY 53; IMMORTALITY 5d-5g; PUNISHMEN

The teaching of Christian theology concerning Christ, see GOD 90-93)

Matters relevant to man's understanding of himself, his place in the

to God or the gods, see DESIRE yb; GOD 3-3k WORLD 2.

The tragedy or comedy of humsn life, see HAPPINESS 4b; POETRY 4b.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty ofthe Western Wor

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divid

I. Works by authors represented in this collectio

II. Works by authors not represented in this colle

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of t

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapt

AQUINAS, Summa Theo

L PLUTARCH. "That Brute Beasts Make Use of Rea- DANTE. Convivio (Th

son," in Moralia CH 23-28 AUGUSTINE. On Nature and Grace F. BACON. "Of Natur
AQUINAS. Quaestiones Disputatac, De Veritate, Q 18 Age," in Essays

e ANIMAL 1c-1c(2); ILL 6c. ee ELEMENT 5f; MATTER er sciences, see KNOWLmparisons
of ANIMAL 1c(i)-1c(2), i-1a, 1c, D MANY 35); 6b-6c; and for the MIND 4b. n of
human abplace of women in 1c; TIME 8b; and for see ANIMAL 10; EVOLUrogress of
historic man, vil society, see LAW 4b; as a social animal, see sin, and of the
condition ; SIN 3-3c; VIRTUE AND life on earth and T 5d; SIN 6c-6e. ONE AND MANY
6c. ; world, and his relation ld, but relevant to the ed into two groups: n.
ction. he works cited, consult er of The Great Ideas. logies PART H-II, QQ 161-
e Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE, e in Men," "Of Youth and

CHAPTER 51: MA

HOBBES. The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic

The Whole Art of Rhetoric. BK n, CH 14-

.

'9

KANT. Anthropologie J. S. MILL. A System of Logic, BK vi, CH 3-4 FREUD. An
Outline of Psychoanalysis

II.

THEOPHRASTUS. The Characters CICERO. De Finibus (On the Supreme Good), iv-v
HORACE. Satires SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against the Logicians, BK i

(Concerning Man) BOETHIUS. Contra Eutychen (A Treatise

Against

Eutyches and Ncstorius) ERIGENA. De Divisione Naturae, BK iv IBN GABIROL. The
Improvement ofthe Moral Qualities

ABAILARD. Ethics (Scito Teipsttm) BONAVENTURA. Breviloquium, PART n (9-1 1), iv
PETRARCH. On His Own Ignorance ALBO. The Book of Principles (Sefer ha-lkarmi),
BK in, CH 1-7

NICOLAS OF CUSA. De Docta Ignorantia, BK in G. Pico DELLA MIRANDOLA. Oration on
the Dignity of Man

LUTHER. A Treatise on Christian Liberty The Magmfaat

.

ViviiS. A Fable About Man

CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK i, CH 15; BK n, CH 1-3

BEN JONSON. Every Man in His Humour MOLIERE. Le misanthrope (The Man-Hater)

MARVELL. Dialogue Between the Soul and the Body

DiiFot. Robinson Crusoe

POPE. Essay on Man LAMLITRIE. Man a Machine

BUH ON. "On Man," m Natural History J

HARTLEY. Observations on Man, His Frame, His Duty and His Expectations

FERGUSON. An Essay on the History of Civil Society, PART i, SECT i-iv

VOLTAIRE. Candide

. "Contradictions," "Man, Woman," in A

Philosophical Dictionary

. The Huron, or Pupil of Nature (L'ingenue)

GOLDSMITH. The Deserted Village HELVTIUS, A Treatise on Man KAMES. Sketches of
the History of Man BENTHAM. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation, CH 7

J. G. FICHTE. The Dignity of Man .Addresses to the German Nation, iv-vin

SCHLEIERMACHER. The Christian Faith, par 60-6 1

N 41 D. STEWART, Elements of the Philosophy of the

Human Mind, PART in, CH 2

.

Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of

Man GOGOL. The Overcoat KIERKEGAARD. Either/Or

.

Concluding Unscientific Postscript

. The Sickness Unto Death SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL i,

BK IVJ VOL III, SUP, CH 31-32

. On Human Nature COMTE. System of Positive Polity, VOL iv, Theory of

the Future of Man, CH i, 3-4 LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK iv, CH 4-5; BK vi, CH 2, 4-5
RENOUVIER. Essais de critique generale, n, PART i T. H. HUXLEY. Man's Place in
Nature

. Methods and Results, vn G ALTON. Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
Development

MEREDITH. Earth and Man C, S. PEIRCE. Collected Papas, VOL vi, par 238-271
WUNDT. Outlines of Psychology, (20-21) ROYCE. The World and the Individual,
SERIES n (6-7) SANTAYANA. Reason in Common Sense, CH 12 MARK TWAIN. What Is Man?
FRANCE. Pengu in hland UN AMU NO. The Tragic Sense of Life JUNG. Two Essays on
Analytical Psychology .

Psychological Types

SHAW. Bacl( to Methuselah BUBLR. I and Thou CHESTERTON. The Everlasting Man B.
RUSSL.LL. What I Believe, en i FRAZLR. The Golden Bough, PART i; PART vi, NOTE
(The Crucifixion of Christ); PART vn

Man, God, and Immortality, PART i-n

. SPEARMAN. The Abilities of Man J. S. HALDANL. The Sciences and Philosophy,
LECT vi-x

M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK n, CH 4 JASPERS. Man in the Modern Age
BLONDEL. V action DEWEY. Human Nature and Conduct freedom and Culture, CH 2

. MARITAIN. Ransoming the Time, CH i NIEBUHR. The Nature and Destiny of Man J.
S. HUXLEY. Evolution, the Modern Synthesis, CH 10 T. S. ELIOT. Pour Quartets
CASSIRER. An Essay on Man LUBAC. Surnaturel WEISS. Nature and Man SARTRE.
Existentialism KEITH. A New Theory of Human Evolution WIENER. Cybernetics VON
WEIZSACKER. The History of Nature

REFERENCES
============================================================

1. Definitions of man - conceptions of the properties and qualities of human nature

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:20-30 / Psalms, 8:5-9
5 SOPHOCLES: Antigone [332-375] 134a-b; [683- 684] 137a
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [195-213] 260a-b
6 TnucvDiDESiPeloponnesian War, BKi,368b-c; BK iv, 461d-462a; BK v, 506b-c
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 116c-d / Symposium, 157b- 159b / Gorgias, 270d / Republic, BK ix, 425c- 427b / Timaeus, 452c-454a; 466a-467d / Critias, 485b-c / Laws, BK i, 649d-650b; BK iv, 685a-c; BK v, 686d-687c; BK vi, 704a-b; BK VII, 715b; 723c-d
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK v, CH i [i28 b i5~i6] 178b; CH 3 [132*1-9] 182d; [i32 a i7-22] 183a; CH 4 [i33 B '5-23l 184b l ('33 a28 -33l We; [i33 b 8-i3] 184d; CH 5 [134*8-17] 185b-c; CH 7 [i36 b i9-22] 188d; BK vi, CH 3 [140*32-37] 193c / Heavens, BK II, CH 12 [292^-11 ] 384a / Metaphysics, BK i, CH i [980*22-981*27] 499a-d / Soul, BK ii, CH 3 [4i4 b i7-2o] 644d; [415*7- 12] 645b; BK III, CH 3 [427 b 7-'4l 659d-660a; [428*20-24] 660c; CH 10 [433*8-13] 665d / Memory and Reminiscence, CH 2 [453*5-14] 695b
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK i, CH i [488*6-10] 9a; [488*27] 9b; [ 4 88 b 20-2 7 ] 9d; CH ii [492*31] 14b; CH 16 [494 b 28] 17a; BK II, CH i [497 b 32~498*4] 20b; BK III, CH ii [5i7 b 27J 42b; CH 19 [521*3] 45d; CH 22 [523*14-15] 48c; BK iv, CH 9 [536 b i-8] 63a-b; BK VIII, CH i [588*i8- b 4] 114b,d; BK ix, CH i [6o8*iob i9] 133b,d-134a / Parts of Animals, BK i, CH i [64^5-8] 164b-c; BK II, CH 7 [653*29- b 2] 178c-d; CH 10 [656*4-13] 182a-b; CH 14 [658*15-27] 184d-185a; [658^-8] 185b; CH 16 [659 b 28]-cH 17 [66o b 3] 186d-187c; BK III, CH i [662 b 2i-22] 190a; CH 6 [669*18-20] 197c; [669 b 4-5] 197d-198a; CH 10 [673*4-10] 201d-202a; [673*28] 202b; BK iv, CH 10 [686*25-687 b 5] 217d-219a; [689 b ii-i2] 221c; [690*28-30] 222b / Gait of Animals, CH 4 [706*19-25] 244d-245a; CH 5 [7o6 b 8-io] 24Sb / Generation of Animals, BK i, CH 20 [728**! 4- 21] 268d; BK II, CH 6 [744*27-31] 285c; [745 b i6-i9] 286d; BK iv, CH 4 [772 b i-8] 314b-c; CH 8 [776^3-27] 318d-319a; BK v, CH 2 [78^17-23] 323d-324a; CH 7 [786 b i5~22] 328c-d / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [io97 b 7-n] 342d- 343a; [io97 b 23-io98*7] 343a-b; CH 13 [1102* 27-1103*3] 347d-348c; BK HI, CH 2 [nn b 6- 12] 357b-c; BK VII, CH i [1145*15-33] 395a-b; CH 3 [ii47*25- b 5] 397c-ct; BK VIII, CH 12 14 1 (1. Definitions of man - conceptions of the properties and qualities of human nature.) [1162*16-25] 414c; BK ix, CH 9 [n6 423b; [ii70 a i6-i8] 423d-424a; BK x, CH 7 [H77 b 26-ii78 a 8] 432c; CH 8 [ii78 b 23-27] 433c / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*1-39] 446b-d; CH 5 [125^15-25] 448b; BK VII, CH 13 [i332 a 39~ b 7] 537a-b; CH 15 [i334 b i2-28] 539c-d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH i [i355 b i~3] 594d / Poetics, CH 4 [i4 4 8 b 4-24] 682c-d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; CH 9 114c-116b; CH 23 128c-d; en 28, 134a-d; BK ii, CH 8, 146a-147a; CH u 150a-151b; BK iv, CH 5, 228c-229b; CH n 240d-242d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II., SECT i 256b,d; BK III, SECT 4 260b 261a; BK iv, SECT 4 264a; SECT 24 265c-d; SECT 29 266a; BK v, SECT 5 269b; SECT 16 271c-d; BK vi, SECT 23 276b; BK VII, SECT 13 280c; SECT 55 283b-c; BK VIII, SECT 12 286b-c; SECT 34 288a-b; BK ix, SECT i 291a-c; SECT 9 292b~d; SECT 23 293c; BK x, SECT 6 297a-b; BK xi, SECT 8 303a-b; BK xii, SECT 30 310a b
14 PLUTARCH: Pompey, 512c-d
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK II, 219d; BK iv, 271b
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR i la-6b; TR iv, CH 14 18a-c / Third Ennead, TR in, CH 4 94c- 95c; TR iv, CH 2 97d-98a / Sixth Ennead, TR vii, CH 4-6 323c-325a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xm, par 12 113b-d; par 35-37 120b-121a / City of God, BK v, CH ii 216c-d; BK vii, CH 23, 256b-c; BK xi, CH 26-28 336d-338d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 8 626c-627a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, QQ 75- 83 378a-440b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISU, vin [91- 148] 117d-118c
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xvn, 24a-c; CH XVHI 25a-26a passim 23HoBBEs - Leviathan, INTRO 47a-d; PART i, 76c-d; 79b-d; 83a; 84c-86b; PART ii, 99a-b; 104d; 138d-139a; 141a-b
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, la,c; 65c-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 119b-d; 207a-c; 215a- 232c esp 216c-219a, 231d-232c; 381b c; 462d- 463a
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT n, sc n [314-322] 43d; ACT iv, sc iv [31-66] 59a-c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 454a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv 51b-54b passim / Meditations, ii 77d-81d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART ii, AXIOM 1-2 373c-d; PROP 10-13 376c-378c; PART iv, PROP 18, SCHOL 429a~d; PROP 35 433b-434a; APPENDIX 447a-450d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [345-353] 118b- UQa; BK III [80-216) 137-140a; BK iv [288- 369] 158b-160b; BK VII [519-640] 228b-231a / Samson Agonistes [667-709] 354a 355a / Areopagitica, 384a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, in 194a; 115 194b; 125-183 195b-204b; 365 236a; 396-424 240b-243b / Vacuum, 357a-358a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en vi, SECT 67 39c-d; CH vii, SECT 77 42b / Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxvn, SECT 8 221a-222a; BK III, CH vi, SECT 22 273d-274a; SECT 33 278b-c; en x, SECT 17 295d-296b; CH xi, SECT 20 304c-d; BK iv, CH iv, SECT 13-16 326d-328d; CH vn, SECT 16-18 344a-c; CH xvi, SECT 12, 370c-371a; CH xvn, SECT i 371c-d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 151b-152a; 159b- 160a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 383a-384a; 394a
37 FIELDING: 70tf7/ofl,lb-d;187d-188d;205a-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, ld-2d; BK xxm, 187d; BK xxvin, 259b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-348a,c passim esp 329a-334a,c, 343a-345c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 71b-d; BK II, 147d-148a; BK v, 343a-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 409d-410a
42 KANT: Pute Reason, 199c-200c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 270c-d; 271d-273b; 284b-285a / Practical Reason, 316c 31 7a; 348a-b / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 372a-b; 373d / Science of Right, 400b,d-402a esp 401b-402a; 421c-422d /Judgement, 479a-c; 571c-572a; 583b-c; 584d-585c; 587a-588a; 591b-592d
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [7-9] la
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 6 38d-41c passim; NUM- BER 10, 50b-d; NUMBER 15, 65b-c; NUMBER 17, 69c; NUMBER 27, 95d; NUMBER ^4, HOc-d; NUMBER 37, 120d-121a; NUMBER 49, 160a; NUMBER 51, 163b-c; NUMBLR 55, 174c-d; NUMBER 57, 177b-c; NUMBER 71, 214b-c; NUMBER 76, 226d-227b
43 MILL: Liberty, 273d; 294a-297b esp 295a-b / Utilitarianism, 448d-449b; 459c-464d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 377d; 403a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 190 66a b; par 209 69d; par 270, 86d-87b [fn i]; ADDITIONS, 34 122a b; 121 136c-d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 178a-179d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PROLOGUE [280-292] 8a; PART i [1110-1117] 27b-28a; [3240-3250] 79b; PART ii [8082-8131] 197a-198a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 84b-85a; 236a-239a; 306a; 313b-314a; 343a; 345b-347b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 286a-287b; 287d; 291a; 302b; 310a-314a esp 310a-d, 312a-b; 319b-d; 349d; 597c
50 MARX: Capital, 98a; 159a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 431b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 689b-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 54a-b; BK v. 127b-137c la CHAPTER 51: MAN 15
53 JAMES: Psychology, 49b-50a; 712b-737a passim, csp 716a-717b, 721a, 730a, 736b-737a; 826a-827a
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 684d-686c esp 686c / War and Death, 758a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 787a / New Introductory Lectures, 883b-c

1a. The conception of man as essentially distinct, or differing in kind, from brute animals - man's specific rationality and freedom

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:20-30 esp 1:26-30; 5:1-2; 9:6
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-9 (D) OT, Ec- clcsiasticus, 17:1-9
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Timaeus, 452d- 453a
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK i, en i [980*22- b 27J 499a-b / Soul, BK II, CH 3 [4i4 b i7-2o] 644d; [415*7-12] 645b; BK III, CH 3 [427^ -14] 659d-660a; [428*20-24] 660c; CH 10 [433*8- 13] 665d / Memory and Reminiscence, CH 2 [453*5-14] 695b
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK VIII, CH i [588*i8- b 4] 114b,d / Parts of Animals, BK i, CH i [64i b 5~8] 164b-c; BK iv, CH 10 [686*27- 33] 217d-218a; [687*4-10] 218c-d / Generation of Animals, BK II, CH 6 [744*27-31] 285c / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [io97 b 2 3-1098*7] 343a-b; en 13 [1102*27-1103*3] 347d-348c; BK III, en 2 [nu b 6 12] 357b-c; BK VII, CH i [1145*15 33] 395a-b; CH 3 [ii47 a 25- b 5l 397c-d; BK ix, CH 9 [i i70 ft i6 -i 8] 423d-424a; BK x, CH 7 [1177^6- ii78' l 8] 432c; CH 8 [i i78 b 23-27] 433c / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*1-39] 446b-d; CH 5 [i254 b i5- 25] 448b; BK VII, CH 13 [1332*39^7] 537a-b; CH 15 [i334 b i2-28] 539c-d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; en 6 110c-112b; CH 9 114c-116b; CH 16 121d- 122d; en 28, 134a-d; BK II, CH 8, 146a-147a; BK III, CH 7, 183c-184a; BK iv, CH i 213a- 223d; CH 5, 228c-229b; CH 7, 233a-b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT 16 259a; BK III, SECT 1 6 262d-263a,c; BK v, SECT 16 271c-d; BK vi, SLCT 23 276b; BK VIII, SECT 7 286a; SECT 41 288d; BK ix, SECT 9 292b-d
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR i la-6b esp en 10, 5a / Third Ennead, TR in, CH 4 94c-95c / Sixth Ennead, TR vii, CH 4-6 323c-325a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xin, par 12 113b-d; par 35-37 120b-121a / City of God, BK v, CH n 216c-d; BK vii, CH 23, 256b-c; BK VIII, CH 6, 269a; BK xi, CH 26-28 336d-338d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 8 626c-627a; CH 22 629b-630a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP 2 14b-15b; Q 18, A 2, REP i 105c-106b; A 3, ANS 106b-107c; Q 19, A 10, ANS 117d-118b; Q 23, A i, ANS and REP 2-3 132c-133b; Q 30, A 2, REP 3 168a-169b; Q 59, A 3, ANS 308b- 309a; Q 72, A i, REP 1,3-4 368b-369d; QQ 75- 83 378a-440b; Q 86, A 4, REP 3 463d-464d; Q 91, A 3, REP 1-3 486b-487d; Q 92, A r, ANS 488d-489d; Q 96 510a-513c esp A i 510b-511b, A 4 512d-513c; PART i-n, PROLOGUE 609a,c; Q i, AA 1-2 609b-611b; Q 6, A 2 646a-c; Q n, A 2 667b-d; Q 12, A 5 672a-c; Q 13, A 2 673c-674c; Q 15, A 2 682a-c; Q 17, A 2 687d- 688b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 50, A 3, REP 2 8b-9a; Q no, A 4, REP 3 350d-351d; PART in SUPPL, Q 79, A i, ANS 951b-953b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xxvi [112-120] 39b; xxxi [46-57] 46c; PURGATORY, xxv [34- 78] 91d-92a; PARADISE, v [19-24] 112b; vn [121-148] 116b-c
22 CHAUCER: Knight's Tale [1303-1333] 181b- 182a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 184b-c; 215a 232c esp 216c-219a, 231d-232c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT iv, sc iv [32-39] 59a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART i, 41b,d; PART iv 51b-54b passim; PART v, 56a-b; 59a-60c / Meditations, n 77d-81d esp 78b-c; iv 89a-93a / Objections and Replies, 156a-d; 209b; 226a-d; 276c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART 11, AXIOM 2 373d; PART in, PROP 57 414d-415b; PART iv, PROP 35, SCHOL 433d-434a; PROP 37, SCHOL 1-2 434d- 436a passim
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK vii [449-549] 227a- 229a; BK VIII [369-451] 240a-242a; BK ix [549-566] 259b; BK xn [63-110] 320b-321b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 140 199a-b; 339-348 233a- 234a; 418 243a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en vi, SECT 56-63 36d-38c; CH xiv, SECT 163-164 63a-c / Human Understanding, BK II, en xi, SLCT JQ--II 145d- 146a; en xxvn, SUCT 8 221a-222a; SECT 12 223a-b; BK III, CH vi, SECT 26-27 274d-276a; CH x, SECT 17 295d 296b; CH xi, SECT 20 304c-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, ld-2b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 337d-338c; 357c-358b / Social Contract, BK i, 393b-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 6d-7b; 8a-b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 164a-165c / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 264d-265a; 279b,d; 281c-282c / Practical Reason, 291a-293b; 316c- 31 7a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 378b-c / Science of Right, 400b,d-402a esp 401b-402a; 420d-421a /Judgement, 584d-585c
43 MILL: Liberty, 294a-297b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, INTRO, par 21 17a-c; PART i, par 47 24a-b; PART II, par 132 46b-47a; par 139 48d-49b; ADDITIONS, 4 116a-d; 10 117d-118a; 22 120c-d; 28 121b; 62 126a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156c; 168b-d; 178a-b; 186a; PART i, 257d-258a; PART in, 304d-305a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 287b-c; 319b-d; 331b-332a 16 \b to \c (I. Definitions of man - conceptions of the properties and qualities of human nature, la. The conception of man as essentially distinct, or differing in kind, from brute animals - man's specific rationality and freedom.)
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE 11, 689c- 690a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim

1b. The conception of man as distinguished from brutes by such powers or properties as abstraction or relational thought, language and law, art and science

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 2:19-20
5 AESCHYLUS: Prometheus Bound [442-506] 44c- 45a
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [195-213] 260a-b / Trojan Women [665-672] 275d
7 PLATO: Laches, 35b-d / Protagoras, 44a-45a / Theaetetus, 534d-536a esp 535d-536a / Laws, BK ii, 653a-c
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK v, CH i [i28 b i5-i6] 178b; CH 3 [i32 a i-9] 182d; [i32 tt i7-22] 183a; CH 4 [133*15-23] 184b; CH 5 [134*8-17] 185b-c / Heavens, BK II, CH 12 [292 b i-n] 384a / Metaphysics, BK i, CH i [98o b 25-98i a 27]499b-d / Soul, BK III, CH 3 [427 b 7~i4] 659d-660a; [428*20-24] 660c / Memory and Reminiscence, CH 2 [453-5-14] [695b
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK i, CH i [488 b 2o-27] 9d; BK iv, CH 9 [536 b i-8] 63a-b; BK VIII, CH i [588 a i8- b 4] 114b,d; BK ix, CH i [6o8 a iob i9] 133b,d-134a / Parts of Animals, BK ii, CH 10 [656*8-9] 182a; CH 16 [659^8] CH 17 [66o b 3] 186d-187c; BK III, CH 6 [669 a i8- 20] 197c; CH 10 [6?3 a 4-io] 201d-202a; BK iv, CH 10 [686*25-687%] 217d-219a esp [686 b 24] 218b, [687 a 4-23] 218c-d / Generation of Animals, BK II, CH 6 [744*27-31] 285c; BK v, CH 2 [78i b i7-23j 323d-324a; CH 7 [786^5-22] 328c d / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [io97 b 7-n] 342d- 343a; BK III, CH 2 [nn b 6-i2] 357b-c; BK VH, CH i [ii45 R i5-33] 395a-b; CH 3 [ii47 a 25- b 5l 397c-d; BK VIII, CH 12 [i 162^6-25] 414c; BK ix, CH 9 [n69 b i7-i9] 423b / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i253 a i~39] 446b-d; BK VH, CH 13 [1332*39- b 7J 537a-b / Rhetoric, BK i, CH i [i355 b i-3] 594d / Poetics, CH 4 [i 448^-24] 682c-d 12EpicTETUs - Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; CH 28, 134a-d; BK iv, CH n 240d-242d
12 AUHELIUS: Meditations, BK III, SECT 16 262d- 263a,c; BK ix, SECT 9 292b-d
23 MACIHAVELLI: Prince, CH xvm, 25a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 52 b; 53a-b; 54a; 54c; 57d; 59b-c; 63a; 79b-d; PART II, lOOac
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 215b-216b; 218a-c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 427d-428a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d / Novum Organum, BK II, APH 35, 163d-164a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 59c-60b / Objections and Replies, 226a-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [369-451] 240a-242a; BK ix [549-566] 259b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, INTRO, SECT i 93a-b; BK II, CH xi, SECT 4-11 144d-146a esp SECT 10 145d; BK III, CH i, SECT 1-3 251b,d-252a; CH vi, SECT 33 278b-c; BK iv, CH xn, SECT n, 361c-d; CH xvin, SECT n, 384b
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, INTRO, SECT n 407b-408a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 4, 452b-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 341d; 349d-350a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 6d-8b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 164a-165c; 199c-200c / Practical Reason, 316c-317a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 372a b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 386b-d / Judgement, 479a-c; 602b,d [fn i]
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 448a-449c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 211 70a-c; ADDITIONS, 26 121a-b; 121 136c-d; 157 142b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 168b-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 278a-279a; 294c- 304a esp 294c-d, 297a-298a, 304a; 311d; 320a-b; 349d; 591d-593c
50 MARX: Capital, 85b-c; 86b-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 122d-123a; BK vi, 167c-d
53 JAMES: Psychology, 85a-b; 677a; 678b-686b esp 678b, 683b-684a, 686a-b; 691a-b; 704a- 706b esp 706b; 873a
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 385b-c / Unconscious, 429c-d / General Introduction, 616b -c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 778a Ic. The conception of man as an animal, differing only in degree of intelligence and of other qualities possessed by other animals
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 79, A i, ANS 951b-953b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 52b; 53a-b; 53d- 54a; 59b; 64a-c; 79c; PART ii, 112d-113a; PART iv, 267b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 207a-c; 215a 232c esp 216c-219a, 231d-232c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 35, 163d- 164a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK ix [549-566] 259b
35 LOCKE : Human Understanding, BK III, CH vi, SECT 12 271d-272b; CH x, SECT 17 295d-296b; CH xi, SECT 20 304c-d; BK iv, CH xvi, SECT 12, 370c-371a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT ix 487b- 488c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 334b,d-338d; 348d- 349c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 199c-200c
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 448a-449c; 469b-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 286a-319d csp 287a-b, 294c, 304a-305c, 319b-d; 331b-332a; 591d-592a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 689c- 690a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 677a; 690b
54 FREUD: Sexual Enlightenment of Children, 121d; 122c

2. Man's knowledge of man

    [sem referências]

2a. Immediate self-consciousness - man's intimate or introspective knowledge of himself

7 PLATO: Charmides, 7b-c; 8b-d / Phaedrus, 116c-d / Philebus, 629b-c
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK III, CH 4 [429^-9] 661d; [429^5-29] 662b; [430*2-9] 662b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK ix, CH 9 [ii7o a 28- h i] 424a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH i, 105a-b; CH 27, 133a-b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK xi, SECT i 302a b
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK x, par 3 72a; par 7 73a / City of God, BK xi, en 26 336d- 337b; CH 27, 337d-338a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 87, A i, ANS 465a-466c; A 2, ANS 466c-467b; A 4, ANS 468b-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 112, A 5, ANS and REP 1,5 359c-360c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvm [49-60] 80b-c
23 HOBBRS: leviathan, INTRO, 47b-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 6d-7a; 69d-70c; 177d- 181d esp 180b-d; 253d-254a; 319d-320b; 322b-323b; 388c-389c; 48Sc-486a; 520b 522a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 332b
30 BACON: Advancement of learning, 54b-c; 88c- 89b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 51c-52a / Meditations, n 77d-81d / Objections and Re- plies, 207b; 224b,d; 276b-c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART II, PROP 19-23 382b- 383c
33 PASCAL: PensSes, 396-399 240b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH i, SECT 1-8 121a-123a esp SECT 7-8 122c-123a; CH ix, SECT 1-2 138b-c; CH xix 175b-176b; CH xxi, SECT 30 185a-c; CH xxm, SECT 15 208c-d; SECT 32-33 212c-213a; CH xxvn, SECT 9 222a-b; BK iv, CH ix, SECT 2-3 349a-c
35 HUME: Human Understanding SECT i, DIV 8, 454a-b; SECT vn, DIV 51-53 472b-474b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 349b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 32a-c; 55a-56c; 99a-101b; 121a-123b / Practical Reason, 292d [fn i]; 307d-310c / Judgement, 599d-600d
43 MILL: Liberty, 303b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, INTRO, par 5 13a-c; par 7 14a-c; PART i, par 35 21a-b; ADDITIONS, 5 116d-117a; 22 120c-d; 25 121a / Philosophy of History, PART i, 257d-258a; PART II, 278a-c; PART HI, 304a-b; 310d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [3217-3239] 79a-b; PART II [11,433-452] 278a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 688b- 689b; 693d-694c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK xi,341c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 121a-b; 122b-126a; 191a- 197a esp 193a, 196a-197a; 221b; 223b 224a; 233a-b
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 383b c / Unconscious, 429c-430c / General Introduction, 451a-b; 620a / Ego and Id, 702d-703a

2b. The sciences of human nature - anthropology and psychology; rational and empirical psychology; experimental and clinical psychology

8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK vi, CH i [1026* 5-6] 548a / Soul, BK i, CH i 631a-632d; BK II, CH 4 [415*14-22] 645b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 13 [1102*5-25] 347b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 261c-269b passim
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 54b-c
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i 451a- 455b passim; SECT vm, DIV 65 479b-480a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-330b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, la-4a,c esp Ib-d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253b-254b; 271a-c / Practical Reason, 294a-b; 307d-310c / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 388a-c / Judgement, 599d-600d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, INTRO, par n 15a-b
53 JAMES : Psychology, xiiib-xiva; la-4a; 120a-l 29b
54 FRLUD: Unconscious, 431b-d / General Introduction, 451a-453a esp 451b-452a / Group Psychology, 664a 665a / New Introductory Lectures, 864a-868d esp 868b-c; 873c-d
#2b(1) The subject matter and scope of the science of man
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK i, CH i 631a-632d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 87 464d-468d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 49d-SOb; 54b-c
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, INTRO, SECT 1-4 93a-94b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i 451a- 455b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-331d
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 294a-b / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 388b-c / Judgement, 599d-600d esp 600d 53IAMES: Psychology, xiiib-xiva; 3b-4a; 120a- 121a; 129b; 236a; 825a [fn i]
54 FREUD: Unconscious, 428a-429c esp 429b / General Introduction, 452a-454b; 467b-d; 550a-b; 606a / Group Psychology, 664a-665b / New Introductory Lectures*, 866a-b 18
#2b(2) The methods and validity of psychology
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK i, CH i 631a-632d; BK 11, CH 4 [415*14-22] 645b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 13 [1102*5-25] 347b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 87 464d-468d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvm [49-60] 80b-c
23 HOBBKS: Leviathan, INTRO, 47b-d; PART II, 163a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 49d-50b; 54b-c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 145 441d-442a; SECT 148 442b-d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 8 454a-c; SECT ix, DIV 82 487b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 55a-56c; 121a-123b; 126c d / Practical Reason, 292d [fa i]; 294a-b; 307d-310c I Judgement, 599d-600d
43 FLDERALIST: NUMBER 79, 234b-c
52 DOSTOLVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK xn, 386c-387d
53 JAMES: Psychology, 17b-18b; 56a~66a passim; 121a-129b esp 126a-129b; 146a; 165a; 235b- 236a esp 236b [fn i]; 259a-b; 822b; 825a [fn i]
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 13c-14a / Unconscious, 429b-c; 434c / General Introduction, 451d-452a; 548a-550c esp 550a-b; 606a-b / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 639a-b; 661c-662b / Ego and Id, 706d-707a
#2b(3) The relation of psychology to physiology - the study of organic factors in human behavior
7 PLATO: Phaedo, 240d-242b / Timaeus, 474b- 475d
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VII, CH 3 [246 b 20- 248*8] 330a-d / Soul, BK i, en i [40^2^19] 632a-d; BK II, CH i 642a-643a; CH 9 [42^22- 26] 653b; BK III, CH 4 [429*28- b 4] 661c-d; CH 9 [432 b 26-433*i] 665c / Sleep 696a-701d esp CM i 696a-697c / Dreams 702a-706d passim, esp CH 2 703a-704d
9 ARISTOTLE: Pans of Animals, BK II, CH 4 175b-176a; CH 7 [653 b i~7] 178d-179a; BK III, CH 6 [669*18-20] 197c; BK iv, CH 10 [686 b 22- 29] 218b-c / Motion of Animals, CH 7 [70i b i3]- CH 8 [702*22] 237a~c; CH n 239a~d
10 HIPPOCRATES: Sacred Disease, 155d-160d esp 159a-c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of 'Things, BK HI [94-829] 31b-40c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologiea, PART i, Q 75, A 3, REP 3 380c-381b; A 4 381b-382a; Q 76, A 5 394c-396a; Q 84, AA 7^8 449b-451b; Q 85, A 7 459c-460b; PART i-n, Q 41, A i, ANS 798b-d
28 HARVEY: Motion of the Heart, 271a-b; 296d / Circulation of the Blood, 321d-322a; 322c-d / On Animal Generation, 431d-432a
30 BACON: Advancement of learning, 48d-50b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 60b-c; PART vi, 61c / Meditations, vi, 99d / Objections and Replies, 207d-208a; 209c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART II, PROP 14 380c; PROP 16-17 380d-381d; PROP 26, DEMONST 384a-b; PART v, PREF 451a-452c; PROP 39 462a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 338a
42 KANT: Judgement, 538d-539a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE 11, 689c- 690a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 2b-4a; 7a; 9a-56a esp 9a-b, 52a-53b; 66b-71a passim; 690b
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 154c-155a / Unconscious, 429a-b; 431c-d / General Introduction, 451d-452a; 605b-606b / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 721a / New Introductory Lectures, 872c-d
#2b(4) The place of psychology in the order of sciences - the study of man as prerequisite for other studies
7 PLATO: Charmides, 7b-c; 8b-d / Phaedrus, 116c-d / Phaedo, 240d-242b / Republic, BK II, 316a-b; BK iv, 350a-b / Philebus, 629b-c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK vi, CH i [1026* 5-6] 548a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 13 [1102*5-25] 347b-c / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 2 [1356*21-29] 595d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, INTRO, 47b-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 69d-70c; 259a-260b; 308c-d
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 443b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 51c~52a / Meditations, n 77d-81d / Objections and Re- plies, 207b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 66 180b; 144-146 200b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, 87d; INTRO 93a-95d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 7-8 453c-454c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-330b
42 KANT: Pure Reason, la-4a,c esp Ib-d / Practical Reason, 307d-310c; 331a-332d I Judgement, 511a-512a; 599d-600d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, INTRO, par 4 12d- 13a; par 19 16d-17a
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 868b d; 874a-c; 883c-d

3. The constitution of man

    [sem referências]

3a. Man as a unity or conjunction of matter and spirit, body and soul, extension and thought

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 2:7
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:14-15; 15:11 (D) OT, Boo^of Wisdom, 9:14-15; 15:11
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Romans, 7:14-23; 8:4-13 / / Corinthians, 15:36-49 3* /o 30(2)
7 PLATO: Cratyluf, 93b-d / Phaedrus, 124b-d / Phaedo, 231b-234c / Republic, BK III, 338a- 339a / Timaeus, 453b-c / Laws, BK v, 686d- 687c
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BKVII, CH 10 [i(>35 b 13-32] 559a-b; BK VIII, CH 3 [1043*29^4! 567d; CH 6 569d-570d; BK XH, CH 10 [1075** 34-37] 606d / Soul, BK i, CH i Uo3 ft 2- b i9] 632a-d; CH 5 [4io b io-i6] 640c; U" b 5-i8] 641 c-d; BK ii, CH 1-2 642a-644c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 5 [i254 a 33~ b 7] 448a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [94-176] 31b-32b; [370-395] 34d-35a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; BK iv, CH ii, 240d-241b
12 AURELIUS : Meditations, BK iv, SECT 21 265b-c; BK VII, SECT 55 283b-c; BK ix, SECT 8 292b; BK xii, SECT 30 310a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 29a-b
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR i la-6b / Second Ennead, TR i, CH 5, 37c / Fourth Ennead, TR HI, CH 19-23 151d-154b esp CH 20 152b 153a; TR vii, CH i 191c-d; CH 8, 197c-198b / Sixth Ennead, TR vn, CH 4-6 323c-325a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK v, CH n, 216c; BK ix, CH 8-17 289d-295c passim; BK x, CH 29 316d-318b; BK xm, CH 16 367a-d; CH 19 369c-370c; BK xiv, CH 2-3 377a-378d; CH 5 379c-380b
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 8, A i, REP 2 34d-35c; A 2, REP 2 35c-36b; QQ 75^76 378a-399b; Q 118, A 2, ANS and REP 2 601c- 603b; A 3, ANS 603b-604b; Q 119, A i, ANS 604c-607b; PART I-H, Q 4, A 5, REP 2 632c- 634b; Q 17, A 4, ANS and REP 3 688d-689c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART HI, Q 2, A i, ANS and REP 2 710a-711c; A 5 715a~716b; Q 17, A 2, REP 4 808d-809d; PART HI SUPPL, Q 79, A I-Q 80, A 2 951b-958b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxv [34-78] 91d-92a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 311a-b; 432 b-d; 538a- 543a,c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 48d-49c
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 5ld-52a; PART v, 60b-c / Meditations, 11 77d-81d; vi, 98c-99a; 99d-100a / Objections and Replies, 119d-120a; DBF vi-vn 130c-d; DBF x 130d; PROP iv 133c; 135d-136b; 152b,d-156a; 170b c; 207d 208a; 209c; 224d 225d; 231a- 232d; 248 b; 276b-c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART u, PROP 10-13 376c- 378c; PART HI, PROP 2 396c-398b; PART v, PREF 451a-452c
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 512 262a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH HI, SECT 4, 113b; BK II, CH xxvii, SECT 6-8 220c- 222a esp SECT 8, 221d-222a; SECT 15 224b-c; SECT 21 225d-226a; SECT 27-29 227d-228c; BK iv, CH in, SECT 6 313c-315b passim
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vii, DIV 52 472c-473c CHAPTER 51: MAN 19
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 229b 230a; 270b; 277a-b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 198a-c
42 KANT: Judgement, 557c-558b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 47-48 24a-c; ADDITIONS, 2 115d
53 JAMES: Psychology, la-4a esp 2b-3a, 4a; 84a- 93b esp 88a-90b; 116a-119b; 130a; 139a-140a; 208a-b; 221a-226a esp 221a-222b, 225b-226a
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 154c-155a
#3a(1) Man as a pure spirit - a soul or mind using a body
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 93b-d / Phaedrus, 124b-126c / Meno, 179d-180b / Phaedo, 231b-234c; 250a-d / Timaeus, 452d-454a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK iv, CH 11, 240d- 241a
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK vi [724-751] 230b-231a
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR i la-6b esp CH 5-7 2d-4a / Second Ennead, TR i, CH 5, 37c / Third Ennead, TR iv, CH 2 97d-98a / Fourth Ennead, TR vn, CH i 191c-d / Sixth Ennead, TR vn, CH 4-6 323c 325a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xm, en 16 367a- d; CH 19 369c-370c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 29, A i, REP 5 162a-163b; Q 75, A 4 381b-382a; Q 76, A i, ANS 38Sd-388c; A 4, ANS 393a-394c; A 7, ANS 396d-397d; Q 118, A 3, ANS 603b-604b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 79, A i, ANS and REP 4 951b-953b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv, 51c-52a; PART v, 60b-c / Meditations, n 77d-81d; vi, 98c-d / Objections and Replies, 119d-120a; DEF vi-vn 130c-d; DEF x 130d; PROP iv 133c; 135d-136b; 152d; 155c-156a; 207d-208a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART in, PROP 2 396c-398b; PART v, PREF 451a-452c
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxvii, SECT 6-8 220c-222a esp SKCT 8, 221d- 222a; SECT 21 225d-226a; SECT 28-29 228a-c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 2 413b; SECT 89 430b-c; SECT 135-142 440a-441c; SECT 148 442b-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 186a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 35 21a-b; par 47 24a-b; ADDITIONS, 5 116d-117a; 22 120c-d; 25 121a; 28 121b / Philosophy of History, PART in, 310d
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 28a; 380b-381a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VII, 295b-c
53 IAMES: Psychology, 220b-226a
#3a(2) Man's spirituality as limited to his immaterial powers or functions, such as reason and will
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK i, CH 4 [408^8-29] 638c; CH 5 [4ii b i3-i8] 641c-d; BK II, CH 2 [4i3 b 24- 29] 643d-644a; BK III, CH 4-5 661b-662d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 7, A 2, REP 2 31d-32c; Q 29, A i, REP 5 162a-163b; Q 75, A 2 379c-380c; AA 5-6 382a-384c; Q 76 20 Ibto 4 385c-399b passim; Q 77, A 5 403d-404c; Q 78, A i, ANS 407b-409a; Q 79 413d-427a; Q 80, A 2 428a-d; QQ 82-83 431d-440b; Q 84, A i, ANS and REP i 440d-442a; A 2, ANS 442b-443c; A 6, ANS 447c-449a; Q 85, A i, ANS 451c-453c; Q 86, A i, REP 3 461c-462a; Q 87, A i, REP 3 465a-466c; Q 91, A i, ANS and REP i 484a- 485b; Q 96, A 2 511b-d; Q 98, A i, ANS 516d- 517c; Q 118, A 2, ANS 601c-603b

3b. Comparisons of man with God or the gods, or with angels or spiritual substances

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1.26-27; 5:1-2; 9:6 / Job, 4:16-21 / Psalms, S.^-(D) Psalms, 8:6
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 2:23
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 22:23-30 / / Corinthians, n 7 / Hebrews, 2.7 / James, 3:9 / II Peter, 1.3-47 Revelation, 22:8-9 (D) Apocalypse, 22:8-9
7 PLAIO. Protagoras, 44a-45a / Republic, BK vi, 382c / Timacus, 476a-b 9ARis>ToiLL. Parts of Animals, BK iv, en 10 [68627-33]217d-218a
10 HIPPOCRATES Sacred Disease, 155c-d
12 EPICTEIUS' Discourses, BK i, en 3 108b-c; CH 12, 119b-120a, CH i\ 120d-121c; BK 11, CH 16, 158b-d
18 AucusTiNi : Confessions, BK vi, par 4 36a-b; BK xn, par 20 103c-d; BK xin, par 32 119a-b / City of God, UK vin, CH 25 283b-c, BK ix, CH 8 17 289d 295c; BK MI, CH 21 357a b; CH 23 357d-358a, BK xin, ni i 360a-b, BK xvi, CH 6 426c-427a / Christian Doctnne, BK i, CH 22, 629b-c; CH 23 630a-c; en 30 632c-633b; CH 33 633d-634b
19 AQUIN\S: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 7, A 2, REP 2 31d-32c; Q 30, A 2, RLP 3 168a-169b; Q 47, A 2, ANS 257b~258c; QQ 50-64 269a-338d passim; Q 75, A 7 384d-385c; Q 93 492a 501 c; Q 96, A 2 511b-d; QQ 106-107 545c-552b passim; Q 108, A i, ANS 552c-553c; A 8 561a-562a; Q 112, \ i, REP 4 571d-573a, Q 117, A 2, REP 3 597c 598c; A 3, ANS 598c-599b; Q 118, A 3, ANS 603b-604b; PART MI, Q 4, A 5, RLP 6 632c634b
20 AQUINAS' Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 50, A 6 11a 12a, PART in, Q 6, A 3, REP 2 742a- 743a
21 DAML' Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vn [121- 148] 116b c; xxix [13-84] 150b-151a
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART II, 162c; PART in, 183d 184a
27 SHAKESPEARE. Hamlet, ACT n, sc n [314-324] 43d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [345-353] 118b- 119a; BK iv [358-393] 160a-161a; BK v [388- 450] 183b-185a; [469-505] 185b-186a; BK vi [320-353] 203a-204a; BK x [888-908] 293b- 294a
33 PASCAI- Pcnsees, 140 199a b; 418 243a
35 LOCKE- Human Understanding, BK II, CH x, SECI 9 143a-c; CH xxm, SECT i \ 207d-208b, BK iv, CH in, SECT 17 317c; si-cr 2^ 320a c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECI 81 428c-d
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 394a
42 KANT Pure Reason, 33a-d / Practical Reason, 350c-351b
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [482-517] 14a-b; [602- 736] 16b-19b passim; PART II [8094-8097] 197a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VII, 295b-c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 745a

3c. Man as an organization of matter or as a collocation of atoms

7 PLATO: Sophist, 567a-568a / Laws, BK x, 761 b
8 ARISIOILE: Generation and Corruption, BK II, CH 6 [334 tt io-i5] 435a / Soul, BK i, CH 2-5 633a-641d
10 GALPN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 12 172d- 173c
12 LucRhiiusNature of Things, BK II [251-203] 18b-d; BK III [()j-8(x)] 3lb-41a; BK iv [722- 817} 53d-54d; [877-<)6i| 55d-56d
17 PLOIINUS* Third Enncad, IR i, CH 3 79b-c / Fourth Ennead, IR vn 191c-200c csp CH 1-4 191c-193c, CH 8, 195b-196a, 196c-197c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 75, A i 378b-379c, Q 84, A 2, ANS 442b-443c, A 6, ANS 447c-449a
23 HoBBi'S. Leviathan, INTRO, 47a; PART i, 49a-d; 80a b, PART iv, 251a-b
31 DLSC MU i s Objections and Replies, 226a-d
35 LCX.KL. Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxvn, SECI 21 225d-226a, SLCT 28 29 228a-c; BK iv, en in, si ci 6 313c 315b; CH x, SECT 5 350a-b; SK.I 10 351b-352a, snt.i 17 353b-c
35 Bi RKELEY- Human Knowledge, si.er93431b, SLCT 137 440b-c; SECT 141 441a-b
42 KAN i Pure Reason, 126c-d / Judgement, 557c- 559d; 575b 578a, 578d-582c; 599d-600d
46 HFCLL Philosophy ofllntory, PART i, 255d
51 TOLSIOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 689c- 690a
53 JAMKS: Psychology, 95a-119b
54 FRKUD: New Introductory Lectures, 829a b

4. The analysis of human nature into its faculties, powers, or functions - the id, ego, and super-ego in the structure of the psyche

7 PLATO: Republic, BK iv, 350a-353d
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK ii-in 642a-668d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, QQ 77- 83 399b-440b
31 DESCARIES: Meditations, vi 96b 103d passim
40 to 4 CHAPTER 51: MAN 21
42 KANT: Judgement, 465c-467a; 475b-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 287a-302b passim
54 FREUD: General Jntioduction, 501d-504b; 531d-532b / Group Psychology, 681a-b / Ego and Id, 701d-708c esp 702c, 706d-707d; 715a- 716c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 721d-722c / New Introductory Lectures, 830a- 840a csp 836c-838d

4a. Man's vegetative powers - comparison with similar functions in plants and animals

7 PLATO: Republic, BK v, 361c-362a / Timaeus, 469d-471d
8 ARISTOTLE: Generation and Corruption, BK i, CH 5 417b-420b / Soul, BK II, CH 2 [413*20- b i3] 643b-d; CH 4 645b-647b; BK III, en 9 [432 b 8-io] 665a; CH 12 [434*22-26] 667a-b
9 ARTS TO I'LL : History of Animals, BK VIII, CH i [588 b 2 3-589*8] 115b / Generation of Animals, BK i, en 23 271b-d; BK II, CH i [735*13-24] 275d-276a; CH 4 [740^-711*5] 281c-282a / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [1097^3-1098*1] 343b; CH 13 [iio2*33- b i3] 347d-348a IOGALCN: Natural Faculties 167a-215d esp BK i, CH i 167a-b, CH 5 8 169b-171a
17 PLOTINUS: Third Enncad, TR iv, CH 2 97d- 98a / Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 19, 152a; TR ix, CH 3, 206b
18 AUGUST INL: City of God, BK VII, CH 23, 256b-c; BK xiv, CH 26 395d-396c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 18, A 3, REP 3 106b-107c; Q 76, A 4, ANS 393a-394c; Q 78, AA 1-2 407b-410a; o 96, \ 2 511b-d; o 98 516d-519a; Q 118, A i 600a-601c; A 2, REP 2 601c-603b; Q 119 604c-608d; PART i-n, Q 17, A 8 692a-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 50, A 3, RKP i 8b-9a; PART in SUPPL, Q 80, A \, ANS and RFP 4-5 959c-963a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxv [34-8 4 ]91d-92b
24 RABLLAIS: Gargantua and Pantagrucl, BK III, 143a-144c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 427d-428b
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 27, 158ab
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 207a; 244b-c
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 256a-257c
54 FREUD: Sexual Enlightenment of Children, 121 d

4b. Man's sensitive and appetitive powers - comparison with similar functions in other animals

7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 319c-320c; BK iv, 351b-353d / Timaeus, 466a-467d / Theaetetus, 534d-535b / Philebus, 620b-622b / Laws, BK VII, 715b-c; BK xn, 796a-b
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK i, en 5 [41 1^7-3 1] 641d; BK II, en 2 [4H n 2o- b i3] 643b-d; BK II, CH 5-BK III, CH 3 647b-661b / Sense and the Sensible 673a-689a,c
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK iv, CH 8- 10 59d-64b; BK VIII, CH i [588*18-589*10] 114b,d-115b; BK ix, CH i [6o8 a iob i9] 133b,d- 134a / Parts of Animals, BK II, en 16 [660*13]- CH 17 [660*23] 187a / Motion of Animals, en 6-1 1 235d-239d esp en 10 238c-239a / Generation of Animals, BK III, CH 2 [753*7-16] 294a-b / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [io97 b 23-i098 8 2o] 343a-c; CH 13 [iio2 b i 3-1 103*3] 348a-c; BK III, CH i [nn a 2i- b 3] 357a-b; en 2 [im b 7-9] 357b; CH 10 [1118*17 b 7J 364d-365a; BK vi, CH 2 [i 1 39*17-21] 387d; BK VII, CH 3 [i 147*^3-5] 397d/ Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*9-15] 446b-c
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH i 167a-b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK iv [522-721] 51a-53d; [1192-1208] 59d-60a
12 EpicrtTus - Discourses. BK i, en 3 108b-c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK III, SECT 16 262d- 263a,c; BK ix, SECT 9 292b-d
17 PLOIINUS. First Ennead, IK i la 6b passim / Third Ennead, IR iv, en 2 97d-98a / Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 19 151d~152b; IR iv, CH 20-21 167d 168c; en 23-25 169c 171b; CH 28 172a-173b; TR ix, CH 3 206a b
18 AUGUSTINE Confessions, I>.K x, par n 74a-b / Cit\ of God, BK v, en 9, 215a; BK VII, CH 23, 256bc 19ApuiN\s - Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 75, A 3, ANS 380c 381b; Q 76, A 3, ANS 391a 393a; A 5, ANS 394c-396a; Q 78, A i 407b-409a, AA 3-4 410a-413d; QQ 80-8 1 427a -t31d; Q 91, A 3, REP 1,3 48bb-487d; Q Qf>, \ 2 511b d; P\RT i n, Q 22, A 3 722d-723b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, P\RT i n, Q 50, A 3 8b-9a; P\RT in, Q 2, A 2, RH> 2 711d-712d; Q 18, A 2, ANS Slid 812b; PARI in ST PPL, Q 79, A 2, RLP 3 953b-955c
21 DANIE. Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxv [34-84] 91d-92b
22 CH \UCER: Knight's Tale [1^03-1333] 181b- 182a / Manciple's Tale [17,104-144! 490a-b
23 HOBBFS. Leviathan, PARI i, 49a 54c; 61a-c; 64a-c, PMII n, 139a; 141a-b; P\RI iv, 267b 24 R \BLLAIS. Gargantua and Pantagrnd, BK III, 192b-d
25 MONIAIGNL: Essays, 285c-292d; 424d-425c
27 SHAKLSPLARE. King l^ear, ACT iv, sc vi [109-191] 274c-275b 28 H \RVEY. On Animal Generation, 347c-d
30 BACON: Novum Orgunum, BK II, APII 27, 157b-c; APH 40, 173c-d
31 DESCARTES: Rules, xn, 19a 20d / Discowse, PART v, 59a-b / Objection* and Replies, 156a d
31 SPINOZA' Ethics, PART in, PROP 57, SCHOL 415b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [369-451] 240a-242a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vn, SECT 77-81 42b-43a / Human Understanding, BK II, CH ix, SECT 11-15 140b-141a; CH x 141b-143d passim, esp SECT 10 143c-d; CH xi, SECT 4-7 144d- 145b 22 (4. The analysis of human nature into its faculties, powers, or functions - the id, ego, and superego in the structure of the psyche. 4b. Man's sensitive and appetitive powers - comparison with similar functions in other animals.)
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT ix 487b- 488c
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 147b-148b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 331a-b; 337d-338d; 348d~349c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 164b-c / Intio. Mctaphysic of Morals, 386b-d / Judgement, 479a-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 121 136c-d
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic^, 134b-135a; 244a- 245b; 286b-288a; 289b-291a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 261c-262a; 287d- 291c; 294c; 301c-302b; 304a-313a; 568d-571b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE 11, 689c- 690a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 54a-b
53 JAMES: Psychology, 49a-50a; 198b-199b; 702a- b; 704a-706b; 712b-737a
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 20a-d / Narcissism, 400c-401d / Instincts 412a-421a,c esp 413a-415b / General Introduction, 569c-585a esp 574a-d, 579b- 581c, 584b c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle 639a-663d esp 640b-c, 647a-648a, 651d- 654c, 659d-66tc / Ego and Id, 708c-712a esp 708d-709b / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 720b-721a; 737b-738a; 752a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 782a-d [fni]; 784d- 785a / New Introductory lectures, 840a-853b esp 843d 844c, 846a-850a, 850d-851d

4c. Man's rational powers - the problem of similar powers in other animals

7 PLATO: Laches, 35b-c / Republic, BK III, 338a- 339a; BK iv, 352b-353d / Timaeus, 452c-454a / Thcaetettis, 535b-536a / Laws, BK II, 653a-c; BK vii, 723c-d
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK v, en 3 [i}2 a i7-22] 183a / Metaphysics, BK i, en i [98o b 25-27J 499b; BK ix, CH 2 571c-572a; en 5 573a-c; en 7 [1049*5-12] 574c-d / Soul, BK II, CH 3 [4i4 b i7-2o] 644d; [415*7-12] 645b; BK HI, en 3-8 659c-664d; CH 10 [433*8-13] 665d / Memory and Reminiscence, CH 2 [453*5-14] 695b
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK i, CH i [488 b 2o--27] 9d; BK iv, CH 9 [536 b i-8] 63a-b; BK VIII, CH i [588*1 8- b 4] 114b,d / Parts of Animals, BK i, CH i [64^5-10] 164b-c; BK ii, CH 16 [659 h 28]-cn 17 [66o b 3] 186d-187c; BK III, CH 6 [669*18-20] 197c; CH 10 [673*4-10] 201d- 202a; BK iv, CH 10 [686*25-687^5] 217d-219a / Generation of Animals, BK v, CH 7 [786 b i5- 22] 328c-d / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [io97 b 23-io98 a 20] 343a-c; CH 13 [no2 b i3-i 103*3] 348a-c; BK III, CH 2 [ini b 6-9] 357b; BK vi, CH i 2 [ii39 b i4] 387b-388b; BK VII, CH 3 [ii47 b 2-5] 397d; BK ix, CH 9 [1170*16- 18] 423d-424a; BK x, CH 7-8 431d-434a passim, esp CH 7 [ii77 b 26-i 178*8] 432c, CH 8 [ii78 b 23-3i] 433c / Politics, BK i, en 2 [1253* 7-18] 446b-c; BK VII, CH 13 [i332 B 39~ b io] 537a-b; CH 15 [1334^-28] 539b-d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH i [i355 b i-3] 594d
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 12, 173a-c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 6 110c-112b; CH 28, 134a-c; BK II, CH 8, 146a-b; CH n 150a-151b; BK III, CH 7, 183c-184a; BK iv, CH 6-7, 231d-233b; CH 7, 234d-235a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK III, SECT 16 262d- 263a,c; BK v, SECT 16 271c-d; BK vi, SECT 23 276b; BK VIIi, SECT 7 286a; SECT 41 288d; BK ix, SECT 8-9 292b-d; BK xi, SECT i 302a-b
17 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR iv, CH 2 97d-98a / Fifth Ennead, TR i, CH 10, 213d-214a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK v, CH n 216c-d; BK VII, CH 23, 256b-c; BK XH, en 23, 357d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 8 626c-627a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP 2 14b-15b; Q 7, A 2, REP 2 31d-32c; Q 59, A 3, ANS 308b-309a; Q 76, A 5, REP 4 394c- 396a; Q 78, A i, ANS 407b-409a; A 4, ANS and REP 4-6 411d-413d; Q 79 413d-427a; o 80, A 2 428a-d; Q 81, A 3 430c-431d; QQ 82-89 431d- 480c; Q 96, A 2 511b-d; Q 118, A 2, ANS 601c- 603b; PART i-n, Q 12, A 5 672a-c; Q 13, A 2 673c-674c; Q 15, A 2 682a-c; Q 17, A 2 687d- 688b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 50, A 3, REP 2 8b-9a; AA 4-5 9a-10d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvm [19-75] 80a-c; xxv [34-84] 91d-92b
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART i, 52b; 53a-b; 54a; 57d; 59b; 63a; PART II, lOOa-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 119b-d; 184a-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT iv, sc iv [32-39] 59a
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 427d-428a
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 35, 163d-164a
31 DESCARTES: Rules, xn, 19a-20d / Discourse, PART i, 41b,d; PART iv, 51d-52a; PART v, 56a-b; 59c-60b / Meditations, 71b-d; 11 77d- 81d / Objections and Replies, 156a-d; 209b-c; 226a-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART II, AXIOM 2 373d; PART in, PROP 57, SCHOL 415b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VII [499-528] 228a-b; BK VIII [369-451] 240a-242a; BK ix [549-566] 259b
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 339-349 233a-234a; 365 236a / Vacuum, 357a-358a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, INTRO, SECT i 93a-b; BK i, CH i, SECT i 95b,d-96a; CH in, SECT 12 115b-116a; SECT 17 117a-c; SECT 23 119b-120a; SECT 25 120c-d; BK II, CH vi 131b-c; en xi 143d-147b esp SECT 8-n 145b- CHAPTER 51: MAN 23 146a; CH xxi, SECT 5-6 179c-180a; SECT 15-16 181c-182a; CH xxvn, SECT 12 223a-b; BK iv, CH xiv, SECT 3-4 364d-365a; CH xvn, SECT 1-3 371c-372b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 62 478b-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, ld-2b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 337d-338c; 349b-c / Social Contract, BK i, 393 b-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 6d-8b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 150c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 164a-165c; 199c-200c / Fund. Prin. Mctaphysic of Morals, 264d-265a; 271c-d; 279b; 281c-282c; 284d-285a / Practical Reason, 303b-d; 316c-317a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 372a-b / Judgement, 465c-467a csp 466a-c; 474b-475d; 479a-d; 522b; 568c-575b esp 568c-d, 570c- 571c, 572b-575b; 584d-585c; 587d-588a; 602b,d [In i]
43 MILL: Liberty, 294a-297b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 4-5 116a-117a; 121 136c-d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 156c; 168b d; 186a; PART i, 257d- 258a; PART in, 304d-305b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 278a-b; 287a-b; 292a-294c; 296c-300a esp 297d-298a, 299b; 312a-313a; 319c; 331b-332a; 591d-592a
50 MARX: Capital, 8Sa-d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 689c- 690a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 85a b; 184a-187b csp 186a- 187a; 664a-693b esp 664a-b, 677a-686b, 691a; 873a
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 363b-364b; 367b-c; 377c-379c csp 379a-b; 384c-385c / Unconscious, 429c-d / General Introduction, 532a

4d. The general theory of faculties - the critique of faculty psychology

8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK u, CH 2-3 643a-645b; CH 5 [417*21-418*6] 647d-648d; BK III, CH 9 664d-665c
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 1-2, 167a-b; CH 4 169a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 77 399b-407a; Q 78, A i 407b-409a; A 4, ANS 411d-413d; Q 83, A 2, REP 2 438a-d
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 49, A 3, ANS and REP 2 4b-5a; A 4 5a-6a; Q 50, A 2 7c-8a; Q 54, A i 22d-23d; Q 56, A i, ANS 30a-c; Q no, A 4 350d-351d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, iv [1-18] 57c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 49d-50b esp 50b; 54b
31 DESCARTES: Rules, xn, 18b-20d / Meditations, iv 89a-93a; vi, 98d-99a; 101d-102a / Objections and Replies, 135b-c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART II, PROP 48-49 391a- 394d
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH i, SECT i 95b,d-96a; CH in, SECT 12 115b-116a; SECT 17 117a-c; SECT 23 119b-120a; SECT 25 120c-d; BK II, CH xxi, SECT 6 179d-180a; SECT 15-20 181c-183a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 8, 454b-c
42 KANT: Judgement, 461a-475d esp 466a-c, 474b- 475d
53 JAMES: Psychology, la-2a; 17b-18b

5. The order and harmony of man's powers and functions - contradictions in human nature; the higher and lower nature of man

0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:15 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 9:15
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Romans, 5-8 csp 7:15-25 / Galatians, 4-5 /James, 4:1-3
7 PLATO: Phaedo, 231b-234c / Republic, BK iv, 350a-355a; BK ix, 421a-427b; BK x, 431b-434a / Timacus, 466a-c / Laws, BK v, 686d-687c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 7 |iog7 b 22- 1098*17] 343a-c; BK VII, CH 6 [1150*1-5] 400c
12 EPIC FETUS: Discourses, BK III, en 24 203c- 210a; BK iv, CH n 240d-242d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK i, SECT i 253a; BK III, SECT 6 261a~c; BK iv, SECT 27 266a; SECT 39 267a; BK v, SECT 26 272c; BK VII, SECT 13 280c; BK ix, SECT i 291a-c; SECT 7-8 292b
17 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR iv, CH 2 97d 98a / fourth Ennead, TR iv, cti 18 166d-167b / Sixth Ennead, TR iv, CH 15, 304c-d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VIII, par 10-11, 55d; par 19-24 58b 60a; BK xin, par 12 113b-d / City of God, BK xi, CH 26-28 336d- 338d; BK xm, CH 3 361a-c; CH 15 366c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 77, AA 4-7 403a-406b; Q 95, A 2 507c 508a; PART i -ii, Q 13, A i, ANS 672d-673c; Q 16, A i 684b-d; Q 17, A 4 688d-689c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 82, A i 168a-d; A 4, REP i 170b-171a; Q 85, A i, ANS 178b-179b; Q 91, A 6, ANS 212c-213c
22 CHAUCER: Manciple's Talc [17,104-144] 490a-b
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xvm, 25a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 63a; 85b 86b esp 86b; PART II, 141a-b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 105c-107a; 161a; 162b; 326b-327b; 381b-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT i, sc iv [23-38] 36a-b / Troilus and Cressida, ACT HI, sc n [82- 106] 121a-b / King Lear, ACT iv, sc n [38-50] 270d-271a / Macbeth, ACT iv, sc in [1-132] 303b-304d / Coriolanus, ACT iv, sc vn [28-57] 384c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 207d-208a
33 PASCAL: Penstes, 106-117 193b-194b; 125-183 195b-204b; 396-424 240b-243b; 532 265a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 151b-152a 24 5a (5. The order and harmony of man** power* and Junction*: contradiction* in human nature; the higher and lower nature of man.)
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 198a-c; 205a-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, ld-2b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 337d-338d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 164a-165c / Fund. Prin. Metaphvsic of Morals, 282b-283d / Practical Reason', 292a 293b; 316c-317a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 385c-386b / Judgement, 584d- 585c; 587a-588a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 55, 174c-d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 448a-450a
46 HhGhL: Philosophy of Right, PART ii, par 139 48d-49b / Philosophy of History, PART in, 304b-306b
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [1110-1117] 27b-28a; [3217-3250] 79a-b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic1(, 204b-205a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 304a-305a; 316a- 317a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VIII, 304b-305a
53 JAMES: Psychology, la-b; 188b-191a; 717a
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 377c-382a, esp 379c-d / General Introduction, 590c-d; 592b 593b; 615c-616c esp 616b c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 640b-d / Group Psychology, 689d-690c / Ego and Id, 699a-c; 71 Ib / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 746c- 747b esp 747a / New Introductory Lectures, 830a 832c; 834 b-c

5a. Cooperation or conflict among man's powers

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:29-30; 26:41 / Mar\, 9:43-47; 14:38 (D) Marf(, 9:42-46; 14:38 / Romans, 7:18-23 / Galatians, 5:16-26 / Ephesians, 4:17-18/7 Peter, 2:11
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 128a-d / Republic, BK i, 308b 309b; BK III, 338a-339a; BK iv, 346a- 355a; BK ix, 425c-427b / Timaeus, 453b-454a; 474b-d; 476a-b / Laws, BK i, 641a-b; 649d- 650b
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK III, en 6-13 662d 668d
9 ARISTOTLE: Motion of Animals, CH n 239a-d / Ethics, BK i, CH 7 [1098*3-7] 343b; CH 13 347b-348d; BK v, en u [ii38 b 5-i3] 387a,c; BK ix, CH 4 [n66 b i2-24] 419d-420a / Politics, BK i, CH 5 [i254 a 33- b 8] 448a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 2-5 106d- llOc; BK III, CH 2, 177c-178a; CH 15 190a-191a; CH 24 203c-210a; BK iv, CH i 213a-223d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK i, SECT i 253a; BK iv, SECT 33 266c-d; BK VII, SECT 13 280c; SECT 55 283b-c; BK VIII, SECT i 285a-b; SECT 39 288c; BK ix, SECT i 291a-c; SECT 8 292b
17 PLOTINUS: Fourth Ennead, TR iv, CH 18 166d- 167b / Sixth Ennead, TR iv, CH 15, 304c-d
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK VIII, par 10-11 55c-56b; par 19-27 58b-60c; BK x, par 39 81b-c; BK XHI, par 47, 123d-124a / City of God, BK xin, CH 3, 361c; CH 15 366c-d; BK xiv, CH 5-10 379c-385d; BK xix, CH 12-14 517b-520d; CH 21, 524c-525a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 24 630c-631a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 81, A 3 430c-431d; Q 84, A 3, ANS 443d-444d; Q 91, A 3, ANS and REP i 486b-487d; Q 95, A i, ANS 506b-507c; A 2 507c-508a; Q 96, A 2 Sllb'd; PART i-n, Q 37, A i, ANS 783d-784c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 77, AA 1-2 145a-147c; QQ 82-83 168a-174b; PART II-ii, Q 29, A i, ANS 530b-531a; A 2 531a-d; PART in, Q 15, A 9, REP 3 794c-795b; PART HI SUPPL, Q 96, A ii 1063d-1064d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, iv [1-18] 57c
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 12, 503b
23 HOBBES: Jjeviathan, CONCLUSION, 279a-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 5a-6c; 36c-41a esp 39b- 40a; 159a-162c; 274d-276a; 344a-347c; 405c- 406a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard II 320a-351d esp ACT v, sc v [1-41] 349d-350a / Merchant of Venice, ACT i, sc ii [11-24] 408b-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Othello, ACT i, sc in [329-337] 212c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 347c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of learning, 72 b; 78a d
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, i 75a-77c; iv 89a- 93a csp 90b-91b; vi, 102d-103a / Objections and Replies, 155d-156a; 207d-208a; 209c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART m, PROP 1-2 396a- 398b; PART iv, PROP 7, COROL 426b; PROP 60 442d-443a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK VIII [561-594] 244b-245a; BK xi [466-543] 309b-311a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 125-131 195b; 411-413 242a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 239b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK i, 393b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 192b
42 KANT: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 282b-283d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 368d-369a / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 390b,d-394a,c / Judgement, 509c-d
43 MILL: Liberty, 293b-302c passim / Utilitarianism, 448a-450a
44 BosvvELL:/oAwjow, 135c-d; 455a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [354-521] lla-15a; 11110-1117] 27b-28a; [3217-3250] 79a-b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 311a-314b csp 312a- 313a, 313d-314b; 318d-319a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 15a-b; BK vi, 235a-238c; BK xn, 554b 555c; BK xm, 577a- 578b; BK xiv, 605b-d; BK xv, 630c-631a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK II, 39a- 40a, BK III, 53b-54b; BK iv, 95b-100c; BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK vi, 164b-d
53 JAMES Psychology, 199b-204b esp 199b-200b; 717a-718a; 734b-735a; 799a-800a
54 FREUD: Interpretation ofDreams, 370b; 379a- 380d / Narcissism, 407a-408a; 409d-410b / 5b to 6a CHAPTER 51: MAN 25 Unconscious, 433c / General Introduction, 589c-591a; 635b-c / Ego and Id, 702c-d; 704a-d; 708d-712a passim, csp 711c-d; 715b- 716c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 720a-722c esp 721d-722c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 785b [fn i); 787a-788b; 790a- 791d; 797c-799a; 800d-801a / New Introductory Lectures, 837d-839b

5b. Abnormalities due to defect or conflict of powers - feebleminded ness, neuroses, insanity, madness

5 AESCHYLUS: Choephoroe [1021-1076] 80a-d
5 SOPHOCLES: Ajax 143a-155a,c esp [1-330] 143a-146a
5 EURIPIDES: Orestes 394a-410d csp [1-423] 394a-398b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK III, 96b-98a
7 PLATO: Republic, BK ix, 416a-417b / Ttmaeus, 474b-d / Laws, BK vi, 71 2b
8 ARISTOTLE: Categories, en 8 [9 b 34~io a 6] 15a
9 ARISTOTLE: Parts of Animals, BK iv, CH 10 [686 b 22~29] 218b-c / Ethics, BK III, CH 10 Jni8 a i7- b 7]364d-365a; BK VII, CH i [1145*27- 33] 395a b; CH 3 [1147*10 19] 397b; en 5 399a-d; CH 6 [ii 49^4-1 i5o a 8] 400b-c
12 KpicrtTus - Discourses, BK i, CH 5 llOb-c; BK ii, CH 15 155c-156b
12 AURLLIUS: Meditations, BK III, SECT i 259b,d
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK VII [323-405] 245a-247b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 84, A 7, ANS 449b-450b; Q 115, A 5, REP i 590d- 591c; PART i-n, Q 6, A 7, REP 3 650a-d; o 10, A 3, ANS and REP 2 664d-665c; Q 24, A 2 727d- 728c; Q 28, A 3, ANS and REP i 742a-d; Q 31, A 7 757c-758b; Q 37, A 4, REP 3 785d-786d
23 HOBBLS: Leviathan, PART i, 66d-67b; 68b-d; 69b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 5a-6c; lOb-llb; 25c- 26d; 36c-41a; 166a-167a; 235b c; 274d-276a; 316b-c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard HI 105a-148a,c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT iv, sc v 59c-62a; ACT v, sc ii [236-255] 70b c / Othello, ACT iv, sc i [1-59] 229d-230b / King Lear, ACT iv, sc iv [1-19] 272b-c; sc vn [16-82] 276d-277c / Macbeth, ACT v, sc i 306b-307a; sc in [37- 56] 308a-b
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 347c-d
29 CLRV ANTES: Don Quixote esp PART i, la-3b, PART ii, 205a-209d
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 155d- 156a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vi, SECT 60 37d- 38a / Human Understanding, BK II, CH xi, SECT 12-13 146a-c; BK iv, CH iv, SECT 13-16 326d-328d esp SECT 13 326d-327a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 109c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 13a-14a; 214b-c; 354c- 355a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [4405-4612] HOa- 114b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 122b-124a; 136a-b; 232a-236a; 380b 381a; 388b 389a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 299c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 510b-d; 515a- 517a; 524c-527a; BK xv, 616a-617a
52 DOSTOLVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK H, 21d- 22b; BK xi, 337a-348d; BK XH, 364b-369a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 23b-26b esp 25b-26b; 32a-34a; 35b-37a; 132a-137b esp 137a; 147b- 149a; 241b-258b csp 242a, 244b, 251b-252a, 258a-b; 749a-750b; 753b-754b; 799b-807a; 818a-819a; 828b-829a
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 7a-8b / Hysteria, 35b-c; 52d-53c; 81d-86c; 97b-106c; llla-115a / Interpretation of Dreams, 176a-d; 328c; 364c-d; 370b-c; 380d-382a / Narcissism, 409c-d / Unconscious 433c / General Introduction, 558a-c; 585b 623b esp 586a-592b, 593c-595b, 600b-c, 604c- 606a, 616b-c, 623a-b; 624b-d; 627a-b; 635b-c / Group Psychology, 690a 691c / Ego and Id, 713a-715a / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 721c; 722b-723d; 728b-731d passim; 746c-748a / New Introductory Lectures, 81 2a; 830d-832a; 872a-d

6. Individual diflferences among men

    [sem referências]

6a. The cause and range of human inequalities - differences in ability, inclination, temperament, habit

0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-15; 38:24-34 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 33:10-15; 38:25-39 NLW TESTAMENT: Romans, 12:3-8 / / Corinthians, 12/II Timothy, 2:20-21
4 HOMLR: Iliad, BK xni [723-734] 95d 96a / Odyssey, BK VIII [165-185] 223d-224a; BK xiv [199-232] 262b-c
5 SOPHOCLES. Ajax [1226-1263] 153c-154a
5 EURIPIDES: Rhesus [105-108] 204a / Electra [358-400] 330b-d / Heracles Mad [632 636] 370c / Iphigenia at Aulis [558-572] 429d- 430a
5 ARISTOPHANES: Progs [1482-1499] 581d-582a
6 TIIUCYDIDLS: Pcloponncsian War, BK i, 370a-c; 383d-384a; BK III, 425b-c
7 PLATO: Euthydemus, 70c / Gorgias, 274a-275c / Republic, BK II, 316c-320c; BK III, 329c- 330a; 339b-341a; BK v, 357b 360d; BK vi, 373c-375b; 383c-d; BK VIIi, 404a-405c; BK ix, 421a-c / Theaetetus, 540c-541a / Statesman, 605d 608a / Laws, BK vi, 699d-700b; 704a-c / Seventh Letter, 809c-810d esp 810c
8 ARISTOFLE: Categories, CH 8 [8 h 25-9 R i3] 13d- 14a; [9 b 9~io ft io] 14c-15a / Posterior Analytics, BK i, CH 34 122c / Memory and Reminiscence, CH i [449 b 3~9] 690a; [450*25^12] 691a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK VII, CH i [582*5-16] 107c-d; CH 2 [583^-14! 108c / Parts of Animals, BK iv, CH 10 [686 b 22-29] 218b-c / Generation of Animals, BK i, CH 18 [725^5-726*6] 266a; BK iv, CH 3 [767*35- 26 6a (6. Individual differences among men. 6a. The cause and range of human inequalities - differences in ability, inclination, temperament, habit.) 769 b io] 308d-311b / Ethics, BK HI, CH 5 359c- 361a passim, esp [ni4 a 32- b 25] 360c-d; BK vi, CH 13 [ii44 b i-i4J 394b; BK VH, CH 7 400d- 401c / Politics, BK i, CH 5-6 447d-449b; BK III, CH 13 481b-483a; CH 17 486c-487a; BK v, CH 12 [i3i6 B r-io] 518d-519a / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 6 [i?63 b i-3] 604c; CH 9 [i367 a 32- b 8] 610a-b; CH 10 [1369*5-28] 612b-c; CH 12 [I372 b 8-i373 ft i7) 616b 617a; CH 15 [1377*6-8] 621d; BK ii, CH 2 [I378 b 28-i379 a 3] 623d- 624a; CH 5 [n82 b i9-22] 628d; CH 16-17 638b- 639a; BK III, CH 7 [i4o8 n 27~33] 659b-c
10 HIPPOCRATES: Airs, Waters, Places, par 3-7 9c-12a; par 10 13b-14a; par 12-24 14b-19a,c / Epidemics, BK III, SECT in, par 14 59b / Sacred Disease, 155d-156a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [231-322] 33a-34b
12 EPICTLTUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 2-3 106d- 108c; CH 5, HOb; BK 11, CH 15, 156a-b; BK III, CH 6, 182a-b; CH 24, 203c-206a
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, DK xi [243-295] 334b-336a
14 PLUTARCH: Pompey, 512c-d
17 PLOTINUS: First Ennead, TR HI, CH 1-3 lOa- lla / Fourth Ennead, TR iv, CH 17, 166d / Fifth Ennead, TR ix, en i 246c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 85, A 7 459c-460b; o 96, AA 3-4 512a-513c; Q 113, A 2, REP 3 576d-577d; PART MI, Q 46, A 5, ANS 815d-816d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, vn [121-123] 64a; PARADISE, vm [91-148] 117d- 118c
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK II, STANZA 5-7 22a-b / Tale of Wife of Bath [6691-6788] 274b-276a / Clerks Tale [8269-8317] 302b- 303a / Parson's Tale, par 27-28, 514b-515a
23 HOBDCS: Jonathan, PART i, 60a 61a; 61c-d; 66d-67a; 67d-68c; 71a; 84c-d; 94b-c; PART II, 112d; 154a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 17c-18c; 60a-c; 63d-64b; 71d-72b; 126b-127c; 150b-151a; 240a-c; 264b- 265a; 279b-c; 310d 312a; 317b-c; 367b-368a; 451a-c; 491d-493a; 513a-514a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Merchant of Venice, ACT i, sc i [1-104] 406a-407b; sc n [39-133] 408c-409b; ACT iv, sc i [40-62] 426a / 1st Henry IV, ACT i, sc in [1-21] 437d-438a; ACT HI, sc i [165-191] 451d-452a; sc n [93-161] 453d-454c / 2nd Henry IV, ACT iv, sc in [92-135] 492b-c / Much Ado About Nothing, ACT i, sc in [1-41] 506d-507a; ACT in, sc i [47-116] 514d-515c /Julius Caesar, ACT i, sc n [33-47] 569d; [97- 161] 570b-571a; [192-214] 571b-c; sc in [89- iii] 573c-d; ACT iv, sc i [1-40] 587a-c; sc in [1-123] 588b-589c; ACT v, sc v [68-75] 596a,c / As You Like It, ACT iv, sc i [1-20] 617a-b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT i, sc n [66-86] 32b; ACT n, sc n [307-324] 43d; ACT iv, sc iv [31-66] 59a-c / Troilus and Cressida, ACT i, sc n [19-31] 105b; [201-270] 106d-107c / Macbeth, ACT in, sc i [92-108] 295d-296a / Antony and Cleopatra, ACT n, sc in [10-39] 321c-d; ACT v, sc n [76-100] 347a-b / Cymbeline, ACT iv, sc n [2-5] 472c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 76a-78a / Novum Organum, BK i, APH 42 109d; APH 53-58 lllc-112b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART i, 41b,d / Meditations, 70b-d
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 7 173a; 97 190b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en vi, SECT 54 36c / Human Understanding, BK 11, CH x, SECT 8 142d-143a; CH xi, SECT 2 144a-c; BK HI, CH vi, SECT 26-27 274d-276a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 66 480b-c; SECT ix, DIV 84, 488b,d [fn i]
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 191b-192b; 269b- 273a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 274a-b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 2b-d passim; BK VIII, 52a; BK xiv, 102b,d~104a; BK xv, llla-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality 323a 366d esp 329a- 334a,c, 347a-b, 348b,d-363a,c / Social Contract, BK i, 387b,d-390d esp 388b-c; 394d; BK III, 411c 412c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 7d-8a; 54d- 55b; 71b-d; BK v, 340c-343d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 343c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 31b,d-32a
42 KANT: Judgement, 525c-532a esp 526a-d, 528c- 530c; 586a-587a
43 FtDERALisr - NUMBER 10, 50b-c
43 MILL: Liberty, 293b-302c passim / Representative Government, 336b-c; 346c-348c; 384a- 387d / Utilitarianism, 448a-449c; 472d-473a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 8a-c; HOd; 124d-125d; 145d-146a; 283c; 413c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 200 67c-68a; ADDITIONS, 126 137a-b / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 166b-168a; 184b-d; 196d- 199d; PART i, 222d; 250a-c; PART HI, 289b-d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [1064-1141] 26b-28a
48 MLLVILLL: Moby Dic^, 54b-55a; 59a-60b; 83a-88b; 107a-b; 117a-131a; 137b-138a; 317a- 321a; 417b-418a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 266a-271a
50 MARX: Capital, 25c-d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 15a-b; 53c-d; BK v, 215b-c; BK VII, 278c; 281a-d; 283d- 284a; BK ix, 349d; BK xi, 480a-482b; BK xni, 576a-b; 578b; BK xv, 632d-633a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov esp BK i la-15a,c, BK II, 18b-21b, 32d-37b, 38d-40b, 41c-45d, BK III, 53c-62a, 63d-64c, BK iv, 91c- 92b, 95b-100c, 105c-107a, BK v, 109a-114b, BK vii, 180a-189a, BK x, 272a-274d, BK xi, 368a-c, BK XH, 370b-372d, 373c-374b, 376b- 6b CHAPTER 51: MAN 27 d, 380d-382b, 393a-c, 395d-396a, EPILOGUE, 402a-404c
53 IAMES: Psychology, 14b-15a; 197b-198a; 201b- 202a; 274a-275a; 315a-b; 345 b; 381 a; 431b- 432a; 448a-b; 484a-496b; 686b-690a; 691a-b; 692b 693a; 759b-760b; 795b; 79 7a; 798b- 801a; 826a-827a; 856b-858a
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 18c-d / General Introduction, 594d- 595b; 600b-c / Group Psychology, 681b / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 744b- 745b / War and Death, 758d-759c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 775c-776a; 787d-788b

6b. The differences between men and women - their equality or inequality

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:26-30; 2:18-25; 3:16; 5:1-2
0 NEW TESTAMENT: / Corinthians, 11:1-16; 14:34- 35 / Galatians, 3:28 / Ephesians, 5:22-33 / Colossians, 3:18-19 / / Timothy, 2:9-15 / I Peter, 3:1-7
5 AESCHYLUS: Seven Against Thebes [181-202] 29a-b
5 EURIPIDES: Medea [263-266] 214b; [401-430] 215c-a; [1086-1092] 221b / Andromache [269- 273] 317c-d; [929-953] 323a-b / Hecuba [1177- ii 86] 362d-363a / Phoenician Maidens [193- 201] 379d / Iphigenia Among the Tauri [1052- 1066] 420c / Iphigenia at Aulis [558-572] 429d-430a
5 ARISTOPHANES: Lysistrata 583a~599a,c / Thesmophoriazusae [785-847] 609b-610b / EC- clesiazusae 615a-628d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK 11, 56c; BK iv, 153a-b; BK VIII, 275b; BK ix, 311a-b
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 89d-90a / Symposium, 157b- 158b/ Meno, 174d-175c / Apology, 208d-209a / Republic, BK v, 357b-360d; BK VII, 401b-c / Timaeus, 442d; 452d-453a; 476b-d / Critias, 480a / Laws, BK vi, 711b-d; BK VII, 720d- 721a; 721d-722d; BK VIII, 734a-735a
8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK x, CH 9 586a-c
9 ARISTOTLE : History of Animals, BK i, CH 7 [49i b 3-5] 13a; BK II, CH 3 [5oi b 20-22] 24a; BK HI, CH 20 [522*12-22] 47a-b; BK iv, CH n [538 a 22- b i5] 64d-65a,c; BK v, CH 8 [542*32- 33] 69a; CH 14 [545 b 26-3o] 72c; BK VII, CH 3 [583 b i4-29] 109b-c; BK ix, CH i [6o8*2i- b 2o] 133b,d-134a / Generation of Animals, BK i, CH 19-20 266c-269c; BK iv, CH 6 [775*5-27] 317a-b; BK v, CH 3 J783 b 8-784*io] 325c-326a / Ethics, BK VH, CH 7 [ii50 b i-4] 401a-b; [ii5o b i2-i6] 401b; BK VIII, CH 7 [ii58 b i2-29] 410c-d; CH 10 [n6o b 32-i 161*2] 413a-b; CH n [1161*23-24] 4I3c; CH 12 [1162*15-29] 414c-d / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252*26- b 9] 445c-d; CH 5 [i254 b i3-i5] 448b; CH 12 453d-454a; CH 13 [i259 b 29-i26o*3i] 454b-d; BK II, CH 5 [1264*1-7] 459d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 5 [1360* 38-1361*12] 60lb-c; CH 9 [1367*17-18] 609d; BK HI, CH 7 [1408*27-29] 659b-c / Poetics, CH 15 [1454*15-24] 689a-b
10 HIPPOCRATES: Aphorisms, SECT vn, par 43 142d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [1350- 1360] 78c-d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 16, 122b-c
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK iv [554-570] 182b-183a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus-Numa, 62d-63c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK HI, 53a-b / Histories, BK iv, 285d-286a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xm, par 47, 123d-124a / City of God, BK xn, CH 21 357a-b; BK xix, CH 14, 520c-d; BK xxn, CH 17 603a-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 92 488d-491d; Q 93, A 4, REP i 494c-495b; A 6, REP 2 496b-498a; Q 96, A 3, ANS 512a-c; Q 99, A 2 520a-d; Q 115, A 3, REP 4 588c-589c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 81, A 3 966a-c
22 CHAUCER: Wife of Bath's Prologue 256a- 270a / Tale of Wife of Bath 270a-277a esp [6612-6627] 273a-b / Clerks Tale [8808-8814] 312b / Merchant's Tale [10,110-164] 335b- 336a / TaleofMelibeus, par 14-16 405a-407b / Nun's Priest's Tale [15,258-272] 457a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 109c-110a
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK HI, 159b-d; 164d-165c; 191c-193c; 195a-196b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 84a-b; 188c-191c; 399c- d; 406a-434d passim
26 SHAKESPEARE: 3rd Henry VI, ACT i, sc iv [128-142] 75d-76a / Comedy of Errors, ACT n, sc i 152a-153b / 1st Henry IV, ACT n, sc in [105-115] 444b / Julius Caesar, ACT n, sc i [261-309] 577b-c; sc iv 579d-580b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT HI, sc i [122-157] 48b-c / Troilusand Cressida, ACT v, sc n [107- 112] 136a / All's Well That Ends Well, ACT i, sc in [62-94] 146"b-c / Othello, ACT n, sc i [101-167] 214c-215a; ACT in, sc iv [103-106] 228c; ACT iv, sc in [60-108] 236c-237a / King Lear, ACT iv, sc n [59-68] 271a-b; sc vi [109- 135] 274c-d / Cymbeline, ACT n, sc v 463a-c; ACT in, sc iv [19-35] 466d-467a; [156-168] 468b-c / Sonnets, xx 589b
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART i, 123c-124a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 84b-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK iv [288-301] 158b- 159a; [440-502] 162a-163a; [634-658] 166a-b; BK VIII [452-594] 242a-245a; BK x [144-156] 277b; [867-936] 293b-294b / Samson Agonistes [210-214] 344a; [871-902] 358b-359a; [997- 1060] 361b-362b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH VH, SECT 82 43b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 66, 480b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 29b-31a; PART in, 98b 99a; PART iv, 163 a; 166b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 30a-32a esp 30d-31a; 100b-102a; 120c-121a,c; 126d-127b; 203 b; 219a-b; 219d-220a; 235b^238d; 283b c 28 6c (6. Individual differences among men. 6b. The differences between men and women - their equality or inequality.)
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK VII, 47c; 50d; BK xvr, 116a-c; BK xxm, 189d-190a; BK xxvi, 217d-218a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 346a / Political Economy, 367d-368a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 92d-93b
42 KANT: Science of Right, 404d; 419c-420a; 436d-437c
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: AMENDMLNTS, xix 19d
43 MILL: Liberty, 311a-312a; 317c-d / Representative Government, 387d-389b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 132a; 165b-c; 312a; 312c; 391c-392a; 537a-c
46 HEGLL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 165- 166 59d-60a; ADDITIONS, 104 133d; 106-107 134a-b / Philosophy of History, PART i, 222d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [3522-3535] 86a; [3978-3985] 97a; PART II [9127-9134] 222a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 257c; 264d-265a; 372d-373c; 383b-384d; 562a-567c esp 566a- 567b; 584c-585d; 588d-589a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 51d; BK iv, 184b; BK vi, 263b-264b; BK VII, 287a-b; BK xi, 488b-c; BK xn, 543b-544a; BK xv, 639a-b; EPILOGUE i, 659b; 660d-661b
53 JAMES: Psychology, 691b-692a; 720a; 887b [fn 3 ]
54 FREUD: Narcissism, 405b-406a / Ego and Id, 705a-706a; 707d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 785a [fn i] / New Introductory Lectures, 853b-864a esp 854a-855a, 862a- 863c

6c. The ages of man - infancy, youth, maturity, senescence

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 17:15-19; 18:9-15; 21 : 1-8; 27:1 / Deuteronomy, 34:7 / / Kings, 1:1-4 (D) III Kings, 1:1-4 / /^ 3 2: ^ 9 / Proverbs, 20:29 / Isaiah, 65:20 (D) Isaias, 65:20
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 14:17-18 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 14:18-19
0 NEW TESTAMENT: John, 21:18 / / Corinthians, 13:11
4 HOMER: Iliad, BK xxm [448-499] 165d-166b; [566-649] 167a-168a; [785-792] 169c; BK xxiv 171a-179d esp [349-551] 175a-177a
5 AESCHYLUS: Agamemnon [71-82] 52d
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus at Colonus [1211-1248] 125b-c / Antigone [631-767] 136c-137d / Philoctetes [96-99] 183a
5 EURIPIDES: Alcestis [629-705] 242c-243a
5 ARISTOPHANES: Acharnians [676-718] 463a-c
7 PLATO: Laches, 31c / Symposium, 166a / Meno, 174b-175c / Republic, BK i, 295d-297b; BK II, 320c-321d; BK iv, 353b-d; BK vi, 380d- 381a; BK VII, 398c-401d/ Timaeus, 471d-472a / Theaetetus, 514b-c / Laws, BK II, 653 b-c; 655b-656c; 659c-d; BK VII, 713d-714a; 723c-d; BK xn, 796a-d / Seventh Letter, 802b
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK HI, CH 2 [117*26-34] 164a / Physics, BK VII, CH 3 [247 b i 3-248*6] 330c-d / Soul, BK i, CH 4 [408^8-29] 638c / Memory and Reminiscence, CH i [45o a 26- b 9] 691a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK 11, CH i [5oo b 25~50i a 4] 23a-b; CH 4 24a-b; BK III, CH ii [5i8 ft 6- b 2 9 ] 42c-43c; BK iv, CH 9 [536^-8] 63a-b; CH 10 [537^4-20] 64b; BK v, en 14 [544 b i3-27] 71b-c; [545^6-30] 72c; BK vii, CH 1 106b,d-108a; CH 5 [585*33]-^ 6 [585^9] lllb'd; en 10 [ 5 87 b 5-i8] 113d-114a; BK VIII, CH i [ 5 88 a 24- b 5] 114b,d / Parts of Animals, BK iv, cn 10 [686^-30] 218a-c / Gait of Animals, CH ii [7io b i2-i8] 248d / Generation of Animals, BK i, CH 18 [725^8-25] 265d-266a; CH 19 [727 n 2-io] 267a-b; BK iv, en 2 [766^7- 34] 308b; CH 6 [775*9 - ? - 8 ] 317a-b; CH 8 [776 b i5-28] 318d-319a; BK v, en i [778^0- 779 b i3l 321a-d; [780*14^10] 322b-d; CH 3 [78i b 3o-782 a 2o] 324a-b; CH 3 [783 b 2]~cn 4 [785*7] 325c-327a / Ethics, BK i, CH 3 [io 9 4 b 29-1095*12] 340a-b; CH 9 [io99 b 33-iioo } V)| 345b-c; BK III, CH 12 [1119*34^19] 366a,c; BK vi, CH 8 [ii42 n i2-i9] 391b; BK x, CLI ^ [i i74 n i-4] 428b / Politics, BK i, CH 1 3 [i 259^9- I26o a 33] 454b 455a; BK vii, en 14 [i3$2 h }6- 41] 537c-d; BK VIIi, CH 7 [i342 b i8~33] 548c / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 5 [i36i b 6-i5] 602a-b; BK ii, en 12-14 636a-638a
10 HIPPOCRATES: Injuries of the Head, par 18 69a b / Aphotisms, SECT i, par 13-14 131d; SECT n, par 39 133c; par 53 133d; SLCT in, par 3 134a; par 18 134d; par 24-^1 135a-b; SLCT vi, par 6 140c; par 29-30 141a; par 57 141d; SECT vn, par 82 144a / Sacred Disease, 157b-158b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [445- 458] 35d-36a; BK iv [1037-1057] 57d; BK v [222-234] 64a
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK VIII [152-174] 263a-b; [510-520] 272b-273a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK i, par 7-13 2c- 4c; par 30-31 8b-9a / City of God, BK xxi, CH 16 573b-574a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 77, A 8, REP 3 406b-407a; Q 96, A 3, ANS 512a-c; PART i-n, g 34, A i, REP 2 768c-769d; Q 40, A 5, REP 2 795d-796c; A 6 796c-797a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 94, A I, REP tO CONTRARY 221a-d; PART III SUPPL, Q 70, A i, REP 7 893d-895d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvi [85- 105] 77d
22 CHAUCER : Reeve's Prologue [3862-3896] 224a-b
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xxv, 36b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 53d; 60 b; 78b-c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 14c-19a 6c to Ib CHAPTER 51: MAN 29'
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 43a-c; 63d-64b; 72b-c; 74b; 156d-158a,c; 185d-188d; 339a-d; 394a- 395b; 406a-408b; 432d-434a; 535c-536a
26 SHAKESPEARE: 1st Henry VI, ACT n, sc v [i- 16] 12d-13a / 2nd Henry VI, ACT v, sc i [161- 174] 66d / 2nd Henry IV, ACT m, sc n [321- 357] 486d-487a / Henry V, ACT i, sc i [22-69] 533b-c / As You Life It, ACT n, sc VH [137- 166] 608d 609a
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT ii, sc 11 [197-209] 42c-d / Troilus and Cressida, ACT n, sc n [163- 173] 115b / King Lear 244a-283a,c esp ACT i, sc i [291-312] 247c-d, sc ii [48-53] 248b-c, [75-79] 248c-d, sc HI [12-21] 249d-250b, sc iv [258-344] 252c-253c, ACT 11, sc iv [148- 158] 260a, ACT iv, sc vn 276c-277d / Macbeth, ACT v, sc in [20-28] 307d
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 450a-b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 70b-c
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK xi [527-543)3100- 311a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en vi 36a-42a passim
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 66, 480b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 127a-128a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 352b-353b
38 MONTESQUILU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxm, 188a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 336a-b / Social Contract, BK i, 387d-388a; BK 11, 402d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 309d-310a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 79, 234c-d
43 MILL: Liberty, 271d-272a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 8b; 55c-56a; 126d; 128b; 146b-d; 360b; 381a; 407d-408a; 422c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 169d; 187d-188b; 203d-206a,c; PART i, 222d; 257c- d; PART ii, 259a-b
47 GOETHE: Faust, PRELUDE i [184-213] 5a-b; [2337-2365] 56b-57a; [4076-4087] 99b; PARTII [6685-68!8] 164a-166b; [10,331-344] 251b- 252a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 297b; 562c 563a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK III, 132b-c; 153d-154b; BK iv, 168d-169b; 171c-d; BK v, 206d-207b; BK VIII, 305b-310d passim; BK x, 391d-394d; 400c-401d; BK xn, 559d; BK xnr, 584c; EPILOGUE i, 659d-660b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK i, 7a- 8d; BK v, 117c-127b; BK vi, 167c-168a; BK x 272a-297d; EPILOGUE, 411b-412d
53 JAMES: Psychology, 206b-207a; 242a; 270a; 409a-b; 413b [fn 2]; 431b-433a; 649b-650a; 711b-717a
54 FREUD: Origin and Development of PsychoAnalysis, 15a-16c; 17b-18a / Sexual Enlightenment of Children 119a-122a,c passim / Interpretation of Dreams, 191b-193a; 238b-246b passim, esp 238c-239a, 241b-c, 243a-c / Narcissism, 400a-b; 406b-407c; 410b / General Introduction, 495a-496b; 526d-527b; 528d- 531d; 572d-576d; 579b-584d; 592c; 594d- 599d; 612d-614b / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 641d-643c esp 643b-c; 644d-645a; 651 b-c / Group Psychology, 685b-686a; 693a-c / Ego and Id, 704d-706c / Inhibitions, Symptoms, and Anxiety, 725d<726a; 738b-740c; 743a- 744a; 746c-747a; 751d-753c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 768b-d / New Introductory Lectures, 855b-863c esp 855d-858d, 860b- 861c; 869a-870c

7. Group variations in human type - racial differences

    [sem referências]

7a. Biological aspects of racial type

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK ii, 69b-d; BK III, 91b-c; 113d; 114a-b; BK iv, 128a-c; 131b-c; 143b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK III, CH 9 [517*12-20] 41c; CH 22 [523*17 19] 48c; BK VII, CH 4 [584 b 8-i5] HOb / Generation of Animals, BK ii, CH 2 [736*9-13] 276d; BK v, en 3 [782 b 30-783 tt 2] 324d-325a
10 HIPPOCRATES: Airs, Waters, Places, par 3-7 9c-12a; par 12-15 14b-15c; par 19-24 16c- 19a,c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Titus Andwnicus, ACT iv, sc n [51-127] 188b-189a; ACT v, sc i [20-53] 192c-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Othello, ACT i, sc n [62-81] 208b-c; sc in [9^-106] 210a
38 MONTLSQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xiv, 102b,d-104c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 546d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 49d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 113a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 352a- 353a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic1(, 304a-305a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 342a-359d esp 348c-350b, 356a-359d; 562d-565a passim; 573d-576d; 578a-589d esp 583b-584d, 586a, 589c-d; 591a-c

7b. The influence of environmental factors on human characteristics - climate and geography as determinants of racial or national differences

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 31d*32a; BK III, 91 b-c; BK ix, 314a,c
7 PLATO: Laws, BK v, 696d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK vii, CH 7 [i}27 b i9-38] 531d-532a
10 HIPPOCRATES: Airs, Waters, Places, par 3-7 9c-12a; par 12-13 14b-15a; par 15-16 15b-16a; par 19-21 16c-17b; par 23-24 18a-19a,c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK vi [1106- ni3]94d-95a
14 PLUTARCH: Solon, 72d / Pompey, 512c-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 279b-c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Henry V, ACT in, sc v 547a-c
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 79a-80a; PART iv, 168a-b 30 (7. Group variations in human type - racial differences. lb. The influence of environmental factors on human characteristics - climate and geography as determinants of racial or national a iff erences.)
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 203a-204a; 224a-b; 295b-296b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xiv 102b,d- 108d; BK xv, llla-b; BK xvi, 116a-120a; BK xvii, 122a-124d passim; BK xvui, 125a-129c; BK xxi, 153a-154a; BK xxin, 190c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 349a / Social Contract, BK III, 415b-4l7c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 291a-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 45d; 87d-88a; 397c-398a; 409d-412c esp 410a-411a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 220b-223c passim, esp 221b-c; 338b-c; 341b 342c; 778a [n ij
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER n, 55d-56b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 346 lllb / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 190b- 201a,c; PART i, 235c-d; 236d-237a; 251d- 252d; PART II, 259d-260a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 267a-c; 268b-269a; 343c-344a; 356b-358d; 584a-b

7c. Cultural differences among men - Greek and barbarian, Jew and gentile, European and Asiatic

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 12:1-4; 15; 17:1-18:19; 26:1-6; 27:46; 35:9-13 / Exodus, 34:1-17 / Leviticus, 26 / Deutewnomy, 7:1-8; 10:15; 14:1-2; 26:17-19; 28:1-10,58-65 /Judges, 14- 16 / Ruth I I Kings, 8:38-43,51-53; n -i- 10 (D) /// Kings i 8:38 -43,51-53 ; 11:1-10 / / Chronicles, 17:21-24 (D) I Paralipomenon, 17:21-24 / Esther (D) Esther, 1:1-10:3 / Ezetyel, 37:21-22 (D) Ezechiel, 37:21-22 / Daniel, 1:1-8
0 APOCRYPHA: Rest of Esther (D) OT, Esther, 10:4-16:24 / II Maccabees, 6:1-11; 11:22-26 (D) OT, // Machabces, 6:1-11; 11:22-26
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 10:5-6 / Acts, 15:1- 29 esp 15:9, 15:17; 16:16-24 / Romans, 2:9- 29; 3:29-30; 4:11-12; 10:12 / / Corinthians, 1:22-24; 12:13 / Galatians, 3:26-29; 4:21-31 / Ephesians, 2:11-22 / Colossians, 3:9-11
4 HOMER: Iliad, BK iv [422-445] 28a-b
5 EURIPIDFS: Medea 212a-224a,c / Andromache 315a-326a,c esp [147-244] 316c-317b, [445- 453] 319a-b, [590-601] 320b / Hecuba [1196- 1201] 363a / Iphigenia Among the Tauri 411a-424d / Iphigenia at Aulis [1395-1401] 437d
6 HERODOTUS: History la-314a,c passim, esp BK i, 12d-13b, 35b-c, BK II, 57d-58a, 61d, 69b-d, BK HI, 97d-98a, BK iv, 137a-138c, 140d-141a, BK v, 163d-164a, BK VII, 216b-d, 232d- 233d, 253b-254a, BK VIII, 264c, 287c-d, BK ix, 291c-292a, 298a-302c, 305d-306a, 308d- 310c
6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350b- d; 366a-c; 370a-c; BK II, 395d-397d; BK VIII, 589d-590a
7 PLATO: Crutyhis, 106b-c / Republic, BK iv, 350c-d; BK v, 357d-358a; 367b-368c / Statesman, 582d-583b / Laws, BK i, 645b 647c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252 b 5-9] 445d; CH 6 [1255*28-37] 448d-449a; BK III, CH 14 [1285*17 29] 483b-c; BK VII, CH 7 [i327 b i9~ 38] 531d-532a
10 HIPPOCRATES: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23 18a-c
14 PLUTARCH: Thcmistocles, 99b-c / Marcellus, 254c-256b / Flamininus, 303a-310d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 23d 24a / Histories, BK v, 295d-296a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i, CH 1-17 129d- 140b; BK iv, en 34 206d-207a,c; BK xvi, CH 1 6 433c-434a; CH 18 434c; CH 21-28 435a- 440b; CH 32, 442b-c; BK xix, en 22 525b-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 98, AA 4-5 242b-244b; QQ 102-105 270b 321a passim
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK II, STANZA 3-7 22a-b / Tale of Man of Law [4631-4644] 238a / Prioress's Tale [13,418-620] 392a- 395b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART iv, 267c-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 44b-48a; 91d-98b esp 93b-94a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Merchant of Venice, ACT i, sc in 409c 411b; ACT n, sc in 414a-b; ACT in, sc i 418d-420a; sc in 423b-d; ACT iv, sc i [386-400] 429c-d
31 DESCARTLS: Discourse, PART 11, 46b-c
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 266c-269b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xiv 102b,d-108d; BK xv, HOa-d; BK xvi, 116a- 120a; BK xix 135a-146a,c passim; BK xxi, 153a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 352b / Social Contract, BK II, 402d-403a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 99c; 179d-183a; 207b-208d; 260d-261a; 402a; 409d-410a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 32d-34c; 35b-36c; 222d-226a passim, esp 224b; 300a-c; 336c- 339b passim; 341b-343a; 508d-509d
42 KANT: Judgement, 504a-b
43 MILL: liberty, 300d-302c; 307d-308c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 351 112a-b / Philosophy of History 153a-369a,c passim, esp INTRO, 161a-c, 174b-d, 176b, 177b- 178a, 182d-183a, 183d-188b, 192a-194a, 196d- 199d, PARF i, 211a-221a, 222a 233a, 235c-d, 245d-247b, 250a-c, PART II, 276d-277a, 277d- 278a, 279c-d, PART in, 289b-d, 312c-313a, PART iv, 352a 353a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic1(, 17a-19a; 36b-46a; 60b 65a; 350b-354b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 323a-b; 571b- 577d esp 573b-c, 575d, 577b-c; 584a-b CHAPTER 51: MAN 31
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK III, 140d-141b; BK iv, 171b; BK VIIi, 309b-c; BK ix, 358b-365c passim, esp 362d-363a; BK xi, 497c-499c; 515c-521c; BK xm, 575d-577a; BK xv, 624d- 626d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 123b425c
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 882c-d

8. The origin or genealogy of man

    [sem referências]

8a. The race of men as descendants or products of the gods

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 79c-80a
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 43d-45a / Symposium, 157b-158b / Timaeiis, 452c-454a; 466a-467d / Laws, BK ix, 743a-b
12 EPICTLTUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; en 6, llla-c; CH 13 120b-c; CH 17, 123d; BK HI, en n 187a-b; CH 24, 204b-c
14 PLUTARCH: Alexander, 553d-554b
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR i, CH 5 37b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK HI, CH 4 170c
48 MLLVILLE: Moby Dic\, 345b-346b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 265d

8b. God's special creation of man

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:26-27; 2:7,18,21-23; 5:1-2 / Job, 10:8-12 / Psalms, 8:4-6; 100:3; 119:73; 139:14-16 (D) Psalms, 8:5-7; 99 : 35 118:73; 138:14-16 / Isaiah, 29:15-16; 43:7; 45:12 (D) Jsaias, 29:15 16; 43.7; 45:12 / Jeremiah, 27:5 (D) Joemias, 27:5 / Malachi, 2:10 (D) Malachias, 2:10
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23; 6:7; 10:1 15:10-11 (D) OT, Bool^ of Wisdom, 2:23; 6:8; 10:1; 15:10-11 / Ecclesiatficus, 17:1-3; 33:10-13 (D) OT, Ecclestasticus, 17:1-3; 33:10-14 / // Maccabees, 7:23,28 (/)) OT, II Machabees, 7:23,28
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 19:4 / Mar^ 10:6 / Acts, 17:24-29 / / Corinthians, 15:45 / Colossians, 3:10
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK VII, CH 29-30, 261a-c; BK x, CH 31 319b-d; BK xn, CH 10-13 348b-350d; CH 20-21, 356d-357b; CH 23 357d- 358a; CH 26-27 359a-360a,c; BK xm, CH 24 373d-376a,c; BK xxn, CH i 586b,d-587b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 22, 629b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 72, A i, REP i 368b-369d; Q 73, A i, REP 3 370a- 371a; Q 75, A 6, REP i 383c-384c; QQ 90-92 480c-491d; Q 118 600a-604b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvi [85- 90] 77d; xxv [34-78] 91d-92a; PARADISE, vn [64-84] 115d-116a; [121-148] 116b-c; xm [52- 87] 126a-b
22 CHAUCER: Monffs Tale [14,013-020] 434b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART HI, 176d; PART iv, 251a-b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 41b-c; 54b-c
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 56a-b / Meditations, in, 87d-88d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK i [650-659] 107b; BK II [345-353] 118b-119a; BK VII [139-161] 220a-b; [499-550] 228a-229a; BK VIII [452- 499] 242a-243a; BK xi [497-511] 310a-b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 6 26b-c; CH vi, SECT 56-57 36d 37a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 187d-188a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 228a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 265d; 590b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 689b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 120d-121c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 420a
54 FRLUD: General Introduction, 562d

8c. Man as a natural variation from other forms of animal life

38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 334b,d
42 KANT: Judgement, 578d-580a esp 579b-c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [8245-8264] 201a; [8321-8326] 202b-203a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 253a-287b esp 253a-254a, 255a-c, 265a-d, 284c 285c; 331a- 341d esp 341a-d; 590a-591d; 596d-597a,c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 689c- 690a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 51b-52b; 95a-98a
54 FREUD: General Introduction, 509d-510a; 562d; 591d-592a / New Introductory Lectures, 881a

9. The two conditions of man

    [sem referências]

9a. The myth of a golden age - the age of Kronos and the age of Zeus

5 AESCHYLUS: Prometheus Bound 4Qa-51d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 80a
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 92b-d / Timaeus, 444c-446b / Critias 478a-485d / Statesman, 586c-589c / Laws, BK iv, 681b-d
13 VIRGIL: Eclogues, iv 14a-15b / Georgics, i [118-146] 40a-41a / Aeneid, BK i [254-296] HOa-llla; BK VIII [306-336] 267a-268a
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 59d-60b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 51b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xiv [94-120] 20c-d; PURGATORY, xxn [130-154] 87d-88a; xxvin [136-148] 97c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK III, 143b-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 215b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Tempest, ACT n, sc i [143- 168] 532d-533a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART i, 27b-28a; PART II, 208a-c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 71d-72a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xi, DIV 106-107 499b-500b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 268c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 188c 32

9b. The Christian doctrine of Eden and of the history of man in the world

#9b(1) The condition of man in Eden - the preternatural powers of Adam
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis^ 1:26-30; 2:7-25
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:13-16; 2:23- 24 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, i :i3~i6; 2 123- 25 / Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-15 (D) OT, Becksiasticus, 17:1-13
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xi, CH 12 329b-c; BK xii, CH 21 357a-b; BK xm, CH i 360a-b; CH 13-14 366a-c; CH 23 372a-373c; BK xiv, CH 10-13 385b-388c; CH 15-17 388d-391a; CH 21-24 392b-395b; CH 26-27 395d-397a; BK xxii, en 30, 617c-618a
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 76, A 5, REP i 394c-396a; QQ 94-102 501c-527a,c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 89, A 3 200d-201d; Q 109, A 2, ANS 339c-340b; A 3, ANS 340c-341b; A 4, ANS 341c>342a; A 8, ANS 344d-346a; PART 11-11, Q 2, A 7, ANS 396a- 397c; Q 5, A i, ANS 410a-411b; PART in, Q i, A 3, REP i 704d-706a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxvm [91 1 -xx ix [56] 97a-98a; PARADISE, VH [64-93] 115d 116a; xm [31-87] 125d-126b
22 CHAUCER: Monl(s Tale [14,013-020] 434b / Parson's Tale, par 18, 507a-b 23HoBBEs - leviathan, PART in, 191b-192c; PART iv, 250c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 17d 18a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 68, SCHOL 445a-b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK i [650-654] 107b; BK III [56-371] 136b-143b; BK iv [32-538] 153a-164a esp [131-171] 155a-156a, [205-392] 157a-161a; [610-775] 165b-169a; BK v [i- 560] 175a-187b; BK vii-vin 217a-246b esp BK VIII [1-560] 232a-244a; BK ix [1-1004] 247a~269a; BK xi [45-71] 300a-b; BK xn [63-110] 320b-321b
33 PASCAL: Pens&s, 560 272b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 179d- 180c; PART HI, 304d-306a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VII, 275a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 125a~ 126a
#9b(2) The condition of man in the world - fallen man; corrupted or wounded human nature
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 3 esp 3:15-19; 6:5-13; 8:21 / Job, 5:7; 8:9; 14-15 passim; 25:4-6 / Psalms, 8; 14:2-3; 39:5-6,11; 51:2-5; 53:1-3; 103:13-15; 144:3-4 (D) Psalms, 8; 13:2-3; 38:6-7,11-12; 50:4-7; 52:1-4; 102:13-15; 143:3-4 / Proverbs, 20:9 / Ecclesiastes esp 2:18-26, 3:19, 5:16-19, 6:1-12,7:20, 7:27-29, 9:3 (D) Ecclesiastes esp 2:18-26, 3:19, 5:15- 18, 6:1-11, 7:21, 7:28-30, 9:3 / Jeremiah, 17:9 (D) Jeremias, 17:9 9b to 95(2)
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:13-16; 2:1- i2,23-24~(D) OT, BooJ^of Wisdom, 1:13-16; 2:1-12,23-25
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 15:10-20 / Marl^, 7:14-23 / John, 8:3-8 / Romans, 3:9-23; 5:12-21; 7:14-24; 8:20-23; 9:29 / / Corinthians, 3:1-4; 15:21-22 / Galatians, 3:22; 4:1-3; 5:19-21 / Ephesians, 2:1-5 / I John, 2:15-17
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xii, CH 22 357c; BK xm, CH 3 361a-c; CH 10 364a-c; CH 13-14 366a-c; CH 23 372a-373c; BK xiv, CH i 376b,d- 377a; CH 3 378a-d; CH 12 387a-b; CH 15-26 388d-396c; BK xxi, CH 12 571a-c; CH 15 572c- 573b; BK xxii, CH 22-23 606d-609a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 17, A 9, REP 3 692d-693d
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, QQ 81- 83 162d-174b; Q 85, A i, ANS 178b-179b; A 3 180b-181b; A 5 181d-182d; Q 91, A 6, ANS 212c-213c; Q 109 338a-347d passim; PART HI, Q 8, A 5, REP i 760a-d; QQ 14-15 784a- 796a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xiv [94-120] 20c-d; PURGATORY, in [16-45] 56a-b; x [121- 129] 68c-d; xvi [52-114] 77b-78a; xxvm [91- 96] 97a; PARADISE, vn [19-148] 115b-116c; xm [31-87] 125d-126b
22 CHAUCER: Monffs Tale [14,013-020] 434b / Second Nun's Prologue [15,497-552] 461b-462b / Second Nun's Tale [15,788-822] 467a-b / Parson's Tale 495a-550a esp par 18 506b-507b, par 53 S26b-527a
23 IIOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 191b-193c passim; 195d; PART iv, 250c-251b; 253b-255b passim
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK II, 81a-b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 238c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 52, 195a-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK i [1-26] 93b-94a; BK ii [496-505] 122a; [1021-1033] 133b; BK HI [167-216] 139a-140a; [274-343] 141b-143a; BK iv [304-320] 159a-b; BK VII [542-547] 229a; BK ix [780-1189] 264b-273a; BK x [103-117] 276b-277a; [229-414] 279b-283b; [585-640] 287a-288b; [720-844] 290a-292b; [1046-1104] 297a-298b; BK xi [45-71] 300a-b; [84-98] 301a; [162-180] 302b-303a; [251-262] 304b- 305a; BK xi [334]-BK xii [649] 306b-333a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 430 245a-247b; 434-435 248a-251a; 439-450 251a-253a; 560 272b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 38d
44 Bos WELL: Johnson, 482a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 14 118c-d / Philosophy of History, PART in, 304d- 306a
50 MARX: Capital, 354b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VII, 275a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK HI, 54a-b; BK v, 125a426a; 127b-137c passim; BK vi, 165b-169c
#9b(3) The Christian view of the stages of human life In the world - law and grace
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:17-44 / Lufy, 16:16-17 / John, 1:17; 3:3-8 / Acts, 10 ; 13:38- 39 / Romans, 2-8 / // Corinthians, 3; 5:17 / Galatians / Ephesians, 2:14-15; 4:17-24 / Phihppians, 3:8-10 / Colossians, 2-3 / // Timothy, i :8-io / Hebrews / I Peter, i -.1-2:10
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xm, par 49- 51 124a-d / City of God, BK x, CH 14 307c- 308a; CH 25 313c-314c; BK xn, CH 22 357c; BK xv-xvin 397b,d-507a,c esp BK xv, CH 1-3 397b,d-399c, CH 21 415b-416a, BK xvi, CH 26 438c-439a, CH 37 444b-445a, BK xvn, CH 1-4 449a-455c, BK xvm, CH n 477c-d; BK xx, CH 4 532b-c; BK xxi, CH 16 573b- 574a; BK xxn, CH 30, 618c-d / Christian Doctrine, BK III, CH 33 670b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 51, A 2, REP i 276b-277a; Q 73, A i, REP i 370a- 371a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 98 239b-245b; QQ 106-167 321a-330d; PART ii-n, Q i, A 7, REP 4 385c-387a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vn [19- 148] 115b-116c
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 53 S26b-527a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [56-415] 136b- 144b esp [130-134] 138a, [227-238] 140b; BK xi [1-21] 299a-b; [251-262] 304b-305a; BK xi [}34]-BK xn [649] 306b-333a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 560 272b; 655 292b; 699 302b J2 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim

9c. Secular conceptions of the stages of human life - man in a state of nature and in society; prehistoric and historic man; primitive and civilized man

4 HOMER: Odyssey, BK ix [105-141] 230b-c
5 AESCHYLUS: Prometheus Bound 40a-51d esp [196-256] 42b-d [442-506] 44c-45a
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 349a- 354b
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Symposium, 157b-159b / Republic, BK II, 311b-c / Laws, BK III, 663d-667b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 8 [1269*4-8] 465a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [925- 1457] 73b-80a,c
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK VIII [306-336] 267a-268a IS TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 51b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 84c-86b; 94b-c; PART iv, 267c-268a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 91d*98b esp 93b-94a; 237d-238c; 440b-443d
26 SHAKESPEARE: As You Like It 597a-626a,c esp ACT II, SC I [l-20] 603c-d, ACT HI, SC II [11-90] 609d-610c
27 SHAKESPEARE : Cymbelinc, ACT HI, sc ill 465c-466c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, CH n 25d-28c esp SECT 14-15 28b-c; CH HI, SECT 19 29b-c; CH VH, SECT 94 46a-c; CH ix 53c-54d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 2b-3a; BK VIII, 52a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-366d esp 329a- 334a,c, 362a-366d / Social Contract, BK i 387b,d-394d esp 393b-c; BK II, 398a-b; 400d- 401a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, INTRO, Ib-c; BK i, 6a-d; BK III, 163d-164a; BK v, 309a-311c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 53b-c; 86b,d-96d passim, esp 88d, 89d, 92c-d; 398d-399a; 409d-414a passim, esp 409d-410a; 566a-b; 632b-634a,c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 86d-87b
42 KANT: Pure Keason, 222b-c / Science of Right, 402c; 405d-406c; 408c-409c; 412c-414c; 433c- 434d; 435c-436b; 450d-451a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 51, 164c-d
43 MILL: Liberty, 272a / Utilitarianism, 472b-c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, HOd; 124d-126a; 164d; 204c-205a; 209a; 2Kb; 221c-d; 311b; 408d- 409a; 510b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 187 65a-c; par 194 66c-d; par 256 79d-80a; ADDI- TIONS, 126 137a-b; 129 137c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 171c-172b; 179d-182c; 188c; 196d-199d; PART i, 209b; 235d-236a; 240a-b; 243d-244c; PART II, 260b-261a; 267b-268b; PART iv, 317d-318a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 9b-23b; 136b-137a; 171b; 221b-223b; 354a
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 13c / Descent of Man, 314c-316a; 317c-d; 320a-330a,c passim, esp 323a-b, 328d-330a,c; 349b-d; 351a-355d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 421c
54 FREUD: War and Death 755a-766d passim, esp 759c-d, 763a-766c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 776c-782d esp 776c-777b, 780d- 781a; 788d-789b

10. Man's conception of himself and his place in the world

    [sem referências]

10a. Man's understanding of his relation to the gods or God

0 OLD TESTAMENT
0 NEW TESTAMENT
4 HOMER: Iliad 3a-179d esp BK i 3a-9a,c, BK II [340-447] 13b-14c, BK iv [1-183] 24a-25d, BK v 30a-39a,c, BK VIII 51a-56d, BK xiv-xv 98a-llld, BK xvi [431-461] 117a-b, [843-867] 121c-d, BK xvm [1-137] 130a-131c, BK xx-xxi 142a-154d, BK xxiv [513-551] 176d-177a / Odyssey 183a-322d 34 10* (10. Man's conception of himself and bh place in the world. 1 Oa. Man's understanding of bis relation to the gods or God.)
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [86-103] 2a-b / Persians [798-831] 23d-24a / Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c / Prometheus Bound 40a-51d / Agamemnon 52a-69d / Choephoroe 70a-80d / Eitmenides 81a-91d
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [863-910] 107b-c / Oedipus at Colonus 114a-130a,c csp [258-291] 116c-d, [959-999] 123b-c, [1751-1753] 129d / Antigone 131a-142d / Ajax 143a-155a,c csp [430-459] 146d-147a, [666-677] H8d, l74 8 - 783] 149c-d / Trachiniae 170a-181a,c csp [94- 140] 171a-b, [1264-1278] 181c / Philoctetes [441-463] 186a; [1316-1347] 193d-194a
5 EURIPIDES: litppolytus 225a-236d esp [936- 1466] 232d-236d / Alcestis [962-996] 245c / Suppliants 258a-269a,c esp [195-245] 260a-c, [734-749] 264d / Trojan Women 270a-281a,c csp [895-990] 277c-278b, [1277-1283] 280d / Ion 282a-297d esp [237-451] 284a-286c / Helen 298a-314a,c esp [711-721] 304d-305a / Andromache [1070-1288] 324b-326a,c / Electra 327a-339a,c esp [1233-1359] 338b-339a,c / Bacchantes 340a-352a,c / Heracles Mad [1301- 1356] 376b-d / Orestes 394a-410d esp [316- 347] 397a-b, [1625-1693] 410b-d / Iphigenia Among the Tanri 411a-424d esp [378-391] 414b, [57 -575] 416a, [903-911] 419a, [1435- 1499] 424a-d / Iphigenia at Aulis [1034-1035] 434c; [1279-1335] 436d-437a
5 ARISTOPHANES: Clouds [356-411] 492b-493c / Birds [1189-1266] 557c-558b; [1494-1765] 5GOc-563d / Plutus 629a-642d esp [76-146] 630a-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 7b-10a esp 9d- lOa; 12d-13b; 20b-22a;39a-d;40d-41a; BK III, 98b-c; 99a; BK iv, 124d-125a; 159d; BK VII, 217c; 224d-225a; 250b; BK VIII, 262b-c; 279d- 280a; BK ix, 309d
6 TuucYDiDES-.Peloponnesian War, BKV,506b-c
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 94a; 106b / Phaedrus, 125b- 126c / Ion, 144b-145c / Euthyphro 191a-199a,c / Apology, 206b-d / Phaedo, 222b-d / Republic, BK ii, 314c-d; 320c-324c / Timaeus, 447a- 477a,c passim / Critias 478a-485d / Theaetetus, 530b-531a/ Laws, BK i, 650a-b; BK 11, 653b-c; BK iv, 682d-683d; BK v, 686d-689c passim; BK VII, 721a-c; BK x 757d-771b
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK i, CH n [105*2-6] 148c / Metaphysics, BK i, CH 2 [982 b 28-983*5] 501a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VII, CH i [1145*15-33] 395a-b; BK VIII, CH 7 [ii58 b 29-i 159*1^] 410d-411a / Rhetoric, BK II, CH 5 [i383 a 33~ b 8] 629c-d; CH 17 [i39i a 3o- b 3] 638d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [581-660] 22b-23b; [1090-1104] 29a; BK HI [978-1023] 42d-43b; BK v [146-234] 63a-64a; [1161-1240] 76b-77b; BK vi [43-79] 80d-81b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 3 108b-c; CH 6 110c-112b; CH 12 118d-120b; CH 14 120d- 121c; CH 17, 123c-124a; BK II, CH 8 146a-147c; BK iv, CH i, 218b-219d; en 3 224b-d; CH 4, 226d-228a; CH 7 232c-235a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT i 256b,d; SECT 3-4 257a-b; SECT 11-13 258a-c; BK HI, SECT 6 261a-c; SECT 13 262c; BK v, SECT 8 269d-270b; SECT 27 272d; BK vi, SECT 40 277d; SECT 42 278a-b; SECT 44 278b-c; BK ix, SECT i 291a-c; BK xn, SECT 2 307b; SECT 5 307d-308a; SECT 23 309a b; SECT 30 310a-b
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid 103a-379a esp BK ix [77-122] 281a-282a, BK x [96-117] 304b-305a, [621- 632] 319a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 50d-51c / Coriolanus, 189a-c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 59d-60c; BK vi, 91b-d; BK xvi, 179d; 183d / Histories, BK i, 189d-190a; BK II, 235a-c
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 9, 71a / Third Ennead, TR n, CH 8-9 86c-88a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions la-125a,c passim / City of God 129a-618d / Christian Doctrine, BK i 624a*636a,c; BK II, CH 7 638d-639c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 8, A 3, ANS and REP 4 36b-37c; Q 17, A i, ANS lOOd-lOld; Q 22, A 2, REP 4-5 128d-130d; QQ 23-24 132b-143c; Q 83, A i, REP 2-4 436d- 438a; Q 103, A 5, REP 3 531b-532b; A 8, REP 1-2 533d-534b; Q 116 592d-595c; PART i-n, QQ 1-48 609a-826a,c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, QQ 49-114 la-378a,c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy esp PARADISE, i [94- 142] 107b-d, vn [19-120] 115b-116b, xix [40- 66] 135c-d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK i, STANZA 30-35 5a-b; BK III, STANZA 89 66a; BK iv, STANZA 136-155 106a-108b; BK v, STANZA 259-267 154a-155a / Knight's Tale [1251- 1274] 180b-181a; [1303-1333] 181b-182a / Tale of Man of Law 236b-255b esp [4869- 4931] 242b-243b, [5240-5253] 249b / Friar's Tale [7056-7085] 281a-b / Franklin's Tale [11,177-206] 353b-354a / Prioress's Tale 391a- 395b / Tale ofMelibeus, par 17 407b-408a / Monffs Prologue 432a-434a / Mon%s Tale 434a-448b / Nun's Priest's Tale [15,236-256] 456b-457a / Second Nun's Tale 463b-471b / Parson's Tale 495a-550a esp par i 495a-b, par 12, 503b-504a, par 52-56, 526a-528a, par 103 549b-550a
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xxv, 35a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 54b-c; 78d-83a; PART II, 113b-c; 159d-164a,c; PART iv, 254b; 260b-c; 272b-c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK iv, 265a-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 98b-99a; 208a-294b esp 209a-212d, 233a-234a, 246a-258b
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard II, ACT v, sc 11 [23-40] 346c-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT i, sc n [129-134] 32 d; ACT in, sc HI [36-96] 53d-54b / King Lear, ACT iv, sc i [30-37] 269d; sc n [46-81] 271a-b; sc vi [34-80] 273d-274b / Antony and Cleopatra, ACT n, sc i [1-8] 317d / Pericles, ACT in, sc i [1-26] 433c-434a / Cymbeline, ACT v, sc iv [1-151] 481a-482c; sc v [425-485] 488bd
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 267b-c; 408c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 80b-81a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART iv 51b-54b passim / Meditations, m 81d*89a passim; iv 89a- 93a / Objections and Replies, 122a-b; 123c-d; 142b-c; 213b-214d; 226d-227a; 229c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 25, COROL 365b; PROP 29, SCHOL 366b-c; APPENDIX 369b-372d; PART II, PROP 5 374c-d; PROP 10 376c-377a; PART iv, PREF, 423a-b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK III [80-134] 137a- 138a; BK iv [411-439] 161b-162a; BK v [224- 245] 180a-b; [506-543] 186a-187a; BK x [610- 640] 287b-288b / Samson Agonistes [373-419] 347b-348b; [667-709] 354a-355a / Areopagitica, 394b-395b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 78b-80b / Pensees, 389 239b; 425-555 243b-270a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 6 26b-c / Human Understanding, BK II, CH VH, SECT 5-6 132c-d
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 155-156 444b-d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vm, DIV 78-81 485c-487a; SECT xi, DIV 106-109 499b- 501a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, la-2b; BK xn, 85d-86a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 366b-d / Social Contract, BK iv, 435a-439c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 292d-296c; 409b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 258a; 259b-260a
42 KANT: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 278b-279d / Practical Reason, 291a-292a; 325a-328b; 334a-335c; 345c-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 383b,d-384a,c / Judgement, 502d-503a; 594d [fn i]
43 MILL: Liberty, 296b-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 392d-393a; 394a-c; 481d- 482d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 158c- 160b; 169d; PART i, 224a-225a; 236a-c; 245d- 246c; PART II, 263d-265c; 266d; 268b-271c; 280b-281b; PART in, 291b-292b; 303c-307b; 308a-b; PART iv, 322a-c; 339b-d; 349c- 350c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [354-517] lla-14b; [1810-1815] 43a; PART 11 [8582-8590] 209a
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 28a-36b; 84b-85a; 123a-b; 306b-307a; 318b; 380a-381a; 396b- 397a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 302b-303d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 50b-c; BK v, 196a-198b; 216d-218b; BK ix, 357d-358b; BK xiv, 608a-b; BK xv, 631a-c; EPILOGUE 11, 675a-676b; 680b-c; 684b-d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 54a-b; 64c-67a; BK v, 121d-137c passim; BK vi 146b,d-170d; BK vii, 177b-180a; 185a-c; BK xi, 313c-314d; 337a-346a passim
53 JAMES: Psychology, 203a-204b
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 246c-247d / General Introduction, 582a-b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 771a-b; 793c

10b. Man as the measure of all things

7 PLATO:' Cratylus, 85a-86d / Theaetetus, 517b- 532a esp 517b-c, 522b, 525a-526c, 531b-c; 534b / Laws, BK iv, 683a
8 ARISTOTLE : Metaphysics, BK iv, CH 5-6 528c- 531c; BK x, CH i [io53*3i- b 3] 580a; CH 6 [1057*7-11] 584b; BK xi, CH 6 [io62 b i2- io63 b i4] 590d-592a
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART i, 50a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 279d- 280b

10c. Man as an integral part of the universe - his station in the cosmos

7 PLATO: Laws, BK x, 767c-768c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 2 106d-108b; CH 12 118d-120b; CH 14 120d-121c; BK II, CH 8 146a-147c; BK III, CH 13 188b-189c; CH 24 203c-210a; BK iv, CH i 213a-223d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT i 256b,d; SECT 4 257b; SECT 9 257d; SECT 16 259a; BK iv, SECT 14 264d; SECT 23 265c; SECT 48 267d-268a; BK v, SECT 3-4 269a; SECT 8 269d-270b; BK vi, SECT 40-46 277d-278d; BK vii, SECT 9-10 280b-c; SECT 13 280c; BK VIII, SECT 27 287c; SECT 34 288a-b; BK ix, SECT i 291a c; SECT 9 292b d; BK x, SECT 6-7 297a-c; BK xn, SECT 30 310a-b
17 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR n, CH 14 89b-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 25, COROL 365b; PROP 29, SCHOL 366b-c; PROP 31 366d- 367a; PART II, PROP i-io 373d-377a; PROP n, COROL 377b-c; PART in, 395a-d; PART iv, PROP 2-6 425a~426a; APPENDIX, vi-vni 447c-d; xxvi 449c; xxxn 450c-d; PART v, PROP 40, SCHOL 462d

10d. The finiteness and insufficiency of man - his sense of being dependent and ordered to something beyond himself

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:26-30; 3:16-24 / Numbers, 23:19 / Deuteronomy, 8:3 / Job, 4:17-21; 9; 12-14; 2 5 / Psalms, 8; 39:4; 103:14-16; 119-120; 139:1-16; 144:3-4 (D) Psalms, 8; 38:5; 102:14-16; 118-119; 138:1-16; 143:3-4 / Proverbs, 16:33; 20:2 4 / 17:5-8 (D) Jeremias, 17:5-8 36 Wdto 10<? (10. Man's conception of himself and bis place in the world. lOd. The finiteness and insufficiency of man - his sense of being dependent and ordered to something beyond himself.)
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:14-17; 16:26 (D) OT, Bool( of Wisdom, 9:14-17; 16:26 / Ecclesiasticus, 18:7-11; 33:10-15 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 18:6-10; 33:10-15
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Luty, 4:4 / Romans, 14:7-9 /
7 Corinthians, 2-3 / James, 4:13-16 / I Peter, 1:24
3 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [86-103] 2a-b
5 EURIPIDES: Alcestis [962 996] 245c / Suppliants [195-245] 260a-c; [734-749] 264d / Heracles Mad [1301-1356] 376b-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 7b-8a; 20b-21a; 46c-d; BK II, 65b; BK III, 98b c; 99a; 103d- 104b; BK iv, 153b-d; BK VH, 252b-c; BK ix, 291bc
7 PLATO: Phaedo, 246c / Laws, BK i, 650a-b; BK VII, 721a-c; BK x, 767c-768c
8 ARISTOILP: Metaphysics, BK XIT, CH 10 [1075* i2-24]605d606a
12 RpicThrus - Discourses, BK iv, en 7 232c- 235a
12 AURLLIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT 3 257a-b; SECT 17 259b-d; BK HI, SECT 10 261d-262a; BK iv, SECT 33-36 266c-d; BK v, SECT 10 270c-d; SECT 33 273b-c; BK VII, SECT 44-50 282b-283a; BK xii, SECT 32 310c
14 PLUTARCH: Aemilius Paulus, 225b-c; 229a-c / Sulla, 370c-371b / Demetrius, 739c-740d; 744b-c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 49c; BK iv, 68d-69b; BK vi, 91b-d / Histories, BK i, 194a-c; BK II, 232d-233a; BK iv, 281a-b
17 PLO-IINUS: Third Ennead, TR n, CH 9, 87d
18 AUGUSTINL: Confessions, BK i, par 1-2 la-c; BK iv, par 15-19 23a-24b; BK v, par 1-2 27a-c; BK vii, par 16-17 48c-49a; BK ix, par 23 -26 68a-d; BK x, par 7-8 73a-c; par 33-40 79d- 81c; BK xii, par 10 lOlc; BK XHI, par 9 112c-d / City of God, BK xii, CH i 342b,d-343c; BK xix, CH 4-10 511a-516d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 38 635c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica* PART i, Q 12, A i, ANS 50c-51c; A 8, REP 4 57b-58b; Q 60, A 5, ANS 313b-314c; PART i-n, Q 2, A 3 617b- 618a; A 8 621c-622b; Q 3, AA 6-8 627b-629c; Q 5, A 3 638b 639a; A 5 640b-641a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [61-96] lOb-c; PURGATORY, HI [16-45] 56a-b; x [121- 129] 68c-d; xi [1-30] 68d-69a; xvi [52-105] 77b-d; PARADISE, vn 115a-116c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 163d-164a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 6d-10a passim; 149b-d; 208a-294b esp 213a-215b, 231d-234a, 251c- 252b, 269d-270a, 294a-b; 503b-d; 514d-515a; 520b-d; 528c-529b
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, HI 81d 89a passim / Objections and Replies, 122a-b; 214a-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, APPENDIX 369b- 372d; PART iv, PREF 422b,d-424a; PROP 2-6 425a-426a
32 MILTON: Sonnets, xvi 66b-67a / Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a<b / Mr. Cyriac\ Stunner 70a / Paradise Lost, BK vi [168-188] 200a / Samson Agonistes 339a-378a esp [164-175] 343a-b, [373-419] 347b-348b, [667-704] 354a-355a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 205 21 la; 208 211b; 227 213a; 233 213b-216a / Geometrical Demonstration, 439b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH n, SECT 3 128b-c; CH vn, SECT 5-6 132c-d; CH xv, SECT 12 165b-c; CH xxni, SECT 12-13 207a-208b; BK iv, CH xiv, SECT 1-2 364b-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, la-2b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 366b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 270, 85c; par 340 HOb-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 162a-170b; 196d-198b; PART II, 266d; 280b-281b; PART in, 304c-306c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PROLOGUE 7a-9b; PART i [652-655] 17b; [997-1010] 25b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 50b-c; BK v, 196a-198b; BK vi, 243d-250a; 262c; BK VIIT, 303a-305b; BK xiv, 605b-d; BK xv, 631a-c; EPILOGUE i, 646d-647b; 650b-d; 659c-d; 671c-672a; EPILOGUE n, 692c-694d

10e. Man's comparison of himself with other creatures and with the universe as a whole

7 PLATO: Timaeus, 447b-455c esp 452c-453c; 466a-b / Philcbus, 618c-619c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK vi, CH 7 [ii4i a 2o- b 2] 390a-b / Politics, BK i, CH 8 [1256! 5-22] 450c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK vi [647-652] 89a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK II, CH 5, 143d- 144a; BK III, CH 13, 189a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK iv, SECT 4 264a
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 915b-916a
17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH 7 69c-70a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 17, A 8, REP 2 692a-c
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK i, STANZA 31-35 5a-b; BK v, STANZA 263 154b / Tale of Man of Law 236b-2S5b esp [4610-4623] 237b, [4701-4729] 239a-b
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK III, 135b-139b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 213d-215a; 259a-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet, ACT 11, sc 11 [303-331] 43d; ACT in, sc i [122-132] 48b; sc iv [53-63] 55a-b; ACT iv, sc in [17-33] 58a-b / King Lear, ACT in, sc n 262d-263d; sc iv 264a- 266b esp [105-114] 265b / Macbeth, ACT v, sc v [16-28] 308d-309a / Antony and Cleopatra, ACT v, sc ii [76-100] 347a-b / Pericles, ACT i, sc i [41-55] 422b; ACT n, sc i [i-ii] 427b / Tempest, ACT iv, sc i [148-158] 543b
29 CERVANTES : Don Quixote, PART II, 237c; 427a CHAPTER 51: MAN 37
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 50c-51d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART 11, PROP 13, SCHOL 378a-c
32 MILTON: Sonnets, vn 63b / Paradise Lost, BK iv [411-735] 161b-168b esp [411-491] 161b- 163a, [721-735] 168a-b; BK VHI [249-559] 237b-244a / Samson Agonistes [164-175] 343a-b; [667-704] 354a-355a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 347-348 233b- 234a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxm, SECT 12-13 207a-208b; BK III, CH vi, SECT 12 271d-272b esp 272b; BK iv, CH xvi, SECT 12, 370c-371a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i 3a-42a; PART II 45a- 87b; PART iv, 172b-173a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 383a-384a; 394a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 349b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 175b [fn i] / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 271d-273b esp 271d- 272c; 274a-277b / Practical Reason, 327d- 328b; 348a-b; 360d-361d / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 373d / Judgement, 583b-c; 584d-587a; 591b-592d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 168b*d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PROLOGUE [280-292] 8a; PART i [652-655] 17b; PART ii [11,404-419] 277b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{ esp 84b-85a, 123a-b, 168a-b, 171b, 204a, 209b, 236a-239a, 313b- 314a, 318a, 319a-b, 341b-343a, 347b, 353b- 354b, 360b-361a, 363a-364a, 370b-371b, 381a, 409b-410b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK III, 156d; 162b- 164a,c; BK v, 217b-218b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 117c-127b passim
53 JAMES: Psychology, 655a-659a esp 655b-657b
54 FREUD: General Introduction, 562c-563a / New Introductory Lectures, 874a

11. The theological conception of man

    [sem referências]

11a. Man as made in the image of God

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:26-27; 5:1; 9:6
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 2:23 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 2:23 / Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 17:1-3
0 NEW TESTAMENT: / Corinthians, 11:7; 15:49 / // Corinthians, 3:18 / Colossians, 3:8-10 / James, 3:9
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK vi, par 4 36a-b; BK xin, par 12 113b-d; par 32 119a-b / City of God, BK xi, CH 26-28 336d-338d; BK XH, CH 23 357d-358a; CH 27, 359c-d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 22 629b-630a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART i, Q 3, A i, REP 2 14b-15b; Q 14, A 2, REP 3 76d-77d; Q 32, A i, REP 2 175d-178a; Q 35, A 2, REP 3 189d-190d; Q 59, A i, CONTRARY 306c-307b; Q 72, A i, REP 3 368b-369d; Q 77, A 2, REP i 401 b-d; Q 88, A 3, REP 3 472c-473a; Q 91, A 4, REP 1-2 487d-488c; Q 93 492a-501c; Q 106, A i, REP 3 545d-546d; PART I-H, PROLOGUE 609a,c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART i-ii, Q 55, A 2, REP 3 27a-d; Q no, A 4, ANS 350d-351d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, v [19-24] 112b; vn [64-84] 115d-116a
22 CHAUCER: Iroilus andCressida, BK v, STANZA 263 154b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 41 b-d
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, in, 88c-d / Objections and Replies, 214a-d
32 MILTON: Paradise Ijost, BK iv [285-294] 158b; [356-365] 160a-b; BK VII [519-528] 228b; BK xi [466-522] 309b 310b / Areopagitica, 384a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 430-431, 246b-247b; 434- 435, 249b-251a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 168b-d; PART in, 304d-305b; 310d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [486-517] 14a-b; [614- 685] 17a-18a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 790d

11b. The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 4:1-15 / Leviticus, 19:11,13-18,33-34 / Deuteronomy, 10:17-19 / Psalms, 82:6; 103:13 (D) Psalms, 81:6; 102:13 / Isaiah, 2:1-4; 45 :II ~ I 3I 63:15-16 (D) Isaias, 2:1-4; 45:11-13; 63:15-16 / Micah, 4:1-5 (D) Micheas, 4:1-5 / Malachi, 2:10 (D) Malachias, 2:10
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 13:15-17; 25:1 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 13:19-21; 25:1-2
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 5:38-48; 12:46-50; 19:19; 22:39; 23:8-9; 25:34-40 / Mar\, 12:31- 33 / Luke, 10:27 /John, 1:12; 8:41-42; 13:34- 35; 15:12-17 / Acts, 17:22-34 esp 17:24-26 / Romans, 3:29; 8:14-19; 12; 13:8-10; 14:10-13 / // Corinthians, 6:17-18 / Galatians, 3:26-28; 5:13-14 / Ephesians, 2:13-22; 3:6,14-15; 4:1- 6,25; 5:1-2 / Colossians, 3:9-14 / / Thessalonians, 4:9-10 / / Peter, 1:22; 2:17 / I John, 2:9-11; 3:1-2,10-18; 4:7-11,20-21; 5:1-2
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 9 114c-116b; CH 13 120b-c; BK III, CH ii 187a-b; CH 22, 199b-d; CH 24, 203c-204c; 207a-b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK HI, SECT 4 260b- 261a; SECT n 262a-b; SECT 13 262c; BK vi, SECT 42 278a-b; BK ix, SECT i 291a-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK XH, CH 2i-*2 357a-c; CH 27, 359d / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 22 629b-630a; CH 30 632c-633b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART II-n, QQ 25-27 501 a- 52 7a; Q 29, A 3, ANS 531d-532c; A 4, ANS 532c-533a; Q 44, AA 2-3 593d-595b; A 7 597b-598a; Q 184, A 2, REP 3 629d-630d
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 31 517b-518b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 31d-32a
44 Bos WELL: Johnson, 392b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 308a-b; 310d-311a 38 Ik/012 (11. The theological conception of man. lib. The fatherhood of God and the brotherhood of man.)
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 84b-85a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 196a-198b; 213a-218b; BK xi, 525c-526b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 117c-137c passim; BK vi 146b,d-170d passim
53 JAMES: Psychology, 887a-b
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 674c-d

11c. God incarnate in human form - the human nature of Christ

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 1:18-25; 2:11; 11:18- 19; I3--54-5 6 ; M:; 16:13-17; 17:1-9; 22:41- 46; 26:63-66; 27:26-54 / Marl^ 3:9-12; 6:2-3; 14:61-62; 15:15-39 / Lu{e, 1-2 esp 1:26 38, 2:8-12; 5:18-26; 7:33-34; 11:27-28; 22:67 70; 23:2447; 24:2-7,36-43 / John, 1:1-18 csp 1:14; 1:30-34; 5:16-47 esp 5:27; 6:42; 8:12-28; 10:22 38; 11:27; 14; 19:25-34; 20:24-21:14 / Romans, 1:3-4; 8:3 / // Corinthians, 5:16 / Galattans, 4:4 / Ephesians, 2:14-16 / Philipfians, 2:5-8 / Colossians, 1:12-20 / / Timothy, 2:5; 3:16 / Hebrews, 1:1-6; 2:14-18; 4:14-15; 5:7-8; 7:20-25 / I John, 1:1-4; 2:18-29; 4:2-3 / II John, 7-11
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK v, par 20 32d- 33a; BK VII, par 13-14 47c-48b; par 24-25 50d-51c; BK x, par 67-70 88b 89a; BK xi, par 4 90a-b / City of God, BK ix, en 15 293a- 294a; CH 17 295a-c; BK x, CH 20 311b-c; CH 22 312a b; en 24 312d-313c; en 27-29 315b- 318b; BK xi, CH 2 323a~c; BK xxi, CH 15-16 572c-574a / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 11-14 627b-628b; CH 34 634b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART i, o 51, A 2, REP i 276b-277a; A 3, REP 5 277a-278c; Q 95, A i, REP i 506b-507c; PART i-n, Q 5, A 7, REP 2 642a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART in, QQ i 26 701b,d-846d esp QQ 4-15 730c-796a, Q 26 845a 846d; PART in SUPPL, Q 76, A i, ANS 939d 941a; Q 95, A 3, ANS 1045b-1046d; A 4, ANS 1046d-1047d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxix [106-120] 98d-99a; xxxi [76-126] 101c-102a; xxxn [28-48] 102c-d; PARADISE, n [37-45] 108a; vn 115a-116c; xin [31-87] 125d-126b; xxxin [76-145] 157a-d
22 CHAUCER: Troilus and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 264 154b / Prioress's Tale [13,383-417] 391a-b / Parson's Tale, par 12-13 503b-505a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 182a*b
32 MILTON: Christs Nativity la-7b / The Passion 10b-12a esp [15-21] lOb-lla / Upon the Circumcision 12b 13a / Paradise Lost, BK III [56- 415] 136b-144b esp [238-241] 140b, [281-343] 141b-143a; BK xi [22-36] 299b 300a; BK xn [355-465] 327a-329a
33 PASCAL: Pens&s, 512 262a; 553 268a-270a; 763-765 322a; 785 325b; 862 342b-343a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 308a-b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 134a-161a,c esp 134a-138a; 230d-231a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 306b 307b; 308a-b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127a-137c

12. Man as an object of laughter and ridicule - comedy and satire

5 ARISTOPHANES: Acharnians 455a-469a,c / Knights 470a-487a,c / Clouds 488a-506d / Wasps 507a-525d / Peace 526a-541d / Birds 542a-563d / Frogs 564a-582a,c / Lysistrata 583a-599a,c / Thesmophonazitsae 600a-614d / Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d / Plutus 629a-642d
7 PLATO: Phaedo, 237b-c / Phtlebiis, 629a-630c
12 Luciiii'iius - Nature of Things, BK III [978 1052] 42d-43c; BK iv [1073-1191] 58a-59d; BK v [1007-1010] 74b
14 PLUTARCH: Antony, 774a-b
22 CHAUCER: Miller's Prologue 211a-212b / Miller's Tale 212b-223b / Reeve's Prologue 224a- 225a / Reeve's Tale 225a-232a
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH XVH, 24a-c; CH xvin 25a-26a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 59b-c; 63c
24 RABELAIS: Gaigantua and Pantagruel
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 6d 10a passim, esp 6d- 7a; lOb-llb; 42a-b; 145d-147b; 159a-162c; 165c-167a; 168d~169a; 208a-295a csp 213a- 219a, 231d234a, 251c-252b; 300d-301c; 308c-d; 326b-327b; 388c-395b; 424d-426b; 478c-482b; 538a-543a,c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Comedy of Errors 149a-169d / Tamng of the Shrew 199a-228a,c / Love's Labour's Lost 254a-284d / Midsummer -Night's Dream 352a-375d / 1st Henry IV, ACT 11, sc iv [510-550] 449a-c / 2nd Henry IV, ACT iv, sc in [92-135] 492b-c / Much Ado About Nothing 503a-531a,c / As You Life It 597a-626a,c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Twelfth Night la-28d / Merry Wives of Windsor 73a-102d / Troilus and Cressida, ACT n, sc in [1-82] 115d-116c / All's Well That Ends Well, ACT iv, sc in [76 87] 164c / Measure for Measure, ACT n, sc n [no123] 183b; ACT in, sc 11 [234-245] 191d-192a; [275-286] 192b / King Lear, ACT in, sc n [80- 95] 263d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver 3a-184a esp PART u, 71a-76b, PART iv 135a-184a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy 191a-556a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 59c-d; 173b-c; 186c- 189a,c; 205a-c; 274a-b; 275d-276a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxv, 208d- 209a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PRELUDE [109-132] 3b-4a; PROLOGUE [280-292] 8a; PART i [1202-1209] 30a; [1868-2054] 44b-48b; [3251-3344] 79b- 81b; PART ii [4917-4922] 122a; [5061-5064] 13 CHAPTER 51: MAN 39 125a; [5457-5470] 134b-135a; [6956-6966] 170b

13. The grandeur and misery of man

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 1:26-30; 3:17-19; 11:1- 9/77 Samuel, 14:14 (D) II Kings, 14:14 /
7 Chronicles, 29:15 (D) 7 Paralipomenon, 29:15 / Job esp 3:1-26, 5:7, 7:1-21, 14:1-12, 15:14-16, 21:23-26, 25:4-6, 29:1-30:31 / Psalms, 8:4-8; 39:4-6,11; 49:12-14; 51:2-5; 89:47-48; 103:13-16; 144:3-4 (D) Psalms, 8:5-9; 38:5-7,11-12; 48:13-15; 50:4-7; 88:48- 49; 102:13-16; 143:3-4 / Ecclesiastes passim / Isaiah, 40:6-8 (D) Isaias, 40:6-8
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 9:1-3,13-16; 10:1-2 (D) OT, BooJ( of Wisdom, 9:1-3,13- 16; 1 0:1-2 / Ecclesiasticus, 8:7; 10:9-11; 14:17- 19; 17:1-4,30-32; 40:1-11 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 8:8; 10:9-13; 14:18-20; 17:1-4,29-31; 40:1-11
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Romans, 7:21-25 / Hebrews, 2:6-8 /James, 4:14 / 1 Peter, 1:24
4 HOMER: Iliad, BK vi [144-151] 41c; BK xvn [420-455] 126b-d
5 AESCHYLUS: Prometheus Bound [442-506] 44c- 45a
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [1186-1195] HOb-c; [1524-1530] 113c / Oedipus at Colomis [1211-1248] 125b-c / Antigone [332-375] 134a-b / Trachimae [94-140] 171a-b
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [195-245] 260a-c; [734- 749] 264d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Kirds [685-692] 551b-c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 2b; 7b-8a; 20b- 21a; BK v, 160c-d; BK VII, 224d-225a; 252b-c; BK ix, 291b-c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 322a-b / Timaeus, 476a-b / Laws, BK vi, 704b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [1-61] 15a-d; BK III [31-93] 30b-31b; [1053-1075] 43c-d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, en 3-4 108b- HOa; CH 24 129a-d; CH 28 133b-134d; BK II, en 16 156b-158d; BK III, CH 22 195a-201a; CH 24 203c-210a
17 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR in, CH 3 93d-94c / Fourth Ennead, TR in, CH 8 145d-146d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK ix, CH 14-15 293a-294a; BK XH, CH i, 343a-c; BK xm, en 10 364a-c; BK xix, CH 4-10 511a-516d; CH 20 523d-524a; CH 27 529a-d; BK xxi, CH 15 572c-573b; BK xxn, CH 22-24 606d-612a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xxvi [49-142] 38c-39c
22 CHAUCER: Knight's Tale [1303-1333] 181b- 182a / M on1(s Prologue 432a-434a esp [13,971- 996] 433b-434a / Monffs Tale 434a-448b esp [13,997-14,004] 434a, [14,679-684] 446b-447a
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART i, 76c-d; 79c-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 149b-d; 381 b-c; 528c- 529b
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard II 320a-351d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Hamlet 29a-72a,c / Troilusand Cressida 103a-141a,c / King Lear 244a-283a,c / Timon of Athens 393a-420d / Henry VIII, ACT in, sc n [350-372] 572c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 49b
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK II [496-505] 122a; BK xi [466-529] 309b-310b / Samson Agonistes [164-175] 343a-b; [667-709] 354a-355a
33 PASCAL: Pensees, 72 181a-184b; 103 192b- 193a; 125-183 195b-204b; 195 209b-210b; 199 210b; 351 234a; 366 236a; 386 239a; 397-424 240b-243b; 430-431 245a-247b; 434-435, 249a-251a; 443 251b; 510-511 261b; 513-517 262a-263b; 524-555 264a-270a; 693, 301b
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 383a-384a; 394a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 337d-338c; 363a-366d / Social Contract, BK i, 393 b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 633d-634a,c
42 KANT: Practical Reason, 300a-d; 321b-329a esp 327d-328d; 345a-347a; 360d-361d / Judgement, 584d-586a; 587a-588a; 591b-592d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 58b-c; 94d-95d; 102a-b; 102d-103a; 312b; 362c-363a; 401a-b; 540b- 542a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 39 21d; PART in, par 358 113c; ADDITIONS, 22 120c-d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 165a- 170b; PART II, 280b-281b; PART in, 285a-b; 304c-306c; 310d
47 GOLTHE: Faust esp DEDICATION ^J-PRELUDE [78] la-3a, PROLOGUE [280 -292] 8a, [300-329] 8b-9a, PARTI [354-517] lla-14b, [606-807] 16b ' 21a, [1064-1117] 26b-28a, [1178-1237] 29b- 30b, [1544-1571] 37b-38a, 11583-1706] 38b- 41a, [1765-1815] 42a-43a, [1851-1867] 44a-b, [3217-3250] 79a-b, [MB 1 -^^^] 84a-b, [4405- 4612] 110a-114b, PART II [8094-8131] 197a- 198a, [9695-9944] 235a-241b, [11,219-272] 273a-274a, [11,384-419] 277a-b, [11,573-603] 281b-282a, [11,934-12,111] 290b-294b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 54b-55a; 59a-60b; 84b-85a; 88b-91a; 107a-b; 313a-314a; 318a; 343a; 403a-b; 418a-4l9a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 597a,c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace esp BK vi, 235a- 238c, 243d-250a, 262c-263a, BK VII, 294b 4 BK VIII, 303a-305b, 311a-313a, BK ix, 355c- 358b, BK x, 430a-b, 439b-440a, BK xi, 514c-d, BK xiv, 605b-d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK III, 54a-b; BK v, 127b-137c
54 FREUD: Interpretation of Dreams, 246c-248c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 654a-c / Civilization and Its Discontents 767a-802a,c esp 771c- 776b, 778d-779a, 799a-802a,c / New Introductory Lectures, 853a-b <ref_end>


ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty ofthe Western Wor

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divid

I. Works by authors represented in this collectio

II. Works by authors not represented in this colle

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of t

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapt

AQUINAS, Summa Theo

L PLUTARCH. "That Brute Beasts Make Use of Rea- DANTE. Convivio (Th

son," in Moralia CH 23-28 AUGUSTINE. On Nature and Grace F. BACON. "Of Natur
AQUINAS. Quaestiones Disputatac, De Veritate, Q 18 Age," in Essays

e ANIMAL 1c-1c(2); ILL 6c. ee ELEMENT 5f; MATTER er sciences, see KNOWLmparisons
of ANIMAL 1c(i)-1c(2), i-1a, 1c, D MANY 35); 6b-6c; and for the MIND 4b. n of
human abplace of women in 1c; TIME 8b; and for see ANIMAL 10; EVOLUrogress of
historic man, vil society, see LAW 4b; as a social animal, see sin, and of the
condition ; SIN 3-3c; VIRTUE AND life on earth and T 5d; SIN 6c-6e. ONE AND MANY
6c. ; world, and his relation ld, but relevant to the ed into two groups: n.
ction. he works cited, consult er of The Great Ideas. logies PART H-II, QQ 161-
e Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE, e in Men," "Of Youth and

CHAPTER 51: MA

HOBBES. The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic

The Whole Art of Rhetoric. BK n, CH 14-

.

'9

KANT. Anthropologie J. S. MILL. A System of Logic, BK vi, CH 3-4 FREUD. An
Outline of Psychoanalysis

II.

THEOPHRASTUS. The Characters CICERO. De Finibus (On the Supreme Good), iv-v
HORACE. Satires SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against the Logicians, BK i

(Concerning Man) BOETHIUS. Contra Eutychen (A Treatise

Against

Eutyches and Ncstorius) ERIGENA. De Divisione Naturae, BK iv IBN GABIROL. The
Improvement ofthe Moral Qualities

ABAILARD. Ethics (Scito Teipsttm) BONAVENTURA. Breviloquium, PART n (9-1 1), iv
PETRARCH. On His Own Ignorance ALBO. The Book of Principles (Sefer ha-lkarmi),
BK in, CH 1-7

NICOLAS OF CUSA. De Docta Ignorantia, BK in G. Pico DELLA MIRANDOLA. Oration on
the Dignity of Man

LUTHER. A Treatise on Christian Liberty The Magmfaat

.

ViviiS. A Fable About Man

CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK i, CH 15; BK n, CH 1-3

BEN JONSON. Every Man in His Humour MOLIERE. Le misanthrope (The Man-Hater)

MARVELL. Dialogue Between the Soul and the Body

DiiFot. Robinson Crusoe

POPE. Essay on Man LAMLITRIE. Man a Machine

BUH ON. "On Man," m Natural History J

HARTLEY. Observations on Man, His Frame, His Duty and His Expectations

FERGUSON. An Essay on the History of Civil Society, PART i, SECT i-iv

VOLTAIRE. Candide

. "Contradictions," "Man, Woman," in A

Philosophical Dictionary

. The Huron, or Pupil of Nature (L'ingenue)

GOLDSMITH. The Deserted Village HELVTIUS, A Treatise on Man KAMES. Sketches of
the History of Man BENTHAM. An Introduction to the Principles of Morals and
Legislation, CH 7

J. G. FICHTE. The Dignity of Man .Addresses to the German Nation, iv-vin

SCHLEIERMACHER. The Christian Faith, par 60-6 1

N 41 D. STEWART, Elements of the Philosophy of the

Human Mind, PART in, CH 2

.

Philosophy of the Active and Moral Powers of

Man GOGOL. The Overcoat KIERKEGAARD. Either/Or

.

Concluding Unscientific Postscript

. The Sickness Unto Death SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL i,

BK IVJ VOL III, SUP, CH 31-32

. On Human Nature COMTE. System of Positive Polity, VOL iv, Theory of

the Future of Man, CH i, 3-4 LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK iv, CH 4-5; BK vi, CH 2, 4-5
RENOUVIER. Essais de critique generale, n, PART i T. H. HUXLEY. Man's Place in
Nature

. Methods and Results, vn G ALTON. Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
Development

MEREDITH. Earth and Man C, S. PEIRCE. Collected Papas, VOL vi, par 238-271
WUNDT. Outlines of Psychology, (20-21) ROYCE. The World and the Individual,
SERIES n (6-7) SANTAYANA. Reason in Common Sense, CH 12 MARK TWAIN. What Is Man?
FRANCE. Pengu in hland UN AMU NO. The Tragic Sense of Life JUNG. Two Essays on
Analytical Psychology .

Psychological Types

SHAW. Bacl( to Methuselah BUBLR. I and Thou CHESTERTON. The Everlasting Man B.
RUSSL.LL. What I Believe, en i FRAZLR. The Golden Bough, PART i; PART vi, NOTE
(The Crucifixion of Christ); PART vn

Man, God, and Immortality, PART i-n

. SPEARMAN. The Abilities of Man J. S. HALDANL. The Sciences and Philosophy,
LECT vi-x

M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK n, CH 4 JASPERS. Man in the Modern Age
BLONDEL. V action DEWEY. Human Nature and Conduct freedom and Culture, CH 2

. MARITAIN. Ransoming the Time, CH i NIEBUHR. The Nature and Destiny of Man J.
S. HUXLEY. Evolution, the Modern Synthesis, CH 10 T. S. ELIOT. Pour Quartets
CASSIRER. An Essay on Man LUBAC. Surnaturel WEISS. Nature and Man SARTRE.
Existentialism KEITH. A New Theory of Human Evolution WIENER. Cybernetics VON
WEIZSACKER. The History of Nature