Chapter  53:  MAT INTRODUCTION we came out of the church," says AkTER Roswcll in
his  Life  ofJohnson,  "we  stood  talking  foi  some  time  together  of Bishop
Berkeley's  ingenious  sophistry  to  prove the nonexistence of matter, and that
everything  in  the  universe  is  merely  ideal.  1 obseived that though we are
satisfied his doctrine is not tiue, it is impossible to refute it. I shall never
forget  the  alacrity with which Johnson answeicd, striking his foot with mighty
fotte  against a large stone, till he rebounded from it, T lefule it thus.'" But
Berkeley's  argument  anticipated  Dr.  Johnson's style of refutation. "I do not
argue,"  he  says, "against the existence of any one thing that we can apprehend
either  by sense or reflexion. That the things 1 see with my eyes and touch with
my  hands  do exist, icallv exist, I make not the least question. The only thing
whose  existenc  e  I  deny  is that \\hkchphtlosophers call Matter 01 corporeal
substance.  And  in  doing this there is no damage clone to the rest of mankind,
who,  1  dare  say,  will  never  miss  it/' The rest of mankind does need to be
instructed,  however,  that  when  they  use  the  word  "matter," they speak of
nothing.  They  may  from  careless habit suppose they arc referring to the most
obvious  something  there  is  in  the world the solid, massy, concrete stulf of
which  tangible, visible, movable, and moving things aic made. Of them, Berkeley
would  ask  how  they  know  such stuff exists. It is not itself perceptible. We
perceive  a  variety of qualities colors, shapes, temperatures, textures, sizes,
or  extensionsbut  these,  Berkeley argues, have their being in being perceived.
Even if certain of these sensible qualities, sometimes called "primary," such as
figuie,  size,  or  weight,  arc  supposed to belong to bodies when they are not
actually  being  sensed,  they  are  not  matter, but only Us properties. Matter
itself  is not sensible. Those 63 TER who assert its existence postulate it as a
substratum  or  support  for the sensible qualities they perceive. The question,
therefore,  is  whether  such  a  substratum  is  a  necessary or an unnecessary
hypothesis.  Berkeley  does  not  deny  the  existence of beings which cannot be
directly  sensed. He affirms the existence of the human spirit or mind, of minds
other  than  his ok\n, and the spiritual being of God. These must be inferred to
exist  in  order  to  explain  the  phenomena of our sensible experience and the
experience  of  our  own  activities  in  thinking,  imagining,  willing. If, in
addition,  the  existence  of  matter  or a material substance were necessary to
explain  the  phenomena, Berkeley would not object to affirming its existence by
inference,  even  if  it  could  in  no  way be directly perceived. His argument
therefore  involves,  first, a denial of Locke's distinction between primary and
secondary  qualities.  Supposing  it to be generally agreed that colors, sounds,
odors  have  no  actual  existence except in the perceiving mind, he denies that
perceptible  figure,  size,  or motion can exist otherwise. "It hakmg been shown
th.it  none eA en of these can possibly exist otherwise than in a Spirit or Mind
which  perceives  them,  it follows that we have no longer any reason to suppose
the  being  of  Matter." Matter is not needed as a substratum or support for the
qualities  we  peiceive.  This  is  the second mam point in Berkeley's argument.
"Though  we  give  the  materialists  their  external  bodies, they by their own
confession  are never the nearer k'.owmg how our ideas are produced ; since they
own  themselves unable to comprehend in what manner body can act upon spirit, or
how  it  is possible it should imprint any idea in the mind. Hence it is evident
that  the production of ideas or sensations in our minds can be no reason why we
should  suppose  Matter  or  64  THE GREAT I corporeal substances, since that is
acknowledged to remain equally inexplicable with or without this supposition."

BERKELEY'S  ARGUMENTS  against  matter,  which  occupy  the  greater part of his
Principles of Human Knowledge, may not have the same force when they are applied
against  different  theories  of  matter. Berkeley seems to regard his attack on
materialism  as  the  refutation of an error at the root of skepticism, atheism,
and  irreligion.  He  also  thinks  materialism  creates  difficulties  for  the
sciences.  But  are  all  affirmations  of  matter  to  be  lumped  together  as
materialism in the same senseTh Are Aristotle, Plotinus, Descartes, Spinoza, and
Locke  materialists  in  the  same sense as Lucretius, Hobbes, and perhaps Marx?
Does  it  make  no  difference  whether  bodies  are  said  to  be the only real
existences,  or  whether,  in  addition  to  bodies,  immaterial  substances  or
spiritual  beings are also said to exist ? Does it make no difference how matter
is conceived whether as a self-subsistent substance in its own right, capable of
existing  apart  from  any qualities except extension and motion which belong to
its  very  essence,  or  merely as one factor in the constitution of bodies, the
factor  of  potentiality which, as will be presently explained, has no existence
apart from the forms which actualize it? Are skepticism, atheism, and irreligion
to  be  associated  with  all  affirmations  of matter, in view of the fact that
theologians like Augustine and Aquinas seem to think that a sound view of matter
supports  the  truths  of religion against the errors of the materialists? There
seem  to  be,  in  short,  three  distinct positions to which Berkeley's blanket
denial of matter stands opposed. The diametrically opposite view seems to be the
blanket denial of anything except bodies, or of anything which cannot be reduced
to  a property or function of matter. The atomism of Lucretius, discussed in the
chapter  on  ELEMENT, may be taken as representative of this view, though Engels
would  insist  that  materialism  can  be  dialectical  rather than atomistic or
mechanical.  Between  the  two extremes, there appear to be two middle positions
which  are  alike insofar as both affirm the immaterial as well as the material.
Although they are alike in asserting the existence of spiritual substances, they
may,  of  course,  define the nature of these immaterial things differently, and
differently interpret their relation to the realm of matter. But, as theories of
matter,  their  principal  difference consists in the way in which they conceive
the being of bodies, material substances, or the bodily mode of substance.

In the conceptions of Descartes and Locke, for example, it is matter which gives
actuality to sensible bodies. We have "no other idea or notion of matter," Locke
writes,  "but  something wherein those many sensible qualities, which affect our
sense,  do subsist." The entire substance of sensible bodies consists of matter.
All  their  properties  derive  from the essence or nature of matter. But in the
conceptions of Aristotle and Plotinus, bodies would not exist at all if theywere
composed  only  of  matter, for matter is no more than a capacity for being, not
something  which  by  itself actually is. Sensible bodies derive their being and
all their attributes from the forms which matter assumes when its potentialities
are  actualized. Matter totally devoid of form is not the nothing Berkeley calls
it, but it is so near to nothing that Plotinus says it is "more plausibly called
a  non-  being  ...  a  bare  aspiration  towards  substantial existence." These
theories  of  matter or corporeal being seem to be as contrary to one another as
together  they  are  contrary to Berkeley's doctrine. Yet each of the two middle
positions  leans  toward  one of the opposite extremes. The conception of matter
seems  to  be  very  much  the same in the complete materialism of Lucretius and
Hobbes  and  in  the  view of Descartes, Spinoza, and Locke. In the former, only
bodies  exist. In the latter, bodies do not comprise the whole of existence, but
matter  is  the  whole  substance of bodies. The separation of body and mind, or
matter  and  spirit,  into  distinct  substances,  or modes of substance, leaves
matter  the  same  kind  of stuff that it is in a world which admits of no other
reality.  Atomism,  furthermore, may be common to both theories, at least to the
extent  that  it  is  held  that  the complex bodies we perceive are composed of
minute and insensible particles. Unlike Lucretius, Locke may not insist upon the
absolute  indivisibility of the particles, or upon the eternity of the uncreated
atoms  of  matter;  CHAPTER  53:  M  but he, like Hobbes and Newton, carries the
division  of  the familiar bodies of sense-experience down to parts which cannot
be  perceived and yet have, in a way, a more ultimate reality as units of matter
than the complex bodies they constitute.

"Had  we  senses acute enough to discern the minute particles of bodies, and the
real  constitution  on  which their sensible qualities depend," Locke writes, "I
doubt  not but that would produce quite different ideas in us; and that which is
now  the yellow color of gold, would then disappear, and instead of it we should
see  an  admirable texture of parts, of a certain size and figure." At the other
extreme,  Berkeley's  complete denial of matter has less in common with the view
of  Aristotle,  Plotinus,  Augusline,  and Aquinas than the theoiy of Descartes,
Spinoza,  and Locke has with the materialism of Lucretius and Hobbes. They would
appear to be close enough, for one seems to hold that matter is almost non-being
and  the  other  that matter is simply nothing at all. But where Berkeley denies
any role to matter, Aristotle and those who take his view affirm matter to be an
indispensable  factor  in  the  constitution  of  physical  things.  They do not
question  the  reality  of bodies or their existence apart from mind. On both of
these  points  they  are  as  opposed  to Berkeley as they would be if they were
complete materialisls. Nevertheless they lean toward Berkeley rather than toward
the other extreme in one respect. Where Berkeley denies the existence of matter,
they deny its substantiality.

Where  Berkeley  says  matter  has no being, they say it has the lowest grade of
being on the very verge of not beingTh

IN SPITE OF ALL the differences noted, the idea of matter has a certain constant
meaning  throughout the tradition of the great books. It is generally associated
with  the  idea  of quantity, and especially the basic magnitudes, such as time,
space,  and  mass.  Sometimes  it  is  said that the essence of matter itself is
extension;  sometimes  that  bodies  not  matter  itself  have  the  property of
tridimensionality.  But  in  either  case  that  which  is  or  has matter in it
necessarily  occupies  space. The manner of that occupation is also gener- ATTER
65  ally  agreed  upon.  Two  bodies or two distinct quantities of matter cannot
occupy  the  same  place at the same time. A body may not be impenetrable in the
sense  of  being indivisible, but so long as it remains the whole that it is, it
offers  resistance  to  other bodies tending to move into the place it occupies.
There  is  another connection between matter and quantity. To those who ask what
makes  two  otherwise  identical things two in number or what is involved in the
merely  numerical  difference  of  things alike in every other respect the usual
answer  is  in  terms  of  matter.  Matter  is  traditionally  spoken of as "the
principle  of  individuation."  Aquinas,  for example, holds that angels, unlike
physical  substances,  cannot differ from one another as do numerically distinct
individuals.  Because they are immaterial, they can differ only as do species or
kinds.  "Such  things  as  agree  in species," he writes, "but differ in number,
agree  in  form,  but are distinguished materially. If, therefore, the angels be
not composed of matter and form, it follows that it is impossible for two angels
to  be  of  one  species; just as it would be impossible for there to be several
whitenesses  apart,  or  several  humanities, since whitenesses are not several,
except  in so far as they are in several substances." The way in which matter is
related to individual differences can be exemplified in works of art. Two coins,
stamped  out  of  the same kind of matter by the impression of the same die, may
differ  in no other discernible respect than that they are two of the same kind.
Their  ttvoness  seems to be somehow related to the fact that each consists of a
distinct  quantity  of  matter. But it may be asked how two units of matter have
the  distinction  of being two while they differ in no other respect. One answer
to this difficult question is that their distinction consists in their occupying
different  places.  In the Platonic theory of the origin of many particulars all
participating  in the same form, diversity of place seems to play the role which
matter  plays  for  Aristotle  and  Aquinas. Plato's doctrine of the receptacle,
which  is  discussed  in  the  chapter  on  FORM,  is  sometimes  interpreted by
conceiving  the  receptacle  as space, and sometimes by conceiving it as matter.
The  receptacle,  it is said in the Timaeus, is that which, "while receiving all
things,  never 66 departs at all from her own nature and never in any way, or at
any  time,  assumes a form like that of any of the things which enter into her."
This,  according  to  Plotinus,  means  that  "its  one  form  is  an invincible
formlessness.'*  But  Plotinus,  who combines Plato's doctrine of the receptacle
and  the forms with Aristotle's theory of potentiality and actuality, holds that
it  is matter, not space, which is "the receptacle and nurse of all generation."
He  says  that  "recipient and nurse" is a better description of matter than the
term  "mother,"  for that term "is used by those who think of a mother as matter
to the offspring, as a container only, giving nothing to them." In his own view,
matter  is  more  than  space  or  mere  receptivity. He is willing to admit the
"parallel  with  motherhood"  only  to  the  extent that "matter is sterile, not
female to full effect, female in receptivity only, not in pregnancy."

TRADITIONALLY, the distinction between universal and particular is understood as
a  distinction between the intelligible and the sensible. This indicates another
traditional  meaning  of matter or the material. The realm of sensible things is
the  realm  of  bodies.  But  the atoms which are the elementary bodies are also
usually   called  "insensible  particles  of  matter."  This,  however,  can  be
interpreted  to  mean,  not  that  a definite material mass or bulk is in itself
absolutely  intangible  or  imponderable, but that, because of the limitation in
our senses, it is imperceptible to us. On this interpretation it would then seem
possible  to  say that all bodily existence is sensible existence. But if we ask
about  the  sensibility  of  matter itself,rather than of bodies large or small,
questions  arise  which  are  more  difficult  to solve.On one theory of matter,
matter  devoid of form is as insensible as it is unintelligible, yet forms which
are  not  material,  that  is,  not  in  matter,  are  also  insensible  but not
unintelligible.   On   the   contrary,  they  are  regarded  as  more  perfectly
intelligible than embodied forms.

How,  then,  does  matter  which  is  itself insensible cause the forms which it
assumes  to  become  sensible  when they are materialized ? The theory of matter
which does not regard it as a co-principle with form seems to be confronted with
a different problem of sensibility.

AS  It  is  supposed  that  some  of  the qualities which we sense in bodies are
actually  in  them whether we sense them or not such properties as size, figure,
weight,  motion.  Other sensible qualities, such as colors, odors, temperatures,
or  sounds,  are  supposed  to  be  effects  produced by the motions of material
particles acting on the sensitive apparatus of animals. This distinction between
what  Locke  calls "primary and secondary qualities" found also in Lucretius and
Descartesis more fully considered in the chapters on QUALITY and SENSE, but here
it  calls  attention  to  the  problem of how matter, devoid of certain sensible
qualities,   causes  these  qualities  to  arise.  For  Lucretius  the  peculiar
difficulty  of the problem seems to lie in the fact that the sensitive animal is
itself  nothing  but a material system. All its powers and acts are conceived as
functions of matter in motion. How, then, does moving matter within the organism
generate  certain  qualities  which  do  not belong to moving matter outside the
organism?  For  Locke  the  problem  raises  a difficulty of still another sort.
Secondary  qualities, such as colors, sounds, odors, exist only as sensations in
the  mind.  In  corporeal substances, or bodies, such qualities, he writes, "are
nothing  but  the powers those substances have to produce several ideas in us by
our  senses;  which  ideas  are  not in the things themselves, otherwise than as
anything  is  in  its  cause."  Though  they  result  from  the impact of moving
particles  on the bodily sense-organs, they do not belong to the world of matter
at  all,  but  to the realm of spirit. How, then, do the motions of matter cause
effects  which  exist  only  in  the immaterial domain of mind ? These questions
indicate  some  of  the  problems of matter as an object, condition, or cause of
knowledge.  They  also  show how the nature of the problem varies with different
conceptions  of  matter,  both  in itself and in its relation to mind. There are
still other problems which confront those theories of mind which separate reason
or  intellect  from the sensitive faculty. In such theories the consideration of
matter's  relation to mind goes beyond the question of the origin of sensations.
It  takes  sensations  and  images as somehow the functions of living matter the
acts  of  the  various  sense-organs  and  the brain. But sensations and images,
because  they are acts of corporeal organs, have the CHAPTER 53: same limitation
which   belongs  to  everything  material.  As  matter  is  said  to  cause  the
individuality or numerical diversity of bodies, so is it said to make sensations
and  images "particular intentions of the mind" that capable of is, representing
only  particular objects, not general kinds or classes. Hence such theories face
the  problem  of  the  relation  of  sensations  and  images  to  the "universal
intentions of the mind," its general concepts or abstract ideas.

ONE  MORE TRADITIONAL meaning of matter remains to be mentioned. The sciences of
physics or mechanics are concerned with change or motion. They are not concerned
with  mutability  in general, but with the kind of mutability that is manifested
by  material  things.  Material  things  are  never  conceived  as  unmovable or
unchangeable.  The  question  whether  matter  itself  is immutablehas different
meanings  for  different  theories  of  matter.  On the theory (discussed in the
chapter  on  CHANGE)  that  matter and form are together principles of change in
changing  substances,  it is neither matter nor form but the substance composite
of  matter  and  form  which  changes.  Those  who think that the motions of the
physical  world  are  without beginning and end, attribute a similar eternity to
matter  and  conceiveit  as imperishable. The theologians who think that God can
annihilate  whatever  He  creates,  do not hold that mattcris indestructible,but
they  nevertheless  attribute  everlasting  endurance  to  matter in God's plan.
Aquinas,  for  example,  in  his treatise on the end of the world, describes the
final  conflagration which will purge the material universe but leave its matter
in existence under the forms of the elements and the heavenly bodies. "The world
will  be  renewed," he writes, "in such a way as to throw off all corruption and
remain  forever  at  rest."  Hence  nothing can be "the subject of that renewal,
unless  it  be  a  subject  of  incorruption," such as "the heavenly bodies, the
elements, and man." On other theories of matter the fact that motion is regarded
as  an  intrinsic  property  of bodies seems to be similarly consistent with the
notion that matter itself is immutable or indestructible. This indestructibility
may be conceived in terms of the absolute indivisibility of MATTER 67 the atoms,
as  in  Lucretius  and  Newton;  or, as in Spinoza, it may be established by the
uncreated  and eternal nature of God. "By body," Spinoza writes, "I understand a
mode  which  expresses in a certain and determinate manner the essence of God in
so  far as He is considered as the thing extended." In the modern development of
the  science  of  mechanics  the  law  of the conservation of matter seems to be
another  expression  of the same insight."We may lay it down as an incontestable
axiom," Lavoisier writes, "that in all the operations of art and nature, nothing
is  created;  an  equal  quantity  of  matter  exists  both before and after the
experiment."  What  appears  to  be  the  destruction  of  a  body is merely the
transformation  of  its  matter into another physical condition, without loss of
mass  unless there is an equivalent gain in energy. The total quantity of matter
and  energy  remains constant throughout all physical changes. But though change
or  motion seems to be inherent in the material world, the mutability of bodies,
as  well  as  the  immutability  of  matter,  seems  to be differently conceived
according to different conceptions of matter. The difference between the physics
of  Aristotle  and the physicsof Descartes can be expressed in terms of contrary
definitions  of  motion, or divergent notions of causality, but neither of these
differences is fully intelligible apart from the variance of these theories from
one  another  on the nature of matter. When matter is an actual substance, whose
essence is extension and whose chief property is local motion, the principles of
physics  are  mechanical.  The  laws of mechanics, with time, space, and mass as
their fundamental variables, seem to have a universality adequate for describing
all  natural  phenomena.  All  changes  in  material things are either the local
motions of bodies or the result of the local motions of their parts. Motions are
determined  in  their  magnitude  and direction by the impressed force which one
body  exerts  upon  another  and  the resistance of that other. Motion is itself
completely  actual,  as  matter  is; and the only type of cause to which physics
need  appeal  is the efficient cause, that is, the push or pull of one body upon
another. Physicists who share this Conception of mat- 68 THE GREAT I ter may not
agree,  as  Descartes  and Newton do not, in their mechanical formulations. They
may or may not be atomists. They may, like Lucretius, think that local motion is
an  absolutely  intrinsic  property of the eternal particles; or, like Descartes
and  Newton,  they  may  think  that  God first imparted motion to matter at the
world's creation. They may hold that all subsequent motions issue therefrom in a
continuous  chain of cause and effect. But when matter is the only factor in the
constitution  of  bodies,  and  one  body  differs  from  another  only  in  its
quantitative determinations, the consequence for physical theory seems to be one
or  another  sort  of mechanical formulation. When matter is nothing more than a
body's  potentiality  for  change,  and when neither what the body is nor how it
changes can be explained by reference to its matter alone, physical theory seems
to  be  constructed  in other than mechanical terms. Its concepts and principles
resemble  those  of biology. It finds natural tendencies or desires, and ends or
final  causes,  in  the  motion  of  inert as well as animate bodies. Central to
Aristotle's  physics are his theory of the four causes, discussed in the chapter
on  CAUSE,  and theory of the four types of his change, discussed in the chapter
on CHANGE.

But  even  more  fundamental is his definition of motion as the actualization of
that which is potential in a respect in which it is potential.

With  motion  so defined, the principles of physics must include the correlative
factors  of  potentiality  and  actuality  which Aristotle conceives in terms of
matter and form.

REMOVE  MATTER entirely from a thing and, according to Aristotle, you remove its
capacity  for  physical  change.  Remove form, and you remove its existence, for
nothing  can exist without being actual or determinate in certain respects. When
a  thing  changes  physically,  it loses certain determinate characteristics and
acquires  others.  The  determinations it acquires it had previously lacked, yet
all  the  while  it  must have had a capacity for acquiring them. * The thing is
'capable  both  of being and of not being," Aristotle says, "and this capacity,"
he  goes on to say, "is the matter in each." The matter of an existing substance
is  thus  conceived  as  that which has certain forms (the respects in which the
substance  is actually determinate), and lacks certain forms which it can assume
(the  respects  in  which the substance is both indeterminate and potential). As
the  chapter  on ART indicates, Aristotle frequently uses artistic production to
afford  a  simple illustration of his theory of matter and form as principles of
change.  When  a  man sets out to make a bed, he chooses material, such as wood,
which  can be shaped in a certain way. The same wood could have been made into a
chair  or  a  table.  With  respect  to these various possible determinations in
structure,  the wood is itself indeterminate and determinable. Before the artist
has  worked  on  it  productively,  the wood is in a state of both privation and
potentiality  with  regard  to  the  form  of  a  bed,  a chair, or a table. The
transformation  which  the  artist  effects  consists in his actualizing certain
potentialities in the material for forms or determinations which the material at
the moment lacks. When the bed is made, the wood or matter which is now actually
in  the  form  of  a bed may still have the potentiality for being remade into a
chair  or  table.  The  wood,  of course, remains actually wood throughout these
artificial  changes,  as  it  does  not  when  it  suffers the natural change of
combustion. This indicates that though the wood may be called matter or material
by  the  artist,  it is not matter, but a substance, a thing composite of matter
and  form;  for  when the wood is reduced to ashes by fire, the matter which had
the  form  of  wood  assumes another form. In the analysis of accidental change,
which  artistic  production  illustrates,  it  suffices  to  treat  a  composite
substance,  like  wood  or iron or bronze, as the material principle. But in the
analysis  of  substantial change, when matter itself changes from being one kind
of  matter  to  being  another  in  the  coming  to be or perishing of composite
substances,  the material principle must be pure matter matter totally devoid of
form.  Where  a  whole  substance can be regarded as the matter or substratum of
accidental change (in quality, quantity, or place) the substratum of substantial
change,  which  Aristotle calls "generation and corruption," must be matter in a
condition  of  absolute  indeterminacy  and pure potentiality. Referring to this
ultimate  substratum as "the CHAPTER 53: underlying nature," Aristotle says that
it "is an object of scientific knowledge by analogy. For as the bronze is to the
statue,  the wood to the bed, so is the matter and the formless before receiving
form  to  anything  which  has  form,  and  so  also is the underlying nature to
substance, i.e., the actually existing."

ARISTOTLE'S  DEFINITION of matter as "the primary substratum of each thing, from
which  it  comes  to be without qualification, and which persists in the result"
not  only  signifies  an  object which the physicist must apprehend analogically
(i.e.,  by  comparisson  with substantially formed matter like wood and bronze),
but  also  indicates  that  matter,  by  definition,  must  be  in  itself  both
unintelligible  and  non-existent. What Aristotle calls "the primary substratum"
is later called by Plotinus "primal matter," by Augustine "formless matter," and
by  Aquinas "prime matter." Since they all agree that that which is without form
lacks  all  determination and actuality, they deny that it can have existence by
itself or be an object of knowledge, either by sense or reason.

Augustine  and Aquinas go further. They deny even to God's omnipotence the power
of  creating  matter  without  form. They speak of matter not as created, but as
concretized,  that is, united at the very instant of its creation with the forms
it  must  assume  in  order  to  exist.  God "made formless matter of absolutely
nothing, and the form of the world from this formless matter," Augustine writes.
Yet He "created both simultaneously, so that form came upon matter with no space
of time intervening."

IN THE TRADITION of Aristotle's physics and metaphysics, especially as developed
by  Aquinas,  matter  and  form  become  basic  analytic  terms,  often having a
significance  remote  from their original meaning in the analysis of change. The
conception of prime (or formless) matter as the substratum of substantial change
leads  to  the  designation of the formed matter underlying accidental change as
"second  matter."  This, in turn, is called "signate matter" when, considered as
the  matter  of  an  individual  substance,  it is viewed as having the limiting
determinations  of  individuality.  "Matter  is  twofold," Aquinas writes, "com-
MATTER  69  mon, and signate or individual; common, such as flesh and bones; and
individual, as this flesh and these bones." When the intellect forms concepts of
different  kinds  of  physical  substances,  it  abstracts  "from the individual
sensible  matter,  but  not  from  the  common sensible matter." In defining the
nature  of  man,  for  example,  we abstract, Aquinas says, from "this flesh and
these bones, which do not belong to the species as such, but to the individual";
but we do not abstract from the fact that man, consisting of body and soul, is a
thing  of  flesh  and  bones.  To  say  that man consists of body and soul is to
indicate  that  common  matter  enters  into the definition of man as a physical
substance. Bur in distinction from definitions of this type, which are proper to
physics,  mathematical  and  metaphysical definitions carry the abstraction from
matter  still further. In mathematics, Aquinas declares, the intellect abstracts
"not  only  from  individual  sensible  matter,  but  also  from common sensible
matter."  In  conceiving  numbers  and figures, the intellect does not, however,
abstract from matter entirely, but only from individual intelligible matter. The
common  intelligible  matter  which  is  represented by "substance as subject to
quantity"  underlies  all  mathematical  notions.  "But  some  things,"  Aquinas
maintains,  "can  be  abstracted  even  from common intelligible matter, such as
being, unity, potency, act and the like, all of which can exist without matter."
Such  abstraction  characterizes  the  concepts  of  metaphysics.  Aquinas  thus
differentiates  the  three  speculative  sciences  of  physics, mathematics, and
metaphysics  in  terms of three grades of abstraction, each distinguished by the
type  of  matter from which the concepts of the science are abstracted. With one
exception  physical  matter  is not said to be of different kinds when it exists
under  different  forms. The one exception for both Aristotle and Aquinas is the
matter  of  terrestrial  and  celestial  bodies.  Basing  his  inference  on the
observations  available  to  him,  Aristotle  holds that the heavenly bodies are
eternal  "not subject to increase or diminution, but unaging and unalterable and
unmodified."  Immutable  in every other way, they are, however, subject to local
motion.  Since  they  are eternal, both their matter and 70 their motion must be
different  from  that  of  difference between cel perishable terrestrial bodies.
"All  things  that  tcr or motion, and as change have matter," Aristotle writes,
"but  OMY  shows, by so doing matter of different sorts; of eternal things those
petus  to  the  Copernica which are not generable but are movable in the way for
Newton  to  space  have  matternot matter for generation, applicable to matter e
howevcr,  but for motion from one place to verse. Because their m another." That
motion from place to place is, possible, Kepler insis unlike terrestrial motion,
circular;  it  has  the  the  heavenly  bodies  by appropriate characteristic of
endlessness.  which  account  for the Kepler challenges this theory of a radical
earth.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PACE

1. The conception of matter as a principle of change and as one constituent of the being
of changing things: the receptacle or substratum
   1a. Matter and     the analysis of change: prime and secondary matter; privation and
   form; participation and the receptacle
   1b. Matter in relation to the     kinds of change: substantial and accidental change;
   terrestrial and celestial motion
   1c. Matter and the distinction between individual and universal: signate and com-
   mon matter; sensible and intelligible matter

2. The conception of matter as extension, as a bodily substance, or as a mode of substance:
atoms and compound bodies
   2a. The properties of matter: hypotheses concerning its constitution
   2b. The motions of matter or bodies
   2c. Matter as the support of sensible qualities
   2d. The diremption of body and mind, or matter and spirit

3. The existence of matter
   3a. Matter as the sole existent: materialism, atomism
   3b. Matter as the most imperfect grade of being or reality
   3c. Matter as a fiction of the mind
   3d. The relation of God to matter: the creation of matter and its motions
   4.
   Matter as an object or condition of knowledge
   3e. The knowability of matter: by sense, by reason
   3f. The role of matter in the concepts and definitions of the several sciences: the
   grades of abstraction in physics, mathematics, and metaphysics
   3g. The material conditions of sensation, imagination, and memory
   4*/.
   The material conditions of thought: the relation of matter to the existence and
   acts of the mind

5. Matter in relation to good and evil

6. Criticisms of materialism and its consequences

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Other considerations of matter as a principle of chan

2a; FORM 1d(i)-1d(2); and for the theory of celes

kind, see ASTRONOMY 8a; BEING 7b(3); CHANGE 7c(4);

The  conception  of  matter  as  potentiality in relation physical substances as
composite  of matter and fo 2c(3); INFINITY 4c; MAN 33; MIND 2b; ONE AND MANY 3b
Considerations relevant to the doctrine that matter is

principle of individuality in material things, se

PARTICULAR 3.

77  2  AURELIUS:  "Meditations,  BK  in, SECT 3 260b; BK ix, SECT 36 294d-295a 7
PLOTINUS:  First  Ennead,  TR vin 27b-34a csp CH 3-5 28a-29c, CH 7, 30d / Second
Ennead, TR iv, en 16 57b-c / Fifth Ennead, TR ix, CH 10, 250c / Sixth Ennead, TR
vii,  CH  27-29 334d-336b 8 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK v, par 19-21, 32c 33b; BK
vn,  par  1-7  43b-45d; par 18-22 49a-50a; BK xni, par 45 123a / City of God, BK
xi,  CH 23 334c-335c 9 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, o 3, A 2, ANS 15c-16a;
Q  4,  A  i,  ANS  and REP 2 20db21b; PART i-n, Q 17, A 8, REP i 692a c 1 DANTE:
Divine Comedy, PARADISE, i [97-142] 107b-d; xin [52-87] 126a-b 1 Gi BBON Decline
and Fall, 330a-b

:  Criticisms  of materialism and its consequences 7 PLATO: Sophist, 567a-568a 8
ARISTOTLE:  Soul, BK i, CH 2-5 633a 641d 9 ARISTOTLE: Parts of Animals, BK i, CH
i b a

K40  5-64i 33] 163a-164b 0 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, en 12 172d173c; UK n,
CH i, 185a; CH 6 188c 191a 7 PLOTINUS: Third Ennead, TR i, en 2, 78d; cn 3 79b-c
/  Fourth  Ennead, IR vn, CH 68, 194bl97b 9 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q
75,  442a; A 6, ANS 447c 449b A i, REP i 378b-379c; Q 84, A i, ANS 440d8 HARVEY:
On  Animal  Generation,  355b-d;  495c-496d 5 BERKELLY: Human Knowledge, SECT 21
417a; SECT 35 419c; SI:CT 50 422c; SUCT 85 88 429c 430b; SECT 92 96 431a-d; SECI
102 432d-433a; SECT 133 439c-440a; SECT 141 441a-b 2 KANT: Pure Reason, 126c-d /
Judgement,  558b-559d;  579d-580a; 582b-c 1 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK in, 140b;
143a-c;BK  x,  449b-c;  BK xi, 469a-472b; BK xin, 570d; BK xiv, 589c-590c; 609b;
EPILOGUE  n,  678a-b;  689c  690a;  694d-696d  3  JAMES:  Psychologv, 5a; 8b 9a;
84a-119b;  291a-295b;  655b-656a;  745a-b;  823a-825a  4 FREUD: New Introductory
lectures,  882b  884c  ge,  see ART 2b; BEING 7b(5); CHANGE tial and terrestrial
matter  as distinct in WORLD 6a. to form as actuality, and for the theory of rm,
see  BEING  7b(2),  7c(3);  FORM  2c(i)-  (4);  SOUL 3c. the source of numerical
diversity or the e SAME AND OTHER. la; UNIVERSAL AND

78  For:  The  conception of matter or extension as a substance, or as a mode of
substance,

7b(4); FORM 2d; MAN 33; MIND 2d; SOUL 3c.

Atomism as a theory of matter and as a materialistic philosophy of natur

5h; MIND 2e; and for discussions bearing on materialism as a philosoph

and history, see ELEMENT 5; HISTORY 43(2); MAN 3c; WILL 5c.

Matter in relation to mind, or body in relation to soul, see MAN 3a; MIN

3e; and for the discussion of immaterial substances, spirits, or being

from matter, see ANGEL 2, 3b; BEING 7X2); ETERNITY 43; FoRM2a,2d; GoD4

MIND 2a; SOUL 3a-3c.

The theological problems of matter, its creation and conservation, see G

4 e( ')- .

The physical properties of matter or bodies and the laws of their motion

8c(}); MECHANICS 43, 53-52), 6a-6e; QUANTITY 5d-5c; SPACE la-1d; and

lem of the infinity of matter or of an infinite body, see INFINITY 43-

Matter as an object of knowledge, see KNOWLEDGE 53(2).

Matter in relation to sensation and to sensible qualities, see ELEMENT 5

QUALITY i; SENSE 33).

Matter in relation to thought, abstract ideas, or definitions, see DEFIN

IDEA 2g; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(i); MIND 13(2); SENSE 53; UNIVERSAL

PARTICULAR 40.

ADDITIONAL HEADINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy of the Western World

idea and topics with which this chapter deals, These works are divided

I. Works by authois it-presented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collect

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter

SUAREZ. Disputationes

*

xii (3), xm-xv, xvi AQUINAS. On Being and Essence (4), xxxi (8, 10, 1

On the Power of God, Q 4

. xxxvi

.

De Natura Matenae et Dimensionibus InterJOHN OF SAiNr THOMAS.

minahs misticus, Phtlosoph

DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i, 9, n 7-8, 11-12, 62-65; PART n,
22-23; PART ni 4k-DIGBY. The Nature of

102; PART iv, 1-27, 31-48 MALEBRANCHK. De la re

HOBBES,  Concerning  Body,  PART n, CH 8 (n), CH 8 (2) BERKELEY. Three Dialogues
Between Hylas and LEIBNITZ. New Ess Philonous standing, APPENDIX,

KANT.  Metaphysical  Foundations  of Natural Science VOLTAIRL. "Matter," i ]. S.
MILL.  An  Examination  of  Sir  William  Hamil-  HOLBACH.  The  System  o ton's
Philosophy, CH

12-13 J. PRIESTLEY and PR

ENGELS.  Ludwig  Feuerbach and the Outline ofClas- Doctrine of Mate steal German
Philosophy sity

SCHOPENHAUER. The Wor

**

in, SUP, CH 24

EPICURUS.  Letter  to  Herodotus  BUCHNKR.  Force  and  Ma ERIGENA. De Divisione
Naturae  HELMIIOLTZ.  Popular  L  JUDAH HA-LEVI. Kitab al Khazari vn CRESCAS. Or
Adonai,  PROPOSITIONS  10-12,  16,  19- LANGE. The History of 24 B. STEWART. The
Conse

see  BEING  e,  see  ELEMENT 53- y of nature, society, D 2a-2e; SOUL 3c, s which
exist  apart  c; MAN 33(1); OD 73; WORLD 46- , see ASTRONOMY for the prob- 4k 0;
MECHANICS  4b;  ITION  6a; FORM 3c; AND , but relevant to the into two groups: .
ion.  works  cited, consult of The Great Ideas. Metaphysicae, v ($), x (3), (i),
xxvi  (2), xxvii, xxx 3), xxxiv (5-6), xxxv (3, 6), 1a Naturahs, PART i, QQ 2-3,
Cursus  Philosophies  ThoBodies cherche de la veritc, BK in ays Concerning Human
Underen  i  n  A Philosophical Dictionary f Nature ICE. A Free Discussion of the
rialism  and  Philosophical  Necesld  as  Will  and  Idea,  VOL  tter ectures on
Scientific Subjects, Materialism rvation of Energy

CHAPTER 53
MAXWELL. Matter and Motion

LOTZE.  Metaphysics,  BK n, CH 5-6 PLANCK. Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie
C.  S.  PEIRCE,  Collected  Papers,  VOL vi, par 238-286 PEARSON. The Grammar of
Science, CH 8 MACH. "On the Principle of the Conservation of

Energy," in Popular Scientific Lectures BERGSON. Matter and Memory, CH 4

PLEKHANOV. In Defense of Materialism

.

Essays in the History of Materialism MEYERSON. Identity and Reality, en 4-5, 7-8
LENIN. Materialism and Empiriocriticism CASSIRER. Substance and Function, SUP iv
WEYL. Space Time Matter WHITEHEAD. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of

Natural Knowledge, CH 15

: MATTER 79

The Nature of Existence, CH 34

r. STOUT. Mind and Matter BROAD. The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH 4 DESCOQS.
Essai  critique sur rhylemorphisme G. N. LEWIS. The Anatomy of Science, ESSAY iv
B. RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics, CH 53

. The Problems of Philosophy, CH 2-4

.

Mysticism and Logic, CH 7

.  The  Analysis  of  Matter, CH 1-14 McDoucALL. Modern Materialism and Emergent
Evolution SANTAYANA. Scepticism and Animal Paith, CH 19-20

.  The  Realm of Matter, CH 2-3, 10 LRNZF.N. The Nature of Physical Theory, PART
iv, CH 15 KONINCK. Leprobleme de rindeterminisme
