CHAPTER: MECHANICS

INTRODUCTION

MECHANICS, taken as the name for just one of the physical sciences, would merit no place on a small list of basic, focal terms. But the word "mechanics" means more than that. In the tradition of western thought it signifies a whole philosophy of nature, and it connotes a set of fundamental principles under which, it has been thought, all the physical sciences can be unified.

The principles of mechanics have been applied not only in statics and dynamics, which are concerned with the action and reaction of bodies at rest or in motion, but also in acoustics and optics and the sciences of heat, magnetism, and electricity. They have been extended to astronomical phenomena to constitute what is called "celestial mechanics." They have been thought to govern the action or motion of invisible particles or waves as well as the familiar bodies of ordinary experience. In the range and variety of the phenomena it covers, mechanics would seem to be co-extensive with physics. Such at least appears to be its scope at one stage in the development of natural science.

We shall presently consider the dissatisfaction with the mechanical point of view which causes scientists in our own day to hail the replacement of "classical mechanics" by the "new physics" as a great advance in science. The intellectual significance of this change can be compared with that earlier revolution in the

17th century when the new natural science founded on the achievements of Galileo, Huygens, and Newton replaced the physics of Aristotle which had long reigned as the traditional philosophy of nature. What Einstein calls "the rise and decline of the mechanical point of view" thus seems to provide an apt title for the story of three stages in the history of science, in only one of which does the whole of physics appear to be dominated by mechanics.

One way, then, of understanding the importance of mechanics is in terms of that story. Other chapters, such as Astronomy, Change, Element, Matter, Physics, Space, and Time —and perhaps also Cause and Hypothesis— tell part of that story, especially the part which turns on the differences between Aristotle's physics (which is neither experimental nor mathematical) and modern physics (which is both). This chapter focuses on issues which fall largely within modern physics— issues belonging to that part of the story which, in the great books, begins with Galileo, Huygens, and Newton and runs to Fourier and Faraday. The story itself does not end there, but the point to which Faraday carries it suggests the sequel in Clerk Maxwell and Einstein, just as Galileo's point of departure reflects antecedents in Aristotle. The great books state the issues sufficiently well, though they do not tell the whole story. That can be fully documented only by a host of sup- plementary scientific classics in various fields, such as the works listed in the Additional

Readings.

In modern times it is accepted that physics should be both experimental and mathematical. No one questions the ideal of unifying the physical sciences and finding the unity in nature's laws. But the question is whether that unification can be achieved under the aegis of mechanics; and the issue is whether physics should gather its experimental findings together under purely mathematical formulations or should also try to give those mathematical formulae a mechanical interpretation.

The issue involves more than a question of scientific method. It concerns the ultimate aim of natural science and the kind of concepts it should employ to fulfill this aim. Should the scientist seek to do no more than describe the phenomena of nature in terms of the simplest and most universal mathematical relations? Or should he go beyond description to an explanation of the phenomena in terms ^ofrfieir causes ?

When the issue is thus stated as a choice between being content with description or striving for explanation, it appears to be broader than the question whether physics should or should not be mechanical. Even granted that explanation is desirable, does it necessarily follow that physical explanation must employ the principles and concepts of mechanics? Aristotle's physics, it can be argued, provides a negative answer. His various physical treatises represent a natural science which tries to explain the phenomena without doing so mechanically, just as it tries to describe the phe- nomena without doing so mathematically.

That the connection of these two features of Aristotle's physics is not accidental seems to be indicated by the conjunction of their opposites in modern physics. When in the 17th century the physicist describes natural phenomena in mathematical terms, he explains them— if he tries to explain them at all— in mechanical terms. "The laws of Mechanics," writes Descartes, "are the laws of Nature." Huygens opens his Treatise on Light by referring to optics as the kind of science "in which Geometry is applied to matter"; but he at once expresses the desire to advance this branch of mathematical physics by investigating "the origin and the causes" of the truths already known, in order to provide "better and more satisfactory explanations." Such explanations, he thinks, will be found only if we conceive "the causes of all natural effects in terms of mechanical motions." He declares it his opinion that "we must necessarily do this, or else renounce all hopes of ever comprehending anything in Physics."

Galileo and Newton, as will be noted, do not unqualifiedly share Huygens' view that it is proper for the mathematical physicist to inquire about causes. But they would agree that if any explanation is to be given for laws of nature expressed in mathematical form, one or another type of mechanical hypothesis would be required to state the causes. Postponing for the moment the consideration of whether the investigation of causes belongs to mathematical physics, let us examine what is involved in giving a mechanical explanation of anything and why this type of explanation tends to occur in the causal interpretation of mathematically formulated laws of nature.

Two points seem to constitute the essence of mechanical theory. Both are fundamental notions and both are philosophical in the sense that they do not seem to result from the findings of experimental research. The first point is an exclusive emphasis upon efficient causes, which means the exclusion of other types of causes, especially final and formal causes, from mechanical explanation. As the chapter on Cause indicates, efficient causality consists in one thing acting on another. But not every sort of action by which one thing affects another is mechanical. According to the doctrine, an efficient cause is mechanical only if it consists in a moving body acting on another by impact, or if it consists in a force exerted by one body to cause motion in another or to change its quantity or direction. The notion of a force which does not work through the impact of one moving thing upon another raises the problem of action-at-a-distance to which we shall return subsequently.

The second fundamental point is an exclusive emphasis upon quantities. Mechanical explanation makes no references to qualities or other attributes of things. Paradoxically this point is sometimes expressed in terms of a distinction between primary and secondary qualities; but, as the chapters on Quantity and Quality point out, the primary qualities are all quantities. According to Locke, they are "solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest, and number"; according to Newton, "the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever" are "extension, hardness, impenetrability, mobility, and inertia." Others, like Galileo and Descartes, give still different enumerations, but the point remains that the only attributes of bodies which have mechanical significance are measurable quantities. Such secondary qualities, for example, as colors and tones belong to the physical world (as it is mechanically conceived) only by reduction to the local motion of particles or waves having certain velocities, lengths, or other quantitative attributes.

We need not be concerned here with what sort of reality is assigned to secondary qualities, or how their presence in experience is accounted for. These problems are discussed in other chapters, such as Quality and Sense. However they are solved, the philosophy of mechanism excludes from the physical world whatever does not consist in, or cannot be reduced to, quantities of matter (or mass), motion, or force, and such related quantities as those of time and space (or distance).

The two points of mechanical theory are obviously connected, for the kind of cause which mechanical explanation employs to the exclusion of all others consists in a quantity of motion or of force. Just as obviously, mechanical explanation, dealing only in quantities and in causes which are quantitatively measurable, is precisely the type of explanation which would seem to be appropriate if one felt called upon to give an interpretation of the mathematical relationships which the mathematical physicist formulates as laws of nature. These mathematical laws are after all statements of the relations among physical quantities which have been subjected to experimental determination or measurement.

As a philosophical theory the mechanical view of nature antedates modern physical science. The atomistic conception of the world, which Lucretius expounds, contains both of the fundamental points of mechanism— the doctrine of primary and secondary qualities and the doctrine that all effects in nature are pro- duced by efficient moving causes.

The controversy over mechanism is also ancient. Aristotle denies both points of doctrine in his criticism of the Greek atomists, Democritus and Leucippus; and in the exposition of his own physical theories he states an opposite view. To qualities and qualitative change he assigns physical reality. He explains change in terms of four types of causes, not one. He does not exclude the mechanical type of cause in his explanation of local motion. On the contrary, with respect to local motion his theory that a body in motion must be directly acted upon by a moving cause throughout the period of its motion, seems to be more mechanical than the modern theory that no cause need be assigned for the continuing uniform motion of a body along a straight line but only for a change in its direction or velocity.

What is new in modern times is not the philosophical doctrine of mechanism, but the introduction of mechanical explanation into experimental and mathematical physics, and the controversy about whether it belongs there or can be defended as useful. The so-called rise and decline of the mechanical view in modern physics is connected with experimental discoveries and mathematical formulations. It is not an alternation between success and failure on the level of philosophical argument concerning the ultimate truth of mechanical conceptions. When these conceptions are rejected, it is not for the sake of returning to opposite notions in physical theory, such as those of Aristotle, but rather because, as Einstein says, "science did not succeed in carrying out the mechanical program convincingly, and today no physicist believes in the possibility of its fulfillment."

There is a touch of prophecy in the conversation Swift imagines taking place between Aristotle and the physicists of the 17th century.

According to Swift, when Aristotle was confronted with Descartes and Gassendi, he "freely acknowledged his own mistakes in natural philosophy, because he proceeded in many things upon conjecture, as all men must do; and he found that Gassendi, who had made the doctrine of Epicurus as palatable as he could, and the vortices of Descartes, were equally exploded. He predicted the same fate to attraction, whereof the present learned are such zealous asserters. He said that new systems of nature were but new fashions, which would vary in every age; and even those who pretend to demonstrate them from mathematical principles, would flourish but a short period of time, and be out of vogue when that was determined."

Both Galileo and Descartes re-state the philosophical doctrine which first appears in ancient atomism, but both re-state it in a way that suggests its utility for an experimental investigation of nature. It is significant that

Galileo's statement occurs in the context of his concern with the nature and causes of heat. He wishes to explain, he writes in // Saggiatore, why he thinks that "motion is the cause of heat." To do this he finds it necessary to question a prevalent notion "which is very remote from the truth"— the belief that "there is a true accident, affection, or quality, -really inherent in the substance by which we feel ourselves heated." He denies the physical reality of heat as an inherent quality of bodies on the same ground that he denies the physical reality of other qualities. "I do not believe," he declares, "that there exists anything in external bodies for exciting tastes, smells, and sounds, but size, shape, quantity, and motion, swift or slow; and if ears, tongues, and noses were removed, I am of the opinion that shape, quantity, and motion would remain, but there would be an end of smells, tastes, and sounds, which, apart from the living creature, I regard as mere words."

Descartes' statement of the doctrine is bolder, perhaps, in its suggestion of a mechanical program for physical research. "Colors, odors, savors, and the rest of such things," he writes, are "merely sensations existing in my thought." They differ from the real properties of bodies just as much as "pain differs from the shape and motion of the instrument which inflicts it." The true physical properties, such as "gravity, hardness, the power of heating, of attracting and purging" consist, in Descartes' opinion, "solely in motion or its absence, and in the configuration and situation of [bodily] parts."

As a philosophical doctrine, the mechanical view is not necessarily tied to atomism. Descartes opposes atomism as plainly as does Aristotle. Furthermore, Newton, who is an atomist, disagrees with both Descartes and the Greek atomists on one fundamental point in mechanical theory. The ancient atomists make the actual motion of one particle in collision with another the indispensable cause of a change of motion in the latter. Descartes likewise requires one motion to be the cause of another and explains gravity in terms of actual bodily motions. Newton rejects Descartes' mechanical hypothesis of material vortices as the cause of gravitation. He seems to have this in mind, and to put

Descartes in the same class with Aristotle, when he says that "hypotheses, whether metaphysical or physical, whether of occult qualities or mechanical, have no place in experimental philosophy."

The force of gravity, according to Newton, is a power of attraction which one body exercises on another without the first being in motion or coming into contact with the second. Newton acknowledges the problem of action-at-a-distance which his theory raises. For the most part he lets it stand as a problem which does not affect the mathematical results of his work. But in the Queries he attaches to his Optics he suggests, by way of solution, the hypothesis of an ether as the continuous medium through which gravitational force is exerted. In the opinion of later physicists, Newton's hypothesis is no less mechanical than Descartes'. Nor does there seem to be any philosophical grounds for preferring one hypothesis to the other.

But Newton's quarrel with Descartes is not on a philosophical issue. It turns on which mechanical conception, if any at all is to be offered, fits best with the mathematical laws of terrestrial and celestial motion which Newton had succeeded in formulating as universal laws of nature. Those mathematical laws, moreover, had the merit of fitting the observed phenomena and so, of realizing the scientific ideal of accurate description stated in the most generalized form. Newton's triumph over Descartes, then, is a triumph in mathematical and experimental physics, not a triumph in philosophy.

Pope's couplet

Nature and Nature's Laws lay hid in Night, God said, Let Newton be, and all was light records that triumph, and celebrates the illumination of nature by the mechanical as well as the mathematical principles of Newton's physics. Newton's picture of the world dominates the mind of a century and controls its science. Locke speaks of "the incomparable Mr. Newton" and of "his never enough to be admired book"; Hume refers to him as the philosopher who, "from the happiest reasoning

. . . determined the laws and forces, by which the revolutions of the planets are governed and directed"; and even Berkeley, who challenges his theories of space, time, and attraction, regrets that he must take issue with "the authority of so great a man," a man "whom all the world admires" as the author of "a treatise on Mechanics, demonstrated and applied to nature."

Newton's achievement is to have accomplished an extraordinary synthesis of all that was good in previous scientific work, and a sweeping criticism of all that was considered stultifying. That so many and such varied phenomena should be organized mathematically by a theory as simple as Newton's, is altogether impressive. Equally astonishing is the predictive power of Newton's laws and the explanatory power of his mechanics, not to mention the technological fruits of the latter in mechanical engineering and the invention of machinery of all sorts. Whatever difficulties are implicit in the Newtonian mechanics—subsequently to become, with new discoveries, more and more perplexing— the scope and grandeur of Newton's book gives mechanics a commanding position with respect to the future of science for at least two centuries.

In the century between the publication of

Newton's Mathematical Principles and the publication in 1787 of Lagrange's Mecanique analytique, "the notion of the mechanical explanation of all the processes of nature," writes Whitehead, "finally hardened into a dogma ofscience."

In the next century, the mechanical dogma spreads from physics and chemistry throughout the whole domain of natural science— into biology and psychology—and even beyond that, into economics and sociology. Books bear such titles as The Mechanistic Conception of

Life, The Mechanism of Human Behavior, Social Statics, Social Dynamics. At the end of the

19th century, James notes the conquests which are being made on all sides by the mechanical idea. "Once the possibility of some kind of mechanical interpretation is established," he writes, "Mechanical Science, in her present mood, will not hesitate to set her brand of ownership upon the matter."

James himself testifies to the persuasiveness and success of the mechanical dogma, though not without some resentment. "The modern mechanico-physical philosophy, of which we are so proud," he says, "because it includes the nebular cosmogony, the conservation of energy, the kinetic theory of heat and gases, etc., etc., begins by saying that the only facts are collocations and motions of primordial solids, and the only laws the changes in motion which changes in collocation bring. The ideal which this philosophy strives after," he continues, "is a mathematical world-formula, by which, if all the collocations and motions at a given moment were known, it would be possible to reckon those of any wished-for future moment, by simply considering the necessary geometrical, arithmetical, and logical implications."

Laplace had in fact pictured a lightning calculator who, given the total configuration of the world at one instant, would be able to bring the whole future "present to his eyes." And

James quotes Helmholtz to the effect that the whole problem of physical science is "to refer natural phenomena back to unchangeable attractive and repulsive forces whose intensity depends wholly upon distance. The solubility of this problem is the condition of the complete comprehensibility of nature."

In commenting on this, James admits that "the world grows more orderly and rational to the mind, which passes from one feature of it to another by deductive necessity, as soon as it conceives it as made up of so few and so simple phenomena as bodies with no properties but number and movement to and fro." But he also insists that it is "a world with a very minimum of rational stuff. The sentimental facts and relations," he complains, "are butchered at a blow. But the rationality yielded is so superbly complete inform that to many minds this atones for the loss, and reconciles the thinker to the notion of a purposeless universe, in which all the things and qualities men love . . . are but illusions of our fancy attached to accidental clouds of dust which will be dissipated by the eternal cosmic weather as careless as they were formed."

With the 20th century a change occurs. The dogma of mechanism may continue to spread in other sciences and gain even wider acceptance as a popular philosophical creed, but within the domain of the physical sciences, certain mechanical conceptions become suspect and a wholesale rejection of classical mechanics (which becomes identified with Newtonian physics) is called for.

Einstein, for example, quotes the passage from Helmholtz that James had cited, in which

Helmholtz goes on to say that the vocation of physics "will be ended as soon as the reduction of natural phenomena to simple forces is complete." This "mechanical view, most clearly formulated by Helmholtz," Einstein concedes, "played an important role in its time^but, he adds, it "appears dull and naive to a twentieth century physicist."

Einstein reviews the assumptions which physicists had to make in order to construct a mechanical theory of light, gravitation, and electricity. "The artificial character of all these assumptions," he says, "and the necessity for introducing so many of them all quite independent of each other, was enough to shatter the belief in the mechanical point of view. . . .

In the attempt to understand the phenomena of nature from the mechanical point of view," he continues, "throughout the whole develop- ment of science up to the twentieth century, it was necessary to introduce artificial substances like electric and magnetic fluids, light corpuscles, or ether." According to Einstein, "attempts to construct an ether in some simple way" have been "fruitless"; but what is more important in his opinion, such failures "indicate that the fault lies in the fundamental assumption that it is possible to explain all events in nature from a mechanical point of view."

Does this mean that the contemporary physicist has found another and better way of explaining nature? Is there a non-mechanical way of explaining the phenomena, which fits the mathematical laws of experimental physics; or does discarding mechanics mean relinquishing all efforts to explain nature?

Eddington suggests an answer. "One of the greatest changes in physics between the nineteenth century and the present day," he writes, "has been the change in our ideal of scientific explanation. It was the boast of the Victorian scientist that he would not claim to understand a thing until he could make a model of it; and by a model he meant something constructed of levers, geared wheels, squirts, and other appliances familiar to the engineer. Nature in building the universe was supposed to be dependent on just the same kind of resources as any human mechanic. . . . The man who could make gravitation out of cogwheels would have been a hero in the Victorian age." Today, however, Eddington continues, "we do not encourage the engineer to build the world for us out of his material, but we turn to the mathematician to build it out of his material." We may turn to the mathematician's construction of the world in his terms; but in the tradition of western thought, mathematically formulated laws of nature are not, with the single exception perhaps of the Pythagoreans, regarded as explanations of why things behave as they do or how they work. The change from the 19th to the 20th century with respect to "our ideal of scientific explanation" cannot, then, be the substitution of the mathematical for the mechanical account of why and how. The shift from mechanics to mathematics is rather a shift from explanation as the scientific ideal to the statement of laws which, while having maximum generality, remain purely descriptive. What Eddington means by building the world out of the material of mathematics seems to be the same as what Galileo means, four centuries earlier, when he says that the book of nature "is written in mathematical language." The materials are such symbols as "triangles, circles, and other geometrical figures." Without the help of these, Galileo writes to Kepler, nature "is impossible to comprehend."

But does the mathematical comprehension of nature mean a causal explanation of it? More explicitly than Eddington, Galileo insists that explanation— at least in the sense of stating the causes— is not the business of the mathematical physicist. In a passage which cannot be read too often or examined too closely, he names three opinions which the philosophers have expressed about "the cause of the acceleration of natural motion." Some, he says, "explain it by attraction to the center, others to repulsion between the very small parts of the body, while still others attribute it to a certain stress in the sur- rounding medium which closes in behind the falling body and drives it from one of its positions to another. Now all of these fantasies," he continues, "and others too, ought to be examined, but it is not really worthwhile." They ought to be examined by philosophers, perhaps, but debating them is not worthwhile in "those sciences where mathematical demonstrations are applied to natural phenomena."

Perfectly defining the program of mathematical physics, Galileo sets himself a limited task: "merely to. investigate and to demonstrate some of the properties of accelerated motion (whatever the cause of this acceleration may be)." It should be noted that of the three opinions about causes which Galileo mentions, the first, which anticipates Newtonian attraction, is no less summarily dismissed than the third, which summarizes the Aristotelian theory.

"What I call Attraction," Newton later writes, "may be performed by impulse or by some other means unknown to me. I use that word here to signify only in general any force by which bodies tend towards one another, whatsoever be the cause." It is well known, he asserts in the same passage of the Optics, "that bodies act one upon another by the attractions of gravity, magnetism, and electricity"; but, he goes on, "how these attractions may be per- formed I do not here consider." Newton's attitude toward causes and explanation would seem to be identical with Galileo's. Galileo calls opinions about causes "fantasies" and dismisses them; Newton calls them "hypotheses" and seems to banish them as resolutely. "Hypotheses are not to be regarded in experimental philosophy," he declares in one place; and in another, having just referred to predecessors who feigned hypotheses "for explaining all things mechanically," he says that, on the contrary, "the main business of natural philosophy is to argue from phenomena without feigning hypotheses."

The task of the physicist who is both experimental and mathematical in his method, Newton plainly states, is "to derive two or three general principles of motion from phenomena, and afterwards to tell us how the properties and actions of all corporeal things follow from those manifest principles. [This] would be a very great step in philosophy, though the causes of those principles were not yet discovered. And therefore," he says of his own work, "I scruple not to propose the principles of motion above mentioned, they being of very general extent, and leave their causes to be found out."

The two or three principles of motion mentioned in this passage from the Optics are the foundation of Newton's other great work, the

Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy.

Its title indicates the clearly conceived intention of its author to limit himself to the pro- gram of mathematical physics on which both he and Galileo seem to agree. He will not try to define "the species or physical qualities of forces"; he will only investigate "the quantities and mathematical proportions of them." In the General Scholium with which the Mathematical Principles concludes, Newton disavows once more any knowledge of the cause of gravity. "To us it is enough," he says, "that gravity does really exist, and acts according to the laws which we have explained, and abundantly serves to account for all the motions of the celestial bodies, and of our sea." Admitting that he has "not been able to discover the causes . . . of gravity from phenomena," Newton flatly reiterates his policy: "I frame no hypotheses."

Ix view of this policy, how does the name of Newton come to be associated with the tri- umph of the mechanical point of view in physics? Why do contemporary scientists like Einstein identify Newtonian physics with classical mechanics? If a mathematical physicist, like Newton or Galileo, refrains from guessing at or asserting causes, how can he be charged with having indulged in the impurity of a mechanical explanation of the phenomena, and with having foisted a mechanical conception of the universe upon mankind ?

The answer to these questions, so far as Newton is concerned, may be partly found in his own writings. He did not, it seems, entirely disavow an inquiry into the cause of attractive force, as in itself either misguided or irrelevant to science. "We must learn from the phenomena of nature," he tells us, "what bodies attract one another, and what are the laws and properties of the attraction, before we enquire the cause by which the attraction is performed."

This statement postpones, but does not exclude, an inquiry into causes. In another statement, Newton even gives us a reason for the postponement. "In mathematics," he says, "we are to investigate the quantities of force with their proportions consequent upon any conditions supposed; then, when we enter upon phvsics, we compare those proportions with the phenomena of nature, that we may know the several kinds of attractive bodies. And this preparation being made, we argue more safely concerning the physical species, causes, and proportions of the forces."

These remarks of Newton do not give the whole answer. For the other and perhaps-more important part of it, we must go to the actual development of physical science in the 17th century. The steps in this development— largely discoveries and formulations made by

Galileo, Huygens, and Newton— lead to crises from which the scientists could not extricate themselves without discussing causes— the causes of gravity and of the propagation of light. We may thus be able to understand why Newton could not abandon the search for causes; and why, in the Queries he appended to the Optics, he proposes a mechanical hypothesis in order to explain how the attractive force of gravity exerts itself across great distances, and also defends his mechanical theory of light against the equally mechanical but different hypothesis of Huygens.

It might well be argued that, though Galileo's pure position initiated modern mathematical physics, it was the persistence of impurity in the worrying about causes, or even the inescapability of such concern, which caused great scientific advances to be made. The concern about causes seems to provide, time and time again, the pivot for new discoveries. The causes are not found, but new hypotheses are made, and these, when employed, lead to wider, more general results in the form of more inclusive, unifying laws. We see this happen not only in the study of gravitation and light, but also in the investigation of heat and electricity. The concern of Faraday, for example, to explain electrical attraction and repulsion in terms of the action of contiguous particles, and to establish the existence of physical lines of force, leads to Maxwell's theory of the electro-magnetic field; and his field equations, combined with Faraday's speculations concerning the relation between electrical and gravitational attraction, lead to the attempt, on the part of contemporary physics, to construct a unified field theory covering all physical phenomena.

Physics may return in the 20th century to the purely mathematical character it had at the beginning of its modern development. But as may be seen in any introduction to recent physics written for the layman, it is necessary to mark the influence of mechanical conceptions upon scientific discovery and thought, in order to understand the difference between the unifying mathematical laws of the 17th and the

20th centuries. As we retrace the steps we see how fertile is the interplay between mathematical insights and mechanical hypotheses.

As Fourier tells the story of "rational mechanics," the "discoveries of Archimedes" begin the science. "This great geometer," he says, "explained the mathematical principles of the equilibrium of solids and fluids. About eighteen centuries elapsed before Galileo, the originator of dynamical theories, discovered the laws of motion of heavy bodies." Statics and dynamics are related as the two parts of mechanics when that is conceived narrowly as the science which treats of the local motions of inert or inanimate bodies. The rest or equilibrium of bodies, which is the subject of statics, can be thought of as a limiting case of their motions, to which the principles of dynamics apply.

In the eighteen centuries between Archimedes and Galileo, little progress is made in mechanics. So far as statics is concerned, Archimedes, according to Galileo, by the "rigor of his demonstration" established the science in all its essentials; "since upon a single proposition in his book on Equilibrium depends not only the law of the lever but also those of most other mechanical devices." Pascal may later enlarge statics, by showing in his treatise On the Equilibrium of Liquids that "a vessel full of water is a new principle of Mechanics, a new machine which will multiply force to any degree we choose"; in other works Pascal extends these conceptions further, as in his treatment of the pressure of air. But at the time of Galileo, it could be said that although Archimedes had offered an exemplary model of mathematical physics, no progress was made until the work of

Galileo's immediate predecessors.

Not without assistance from certain predecessors like Stevin, Galileo founds the science of dynamics. It may be wondered why, with the start made by Archimedes, no earlier application of his principles and method had been made. The answer may be found in the physics of Aristotle. His theory of the four elements carried with it a doctrine of natural motions to different natural places, drawn from the observation of fire rising, stones dropping, air bubbling up through water. Such a doctrine would prevent the search for laws of motion applicable to all bodies; and the general character of Aristotle's physics, treating qualities as well as quantities, seems to have discouraged the application of mathematics even to the study of local motions.

The mathematical expression of the laws of motion is Galileo's objective. His interest in the new astronomy which affirmed the motion of the earth led him, he told Hobbes, to the careful study of movements on the earth. His aim is simply to describe with precision the motions to be found in a child's play— stones dropped and stones thrown, the one the natural motion of free fall, the other the violent motion of a projectile. It is clear to observation that the motion of a freely falling body is accelerated. But though, as a mathematical physicist, Galileo refrains from asking why this is so, he is not satisfied to know simply that it is so. He wants to know the properties of such acceleration. What is the relation of the rate of increase in velocity to the durations and distances of the fall ? How much increase in velocity is acquired and how fast? What is the body's velocity at any given point in the fall? Similarly, when

Galileo turns to projectiles, he wants to know, not merely that their trajectory is consistently curvilinear, but precisely what curve the path of the projectile describes.

Galileo succeeds in answering all these questions without being perturbed by any of the philosophical perplexities connected with space and time; nor does he allow questions about the forces involved in these motions to distract him from his purpose to "demonstrate everything by mathematical methods." With mathematical demonstration he combines observation and experiment and uses the latter to determine which mathematical conclusions can be applied to nature—which principles can be empirically verified as well as mathematically deduced.

One of Galileo's principles, however, seems to outrun ordinary experience and to defy experimental verification. In the interpretation of his experiments on inclined planes, Galileo expresses an insight which Newton later formulates as the first law of motion, sometimes called the "law of inertia." It declares that "every body continues in its state of rest, or of uniform motion in a right line, unless it is compelled to change that state by forces impressed upon it." Though Newton describes his method as one of "making experiments and observations, and in drawing general conclusions from them by in- duction," the law of inertia seems to be an exception; for it is difficult to say, as Hume does, that "we find by experience that a body at rest or in motion continues forever in its present state"— that is, unless it is acted on by some new force.

The condition introduced by "unless" raises

Poincare's question: "Have there ever been ex- periments on bodies acted on by no forces?"

If not, and if they are impossible, then James may be right in saying that "the elementary laws of mechanics" are "never matters of experience at all, but have to be disengaged from under experience by a process of elimination, that is, by ignoring conditions which are always present." Because "the idealized experiment

[which it calls for] can never be performed," the law of inertia, according to Einstein, can be derived "only by speculative thinking consistent with observation."

In any case, the first law of motion initiates a new departure in physics. So far as local motion is concerned, Aristotle and his followers look for the cause which keeps a moving body in motion or a stationary body at rest. According to Galileo and Newton, uniform motion continues naturally without cause. Only a change in the velocity or direction of that motion requires a cause, such as a force impressed upon it. How radical this innovation is may be judged from its consequences in celestial mechanics, which in turn lead to a completely unified dynamics for both celestial and terrestrial motions. These advances are the work of Newton's mathematical genius, but the ground for them had been laid by the investigations of Galileo.

Galileo had resolved the curvilinear motion of a projectile into the imparted rectilinear motion and the deflecting pull of gravity. This composition of forces—sometimes called the "parallelogram law"—explains why the path of the projectile is a parabola. The path of the planets in their orbits, Kepler had previously shown, is another conical curve—an ellipse.

But Kepler, lacking the first law ofjaaetion, could theorize physically about the cause of the planetary orbits only by looking for a force, projected outward from the sun, which would sweep around to keep the planets moving in their paths. On the other hand, a follower of

Galileo, as Whitehead points out, would seek "for normal forces to deflect the direction of motion along the curved orbit." He would look for a force pulling the planet off its own rectilinear course inward toward the sun.

That is precisely what Newton did. When the problem, which others had been able to formulate, was put to Newton, he simply went to his study for the solution. He had solved that problem some years before. He had found the law of the force which, attracting the planets to the sun, would produce their elliptical paths and the other proportionalities stated in Kepler's purely descriptive laws.

With that single discovery, Galileo's terrestrial dynamics becomes a celestial one, too; and the traditional separation of the heavens from the earth is overcome. Newton goes even further. He guesses, and then shows by arithmetic, that the force deflecting the planets around the sun and the moon around the earth, is the same force which makes apples fall and stones heavy in the hand. He generalizes this insight in his famous inverse -square law: "Every particle of matter attracts every other particle of matter with a force proportional to the mass of each and to the inverse square of the distance between them."

Accordingly, the world can be pictured as one in which material particles each have position in absolute space and a determinate velocity. The velocity of each particle causes the change of its position, and changes in velocity are caused by forces, the amounts of which are determined by positions. From his laws of motion and this simple law of force Newton is able, by mathematical deduction, to account for the perturbations of the moon, the oblateness of the earth, the precession of the equinoxes, the solar and lunar tides, and the paths of the comets.

But is Newton's law of force as simple as it appears to be at first? Its mathematical meaning is plain enough, and its application to measured phenomena reveals its descriptive scope. When we ask, however, about its physical significance, we raise difficult questions concerning the nature of this attractive force and how it operates. To call it the "force of gravity" and to point out that this is a familiar force which everyone experiences in his own person hardly answers the question.

Galileo would not have tried to answer it.

In his Dialogues Concerning the Two Great Systems of the World, one of the characters, Simplicio, refers to that manifest cause which "everyone knows is gravity." To this Salviati replies: "You should say that everyone knows it is called gravity. I do not question you about the name," he continues, "but about the essence of the thing"; and that, he concludes, is precisely what cannot be defined.

A physicist like Huygens, who expects the explanation of natural effects to be expressed in the familiar mechanical terms of bodily impact, has other objections. "I am not at all pleased," he writes to Leibnitz about Newton, "with any theories which he builds on his principle of attraction, which seems to me absurd." What shocks Huygens is a scandal that Newton himself cannot avoid facing. It is the scandal of action-at-a-distance—of the force of gravity being propagated instantaneously across great distances and producing effects at some remote place but no effects along the way. Newton recognizes the strangeness of such a force. In a letter to Bentley, he echoes Huygens' protest to Leibnitz. "That gravity should be innate, inherent and essential to matter," he says, "so that one body may act on another at a distance through a vacuum, without the mediation of anything else, by and through which their action and force may be conveyed from one to another, is to me so great an absurdity, that 1 believe no man who has in philosophical matters a competent faculty of thinking, can ever fall into it."

The absurdity of action-at-a-distance seems to be recognized by common sense and philoso- phy alike. "No action of an agent," Aquinas remarks, "however powerful it may be, acts at a distance except through a medium"; and

Kant, who regards Newtonian physics as the model of a rational science of nature, speaks of "a force of attraction without contact" as a "chimerical fancy" which "we have no right to assume." How can Newton avoid this absurdity without violating his rule of method in mathematical physics— not to frame hypotheses ?

Newton's dilemma can perhaps be stated in the following alternatives: either the inversesquare law of gravitational attraction is to be treated as a purely mathematical, and hence a purely descriptive, proposition of great simplicity and generality; or it must be given physical meaning by a causal explanation of how gravitational force operates. On the first alternative, Newton can avoid framing hypotheses, but the physical meaning of the concepts he employs to state the mathematical law is then left dark. On the second alternative, he can solve the mechanical problem created by such words in his law as "attracts" and "force," but only by going beyond mathematical physics into the realm of mechanical hypotheses.

Newton seems to take the first alternative in his Mathematical Principles of Natural Philosophy, and the second in his Optics. There he proposes the hypothesis of an ethereal medium to explain the attractive force of gravity. "Is not this medium," he asks, "much rarer within the dense bodies of the sun, stars, planets, and comets, than in the empty celestial spaces between them ? And in passing from them to great distances, doth it not grow denser and denser perpetually, and thereby cause the gravity of those great bodies towards one another, and of their parts towards the bodies; every body endeavoring to go from the denser parts of the medium towards the rare ? . . . And though this increase of density may at great distances be exceeding slow, yet if the elastic force of this medium be exceeding great, it may suffice to impel bodies from the denser parts of the me- dium towards the rarer, with all that power which we call gravity."

The hypothesis fits the law of gravitation if, as Maxwell points out, "the diminution of pressure [in the ether] is inversely as the distance from the dense body." Newton recognized, according to Maxwell, that it then becomes necessary "to account for this inequality of pressure in this medium; and as he was not able to do this, he left the explanation of the cause of gravity as a problem for succeeding ages. . . . The progress made towards the solution of the problem since the time of Newton," Maxwell adds, "has been almost imperceptible."

The problem of the mechanical properties of an ethereal medium occurs in another form in the field of optics. Here it is complicated by the rivalry between two theories of light—Newton's corpuscular theory and Huygens' undulatory or wave theory. Each involves a mechanical hypothesis—one concerning the motion of particles emitted from the light source, and one concerning the wave-like propagation of the light impulse through a medium. Both theories involve the motion of particles. In their explanation of the oar which appears bent in the water, both appeal to the action of the particles in the refracting medium on the light corpuscles or the light waves.

Both theories, furthermore, are expressed by their authors in a mathematical form which permits the deduction of quantitative facts like the equality of the angles of incidence and of reflexion, the bending of the light ray in refraction according to the law of sines, and the recently discovered fact of the finite velocity of light. Huygens' book gives prominence to the explanation of the strange phenomena of double refraction found in "a certain kind of crystal brought from Iceland"— Iceland spar. But both theories seem to be equally competent in dealing with the established facts of reflexion and refraction, and the new facts about dispersion.

For a century at least, their rivalry resembles that between the Ptolemaic and Copernican theories at a time when they seemed equally tenable so far as accounting for the phenomena was concerned. Later, new discoveries, such as those by Young and Fresnel, tend to favor the wave theory of light; but the rivalry continues right down to the present day. It remains unresolved, at least to an extent which prompts

Eddington, in reviewing contemporary controversy about the nature of light and electricity, to suggest the invention of the word "wavicle" to signify the complementary use of both particles and waves in the modern theory of radiation.

Unlike the rivalry between the Ptolemaic and Copernican systems, which seemed for a while to be entirely a matter of different mathematical descriptions of the same phenomena, the conflict between these two theories of light involves from the very beginning an issue between diverse mechanical hypotheses to explain the phenomena. That issue is argued not only with respect to the adequacy of either theory to explain such phenomena as the rectilinear propagation of light and its different behavior in different mediums; but it is also debated in terms of the underlying mechanical conceptions. As gravitational force acting at a distance raises a mechanical problem which Newton's ether is not finally able to solve, so Huygens' ether as the medium through which light is propagated in waves raises mechanical problems which, if insoluble (as they seem to be), contribute even more heavily to the general scientific scandal of mechanics.

The two authors take different attitudes toward hypotheses and mechanical explanation.

Huygens, as we have seen, begins his book with the express intention to "investigate . . . the causes" and to express them "in terms of mechanical motions." Newton, on the other hand, begins his with a reiteration of his disavowal of hypotheses. "My design in this book," he writes, "is not to explain the properties of light by hypotheses, but to propose and prove them by reason and experiments." Nevertheless, Newton's explanation of how the prism produces from white light the band of colors in the spectrum seems to require the assumption of a distinct kind of light corpuscle for each color; and, in addition, the assumption that, although all light particles have the same velocity when they travel together making white light, separate particles for different colors are differently refrangible, that is, differently susceptible to the action of the particles in the refracting me- dium of the glass.

Perhaps only in Newton's somewhat artificially restricted sense of the word "hypothesis" could these assumptions escape that denomination. In any case, the existence of Huygens' rival theory prevented his escaping a controversy about hypotheses. In the Queries attached to his Optics, he engages in that controversy with an acumen which shows another side of his genius.

Huygens' wave theory requires what anybody would have to call an hypothesis and requires it from the very start. "It is inconceivable," he writes, "to doubt that light consists in the motion of some sort of matter." He immediately rejects the notion that light rays consist in the "transport of matter coming to us from the [luminous] object, in the way in which a shot or an arrow traverse the air"— if for no other reason, because "the rays traverse one another without hindrance." The similarity between the phenomena of light and the phe- nomena of sound suggests to him the "way that light spreads," and causes him to extend the mechanics of sound—conceived as a wave mo- tion—to light.

"We know that by means of air, which is an invisible and impalpable body," Huygens argues, "sound spreads around the spot where it has been produced, by a movement which is passed on successively from one part of air to another; and that the spreading of this movement, taking place equally on all sides, ought to form spherical surfaces ever enlarging and which strike our ears. Now there is no doubt at all that light also comes from the luminous body to our eyes by some movement impressed on the matter which is between the two. ... If, in addition, light takes time for its passage . . . it will follow that this movement, impressed on the intervening matter, is successive; and consequently it spreads, as sound does, by spherical surfaces and waves; for I call them waves from their resemblance to those which are seen to be formed in water when a stone is thrown into it."

Huygens is aware, however, that the analogy between light and sound is far from perfect.

"If one examines," he says, "what this matter may be in which the movement coming from the luminous body is propagated, one will see that it is not the same that serves for the propagation of sound. . . . This may be proved," he goes on, "by shutting up a sounding body in a glass vessel from which the air is with- drawn." An alarm clock beating its bell in a jar without air makes no sound, but a jar without air is no less transparent than one with air.

Since when "the air is removed from the vessel the light does not cease to traverse it as before," and since waves have to be waves of something, and light waves cannot be waves of air, they must be waves of a substance, says Huygens, "which I call ethereal matter."

This ether, a transparent medium permeating the whole universe, proves to be what Einstein calls the enfant terrible in the family of hypothetical physical substances. Postulated by Huygens in order to explain light mechanically, it in turn calls for a mechanical account of its own extraordinary properties. Huygens does not avoid this new problem, but neither does he undertake to solve it completely.

Suppose "one takes a number of spheres of equal size, made of some very hard substance, and arranges them in a straight line, so that they touch one another." Then, says Huygens, "one finds, on striking with a similar sphere against the first of these spheres, that the motion passes as in an instant to the last of them, which separates itself from the row, without one's being able to perceive that the others have been stirred." This type of motion in the ether would account for "the extreme velocity of light" and yet "this progression of motion is not instantaneous," as the motion of light also is not. "Now in applying this kind of movement to that which produces light," Huygens continues, "there is nothing to hinder us from estimating the particles of the ether to be of a substance as nearly approaching to perfect hardness and possessing a springiness as prompt as we choose." Beyond this Huygens does not go.

"It is not necessary to examine here," he says, "the causes of this hardness, or of that springiness. . . . Though we shall ignore the true cause of springiness we still see that there are many bodies which possess this property; and thus there is nothing strange in supposing that it exists also in little invisible bodies like the particles of the ether."

But difficulties which Huygens did not foresee make his ether more than a strange supposition—almost a mechanical impossibility. Huygens had thought that light waves are transmitted in the ether in the way that soundwaves are in the air, that is, longitudinally, the direction in which the individual particles vibrate being the same as the direction of the wave motion itself. But when, in the 19th century, it was found that the phenomena of the polarization of light could not be explained by the corpuscular theory, but only by the wave theory (thus shifting the scales decisively in favor of the latter), it was also found that the wave theory could explain polarization only on the assumption that the motion of the ether particles which produce the light waves is not longitudinal, but transverse, that is, in a direction perpendicular to the waves produced by the vibration of the particles.

As Fresnel pointed out at the time, "the supposition that the vibrations were transverse was contrary to the received ideas on the nature of the vibration of elastic fluids." They had all involved, as in the case of air as the medium for sound, a longitudinal transmission. The character of the ether is changed by the requirement that its particles vibrate transversely. It ceases to be an air-like ether and must be imagined as a jelly-like ether.

The task which Huygens had postponed that of giving a mechanical explanation of the ether he had posited in order to state the mechanics of light— becomes in consequence far more difficult, if not impossible. In their efforts to construct "the ether as a jelly-like mechanical substance, physicists," according to Einstein, had to make so many "highly artificial and unnatural assumptions," that they finally decided to abandon the whole program of mechanical explanation.

Of Newton's two objections to the wave theory of light, the second by itself seems to create an insuperable difficulty for Huygens' ether, even before the realization that it must be a jelly-like medium.

Newton's first objection is that any wave theory is inconsistent with the fact of the rectilinear propagation of light. "If light consisted in pression or motion, propagated either in an instant or in time, it would bend into the shadow; for," he points out, "pression or motion cannot be propagated in a fluid in right lines, beyond an obstacle which stops part of the motion, but will bend and spread every way into the quiescent medium which lies beyond the obstacle. . . . The waves, pulses or vibrations of the air, wherein sound consists, bend manifestly, even though not so much as the waves of water."

This objection loses its force when, in the 19th century, light's bending is experimentally discovered. But Newton's other objection gains force when, two centuries after he made it, a jelly-like density is imposed upon the^etrleTby the experimental facts of polarization. This second objection does not point to the inadequacy of the wave theory with respect to the phenomena which must be described, but rather calls attention to its inconsistency with celestial mechanics.

Light travels through inter-stellar space. But so also do the planets. Newton's astronomy accounts for the motion of the planets with great precision, only on the supposition of no resistance from a medium. "To make way for the regular and lasting motions of the planets and comets," he writes, "it is necessary to empty the heavens of all matter, except perhaps . . . such an exceedingly rare ethereal medium as we described above." Here he refers to the ether he himself had posited as a possible cause of gravitational attraction. Its resistance, he thinks, is "so small as to be inconsiderable." The "planets and comets and all gross bodies [can] perform their motions more freely in this ethereal medium than in any fluid, which fills all space adequately without leaving any pores." Such "a dense fluid . . . serves only to disturb and retard the motions of those great bodies, and make the frame of nature languish." Since it "hinders the operations of nature," and since "there is no evidence for its existence," Newton concludes that "it ought to be rejected."

The next conclusion follows immediately. "If it be rejected, the hypotheses that light consists in pression or motion, propagated through such a medium, are rejected with it." Newton would seem entitled to draw these conclusions because, no matter how slight the density of ethereal matter, the use of the ether in the wave theory of light involves some interaction between the particles of ether and the particles of matter. Unless such interaction takes place, no explanation can be given of the change in the velocity of light when it enters a medium like glass or water. Since in Newton's universe there is no difference between terrestrial and celestial matter, Newton cannot accept an ether which interacts with the matter of glass or water, but does not interact with the matter of the planets.

This objection of Newton's, pointing to an inconsistency between the kind of ether required by the wave theory of light and the unretarded motion of the heavenly bodies, appears not to have been answered, but only waived, at the time of the wave theory's ascendancy. The famous Michelson-Morley experiment on ether drift later re-opens Newton's penetrating query about the ether. But this occurs at a time when physicists are prepared to give up not only the ether, but also with it the mechanical explanations of gravity and light which it had brought into conflict with one another. Before the mechanical dogma runs its course, it has a career in other fields of physical inquiry. The phenomena of heat, magnetism, and electricity are explored and explained under its inspiration. The history of these subjects is marked by a very rash of hypotheses. Each time mechanical explanation is attempted for a new domain of phenomena, new substances are added.

The postulated entities— calorific, magnetical, and electric fluids— are unobservable and without weight. In Newton's terms, they are "occult"; though, it must be added, they are no more occult than the ether Newton himself postulated to explain gravity or the ether Huygens postulated to explain light. In fact, each of these new substances seems to resemble the aeriform or fluid ether, just as each is conceived, as the gravitational or optical ether was earlier conceived, in the context of the issue of action-at-a-distance as opposed to action-bycontact. They would seem to be unavoidable in a mechanical account of the radiations of heat, magnetism, and electricity.

The phenomena of heat, Lavoisier writes, are "difficult to comprehend . . . without admitting them as the effects of a real and material substance, or very subtle fluid Wherefore," he continues, "we have distinguished the cause of heat, or that exquisitely elastic fluid which produces it, by the term of caloric." Lavoisier declares himself "unable to determine whether light be a modification of caloric, or if caloric be, on the contrary, a modification of light." But in terms of observed effects he does attribute ether-like properties to caloric. "This subtle matter," he says, "penetrates through the pores of all known substances"; for "there are no vessels through which it cannot escape."

The theory of caloric serves its purpose before it gives way to the theory of heat as molecular motion, a conception which can be integrated with the molecular, or kinetic, theory of gases. "The development of the kinetic theory of matter," writes Einstein, "is one of the greatest achievements directly influenced by the mechanical view." It is all the more striking, therefore, that in the opening pages of

Fourier's Analytical Theory of Heat—wherein he reviews the triumphs of explanation achieved by Newton and his successors

Fourier should so flatly assert: "But whatever may be the range of mechanical theories, they do not apply to the effects of heat. These make up a special order of phenomena which cannot be explained by the principles of motion and equilibrium."

It is equally striking that Lavoisier seems to have anticipated not only the mechanical theory of heat, but the possibility of a purely mathematical treatment of the phenomena. "We are not obliged to suppose [caloric] to be a real substance," he writes; it is sufficient "that it be considered as the repulsive cause, whatever that may be, which separates the particles of matter from each other, so that we are still at liberty to investigate its effects in an abstract and mathematical manner."

The second of these two things is precisely what Fourier proposes to undertake, but he disavows any interest in the first, namely, the explanation of heat in terms of the mechanical separation of particles by repulsion. In language which resembles Newton's disavowal of concern with the cause of attraction, Fourier declares that "primary causes are unknown to us, but are subject to simple and constant laws, which may be discovered by observation."

In another place he writes: "Of the nature of heat only uncertain hypotheses could be formed, but the knowledge of the mathematical laws to which its effects are subject is independent of all hypothesis." Fourier's aim, therefore, with respect to "the very extensive class of phenomena, not produced by mechanical forces, but resulting simply from the presence and accumulation of heat," is "to reduce the physical questions to problems of pure analysis" and "to express the most general conditions of the propagation of heat in differential equations." He expresses his indebtedness to Descartes for "the analytical equations" which that mathematician "was the first to introduce into the study of curves and surfaces," but "which are not restricted to the properties of figures, and those properties which are the object of rational mechanics." These equations, he insists, "extend to all general phenomena," and "from this point of view, mathematical analysis is as extensive as nature itself."

This strongly worded statement affirms the mathematical character of nature as the support and justification for a purely mathematical physics. If Fourier's remarks about causes and hypotheses are reminiscent of Newton in his mathematical mood, how much more is Fourier's faith in pure mathematical analysis reminiscent of Galileo. Like Galileo, and unlike Newton, Fourier never deviates from his indifference to causes and never softens his judg- ment of the incompetence and irrelevance of mechanics to the subject he is investigating.

His trust in mathematical analysis, which is able by itself to yield and organize physical discoveries, not only revives the spirit of Galileo, but also seems to have inspired Clerk Maxwell to turn from a mechanical to a mathematical theory of electricity.

Certain of Fourier's mathematical achievements, such as his theory of dimensions, prove useful to Maxwell. More important, perhaps, is the fact that Maxwell's predictions about the propagation of electro-magnetic waves, later experimentally verified by Hertz, are the result of mathematical analysis. With such a demonstration of the power of mathematics to work fruitfully with experiment, and without any aid from mechanical hypotheses, Maxwell gives up the attempt to formulate a mechanics for his equations describing the electro-magnetic field. He is quite content to let his field theory state the mathematical structure of the phenomena.

Between Fourier and Maxwell comes Faraday. One of the greatest experimenters in the whole tradition of science, Faraday discovers the phenomena whose mathematical structure

Maxwell later develops. He prepares the way for Maxwell's application to electricity and magnetism of the method Fourier had practiced. His speculations concerning the relation of electrical and gravitational force point ahead, beyond Maxwell, to the possibility ofa field theory which might unify all physical phenomena under a single set of mathematical laws.

Faraday sees no incompatibility between experimentation and speculation. On the contrary he says that "as an experimentalist I feel bound to let experiment guide me into any train of thought which it may justify; being satisfied that experiment, like analysis, must lead to strict truth, if rightly interpreted; and believing also that it is in its nature far more suggestive of new trains of thought and new conditions of natural power." Faraday's faith seems to have been amply justified. His experiments not only discovered a stunning number of new facts, but the speculations to which they led transformed the whole mode of thinking about electricity and magnetism, and, to some extent, the whole of physics.

The Elizabethan Gilbert, with his bold and brilliantly handled thesis that the earth is a magnet, had made magnetism appear something more than a random phenomenon occasionally met with in nature. But not until Faraday's discovery of diamagnetism, announced in a memoir On the Magnetic Condition of All Matter, would anyone have dared to say that "all matter appears to be subject to the magnetic force as universally as it is to the gravitating, the electric and the chemical or cohesive forces." Of electricity, he can only predict, as the result of his protracted experimental investigations, that "it is probable that every effect depending upon the powers of inorganic matter . . . will ultimately be found subordinate to it." These remarks indicate the controlling theme of Faraday's researches, namely, the convertibility and unity of natural forces. It seems to have been suggested to him by the discovery that both electrical and magnetic forces obey the same simple inverse-square law as the force of gravitational attraction. The fact that certain forces obey the same law or that their action can be described by the same equations, would not of itself reveal whether one of these forces is primary or all are derivative from some other primary force. But it would suggest questions to be asked by experiment.

Gilbert compares magnetism and electricity but he is not able to convert one into the other. Oersted, before Faraday, is the first to establish one aspect of their convertibility. He shows that an electric current has a magnetic effect. Faraday succeeds in showing the reverse— that a magnetic current has electrical power. He expresses his fascination with such reversibilities in his remarks on the electrical torpedo fish. "Seebeck," he writes, "taught us how to commute heat into electricity; and Peltier has more lately given us the strict converse of this, and shown us how to convert electricity into heat. . . . Oersted showed how we were to convert electric into magnetic forces, and I had the delight of adding the other member of the full relation, by reacting back again and converting magnetic into electric forces. So perhaps in these organs, where nature has provided the apparatus by means of which the fish can exert and convert nervous into electric force, we may be able, possessing in that point of view a power far beyond that of the fish itself, to reconvert the electric into the nervous force."

Faraday demonstrates still another such reversibility in nature. The nature of his discovery is indicated by the titles of the papers in which he announces it: On the Magnetization of Light and the Illumination of Magnetic Lines of Force and The Action of Electric Currents on Light. These papers, in his opinion, "established for the first time, a true, direct relation and dependence between light and the magnetic and electric forces"; and he concludes them with an explicit statement of the central theme of all his researches and speculations.

"Thus a great addition is made," he writes, "to the facts and considerations which tend to prove that all natural forces are tied together and have one common origin. It is no doubt difficult in the present state of our knowledge to express our expectation in exact terms; and, though I have said that another of the powers of nature is, in these experiments, directly related to the rest, I ought, perhaps, rather to say that another form of the great power is distinctly and directly related to the other forms."

One form of the "great power" remained to be connected with such "other forms" as those of light, heat, electricity, and magnetism. That was the power of gravitational force. Faraday comes to this last stage of his speculations concerning the unity of nature's powers in terms of his conception of "lines of force" and of what later came to be called "the field of force."

The earliest theories of electricity and magnetism, in an orthodox atomistic vein, had conceived them as exerting an influence by means of the effluvia which they emitted. Newton, for example, speculates on "how the effluvia of a magnet can be so rare and subtle, as to pass through a plate of glass without any resistance or diminution of their force, and yet so potent as to turn a magnetic needle beyond the glass." When electrical conduction is later discovered, effluvia are replaced by fluids, on the analogy of caloric as the fluid conductor of heat. But when

Faraday finds that he can induce from one current to another, he becomes interested in the dielectric, non-conducting medium around the circuits. He is strongly averse to any theory which involves action-at-a-distance, and so he argues that induction takes place by the action of contiguous particles. To support that argu- ment he shows experimentally that electrical induction can "turn a corner."

From his study of all the phenomena of magnetism, Faraday forms the conception of "lines of force" and concludes that there is "a center of power surrounded by lines of force which are physical lines essential both to the existence of force within the magnet and to its conveyance to, and exertion upon, magnetic bodies at a distance." He says of this "idea of lines of force" that "all the points which are experimentally established with regard to [magnetic] action, i.e., all that is not hypothetical, appear to be well and truly represented by it"; and he adds: "Whatever idea we employ to represent the power ought ultimately to include electric forces, for the two are so related that one expression ought to serve for both."

Subsequently Faraday satisfies himself as to the physical reality of electrical lines of force in addition to the magnetic lines. The compulsionof his interest in the unity of nature then drives him to speculate about gravitational force. He begins by admitting that, "in the case of gravitation, no effect sustaining the idea of an independent or physical line of force is presented to us; as far as we at present know, the line of gravitation is merely an ideal line representing the direction in which the power is exerted." But encouraged, perhaps, by Newton's repeated references to "the attractions of gravity, magnetism, and electricity," and by Newton's letter to Bentley which he interprets as showing Newton to be "an unhesitating believer in physical lines of gravitating force," Faraday goes to work experimentally.

The report of these researches On the Possible

Relation of Gravity to Electricity opens with the re-statement of Faraday's central theme. "The long and constant persuasion that all the forces of nature are mutually dependent, having one origin, or rather being different manifestations of one fundamental power, has made me often think of establishing, by experiment, a connexion between gravity and electricity, and so introducing the former into the group, the chain of which, including also magnetism, chemical force and heat, binds so many and such varied exhibitions of force together by common relations." His experiments, he tells us, unfortunately "produced only negative results," but that does not shake his "strong feeling of the existence of a relation between gravity and electricity."

Though Faraday fails to prove "that such a relation exists," he does bequeath, as a legacy to 20th century physics, the problem of a field theory which would embrace both gravitational and electrical force. But whereas Faraday conceives the problem mechanically in terms of the physical reality, as well as unity, of all lines of force, in which contiguous particles act on one another, those who inherit the problem from him cease to concern themselves with the physical existence of "lines of force" and their mechanical basis in the action and reaction of bodies. Influenced by the amazing generality implicit in Maxwell's field equations, they proceed to search for a purely mathematical statement of nature's structure.

In the judgment of the 20th century physicist mathematics may at last succeed in doing precisely what mechanics, from Newton to

Faraday, kept promising but forever failing to do. If the unity of nature can be expressed in a single set of laws, they will be, according to Einstein, laws of a type radically different from the laws of mechanics. Taking the form o£ Maxwell's equations, a form which appears in all other equations of modern physics," they will be, he writes, "laws representing the structure of the field."

In saying that "Maxwell's equations are structure laws" and that they provide "a new pattern for the laws of nature," Einstein means to emphasize their non-mechanical character. "In Maxwell's theory," he writes, "there are no material actors." Whereas "Newton's gravitational laws connect the motion of a body here and now with the action of a body at the same time in the far distance," Maxwell's equations "connect events which happen now and here with events which will happen a little later in the immediate vicinity." Like the equations which describe "the changes of the electromagnetic field, our new gravitational laws are," according to Einstein, "also structure laws describing the changes of the gravitational field."

The heart of the difference between a "structure law" and a mechanical law seems to be contained in Einstein's statement that "all space is the scene of these laws and not, as for mechanical laws, only points in which matter or changes are present." This contrast between matter and space brings to mind the difference between physics and geometry. Yet Einstein's repeated reference to "changes" in these spacestructures also reminds us that the electrical and gravitational fields are not purely geometrical, but physical as well.

The structure laws of the new physics may be geometrical in form, but if they are to have any physical meaning, can they entirely avoid some coloring by the mechanical conceptions which have been traditionally associated with the consideration of matter and motion? At least one contemporary physicist appears to think that mechanics survives to bury its undertakers. After describing the development in which geometry progressively "swallowed up the whole of mechanics," Eddington observes that "mechanics in becoming geometry re- mains none the less mechanics. The partition between mechanics and geometry," he continues, "has broken down and the nature of each of them has diffused through the whole"; so that "besides the geometrisation of mechanics, there has been a mechanisation of geometry."

According to this view, it is not mechanics, but classical mechanics, which the new physics has abandoned. The character of the mechanics seems to have altered with the character of the mathematical formulations. Field theory, dealing with contiguous areas and successive events, avoids the problem of action-at-a-distance and also apparently that problem's classical solution in terms of the action of contiguous particles. But another sort of mechanics may be implicit in the field equations which connect events in one area with events in the immediate vicinity. If those equations had been available to him, Newton might have expressed his theory of a variably dense ether—analogous to the modern conception of a variably filled or variably curved space— in terms of structure laws describing the gravitational field. We are left with a number of questions. Is the story of mechanics the story of its rise and decline or the story of its changing role—now dominant, now subordinate; now more manifest, now more concealed— at all stages in the development of a physics which is committed to being both mathematical and experimental? Do the status and character of mechanical conceptions change with changes in the form of the mathematical laws which describe the phenomena ? Can physics be totally devoid of mechanical insight and yet perform experiments which somehow require the scientist to act on bodies and to make them act on one another? Could a pure mathematical physics have yielded productive applications in mechanical engineering without the intermediation of mechanical notions of cause and effect ? Whichever way these questions are answered, we face alternatives that seem to be equally unsatisfactory. Either experimental physics is purely mathematical and proclaims its disinterest in as well as its ignorance of causes; or physics cannot be experimental and mathematical without also being mechanical, and without being involved in a search for causes which are never found.

To the layman there is something mysterious about all this. He stands in awe of the physicist's practical mastery of matter and its motions, which he naively supposes to depend upon a scientific knowledge of the causes, while all the time the scientists protest that the causes remain unknown to an experimental and mathematical physics. Mechanical explanations may be offered from time to time, but the various "forces" they appeal to can be understood only from their effects, and are nothing more than verbal shorthand for the formulae or equations which express the mathematical laws. Yet they remain cause-names, and seem to stimulate advances in science— both experimental and mathematical—almost as a consequence of the exasperating elusiveness of these hidden causes.

Certain philosophers hold a view which suggests that the clue to the mystery may lie in the word "hidden." Causes exist and we can control them to build machines and explode bombs, but we cannot with our senses catch them in the very act of causing, or perceive the inwardness of their operation. If the fact that they are thus unobservable means that they are occult, then all causes are occult— not least of all the mechanical type of cause which consists in the impact of one body upon another.

In the century in which physicists tried to avoid the scandal of forces acting at a distance by postulating mechanical mediums through which one body acted directly on another, philosophers like Locke and Hume express their doubts that such causal action is any less occult than Newton had said Aristotle's causes were.

"The passing of motion out of one body into another," Locke thinks, "is as obscure and unconceivable, as how our minds move or stop our bodies by thought. . . . The increase of motion by impulse, which is observed or believed sometimes to happen, is yet harder to understand. We have by daily experience, clear evidence of motion produced both by impulse and by thought; but the manner how, hardly comes within our comprehension; we are equally at a loss in both." In Locke's judgment we will al- ways remain "ignorant of the several powers, efficacies, and ways of operation, whereby the effects, which we daily see, are produced." If scientific knowledge is knowledge of causes, then "how far soever human industry may ad- vance useful and experimental philosophy in physical things, scientifical will still be out of our reach."

When we try to observe efficient causes at work, what do we see? Hume answers that we only see one thing happening after another. "The impulse of one billiard-ball is attended with motion in the second. This is the whole that appears to the outward senses." Nor can we form any "inward impression" of what takes place at the moment of impact. "We are ignorant," he writes, "of the manner in which bodies operate on each other"; and we shall always remain so, for "their force or energy is entirely incomprehensible."

As the chapter on Cause indicates, Aristotle holds an opposite view of the matter. What takes place in efficient causation may be imperceptible, but it is not incomprehensible. All causes may be occult so far as the senses are concerned, but they are not obscure to the intellect. But Aristotle would also insist that the action of efficient causes cannot be understood if they are totally isolated from other causes material, formal, final. A purely mechanical physics, in his opinion, defeats itself by its basic philosophical tenets, which exclude all properties that are not quantitative and all causes except the efficient. Only a different metaphysics —one which conceives physical substances in terms of matter and form, or potentiality and actuality—can yield a physics which is able to deal with causes and explain the phenomena; but such an Aristotelian physics, from the modern point of view, stands condemned on other grounds. It is not experimental. It is not productive of useful applications. It is not mathematical; nor is it capable of comprehending all the phenomena of nature under a few simple, universal laws.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The foundations of mechanics
 1a. Matter, mass, and atoms: the primary qualities of bodies
 1b. The laws of motion: inertia; the measure offeree; action and reaction
 1c. Space and time in the analysis of motion

2. The logic and method of mechanics
 2a. The role of experience, experiment, and induction in mechanics
 2b. The use of hypotheses in mechanics
 2c. Theories of causality in mechanics

3. The use of mathematics in mechanics: the dependence of progress in mechanics on
mathematical discovery
 3a. Number and the continuum: the theory of measurement
 3b. The geometry of conies: the
 motion of planets and projectiles
 3c. Algebra and analytic geometry: the symbolic formulation of mechanical
 problems
 3d. Calculus: the
 measurement of irregular areas and variable motions

4. The place, scope, and ideal of the science of mechanics: its relation to the philosophy of
nature and other sciences
 4a. Terrestrial and celestial
 mechanics: the mechanics of finite bodies and of parti-
 cles or atoms
 4b. The explanation of qualities and qualitative change in terms of quantity and
 motion
 4c. The
 mechanistic account of the phenomena of life
 The basic phenomena and problems of mechanics: statics and dynamics
 4d. Simple machines: the balance and the lever
 4e. The equilibrium
 and motion of fluids: buoyancy, the weight and pressure of air,
 the effects of a vacuum
 4f. Stress, stra in, and elasticity: the strength of materials
 4g. Motion, void, and
 medium: resistance and friction
 4h. Rectilinear
 motion
 (1) Uniform motion: its causes and laws
 (2) Accelerated motion: free fall
 5/! Motion about a center: planets, projectiles, pendulum
 (1) Determination of orbit, force, speed, time, and period
 (2) Perturbation of motion: the two and three body problems
 PACE

6. Basic concepts of mechanics
 6a. Center of gravity: its determination for one or several bodies
 6b. Weight and specific gravity: the relation of mass and weight
 6c. Velocity, acceleration, and momentum: angular or rectilinear, average or
 instantaneous
 6d. Force: its kinds and its effects
 (1) The relation of mass and force: the law of universal gravitation
 (2) Action-at-a-distance: the field and medium offeree
 (3) The parallelogram law: the composition of forces and the composition of
 velocities
 6e. Work and energy: their conservation; perpetual motion

7. The extension of mechanical principles to other phenomena: optics, acoustics, the
theory of heat, magnetism, and electricity
 7a. Light: the corpuscular and the wave theory
 (1) The laws of reflection and refraction
 (2) The production of colors
 (3) The speed of light
 (4) The medium of light: the ether
 7& Sound: the mechanical explanation of acoustic phenomena
 yc.
 The theory of heat
 (1) The description and explanation of the phenomena of heat: the hypothesis
 of caloric
 (2) The measurement and the mathematical analysis of the quantities of heat
 7b. Magnetism: the great magnet of the earth
 (1) Magnetic phenomena: coition, verticity, variation, dip
 (2) Magnetic force and magnetic fields
 7c. Electricity: electrostatics
 and electrodynamics no
 (1) The source of electricity: the relation of the kinds of electricity
 (2) Electricity and matter: conduction, insulation, induction, electrochemical
 decomposition
 (3) The relation of electricity and magnetism: the electromagnetic field
 (4) The relation of electricity to heat and light: thermoelectricity
 (5) The measurement of electric quantities

REFERENCES
============================================================

1. The foundations of mechanics

    [sem referências]

1a. Matter, mass, and atoms - the primary quahties of bodies

8 ARISTOTLE: Heavens, BK HI, CH 4 [303 B 3- b 8] 394b-d / Generation and Corruption, BK I, CH 2 410d-413c; CH 8 423b-425d
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 12, 173a-b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [146-328] 2d-5a; [483-634] 7a-8d; BK II [333-568] i9b- 22b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 115, A i, ANS and REP 3,5 585d-587c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 72a-d; PART HI, 172a-b; PART iv, 269d
28 GILBERT : Loadstone, *K n, 29c-34b esp 29c-30a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 134a-153a passim
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK i, APH 66 114d- 115c; BK II, APH 8 140b; APH 48 179d-188b
31 DESCARTES: Meditations, n, 78c-d / Objeclions and Replies, DEF vn 130c-d; 231a-232a
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 367a-368b
34 NEWTON: Principles, DEF i 5a; DEF m 5b; BK i, PROP 73, SCHOL 133b-134a; BK II, GENERAL SCHOL, 218a-219a; PROP 40, SCHOL, 246a-b; BK HI, RULE HI 270b-271a; PROP 6, COROL HI-IV 281b; PROP 7 281b 282b / Optics, BK II, 479b-485b; BK III, 520a-522a; 52 8b; 53 la543a esp 537a-b, 541b-542a 34HuYGENs - Light, CH i, 558b-560a; CH m, 566b-569b; CH v, 601b-603b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH iv 129b-131a; CH vm, SECT 7-26 134b-138b passim; CH xm, SECT 11-27 150d-154d passim; CH xxi, SECT 2-4 178c-179c; CH xxm, SECT 7-17 205d-209a passim; SECT 22-32 209d-212d; CH xxxi, SECT 2, 239d; BK III, CH x, SECT 15 295a-c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 9-18 414d-416c passim; SECT 50 422c; SECT 102 432d 433a
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PREP, 3b- 4a; PART i, 9a-15c passim, esp 9b-c, 13a b; 16b-c; 41b-c
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169a-170a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 685d 686c; 850b,d-855a,c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 68a-b
54 FREUD: Narcissism, 400d-401a ,

1b. The laws o f motion - inertia; the measure of force; action and reaction

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIII, CH 10 [266*27- 267*21] 354b-d / Heavens, BK III, CH 2 [30i*2i- b 3i] 392c-393b 102 \c to la (1. The foundations of mechanics, Ib. The laws of motion - inertia; the measure of force; action and reaction!)
9 ARISTOTLE: Motion of Animals, CH 2-4 233c- 235c / Gait of Animals, CH 3 243d-244a / Generation of Animals, BK iv, en 3 [768 b i6-24] 310b-c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [80-99] 16a-b; [184-250] 17b-18b
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 894a-895b; 899a- 900a; 905a-906b; 933b-934b; 936a-937a; 938b-939a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART HI, Q 84, A 3, REP 2 985d-989b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 50a; 72a-d; PART iv, 271d
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK 11, 56b-c
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 209a-210a; 224d-225d; FOURTH DAY, 240a-d
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK H, APH 35-36 162a-168d passim; APH 48 179d-188b
34 NEWTON: Principles, DLF in 5b; LAWS OF MOTION 14a-24a; BK u, PROP 40, SCIIOL, 246a-b / Optics, BK III, 541b-542a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, en xxi, SECT 2-4 178c-179c; en xxm, SECT 17 209a
35 BLRKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT in, 434d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT iv, DIV 27, 460c; SECT vii, DIV 57, 475d-476b [fn 2]
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, Ib
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 695a-c

1c. Space and time in the analysis of motion

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK vi 312b,d~325d
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 201a202a
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 45 46 176a-179a
33 PASCAL: Geometrical Demonstration, 434a- 439b
34 NLWTON: Principles, DEFINITIONS, SCHOL 8b- 13a; UK in, GENERAL SCHOL, 370a~371a / Op- tics, UK in, 528b 529a; 542a-543a
35 BERKLLEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 110-117 434b-436a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 24a-29d; 74b-76c; 160b- 163a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 249a-251b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 469a-d

2. The logic and method of mechanics

28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, SECOND DAY, 179c d; THIRD DAY, 200a-b; 202d 203a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 34b / No- vum Oiganum, PREF 105a-106d; BK i, APH 8 107c-d; APH 50 lllb; APH 64 114b; APH 70 116b-117a; APH 82 120d-121b; APH 99-100 127b-c; APH 121 132b-d; BK II 137a-195d / New Atlantis, 210d-214d
31 DESCARTES: Rules, vin, 12b 13a / Discourse, PART vi, 61d 62c
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 355a 358b passim; 365b- 366a
34 NEWTON: Principles, la-2a; BK i, PROP 69, SCHOL 130b-131a; BK III, 269a-b; RULES 270a-271b; GENERAL SCHOL, 371b-372a / Op- tics, BK III, 531b; 543a-b 34HuYGENs - Light, PREF, 551b-552a; CH i, 553b-554a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH in, SECT 16 317a-c; SECT 25-29 321a-323a passim; CH xn, SECT 9-13 360d-362d
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 104 433a-b; SECT 107 433d-434a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT iv, DIV 23-27 459a-460d esp DIV 26-27 460b-d; SECT vn, DIV 57, 475d-476b [fn 2]
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 6b c; 17d-18d; 32a; 69c- 72c esp 71b-72a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169a 170a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 440b,d; 758a-759c; 831a-d; 850b,d-855a,c esp 850b,d- 851c
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 239c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 882a-884b
54 FREUD: Instincts, 412a-b

2a. The role of experience, experiment, and induction in mechanics

28 GILBERT: Loadstone, PREF, la-b; BK i, 6a-7a esp 6d-7a; BK 11, 27b-c
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 200a-b; 207d-208a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 16a; 33d- 34b;42a-c
31 DESCARTES: Rules, vin, 12b-13a / Discourse, PART vi, 61d-62c
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 356a-357a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 69, SCHOL 130b 131a; BK III, RULL iv 271b; GENERAL SCHOL, 371b-372a / Optics, BK i, 379a; BK III, 542a; 543a-b
34 HUYGENS: Light, CH i, 553a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH in, SECT 16 317a-c; SECT 25-29 321a 323a passim; CH xn, SECT 9-13 360d-362d
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 58-59 424a-b; SECT 104 433a-b; SECT 107 433d- 434a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT iv, DIV 24-27 459b-460d esp DIV 26 460b-c; SECT vn, DIV 57, 475d-476b [fn 2]
42 KANT: Pute Reason, 6b-c; 227b-c
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PREF, Ic- 2b; PART i, 23c; PART in, 87b-c
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 175b; 181b; 184a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 385 b-c; 440b,d; 467a-b; 607a,c; 659a; 774d-775a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 864a 2b to 3t> CHAPTER 54: MECHANICS 103

2b. The use of hypotheses in mechanics

12 LUCRETIUS : Nature of Things, BK v [509-533] 67d-68a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FOURTH DAY, 240d-241c
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 367a-370a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, RULE iv 271b; GENERAL scHOL, 371b-372a / Optics, BK i, 379a; BK III, 528b; 543a
34 HUYGENS: Light, PREF, 551b-552a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK iv, CH in, SECT 16 317a-c; CH xn, SECT 12-1 } 362a-d
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 50 422c; SECT 105-106 433b-d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 57, 475d-476b [fn 2]
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 118b-119a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 227b-c
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, 9d- lOb
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 181b; 184a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 467a-b; 607a,c; 758a-759c; 777d-778c; 850b,d-855a,c esp 850b,d-851c
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 239c
53 JAMES : Psychology, 884a-b
54 FREUD: Narcissism, 400d-401a

2c. Theories of causality in mechanics

12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [509-533] 67d-68a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 202d-203a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 59a
34 NEWTON: Principles, DEF vm, 7b~8a; BK i, PROP 69, SCHOL 130b-131a; BK III, RULE i-n 270a; GENERAL SCHOL, 369b-372a / Optics, BK III, 528b-529a; 531b; 541b-542a
34 HUYGENS: Light, CH i, 553b-554a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxi, SECT 1-4 178b-179c; BK iv, CH in, SECT 25-26 321a-c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 50-53 422c-423a passim; SECT 60-66 424b-426a; SECT 102-109 432d-434b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT iv, DIV 24-27 459b-460d esp DIV 26 460b-c; SECT vn, DIV 55, 474c-d; DIV 56-57 475a-d esp DIV 57, 475d [fn 2]; SECT vm, DIV 64, 478d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 118b-119a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169a; 183a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 687d; 695b-c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 885b-886a

3. The use of mathematics in mechanics - the dependence of progress in mechanics on mathematical discovery

8 ARISTOTLE: Posterior Analytics, BK i, CH 9 104b-d; CH 13 [78 b 3 1-79*1 6] 108b-c / Physics, BK ii, CH 2 [194*7-11] 270b-c; BK VII, CH 5 333a-d / Metaphysics, BK xin, CH 3 [1078*5- 17] 609b-c
11 ARCHIMEDES: Equilibrium of Planes 502a- 519b / Floating Bodies 538a-560b / Method 569a-592a
14 PLUTARCH: Marcellus, 252a-255a
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK v, 964b-965a
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 35, A 8, ANS 779c-780c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 72a-d; 73b; PART iv, 268c-d
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 131b-132a; 133b; SECOND DAY -FOURTH DAY 178a-260a,c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 46b-c
31 DESCARTES: Rules, iv, 7a; xiv, 31c-d / Discourse, PART i, 43b-c; PART in, 50d / Objections and Replies, 169c-170a / Geometry, BK II, 322b-331a
34 NEWTON: Principles, la-2a; DEF vm 7b-8a; BK i, PROP 1-17 and SCHOL 32b-50a; PROP 30-
98 and SCHOL 76a-157b esp PROP 69, SCHOL 130b-131a; BK 11 159a 267a; UK in, 269a-b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, stcr w, DIV 27 460c-d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 94b-103a
42 KANT: Judgement, 551a-552a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169a b; 172a-173b; 175b; 177a; 182b-184a; 249a-b
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 831a-d
50 MARX: Capital, 170a-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 469a-d
53 JAMES: Psychology, 675b; 876a-b; 882a-883a

3a. Number and the continuum - the theory of measurement

11 EUCLID: Elements, BK v 81a 98b rsp DLMNI- TIONS, 5 81a; BK VII, DEFINITIONS, 20 127b; BK x, PROP 1-2 191b-193a; PROP 5-9 195a-198b
11 ARCHIMEDES: Measurement of a Cm If, PROP 3 448b-451b / Conoids and Spheroids, PROP 3-6 458b-460b / Equilibrium of Planes, BK i, PROP 6-7 503b-504b
16 PTOLEMY: Almagest, BK i, 18b-20b
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 197b-200a; 205b 206c
31 DESCARTES: Rules, xiv, 31b-33b / Geometry, BK i, 295a-296b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, LLMMA i 25a 42 K\NT: Judgement, 551a-552a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 183a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 469a-d

3b. The geometry of conies - the motion of planets and projectiles

11 ARCHIMEDES: Quadrature of the Parabola 527a-537b
11 APOLLONIUS: Conies 603a-804b
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK v, 975a-979b
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, SECOND DAY 191c-195c; FOURTH DAY 238a-260a,c passim, esp 238b-240a 104 3c to 4<r (3. The use of mathematics in mechanics - the dependence of progress m mechanics on mathematical discovery. 36. The geometry of conies - the motion of planets and projectiles!)
31 DESCARTES: Geometry, BK i-n, 298b-314b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 11-29 and SCHOL 42b-75b esp PROP 11-13 42b-46a; BK III, PROP 13 286a-b; PROP 40 337b-338a 34HuYGENs - Light, CH v, 583b-598a; 604b- 606b; CH vi, 607b-611a
42 KANT. Judgement, 551a-552a

3c. Algebra and analytic geometry - the symbolic formulation of mechanical problems

31 DESCARTES: Rules, iv, 5c-d; xiv, 30d-33b; xvi 33d-35c; xvm 36b-39d / Geometry 295a- 353b esp BK i-n, 298b-314b, BK II, 322b- 331a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, LEMMA 19 57b- 58b
34 HUYGENS: Light^ CH vi, 610a-b
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PREP, la
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 172a-173b; 177a- 251b

3d. Calculus - the measurement of irregular areas and variable motions

11 ARCHIMEDES: Equilibrium of Planes, BK i, PROP 7 504b / Quadrature of the Parabola 527a-537b
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK v, 973a-975a; 979b- 983b
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, SECOND DAY, 193b-194d; THIRD DAY, 205b-d; 224b-c
33 PASCAL: Equilibrium of Liquids, 395a-b / Geometrical Demonstration, 434b-435b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, LEMMA i-n and SCHOL 25a*32a esp LEMMA n, SCHOL, 31a-b; BK ii, LEMMA 2 and SCHOL 168a-170a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 172b; 177a; 181a-b; 183a-b; 221a-248b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 469a-d; EPILOGUE ii, 695b-c

4. The place, scope, and ideal of the science of mechanics - its relation to the philosophy of nature and other sciences

23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 72a-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 16a-b; 33d- 34b / Novum Organum, BK i, APH 74 118b; BK II, APH 9 140b-c / New Atlantis, 210d- 214d
31 DESCARTES: Rules, iv, 7a; v, 8a / Discourse, PART v, 54d-56a; 59a
34 NEWTON: Principles, lb-2a; BK i, PROP 69, SCHOL 130b-131a / Optics, BK III, 541b-542a
34 HUYGENS: Light, CH i, 553b-554a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 9, 454c-d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 94b-103a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 32a; 69c-72c esp 71b-72a / Judgement, 563a-564c
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169a-b; 172a-173b; 182a-184a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 468d-469a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 69b-70a; 882a-886a esp 883a-884b; 889a-890a

4a. Terrestrial and celestial mechanics - the mechanics of finite bodies and of particles or atoms

9 ARISTOTLE: Motion of Animals, CH 3 [699*11]- CH 4 [7oo ft 5] 234a-235a
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 888b-905a passim; 919b; 929a-933a; 935b; 940b-941a; 959a- 960a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FOURTH DAY, 245b-d
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK H, APH 5 138b- 139a; APH 35 162a-164a; APH 36, 165c-166c; APH 46, 178c; APH 48, 186c-d
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK HI, RULES 270a-271b; PROP 7 281b-282b / Optics, BK III, 539a- 542b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xm, 563a-b; EPILOGUE ii, 694d-696d

4b. The explanation of qualities and qualitative change in terms of quantity and motion

8 ARISTOTLE: Metaphysics, BK i, CH 4 [985 b 3~i9] 503c-d / Sense and the Sensible, CH 4 [442*30- b 24] 680a-c
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 2, 167b- 168b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK ii [398-521] 20a-21c; [677-687] 23c-d; [730-1022] 24b- 28a; BK iv [522-721] 51a-53d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 49b-d; PART in, 172b
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 231a-b
34 NEWTON: Optics, BK i, 431a-455a esp 450a- 453a
34 HUYGENS: Light, CH i, 553b-554a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK ii, CH vm, SECT 4 133d; SECT 7-26 134b-138b; CH xxi, SECT 3 178d; SECT 75 200b-d; CH xxm, SECT 8-9 206a-c; SECT n 206d-207a; SECT 37 213d- 214b; CH xxxi, SECT 2 239b-d esp 239d; BK III, CH IV, SECT 10 261b-dj BK IV, CH II, SECT 11-13 311c-312b; CH in, SECT 6, 314b; SECT 12-14 316a-d; SECT 28 322a-c
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 25 417d- 418a; SECT 102 432d-433a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 169b; 182a-b

4c. The mechanistic account of the phenomena of life

7 PLATO: Phaedo, 240d-242b / Sophist, 567a- 568a
8 ARISTOTLE: Sense and the Sensible, CH 4 a-c 5to5d CHAPTER 54: MECHANICS 105
9 ARISTOTLE: Parts of Animals, BK i, CH i [640** 5-641*19] 163a-164a / Motion of Animals, CH 7 [70i b i-3<>] 236d-237b; CH 8 [702*22]- cn 10 [703 b i] 237c-239a / Gait of Animals 243a-252a,c / Generation of Animals, BK II, CH i [734 b 3-2o] 275a-b; CH 5 [74i b 5-io] 282c
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH I2-BK II, CH 8 172d-195c esp BK i, en 12 172d-173c, BK II, CH 3, 185a, CH 6 188c-191a; BK III, CH 14-15, 213b-214c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [865- 1022] 26a-28a; BK III [94-869] 31b-41a; BK v [783-836] 71b-72a
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, INTRO, 47a-b
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 355b-d; 495c-496d
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 56a-60b
34 NEWTON: Optics, BK i, 384b-385b; 428a-b; BK HI, 518b-519b; 522a
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH ix, SECT ii 140b-c; CH x, SECT 10 143c-d; CH xi, SECT ii 145d-146a; CH xxvn, SECT 5 220b-c; BK iv, CH in, SECT 25 321a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 337d-338a / Political Economy, 368d-369a
42 KANT: Judgement, 571c-572a; 575b-578a; 578d-582c
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, 14a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 440 b,d; 540a-541a,c
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 89b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK x, 449b-c; EPILOGUE n, 689c-690a
53 IAMES: Psychology, 5a-6b; 9a-17b; 44a-52a; 68a-71a; 95b-98a'
54 FREUD: Instincts, 412c-414c / Beyond the Pleasure Principle, 651d-657d passim, csp 651d, 652d; 659d-661c esp 660a / Ego and Id, 708d-709b; 711c-d

5. The basic phenomena and problems of mechanics - statics and dynamics

    [sem referências]

5a. Simple machines - the balance and the lever

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIII, CH 4 [255*20-22] 339d
10 HIPPOCRATES: Fractures, par 31, 87c
11 ARCHIMEDES: Equilibrium of Planes, BK i, POSTULATES, 1-3 502a; 6 502b; PROP 1-3 502b-503a; PROP 6-7 503b-504b
14 PLUTARCH: Marcellus, 252c-d
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 933b-934b; BK v, 970b-972a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, SECOND DAY, 178b-180c; THIRD DAY, 209a-210a; FOURTH DAY, 258c d
33 PASCAL: Equilibrium of Liquids, 390a 394b
34 NEWTON: Principles, COROL n 15a-16b; LAWS OF MOTION, SCHOL, 23a-24a
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT iv, DIV 27, 460c
50 MARX: Capital, 181a

5b. The equilibrium and motion of fluids - buoyancy, the weight and pressure of air, the effects of a vacuum

8 ARISTOTLE: Heavens, BK iv, CH 6 404d-405a,c
10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 16, 181a d; BK II, CH 1-2, 183b,d-184c; CH 6 188c-191a; BK III, CH 14-15, 213b-214c
11 ARCHIMEDES: Floating Bodies 538a-560b
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRS r DAY, 135b- 138b; 163a-166c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 48, 180a
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 359a-365b / Great Experiment 382a-389b / Equilibrium of Liquids 390a- 403a / Weight of Air 403a-429a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK II, PROP 19-23 and SCHOL 194b-203a; PROP 36 226a-231b; HY- POTHESIS-PROP 53 and SCHOL 259a 267a; BK III, PROP 41, 356b-357b/ Optics, BK III, 518a-b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxm, SECT 23-24 209d-210c
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, lOc- 12d; 15c-16d; PART m, 88d-89d; 96b 99a

5c. Stress, strain, and elasticity - the strength of materials

28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 131a- 139c; SECOND DAY 178a-196d passim
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 48, 180a-d; 187d
34 NEWTON: Principles, LAWS OF MOTION, SCHOL, 21b-22a; BK II, PROP 23 and SCHOL 201b 203a / Optics, BK III, 540b-541a
34 HUYOENS: Light, CH i, 558b-559b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, en xxm, SECT 23-27 209d-211b
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PARTI, 14c- 15c; PART in, 96b 99a
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 192a-b

5d. Motion, void, and medium - resistance and friction

7 PLATO: Timaeus, 460c-d
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK iv, CH 6-9 292c-297c / Heavens, BK III, CH 2 [301*2 i- b 3i] 392c 393b / Dreams, CH 2 [459*28-34] 703b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [329-448] 5b-6c; [951-1051] 12d-14a; BK II [142-166] 16d-17a; [225-242] 17d-18a; BK vi [830-839] 91b-c
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 857a-b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in, Q 84, A 3, REP 2 985d-989b
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK vi, HOc
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 134a- 135b; 157b-171b; FOURFH DAY, 241d-243c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 8 140b; APH 36, 167b-c; APH 48, 186a; 187a; 187c
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK II 159a-267a passim, CSp GENERAL SCHOL 211b-219a; BK III, PROP 6, COROL in 281b; PROP 10 284a-285a / Optics, BK HI, 521b-522a; 527a-528b 106 5e to (5. The basic phenomena and problems of mechanics - statics and dynamics, id. Motion, void, and medium - resistance and friction.)
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK H, CH XIH, SECT 22-23 153b-d; CH xvn, SECT 4 168b d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 71b-72a

5e. Rectilinear motion

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK v, CH 4 [228 b i 5-229*7] 309d-310a; BK VIH, CH 8 [261*27-26?$] 348b- 349c / Heavens, BK i, CH 2 [268 b i5-24] 359d
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 157b- 171b; THIRD DAY 197a-237a,c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 48, 186b-c
34 NEWTON: Principles, LAW I-H 14a-b; BK i, PROP 32-39 81a-88a; BK II, PROP 1-14 159a- 189a passim
#5e(1)  Uniform motion - its causes and laws
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 162c- 163a; THIRD DAY, 197b-200a
34 NEWTON: Principles, DEF m-iv 5b-6a; LAW i 14a; COROL iv-v 18a-19a; BK H, PROP i, COROL 159a; PROP 2 159b 160a; PROP 5-6 165a-167a; PROP 11-12 183a-184b
#5e(2) Accelerated motion - free fall
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK iv, CH 8 [215*24- 216*21] 295a-d / Heavens, BK III, CH 2 [301** 16-31] 393a-b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [225-242] 17d-18a
16 PTOLEMY: Almagest, BK i, lOb-llb
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 115, A i, REP 3 585d-587c
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 157b- 171 b; THIRD DAY, 200a-237a,c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 36, 166b-c; APH 48, 181d
34 NEWTON: Principles, DEF iv 6a; LAW n 14a~b; COROL vi 19b; BK i, PROP 32-39 81a-88a; BK II, PROP 3-4 160b-165a; PROP 8-10 170a-179a; PROP 13-14 184b-189a; PROP 32-40 and SCHOL, 219a-246b esp PROP 40, SCHOL 239a-246b; PROP 41-50 and SCHOL 247a-259a

5f. Motion about a center - planets, projectiles, pendulum

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIH, CH 8-10 348b- 355d / Heavens, BK i, CH 2 359d-360d; CH 4 362a-c; BK II, CH 3-12 377c-384c / Metaphysics, BK XH, CH 8 603b-605a / Soul, BK i, CH 3 [4o6 b 26-407 b i3] 636b-637b
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 895b-905a passim; 913a; 914b-915a; 918b-928a passim; 933a- 946a csp 939a 940b; BK v, 965a 966a / Harmonies of the World, 1015b-1023a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FOURTH DAY, 240ad
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 36, 167b-r; APH 46, 177c-178a; APH 48, 186b-d
34 NEWTON: Principles, DEF v 6a-7a; LAWS OF MOTION, SCHOL, 19b~20a; BK I, LEMMA I-II and SCHOL 25a-32a; PROP 1-3 and SCHOL 32 b- 3Sb esp PROP 3, SCHOL 35b; PROP 46 lOla-b; BK II, PROP 51-53 and SCHOL 259a~267a csp PROP 53, SCHOL 266a-267a; BK m, PHENOM- ENA 272a-275a; PROP 13 286a-b 5/(l) Determination of orbit, force, speed, time, and period
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [614-649] 69a-c
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 905a-907a; BK v, 968a-985b esp 975a-979b
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 166d-168a; 171b-172d; THIRD DAY, 203d- 205b; 235b-d; FOURTH DAY 238a-260a,c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 48, 186bd
34 NEWTON: Principles, LAWS OF MOTION, SCHOL, 19b-22a; BK i, PROP 1-17 and SCHOL 32b-50a; PROP 30-31 and SCHOL 76a-81a; PROP 40-42 88b-92b; PROP 46-47 and SCHOL 101a-102a; PROP 51-56 105b Ilia; BK II, PROP 4 161b- 165a; PROP 10 and SCHOL 173b-183a; LEMMA 3-PROP 1 8 189b-194b; PROP 24-GENERAL SCHOL 203a-219a; BK III, PROP 1-5 and SCHOL 276a-279a; PROP 13 286a-b; PROP 20 291 b- 294b; LEMMA 4-PROP 42 333a-368b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xiv, SECT 21 159a-d
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT in, 434d 5/(2) Perturbation of motion - the two and three body problems
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 920b 921b; 922b- 926a; 957b-959a
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 54c-d; 55c-56b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 43-45 92b- lOla; lllb; PROP 57-69 and SCHOL lllb-131a; BK III, PROP 5, COROL HI 279a; PROP 12-14 and SCHOL 285a-287b; PROP 21-39 294b-333a
45 FARADAY : Researches in Electricity, 817a-b

6. Basic concepts of mechanics

    [sem referências]

6a. Center of gravity - its determination for one or several bodies

11 ARCHIMEDES: Equilibrium of Planes 502a- 519b / Method, PROP 6 578a-579a; PROP 8-9 580b-582b
31 DESCARTES : Objections and Replies, 231c~d
33 PASCAL: Equilibrium of Liquids, 393b-394a
34 NEWTON: Principles, COROL iv 18a-19a; BK HI, HYPOTHESIS I-PROP 12 285a-286a

6b. Weight and specific gravity - the relation of mass and weight

7 PLATO: Timaeus, 462d-463c S ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK iv, CH 8 [216*12-20] 295c-d / Heavens, BK i, CH 3 [269 b i8-270*i2] 360d-361b; CH 6 [273*22-274*18] 364c-365b; 6c to 6d(2) CHAPTER 54: MECHANICS 107 BK HI, CH 2 [301*2 i- b 32] 392c-393b; BK iv, CH 1-3 399a-402c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK i [358-369] 5c; BK ii [80-108] 16a-b; [294-296] 18d
16 COPERNICUS: Revolutions of the Heavenly Spheres, BK i, 52 la
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK v, 970b
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 26, A 2, ANS 734d-735c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART iv, 2 7 Id
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK vi, 115d-116a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 158b-c; 160a-164a passim
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 24, 154d-155a; APH 35, 163c-d; APH 36, 166b-c; APH 40, 172a-b
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 231b 232a
34 NEWTON: Principles, DBF i 5a; BK II, PROP 24 203a 204a; BK III, PROP 6 279b-281b; PROP 8 282b-283b; PROP 20 291b-294b passim
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART in, 88d-89d
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 249a-251b
45 FARADAY : Researches in Electricity, 632a

6c. Velocity, acceleration, and momentum - angular or rectilinear, average or instantaneous

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK iv, CH 8 [215*24- 216*21] 295a-d; BK v, CH 4 [228*20-229*7] 309b-310a; BK vi, CH 1-2 312b,d-315d; BK vii, CH 4 330d-333a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 166d- 168a; THIRD DAY, 197b-c; 200a-207d; 209a- 210a; 224b-225d; FOURTH DAY, 240a-d; 243d- 249b
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 46, 177d- 178d
34 NEWTON: Principles, DBF n 5b; DEF vn-vin 7a-8a; LAW n 14a-b; COROL in 16b-17b; LAWS OF MOTION, SCHOL, 20a~22a; BK i, LEMMA 10 28b-29a; LEMMA n, SCHOL, 31b-32a; PROP i, COROL i 33a / Optics, BK III, 540a-541b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT iv, DIV 27, 460c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 470d-471a; BK xiv, 589d

6d. Force - its kinds and its effects

8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK vu, CH 5 333a-d; BK viu, CH 10 [266*25-267*20] 353c-354d / Heavens, BK III, CH 2 [30^2-32] 392d-393b
9 ARISTOTLE: Motion of Animals, CH 3 234a-c
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 938b-939a; BK v, 969a-971b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 105, A 4, REP i 541c-542a; PART i-n, Q 23, A 4 726a-727a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in, Q 84, A 3, REP 2 985d 989b
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 26d-40b passim
31 DESCARTES: Rules, ix, 15c / Objections and Replies, 231c-232a
34 NEWTON: Principles, DEF ni-vm 5b-8a; DEF- INITIONS, SCHOL, lla-13a; LAW n 14a b; BK i, LEMMA 10 28b-29a; PROP 6 37b-38b; BK III, PROP 6, COROL v 281b; GENERAL SCHOL, 371b- 372a / Optics, BK III, 531b; 541b-542a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 103-106 433a-d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 118b-119a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 338a-b; 514d-532a; 595a; 603d; 646b 655d; 670a- 674a; 685d-686b; 817a-818d; 819b,d; 850b,d- 855a,c esp 855a,c
54 FREUD: Narcissism, 400d-401a
#6d(1)  The relation of mass and force - the law of universal gravitation
16 KEPLER: Epitome* BK iv, 910b
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 51c-52c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 24, 154d-155a; APH 36, 166b-c; APH 40 170c-173d
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 231c-232a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 69-93 an< ^ SCHOL 130a-152b csp PROP 75-76 134b-136a; BK III, PROP 1-7 276a-282b esp PROP 7 281b- 282b; GENERAL SCHOL, 371b / Optics, BK HI, 531b-543a csp 541b-542a
35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 103-106 433a-d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 57, 475d [fn 2]
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 850b,d- 855a,c esp 855a,c
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 239c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 695c
54 FREUD: Narcissism, 400d-401a
#6d(2) Action-at-a-distance - the field and medium of force
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIII, CH 10 [266^7- 267*21] 354b-d / Heavens, BK III, CH 2 [3oi b i6~3i] 393a b / Dreams, CH 2 [459*28- 34] 703b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK vi [906- 1089] 92b-94c
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 897b-905a esp 900b- 901b; 906a-b; 922a b; 934b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 8, A i, REP 3 34d-35c
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK i, lOa-c; BK II, 26d- 40b esp 30a-32c; 42b-43c; 45d-47b; 51a-c; 54d-55c; BK v, 102d-104b; BK vi, 112d
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 202 d
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 37 168d- 169c; APH 45 176a-177c; APH 48, 183a-c; 186a
31 DESCARTES: Rules, ix, 15c / Discourse, PART v, 55c
34 NEWTON: Principles, DBF V-VIH 6a-8a; BK i, PROP 69, SCHOL 130b-131a; BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 371b-372a / Optics, BK III, 507a-516b; 520a-522a esp 521a-b; 531b-542a passim
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vn, DIV 57, 475d [fn 2]
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 227b 1U8 UKbAl (6d. force - its kinds and its effects. 6d(2) Actionat-a-distance - the field and medium of force)
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, 9b-c
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 441a-442b; 451a-454a; 463d-465d; 513d-514c; 521a-524a; 528c-532a; 604b-c; 631b-c; 648b-d; 685d- 686c; 816b,d-819a,c; 819a-d; 824a-b; 832a c; 840c-842c; 855a,c
#6d(3) The parallelogram law - the composition of forces and the composition of velocities
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK v, 969a 970a
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, THIRD DAY, 224d-225c; FOURTH DAY, 240a-d; 243d-249b passim
34 NLWTON: Principles, COROL I-H 15a-16b
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 691b 692a; 788c-793c; 817a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xin, 570d
53 jAMhs - Psychology, 105a

6e. Work and energy - their conservation; perpetual motion

28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 56b-c
71 DESCARFLS: Rules, xm, 27c
33 PASCAL: Equilibrium of Liquids, 392b-394b
34 NLWTON: Principles, COROL n 15a-16b; LAWS OF MOTION, SCHOL, 23a~24a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 582b-584a; 837b c; 837d-840c
53 JAMES: Psychology, 884a

7. The extension of mechanical principles to other phenomena - optics, acoustics, the theory of heat, magnetism, and electricity

    [sem referências]

7a. Light - the corpuscular and the wave theory

8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK II, CH 7 [418*26-419*24] 649b-650b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK iv [364- 378] 48d-49a
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 896b; 901a-903a; 922b-926a passim
17 PLOTINUS: Fourth Ennead, TR v 183a~189b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 53, A 3, ANS and REP 2 283b-284d; Q 67 349d- 354a; Q 104, A i, ANS and REP 1,4 534c-536c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 92, A i, REP 15 1025c 1032b
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK 11, 43a-b
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 36, 167a-b; APH 37, 169a-c; APH 48, 185a-c / New Atlantis, 212d-213a
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 54d-55b
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 366b-367a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 94-98 and SCHOL 152b-157b; BK II, PROP 41-42 247a- 249b; PROP 50, SCHOL, 257b / Optics 377a- 544a passim, esp BK i, 379a, BK II, 492a-495b BK III, 525b-531b
34 HUYGENS: Light 551a-619b passim, csp CH i 553a-563b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK HI, CH iv, SECT 10 261b-d; BK iv, CH n, SECT 11-13 311c- 312b
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, lOb-c
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 595a- 607a,c; 817b-c
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 239c
#7a(1)  The laws of reflection and refraction
7 PLATO: Timaeus, 454c-455a
8 ARISTOTLE: Meteorology, BK III, CH 2-6 476b- 482d / Soul, BK II, CH 8 [419^8-33] 651a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK iv [269-323] 47d-48b; [436-442] 49d-50a
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART in SUPPL, Q 82, A 4, REP 5 972d-974c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xv [16- 24] 75c
31 DESCARTES: Rules, vm, 12b-13a / Geometry, BK II, 322b-331a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 94 152b-153b; PROP 96-98 and SCHOL 154b-157b / Optics, BK i, 379a-423b passim, esp 379a-386b, 409a- 412a; BK H, 478b-479b; 485b-495b; BK HI, 520b; 522b-530b passim
34 HUYGENS: Light, CH n-vi 563b 619b esp CH ii-m 563b-575a
#7a(2) The production of colors
7 PLATO: Meno, 177b-c / Timaeus, 465b-d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [730-841] 24b-25c; BK vi [524-526] 87b
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 901b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 14, A 6, ANS 80a-81c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 23, 154a-b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 55c-d / Objections and Replies, 231b
34 NEWTON: Optics, BK I-H 379a-506b passim, esp BK i, 424a-428b, 440a-441b, 453a-455a, BK II, 481a~482a; BK III, 519a-b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic^, 144b-145a
#7a(3) The speed of light
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK iv [176-208] 46c-47a; BK vi [164-172] 82b-c
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 148b- 149c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 46, 178a-b
31 DESCARTES: Discourse, PART v, 55b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 96, SCHOL, 155a / Optics, BK i, 379b; BK II, 488b-492a
34 HUYGENS: Light, CH i, 554b-557b; CH HI, 570a-575a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 81
#7a(4) The medium of light - the ether
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK 11, CH 7 [418*27-419*24) 649b-650b; BK III, CH 12 [434 b 22-435 a n] 667c-668a / Sense and the Sensible, CH 3 676a- 678b; CH 6 [446"20-447 B i2] 684c-685c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [449-508] 67a-c
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 857a-b; 901a-b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Thcohgica, PART i, Q 14, A 6, ANS 80a-81c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 48, 186a
33 PASCAL: Vacuum, 366a-367a
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 372a / Optics, BK III, 520a-522b; 525b-529a
34 HUYGENS : Light) CH i, 553b-560b esp 557b- 560b
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 595b [fn 2]

7b. Sound - the mechanical explanation of acoustic phenomena

7 PLATO: Meno> 177b-c / Timaeus, 471 b
8 ARISTOTLE: Soul, BK II, CH 8 650c-652c
9 ARISTOTLE: Generation of Animals, BK v, CH 7 328c-330b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK iv [524- 614] 5la-52b
17 PLOTINUS: Fourth Ennead, TR v, CH 5 186b d
28 GALILEO: Two New Sciences, FIRST DAY, 172b-177a,c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 46, 178a; APH 48, 185a-c; 186a / New Atlantis, 213b
31 DESCARTES: Rules, xin, 25c
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK II, PROP 41-50 and SCHOL 247a-259a passim / Optics, BK HI, 525b-526a
34 HUYGENS : Light, CH i, 554b-558b passim
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 485b-486b

7c. The theory of heat

#7c(1)  The description and explanation of the phenomena of heat - the hypothesis of caloric
7 PLATO: Timaeus, 462c-d / Theaetetus, 533b-c
8 ARISTOTLE: Heavens, BK II, CH 7 380c-d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [592- 613] 68d-69a; BK vi [132-322] 82a-84c; [848- 905] 91c-92b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 67, A 3, ANS and REP 1,3 351b-352a; Q 104, A i, ANS 534c-536c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK 11, APH 10-20 140c-153a; APH 24, 154c-d; APH 26, 157a; APH 33, 161c; APH 36, 168b-d; APH 48, 182 b; 183d; 184d-185a; APH 50, 190b-192b
31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 231a-b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 372a / Optics, BK m, 516b-518b; 520a-b; 541a-b 109
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, 9a-16d
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat 169a-251b passim
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 812b-c; 813b-815b; 857a 858d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xin, 587b-c; EPILOGUE n, 687d
#7c(2) The measurement and the mathematical analysis of the quantities of heat
33 PASCAL: Great Experiment, 388a
45 LAVOISIER: Elements of Chemistry, PART i, 14a-c; 33b-36a; PART HI, 99d-103b *
45 FOURIER: Theory of Heat, 184b 185b

7d. Magnetism - the great magnet of the earth

10 GALEN: Natural Faculties, BK i, CH 14, 177a- 178c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK vi [906- 1089] 92b-94c
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK i, 23b-25d; BK vi 106a-121a,c
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 36, 166c-167a; APH 45, 176b-c; APH 48, 183b-c
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 100a-102a
45 FARADAY: Researches th Electricity, 286a-294a; 697b-757d
#7d(l) Magnetic phenomena - coition, verticity, variation, dip
7 PLATO: Ion, 144b / Timaeus, 471 b-c
8 ARISTOTLE: Physics, BK VIII, CH 10 [266^0- 267*2] 354b-c
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 897b-898b; 935a- 936a; 941b-942a
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK i-v 3a-105d passim
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 25, 155c-d; APH 35, 163c-d; APH 36, 166c-167a; APH 37, 169b-c; APH 42, 174b-c; APH 45, 176b-c; APH 48, 182c; 183b-c; 184a; 185a-d
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 595a*600a; 607a-669d; 673b,d-757d; 812b-c; 813b-815b; 855a-866a,c
#7d(2) Magnetic force and magnetic fields
16 KEPLER: Epitome, BK iv, 897b-898b; 935a- 936a; 941b-942a
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 26d-43c esp 38a- 39b; 45d-47b; 54d-55c; BK v, 102d-105d
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 37, 169b-c; APH 45, 176b-c
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, PROP 69, SCHOL, 130b; BK II, PROP 23, SCHOL 202b-203a; BK III, PROP 6, COROL v 281b; PROP 7, COROL i 282a / Optics, BK III, 53 Ib
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 281c-282c; 298d-301a; 302a-d; 528c-532a; 603d-604c; 679a-b; 690a-697b; 758a-795d; 816b,d-824b; 830b848a,c
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic% 376b-379a 110 7eto7e(5) (7. The extension of mechanical principles to other phenomena - optics, acoustics, the theory of heat, magnetism, and electricity)

7e. Electricity - electrostatics and electrodynamics

28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 26d-34b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, PROP 7, COROL i 282a; GENERAL SCHOL, 372a / Optics, BK III, 531b; 542a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 514d-528c
#7e(1)  The source of electricity - the relation of the kinds of electricity
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 269a-273a; 277a-316a esp 281d-282c, 302a-d, 315d-316a; 386c-422a,c; 433a-440a,c; 532b-539b; 541b,d- 594d; 813a-b; 824b-830b esp 826a-b, 829d- 830a
49 DARWIN: Origin of Species, 89b-c
#7e(2) Electricity and matter - conduction, insulation, induction, electrochemical decomposition
30 BACON: Novum Organum, BK II, APH 48, 181b-c
45 FARADAY: Reseafthes in Electricity, 265a- 269a; 273a-277a;306a; 309a-312a;312c-313d; 314b; 315a-b; 319b,d-345d; 361a-432d; 440b,d-514c;' 515a-d; 522b,d-532d; 541b,d- 584a,c; 8 24 b 830 b; 848b,d-855a,c
#7e(3) The relation of electricity and magnetism - the electromagnetic field
28 GILBERT: Loadstone, BK II, 26d-34b
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, PROP 7, COROL i 282a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 266b-d; 269a-302d; 305d-306a; 307a-309a; 313d- 314c; 315a; 520b-521a; 528c-532a; 595a; 615a-619c; 658b,d-667c; 685d-686b; 759c- 788c; 795b,d-813a; 816b,d-819a,c
#7e(4) The relation of electricity to heat and light - thermoelectricity
34 NEWTON: Principles, BK III, GENERAL SCHOL, 372a / Optics, BK HI, 516b-517a
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 305b-d; 306d-307a; 313d-314a; 314c-d; 315a; 404b- 405a; 476a-506a; 515d-516a; 518a-d; 561b,d- 569b; 580d-582b; 595a-607a,c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 687d
#7e(5) The measurement of electric quantities
45 FARADAY: Researches in Electricity, 277d- 279a; 316b-318c; 366d-371d; 377d-390d; 444a-451a; 465d-467a,c; 768d-773d; 778b,d- 788c <ref_end>


CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Considerations relevant to the basic concepts and laws of mechanics, see
CHANGE 7 TITY 53-56; SPACE 2a; TIME i. Discussions of the role of experiment,
induction, and hypotheses in physical sci

EXPERIENCE 5a-5c; HYPOTHESIS 40-40Th; INDUCTION 5; LOGIC 40; PHYSICS 4a-4d; SCI

5a-5e; and for the physicist's treatment of causes, see CAUSE 2, $b, 6;

PHYSICS 2b; SCIENCE 40.

The general theory of applied mathematics or mathematical physics, see ASTRONOMY

MATHEMATICS 5b; PHYSICS 1b, 3; SCIENCE 5C.

Other discussions of the mathematical ideas or operations which are applied in m

see MATHEMATICS 43-40Th; QUANTITY 3oTh(i), 4C, 6b.

The relation of mechanics to the philosophy of nature and to other natural scien
PHILOSOPHY 1c; PHYSICS 2; SCIENCE 1c.

Other treatments of the problem of qualitative change, see CHANGE 6a-6b; QUALITY

QUANTITY la.

Mechanism as a philosophy of nature, man, and history, see ANIMAL 1c; ELEMENT 5e

HISTORY 43(2); MAN 30; MIND 2e; WILL 50; WORLD 1b.

Other discussions of motion and its laws, see ASTRONOMY 8c-8c(3); CHANGE 7-7d; M

2b; and for the related consideration of the void and action-at-a-distance, se

3b; ELEMENT 5c; SPACE 2b(2)-2c. Another discussion of mass and weight, see
QUANTITY 5d; for another discussion o

acceleration, and momentum, see QUANTITY 5c; for another discussion offeree, s

TITY 5e; and for another discussion of the composition of forces, see OPPOSITI

7eto7e(5) 848b,d-855a,c 522b,d-532d; 541b,dtricity and magnetetic field K n,
26d-34b K in, PROP 7, COROL i n Electricity, 266b-d; -521a; 528c-532a; 595a;
6b,d-819a,c -667c; 685d-686b; 759c06a; 307a-309a; 313dtricity to heat and city
in, GENERAL SCHOL, 516b-517a Electricity, 305b-d; 607a,c , EPILOGUE n, 687d
516a; 518a-d; 561b,d314c-d; 315a; 404blectric quantities es in Electricity,
277d- 366d-371d; 377d-390d; ; 768d-773d; 778b,d- d; QUANence, see ENCE NATURE
30(3); 20; echanics,

ces, see 33, 3c; ~5g; ATTER e ASTRONOMY f velocity, ee QUAN- ON 3d.

CHAPTER 54: MECH

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books ofth

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These wo

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the pu

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows

I.

KEPLER. Dioptrik DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART u,

6-7, 19, 24-27, 48-64; PART in, 48-102, 121-125;

PART IV, 2O-27, 133-187 HOBBES. Concerning Body, PART iv, CH 30

. Examinatio et Emendatio Mathematicae Hodiernae

.

Dialogus Physicus

I IUYGENS. Travaux divers de statique et de dynamique de a 1666

. Percussion

.

Uhorloge a pendule

. Sur la cause de la pesanteur

. Force centrifuge

.

Question de I' existence et de la perceptibilite du

mouvement absolu

BERKELEY. De Motu KANT. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science GOETHE.
Beitrage zur OptiJk Theory of Colours

.

HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL n, SECT n, en i FARADAY. The Various Forces of
Matter and Their Relations to Each Other

II.

EPICURUS. Letter to Pythocles R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART v NICOLAS OF CUSA. The
Idiot, BK iv STEVIN. Uart ponderaire, ou la statique BOYLE. New Experiments
Physico- Mechanical .A Defence of the Doctrine Touching the Spring

and Weight ofthe Air Against the Objections of

. . .

Franciscus Linus

WALLIS. Mechanica: sive, De Motu GUERICKE. Experimenta Nova LEIBNITZ. Discourse
on Metaphysics, xv-xxn

.

Philosophical Worfy, CH 20 (On Nature in

Itself)

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

APPENDIX, CH 4-5

VOLTAIRE. Letters on the English, xiv-xvn EULER. Mechanik D'ALEMBERT. Traite de
dynamique FRANKLIN. Experiments

J. PRIESTLEY. Experiments and Observations on Different Kinds of Air .

Experiments and Observations Relating to Various Branches of Natural Philosophy

ANICS Hi e Western World, but relevant to the rks are divided into two groups:
ed in this collection. sented in this collection. blication of the works cited,
consult the last chapter of The Great Ideas. CARNOT. Principes fondamentaux de
requilibre et dn mouvement LAGRANGE. Mecanique analytique GALVANI. De Vinbus
Electricitatis in Motu Musculari Commentarius RUMFORD. An Experimental Inquiry
Concerning the Source of Heat LAPLACE. Mecanique celeste (Celestial Mechanics)
POINSOT. Siemens de statique T. YOUNG. Miscellaneous Works, VOL i, NUMBER in,
VII, IX-X, XVII-XVIII FRESNEL. Theorie de la lumiere PONCELET. Cours de mecamque
AIRY. Gravitation W. R. HAMILTON. Dynamics WHEVVELL. The Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences, VOL i, BK in, CH 5-10 JOULE. Scientific Papers HELMHOLTZ.
Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, VII W.THOMSON and TAIT. Treatise on
Natural Philosophy TYNDALL. Light and Electricity REULEAUX. The Kinematics of
Machinery MAXWELL. Theory of Heat. . A Treatise on Electricity and Magnetism

.Matter and Motion RAYLEIGH. The Theory of Sound

STALLO. Concepts and Theories of Modern Physics, CH 2-6, 9-12 CLIFFORD. The
Common Sense of the Exact Sciences, CH v BALL. A Treatise on the Theory of
Screws GIBBS. Collected Worlds C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 35-87
KELVIN. Lectures on Molecular Dynamics and the Wave Theory of Light . Popular
lectures and Addresses

PEARSON. The Grammar of Science APPELL. Traite de mecamque rationnelle HERTZ.
The Principles of Mechanics MACH. History and Root of the Principle of the
Conservation of Energy . The Science of Mechanics . "On the Principle of the
Conservation of Energy/' in Popular Scientific Lectures

BOLTZMANN. Principe der Mechanik B. RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics, CH 54,
56- 59 PAINLEVE". Les axiomes de la mecamque THE GREAT I SANTA VAN A. Reason in
Science, CH 3 DUHEM. V evolution dc la mecanique

. Lcs origines dc la statique

. fitudes sur Leonard de Vinci ENRIQUES. Problems of'Science CH 5-6 ',

HEAVISIDE. Electromagnetic Theory MEYERSON. Identity and Reality, CH 2-3, 10
POINCARE. Science and Hypothesis, PART in; PART

iv,CH 12-13

Science and Method, BK in

. CASSIRER. Substance and Function, PART i, CH 4;

SUP VII

1

CURIE. Traitc de radioactivitS E. T. WHITTAKER. A Treatise on the Analytical
Dynamics of Particles and Rigid Bodies

.

A History of the Theories of Aether and Electricity

RUTHERFORD. "Radio-active Substances and Their Radiations EDDINGTON. Space,
Time, and Gravitation

EINSTEIN. Relativity: The Special and the General Theory .

Sidelights on Relativity

. The Meaning of Relativity LEVI-CIVITA. Pragen der tfassischen und
relativistischen Mechanitk PLANCK. Das Prinzip der Erhaltung der Energie .
Treatise on Thermodynamics . "The Place of Modern Physics in the Mechanical View
of Nature," in A Survey of Physics

WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern World, CH i-iv BRIDCMAN. The Logic of Modern
Physics, CH 3 SCHRODINGER. Collected Papers on Wave Mechanics .Four Lectures on
Wave Mechanics BOHR. Atomic Theory and the Description of Nature BROGUE. An
Introduction to the Study of Wave Mechanics DIRAC. The Principles of Quantum
Mechanics HEISENBERG. The Physical Principles ofthe Quantum Theory NAGEL, On the
Logic of Measurement M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK 11, CH 2-3 C. G. DARWIN.
The New Conceptions of Matter LENZEN. The Nature of Physical Theory, PART i, in
BCRGSON, Time and Fiee Will . Creative Evolution, CH i, 4

. Two Sources of Morality and Religion, CH 4 WIENER. Cybernetics