CHAPTER: MEMORY & IMAGINATION

INTRODUCTION

CONCERNING memory and imagination, the tradition of western thought seems to be involved in less dispute than it is on other aspects of human and animal life. There are, as we shall see, points of difficulty and debatable theories. But these arise only within the frame- work of certain fundamental insights which are widely, if not universally, shared. Here at least we can begin without having to deal with verbal ambiguities. Unlike many of the words which are the traditional bearers of the great ideas, "memory" and "imagination" have a constant core of meaning in almost everyone's discourse.

It is understood that memory and imagination depend upon sense-perception or upon previous experience. Except for illusions of memory, we do not remember objects we have never perceived or events in our own life, such as emotions or desires, that we have not experienced. The imagination is not limited in the same way by prior experience, for we can imagine things we have never perceived and may never be able to.

Yet even when imagination outruns perception, it draws upon experience for the materials it uses in its constructions. It is possible to imagine a golden mountain or a purple cow, though no such object has ever presented itself to perception. But, as Hume suggests, the possibility of combining a familiar color and a familiar shape depends upon the availability of the separate images to be combined. "When we think of a golden mountain," Hume writes, "we only join two consistent ideas, gold and mountain, with which we were formerly acquainted . . . All this creative power of the mind amounts to no more than the faculty of compounding, transposing, augmenting, or diminishing the materials afforded us by the senses and experience." A congenitally colorblind man who lived entirely in a world of grays would not be able to imagine a golden mountain or a purple cow, though he might be able to imagine things as unreal as these.

Because of their dependence on sense-perception, memory and imagination are usually regarded as belonging to the same general faculty as the external senses. Not all writers, however, conceive of a generic power of sense, which they then divide into the exterior senses such as sight, hearing, and touch, and the interior senses such as memory and imagination. Some, like Hobbes, treat imagination as "nothing but decaying sense," and use the word "memory" to "express the decay, and signify that the sense is fading, old, and past." The image, whether it is a memory-image or fancy-free, re-produces or re-presents sensory material. It may be less vivid, less sharp in outline, and less definite in detail than the sensation or perception from which it is derived. But in one important respect the image does not differ from the original sense-impression. That is the respect in which ideas or concepts do differ from sense-impressions—at least according to those who hold that ideas or concepts have a certain universality and abstractness which is not found in sensations and sensory images. Those who, like Berkeley and Hume, call sensations or images "ideas" deny the existence of abstract ideas or universal notions precisely because they, too, agree that senseimpressions or sensory images are always particular in their content and meaning.

The fundamental controversy about what an idea is and the verbal confusion occasioned by the ambiguity of the word (which appears in the chapter on Idea) do not seem to affect the understanding of the nature of images or their role in the activities of memory and imagination. As William James points out, in discussing the "blended" or "generic" image which is somehow associated with abstract or universal meaning, "a blurred thing is just as particular as a sharp thing, and the generic character of either sharp image or blurred image depends on its being felt with its representativefunction." He speaks of this function as "the mysterious plus, the understood meaning," but he denies the possibility of universal or abstract images, whatever may be the truth about ideas which are not images at all. Certainly those who deny the presence of anything abstract or universal in the understanding do so on the ground that the content of the mind is basically sensory, whether the mind is perceiving or remembering, imagining or thinking.

The controversy about the nature of the mind does not seem to affect the conception of memory or imagination. As neither is confused with sense-perception, so neither is confused with rational thought. This remains the case whether the theory of mind looks upon the intellect as a faculty separate from the sensitive faculty (including memory and imagination), or conceives the understanding as a single faculty which is active in judgment and reasoning as well as in perceiving, remembering, and imagining.

This and related issues are considered in the chapter on Mind. Except for one point, perhaps, such issues can be ignored here. Sensation is attributed to both animals and men— to all organisms which give evidence of having senseorgans or some sort of sensitive apparatus. Whether all animals, even those which have the most rudimentary sensorium, also have memory and imagination may be disputed; but no one doubts that the higher animals, with central nervous systems and brain structures resembling those of men, can remember and imagine as well as perceive.

All agree, furthermore, that memory and imagination require bodily organs, though the assignment of these two functions to the brain as their organic seat is more uniformly a tenet of modern than of ancient physiology, and can be more clearly expounded as the result of modern researches in neurology. But the question whether the memory or imagination of men and other animals differs more than their bodies do, elicits opposite answers from those who affirm that man alone has reason and those who deny that man has powers of knowing or thinking not possessed by other animals to some degree.

Nevertheless, if man alone is considered, the nature of memory and imagination is clear. The object remembered or imagined need not be physically present to the senses like the object perceived. The object imagined need not be located in the past like the object remembered; nor, for that matter, need it have any definite location in time and space. It need have no actual existence. It may be a mere possibility, unlike the object which cannot be known without being known to exist. As the object of memory is an event which no longer exists, so the object of imagination may be something which has never existed and never will.

Thus memory and imagination greatly enlarge the world of human experience. Without them, man would live in a confined and narrow present, lacking past and future, restricted to what happens to be actual out of the almost infinite possibilities of being. Without memory and imagination, man could be neither a poet nor an historian; and unless he had an angelic sort of intellect which in no way depended on sense-experience, he would be impeded in all the work of science, if memory and imagination did not extend the reach of his senses.

The psychological analysis ofmemory usually divides it into a number of separate acts or phases. Recollection presupposes the retention of the material to be recalled. The ingenious experiments of Ebbinghaus that James reports — using the memorization of nonsense syllables to isolate the factors influencing memory seem to show that retention is affected by the strength of the original associations. But retention is also affected by the interval between the time of learning and the time of revival. The amount of forgetting seems to be a function of two separate factors: the force with which the material to be recalled is originally committed to memory, and the lapse of time.

That retention is not the same as recall may be seen from Ebbinghaus' experimental discovery of the fact that forgetting is never complete. Material which lies below the threshold of recall is nevertheless retained, and manifests its presence by its effect on attempts to relearn the material which appears to have beerTiorgotten.

Nothing can be utterly forgotten if, as Augustine suggests, what seems to be forgotten remains in the memory. He considers the effort men make to remember a forgotten name. "Where does that name come back from," he asks, "except from the memory? For even when it is through being reminded of something else that we recognize someone's name, it is still by memory that we do it, for we do not hold it as some new thing learned, but by memory we are sure that this is what the name was. But, were the name utterly blotted out of mind," Augustine argues, "we should not re- member it even if we were reminded. For if we had utterly forgotten it, we should not even be able to think of looking for it."

Freud considers forgetting from another point of view. He describes the psychoanalytic method at its inception as a "talking cure" involving efforts in reminiscence. The things which we have put out of mind, he claims, are "hindered from becoming conscious, and forced to remain in the unconscious by some sort of force." He calls this "repression." Freud observed that it occurred when" a wish had been aroused, which was in sharp opposition to the other desires of the individual, and was not capable of being reconciled with the ethical, aesthetic, and personal pretensions of the patient's personality. . . . The end of this inner struggle was the repression of the idea which presented itself to consciousness as the bearer of this irreconcilable wish. This was repressed from consciousness and forgotten."

On this view things which have been put out of mind because we find them unpleasant to contemplate, things which are repressed in order to avoid conflict, are not forgotten when they cannot be consciously remembered. Nor are they below the threshold of recall in the sense that our retention of them has been so weakened by time that no effort at recollection can revive them. On the contrary, they may be capable of quite vivid revival when the emotional obstacles to recollection are removed. Freud applies his theory of the "obliviscence of the disagreeable" to such everyday occurrences as the forgetting of familiar names as well as to the repression of memories connected with the emotional traumas of early life.

Recollection is distinct not only from retention, but also from recognition. The illusion known as defi vu consists in the experience of intense familiarity with a place or scene that, so far as one can recall, has never been witnessed before. In contrast, normal recognition depends upon previous acquaintance with the object being cognized again, i.e., re-cognized. The fact, noted by many observers, that recognition may or may not be accompanied by recollection of the previous circumstances, indicates the separation of recall and recognition as acts of memory. Whereas recollection is remembering through the recall of images, recognition consists in remembering at the very moment of perceiving. Both, however, depend upon what seems to be memory's fundamental act — retention.

With regard to retention, there are two problems which have been the subject of inquiry throughout the whole tradition. The first concerns what is usually called "the association of ideas." From Aristotle through Hobbes and Hume to James and Freud, there have been various formulations of the laws of association and various interpretations of what such laws signify about the mind. Ebbinghaus, for example, used nonsense syllables in order to measure the effect upon retention of the associations formed by repetition of a series of sounds. All meaning had been removed in order to avoid the influence upon recollection of associations resulting from meaningful connections of the sort which exists among ordinary words. The repetition of nonsense syllables in pairs or series illustrates association by contiguity or succession. According to most writers, the elements of experience become associated through other modes of relation also, such as their similarity or contrast with one another in any significant respect.

It is not the association itself which is re- membered. Rather it is through the association of one part of experience with another that memory seems to work, one particular tending to recall others with which it has been associated in one or more ways. Recollection seems to occur through activating connections which have been formed and retained. The modern differentiation of controlled and free association indicates two ways in which this can happen either by a purposeful pursuit of the past or by the apparently chance recall of one thing by another. The ancients make a parallel distinction between reminiscence and reverie. The former is a process in which recollection resembles reasoning in proceeding step by step through a series of related terms; the latter is more like daydreaming or spontaneous fantasy.

The second problem can be stated, perhaps, as the mystery of retention itself. In describing the capacity of the memory to hold the innumerable things which are not now in mind but can be recalled, the ancients speak of memory as "the storehouse of images." Every variety of thing which can be perceived can be "stored up in the memory," says Augustine, and "called up at my pleasure. . . . When I speak of this or that," he goes on, "the images of all the things

I mention are at hand from the same storehouse of memory, and if the images were not there I could not so much as speak of the things . . . The things themselves are not brought into the memory; it is only their images which are seized with such marvellous speed, and stored away marvellously as if in cabinets, and as marvellously brought forth again when we re- member."

The marvel of memory deepens into a mystery when we ask what the metaphor of the storehouse literally means. Where actually are the images when they are not actually in mind ?

If an image is by its nature an act of consciousness, whereby we apprehend objects not immediately present to our senses, how do images exist outside of consciousness during intervals when they do not function in remembering, imagining, or other acts of knowing? Their return to consciousness seems to imply that they have been retained, but where and how is the problem not solved by the metaphor of things stored away in a capacious barn.

The physical storehouse does not require any fundamental transformation in the being of the things it holds between periods when they are actually in use. The memory does. This prob- lem of the nature and causes of retention William James seems to think can be solved only in terms of the retentive power of nervous tissue—what he calls "physiological retentive- ness"— though in the view of others the prob- lem becomes no easier (and may even be more complicated) when it is transferred from mind to matter. On either view, there seems to be no question that changes in the brain are some- how causally connected with the activity of memory and imagination, especially retention and recall. Aquinas, for example, observes that the imagination and memory may be "hin- dered by a lesion of the corporeal organ ... or by lethargy," an observation many times extended by more recent investigations of the brain pathology underlying amnesia and aphasia.

James' treatment of retention as somehow based on pathways traced in the brain, with recall the result of a retracing of these paths, tends to emphasize the affinity between mem- ory and habit. His theory, discussed in the chapter on Habit, that the plasticity of matter, certainly living matter, underlies learning or habit formation, while the inertia or retentiveness of matter, especially the neural matter of the brain, explains memory or the persistence of habits during periods of disuse, seems almost to identify habit and memory. Ice skating after many years of absence from the sport is as much remembering how to ice skate as reciting a poem committed to memory in youth is the exercise of an old habit.

Not all conceptions of habit and memory permit this fusion of the two—or even their affinity as related aspects of the same phenomenon. Aquinas, for example, restricts memory to an act of knowledge. The performance popularly called "reciting from memory" would not be for him an act of memory, though it might involve memory if the recitation were accompanied by knowledge of the time or place and occasion when the poem was first learned. Such knowledge would be a memory, but the recitation itself would not be, any more than ice skating is. These performances represent the exercise of habits of skill or art.

In view of this, Aquinas raises the question whether the act of knowledge, of the sort involved in reconsidering a geometric proof learned at some earlier moment and now recalled to mind, is an act of memory. The knowledge of the proof which is retained bythe intellect during periods when it is not actually exercised, he would call an intellectual habit or habit of knowledge. But should the recollection of this retained knowledge, or the activation of this intellectual habit, also be called an act of memory ? Aquinas answers No, on the ground that no reference to the past need be involved in reworking a geometrical problem solved at some earlier time. But if the individual also happens to recall when he first solved the problem, that is another matter. Even so, Aquinas claims that "if in the notion of memory we include its object as something past, then the memory is not in the intellectual, but only in the sensitive part." The intellect is said to remember only in the sense of recalling a truth retained by habit, and "not in the sense that it understands the past as something here and now."

Memory is considered in still another way in relation to speculative truths about scientific or philosophical matters. The question is one of the origin of such knowledge. In the usual conception of memory as knowledge of past particulars, one traditional view, found in Aristotle, holds that "out of sense-perception comes to be what we call memory, and out of frequently repeated memories of the same thing develops experience"— the generalized experience which gives rise to induction and the apprehension of the universal. But in the tradition of the great books we also find a more radical and, perhaps, less familiar conception of memory as the chief source of knowledge. This is Plato's doctrine of reminiscence, in which all learning is a kind of remembering of knowledge already present in the soul. All teaching takes the form of helping the learner to recollect things he may not be aware he knows, by reminding him through a process of questioning which awakens the knowledge already latent in him. In the Meno, Meno asks Socrates, "What do you mean by saying that we do not learn, and that what we call learning is only a process of recollection?" Socrates undertakes to show Meno what he means by taking a slave boy who appears not to know the solution of a certain geometrical problem and merely by questioning him, without ever giving him a single answer, getting the slave boy to find the right solution for himself. Meno assures Socrates that the slave boy had never been taught geometry.

Since the boy was not told the answer, he must have always known it, and needed only some re- minding to remember what he knew. Socrates suggests the explanation that the boy's soul always possessed this knowledge, bringing it from another life.

Before he undertook the demonstration with the slave boy, Socrates had proposed this hypothesis. "The soul, being immortal, and having been born again many times, and having seen all things that exist . . . has knowledge of them all; and it is no wonder that it should be able to call to remembrance all that it ever knew about virtue, and about everything; for as all nature is akin, and the soul has learned all things, there is no difficulty in her eliciting, or as men say learning, out of a single recollection all the rest, if a man is strenuous and does not faint; for all enquiry and all learning is but recollection."

Though he differs from Plato in his conception of the soul and the origin of the knowledge which it innately possesses, Augustine seems to hold a similar view. As he examines his own memory, it appears to contain much that has not been implanted there by sense-experience.

Certain things, referred to by words he understands, he says, "I never reached with any sense of my body, nor ever discerned them otherwise than in my mind; yet in my memory have I laid up not their images, but themselves. How they entered into me, let them say if they can; for I have gone over all the avenues of my flesh, but cannot find by which they entered."

If the seeds of learning are in the soul at its creation, memory can draw from these "seminal reasons" the full fruit of knowledge.

The doctrine of reminiscence changes the meaning of both learning and memory at the same time. When learning consists in remembering knowledge not acquired in this life, then the activity of memory cannot be, as it is usually conceived, a recollection of knowledge previously acquired in this life by learning. In order to understand a doctrine in which familiar meanings are so profoundly altered, it is perhaps necessary to understand the problem it tries to solve.

That problem exists only for those who make an absolute distinction between particular sensory images and universal ideas or abstract concepts. Those who, like Hobbes, Berkeley, or Hume, deny universals or abstractions as any part of the mind's content, see no special problem in the origin of that part of the mind's content which is not received as sense-impressions. The original impressions are somehow externally caused, and all the rest of the mind's content— its images and memories and all constructions of the sort Locke calls "complex ideas"— then arise by natural derivation from the original sense-impressions.

But those who, on the contrary, maintain that ideas or concepts are not images of any sort, cannot avoid the problem of how the mind comes by its ideas. One solution of this problem attributes existence to ideas as intelligible objects, and attributes to the mind the power to apprehend them by direct intuition, just as the senses directly apprehend sensible objects. But if ideas, whether or not they exist outside the mind, cannot be apprehended intuitively, then what is the origin of the ideas whereby the mind understands intelligible objects?

To this question, the doctrine of reminiscence is one answer. Another answer is the doctrine of abstraction, as formulated by Aristotle and Aquinas. Locke and James also seem to recognize a distinction in kind between abstractions and other mental content, but they do not appear to find any need for a special power to perform the act of abstracting general ideas or universal concepts from the sensory particulars of perception and imagination. Aquinas, however, thinks that a special faculty called "the active intellect" must be postulated to account for the mind's possession of the ideas or concepts whereby it actually understands what it cannot perceive or imagine.

These theories are considered in the chapters on Idea and Mind. But just as the doctrine of reminiscence is relevant here for its bearing on the discussion of memory, so the doctrine of abstraction which posits an active intellect is relevant to the discussion of imagination.

"Imagination," writes Aristotle, "is different from either perceiving or discursive thinking, though it is not found apart from sensation or judgment without it. That this activity is not the same kind of thinking as judgment is obvious. For imagining lies within our own power whenever we wish (e.g., we can call up a picture, as in the practice of mnemonics by the use of mental images), but in forming opinions we are not free; we cannot escape the alternatives of falsehood or truth."

The point is not that images cannot be false. They frequently are, as (according to Aristotle) sensations neverare. But the falsity of our imaginations involves a judgment that things really are as we imagine them to be. If imagination is not accompanied by judgment, the question of truth or falsity does not arise, for in pure imagination we are not concerned with the way things actually exist, but with the possible, i.e., the imaginary rather than the real. "Everyone knows the difference," says James, "between imagining a thing and believing in its existence.

Conceiving imagination as an activity de- pending upon the prior activity of the senses,

Aristotle holds that imagination is "incapable of existing apart from sensation." In this he does not differ from other psychologists. But he also holds that rational thought, which for him is quite distinct from imagination, cannot exist apart from imagination. "To the thinking soul images serve as if they were the contents of perception. . . . That is the why the soul never thinks without an image."

Aristotle is here saying more than that a special faculty of mind or intellect abstracts the universal form—or what Aquinas calls "the intelligible species"—from the sensory matter of the image, or what Aquinas calls "the phantasm." Aristotle is, in addition, insisting that the act of understanding is always accompanied by imaginative activity. The kind of thinking which depends upon the abstraction of ideas from imagery also depends upon the presence of images when the thinking takes place. "The faculty of thinking," says Aristotle, "thinks the forms in the images"; or, as Aquinas expresses it, "for the intellect to understand actually, not only when it acquires new knowledge, but also when it uses knowledge already acquired, there is need for the act of imagination. . . It must of necessity turn to the phantasms in order to perceive the universal nature existing in the individual." The cooperation of the imagination with the intellect is shown, furthermore, by the fact that "when the act of imagination is hindered by a lesion of the corporeal organ ... we see that a man is hindered from understanding actually even those things of which he had a previous knowledge."

Augustine, on the contrary, refers to things "which we know within ourselves without images." When we consider numbers, for example, "it is not their images which are in [our] memory, but themselves." The question of imageless thought— of thinking abstractly without the use of images— seems to be peculiarly insistent in sciences like mathematics, metaphysics, and theology, in which the conceivable may not be imaginable. The objects peculiar to these sciences seem to require the scientist to do without imagery, or, as Aquinas says, "to rise above his imagination."

This may be true even in physics. Atoms, according to Lucretius, are conceivable, but they are no more imaginable than they are perceptible. If we need images to think of them, we must use imagery in a metaphorical way, picturing the atom as the smallest particle imaginable—only more so! To the objection that there must be imageless thought if we can think of incorporeal beings, of which there can be no images or phantasms, Aquinas replies that we do so "by comparison with sensible bodies of which there are phantasms." Aristotle's theory that the operations of thinking are always dependent on (though not reducible to) acts of imagination, does not imply that imagination is always accompanied by abstract or rational thought. Normally, human thinking and knowing is a work which combines both sense and intellect, both reason and imagination, but sometimes even in man imagination may be active without judgment or reasoning. Brute animals, according to Aristotle, are largely guided by their imaginations "because of the non-existence in them of mind." But when imagination takes the place of thought in men, it is "because of the temporary eclipse of their minds by passion or disease or sleep."

Dreaming seems to be the striking case of imagination divorced from reason's judgment or control. It has long been suspected that animals also dream, but the question whether they can distinguish their dreams from their waking perceptions may prove forever unanswerable.

Philosophers and psychologists have, however, asked themselves whether there is any way of being certain of the difference between waking thought and the phantasmagoria of dreams.

Descartes, for example, asks, "How do we know that the thoughts that come in dreams are more false than those that we have when we are awake, seeing that often enough the former are not less lively and vivid than the latter?" It seems to him that "there are no certain indications by which we may clearly distinguish wakefulness from sleep." Even as he writes these words, he can almost persuade himself that he is dreaming. Yet he does find one probable sign whereby to tell dreaming from waking. "Our memory," he observes, "can never connect our dreams with one another, or with the whole course of our lives, as it unites events which happen to us while we are awake."

Aquinas finds other evidences of the difference. When a man is fully asleep, he does not dream at all, for his imagination is inactive as well as his senses and his mind. But as sleep passes gradually into waking, his faculties begin to act again, not merely the imagination, but the reason also, so that "a man may judge that what he sees is a dream, discerning, as it were, between things and their images. Nevertheless, the common sense remains partly suspended, and therefore, although it discriminates some images from reality, yet it is always deceived in some particular. Even while a man is asleep, his sense and imagination may be to some extent free, and similarly the judgment of his intellect may be unfettered, though not entirely. Consequently, if a man syllogizes while asleep, when he wakes up he invariably recognizes a flaw in some respect."

Apart from questions of truth and falsity, or reality and illusion, the nature and causes of dreaming are perennial themes in the tradition of western thought. As different suppositions are made concerning the cause of dreams, so different interpretations are given of their content.

When it is supposed that the dream is inspired by the gods or is a divine visitation, it becomes a medium of divination or prophecy a way of foretelling the future, or of knowing what the gods intend in general, or for the guidance of some particular man. In the great books of ancient poetry and history, and in the Old Testament as well, dreams, like oracles, are interpreted as supernatural portents, and figure as one of the major sources of prophecy. Aristotle discounts both the fulfillment of dreams and their non-fulfillment, "for coincidences do not occur according to any universal or general law." Regarding prophetic dreams as mere coincidences, he does not find it surprising that "many dreams have no fulfillment." From the fact that "certain of the lower animals also dream," he thinks "it may be concluded that dreams are not sent by God, nor are they designed for the purpose of revealing the future."

Instead, Aristotle proposes natural causes for the origin of dreams. Slight stimulations of the sense-organs awaken the dream process and determine its content. "Dreamers fancy that they are affected by thunder and lightning, when in fact there are only faint ringings in their ears

... or that they are walking through fire and feeling intense heat, when there is only a slight warmth affecting certain parts of the body."

Lucretius similarly explains dreams by natural causes, but attributes their content to events which have dominated the thought of waking life.

"On whatever things we have before spent much time," he writes, "so that the mind was more strained in the task than is its wont, in our sleep we seem mostly to traffic in the same things; lawyers think that they plead their cases and confront law with law, generals that they fight and engage in battles, sailors that they pass a life of conflict waged with winds." This is true even of animals. "Strong horses, when their limbs are lain to rest," Lucretius continues, "yet sweat in their sleep, and pant forever, and strain every nerve as though for victory.

. . . And hunters' dogs often in their soft sleep yet suddenly toss their legs, and all at once give tongue, and again and again sniff the air with their nostrils, as if they had found and were following the tracks of wild beasts."

In the tradition of the great books, modern writers like their ancient forebears appeal thus to sensation and memory as the natural causes of the origin and content of dreams. But, ex- cept for daydreams or waking fantasy, they do not observe that dreaming may be even more profoundly a product of desire. If Freud's extraordinary insight on this point is supported by all the evidences he assembles in his great work, the Interpretation of Dreams, then the lateness of this discovery may be thought even more extraordinary than the theory itself.

The theory is not simply that the content of dreams is determined by desires. When Oedi- pus tells Jocasta of his fear that in taking her to wife he has unwittingly married his mother, she tells him to fear not, for "many men ere now have so fared in dreams also." If that is so, then such dreams do not call for the interpretation which Freud gives. If there are men who suffer from what Freud calls "the Oedipus complex," involving repressed incestuous desires, then the expression of those desires in dreaming will not take the form of imagining them to be actually fulfilled.

On the contrary, Freud's theory of dream symbolism holds that "the dream as remembered is not the real thing at all, but a distorted substitute." Beneath what he calls "the manifest dream-content"— the actual moving images which occupy the dreaming consciousnesslie "the latent dream-thoughts" which are distorted in the actual dream. This distortion "is due to the activities of censorship, directed against the unacceptable unconscious wishimpulses . . . invariably of an objectionable nature, offensive from the ethical, aesthetic, or social point of view, things about which we do not dare to think at all, or think of only with abhorrence." The repressed desires or wishes, the loves or fears, which the dreamer refuses to acknowledge consciously must, therefore, appear in dreams in a disguised form. The imagery of dreams seems to Freud to be a kind of language in which the repressed materials of thought and feeling employ a special symbolism to express what the moral censor will not permit us to express in the ordinary language of our conscious thought or social conversation.

As ordinary language contains symbols conventionally agreed upon, so Freud finds that the recurrence again and again of certain images in the dreams of neurotic patients, and of normal persons as well, gives them the character of conventional symbols. "The number oftrnngs which are represented symbolically in dreams is," according to Freud, "not great." They are, he says, "the human body as a whole, parents, children, brothers and sisters, birth, death, nakedness—and one thing more. The only typical, that is to say, regularly occurring, representation of the human form as a whole is that of a house. . . . When the walls are quite smooth, the house means a man; when there are ledges and balconies which can be caught hold of, a woman. Parents appear in dreams as emperor and empress, king and queen, or other exalted personages . . . Children and brothers are less tenderly treated, being symbolized by little animals or vermin. Birth is almost invariably represented by some reference to water. . . . For dying we have setting out upon a journey or travelling by train. Clothes and uniforms stand for nakedness." The one thing

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
 0a. The faculties of memory and imagination in brutes and men
 0b. The relation of memory and imagination to sense: the a priori grounds of possible
 experience in the synthesis of intuition, reproduction, and recognition
 0c. The physiology of memory and imagination: their bodily organs
 0d. The distinction and connection of memory and imagination: their interdepend-
 ence
 0e. The influence of memory and imagination on the emotions and will: voluntary
 movement
 0f. The activity of memory
 0g. Retention: factors influencing its strength
 0h. Recollection: factors influencing ease and adequacy of recall
 0i. The association of ideas: controlled and free association; reminiscence and
 reverie
 0j. Recognition with or without recall
 0k. The scope and range of normal memory: failure or defect of memory and its
 causes
 (1) Forgetting as a function of the time elapsed
 (2) The obliviscence of the disagreeable: conflict and repression
 (3) Organic lesions: amnesia and the aphasias
 fc
 (4) False memories: illusions of memory; dejh vu

3. Remembering
as an act of knowledge and as a source of knowledge
 3a. Reminiscence as the process of all learning: innate ideas or seminal reasons
 3b. Sensitive and intellectual memory: knowledge of the past and the habit of
 knowledge
 3c. The scientist's use of memory: collated memories as the source of generalized "
 experience
 3d. Memory as the muse of poetry and history: the dependence of history on the
 memory of men

4. The contribution of memory: the binding of time
 4a. Memory in the life of the individual: personal identity and continuity
 4b. Memory in the life
 of the group or race: instinct, legend, and tradition
 The activity of imagination, fancy, or fantasy: the nature and variety of images
 4c. The distinction between reproductive
 and
 creative imagination: the representa-
 tive image and the imaginative construct
 5& The image distinguished from the idea or concept: the concrete and particular
 as contrasted with the abstract and universal
 4d. The pathology of imagination: hallucinations, persistent imagery

6. The role of imagination in thinking and knowing
 6a. Imagination as knowledge: its relation to possible and actual experience
 6b. The effect of intellect on human imagination: the imaginative thinking of
 animals
 6c. The dependence of rational thought and knowledge on imagination
 (1) The abstraction of ideas from images: the image as a condition of thought
 (2) The schema of the imagination as mediating between concepts of the
 understanding and the sensory manifold of intuition: the transcendental
 unity of apperception
 6d. The limits of imagination: imageless thought; the necessity of going beyond
 imagination in the speculative sciences

7. Imagination
and the fine arts
 7a. The use of imagination
 in the production and appreciation of works of art
 7& The fantastic and the realistic in poetry: the probable and the possible in poetry
 and history

8. The nature and causes of dreaming
 8a. Dreams as divinely inspired: their prophetic portent; divination through the
 medium of dreams
 8b. The role of sensation and memory in the dreams of sleep
 8c. The expression of desire in daydreaming or fantasy
 8d. The symbolism of dreams
 (1) The manifest and latent content of dreams: the dream-work
 (2) The recurrent use of specific symbols in dreams: the dream-language
 8*. Dream-analysis as uncovering the repressed unconscious

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: The discussion of memory and imagination in relation to t

standing, desire and will, see DESIRE 53; IDEA 1c, 2 The controversy over the
distinction between image and ide SENSE 1d, 53; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 4d.

Other discussions of the association of ideas, and of reve

IDEA 56; RELATION 4f.

The consideration of memory as knowledge of the past, see

TRUTH 33(2); and for the distinction between memory and

5d; MIND 4c.

The doctrine of reminiscence which identifies learning wit

of innate ideas, see IDEA 2b; KNOWLEDGE 6c(3); MIND 4d(2

The role of memory in science, history, and poetry, see EX

INDUCTION 2; POETRY 2.

The problem of personal identity, see SAME AND OTHER 1b; S

The theory of racial memory in relation to instinct and tr

3c; POETRY 3.

155 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK n, 86a; BK vi, 249a-250a; BK xi, 481a-482b; BK
xn, 561c-d; 674a,c BK xiv, 608a-b; EPILOGUE i, 672b; 673dFREUD: Orig in and
Development of PsychoAnalysis, llc-12c / Interpretation of Dreams, 178a-205c csp
189b-190a, 194b-d, 204c-d; 252c-340a esp 252c-253a, 332a-333b, 336d340a;
356d-373a passim / General Introduction, 489c-504d csp 489c-494d; 513d-526c esp
513d-519d; 532d-544d passim, esp 536c-539a, 810b; 812d-814d; 816b-818b 541b-542b
/ New Introductory Lectures, 809bThe recurrent use of specific symbols in
dreams: the dream-language FREUD: Orig in and Development of PsychoAnalysis,
12c-d / Psycho- Analytic Therapy, 123d-124a / Interpretation of Dreams,
173a174d; 178b-179c; 230b-231c; 265a-272c; 277b-298a esp 278d-285c / General
Introduction, 504d-513d; 516a-518c; 523a-526c / New Introductory Lectures, 813d;
815a-817a Dream-analysis as uncovering the repressed unconscious FREUD: Orig in
and Development of PsychoAnalysis, lla-13a / Interpretation of Dreams, 178a-205c
esp 178a-179c, 204c-d; 282d-283a; 285c; 294d-295a; 319d-320c; 340a-387a,c esp
345c-350a, 356d-358c, 365a, 383d-384a, 386b-387a / General Introduction,
483d-494d esp 486b-c, 488b-c, 489c-490a; 501c504d esp 504b-d; 519d-524a passim;
531d-532c; 538d-539b; 585a; 635a / New Introductory Lectures, 808d-813b esp
811a-812b, 812d e-2f; SENSE 3b(2), jdfa). a, see IDEA 2f-2g; MIND 1a(i); he
faculties of sense and underrie or daydreaming, see DESIRE 53; KNOWLEDGE 6b(2);
TIME 6e; intellectual habit, see HABIT i, h remembering, or for the doctrine ).
PERIENCE 2a-2b; HISTORY i; OUL 1d. adition, see HABIT 36; LANGUAGE For; The
function of imagination in thinking and knowing, see MIND 1a(2); REASONING 1c;

and for the doctrine that universal concepts are abstracted from sensory images,

2g; SENSE 53; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 4C.

The theory of the transcendental unity of apperception, to which memory or ima

contributes, see KNOWLEDGE 6b(4); ONE AND MANY 4b; SENSE 1c, 35).

The imagination as a factor in art, see ART 5; and for another discussion of t

the possible in poetry, see POETRY 83(2).

Other discussions of dreams, their causes and meaning, see DESIRE 53, 6c; LANG

PROPHECY 30; SIGN AND SYMBOL 6a; and for the theory of conflict, censorship,

sion involved in the Freudian interpretation of dreams, see DESIRE 4a-4d, 6b

Matters relevant to the psychopathology of memory and imagination, see DESIRE

EMOTION 3a-3b; MAN 50; MIND 8b; SENSE 4d(2); TRUTH 33(2).

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great floods of the Western World, but

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into t

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The

W. HAMILTON. Lectures on M

I.

VOL i (30-33) HOBBES. The Elements of Law, Natural and Politic, BAIN. The Senses
and the In

PART I, CH 3 SPKNCER. The Principles of HuMfc. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK i,
PART i, II, CH 5-8; PART IV, CH 6

SLOT Hi; PART III, SECT V-VII CH 3 FREUD. The Psychopathology of Everyday Life,
CH EMERSON. Natural History of

1-7 HLRING. Memory

. Wit and Its Relation to the Unconscious TAINE. On Intelligence

. Leonardo da Vinci TYNDALL. Scientific Use of

LEWIS CARROLL. Alice's Adve

II.

.

Through the Loo CICERO. Academics, n Found There ALBERTUS MAGNUS. De Memoria ef
Reminiscentia S. BUTLER. Unconscious Memo G. F. Pico DELLA MIRANDOLA. On the
Imagination SULLY. Illusions, CH 10 MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la veritt,
BK n GALTON. Inquiries into Huma LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Under-
velopment (Mental Imagery

standing, BK II chometric Experiments, An

.

Monadology, par 26-28 sciousness, Visionaries, HARTLEY. Observations on Man, His
Frame, His ROMANES. Mental Evolution i

Duty and His Expectations, VOL i, INTRO; PROP- EBBINGHAUS. Memory

OSITION 8-14, 79-94 C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Pap VOLTAIRE. "Imagination," in A
Philosophical Dic- STEVENSON. "A Chapter on Dr

tionary Plains T. REID. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, in HODGSON. The
Metaphysic of BLAKE. Songs of Innocence (3-4. 6), 3 (3-4), 7 (5),

Songs of Experience

. 2 3 (5). 4 (3) 5

COLERIDGE. Diographia Literaria, CH 13 STOUT. Analytic Psychology, BROWN.
Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human . Manual of Psych

Mind, VOL n, pp 354-405 RIBOT. Diseases of Memory DE QUINCEY. Confessions ofan
English Opium-Eater Essay on the Creative

.

LAMB. "Dream-Children," in The Essays of Elia WOODWORTH. Psychological Is J.
MILL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human TITCHENER. Lectures on the

Mind, CH 7, 10 of the Thought-Processes

see IDEA gination he probable and UAGE 10; and repres- . relevant to the wo
groups: cited, consult Great Ideas. etaphysics and Logic, tellect (Intellect)
Psychology, VOL i, PART ; VOL II, PART IX, Intellect the Imagination ntures in
Wonderland ting-Glass and What Alice ry n Faculty and Its De, Associations,
Psyti-Chamber of ConNumber Forms) n Animals ers, VOL vi, par 494-504 eams," in
Across the Experience, VOL i, en 2 8 (4); VOL m, CH i (2 (c)), CH 1 1 ology, BK
iv, CH i Imagination sues, CH 4, 7 Experimental Psychology

CHAPTER 56: MEMORY AND IMAGINATION BRADLEY. Collected Essays, VOL i (13, 18)
SANTA Y ANA. Soliloquie

Essays on Truth and Reality, CH

.

3, 12- oquies, CH 29

'3 .

Scepticism and An BERGSON. Matter and Memory JAENSCH. Eidetic Imager

Dreams

.

of Investigation

Mind-Energy, CH 4-5

. LOWES. The Road to Xana JUNG. Instinct and the Unconscious JONES. Nightmare,
Witch PROUST. Remembrance of Things Past JOYCE. Ulysses B. RUSSELL. The Analysis
of Mind, LECT 8-9 .

Finnegans Wake BROAD. The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH 5 WERTHEIMER.
Productive imal Faith, CH 17 s in England and Later Solily and Typological
Methods du es, and Devils Thinking
