Chapter  w  METAPHYSICS  INTRODUCTION  this  chapter, as in MATHEMATICS, we must
INdistinguish   controversies   about   the  science  we  are  considering  from
controversies  in it. But here the situation is complicated by many ambiguities.
In  the  tradition of western thought, the name of science has never been denied
to  mathematics,  no  matter  how  its  subject  matter has been defined or what
conception  of  science has prevailed. But controversies about metaphysics often
begin,  in  modern  times  at  least,  by  questioning our right to use the word
"science"  when  we  speak of metaphysical inquiry or speculation. The challenge
usually implies that metaphysics cannot be regarded as a body of valid knowledge
because the peculiar objects it has chosen to investigate are not susceptible to
scientific  inquiry.  If  experimentation  were  the  sine qua non of scientific
knowledge, it would follow, of course, that a discipline which could not perform
experiments or even less rigorous types of empirical research couldnot be called
a science. But by that standard mathematics would also be ruled out. It does not
seem  to  be  the  case, however, that mathematics and metaphysics stand or fall
together.  Hume,  for  example, admits the one and excludes the other. If we are
persuaded  of  his  principles  concerning science, what havoc, he says, must we
make  when  we  run  over  our libraries. "If we take in our hand any volume; of
divinity  or  school  metaphysics, for instance; let us ask, Does it contain any
abstract  reasoning  concerning  quantity  or  number?  No.  Does it contain any
experimental  reasoning  concerning  matter of fact and existence? No. Commit it
then  to the flames; for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion." Nor
does  Kant make experimentation or empirical research indispensable to valid and
certain knowledge. On the contrary, pure, as op- 158 posed to empirical, physics
is for him like mathematics in having the superior status of a priori knowledge.
They  are both sciences in the highest sense of the term because they consist of
valid   synthetic   judgments  a  priori.  Kant,  therefore,  does  not  exclude
metaphysics  from  the  ranks  of  science  because  he thinks that "metaphysic,
according  to  its  proper  aim,  consists  merely  of  synthetic propositions a
priori."  Not  the  method of metaphysics, nor the form of its propositions, but
the  character of its objects seems to be the cause of its frustration, reducing
it  to  what  Kant calls an "illusory dialectic" rather than a valid science. It
might  be  supposed  that those who take the opposite view that metaphysics is a
science,  even, perhaps, the highest of the sciences would agree in defining its
objects or the scope of its inquiry. This docs not seem to be the case, any more
than  it  seems to be true that all those who criticize metaphysics conceive its
subject  matter  in  the same way. Following what he takes to be the traditional
conception  of  metaphysics in the mediaeval schools, which appears to him to be
continued  in  the  writings  of  Descartes, Leibnitz, and Wolff, Kant says that
"metaphysic  has  for the proper object of its inquiries only three grand ideas:
God, Freedom, and Immortality." This also seems to be at least part of what Hume
has  in  mind  when  he  refers  to  "school metaphysics" and associates it with
"divinity,"  by  which he means theology, natural or sacred. Yet we find William
James  saying  that  "Hume  is  at  bottom  as much of a metaphysician as Thomas
Aquinas,"  because he is engaged in speculations concerning the relation or lack
of  relation,  the  identity  or  lack  of identity, in the discrete elements of
immediate  experience. Here the question seems to be not about God, freedom, and
immortality,  but  about  the  existence  of  enduring CHAPTER 57: ME substances
underlying  all  perceptible qualities, or about a fixed order of reality behind
the sequence of phenomena in experience. According to James, "the whole question
of  interaction  and  influence  between  things is a metaphysical question, and
cannot  be  discussed  at  all  by  those  who  are unwilling to go into matters
thoroughly."  In the Preface to his Principles of Psychologyk James declares his
plan to limit his own inquiries to what can be known by the empirical methods of
the  natural  sciences.  Psychology  like  physics must assume certain data. The
discussion  of  these  assumptions,  he  says,  "is called metaphysics and falls
outside  the  province  of  this  book The data assumed by psychology, just like
those  assumed  by  physics  and  the  other  natural sciences, must sometime be
overhauled.  The  effort to overhaul them clearly and thoroughly is metaphysics;
but  metaphysics can only perform her task well when distinctly conscious of its
great  extent."  The  implication seems to be not that metaphysics is impossible
but  rather  that  metaphysics, as James conceives it, does not yet exist in any
mature  or  satisfactory development. "Only a metaphysics alive to the weight of
her task," he writes, can hope to be successful. "That will perhaps be centuries
hence."

WE  CANNOT FULLY explore the issue concerning the objects of metaphysics without
observing  that  other  names  are  used  in the tradition of the great books to
designate  the  discipline  which,  rightly or wrongly, claims to be the highest
human  science. The Greeks initiated the conception of a discipline which should
be  preeminent because it deals with first principles and highest causes. It not
only  searches  for  wisdom  about  the  ultimate  realities;  it  also lays the
foundations for all other sciences. But the Greeks do not have one name for this
discipline,  nor  is  "metaphysics"  even  among  the  various  names  they use.
Aristotle,  whose  Metaphysics  is the first great book to have this word in its
title,  never uses the word to refer to the science which he is trying to define
and  establish.  In  the  opening  chapters,  he  speaks of it under the name of
wisdom, for "all men suppose what is called Wisdom to deal with the first causes
and  the  principles  of  TAPHYSICS  all  things."  There  are other theoretical
sciences, such as physics and mathematics, which investigate causes or deal with
principles, but they do not reach to the highest causes or first principles, nor
do  they  take  all things in their most universal aspect as the object of their
inquiry.  Though  "physics also is a kind of Wisdom," says Aristotle, "it is not
the  first  kind"; and elsewhere he says that "both physics and mathematics must
be  classed  as  parts  of  Wisdom."  Physics deals only with material things in
motion;  and "the mathematician investigates abstractions" objects which, except
as abstracted, cannot exist apart from matter and motion, "If there is something
which  is eternal and immovable and separated from matter, clearly the knowledge
of  it  belongs  to  a  theoretical  science  not,  however,  to  physics nor to
mathematics,  but  to  a science prior to both." It is that science which is the
highest  part  of wisdom. Aristotle gives two names to the supreme form of human
wisdom  or  the highest of the theoretical sciences. He denominates it both from
the  position it occupies in relation to all other disciplines and also in terms
of  the kind of substance which it alone investigates. If there is "no substance
other  than  those  which  are formed by nature, natural science (i.e., physics)
will  be  the first science, but if there is an immovable substance, the science
of  this  must  be prior and must be first philosophy." But this highest science
also  deserves to be called "theology" as well as "first philosophy." There are,
Aristotle  says, "three theoretical philosophies, mathematics, physics, and what
we  may  call  theology,  since  it  is  obvious  that  if the divine is present
anywhere,  it  is  present  in things of this sort," /., the eternal, immutable,
immaterial.  THERE  is STILL another name for the highest speculative discipline
in  the  Greek  conception of the order of the sciences. "Dialectic" is the name
which  Plato  gives  to the search for first principles and for the knowledge of
the  most  intelligible  realities.  As  appears  in  the  chapter on DIALECTIC,
Aristotle  contrasts  the  dialectician  and  the  philosopher  as  respectively
concerned  with  opinion  and  knowledge,  but Plato regards the dialectician as
preeminently  the  philosopher.  Not  only does dialectic belong to the realm of
knowledge  rather  than  opinion,  but  in  the  realm of knowledge, mathematics
occupies the lower, dialectic the upper part.

The  mathematical  sciences  build  upon hypotheses which they do not and cannot
establish.

Dialectic  uses  hypotheses  only "as steps and points of departure into a world
which  is  above hypotheses, in order that she may soar beyond them to the first
principle of the whole; and . . . by successive steps she descends again without
the  aid  of  any  sensible  object  from ideas, through ideas, and in ideas she
ends."  Despite  all  the  relevant  differences  between  Plato  and  Aristotle
concerning  being  and  becoming,  reason  and  sense,  the intelligible and the
sensible,  it  seems  possible  to  compare  the  knowledge  which  Plato  calls
"dialectic"  with  what  Aristotle calls "first philosophy" or "theology." Both,
for  example, proceed from first principles and establish the foundations of the
inferior  sciences.  On its downward path, dialectic, according to Plato, brings
the light of reason to bear on the understanding of the hypotheses which are the
principles  of  mathematics.  Though  Aristotle thinks that mathematics rests on
axioms  or  self-evident  truths,  he also says that "it must be the business of
first   philosophy  to  examine  the  principles  of  mathematics"  because  the
mathematician  only  uses  them  in  a special application without investigating
their  general  truth.  Furthermore,  the question concerning how the objects of
mathematics   exist   is   a   question  for  the  first  philosopher,  not  the
mathematician.  In  the Sophist, Plato, to illustrate the difference between the
sophist  and the dialectician or philosopher, develops an analysis of such terms
as  being  and non-being, true and false, same and other, one and many, rest and
motion.  These,  it  seems,  are  the  fundamental concepts in the philosopher's
knowledge  of  the ultimate reality. But these are also the fundamental concepts
in Aristotle's Metaphysics. In the mediaeval period when "metaphysics" generally
replaces  "dialectic"  as  the  name  for  the  first  philosophy, the so-called
transcendental  termssuch  as being, essence, other, one, true, good ILK treated
as  the  basic  metaphysical  concepts;  and  what  is characteristic of them as
abstractions S helps to characterize the nature of metaphysics as a science. The
word  -"metaphysics" comes into use as a result of the title supposedly given by
the Alexandrian librarians to the work in which Aristotle treats the problems of
the  first  philosophy.  The  word  is short for "the books which come after the
books  on  physics."  Plotinus  uses  the word and connects it with the Platonic
meaning  of "dialectic. "In the training of the metaphysician he says, dialectic
is  the  ultimate  study.  Dialectic,  according to Plotinus, "is the method, or
discipline,  that  brings with it the power of pronouncing with final truth upon
the nature and relation of things what each is, how it differs from others, what
common  quality all have, to what kind each belongs and in what rank each stands
in  its kind and whether its being is real-being, and how many beings there are,
and  how many non-beings to be distinguished from beings." But we must not think
of  dialectic,  Plotinus  declares,  "as the mere tool of the metaphysician." It
goes beyond metaphysics as vision or contemplative wisdom goes beyond discursive
reasoning  and  demonstration.  "It  leaves  to another science all that coil of
premises  and  conclusions  called  the  art  of  reasoning." THE QUESTION which
Plotinus  raiseswhether  there  is  a  higher  science or form of knowledge than
metaphysics  is naturally considered by the great Christian theologians. In part
their  answer resembles that of Plotinus; in part it ' * differs. Where Plotinus
speaks  of  dialectic  as  the  most  precious  part  of  philosophy" because it
transcends reasoning and argument and reaches the sort of immediate apprehension
of  reality  which  cannot  be  expressed  in  words,  theologians recognize the
supremacy  of  mystical knowledge a foretaste in this life of what the vision of
God  will  be  like in the life to come. But, unlike Plotinus, they do not think
such  knowledge, here or hereafter, is natural wisdom. Rather it is supernatural
knowledge,  the divine gift to man of a contemplative wisdom to which his nature
cannot  attain  by  its  own  unaided  powers. The subordination of metaphysical
science to knowledge which is both supernatural and nonscientific (i.e., neither
discursive  nor analytical nor demonstrative) is considered in the chap- CHAPTER
57:  META  ters  on  THEOLOGY  and WISDOM. Another subordination of metaphysics,
considered there also, must be mentioned here as well. That is the subordination
of  metaphysics  to  theology. Both metaphysics and theology may be conceived as
sciences  which  are  engaged  in  reasoning  and  argument  and  in  trying  to
demonstrate  conclusions  from  principles.  But  one  is merely a human science
working  with  the principles of reason, whereas the other is what Aquinas calls
"sacred  doctrine,"  in  order  to  signify  that its principles are articles of
religious faith. In the hierarchy of human sciences, metaphysics remains supreme
the first philosophy. It suffers only by comparison with theology insofar as the
latter rests upon divine revelation and, since it enjoys the certainty of faith,
escapes  the  insecurity  of  reason.  Though metaphysics and theology differ in
their  principles  and somewhat in their methods, they do not differ entirely in
their  subject  matter. Both, for example, may treat of God and of the existence
of immaterial and imperishable beings.

Aquinas,  therefore,  must  face  the  objection  that  there is no need for any
knowledge  in addition to metaphysics because "everything that is, is treated of
in  philosophical  science  even  God Himself, in that part of philosophy called
theology, or the divine science, by Aristotle." To this he replies by giving two
reasons for sacred theology. It is necessary, he says, "for the salvation of man
that  certain  truths  which  exceed human reason should be made known to him by
divine  revelation.  Even  as  regards those truths about God which human reason
could  have  discovered,  it was necessary that man should be taught by a divine
revelation;  because  the  truth  about God such as reason could discover, would
only  be  known  by a few, and that after a long time, and with the admixture of
many  errors."  Furthermore,  he continues, there is no reason "why those things
which  may  be learnt from philosophical science, so far as they can be known by
natural reason, may not also be taught us by another science so far as they fall
within  revelation.  Hence  the  theology included in sacred doctrine differs in
kind  from  that  theology  which  is  a part of philosophy." These two kinds of
theology  are  traditionally  distinguished  as  natural  and sacred. When Fran-
PHYSICS  cis  Bacon divides the sciences "into theology and philosophy," he adds
that "in the former we do not include natural theology." Natural theology is the
divine  part  of  philosophy, yet it is clearly distinct from sacred theology or
what  Bacon calls "inspired divinity." This distinction, in whatever language it
is  made,  raises  two  problems.  The first concerns the relation of natural to
sacred theology, especially with regard to the scope of natural theology and the
precise  nature  of  its independence of sacred doctrine. On this question there
seems  to  be  considerable  difference  between  such  writers as Augustine and
Aquinas,  or  Bacon and Descartes. As already noted, the various issues involved
are  reserved  for  discussion in the chapter on THEOLOGY. The second problem is
directly pertinent to metaphysics alone. The question is whether metaphysics and
natural  theology  are  identical in subject matter or scope, or whether natural
theology  is only a part of metaphysics. Aristotle seems to answer this question
when  he  suggests  that  "first  philosophy" and "theology" are interchangeable
designations for the highest branch of speculative knowledge. To the extent that
he declares this science to be an inquiry concerning the existence and nature of
immaterial  and  imperishable  substances,  his  definition  of  the  object  of
metaphysics  would  seem  to  justify the title of theology. Descartes, who also
separates  metaphysics  from  physics  by  reference  to  the  immateriality and
materiality  of  the  substances  which  are their objects, even more explicitly
seems  to  give the whole of metaphysics a theological character. In the Preface
to  his  Meditations  on  the  First Philosophy, he says that he is concerned to
treat  of  "God  and  the  human soul"; for, as he explains to the professors of
Sacred  Theology  of  the  Sorbonne,  "I  have  always  considered  that the two
questions  respecting  God and the soul were the chief of those that ought to be
demonstrated  by philosophical rather than theological argument." Though he adds
the freedom of the human will to the existence of God and the immortality of the
soul,  Kant's  definition  of  the objects of metaphysical speculation similarly
makes  metaphysics an inquiry into things which lie outside the realm of physics
and  associates  it THE GREAT I with the traditional subject matter of theology,
at least in the sense that here reason tries to prove propositions which are the
main  tenets  of  religious  faith.  In  his Preface to the first edition of the
Critique ofPure Reason, Kant remarks that when reason "finds itself compelled to
have recourse to principles which transcend the region of experience," it "falls
into  confusion and contradictions. . . . The arena of these endless contests is
called Metaphysic."

IF  NOTHING  IMMATERIAL  exists,  if there are no beings apart from the changing
things  of  senseexperience,  or  if, although such things exist, they cannot be
known  by reason proceeding in the manner of speculative science, does it follow
that  metaphysics  must  also  be  denied  existence,  at least as a speculative
science?  The  answer seems to be clear. If the declared objects of a science do
not  exist, or if those objects are unknowable by the methods which that science
proposes  to  follow, then it seems difficult to defend its claims to be a valid
science  against  those who challenge them. The controversy over the validity of
metaphysics  would  thus appear to turn on the truth or falsity of the two "ifs"
just  mentioned.  But  the matter cannot be so resolved if natural theology does
not  exhaust the whole of metaphysics; that is, if metaphysics considers objects
other  than  the  immaterial,  and  if it inquires into their nature rather than
their  existence.  Aristotle's  definition  of  the  subject matter of the first
philosophy  seems to contain an alternative conception of metaphysics, one which
may  be  quite  consistent  with  the  conception  of it as theology, but which,
however, gives it problems to solve in the realm of physical things. "There is a
science,"   Aristotle  writes,  "which  investigates  being  as  being  and  the
attributes  which  belong to being in virtue of its own nature." This definition
of  the  first philosophy seems to differentiate it from mathematics and physics
as  sharply  as  the  other  definition  in terms of immaterial and imperishable
substances.  The  other sciences, according to Aristotle, do not treat of "being
qua being universally." The properties of anything which is "in so far as it has
being,  and  the contraries in it qua being, it is the business of no other sci-
ence to investigate; for to physics one would assign the study of things not qua
being,  but  rather  qua sharing in movement"; and mathematics is concerned with
the  attributes  of  things  insofar  as they are "quantitative and continuous."
These  sciences "mark off some particular kind of being, some genus, and inquire
into  this, but not being simply, nor qua being. . . . Similarly, these sciences
omit  the  question  whether  the  genus with which they deal exists or does not
exist,  because  it  belongs to the same kind of thinking to show what it is and
that  it  is."  Only  the  first  philosophy  "does not inquire about particular
subjects  in  so  far  as each has some attribute or other, but speculates about
being,  in  so  far  as  each  particular  thing  is." Its subject matter, then,
includes all existing things as existing, and involves not only the question how
anything  which  exists  exists  (i.e.,  the  properties of being), but also the
question  whether  certain things, whose existence can be questioned, do in fact
exist.  Whatever truths hold good for all things qua being such as the principle
that  the  same  thing cannot both be and not be in the same respect at the same
time  belong  to  the  first  philosophy, even though, as in this case Aristotle
points  out,  the law of contradiction may also belong to logic as the principle
of  demonstration.  THIS BROADER CONCEPTION of the first philosophy explains, as
its  restriction to natural theology could not explain, why the central books in
Aristotle's  Metaphysics treat of sensible, physical substances; their nature as
substances;  the  distinction  between  substance and accident, form and matter,
potentiality  and  actuality,  as principles of the composite nature of changing
substances;  and  the  properties  of  such existences in virtue of their having
being,  e.g.,  their  unity  and  divisibility,  their  sameness  and otherness.
Aristotle does not inquire whether such substances exist. He seems to take their
existence as unquestionable, for he frequently refers to physical things as "the
readily  recognized  substances."  But in addition to the question "how sensible
substances exist," there are such questions as "whether there are or are not any
besides  sensible  substances.  .  .  and whether there CHAPTER 57: METAPHY is a
substance  capable of separate existence, apart from sensible substances, and if
so  why  and  how."  These  latter questions lead to the concluding books of the
Metaphysics   which   inquire  into  the  existence  of  the  non-sensible,  the
immaterial, the immutable. If Aristotle's theology begins here, then theology is
only a part the crowning part, perhaps of a larger science whose object is not a
special  realm  of  being,  but  all  of being. Hobbes and Bacon go further than
Aristotle  in  the  direction of opposing the identification of metaphysics with
theology. Where Aristotle seems to admit theological subject matter as a part of
the  first  philosophy,  they  exclude it entirely. Hobbes does not use the word
"metaphysics" in his own classification of the sciences; he employs it only as a
term of derogation to refer to scholastic doctrines which he repudiates. His own
classification  makes  philosophia prima that branch of natural philosophy which
is  prior  to  the  mathematical  and  mechanical sciences. The latter deal with
determinate quantity and motion. The antecedent science deals with "quantity and
motion  indeterminate"  These  "being  the  principles  or  first  foundation of
philosophy,"  the  science  which  deals with them "is called Philosophia Prima"
Bacon  distinguishes  between  first  philosophy  and  metaphysics  and  between
metaphysics  and  natural  theology.  First  philosophy, he says, is "the common
parent  of sciences." It is concerned with "axioms, not peculiar to any science,
but   common   to  a  number  of  them"  and  also  with  "the  adventitious  or
transcendental  condition  of  things,  such  as  little, much, like, different,
possible,  impossible,  entity,  nonentity, etc." Natural theology, which is the
divine  part  of  philosophy  because  it  inquires about "God, unity, goodness,
angels, and spirits," is separate from the rest of natural philosophy.

"But  to  assign  the proper office of metaphysics, as contra-distinguished from
primary  philosophy  and  natural theology," Bacon writes, "we must note that as
physics  regards  the things which are wholly immersed in matter and movable, so
metaphysics  regards  what  is  more abstracted and fixed; that physics supposes
only  existence, motion, and natural necessity, whilst metaphysics supposes also
mind  SICS  and  idea.  ...  As  we  have  divided  natural  philosophy into the
investigation  of  causes  and  the  production  of  effects,  and  referred the
investigation  of  causes  to  theory,  which  we again divide into physical and
metaphysical,  it  is  necessary  that the real difference of these two be drawn
from  the  nature of the causes they inquire into." Physics, according to Bacon,
inquires  into efficient and material causes; metaphysics, into formal and final
causes;  and  as  mechanics  is the practical application of physical theory, so
what  Bacon  calls  "magic"  is  the  practical doctrine that corresponds to the
metaphysical  theory  of forms. AGREEMENT OR disagreement concerning the subject
matter  and  problems  of  that  which  claims  to be the highest human science,
however  named,  does  not  seem  to  be  uniformly  accompanied by agreement or
disagreement  concerning  the  status  and  development  of  the  discipline  in
question.  There  seems  to  be  some  similarity,  for example, between Plato's
dialectic  as  an  inquiry  into  forms  and  Bacon's  notion  of metaphysics as
concerned  with  formal  causes  a  similarity which Bacon himself observes. But
where  Plato  seems  to  think  that dialectic exists, to be taught and learned,
Bacon's  judgment is that this part of metaphysics, if not the part dealing with
final  causes,  has not yet been developed because the right method has not been
employed.  Again,  Aristotle's  conception  of metaphysics as concerned with the
primary  axioms,  the  universal principles applicable to all existence, and the
transcendental  properties  of  being, seems to bear some resemblance to Bacon's
primary  philosophy.  But Bacon writes as if Aristotle's Metaphysicsk.k not been
written,  or  at  least  as  if  it  had  not succeeded, as Aristotle might have
supposed it had, in establishing the science which Bacon finds for the most part
in  a defective or undeveloped condition. If we turn to natural theology, either
as a part of metaphysics (with Aristotle), or as separate from metaphysics (with
Bacon),  or  as  identical  with  metaphysics (with Descartes), we find the same
situation.  Aside  from  some  verbal  and  some real differences concerning the
objects of the inquiry, Aristotle, Bacon, and Descartes think that the existence
of beings apart from the sensible world of matter and change can be demonstrated
and  that  something  can  be  known  of  their  nature  whether they are called
immaterial  substances,  spirits,  and intelligences, or God, angels, and souls.
With some alterations in and language thought, Plato and Plotinus, Augustine and
Aquinas, Spinoza and Locke can be added to this company. They are theologians in
that  sense  of  "theology"  which implies a rational knowledgewithout religious
faith,  and  either  by intuition or demonstration of beings which really exist,
yet  are  not  sensible  or material or mutable or finite. Spinoza, for example,
docs not use the word "metaphysics," but he holds that "the human mind possesses
an  adequate  knowledge  of  the  eternal and infinite essence of God." Although
Locke's  use  of the word "metaphysics" is derogatory, and though the purpose of
his  Essay  Concerning  Human  Understanding  is to prevent human inquiries from
extending  beyond  man's  capacities,  he  attributes  greater  certainty to our
knowledge  of  God  and  the  soul than to our knowledge of bodies, and finds no
greater  difficulty  in  our  speculations about spirits than about particles of
matter.

"Experimenting  and  discovering  in  ourselves  knowledge,  and  the  power  of
voluntary  motion,  as certainly as we experiment, or discover in things without
us,  the  cohesion  and  separation  of  solid parts, which is the extension and
motion  of  bodies,"  Locke writes, "we have as much reason to be satisfied with
our  notion  of immaterial spirit, as with our notion of body, and the existence
of the one as well as the other.

...  But  whichever  of  these  complex  ideas  be  clearest,  that  of body, or
immaterial  spirit, this simple ideas that make them is evident, that the up are
no  other  than what we have received from sensation or reflection; and so is it
of  all  our other ideas of substances, even of God himself." As we have already
seen,  Hume  and  Kant deny metaphysics (so far as it is identified with what is
traditionally  natural  theology) the status of a valid theoretical science. For
them  it  is incapable of taking its place beside physics and mathematics. Hume,
in  addition,  denies validity to metaphysical speculation concerning causes and
substances  in  the  natural order. Unlike Hume, who simply removes metaphysi- S
cal  problems  from  the  realm of questions worth thinking about, Kant does not
reject the problems but rather offers alternative methods of stating and solving
them.  He  hopes thereby to accomplish a reformation rather than an abolition of
metaphysical  inquiry.  The  existence  of God, freedom, and immortality must be
affirmed,  Kant  thinks, in the order of practical, not speculative reason. They
are  indispensable  "conditions of the necessary object of our will .... that is
to  say,  conditions  of  the  practical  use of pure reason." Yet, he adds, "we
cannot  affirm  that  we  know and understand, I will not say the actuality, but
even  the  possibility, of them." Furthermore, by redefining metaphysics to mean
"any  system  of knowledge a priori that consists of pure conceptions," Kant not
only  gives  his  fundamental  treatises  in  morals  and  ethics a metaphysical
character,  but  sees  the possibility of a genuine metaphysic emerging from the
Critique  of  Pure  Reason. Once "the dogmatism of metaphysic" has been removed,
"that  is, the presumption that it is possible to achieve anything in metaphysic
without  a  previous criticism of pure reason. ... it may not be toodifficult to
leave  a bequest to posterity in the shape of a systematical metaphysic, carried
out according to the critique of pure reason." Kant's transcendental philosophy,
and  especially  what he calls "the architectonic of pure reason," is in a sense
that  metaphysic  already  begun.  In  subject  matter,  if not in its method or
conclusions,  it  resembles  the  traditional  inquiry  concerning the universal
principles  and  transcendental  properties  of  being.  The  objects of natural
theology are, of course, excluded as being beyond the power of reason to know in
a  speculative  manner.  Metaphysics  as a possible science is for Kant "nothing
more  than  the inventory of all that is given us by pure reason, systematically
arranged.  Such  a  system  of  pure  speculative  . . . reason," he says in his
original  preface to the Critique, "I hope to be able to publish under the title
of  Metaphysic  of  Nature"  And  in  the last pages of the Critique, wherein he
criticizes  all  speculative  efforts  in  the  sphere of natural theology, Kant
reaffirms  "the  speculative and the practical use of pure reason" to constitute
"a Metaphysic of Nature and a Metaphysic of CHAPTBR 57: MET Ethics." The former,
he says, is "what is commonly called Metaphysic in the more limited sense." Both
together "form properly that department of knowledge which may be termed, in the
truest  sense  of  the  word,  philosophy,  The path which it pursues is that of
science,  which,  when  it  has  once  been discovered, is never lost, and never
misleads."

CONTROVERSIES   ABOUT   metaphysics   can  be  distinguished  from  metaphysical
controversies  that  is,  disputes  within the field of metaphysical thought. We
have  confined  our  attention to the former throughout this chapter. But it may
not  be  possible  to  judge,  much less to resolve, the issues about the scope,
methods,  and  validity  of metaphysics without engaging in, or at least facing,
issues which are themselves metaphysical.

The  only way to escape this would be to suppose that psychology (as an analysis
of the powers of the mind) or epistemology (as a OUTLINE OF TOP

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
1.
Conceptions of the highest human science: dialectic, first philosophy, metaphysics,
natural theology, transcendental philosophy

2. The analysis of the highest human science: the character of dialectical, metaphysical,
or transcendental knowledge
   2a. The distinctive objects or problems of the supreme science
   2b. The nature of the concepts, abstractions, or principles of the highest science
   2c. The   method of metaphysics: the distinction between empitical and transcen-
   dental methods
   2d. The distinction between a metaphysic of nature and a metaphysic of morals:
   the difference between the speculative treatment and the practical resolu-
   tion of the metaphysical problems of God, freedom, and immortality

3. Metaphysics in relation to other disciplines
   3a. The relation of metaphysics to theology
   3& The relation of metaphysics to mathematics, physics or natural philosophy,
   psychology, and the empirical sciences
   3b. The relation of metaphysics to logic and dialectic

4. The criticism and reformation
of metaphysics
   4a. The dismissal or satirization
   of metaphysics as dogmatism or sophistry
   as a propaedeutic to meta-
   4b. Reconstructions of metaphysics: critical philosophy
   physics

CROSS-REFERENCES

For:  Statements  in  other  contexts  concerning  the  highest h PHILOSOPHY 2b;
SCIENCE  13(2);  THEOLOGY  33;  WISDOM  Discussions  relevant  to  the  objects,
problems,  and  human science, see BEING 2, 3, 4-43, 7a-7b, 7c 6b; GOOD AND EVIL
la-1b; IDEA 1f; IMMORTALITY

43;  MIND lof; NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY i, 2aSAME AND OTHER i, 2c, 2e; SOUL 4b;
TRUTH 1b-1c

Considerations relevant to the nature of metaphysic

DEFINITION 6a; IDEA 1d, 2g, 44); MEMORY AND I

The method or character of metaphysical thought, se

OPHY 3a-3b; REASONING 6a; TRUTH 4C.

The  relation  of metaphysics to theology, see KNOWLE WISDOM la, 1c; and for the
relation  of  metaphysic  MATHEMATICS  la; NATURE 4b; PHILOSOPHY 2b; PHYSICS The
problem of principles common to metaphysics and

statement of the law of contradiction, see OPPOSI

Criticisms of metaphysics, and for the substitution

physics as the first philosophy, see DIALECTIC 2c

PHILOSOPHY 3d, 6b; SOUL 53; THEOLOGY 5.

Considerations relevant to a metaphysic of morals,

lems of God, freedom, and immortality, see GOD 2d CONTINGENCY 4b; PHILOSOPHY 23;
WILL

ICS  169  41  GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 526c-527a 42 KANT: Pure Reason, la-4a,c;
20b-c;  36a-37d;  109b-c;  120c-121c;  129c-130a; 133d; 157d; 187c 188b; 192a-b;
218d  222b  esp  221c 222b; 229b-c / Practical Reason, 299d; 304d-305a; 335b-c /
Judgement,  600d-601c;  607d-608c  7GohTHE:  Faust,  PART  i  [1948-1963] 46a-b;
[4343-4367]  107a-b;  PART n [7843-7846] 191a 8 MELVILLE: Moby Dic1(, 115b-117a;
255a 1 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 243b 3 JAMES: Psychology, xiva; 90a; 227b;
235b;  702a-b  .  Reconstructions  of  metaphysics:  critical  philosophy  as  a
propaedeutic  to  metaphysics  3  HOBBES: Leviathan, PART iv, 269bc 1 DESCARTES:
Discourse,   PART  n,  46c-48b;  sim;  267a-277a,c  passim  PART  iv  51b-54b  /
Meditations,  72b,d; i 7Sa77c / Objections and Replies, 237b-238b pas5 BERKELEY:
Human  Knowledge,  INTRO 405a412a,c passim, esp SECT 21-25 411b-412a,c; SECT 133
439c-440a  5 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 7-10 453c-455b; SECT xn, DIV
116,  503d-504a  2  KANT:  Pure  Reason,  la-13d;  15c-16d; 19a22a,c; 101d-102b;
133c-134d;  146a-149d;  157d;  196b-197c;  218d-227a;  248d 250a,c / Fund. Prin.
Metaphysic  of  Morals,  270c-d;  273d  274a / Practical Reason, 292d-293b; 568a
296a-d;  307a-d;  331a-332d  / Judgement, 567cuman science, see DIALECTIC 2a, 4;
la. concepts of metaphysics or the highest , 70Th, 76, 8a-8b; CAUSE 53, 5tl; GOD
2b-2c,  2;  KNOWLEDGE 6a(i), 63(4); LIBERTY 2b; ONE AND MANY i-1b; RELATION 3; .
al  concepts or abstractions, see BEING i ; MAGINATION 6d; SIGN AND SYMBOL 3d. ;
DGE  6c(5);  THEOLOGY  2,  33,  43;  e  KNOWLEDGE  6c(4)  LOGIC  4d;  PHILOSs to
mathematics and physics, see la; SCIENCE 13(2).

logic,  see PRINCIPLE 1c; and for the TION 2a. of psychology or epistemology for
meta,  3C,  6;  KNOWLEDGE  5d-5e; MAN 2b(4); and for the solution therein of the
prob; IMMORTALITY 33; NECESSITY AND ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below arc works not included in Great Boo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. T

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which fo

I.

AQUINAS. On the Trinity ofBoethius, QQ 5-6 HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK
i, PART iv,

SECT m-iv KANT. De Mundi Sensibilis (Inaugural Dissertation) ,

SECT v

.

Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic, par

1-5, 40-60; SCHOLIA

.

Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science HEC;F.L. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK
i W. JAMES. Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 2-3

II.

MAIMONIDKS. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i,

CH 33-36 BONAVENTURA. Itlnerarium Mentis in Deum (The

Itinerary of the Mind

to God) SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, esp i

MALEBRANCHE. Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion

LEIBNITZ. Philosophical Works, CH 1 1 (On the Reform of Metaphysics and on the
Notion of Substance)

AS  fy  ofthe Western World, but relevant to the hese works are divided into two
groups: ed in this collection. sented in this collection. the publication of the
works  cited,  consult  llows  the  last  chapter  of The Great Ideas. VOLTAIRE.
"Metaphysics," in A Philosophical Dictionary SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and
Idea,   VOL  n,  SUP,  CH  17  COMTE.  The  Positive  Philosophy,  INTRO  LOTZE.
Metaphysics,  INTRO  C.  S.  PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 318-394 A. E.
TAYLOR.  Elements  of  Metaphysics  BERGSON.  The Creative Mind, CH 6 SANTAYANA.
Dialogues in Limbo, CH 10 HEIDEGGER. Was ist Metaphysiltf WHITEHEAD. Process and
Reality,  PART  i, CH 3 (2); PART H, CH 9 (4) T. WHITTAKER. Prolegomena to a New
Metaphysic  MARITAIN.  The  Degrees  of  Knowledge,  INTRO;  CH4  A  Preface  to
Metaphysics, LECT ii-m

. CARNAP. The Unity of Science Philosophy and Logical Syntax, i

. GILSON. The Unity of Philosophical Experience, CH 12 B. RUSSELL. Mysticism and
Logic, CH 5 . An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, CH 25
