Chapter $S:

INTRODUCTION  TN  the  tradition  of the great books, the word JL "mind* is used
less  frequently  than  "reason," "intellect," "understanding," or "soul." There
are  still  other words, like "intelligence," "consciousness," and even "spirit"
or  "psyche,"  which often carry some part of the connotation of the word "mind.
"Certain  authors use "mind" as a synonym for one or another of these words, and
give it the meaning which other writers express exclusively in terms of "reason"
or  "understanding."  Some discuss mind without reference to soul, some identify
mind  with  soul  or  spirit,  and  some conceive mind as only a part of soul or
spirit.  For  the  purpose  of  assembling in a single chapter references to all
discussions  which fall within the area of meaning common to all these terms, it
was necessary to adopt some single covering word. Our choice of "mind" is partly
the  result  of  its  present currency, partly the result of the fact that it is
somewhat  more  neutral  than  the  others and therefore less prejudicial to the
conflicting  theories  which are juxtaposed in this chapter. Words like "reason"
or  "intellect"  usually  imply  a  sharper distinction between the functions or
faculties  of  sensation  and thought than does the word "mind." Imagination and
memory,  for  example,  are  attributed  to the understanding in the writings of
Locke  and Hume, whereas, in the analytical vocabulary of Aristotle and Aquinas,
imagination and memory belong to sense, not to reason or intellect.

Similarly,  words  like "soul" or "spirit" usually connote a substantial as well
as an immaterial mode of being, whereas "mind" can have the meaning of a faculty
or  a  power to be found in living organisms. The adoption of the word "mind" is
purely  a matter of convenience. It begs no questions and decides no issues. The
relations  between  1  what  is here discussed and the matters considered in the
chapters  on  SOUL, SENSE, MEMORY AND IMAGINATION, remain the same as they would
be  if  "reason"  or  "intellect"  were  used  in  place  of  "mind."  Different
formulations  of  these relationships are not affected by the words used, but by
different  theories of what the mind is, however it is named. Before we consider
the  diverse  conceptions of the human mind which are enumerated under the seven
main  divisions  of the first section in the Outline of Topics, it may be useful
to examine the elements of meaning more or less common to the connotation of all
the  words  which  "mind"  here  represents. Even here we must avoid begging the
question  whether  mind is a peculiarly human possession. Other animals may have
minds.  Mind  may  be,  as  it is on one theory, a universal property of matter.
According  to another theory, there may be superhuman minds or intelligences, or
a single absolute mind, a transcendent intelligence.

What,  then,  does the universe contain because there is mind in it, which would
be  lacking  if  everything  else  could remain the same with mind removed ? The
facts we are compelled to mention in answering this question should give us some
indication of the elements of meaning common to "mind" and all its synonyms.

FIRST  is  THE FACT of thought or thinking. It there were no evidence of thought
in the world, mind would have little or no meaning. The recognition of this fact
throughout  the  tradition  accounts  for the development of diverse theories of
mind.  None  of  the  great  writers  denies  the phenomenon of thought, however
differently  each  may  describe or explain it; none, therefore, is without some
conception  of mind. t 71 172 may be supposed that such words as It "thought" or
"thinking"  cannot, because of their own ambiguity, help us to define the sphere
of  mind.  But  whatever  the relation of thinking to sensing, thinking seems to
involve  more for almost all observers than a mere reception of impressions from
without.  This  seems to be the opinion of those who make thinking a consequence
of  sensing, as well as of those who regard thought as independent of sense. For
both, thinking goes beyond sensing, either as an elaboration of the materials of
sense or as an apprehension of objects which are totally beyond the reach of the
senses.  To  the  extent  that  this insight is true, the elements or aspects of
thought  discussed  in  the  chapters  on  IDEA, JUDGMENT, and REASONING have an
obvious relevance to the various theories of mind discussed in this chapter.

THE  SECOND  FACT  which seems to be a root common to all conceptions of mind is
that of knowledge or knowing. This may be questioned on the ground that if there
were  sensation without any form of thought, judgment, or reasoning, there would
be  at  least  a  rudimentary  form of knowledge some degree of consciousness or
awareness  by  one  thing  of  another. Granting the point of this objection, it
nevertheless  seems  to  be true that the distinction between truth and falsity,
and  the  difference  between  knowledge,  error,  and  ignorance, or knowledge,
belief, and opinion, do not apply to sensations in the total absence of thought.
The   chapter  on  KNOWLEDGE  reports  formulations  of  these  distinctions  or
differences.  Any  understanding of knowledge which involves them seems to imply
mind for the same reason that it implies thought. There is a further implication
of mind in the fact of self-knowledge. Sensing may be awareness of an object and
to  this extent it may be a kind of knowing, but it has never been observed that
the  senses  can sense or be aware of themselves. Take, for example, definitions
of  sense,  or  theories of sensation and the objects of sense. Such definitions
and  theories  must  be  regarded  as  works of reflective thought; they are not
products of sensation.

Thought  seems  to  be  not  only  reflective,  but  reflexive, that is, able to
consider  itself,  to de- AS fine the nature of thinking and to develop theories
of  mind.  This  fact  about  thought  its reflexivity also seems to be a common
element  in  all  the  meanings  of  "mind." It is sometimes referred to as "the
reflexivity  of  the intellect" or as "the reflexive power of the understanding"
or  as  "the  ability  of  the understanding to reflect upon its own acts" or as
"self-consciousness."  Whatever the phrasing, a world without self-consciousness
or  self-knowledge  would be a world in which the traditional conception of mind
would  probably  not  have  arisen.  THE  THIRD  FACT  is the fact of purpose or
intention,  of  planning  a  course of action with foreknowledge of its goal, or
working in any other way toward a desired and foreseen objective. As in the case
of  sensitivity,  the phenomena of desire do not, without further qualification,
indicate  the  realm  of  mind.  According  to the theory of natural desire, for
example,  the  natural  tendencies  of even inanimate and insensitive things are
expressions  of  desire.  But it is not in that sense of desire that the fact of
purpose  or  intention  is  here  taken as evidence of mind. It is rather on the
level  of  the  behavior of living things that purpose seems to require a factor
over and above the senses, limited as they are to present appearances. It cannot
be  found  in  the  passions  which  have the same limitation as the senses, for
unless  they  are  checked  they tend toward immediate emotional discharge. That
factor,  called  for  by  the  direction of conduct to future ends, is cither an
element  common  to  all meanings of "mind" or is at least an element associated
with  mind.  It  is  sometimes  called the faculty of will rational desireor the
intellectual  appetite.  Sometimes  it  is  treated as the act of willing which,
along   with   thinking,  is  one  of  the  two  major  activities  of  mind  or
understanding;  and  sometimes  purposiveness is regarded as the very essense of
mentality.  Considerations  relevant to this aspect of mind are discussed in the
chapter on WILL, THESE THREE OR FOUR FACTS thought, knowledge or self-knowledge,
and purpose seem to be common to all theories of mind. More than that, they seem
to  be  facts  which require the CHAPTER 58: development of the conception. They
are,  for the most part, not questioned in the tradition of the great books; but
they  are  not always seen in the same light. They are not always related in the
same  way  to  one  another  and  to  other  relevant  considerations. From such
differences  in  interpretation  and  analysis  arise  the  various  conflicting
conceptions  of  the  human  mind.  The conflict of theories concerning what the
human  mind  is, what structure it has, what parts belong to it or what whole it
belongs  to,  does  not comprise the entire range of controversy on the subject.
Yet enough is common to alltheories of mind to permit certain other questions to
be  formulated.  How does the human mind operate? How does it do whatever is its
work,  and  with  what intrinsic excellences or defects? What is the relation of
mind  to  matter,  to  bodily  organs,  to material conditions? Is mind a common
possession  of  men  and animals, or is whatever might be called mind in animals
distinctly  different  from  the  human  mind  ?  Are  there  minds or a mind in
existence  apart from man and the whole world of corporeal life ? Such questions
constitute  the  major  topics  of this chapter. Other topics which appear here,
such  as the moral and political aspects of mind, are reserved for discussion in
the  many  other  chapters  devoted  to  the  great ideas of moral and political
thought.  Still  others, like the problem of insanity the loss or derangement of
mind  obviously  relevant here even are though the more general consideration of
psychopathology belongs elsewhere, c.g. t in the chapter on MEDICINE.

The  intelligibility  of  the positions taken in the dispute of the issues which
are  here  our major concern depends to some degree on the divergent conceptions
of  the  human  mind  from  which  they  stem. It seems necessary, therefore, to
examine  the seven notions of mind which appear in the great books. This will at
least provide the general context for the reader's further explorations, even if
it  is not possible to trace the implications each of these notions may have for
the  great  controversial  issues.  Seven  is, of course, a fiction of analysis.
There  are, from one point of view, more perhaps as many as there are, among the
great  authors,  MIND  thinkers  who  have  dwelt at length on the subject. From
another  point  of  view,  there may be fewer than seven, for when the lines are
drawn  according  to certain basic differences, several of these theories appear
to  be  variants  of a single doctrine. "THAT IN THE SOUL which is called mind,"
Aristotle  writes, is "that whereby the soul thinks and judges." For him, as for
Plato,  the  human  intellect  or  reason is a part or power of the soul of man,
distinct  from other parts or faculties, such as the senses and the imagination,
desire  and  the passions. Though the human soul is distinguished from the souls
of  other  living  things  by  virtue  of  its having this part or power, and is
therefore  called  by Aristotle a "rational soul," these writers do not identify
mind  and  soul.  As  soul is the principle of life and all vital activities, so
mind  is  the subordinate principle of knowledge and the activities of thinking,
deliberating,  deciding.  Within  the  general  framework  of  this theory, many
differences  exist  between  Plato and Aristotle and between them and others who
share  their views. These differences arise not only with respect to the soul of
which the intellect is a part, but also with respect to the power or activity of
the  intellect  itself.  For example, the distinction which Aristotle initiates,
between  mind as an active and as a passive power, is more explicitly formulated
by Aquinas in his theory of the active intellect and the intellect as potential.
The human intellect, Aquinas writes, "is in potentiality to things intelligible,
and  is  at  first  Ufa  a  clean  tablet  on  which  nothing is writtenk as the
Philosopher  says. This is made clear from the fact that at first we are only in
potentiality  towards  understanding,  and  afterwards we are made to understand
actually.  And  so  it  is  evident that with us to understand is in a way to be
passive''  But  the  forms  of things, or what Aquinas calls their "intelligible
species,"  are  not  actually  intelligible as they exist in material things. He
therefore argues that in addition to the "power receptive of such species, which
is  called the possible intellect by reason of its being in potentiality to such
species,"  there  must  also  be  another intellectual power, which he calls the
active of "agent" intellect.

174  Nothing,  he  says,  can  be  "reduced  from  potentiality to act except by
something  in  act"  or already actual. "We must therefore assign on the part of
the   intellect  some  power  to  make  things  actually  intelligible,  by  the
abstraction  of  the species from material conditions. Such is the necessity for
positing an agent intellect."

The more explicit formulation which Aquinas gives of the distinction between the
active  and  the possible intellects as distinct powers has further consequences
for  the  analysis  of  three  states  of  the  passive  or  possible  intellect
distinguished  by  Aristotle.  The  intellectual power which is receptive of the
intelligible  species  may  either be in complete potentiality to them, as it is
when it has not yet come to understand certain things. Or it may be described as
in  habitual  possession  of  the  intelligible  species  when it has previously
acquired the understanding of certain things, but is not now actually engaged in
understanding  them.  In  the  third  place, the potential intellect may also be
actual  or  in act whenever it is actually exercising its habit of understanding
or  is  for the first time actually understanding something. In this traditional
theory  of  mind,  many  other  distinctions  are  made  in the sphere of mental
activity,  but  none  is  thought  to  require  a  division of the mind into two
distinct  powers, or even to require the discrimination of several states of the
same  power.  Just  as  Plato  regards  the  intuition or direct apprehension of
intelligible  objects  as  an activity of the same intelligence which is able to
reason discursively about the ideas it can contemplate, so Aristotle and Aquinas
assign  three  different  activities  to the intellectual power which apprehends
intelligible  objects,  not  by  intuition,  but  only  as  the  result  of  the
abstraction  of  forms  from  matter  by the active intellect. Once the possible
intellect  is  actualized by the reception of the abstracted species, it can act
in  three ways. It can express in concepts the species which have been impressed
upon it.

This  the first act of the intellect is conception. Its second and third acts of
judgment and of reasoning consist in forming propositions out of concepts and in
seeing  how  one  proposition  follows from others in inference or proof. Unlike
abstraction and conception, which Aquinas assigns to the active and the possible
intellect  respectively,  conception,  judgment,  and  reasoning  do not, in his
opinion, require distinct powers. Nor do the two kinds of * thought or reasoning
which Aquinas calls 'speculative" and "practical." The speculative and practical
intellects,  he  maintains,  "are  not distinct powers," for they differ only in
their  ends.  The  speculative  intellect  "directs  what  it apprehends, not to
operation,  but  to  the  sole  consideration of truth"; the practical intellect
"directs  what  it  apprehends  to  operation"  or  action. But to the nature of
intellect  as  a power of apprehension, "it is accidental whether it be directed
to  operation  or  not." NOT ALL THE foregoing distinctions are made, or made in
the same way, by Plato, Aristotle and other authors like Plotinus, Augustine, or
Aquinas,  who stand together in regarding mind as only a part of the human soul.
Lucretius belongs with them on this point, though he differs radically from them
on  the  issue  of  mind  and  matter.  Mind,  for  him,  is only "the directing
principle" of the soul, "the head so to speak, and reigns paramount in the whole
body."  It  is  only  the  thinking  or  deciding  part  of the soul. But Plato,
Aristotle,  and their followers make a distinction in kind between sensations or
images  and  universal  ideas  or abstract concepts. Sense and intellect are for
them  distinct  faculties of knowing and have distinct objects of knowledge. For
Lucretius,  on  the  other  hand,  thinking  is merely a reworking of the images
received  by the senses. In this one respect at least, Lucretius is more closely
associated  with  the  theory of mind to be found in Hobbes, Locke, and Hume. In
the  consideration  of  mind,  agreement  on  one  point  seems everywhere to be
accompanied  by  disagreement on another. Locke does not agree with Lucretius or
Hobbes  about  the  materiality of mind; and though he agrees with Berkeley that
mind  is a spiritual entity, he does not agree with him, any more than he agrees
with  Hobbes and Hume, about the abstraction of general concepts from particular
sense-impressions.  Plato  and Aristotle agree that the senses and the intellect
or  reason are quite distinct, but they do not agree about the relation of these
faculties,  especially  not  on the extent CHAPTER 58: to which the mind can act
independently  of  sense  and  imagination.  Augustine  seems  to  share Plato's
doctrine of reminiscence as an account of how the senses recall actively to mind
ideas  it  hasalways  somehow  possessed. Aquinas adopts Aristotle's doctrine of
abstraction  as  the  quite  contrary  account  of  the  role the senses play in
providing  the  materials on which the mind works to obtain ideas. But Augustine
and  Aquinas  come  together  on  another  point in which they depart alike from
Aristotle  and  Plato. They distinguish with precision between the intellect and
will  as  separate  faculties  of  the  soul,  whereas Plato and Aristotle treat
thinking and willing (or knowing and loving) as merely diverse aspects of mental
life.

THE  SAME SITUATION prevails with respect to the other theories of mind which we
must  now  consider  in their own terms. Descartes, for example, resembles Plato
and  Augustine on the point on which we have seen that they together differ from
Aristotle  and  Aquinas, namely, the relation of mind or reason to the senses or
imagination.  Yet he is also closer to Aristotle and Plato in a respect in which
they  together  differ from Augustine and Aquinas, namely, in regarding thinking
and  willing as acts of the mind rather than as belonging to completely separate
faculties.  These  agreements  and  differences  occur in the context of a basic
opposition  between Descartes and all the other writers so far mentioned. Unlike
all  of them, he identifies the human mind with the rational soul of man. In the
dual  nature  of  man,  he  says,  "there  are certain activities, which we call
corporeal, e.g., magnitude, figure, motion, and all those that cannot be thought
of  apart  from  extension  in  space;  and the substance in which they exist is
called  body  Further,  there  are  other  activities,  which  we  call thinking
activities,  e.g., understanding, willing, imagining, feeling, etc., which agree
in  falling  under the description of thought, perception, or consciousness. The
substance  in  which  they  reside  we call a thinking thing or the mind, or any
other  name  we  care,  provided  only  we  do  not  confound  it with corporeal
substance, since thinking activities have no affinity with corporeal activities,
and  thought,  which  is the common nature in which the former agree, is totally
different  from extension, the common term for describing the latter." Descartes
denies  that brutes possess thought, but "even though I were to grant," he says,
"that thought existed in them, it would in nowise follow that the human mind was
not to be distinguished from the body, but on the contrary that in other animals
also  there  was  a  mind distinct from their body." The two components of human
nature  are, according to Descartes, each of them substances a res cogitans or a
thinking  substance  and  a res extensa or an extended substance. Descartes uses
the  phrases "rational soul" and "mind" interchangeably. Reason or intellect the
capacity  to  think is not a power of the soul. Nor is thinking an act which the
soul  sometimes performs, sometimes does not. It is the very essence of the soul
itself,  even  as  extension is the essence of body. Just as bodies cannot exist
without  actually  having  three  dimensions,  so  the mind cannot exist without
thinking.  Though it is literally translated into English by "I think, therefore
I  am,"  Descartes' cogito, ergo sum can be rendered by "Thinking is; therefore,
the  mind  is,"  or  by  the  strictly  equivalent  statement, "The mind exists;
therefore,  there  is  thinking."  It  is  precisely this equation of the mind's
existence  with  the  activity  of  thought  which  Locke  challenges.  "We know
certainly,  by experience," he writes, "that we sometimes think, and thence draw
this infallible consequence, that there is something in us that has the power to
think;  but  whether  that  substance  perpetually  thinks  or not, we can be no
farther assured than experience informs us I grant that the soul in a waking man
is  never  without  thought,  because  it  is  the condition of being awake: but
whether  sleeping,  without dreaming, be not an affection of the whole man, mind
as  well  as  body,  may  be worth a waking man's consideration. .Methinks every
drowsy  nod  shakes  .  .  their  doctrine,  who  teach  that the soul is always
thinking."

What  is  striking  about this disagreement is that Locke and Descartes agree in
their  conception  of  man  as  a union of two distinct substancesthe union of a
material substance or body with a spiritual substance, a mind or soul. It is not
surprising, however, that Berkeley should hold the Cartesian view against Locke.

Considering  the  flow  of  time  in  terms of the succession of ideas, Berkeley
affirms  it  to be "a plain consequence that the soul always thinks.'* To try to
"abstract  the existence of a. spirit from its cogitation" is, he adds modestly,
"no  easy  task."  He  might have said it is impossible, for since he holds that
bodies  do  not exist and that man consists of mind or spirit alone, he need not
hesitate  to  assert that the mind cannot cease to think witJiout ceasing to be.
Neither  he  nor  Descartes is, in James' opinion, "free to take the appearances
for  what  they seem to be, and to admit that the mind, as well as the body, may
go to sleep."

Despite  these  differences, Descartes, Locke, and Berkeley seem to agree on the
range  of activities within the sphere of mind. The mind is a thinking substance
for  Descartes,  yet it also senses and imagines, suffers passions, and exerWhat
Descartes  says  in  terms  cises  acts of will. of acts, Locke says in terms of
powers.  Mind  has  many  distinct  powers,  among  which Locke includes all the
cognitive  faculties (not only the powers of abstract thought and reasoning, but
also  those  of sense and imagination), and such voluntary faculties as choosing
and willing.

Berkeley  also  includes  the  whole  range of psychological phenomenasensation,
imagination,  memory,  the passions, reasoning, and choice. Hume takes a similar
view,  though  in  his  case  one basic qualification must be added. He does not
conceive  the mind as a soul or a spirit or any other sort of substance. He even
has some difficulty with the notion of its continuity or identity from moment to
moment  in  the flow of experience. Yet, he says, "it cannot be doubted that the
mind  is  endowed  with  several  powers  and  faculties,  that these powers are
distinct  from  each  other.  .  . . There are many obvious distinctions of this
kind,  such  as  those  between  will and understanding, the imagination and the
passions, which fall within the comprehension of every human creature." What the
mind is or how it exists, we may not be able to say; but Hume thinks that "if we
can  go  no  farther  than this mental geography, or delineation of the distinct
parts  and  powers  of  the  mind  it  is at least a satisfaction to go so far."
Descartes'  theory  of  mind  seems  to serve as a point of departure in another
direction  from  AS  that  taken  by  Locke.  Spinoza  agrees that the mind is a
thinking thing. He agrees that man consists of an individual body united with an
individual  mind.  But he differs from Descartes on the meaning of substance. By
its very nature, substance is infinite; and because it is infinite, there can be
only  one  substance,  which is God. Finite individual things, whether bodies or
minds,  do  not exist as substances, but as modes of the divine attributes. "The
human  mind  is a part of the infinite intellect of God, and therefore," Spinoza
declares,  "when we say that the human mind perceives this or that thing, we say
nothing  less than that God has this or that idea." He includes love and desire,
as  well  as  perception and imagination, among the affections of the mind, even
calling them "modes of thought." He do not exist apart adds, however, that these
from the idea of the thing loved or desired, "though the idea may exist although
no  other  mode  of  thinking  exist."  OF  THE  REMAINING  three  of  the seven
conceptions  of  mind  here  being  considered, two bear certain resemblances to
theories  already  mentioned.  Hegel's  view  of  the  human  mind as a phase or
dialectical  moment of the Absolute Mind or Spirit seems comparable to Spinoza's
conception of the human mind as a part of God's infinite intellect. The Hegelian
theory  of  mind,  developed  in such works as the Phenomenology of Mind and the
Philosophy  of  Mind,  is  reflected  in  his  Philosophy  of History and in his
Philosophy  of  Right. The expression of his view of mind appears, therefore, in
the  chapters  on  HISTORY and STATE, as well as here. There seems to be similar
justification for associating the views of William James with those of Locke and
Hume.  Willing  to  posit a soul "influenced in some mysterious way by the brain
states and responding to them by conscious affections of its own," James goes on
to  say that "the bare phenomenon, however, the immediately known thing which on
the  mental  side is in apposition with the entire brain-process is the state of
consciousness  and  not the soul itself." What the soul is and whether it exists
belong to metaphysics. So far as psychological obser- CHAPTER 58: MIN varion and
analysis  are  concerned, the phenomena of mind are to be found in the stream of
thought  or consciousness. States of mind are statesof consciousness. James uses
the  words "feeling" or "thought" to cover every type of mental operation, every
state  of  mind, every form of consciousness, including sensations and emotions,
desires  and  wishes,  as  well  as  conception  and  reasoning.  Locke and Hume
distinguish powers of the mind according to different types of mental operation.
James  tends rather to analyze the mind in terms of its diverse states according
to  different  types  of  mental  content.  But he also lays great stress on the
dynamic  interconnection  of  the  various  elements  of  consciousness  in  the
continuous  flow  of  the  stream  of thought. Freud too presents an analysis of
different  types  of  mental  content,  and  accompanies  it  by a theory of the
different  layers  of mind or psychic structure. He holds, for example, that "we
have  two  kinds  of  unconscious  that  which is latent but capable of becoming
conscious,  and that which is repressed and not capable of becoming conscious in
the  ordinary  way.  .  .  .  That  which is latent, and only unconscious in the
descriptive  and  not  in  the  dynamic  sense,  we  call preconsciousk the term
unconscious  we  reserve  for  the dynamically unconscious repressed, so that we
have  three  terms,  conscious (Cs), preconscious (Pcs), and unconscious (Ucs)."
Like  James,  Freud  is concerned with the dynamic interaction of various mental
operations  or  contents.  In  addition,  a  further  point of similarity exists
between  them.  James  says that "the pursuance of future ends and the choice of
means  for  their  attainment  are ... the mark and criterion of the presence of
mentality . . . No actions but such as are done for an end, and show a choice of
means, can be called indubitable expressions of Mind." Freud goes further in the
same  direction.  By  identifying "psychic energy in general" with what he calls
"libido,"  he  implies  that  mind  in  its most primitive form has entirely the
aspect of desire or seeking. It expresses itself in "two fundamentally different
kinds  of  instincts, the sexual instincts in the widest sense of the word . . .
and the aggressive instincts, whose aim is destruction."

D  FINALLY, THERE is the theory in which mind is neither one of the faculties of
the  soul,  nor  itself  a  thinking substance; nor is it a soul or spiritwith a
diversity  of  powers.  "All  our  knowledge,"  Kant writes, "begins with sense,
proceeds  thence  to  understanding,  and  ends with reason beyond which nothing
higher  can  be  discovered  in  the  human  mind  for elaborating the matter of
intuition  and  subjecting  it  to  the  highest  unity of thought." These three
faculties  have  distinct functions for Kant. The sensitive faculty is a faculty
of  intuition.  The  faculty  of  understanding  is  a  faculty  of judgment and
scientific  knowledge. The faculty of reason, when properly employed, performs a
critical  and  regulative  function  in  the realm of thought, but when employed
beyond  the province of its power leads thought into blind alleys or dialectical
frustrations.  Mind  is not one of these faculties, nor is it the being in which
these faculties inhere. The notion of mind seems to have significance, for Kant,
primarily  in a collective sense. It represents the unity and order of the triad
of  cognitive  faculties.  The  faculties of feeling and will which Kant adds to
these in his enumeration of "the higher faculties" belong to the "transcendental
ego,"  but  they  do  not  fall within that part of the transcendental structure
which  is mind. Kant's distinction between the speculative and the practical use
of  reason,  and  his  distinction between the moral and the aesthetic judgment,
involve  different relationships between mindor its triad of faculties and these
other  faculties.  THE  FOREGOING  SURVEY of conceptions of the human mind gives
some  indication  of  the  way in which other questions about mind are answered.
With  regard  to  the  relation of mind and matter, for example, the theories of
Descartes,  Spinoza, Locke, and James seem to affirm a duality of substances, or
of  modes  of substance, or at least of realms the physical and the mental. They
are  confronted  by  the  problem  of the relation which obtains between the two
their  independence  or interaction. "Mental and physical events," writes James,
"are,  on  all  hands,  admitted to present the strongest contrast in the entire
field of being.

178 THE GREAT I The chasm which yawns between them is less easily bridged over
by the mind than any interval we know. Why, then, not call it an absolute
chasm," he asks, "and say not only that the two worlds are different, but that
they are independent?" James thinks that to urge this theory of the complete
independence of mind and body "is an unwarrantable impertinence in the present
state of psychology'." He prefers the common -sense theory that each acts on the
other somehow. But earlier writers who consider body and mind as distinct
substances, find grave difficulties in the way of conceiving their interaction.
"How our minds move or stop our bodies by thought, which we every moment find
they do," is, according to Locke, "obscure and inconceivable." According to
Hume, there is no "principle in all nature more mysterious than the union of
soul with body." He interprets one consequence of the union to be that "a
supposed spiritual substance acquires such an influence over a material one,
that the most refined thought is able to actuate the grossest matter. Were we
empowered by a secret wish, to remove mountains, or control planets in their
orbit; this extensive authority," Hume thinks, "would not be more extraordinary,
nor more beyond our comprehension." Denying that bodies exist, Berkeley
nevertheless argues that even if they did, they could exert no influence upon
mind. "Though we give the materialists their external bodies," he says, "they by
their own confession are never the nearer knowing how our ideas are produced;
since they own themselves unable to comprehend in what manner body can act upon
spirit, or how it is possible that it should imprint any idea in the mind. Hence
it is evident that the production of ideas or sensations in our minds can be no
reason why we should suppose matter or corporeal substances, since that is
acknowledged to remain equally inexplicable with or without this supposition."
Those who deny the existence of matter, like Berkeley, or the existence of
anything immaterial, like Lucretius or Hobbes, are confronted by problems of
their own. Berkeley must explain the mind's perception of bodies or why the mind
thinks of matter. Lucretius must explain perception, thought, and choice as
functions of material particles in motion.

The  reduction  of  mind to matter raises a question which leads in the opposite
direction.  Why  may  it not be supposed that thought and feeling arc present in
the universe wherever matter is an atom of mind inseparably conjoined with every
atom of matter, as in the "mind-stuff" or "mind-dust" theory which William James
considers  and  criticizes? Still another formulation of the relation of mind to
matter  is  found  in the theory of Aristotle and Aquinas, according to whom the
rational  soul  is  "the substantial form of an organic body," but the intellect
one  of  its  powers  isnot  united  to  matter  in  any way. Mind is said to be
immaterial in that understanding or thought does not require a bodily organ. The
angelic  intellect, according to Aquinas, is a "cognitive power which is neither
the  act  of a corporeal organ, nor in any way connected with corporeal matter."
The  human  mind  is  not  so completely divorced from matter, for, though man's
intellect  "is  not the act of an organ, yet it is a power of the soul, which is
the  form  of  the  body."  Among all bodily forms, the human soul alone has the
distinction  of  possessing  "an operation and a power in which corporeal matter
has  no  share whatever." But Aquinas also maintains that "the body is necessary
for  the action of the intellect, not as its organ of action, but on the part of
the  object"  the  phantasm  or  image  produced  by  the  sensitive faculty. He
conceives  this  dependence  in  the  following  manner.  "For  the intellect to
understand  actually  .  there is need for the . . act of the imagination and of
the  other  powers"  that  are  acts  of  bodily  organs.  "When  the act of the
imagination  is  hindered by a lesion of the corporeal organ, for instance, in a
case  of  frenzy,  or  when the act of the memory is hindered, as in the case of
lethargy,  we  see that a man is hindered from understanding actually even those
things  of  which  he had a previous knowledge." The problem of body and mind is
discussed  more  fully  in the chapter on MATTER. Other problems involved in the
theory  of  mind similarly occur in other chapters as well as in this one, e.g.,
the problem of mind in animals and men (in the chapters on ANIMAL and MAN) the ;
problem  of  the  existence of minds superior to that of man (in the chapters on
ANGEL  and CHAPTER 58 GOD); the problem of the origin of ideas in the human mind
(in  the  chapters  on  IDEA  and  MEMORY  AND IMAGINATION). It should be noted,
however, that agreement or disagreement on the nature of the human mind does not
always   determine  agreement  or  disagreement  with  respect  to  these  other
questions.  Sharing  the  view that the mind is a spiritual substance, Locke and
Descartes  do  not  agree about innate ideas or principles. Locke tends to agree
with  Aristotle  when  he  says  that  the  mind  is a tabula rasa, "void of all
characters,  without  any ideas. How comes it to be furnished?" he asks. "Whence
has  it all the materials of reason and knowledge? To this I answer in one word,
from  Experience.  In  that  all  our  knowledge  is  founded;  and from that it
ultimately  derives  itself.  Our  observation  employed  either  about external
sensible  objects,  or  about  the internal operations of our own minds, is that
which supplies our understandings with all the materials of thinking." But Locke
does not accept Aristotle's sharp distinction between the faculties of sense and

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
Diverse conceptions of the human mind
   0a. Mind as intellect or reason, a part or power of the soul or human nature, distinct
   from sense and imagination
   (1) The difference between the acts of sensing and understanding, and the ob-
   jects of sense and reason
   (2) The cooperation of intellect and sense: the dependence of thought upon
   imagination and the direction of imagination by reason
   (3) The functioning of intellect: the acts of understanding, judgment, and
   reasoning
   (4) The distinction of the active and the possible intellect in power and function
   0b. Mind as identical with thinking substance
   (1) The relation of the mind as thinking substance to sense and imagination
   (2) Thinking and willing as the acts of the thinking substance
   0c. Mind as a particular mode of that attribute of God which is thought
   (1) The origin of the human mind as a mode of thought
   (2) The properties of the human mind as a mode of thought
   0d. Mind as soul or spirit, having the power to perform all cognitive and voluntary
   functions
   (1) The origin of the mind's simple ideas: sensation and reflection
   (2) The activity of the understanding in relating ideas: the formation of com-
   plex ideas
   0e. Mind as a triad of cognitive faculties: understanding, judgment, reason
   (1) The relation   of understanding to sense or intuition: its application in the
   realm of nature; conformity to law
   (2) The relation of judgment to pleasure and displeasure: its application in the
   realm of art; aesthetic finality
   (3) The relation of reason to desire or will: its application in the realm of free-
   dom; the summum bonum
   0f. Mind as intelligence
   or self-consciousness, knowing itself as universal: the unity
   of intellect and will
   0g. Mind as the totality of mental processes and as the principle of meaningful or
   purposive behavior
   (1) The nature of the stream of thought, consciousness, or experience: the va-
   riety of mental operations
   (2) The topography of mind
   (3) The unity of attention and of consciousness: the selectivity of mind

2. The human mind in relation to matter or body
   2a. The immateriality of mind: mind as an immaterial principle, a spiritual substance,
   or as an incorporeal power functioning without a bodily organ
   2b. The potentiality of intellect or reason compared with the potentiality of matter
   or nature
   2c. The interaction of mind and       body
   (1) The physiological conditions of mental activity
   (2) The influence of mental activity on bodily states
   2d. The parallelism of mind and body
   2e. The     reduction of mind to matter: the atomic explanation of its processes, and
   of the difference between mind and soul, and between mind and body

3. Mind in animals
and in men
   3a. reason, or understanding as a specific property of human nature: com-
   parison of human reason with animal intelligence and instinct
   3& Mentality as a common property of men and animals: the differences between
   human and animal intelligence in degree or quality
   3b. The evolution of mind or intelligence

4. The various
states of the human mind
in intelligence: degrees of capacity for
   4a. Individual differences                                          understanding
   4b. The mentality of children
   4c. The states of the possible intellect: its potentiality, habits, and actuality
   4<
   The condition of the mind prior to experience
   (1) The mind as completely potential: the mind as a tabula rasa
   (2) The innate endowment of the mind with ideas: instinctive determinations
   (3) The transcendental or a priori forms and categories of the mind
   4*. The condition of the human mind when the soul is separate from the body
   4/! Supernatural
   states of the human intellect: the state of innocence; beatitude; the
   human intellect of Christ
   The weakness and limits of the human mind
   4d. The fallibility
   of the human mind: the causes of error
   4e. The natural
   limits of the mind: the unknowable; objects which transcend its
   reason's critical determination of its own limits or boundaries
   powers;
   4f. The elevation of the human mind by divine grace: faith and the supernatural
   gifts

6. The reflexivity of mind: the mind's knowledge of itself and its acts
7.
The nature and phases of consciousness: the realm of the unconscious
   6a. The nature of self-consciousness
   6b. The degrees
   or states of consciousness: waking, dreaming, sleeping
   7^.
   The conscious, pre-conscious, and unconscious activities of mind

8. The pathology of mind: the loss or abeyance of reason
   8a. The distinction between sanity and madness: the criterion of lucidity or insight
   8b. The causes of mental pathology: organic and functional factors
   8c. The abnormality peculiar to mind: systematic delusion

9. Mind in the moral and political order
   9a. The distinction
   between the speculative and practical intellect or reason: the
   spheres of knowledge, belief, and action
   9b. The relation
   of reason to will, desire, and emotion
   9c. Reason as regulating human conduct: reason as the principle of virtue or duty
   9d. Reason as the principle
   of free will: rationality as the source of moral and political
   freedom
   9*.    Reason as formative of human society: the authority of government and law
   9/ The life of reason, or the life of the mind, as man's highest vocation: reason as
   the principle of all human work

10. The existence of mind apart from        man
   10a. The indwelling reason in the order of nature
   10b. Nous or the intellectual principle: its relation to the One and to the world-soul
   10c. The realm of the pure intelligences: the angelic intellect
   10d. The unity and separate existence of the active or the possible intellect
   10e. Mind as an immediate infinite mode of        God
   io/. Absolute mind: the moments of its manifestations
   (1) The unfolding of mind or spirit in world history
   (2) The concrete objectification of mind in the state
   10f. The divine intellect: its relation to the divine being and the divine will

CROSS-REFERENCES 17 PLOTINUS: Second Ennead, TR ix, CH i 65dFor: Matters
relevant to the conception of reason or i

imagination and also from will, see BEING 8a-8 4b-4c; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 5b,
6b-6c; SENSE

5a(i); and for the further distinction of the va

EXPERIENCE 2b; IDEA 1b, 2g; JUDGMENT i; MEMORY A

UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 2b, 4c-4d.

Matters relevant to the conception of the human mi

74); FORM 2d; IDEA 2b; MAN 33(1); SOUL 1c.

Matters relevant to the conception of the human mi

God, see BEING 70(4); IDEA 1c; MAN 33; NATURE 1b

Matters relevant to the conception of the human mi

psychological functions, see IDEA 1c, 2c-2f; MAN

Matters relevant to the conception of the human mi

IDEA 1d, 2b; JUDGMENT 1-4, 8d; KNOWLEDGE 6b(4)

ONE AND MANY 4b; PRINCIPLE 2b(3); SENSE 30(5);

consideration of its transcendental or a prior

QUALITY i; QUANTITY i; RELATION 4c; SENSE 1c;

D 201 18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK xni, par 12 113b-d / City of God, BK vin, CH
6  268d269c; BK xi, CH 21 333a-d; BK xii, CH 17-18 353a-354d; CH 23 357d-358a 19
AQUINAS:  Summa  Theologica, PART i, 3 3, A i, REP 2-3 14b-15b; o 14, AA 1-4 75d
79a  esp  A  4 78b-79a; A 8, ANS 82c-83b; Q 16, A 5, REP i 97c-98b; Q 18, AA 3-4
106b-J08c; Q 19, A i,

ANS  108d-109c; A 3, REP 6 lK)b-lllc; A 4, ANS lllc-112c; Q 26, A 2 150c iSla; Q
46,  A 2, REP 3 253a-255a; o 50, A i, ANS 269b-270a; Q 54, A 2, ANS 285d-286c; Q
55,  A i, ANS 289a-d; A 3, ANS and REP i 291a-d; Q 59, A 2, ANS 307c-308b; Q 79,
A  i,  ANS 414a-d; A 2, ANS 414d-416a; A 4, ANS and REP 1,5 417a418c; A 5, REP 3
418c-419b;  A  10,  REP  2  423d-424d;  Q  84,  A  2,  ANS 442b 443c; A 4, Rtp i
444d-446b;  A 5 446c-447c; Q 85, A 4, ANS 457a-d; A 5, ANS 457d-458d; g 87, A i,
ANS  465a-466c; A 3, ANS 467b-468a; Q 89, A i, ANS and REP 3 473b 475a; A 4, ANS
476c477a;  Q 93, AA 6-8 496b-500c; Q 105, A 3 540c-541b; PART I-H, Q i, A 4, REP
i  612a613a;  Q  5,  A  6,  REP  2 641a 642a; Q 19, A 4 705b-c; Q 40, A 3, REP i
794c-795a;  Q  46,  A 4, REP 2 815b-d 20 AOUINAS: Summa Thcologica, I'ART i-n, Q
51,  A  I,  RtP  2  12b-13ci I'ART III, Q 6, A 2, ANS 741c-742a 21 DANTE: Divine
Comedy,  P/VRATJISE,  xv  [37-84] 128d-129b; xxxin {82-145] 157a-d 31 DESCARTES:
Objections  and  Replies,  122a  b;  228a-c 31 SPINOXA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 17,
SCHOL  362c-363c;  PROP 32-33 367a-369a; PART n f PROP i 373d-374a 42 KANT: Pure
Reason, 53a-b / Practical Reason, 303b-304a; 350c-d / Judgement, 612b-d ntellect
as a faculty distinct from sense and b; IDEA 2b; KNOWLEDGE 6c(3); MAN la, la-1d;
SOUL 2c(2)-2c(3); WILL i, rious intellectual powers and acts, see ND IMAGINATION
6c(i); SENSE 53; nd as a thinking substance, see BEING nd as a finite mode of an
attribute  of  .  nd as soul or spirit performing all 33; ONE AND MANY 43; SENSE
1d,  53.  nd  as  a  triad  of cognitive faculties, see ; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION
6c(2);  SOUL  1d; WILL 53(4); and for the i forms and cstegories, see EXPERIENCE
2c-2d; SPACE 43; TIME 6c.

202   For:   Matters   relevant   to   the  conception  of  the  human  mind  as
self-consciousness, s

43(3); IDEA 1f; SOUL 1d.

Matters relevant to the conception of the mind as consciousness or as a psyc

cluding conscious and unconscious processes, see DESIRE 23, 5a-5c; EXPERIE

MAN 4; ONE AND MANY 43; SOUL 20; WILL 30.

The general problem of the relation of body and mind, or matter and spirit,

MAN 33-33(2), 3c; MATTER 4c-4d; SOUL 3C-3d; 3nd for the condition of the h

when the soul is separated from the body, see SOUL 4d.

The distinction between real and intentional existence, or being in nature a

mind, see BEING 7d, yd (2); FORM 23; IDEA 6a-6b; KNOWLEDGE i; and for the

between change in matter and change in mind, see CHANGE 6d.

Other comparisons of human and animal mentality, see ANIMAL 1c, 1c(2) EVOLUT

LANGUAGE i; MAN m-1c; SENSE 2c; and for the relation of reason and instinc

HABIT 3c.

The mind's knowledge of itself in relation to the nature and method of psych

IDEA 2d; KNOWLEDGE 53(6); MAN 23-24); SOUL 53-5k

Other discussions of the weakness and limits of the human mind, see KNOWLEDG

TRUTH 3d-3d(i), 73; snd for the consideration of the training of mind, hab

intellectusl virtues, and supernatural gifts, see EDUCATION 53-5k GOD 60(2

5d; KNOWLEDGE 6c(5) PRUDENCE i RELIGION 13; SCIENCE 1a(i) VIRTUE AND VICE

; ;

8e; WISDOM 1c, 23.

Other discussions of sleep and dresms, see DESIRE 53; LIFE AND DEATH 5b; MEM

IMAGINATION 83-80; SIGN AND SYMBOL 63; and for mstters relev3nt to the the

repressed unconscious, see DESIRE 3b(2), 6c; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 20(2);

TION 4c; SIGN AND SYMBOL 6a.

Other discussions of psy chops thology and the causes 3nd cure of mental dis

TION 3c-3(J; MAN 5b; MEDICINE 63-6d; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 5c.

Matters relevant to the distinction between the speculative and practical in

pure snd practical reason, see JUDGMENT 2; KNOWLEDGE 6e(i); PHILOSOPHY 23;

2a-2b; SCIENCE 33; TRUTH 2c; WISDOM 1b; and for the bearing of this distin

the bearing of reason's relation to will and desire, on the differentiatio

belief, and opinion, see DESIRE 5b; EMOTION 3b; GOD 2d; IMMORTALI

4b; METAPHYSICS 2d; OPINION 2a-2b; WILL 30-31), 3b(3), 54).

The moral and politicsl aspects of mind, see DESIRE 6a; EMOTION 43-43(2); LA

3b; SLAVERY 7; STATE 13; TYRANNY 5d; VIRTUE AND VICE 5b.

The consideration of the existence of mind, resson, or intellect apart from

3d; GOD 5f; IDEA 1c; NATURE 33; SOUL la; WILL 43; WORLD 6c.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western World, bu

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of T

AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gent

*

. On Spiritual Creat PLUTARCH. "That Brute Beasts Make Use of Rea- .

Quaestioncs Disput

son," in Moralia De Anima, AA 3-5 AUGUSTINE. On the Trinity, BK x . The Unicity
of the

ee  HISTORY  NCE  i,  2a; see ELEMENT 56 ; hic structure inuman mind nd being in
difference  ION  73)  ;  ;  t, see ology, see E 53-56; its of mind, ); HABIT 5c-
23(2),  ; ORY AND ory of the OPPOSIorder, see EMOtellect, or the PRUDENCE ction,
and  n of knowledge, TY 33; KNOWLEDGE W 1b; LIBERTY man, see ANGEL 2, t relevant
to  the  two groups: s cited, consult he Great Ideas. iles, BK n, CH 73-78 ures,
AA 9-10 atae, De Veritate, QQ 10, 15; Intellect, III-VH

CHAPTER 58 DANTE. Convivio (The Banquet), THIRD TREATISE,

CH 2, 3 (3), 4(11) DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i,

7-8, 11-12, 52-53, 62-65; PART iv, 196-197 HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK
i, PART HI,

SECT XVI KANT. De Mundi Scnsibilis (Inaugural Dissertation)

HEGEL. The Phenomenology of Mind, v

.The Philosophy of Mind, SECT i

II.

PETER LOMBARD. The Pour Books of Sentences, BK i, DIST3

MAIMONIDES. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i, CH 31-32; PART ii, CH 37

ALBERTUS  MAGNUS.  On the Intellect and the Intelligible BONAVENTURA. Itmerarium
Mentis in Deum (The

Itinerary of the Mind to God) DUNS SCOTUS. Opus Oxoniense, BK i, DIST 2, 03

PETRARCH. On His Own Ignorance

FICINO. Five Questions Concerning the Mind PARACELSUS. The Diseases That Deprive
Man of His Reason SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xxx (14-15),

xxxv, XLIV (4) BURTON. The Anatomy of Melancholy, PART i, SECT

I,  MEMB  II,  SUB-SECT  9-I  I  JOHN  OF  SAINT  THOMAS.  Cursus  Philosophicus
Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis, PART iv, OQ 9-

ii MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la veritS, BK i,

CH i (i); UK in (i), CH 1-4

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding

.
Monadology

VAUVENARGUES.  Introduction a la connaissance de Vesprit humain VOLTAIRE. "Wit,"
"Spirit,"  "Intellect,"  "Mind (Limits of Human)," in A Philosophical Dictionary
T. REID. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man,

i, CH 5-8 D. STEWART. Elements of the Philosophy of the

Human Mind

COLERIDGE. Biographia Literaria, CH 5-8 SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and
Idea, VOL i,

BK IJ VOL II, SUP, CH 15; VOL III, SUP, CH 22 BROWN. Lectures on the Philosophy
of the Human

Mind

: MIND J. MILL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human

Mind,  CH  1 6 BAIN. The Senses and the Intellect E. HARTMANN. Philosophy of the
Unconscious  TAINE.  On  Intelligence  CLIFFORD.  "Body  and  Mind,"  in VOL 11,
Lectures

and Essays LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK v

Metaphysics, BK HI, CH 5

.  ROMANES.  Animal Intelligence T. H. GREEN. Prolegomena to Ethics, BK 11, CH 2
C.  S.  PEIRCE.  Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 238-286 FRAZER. The Golden Bough,
PART  vn  C.  L.  MORGAN.  Animal  Life  and  Intelligence  WUNDT.  Outlines  of
Psychology, (15-17, 22) LOEB. Comparative Physiology ofthe Brain and Comparative
Psychology

P.  M.  JANET. The Major Symptoms of Hysteria HOLT. The Concept of Consciousness
BERGSON. Matter and Memory, CH 3 Creative Evolution, CH 3-4

.
.

Mind-Energy, CH i, 7

MARITAIN. Reflexions sur Vintelligence et sur la vie propre

. Theonas: Conversations of a Sage, i, in

STOUT.  Mind  and  Matter BOSANQUET. Three Chapters on the Nature of Mind BROAD.
The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH 3, 7-10, 13-14

PIERON.  Thought  and  the  Brain  DEWEY. Experience and Nature, CH 2, 6-8 G. N.
LEWIS. The Anatomy of Science, ESSAY vm WOODBRIDGE. Nature and Mind The Realm of
Mind

. JUNG. Two Essays on Analytical Psychology Instinct and the Unconscious

. Mind and the Earth

.  SPEARMAN.  The Abilities of Man LASHLEY. Brain Mechanisms and Intelligence C.
I.  LEWIS.  Mind and the World Order WHITEHEAD. The Function of Reason R. M. and
A.  W.  YERKES. The Great Apes SHERRINGTON. The Brain and Its Mechanism BLONDEL.
La  pensSe THURSTONE. The Vectors of Mind BLANSHARD. The Nature of Thought S ANT
AY AN A. Reason in Common Sense, CH 5-6 The Realm of Spirit

. B. RUSSELL. The Analysis of Mind Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, PART

. i, CH 6; PART ii, CH 7
