Chapter  59:  MONARCHY INTRODUCTION all the traditionally recognized forms of OF
government,  monarchy  is  the  easiest  to  define and to identify. As the word
indicates,  it  is  government by one man. It is indifferent whether that man is
called  king  or  prince, Caesar or Czar. Of all such titles, "king" is the most
frequent; and in consequence monarchy is often called kingship or referred to as
the royal form of government.

When monarchy is thus defined in terms of the principle of unity, other forms of
government,  such  as  aristocracy  or  oligarchy  and  democracy,  tend  to  be
characterized  as government by the few or the many. But the numerical criterion
by  itself is obviously inadequate. To those who distinguish between aristocracy
and  oligarchy, it makes a difference whether the few who rule are selected] for
their  pre-eminence  in  virtue or in wealth. A tyranny, like a monarchy, may be
government  by one man. Hence those who wish to use the word "monarch" or "king"
eulogisticaily  cannot  be satisfied with a definition that fails to distinguish
between  king  and tyrant. It has been said by Aristotle, for example T that the
perversion  of,  or "deviation from, see monarchy is tyranny; for both are forms
of  oneman  rule. But," he adds, "there is the greatest difference between them;
the  tyrant  looks to his own advantage, the king to that of his subjects." Both
Aristotle and Plato also say that as tyranny is the worst form of government, so
monarchy  at  the  opposite  extreme  is  the  best. But though in their opinion
tyranny is always the worst form of government, Aristotle at least does not seem
to   think   that   monarchy  is  always  under  all  conditions  best.  Further
complications appear when other views are taken into consideration. The chapters
on  CITIZEN,  CONSTITUTION,  and  GOVERN-  gov MENT discuss the basic opposition
between ab- 204 solute and limited government in the various terms in which that
opposition  is  traditionally expressed: royal as opposed to political, despotic
as  opposed  to  constitutional  government;  or government by men as opposed to
government  by  law.  That  opposition  seems  to  be  relevant to the theory of
monarchy,  certainly  to  any  conception of monarchy which tends to identify it
with  absolute  rule,  or  which  sees  some affinity between royal and despotic
government.  The  word  "despotic"  is,  of  course,  sometimes used in a purely
descriptive  rather  than a disparaging sense. Used descriptively, it designates
the absolute rule exercised by the head of a household over children and slaves,
neither  of  whom  have  any  voice in their own government. Aristotle sometimes
characterizes  the  royal  government  of  a  political community as despotic to
signify  its  resemblance  to  the  absolute  rule  of the father or master. lie
expresses the same comparison in reverse when he says that "the rule of a father
over  his children is royal." he derogatory sense of "despotic" would m to apply
to  those  cases  in which grown men are ruled as if they were children, or free
men  as  if they were slaves. The great issue concerning monarchy, therefore, is
whether  royal  government  is  despotic  in  this  sense. Always, or only under
certain  conditions?  And  if  despotic,  is  italso  tyrannical? Is monarchy in
principle the foe of human liberties ? To all these questions there are opposite
answers  in  the  great books of political theory. Where Hegel says that "public
freedom  in  general  and  an hereditary monarchy guarantee each other," others,
like  Rousseau  and Mill, identify the freedom of citizenship with republican or
representative  ernment.  This  central issue is complicated not only by CHAPTER
59:  MONA  the  various  meanings  of  "despotism"  (discussed in the chapter on
TYRANNY),  but  also  by  variations  in  the  meaning of the word "monarchy" by
different  writers.  The word is as it is used even used by the same writer in a
number  of  senses.  Rousseau,  for  example,  says  in  one  place  that "every
legitimate  government  is  republican," and in another that "monarchical always
ranks below republican government." But he also treats monarchy or royal rule as
one  form  of  legitimate  government. He describes the king, in whose hands all
political  power  is concentrated, as only having "the right to dispose of it in
accordance  with  the  laws." He distinguishes not only between king and tyrant,
but  also between king and despot. To avoid what may be only verbal difficulties
here,  Kant  suggests the use of the word "autocrat" to signify "one who has all
power"  and  who  in  his  own  person "is the Sovereign." In contra-distinction
"monarch"  should  signify  the  king  or  chief  magistrate  (sometimes  called
"president")  who  "merely  represents  the  sovereignty" or the people who "are
themselves sovereign." SOME POLITICAL theorists distinguish between absolute and
limited  (or  constitutional)  monarchy.  This  in  turn  raises new problems of
definition and evaluation. Is absolute government always monarchical in form, so
that  absolute  government  and  absolute  monarchy can be treated as identical?
Hobbes,  who seems to think that government by its very nature must be absolute,
nevertheless  treats  aristocracy  and democracy along with monarchy as forms of
absolute  government. Furthermore, as Rousseau points out, "the Roman Empire saw
as  many  as  eight  emperors at once, without it being possible to say that the
Empire was split up." The absolutism of the government was not diminished by the
fact  that  two  or  more  Caesars  often  held  power  at  the  same  time. The
triumvirates  were  also  absolute dictatorships. It would seem, therefore, that
the  principle  of  absolute  government  can be separated from the principle of
monarchy.  But  can  monarchy as a form of government be separated from absolute
rule? The question is not whether, in a republic, RCHY the monarchical principle
is  present in the sense that one man may hold the office of chief executive. On
the issue of a single as opposed to a plural executive, Hamilton and Madison and
with  them  Jefferson emphatically favor the principle of unity in the executive
branch  of  the government. "Energy in government," according to The Federalist,
"requires  not  only  a  certain duration of power, but the execution of it by a
single  hand."  The  qualities essential to a good executive, such as "decision,
activity,  secrecy,  and  dispatch," Hamilton says, "will generally characterize
the proceedings of one man in a much more eminent degree than the proceedings of
any  greater  number;  and  in  proportion  as  the  number  is increased, these
qualities  will be diminished." Yet the authors of The Federalist, and JerTcrson
too,  are equally emphatic in insisting upon the difference in kind, not degree,
between the power granted the President of the United States and that enjoyed by
the  King of Great Britain. For them, monarchies and republics are fundamentally
opposed in the spirit of their institutions. Despotism is inherent in the nature
of monarchy not only absolute, but even limited monarchy. If the Constitution of
the  United  States  does  not  set up a constitutional monarchy, even though it
provides  for  one  man  as chief executive, then a constitutional monarchy must
have some other principle in it which distinguishes it from a republic. That may
be  hereditary  succession  to  the  throne;  or  it  may  be a certain symbolic
identification  of  the  king  with  the state. But in a monarchy, no matter how
attenuated,  so  long  as  it  does  not become purely and simply constitutional
government,  the  king  also  seems  to retain some degree of despotic power the
absolute  power exercised by a sovereign person who is free from the supervision
of  law.  Aristotle takes a similar view. Enumerating five types of kingly rule,
he  sets  one  form  apart  from all the rest the form in which one man "has the
disposal  of  everything.  .  .  .  This  form  corresponds  to the control of a
household. For as household management is the kingly rule of a family, so kingly
rule  is the household management of a city or of a nation." The other forms are
all,  in  one  way  or another, kingships accord- 206 ing to law. Of these, most
clearly  exemplified  in  the  Spartan  constitution,  Aristotle  says that "the
so-called  limited  monarchy, or kingship according to law ... is not a distinct
form of government, for under all governments, as for example, in a democracy or
aristocracy,  there  may be a general holding office for life, and one person is
often  made supreme over the administration of a state." Whether or not there is
a supreme commander or a chief magistrate, elected or hereditary, the government
is  not  distinctively royal if the man called "king" is subject to the laws and
if  the other men in the state are not his subjects but his fellow citizens. For
somewhat  different  reasons,  Hobbes  agrees  with  the view that only absolute
monarchy  is  monarchy.  When  the  king  is  limited  in  power,  he  says, the
sovereignty is always "in that assembly which had the right to limit him; and by
consequence the government is not monarchy, but either democracy or aristocracy;
as  of old time in Sparta, where the kings had a privilege to lead their armies,
but  the sovereignty was in the Ephori" Hobbes uses the government of one people
over  another  people  the mother country over colonies, or the conqueror over a
subjugated  nation  to  illustrate  what  he  means  by  absolute monarchy. This
suggests  a  significant  parallelism  between  the problems of monarchy and the
problems of empire.

IF  THERE  WERE  universal agreement on the point that only absolute monarchy is
truly  monarchy,  the issue concerning monarchy could be readily translated into
the  basic  opposition  between  rule by men and rule by law. But such agreement
seems  to  be wanting, and the problems of monarchy are, in consequence, further
complicated.

Plato,  for  example,  distinguishes  in  the  Statesman  between three forms of
government  according to established laws, of which one is monarchy. Monarchy is
better  than  aristocracy  and  democracy,  obviously  not  with  respect to the
principle of the supremacy of law, but simply because government by one seems to
be more efficient than government by a few or many; just as tyranny is the worst
form  of  government because, in violating or overthrowing the laws, one man can
succeed  in  going  further  than a multitude, which is "unable to do either any
great  good or any great evil." But all these forms of government, good and bad,
better  and worse, are compared by Plato with a form of government which he says
"excels  them  all,  and  is among States what God is among men." It seems to be
monarchical  in type, but, though not lawless like tyranny, it is entirely above
the  need  of  written or customary rules of law. "The best thing of all," Plato
writes,  "is not that the law should rule, but that a man should rule, supposing
him  to  have  wisdom  and  royal power." Whether such government can ever exist
apart  from  divine  rule,  or perhaps the advent of the "philosopher king," the
point  remains  that Plato seems to conceive monarchy in two quite distinct ways
both  as  an  absolute  rule  and  also  as  one of the legally limited forms of
government. Montesquieu separates monarchy from absolute government entirely. At
the  same  time,  he  distinguishes  it from republics, whether aristocracies or
democracies.  According to him, monarchy is as much a government by law, as much
opposed to despotism or absolute government, Monarchies and republics are as are
republics.   the   two   main   kinds  of  constitutional  government,  just  as
aristocracies and democracies arc the two main kinds of republic.

Where  Aristotle  holds  that  constitutional is not a distinct monarchy type of
government,  Montesquieu  holds that absolute monarchy does not deserve the name
of   "monarchy,"  but  should  be  called  "despotism"  instead.  He  criticizes
Aristotle's  fivefold classification of kingships, saying that "among the number
of  monarchies,  he  [Aristotle]  ranks  the  Persian  empire and the kingdom of
Sparta.  But is it not evident," he asks, "that the one was a despotic state and
the  other  a  republic?"  Since Montesquieu's own view of monarchy involves, in
addition to a king, a body of nobles in whom intermediate and subordinate powers
are  vested,  he  thinks  no true notion of monarchy can be found in the ancient
world.  Hegel  agrees  with Montesquieu that conmonarchy is the very opposite of
stitutional  despotism,  but  he  goes  much  further  than  Montesquieu  in the
direction  of  identifying  monarchy  with  constitutional  government.  For him
constitutional   monarchy  is  the  ultimately  true  CHAPTER  59:  MO  form  of
government.  "The  development  of  the  state to constitutional monarchy is the
achievement of the modern world." He thinks Montesquieu was right in recognizing
that  the  ancient  world  knew only the patriarchal type of monarchy, a kind of
transference of familial government to larger communities still organized on the
domestic  pattern. But according to Hegel, Montesquieu himself, in stressing the
role  of the nobility, shows that he understands, not the type of monarchy which
is  "organized  into an objective constitution" and in which "the monarch is the
absolute apex of an organically developed state," but only "feudal monarchy, the
type  in  which  the  relationships  recognized  in  its  constitutional law are
crystallized  into  the  rights  of  private  property  and  the  privileges  of
individuals  and  corporations."  It may be questioned, however, whether Hegel's
theory  of  constitutional  monarchy  avoids the issue raised by republicans who
think  that  monarchy  is  inseparable  from  some  form  of absolutism, or that
monarchy,  if  entirely devoid of absolutism, has no special character as a form
of government. In spite of his acceptance of the traditional distinction between
constitutional  government  and despotism, Hegel seems to regard the sovereignty
of  the  state  as  absolute  in  relation  to  its own subjects at home no less
absolute  than  is its sovereignty in external affairs vis-b-vis foreign states.
The  crown  is  the  personification of the absolute sovereignty of the state at
home. The absolute power of the state comes into existence only in the person of
a monarch who has the final decision in all matters.

"The  sovereignty  of the people," writes Hegel, "is one of the confused notions
based  on  the  wild  idea  of  the 'people.' Taken without its monarchy and the
articulation  of  the whole which is the indispensable and direct concomitant of
monarchy,  the  people  is  a  formless  mass and no longer a state." Hegel thus
dismisses  the  notion  of popular sovereignty (which to Rousseau, Kant, and the
Federalists  is  of  the  essence of republican government) as inconsistent with
"the Idea of the state in its full development."

A   profound   opposition,   therefore,   exists   between   Hegel's  theory  of
constitutional  monarchy  and  republican theories of constitutional government.
Even  though the issue cannot be NARCHY stated in terms of government by men vs.
government by laws, a monarchy as opposed to a republic still seems to represent
the  principle of absolutism in government. THERE is STILL another conception of
a  type 01 government which is neither a pure republic nor an absolute monarchy.
What  the  mediaeval  writers  call  a  "mixed  regime"  is not a constitutional
monarchy in the Hegelian sense, nor is it what Aristotle means when he uses that
term.  The mediaeval mixed regime is a combination of two distinct principles of
government  the  royal principlek according to which absolute power is vested in
the  sovereign  personality  of  an individual man; and the political principle,
according  to which the supremacy of law reflects the sovereignty of the people,
who   have   the   power  of  making  laws  either  directly  or  through  their
representatives.  This  conception of a mixed regime of government which is both
royal  and  political  appears at first to be self-contradictory. In Aristotle's
terms,  it  would  seem impossible to combine the supremacy of law, which is the
essence  of constitutional government, with the supremacy of a sovereign person,
which is the essence of royal government. The mixed regime would also seem to be
impossible  in  terms  of  Ilobbcs' theory of the indivisibility of sovereignty.
Impossible  in  theory,  the  mixed  regime  nevertheless existed as a matter of
historic fact in the typical mediaeval kingdom, which derived its character from
the  feudal  conditions  under  which  it  developed.  Does  not the fact of its
historic  existence refute the incompatibility of the principles which the mixed
regime  combines? The answer may be that, like a mixture of oil and water, royal
and  political  government  can only exist as a mixture in unstable equilibrium.
Originating  under  feudal conditions, the mixed regime tends toward dissolution
as these conditions disappear with the rise of the modern nation-state. It first
tends  to  be  supplanted  by  a movement toward absolute monarchy. Then, in the
course of re action and revolution, it tends toward constitutional monarchies or
republics  through  added limitations on the power of the throne. These historic
developments  seem to indicate that the principles of the mixed regime are ulti-
208 mately as irreconcilable in fact as they are in theory. Montesquieu's remark
that  the ancients "had not a clear idea of monarchy" can be interpreted to mean
that they did not have the conception of a mixed regime. Before the accidents of
history  brought  it  into  existence,  it  is  unlikely  that anyone would have
conceived  of  a government both royal and political. Montesquieu does not adopt
the  mediaeval  description  of  a mixed regime, which, as stated by Aquinas, is
"partly  kingdom,  since there is one at the head of all; partly aristocracy, in
so  far  as  a number of persons are set in authority; and partly democracy, /.,
government  by  the people, in so far as the rulers can be chosen by the people,
and  the people have the right to choose their rulers." Yet Montesquieu's theory
of  monarchy seems to be determined by characteristics peculiar to the mediaeval
kingdom. This seems to be the point of Hegel's observation, already quoted, that
Montesquieu's  theory  of  monarchy  identifies  it with the feudal kingdom. The
point  is  confirmed  in  another  way  by  the fact that Montesquieu's ideal of
monarchy  is the government of England at the end of the lyth century, which, he
says, "may be justly called a republic, disguised under the form of a monarchy."
Locke's  conception  of  the  English government in his own day tends to clarify
this  point.  The form of a government, says Locke, "depends upon the placing of
the  supreme  power, which is the legislative." When the power of making laws is
placed  in the hands of one man, then it is a monarchy. But, according to Locke,
"the  legislative and executive power are in distinct hands ... in all moderated
monarchies  and  well-framed  governments."  What  Locke here calls a "moderated
monarchy"  (intending  to  describe  the government of England), seems to be the
mixed  regime,  the  form  of  government  which  Fortescue had earlier called a
"political  kingdom,"  and Bracton a regimen regale et politicum.Tht legislative
power  is  in  the  hands of the people or their representatives. If it belonged
exclusively  to  the  king  as  a  right vested in his sovereign person, and not
merely  as  the  people's  representative  or, in the language of Aquinas, their
vicegerentthe  government  would  be  in form an S absolute monarchy. If, on the
other  hand,  the  king  were merely a representative, the government would be a
republic.  The  sovereign  character of the king in a mixed regime seems to stem
from  his  unique  relation to the laws of the land. In one way, he is above the
laws, and has certain powers not limited by law; in another way, his whole power
is  limited  by the fact that he does not have the power to make laws in his own
right  or  authority.  When  a  people are free and able to make their own laws,
Aquinas  writes, "the consent of the whole people expressed by custom counts far
more  in  favor  of  a  particular  observance,  than  does the authority of the
sovereign,  who  has  not  the  power  to frame laws, except as representing the
people."  But  Aquinas also says that the sovereign is "exempt from thelaw as to
its  coercive power; since, properly speaking, no man is coerced by himself, and
law  has  no  coercive  power  save  from  the  authority of the sovereign." The
coercive power of the law belongs to the sovereign as executive, not legislator.
Admitting  the  king  to  a  share  in  legislative  power,  Locke conceives his
essential   function   that  which  belongs  to  him  alone  as  executive.  The
absoluteness  of  this  executive  power  Ix)cke  defines  in terms of the royal
prerogative,  that  "being  nothing  but  a  power in the hands of the prince to
provide  for  the public good in such cases which, depending upon unforeseen and
uncertain  occurrences,  certain  and unalterable laws could not safely direct."
Prerogative,  he  then  goes  on  to  say,  is  the  power  "to act according to
discretion  for  the  public good without the prescription of law, and sometimes
even against it." Locke thus gives us a picture of the mixed regime in which the
king's  sovereign power is limited to the exercise of an absolute prerogative in
performing  the  executive functions of government. In the executive sphere, the
king's  power  is  absolute,  yet  his  sovereignty  is not absolute; for in the
legislative sphere, he either has no voice at all where ancient customs prevail,
or, in the making of new laws, he can count himself merely as one representative
of  the  people  among  others. The extent of the prerogative permitted the king
depends  upon  the  extent  to  which  mat  CHAPTER 59: MONA ters are explicitly
regulated  by  law.  When  in  the  infancy  of governments the laws were few in
number, "the government was almost all prerogative," as Locke sees it. He thinks
that  "they  have a very wrong notion of government who say that the people have
encroached  upon the prerogative when they have got any part of it to be defined
by  positive laws. For in so doing they have not pulled from the prince anything
that  of  right  belonged  to  him, but only declared that that power which they
indefinitely  left  in  his  or  his ancestors' hands, to be exercised for their
good, was not a thing they intended him, when he used it otherwise."

Here  we see the seed of conflict between sovereign king and sovereign people in
the  combination  of  incompatible principles that constitute a mixed regime. As
the  king,  jealous  of  his  prerogative,  tries to maintain or even extend his
power,  royal  and  political  government tends toward absolute monarchy. As the
people,  jealous  of their sovereignty, try to safeguard their legislative power
from  royal  usurpations,  the  mixed  regime  tends  to  dissolve  in the other
direction. This happens as it moves toward republican government through various
stages  of  limited  or  constitutional monarchy in which the sovereignty of the
king  becomes more and more attenuated. When the king's prerogative includes the
power  of  calling  parliament  into  session,  nothing  short of revolution may
resolve  the  issue;  for,  as  Ix)ckc  observes, "between an executive power in
being,  with such a prerogative, and a legislativethat depends upon his will for
their convening, there can be no judge on earth."

IN  THE DISCUSSION of monarchy, as in the discussion of democracy or other forms
of  government, the fundamental terms and issues do not have the same meaning in
the  various  epochs  of  western  thought.  The continuity of discussion in the
tradition  of  the  great  books  must  be qualified, especially in the field of
political  theory, by reference to the differing historic institutions withwhich
their  authors  are  acquainted  and concerned. Ancient and modern controversies
over  the merits of monarchy in relation to other forms of government seem to be
comparing  institutions  of  government  as  dif- RCHY ferent as the ancient and
modern forms of the democratic constitution.

In  the  ancient  world,  the  choice  between purely royal and purely political
government  underlies  the  meaning  and  evaluation  of monarchy. In the modern
world, with its heritage from the feudal institutions of the Middle Ages, either
the  mixed  regime  or  constitutional  monarchy  is  thought  to  offer a third
alternative.  The  praise  of  monarchy  may  therefore  be  the  corollary of a
justification  of  absolute government or the absolute state, as with Hobbes and
Hegel; it may be accompanied by an attack on absolute or despotic power, as with
Locke  and  Montesquieu; or in defense of purely republican principles, monarchy
may  be  attacked,  as  by Rousseau and the Federalists, without differentiation
between  its  absolute  and  limited  forms. This does not mean that there is no
continuity between ancient and modern discussion. It seems to exist with respect
to  both  elements in the idea of monarchy the unification of government through
its having one head, and the Tightness of absolute power. On the point of unity,
Plato's  argument  that  monarchy  is the most efficient of the several forms of
government  which  are  otherwise equally just, seems to be paralleled by modern
arguments  for a unified executive in the constitution of a republic. It is also
reflected  in  the  reasoning of Montesquieu and Rousseau concerning the greater
competence  of  monarchies  to  govern  extensive  territories.  On the point of
absolute  power, there is some continuity between ancient and modern discussions
of  government  by  men  versus  government  by  law. But here there seems to be
greater   similarity   between  ancient  and  modern  arguments  against  giving
sovereignty  to  an  individual  human  being  than  there is between the modern
defense of monarchy and ancient speculations concerning royal government. Taking
different  shape in Hobbes and Hegel, the argument for the necessity of absolute
government seems to be peculiarly modern. It is not simply the point made by the
ancients,  that  under  certain  circumstances  it  may  be right for the man of
superior  wisdom  to  govern  his  inferiors  in an absolute manner, as a father
governs  children,  or  a  god  men.  The point is rather that the very nature o
government  and  the THE GREAT I state requires a unified repository of absolute
power.  Hobbes  does  not  ask  whether the monarch in whose hands such power is
placed  deserves  this  by  reason of personal superiority to his subjects.Hegel
explicitly  repudiates  the  relevance  of  any  consideration  of the monarch's
particular  character.  Neither  Hobbes nor Hegel argues for the divine right of
kings,   or  their  divine  appointment;  though  Hegel  does  insist  that  the
constitution  itself,  which  establishes  the  supremacy  of  the crown, is not
something made by man, but "divine and constant, and exalted above the sphere of
things that are made." That kings have absolute power by divine right is another
peculiarly  modern  argument  for absolute monarchy. "Not all the water from the
rough  rude  sea," says Shakespeare's Richard II, "can wash the balm off from an
anointed king. The breath of worldly men cannot depose the deputy elected by the
Lord." According to the theory of divine right, the king is God's vicar, not, as
Aquinas  thinks, the vicegerent of the people. The theory of the divine right of
kings does not seem to be a mediaeval doctrine.

It  appears  later  in  such  tracts as those by Barclay and Filmer, which Locke
undertakes  to  answer. The controversy involves its adversaries in dispute over
the interpretation of Holy Writ. The anointing of Christian kings is supposed to
draw  its significance from the establishment of this practice among the ancient
Hebrews.  But  the  story  of  the origin of the Hebrew kingship can be given an
opposite interpretation. The people of Israel, after the leadership of Moses and
Aaron, first submitted their affairs to the government of judges, and "there was
no  king in Israel, but every one did that which seemed right to himself." Later
they  went  to Samuel, their judge, saying: "Make us a king to judge us like all
the  nations." This displeased Samuel. Samuel prayed unto the Lord, and the Lord
said  unto Samuel: "Hearken to the voice of the people in all that they say unto
thee;  for they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me, that I should
not  reign  over them." The Lord then describes the tribulations the people will
suffer  at  the hands of an earthly ruler with absolute power, a punishment they
deserve  for  wanting  to be ruled by a king, in- stead of by God and God's law,
administered for them by judges. THE GREAT POEMS and histories of ancient Greece
and  Rome  would  seem  to  indicate  that the divinity of kings is not a modern
notion.  The  deification of emperors and kings certainly appears to be a common
practice.  But  the  assumption  of divinity by kings is not supposed to signify
divine  appointment,  or  election by the gods; nor do the rulers of the ancient
world  justify  their  absolute  power as a god-given right. Furthermore, in the
political  theory  of  Plato  and  Aristotle, the analogy between royal rule and
divine  government works in the opposite direction. According to their view, the
right to absolute government depends upon a radical inequality between ruler and
ruled.  If  a  god  were  to rule men on earth, as in the myth retold in Plato's
Statesman,  he  would  govern them absolutely, deciding everything by his wisdom
and  without  recourse  to  written laws or established customs. If there were a
god-like  man, or if atrue philosopher were to become king, he too would deserve
to  be  an  absolute  monarch.  It would be unjust, says Aristotle, to treat the
god-like man merely as a citizen, and so to treat him as no more than "the equal
of those who are so far inferior to him in virtue and in political capacity." It
would  also seem to be unjust for a man who does not have great superiority over
his  fellow  men  to  rule  them  like a king, instead of being merely a citizen
entitled  to hold public office for a time. Aristotle frequently refers to royal
government  as  the  divine  sort  of  government,  but  he does not justify its
existence  except  when one man stands to others as a god to men. Though some of
the  historic kingships which Aristotle classifies are absolute monarchies, none
is  royal  government of the divine sort. That seems to remain for Aristotle, as
for  Plato,  a  purely  hypothetical construction. Actual royal government has a
patriarchal  rather  than a divine origin. It is the kind of government which is
appropriate  to  the village community rather than to the city-state. The kingly
form  of  government  prevails  in the village because it is an outgrowth of the
family.  That  is  why,  says  Aristotle,  "the  Hellenic states were originally
governed  by kings; the Hellenes CHAPTER 59: M were under royal rule before they
came  together,  as  the  barbarians  still  are."  In thinking that absolute or
despotic  government  befits  the  servile Asiatics, but not the free men of the
Greek city-states, Aristotle takes a position which has a certain counterpart in
the  views  of Montesquieu and Mill. These modern opponents of absolute monarchy
do  not  assert  that  constitutional  government is unconditionally better than
despotism.  For  certain  peoples, under certain conditions, self-government may
not  be  possible or advantageous. "A rude people," Mill writes, "though in some
degree alive to the benefits of civilized society, may be unable to practice the
forbearance  which  it  demands:  their  passions  may  be too violent, or their
personal  pride  too exacting, to forego private conflict, and leave to the laws
the  avenging  of  their  real  or  supposed wrongs. In such a case, a civilized
government,  to  be  really  advantageous  to  them,  will  require  to  be in a
considerable  degree  despotic;  to  be  one  over  which they do not themselves
exercise  control,  and  which imposes a great amount of forcible restraint upon
their  actions."  Montesquieu  seems  further  to  suppose  that different races
largely  as  a  result  of  the climate in whichthey live are by nature inclined
toward  freedom  or  servitude.  The  Asiatics are for him a people whose spirit
perpetually  dooms them to live under despotism. In contrast, Mill's conditional
justification  of  absolute  government  demands  that  despotism  serve  only a
temporary  purpose.  It must seek not merely to keep order, but by gradual steps
OUTLINE  OF  TOP to prepare the people it rules for self-governi. The definition
of  monarchy  and  the  classific  la. The distinction between royal and pol (1)
Absolute  or  personal rule contras by law (2) The theory of absolute government
and  duties of the monarch; th ruled in absolute government ib. Modifications of
absolute monarchy: principle (i) The combination of monarchy with regime ONARCHY
ment.  "Leading-strings  are  only admissible," he says, "as ameans of gradually
training  the  people  to  walk  alone."  When  they  have reached that stage of
development  where  they  are able to govern themselves, the despotic ruler must
either abdicate or be overthrown.

There is a deeper contrast between Mill on the one hand, and Aristotle and Plato
on the other, one which goes to the very heart of the issue concerning royal and
political  government.  Both  Aristotle  and Plato seem to be saying that if the
superior or god-like man existed, then royal government would be better than the
best  republic,  even for the civilized Greeks. In calling royal rule the divine
form  of  government,  they  imply that it is the ideal, even if it can never be
realized.  This Mill most emphatically denies. The notion that "if a good despot
could be ensured, despotic monarchy would be the best form of government, I look
upon,"  he  writes,  "as  a  radical and most pernicious conception of what good
government  is."  The point at issue is not whether the good despot the god-like
ruler  or philosopher king can be found. Suppose him to exist. The point then to
be  made  is  that  the  people ruled by "one man of superhuman mental activity"
would  of  necessity have to be entirely passive. "Their passivity is implied in
the  very  idea  of absolute power. . . . What sort of human beings," Mill asks,
"can   be   formed   under   such  a  regimen?"  Men  must  actually  engage  in
self-government in order to pass from political infancy to maturity. Whenever it
is  possible,  representative  or  constitutional government is therefore better
than absolute monarchy. ICS ation of the types of kingship itical government ted
with  constitutional  government  or  rule  :  the nature of absolute power; the
rights  e  radical  inequality  between  ruler and 2I 4 other embodiments of the
monarchical  other  forms of government: the mixed (2) Constitutional or limited
monarchy  (3)  The  monarchical  principle  in  the  executive branch of ic. The
principle  of succession in monarchies 2. The theory of royalty 20. The divinity
of  kings  2b.  The  analogy  between divine government and rule by the best man
opher  king  2C.  The divine institution of kings: the theory of the divine righ
2d.  The  myth of the royal personage: the attributes of royalty and monarchy 3.
The  use  and  abuse  of  monarchical power 30. The good king and the benevolent
despot  in  the  service of thei education of the prince 3k. The exploitation of
absolute power for personal aggrandizeme of princes and tyrants 4. Comparison of
monarchy  with  other  forms  of  government  40. The patriarchical character of
kingship:  absolute  rule in the and paternalism in the state 4k. The line which
divides monarchy from despotism and tyranny 4?. The differences between kingdoms
and  republics  with resp and extent of territory 4k. The defense of monarchy or
royal rule (1) The necessity for absolute government (2) Monarchy as the best or
most  efficient  of the several go ment (3) The preference for the mixed regime:
defense of royal pr lute in their sphere 4*.

The  attack on monarchy or absolute government (1) The paternalistic or despotic
character  of monarchy: the olent despotism; the advantages of constitutional sa
(2)   The  justification  of  absolute  rule  or  benevolent  despo  capable  of
self-government  (3)  The  illegitimacy  of  absolute  monarchy: the violation o
popular  sovereignty (4) The illegality of royal usurpations of power in a mixed
tions of royal prerogative in a constitutional monar 5.

The  absolute  government  of colonies, dependencies, or conquered peopl 50. The
justification   of  imperial  rule:  the  rights  of  the  conqueror  civilizing
achievements  of  empire  5#.  The  injustice  of  imperialism: exploitation and
despotism  6.  The  history  of  monarchy:  its  origin  and  developments  PAGE
republican  government t of kings 216 : the philosthe burdens of r subjects: the
nt:  the  strategies  family  or  tribe,  ect  to  unity,  wealth,  od  forms of
governerogatives  as  absorejection  of  benevfeguards  tism for peoples inf the
principle  of  chy  regime:  the  limitaes ; the unifying and CHAPTER 59: MONARC
REFERENCES To find the passages cited, use the numbers in heavy t numbers of the
passages  referred to. For example, in 4 number 4 is the number of the volume in
the set; the n sage is in section d of page 12.

PAGE  SECTIONS:  When  the text is printed in one colu upper and lower halves of
the  page. For example, in 53 begins in the upper half of page and ends in the l
printed  in  two  columns, the letters a and b refer to t hand side of the page,
the  letters  c  and d to the uppe the page. For example, in 7 PLATO: Symposium,
163b-164  of the left-hand side of page and ends in the uppe AUTHOR'S DIVISIONS:
One  or more of the main division SECT) arc someiimes included in the reference;
line nu tain cases; e.g., Iliad, BK n [265-283] 12d.

BIBLE  REFERENCES:  The references are to book, chapte and Douay versions differ
in  title  of  books  or  in  the  James  version  is cited first and the Douay,
indicated MENT: Nehemiah, 7:45 (D) // Esdras, 7:46.

SYMBOLS:  The  abbreviation "esp" calls the reader's a relevant parts of a whole
reference;  "passim"  signifie  tently  rather  than continuously in the work or
passag  For  additional information concerning the style of the Reference Style;
for  general  guidance  in  the  use  of  Th  The definition of monarchy and the
classifi-  l  cation of the types of kingship 4 HOMER: Iliad, BK n [198-206] 12a
6H  B  RODOTus://s/ory.  BKm,107c-108c  1  7  PLATO:  Republic,  BK  iv,  356a /
Statesman,

598b-604b 9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK in, CH 7 [1279b33-34]

476d; CH 14 483a-484a; BK iv, CH 10 [1295* b

3-18] 495a / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 8 [i365 38-

1366b3] esp [1366b1-3] 608b 20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 95,

A 4, ANS 229b-230c; Q 105, A i 307d-309d 23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH 1 3a-b; CH
iv, 7a-b;

CH ix 14c-16a; CH xix, 29c-d 23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART n, 104d-105a;

106d-107c; PART in, 228b 35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH x, SECT 132 55a-b 58
MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK n, 4a;

7c-d; BK xi, 75b-76c 58 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK in, 410b;

412c-d;  BK iv, 427d 10 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 24b 12 KANT: Science of Right,
450a-c  16  HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 273, 91c-d; par 281 95b-d /
Philosophy  of  History,  INTRO,  174a-d  HY  ype, which are the volume and page
HOMER:  Iliad,  BK  n [265-283] 12d, the umber 12d indicates that the pasmn, the
letters  a  and  b  refer to the JAMES Psychology, 116a-119b, the passage : ower
half  of  page  119. When the text is he upper and lower halves of the leftr and
lower halves of the right-hand side of c, the passage begins in the lower half r
half  of  the  right-hand  side  of page 164. s of a work (such as PART, BK, CH,
mbers,  in brackets, are given in cerr, and verse. When the King James numbering
of  chapters  or  verses, the King by a (D), follows; e.g., OLD TESTAttention to
one  or  more  especially  s  that  the  topic  is  discussed  intermite  cited.
references,  see  the  Explanation of e Great Ideas, consult the Preface. a. The
distinction  between  royal  and  political government k(1) Absolute or personal
rule contrasted th constitutional government or rule

b  y  law  5  AESCHYLUS:  Prometheus Bound [322-326] 43c 5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants
[399-456]  261d-262b 6 HERODOTUS: History, BK in, 107c-d; BK vn, 233a-d 7 PLATO:
Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws, BK in, 670c-676c; BK iv, 680d-682c; BK ix, 754a-b /
Seventh  Letter,  805d  9  ARISTOTLE:  Ethics, BK v, CH 6 [ii34 a3o-b 8] 382a-b/
Politics,  BK i, CH i [1252b6-16] 445a-b; CH 5 [i254 a34-b 9] 448a; CH 7 [i255 b
i6-2o] 449b; CH 12 453d-454a; BK HI, CH 15-17 484b-487a; BK iv, CH 4 [1292b4-37]
491b-d;  CH 10 [1295b9-24] 495a-b; BK v, CH 10 [13137-1313b10] 515c 14 PLUTARCH:
Romulus,  27d-28a  /  Caesar,  591d  /  Cato  the Younger, 638b-639a 15 TACITUS:
Annals, BK i, la-2b; BK in, 51b-c; 61c-62a 19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i,
Q  81,  A  3,  REP  2 430c-431d (la. The distinction between royal and political
government.  la(l)  Absolute  or  personal 3 rule contrasted with constitutional
govern" ment or rule by law.)

20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 90, A i, REP 3 205b-206b; Q 95, A i,
REP 2 226c227c; Q 96, A 5, REP 3 233d-234d 3

23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART n, 114b-115a; 131d-132a; 149d-150a 4

35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH iv, SECT 21

29d; CH vii, SECT 90-94 44d-46c; CH xi 4

55b-58b; CH xiv 62b-64c; CH xvui, SECT 199-202 71a-72a

38 MoNTtsguiEu: Spirit of Laws, BK n, 4a; 4 8b-d; BK in, 12a-d; BK v, 29a-31b;
BK vi, 4

33a-35a; 36a-37b; 37d-38b; BK vin, 54a-b 4

38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 323d-324a; 357b-c; 358b-d / Social Contract, BK in,
408c; 419a-c

40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 24b,d-28b passim, 4 csp 25a-c; 51b-d; 154a-c; 592a
4

41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 73d-75a \b ment, 547b-c 42 KANT: Science of Right,
438b; 450b /Judge43 DI-.CLA RATION OP INDEPENDENCE: la-3b passim

43 MILL: 267d-268b / Representative Liberty, Government, 339d-340c; 341d-350a
passim

44  \\osvjkLLL\Johnson, 195c-d 46 1 1 EG I-.L: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par
286  96c  97a;  ADDITIONS,  171  146b-c / Philosophy of History, PART i, 208b-c;
213b-214d;  PART  n,  262a-c;  PART  in, 301c-302a la (2) The theory of absolute
government: the nature of absolute power; the rights and

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The definition of monarchy and the classification of the types of kingship
   1a. The distinction between royal and political government
   (1) Absolute or personal rule contrasted with constitutional government or rule
   by law
   (2) The theory of absolute government: the nature of absolute power; the rights
   and duties of the monarch; the radical inequality between ruler and
   ruled in absolute government                                                    2I 4
   1b. Modifications   of absolute monarchy: other embodiments of the monarchical
   principle
   (i) The combination of monarchy with other forms of government: the mixed
   regime
   (2) Constitutional or limited monarchy
   (3) The monarchical principle
   in the executive branch of republican government
   1c. The principle of succession in monarchies

2. The theory of royalty
   2a. The divinity of kings
   2b. The analogy between divine government and rule by the best man: the philos-
   opher king
   2c. The divine institution of kings: the theory of the divine right of kings
   2d. The myth of the royal personage: the attributes of royalty and the burdens of
   monarchy
   3.
   The use and abuse of monarchical power
   2e. The good king and the benevolent despot
   in the service of their subjects: the
   education of the prince
   2f. The exploitation
   of absolute power for personal aggrandizement: the strategies
   of princes and tyrants

4. Comparison
of monarchy with other forms of government
   4a. The patriarchical character
   of kingship: absolute rule in the family or tribe,
   and paternalism in the state
   4b. The line which divides monarchy from despotism and tyranny
   4?. The differences between kingdoms
   and republics with respect to unity, wealth,
   and extent of territory
   4c. The defense
   of monarchy or royal rule
   (1) The necessity for absolute government
   (2) Monarchy as the best or most efficient of the several good forms of govern-
   ment
   (3) The preference for the mixed regime: defense of royal prerogatives as abso-
   lute in their sphere
   4*.
   The attack on monarchy or absolute government
   (1) The paternalistic or despotic character of monarchy: the rejection of benev-
   olent despotism; the advantages of constitutional safeguards
   (2) The justification of absolute rule or   benevolent despotism for peoples in-
   capable of self-government
   (3) The illegitimacy   of absolute monarchy: the violation of the principle of
   popular sovereignty
   (4) The illegality of royal usurpations of power in a mixed regime: the limita-
   tions of royal prerogative in a constitutional monarchy
   The absolute government of colonies, dependencies, or conquered peoples
   4d. The justification of imperial rule: the rights of the conqueror; the unifying and
   civilizing achievements of empire
   4e. The injustice of imperialism: exploitation and despotism

6. The history of monarchy: its origin and developments

CROSS-REFERENCES For:
Discussions relevant to the distinction between royal and political government,
s 2b; CONSTITUTION i; GOVERNMENT 1b; LAW 73; SLAVERY 6b; TYRANNY 5.

Other  considerations  of  the mixed regime and its distinction from the mixed c
see CONSTITUTION 33, 5b; DEMOCRACY 3b; GOVERNMENT 2b.

Monarchy  in  relation  to other forms of government, see ARISTOCRACY 2a; DEMOCR
GOVERNMENT  2-2e; OLIGARCHY 2; STATE 6a; TYRANNY 2a, 43; and for the compari son
of  monarchy with domestic or despotic government, see FAMILY 2b; GOVERN TYRANNY
4b.

Another  discussion  of  government in relation to the wealth and territorial ex
see STATE 4a-4c; WEALTH pf.

Matters  relevant  to the theory of the royal prerogative, see GOVERNMENT 36 The
controversy  concerning  the  legitimacy  or  justice  of  absolute monarchy, an
statement  of  the  issue  in terms of the doctrine of natural rights and po see
CONSTITUTION  3b;  DEMOCRACY  40;  GOVERNMENT 1g(i)-1g(3); JUSTICE 9c-9d 6b, yb;
LIBERTY 1d, 1g; STATE 2c; TYRANNY 5a-5c.

Matters  relevant  to  the justification of absolute rule when it takes the form
despotism,  see DEMOCRACY 4d; GOVERNMENT 2c; PROGRESS 4b; SLAVERY 6b-6c; ,, 4b :
The issues concerning imperialism as a form of absolute rule, see GOVERNMENT 6c;
REVOLUTION 7; SLAVERY 6d; STATE lob; TYRANNY 6.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed  below  ate  works  not included in Great Boofy of the Western World, but
idea  and  topics with which this chapter deals. These works arc divided into I.
Works by authors represented in this collection.

IT. Works by authors not represented in this collection For the date, place, and
other  facts  concerning  the  publication  of  the  works  the  Bibliogiaphy of
Additional  Readings which follows the last chapter of Th MARSILIUS OF PADUA. De
** WYCLIFFE. Tractates de PLUTARCH. "Of the Three Sorts of Government FORTESCUE.
Governance  Monarchy,  Democracy  and  Oligarchy," in Mo- ERASMUS. The Education
ralia  CASTIGLIONE.  The  Book  AQUINAS.  On the Governance of Rulers LA BOETIE.
Anti-Dictat DANTE. On World-Government or De Monarchia tude volontaire F. BACON.
"Of the True Greatness of Kingdoms BODIN. The Six Bootes and Estates," in Essays
BELLARMINE. The Treati MILTON. The Tenure of Kings and Magistrates Laicis) .

Defence of the People of England MARLOWE. Edward the Se HOBBES. Behemoth HOOKER.
Of  the  Laws  of SPINOZA. Tractates Politicus (Political Treatise), en MARIANA.
The  King and 6-7 King BERKELEY. Passive Obedience W. BARCLAY. De Regno JAMES i.
The  Trew  Law  ** .An Apologiefor th DEMOSTHENES. Philippics . A Premonition De
Corona   (On   the   Crown)   .  Princes  and  States  BRACTON.  De  Legibus  et
Consuetudinibus  Angliae  .  A Defence of t (On the Laws and Customs of England)
Cardinall Perron ee CITIZEN onstitution, ACY 3c; - MENT 1b; tent of the state, ;
LAW  ye.  d for the pular sovereignty, ; LAW of a benevolent TYRANNY 5b; LIBERTY
relevant  to the two groups: . cited, consult e Great Ideas. fensor Pads Officto
Regis  of  England  of a Christian Ptince of the Courtier or, the Discours de la
serviof  a Commonweale se on Civil Government (De cond Ecclesiastical Polity the
Education  of  the  of  Free  Monarchies  e  Oath of Allegiance to all Christian
Monarches,  Free he Eight of Kings, Against CAMPANELLA. A Discourse Touching the
Spanish  Monarchy  CORNEILLE.  Cinna PRYNNE. The Soveraigne Power of Parliaments
and  Kingdomes  HUDSON.  The Divine Right of Government FILMER. The Anarchy of a
Limited  or  Mixed Monarchy Patriarcha . SE"VIGNE. tetters BARROW. A Treatise of
the  Pope's  Supremacy  BOSSUET.  Politique  tiree  des  propres  paroles  de /'
fieriture Sainte A. SIDNEY. Discourses Concerning Government S VOLTAIRE. "King,"
in  A  Philosophical  Dictionary  BURKE. Reflections on the Revolution in Prance
PAINE. Common Sense, n .

Rights  of  Man,  PART  i  MAISTRE.  Du pape PUSHKIN. Boris Godunov BAGEHOT. The
English Constitution FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART i; PART n, CH i; PART in, CH
2-5  FIGGIS.  Theory  of  the  Divine  Right  of  Kings MAURRAS. EnquSte stir la
monarchic HOCART. Kingship B. RUSSELL. Power, CH 5 A. J. CARLYLE. Politica
