Chapter 61: OLIGAR INTRODUCTION TN the great books of political theory the word
JL "oligarchy" is usually listed along with "monarchy" and "democracy" among the
traditional names for the forms of government. According to the meaning of their
Greek roots, "oligarchy" signifies the rule of the few as "monarchy" signifies
the rule of one and "democracy" the rule of the people or the many. These verbal
meanings are somewhat altered, however, when we consider the actual conflict
between oligarchy and democracy in Greek political life. It involved an
opposition, not simply between the few and the many, but between the wealthy and
the working classes. The contest between these factions for political power
dominated more than a century of Greek history around the Periclean age; and
that fact justifies Aristotle's remark that oligarchy and democracy arc the two
principal conflicting forms of government.

We would not so describe the political struggle of our time. We would not speak
of oligarchy as one of the principal forms of government in the world today.
Instead we tend to think in terms of the conflict between democracy and
dictatorship or despotism. Even when we look to the background of present
issues, it is the age-old struggle between absolute and constitutional
government or between monarchies and republics which seems to supply the obvious
historical parallels for the contemporary conflict between the principles of
arbitrary and legal government. The traditional terms of political theory, with
the exception of oligarchy, thus appear to have a certain liveliness in the
consideration of current problems. But though it does not have such frequency in
our speech or familiarity in our thought, oligarchy may be much more relevant to
the real issues of our day than appears on the surface. Certainly within the
framework of constitu- 270 CHY tional government oligarchical and democratic
principles are the opposed sources of policy and legislation. In modern as in
ancient republics the division of men into political parties tends to follow the
lines of the division of men into economic factions. The ancient meanings of
oligarchy and democracy, especially for those observers like Thucydides and
Aristotle who see the rich and the poor as the major rivals for constitutional
power, indicate the fusion of political and economic issues.

The difference between oligarchy and democracy, says Aristotle, is not
well-defined by reference to the few and the many, unless it is understood that
the few are also the rich and the many the poor. The issue is not whether the
few are wiser than the many, or whether it is more efficient to have the
government in the hands of the few rather than the many. Such issues have been
debated in the history of political thought, but they are more appropriate to
the alternatives of aristocracy and democracy than to the conflict between
oligarchy and democracy. The historic struggle between oligarchs and democrats
whether described as a struggle between rich and poor, nobility and bourgeoisie,
landed gentry and agrarian peons, owners and workers, classes and masses is a
struggle over the political privileges of wealth, the rights of property, the
protection of special interests. In the tradition of the great books, Marx and
Engels may be the first to call this struggle "the class war," but they are only
the most recent in a long line of political and economic writers to recognize
that the economic antagonism of rich and poor generates the basic political
conflict in any state. "Any city, however small," says Socrates, "is in fact
divided into two, one the city of the poor, the other of the rich: these are at
war with one another."

CHAPTER 62: O OLIGARCHY is NOT always defined as the rule of the wealthy, nor is
it always conceived as the opponent of democracy on constitutional questions. In
the Statesman, for example, Plato first divides the forms of government into
"monarchy, the rule of the few, and the rule of the many," and then divides "the
rule of the few into aristocracy, which has an auspicious name, and oligarchy."
Here aristocracy and oligarchy seem to be regarded as oppositcs, the one a
government in which the few rule according to the laws, the other lawless
government by the few. In both, the few are the wealthy; hence wealth is no more
characteristic of oligarchy than of aristocracy. Some political theorists make
no reference to wealth at all in the discussion of oligarchy, Hobbes divides the
forms of government according to whether the sovereign power is in the hands of
one or more; and if in the hands of more than one, then whether it is held by
some or all. He calls the several forms of government monarchy (one),
aristocracy (some), and democracy (all). There arc "other names of government in
the histories and books of policy," he adds, such as "tyranny and oligarchy. But
they are not the names of other forms of government, but of the same forms
misliked. For they that are discontented under monarchy call it tyranny, and
they that are displeased with arisit oligarchy." Like Hobbes, both tocracy call
Locke and Rousseau use no criterion except numbers lo distinguish the forms of
government, Locke calling government by the few "oligarchy" and Rousseau calling
it "aristocracy."

Barely outlined in this way, the alternatives of monarchy, aristocracy or
oligarchy, and democracy seem to raise issues only of expediency or efficiency
rather than of justice. Whether oligarchy is intrinsically a good or bad form of
government tends to become a question only when other factors are considered;
when, for example, the distinction between aristocracy and oligarchy is made to
turn on whether the few are men of virtue or men of property, or when, in the
comparison of oligarchy with democracy, the emphasis is not upon numbers but on
the principles of wealth and liberty. Nevertheless, the numerical criterion does
not seem to be totally irrelevant to the com- LIGARCHY parison. "Oligarchy and
democracy," Aristotle writes, "are not sufficiently distinguished merely by
these two characteristics of wealth and freedom." Though the "real difference
between democracy and oligarchy is poverty and wealth," and though "wherever men
rule by reason of their wealth, whether they be few or many, that is an
oligarchy," Aristotle does not seem to think we can neglect the political
significance of what he calls the "accidental fact that the rich everywhere are
few, and the poor numerous. With regard to aristocracy and oligarchy, the chief
question does not seem to be one of principle, but of fact. Plato in the
Republic and Aristotle in the Politics define aristocracy as government by the
few best men, or the most virtuous. They also place it next to what is for them
the ideal government by the supremely wise man the rule of the philosopher king,
or what Aristotle calls "the divine sort of government." In this context,
oligarchy represents a perversion of aristocracy, as tyranny represents a
corruption of monarchy. Plato describes oligarchy as arising when "riches and
rich men are honored in the State" and when the law "fixes a sum of money as the
qualification for citizenship" and allows "no one whose property falls below the
amount fixed to have any share in the government." But according to Socrates,
wealth does not qualify men to rule, as virtue and wisdom do. "Just think what
would happen," he says, "if pilotswere to be chosen according to their property,
and a poor man were refused permission to steer, even though he were a better
pilot." To which Adeimantus agrees that in government, as in navigation, the
probable result would be shipwreck. But though there may be no question of the
superiority of aristocracy over oligarchy in principle, the critics of
aristocracy question whether any historic state in which the few hold political
power is not in fact an oligarchy. It may not always be the case that the power
of the few rests directly on wealth. The privileged class may be a military
clique or an hereditary nobility. Yet these distinctions are seldom
unaccompanied by the control of land or other forms of wealth, so that
indirectly at least the oligarchical factor is thought to be operative.

272 THE GREAT I THE CRITICISM OF aristocracies as masked oligarchies is
discussed in the chapter on ARISTOCRACY. The critical point seems to be that
nothing except superior virtue or talent justifies a political inequality
between the few and the many. The meaning of oligarchy is generalized in
consequence to include any government in which the special privileges or powers
held by the few cannot be justified, whether it is wealth or some other to
pre-eminence title that is substituted for superiority in virtue or talent. When
it is so understood, the word "oligarchical" tends to become like "tyrannical,"
a term of reproach.

In describing different forms of democracy, Aristotle observes that their common
principle is to give a share in the government to all who meet whatever minimum
qualification is set by law. "The absolute exclusion of any class," he says,
"would be a step towards oligarchy."

To the same effect is Mill's comment on the steps away from oligarchy
accomplished by English constitutional reforms in the i9th century.

"In times not long gone by," Mill writes, "the higher and richer classes were in
complete possession of the government. ... A vote given in opposition to those
influences . . . was almost sure to be a good vote, for it was a vote against
the monster evil, the over-ruling influence of oligarchy." But now that the
higher classes are no longer masters of the country, now that the franchise has
been extended to the middle classes, a diminished form of oligarchy still
remains. "The electors themselves are becoming the oligarchy" in a population
where many are still disfranchised. "The present electors," Mill continues, "and
the bulk of those whom any probable Reform Bill would add to the number, are the
middle class; and have as much a class interest, distinct from the working
classes, as landlords or great manufacturers. Were the suffrage extended to all
skilled laborers, even those would, or might, still have a class interest
distinct from the unskilled."

Oligarchy remains, according to Mill, so long as there is any un j ustifiable
discrimination among classes in the population. It is not in his view limited to
discrimination based on the extremes of wealth and poverty, as he plainly
indicates by his remarks on the special interests of different parts of the
working class, or their relation as a whole to the lower middle classes. He
makes this even plainer by what he has to say on political discrimination as
between the sexes. Suppose the suffrage to be extended to all men, he writes,
"suppose that what was formerly called by the misapplied name of universal
suffrage, and now by the silly title of manhood suffrage, became the law; the
voters would still have a class interest, as distinguished from women." The
oligarchical defect in representative government which Mill is here criticizing
seems to have little or no basis in economic class divisions. The exclusion of
any class in the population from a voice in government renders that government
oligarchical with respect to them. The excluded class may even be a minority. So
conceived, oligarchy no longer means the rule of either the rich or the few.
When the meaning of oligarchy is generalized in this way, the discussion of
oligarchy seems to presuppose the typically modern conception of democracy. As
indicated in the chapter on DEMOCRACY, the distinguishing feature of the modern
democratic constitution is universal suffrage. By this criterion, the conflict
between the democrats and the oligarchs of the ancient world appears to be a
conflict between two forms of the oligarchical constitutionone in which the
wealthier few and one in which the poorer many have political rights, but in
neither of which membership in the political community includes all normal adult
human beings in the population. Where ancient political theory could conceive of
a mixed constitution somehow combining oligarchical and democratic principles
the modern conception of democracy seems to make any compromise with oligarchy
impossible. Certain modern writers, notably Mosca, Michels, and Pareto, seem to
insist, on the contrary, that oligarchy is present in all forms of government,
and is especially prevalent in representative democracies where the actual
conduct of government the effective power is in the hands of a bureaucracy or an
elite, whether popularly chosen or self-appointed. But the contradiction may be
more verbal than real if on one side the word "oligarchy" means some degree of
restriction in the franchise or citizenship, and, on the other, it applies to
any situa CHAPTER 62: tion in which the whole people are not directly active in
all the affairs of government and, consequently, a small number of men
administers the state. Understood in the latter sense, the oligarchical
principle does not seem to be incompatible with representative democracy. Those
who use the word in this sense merely call attention to an inevitable
characteristic of representative government. A representative democracy may also
have an aristocratic aspect when it follows the principle that the men best
qualifiedby virtue or talent for public office should be chosen by the suffrage
of all their fellow-citizens.

FULLER DISCUSSION of these aspects of oligarchy is found in the chapters on
ARISTOCRACY and DEMOCRACY. Here we are primarily concerned with political issues
which have their source in the opposition of economic classes in the state,
primarily that extreme division of men into those who live by their labor and
those who live on their property and the labor of others. It is in terms of this
extreme division between men of leisure and working men that the conflict
between oligarchy and democracy takes place in the ancient world. At a time when
citizenship meant a much more active and frequent participation in government
than it does under the modern institutions of the ballot box and the
representative assembly, the ancient defenders of oligarchy could argue that
only men of wealth had the leisure requisite for citizenship. Oligarchy could be
further defended on the ground that, in many of the Greek city-states, public
officials were either not compensated at all or at least not substantially. Only
men of sizeable property could afford to hold public office. Aristotle weighs
the arguments for and against oligarchy. Onthe point of leisure, for example, he
holds that "nothing is more absolutely necessary than to provide that the
highest class, not only when in office, but when out of office, should have
leisure." Yet "even if you must have regard to wealth in order to secure
leisure," it is "surely a bad thing," he thinks, "that the greatest offices,
such as those of kings and generals, should be bought. The law which allows this
abuse makes wealth of more account than virtue."

OLIGARCHY Aristotle seems to regard democratic and oligarchical claims as
complementary half-truths. "Both parties to the argument," he says, "are
speaking of a limited and partial justice, but imagine themselves to be speaking
of absolute justice." According to an adequate conception of political justice,
it is as unjust to treat equals unequally as it is to treat unequals equally.
The oligarch violates the first of these principles, the democrat the second.
"Democracy arises out of the notion that those who are equal in any respect are
equal in all respects; because men are equally free, they claim to be absolutely
equal. Oligarchy is based on the notion that those who are unequal in one
respect are in all respects unequal; being unequal, that is, in property, they
suppose themselves to be unequal absolutely." Both forms of government have "a
kind of justice, but, tried by an absolute standard, they are faulty; and,
therefore, both parties, whenever their share in the government does not accord
with their preconceived ideas, stir up revolution In oligarchies the masses make
revolution under the idea that they are unjustly treated, because . they are
equals and have . . not an equal share; and in democracies, the notables revolt,
because they are not equal, and yet have only an equal share." What can cure
this situation in which perpetual revolution seems to be inevitable, as
democracy succeeds oligarchy, or oligarchy democracy, in the government of the
Greek cities? Aristotle describes many forms of oligarchy and democracy, but
none seems to remove the cause of revolution. When, in an attempt to preserve
their position, the wealthier families turn to the more extreme forms of
oligarchical constitution, that tendency eventually leads to a kind of despotic
government which Aristotle calls "dynasty," or the lawless rule of powerful
families. To establish a stable government which shall be less subject to
revolution in favor of a contrary principle of government, and which shall
resist the tendency toward lawless rule, by either the masses or the powerful
few, Aristotle proposes the mixed constitution, which shall combine the elements
of both democratic and oligarchical justice. But this will not work in actual
practice, he thinks, unless the middle class "is large, and stronger if possible
than both the other classes Great then is the good fortune of a state in which
the citizens have a moderate and sufficient property; for where some possess
much, and the others nothing, there may arise an extreme democracy, or a pure
oligarchy; or a tyranny may grow out of either extreme These considerations will
help us to understand why most governments are either democratical or
oligarchical. The reason is that the middle class is seldom numerous in them,
and whichever party, whether the rich or the common people, transgresses the
mean and predominates, draws the constitution its own way, and thus arises
either oligarchy or democracy.*' From the point of view which sees no justice in
granting any special privileges to property, Aristotle's position on oligarchy
seems open to question. For one thing, in admitting a partial justice in the
principle that those who are unequal in wealth should be treated unequally in
the distribution of political power, Aristotle appears to affirm that the
possessors of wealth deserve a special political status. For another thing, in
his own formulation of an ideal polity, Aristotle advocates the exclusion of the
working classes from citizenship. "The citizens must not lead the life of
mechanics or tradesmen, for such a life is ignoble and inimical to virtue.
Neither must they be husbandmen, since leisure is necessary both for the
development of virtue and the performance of political duties." All these
classes of men are necessary for the existence of the state, but they are to be
no part of it in the sense of political membership. "The best form of state will
not admit them to citizenship," though it will include as necessary "the slaves
who minister to the wants of individuals, or mechanics and laborers who are the
servants of the community." Some of the great speeches in Thucydides' History,
which deal with domestic issues as well as the issues of war and peace,
eloquently argue the opposite side of the case. Debating with Hermocrates before
the Syracusan assembly, Athenagoras answers those who say that "democracy is
neither wise nor equitable, but that the holders of property are the best fitted
to rule. I say, on the contrary, first, that the word demos, or people, includes
the whole state, oli- S garchy only a part; next, that if the best guardians of
property are the rich, and the best counsellors the wise, none can hear and
decide so well as the many, and that all these talents, severally and
collectively, have their just place in a democracy. But an oligarchy gives the
many their share of the danger, and not content with the largest part, takes and
keeps the whole of the profit," IN MODERN POLITICAL thought, the discussion of
oligarchy seems to occur on two levels. There is a controversy on the level of
constitutional principles with regard to suffrage and representation and the
qualifications for public office. Here the issues concern the justice of the
fundamental laws of republican or popular government. There is also a
consideration of the way in which men of property or corporate concentrations of
wealth are able to exert influence upon the actual course of government. Here
the problem becomes, not so much the justice of the constitution or of the laws,
but the weight which wealth seems able to throw onto the scales of justice. The
great modern defense of the oligarchical constitution does not seem to be as
plainly or forcefully made in any of the great books as in the speeches of
Edmund Burke, especially those in opposition to the suffrage reform measures
proposed by Charles James Fox, wherein Burke argues for the principle of virtual
representation. It is unnecessary, he claims, for the franchise to be extended
to the working classes if their economic betters who also happen to be their
superiors in talent and educationdeliberate on what is for the common good of
all. The Federalists seem to take an opposite view. Reflecting on the system of
British representation in their day, they observe that, for the eight millions
of people in the kingdoms of England and Scotland, "the representatives ... in
the House of Commons amount to five hundred and fifty-eight." But, they go on,
"of this number one ninth are elected by three hundred and sixty-four persons
and one half by five thousand seven hundred and twenty-three persons. It cannot
be supposed," they argue, "that the half thus elected and who do not even reside
among the people at large, can add anything either to the security of the people
CHAPTER 62: OLIGARC against the government, or to the knowledge of their
circumstances and interests in the legislative councils. On the contrary, it is
notorious that they are more frequently the representatives and instruments of
the executive magistrate than the guardians and advocates of the popular
rights." Nevertheless, they do not condemn such an oligarchical system of
representation as entirely inimical to the virtues of parliamentary government.
"It is very certain," they declare, "not only that a valuable portion of freedom
has been preserved under all these circumstances, but that the defects in the
British code are chargeable, in a very small proportion, on the ignorance of the
legislature concerning the circumstances of the people." Some of the American
constitutionalists may be influenced by Burke's defense of oligarchy in terms of
the virtues of an aristocracy, but they state their own position in terms which
are more plainly oligarchical. They argue for poll tax clauses and property
qualifications for public office on the ground that the country should be run by
the people who own it. Furthermore, those who are not economically independent
are not in a position to exercise political liberty. "Power over a man's
subsistence," Hamilton declares, "amounts to power over his will." Facing the
issue which had been raised on the floor of the constitutional convention,
Madison remarks that "the most common and durable source of factions has been
the various and unequal distribution of property. Those who hold and those who
are without property have ever formed distinct interests in society." He
proposes a representative or what he calls a "republican" system of government
to avoid the excessive factionalism of the pure or direct democracies of Greek
city-states. "Theoretic politicians, who have patronized this species of
government," Madison writes, "have erroneously supposed that by reducing mankind
to perfect equality in their political rights, they would, at the same time, be
perand assimilated in their posfectly equalized sessions, their opinions, and
their passions." By a weighted system of representation, the power of sheer
numbers may be counter- balanced by the power given to other factors, thus
preventing the "accomplishment of the secret wishes of an unjust and interested
majority.

HY 275 .... A rage for paper money, for an abolition of debts, for an equal
division of property, or for any other improper or wicked project, will be less
apt to pervade the whole body of the Union than a particular member of it." In
another paper, the Federalists answer the charge that the constitution is
oligarchical, because "the House of Representatives will be taken from that
class of citizens which will have least sympathy with the mass of the people and
be most likely to aim at an ambitious sacrifice of the many to the
aggrandizement of the few." This objection, they say, while "leveled against a
pretended oligarchy," in principle "strikes at the very root of republican
government." The method of election provided for by the Constitution aims "to
obtain for rulers men who possess most wisdom to discern, and most virtue to
pursue, the common good of the society Who are to be the electors of the federal
representatives? Not the rich, more than the poor; not the learned, more than
the ignorant; not the haughty heirs of distinguished names, more than the humble
sons of obscurity and unpropitious fortune Who are to be the objects of popular
choice? Every citizen whose merit may recommend him to the esteem and confidence
of the country. No qualification of wealth, of birth, of religious faith, or of
civil profession, is permitted to fetter the judgment or disappoint the
inclination of the people." WHETHER THE AMERICAN Constitution in its original
formulation is an oligarchical document has long been a matter of dispute.
Whether the Federalists favor devices for protecting the rights of property or
repudiate oligarchical restrictions in favor of the rights of man has also been
the subject of controversy. That this is so may indicate at least a certain
ambiguity in their position. But on the question of the oligarchical influences
on government the political pressures exerted by propertied classes to serve
their special interests the opinion of the modern authors of the great books
seems much clearer. The most extreme statement of this opinion is, of course, to
be found in the Communist Manifesto. There government, in fact the state it- 276
self, is regarded as an instrument which the economic oppressors wield against
the oppressed.

The final step in the bourgeois revolution, according to Marx and Engels,
occurred when the bourgeoisie "conquered for itself, in the modern
representative State, exclusive political sway."

In the bourgeois state, legislation is nothing but the will of this one class
made into a law for all.

One aim of the communist revolution, beyond the temporary dictatorship of the
proletariat, is the withering away of that historic formation of the state in
which "political power ... is merely the organized power of one class for
oppressing another."

Though much less radical in intention than Marx, Smith and Mill make statements
which seem to be no less radical in their criticism of the oligarchical
influences on modern parliamentary government. It has been said, Smith observes,
that "we rarely hear ... of combinations of masters, though frequently of those
of workmen. But whoever imagines, upon this account, that masters rarely
combine, is as ignorant of the world as of the subject. Masters are always and
everywhere in a sort of tacit, but constant and uniform combination, not to
raise

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The oligarchical constitution: the principles and types of oligarchy 2 77

2. The relation of oligarchy to monarchy, aristocracy, and democracy

3. The instability
of oligarchical government
 3a. The revolutionary changes to which oligarchy is subject: the change to despotism
 or democracy
 3b. The preservation
 of oligarchies against revolution

4. The
defense of oligarchy: the political rights and privileges of property
The attack on oligarchy and on the political power of wealth
 4a. The objection to property as a basis for privilege with regard to citizenship or
 public office
 4b. The character of the oligarch: the man of property; the capitalist
 4c. Economic status and power as a political instrument: oligarchy in relation to
 the class war

6. Historical observations of oligarchy: the rise and fall of
oligarchies

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general discussion of constitutional government, see
CONSTITUTION 1-3Th); MONARCHY 1a-1a(i). Other considerations of the relation of
oligarchy to aristocracy and democr

RACY 2d; DEMOCRACY 2b, 3a-3b; GOVERNMENT 2a, 2c; and for the theory of th

constitution as a compromise between democracy and oligarchy, see ARISTOC

CONSTITUTION 5b; DEMOCRACY 33; GOVERNMENT 2b.

5cto6 17a,c, 420b-c, 421c-422a, 9c, 434a-d mmunist Manifesto 415aservations of
oligarchy: the l of oligarchies ory, BK vi, 202c-203b; BK oponnesian War, BK i,
353d; d; 503d-504b; BK vi, 520a-d; ,c esp 568d-569a, 575c-576c, b; BK iv,
458d-459c; 463a3c, 584b-585a, 585d-586b, tetter, 800b-d tics, BK n, CH 10
[1272b27- CH n [1273b3-30] 469c-d; 69a; BK HI, CH 15 [i286b 9-2i] 0b; , CH 4
[1304b18-39] 505db 6b-508c; CH 12 [i3i6bi- 28] enian Constitution, CH 2-6

2-41 568a-572a passim gus, 34b-37c; 47a-48a / esp 117c-121a,c / Alcibiades,
iolanus, 176b-184c / Lysander Phocion 604b,d-619d / Agis 74c-681a,c / Caius
Gracchus 75c-76d / Camillus 102b,d, BK vi, 97b-c 83c rit of Laws, BK vm,
51deomenes, 657a-663c / TibeContract, BK iv, 429c-431a Nations, BK m,
165b-181a,c 39c-240b and Fall, 501c-d and Fall, 73b; 81c-82a; 582b esp
576a-577b, 579ctative Government, 346a-c; 367a; 393c-395a y of Right, PART m,
par PART in, 293c-294a; 295dof History, PART n, 275bital, 354a-377a esp
355d-359c, 372c munist Manifesto, 415b- c esp 420b-c; 429c-433d LAW 73; acy, see
ARISTOCe mixed RACY 2b;

CHAPTER 62 :

For: The tyrannical and despotic extremes to which oligarchy

The revolutions generated by oligarchy, see ARIST

Other discussions of property rights, see DEMOCRA

The general issues of economic and political just

oligarchy concerning the qualifications for ci

CITIZEN 2c-3; CONSTITUTION 53; DEMOCRACY 4a(i)

2d; SLAVERY 5a-5b; WEALTH ph.

Other discussions of capitalism, and of the class

OPPOSITION 5b; REVOLUTION 4a, 5a-5c; WAR AND PE

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

*

PLUTARCH. "Of the Three Sorts of Government

Monarchy, Democracy and Oligarchy," in Moti&

DANTE. Convivio (The Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE,

CH 10-14

IL

f. ADAMS. A Defense of the Constitutions of Government of the United States of
America BURKE. Thoughts on the Cause of the Present Discontents

. On the Reform of the Representation in the House of Commons

.An Appealfrom the New to the Old Whigs can go, sec TYRANNY 20. OCRACY 3;
REVOLUTION 3c(2). CY 4a (2); JUSTICE 8a; LABOR 70; WEALTH ya. ice in the
conflict between democracy and tizenship and the extension of the suffrage, see
; JUSTICE pe; LABOR yd, yf; LIBERTY war, see DEMOCRACY 43(2); ACE 2c; WEALTH 6a,
ph. oty of the Western World, but relevant to the These works are divided into
two groups: ed in this collection. sented in this collection. the publication of
the works cited, consult ollows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. BURKE.
Letter to Sir Hercules Langrishe MOSCA. The Ruling Class MICHELS. Political
Parties 3. ADAMS. The Theory of Social Revolutions BEARD. An Economic
Interpretation of the Constitu

f f jon O the United States

. Economic Origins ofjeffersonian Democracy PARETO. The Mind and Society, VOL
in, CH n T. VEBLEN. The Theory of Business Enterprise

. The Vested Interests and the State of the Industrial Arts BRYCE. Modern
Democracies, PART HI, CH 74-75 TAWNEY. Equality BRINTON. The Anatomy of
Revolution, CH H, vii BURNHAM. The Machiavellians
