Chapter 6y. ONE AND MANY INTRODUCTION TN Pragmatism and in his unfinished last
work, JL Some Problems of Philosophy William James uses the problem of the one
and the many as one of the crucial tests of the philosophical mind. In his
famous table of doctrines or "isms" he aligns monism with rationalism and
idealism in the column headed "tender-minded," and in the other column, headed
"tough-minded," he places their opposites pluralism, empiricism, and
materialism. But as his own theories show, "isms" like monism and pluralism tend
to oversimplify the issues. Whoever emphasizes the oneness of the world, for
example, may also acknowledge its manyness and recognize that it is somehow a
pluriverse as well as a universe. Some, like Bradley, may qualify this view by
regarding the unity as ultimate reality, the plurality as appearance or
illusion. Whoever finds the multiplicity of things the primary fact may,
nevertheless, find some unity in the order and connection of things. Some, like
James himself, may insist that the connection is a loose concatenation of
relatively independent parts of reality, rather than an interpenetration of each
part with every other in the solid whole which James calls the "block universe."
There may be another oversimplification in James' consideration of the problem
of the one and the many. He seems to be concerned largely, if not exclusively,
with the alternatives of the block and the concatenated universe as con- nec
ceptions of the structure of reality. But, as uni some of the great books of
antiquity make evident, that is only one of the problems of the one des and the
many. Perhaps it should be said, not one that there are many problems of the one
and be the many, but that there is one problem having wor many aspects or
applications, for in every state- awa ment of the problem there is at least this
single- dif ness of theme; that the one and the many are sam opposed, that the
one is not a many and the many not a one. Yet even that does not seem to be
quite accurate for, as Socrates tells Protarchus in the Philebus, it may also be
said that the one is a many and the many a one. These are "wonderful
propositions," he says, wonderful because "whoever affirms either is very open
to attack." At this early moment in the recorded tradition of western thought,
the dialogues of Plato, so thorough in their exploration of the problems of the
one and many, make no claim to having discovered or invented them. They were
ancient even then. They seem to hang in the very atmosphere of thought, usually
befogging those who try to see the truth about anything else without first
clearing away their obscurities. Socrates refers to "the common and acknowledged
paradoxes of the one and the many . . . that everybody has by this time agreed
to dismiss as childish and obvious and detrimental to the true course of
thought." These aside, some genuine perplexities remain. Protarchus asks
Socrates to instruct him about "those other marvels connected with this subject
which," as Socrates seems to have implied,"have not yet become common and
acknowledged." Socrates begins by calling his attention, not to the unity of
this man or this ox, but to the sense in which it is said that "man is one, or
ox is one, or beauty one, or the good one." It is essary to ask, he says, first,
whether such ties exist; then, such unities being always the same, and admitting
neither generation nor truction, how each is itself alone, is not only but this
one; finally, how these unities can conceived as dispersed and multiplied in the
ld of things which come to be and pass y. This last question seems to be the
most ficult because it asks about the being of the e and one as it becomes in
the one and manv.

CHAPTER W: UJNh AJ Protarchus is impatient to begin clearing up these problems.
Willing to undertake what he calls "this great and multifarious battle, in which
such various points are at issue," Socrates is also anxious to let Protarchus
and the other youths know the intellectual perils which lie ahead for novices
who enter upon this inquiry. "The one and many," he tells them, "become
identified by thought They run about . . . together, in and out of every word
which is uttered .This union of them will never . . cease, and is not now
beginning, but is ... an everlasting quality of thought itself, which never
grows old." That is why, he explains, "any young man, when he first tastes these
subtleties, is delighted, and fancies that he has found a treasure of wisdom; in
the first enthusiasm of his joy, he leaves no stone, or rather no thought,
unturned, now rolling up the many into the one, and kneading them together, now
unfolding and dividing them; he puzzles himself first and above all, and then he
proceeds to puzzle his neighbors, whether they are older or younger or of his
own age makes no difference; that neither father nor mother does he spare; no
human being who has ears is safe from him, hardly even his dog; and a barbarian
would have no chance of escaping him, if an interpreter could only be found."

WHETHER IT is full of exasperating subtleties or is a treasure of true wisdom,
the discussion of the one and the many in itself and in relation to being and
becoming, the intelligible and the sensible, the definite and the infinite, the
same and other, universals and particulars, wholes and parts, the simple and the
complex, the indivisible and the continuous is a discussion which seems
unavoidable to the ancients. In the dialogues of Plato and in Aristotle's
treatises, especially his Metaphysics, the one and the many are connected with
the basic terms of philosophical thought. For Plato, the distinction between the
one and the many enters into the analysis of almost any object such as pleasure
or virtue or knowledge. Anything, viewed under the aspect of its being or its
becoming, its definite sameness or its indefinite otherness and variety, must be
discussed both as a one and as a many. The NU MANY motion of Plato's dialectic
may be from the one to the many or from the many to the one; or it may be on the
level of the many as an intermediate stage through which analysis must go in
proceeding from the infinite to the one. Those who pass at once from unity to
infinity, says Socrates, do not recognize "the difference between the mere art
of disputation and true dialectic."

For Aristotle, first philosophy or metaphysconcerned as it is with "being qua
being ics, and the attributes which belong to anything qua being," also
investigates unity. Unity is the first property of being. The meanings of one or
unity are as various as the meanings of 'to be.' If there is a difference
between essential and accidental being, there is a parallel difference between
essential and accidental unity. If natural and artificial things differ in
substance or being, so too must they differ in unity. "Being and unity are the
same," Aristotle says, "and are one thing in the sense that they are implied in
one another as are principle and cause." Unity from being, and nothing can be is
nothing apart without being one in some sense of unity which is determined by
the way in which the thing exists. Aristotle's analysis of any subject matter,
proceeding as it does by reference to contraries, always appeals to the one and
the many. "All contraries," he says, "are reducible to being and non-being and
to unity and plurality, as for instance, rest belongs to unity and movement to
plurality . . And everything else is evidently . reducible to unity and
plurality. . ..For all things are either contraries or composed of contraries,
and unity and plurality are the principles of all contrariety." THE PROBLEMS IN
whose analysis one and many seem to be involved recur in every period of western
thought. The question, for example, whether there is an irreducible duality in
the relation of knower and known, or whether, in the act of knowledge, knower
and known are one, is discussed by Hobbes and William James as well as Plotinus
and Aristotle. The question whether the state which is a multitude somehow
united for a common lifehas, or should have, the same degree of unity as the
family, is discussed by Locke and Hegel as well as Plato and Aristotle.

284 The earlier controversy over the indivisibility of sovereignty becomes at a
later stage the central issue of federal union, to which e pluribus unum is the
solution offered by the Federalists. Questions concerning the simple and the
complex, or wholes and parts, as objects of knowledge, or questions concerning
the unity and divisibility of time, space, or matter, engage the attention of
inquirers and analysts no less in modern than in ancient times. But there are
certain problems which are treated with unusual speculative vigor by the
ancients alone. Unlike the problems just mentioned, which deal with applications
of the contrast between unity and multiplicity, these are questions about the
One itself what it is, whether it exists, whether it is identical with Being,
whether it is itself a substance or the substance of ail things. The sustained
inquiry into such matters in antiquity seems to testify to the extraordinary
power exerted upon ancient thought by Parmenides of Elea. The person called "the
Eleatic Stranger" represents his theories in such dialogues of Plato as the
Sophist and the Statesman. Parmenides, or his disciple Zeno, is probably the
source of many of the paradoxes and riddles which Socrates, in the Philebus,
dismisses as no longer worthy of serious attention. One whole dialogue, named
Parmenides because of his part in the discussion, exhibits the Eleatic
demonstration that 'all is one.' It abounds in the subtleties of the various
arguments which try to defend the reality of the many or try to reduce that
position to absurdity. Questioned by Socrates concerning his paradoxes, Zeno
says that his writings "were meant to protect the arguments of Parmenides
against those who make fun of him and seek to show the many ridiculous and
contradictory results which they suppose to follow from the affirmation of the
one." When he addresses himself to the partisans of the many, Zeno says that he
returns "their attack with interest by retorting upon them that their hypothesis
of the being of many, if carried out, appears to be still more ridiculous than
the hypothesis of the being of one."

Aristotle also deals with the Eleatic arguments. In the Physics, he says first
that inquiring about whether being is one, cannot contribute to the study of
nature. He then adds that such inquiry anyway would be "like arguing against any
other position maintained for the sake of argument ... or like refuting a merely
contentious argument." This description, he says, "applies to the arguments both
of Melissus and Parmenides: their premises are false and their conclusions do
not follow Accept one . . . ridiculous proposition and the rest follows a simple
enough proceeding." Aristotle's treatment of Parmenides and Zeno in the
Metaphysics seems to be no more sympathetic, though it tacitly admits the
relevance of the Eleatic speculations to the study of being, if not to the study
of change and the principles of nature. Nevertheless, many of the questions
concerning the one and the many which both Plato and Aristotle deem worthy of
discussion appear to have some connection with the perplexities propounded by
Parmenides and his school. THOSE WHO DO NOT deny either the unity of being or
its multiplicity tend to make the primary fact about reality either its oneness
or its manyness. This may seem at first to be of slight significance, but if the
two views of the world which result from this difference are examined, it may be
found that the disagreement on this single point changes the perspective on
everything else. The philosophers who magnify either the one or the many behold
universes more radically dissimilar than the same object looked at from opposite
ends of a telescope. But that is not all. Almost every other fundamental
conception of God and man, of the mind and knowledge, of matter and motion, of
cause and necessity seems also to be altered. Spinoza, for example, criticizes
those who attribute to finite things, of which there are necessarily many, the
properties which belong to the infinite being, of which there can be only one.
This man, this stone, or any comparable individual thing, is not a substance,
having the power to exist in and of itself; it consists merely "of certain
modifications of the attributes of God," the one infinite substance in which
everything else "both is and is conceived." According to Spinoza, those who
suppose that the finite many are substances "have not observed a proper order of
philosophic study." They begin with the objects of sense which have the least
reality and come last to the di- CHAPTER 63: ONE AND MANY vine nature, the
infinite one, which "ought to be studied first because it is first in the order
of knowledge and in the order of things . . . Hence it has come to pass,"
Spinoza continues, "that there was nothing of which men thought less than the
divine nature while they have been studying natural objects, and when they
afterwards applied themselves to think about God, there was nothing of which
they could think less than those prior fictions upon which they had built their
knowledge of natural things, for these fictions could in noway help to the
knowledge of the divine nature." Starting with the definition of substance as
that which exists in itself and is conceived through itself, and with the
definition of God as absolutely infinite being, "that is to say, substance
consisting of infinite attributes," Spinoza undertakes to prove that there
cannot be two or more substances having the same nature or attributes, that
substance is necessarily infinite, and hence that it is impossible for more than
one substance to exist. Since he regards it as axiomatic that "everything which
is, is either in itself or in another," it follows for Spinoza that if anything
at all exists, God (or substance) must necessarily exist as that which alone
exists in itself and as that in which everything else has its finite being as a
mode or afcction of the attributes of God. Certain other consequences seem to
follow. The one infinite substance is indivisible: it is not a whole made up of
parts which can have independent existence, as the parts of a quantitative whole
seem able to exist when the quantity is God, acdivided. Furthermore, cording to
Spinoza, "is the immanent, and not the transitive, cause of all things." God
causes them not as one thing acting on another when both are independent in
existence, but rather as the being in which all things are. God is not present
in the world, as other theologians seem to think, in the manner in which a cause
exists in an effect that depends upon it. Rather the whole world is in God as an
effect which can in no way be separated from the existence of the cause, any
more than an aspect can be separated from that of which it is an aspect. For
Spinoza, the unity and totality of being can be called "nature," as well as
"infinite substance" or "God." His distinction between natura naturans and
natura naturata, discussed in the chapter on NATURE, seems to permit him to
distinguish between the infinite or eternal and the finite or temporal the one
and the many without implying a real separation between God and the world. Since
God is immanent in the world, and since God not only exists necessarily but also
acts from the necessity of His own nature, it follows (as is indicated in the
chapter on NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY) that every finite and temporal aspect of
nature is necessarily determined.Nothing is contingent. Nothing could be
otherwise than it is. THIS EXAMINATION of a doctrine in which the primacy of the
one absorbs as well as subordinates the many, serves to exemplify the point that
making the one primary is more than a matter of emphasis. It also shows that
almost every fundamental question is affected. It presents a picture of what
William James appears to mean when he speaks of the block universe, though he
himself usually seems to have in mind Hegel's Absolute rather than Spinoza's
God. Aristotle advances a contrary doctrine. Like Spinoza he uses the term
'substance.' Like Spinoza he defines substance as that which exists in itself,
not as an accident (a quality, for example) which exists in another, e.g., the
redness in the rose. But for him substance is not necessarily infinite, nor is
it indivisible. A rose or a man is a substance. Every physical thing which has a
natural unity is a substance. Each is a finite whole, or rather each is a whole
in a number of different senses. Insofar as it has essential unity, it is a
whole composed of matter and form which, according to Aristotle, are represented
in the formulation of a definition by the genus and the differentia. Insofar as
it iscomposed of matter, it also has the unity of a quantitative whole in virtue
of which it moves as one thing or uniquely occupies a place. Since quantitative
unity involves continuity, and continuity entails divisibility, a substance
remains one only so long as it is not divided into its quantitative parts, just
as it remains one essentially only so long as its matter and form are not
separated. A substance is individual not because it is absolutely indivisibleas
for Lucretius the atom THE GREAT I is because it is simple rather than
composite. Its individuality rather consists, first, in its being divided from
other substances in such a way that it can perish without necessarily destroying
them, or they can perish without destroying it; and, second, in the fact that,
though divisible into parts, it is one whole when these parts remain undivided.
Yet as one substance it has more unity than a mere collection of things. The
difference between a man and a machine, according to Aristotle's differentiation
between the unity of natural substances and of artificial things, is that a man
is not composed of substances (though the parts of a living organism may come to
exist as substances when it is decomposed or they are separated from it),
whereas a machine, made up of separate pieces of metal, is nothing but a number
of individual substances arranged in a certain way. The unity of man does not
appear to be the same, therefore, when soul and body are conceived by Descartes
as two substances and by Aristotle not as distinct substances but as form and
matter which through their union constitute a single substance.

Unity, in short, belongs essentially to the individual natural substance.
Because each individual substance is necessarily a one among a many, Aristotle,
unlike Spinoza, cannot affirm the unity of substance without also affirming a
plurality of substances. Not itself a substance, but only an aggregation of
substances, the world is primarily a many rather than a one.

The unity it possesses derives from the order and connection of the substances
which are its component parts; and that in turn largely derives from the way in
which distinct substances causally interact. Since, according to Aristotle,
causality includes contingency and chance, the causal interdependence of
substances, with respect to their generation and their motions, does not lock
them together into a solid block. To use James' imagery again, a vast plurality
of individual substances, causally yet also contingently related, constitutes a
loosely-knit world, a concatenated universe.

THE RELATION OF the world as a whole to God does give it greater unity, if the
supposition of a plurality of finite individual substances re- mains the
fundamental feature of the world God creates. The Christian doctrine of creation
may attribute to the world a greater unity than that possessed by any work of
human art, in proportion as the infinitely greater wisdom of the divine plan
orders the separate things of nature with an infinitely greater perfection than
man can achieve in putting things together or in ordering them to his purpose.
But if, according to the theologian, God in creating the world creates not one
substance, but many substances, forming a single whole through the pattern of
their connection with one another, then in a sense the world has less unity than
each of its component substances. For Aquinas, one kind of substance may have
greater unity than another. The immaterial has more than the material; and God
more than any finite substance, since each of these is composed of matter and
form, or essence and accidents, or at least of essence and existence, whereas
the infinite being of God is absolutely simple. The divine nature is without
matter, without accidents; its attributes are identical with its essence, and
its essence with its existence. This cardinal point about the divine nature is
crucial to the conception of God, and of the world's relation to God. In the
formation of Christian theology, God's absolute simplicity seems to exclude all
but one resolution of the issue concerning the Trinity. According to the
position Augustine takes in criticizing the Arian heresy, the position which is
expressed in the Nicene Creed, God is not a trinity of substances, but a trinity
of persons aspects of, or relations within, one substance. The plurality of
things which constitutes the world puts the world entirely outside the divine
substance. Immanent only as a cause, the simple being of God transcends the
complex whole of the created world. This transcendence seems, furthermore, to
imply for theologians like Augustine and Aquinas a fundamental duality in the
realm of existence. God and the world are two, not one. Infinite being is
absolutely prior to and independent of finite beings. The one can exist without
the many. Though the many are said to participate in being, when they do exist,
they do not enter into the being of the one, or share it in any way.

CHAPTER 63: ONE The being they have is not only separate from the being of God,
but even their mode of being is only analogical to the divine being.

The doctrine that each thing has its own being, and that, as Aquinas says,
"being is common to all things only in an analogical sense," seems to put
diversity above unity in the structure of reality, and to leave the ultimate
plurality of this world unaffected either by the fact that it was created as one
or by the fact of its relation to a transcendent One.

IN THE TRADITION of the great books, the problem of the one and the many is
often stated without using the notion of substance as the pivotal term. It
appears in Plato's consideration of being and becoming. It is sometimes present
in his treatment of the relation between intelligible forms and sensible things
between the universal ideas and the particulars which resemble them through some
manner of imitation or participation. It even runs through the discussion of the
realm of ideas itself; for the idea of the one is one idea among many, and yet
each of the many ideas is in some way one. The problem of the one and the many
appears in Hume's consideration of the absolute distinctness of each unit of
experience from every other, accompanied as it is by his skepticism concerning
our ability to discover any connections which might tie these units together
into a real unity. It appears inKant's theory of the transcendental unity of
apperception, which reduces the sensory manifold to a unity of order; and in
Hegel's theory of the one Absolute Idea which contains within itself all the
variety that becomes manifest as the Idea unfolds in the processes of nature or
history. The substitution of one set of terms for another docs not seem to alter
the fundamental issue.Nor does it enable the mind to escape taking sides with
those who give primacy to the one or to the many, except perhaps by trying to
balance them as correlatives. Among the great books, however, the Enneads of
Plotinus develops a theory of the One which, putting it above being and beyond
knowing, seems to transfigure all the traditional terms of analysis. The One of
Parmenides is, after all, Being; and this identification of Being with One
raises AND MANY a question of the reality of the many. But, according to
Plotinus, "there exists a Principle which transcends Being; this is The One,
whose nature we have sought to establish so far as such matters lend themselves
to proof. Upon The One follows immediately the Principle, which is at once Being
and the Intellectual-Principle. Third comes the Principle, Soul." These are what
Plotinus calls the three hypotases. He finds some analogy for his trinity in a
doctrine he ascribes to Plato's Parmenides, in which he finds a threefold
distinction "between the Primal One, a strictly pure Unity, and a secondary One
which is a One-Many, and a third which is a One-and-Many." The One, according to
Plotinus, not only transcends being; it also transcends intelligence.

Knowing or thinking requires an object. The relation of knower and known entails
a duality which would fracture the utter simplicity of The One. Even the
complete reflexivity of The One knowing only itself is excluded. The
superessential is for Plotinus also the supra-cogitative. "What stands above
Being stands above intellection," he says; "it is no weakness in it not to know
itself, since as pure unity it contains nothing which it needs to explore."
Multiplicity begins with the effort of the Intellectual-Principle to know the
Transcendent. "It knows the Transcendent in its very essence but, with all its
efforts to grasp that prior as pure unity, it goes forth amassing successive
impressions, so that, to it, the object becomes multiple The . . .
Intellectual-Principle is established in multiplicity." What is the All of which
The One is not all, since the Intellectual-Principle and the Soul also belong to
it? Plotinus answers that "The One is all things and no one of them. The source
of all things is not all things ... It is precisely because there is nothing
within the One that all things are from it." Everything else in the totality of
which the Transcendent is the source emanates from it. "Seeking nothing,
possessing nothing, lacking nothing," Plotinus declares, "The One is perfect
and, in our metaphor, has overflowed, and its exuberance has produced the new:
this product has turned again to its begetter and has filled and has become its
contemplator and so an Intellectual-Principle ... It is simulta- 288 THE GREAT
ncously Intellectual-Principle and Being; and, attaining resemblance in virtue
of this vision, it repeats the act of the One in pouring forth a vast power.
This second outflow is a Form or Idea representing the Divine Intellect as the
Divine Intellect represented its own prior, The One. This active power sprung
from essences (from the Intellectual-Principle considered as Being) is Soul.
Soul arises as the idea and act of the motionless Intellectual-Principle. ... It
takes fullness by looking toward its source; but it generates its image by
adopting another, a downward, movement. This image of Soul is Sense and Nature,
the vegetal principle."

Nothing, writes Plotinus, "is completely severed from its prior. Thus the human
Soul appears to reach as far down as to the vegetal order." In these successive
emanations "all that is not One is conserved by virtue of the One, and from the
One derives its characteristic nature.'* Every thing except the One is a
one-many. "If it had not attained such unity as is consistent with being made up
of multiplicity, we could not affirm its existence." The Transcendent alone "a
really existent One, wholly and is truly One, while its sequent, poured down in
some way from the One, is all, a total which has participation in unity and
whose every member is similarly ail and one."

If reason cannot fully grasp the Transcendent One, that may be because
discursive reason is OUTLINE OF TOP

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The transcendental one: the Absolute; the unity of being, of nature, of the universe
 1a. The relation of the one and the many: emanation of the many from the one
 1b. The unity or duality of God and the world: the immanence and transcendence of
 God
 1c. The one and the many in relation to the universal and the particular: the abstract
 and the concrete universal

2. The modes of unity: comparison of numerical, essential, and divine unity
 2a. Numerical unity or identity: the number one
 2b. The unity of the indivisible or the simple: the individual thing, the point, the
 2c. the quality 2 93
 2d. The complex unity of a whole composed of parts: the distinction between the
 indivisible and the undivided
 PAGB
 3.
 Kinds of wholes or complex unities
 2e. Quantitative wholes: oneness in matter or motion
 (1) The continuity of a quantitative whole
 (2) The unity and divisibility of a motion
 (3) The unity
 and divisibility of matter
 (4) The unity and divisibility of time and space
 2f. Natural or essential wholes: the
 oneness of a being or a nature
 (1) The distinction between essential and accidental unity
 (2) The comparison of the unity of natural things with man-made compositions
 or aggregations: artificial wholes
 (3) The unity of a substance and of substantial form
 (4) The unity
 of man as composite of body and soul, matter and spirit, exten-
 sion and thought
 (5) The unity of the
 human person or the self: the order of man's powers; the
 split personality
 in the realm of mind: unity in thought or knowledge

4. Unity
 4a. The unity
 of mind or intellect, the cognitive faculties, or consciousness
 4^.
 The unity of sense-experience: the unity of attention; the transcendental unity
 of apperception
 in thinking or understanding: the unity of complex ideas and definitions;
 4b. Unity
 the unity of the term, the judgment, and the syllogism
 4c. The unity of science: the unity of particular sciences
 4d. The
 one and the many, or the simple and the complex, as objects of knowledge:
 the order of learning with respect to wholes and parts
 4_/".
 The unity of knower and known, or of subject and object
 in moral and political matters

5. Unity
5#.
The unity of virtue and the many virtues
5^.
The unity of the last end: the plurality of intermediate ends or means
 5a. The unity of subjective will and objective morality in the ethical realm
 5b. The unity
 of the family and the unity of the state: the limits of political or social
 unification
 5c. The unity of sovereignty: its divisibility or indivisibility; the problem of federal
 union

6. Unity in the supernatural order
 6a. The unity and simplicity of God
 6b. The unity of the Trinity
 6c. The unity of the Incarnation

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of the problem of the one and the m
nature, or reality, see BEING 2-23; GOD 5d-5e; NATU 3; WORLD 3a-3b.

Problems closely related to that of the one and the ma

2b, 2e UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR i.

;

The dialectical significance of the problem of the one OPPOSITION 2b.

Other discussions of numerical unity or identity, or t

divisible, see ELEMENT 53-5Th); INFINITY 4b; MATHEMA

OTHER la-1b.

Discussions relevant to the unity and divisibility of

CHANGE 5b; ELEMENT 5b; INFINITY 4b; QUANTITY 2; SPAC

The problem of essential and accidental unity, see SAM

The problem of the unity of substantial form, see FORM

The problem of the unity of man, or of unity in the hu

OPPOSITION 4-4b, 4d; SOUL 43.

Considerations of unity in the faculties or operations

TION 1d; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 60(2); MIND 1g(3);

3c(5)-

301 33] 127b; xxiv [115-154] 143d-144b; xxxm [76-145] 157a-d 2 CHAUCER: Troilus
and Cressida, BK v, STANZA 267 155a / Second Nun's Tale [15,798-809] 467a-b
208c; PART iv, 259d 3 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART in, 207b; 207d0 BACON: Advancement
of Learning, lOOc-d 1 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 232b 2 MILTON: Christs
Nativity [1-14] la-b / Paradise Lost, BK v [600-615] 188l BK xii [469-551] ;
329b-331a 0 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 307a-313d esp 307b-c, 310b-312a; 605a-b
304a; 306a-c 6 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 303dThe unity of the
Incarnation EW TESTAMENT: John, 1:9-14; 10:30,38; 14:10- ii / Philippians, 2:5-7
/ kolossians, 2:9 8 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK ix, CH 14-17 293a-295c; BK x, CH
29 316d-318b / Christian Doctrine, BK i, CH 13 627d 1046d 0 AQUINAS: Summa
Theologica, PART m, QQ i26 701b,d-846d esp Q 2 709d-723a, Q 17 806d809d; PART in
SUPPL, Q 95, A 3, ANS 1045b1 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xxxi [76-126]
101c-102a; PARADISE, n [51-45] 108a; vn [25-33] H5c; xxxm [76-145] 157a-d 3
PASCAL: Pensees, 512 262a; 765 322a 0 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 308a b 1 GIBBON:
Decline and Fall, 134a-138a esp 136b-d, 137c-d; 140a-b; 145b-d; 150c-151c 307b 6
HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 306bany in relation to the order of
being, RE 1b; OPPOSITION 2b, 2e; RELATION ny, see RELATION 1d; SAME AND OTHER
and the many, see DIALECTIC 33, 3d; he unity of the individual or the inTICS 2c;
QUANTITY 2, 6a; SAME AND matter, motion, time, and space, sec E 33; TIME i. E
AND OTHER 33. 20(3). man personality, see MAN 33, 5-53; of thought or knowledge,
see DEFINI- SAME AND OTHER 40; SENSB For: The one and the many, or the simple
and the complex, as o

to the order of learning, see IDEA 5d; KNOWLEDGE 5

The unity and diversity of knower and known, see KNO

The controversy over the unity of virtue and the plu

DENCE 30; TEMPERANCE la; VIRTUE AND VICE 1b, 3b.

Other discussions of the order of means and ends, se

RELATION 53(2).

Unity as an aesthetic or an artistic principle, see

Matters bearing on the unity of the family and the s

limits of social unification, see CITIZEN 8; FAMIL

WAR AND PEACE na, nd.

Considerations germane to the divisibility or indivi

1g, 5d; STATE 9d.

Other discussions of the uniqueness and simplicity o

and the Incarnation, see GOD 4b, pa-pb; MAN lie; R

ADDITIONAL HEADINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. Thes

I. Works by authors represented

II. Works by authors not represe

For the dale, place, and other facts concerning the

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follo

*

AQUINAS. On the Trinity ofBoethius, Q 4 DANTE. On World- Government or De
Monarchic

BK i, CH 14-15 DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i,

60-65 HEGEL. The Phenomenology of Mind

Science of Logic, VOL i, BK i, SECT i, CH 3(8);

.

BK n, SECT n, CH 3(A) W. JAMES. Memories and Studies, CH 8

.

Pragmatism, LECT iv

. A Pluralistic Universe

. Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 7-8

" SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against the Physicists, BK i

(Concerning Whole and Part)

PROCLUS. The Elements of Theology, (A, H) ERIGENA. De Divisione Naturae

ALBO, The Book of Principles (Sefer ha-ltyarim),

BK ii, CH 8, 10-13 G. Pico DELLA MIRANDOLA. Of Being and Unity BRUNO. De la
causa, principio, e uno SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphystcae, HI-VI, xv

(10), xxx (10), xxxiv, XLIV (n), XLVI (i),

XLVII (n, 14-15, 17)

bjects of knowledge and in relation 0. WLEDGE i SAME AND OTHER 43.; rality of
virtues, see COURAGE 4; PRUe GOOD AND EVIL 5c; PRINCIPLE 43; ART yb; BEAUTY 1c;
POETRY 8a(i). tate, and relevant to the process and Y 2a; GOVERNMENT 1b; STATE
1b, ica-iof; sibility of sovereignty, see GOVERNMENT f God, and of the mysteries
of the Trinity ELATION 2. of the Western World, but relevant to the e works are
divided into two groups: in this collection. nted in this collection.
publication of the works cited, consult ws the last chapter of The Great Ideas.
SUAREZ. On the Various Kinds of Distinctions (Disputationes Metaphystcae, vn)
JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Ctirsus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logtca, PART n, Q
27; Philosophia Naturalis, PART in, Q 9 LEIBNITZ. Monadology, par 1-9, 56-90
SCHELLING. Von der Weltseele SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL i, BK
iv (56) pECHNER. Uber die physifylische und philosophische Atomenlehre LOTZE.
Metaphysics, BK i, CH 6 . Outlines of Metaphysic, DIV i, csp CH 3, 5; DIV n C.
S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL vi, par 373-383

BRADLEY. The Principles ofLogic, Terminal Essays, iv-v . Appearance and Reality
ROYCE. The World and the Individual, SERIES 1(4,

9-10) Supplementary Essay

; B. RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics, CH 16-17 H. ADAMS. Mont-Saint-Michel
and Chartres MEYERSON. Identity and Reality BLOOD. Pluriverse MCTAGGART. The
Nature of Existence, BK in BROAD. The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH i
WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern World, CH 10
