Chapter 65: OPPOSITION INTRODUCTION CERTAIN words in the vocabulary of common
speech, used at almost every turn of discourse, indicate ideas so indispensable
to human thought that they are often employed without analysis. The word "is" is
one of these, signifying the idea of being or existence. The word "not" and the
pair of words "either. . . . or" have the same character. Taken together, "not"
and "either. ..or" signify the idea of . opposition. The quality of redness is
not the same as the quality of hotness, yet this negative relation by itself
does not make them opposite, for something can be red-hot. It is only when a
thing can have either one quality or another, but not both, that the qualities
are said to be opposed. Opposites are more than merely distinct; they exclude
one another. Opposition seems to be as pervasive as the familiar words which
signify it. Even if it were not itself one of the great ideas, it would be
manifest in all the other basic notions which come in antithetical pairs, e.g.,
good and evil, lifeand death, war and peace, universal and particular, pleasure
and pain, necessity and contingency, same and other, one and many, virtue and
vice. Each of these notions seems to imply its opposite and to draw its meaning
from the opposition. There are other terms in the list of great ideas which,
though not paired in the same chapter, stand opposed to one another: art to
nature, chance to fate, liberty to slavery, time to eternity, knowledge to
opinion, matter to form, democracy to oligarchy and similarly other forms of
government. Still other terms cannot be discussed without reference to their
opposites, even though we have not explicitly listed them, such as being and
non-being, truth and falsity, love and hate, justice and injustice, wealth and
poverty. The enumeration might extend to include every fundamental notion,
except for the in- convenience in certain cases of not having readily familiar
names to designate the opposites. In some instances, moreover, the opposition
seems to involve more than a pair of terms, as, for example, is the case with
poetry, history, and science; or physics, mathematics, and metaphysics. In the
tradition of the great books we not only find the opposition of one idea to
another, but we also find opposite points of view, conflicting theories or
doctrines, in the discussion of almost every basic topic under the heading of
these ideas. We find the same word used with contrary meanings, the same
proposition affirmed and denied. We find reasoning opposed to reasoning. The
same conclusion is reached from apparently opposite principles, or opposite
conclusions are drawn from premises apparently the same. But though opposition
seems to be inherent in the realm of ideas and in the life of thought, the idea
of opposition is not itself explicitly thought about in many of the great books.
This does not mean that in the consideration of other matters the significance
and consequences of opposition go unnoted. On the contrary, all the chapters
dealing with the nature and conduct of man, or with the institutions and history
of society, give evidence of the general recognition by poets and historians, by
scientists and philosophers that opposition in the form of active conflict
characterizes the phenomena. The fact of warring opposites not only enters into
descriptions of the way things are, but also poses problems for psychologists,
moralists, economists, and statesmen to solve. The study of nature, as well as
of man and society, discovers opposition at the root of change. The physics of
antiquity, for example, defines the elements or the bodily humours in terms of
contrary qualities; according to Aristotle, contraries are among the ultimate
prin- 323 324 ciples of naturethe terms of change. The cosmology of Lucretius
makes the conflict of opposites the principle of growth and decay in the
universe. Destruction struggles against creativity; life against death. "The
death-dealing ' motions," the poet writes, 'cannot keep the mastery always nor
entomb existence for evermore, nor on the other hand can the birth and
increase-giving motions of things preserve them always after they are born. Thus
the war of first-beginnings waged from eternity is carried on with dubious
issue: now here, now there, the life-bringing elements of things get the mastery
and are overmastered in turn."

Modern mechanics deals with action and reaction in the impact of bodies and the
resolution of forces tending to produce opposite results. The theory of
evolution pictures the world of living organisms as engaged in the struggle for
survival, organism competing with organism or against an adverse environment for
the means of subsistence or reproduction.

These indications of the prevalence of conflict in the realm of thought itself,
or as a fundamental conception in man's thinking about nature and society, do
not alter the point that only in logic or metaphysics is opposition abstracted
from special subject matters, to become itself the object of thought. Even so,
not all of the great speculative works develop an explicit theory of opposition
classifying its types, analyzing formulating it as its structure, a universal
principle of being, mind, or spirit. Four authors especially treat opposition as
a primary theme, though not out of the context of such other notions as being,
relation, one and many, same and other, or identity and difference. They are
Plato, Aristotle, Kant, and Hegel. It should not be surprising that the same
authors are the principal figures in the chapter on DIALECTIC. Their
disagreement about the nature or meaning of dialectic has a parallel here in
their conflicting theories of opposition.

SOCRATES ARGUES, in the Protagoras, for the unity of virtue by using the
principle that "everything has one opposite and not more than one." If wisdom is
the opposite of folly, and if it also appears that folly is opposed by
temperance, then either wisdom and temperance are the same, or a thing may have
more AS than one opposite. Protagoras reluctantly accepts the first alternative;
he is apparently unwilling to re-open the question concerning the pairing of
opposites. But the question is reopened by others. It is one of the great
problems in the theory of opposition, relevant to the distinction of different
kinds of opposites. The problem can most readily be stated in terms of the
logical processes of division and definition. On the hypothesis that opposites
always come in pairs, every class can be divided into two sub-classes which not
only exclude each other, but also exhaust the membership of the divided class.
Such division is called dichotomy. Many of the Platonic dialogues notably the
Sophist and the Statesman exemplify the method of dichotomous division, used as
a device for constructing definitions. The object to be defined, the character
of the statesman or the sophist, is finally caught in the net of
classificationwhen, division after division having been made, two sub-classes
are reached which leave no other possibilities open. The thing is either one or
the other. In the Sophists, preliminary exercise is undertaken in the method of
division as preparation for the use of this method to define the sophist. It
will serve us here as an example of dichotomy. All the arts are first divided
into two kinds, the productive and the acquisitive; then the acquisitive arts
are divided into those making voluntary exchanges and those which obtain goods
by coercion; the coercive divides into fighting and hunting according to the
alternatives of open or secret attack; hunting into the hunting of the lifeless
and the living; hunting of the living into hunting of swimming or walking
animals; the hunting of swimming animals into the hunting of winged animals and
the hunting of water animals; the hunting of water animals into opposite methods
of catching fish, with further sub-divisions made until the art of angling can
be defined as an acquisitive art which, being coercive, is a form of hunting,
distinguished from other forms of hunting by the character of its object animals
which swim in water rather than air and by the method used to catch them hooks
or barbs rather than nets or baskets. Aristotle objects to this process of
division as a way of defining things. "Some writers," he CHAPTER 65: OPP says,
"propose to reach the definitions of the ultimate forms of animal life by
bipartite division. But this method is often difficult, and often
impracticable." For one thing, it tends to associate or dissociate natural
groups arbitrarily, e.g., the classification of birds with water animals, or of
some birds with fish and some birds with land animals. "If such natural groups
are not to be broken up, the method of dichotomy cannot be employed, for it
necessarily involves such breaking up and dislocation." Aristotle also calls
attention to the fact that the method of dichotomy often uses negative terms in
order to make an exhaustive division into two and only two sub-classes. But the
class which is formed by a negative characterization cannot be further
sub-divided. "There can be no specific forms of a negation, of featherless for
instance or of footless, as there are of feathered and of footed." It is
impossible, Aristotle says, to "get at the ultimate specific forms of animal
life by bifurcate division." He therefore proposes a method of defining by genus
and difference, according to which it is possible in biological classification
to sub-divide a genus into more than two species. To avoid sub-division into two
and only two, that which differentiates each species from the others within the
same genus must be some positive characteristic.

As ALTERNATIVE methods of definition, dichotomous division and the
differentiation of species within a genus are discussed in the chapter on
DEFINITION. Here we are concerned with the problem of the number of opposites
produced by the exhaustive division of a class or kind. For example, how many
species of color are there? If the primary colors are more than two, it would
appear that each primary color has more than one opposite, since the same object
at the same time and in the same respect cannot be both red and yellow, red and
green, green and yellow. But Aristotle seems to restrict the notion of
contrariety to pairs of opposite qualities. "Red, yellow, and such colors,
though qualities, have no contraries," he says. Whether or not he would have
regarded them as contraries if he had been acquainted with the chromatic series
of the spectrum, remains a conjecture.

To find a single opposite for red, it is neces- OSITION sary to employ the
negative term 'not-red.' But then another difficulty arises which Aristotle
recognizes when he calls the negative term "indefinite" and which Kant discusses
when he treats the infinity of the negative. The not-red includes more than
other colors which are not red, such as green and yellow. It includes everything
in the universe, colored or colorless, which is not red, e.g., happiness or
atoms or poetry. Perfect dichotomy can be achieved by using positive and
negative terms as opposites, or what Aristotle sometimes calls "contradictory
terms" such as man and not-man or just and not- just. But the class which is
thus divided is absolutely indeterminate. It is the universe, everything, the
infinite. It is necessary, furthermore, to distinguish between the opposition of
'just and 'not-just' and the opposition of 'just and 'unjust.' The term 'unjust'
is the contrary rather than the contradictory of 'just/ for these opposites
apply only to men, or laws, or acts; only certain kinds of things are either
just or unjust, and that is why it is said that contraries are always opposites
within a genus or a definite kind. In contrast, 'not-just' is the contradictory
rather than the contrary of 'just/ for these opposites apply to everything in
the universe; everything is either the kind of thing to which just and unjust
apply or it is the kind of thing to which neither of these terms apply, and so
it is the not- just. In addition to separating contraries (both of which are
positive terms) from contradictory opposites (one of which is a positive, the
other a negative term), Aristotle distinguishes two sorts of contraries. On the
one hand, such contraries as odd and even exhaustively divide a limited
class(e.g., integral numbers): on the other hand, such contraries as white and
black represent the extremes of a continuous series of shades, in which any
degree of grayness can be considered as the opposite of either extreme or of a
darker or a lighter gray. There are still other kinds of opposite pairs,
according to Aristotle, such as the terms 'double' and 'half/ which have the
peculiarity of implying each other; or the terms 'blindness' and 'sight/ which
are opposite conditions of the same subject. In this last case, one of the
opposites naturally belongs taa certain kind of THE GREAT I thing, and the other
represents a loss of that natural property or trait. It is therefore called a
"privation."

Considering these various modes of opposition, Aristotle proposes a fourfold
classification of opposite terms: correlative opposites, like double and half;
contrary opposites, like odd and even, white and black, just and unjust; the
opposites of possession and privation, such as sight and blindness; the
opposites of affirmation and negation, such as man and not-man, or just and
not-just. He discusses the special characteristics of each type of opposition,
but it is only contrariety which he thinks requires further subdivision. Even
though both are always positive terms, some contraries, like odd and even,
exhaust a definite class, just as positive and negative opposhes exhaust the
infinite. They admit of no intermediate terms and hence they differ from
contraries like white and black. White and black are extreme limits of a
continuous series and thus permit an indefinite number of intermediates which
fall between them. Things which differ only in degree are like the sort of
contraries which find their place in a continuous series. Things which differ in
kind are like the sort of contraries between which no intermediates are
possible. One of the great problems of classification, especially with respect
to living organisms, is whether the diverse species which fall within a single
genus differ in kind or only in degree. The answer would seem to depend on
whether the several species are rekted by one or the other sort of contrariety.
As the chapter on EVOLUTION indicates, the basic meaning of the word "species"
changes when the possibility of "intermediate forms" is rejected or admitted.
When a class is divided by contraries without intermediates, the genus can have
only two species, as for example, the division of animals into brutes and men.
When a genus is divided into more than two sub-classes, (e.g., the division of
vertebrates into fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, and mammals), it would seem
to follow that the species are like points in a continuous series and admit the
possibility of intermediate types. According to Darwin's conception of species,
their contrariety always tends to take the latter form. Aristotle, on the other
hand, seems to use the word "species" in two distinct senses which correspond to
the two kinds of contrariety with and without intermediates. "A thing's
difference from that from which it differs in "must be a contrariety." species,"
he writes, But though contrariety is always a "complete difference," the fact
that "contraries are socalled in several senses" leads him to observe that
"their modes of completeness will answer to the various modes of contrariety
which attach to the contraries." THE LOGICAL OPPOSITION of propositions or
judgments depends in part on the opposition of terms or concepts. If contrary
things are said about the same subject of discourse (i.e. t if the same number
is called odd and even, or the same act is called cowardly and courageous, or
the same animal is called a bird and a mammal), pairs of contrary statements are
made, of which both cannot be true. But it does not seem to follow that one of
the two statements must be true. Both can be false. In the examples given, the
number may be a fraction and neither odd nor even; the act may be foolhardy and
neither courageous nor cowardly; the animal may be a reptile and neither bird
nor mammal. This characteristic of contrary statements the impossibility of
their both being true combined with the possibility of their both being false
can also be found, according to Aristotle, in propositions which have the same
subject and do not contain contrary terms as predimen are white and cates. The
propositions 'All 'No men are white' cannot both be true, but they can both be
false. The contrariety of these two statements, which can be taken as typifying
the opposition of all universal affirmations and negations, does not depend on
contrary predicates, but on the opposed meanings of 'all are and 'none is.'
Keeping the terms constant and varying only the quality and quantity of the
propositions, Aristotle formulates two other typical modes of opposition between
pairs of statements. When both statements are particular or limited, but one is
affirmative and the other negative, both cannot be false though both can be
true, e.g., 'Some men are white' and 'Some men are not white.' This pair of
opposites Aris- CHAPTER 65: OPPO totle calls "sub-contraries." When one
statement is universal and affirmative and the other is particular and negative
or when one is universal and negative, the other particular and affirmative the
two propositions are, according to Aristotle, contradictory. Contradiction is
the most complete type of opposition, for contradictory statements are opposite
in both quality and quantity. Of a pair of contradictories, both cannot be true
and both cannot be false. One must be true and the other false, e.g., it must be
true either that all men are white or that some men are not white. The formal
scheme of opposite statements, traditionally known as "the square of
opposition," appears to exhaust all possibilities. It indicates, moreover, that
every statement may have two opposites, a contradictory and either a contrary or
a sub-contrary; for example, 'All men are white' is contradicted by 'Some men
are not white' and opposed in a merely contrary fashion by 'No men are white.'
The latter is a weaker form of opposition since it permits the dilemma to be
avoided by the truth of a third statement, that some men arc white and some are
not. The dilemma set up by a contradiction cannot be avoided in this way.

The propositions 'God exists' and 'God does 5 not exist, or The world had a
beginning' and The world did not have a beginning,' constitute contradictions
from which there seems to be no escape. It would seem to make a difference,
therefore, in facing the great controversies in the tradition of western
thought, to know whether the opposite views which men have taken on fundamental
issues arc genuine contradictions, requiring everyone to take sides, or whether
they are merely contrary positions. In the latter alternative, the inconsistency
of the theories prevents us from agreeing with both parties to the dispute, but
it does not require us to agree with either, for contrary doctrines never
exhaust the possibilities. Between such extreme positions, for example, as that
everything is in flux and nothing changes, both of which cannot be true, the
truth may lie in the doctrine that some elements of permanence are involved in
all change; or it may be in the theory of a realm of becoming that lacks
permanence and a realm of being that is free from change.

SITION ONE OF THE BASIC controversies in the tradition of the great books
concerns opposition itself. Is the principle of contradiction the ultimate test
of the truth of judgments and reasoning? Is the truth of indemonstrable
propositions or axioms certified by the self-contradiction of their
contradictories? For example, is the truth of the proposition 'The whole is
greater than the part' made necessary by the impossibility of the contradictory
statement 'The whole is not greater than the part,' on the theory that this
latter statement is impossible because it is self-contradictory? And when a
conclusion is demonstrated by propositions which seem to be necessarily true,
must not the contradictory of this conclusion be false or at least be incapable
of demonstration by propositions which are also necessarily true? On both these
questions Kant and Aristotle seem to be opposed. According to Aristotle, no
truths are necessary or axiomatic unless their contradictories arc
self-contradictory. But Kant makes a distinction between analytical and
synthetical propositions (discussed in the chapter on JUDGMENT) and in terms of
it he restricts the principle of contradiction to serving as a criterion of
truth for analytical judgments alone. "In an analytical judgement," he writes,
"whether negative or affirmative, its truth can always be tested by the
principle of contradiction." But though we must admit, Kant continues, that "the
principle of contradiction is the general and altogether sufficient principle of
all analytical knowledge, beyond this its authority and utility, as a sufficient
criterion of truth, must not be allowed to extend." In "the synthetical part of
our knowledge, we must no doubt take great care never to offend against that
inviolable principle, but we ought never to expect from it any help with regard
to the truth of this kind of knowledge." The reason, Kant explains, is that "in
forming an analytical judgement I remain within a given concept, while
predicating something of it. If what I predicate is affirmative, I only
predicate of that concept what is already contained in it; if it is negative, I
only exclude from it the opposite of it." For example, if the meaning of the
concept 'whole' involves 'being greater than a part,' self-contradiction results
from denying that the whole is greater than a part.

328 TOE "In forming synthetical judgements, on the contrary, I have to go beyond
a given concept, in order to bring something together with it, which is totally
different from what is contained in it. Here," Kant declares, "we have neither
the relation of identity nor of contradiction, and nothing in the judgement
itself by which we can discover its truth or its falsehood"; for example, the
judgment that everything which happens has a cause. The truth of such
synthetical judgments, according to Kant, is as necessary and as a priori as the
truth of analytical judgments, but the principle of contradiction does not
provide their ground or validation. For Aristotle, in contrast, those
propositions which do not derive necessity from the principle of contradiction
belong to the sphere of opinion rather than to the domain of knowledge. They can
be asserted as probable only, not as true or false. In the domain of knowledge,
it is impossible to construct valid arguments for contradictory conclusions, for
if one must be true and the other false, one can be validly demonstrated and the
other cannot be demonstrated at all. But in the sphere of opinion, dialectical
opposition is possible. Because the contradictory of a probable statement is
itself also probable, probable arguments can be constructed on the opposite
sides of every dialectical issue.

For Kant dialectical issues do not consist in a conflict of opposed
probabilities. Far from setting probable reasoning against probable reasoning,
dialectical opposition consists in what appear to be demonstrations of
contradictory propositions. For example, in that part of the Critique of Pure
Reason devoted to the Transcendental Dialectic, Kant presents opposed arguments
which look like demonstrations of contradictory propositions such as the thesis
that "the world has a beginning in time" and its antithesis that "the world has
no beginning"; or the thesis that "there exists an absolutely necessary being"
and its antithesis that "there nowhere exists an absolutely necessary being."
These are two of the four issues which Kant calls the "antinomies of a
transcendental dialectic." Such issues, Aristotle would agree with Kant, do not
belong to the sphere of opinion or prob- - ability. But Kant would not agree
with Aristotle that such issues belong to the domain of science or certain
knowledge. The problem of the world's beginning or eternity, for example, is one
which Aristotle treats in his Physics and appears to think is solved by the
demonstration that motion can have neither beginning nor end. The problem of the
existence of a necessary being is one which Aristotle treats in his Metaphysics
and which he also appears to think is capable of a demonstrative solution. For
him, therefore, both are problems to which scientific answers can be given. But
for Kant the demonstration of the antitheses, or contradictory propositions, iu
both cases is as cogent as the demonstrations of the theses; and therefore,
since we know that both of a pair of conliadictory propositions cannot be
validly demonstrated, we must conclude that the arguments advanced are only
counterfeit demonstrations, or as Kant says, "illusory." He calls these
demonstrations "dialectical," and the issues they attempt to resolve
"antinomies," precisely because he thinks the reasoning goes beyond the limits
of scientific thought and because he thinks the issues are problems reason
cannot ever solve. With respect to conclusions affirming or denying matters
beyond experience, the antinomies can be interpreted eilher as showing that
contradictory arguments are equally sound or as showing that they are equally
faulty. On either interpretation, Kant and Aristotle seem to be opposed on the
applicability of the principle of contradiction to conflicting arguments and
conclusions (except, of course, those which are merely probable). This
difference between them accords with the difference in their conceptions of
science and dialectic, and in their theories of the scope and conditions of
valid knowledge. THE OPPOSITION between Kant and Aristotle may not present the
only alternatives. Hegel's theory of the dialectical process seems to offer a
third. Where Aristotle appears to think that all contradictions must be resolved
in favor of one of the opposites, and where Kant appears to think that some
contradictions cannot be resolved at all, Hegel proposes the resolution of all
contradictions, not by a choice between CHAPTER 65: OPPOS them, but by a
synthesis uniting the opposites and reconciling their differences.

According to Aristotle, opposites exclude one another in existence as well as in
thought. A thing cannot both exist and not exist at the same time; nor in any
particular respect can it simultaneously both be and not be of a certain sort.
Only with the passage of time and in the course of change can opposites be
realized, when a thing passes from being to non-being, or gives up one attribute
in order to assume its contrary. The difference for Aristotle between becoming
and being (or between change and complete actuality) seems to be that the one
includes and the other excludes opposites. Change cannot occur except as one
opposite comes into existence while the other passes away. But opposites cannot
co-exist with complete actuality. So far as reality consists of co-existent
actualiby the principle of contradicties, it is limited tionas a principle of
being to those which are not contradictory. All possibilities cannot, therefore,
be simultaneously realized, for, as Leibnitz states the principle, all
possibilities are not "compossiblc."

According to Hegel, every finite phase of realityeverything except the Absolute
Idea itselfhas its contradictory, as real as itself, and co-existent with it.
Contradictories imply one another and require each other, almost as correlative
opposites do. Whatever is partial and incomplete presupposes something which is
partial and incomplete in an opposite respect. The opposition between them can
therefore be overcome by a synthesis which includes them both, and which
complements each by uniting it with the other.

For example, the category of being is opposed by non-being. These opposites both
exclude and imply one another. They are in a sense even identical with one
another, insofar as the notion of being contains the notion of non-being, and,
conversely, the notion of non-being, the notion of being. Except for the
Absolute, everything which is also is not, and everything which is not also is.
The apparent contradiction involved in this simultaneous application of opposite
categories to the same thing is overcome by a third category, becoming, which is
the synthesis of being and non-being. Being and non-being are united in
becoming.

ITION This reconciling of opposites, by their union in a more inclusive whole
embracing both, typifies the Hegelian dialectic of thesis, antithesis, and
synthesis. The motion repeats itself as the synthesis of one contradiction faces
its own opposite and requires a higher synthesis to overcome the contradiction
it has generated. Thus every opposition in reality or thought is a phase in the
progressive realization of the Absolute, wherein all contradictions are
resolved. In Hegel's Philosophy of History and in his theory of the development
of the state in the Philosophy of Right, the dialectical process is exemplified
at every stage of progress. The conflict of interdependent opposites of opposite
classes or forces in society, of opposite political institutions or principles
calls for a resolution which shall unite rather than exclude the opposites.
Considering the division of labor, for example,Hegel writes: "When men are
dependent on one another and reciprocally related in their work and the
satisfaction of their needs, subjective self-seeking turns into a contribution
to the satisfaction of the needs of everyone else. That is to say, by a
dialectical advance, subjective self-seeking turns into the mediation of the
particular through the universal, with the result that each man in earning,
producing, and enjoying on his own account is eo ipso producing and earning for
the enjoyment of everyone else." The opposition between the particular good of
each individual and the universal good of all is thus overcome by that advance
in social organization which is the division of labor. Each of the stages of
world history is, according to Hegel, "the presence of a necessary moment in the
Idea of the world mind." But the world mind itself is a synthesis, a resolution
of the conflicting opposites of the various national minds "which are wholly
restricted on account of their particularity. Their deeds and destinies in their
reciprocal relations to one another are the dialectic of the finitude of these
minds, and out of it arises the universal mind, the mind of the world, free from
all restrictions, producing itself as that which exercises its right and its
right is the highest right of all over these finite minds in the 'history of the
world " which is the world's court of judgment.'

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. Opposition in logic
 1a. Kinds of opposition among terms: correlation, contrariety, privation, negation
 1b. The analysis of contrariety : the kinds of terms which can be contrary; contrariety
 with and without intermediates between extremes
 1c. The exclusiveness of opposites as a principle of logical division
 (1) Dichotomous division: positive and negative terms
 (2) Division of a genus by differentia: the contrariety of species
 1d. The opposition of propositions or judgments
 (1) The square of opposition: contradictories, contraries, subcontraries
 (2) Modal opposition: the necessary and the contingent
 1e. Opposition in reasoning and proof: the conflict of dialectical arguments; the
 antinomies of a transcendental dialectic

2. The metaphysical significance of opposition
 2a. Opposition as limiting coexistence: noncontradiction as a principle of being
 2b. Opposites in the realm of being, mind, or spirit: the one and the many; the dia-
 lectical triad of thesis, antithesis, and synthesis
 2c. Nonbcing as the opposite of being
 2d. The opposition of good and evil in the world and in relation to God
 2e. The reconciliation of opposites in the divine nature: the synthesis of all con-
 traries in the Absolute
 in the realm of physical nature

3. Opposition
 3a. The contraries
 as principles of change
 3b. Contrariety of quality
 in the theory of the elements or humours
 3c. The opposition of motion and rest, and of contrary motions
 3d. The opposition of physical forces and its resolution
 3e. The struggle for existence: the competition of species

4. Opposition
or conflict in the psychological and moral order
 4a. The conflict of reason and the passions
 4b. Conflicting emotions, humours, instincts, or habits
 4c. Conflict
 as the cause of repression and as a factor in neurotic disorders
 4<t.
 The conflict of loves and loyalties, desires and duties
 4*. Conflict in human life: opposed types of men and modes of life

5. Conflict
in society and history
 5a. Competition in commerce and the rivalry of factions in politics
 5b. The class war: the opposition of the rich and the poor, the propertied and the prop-
 5c. capital and labor, producers and consumers
 5d. The inevitability of civil strife and war between states
 5e. Opposition or strife as a productive principle or source of progress

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other considerations of the opposition of terms and
propositions, or of oppos

ing and argument, see DIALECTIC 3b-3d; IDEA 40; JUDGMENT 73; NECESSITY

TINGENCY 4e(i); REASONING 50; SAME AND OTHER 33(2).

The distinction between dichotomous division and the differentiation of a

of definition, see DEFINITION 2a-2b.

Discussions of the law of contradiction as a principle of thought and of

METAPHYSICS 3c; PRINCIPLE 1c; TRUTH 3c; and for the various ways in whi

concerned with opposition, see DIALECTIC 3a-3d.

The opposition of being and non being, one and many, same and other, see

LECTIC 3a; ONE AND MANY la, 1c; SAME AND OTHER 2e; UNIVERSAL AND PARTIC

The theory of synthesis or the reconciliation of opposites, see DIALECTIC

IDEA 1f; LIBERTY 6a; MIND 1f, iof-iof(2); PROGRESS la; STATE 2a(3).

The role of opposition in nature, k CHANGE 2b, 4; ELEMENT 3b; EVOLU

6d(3); QUALITY 43-4k

Conflict in human nature and the life of man, see DESIRE 3d, 43; DUTY 6,

LOVE 3c; MAN 5-53; MIND 9b; ONE AND MANY 35); and for conflict in so

DEMOCRACY 54); LABOR 7c-7c(i); NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 5d

history, see

PROGRESS la; REVOLUTION 53; STATE 5d-5d(2); WAR AND PEACE 2c, 7; WEALTH

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great BooJp of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided i

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collectio

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the w

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter o

EMERSON. "Compensation,"

*

PROUDHON. The Philosophy KANT. Prolegomena to Any Future Metaphysic, par 2
LOTZE. Logic, BK i, CH 2

(b, c) C. S. PEIRCE. Collected HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK n, SECT i, CH
2 457-461

.

Logic, CH 8, par 115-122 BOSANQUET. Logic, VOL i, MARX. The Poverty of
Philosophy Science and Philoso

.

CROCE. Logic as the Scie

IL SECT i (6) ERIGENA. De Divisione Naturae, BK i ROYCE. The Principles of
NICOLAS OF CUSA. De Docta Ignorantia BRADLEY. Appearance and SUAREZ.
Disputationes Metaphysicae, iv (6), vi Essays on Truth and

.

(9-10), xxvi (6), XLII (6), XLV SHELDON. Strife of Syste JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS.
Cursus Philosophicus Tho- M. R. COHEN. Reason and

misticus, Ars Logica, PART i, Q 7 OGDEN. Opposition J. G. FICHTE. The Science of
Knowledge, PART HI, DEWEY. Logic, the Theory

A-D B. RUSSELL. Introduction W. HAMILTON. Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic,
ophy, CH 14

VOL n (14) . An Inquiry into eace, BK ix, 342a-344b; 717a-b roduction, 545d /
Beyond iple, 654a-c / Civilization and ures, 882c-884c , 787a-788d; 802a,c / New
Inition in reasonAND CONgenus as methods being, see LOGIC la; ch dialectic is
BEING i; DIAULAR i. 3d; HISTORY 4a(3); TION 53; MECHANICS 8; EMOTION 4:1 ciety
and ; 4f. but relevant to the nto two groups: n. orks cited, consult f The Great
Ideas. in Essays, i of Misery (c) Papers, VOL i, par 322-336, CH 7 phy, 5 nce of
Pure Concept, PART i, Logic Reality Reality, CH 7-9 ms and Productive Duality
Nature, BK i, CH 4 (5) of Inquiry, CH 10 to Mathematical Philosv Meaning and
Truth, CH 20
