Chapter 69:

INTRODUCTION

HpHE spirit in which the great poets have read their predecessors differs
remarkably from the attitude toward the past which prevails in other fields. The
philosophers and scientists frequently feel assured that they can improve upon
their predecessors. The poets, for the most part, wish only to do as well.
Virgil's admiration for Homer; Dante's accolade to Virgil; Milton's praise of
Aeschylus, Sophocles, and Euripides as "the three tragic poets unequall'd yet by
any"; the tributes which Cervantes and Fielding pay to the poets of antiquity
these is no battle between the testify that there modern and the ancient books
of poetry.

Contemporary novelists and dramatists especially those who are proud of their
innovations in the forms or materials of poetry may constitute an exception. But
they would still be the exception to a rule which can be verified for almost all
the great books of poetry. Part of the reason for such unusual accord may be
that, in the tradition of the great books, one book enjoys the unique
distinction of having founded the science of poetry. More than that, it seems to
have gained from the poets a large measure of approval, and even adherence to
its principles, during a period of more than years. Not that Aristotle's Poetics
\s without sources.

They exist in Plato's comments on the kinds of poetry; in Aristophanes' critical
weighing of Aeschylus and Euripides; and, of course, in the original inventions
of Homer and the great dramatic poets, both tragic and comic. Not that the
acceptance of Aristotle's theory of poetry is unaccompanied by some dissent, as,
for example, in Fielding's quarrel with the rules about the unities of time and
place. But Fielding, like Cervantes who is another close student of the Poetics,
more frequently adopts than rejects Aristotle's basic insights.His most
rebellious protest that the originality of creative genius cannot be bound by
the laws of art or held accountable to any established critical standards would
certainly receive sympathetic consideration from the man who formulated the
rules of poetry and its measures of excellence by the study of the productions
of Greek genius. One way in which later poets have expressed their disagreement
with the Poetics confirms Fielding's' insight. Those who have violated its rules
and yet produced great poems have been men of exceptional genius. Where the
genius has been lacking to create new forms, the violation of the rules has
usually resulted in formlessness. But it is not only in the creative work of the
poets that Aristotle's principles have been put to use and tested. His influence
also appears in the comments which the poets make on the nature and purpose of
poetry. The terms and distinctions of the Poetics are reflected in the writings
of Dante, Chaucer, Shakespeare, Milton, Goethe, and Melville, as well as in many
essays in criticism from Horace and Demetrius to Boccaccio, Boileau, Dryden, and
Pope. Socrates once complained of the wisdom of the poets. Those whom he asked
about their poetry were tongue-tied. They finally resorted to the mystery of
inspiration or the inscrutability of genius. "There is hardly a person present,"
he tells his judges in the Apology, "who would not have talked better about
their poetry than they did themselves." The poets of a later age were, through
benefit of Aristotle, better able to discourse analytically of their art. IF WE
TURN FROM the poets themselves, or rather from their poems, to the analysis of
poetry by poets or others we find a number of major issues. On what poetry is
and on the end it serves, the tradition does not seem to be either unified or
harmonious. Basic disagreements begin with the ancients. 400 CHAPTER 69: On the
question, for example, whether the poets have the same obligation to speak the
truth and the same kind of truth as do philosophers or scientists, Plato and
Aristotle seem to be opposed. On the question whether the art of poetry lies in
its use of language or is primarily the craft of fiction, Aristotle's Poetics
and Horace's Art of Poetry represent the opposite answers which have been points
of departure for divergent discussions of poetry throughout the whole tradition
of western thought. With regard to the second of these two questions, it may be
wondered whether we are in the presence of the sort of disagreement which
requires us to take one side rather than the other. The fact that Aristotle, in
his Rhetoric, writes about poetry in a vein contrary to the theory he advances
in his Poetics, would suggest the possibility of different but not inconsistent
points of view about poetry. Unless Aristotle unwittingly contradicts himself,
the rhetorical consideration of poetry is simply a different way of conceiving
what is poetic. In the Advancement of Learning, Bacon records this difference in
the meaning of poetry, which had become traditional by his time. He treats
moreover, as the sort of difference it, which does not require the rejection of
cither alternative as incorrect. Poetry, he writes, can be "taken in two senses:
in respect of words or matter. In the first sense it is but a character of
style, and bclongeth to the arts of speech, and is not pertinent for the
present. In the latter it is (as hath been said) one of the principal portions
of learning, and is nothing else but feigned history, which may be styled as
well in prose as in verse." When Bacon says that the conception of poetry as a
literary style as an art of writing in verse rather than prose "is not pertinent
for the present," he does not reject that alternative entirely. He merely
postpones it for the later section of his work in which he treats of grammar and
rhetoric. The other alternative poetry as "feigned history" is germane to his
present consideration of the kinds of learning. Just as Aristotle does not set
his Rhetoric against his Poetics on the nature of poetry, so Bacon does not
exclude one of these conceptions in favor of the other when he observes how
different are the principles and considerations appropriate to each. These two
points of view about the nature of poetry are not always treated in this way.
Sometimes one or the other is taken as the primary or even the only way of
approaching the subject, and then a genuine issue ensues either with those who
take the excluded point of view or with those who find it possible to embrace
both. The Alexandrian and Roman critics seem to create such an issue by
considering poetry largely in terms of style. Modern criticism, especially since
the beginning of the iQth century, goes even further in the direction of
identifying poetry with verse. When Wordsworth discusses the art of poetry in
his preface to Lyrical Ballads, he is concerned largely with its language. His
definition of poetry as "emotion recollected in tranquility" indicates his
emphasis upon the lyrical aspect of even narrative poetry. When Edgar Allen Poe
writes his Poetic Principle and Matthew Arnold his Essays in Criticism, each is
concerned almost exclusively with lyric poetry, with that kind of poetry which
is written in verse rather than prose. The poet tends to become more and more a
composer of verses so much so that the free-verse movement can appear to be a
great revolution in poetry. In the Brothers Karamazov, Smerdyakov says, "Poetry
isrubbish." At Maria's protest thai she is very fond of poetry, he adds: "So far
as it's poetry, it's essentially rubbish. Consider yourself, whoever talks in
rhyme?" Just as the word "art" has come in popular usage to mean only painting
and sculpture, so its sister-word "poetry" has also narrowed in significance.
Contemporary readers who are accustomed to think of poems as lyrics and of
poetry as verse may be surprised to learn that according to the significance of
its Greek root, the word "poetry" can cover all the forms of art or human
productivity; they are just as likely to be surprised by the reference to novels
and plays, written in prose, as poems. Yet, in the tradition of the great books,
novelists like Cervantes, Fielding, and Melville call themselves poets. The
great books consider poetry primarily as narrative rather than lyrical, as story
rather than song. This does not mean that they exclude the other consideration
of poetry. Fielding, for example, says in one place that "poetry ... demands
numbers or something like numbers" (/., metre), but for the most part he insists
that the art of the novelist or romancer lies mainly in the invention of good
stories, not in the mastery of rules of prosody which apply only to poems of the
lyric sort, written in verse. Speaking of "the sweet influence which melody and
rhythm by nature have," Plato may observe "what a poor appearance the tales of
the poets make when stripped of the colors which music puts upon them and
recited in simple prose"; but for Plato as for Aristotle the poet is a teller of
tales, either in prose or in verse. Aristotle does not ignore the devices of
language. In the third book of the Rhetoric, where he considers problems of
style in all sorts of compositions, he distinguishes "poetic" from "prosaic"
writing; and in the Poetics also he devotes a few chapters to style. But when in
the latter case he deals with the language of poetry, he is not concerned with
the style of any sort of composition, but only of dramatic and epic narratives.
Except for a brief mention of the form of verse known as the "dithyramb,"
Aristotle does not discuss the isolated lyric as a kind of poetry. He treats
song and spectacle merely as embellishments of the drama. In the Poetics his
emphasis is not upon the devices of language or the sentiments of the poet, but
upon the construction of plot, the development of character, the diction and
thought of the characters in short, upon the subject matter of the poem rather
than upon the feelings of the poet and the eloquence with which he expresses
them. Because he regards plot as the "soul of tragedy"- and, by extension, the
primary principle of all narrative poetry Aristotle insists that "the poet or
'maker' should be the maker of plots rather than of verses." He is therefore led
to criticize the confusion apparently prevalent in his day as in ourswhich he
thinks results from identifying the art of poetry with skill in writing verse.
"Even when a treatise on medicine or natural science is brought out in verse,"
he writes, "the name of poet is given by custom to the author; and yet Homer and
Empedocles have nothing in common except the metre, so that it would be better
to call the one poet, the other physicist rather than poet." Just as Bacon later
remarks that "a true narrative may be delivered in verse and a feigned one in
prose," so Aristotle says that "the poet and the historian differ not by writing
in verse or in prose. The work of Herodotus might be put into verse, and it
would still be a species of history, with metre no less than without it." That
the difference between prose and verse may affect the style of writing but not
the essence of storytelling is a point which has wide acceptance among writers
who call themselves poets. In the Prologue to Melibeus, Chaucer's host commands
him to leave off rhyming and "tell a tale in prose you might do worse wherein
there's mirth or doctrine good and plain." Thinking of his History of Don
Quixote as a species of epic poetry, Cervantes declares that "epics may be as
well written in prose as in verse." The use, by Cervantes and Fielding, of the
word "history" in the title of their novels indicates the acceptance of the
other point in the conception of poetry by reference to its subject matter
rather than to its linguistic style. The great poets recognize that, as
narratives, their works resemble histories, but they also know that the stories
poets tell are, in the words of Bacon, "imaginary history." Just as Fielding
writes at length in mock justification of himself as an historian, so Melville
touches upon "the plain facts, historical and otherwise," of whale fishery, lest
someone "scout at Moby Dick as a monstrous fable, or still worse and more
detestable, a hideous and intolerable allegory." In his chapter on the
Leviathan's tail, he says, "Other poets have warbled the praise of the soft eye
of the antelope, and the lovely plumage of the bird that never alights; less
celestial, I celebrate a tail." THE CONCEPTION of poetry as feigned or imaginary
history seems to have a direct bearing on the question of the poet's obligation
to speak the truth. We shall return subsequently to other aspects of the
comparison of poetry with history and philosophy. For the present we are
concerned with the issue in the theory of poetry which arises from applying the
standards of knowledge to the inventions of the poet. Bacon, like Aristotle,
denies that such standards are applicable. Though he treats poetry as CHAPTER
69: "a part of learning," he holds that it is only restrained "in measure of
words"; "in all other points,'* it is "extremely licensed, and doth truly refer
to the imagination; which, being not tied to the laws of matter, may at pleasure
join that which nature hath severed, and sever that which nature hath joined."
Kant, on the other hajid, like Plato, judges poetry in terms of its contribution
to knowledge. A thing of the imagination, poetry, he maintains, serves the
understanding, for it conducts "a free play of the imagination as if it were a
serious business of the understanding."

Though "the poet promises merely an entertaining play with ideas," Kant
continues, "yet for the understanding there enures as much as if the promotion
of its business had been his one intention." He achieves a certain "combination
and harmony of the two faculties of cognition, sensibility and understanding,
which, though doubtless indispensable to one another, do not readily permit of
being united without compulsion and reciprocal abatement." In so doing, the
poet, in Kant's opinion, "accomplishes something worthy of being made a serious
business, namely, the using of play to provide food for the understanding, and
the giving of life to by means of the imagination." its concepts Yet Kant and
Plato do not agree in their judgment of the poet. Regarding "the poet's promise"
as "a modest one" "a mere play with ideas is all he holds out to us" Kant
praises him for achieving more in actual performance than he promises. Plato, on
the contrary, seems to think the poet promises more and achieves less. He seems
to regard the poet not as assisting, but as competing with the philosopher. The
reason why the poet must fail in this attempt is that he tries to do on the
level of the imagination what the philosopher is better able to do on the level
of reason. Both are engaged in a process of imitation for all knowledge is
imitation but whereas the notions of the philosopher imitate the reality of the
Ideas, the images of the poet imitate sensible appearances, which are themselves
imitations of the Ideas or eternal Forms. Even when it is accurate or truthful,
poetry must, therefore, be an inferior form of knowledge. In Plato's terms, it
is on the level of opinion, along with fancy and belief. In any case, it must
sub- POETRY mit to being judged by the same standards of accuracy as anything
else which claims to be knowledge or right opinion. "Imitations," he writes,
"are not to be judged of by pleasure and false opinion. . . . They are to be
judged of by the standard of truth, and by no other whatever." The competent
judge of poetry must, therefore, "possess three things: he must know, in the
first place, of what the imitation is; secondly, he must know that it is true;
and thirdly, that it has been well executed in words and melodies and rhythms."
The issue concerning poetry and truth can be most sharply drawn between Plato
and Aristotle, precisely because Aristotle thinks that poetry is a form of
imitation, but that knowledge does not have the character of imitation at all.
Since poetry is not a kind of knowledge, the same standards do not apply to
both. "There is not the same kind of correctness," he insists, "in poetry as in
politics" or "in medicine or any other special science." The poet's art is at
fault if he "meant to describe the thing correctly but failed through lack of
power of expression." But if a technical error in physiology enters into his
description because he meant to describe the thing "in some incorrect way (e.g.,
to make the horse in movement have both right legs thrown forward)," then,
according to Aristotle, "his error in that case is not in the essentials of the
poetic art." The poet's obligation is not to be truthful in such particulars but
to make his whole story seem plausible. Aristotle summarizes his position in the
statement of his famous rule concerning the probable and the possible. "For the
purposes of poetry," he says, "a convincing impossibility is preferable to an
unconvincing possibility." Connected with this issue concerning the kind of
truth to be expected from the poet is the controversy over the purpose of
poetryto instruct or to delight, or to do both. This in turn relates to the
moral problem of the influence poetry can have on human character or virtue; and
to the political problem of the regulation of poetry by the state or the right
of poetry to be free from such censorship. It is not surprising that Plato,
conceiving poetry as he does, should banish poets from the ideal state described
in the Republic or that he should lay THE GREAT I down specific regulations for
the content of poetry in the Laws.

At the opposite extreme are those who, like Milton and Mill, attack the
principle of censorship itself as applied to poetry as well as toother forms of
communication. But the traditional defense of poetry, in essays bearing that
title from the pen of Sidney and Shelley or in the writings of Chaucer,
Montaigne, and Cervantes, usually tries to answer Plato by praising poetry as an
instrument of moral instruction as well as of delight. Waiving the question of
its effect upon morals, some, like Adam Smith, answer the sort of criticism
Augustine levels against pagan poetry and theatrical presentations by holding
the theatre to be a legitimate, a lawful, even a necessary means of recreation.

SOME OF THESE issues touch on considerations The problem of dealt with in other
chapters. censorship is discussed in the chapters on ART and LIBERTY; and the
theory of imitation as applied to the arts in general, useful as well as fine,
is discussed in the chapter on ART. Here we are concerned with the bearing of
that theory upon the nature of poetry. The difference we have observed between
Plato and Aristotle concerning imitation itself does not seem to affect their
use of this notion in treating works of fine art, and more particularly poetry.
What Hamlet tells the players is the purpose of their play "to hold, as 'twere,
the mirror up to nature" Aristotle says is the aim of such arts as poetry,
sculpture, painting, music, and the dance, which give both instruction and
delightthrough imitation. Within the sphere of the fine arts, the distinction of
poetry from the others is usually made in terms of the medium of imitation.

Poetry, according to Aristotle, imitates through the medium of language;
painting and sculpture through lines, planes, colors, and shapes; music through
rhythm and harmony. Whether Aristotle's statement that "the objects of imitation
are men in action" applies to poetry alone or to all the fine arts, is a
question of interpretation to which opposite answers have been given. Some
commentators seem to think that human action as the object of imitation
specifically defines poetry, whereas music and sculpture have distinct objects
as well as dis- tinct mediums of imitation. Others hold that human action is the
object of imitation common to all the arts. However this issue is resolved, the
differentiation of the kinds of poetry can be made neither in terms of the
object nor the medium of imitation, but only in terms of the manner. "The medium
being the same and the object the same," Aristotle writes, "the poet may imitate
by narration in which case he can either take another personality as Homer does,
or speak in his own person, unchanged or he may present all his characters as
living and moving before us." Plato makes the same distinction, pointing out
that the Homeric type of poetry combines both the discourse of the poet and the
discourse of his characters in dialogue. He calls stage plays pure imitations in
the sense that the author never speaks directly, but tells his story entirely
through the actions and speeches of the characters; whereas the type of poetry
which he calls narrative as opposed to imitative may combine both methods of
storytelling or may, in some extreme instances, never resort to dialogue at all.
Since all storytelling is narration, and since all poetry is imitation, it seems
slightly confusing to call the two major types of poetry "narration" and
"imitation," as Plato sometimes does, or "narrative" and "dramatic," as
Aristotle sometimes does. Bacon also speaks of "narrative" and "dramatic" or
"representative" poetry. lie defines narrative poetry as "such an exact
imitation of history as to deceive, did it not often carry things beyond
probability," and dramatic poetry as "a kind of visible history, giving the
images of things as if they were present, whilst history represents them as
past." The difficulties of language seem to be removed by other terms which both
Plato and Aristotle use to express the main distinction. The manner of
storytelling, exemplified by Homer, which either employs direct narration
without dialogue or combines both, is epic poetry. That which uses dialogue
alone, is dramatic. These words "epic" and "dramatic" may have their
difficulties, too, especially for the contemporary reader, unless a number of
things are remembered. First, epics and dramas may CHAPTER 69: P be written
either in prose or verse. Second, the arts of theatrical representation are
auxiliary to the art of the dramatic poet. The writing of a play is completely
independent of its acting, "the production of spectacular effects depending," as
Aristotle says, "more on the art of the stage machinist than on that of the
poet." Third, epic poetry differs from dramatic poetry in other respects than
the use of indirect discourse as well as dialogue. On this last point, Aristotle
observes that all the elements of epic poetry are found in drama, whereas the
dramatic form may include the embellishments of song and spectacle in addition
to plot, character, thought, and diction. Even more important is his distinction
of the two in terms of the unities of time, place, and action. Because it need
not be limited at all in time and place, epic narration may have a much more
complicated plot structure or even, as Aristotle says, "a multiplicity of
plots." With this understanding of the distinction between the two major types
of storytelling, we can see why the great novels of Cervantes, Melville,
Tolstoy, and Dostoevsky should be classified as epic poems, and were apparently
so conceived by their authors, at least in the cases of Cervantes and Melville.
As measured by the magnitude of its plot its reach in time, and its scene the
whole universe "from Heaven, through the world, to Hell" Goethe's Faust, even
though dramatic in manner, seems to be no less epic in its structure and
proportions than the poems of Homer, Virgil, Dante, and Milton. The story of a
single white whale can be epic in its immensity if the storyteller, like
Melville, makes it "include the whole circle of the sciences, and all the
generations of whales, and men, and mastodons, past, present, and to come, with
all the revolving panoramas of empire on earth, and throughout the whole
universe, not excluding its suburbs."

ANOTHER TRADITIONAL division in the kinds of poetry is that between the tragic
and the comic. This distinction is variously expressed. Fielding sees the
difference in terms of the misery or happiness to which the poet brings his
principal characters in the end. Speaking of tragedy alone, Milton says that it
has ever been held "the gravest, moralest, and most profitable of OETRY all
other poems." In similar vein, Marcus Aurelius praises tragedy "for reminding
men of the things which happen to them and that it is according to nature for
things to happen so." He does not admit comedy to be of equal worth, though he
does look with some favor upon the older forms of comedy which were "useful in
reminding men to beware of insolence." According to Aristotle, "comedy
represents men as worse, tragedy as better than in actual life." He describes
the action which tragic poetry imitates as serious, adding that tragedies
"through pity and fear effect the proper purgation of these emotions." Whether
comedies also arouse and purge certain emotions Aristotle does not say, for his
promise to speak more fully of comic poetry is not fulfilled in the Poetics.
Concerning the meaning of the tragic catharsis, there are questions enough.
Augustine asks: "How is it that a man wants to be made sad by the sight of
tragic sufferings that he could not bear in his own person? . . . The more a man
feels such sufferings in himself, the more he is moved by the sight of them on
the stage. Now when a man suffers himself, it is called misery; when he suffers
in the suffering of another, it is called pity. But how can the unreal
sufferings of the stage possibly move pity?" Boswell begs Dr. Johnson to explain
Aristotle's doctrine of the purging of the passions as the purpose of tragedy.
"Why, Sir," Johnson replies, "you are to consider what is the meaning of purging
in the original sense.

It is to expel impurities from the body. The mind is subject to the same
imperfections. The passions are the great movers of human actions; but they are
mixed with such impurities, that it is necessary they should be purged or
refined by means of terror and pity. For instance, ambition is a noble passion;
but by seeing upon the stage, that a man who is so excessively ambitious as to
raise himself by injustice is punished, we are terrified by the fatal
consequences of such a passion. In the same manner a certain degree of
resentment is necessary; but if we see that a man carries it too far, we pity
the object of it, and are taught to moderate that passion." Johnson's
interpretation seems to be more specificthan Milton's notion that to purge the
passions by tragedy is "to temper and reduce TOE GREAT IDE them to just measure
with a kind of delight, stirr'd up by reading or seeing those passions well
imitated."

It may be arguable whether the difference between tragedy and comedy is well
defined by reference to the nobility or vulgarity of the leading characters; by
the contrast between the pride of the tragic and the wit of the comic hero; by
the seriousness or lightness of the tragic and comic themes and by the passions
appropriate to each. In any case it seems clear that this division of poetry
crosses the other division into epic and dramatic writing. The plays of
Sophocles and the Iliad of Homer, Aristotle observes, are tragic poetry, yet
dramatic and epic respectively in manner; but from another point of view,
Sophocles is to be compared with Aristophanes, for though the one writes
tragedies and the other comedies, both are dramatists. In the tradition of the
great books, there are comic as well as tragic epics Chaucer's Troilus and
Cressida, Rabelais' Gargantua and Pantagruel, Cervantes' Don Quixote, Sterne's
Tristram Shandy ', and Fielding's Tom Jones }\is. as there are tragic and comic
plays.

The examination of these suggests that talk rather than action is the essence of
comedy. The chief thing which Aristodemus remembers of Socrates' discourse the
morning after the banquet, in Plato's Symposium, is Socrates' success in
compelling Aristophanes and Agathon "to acknowledge that the genius of comedy
was the same as that of tragedy, and that the true artist in tragedy was an
artist in comedy also. To this they were constrained to assent, being drowsy,
and not quite following the argument." Precisely what they assented to has never
been entirely clear. On one interpretation of Socrates' remark, examples of his
point are difficult to find in the great books except, perhaps, for the plays of
Shakespeare which, in the sphere of dramatic poetry, seem to represent an equal
genius for tragic and comic writing. In the sphere of epic poetry, we have only
Aristotle's reference to a lost poem of Homer's the Margites which he says
"bears the same relation to comedy that the Iliad and Odyssey do to tragedy."
According to another interpretation the insight of Socrates is that the totality
of the great tragic vision tends to approximate the totality AS of the great
comic vision. The same poem may be both tragic and comic because the poet has
been able to see far enough into the nature of things to reveal a world which is
at once dreadful and ridiculous. In this sense Moby Dick may be both a tragedy
and a comedy. "Though in many of its aspects," Melville writes, "this visible
world seems formed in love, the invisible spheres were formed in fright"; but he
also remarks that "there are certain queer times and occasions . . . when a man
takes this whole universe for a vast practical joke." IN THE SCIENCE of poetics,
certain principles or rules seem to apply to all the major forms of poetry,
where others relate specifically to epic or dramatic writing, or to tragedy or
comedy. Aristotle implies that his most general formulations hold not only for
long poems, but for dithyrambic poetry as well. If that is so, they should be
capable of extension to other forms of lyric poetry, such as, for example, the
sonnets of Shakespeare and Milton, and Milton's odes and elegies. Yet the two
principal elements in Aristotle's analysis of poetry plot and characterseem,
superficially at least, to belong peculiarly to narrative poems, long or short.
Whether they are present in any comparable manner in the structure of a lyric,
or whether the form and content of lyric poetry requires an analysis peculiar to
itself, are among the most difficult questions in the theory of poetry. In the
tradition of the great books, there seems to be, as already observed, general
agreement about the basic rules for writing narrative poetry. Since these rules
aim to direct the artist toward the achievement of excellence, they are also the
basic principles of criticism. The science of poetics is at once an organon of
production and a canon of criticism. The simple rules such as those of plot
construction afford an example. A well constructed plot must have a beginning,
middle, and end. It must observe certain unities (at least of action, if not of
time and place). Certain effects, it is held, can best be produced by the use of
recognition scenes and reversals of fortune. Whether the events narrated are
possible or impossible, the poet must at least invest them with plausibility or
verisimilitude. Such rules, formulated by Aristotle and discussed by Ccr-
CHAPTER 69: vantes, Fielding, and others, provide standards for judging whether
a poem is skillfully made, as well as give directions for the attainment of
skill by the poet.

It may be held, of course, that the great poet works by inspiration, by a divine
madness rather than by rule; that, as Theseus says in A Midsummer-Night's Dream,
"the lunatic, the lover, and the poet are of imagination all compact .The poet's
eye, in a fine frenzy . . rolling, doth glance from heaven to earth, from earth
to heaven; and as imagination bodies forth the forms of things unknown, the
poet's pen turns them to shapes, and gives to airy nothing a local habitation
and a name." But if there is an art of poetry, then like any other art it is a
thing of rules, whether or not genius needs their guidance or can be regulated
by them.

The pivotal question here is, Which takes precedence, the creative or the
critical faculty? Does Aristotle's rule concerning the primacy of of antiqplot
derive from the greatest poems uity in which he found this principle observed?

Docs it set up an infallible measure of excellence in narration or, on the other
hand, do certain modern novels have an impeccable greatness despite their
violation of this rule by the emphasis they place on the development of
character rather than on the action in which the characters are involved? The
rule of probability and necessity may, on the other hand, be inviolable. Not
even the most original genius may be able to tell a good story without giving it
poetic truth, according to the necessities of the characters he has created and
the probabilities of the situations in which he places them.

ON THE SIDE of language, poetic theory seems to draw much from the art of
rhetoric. The relation of rhetoric to poetics, the nature of rhetorical
devicessuch as metaphor and simile, the choice among existing words or the
invention of new ones, are matters dealt with in the chapter on RHETORIC as well
as here. Aristotle's treatment of these problems both in his Rhetoric and his
Poetics lays the foundation for the traditional association of these two
disciplines. In both, for example, he discusses the various modes of metaphor
and their utility in achieving an expansion of meaning combined with a
contraction of speech.

POETRY This, in turn, relates to his general maxim of style which directs the
writer "to be clear without being ordinary. The clearest style," he says, "is
that which uses only current or proper words," but in order to avoid being
commonplace or ordinary, it must be admixed with lofty diction "raised above the
commonplace by the employment of unusual words. . . Nothing contributes more to
produce a . clearness of diction that is remote from commonness than the
lengthening, contraction, and alteration of words. . . . Phrases which are not
part of current idiom give distinction to style. . . . But the greatest thing by
far is to have a command of metaphor. This alone cannot be imparted by another;
it is the mark of genius for to make good metaphors implies an eye for
resemblances." One part of Aristotle's theory of style seems to be amplified by
Pascal's observation that a certain perfection is achieved by the use of those
words which, if altered, would spoil the discourse. In these terms, prosaic as
opposed to poetic writing does not result from the lack of a fixed metre but
rather from commonplaceness or lack of distinction in language. This standard of
style does not apply to poetry alone; for just as history and philosophy may be
written in prose or verse, so also may they be written poetically or
prosaically. Dr. Johnson's point that poetry cannot be translated, that "the
beauties of poetry cannot be preserved in any language except that in which it
was originally written," may be capable of the widest generalization. It may be
extended to mean that writing which is poetic cannot be translated into any
other form of words, even in the same language. A poetic sentence in English is
untranslatable in this absolute sense when no alternative English phrasing is
truly its equivalent. For example, it seems impossible to re-state, without loss
or ruin, Shakespeare's "Life is a tale told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
signifying nothing" or Hobbes' "Life in a state of nature is solitary, poor,
nasty, brutish, and short." The other part of Aristotle's theory of style, that
concerning metaphors, seems to be converted by William James into a general
distinction between poetic and philosophic thought, or what he calls "the
splendid and the analytic" THE GREAT I types of intellect. Poetic thought tends
to develop the implications of an analogy without giving an explication of its
grounds. This, in James' view, explains "the abrupt transitions in Shakespeare's
thought," which "astonish the reader by their unexpectedness, no less than
delight him by their fitness." Quoting a passage from Homer, unfathomably rich
in metaphor, he says that "a man in whom all the accidents of an analogy rise up
as vividly as this, may be excused for not attending to the ground of the
analogy." The two types of intellect are rarely found conjunction Plato,
according to in fames, being one of the few exceptions "whose strangeness proves
the rule."

ON THE LEVEL of thought and knowledge, as opposed to that of language, poetry is
traditionally contrasted to philosophy and history. As indicated in the chapter
on HISTORY, historians like Herodotus, Thucydidcs, and Plutarch emphasize the
difference rather than the similarity; the historian is a reporter of fact, the
poet a creator of fables or fictions. The one gains credence by his display of
evidence and reasons; the other, by the intrinsic plausibility of his tale. "In
a good poem," writes Hobbcs, "whether it be epic or dramatic . . . both judgment
and fancy are required, but the fancy must be more eminent ... In a good
history, the judgment must be eminent, because the goodness consists in the
method, in the truth . . . Fancy has no place but only in adorning the style."
Bacon associates poetry most intimately with history, both being concerned with
"individuals, circumscribed by time and place," and differing only as one
employs the imagination, the other the memory. Aristotle, on the other hand,
finds poetry and philosophy more alike, at least to the extent that poetry,
unlike history, "tends to express the universal," by which he means "how a
person of a certain type will on occasion speak or act, according to the law of
probability or necessity." Even if the poet "chances to take an historical
subject, he is none the less a poet; for there is no reason why some events that
have actually happened should not conform to the law of the probable and
possible, and in virtue of that quality in them he is their poet or maker." In
this sense the historian also may turn poet. Referring to the speeches in his
history, Thucydides tells us that it was his habit "to make the speakers say
what was in my opinion demanded of them by the various occasions, of course
adhering as closely as possible to the general sense of what they really said."
Some of the great poems, notably the Divine Comedy, Paradise Lost, and Faust,
are frequently called philosophical for what appear to be other reasons: either
because the discourse of their characters is weighted with doctrine, or because
the poet himself is expressing a doctrine, not in particular speeches, nor by
argument, but in the symbolism of the poem as a whole. By these criteria,
Lucretius' On the 'Nature of Things is a philosophical work, but not a
philosophical poem. It is argumentative throughout, not narrative at all; it
aims to be a rather than an allegorical statement of literal the truth. Bacon's
definition of allegorical as that "which represents intellectual poetry things
to the senses" seems to characterize both the poetic aspect of philosophy and a
distinctively philosophical type of poetry. Yet Aristotle's point, that poetry
and philosophy are alike, may remain valid. All poetry, certainly all the great
narrative poems, the great epics and dramas, novels and plays, deal with the
abiding problems of human action and the perennial themes of human thought. It
is not this moral or metaphysical content, however, which makes poetry more
philosophical than history. It is the poet's treatment of such matters. In the
persons and events of his story he succeeds in giving the universal a concrete
embodiment. Precisely because these are only imaginary, not real particulars,
they permit the abstract universal to be readily disengaged. Poets like Chaucer
and Cervantes, who insist that their function is to instruct as well as to
delight, do not assume the role of pedagogues or preachers. They teach, not
dogmatically, but as experience does, by affording the mind the materials or
occasions for insight and inference. As an artistic imitation, poetry may be
better than the experience it represents. It may improve upon experience as a
teacher, because, born of the poet's mind, it is already impregnated with ideas.

CHAPTER 69: POETRY

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of poetry: its distinction from other arts
 1a. The theory of poetry as imitation: the
 enjoyment of imitation
 1b. The object, medium, and manner of imitation in
 poetry and other arts

2. The origin and development of poetry: the materials of myth and legend
3.
The inspiration or genius of the poet: the influence of the poetic tradition

4. The major
kinds of poetry: their comparative excellence
 4a. Epic and dramatic poetry
 4b. Tragedy and comedy

5. Poetry in relation to knowledge
 5a. The aim of poetry to instruct as well as to delight: the pretensions or deceptions
 of the poet as teacher 41 ^
 5b. Poetry contrasted with history and philosophy: the dispraise and defense of the
 poet

6. Poetry and emotion
 6a. The expression of emotion in poetry
 6b. The arousal and purgation of the emotions by poetry: the catharsis of pity and
 fear
 7.
 The elements of poetic narrative
 its construction
 6c. Plot: its primacy;
 7& The role of character: its relation to plot
 6d. Thought
 and diction as elements of poetry
 6e. Spectacle
 and song in drama

8. The science of poetics: rules of art and principles of criticism
 8a. Critical standards and artistic rules with respect to narrative structure
 (1) The poetic unities: comparison of epic and dramatic unity
 (2) Poetic truth: verisimilitude or plausibility; the possible, the probable, and
 the necessary
 (3) The significance
 of recognitions and reversals in the development of plot
 8b. Critical standards and artistic rules with respect to the language of poetry: the
 distinction between prose and verse; the measure of excellence in style
 8c. The interpretation of poetry

9. The moral and political significance
of poetry
 9a. The influence of poetry on mind and character: its role in education
 9b. The issue concerning the censorship of poetry

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The comparison of poetry with history, philosophy, and
science, see HISTORY i ; KNO

40; PHILOSOPHY 1d; SCIENCE 2b; TRUTH 40.

The consideration of the fine arts in general, see ART 73; and for standards

ment with respect to the beauty or excellence of works of fine art,

ART 7

Another discussion of the theory of art as imitation, and for related doctri

FORM 1d(i).

The elements of inspiration, emotion, and tradition in the formation of poet

MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 3d.

Other aspects of the distinction between tragedy and comedy, see HAPPINESS 4

Matters related to the theory of emotional purgation, see ART 8; DESIRE 4d.

The place of poetics among the sciences, see PHILOSOPHY 2C.

The discussion of poetic truth and probability, see MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 7

Other considerations of the problem of style, see LANGUAGE 9; RHETORIC 2-2b.

Matters bearing on the interpretation of poetry, see RHETORIC 2d.

The role of poetry and other fine arts in education, see ART loa; EDUCATION

VICE 4d(4).

Other discussions of the problem of censorship, or of the political regulati

expression, see ART lob; EDUCATION 8c; EMOTION 56 LIBERTY 23. ;

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books ofthe Western World, but

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection.

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of T

BOCCACCIO. On Poetry

*

P. SIDNEY. An Apology for PLUTARCH. "How a Young Man Ought to Hear CORNEILLE.
Examens

Poems," in Moralia . Trots discours su AUGUSTINE. On Music MOLIERE. La critiqu
DANTE. De Vulgari Eloquentia School for Wives Critici

Epistle to Can Grande della Scala

. BOILEAU-DESPREAUX. The Ar HUME. Of the Standard of Taste DRYDEN. An Essay of
Dramat

Of Tragedy

. .

Of Heroic Plays GIBBON, An Essay on the Study of Literature, I-XLIII . A
Discourse Conce A. SMITH. "Of the Affinity Between Music, Dancing POPE. Essay on
Criticism

and Poetry," in Essays Philosophical and Literary Vico. The New Science, BK
GOETHE. Poetry and Truth J. HARRIS. Three Treatises

Conversations with Ecfyrmann

. The Second Concerning M

MILL. "Thoughts on Poetry and Its Varieties," J. S. Poetry. The Third Conce

in VOL i, Dissertations and Discussions Upon the Rise and Pro

.

TOLSTOY. What Is Art? BURKE. Hints for an Essay FREUD. Wit and Its Relation to
the Unconscious, CH . A

Philosophical Enq

5-7 Ideas of the Sublime an

GRAY. The Progress of Poes

**

KAMES. Elements of Critici HORACE. The Art of Poetry VOLTAIRE. Letters on the E
LONGINUS. On the Sublime "Art of Poetry," "Poe

.

DEMETRIUS. On Style Dictionary

WLEDGE of critical judgw 0; BEAUTY 2, 5. nes, see ART 3; ry, see ART 8; b. b;
TRUTH 4b. 4d; VIRTUE AND on of artistic relevant to the two groups: s cited,
consult he Great Ideas. Poetry r Van dramatique e de Vecole des femmes (The sed)
t of Poetry 1c Poesy rning . . . Satire ii-ni . The First Concerning Art. usic,
Painting, and rning Happiness gress of Criticism on the Drama uiry into the
Origin of Our d Beautiful, PART v y sm nglish, xvm-xx ts," in A Philosophical

CHAPTER LESSING. Laocoon BEATTIE. An Essay on Poetry and Music S. JOHNSON. Lives
of the

English Poets BLAIR. Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles Lettres SCHILLER. The Stage
as a Moral Institution

. On Simple and Sentimental Poetry WORDSWORTH. Preface to the Lyrical Ballads A.
W. SCHLEGEL. Lectures on Dramatic Art and

Literature COLERIDGE. Biographia Literaria, CH 4, 14-20 SCHOPENHAUER. The World
as Will and Idea, VOL

HI, SUP, CH 37 T. L. PEACOCK. Four Ages of Poetry SHELLEY. A Defense of Poetry
HAZLITT. Lectures on the English Poets

.

My First Acquaintance with Poets STENDHAL. Racine et Shakespeare HUGO. Preface
de 'Cromwell' DE QUINCEY. The Literature of Knowledge and the

Literature of Power T. CARLYLE. On Heroes, Hero-Worship and the

Heroic in History, LECT in EMERSON. "The Poet," m Essays, n

" HUNT. An Essay in Answer to the Question What Is

Poetry?" KIERKEGAARD. Either/Or

.The Point of View POE. The Poetic Principle TAINE. Essais de critique et
d'histoire NIETZSCHE. The Birth of Tragedy ARNOLD. Essays in Criticism

MEREDITH. An Essay on Comedy and the Uses of the

Comic Spirit FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART HI, en 3 CHEKHOV. Letters on the
Short Story, the Drama and

Other Literary Topics BERGSON. Laughter CLAUDEL. Poetic Art DILTHEY. Das
Erlebnis und die Dichtung

69: POETRY SHAW. Dramatic Opinions and Essays H. JAMES. The Art of the Novel
BABBITT. The New Laofyon KALLEN. The Boo[ ofJob as Greek Tragedy MARITAIN. Art
and Scholasticism (Frontiers of Poetry) JUNG. On the Relations of Analytical
Psychology to Poetic An ABERCROMBIE. The Theory of Poetry RICHARDS. Principles
of Literary Criticism

. Science and Poetry FORSTER. Aspects of the Novel LOWES. The Road to Xanadu
ROUTH. God, Man, and Epic Poetry Mum. The Structure of the Novel BUCHANAN.
Poetry and Mathematics H. E. READ. Form in Modern Poetry CROCK. Aesthetic as
Science of Expression

. The Defense of Poetry T. S. ELIOT. The Sacred Wood

. "The Function of Criticism," "Rhetoric and Poetic Drama," "A Dialogue on
Dramatic Poetry," in Selected Essays . The Use of Poetry and the Use of
Criticism

HOUSMAN. The Name and Nature of Poetry TATE. Reactionary Essays on Poetry and
Ideas YEATS. Letters on Poetry SANTAYANA. Interpretations of Poetry and
Religion, CH 2, 7, 10 . Reason in Art, CH 6

.

Soliloquies in England and Later Soliloquies,

CH 32-33. 37 .The Realm of Truth, CH 7

RANSOM. The World's Body VALERY. Variety .Introduction h la poétique

CASSIRER. The Myth of the State, PART i VAN DOREN. The Noble Voice SARTRE. What
Is Literature?
