Chapter jr. PROG INTRODUCTION TIKE the idea of evolution, with which it has I k
some affinity, the idea of progress seems to be typically modern. Anticipations
of it may be found in ancient and mediaeval thought, sometimes in the form of
implicit denials of the idea. But in explicit formulation, in emphasis and
importance, progress, like evolution, is almost a new idea in modern times. It
is not merely more prominent in modern discussion; it affects the significance
of many other ideas, and so gives a characteristic color or tendency to modern
thought. The idea of evolution affects our conceptions of nature and man. But
the theory of evolution is itself affected by the idea of progress. Since it was
a major theme at least two centuries before Darwin, progress does not depend for
its significance upon the theory of biological evolution. The reverse
relationship seems to obtain. The idea of evolution gets some of its moral,
social, even cosmic significance from its implication that the general motion in
the world of living things, perhaps in the universe, is a progress from lower to
higher forms. Darwin thinks "Von Baer has defined advancement or progress in the
organic scale better than anyone else, as resting on the amount of
differentiation and specialization of the several parts of a being" to which
Darwin adds the qualification that the organisms must be judged when they have
arrived at maturity. "As organisms have become slowly adapted to diversified
lines of life, their parts will have become more and more differentiated and
specialized for various functions from the advantage gained by the division of
physiological labor.The same part appears often to have been modified first for
one purpose, and then long afterwards for some other and quite distinct purpose;
and thus all the parts are rendered more and more complex. ... In accord- RESS
ance with this view,*' Darwin writes, "it seems, if we turn to geological
evidence, that organization on the whole has advanced throughout the world by
slow and interrupted steps. In the kingdom of the Vertebrata it has culminated
in man." Whether strictly biological evolution has a single or uniform direction
may be disputed in the light of evidences of regression and the multiplication
of lower as well as higher forms. But Darwin seems to think that since "natural
selection works solely by and for the good of each being, all corporeal and
mental endowments will tend to progress toward perfection." Whatever the
evidence may be, the popular notion of evolution, especially when applied by
writers like Herbert Spencer to human society or civilization, connotes progress
the gradual yet steady march toward perfection. APART FROM THIS APPLICATION of
the idea of evolution to man's world, progress seems to be the central thesis in
the modern philosophy of history. In the minds of some, the philosophy of
history is so intimately connected with a theory of progress that the philosophy
of history is itself regarded as a modern development. There seems to be some
justification for this view in modern works on the tendency of history which
have no ancient counterparts, such as the writings of Vico, Condorcet, Kant,
Proudhon, Comte, J. S. Mill, Hegel, and Marx. These writers do not all define or
explain progress in the same way. Nor do they all subscribe to an inviolable and
irresistible law of progress which has the character of a divine ordinance,
replacing or transforming less optimistic views of providence. But for the most
part the moderns are optimists. They either believe in man's perfectibility and
in his approach to perfection through his own efforts freely 437 438 turned
toward the realization of ideals; or they see in the forces of history whether
the manifestations of a world spirit or the pressure of material (t.c. economic)
conditions an inevit table development from less to more advanced stages of
civilization, according to a dialectical pattern of conflict and resolution,
each resolution necessarily rising to a higher level.

As opposed to the optimism of expecting a continual improvement in all things or
an irreversible ascent to new heights, the pessimistic view denies that progress
is either the law or the hope of history. It believes rather that everything
which goes up must come down. As indicated in the chapter on HISTORY, the theory
of cycle after cycle of rise and decline or even the notion that the golden age
is past, that it is never to be regained, and that things are steadily getting
worse prevails more in the ancient than in the modern world. The modern
exceptions to optimism in the philosophy of history are notably Spengler and, to
a much less extent, Toynbee. But modern pessimism never seems to reach the
intensity of the Preacher's reiteration in Ecclesiastes that "there is no new
thing under the sun" and that "all is vanity and vexation of spirit." Nor does
the modern theory of cycles of civilization, even in Vico, seem to be as radical
as that of the ancients. In his vision of cosmic cycles Lucretius sees the whole
world crumbling into atomic dust to be reborn again. Herodotus docs not relieve
the gloom of his observation that, in the life of cities, prosperity "never
continues long in one stay." The eternity of the world means for Aristotle that
"probably each art and each science has often been developed as far as possible
and has again perished."

LEAVING TO THE chapter on HISTORY the discussion of progress so far as it
concerns an explicit philosophy of history, we shall here deal with
considerations of progress as they occur in economics, in political theory, in
the history of philosophy and the whole intellectual tradition of the arts and
sciences. In this last connection, the great books play a dual role. They
provide the major evidence which, on different interpretations, points toward
opposite answers to the question whether or not there has been progress in the
AS tradition of western thought. Whatever their readers may think on this
subject, the great authors, having read the works of their predecessors, offer
their own interpretations of the intellectual tradition. In many cases,
especially among the modern writers, their point of departureeven the conception
they entertain of the originality and worth of their own contribution stems from
their concern with a deplorable lack of progress, for which they offer new
methods as remedies. Before we enter upon the discussion of economic, political,
or intellectual progress, it seems useful to distinguish between the fact and
the idea of progress. When men examine the fact of progress, they look to the
past and find there evidence for or against the assertion that a change for the
better has taken place in this or that respect. Two things are involved : a
study of the changes which have occurred and the judgmentbased on some standard
of appraisal that the changes have been for the better. But when men entertain
the idea of progress, they turn from the past and present and look to the
future. They regard the past merely as a basis for prophecy, and the present as
an occasion for making plans to fulfill their prophecies or hopes. The fact of
progress belongs to the record of achievement; the idea of progress sets a goal
to be achieved. This distinction seems to be exemplified by the difference
between ancient and modern considerations of progress. The ancients observe the
fact of progress in some particulars almost never universally. Thucydides, for
example, in the opening chapters of his History, contrasts the power and wealth
of the modern city-states of Greece with "the weakness of ancient times."
"Without commerce, without freedom of communication either by land or sea,
cultivating no more of their territory than the exigencies of life required,
destitute of capital,never planting their land (for they could not tell when an
invader might not come and take it all away, and when he did come they had no
walls to stop him), thinking that the necessities of daily sustenance could be
supplied at one place as well as another, they cared little for shifting their
habitation, and consequently neither built large cities nor attained to any
other form of greatness."

CHAPTER 71:

But Thucydides does not seem to draw from these observations any general idea of
progress. He does not concretely imagine a future excelling the Periclean age in
the magnitude of its wars and the magnificence of its wealth, as that period
dwarfs antiquity. He does not infer that whatever factors worked to cause the
advance from past to present may continue to operate with similar results. It
might almost be said that he does not think about the future; certainly he docs
not think of it as rich in promise. "Knowledge of the past." he writes, is "an
aid to the interpretation of the future, which in the course of human things
must resemble if it does not reflect it." Adam Smith's thinking about economic
progress represents the contrasting modern emphasis upon the future. In one
sense, both Thucydides and Smith measure economic progress in the same way,
though one writes of the wealth of cities, the other of the wealth of nations.

Both Smith and Thucydides judge economic improvement in terms of increasing
opulence, the growth of capital reserves, the expansion of commerce, and the
enlarged power in war or peace which greater wealth bestows. But Smith, in the
spirit of Francis Bacon, seeks to analyze the causes of prosperity in order to
make them work for further progress. He is the promoter of progress, not merely
the historian who witnesses the beneficial effect on productivity of an
increasingly refined division of labor and of the multiplication of machinery.
To know how these things have operated to bring about the opulence of modern
nations as compared with the miserable poverty of primitive tribes or even the
limited property of ancient cities is to know how to formulate policies which
shall still further expand the wealth of nations. For Smith the study of the
means and methods by which economic progress has been made serves to determine
the policy which is most likely to ensure even greater increments of progress in
the future.

MARX APPEARS TO measure economic progress by a different standard. The
transition from the slave economies of antiquity through feudal serfdom to what
he calls the "wage-slavery" of the industrial proletariat may be accompanied by
greater productivity and vaster accumula- PROGRESS tions of capital stock. But
the essential point for him about these successive systems of production is
their effect upon the status and conditions of labor. The Communist Manifesto
notes respects in which, under the capitalist system, the supposedly free
workingman is worse off than were his servile ancestors. But if economic
progress is conceived as the historically determined approach to the final
liberation of labor from its oppressors, then capitalism represents both an
advance over feudalism and a stage in the march to communism. Each successive
economic revolution brings mankind nearer to the goal of the ideal or classless
economy. Capitalism creates the proletariat the revolutionary class which is to
be that system's own undoing. The overthrow of the landed aristocracy by the
bourgeoisie thus prepares the way for the dictatorship of the proletariat, as
that in turn liquidates the obstacles to the realization of the perfect
communist democracy. We are not here concerned with the details of this history
and prophecy but only with the theory of progress which it involves. In the
first place, it seems to set an ultimate goal to progress, while at the same
time it makes progress a necessary feature of what is for Marx, as it is for
Hegel, the "dialectic of history." Those who think that the inevitability of
progress ought to render progress as interminable as history itself, find some
inconsistency in this tenet of dialectical materialism, as well as in Hegel's
notion of the necessary dialectical stages by which the Absolute Idea reaches
perfect realization in the German state. Can progress be the inner law of
history and yet reach its goal before the end of time? There may be some answer
to this question in a second aspect of the theory of progress which goes with a
dialectic of history. The progress which the successive stages of history
represent resides in the quality of human institutions rather than in the nature
of man. If more economic justice or greater political liberty is achieved, it is
not because the later generations of men are born with a nature more disposed to
goodness or virtue, but because better institutions have evolved from the
conflict of historical forces. Furthermore, according to Marx, man's nature is
only'partly de- 440 tcrmined at birth. Part remains to be determined by the
social and economic circumstances of his lifeby the system of production under
which he lives. Hence though institutional progress may arrive at its historical
goal with the establishment of the ideal economy, it may be possible for further
progress to be made throughout the rest of time by the improvement of men
themselves, when at last their natures can develop under ideal circumstances.

WE HAVE NOTED TWO great issues in the characteristically modern discussion of
progress. Is the goal of progress definitely attainable, or is itsgoal an ideal
progressively approximated but never realized ? Is progress accomplished by the
betterment of human institutions or by improvements in the nature of man? The
second question has a critical bearing on the first, especially for those who
conceive man as infinitely perfectible. It also relates to the problem of the
evolutionist: whether a higher form of life on earth will evolve from man or
whether the future belongs to the progressive development of human nature
biologically or culturally. Darwin is unwilling to admit that "man alone is
capable of progressive improvement," but he does affirm that man "is capable of
incomparably greater and more rapid improvement than is any other animal."

Rousseau, on the other hand, claims that "the faculty of self-improvement" is
one distinction between man and brute "which will admit of no dispute." But he
also thinks that this faculty is the cause of human decline as well as progress.
"A brute, at the end of a few months," he writes, "is all he will ever be during
his whole life, and his species, at the end of a thousand years, exactly what it
was the first year of that thousand .While the brute, . . . which has acquired
nothing and has therefore nothing to lose, still retains the force of instinct,
man, who loses, by age or accident, all that his perfectibility had enabled him
to gain, falls by this means lower than the brutes themselves." One other issue
concerning progress remains to be stated. It raises the question of freedom or
necessity in history. Is progress inevitable in the very nature of the case, or
does it occur only when men plan wisely and choose well in their AS efforts to
better themselves or the conditions of their lives ? In his Idea ofa Universal
History and his Principle of Progress, Kant finds the possibility of progress in
man's potentialities for improvement. He regards the realization of this
possibility as a work of freedom rather than a manifestation of historical
necessity. Political progress may have an ultimate goalthe world republic or
federation of states. But this, according to Kant's conclusion in the Science of
Right, is an impracticable idea, and serves only the regulative purpose of
"promoting a continuous approximation to Perpetual Peace." Hegel's theory of the
progressive realization of the idea of the state in history seems to represent
the contrary position on both points. Progress is an historical necessity, and
it reaches an historic consummation. THE CONTRAST BETWEEN ancients and moderns
with respect to political progress seems to be the same as that which we
observed between Thucydides and Adam Smith with regard to wealth. The ancients
assert the superiority of the present over the past, and even trace the stages
by which advances have been made from primitive to civilized conditions. But
they do not extend the motion they observe into the future. The moderns look to
the future as to a fulfillment without which present political activity would be
undirected. According to Aristotle, for example, the state stage in the
development of social life is the last which begins with the family. "When
several families are united, and the association aims at something more than the
supply of daily needs, the first society to be formed is the village." The
village or tribal community, in turn, becomes the unit out of which a larger and
more truly political community is formed. "When several villages are united in a
single complete community, large enough to be nearly or quite the state comes
into existence." self-sufficing, Aristotle sees this development not merely as a
progress from smaller and weaker societies to larger and more powerful ones, but
also as an advance toward the realization of man's political nature. Absolute or
despotic government by the eldest, natural to the family, still persists in the
tribe. "This is the reason why the Hellenic CHAPTER 71: PR states were
originally governed by kings; because the Hellenes were under royal rule before
they came together, as the barbarians still are." Not until the domestic or
tribal form of government is replaced by political or constitutional government
not until kings and subjects are replaced by statesmen and citizens is the state
or political community fully realized.

But Aristotle does not conceive the development he describes as one continuing
into the future. He does not imagine a larger political unity than the
city-state, as Kant is able to envisage a world state as the ultimate formation
toward which the progressive political unification of mankind should tend.
Though Aristotle recognizes that new institutions have been invented and old
ones perfected, his political theory, unlike Mill's, does not seem to measure
the goodness of the best existing institutions by their devotion to further
progress. Considering the criterion of a good form of government, Mill
criticizes those who separate the maintenance of order, or the preservation of
existing institutions, from the cultivation of progress. "Progress includes
Order," he writes, "but Order does not include Progress." Order "is not an
additional end to be reconciled with Progress, but a part and means of Progress
itself. If a gain in one respect is purchased by a more than equivalent loss in
the same or in any other, there is not Progress. Conducivencss to Progress, thus
understood, includes the whole excellence of government."

Progress fails to define good government, Mill adds, unless we understand by the
term not merely "the idea of moving onward," but "quite as much the prevention
of falling back.

The very same social causes ... are as much required to prevent society from
retrograding, as to produce a further advance. Were there no improvement to be
hoped for, life would not be the less an unceasing struggle against causes of
deterioration; as it even now is. Politics, as conceived by the ancients,
consisted wholly in this . . . Though we no longer hold this opinion; though
most men in the present age profess a contrary creed, believing that the
tendency of things, on the whole, is toward improvement; we ought not to forget
that there is an incessant and everflowing current of human affairs toward the
worse."

OGRESS According to Mill, the ideally best polity is representative government
on democratic principles. By a just distribution of political rights and by the
fullest grant of liberties, it serves better than any other form of government
"to promote the virtue and intelligence of the people themselves." This is the
ultimate end of political progress. Inferior forms of government, such as
despotic monarchy, may be justified for people as yet unfit for self-government,
but only if they also work for progress, i.e., "if they carry those communities
through the intermediate stages which they must traverse before they can become
fit for the best form of government." The whole theory of good government is
thus for Mill a theory of progress in which we must take "into account, not only
the next step, but all the steps which society has yet to make; both those which
can be foreseen and the far wider indefinite range which is at present out of
sight." We must judge the merits of diverse forms of government by that ideal
form "which, if the necessary conditions existed for giving effect to its
beneficial tendencies, would, more than all others, favour and promote not some
one improvement, but all forms and degrees of it." IN THE FIELD OF THE ARTS and
sciences or culture generally, the modern emphasis upon progress seems to be
even more pronounced than in the spheres of economics and politics. Lack of
progress in a science is taken to indicate that it has not yet been established
on the right foundations or that the right method for discovering the truth has
not yet been found. Lack of agreement in a particular field is the chief symptom
of these defects. The fact that philosophy "has been cultivated for many
centuries by the best minds that have ever lived, and that nevertheless no
single thing is to be found in it which is not a subject of dispute, and in
consequence which is not dubious," leads Descartes to propose his new method. He
hopes this may ensure progress in philosophy, of the same sort which the new
method has, in his view, accomplished in mathematics. The Novum Organum of Bacon
seems to be dedicated to the same end of progressively augmenting knowledge in
all those THE GREAT fields in which, according to the inventory made in the
Advancement of Learning of the present state of the sciences, no or little
progress has been made since antiquity. Similarly, Locke, Hume, and Kant insist
that a study of the human mind should precede all other studies in order to save
men from fruitless disputes concerning matters beyond their capacities
forknowledge; they hope thereby to encourage research in areas where progress
can be made. The comparison of different disciplines or subject matters with
respect to their progress leads to the condemnation of those which lag behind.
The great scientific advances of the ryth century tend to intensify the
complaint about philosophy, especially metaphysics. The progress which has been
made from the beginning in mathematics and more recently in physics means to
Kant that each of these disciplines has found the "safe way" or the "secure
path" of a science. By comparison, metaphysics has not yet even made a
beginning. A hundred years later, William fames is still to say that, by
comparison with the progress of knowledge in the natural sciences, metaphysics
belongs to the future. The notion that any field of learning has attained its
full maturity seems to Bacon to be the presumption of those philosophers who,
seeking "to acquire the reputation of perfection for their own art," try to
instill the "belief that whatever has not yet been invented and understood can
never be so hereafter." Whenever such belief prevails, learning languishes. "By
far the greatest obstacle to the advancement of the sciences, and the
undertaking of any new attempt or departure, is to be found in men's despair and
the idea of impossibility."

THOUGH THE ANCIENTS do not evidence this presumption of perfection in their arts
and sciences, neither do they fret about lack of progress. Nor does disagreement
of minds the seem to them to signify an unhealthy condition which requires new
and special methods to cure. "The investigation of the truth is in one way hard,
in another easy," writes Aristotle. "An indication of this is found in the fact
that no one is able to attain the truth adequately, IDEAS while, on the other
hand, we do not collectively foil,but everyone says something true about the
nature of things, and while individually we contribute little or nothing to the
truth, by the union of all a considerable amount is amassed." Aristotle puts the
intellectual tradition to use by adopting the policy of calling "into council
the views of those of our predecessors who have declared any opinion" on
whatever subject is being considered, "in order that we may profit by whatever
is sound in their suggestions and avoid their errors." But, in the opinion of
the moderns, the intellectual tradition can also be the greatest impediment to
the advancement of learning if it is received uncritically and with undue
reverence for the authority of the ancients. "The respect in which antiquity is
held today," Pascal says, "has reached such extremes in those matters in which
it should have the least preponderance, that one can no longer present
innovations without danger." This is the common complaint of Hobbes, Bacon,
Descartes, and Harvey. "The reverence for antiquity and the authority of men who
have been esteemed great in philosophy have," according to Bacon, "retarded men
from advancing in science, and almost enchanted them." Harvey agrees with Bacon
that philosophers or scientists should not "swear such fealty to their mistress
Antiquity, that they openly, and even in sight of all, deny and desert their
friend Truth." Harvey has a much higher opinion than Bacon of the achievements
of antiquity.

"The ancient philosophers," he writes, "whose industry even we admire, went a
different way to work, and by their unwearied labor and variety of experiments,
searching into the nature of things, have left us no doubtful light to guide us
in our studies. In this way it is that almost everything we yet possess of note
or credit in philosophy, has been transmitted to us through the industry of
ancient Greece." His admiration for the ancients does not, however, lead Harvey
to rest on their achievements. "When we acquiesce in the discoveries of the
ancients, and believe (which we are apt to do through indolence) that nothing
farther remains to be known," then, in his opinion, "we suffer the edge of our
ingenuity to be taken off, and the lamp which they delivered us to be CHAPTER
71: P extinguished. No one of a surety," he continues, "will allow that all
truth was engrossed by the ancients, unless he be utterly ignorant (to pass by
other arts for the present) of the many remarkable discoveries that have lately
been made in anatomy." In his own anatomical researches, Harvey adopts an
attitude toward the work of his predecessors, both ancient and recent, which
remarkably resembles the attitude expressed by Aristotle toward his scientific
forebears. "As we are about to discuss the motion, action, and use of the heart
and arteries, it is imperative on us," Harvey declares, "first to state what has
been thought of these things by others in their writings, and what has been held
by the vulgar and by tradition, in order that what is true may be confirmed, and
what is false set right by dissection, multiplied experience, and accurate
observation." It is precisely this attitude which Bacon expressly condemns.
Bacon sees no genuine method of science, but merely a cultivation of opinion, in
those who prepare themselves for discovery by first obtaining "a full account of
all that has been said on the subject by others." Those who begin in this way,
it is the judgment of Descartes, seldom go further. Particularly the followers
of Aristotle "would think themselves happy," he says, "if they had as much
knowledge of nature as he had, even if this were on the condition that they
should never attain to any more.

They are like the ivy that never tries to mount above the trees which
givesupport, and it which often even descends again after it has reached the
summit; for it appears to me that such men also sink again that is to say,
somehow render themselves more ingnorant than they would have been had they
abstained from study altogether. For, not content with knowing all that is
intelligibly explained in their author, they wish in addition to find in him the
solution of many difficulties of which he says nothing, and in regard to which
he possibly had no thought at all." Pascal takes a more moderate view. We can
profit, he thinks, from a limited respect for the ancients. "Just as they made
use of those discoveries which have been handed down to them only as a means for
making new ones and this happy audacity opened the road to great ROGRESS things,
so," Pascal suggests, "must we accept those which they found for us and follow
their example by making them the means and not the end of our study, and thus
try to surpass them by imitating them. For what would be more wrong than to
treat the ancients with more caution than they did those who preceded them, and
to have for them this inviolable respect which they only deserve from us because
they did not feel a similar respect for those who had the same advantage over
them ?" MODERN WRITERS SEEM to conceive the law of intellectual progress by an
analogy between the mind of the race and the individual mind. Where Aquinas says
merely that "it seems natural to human reason to advance gradually from the
imperfect to the perfect," adding, in the past tense, that hence the imperfect
teaching of early philosophers "was afterwards perfected by those who succeeded
them," Pascal generalizes the insight and gives it future significance. "Not
only does each man progress from day to day in the sciences, but all men
combined make constant progress as the universe ages, because the same thing
happens in the succeeding generations of men as in the different ages of each
particular man. So that the whole succession of men, in the course of so many
centuries, should be regarded as the same man who exists always and learns
continually." At this point Pascal applies his metaphor to effect a reversal of
the relation between the moderns and the ancients. "Since old age is the time of
life most distant from childhood, who does not realize that old age in this
universal man should not be sought in the times closest to his birth, but in
those which are farthest away from it? Those whom we call ancients were really
novices in all things, and actually belonged to the childhood of man; and as we
have added to their knowledge the experience of the centuries which followed
them, it is in ourselves that may be found this antiquity which we revere in
others." Whether by accident or borrowing, this modern view of the
advancharacteristically tage progress confers upon modernity is expressed in
similar language by Hobbes and Bacon. "Though I reverence those men of ancient
times," writes Hobbes, "who either have written truth perspicuously or have set
us in a avoidance of two extrem better way to find it out for ourselves; yet to
antiquity and novelty, the antiquity itself I think nothing due; for if new
improvements, and we will reverence age, the present is the oldest." to add
without defacin "Antiquity, as we call it," writes Bacon, "is the serves that
men should young state of the world; for those times are view around which is th
ancientwhen the world is ancient; and not books of the past can those we
vulgarly account ancient by comput- progress, but only if t ing backwards; so
that the present time is the "Let great authors, th real antiquity." Bacon
declares, "but so To secure a sound, not specious, progress in which is the
author of all things of the mind, Bacon recommends the of truth."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The idea of progress in the philosophy of history
 1a. Providence and necessity in the theory of progress: the dialectical development
 of Spirit or matter; conflict as a source of progress
 1b. Optimism or meliorism: the doctrine of human perfectibility
 1c. Skeptical or pessimistic denials of progress: the golden age as past; the cyclical
 motion of history

2. The idea of progress in the theory of biological evolution
3.
Economic progress
 2a. The increase of opulence: the division of labor as a factor in progress
 2b. The improvement of the status and conditions of labor: the goals of revolution
 and reform
 2c. Man's progressive conquest of the forces of nature through science and invention

4. Progress in politics
 4a. The invention and improvement of political institutions: the maintenance of
 political order in relation to progress
 4b. The progressive realization of the idea of the state
 4c. The growth of political freedom: the achievement
 of citizenship and civil rights

5. Forces operating against social progress: emotional opposition to change or novelty;
political conservatism

6. Intellectual or cultural progress: its sources and impediments
 6a. Progress in the arts
 6b. Progress in philosophy and in the sciences
 6c. The use and criticism of the intellectual tradition: the sifting of truth from error;
 the reaction against the authority of the past
 6d. Plans for the advancement of learning and the improvement of method in the
 arts and sciences
 6e. Freedom of expression and discussion as indispensable to the progressive
 discovery
 of the truth

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The general discussion of the philosophy of history, see
DIALECTIC 2d; HIST

4b; and for the consideration of fate, fortune, and freedom in relation

CHANCE 20; FATE 3; HISTORY 43(1); LIBERTY 43; NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY

The religious aspects of optimism and pessimism, see GOD 7ThTh, 8e, 9f; HIST

4c-4d.

The notion of progress in the theory of biological evolution, see EVOLUTIO

Other discussions of the myth of a golden age, see LABOR ra; MAN 93; TIME

Discussions relevant to the theme of economic progress, see LABOR 43, 5a-5

LIBERTY 6b; REVOLUTION 43, 5c; SLAVERY 3c, 5b; WEALTH Qb, 12.

Discussions relevant to the theme of political progress, see CONSTITUTION

4d, 7; GOVERNMENT 6; LIBERTY 6a-6c; MONARCHY 46(2); SLAVERY 5b; STATE 23

TYRANNY 8; and for the distinction between Utopian and practical ideals

political progress, see CITIZEN 8; STATE 6, icf; WAR AND PEACE iid.

Attitudes toward change which have a bearing on progress, see CHANGE i2b;

CONVENTION 8; TIME 7.

Evidences of progress in the arts and sciences, and for the comparative pr

fields of learning, see ART 12; KNOWLEDGE 10; PHILOSOPHY 7.

The conditions on which intellectual progress depends, see KNOWLEDGE 9b; L

OPINION 5b; SCIENCE 6a-6b; SIGN AND SYMBOL 4c; TRUTH 6, 8d.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided in

I, Works by authors represented in this collection.

II, Works by authors not represented in this collectio

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the wo

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

ROUSSEAU. Discourse on

I.

KANT. The Idea of a Uni SWIFT. The Battle of the Boof(s Political Plan HUME. Of
the Rise and Progress of the Arts and The Principle of P

.

Sciences HEGEL. The Phenomenolog

6d to 6e ion and discussion as to the progressive distruth 601c602c ions, BK i,
SECT 14 254b-c ions and Replies, 283c-d I, SECT 20 319D-C , 15c / Human
Understandica 381a-412b esp bstanding, SECT xi, DIV and Fall, 668d-671 b esp
669b, nd Fall, 523a , 220b-221b; 223a-c 4b-293b; 297b-299a ORY 4a(2)~4 to
progress, see 3. ORY 53; PROPHECY N 4d. 8b. d, 70(2), 7f; 10; DEMOCRACY (3); as
goals of CUSTOM AND ogress of different ANGUAGE 6; but relevant to the to two
groups: n. rks cited, consult The Great Ideas. the Arts and Sciences versal
History on a Cosmorogress y of Mind, vi, B (11)

CHAPTER 71: PRO

J. S. MILL. "Civilization," in VOL i, Dissertations

and Discussions

II.

Vico. The New Science VOLTAIRE. Candide

"Optimism," in A Philosophical Dictionary

.

FERGUSON. An Essay on the History of Civil Society,

PART III LESSING. Nathan the Wise

The Education of the Human Race

. HERDER. Outlines of a Philosophy of the History of

Man CONDORCET. Outlines of an Historical View of the

Progress of the Human Mind MALTHUS. An Essay on Population, BK in PROUDHON. The
Philosophy of Misery RENAN. The Future of Science TENNYSON. Locksley Hall

In Memoriam

. SCHOPENHAUER. Studies in Pessimism COMTE. The Positive Philosophy, BK vi

,

System of Positive Polity, VOL in, Social Dynamics

LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK vin

J. H. NEWMAN. An Essay on tJie Development of

Christian Doctrine

. Callista

GRESS SPENCER. Progress: Its Law and Cause BAGEHOT. Physics and Politics S.
BUTLER. Erewhon GEORGE. Progress and Poverty T. H. HUXLEY. Methods and Results,
I-H MAINE, Ancient Law

.

Popular Government, HI BELLAMY. Looking Backward FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART
i, CH 3, 5; PART H, CH 7; PART vn SUMNER. The Absurd Effort to Ma{e the World
Over JENSEN. The Long Journey SOREL. Les illusions du progres B. RUSSELL.
Proposed Roads to Freedom, CH 4-8 SPENGLER. The Decline of the West BURY. The
Idea of Progress WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern World, CH 13 WELLS. The World
of William Clissold DAWSON. Progress and Religion MACIVER. Society; Its
Structure and Changes SHAW. Bad{ to Methuselah

. Doctors' Delusions A. J. TOYNBEE. A Study of History VIII, X MARITAIN.
Theonas, Conversations of a Sage, vn. True Humanism

. Scholasticism and Politics, en 9

SIMON. Community of the Free, CH 3
