Chapter 71: PROP INTRODUCTION '"T" T HE name of prophet signifies, throughout a
great part of the western tradition, an eminence and dignity not shared by the
scientist, the philosopher, the statesman, or even the sage. The soothsayer and
the seer in pagan antiquity and the prophet of the Lord in Israel do not claim
to speak from a merely human wisdom or to declare truths they have learned by
inquiry or reflection. Nor are their utterances concerned with the nature of
things. The prophet claims to know what men cannot know by any exercise of human
powers. He enjoys speHe is divinely inspired. He is incial gifts. structed by
God or has in some way been admitted to the secrets of the gods. His knowledge
is not only of supernatural origin; it deals with supernatural matters. Prophecy
is more than a prediction of the future. It unveils what Fate holds in store for
men; it foretells the course of providence. In most cases, the future predicted
has deep moral significance, expressing the pleasure or displeasure of the gods
with individuals or nations, or manifesting Clod's justice in the rewards
promised those who keep His commandments, and the punishments awaiting those who
break them. The prophet's foresight discerns more than the future; it discovers
what men can hope for or must fear according to their merits, not in the eyes of
men but in the sight of God. This understanding of prophecy seems to be involved
in the major issues which the great books raise about prophets. For example, the
problem of distinguishing between true and false prophets goes beyond the mere
truth or falsity of a prophet's utterances to the validity of his claim to
special sources of knowledge or a supernaturally inspired understanding of
dreams and visions, omens and portents. The false prophet is not like the
mistaken scientist or philosopher just a person in error. He is either a HECY
deceiving impostor or a self-deceived victim of his own pathology. Similarly,
the Christian theologians who criticize the pagan cult of oracles and all forms
of divination which seek to pry into divine mysteries, seem to imply that the
seers and soothsayers of Greece and Rome, unlike the Hebrew prophets, did not
have the gift of prophecy. The acceptance or rejection of prophets and of ways
of foreseeing what has been planned in Heaven cannot, it seems, be separated
from a whole system of religious beliefs. In this respect, prophets arc like
miracles. Without faith, both are incredible. "There be two marks," writes
Hobbes, "by which together, not asunder, a true Prophet is to be known. One is
the doing of miracles; the other is the not teaching any other religion than
that which is already established." In Hobbes' view, that there be a religion
already established among a people is the one indispensable condition for their
reception of prophets or their experience of miracles. Issues concerning
prophecy may, therefore, occur within a single religious community, or be
relative to differences between religious communities, as, for example, the
opposition between the Jewish and Christian interpretation of the messianic
prophecies in the Old Testament. Necessarily, then, there is an issue between
the unbelievers and the religious of any faith. Those who deny the existence of
God or the gods, or divine agency in the temporal affairs of men, and certainly
those who deny the credentials of revelation, cannot but regard prophets as
misled and misleading and those who accept prophecy as gullible or
superstitious. In the pagan tradition, a philosopher like Aristotle may,
however, be critical of divination, and an historian like Thucydides may cast
doubt on oracles, without discredit- CHAPTER 72: PROP ing all other religious
beliefs or being themselves atheists. Some who reject religious prophecy do not
concede that man's natural desire to peer into the future need be completely
balked. But the secular substitutes for religious prophecy appear to alter the
meaning of prophecy. Scientific predictions of the future of the world or of
life on this planet (as, for example, those which occur in the writings of
Lucretius or Darwin) may be accompanied by attributions of moral qualities to
Nature, but usually they connote Nature's sublime indifference to man's welfare.
They are seldom, if ever, read as promises or threats of what man deserves to
have befall him.

Similarly, historians turned prophets, or philosophers of history who, like
Spcngler, prophesy decline and doom, do not exhort men to avert disaster, as do
the prophets of the Old Testament. Nor do those who, like Hegel and Marx,
foresee the ultimate goal toward which events inevitably march, urge men to
prepare themselves for it as do the prophecies of the New Testament, which speak
of the second coming of Christ. Secular prophecies which bespeak the inevitable
operation of necessary causes are, in this respect, like pagan previsions of
Fate. At most, they leave man only the illusion of free choice. Jewish and
Christian prophecy, in contrast, addresses man as a responsible agent, who, even
when he knows something of God's will, remains free to will good or evil for
himself. If, according to the theologians, divine providence or predestination
does not abolish human freedom, neither does prophetic knowledge of the divine
plan." These matters are discussed elsewhere secular prophecy in the chapters on
HISTORY and PROGRESS, and the problem of foreknowledge and freedom in the
chapters on FATE and NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY. IN PAGAN ANTIQUITY, prophecy
does not seem to be confined to men especially appointed by the gods. The gods
themselves foretell the future to men. When people wish to know the future, they
go or send emissaries to the temple at Delphi over which a goddess, the
Pythoness, presides. The institution of the oracles, of which Delphi is perhaps
the most illustrious HECY example, leaves foresight in the hands of the gods;
for, as most of the anecdotes in Herodotus and Thucydides show, only the
Pythoness herself knows unequivocally the meaning of her oracular utterances. To
men is left the task of interpreting what the oracle means. The pagan unlike the
Hebrew prophet seems to be a man of skill in penetrating the secrets of the gods
a skill which may itself be divinely bestowed but he is not a man to whom the
gods have spoken plainly, so that he may in turn unerringly advise others. "No
man, when in his wits," according to Plato, "attains prophetic truth and
inspiration." There are passages in the Greek poets and historians which seem to
suggest that the gods begrudge men too clear a vision of the future, and may
even on occasion mislead them or at least permit them to be misled. In
Aeschylus' play, Prometheus declares that "because he gave to men gifts claimed
by the gods," he is "bound in durance here." He gave them radiant fire, the
mechanical arts; he "took from men the expectancy of Death"; he gave them
medicines and healing drugs. Last in his own enumeration and in a sense most
significant, he endowed men with the divine gift of foresight. "I drew clear
lines for divination," Prometheus says, "and discerned (before all others) what
from dreams is sure to come to pass in waking. I disclosed the mysteries of
omenbringing words, and pathway tokens, and made plain the flight of taloned
birds, both of good augury and adverse ... I cleared the way for mortals to an
art hard of discernment, and made bright and clear fire-auguries, heretofore
obscure and blind." The chorus questions whether "the power of creatures
creeping for an hour" shall by wisdom overpass the bounds set for their little
lives by "the mind of Zeus." Does the wisdom of foreknowledge, gained through
the arts of divination, give men strength to resist the will of the gods or to
struggle against them? Prometheus himself is the answer to the question. The
power he wields over Zeus, which Zeus tries to wrest from him by bribes and
threats and by the infliction of titanic pain, is the foreknowledge which
Prometheus possesses of the doom to befall the son of Kronos. No threat of Zeus
will get him to divulge it, THE GREAT I Prometheus says, because "nought can
surprise me who foreknow Nought in his power . . . shall bend me to reveal whom
Fate prepares to work his overthrow."

A myth which Socrates relates in the Gorgias appears to contain a sequel to the
legend as told by Aeschylus. It also seems to confirm the point that foresight
is a divine privilege in which men should not share, lest they become too
god-like. According to the myth, Zeus, in order to prevent men from evading the
divine judgment, says: "In the first place, I will deprive men of the
foreknowledge of death; this power which they have, Prometheus has already
received my orders to take from them." The oracles never make the future so
plain that men can act with a foreknowledge equal to that possessed by the gods,
but sometimes oracular utterances seem to be contrived not merely to veil the
future, but to lead men astray. Herodotus tells the story of Miltiades who, on
the advice of Timo, a priestess of the goddesses of the underworld, acted in a
way which brought him to grief. When the Parians sent to Delphi to ask whether
Timo should be punished for this, the Pythoness forbade them, saying, "Timo was
not at fault; 'twas decreed that Miltiades should come to an unhappy end; and
she was sent to lure him to his destruction." There is also the story, told by
Thucydides, of Cyclon who, inquiring at Delphi, was told to seize the Acropolis
of Athens on the grand festival of Zeus. This, too, turned into a disastrous
misadventure, apparently because, as Thucydides observes, "whether the grand
festival that was meant was in Attica or elsewhere was a question he never
thought of, and which the oracle did not offer to solve." For the most part,
however, the calamities which befall men who seek guidance from the oracle seem
to be due to their own misinterpretation of the Delphic deliverance, itself
always admittedly difficult to understand. Herodotus and Thucydides abound with
such stories, and also with instances in which the same oracular statement is
given conflicting interpretations, one of which must be wrong.

Nevertheless, Herodotus declares himself unwilling "to say that there is no
truth in prophecies," and he is certainly not willing to question "those which
speak with clearness." Giv- ing an example of a clear prediction, he adds, "When
I look to this, and perceive how clearly Bacis spoke, I neither venture myself
to say anything against prophecies, nor do I approve of others impugning them."

Thucydides appears to take a contrary view. He singles out one example as "an
instance of faith in oracles being for once justified by the event." He puts
into the speech of the Athenians at the Melian Conference the warning not to "be
like the vulgar, who, abandoning such security as human means may still afford,
when visible hopes fail them in extremity, turn to invisible, to prophecies and
oracles, and other such inventions that delude men with hopes to their
destruction." THE PROBLEM OF THE reliability of prophecies, and of the faith or
credulity of those who rely upon them, applies not only to oracles, but also to
dreams or visions, and to omens and portents of all sorts. Two stories about
Croesus, told by Herodotus, show that oracles and dreams can be equally
ambiguous and are equally liable to misinterpretation. Croesus dreamed that his
son Atys would die by the blow of an iron weapon. Subsequently when Atys wished
to go boar hunting with Adrastus, he persuaded Croesus that the dream could not
have been a warning against this undertaking because a boar does not have hands
to strike with, nor does it wield iron weapons. But during the hunt Atys was
killed by the spear which Adrastus intended for the boar. On another occasion,
Croesus inquired of Delphi how long his kingdom would last. The Pythoness
answered, in effect, until "a mule is monarch in Media." This not only pleased
him because "it seemed incredible to him that a mule should ever become king of
the Medes," but also gave him confidence when he engaged in war with the Medes
and Persians, led by Cyrus. The war ended in his defeat and capture but,
according to Herodotus, he had no right to complain of the oracle because "he
had misunderstood the answer which had been given him about the mule. Cyrus was
that mule; for the parents of Cyrus were of different races and of different
kinds" his mother a Median princess, his father a Persian subject. The attitude
of the ancients toward these CHAPTER 72: PR various instruments of prophecy or
divination does not seem to be consistent or constant. Herodotus reports at one
place how Xerxes, "despising the omens," carried out his plans against their
forebodings; and at another how an eclipse of the moon, being interpreted as of
good omen, rejoiced Xerxes who, "thus instructed, proceeded on his way with
great gladness of heart." And again, when Xerxes reports to Artabanus the advice
concerning his war against the Greeks which he received from a dream apparition,
Artabanus scoffs, saying, "Such things, my son, have of truth nothing divine in
them Whatever a man has been . . . thinking of during the day, is wont to hover
round him in the visions of his dreams at night." But when Artabanus himself
experiences the same apparition which had occurred to Xerxes in his dream and,
in addition to giving the same advice, the vision threatens him, Artabanus
changes his mind about dreams and reverses his policy with regard to the
expedition against Greece. "As to the divination which takes place in sleep, and
is said to be based on dreams," Aristotle writes, "we cannot lightly either
dismiss it with contempt or give it implicit confidence." Nevertheless, he
himself seems to conclude that most so-called prophetic dreams are "to be
classed as mere coincidences"; and that "dreams are not sent by God, nor are
they designed for this purpose," /.*., foretelling the future. One proof that
they are not sent by God is, in his opinion, the fact that the persons having
them "are not the best and wisest but merely commonplace persons." The fact that
"the power of foreseeing the future and of having vivid dreams is found in
persons of inferior type implies that God does not send them."

THE CHRISTIAN THEOLOGIANS, distinguishing between prophecy and divination,
condemn the latter as a kind of presumption or impiety.

Though their criticism seems to be directed especially against astrology, it
applies to the interpretation of terrestrial as well as celestial signs.
Augustine refers to "the lying divinations and impious dotages of the
astrologers," and Aquinas explains how the astrologers are able to foretell
things in a general way without OPHECY attributing to them any genuinely
prophetic power. In his consideration of the difference between true and false
religion, Hobbes goes further than the theologians in condemning "the
innumerable other superstitious ways of divination," such as "the ambiguous or
senseless answers of the priests at Delphi, Delos, Ammon, and other famous
oracles," or "the prediction of witches that pretended conference with the dead,
which is called necromancy, conjuring, and witchcraft, and is but juggling and
confederate knavery," or, in general, the recourse to omens, portents, and
dreams for purposes of prognostication. That the things Hobbes calls
superstitious are not confined to pagan antiquity is manifest in Shakespeare's
Macbeth. The witches and the omens there are like the soothsayers and the
portents in Julius Caesar', and Macbeth's misunderstanding of "'til Birnam
Forest come to Dunsinane" is as fatal as Croesus' reliance on "until a mule is
monarch in Media." In one other respect, pagan and Christian cultures seem to
exhibit a certain parallelism with regard to the belief in supernatural
foreknowledge. The spirits of the departed, in the Odyssey and the Aeneid, are
able to inform the visitor to the underworld of coming events on earth. They
speak plainly and with perfect prescience. The veil which hides the future from
mortal eyes has been lifted. So, too, the damned souls and the blessed foretell
future things to Dante, no less accurately though less extensively than, in
Paradise Lost, the archangel Michael unfolds to Adam the whole future history of
mankind. But so far as the foreknowledge of mortal men is concerned, the Hebrew
prophets seem to be unique. Unlike pagan diviners or soothsayers, they do not
probe the future in order to help men anticipate the turns of fortune or the
lines of fate. They do not have to employ arts or devices for penetrating divine
secrets. God speaks to them directly and, through them, to the Chosen People.
For the most part their prophetic speeches, unlike those of the oracles, seem to
be unambiguous. At least the intention seems to be to reveal, not to conceal,
God's plan on such matters as He Himself wishes men to foresee the course of
providence.

458 Where pagan prognosticators may claim to be divinely inspired in the sense
of having special powers of interpretation, the Hebrew prophets speak from a
different kind of supernatural inspiration. They are the vessels through which
the Lord Himself speaks. They are interpreters only in that they make known to
others what God has made known to them. The content of the divine communication
is seldom exclusively a foretelling of the future. It is often accompanied by
instruction concerning the actions to be performed by the Jewish peoplethe
direction of their conduct toward the Promised Land or the rebuilding of the
Temple. Sometimes when the prophecy is one of doom rather than of hope, as in
the case of the destruction of Jerusalem, the Babylonian captivity, or the
dispersion of Israel, the prediction of the future is accompanied by moral
instruction of another sort the lessons of the Law which the Jews have forsaken,
meriting thereby the punishments the prophets foresee. Mere prognostication does
not seem to be the chief purpose of Hebrew prophecy, fust as the Covenant which
God makes with Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob consecrates the Jewish people to a
special mission; just as the Law which God hands down through Moses sets them
apart from the Gentiles and prescribes for them the way of righteousness and
sanctity; so the revelations of God's providence through the prophets tend to
remind the Chosen People of the meaning of the Covenant and the Law as well as
to disclose their destiny as a nation. The prophets speak not only of the
future, but of the present and the past. They are divinely appointed teachers,
no less than the patriarchs and Moses. Yet they may rank below Moses (who is
sometimes also regarded as a prophet) by reason of the manner in which they are
addressed by God. As Hobbes points out, "God himself in express words declareth
that to other prophets he spake in dreams and visions, but to his servant Moses,
in such manner as a man speaketh to his friend" face to face.

The content of Hebrew prophecy, in short, seems to be continuous with the rest
of God's revelation of Himself to His Chosen People. The difference between the
prophets as the instruments of God's teaching and the pagan philosophers as
merely human teachers seems to AS Augustine plainly shown by the agreement of
the prophets with one another and by their continuity with Moses and the
patriarchs; whereas Augustine can find nothing but disagreement and dissension
among even the best teachers of the pagans. Among them, false teachers or
prophets seem to be accorded the same recognition and to attract the same
following as true. "But that nation," Augustine writes, "that people, that city,
that republic, these Israelites, to whom the oracles of God were entrusted, by
no means confounded with similar license false prophets with the true prophets;
but, agreeing together, and differing in nothing, acknowledged and upheld the
authentic authors of their sacred books. These were their philosophers, these
were their sages, divines, prophets, and teachers of probity and piety. Whoever
was wise and lived according to them was wise and lived, not according to men,
but according to God who hath spoken to them." Hobbes also conceives the
prophets of the Old Testament as more than foretellers of the future. "The name
of prophet," he writes, "signifies in Scripture sometimes prolocutor] that is,
he that speaketh from God to man, or from man to God; and some times predictor,
or a foreteller of things to come." In addition to their being divinely
appointed teachers, the prophets, according to Hobbes, seem to perform a
political function. They check the power of the kings, or seek to awaken their
consciences to the dictates of justice and mercy. "Through the whole history of
the kings, as well of Judah as of Israel, there were prophets that always
controlled the kings for transgressing the religion; and sometimes also for
errors of state." A secular view of the Hebrew prophets seems to give prominence
to their political role in the theocratic community of the Jews. Comparing the
Jewish state with other sacerdotal societies, Mill observes that "neither their
kings nor their priests ever obtained, as in those other countries, the
exclusive moulding of their character. . . . Their religion gave existence to an
inestimably precious unorganized institution the Order (if it may be so termed)
of the Prophets. Under the protection, generally though not always effectual, of
their sacred character, the Prophets were a power in the nation, often CHAPTER
72: P more than a match for kings and priests, and kept up, in that little
corner of the earth, the antagonism of influences which is the only real
security for continued progress."

As THERE is A BODY of prophetic doctrine in the Old Testament, so the religion
of the Gospels contains a number of prophetic beliefs peculiar to Christian
doctrine. Such, for example, is the prophecy of the second coming of Christ, the
prophecy of the Last Judgment on that occasion, and the prophecy of a final
conflagration to cleanse the world, which will precede the resurrection of the
body as that in turn precedes the general judgment of souls. Aquinas discusses
the various signs which will foretell the imminence of these events. He also
raises the question whether the time of the end of the world and of the
resurrection can be known exactly. On this he agrees with Augustine that "that
time is hidden from men." It cannot be calculated by natural reason, nor is it
revealed. "Of that day and hour," it is written in Matthew, "no one knoweth, no,
not the angels of heaven." When the apostles asked Christ about His second
coming, He answered, according to Saint Paul, "It is not for you to know the
times or moments which the Father hath put in His own power."

What Christ refused to tell the apostles, Aquinas adds, "He will not reveal to
others. Wherefore all those who have been misled to reckon the aforesaid time
have so far proved to be untruthful; for some, as Augustine says, stated from
our Lord's ascension to His last coming years would elapse, others 500, others i
,000. The falseness of these calculators is evident, as will likewise be the
falseness of those who even now cease not to calculate." The single greatest
prophecy in the JudaeoChristian tradition is, perhaps, the messianic prophecy
the foretelling of a Messiah or of a messianic age. The prediction of a Messiah
or Saviour, who shall be born of the house of David and shall be king of the
Jews, runs throughout the prophetic books of the Old Testament, though with
different degrees of explicitness and varying imagery in Daniel and Jeremiah, in
Isaiah and Ezekiel. "The Lord himself shall give you a sign," says Isaiah.
"Behold a virgin shall conceive and ROPHECY bear a son, and shall call his name
Immanuel. . . . For unto us a child is born, unto us a son is given," Isaiah
goes on, "and the government shall be upon his shoulder, and his name shall be
called Wonderful, Counsellor, The mighty God, The Everlasting Father, The Prince
of Peace. Of the increase of his government and peace, there shall be no end,
upon the throne of David and upon his kingdom, to order it and to establish it
with justice from henceforth even for ever." And Jeremiah tells his people,
"Behold the days come, saith the Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous
Branch and a King shall reign and prosper and shall execute judgment and justice
in the earth. In his days, Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely."
Two of the great issues between the Jewish and Christian faiths concern these
messianic prophecies in the Old Testament. One arises from opposite
interpretations of the event predicteda messianic age in which the kingdom of
the Jews will be established on earth in perpetual righteousness and glory, or
the coming to earth of God's only begotten son, incarnate in human form, for the
salvation of all mankind. The other arises from opposite answers to the question
whether the prediction on either interpretationhas been fulfilled. It is, of
course, the Christian view that the prophets foretold the coming of Christ and
that their prophecy has been fulfilled. But more than that, Christian apologists
and theologians seem to make the fulfillment of Hebrew prophecies,interpreted as
foreshadowing the truths of the Christian religion, a source of verification for
these truths. The difference between Jesus Christ and Mahomet, according to
Pascal, is that "Mahomet was not foretold; Jesus Christ was foretold. I see many
contradictory religions, and consequently all false save one," he writes. "Each
wants to be believed on its own authority, and threatens unbelievers. I do not
therefore believe them. Everyone can say this; everyone can call himself a
prophet. But I see the Christian religion wherein prophecies are fulfilled; and
that is what everyone cannot do." And in another place Pascal declares that "the
prophecies are the strongest proof of Jesus Christ. ... If one man alone had
made a book of predictions about Jesus Christ, as to the time and manner, and
Jesus Christ had come in con- who understood not, al formity to these
prophecies, this fact would since the advent of Ch have infinite weight. But
there is much more that will transpire." here. Here is a succession of men
during four "prophecies which are thousand years, who, consequently and with-
but all the rituals an out variation, come, one after another, to fore- and
institutions, of t tell this same event." ure Christianity, sign Centuries
earlier Augustine writes in a similar ing "those things whic vein. The Hebrew
people as a whole are chosen Jesus Christ unto eter to perform this prophetic
function to fore- been fulfilled, or tell, "sometimes through men who understood
ment, or confidently b what they spake, and sometimes through men filled."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature and power of prophecy
i a.
Prophecy as the reading of fate, the foretelling of fortune, the beholding of the
future
 1a. Prophecy as supcrnaturally inspired foresight into the course of providence
 1b. Prophecy as the instrument of providence: prophets as moral teachers and
 political reformers
 1c. The religious significance of the fulfillment of prophecy

2. The vocation of prophecy: the possession of foreknowledge
 2a. The foreknowledge possessed by the spirits in the afterworld
 2b. The political office of prophecy: priests, soothsayers, oracles
 2c. The Hebraic conception of the prophetic vocation: the law and the prophets;
 Christ as prophet

3. The
varieties of prophecy and the instruments of divination
 3a. The institution of oracles: the interpretation of oracular or prophetic utterances
 3b. Omens and portents: celestial and terrestrial signs; signs as confirmations of
 prophecy
 3c. Dreams, visions, visitations
 3d. Prophecy by the direct word of God

4. Particular prophecies
of hope and doom
 4a. The Covenant and the Promised Land
 4b. The destruction of Jerusalem and the dispersion of Israel: the restoration of
 Israel and the rebuilding of the Temple
 4c. The coming
 of a Messiah: Hebraic and Christian readings of messianic prophecy
 4</.The second coming of the Lord: the Day of Judgment, the end of the world,
 and the millcnium

5. The criticism
and rejection of prophecy: the distinction between true and false proph-
ecy; the condemnation of astrology and divination as impiety or superstition

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. The

I. Works by authors represen

II. Works by authors not repr

For the date, place, and other facts concerning t

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which fol

I.

PLUTARCH. "Wherefore the Pythian Priestess Now

Ceases to Deliver Her Oracles in Verse," "Why

the Oracles Cease to Give Answers," in Moralia AUGUSTINE. De Genesi ad Litteram,
BK xn, CH 9

. On the Spirit and the Letter AQUINAS. Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate

Q 12

. Summa Theologica, PART 11-11, QQ 171-175 F. BACON. "Of Prophecies," in Essays

SPINOZA. Tractatus Theologico-Politicus (Theological-Political Treatise), CH
1-3, n

NEWTON. Daniel and the Apocalypse

II.

CICERO. De Divinatione (On Divination) TERTULLIAN. The Prescription Against
Heretics SAADIA GAON. The Book of Beliefs and Opinions, TREATISE III, VIII

OPHECY of the Western World, but relevant to the se works are divided into two
groups: ted in this collection. esented in this collection. he publication of
the works cited, consult lows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. MAIMONIDES.
Eight Chapters on Ethics, CH 7

. The Guidefor the Perplexed, PART n, CH 32-47 CALDERON. Life Is a Dream J.
TAYLOR. A Discourse of the Liberty of Prophesying FONTENELLE. Histoirc des
oracles standing, BK iv, CH 19

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human UnderVOLTAIRE. "Prophecies," "Prophets,"
in A Philosophical Dictionary PAINE. The Age of Reason, PART i

J. H. NEWMAN. Lectures on the Prophetical Office of the Church KIERKEGAARD. Of
the Difference Between a Genius

and an Apostle COMTE. System of Positive Polity, VOL iv, Theory of the Future of
Man W. R. SMITH. The Prophets of Israel and Their Place

in History FRAZER. Psyche's Tasl(

LCDS. The Prophets and the Rise ofJudaism
