Chapter 75:

INTRODUCTION TT is sometimes supposed that the fundamenJL categories in terms of
which men think tal they are describing reality or their experience merely
reflect the conventions of their language. Substance and attribute and among
attributes, quality and quantity happen to be fundamental categories in western
thought, it is held, only because the group of languages which the western
cultures use all have a grammatical structure that involves a distinction
between noun and adjective and between different kinds of adjectives. It is
said, for example, that Aristotle's enumeration of the categories is merely a
verbal classification based on Greek grammar. When he says that the basic terms
of discourse represent substances, qualities, quantities, relations, and so
forth, he is recognizing the grammatical difference between such words ashman"
and "white," or between "white" and "six feet tall" and "double." The lineaments
of reality, the varieties of being, or the modes of experience are not, it is
held, thereby finally described. In the tradition of the great books, another
interpretation generally prevails. Even those who disagree in one way or another
about the basic categories do not regard them as conventional or of linguistic
origin. Kant, for example, disagrees with Aristotle's listing of the categories.
He makes substance a mode of relation rather than coordinate with quality,
quantity, and relation. He calls his categories "transcendental" to indicate
that they arc not drawn from experience and that, as a priori forms of thought,
they determine the structure of all possible experience. Aristotle, on the other
hand, draws his categories from experience. He thinks that they represent
fundamental modes of being and that they are, therefore, the basic concepts in
terms of which thought apprehends reality. Despite all these differences, Kant
and Aristotle agree that the categories signify real not verbal distinctions.
Their agreement on this point seems to be shared even by those, like Hume, who
question our ability to know whether substances exist; or those, like Berkeley,
who question the validity of the distinction between quality and quantity. In
one sense, no one questions the existence of qualities, as they do the existence
of substances the enduring things, material or otherwise, in which qualities are
supposed to inhere. Everyone somehow acknowledges the hot and the cold, the
light and the dark, the moist and the dry, the hard and the soft. But such
acknowledgement does not preclude a number of basic questions about quality on
which much disagreement exists. Are qualities attributes? Do they exist, that
is, only as qualifiers, only as belonging to something else ? Or do they exist
independently, in and of themselves? If qualities are attributes, do they belong
to things quite apart from our experience of them, or do they belong to things
only as experienced and have no separate reality ?Do things have in reality
certain attributes that cause in us the experience of other traits which we then
attribute to the things themselves? Are all the attributes of things, whether in
or apart from experience, to be conceived as qualities, and if so, are there
different kinds of qualities? Or is quality only one kind of attribute, and if
so, how is quality related to other kinds of attributes ? Is quality, for
example, distinct from quantity, dependent on quantity, reducible to quantity,
affected by quantity ? These questions appear to be related in ways which make
the issues they raise dependent on one another. If, in addition, their
presuppositions and implications are observed, it will be seen that they cannot
be fully discussed without entering into matters considered in other chap- 513
514 ters, such as the notions of substance and accident in the chapter on BEING;
the theory of experience and the various accounts of senseperception and the
objects of sense in the chapters on EXPERIENCE and SENSE; and, of course, some
of the principal topics considered in the closely related chapter on QUANTITY.

SPINOZA DISTINGUISHES between substance and mode as that which exists in itself
and that which exists in another thing. He lays down as an axiom that
"everything which is, is either in itself or in another." Whether or not
qualities are modes of substance, it seems to be clear that Spinoza would not
call them substances. The notion of qualities existing in themselves, and not as
the qualities o/any thing, seems to be self-contradictory. As Descartes points
out, to assert"the existence of real accidents," by which he means the existence
of qualities or quantities apart from substances, is to deny the distinction
between substance and accident. "Substance," he writes, "can never be conceived
after the fashion of accidents, nor can it derive its from them"; whereas "no
reality reality can be ascribed to [accidents], which is not taken from the idea
of substance."

Anyone who acknowledges the distinction between substance and accident also
conceives qualities as accidents or attributes, i.e., as existing in the things
they qualify. Spinoza, Descartes,Locke, and Aristotle do not conceive substance
in the same way, nor do they all use the word "accident" to name the
characteristics which inhere in substance. Locke, for example, uses the word
"quality" with almost the same generality that Spinoza gives to the word "mode,"
or Descartes and Aristotle to "accident." And the word "substance" Locke uses in
a sense that is nearer to Aristotle's meaning for the word "matter," when, in
trying to conceive bare substance as the underlying "I know not what," Locke
defines this substratum as that which supports qualities. Apart from its
qualities, substance has no positive characteristics. Nevertheless, such
differences in theory leave untouched the point of agreement that qualities do
not float freely without any supportin either reality or experience. Even
Berkeley's denial of matter, or of bodies existing apart from AS their being
perceived, does not turn qualities into substances, for qualities as perceived
Arc the qualities of bodies as perceived, and both together have their existence
in the perceiver. The contrary view that qualities exist in and of themselves
does not seem to receive clear or explicit expression in the tradition of the
great books. It may be implied in the conception of experience which Hume
develops more fully in the Treatise on Human Nature than in the Enquiry. There
it seems to be supposed that each element of experience has the same reality as
any other; that each stands by itself without any perceptible dependence upon
any other; and that it has no existence beyond its momentary appearance. On this
view no enduring substances exist. In addition, it is as appropriate to call the
elements of experience "qualities" as it is to call them anything else.
Experience can be described as nothing but qualities and relations or as
qualities related by succession and contiguity. The notion that experience is a
continual flux in which nothing has a continuing identity from moment to moment,
seems to be basic to any theory which denies substances and affirms the
independent reality of qualities. The theory of qualities which Plato attributes
to Heraclitus or his followers illustrates this. "Their first principle,"
Socrates tells Theaetetus, "is that all is motion, and upon this all the
affections of which we were just now speaking are supposed to depend; there is
nothing but motion, which has two forms, one active and the other passive, both
in endless number; and out of the union and friction of them is generated a
progeny endless in number, having two forms, sense and the object of sense." For
example, "when the eye and the appropriate object meet together and give birth
to whiteness and the sensation connatural with it . . then, while the sight is
flowing from the eye, . whiteness proceeds from the object which combines in
producing the color. . . . This is true of allsensible objects, hard, warm, and
the like, which are similarly to be regarded not as having any absolute
existence, but as being all of them generated by motion in their intercourse
with one another ... for the agent has no existence until united with the
patient, and the patient has no existence until united with the agent. . . .
CHAPTER 75 And from all these considerations," Socrates says, "there arises a
general reflection that there is no self-existent thing, but everything is
becoming and in relation." Socrates explains that, for those who assert a
universal flux, qualities are not only the products of motion, but also are
themselves in motion "not even white continues to flow white, and whiteness
itself is a flux or change which is passing into another color." There is no
need to refute this doctrine, Socrates thinks, since it refutes itself by its
unintelligibility or, worse, its inability to say anything definite in
consequence of denying that words can have a constant meaning from moment to
moment. Aristotle concurs in this attitude toward "the most extreme view of the
professed Heracliteans," but goes on to remark that "not even at different times
does one sense disagree about the quality, but only about that to which the
quality belongs. I mean, for instance, that the same wine might seem, if either
it or one's body changed, at one time sweet and at another time not sweet; but
at least the sweet, such as it is when it exists, has never yet changed." The
sweet thing may become sour, either in itself or to us, but sweetness itself
never becomes sourness.

THAT QUALITIES DO NOT change into one another, whereas substances undergoing
alteration change from one quality to another, seems to Aristotle to distinguish
quality from substance. "The most distinctive mark of substance," he writes,
"appears to be that, while remaining numerically one and the same, it is capable
of having contrary qualities. Thus, . . . one and the same color cannot be white
and black. .But the same individual person is at . . one time white, at another
black, at one time warm, at another cold, at one time good, at another bad." The
qualities do not change, but the substance in changing, passes from one
contrary. (The difference bequality to its tween change of quality, or
alteration, and the other types of change which substances can undergo, is
discussed in the chapter on CHANGE.) Aristotle suggests another mark of
distinction between substance and quality. One substance, he says, never stands
to another as its contrary, in the way in which qualities are con- : QUALITY
trary to one another, like hot and cold, white and black, good and bad. A
quality may have a correlative as well as a contrary, e.g., if knowledge is a
quality of mind, the object known is its correlative, whereas ignorance of the
object isthe contrary of knowledge. In some cases, the contrary qualities may be
the extremes or limits of a continuous series of intermediates, e.g., white and
black with all the intermediate greys. In some cases, as with knowledge and
ignorance, the contrary qualities have no intermediates. (Contrariety and
correlation, most frequently exemplified by qualities, are considered in the
chapter on OPPOSITION.) Still another mark of distinction between substance and
quality, according to Aristotle, is that qualities do and substances do not
admit of variation in degree. "One man cannot be more man than another," he
writes, "as that which is white may be more or less white than some other white
object The same quality, moreover, is said to subsist in a thing in varying
degrees at different times. A white body is said to be whiter at one time than
it was before, or a warm body is said to be warmer or less warm than at some
other time." This observation raises a number of questions. Does variation in
the degree of a quality from time to time imply that qualities themselvesundergo
change, just as substances undergo change in quality ? Do they remain one and
the same in kind while varying in degree?

Is this change which qualities undergo as they increase or decrease in
intensity, a change in quantity? Furthermore, does the fact that something white
can become more or less white, mean that a quality can have a certain quantity
even as a body can ? Aquinas suggests an answer by distinguishing between what
he calls the "dimensive quantity" of bodies and the "virtual quantity" of
qualities. Virtual quantity is the degree or intensity which non-quantitative
attributes may possess -such personal qualities as virtues and habits, or such
corporeal qualities as colors and textures. But this still seems to leave a very
difficult question to be answered. How can qualities have the attribute of
quantity without becoming substances? On the principle which both Aristotleand
Aquinas accept that accidents exist only in substances how can one kind of
accident (quantity) exist in another (quality) ? The view which William fames
holds, namely, that variation in intensity creates differences in color as much
as variation in hue, would solve the problem, or rather it would dismiss the
problem as not genuine by denying Aristotle's thesis that a color can remain the
same while varying in degree.

However handled, the problem is not peculiar to qualities. Actions and passions,
Aristotle points out, also vary in degree. Nor are qualities distinguished from
everything else in the world by having contraries. Correlatives can also have
contraries, as can actions and passions. Furthermore, not all qualities have
contraries. Not all admit of variation in degree. Shape, like triangular or
square, which Aristotle regards as a kind of quality, cannot vary in this way.
The square thing cannot become more or less square.

In view of all this, Aristotle concludes that there is one characteristic alone
which differentiates quality not only from substance, but also from everything
else. Quality is the basis for saying that things are like or unlike, similar or
dissimilar, as quantity is the basis for saying that things are equal or
unequal. Other contrasts between quality and quantity, especially those bearing
on the reduction of quality to quantity, are discussed in the chapter on
QUANTITY. Here it may be illuminating to apply the foregoing distinction between
quality and quantity to shapes or figures.

Shape or figure is a curious mixture of quality and quantity. It is a quantified
quality or a qualified quantity or, as Aquinas says, "a quality about quantity,
since the nature of shape consists in fixing the bounds of magnitude." This
seems to be evident in the fact that shapes, like quantities, do not admit of
variation in degree. But it may also be seen in the fact that Euclid deals quite
separately with problems concerning the equality of triangles and problems
concerning their similarity.

EXCEPT FOR THE QUESTION of whether qualities subsist by themselves or are the
attributes of substances, most of the problems of quality seem to concern its
distinction from or relation to quantity. As we have seen, the question of the
degree or amount of a quality involves the notion of quantity. Even more
explicitly a S problem of how qualities and quantities are related, is the
question of the order of these two attributes.Can it be said that quantities are
the more fundamental attributes of things and that they somehow precede or
underlie qualOr are qualities prior in ities? Is it the reverse? certain
respects and quantities in other respects ? Aristotle's theory of the elements
seems to give absolute primacy to quality in the realm of material things. The
four elements of matter arc characterized by combinations of two pairs of
contrary qualities, the hot and the cold, the dry and the moist. On the other
hand, the atomic theory of Lucretius appears to make quantities, such as size
and weight, the primary properties of matter. Newton's enumeration of what he
calls "the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever," including, of course,
their "least particles," lists "extension, hardness, impenetrability, mobility,
and inertia." As indicated in the chapter on QUANTITY, the very reason Newton
gives for calling these qualities "universal" would seem to justify calling them
"quantities" rather than qualities. In any case, Newton's view, like that of the
ancient atomists, seems to be opposed to the theory of the elementary and
contrary qualities. But Aristotle himself also appears to hold a view which
makes quantity prior to quality. Considering the way in which the quality white
is in a body, he says that it is in the body in virtue of the body's extended
surface. If surface or extension is interpreted as a physical quantity, then it
would seem to follow that this quantity underlies a body's possession of visible
and perhaps other qualities. Aquinas, for example, says that "quantity is the
proximate subject of the qualities that cause alteration, as surface is of
color," and, again, that "quantity is in substance before sensible qualities
are." This last statement can be interpreted to mean that quantity is
universally prior to quality among the attributes of substance. Or it can be
understood to mean that quantity is prior only to sensible qualities and then
only among the physical attributes of bodies. Which interpretation is chosen
depends in part on whether all qualities are sensible.

It would seem that all qualities are not sensible, according to Aristotle and
Aquinas, and therefore quantity is not prior to every kind of CHAPTER 75 quality
among the accidents of substance. Natural qualities, Aquinas writes, "may be in
the intellectual part or in the body and its powers." Certainly the qualities
inherent in the intellectual part of man's nature are not sensible; nor arc the
first two of the four species of quality which both Aristotle and Aquinas
enumerate. In their enumeration, human qualities the habits or dispositions of a
man, such as knowledge and virtue, or beauty and health are the first sort. The
powers or inborn capacities whereby men and other animals act to develop their
natures are a second type of quality; e.g., the power of sensitivity in animals,
the power of rationality in men, are qualities proper to these species and are,
therefore, sometimes called "properties." This second type of quality does not
seem to be restricted to living things. Inanimate bodies also have, among their
properties, certain fundamental powers of action or reaction. The third and
fourth types of quality differ from the first two in that both are sensible,
i.e., capable of affecting the senses directly and, therefore, sometimes called
"affective qualities." Of these, the third type shape or figure has already been
discussed. The fourth type colors, sounds, textures, odors, tastes, and such
thermal qualities as hot and cold are, more than shape or figure, regarded as
the principal affective or sensible qualities. The fact that Aristotle regards
certain qualities, such as hot and cold, or hard and soft, as being dispositions
or powers as well as being affective qualities, need not invalidate his fourfold
classification. His classification of the same attribute under two distinct
species of quality seems to imply that it can be considered from two points of
view. The elementary qualities, for example, are affective or sensible qualities
but they are also the active qualities or powers the properties of the elements.
In view of this classification of qualities, it does not seem to be the case
that quantities are prior to all the qualitative attributes of substance. On the
conception of living things as composite of soul and body, the qualities which
are vital powers are usually regarded as properties which the thing has in
virtue of having a soul. They are certainly not founded upon the quantitative
attributes of the organism's body.

: QUALITY The moral and spiritual qualities of men seem to afford another
example of qualities either prior to, or at least independent of, quantities.
Even in the case of inanimate bodies, it may be that certain fundamental
properties or powers are essentially qualitative rather than quantitative. The
proposition that in substances, quantities are prior to qualities or that
qualities inhere in substances in virtue of their quantities may apply only to
sensible qualities, as, for example, colors in relation to surfaces. ONE OF THE
GREAT ISSUES in the tradition of western thought concerns our perception or
knowledge of qualities. If certain characteristics which are not directly
sensible are to be called "qualities," then the problem of how we know such
qualities does not differ from the problem of how we know anything else that
cannot be apprehended by our senses. We may, for example, be able to infer such
qualities as habits or powers from the sensible evidences of a thing's behavior,
even as in turn we infer the thing's nature or essence from its proper qualities
or properties. With regard to sensible qualities, the problem does not seem to
be hotv we know them for the fact that they are sensible means that they are
knowable by the senses. The question is rather one of the mode of existence the
objectivity or subjectivity of the qualities sensed. Locke's famous distinction
between primary and secondary qualities states the problem. It is preceded by
his distinction between the qualities of things and the ideas in our minds. "A
snow-ball," he writes, has "the power to produce in us the idea of white, cold,
and round. The powers to produce those ideas in us, as they are in the snow-
ball, I call qualities; and as they are sensations or perceptions in our
understandings, I call them ideas; which ideas, if I speak of them sometimes as
in the things themselves, I would be understood to mean those qualities in the
objects which produce them in us." The primary qualities of bodies are those
which are utterly inseparable from body such as "sense constantly finds in every
particle of matter which has bulk enough to be perceived, and the mind finds
inseparable from every par- 518 tide of matter, though less than to make itself
singly perceived by our senses." Locke's enumeration of these "original or
primary qualities of body, which we may observe to produce simple ideas in us,
viz., solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest, and number," closely
resembles Newton's list of the universal qualities * of perceptible bodies and
of their 'least particles" or atoms. In contrast, the secondary qualities, such
as colors, sounds, tastes, etc., are "nothing in the objects themselves, but
powers to produce various sensations in us by their primary qualities, i.e., by
the bulk, figure, texture, and motion of their insensible parts. . . . From
whence," Locke declares, "I think it is easy to draw this observation, that the
ideas of primary qualities of bodies, are resemblances of them, and their
patterns do really exist in the bodies themselves, but the ideas produced in us
by these secondary qualities, have no resemblance of them at all. There is
nothing like our ideas existing in the bodies themselves. They are in the bodies
we denominate from them, only a power to produce those sensations in us: what is
sweet, blue, or warm, in idea, is but the certain bulk, figure and motion of the
insensible parts in the bodies which we call so." Locke thinks the sensation of
pain confirms this insight. As the piece of steel which by its corporeal
properties has the power to produce pain in us, does not itself have the quality
of pain, so it does not have anything corresponding to the ideas of blueness or
coldness which it produces in us, except the power to produce these ideas
through the action of its primary qualities on our senses. Yet Locke maintains
that all our simple ideas of quality not only of primary, but also of secondary
qualities "agree with the reality of things." By agreement he does not mean
resemblance in the sense of copying; and therefore he thinks he can, without
inconsistency, deny any resemblance between sensations of color or taste and the
secondary qualities of bodies, while saying that "if sugar produces in us the
ideas we call whiteness and sweetness, we are sure there is a power in sugar to
produce those ideas in our minds, or else they could not have been produced by
it." Locke's point, however, is sometimes given exactly the opposite
implication. Earlier think- ers who do not speak of primary and secondary
qualities attribute to bodies only the characteristics which Locke calls
primary, and give what he calls secondary qualities no reality at all, that is,
no existence outside the mind. The secondary qualities are not qualities of
things, but of sensations or images. Descartes, for example, says that nothing
belongs "to the nature or essence of body except , . . length, breadth and
depth, admitting of various shapes and various motions. ... On the other hand,
colors, odors, savours, and the rest of such things are merely sensations
existing in my thought, and differing no lessfrom bodies than pain differs from
the shape and motion of the instrument which inflicts it." Hobbes similarly
regards the various sensible qualities as feelings in us the seemings or fancies
of sense. All these "qualities called sensible are in the object that causes
them, nothing but so many several motions of the matter The object is one thing,
the fancy is another." One type of "absurd assertion," in the opinion of Hobbes,
consists in giving "the names of the accidents of bodies without us, to the
accidents of our own bodies, as they do that say, the color is in the body, the
sound is in the air, etc." The attributes or accidents which Descartes and
Hobbes assign to bodies seem to be quantities rather than qualities.
Accordingly, whereas Locke attributes both primary and secondary qualities to
bodies, Hobbes and Descartes seem to be saying that bodies differ from one
another only quantitatively, and that qualities or qualitative differences occur
only in the realm of sense or thought. Expounding the atomism of Democritus and
Epicurus, Lucretius appears to make precisely this point when he says that the
first-beginnings or atoms are characterized only by size, weight, shape, and
motion. "The bodies of matter," he writes, "have no color at all." They are
bereft not only of color; "they are also sundered altogether from warmth and
cold, and fiery heat, and are carried along barren of sound and devoid of
taste." These qualities, caused by the blows of the atoms upon the sense-organs
of animals, are the qualities of sensations, not of things. THE CRITICISM OF
THIS THEORY whether in the formulation of Locke or in that of Descartes, CHAPTER
75: QUAL Hobbes, and Lucretius seems itself to take two forms. Aristotle, for
example, criticizes Democritus and the atomists for treating perceptible
qualities differently from perceptible quantities. According to his own theory
of the objects of sense, some, like colors, sounds, odors, flavors which Locke
calls "secondary qualities" and the others simply "qualities" are the proper
objects of the special senses, such as sight, hearing, smell, taste. In contrast
to these "proper sensibles," each exclusively perceived by one and only one
sense, there are the "common sensibles," such as size and shape, number,
movement and rest, which can be perceived commonly by several senses, e.g.,
shape is visible and tangible, motion is visible and audible. Such sensible
attributes of body, which Locke calls "primary qualities," Aristotle, no less
than Hobbes or Lucretius, regards as quantities, not qualities. Reporting his
view, Aquinas writes that "the common sensibles are all reducible to quantity."
Aristotle's critical point seems to be that the atomists "reduce the proper to
the common sensibles, as Democritus does with white and black; for he asserts
that the latter is a mode of the rough and the former a mode of the smooth,
while he reduces savours to the atomic figures." The atomists sometimes make the
opposite error of representing "all objects of sense as objects of touch." But
in either case they have no ground, in Aristotle's opinion, for giving to
certain sensible attributes whether these be tangible qualities or the commonly
sensible quantities an objective reality they deny to other sensible traits,
like colors, sounds, and odors. Aristotle's theory of sensation and the sensible
is discussed more fully in the chapter on SENSE. According to it, the qualities,
no less than the quantities, perceptible by sense have real or actual existence
as the attributes of bodies. On this score Aristotle does not differentiate
between qualities (the proper sensibles) and quantities (the common sensibles).
Just as a body actually has the shape we perceive it to have, so it actually has
the color we perceive it to have, on the supposition, of course, that our
perception is accurate in both cases. If the senses are fallible at all, we are
less prone to make errors, Aristotle thinks, in the field of the ITY proper than
of the common sensibles, e.g., the stick in water which looks bent to the eye
feels straight to the hand. PRECISELY THE OPPOSITE direction seems to be taken
by Berkeley and Hume. Where Aristotle criticizes the atomists for treating
quantities (or common sensibles) as objective, and qualities (or proper
sensibles) as subjective, Berkeley Locke for treating primary and seccriticizes
ondary qualities differently. Where Aristotle's own theory assigns the same
reality to all objects of sense, granting them an actuality apart from
perception, Berkeley makes the actuality of the primary as well as the secondary
qualities dependent upon their being perceived. "Some there are," writes
Berkeley, "who make a distinction betwixt primary and secondary qualities. By
the former they mean extension, figure, motion, rest, solidity or
impenetrability and number; by the latter they denote all other sensible
qualities, as colors, sounds, tastes and so forth. The ideas we have of these
they acknowledge not to be the resemblances of anything existing without the
mind 01 unperceived, but they will have our ideas of the primary qualities to be
patterns 01 images of things which exist without the mind, in an unthinking
substance which they call Matter." Berkeley then argues that the so-called
primary qualities are incapable of being separated, in reality or thought, from
the secondary qualities, and that, therefore, the one like the other exists only
in the mind. "In short, let anyone consider those arguments which are thought
manifestly to prove that colors and tastes exist only in the mind, and he shall
find they may with equal force be brought to prove the same thing of extension,
figure, and motion." His own arguments, he thinks, "plainly show it to be
impossible that any color or extension at all, or other sensible quality
whatsoever, should exist inany unthinking subject without the mind, or in truth,
that there should be any such thing as an outward object." Hume professes to
adopt Berkeley's reasoning. "It is universally allowed by modern enquirers," he
writes, "that all the sensible qualities of objects, such as hard, soft, hpt,
cold, white, black, etc., are merely secondary, and exist not in the objects
themselves, but are we examine it accurate perceptions of the mind, without any
external unintelligible, and ev archetype or model which they represent. If One
fundamenta this be allowed, with regard to secondary qual- ities may, howev must
also follow with regard to the supities, it long and many-sided co posed primary
qualities of extension and solid- nies that sensible qua ity. . . . The idea of
extension is entirely acquired human experience. That from the senses of sight
and feeling; and if all innate, or a priori pr the qualities, perceived by the
senses, be in the nature," James declare mind, not in the object, the same
conclusion "all schools ( must reach the idea of extension. Nothing . . . . . ,
This is so can save us from this conclusion, but the assert- we may make
concerning ing that the ideas of those primary qualities are feelings to the
realit attained by Abstraction, an opinion, which, if become alive."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The nature and existence of qualities: the relation of quality to substance or matter;
the transcendental categories of quality

2. The kinds of quality
 2a. Sensible and nonsensible qualities: habits, dispositions, powers or capacities,
 and affective qualities
 2b. Primary and secondary qualities: the related distinction of proper and com-
 mon sensibles

3. Quality and quantity
 3a. The distinction between quality and quantity: its relation to the distinction
 between secondary and primary qualities
 3b. Shape or figure as qualified quantity
 3c. The degrees or amounts of a quality: intensity and extensity; the quantitative
 conditions of variation in quality
 3</.
 The priority of quality or quantity in relation to form, matter, or substance
 4.
 The relation of qualities to one another
 3d. Qualities which imply correlatives
 3e. The contrariety of qualities: with or without intermediate degrees
 Af.
 The similarity of things with respect to quality: likeness and unlikeness in quality

5. Change of quality: the analysis of alteration

6. Qualities as objects of knowledge
 6a. Quality in relation to definition or abstraction
 6b. The perception of qualities
 6c. The objectivity of sense-qualities: the
 comparative objectivity of primary and
 secondary qualities

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Discussions relevant to the problem of the existence of
qualities and of their re

stance, matter, or experience, see BEING 70, 7b(5)~7b(6); EXPERIENCE i; MA

Discussions relevant to the conception of the categories as transcendental c

understanding, see FORM 1c; JUDGMENT 8c-8d; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(a);

1c(i); PRINCIPLE 2b(3).

The consideration of such non-sensible qualities as habits, dispositions, an

BEING 7c(2); HABIT i; LIFE AND DEATH 2; MAN 4d; NATURE 1a(i); SOUL 2a, 2c.

The distinction between proper and common sensibles, and the related distinc

primary and secondary qualities, see SENSE 3c(2)~3c(4).

Other discussions of the relation of quantity to quality, see MECHANICS 4b; QUAN

and for the problem of the variation of qualities in degree or intensity, see

OTHER 3c; SENSE 3c(2).

The contrariety and correlation of qualities, see OPPOSITION la-1b.

The conception of similarity as likeness in quality, see SAME AND OTHER 30.

The distinction of alteration, or change in quality, from other kinds of cha

6,9.

The general theory of sensitive knowledge and its bearing on the objectivity

qualities, see KNOWLEDGE 6b(i); SENSE 4-4C.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofe of the Western World, bu

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of T

LEIBNITZ. New Essay

*

standing, BK 11, CH BERKELEY. Three Dialogues Between llylas and Phi- W.
HAMILTON, lectures

lonoits VOL i (24) KANT. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Sciencek C. S.
PEIRCE. Collecte

DIV ii 422-426

. Introduction to Logic, vin BRADLEY. Appearance an HEGEL. Logic, CH 7, par
91-98 BERGSON. Matter and Me

J. C. WILSON. Statemen

IL

12) ORME. Treatise on the Breadth of Forms HUSSERL. Ideas: Genera SUAREZ.
Dtsputationcs Metaphysicae, xiv, xvi, xvm nomenology, par 15,

(5-6), XXXIX, XL (2), XLII-XLVI, LIU W. E. JOHNSON. Logic, IOIIN OF SAINT
THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus Tho- WHITEHEAD. The Concept

misticus, Philosophia Naturalis, PART in, o 10 Process and Reali

.

BOYLE. The Origin of Forms and Qualities, According BORING. The Physical D

to the Corpuscular Philosophy CH 6

TTER 2c. lation to suboncepts of the MIND d powers, see tion between TITY la;
SAME AND nge, see CHANGE of sensible t relevant to the two groups: on. s cited,
consult he Great Ideas. 8 s Concerning Human Underon Metaphysics and Logic, d
Papers, VOL i, par 300-321, d Reality, BK i, en 1,3 mory, CH 2, 4 t and
Inference, PART v (6, l Introduction to Pure Phe- 40-41, 52, 124, 129, PART II,
CH J of Nature, CH 2 ty, PART in, CH 1-2 imensions of Consciousness ,
