Chapter  76:  QUAN  INTRODUCTION AS indicated in the chapter on QUALITY, the JLk
traditional   consideration   of  that  fundamental  notion  involves  questions
concerning  the  relation of quality and quantity and the priority of one or the
other  in  the  nature  of  things.  According  to  one  theory of the elements,
difference  in  quality  rather  than  in  quantity  seems  to  be  the  denning
characteristic.  Certain kinds of qualities, it is thought, inhere in substances
directly  and  without  being  based  upon their quantitative aspects. But it is
seldom  if ever suggested that quality takes universal precedence over quantity.
In  the  tradition  of  western  thought,  the opposite view that quantities are
primaryseems  to  occur  with  some  frequency,  at least so far as the realm of
material things is concerned.

It  is  held  that  bodies  have  only  quantitative  attributes.  Such sensible
qualities  as  colors,  odors,  tastes,  textures are thought to have no reality
apart  from  experience; or, as it is sometimes put, red and blue, hot and cold,
sweet  and  sour are the qualities of sensations, not of things. Those who think
that  bodies  can  exist without being perceived, also tend to think that bodies
can  exist  totally  bereft  of  qualities,  but never without the dimensions of
quantity.  The notions of matter and quantity seem to be inseparably associated.
For  matter  to  exist  without  existing  in  some  quantity  seems  to  be  as
inconceivable  as  for  experience to exist without qualitative diversity "As if
there  could  be  matter,'* says Hobbes, "that had not some determined quantity,
when  quantity  is  nothing else but determination of matter; that is to say, of
body,  by  which we say that one body is greater or less than another by thus or
thus  much."  The  use  of the word "quality" where quantity appears to be meant
only  slightly  obscures TITY this point. Newton refers to "extension, hardness,
impenetrability,  mobility, and inertia" as "the qualities of bodies" which "are
to be esteemed the universal qualities of all bodies whatsoever." Following him,
Locke  calls  our  simple ideas of "solidity, extension, figure, motion or rest,
and  number"  ideas  of  "the original or primary qualities of bodies," and says
that  even  if bodies are divided "till their parts become insensible, they must
retain still each of them all those qualities. For division can . . . never take
away  either  solidity,  extension,  figure, or mobility from any body, but only
makes  two  or  more  distinct  separate masses of matter, of that which was one
before."  Though Locke uses the word "quality" for those attributes which belong
to  bodies  even  when  they  are  not  sensed or are not even sensible, he also
appears  to recognize that number, extension, and figure are, as the traditional
objects  of  the  mathematical  sciences,  traditionally  regarded as quantities
rather  than  qualities.  "It  has been generally taken for granted," he writes,
"that mathematics alone are capable of demonstrative certainty; but to have such
an  agreement  or  disagreement  as  may  intuitively  be perceived, being, as I
imagine,  not the privilege of the ideas of number, extension, and figure alone,
it  may  possibly  be  the  want  of  due  method and application in us ... that
demonstration  has  been  thought  to  have  so  little  to do in other parts of
knowledge."  Yet,  he  adds, "in other simple ideas, whose modes and differences
are  made  and  counted  by  degrees,  and not quantity, we have not so nice and
accurate  a  distinction  of  their  differences as to perceive, or find ways to
measure,  their  just  equality."  Newton  also  gives  some indication that his
"universal  qualities"  are  quantities.  He restricts them to attributes "which
admit  neither  intensification  nor  remission  of degrees. *' One dif- 527 528
fcrence  between  quantity and quality, according to an ancient opinion, is that
qualities  are  subject to variation in degree, quantities not. One thing may be
white  or  hot to a greater or less degree than another, Aristotle observes, but
"one thing cannot be two cubits long in a greater degree than another. Similarly
with  regard  to  number:  what is 'three is not more truly 1 three than what is
'five  is  five  . . . Nor is there any other kind of quantity, of all that have
been mentioned, with regard to which variation in degree can be predicated."

GRANTED THAT WHAT Newton and Locke call "qualities" are not qualities, except in
the  sense  in  which  the  word  "quality"  means  attribute,  questions remain
concerning their difficult enumeration of the universal or primary attributes of
bodies.  Do  extension,  hardness,  impenetrability, motion and rest, figure and
number  constitute  an  exhaustive  enumeration?  Are  these  all  the corporeal
quantities,  or  only the basic ones from which others can be derived ? Are they
all  of  the  same kind and, among them, are some more fundamental than others ?
Descartes,  for  example,  seems  to make extension the one primary attribute of
bodies.  "I observed," he writes, "that nothing at all belonged to the nature or
essence  of  bodies, except that it was a thing with length, breadth, and depth,
admitting of various shapes and various motions.

I  found  also  that its shape and motions were only modes, which no power could
make  to exist apart from it ... Finally, I saw that gravity, hardness,the power
of  heating,  of  attracting,  and  of purging, and all other qualities which we
experience  in  bodies,  consisted  solely  in motion or its absence, and in the
configuration  and  situation  of  their parts." With motion and figure modes of
extension, and all the other properties of bodies the result of their motions or
configurations,  the three dimensions of extension (or spatial magnitude) become
almost  identical  with  body  itself.  Considering the statement body possesses
extension,  Descartes  points  out that, though "the meaning of extension is not
identical  with  that of body, yet we do not construct two distinct ideas in our
imagination,  one  of body, the other of extension, but merely a single image of
extended body; and from the point of view of the thing it is exactly as if I had
said:  body  is  extended,  or better, the extended is extended'' But, Descartes
adds, when we consider the expression extension is not body, "the meaning of the
term  extension  becomes  otherwise  than as above. When we give it this meaning
there  is  no special idea corresponding to it in the imagination." It becomes a
purely  abstract  entity,  which  may  properly  be the object of the geometer's
consideration;  but then it should be treated as an abstraction and not as if it
had  independent  reality.  Aquinas  also  distinguishes  between  physical  and
mathematical  quantities,  or  the  quantities  which  inhere  in bodies and the
quantities  abstracted  therefrom.  "Quantities,  such as number, dimension, and
figure,  which  are  the  terminations of quantity, can be considered apart from
sensible  qualities, and this is to abstract them from sensible matter. But they
cannot  be  considered  without  understanding the substance which is subject to
quantity"- that is, corporeal or material substance. Like a body, a mathematical
solid  has  three  dimensions,  but, as Aquinas points out, lacking matter, this
three-dimensional  object  does  not  occupy  space  or  fill a place. The three
spatial  dimensions  are  not  for  him, however, the only primary quantities of
either  the  physical  or  the  mathematical  body.  Number  and  figure  arc as
fundamental.  Still  another  enumeration  of  corporeal  quantitiesis  given by
Lucretius in his description of the properties of atoms. According to him, atoms
vary  in  size,  weight,  and  shape.  Each  of  these  attributes is a distinct
quantity,  not  reducible  to  the  others. In addition, atoms have the property
which Newton calls "impenetrability" and Locke "solidity." But whereas atoms may
be unequal in size and weight, and different in shape or configuration, they are
all  equal  in their solidity, being absolutely indivisible through lack of void
or  pores.  THE  DISTINCTION  BETWEEN mathematical and physical quantity and the
enumeration  or ordering of diverse quantities seem to require the consideration
of  two  prior  questions. What is the nature of quantity? What are the kinds or
modes  of  quantity?  Terms  like  quantity  and  quality  do  not  appear to be
susceptible  of  definition.  Quantity  is, CHAPTER 76: perhaps, the fundamental
notion in the mathematical sciences, yet neither it nor such terms as magnitude,
figure,  and number are defined in the great books of geometry or arithmetic. In
Aristotle's  theory  of  the  categories  as  the  highest genera, such terms as
substance,  quantity,  quality,  and  relation  are  strictly indefinable, if to
define a term is to give its genus and differentia.

With  quite  a  different  theory  of  the  categories, Kant also treats them as
indefinable.  As  indicated  in  the  chapter  on  QUALITY, they are for him the
transcendental  concepts  of  the understanding. He uses such terms as quantity,
quality,  and  relation,  with modality as a coordinate fourth, to represent the
four  major  groupings of the categories. In his table of the categories, Kant's
treatment  of  quantity,  under which he lists the concepts of unity, plurality,
and  totality,  parallels  the  treatment of quantity in his table of judgments,
according  to  which  judgments  are  classified  as  universal, particular, and
singular.  All  these  considerations  of quantity belong to what Kant calls his
"transcendental logic." So far as Kant considers quantity in its mathematical or
physical  (rather than logical) significance, he discusses it in connection with
the  transcendental forms of space and time which provide, according to him, the
a  priori  foundations  of geometry and arithmetic the sciences of magnitude and
number.  But  in none of these connections are quantity and its principal modes,
magnitude  and  number,  defined. Though indefinable, quantity can, according to
Aristotle,  be  characterized  by  certain distinctive marks. As we have already
observed,  where qualities admit of variation in degree, quantities do not. With
few exceptions, each quality has a contrary, whereas definite quantities such as
an  extent  or  a  number  are  not  opposed  by  contrary quantities. Aristotle
considers the possibility that such apparently quantitative terms as 'large' and
'small'  may  also  appear  to be contrary to one another, as hot is to cold, or
white  is  to  black.  But,  he  argues,  these  terms represent quantities only
relatively,  not  absolutely. When things are compared with respect to size, one
may  be  judged to be both larger and smaller than others, but the sizes of each
of two things unequal in size are not contrary to one another.

QUANTITY  These  two  characteristics  (lack  of contrariety and of variation in
degree)  do  not,  however, satisfy Aristotle's search for a distinctive mark of
quantity.  They  apply to substances, such as tree or man, as well as to figures
and  numbers. This fact could have some bearing on the issue whether the objects
of  mathematics  have a separate existence comparable to that of substances, but
in Aristotle's view at least, quantities are not substances. Physical quantities
are  the  attributes of bodies; the objects of mathematics consist of quantities
abstracted from sensible matter. Conceiving quantity as one of the attributes of
substance,  Aristotle  says  that  "the  most  distinctive  mark  of quantity is
equality  and inequality." Only when things are compared quantitatively can they
be  said to be equal or unequal; and, conversely, in whatever respect things are
said  to  be  equal or unequal, in that respect they are determined in quantity.
"How  far  is  it  true,"  Plotinus  asks,  "that  equality  and  inequality are
characteristic  of  quantity?"  It is significant, he thinks, that triangles and
other  figures  are  said to be similar as well as equal. "It may, of course, be
the  case  that  the  term  'similarity'  has  a  different sense here from that
understood  in reference to quality"; or another alternative, Plotinus adds, may
be that "similarity is predicablc of quantity only insofar as quantity possesses
[qualitative]  differences."  In  any  case,  comparison,  whether  in  terms of
equality  or  likeness,  seems  to generate the relationships fundamental to the
mathematical  treatment  of  quantities.  Euclid  does  not  define magnitude in
itself,  but  only  the  relation  of  magnitudes to one another. The first four
definitions  in  the fifth book of his Elements illustrate this. "i. A magnitude
is a part of a magnitude, the less of the greater, when it measures the greater.
2.  The  greater multiple of the less when it is measis a ured by the less. 3. A
ratio  is  a  sort  of relation in respect of size between two magnitudes of the
same  kind.  4.  Magnitudes  are  said to have a ratio to one another, which are
capable,  when multiplied, of exceeding one another." Archimedes also states his
understanding  of  the  distinction between kinds of magnitudes without defining
these  kinds  by  reference  to  their  comparability.  Assuming  that any given
magnitude can, by being multiplied, exceed any other magnitude of the same kind,
he is able to know that magnitudes are of the same kind if, by being multiplied,
they  can  exceed one another. It follows that an indivisible point and a finite
or  divisible  magnitude,  such  as  a  line, are not of the same kind, for they
cannot  have  a ratio to one another. For the same reason, the length of a line,
the  area  of  a plane, and the volume of a solid are not magnitudes of the same
kind.  Since  they  bear  no  ratio  to  one  another,  they  are quantitatively
incomparable.

THE  EMPHASIS UPON ratios has some significance for a controversial point in the
definition  of  the subject matter of mathematics. In the tradition of the great
books,  mathematicians  and  philosophers  seem  to  agree  that  arithmetic and
geometry  have  as their objects the two principal species of quantitynumber and
magnitude. This is the opinion of Euclid, Nicomachus, Descartes, and Galileo; it
is  the opinion of Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Bacon, Hume, and Kant. But writers
like  Russell  and  Whitehead,  who  reflect  developments  in mathematics since
theiQth century, reject the traditional opinion as unduly narrowing the scope of
mathematics.  To  give  adequate  expression to the universality of mathematics,
they  sometimes propose that it should be conceived as the science not merely of
quantity,  but  of relations and order. In view of the fact that the great books
of  mathematics  deal  with quantities largely in terms of their relationship or
order to one another, the broader conception seems to fit the older tradition as
well as more recent developments.

Whether  there is a genuine issue here concerning the definition of mathematical
subject  matter  may  depend,  therefore, on whether the fundamental terms which
generate  the  systems  of  relationship  and  order  are or are not essentially
quantitative.  To  this  question  the  traditional  answer seems to be that the
mathematician studies not relations of any sort, but the relation of quantities.
The  problem  of  the  kinds  of  quantity  seems  to appeal for solution to the
principle  of  commensurability.  For example, Galileo's observation that finite
and  infinite  quantities  cannot be compared in any way, implies their utter AS
diversity.But  he goes further and says that "the attributes 'larger,' 'smaller/
and 'equal' have no pkce either in comparing infinite quantities with each other
or  in  comparing  infinite  with  finite quantities." If the notion of quantity
entails  the possibility of equality or inequality between two quantities of the
same  tynd, then either infinite quantities are not quantities, or each infinite
quantity belongs to a kind of its own. The principle of incommensurability seems
to  be  applied  by mathematicians to distinguish quantities which are different
species   of   the   same   generic  kind.  For  example,  the  one-dimensional,
two-dimensional,  and  three-dimensional  quantities  of  a line, a plane, and a
solid,  are  incommensurable  magnitudes.  The  number of days in a year and the
number  of years in infinite or endless time are incommensurable multitudes. The
distinction between magnitude and multitude (or number) as two modes of quantity
appears   to   be   based   upon  another  principle,  that  of  continuity  and
discontinuity.   Yet   the   question  can  be  raised  whether  magnitudes  are
commensurable with numbers, at least to the extent of being measured by numbers.
It  may  be  necessary, however, to postpone answering it until we have examined
the  fundamental  difference between magnitude and multitude as generic kinds of
quantity.  What  if  magnitude  and  multitude,  or continuous and discontinuous
quantity,  do not divide quantity into its ultimate kinds? Aquinas, for example,
proposes  that the two basic kinds are dimensive and virtual quantity. "There is
quantity  of bulJk or dimensive quantity," he writes, "which is to be found only
in corporeal things, and has, therefore, no place in God. There is also quantity
of  virtue,  which  is  measured  according  to the perfection of some nature or
form."  It  is in the latter sense, according to Aquinas, that Augustine writes:
"In  things  which  are  great, but not in bulk, to be greater is to be better."
Just  as  dimensive  quantities can be incommensurable with one another, so with
respect   to   virtual   quantities,   God's   infinite   perfection  makes  him
incommensurable with finite creatures. But a dimensive quantity cannot be either
commensurable  or  incommensurable  with  CHAPTER 76: QU a virtual quantity. The
standard  of  measurement  by  which  dimensive quantities are compared, and the
standard  by  which  virtual  quantities  are ordered, represent utterly diverse
principles  of  commensurability.  Euclid's statement that "those magnitudes are
said  to  be  commensurable  which  are  measured by the same measure, and those
incommensurable which cannot have a common measure," cannot be extended to cover
dimensive and virtual quantities, for the very meaning of "measure" changes when
we  turn  from  the  dimensions  of  a  body  to the perfections of a being. The
distinction which Aquinas makes between dimensive and virtual magnitudes has its
parallel  in  the  distinction  he  makes  between two kinds of number, for both
depend  on  the  difference  between  material and formal quantity. "Division is
twofold,"  he  writes. "One is material, and is division of the continuous; from
this  results  number,  which  is a species of quantity. Number in this sense is
found only in material things which have quantity. The other kind of division is
formal, and is effected by opposite or diversek forms; and this kind of division
results  in a multitude, which does not belong to a genus, but is transcendental
in  the  sense  in  which  being  is  divided by one and many. Only this kind of
multitude  is found in immaterial things." According to the example suggested in
the  context,  such  is  the  multitude  which  is  the number of persons in the
Trinity.

THE  MATERIAL  quantities  of physics and mathematics seem to fall under the two
main  heads  of  magnitude  and  multitude.  "Quantity  is  either  discrete  or
continuous," writes Aristotle.

"Instances  of  discrete quantities are number and speech; of continuous, lines,
surfaces,  solids,  and, besides these, time and place." Nicomachus explains the
two kinds of quantity by examples.

"The  unified  and  continuous,"  he  says,  is  exemplified  by "an animal, the
universe,  a  tree,  and  the  like,  which  are  properly and peculiarly called
'magnitudes'  "; to illustrate the discontinuous, he points to "heaps of things,
which  arc  called  'multitudes,' a flock, for instance, a people, a chorus, and
the  like."  The  principle  of this distinction appears to be the possession or
lack  of  a  common  boundary. To take Aristotle's example of speech as a ANTITY
quantity,  the  letters  of  a  written word or the syllables of vocal utterance
comprise  a  multitude rather than a continuum or magnitude "because there is no
common  boundary  at  which the syllables join, each being separate and distinct
from  the  rest." The continuity of magnitudes can be readily seen, according to
Aristotle, in the possibility of finding a common boundary at which the parts of
a  line  join  or  make  contact. "In the case of a line," he says, "this common
boundary  is the point; in the case of a plane, it is the line. . . . Similarly,
you  can  find  a  common  boundary in the case of the parts of a solid, namely,
either  a line or a plane." Accepting the principle of the distinction, Plotinus
insists  that  "number  and  magnitude  are  to  be  regarded  as  the only true
quantities."  All others, like space and time, or motion, are quantities only in
a  relative sense, that is, insofar as they can be measured by number or involve
magnitude.   Galileo   raises  another  sort  of  difficulty.  The  Aristotelian
conception  of  magnitudes  as  continuous  quantities  implies  their  infinite
divisibility.  This means, in his terms, that "every magnitude is divisible into
magnitudes" and that "it is impossible for anything continuous to be composed of
indivisible   parts."  Galileo  acknowledges  the  objections  to  "building  up
continuous  quantities  out  of  indivisible quantities" on the ground that "the
addition  of  one indivisible to another cannot produce a divisible, for if this
were  so  it would render the Suppose a line to comindivisible divisible." prise
an odd number of indivisible points. Since such a line can, in principle, be cut
into  two  equal  parts, we are required to do the impos; sible, namely, "to cut
the indivisible which lies exactly in the middle of the line." To this and other
objections which seem to him of the same type, Galileo replies that "a divisible
magnitude  cannot  be  constructed  out of two or ten or a hundred or a thousand
indivisibles,  but  requires  an  infinite number of them. ... I am willing," he
says, "to grant to the Peripatetics the truth of their opinion that a continuous
quantity is divisible only into parts which are still further divisible, so that
however  far  the division and subdivision be continued, no end will be reached;
but  I  am  not  so  certain  that  they  will  concede to me that none of these
divisions  of  theirs  can  be a final one, as is surely the fact, because there
always  remains  'another;  the  final and ultimate division is rather one which
resolves   a   continuous  quantity  into  an  infinite  number  of  indivisible
quantities/'  The  question remains whether these indivisible units, an infinite
number of which constitute the continuity of a finite magnitude, can properly be
called quantities. At least they are not magnitudes, as is indicated by Euclid's
definition  of  a point as "that which has no part," or by Nicomachus' statement
that  "the  point is the beginning of dimension, but is not itself a dimension."
If,  in  addition  to having position, a point had size or extent, a finite line
could  not  contain  an  infinite number of points. This problem of infinite and
infinitesimal quantities is more fully discussed in the chapter on INFINITY.

WITHIN  EACH  OF  THE two main divisions of quantitymagnitude and number further
sub-divisions  into  kinds  are  made.  Relations of equality and inequality, or
proportions  of  these  ratios,  may  occur between quantities different in kind
different  plane  figures,  for  example.  But  the  great  books of mathematics
indicate  other  problems in the study of quantity than those concerned with the
ratios  and  proportions  of quantities. The classification of lines and figures
results in the discovery of the properties which belong to each type. Possessing
the same properties, all lines or figures of a certain type arc similar in kind,
not equal in quantity. In addition to developing the properties of such straight
lines  as  perpendiculars  and  parallels,  or  such curved lines as circles and
ellipses,  parabolas and hyperbolas, the geometer defines the different types of
relationship  in  which  straight  lines  can  stand  to curves, e.g., tangents,
secants,  asymptotes.  As  there  are types of lines and figures, both plane and
solid, so there are types of numbers.

Euclid  and  Nicomachus  divide the odd numbers into the prime and the composite
into  those  which  are divisible only by themselves and unity, such as 5 and 7,
and  those which have other factors, such as 9 and 15. The composite are further
differentia  ted  into  the  variety which is simply secondary and composite and
"the  variety  which,  in  itself, is secondary and composite, but relatively is
prime  and  incom-  AS  posite." To illustrate the latter, Nicomachus asks us to
compare 9 with 25, "Each in itself," he writes, "is secondary and composite, but
relatively  to  each  other  they  have  only  unity as a common measure, and no
factors in them have the same denominator, for the third part in the former does
not  exist  in  the  latter  nor  is  the  fifth part in the latter found in the
former."  The  even  numbers  are divided by Nicomachus into the even-times-even
(numbers  like  64  which can be divided into equal halves, and their halves can
again  be  divided  into  equal halves, and so on until division must stop); the
even-  times-odd  (numbers  like  6, 10, 14, 1 8 which can be divided into equal
halves, but whose halves cannot be divided again into equal halves); and the odd
-times-even  (numbers  like  24,  28,  40 which can be divided into equal parts,
whose  parts  also  can  be so divided, and perhaps again these parts, but which
cannot  be  divided  in  this  way  as  far  as  unity). By another principle of
classification, the even numbers fall into the superabundant, the deficient, and
the  perfect.  The factors which produce superabundant ordeficient numbers, when
added  together,  amount to more or less than the number itself; but a number is
perfect, Nicomachus writes, when, "comparing with itself the sum and combination
of  all  the  factors  whose  presence it will admit, it neither exceeds them in
multitude  nor  is  exceeded  by  them." It is "equal to its own parts"; as, for
example,  6,  "for  6  has  the  factors  half,  third,  and sixth, 3, 2, and i,
respectively,  and  these  added  together  make 6 and arc equal to the original
number."  At  the time of Nicomachus only four perfect numbers were known 6, 28,
496,  8128;  since  his  day  seven  more  have  been  discovered.  The  further
classification  of  numbers as linear, plane, and solid, and of plane numbers as
triangular,  square,  pentagonal,  etc., assigns properties to them according to
their  configurations.  The analysis of figurate numbers by Nicomachus or Pascal
represents  one  of  the great bridges between arithmetic and geometry, of which
the  other, in the opposite direction, is the algebraic rendering of geometrical
loci  in 1 Descartes analytical geometry. In either direction of the translation
between arithmetic and geometry, discontinuous and continuous quantities seem to
have  certain  CHAPTER 76: QU properties in common, at least by analogy. Euclid,
for  example,  proposes numerical ratios as the test for the commensurability of
magnitudes.  "Commensurable  magnitudes  have  to  one another," he writes, "the
ratio  which  a number has to a number." With the exception of infinite numbers,
all  numbers  are  commensurable  and  so  provide the criterion for determining
whether  two  magnitudes are or are not commensurable. Introducing the notion of
dimensionality into the discussion of figurate numbers, Nicomachus observes that
"mathematical  speculations are always to be interlocked and to be explained one
by  means  of  another." Though the dimensions by which linear, plane, and solid
numbers  are  to be distinguished "are more closely related to magnitude ... yet
the  germs of these ideas are taken over into arithmetic as the science which is
the  mother  of  geometry and more elementary than it." The translation does not
seem  to  fail in any respect. The only non-dimensional number, unity, finds its
geometrical  analogue  in  the point, which has position without magnitude. When
diverse  magnitudes are translated into numbers, the diversity of the magnitudes
seems  to  be  effaced  by  the fact that their numerical measures do not have a
corresponding  diversity. The numbers will appear to be commensurable though the
magnitudes  they measure are not, as magnitudes, comparable. As Descartes points
out, necessary, therefore, to regard each it is order of magnitude as a distinct
dimension.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The nature and existence of quantity: its relation to matter, substance, and body; the
transcendental categories of quantity
   1a. The relation between quantity and quality: reducibility of quality to quantity
   1b. The relation of quantities: equality and proportion

2. The kinds of quantity: continuous and discontinuous

3. The magnitudes of geometry: the relations of dimensionality
   3a. Straight lines: their length and their relations; angles, perpendiculars, parallels
   534                                      TOE GREAT IDEAS
   PAGB
   3b. Curved lines: their kinds, number, and degree
   (1) Circles
   (2) Ellipses
   (3) Parabolas
   (4) Hyperbolas
   3c. The relations of straight and curved lines: tangents, secants, asymptotes
   3d. Surfaces
   (1) The measurement and transformation of areas
   (2) The relations of surfaces to lines and solids
   3e. Solids: regular and irregular
   (1) The determination of volume
   (2) The   relations of solids:   inscribed   and circumscribed spheres;   solids   of
   revolution
   4.
   Discrete quantities: number and numbering
   3f. The kinds of numbers: odd-even, square- triangular, prime-composite
   3g. The relations of numbers to one another: multiples and fractions
   3h. The
   number series as a continuum

5. Physical quantities
   5a. Space: the matrix
   of figures and distances
   5b. Time: the
   number of motion
   5c. The quantity of motion: momentum, velocity, acceleration
   5<f.
   Mass: its relation to weight
   $e.
   Force: its measure and the measure of its effect

6. The measurements of quantities: the relation of magnitudes and multitudes;           the units
of measurement
   6a. Commensurable and incommensurable magnitudes
   6b. Mathematical procedures in measurement: superposition, congruence; ratio and
   proportion; parameters and coordinates
   6c. Physical procedures in measurement: experiment and observation; clocks, rules,
   balances

7. Infinite quantity:
the actual infinite and the potentially infinite quantity; the mathe-
matical and physical infinite of the great and the small

CROSS-REFERENCES

For:  Discussions  relevant  to the problem of the existe matter, substance, and
body, see BEING 7b, 7b( Discussions relevant to the conception of the ca

understanding, see FORM 1c; JUDGMENT 8c-8d; ME 1e(i); PRINCIPLE 2b(3).

Other considerations of the relation between qua

QUALITY 33. The conception of equality and inequality as the

AND OTHER 3d; and for the general theory of ra

4c; RELATION 53(3); SAME AND OTHER 30.

The division of quantities into magnitudes and m

quantities, see MATHEMATICS 2c; ONE AND MANY 3

space and time as magnitudes, see MECHANICS 33

Other discussions of magnitudes and numbers as t

MATHEMATICS 2; ONE AND MANY 2a; SPACE 3b-3c; T

Other discussions of such physical quantities as

ASTRONOMY 7; CHANGE 5a-5b; MECHANICS 5d-5e(2),

The general theory of measurement, see MATHEMATI

Other discussions of infinite quantity, see INFI

31 DESCARTES: Objections and Replies, 112b 31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART i, PROP 15,
SCHOL 360b-361d 439b 33 PASCAL: Pensées, 121 195a; 231-233, 213b214a /
Geometrical Demonstrationk 434a34 NEWTON: Principles, BK i, LEMMA i-n and SCHOL
25a-32a esp LEMMA 11, SCHOL, 31a-b; BK ii, LEMMA 2 168a-169b; BK in, GENERAL
SCHOL, 370a-b / Optics, BK HI, 543a 35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK n, CH xin,
SECT 4 149b; SECT 6 149c-d; CH xiv, SECT 26- 27 160c-161a; SECT 30 161c-d; CH
xv, SECT 2-4 162c-163b; SECT 9 164b-d; CH xvi, SECT 8- CH xvii, SECT 22
167c-174a esp CH xvn, SECT 7-8 169b-170a, SECT 12-21 170d-173d; en xxix, SECT 16
237b-238a 35 BERKELEY: Human Knowledge, SECT 123-132 437c-439c 35 HUME: Human
Understanding, SECT xn, DIV 124 506a-c 42 KANT: Pure Reason, 24d; 26d;
130b-133c; 135a-137a,c; 152a-d; 158a-159d; 160b-163a / Judgement, 498b-501b 43
FEDERALIST: NUMBER 31, 103d 46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 17 119a 51
TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 469a-d; EPILOGUE ii, 695b-c nce of quantities and
of their relation to 5)~7b(6); MATTER 2a; QUALITY 3d. tegories as transcendental
concepts of the MORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(i); MIND ntity and quality, see
MECHANICS 4b; basic relation between quantities, see SAME tios and proportions,
see MATHEMATICS ultitudes, or continuous and discontinuous 3 (2) -33 (4); and
for the conception of ; SPACE la; TIME i. he objects of geometry and arithmetic,
see IME 6c. space, time, motion, mass, and force, see 6b-6e; SPACE 3d; TIME 4.
CS 53; MECHANICS 33; PHYSICS 4d. NITY 1b, 33-36; SPACE 33; TIME 2b,

CHAPTER 76: QUAN

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. The

I. Works by authors represente

II. Works by authors not repres

For the date, place, and other facts concerning th

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which foll

I.

AUGUSTINE. On Music DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART n,

8-9 HOBBES. Concerning Body, PART n, CH 12, 14; PART

in, CH 17-20, 23-24 NEWTON. The Method of Fluxions and Infinite Series

. Universal Arithmetic BERKELEY. A Defence of Free Thinking in Mathematics

KANT. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science, DIV I

HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK i, SECT ii-m

SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against II.

the Physicists, BKII,

CH4

OREME.  Treatise  on the Breadth of Forms SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, iv
(9), xm XLI

standing,  BK  II, CH 1 6 (14), xiv, xvi, xviii (3-6), xxvni (i), xxxixLEIBNITZ.
New  Essays  Concerning  Human  UnderT.  REID.  An  Essay  on Quantity VOLTAIRE.
"Number," "Numbering," in A Philosophical Dictionary

GAUSS.  General Investigations of Curved Surfaces WHEWELL. The Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences,

VOL I, BK II, CH 9-IO RIEMANN. Uber die Ilypothesen welche der Geometrie

zu Grunde liegen (The Hypotheses of Geometry)

JEVONS. On a General System of Numerically Definite

Reasoning DEDEKIND. Essays on the Theory of Numbers

TITY  of  the  Western  World, but relevant to the se works arc divided into two
groups:  d  in  this  collection. ented in this collection. e publication of the
works  cited,  consult  ows  the  last chapter of The Great Ideas. CLIFFORD. The
Common  Sense  of  the Exact Sciences, CH i, 3 HELMHOLTZ. Counting and Measuring
BOSANQUET.  Logic,  VOL  I,  CH  3-4 C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL in, par
252-288,

554-562  MCLELLAN  and  DEWEY.  The  Psychology  of Number POINCARE. Science and
Hypothesis,  PART  i CASSIRER. Substance and Function, PART i, CH 2; SUP i L. W.
REID. The Elements ofthe Theory of Algebraic

Numbers  WHITEHEAD and RUSSELL. Principia Mathematica, PART III, SECT A, B; PART
VI B. RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics, CH 11-12, - - 14-15, 19-22, 29-36

Our Knowledge of the External World, v

.

Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, CH

.  1-2,  7-8, 10-11 N. R. CAMPBELL. Physics; the Elements, PART n W. E. JOHNSON.
Logic,  PART  n,  CH  7  G.  N.  LEWIS. The Anatomy of Science, ESSAY i J. B. S.
HALDANE. "On Being the Right Size," in

Possible  Worlds and Other Essays EDDINGTON. The Nature ofthe Physical World, CH
12  DICKSON. Introduction to the Theory of Numbers WHITEHEAD. An Introduction to
Mathematics, CH - .

.

An Enquiry Concerning the Principles ofNatural - Knowledge, CH 9-12

. The Principle of Relativity with Applications to - Physical Science, CH 3

.  Process  and  Reality,  PART  iv  NAGEL.  On the Logic of Measurement TARSKI.
Introduction to Logic, PART n
