Chapter 78:

INTRODUCTION

quantity and quality, relation is genElE erally recognized as a basic term or
category. But its meaning, like theirs, cannot be defined. Relation is, perhaps,
the prototype of an indefinable notion. As Bertrand Russell points out, it seems
to be impossible to make any statement of what relation is without using the
notion of relation in doing so. Any term which is essentially relative seems
also to be incapable of definition. Its meaning cannot be stated without
referring to its correlative; and since the meaning of the latter reciprocally
involves the former as its correlative, each member of a pair of correlative
terms draws upon the other for its meaning. A part is a part of a whole; a
whole, a whole of parts. Similarly, the meaning of parent involves the notion of
child and the meaning of child the notion of parent. Plato applies this
maddening fact about correlative terms to all comparatives which prethe
correlation of more and less. "Comsuppose paratives such as the hotter and the
colder," he writes, "are to be ranked in the class of the infinite." They cannot
be measured or defined. Terms like 'much and 'little,' 'great' and 'small' look
like quantities, but, according to Aristotle, they are "not quantities, but
relatives, for things are not great or small absolutely; they are so called
rather as the result of an act of comparison."

Concerning quantities and qualities, the ancients ask how they exist. The
alternatives seem to be either that they exist in and of themselves, or that
they exist as the attributes of substances such as stones and trees. But with
regard to relations, the question seems to be whether they exist rather than how
they exist. The supposition that a relation cannot exist apart from the terms it
relates may be thought to imply that the relation does exist when the terms it
relates exist. The ancients, however, do not appear to regard the relation as
something having a reality distinguishable from the reality of the correlative
terms. It seems to be significant that both Plato and Aristotle discuss relative
terms, rather than relations as such. For the most part, they signify relations
by using a pair of words which name things standing in a certain relation to one
another. Thus in the Categories, Aristotle refers to 'double' and 'half/
'master' and 'slave,' 'greater' and 'less,' or 'knowledge and 'object known' as
examples of correlative terms. "All relatives," he says, "have a correlative."
Sometimes it is necessary to find the precise word, or even to invent the right
word, for in order to indicate that a given term is relative, its correlative
must be appropriately named. "Concubine," says Locke, "is, no doubt, a relative
name, as well as wife; but in languages where this, and like words, have not a
correlative term, there people are not so apt to take them to be so, as wanting
that evident mark of relations which is between correlatives, which seem to
explain one another, and not to be able to exist but together." When
"reciprocity of correlation does not appear to exist," Aristotle suggests that
it may be the result of our failure to use words carefully. If we wish to use
tho term 'rudder' as relative, we cannot call its correlative a 'boat,' for
"there are boats which have no rudders."

Since there is no existing word, it would be "more accurate," Aristotle thinks,
"if we coined some word like *ruddered' to name the correlative of 'rudder.'"
Similarly, in the case of 'slave' as a relative term, its correlative is not
'man' understood in any sense, but only man understood as 'master.'

The things which are designated by a pair of reciprocally relative terms must,
according to 569 570 THE GREAT I Aristotle, coexist. One man cannot be called a
master unless another man exists who can be called his slave; something cannot
be called larger unless something coexistent with it can be called smaller.
Aristotle considers possible exceptions to this principle of the simultaneity or
coexistence of correlatives; as, for example, in the case of knowledge and the
knowable. It seems possible, he thinks, for the knowable to exist before anyone
has actual knowledge of it. But the exception may be due to an improper naming
of the correlatives. If the correlative of knowledge is the known rather than
the knowable, then knowledge and its object may be said to be necessarily
coexistent, for nothing comes to be an object actually known, except
simultaneously with someone's coming actually to know it.

THE COEXISTENCE OF things which are correlative to one another still leaves a
question concerning the existence of the relation between them. When conceived
as an attribute, a quality or a quantity can be said to exist in the thing it
somehow modifies. In the language of Aristotle, such accidents inhere in
substances, and accordingly have reality as long as the substances in which they
inhere exist. But a relation does not seem to inhere in a substance. It cannot
be the attribute of a single thing. It somehow lies between two things, inhering
in neither, for if it belonged to either one alone it could have some reality if
that one existed and the other did not. The question, therefore, is whether
relations really exist at all, or are only in the mind of him who compares
things or considers them relative to one another. "A sign that the relative is
least of all a substance and a real thing," writes Aristotle, "is the fact that
it alone has no proper generation or destruction or movement; as in respect of
quantity there is increase and diminution, in respect of quality alteration, in
respect of place locomotion, in respect of substance simple generation and
destruction. In respect to relation there is no proper change; for, without
changing, a thing will be now greater and now less or equal, if that with which
it is compared has changed in quantity." Plotinus also questions the reality of
relations. "Has relationfor example, that of right and left, double and half any
actuality? . . . What can be the meaning of correlatives apart from our
conception of their juxtaposition ? 'Greater' may refer to very different
magnitudes; Different' to all sorts of objects. The comparison is ours; it does
not lie in the things themselves." In the case of certain space and time
relations he maintains that "right and left are in our conception, nothing of
them in the things themselves. Before and after are merely two things; the
relation is again of our making." Yet Plotinus seems unwilling to say that "we
do not mean anything by relation, but are victims of words, "or that "none of
the relations mentioned can exist." Recognizing what he calls "the elusive
character of relation," he is willing to affirm the reality of relations "when
the actuality of the relationships is derived from no other source than relation
itself." He thinks that one quantity may be the double of another, "quite apart
from our speech or thought." The fact that one quantity is the double of another
is an additional fact about the two quantities over and above all their other
properties. "In all the conditions in which we assert relation," Plotinus
declares, "the mutual relation exists over and above the objects; we perceive it
as already existent; our knowledge is directed upon a thing, there to be known a
clear testimony to the reality of relation." The problem thus seems to become
one of distinguishing between relations which have independent reality and those
which exist only in the mind. "Some have said that relation is not a reality but
only an idea. But this," Aquinas declares, "is plainly seen to be false from the
very fact that things themselves have a mutual order and relation." Not all
relations are real, however. "Relations which result in the things understood
from the operation of the intellect alone are logical relations only, inasmuch
as reason observes them as existing between two understood things." For example,
"the relation of a thing to itself is not a real relation," for "reason, by
apprehending one thing twice, regards it as two; and thus it apprehends a
certain relation of a thing to itself . . . The same is true of those relations
that follow upon an act of reason, as genus and species, and the like."

CHAPTER 78: RE Aquinas offers, in contrast, "other relations which are realities
with regard to both extremes; as when a relation exists between two things
according to some reality that belongs to both. This is clear of all relations
consequent upon quantity, great and small, double and half, and the like; for
there is quantity in both extremes.'* This distinction between real and logical
relations seems to be qualified by the intermediate case of a relation which is
partly logical and partly real; for, according to Aquinas, "sometimes a relation
in one extreme may be a reality, while in the other extreme, it is only an idea.
This happens whenever the two extremes are not of one order Since God is . . .
outside the whole order of creation and all creatures are ordered to Him, and
not conversely, it is manifest that creatures are really related to God Himself;
whereas in God there is no real relation to creatures, but a relation only in
idea, inasmuch as creatures are related to Him." In the CharmideS) Socrates
raises some doubts about the admissibility of reflexive relations, or the
relations of things to themselves. Others have questioned the partly real and
partly logical relation, according to which one thing is related to another but
the second is not related to the first. But the more important issues, in the
tradition of western thought, seem to be whether there are both real and logical
relations, *.., relations both in nature and in the mind, and whether, in either
case, relations enter into the very nature of the things related or are merely
external, so that the character of a thing is unaffected by the relations in
which it stands.

As INDICATED IN THE chapters on JUDGMENT, REASONING, and LOGIC, relation tends
to displace predication in certain typically modern theories of the proposition
and of inference. What is currently called "relational logic" is set against
"subject-predicate logic." Relations themselves, without regard to the character
of the terms related, become the primary object of logical analysis. It is said,
for example, that 1 the proposition 'John hit James has the form 'aRb' or
*R(a,b),' and that the proposition 'John went to school with James' has the form
LATION 571 *R(a,b,c,).' The first is a dyadic relation, the second a triadic
relation.

Relations are classified not only with respect to the number of the terms they
relate, but also with respect to such formal properties as symmetry,
transitivity, reflexivity. The relation of parent and child, for example, is
asymA is the parent of metrical. It cannot be said, if B, that B is also the
parent of A; whereas the relation of brotherhood is symmetrical. Statements of
symmetrical relationship are convertible. If we say that A is the brother of B,
we can also say that B is the brother of A. The type of relationship remains the
same regardless of the character of the terms. Unequal quantities are
asymmetrically related, equal quantities symmetrically; 'to-the-rightof is an
asymmetrical spatial relation, 'next-to' is symmetrical; in time,
'simultaneous-with' is symmetrical and 'prior-to' asymmetrical. The distinction
between transitive and intransitive relations similarly holds for all kinds of
terms. The relation of father to son or of 'standingnext-to' in space is
intransitive, for if A is the father of B, and B the father of C, A is not the
father of C; whereas the spatial relation of Standing- to- the-right-of is
transitive, for if A is to the right of B, and B to the right of C, then A is to
the right of C. The modern analysis of propositions as relational structures
which differ in type according to the character of the relations, not the
character of the terms, has an antecedent in Locke's analysis ofjudgments as
acts of comparison which look to the relation between ideas rather than to the
ideas themselves. Both analyses lead to a theory of inference which is based on
the convertibility of symmetrical relations and on the transitivity of certain
relationships and the intransitivity of others. As indicated in the chapter on
REASONING, the factor of transitivity appears in William James discussion of the
"principle of mediate comparison." He states this in the formula "more than the
more is more than the less'' Then he explains that "such a formula would cover
all possible cases; as, earlier than early is earlier than late, worse than bad
is worse than good, east of east is east of west; etc., etc., ad libitum.
Symbolically, we might write it as abcd . . and say. that any number of
intermediaries may be ex- 572 punged without obliging us to alter anything in
what remains written."

James thus formulates what he regards as the most fundamental law of thought.
For series " of "homogeneously related terms, the law is " that "shipping
intermediary terms leaves the relations the same The factor of transitivity
enters the picture when fames distinguishes between relations which are and
relations which are not transferable. "Allskipping of intermediaries and
transfer of relations occurs within homogeneous series," he writes. "But not all
homogeneous series allow of intermediaries being skipped. It depends on which
series they are, on what relations they contain. Let it not be said that it is a
mere matter of verbal association, due to the fact thatlanguage sometimes
permits us to transfer the name of a relation over skipped intermediaries, and
sometimes does not; as where we call men 'progenitors' of their remote as well
as of their immediate posterity, but refuse to call them 'fathers' thereof.

There are relations which are intrinsically transferable, whilst others are not.
The relation of condition, e.g., is intrinsically transferable. What conditions
a condition conditions what it conditions-Vcause of cause is cause of effect.'
The relations of negation and frustration, on the other hand, are not
transferable: what frustrates a frustration does not frustrate what it
frustrates. No changes in terminology would annul the intimate difference
between these two cases."

THE FOREGOING PASSAGES from James reflect the general tenor of the theory of the
calculus of relations. He himself does not systematically expound it. Its
elaboration is to be found in the writings of Boole, Couturat, and De Morgan, of
Jevons, Pierce, Bradley, Royce, Russell and Whitehead (whose works are cited in
the Additional Readings). Is this relational logic more general than the
subject-predicate logic that is traditionally called "Aristotelian," or is the
reverse the case ? The modern answer insists upon the greater generality of
relational logic. Royce, for example, denning "subsumption" as a
non-symmetrical, transitive relation which obtains between two classes when one
includes the other, declares that "the entire traditional 'theory of the
syllogism' can be expressed as a sort of comment upon, and relatively simple
application of, the transitivity of the subsumption relation." According to
Royce, William James' axiom of skipped intermediaries represents a step in the
right direction, but it fails to achieve complete generality. Russell disposes
of the traditional theory of the proposition in the same fashion that Royce
disposes of the traditional theory of the syllogism. Traditional logic, he
writes, "believed that there was only one form of simple proposition (i.e., of
proposition not stating a relation between two or more other propositions),
namely, the form which ascribes a predicate to a subject." It is, therefore,
"unable to admit the reality of relations; all relations, it maintains, must be
reduced to properties of the apparently related terms." Russell insists, on the
contrary, that "propositions stating that two things have a certain relation
have a different form from subject-predicate propositions." This can be most
easily seen, he thinks, in the case of asymmetrical relations. The proposition
which states that A and B are related by the symmetrical relation of equality,
can be interpreted to mean that A and B both possess a common property. "But
when we come to asymmetrical relations, such as before and after, greater and
less, etc., the attempt to reduce them to properties becomes," in Russell's
opinion, "obviously impossible." The relational theory of the proposition,
therefore, includes the subject-predicate theory as a special case. A defense of
the subject-predicate logic would not make the counterclaim that relational
logic can be treated as a special case. Rather it would insist that the two
logics are radically different in principle that the one belongs to a philosophy
of nature and a metaphysics, in which substance is the primary concept; whereas
the other belongs to the empirical sciences and to modern mathematics, in which
the concept of relation supplants substance. Whichever side of the controversy
is taken, the undeniable difference between a relational and a subject-predicate
logic represents one of the great differences between modern and ancient
thought. It is not only in logic that the modern emphasis seems to be upon
relations rather than CHAPTER 78: R upon things related on relations denuded of
their terms rather than on terms treated as correlatives. The same tendency
appears in modern mathematics, in algebra, in the calculus, and especially in
the theory of equations and functions, of sets and series. It also appears in
modern physics where, according to Cassirer, the great conceptual revolution
consists in displacing substance by function, and the casual interaction of
substances by functional relationships and systems of order. Such substitutions
obviously parallel the shift in logic from the consideration of terms related as
subjects and predicates, to the consideration of relations without regard to
differences in the terms related. In the tradition of the great books, this
conceptual revolution seems to be announced by the treatment which Hume and Kant
accord to the notion of substance. Hume appears to conceive of experience as a
series of events related, as he says, by "only three principles of connexion . .
. namely, Resemblance, Contiguity in time or place, and Cause or Effect." These
relations make up the fabric of experience. So long as it consisted in such
connections, our experience would be the same whether or not there were enduring
things or substances. "Nature has established connexions among particular
ideas," Hume writes, so that "no sooner does one idea occur to our thoughts than
it introduces its correlative." All our knowledge of matters of fact depends
upon the association of ideas, or the relations of resemblance, contiguity, and
causation among the elements of experience. All other knowledge has for its
object those relations between ideas which do not connect them causally or place
them in a spatial or temporal order. In either case, relations of all sorts,
rather than things and their properties (or substances and their attributes),
seem to be the prime constituents of nature and of knowledge. Kant presents a
fourfold classification of judgments according to their quantity, quality,
relation, and modality. Under the head of relation, he distinguishes the
categorical, the hypothetical, and the disjunctive according to the following
criteria: "a. Relation of the predicate to the subject, b. Relation of the cause
to its effect, c. Relation of subdivided knowledge, ELATION and of the collected
members of the subdivision to each other." These are, he writes, "all the
relations of thought in judgements."

Pointing out that he borrows the term from Aristotle, Kant calls the pure
concepts of the understanding "categories" and constructs a table of categories
which runs parallel to his table of judgments; because, as he explains, "the
same function which imparts unity to various representations in one judgement
imparts unity likewise to the mere synthesis of various representations in one
intuition, which in a general way may be called the pure concept of
understanding." Kant's categories, in contrast to Aristotle's, afford a striking
example of the shift from substance to relation. Where for Aristotle substance
is the primary category and all other categories signify the accidents of
substance, among which relation seems to have least reality in the nature of
things, Kant makes relation one of the four major groups of categories, and
under relation places subsistence and inherence (or substance and accident)
along with causality and dependence (or cause and effect) and community (or
reciprocity between the active and the passive). It is not substance, but the
relation of substance and accident, which is for Kant a transcendental category.
THE ISSUE CONCERNING substance and relation takes another form in the problem
whether relations exist in the very nature of things, as belonging to their
essence, or only exist as connections between things. In the latter alternative,
there is still the question whether relations between things are externally
affixed to them or are internally inherent in them and affect the natures of the
things related. According to the Christian doctrine of the Trinity, there are
real relations in God, each really distinct from the others, yet each identical
with the divine essence. These relations are the persons of the Trinity the
relations Aquinas calls "paternity, filiation, spiration and procession," the
relation of the Father and the Son, and of the Holy Spirit to them both.
"Relation in God," he writes, "is not as an accident in a subject, but is the
divine essence itself; and so it is subsistent, for the divine essence is
subsistent. Therefore, as the Godhead is God, so the divine paternity is God the
Father, Who is a divine person. Therefore, a divine person signifies a relation
as subsisting."

Since the three persons of the Trinity are of the same essence, the principle of
their real distinction must be found elsewhere. Denying that "there can be
discerned between them a real distinction in respect of the divine essence,"
Descartes does not reject the possibility of a distinction "in respect of their
relation to one another." Aquinas considers "two principles of difference among
the divine persons . . . origin and relation" but thinks it is "better to say
that the persons or hypostases are distinguished by relations rather than by
origin"; for, among other reasons, "when a relation is an accident, it
presupposes the distinction of subjects; but when the relation is subsistent, it
does not presuppose, but brings about, distinction."

It would seem to follow that, except in God, relations are not subsistent. In
Aristotle's theory of corporeal substances, for example, the matter and the form
which constitute a physical thing are united, not related. Though matter and
form are conceived as really distinct principles in the composition of a
composite substance as essence and existence are also sometimes said to be
really distinct principles in the being of all things except God their real
distinction does not imply that they are subsistent, as are the persons of the
Trinity, nor that they are relations, or in relation to one another. If real as
opposed to logical relations occur only between things which somehow really
subsist, then those principles which must be united in order for a thing to
subsist cannot be really related to one another.

WITH A SOMEWHAT different analysis, Locke seems to exclude relations from the
constitution of what he calls "the complex idea of substance." All complex
ideas, according to Locke, "are either modes, substances, or relations." The
complex idea of substance is a "collection of those several simple ideas of
sensible qualities, whichwe .... find united in the thing called horse or stone;
yet because we cannot conceive how they should subsist alone, nor one in
another, we suppose them existing in, and supported by some common subject;
which support we denote by the name substance, S though it be certain we have no
clear or distinct idea of that thing we suppose a support." The various simple
ideas of qualities which, together with the indistinct notion of a supporting
substratum, constitute the complex idea of a particular substance, are, in
Locke's theory, compounded, not related. Relation is itself acomplex idea,
consisting in "the consideration and comparing of one idea with another." The
ideas related may be either simple or complex, but the relations are between
ideas, not in them certainly not in simple ideas, nor in complex ideas of modes
and substances, which are combinations, not relations, of simple ideas. The
exception is, of course, a complex idea of relation, which involves several
distinct ideas and, in addition, the idea of a relation between them which,
Locke says, "it gets from their comparison one with another. Since . . . any
idea, whether simple or complex, may be the occasion why the mind thus brings
two things together . . . any of our ideas may be the foundation of relation";
but, Locke adds, "there must always be in relation two ideas, or things, either
in themselves really separate, or considered as distinct, and then ground or
occasion for their comparison." Locke's theory of relations not only seems to
exclude them from the interior constitution of substances, but also seems to
make them entirely extrinsic to the natures of the things related. "Ideas of
relation," Locke says, "may be the same in men who have far different ideas of
the things that are related or that are thus compared." The relation is
unaffected by the things it relates, as they in turn are unaffected by it, for
they are "not contained in the real existence of things, but [are] something
extraneous and super-induced." Berkeley and Hume also seem to agree that
relations are entirely external. "Relations are distinct from the ideas or
things related," writes Berkeley, "inasmuch as the latter may be perceived by us
without our perceiving the former." To Hume, "all events seem entirely loose and
separate. One event follows another; but we can never observe any tie between
them. They seem conjoinedk but never connected" So far as our understanding
goes, nothing in the nature of one event necessarily CHAPTER 78: REL leads the
mind to the consideration of another, as it would if the event could not be
understood by us except as intrinsically related or connected with that other.

In the tradition of western thought, the issue concerning the internality or
externality of relations has profound implications for man's conception of the
order of nature or the structure of the world. The difference, discussed in
chapter on CHANCE, between what the William James calls the "block" and the
"concatenated" universe presupposes not only different views of causality, but
also different positions with respect to the internality or externality of
relations, as is indicated by James' criticism of Hegel and Bradley. The
relation of part and whole, and of one part to another in the structure of an
organic whole, seems to be the prime example of internal relationship. Each part
is thought to be constituted, both in its being and nature, by the being and
nature of the whole to which it belongs and by the other parts which comprise
that whole. This may be seen in Spinoza's theory of God or Nature as the one and
only substance, in and through which everything else both is and is conceived.
All things are locked together in a system of internal relationshipsthe finite
parts with one another through the infinite whole which determines each to be
what it is, in itself and in relation to all others.

SEEMS TO BE the principle of order. At least it can be said that the various
conceptions of order which appear in the great books involve the idea of
relation and of different kinds of relationship.

The order of the universe or of nature, for example, seems to be differently
conceived according as things are causally related to one another, related as
lower and higher species in a hierarchy of grades of being, or as the parts of
one all-embracing whole. In each case, it makes a difference, as we have already
observed, whether the relations involved are thought to be real or logical, and
internal or external to the things related. Relation similarly enters into
conceptions of psychological, political, and moral order the order of the parts
of the soul, the order of classes or functions in the state, the order of ATION
goods, of means and ends, of duties, of loves. Just as the status of each thing
in nature is affected by whether the universe is conceived as a whole of
internally related parts or as a set of externally related wholes, so the status
of the individual in society is affected by whether the state is conceived as an
organic whole or merely as a political order formed by the free association of
individuals. The consideration of the various types of order occurs in other
chapters, such as NATURE, WORLD, SOUL, STATE, GOOD AND EVIL, and BEAUTY.
Particular types of relationship are also discussed in chapters concerned with
the terms between which such relationships hold the relation of cause and effect
in the chapter on CAUSE; spatial and temporal relationships in the chapters on
SPACE and TIME; the relation of species and genus in the chapters on EVOLUTION
and IDEA; relations of equality and inequality in the chapter on QUANTITY; and
relations of similarity and dissimilarity in the chapter on QUALITY. This last
type of relationship, more broadly conceived as including not merely likeness in
quality, but the sameness or similitude of things in every sort of respect, is
the main consideration of the chapter on SAME AND OTHER. The theory of analogy
is discussed there also, for though it is concerned with relation a proportion
being a ratio of ratios the specific relationship by which relations are
themselves related in analogies or proportions seems to be one of similitude
(either identity or similarity). Finally, the idea of relation seems to be
involved in the contrast between the absolute and the relative. Things are said
to be considered absolutely when they are considered in themselves, and
relatively when they are considered with reference to something else. By
extension of these meanings, relativism tends to assert that with regard to most
things, if not all, what they are depends on the point of view, i.e., their
relation to man, to this group of men, or even to this man. Absolutism goes to
the opposite extreme of saying that things are what they are independently of
man's view of them. The opposition of these two tendencies creates familiar
issues concerning the true, the good, and the beautiful, which are discussed in
the chapters devoted to those subjects.'

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The general theory of relation
 1a. The nature and being of relations: the distinction between real and logical or
 ideal relations
 1b. The effect of relations on the nature and being of things: internal and external
 relations
 1c. The coexistence of correlatives
 1d. Relational
 unity or identity of relation: the notion and use of analogy or
 proportionality

2. Order and relation in God : the divine processions and the relations constituting the
Trinity of persons

3. The
relation of God to the world: divine immanence and transcendence
4.
Relation in the order of thought or knowledge
 3a. The definability or indefinability of relative terms
 3b. The proposition or judgment as a statement of relation: relation in reasoning
 3c. The transcendental categories of relation
 4</.
 Relations as objects of knowledge: ideas of relation
 4*. The relations between ideas
 ^f.
 The types of relationship underlying the association of ideas in thought, memory,
 and dreams

5. Order as a system of relationships or related things
 5a. The nature and typesof order: inclusion and exclusion; succession and coexistence;
 5b. posteriority, and simultaneity
 (1) The order of the causes or of cause and effect
 (2) The order of goods or of means and ends: the order of loves
 (3) The order of quantities: the types of proportion
 (4) The order of kinds: hierarchy; species and genus
 5& The order of the universe or of nature: the hierarchy of beings
 5?. Order as a principle
 of beauty

6. The absolute and the relative modes of consideration
 6a. Absolute and relative with respect to space, time, motion
 6b. Absolute and relative with respect to truth
 6c. Absolute and relative with respect to goodness or beauty

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The conception of identity as a logical rather than a and
for the conception of the relation between cr logical, see GOD 5e; ONE AND MANY
1b; WORLD 3b. Another consideration of correlative terms, see OPP

The theory of proportionality or analogical similit

applications of analogy and proportion in metaphy

MATHEMATICS 40; QUANTITY 1b; SIGN AND SYMBOL 3d,

Other discussions of indefinable terms, see DEFINITI

The issues raised by a relational theory of judgment

5c, 6d, yc; REASONING 2.

Discussions relevant to the conception of the catego

understanding, see FORM 1c; JUDGMENT 8c-8d; MEMOR

4d(3); PRINCIPLE 23). The consideration of the relations between ideas as

KNOWLEDGE 63(3).

Other discussions of the association of ideas, see I

Another discussion of the prior, the posterior, and

The order of causes, see CAUSE 1b.

The order of goods, or of means and ends, see GOOD A

The relation of quantities and the relation of quali

SAME AND OTHER 3c-3d.

The order of kinds, see ANIMAL 2a; EVOLUTION 1b; IDE

AND OTHER 3a(i)~3a(3); UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 50

Order in the soul, in the state, and in the universe

ONE AND MANY 3b(5); SOUL 2b; STATE 5a-5c, 6a-6b; W

6c 5 LOCKE: Human Understanding, 90a-d; BK i, CH n, SECT 8-12 105d-107d; SECT 21
Ilia; BK H, CH xxi, SECT 55-56 192c-193b; CH XXVHI, SECT io-i2 230b-231c esp
SECT 10 230b-c 8 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 362a-d 2 KANT: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of
Morals, 259c-d; 270d-271a; 271c-272b / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics,
377c-d / Intro. Metaphysic of Morals, 387a-388a / Science of Right, 397b-398a /
Judgement, 471b-473a; 525a; 540b-542a 476a-495a,c; 513b-516b; 516d-517c; 524d3
MILL: Utilitarianism, 471b-476a,c 4 Bos WELL: Johnson, 197a-b 6 HEGEL:
Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 70 31a; ADDITIONS, 45 123c-d / Philosophy of
History, PART n, 280b-281b 8 MELVILLE: Moby Dice, 302b-304a 9 DARWIN: Origin of
Species, 95a / Descent of Man, 302a; 314c-315d esp 315d; 462d-463a; 569c; 577b-d
0 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 428b-d 1 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i,
15d-16a; BK xi, 514c-d; BK xii, 542d; BK xiv, 611a-c; EPILOGUE i, 645a-646c;
647b-649c passim 4 FREUD: War and Death, 757d-759c esp 759a / Civilization and
Its Discontents, 792b-c real relation, see SAME and OTHER i, 2d; eatures and God
as partly real and partly OSITION la. ude, see SAME AND OTHER 30; and for the
sics and mathematics, see IDEA 40(4); 5f. ON 1c; PRINCIPLE 23(3). and reasoning,
see IDEA 5b; JUDGMENT ries as the transcendental concepts of the Y AND
IMAGINATION 60(2); MIND objects of knowledge, see IDEA la; DEA 56; MEMORY AND
IMAGINATION 2C. the simultaneous, see TIME 5d. ND EVIL 5b-5c. ties, see QUALITY
4c; QUANTITY 1b; A 4X3); OPPOSITION icfa); SAME . or nature, see MAN 5-5a;
NATURE 3a-3b; ORLD la-1c, 6a-6c.

CHAPTER 78: REL

For: The doctrine of the Trinity as concerned with order and r

The absolute and the relative in space, time, an

The absolute and the relative in truth, goodness

CONVENTION 9a-pb; GOOD AND EVIL 6d; OPINION 3c

UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 73-70.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

I.

HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK i, PART i,

SECT v KANT. Metaphysical Foundations of Natural Science,

DIV in

HEGEL. Science of Logic, VOL i, BK n, SECT n, en 3;

SECT in, CH i, 3

ton's Philosophy, CH 4-7

J. S.MILL. An Examination of Sir William HamilW. JAMES. Essays in Radical
Empiricism . The Meaning of Truth, CH n, 13

. Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 9

II.

PETRUS HISPANICUS. Summulae Logicales (Logical Treatises)

DUNS SCOTUS. Tractatus de Primo Principio (A Tract Concerning the First
Principle), CH 1-2

SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, x (i), xxvm (3), XXXII (2), XXXIX, XLVII,

XLVIII (1-4), L (4),

LHI-LIV

JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, PART n, Q 17
LEIBNITZ. Philosophical Worlds, CH 12 (A New System

of the Interaction of Substances), 13 (Reply of M. Poucher Concerning the
Interaction of Substances)

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

BK n, CH 25, 28, 30

ATION elation in God, see GOD pa. d motion, .kCHANGE 7c(3); SPACE 2a;TiME i. ,
and beauty, see BEAUTY 5; CUSTOM AND , 6a; PRINCIPLE 5; TRUTH oty ofthe Western
World, but relevant to the These works are divided into two groups: ed in this
collection. sented in this collection. the publication of the works cited,
consult ollows the last chapter of The Great Ideas. DE MORGAN. Formal Logic, CH
3-5 BOOLE. An Investigation of the Laws of Thought JEVONS. Pure Logic, CH 1-2, 4
LOTZE. Metaphysics, BK in, CH 3 C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL HI, par
45-149, 214-251 VOL vi, par 318-324, 386-392

; BRADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH 3; BK n, CH 26

Collected Essays, VOL n (31)

. COUTURAT. The Algebra of Logic WOODWORTH. Psychological Issues, CH 5-6
CASSIRER. Substance and Function, PART i; PART nf CH 7-8; SUP II-HI WHITEHEAD
and RUSSELL. Principia Mathematica, PART I, SECT C, D; PART II, SECT B, C, D, EJ
PART iv-v ROYCE. The Principles of Logic B. RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics,
CH 9, 24- 31

. The Problems of Philosophy, CH 9

. Our Knowledge of the External World, v

. Introduction to Mathematical Philosophy, CH 4-6 W. E. JOHNSON. Logic, PART i,
CH 12-13 MOORE. Philosophical Studies, CH 9 WHITEHEAD. Science and the Modern
World, CH 10 TARSKI. Introduction to Logic, v B LAN SHAM, The Nature of Thought,
CH 31-32
