Chapter  81: RHETORI INTRODUCTION TJHETORIC is traditionally regarded as JlV one
of  the  liberal  arts.  When the liberal arts are counted as seven, and divided
into  the  three  and the four the trwium and the quadrivium rhetoric is grouped
with  grammar  and  logic,  not  with  the  mathematical  arts of arithmetic and
geometry, astronomy and music.

The  implication  of  this grouping seems to be that rhetoric, like grammar, has
something  to  do  with  language  or  discourse;  and  that,  like logic, it is
concerned with thought, with reasoning or argument. But if grammar is the art of
writing or speaking correctly, and if logic is the art of thinking correctly, it
may be wondered what rhetoric can add to these other arts, either on the side of
language  or  of  thought. Logic by itself does not suffice to ensure that words
are  properly used to express thought; nor does grammar guarantee that discourse
which is flawless in syntax also complies with the demands of rationality. Hence
neither  grammar  nor  logic  seems  to  challenge the function of the other, as
together they challenge the function of rhetoric. Upon the way this challenge is
met depends not only the definition of rhetoric, but also the value put upon it.
In  the  tradition  of  the  great  books,  rhetoric is both praised as a useful
discipline  which  liberally  educated  men  should  possess, and condemned as a
dishonest   craft   to  which  decent  men  would  not  stoop.  Like  the  words
"sophistical" and "dialectical," the epithet "rhetorical" carries, traditionally
as  well  as  cur- a rently, a derogatory implication. The three words sometimes
even tend to merge in mean- m ing, expressing the same reproach against trick- m
ery.  Yet of the three, "sophistical" alone im- h plies an unqualified rebuke. a
We  do not speak of good and bad sophistry. o But dialectic has its defenders as
well as its detractors; and even those who, like Plato, charge t C rhetoric with
being  an  art  of  enchantment or a form of flattery also distinguish between a
true  and  a  false  rhetoric,  the  one  associated  with dialectic as a wholly
admirable  pursuit, the other classed with sophistry as a vocation divorced from
virtue.  According  to  Bacon, the aim of rhetoric is to support reason, "not to
oppress  it."  Rhetoric may be misused, but logic also has its abuses. "Rhetoric
can  be  no  more  charged," in Bacon's opinion, "with the coloring of the worse
part,  than  logic with sophistry, or morality with vice." THE PURPOSE AND scope
of rhetoric are capable of broad and narrow definitions. The broader view, which
we shall consider subsequently, tends to merge rhetoric with poetics as together
the  art  of  eloquence  in  any  sort  of discourse. The narrower view tends to
restrict  rhetoric  to the art of persuasion in the sphere of practical affairs.
Rhetorical  skill consists in getting others to embrace certain beliefs, to form
the  opinions  or  make the judgments which the speaker or writer wishes them to
adopt.  Usually  action,  not  persuasion,  is  the  ultimate goal. The rules of
rhetoric  are  supposed to give one power not merely to move the minds of men to
certain  conclusions  but, through persuasion of their minds, to move men to act
or not act in a certain way. The sphere of rhetoric, so conceived, is limited to
moral  and  political  problems.  The  things  bout  which men deliberate before
acting,  the  things  on  which  they  pass  moral  judgments  or  ake political
decisions,  constitute  the  subject  atter  of  oratory,  or  what Hobbcs calls
"exortation  and  dehortation,"  that  is, "counsel ccompanied with signs in him
that  giveth  it,  f  vehement  desire  to  have  it  followed." In the narrower
conception,  rhetoric  seems  o  be  confined to oratory. It is with oratory and
orators  that  Socrates  seems  to  be concerned when he discusses rhetoric with
Phaedrus  or  with  Gorgias. Gorgias, who was a teacher of rhetoric, praises the
power  of  the  orator to persuade "the judges in the courts, or the senators in
the  council,  or the citizens in the assembly, or at any other public meeting."
In  view  of  this  Socrates  asks  him whether he will accept the definition of
rhetoric  as "the artificer of persuasion." When Gorgias admits that "persuasion
is  the chief end of rhetoric," Socrates goes on to ask whether rhetoric is "the
only  art  which brings persuasion, or do other arts have the same effect ? Docs
he  who  teaches  anything persuade men of that which he teaches or not?" If so,
"then  arithmetic  as  well  as rhetoric is an aitificer of persuasion." Gorgias
reminds  Socrates  of  his initial point about the orator, that "rhetoric is the
art  of  persuasion  in courts of law and other assemblies .. about the just and
unjust."  But  Socrates  is . still not satisfied that rhetoric has been sharply
defined.  He introduces the distinction between knowledge and belief or opinion,
and  gets Gorgias to agree that, whereas there cannot be false knowledge as well
as  true,  beliefs  and  opinions  may  be either true or false. Persuasion can,
therefore, be of two sorts "one which is the source of belief without knowledge,
as the other is of knowledge." Gorgias is willing to limit rhetoric to that form
of  persuasion  "which  only  gives belief," to which Socrates adds the emphatic
negative  that  "the  rhetorician  does  not  instruct thecourts of law or other
assemblies  about things just and unjust, but creates beliefs about them." If an
assembly  wishes to learn about matters connected with medicine or shipbuilding,
it  consults  the  physician  or  shipwright, not the orator. Hut, says Gorgias,
"when  a  decision  has  to  be  given in such matters, the rhetoricians are the
advisers;  they  are the men who win their point." He confirms this by reminding
Socrates  that the speeches of Themistocles and Pericles, not the suggestions of
the  builders,  determined  the  Athenian  assembly  in  the construction of the
harbor,  the  docks  and walls. By way of further illustration, Gorgias tells of
occasions when he has succeeded in getting patients to do what they would not do
on  the advice of their physicians. "I have persuaded the patient," he says, "to
do  for me what he would not do for the physician, just by the use of rhetoric."
Similarly, in a contest for public office between a rhetorician and a man of any
other  profession,  "the rhetorician more than any other would have the power of
getting himself chosen, for he can speak more persuasively to the multitude than
any  of  them,  and  on  any subject. Such is the nature and power of the art of
rhetoricTh"  In comparing it with dialectic, Aristotle seems to have a different
conception  of  the  function  of rhetoric. "Neither rhetoric nor dialectic," he
says,  "is  the scientific study of any one separate subject; both are faculties
for  providing  arguments."  Both  also  are concerned with arguments which fall
short  of  scientific demonstration, that is, with matters of opinion concerning
which  something  probable  can  be said on either side of the issue. Though for
Aristotle  rhetoric  is  the  counterpart  of  dialectic, in that both deal with
arguments  on any subject, his differentiation between the two disciplines seems
to  indicate  that  rhetoric  is  limited to the consideration of oratory in the
familiar  sense of public speaking. The rhetorician is concerned with persuading
an  audience,  not,  as the dialectician is, with carrying on a dispute in which
two  individuals  may  be  privately  engaged.  The  persuasion, furthermore, is
directed  to  obtaining  a  certain  response  from  that  audience  not  merely
agreement,  but  either action, or a decision to act, or approval which, charged
with emotional force or enthusiasm, has practical significance. The divisions of
rhetoric,  according  to  Aristotle,  are determined by the kinds of oratory, as
these, in turn, are determined by the types of audience to be addressed. "Of the
three   elements   in  speech-makingspeaker,  subject,  and  person  addressed,"
Aristotle  writes, "it is the last one, the hearer, that determines the speech's
end  and object. The hearer must be either a judge with a decision to make about
things  past  or  future, or an observer. A member of the assembly decides about
future events, a juryman about past events; while those who merely decide on the
orator's  skill  are  observers.  "From  this  it  follows  that there are three
divisions  of  oratory:  (i)  political,  (2)  forensic,  and (3) the ceremonial
oratory  of display" or, CHAPTER 81: RHETORI as these three are sometimes named,
deliberative, legal,and epideictic. "Political speaking urges us either to do or
not  do  something.  .  .  .  Forensic  speaking either attacks or defends . . .
somebody. The ceremonial oratory of display either praises or censures somebody.
These  three  kinds  of  rhetoric  refer  to  three different kinds of time. The
political  orator  is  concerned with the future; he tries to persuade men about
things to be done or not done hereafter. The party in a case at law is concerned
with  the  past;  one man accuses the other, and the other defends himself, with
reference  to  things already done. The ceremonial orator is, properly speaking,
concerned  with  the present, since all men praise or blame in view of the state
of  things existing at the time, though they often find it useful also to recall
the past and to make guesses about the future. "Rhetoric has three distinct ends
in  view,  one  for  each  of  its  three  kinds.  The  political orator aims at
establishing  the  expediency  or the harmfulness of a proposed course of action
Parties  in  a  lawsuit  aim  at  establishing  the justice or injustice of some
action.  .  .  .  Those  who praise or attack a man aim at proving him worthy of
honor or the reverse."

THIS  CONCEPTION  OF rhetoric as concerned with oratory or public speaking gives
one answer to the question of what rhetoric adds to grammar and logic as arts of
discourse.  In  oratory  more  is  involved than the communication of ideas, the
marshalling  of  arguments,  the making of proofs. Discourse, whether written or
spoken, has an effect upon the emotions as well as upon the mind, and disposes a
man to act as well as the mind to assent. "The communicating of ideas by words,"
Berkeley  observes,  "is  not the chief and only end of language, as is commonly
supposed.  There are other ends, as the raising of some passion, the exciting to
or deterring from an action, the putting the mind in some particular disposition
to  which the former is in many cases barely subservient, and sometimes entirely
omitted  I  entreat  the  reader to reflect with himself, and see if it doth not
often  happen,  either  in  hearing or reading a discourse, that the passions of
fear,  love,  hatred, admiration, disdain and the like, arise immediately in his
mind C upon the perception of certain words, without any ideas corning between."
Engaged  in  the  oratorical task of persuading the people of New York to ratify
the federal constitution, the writers of the Federalist papers are aware that "a
torrent of angry and malignant passions will be let loose" in the debate of that
issue.  They  realize  that  arguing  for  the  adoption  of  certain  political
principles  or  conclusions  is not like teaching geometry, the objects of which
are "entirely abstracted from those pursuits which stir up and put in motion the
unruly  passions  of  the  human heart." Hamilton admits at once, in the opening
paper,  that  "the plan offered to our deliberations affects too many particular
interests,  innovates  upon  too  many local institutions, not to involve in its
discussion,  a variety of objects foreign to its merits, and of views, passions,
and  prejudices  little  favorable  to the discovery of truth." Nevertheless, he
tries  to persuade his audience to judge the issue on the merits of the argument
alone.  The  opponents of the Constitution, he says, "may be actuated by upright
intentions." The opposition may "spring from sources, blameless at least, if not
respectable the honest errors of minds led astray by preconceived jealousies and
fears.  So  numerous indeed and so powerful are the causes which serve to give a
false  bias to the judgment, that we, upon many occasions, see wise and good men
on the wrong as well as on the right side of questions of the first magnitude to
society."  To  recognize  this,  Hamilton  tells his audience, is to be on guard
"against  all  attempts, from whatever quarter, to influence your decision ...by
any  impressions  other than those which may result from the evidence of truth."
He  wishes  them  to  consider him as relying upon nothing but the merits of his
case.  "I  frankly  acknowledge  to  you my convictions," he writes, "and I will
freely  lay  before  you the reasons on which they are founded. . . . My motives
must  remain  in  the  depository of my own breast. My arguments will be open to
all,  and may be judged by all. They shall at least be offered in a spirit which
will not disgrace the cause of truth." We can detect here another element in the
art of rhetoric. The orator seems to be concerned, not only with the strength of
his argu- 648 THE GRE mcnts and with the passions of the audience which he hopes
to  move  by  these  arguments,  but also with the impression he makes upon that
audience  as  a  person  of good character and honest intentions, devoted to the
truth and, above all, to the best interests of those whom he addresses.

The  great  speeches  reportedor  perhaps polished, if not inventedby Thucydidcs
exemplify this effort on the part of the orator, as do also the orations written
by Shakespeare for his characters, of which the speeches of Brutus and Antony in
Julius Caesar arc among the most notable as well as the most familiar. The point
is   also  illustrated  by  the  Communist  Manifesto,  which  is  denounced  as
"propaganda"  by  those who mistrust the writers, but to those who trust them is
powerful  and  persuasive oratory. Separating the use of witnesses and documents
by  the  forensic  orator  from  what  he  calls  the strictly artistic means of
persuasion  i.e.,  the  means intrinsic to the art of rhetoric Aristotle divides
the  latter  into the three elements already noted. Persuasion, he says, depends
"on  the  personal  character  of the speaker ... on putting the audience into a
certain  frame  of mind . . . [and] on the proof, or apparent proof, provided by
the words of the speech itself. Persuasion is achieved by the speaker's personal
character  when  the  speech  is  so  spoken  as  to make us think him credible.
Secondly,  .  .  . persuasion may come through the hearers when the speech stirs
their  emotions. Thirdly, . . . persuasion is effected through the speech itself
when  we  have  proved  a  truth or an apparent truth by means of the persuasive
arguments suitable to the case in question."

These  being  the  three  technical  means  of  effecting  persuasion, Aristotle
concludes  that  rhetorical  skill  must  consist  in the ability "(i) to reason
logically,  (2)  to  understand  human  character  and goodness in their various
forms,  and  (3) to understand the emotions ... to know their causes and the way
in  which  they are excited." The art of rhetoric, therefore, involves more than
training  in  grammar  and logic. It requires the study of ethics and psychology
particularly  knowledge  of  the  types  of human character and knowledge of the
passions.

The  same  consideration  of  the  conditions  of AT IDEAS oratory seems to lead
Socrates  to tell Phaedrus that Thrasymachus or anyone else who teaches rhetoric
ought  "to give an exact description of the nature of the soul," to explain "the
mode  in  which  it acts or is acted upon." The rhetorician, he goes on, "having
classified  men  and  speeches, and their kinds and affections, and adapted them
one  to another," will be able to "tell the reasons of his arrangement, and show
why  one  soul  is persuaded by a particular form of argument, and another not."
THIS  FACT  ABOUT  rhetoric  that  it must adapt speech to persons as well as to
subject  mattersseems to occasion Socrates' definition of oratory as "the art of
enchanting  the  soul."  It  is  not,  he tells Phaedrus, confined to courts and
public  assemblies.  Whether this art is a good or evil thing depends on whether
it  requires  the  speaker  to  know  more  than  the nature of the person he is
addressing  the  truth about the matters spoken of. To engender probabilities in
the  minds  of  the  many  by  the  likeness of the truth, know the truth. it is
necessary,  says  Socrates, to "He who knew the truth would always know best how
to  discover  the resemblances of the truth." Such a man might be able, not only
to  please and so to persuade his audience, but also, perhaps, he might "be able
to say what is acceptable to God." The issue about rhetoric then at least so far
as  that issue concerns its being an art consistent with virtue seems to turn on
the admixture of pleasure and truth. The question is whether, given a particular
sort  of  audience  to  persuade,  the  orator  does  not have to choose between
pleasing them and telling them the truth. Does the art of rhetoric extend to the
persuasion of bad men as well as good? Is the skill of the orator to be measured
by his success in persuading, without regard to the character of the audience he
has  persuaded and the means he has been forced to use? Does the goodness of the
orator  and  of  his  speech  depend  upon his being morally virtuous as well as
rhetorically  skillful?  One  view of rhetoric seems to identify persuasion with
pleasure  and  to  divorce  it  from truth. Pascal, for example, in his essay On
Geometrical  Demonstration,  speaks  of "two methods, the one of convincing, the
other  of  pleasing "In order CHAPTER 81 .-RHETORIC to persuade, he writes, "one
must  consider  the person with whom one has to deal, whose spirit and heart one
must  know,  the  principles  he  accepts, the things he loves." In view of such
considerations,  Pascal  holds  that  "the  art  of  persuasion consists more in
pleasing  than  in  convincing,  to  such  an  extent  is  it  true that men are
controlled  more  by  whim  than  by reason.*' He does not doubt that "there are
rules  which  are  as  reliable  with  respect  to  pleasing  as  there  are for
demonstrating";  nor  does  he  seem  to condemn rhetoric for being such an art,
unless  he  writes  with  irony when he says that "pleasing is incomparably more
difficult,  more subtle, more useful, and more admirable." Rhetoric so conceived
appears to Locke to be a "powerful instrument of error and deceit"; and to Plato
to  be  no  art  at  all, but a form of flattery. As cookery tries to please the
palate  without  caring  what  is  good for the health of the body, so rhetoric,
according  to Plato, aims to delight without caring what is good for the soul or
the  state. Cookery and rhetoric are shams or simulations of the genuine arts of
medicine and politics, which aim at the good, not at pleasure. "This is the sort
of  thing,"  Socrates "which I term flattery, whether tells Callicles, concerned
with  the  body  or  the  soul, or whenever employed with a view to pleasure and
without  any  consideration  of  good  and  evil."  Socrates then asks Callicles
whether he knows rhetoricians who "aim at what is best . . . and seek to improve
the  citizens  by  their  speeches,"  or  whether all "are bent upon giving them
pleasure,  forgetting  the  public  good  in  the thought of their own interest,
playing  with  the  people as with children, and trying to amuse them, but never
considering whether they are better or worse for this."

When  Callicles  replies that he thinks "there are some who have a real care for
the  public  in  what  they  say,"  Socrates says that he is "contented with the
admission  that  rhetoric  is  of  two  sorts:  one,  which is mere flattery and
disgraceful  declamation; the other, which is noble and aims at the training and
improvement  of  the  souls  of  the  citizens, and strives to say what is best,
whether  welcome  or  unwelcome, to the audience." But, he asks Callicles, "have
you  ever  known  such  a  rhetoric;  or  if  you  have,  and  can point out any
rhetorician  of  this stamp, who is he?" SOCRATES MAY NOT be asking a rhetorical
question.  He  may  be  presenting  the defenders of rhetoric with this critical
dilemma:  either  the  orator adheres to the truth and aims at the good, even if
such  highmindedness  defeats his efforts at persuasion with an audience whom he
thus  displeases;  or  the  orator  takes persuasion as his end and subordinates
everything  else  to  the  rhetorical  means  for  succeeding  with  any sort of
audience. Bacon rises to the defense by rejecting the dilemma as ungenuine. "The
duty  and office of rhetoric," he writes, "is to apply reason to the imagination
for  the  better  moving  of the will." He admits that rhetoric is controlled by
other considerations than the truth. Though "logic handle th reason exact and in
truth,"  and  though  "the proofs and demonstrations of logic are toward all men
indifferent  and  the same . . . the proofs and persuasions of rhetoric ought to
differ  according  to  the  auditors."  Nevertheless, Bacon thinks "it was great
injustice  in  Plato, though springing out of a just hatred for the rhetoricians
of  his  time,  to regard rhetoric as a voluptuary art, resembling it to cookery
that  did  mar  wholesome  meats, and help unwholesome by a variety of sauces to
please  the  taste.  For  we see that speech is much more conversant in adorning
that  which is good than in coloring that which is evil; for there is no man but
speaketh  more  honestly than he can door think; and it was excellently noted by
Thucydides  in  Cleon, that because he used to hold on the bad side in causes of
state,  therefore  he  was  ever  inveighing  against  eloquence and good speech
knowing  that  no  man  can  speak fair of courses sordid and base." Aristotle's
defense  of rhetoric seems to be implied in the remark that "its function is not
simply  to  succeed in persuading, but rather to discover the means of coming as
near  such  success  as the circumstances of each case allow." Just as, for him,
the  sophist  differs  from  the  dialectician  not in the skills of argument or
dispute,  but  in  moral purpose or respect for truth, so the name "rhetorician"
may  be  applied to two sorts of men. Rhetoric may signify "either the speaker's
knowledge  of  his  art,  or  his moral THE GREAT purpose." For want of separate
names, both the honest and the sophistical orator are called and can claim to be
"rhetoricians," and it is this which confuses the issue.

IN  THE  TRADITION  of  the  great  books, Aristotle's Rhetoric occupies a place
comparable  to  that  which,  as  noted  in  the  chapter on POETRY, his Poetics
unquestionably  fills.  It  seems  to  be  not merely the first but the standard
treatise  on  oratory.  It divides rhetoric into three parts the first concerned
with  invention, the second with the disposition or order of a speech, the third
with  problems  of  expression. To the last of these belongs the analysis of the
orator's  use of language and his style in speaking; to the second, the analysis
of  the  structure of an oration into such parts as proem, statement, argu mcnt,
and  epilogue;  and  to  the  first,  under  the  head of invention, belongs the
consideration of the means of persuasion. As we have already noted, the artistic
means  of  persuasion are, according to Aristotle, threefoldemotions, character,
and argument. The orator must consider how to arouse and use the passions of his
audience,  as well as calculate how far to go in displaying his own emotions. He
must  consider the moral character of the audience to which he is appealing, and
in this connection he must try to exhibit his own moral character in a favorable
light.  Finally,  he  must  know  the  various  types  and sources of rhetorical
argument not only what sorts of argument arc available for a particular purpose,
but  also  how  to employ each argument most persuasively. In this last respect,
Aristotle  distinguishes  rhetorical  proof  from rhetorical inductionthe use of
what  he  calls the "enthymeme" as opposed to the use of examples and he relates
this distinction to the difference between dialectical proof and induction which
he treats in the Topics. Cicero andQuintilian may extend Aristotle's analysis in
certain  directions,  but  neither  they  nor  modern  writers like Campbell and
Whately  depart  far  from the framework Aristotle sets up for the discussion of
oratory.   Even  those  who  reject  Aristotle's  authority  in  logic,  natural
philosophy,  and  metaphysics  pay him the tribute of following (as does Hobbes)
his treatment of oratory, or of approving (as does Bacon) his IDEAS contribution
to  rhetoric.  In  the  case of this science, as with few others, Bacon finds no
serious  deficiencies  in  the  accepted tradition. He calls rhetoric "a science
excellent and excellently well labored," and places "the emulation of Aristotle"
first  among  the  causes  why later writers "in their works of rhetorics exceed
themselves."  Yet  by  another  standard  Aristotle's  Rhetoric  may  be  judged
deficient.  Because  he  confines  his  attention almost exclusively to oratory,
Aristotle's  discussion leaves rhetoric in a larger sense almost untouched. This
limitation of rhetoric to the subject matter of oratory does not go unexplained.
"Every  other  art,"  Aristotle  writes, "can instruct or persuade about its own
particular  subject  matter;  for  instance,  medicine about what is healthy and
unhealthy,  geometry  about  the  properties  of  magnitudes,  arithmetic  about
numbers,  and the same is true of the other arts and sciences. But rhetoric," he
says,  "we look upon as the power of observing the means of persuasion on almost
any  subject  presented  to us." This last statement would seem to give rhetoric
complete  generality.  Aristotle qualifies it, however. "People fail to notice,"
he  says,  "that  the  more  correctly  they handle their particular subject the
further  they  are  getting  away  from  pure  rhetoric." So far as knowing good
arguments  and  knowing  how  to  use  them are concerned, the physicist and the
mathematician  need no help from rhetoric. The art of rhetoric is necessary only
in dealing with such topics as do not fall within the subject matters or systems
of the established arts and sciences. Such topics are precisely those with which
the  orator  must deal. "The duty of rhetoric," Aristotle writes in summary, "is
to deal with such matters as we deliberate upon without arts or systems to guide
us,  in  the  hearing  of  persons  who cannot take in at a glance a complicated
argument,  or follow a long chain of reasoning." This is his answer to those who
have  given  rhetoric  "a far wider subject matter than strictly belongs to it."
But  Aristotle's  explanation of his limitation of rhetoric is itself limited to
only  one  of  its  major  parts,  namely,  the  construction  of  arguments. As
contrasted  with  the  mathematician,  the physician, and the philosopher, whose
mastery  of  the subject matter of their arts or sci- CHAPTERSTh: RH ences gives
them  a  command  of  the  relevant principles and methods of argument, only the
orator  needs  the  special  art of rhetoric to provide him with the topics from
which  examples  and enthymemes can be drawn and to give him skill in the use of
such  arguments.  But  it is not only the orator who must consider the character
and  emotions  of  his audience. It is not only the orator who must consider the
best way in which to order the parts of an elaborate discourse. Above all, it is
not only the orator who is faced with the problem of using language more or less
effectively in the expression of thought, and especially in its communication to
others.  All  these considerations and problems are common to the orator and the
teacher.  They are considerations and problems which must be faced not merely by
the  public speaker who tries to move an audience to action, but by anyone poet,
philosopher,  or  scientist  who  tries  to  write  whatever  he  has  to say as
effectively  as  possible.  Competence in a particular art or science may give a
man  competence with respect to arguments in the field of his particular subject
matter,  but it does not seem to give him competence with respect to these other
considerations  and  problems,  which  he faces when he tries to communicate his
knowledge  or thought. Here, then, is the possibility of a broader conception of
the  art  of  rhetoric  an art concerned not merely with being persuasive in the
sphere  of  action,  but  with  eloquence  or effectiveness in the expression of
thought.

We  find  this  view of rhetoric reflected in Chaucer's Canterbury Tales. In his
Prologue,  the Franklin asks his companions "to forgive his crude speech" ; for,
he  explains,  "I  never learned rhetoric, to tell you the truth; whatever I say
must  be  blunt  and  plain.  I never slept on Mount Parnassus or studied Marcus
Tullius  Cicero." And the Squire apologizes for the inadequacy of his English to
describe  the  beauty  of  Canace.  "It would take an excellent rhetorician," he
says,  "who  knew  his colorful figures of speech, to describe her adequately.*'
Though  Aristotle's  Rhetoric for the most part neglects this broader conception
of  rhetoric  in  order  to  expound the rules of oratory, the third book of his
treatise, which deals with the use of language, indicates that problems of style
are common to oratory ETORIC and poetry and to other types of discourse as well.

Kant  seems  to  hold this broader conception of rhetoric when he says that "the
arts of speech are rhetoric and poetry" In the tradition of western thought, the
two  arts  tend  to become identified when each is separated from any particular
subject  matter. As appears in the chapter on POETRY, poetry like rhetoric has a
broader  and  a  narrower meaning. In the narrower meaning, it is the art of the
narrative,  just as in its narrower meaning, rhetoric is the art of oratory. The
other sense in which poetics as an art can be understood is, according to Bacon,
with  respect  to  words,  not  matter. "In this sense," he writes, "it is but a
character  of  style, and belongeth to arts of speech." In this sense the poetic
art  is hardly distinguishable from the rhetorical art. The problems involved in
composing  a  good  speech  are not the same as those involved in writing a good
poem  (or  what  Bacon calls a "feigned history"). But when poetics and rhetoric
are  each separated from such problems to become the arts of writing or speaking
well about anything, then, in becoming as general as discourse itself, they tend
to  become  one  and  the  same  art  an  art  of style or expression, an art of
preaching  or  teaching  the  truth  about any matter on which one mind seeks to
communicate  with another. IN THE TRADITION of the great books, no book does for
the  art  of  rhetoric in general what Aristotle's Rhetoric does for that art in
the  limited  sphere  of oratory. But Augustine's treatise On Christian Doctrine
engages  in  a  general  rhetorical  analysis  that  is  in  a way comparable to
Aristotle's  analysis  of  oratory.  In  this  work  Augustine  brings  his  own
professional  training  as  an  orator  to  bear  on  the  problems  of reading,
interpreting,  and expounding Sacred Scripture. The fact that he is dealing with
Sacred  Scripture  and  hence,  in  his  view,  with  the  teaching  of the most
fundamental  truths, lifts him above the limited concerns of the orator; but the
fact  that  he  limits  himself  to  Sacred  Scripture  also  prevents  him from
formulating  his  rules  of  interpretation  and  exposition  with  the complete
generality  they would have to possess in order to be the rules of a general art
of  rhetoric.  At  the  opening  of the fourth book of Chris- 652 (tan Doctrine,
Augustine  declares  that, having considered in the preceding books "the mode of
ascertaining  the  proper  meaning" of Scripture, he will now treat "the mode of
making known the meaning when it is ascertained." He disclaims any intention "to
lay  down  rules  of  rhetoric";  he  wishes merely "to engage it on the side of
truth."  To this end he tries to show how Scripture itself, and such holy men as
St.

Cyprian  and  St.  Ambrose  in commenting on Scripture, have employed the art of
rhetoric. "It is the duty," Augustine writes, "of the interpreter and teacher of
Holy  Scripture  . . . both to teach what is right and refute what is wrong; and
in  the  performance  of  this  task  to  conciliate  the  hostile, to rouse the
careless, and to tell the ignorant both what is occurring at present and what is
probable  in the future. But once his hearers are friendly, attentive, and ready
to  learn,  whether  he  has  found  them  so,  or has himself made them so, the
remaining  obin whatever way the jects are to be carried out case requires." The
first  rule  of  a  general  rhetoric  would  thus  seem to be one of creating a
receptive  frame  of mind in the persons being addressed. This accomplished, the
teacher  must  proceed  with  various alternatives in mind. "If the hearers need
teaching,"  Augustine writes, "the matter treated of must be made fully known by
means  of  narrative.  On  the  other hand, to clear up points that are doubtful
requires reasoning and the exhibition of proofs.

If,  however,  the hearers require to be roused rather than instructed, in order
that  they  may  be  diligent  to  do  what  they  already know, is needed. Here
engreater vigor of speech treaties and reproaches, exhortations and upbraidings,
and  all  the  other means of rousing the emotions, are necessary." In Scripture
and its great commentators, Augustine finds "wisdom not aiming at eloquence, yet
eloquence  not shrinking from wisdom." He also finds examples of the three kinds
of  style  which  Cicero  had  distinguished the eloquence of those "who can say
little  things  in  a  subdued  style, moderate things in a temperate style, and
great  things  in  a majestic style." These three styles Augustine connects with
the three ends which Cicero had assigned to eloquence teaching, giving pleasure,
and  moving.  The  subdued  style,  he  says,  should  be used "in order to give
instruction,"  the temperate style "in order to give pleasure," and the majestic
style "in order to sway the mind."

The great books of history, science, and philosophy provide additional materials
for  general  rhetorical analysis. They offer us the light of examples at least,
even  if  they  do  not,  like  Augustine's commentary on Scripture, give us the
guidance of rules. Such historians as Herodotus, Thucydides, Tacitus, and Gibbon
exhibit  a  diversity  of styles in the writing of history. The diversity is not
only  on  the  grammatical level of the use of language, but also on the logical
level  of order and argument. Rhetorical principles control the way in which the
language  and  the organization of the parts are suited to each other and to the
historian's  purposeto  the effect he wishes to produce upon his reader. The way
in  which Euclid writes the Elements is a style of exposition, having rhetorical
as  well  as  logical  features. In its rhetorical (if not its strictly logical)
form  it  is  applicable to other subject matters. This may be seen in Spinoza's
adoption  of  it  in  his  Ethics  and  in  Newton's  adaptation  of  it  in his
Mathematical  Principles  of  Natural  Philosophy. The dialogue form which Plato
seems  to  have  invented  for  writing  philosophy  appears to recommend itself
rhetorically  not  only  to  other  philosophers,  but  also to a scientist like
Galileo  in  the  composition  of  his Two New Sciences. If the doctrines of the
Summa  Theologica or of the Critique of Pure Reason were separated from the very
special  styles of these two works, they would probably not have the same effect
upon  the  reader;  and  as  they  are  written,  they  affect different readers
differently,  as  differently  as  do  the  styles  of  Dante, Milton, Melville,
Dostoevsky,  Adam  Smith,  and Karl Marx. Some methods of exposition may be more
appropriate than others to certain subject matters. "There is a great difference
in  the  delivery  of  mathematics," says Bacon, "and of politics." But in every
subject  matter or field of learning, there is the common problem of how to make
language serve most effectively to enlighten or convince in the communication of
thought.  The  problem  arises in the writing of a single sentence as well as in
the organization of a whole discourse.

CHAPTER  81  .-RH  THE  CHOICE  OF  WORDS  and  the  formation of new words, the
invention  and  employment  of  figures  of  speech,  by  which  abbreviation or
amplification  of  discourse may be achieved and the imagination freshened these
are  some  of the considerations of style which Aristotle discusses (both in his
Rhetoric  and in his Poetics) and which Augustine illustrates in his analysis of
Scripture.  They  suggest the rules of a general rhetoric, founded on principles
as  universal  as  Pascal's  insight  that  "words  differently  arranged have a
different  meaning,  and meanings differently arranged have a different effect."
This observation indicates a further answer to the question raised much earlier,
namely,  why  the art of rhetoric is needed over and above the skills of grammar
and  logic.  For  oratory  the  question has been answered by reference to those
rules of rhetoric which deal with the passions and with moral character. But for
a  more  general  rhetoric,  concerned with all discourse, the answer must be in
terms of rules of style of the sort Pascal's observation suggests.

If  there  were  never  more than one grammatically and logically correct way of
saying  anything,  then  grammatical and logical standards would suffice for the
regulation  of  sound discourse. But if there are always several ways of stating
something  and  if  each  of  them satisfies the rules of grammar and logic, but
differs  in  the impression it makes on the mind, then criteria other than those
of  grammar  and  logic  will be needed to determine our choice of which to use.
Such  criteria  may take the passions and the imagination into account, but they
may  also look primarily to the manner in which the mind itself naturally works.
The  fact  that  there are several ways of presenting the same truth to the mind
and  usually  several  ways  in  which the mind can interpret the same statement
defines  the  scope of a general rhetoric and the relation of its rules to those
of  grammar and logic. Nevertheless, some of the great authors seem to doubt the
worth  of rhetoric in science or philosophy. Locke, for example, admits that "in
discourses  where  we  seek  pleasure  and  delight  rather than information and
improvement,  such * ornaments" as 'figurative speeches and allu- ETORIC sion in
language"  "can  scarce  pass  for  faults. But," he adds, "if we would speak of
things  as  they  are, we must allow that all the art of rhetoric, besides order
and  clearness, all the artificial and figurative application of words eloquence
hath  invented,  are  for  nothing  else  but to insinuate wrong ideas, move the
passions, and so, indeed, are perfect cheats . . . and where truth and knowledge
are  concerned,  cannot  but be thought a great fault, either of the language or
person that makes use of them." Descartes also declares that "those who have the
strongest  power  of reasoning, and who most skilfully arrange their thoughts in
order  to  render them clear and intelligible, have the best power of persuasion
even if they can but speak the language of Lower Britanny and have never learned
rhetoric." Yet he qualifies this severity somewhat by identifying dialectic with
rhetoric  and  granting  its "possible use ... to serve to explain at times more
easily  to  others  the  truths we have already ascertained." Plato for the most
part  tends  in  the  opposite  direction,  keeping dialectic and rhetoric poles
apart.  But  if  there  were  a  true as opposed to a false rhetoric, a rhetoric
concerned with knowledge and truth, not merely opinion and pleasure, he would be
willing,  it seems, to admit it to the company of dialectic, and regard it as an
aid in the teaching, if not the discovery, of the truth. The pedagogical utility
of  rhetoric as well as dialectic appears in the summary which Socrates gives to
Phaedrus,  after  they have finished examining the speeches about love. "Until a
man  knows  the  truth  of  the  several  particulars  of which he is writing or
speaking,"  Socrates  says,  "and is able to define them as they are, and having
defined them again to divide them until they can no longer be divided, and until
in  like  manner  he is able to discern the nature of the soul, and discover the
different  modes  of  discourse  which  are adapted to different natures, and to
arrange  and  dispose  them  in such a way that the simple form of speech may be
addressed  to  the simpler nature, and the complex and the composite to the more
complex  nature  until he has accomplished all this, he will be unable to handle
arguments  according  to  rules of art ... either for the purpose of teaching or
persuading."

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature and scope of rhetoric
   1a. The distinction of rhetoric     from dialectic and sophistry: the rhetorician and the
   philosopher
   1b. The relation of rhetoric to grammar, logic, and psychology
   1c. The relation of rhetoric to the arts of government: the orator and the statesman

2. The function of rhetoric in expository, speculative, and poetic discourse
   2a. The devices of rhetoric: figures of speech; the extension and contraction of dis-
   course
   2b. The canon of excellence in style
   2c. Methods of exposition in history, science, philosophy, and theology
   2d. Principles of interpretation: the modes of meaning

3. The role of rhetoric as concerned with persuasion in the sphere of action: the analysis
of oratory
   3a. The kinds of oratory: deliberative, forensic, epidcictic
   TJb.
   The structure of an oration: the order of its parts
   3b. The use of language for persuasion: oratorical style

4. The        means of persuasion: the distinction between artistic and inartistic means
   4a. The orator's consideration of character and of the types of audience: the signifi-
   cance of his own character
   4b. The orator's treatment of emotion: his display of emotion; the arousal of his
   audience
   4c. Rhetorical argument: the distinction between persuasion and demonstration
   (1) Rhetorical induction: the use of examples
   (2) Rhetorical proof: the use of enthymcmes
   (3) The topics or commonplaces which are the source of premises: the orator's
   knowledge of various subject matters
   The evaluation of oratory and the orator: the justification of rhetorical means by the
   end of success in persuasion
   4d. The purpose
   of oratory and the exigencies of truth
   5^.
   The orator's concern with justice, law, and the good: the moral virtue of the
   orator

6. The education of the orator: the schools of rhetoric

7. The history of oratory: its importance under various social conditions and in different
forms of government

8. Examples of excellence in oratory

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: The general consideration of the liberal arts, see ART 4; EDUCATION 50; and
for t

of rhetoric to such liberal arts as grammar and logic, see LANGUAGE ra-1b,

The role of rhetoric in the sphere of philosophy, and its relation to or dis

dialectic and sophistry, see DIALECTIC 5; PHILOSOPHY 6b; TRUTH 40Th.

The function of oratory in the sphere of politics, see DEMOCRACY 7a; EMOTION

8d(2).

Discussions relevant to the broad conception of rhetoric as the art of achie

and effectiveness in any sort of discourse, and as concerned with probl

principles of interpretation, see LANGUAGE 33, 6, 12; POETRY 8b-8c; SIG

4c-4d.

Discussions relevant to the narrow conception of rhetoric as the art of orat

concerned with the means of persuasion in the sphere of action, see EMO

3a-3b; INDUCTION 4b; REASONING 5d; TRUTH 4d.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books of the Western World, bu

idea and with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into

topics

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collect

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the work

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of T

I.

TACITUS. A Dialogue on Oratory ISOCRATES. Aegineticu PLUTARCH. "Lives of the Ten
Orators," in Moralia .

Against the AUGUSTINE. Divine Providence and the Problem of .

Panegyricus

Evil . Antidosis

The Harmony of the Gospels

. DEMOSTHENES. Philippi HOBBES. The Whole Art of Rhetoric CICERO. Orations ones,
320c-321b  84d-385b;  427a-c;  564b-c  ;  428c-d;  574b-575d;  577b-d; and Fall,
381a-d;  408dm  Shandy,  255a-256a; 393aINDEPENDENCE: [1-6] la; and Fall, 25b-c;
64a-c;  269bDid(,  30a  36b  and  Peace,  BK  HI, 149d-150a; c; BK x, 415b-416c;
426a-430b   66b-467a;  BK  xi,  482b-484c;  65a-b;  566a-c;  572b-573b;  mmunist
Manifesto, 415ac -c; BK xii, 533a-534d; 536athers Karamazov, BK vi, n, 369a-398d
he relation 8; LOGIC }b. tinction from 5d; STATE ving eloquence ems of style and
N  AND  SYMBOL  ory,  and as TION 5d; HONOR t relevant to the two groups: ion. s
cited, consult he Great Ideas. II. s Sophists cs CICERO. DC Oratorc (On Oratory)

. Brutus

. Orator LONGINUS. On the Sublime QUINTILIAN. Institutio Oratoria (Institutes of
Oratory),

BK. II-VI, VIII, X-XII

DEMETRIUS.  On  Style  ALCUIN.  Rhetoric  T.  WILSON. Arte ofRhetorique FLNELON.
Dialogues on Eloquence LA BRUYERE. "Of the Works of the Mind," in Characters

J.  HARRIS.  Hermes,  or  A  Philosophical  Inquiry Concerning Universal Grammar
BUFFON. Discours sur le style

VOLTAIRE.  "Style,"  in A Philosophical Dictionary W. G. HAMILTON. Parliamentary
Logic G. CAMPBELL. Philosophy of Rhetoric BLAIR. Lectures on Rhetoric and Belles
Lettres BENTHAM. The Boof( of Fallacies

AS   DE   QUINCEY.   Rhetoric   WHATELY.   Elements   of  Rhetoric  T.  CARLYLE.
"Stump-Orator,"  in  Latter  -Day  Pamphlets SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and
Idea, VOL n, SUP, CH II . "The Art of Controversy," in Complete

Essays  LEWES.  The Principles of Success in Literature EMERSON, "Eloquence," in
Society and Solitude VERLAINE. Art poStique PATER. An Essay on Style BRUNETIERE.
An  Apology  for Rhetoric CROCE. Aesthetic as Science of Expression ."On Telling
the Truth," in The Conduct of

Life BUCHANAN. Symbolic Distance .The Doctrine of Signatures

RICHARDS. The Philosophy of Rhetoric .

Interpretation in Teaching
