Chapter 84:

INTRODUCTION

nature of sensation seems at first to be THE as obvious as its existence. In the
tradition of the great books there may be controversy concerning the existence
of sense in plants as well as in animals, and there may be controversy over the
existence in man of faculties higher than sense. But no one disputes that men
and other animals are endowed with a power of sense. The extent of this power
may be questioned, but not the fact that animals and men, when awake, experience
sensations or perceive through their senses. Sleep, according to Aristotle,can
occur only in those living things which have the power of sense-perception. "If
there be an animal not endowed with senseperception, it is impossible that this
should either sleep or wake, since both these are affections of the activity of
the primary faculty of sense-perception." The existence of the sensible of an
external something which causes sensation and can be sensed also seems to escape
denial or dispute.

The existence of a purely intelligible reality of a world of immaterial things
incapable of being sensed is subject to debate in all periods of western
thought. The sensible world is sometimes regarded as the only reality; sometimes
it g is regarded as mere seeming, or appearance, in s comparison with the
reality of purely intelli- i gible being. Men may also differ on the question
whether things possess sensible qualities t when they are not being sensed. But
with few w exceptions, notably Berkeley and Hume, the existence of a sensible
world of material things o is not denied or seriously doubted. w The
controversies and issues indicated above are, for the most part, discussed
elsewhere. The t chapter on ANIMAL considers the sensitivity of s plants. There
also, as well as in the chapters on t MAN, IDEA, and MIND, is considered the
distinc- o tion between the senses and the higher faculties of reason or
intellect. The chapter on MEMORY AND IMAGINATION deals with these two functions
in their relation to sense and sense-perception; and the contrast between
sensible and intelligible reality is discussed in the chapters on BEING, FORM,
IDEA, and MATTER. Some of these topics necessarily recur here, especially as
they bear on what for this chapter are the primary problems the nature of
sensation, the analysis of the power of sense, and the character of the
knowledge which is afforded by the senses. As WE HAVE ALREADY observed, no
difficulty seems to arise at first concerning the nature of sensation. It is
supposed by many inquirers, early and late in the tradition, that matter is
sensitive as well as sensible. Animals have sense-organs which react to physical
stimulation. Bodies either act directly upon the senseorgans, as in the case of
touch and taste; or, as in the case of vision, hearing, and smell, they exert
their influence through an intervening medium, yet in a manner which seems to be
no less the action and reaction of bodies. Those who distinguish between living
oranisms and inanimate bodies tend to regard ensitivity as a property of living
matter, but t does not follow for all who make this distinction that other than
material factors are needed o explain sensation. On the contrary, some riters
seem to think that the motions of matter account for sensation as readily as the
laws f mechanics account for all the sensible changes e are able to perceive.
Lucretius, for example, holds that living hings consist of body and soul, and
that the oul (or mind) differs from the body only in he size, the fineness of
texture, and the mobility f the material particles which compose it. It CHAPTER
84: S is, he says, "by the common motions of the two" body and soul that
"sensation is kindled and fanned throughout our flesh." Sensation occurs when
the particles of body and soul together are set in motion by the impact of
external bodies upon the organs of sense. "When the pupil of the eye receives in
itself a certain kind of blow, it is said to perceive white color, and another
again when it perceives black." Similarly, "every kind of sound and voice is
heard when they have found their way into the ears and struck upon the sense
with their body; for that voice, too, and sound are bodily you must grant, since
they can strike on the senses." Either the external body itself, as in touch,
strikes the sense and sets up those bodily motions in the animal which are
sensation; or, according to Lucretius, minute replicas or images composed of
atoms, as all things are fly off from the surface of distant bodies and enter
through the pores of our sense-organs to awaken in us vision, hearing, or smell.
In either case, sensation is a bodily reaction ; and, for Lucretius, imagination
and memory, even thought, are consequent motions in the atoms of the mind
further bodily reverberations, as it were, of sensation.

"The cause of sense," writes Hobbes, "is the external body or object, which
presses the organ proper to each sense, either immediately, as in taste and
touch, or mediately, as in seeing, hearing, and smelling; which pressure, by the
mediation of nerves, and other strings and membranes of the body, continues
inwards to the brain and heart, causes there a resistance or counter-pressure,
or endeavor of the heart, to deliver itself; which endeavor, because outward,
seems to be some matter without. And this seeming or fancy is that which men
call sense." The object seems to be colored or hot or sweet when it causes
certain sensations in us which are projected outward upon it, in response or
counter-action to the inward motions it sets up. But, says Hobbes, these
sensible qualities are, in the object, nothing but "so many several motions of
the matter by which it presses our organs diversely. Neither in us that are
pressed, are they anything else but diverse motions (for motion produces nothing
but motion)." ENSE THE FOREGOING THEORY, reducing sensation to bodily motion,
seems to draw its cogency from the fact that only bodies are sensible, that
sense-organs are bodily parts, and that senseorgans must be activated by some
sort of physical contact for sensations to occur. Some writers, like Descartes,
accept the theory for animals, but reject it for men; or they distinguish, in
the case of men, between thought and sensation. They regard sensation, with its
subsidiary functions of memory and imagination, as reducible to corporeal
motions, but refuse to grant that external sense-impressions or interior fancy
can produce knowledge without the activity of an immaterial soul. To animals,
Descartes declares, "we can ascribe ... no knowledge at all, but only fancy of a
purely corporeal kind." In contrast, "that power by which we are said to know
things is purely spiritual, and not less distinct from every part of the body
than blood from bone, or hand from eye." In men as well as animals, the external
senses, "in so far as they are part of the body . . . perceive in virtue of
passivity alone, just in the way that wax receives an impression from a seal."
Fancy or imagination is also "a genuine part of the body"; and "memory, at least
that which is corporeal and similar to that of the brutes, is in no respect
distinct from imagination." These corporeal faculties are, according to
Descartes, of use to the understanding or the mind only when it "proposes to
examine something that can be referred to the body"; but if it "deal with
matters inwhich there is nothing corporeal or similar to the corporeal, it
cannot be helped by those faculties." Hence, for Descartes, the "mind can act
independently of the brain; for certainly the brain can be of no use in pure
thought; its only use is for imagining and perceiving." For others, like William
James, the distinction between sensation and thought, so far as their relation
to matter is concerned, seems quite untenable. He objects to those who look upon
sensational consciousness as "something kttfltf-material, hardly cognitive,
which one need not much wonder about," while they regard rational consciousness
as "quite the reverse, and the mystery of it [as] unspeakable." We can correlate
consciousness with the brain's THE GREAT workings only in an empirical fashion,
James thinks, and we ought to confess that "no glimmer of explanation of it is
yet in sight. That brains should give rise to a knowing consciousness at all,
this is the one mystery which returns, no matter of what sort the consciousness
or of what sort the knowledge may be. Sensations, aware of mere qualities,
involve the mystery as much as thoughts, aware of complex systems, involve it."

Still others, like Plotinus and Aristotle, think that the mystery of conscious
matter is not essentially different from the mystery of living matter, for if
there is anything mysterious about nutrition and growth, or sensation and
imagination, it consists in the same thing the union of material and immaterial
principles, of body and soul.

"If the soul were a corporeal entity," Plotinus writes, "there could be no
sense-perception, no mental act, no knowledge. ... If the sentient be a material
entity (as we are invited to believe), sensation could only be of the order of
seal-impressions struck by a ring on wax."

Perception is not a passively received impression.It is, according to Plotinus,
an act of awareness "determined by the nature and character of the living being
in which it occurs. . . . In any perception we attain by sight, the object is
grasped there where it lies in the direct line of vision. . The mind looks
outward; this is . . ample proof that it has taken and takes no inner imprint,
and does not see in virtue of some mark made upon it, like that of the ring on
the wax; it need not look outward at all if, even as it looked, it already held
the image of the object, seeing by virtue of an impression made upon itself."
According to Aristotle, "two characteristic marks have above all others been
recognized as distinguishing that which has soul in it from that which has
notself- movement and sensation." By self-movement he appears to mean such
things as the nutrition and growth which is found in plants, as well as the
additional animal faculty of local motion. Both self-movement and sensation
require soul as well as body.

"Nothing grows or decays naturally," he writes, "except what feeds itself, and
nothing feeds itself except what has a share of soul in it." So, too, "nothing
except what has soul in IDEAS it is capable of sensation," But "the exercise of
sense-perception does not belong to soul or body exclusively." Sensation "is not
an affection of the soul" by itself, nor has a soulless body "the potentiality
of perception." BUT, ARISTOTLE ASKS, are all affections of the soul "affections
of the complex of body and soul, or is there any one among them peculiar to the
soul by itself? ... If we consider the majority of them, there seems to be no
case in which the soul can act or be acted upon without involving the body;
e.g., anger, courage, appetite, and sensation generally. Thinking seems to be
the most probable exception; but if this too proves to be a form of imagination,
or to be impossible without imagination, it too requires a body as a condition
of its existence." Aquinas tries to answer the question Aristotle asks, with a
threefold distinction which I places sensation and imagination midway between
the vegetative functions and rational thought. The power of thought, or "the
intellectual power," Aquinas says, "does not belong to a corporeal organ, as the
power of seeing is the act of the eye; for understanding is an act which cannot
be performed by a corporeal organ, like the act of seeing." At the other extreme
from this "operation of the soul which so far exceeds the corporeal nature that
it is not even performed by any corporeal organ," are those "operations of the
soul . performed by a corporeal organ and by virtue . . of a corporeal quality."
Because it is a kind of self-movement, digestion requires soul as well as body,
but it is a corporeal action in the way in which, according to Aquinas, it
involves "the action of heat." Between these extremes, Aquinas places sensation
and imagination, operations "performed through a corporeal organ, but not
through a corporeal quality." He explains this further by means of a distinction
between natural and spiritual immutation physical and psychic change. "Natural
immutation takes place by the form of the thing which causes the immutation
being received, according to its natural existence, into the thing in which the
immutation is effected, as heat is received into the heated thing." Vegetative
activities, while remaining psychic in the sense of occurring only in living or
be- CHAPTER 84: souled matter, involve only natural immutations in the vital
organs involved. In contrast, "spiritual immutation takes place by the form of
the thing causing the immutation being received, according to a spiritual mode
of existence, into the thing in which the immutation is effected, as the form of
color is received into the eye, which does not thereby become colored." Though
some sensations may require a natural immutation of the senseorgan, as hot and
cold do, all sensations necessarily involve a spiritual immutation, which
enables the sense-organ to perform its proper act of knowing, as the eye knows
color without becoming colored. "Otherwise," Aquinas says, "if a natural
immutation alone sufficed for the sense's action, all natural bodies would feel
when they undergo alteration."

THESE DIVERSE VIEWS of the nature of sensation seem to be paralleled by diverse
views of the sensitive faculty. That the function of the senses is somehow to
apprehend or know does not seem to be disputed. But whether the sensesincluding
memory and imagination are the only faculty of knowing is an issue to which the
great books seem to give a variety of answers. The opposite answers appear to be
correlated, not only with conflicting positions in respect to body and soul, but
also with opposing theories of the distinction between men and other animals.
Those who hold that the motions of matter are adequate to explain the phenomena
of knowing and thinking, tend to make senseperception the primary function of
the mind and to treat not only memory and imagination, but also reasoning or
thought as subsequent activities of the same general faculty which receives
impressions from external sources in the first instance. Since other animals
possess senses and give evidence that perception in them has consequences for
memory and imagination, those who hold this view also tend to attribute thought
to animals and to regard man as differing from them only in degree. Those who
take the contrary view that knowing involves an immaterial principle or cause a
soul as well as a body tend to distinguish the various functions of sense from
the activities of thought such as conception, SENSE judgment, and reasoning.
They also take the position that man, while sharing sense-perception, memory,
and imagination with other animals, alone possesses the higher faculty. The
difference between men and brutes is thus conceived as one of kind, not of
degree, when the difference between the senses and the reason in man is also
conceived as a difference in kind. A functional relationship between sensation
and thought is not thereby denied, but a distinct facultyis affirmed to be
necessary for going beyond the apprehension of particulars to knowledge of the
universal, or for rising above the imagination to abstract thought. The
distinction between sense and reason as faculties of knowing is sometimes stated
in terms of a difference in their objects the particular versus the universal,
becoming versus being, the material versus the immaterial. Sometimes it is
stated in terms of the difference between a corporeal power requiring a bodily
organ and a spiritual power which belongs exclusively to the soul. Sometimes it
is stated in terms of the contrast between sense as intuitive and reason as
discursive, the one beholding its objects immediately, the other forming
concepts, judgments, or conclusions about objects which are either beheld by the
senses or cannot be intuitively apprehended at all. The exceptions to the
foregoing summary are almost as numerous as the exempli iica lions of the points
mentioned. Nothing less than this intricate pattern of agreements and
differences will serve, however, to represent the complexity of the discussion
and the way in which diverse theories of sense imply different views of nature
and man, of mind and knowledge. The situation can be illustrated by taking
certain doctrines which seem to be opposite on most points, and then considering
other theories which seem to agree, on this point or that, with both extremes.
WE HAVE ALREADY observed the opposition between Hobbes and Aquinas with regard
to matter and spirit in relation to the activity of the senses. Hobbes, like
Lucretius, not only treats all mental phenomena as manifestations of bodily
motion, but also reduces thought to the train or sequence of images. Images are
in turn reducible to the sensations from which they derive.

710 THE GREAT "As we have no imagination," Hobbes "whereof we have not formerly
had writes, sense, in whole or in parts; so we have no transition from one
imagination to another, whereof we never had the like before in our senses."

Using the word "thoughts" to stand for the images derived from sense, Hobbes
goes on to say that "besides sense, and thoughts, and the train of thoughts, the
mind of man has no other motion though by the help of speech and ; method, the
same faculties may be improved to such a height as to distinguish men from all
other living creatures."

Only man's use of words makes the difference in the exercise of the imagination
"that we generally call understanding," and which, according to Hobbes, "is
common to man and beast." Similarly, it is only the fact that common names have
general significance which human discourse the appearance of abgives stract
thought, for Hobbes denies abstract ideas. Thoughts or images are no less
particular than sensations, "there being nothing in the world universal but
names."

Berkeley and Hume seem to agree with Hobbes that man has no abstract ideas or
universal concepts; that the operations of all thought are merely elaborations
of the original impressions of sense; and that no special power, but only the
use of language, distinguishes men from other animals. Berkeley uses the word
"idea" to stand for sense-impressions "ideas actually imprinted on the senses"
and for whatever is "perceived by attending to the passions and operations of
the mind." To these two he adds a third: "ideas formed by the help of memory and
imagination, either compounding or dividing, or barely representing those
originally perceived in the aforesaid ways. "The only difference between the
first and the third is that "the ideas of sense are more strong, lively, and
distinct than those of the imagination." But our ideas of sense and imagination
do not cover all the objects of which we can think. He admits, therefore, the
possibility of our having notions, whereby we understand the meaning of a word
like "spirit" or "soul" which refers to a substance of which we can form no
idea. Hume divides "all the perceptions of the mind into two classes or species,
which are dis- IDEAS tinguished by their different degrees of force and
vivacity. The less forcible and lively are commonly denominated thoughts or
ideas" The other he calls "impressions," meaning thereby "all our more lively
perceptions." Impressions are the source of all other ideas, the creative power
of the mind consisting in "no more than the faculty of compounding, transposing,
augmenting, or diminishing the materials afforded us by the senses" and every
simple idea being "copied from a similar impression." Yet, though Berkeley and
Hume seem to agree with Hobbes in reducing all thought to primary
sense-perceptions and derived memories or imaginations, Hume does not attempt to
explain thought by the motions of matter.

Berkeley differs even more radically. He denies thatmatter or bodies exist, and
so he regards sense-perception, like all the rest of thought, as purely
spiritual. The soul passively receives its original impressions directly from
God and actively forms the ideas it is able to derive from these impressions.
NOR DO ALL THOSE who somehow conceive man as composed of both body and soul
agree upon the function of sense in relation to the rest of thought. Locke, for
example, uses "understanding" to cover all sorts of mental activity. Mental
activity begins with the passive reception of the simple ideas of sense the
impressions produced in us when "the bodies that surround us do diversely affect
our organs" and the simple ideas of reflection which arise from an awareness of
our own mental operations. But mental activity also includes the formation of
complex ideas by the compounding of simple ones,and even the act whereby we form
abstract ideas, in doing which man, in Locke's opinion, is distinguished from
brutes. All these activities require soul as well as body. All are somehow
nothing more than a reworking of the original sensations passively received. In
this last respect, Locke's view accords with that of Hobbes, Berkeley, and Hume,
though he differs from them with respect to abstract ideas and in his theory of
body and soul. On the very point which he holds in common with Hobbes, Berkeley,
and Hume, Locke seems to disagree with Descartes.

Thinking, for Descartes, is the activity of a CHAPTER 84 purely spiritual
substance the rational soulpeculiar to the dual nature of man; whereas sensation
and imagination, common to men and brutes, are purely corporeal functions. In
man, the soul or thinking substance may form certain of its ideas, those
relative to bodies, under the influence of sense or fancy; but with regard to
other ideas, such as those we have of geometrical figures, Descartes says he
cannot admit that they "have at any time entered our minds through the senses."
He objects to the use of the word "idea" for images, or what he calls "pictures
in the corporeal imagination, /'.., in some part of the brain." He criticizes
those who "never raise their minds above the things of sense," so accustomed are
they "to consider nothing except by imagining it," with the result that whatever
"is not capable of being imagined appears to them not to be intelligible at
all." Against the maxim which Locke, no less than Hobbcs or Berkeley, would
approve that "there is nothing in the understanding which has not first of all
been in the senses" Descartes offers the ideas of God and of the soul as in the
plainly contrary examples, ideas clearly mind which have no origin in sensation
or fancy.

"Those who desire to make use of their imagination to understand these ideas,"
he adds, "act in the same way as if, to hear sounds or smell odours, they should
wish to make use of their eyes." In making a sharp distinction between the
faculties of sense and understanding or reason, Descartes seems to share the
position of Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, Spinoza, and Kant. Yet for Descartes as
for Plato, the intellect in its own sphere of objects is like the senses in
theirs, since each is able to behold its proper objects intuitively; whereas for
Kant as for Aristotle, sense alone is a faculty of intuition. The ideas by which
we apprehend intelligible objects, according to Plato, Descartes, and Spinoza,
are not derived from sensations or images. According to Aristotle and Aquinas,
on the other hand, the intellect abstracts all its ideas, or universal concepts,
from the particulars of sense. In this respect Aristotle and Aquinas seem to be
in agreement with Locke, even though that agreement must be qualified by the
observa- : SENSE tion that Locke sees no need for a special faculty to obtain
abstract ideas. On the other hand, Plato, Aristotle, Aquinas, and Descartes all
seem to agree in holding that understanding is as immaterial as its objects.
Unlike sense, which requires bodily organs, rational thought is, according to
them, an activity peculiar either to the soul itself or to a power of the soul
which is not embodied in an organ, as the power of vision is embodied in the eye
or the powers of memory and imagination are embodied in the brain. William James
denies this, I le holds the view that all forms of consciousness arc somehow
functions of the brain. Yet he also insists that percept and concept are
radically distinct forms of consciousness. To this extent, James makes as sharp
a separation as the authors above mentioned between the sensory and the rational
phases of thought. He places sensation, perception, memory and imagination on
one side, and conception, judgment, and reasoning on the other. But this is for
him not a distinction of faculties or powers, but only of different functions
which one and the same mind is able to perform. CERTAIN POINTS OR problems in
the traditional discussion of sense are unaffected by the basic issues just
considered. For example, most writers tend to make some distinction between the
special exterior senses, such as vision and hearing, touch and taste, and the
several interior senses, which Aquinas enumerates as the common sense, memory,
imagination, and the estimative or cogitative powers. Yet not all who consider
memory and imagination as activities consequent upon sense-perception call them
"interior senses." Not all recognize a distinct estimative or cogitative power
even when they recognize a kind of thinking about particulars done by animals
and men with sensory materials. Nor do all who discuss discrimination or
comparison, and the collation or combining of the impressions received from the
special senses, attribute these functions to the special faculty which Aristotle
first calls "the common sense." Frequently the same analytical point is made in
different ways. As indicated in the chapter on QUALITY, the distinction which
Aristotle and Aquinas make between proper and common scnsibles, according as the
quality, such as color and odor, belongs to a single sense, or, likeshape and
motion, can be perceived by two or more senses, seems to parallel the
distinction between what Locke calls "secondary" and "primary" qualities. But
where Locke and others treat the so-called "secondary qualities" as entirely
subjective, occurring only in the experience of the sentient organism and having
no reality in the sensible thing, Aristotle takes a contrary view. When it is
not actually seen or smelled, the sensible thing, according to Aristotle, is
potentially colorful or odoriferous; just as when it is not actually seeing or
smelling, the sense of vision or smell is also in a state of potentiality with
respect to these qualities. But when the sensible thing actually sensed, then,
is Aristotle says, "the actuality of the sensible object and of the sensitive
faculty is one actuality." The thing is actually colored when it is actually
seen, though it is only potentially colored when it is merely able to be so
seen.

"Earlier students of nature," he writes, "were mistaken in their view that
without sight there was no white or black, without taste no savor.

This statement of theirs is partly true, partly 1 false: 'sense' and 'the
sensible object arc ambiguous terms, /., they may denote either potentialities
or actualities. The statement is true of the latter, false of the former."

Another example of the same analytical point (which is made differently by
different writers) concerns the distinction between sensation and perception.
According to William fames, "perception involves sensation as a portion of
itself, and sensation in turn never takes place in adult life without perception
also being there." The difference between them is that the function of sensation
is "that of mere acquaintance with a fact," whereas "perception's function ...
is knowledge about a fact, and this knowledge admits of numberless degrees of
complication." Hearing a sound is having a sensation, but perception occurs
when, as James points out, we "hear a sound, and say 'a " horse-car.' But James
does not agree that, when perception is so described, it is, as other
psychologists have suggested, a species of reasoning. "If, ev- AS ery time a
present sign suggests an absent reality to our mind, we make an inference, and
if every time we make an inference we reason; then," James admits, "perception
is indubitably reasoning. Only one sees no room in it for any unconscious part."
No inference is consciously made in perception; and James thinks that "to call
perception unconscious reasoning is either a useless metaphor, or a positively
misleading confusion between twodifferent things." In his opinion, "perception
differs from sensation [simply] by the consciousness of further facts associated
with the object of sensation." For him, "perception and reasoning are coordinate
varieties of that deeper sort of process known psychologically as the
association of ideas." What James treats as the object of sensation, Aristotle
refers to as a quality sensed by one or more of the special senses, either a
proper or a common sensible. What James treats as the object of perception,
Aristotle calls an "accidental object of sense," because it is strictly not
sensible at all by any of the exterior senses, singly or in combination. When we
call "the white object we see" the son of Diarcs or a man, we have an example of
an accidental sensible or an " object incidentally perceived, because 'being the
son of Diares' is incidental to the directly visible white patch" we see with
our eyes. This distinction between sensation and perception seems to have a
bearing on the problem of the fallibility of the senses. Again the same point
seems to be differently made. Aristotle, for example, holds that whereas each of
the senses is normally infallible in the apprehension of its proper object or
appropriate quality, error is possible in the perception of the complex thing
which is not strictly an object of the special senses. "While the perception
that there is white before us cannot be false," he writes, "the perception that
what is white is this or that may be false." Lucretius likewise insists that the
senses themselves are never deceived, but that all the errors attributed to the
senses are the result of a false inference or judgment which reason makes on the
basis of the evidence presented by the senses. That also seems to be the opinion
of Descartes, who thinks that "no direct experience can ever deceive the
understanding if CHAPTER 84 accurately to the object it restricts its attention
presented to it. ... Thus if a man suffering from jaundice persuades himself
that the things he sees are yellow, this thought of his will be composite,
consisting partly of what his imagination presents to him, and partly of what he
assumes on his own account, namely, that the color looks yellow, not owing to
the defect in his eye, but because the things he sees really are yellow. We can
go wrong only when the . . . things we believe are in some way compounded by
ourselves." Descartes holds that "no falsity can reside" in sensations
themselves, but only in those judgments which, on the basis of sensations, we
are "accustomed to pass about things external to us."

THE MOST FUNDAMENTAL judgment which men make on the basis of sensation is that
an external world exists a reality not of our own making. Descartes argues from
the evidence of the senses to the independent existence of a world of bodies.
Though Berkeley argues, on the contrary, that bodies do not exist except as
objects of perception, he attributes the senseimpressions, over which we seem to
have no control, to the action of an external cause to God, who uses them as
signs for instructing us. Locke defines sensitive knowledge as that which
informs us of "the existence of things actually present to our senses." We may
know

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of sense 71 5
 1a. The power of sense as distinct from the power of understanding or reason
 1b. Sense and intellect in relation to becoming and being, particulars and universals
 1c. The distinction between perception or intuition and judgment or reasoning: the
 transcendental forms of intuition
 1d. Sense-perception as a primary function of the mind or understanding: sensations
 as received impressions; the distinction between sensation and reflection,
 ideas and notions, percepts and concepts

2. Sensitivity in relation to the grades of life
2a The differentiation of animals from plants in terms of sensitivity
.
 2a. The degrees of sensitivity in the animal kingdom: the genetic order of the
 several senses
 2b. Comparisons of human and animal sensitivity

3. The analysis of the power of sense:
its organs and activities
 3a. The anatomy and physiology of the senses: the special sense-organs, nerves, brain
 3b. The distinction between the exterior and interior senses
 (1) Enumeration of the exterior senses: their relation and order
 (2) Enumeration of the interior senses: their dependence on the exterior senses
 3c. The activity of the exterior senses
 (1) The functions of the exterior senses: the nature and origin of sensations
 (2) The attributes of sensation: intensity, extensity, affective tone; the psycho-
 physical law
 (3) The classification of sensations or sense-qualities: proper and common sensi-
 bles; primary and secondary qualities
 (4) The distinction between sensation and perception: the accidental sensible;
 complex ideas of substance
 (5) Sensation and attention: pre-perception and apperception; the transcenden-
 tal unity of apperception
 3d. The activity of the interior senses
 (1) The functions of the common sense: discrimination, comparison, association,
 collation or perception
 (2) Memory and imagination as interior powers of sense
 (3) The estimative or cogitative power: instinctive recognition of the harmful
 and beneficial
 3e. The relation of sense to emotion, will, and movement: the conception of a
 sensitive appetite

4. The character of sensitive knowledge
 4a. Comparison of sensitive with other forms of knowledge
 4b. The object of sense-perception: the evident particular fact; judgments of per-
 ception and judgments of experience
 4c. The relation of sense and the sensible: the subjectivity or objectivity of sense-
 qualities
 4<
 The limit, accuracy, and reliability of sensitive knowledge: the fallibility of the
 senses
 (1) The erroneous interpretation of sense-data: the problem of judgments based
 on sensation
 (2) Error in sense-perception: illusions and hallucinations

5. The contribution of the senses to scientific or philosophical knowledge
 5a. Sensation as the source or occasion of ideas: the role of memory or reminiscence;
 the construction of complex ideas; the abstraction of universal concepts
 5b. Sense-experience as the origin of inductions
 5c. The dependence of understanding or reason upon sense for knowledge of particu-
 lars: verification by appeal to the senses

6. The role of sense in the perception of beauty: the beautiful and the pleasing to sense;
sensible and intelligible beauty

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Discussions relevant to the controversy over the distinction between sense
an

intellect, and the distinction between the sensible and the intelligib

EXPERIENCE 4a; IDEA 1b-1c, 2c-2g; KNOWLEDGE 6a(i), 63(4); MEMORY AND I

la, 5b, 6c(i), 6d; MIND la, 1d, 1g; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR 4d; and f

sue concerning the difference between animal and human faculties, see

EVOLUTION yb(3); MAN la-1c; SOUL 2c(2)-2c(3).

The intuitive character of sense-perception as contrasted with the discursi

ment and reasoning, see INDUCTION la; KNOWLEDGE 6b(4), 6c(i); PRINCIPLE 2

REASONING 1b; and for the theory of space and time as transcendental f

seeFORM 1c; MATHEMATICS 1c; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(2); MIND 1e(i),

SPACE 43; TIME 6c.

The differentiation of plant, animal, and human life with respect to sensit

1a(i), 1b, 1c(i); LIFE AND DEATH 3a-3b; MAN 4b; SOUL 2c(i)-2c(2).

The discussion of the nervous system, see ANIMAL 5g.

The theory of memory and imagination as interior powers of sense and as dep

exterior senses, see MEMORY AND IMAGINATION la, 1c; and for another consi

estimative power, see HABIT 3b.

The pleasantness and unpleasantness of sensations, see PLEASURE AND PAIN 4b

variation of sense-qualities in degree or intensity, see QUALITY 3c; SAME

The distinction between proper and common sensibles, or between primary and

qualities, see QUALITY 2b; and for the issue concerning the objectivit

these qualities, see QUALITY 6c.

The distinction between sensation and perception, and the problem of our se

edge of substances as opposed to qualities, see BEING 8c; IDEA 2f; KNOWLE

MEMORY AND IMAGINATION la; PRINCIPLE 23(1); and for the doctrine of the t

tal unity of apperception, see MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(2); ONE AND MANY

727 8c-609c; PART in SUPPL, 68a-970c; Q 91, A A 3-4 1020d- dy, PARADISE, xxx
[19- ts, LIV 594c; LXIX 596d; xote, PART n, 381d 382a 23d [fn i] / Judgement, p
508b-c; 537a-539d of History, PART i, 220b c; PART in, 304a; PART iv, ciences,
FIRST DAY, 175a3d: 492b-495a,c; 501bT n [11,288-303] 274b- {, 307b-308b Species,
95a-d esp 95d / 1c-302a; 451b; 568d 569b; sKaramazw, BK ni,53c- 157a; 755a-758a
csp 755b n and Its Discontents, 775b-c d reason or le, see BEING 7c, 8a-8b;
MAGINATION ANIMAL 10(2); or the related isve nature of judgb(i); orms of
intuition, 401(3); ivity, see ANIMAL endent on the deration of the , 46; and for
the AND OTHER 3C. secondary y or subjectivity of DGE 6b(i); nsitive
knowlranscenden- 4b.

728 For: The relation of sense to emotion and will, and for th

the rational appetite, see DESIRE 3b(i); EMOTI

IMAGINATION 1d; WILL 2b(2).

The comparison of sensitive with other forms of

and for the problem of truth and falsity in se

AND IMAGINATION 26(4), 5c; PRINCIPLE 2b(i); TR

The contribution of sense to thought, and for th

induction, and abstraction, see EXPERIENCE 3b,

AND IMAGINATION 33, 3c, 6c-6d; MIND 13(2); REA

LAR 4c.

The role of sense in the perception of beauty, s

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represent

IF. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

I.

Aur.usriNr. Answer to Sceptics AQUINAS. Qttaestiones Disputatae, De Anima, A 13
DhscARTfcs. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i,

45-46, 48, 66-70; PART II, 3; PART IV, 189-198 HoBRfcs. Concerning Body, PART
iv, en 25, 29 BERKELEY. An Essay Towards a New Theory of

Vision

. Three Dialogues Between Hylas and Philonous HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature,
BK i, PART in,

SECT v-vn KANT. De Mundi Sensibilis (Inaugural Dissertation) HEGLL. The
Phenomenology of Mind, i-m W. JAMES. Some Problems of Philosophy, CH 4-6

II.

THBOPIIRASTUS. On the Senses EPICURUS. Letter to Herodotus CICKRO. Academics
SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Outlines of Pyrrhonism ALBERTUS MAGNUS. De Sensu et Sensato R.
BACON. Opus Majus, PART v JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus
Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis, PART iv, QQ 4-8

MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la veritt, BK i, CH 5-9, 10 (2, 4-6), 12-15,
17-20

Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, iv-v

.

BK n, CH 2-9 LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

- Monadology, par 10-18 .

CONDI LLAC. Treatise on the Sensations VOLTAIRE. "Sensation," in A Philosophical
Dictionary T. REID. An Inquiry into the Human Mind

AS e distinction between the sensitive and ON i; GOOD AND EVIL 43; MEMORY AND
knowledge, sec KNOWLEDGE 6b(i)-6b(3); nsation and sense-perception, see MEMORY
UTH 3a(i)~3a(2). e role of sense in theories of reminiscence, 4b; IDEA 2b,
2f-2g; INDUCTION 2; MEMORY SONING 1c; UNIVERSAL AND PARTICUee BEAUTY 4-5;
PLEASURE AND PAIN 4c(i). ofy of the Western World, but relevant to the These
works are divided into two groups: ed in this collection. sented in this
collection. the publication of the works cited, consult ollows the last chapter
of The Great Ideas. T. REID. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, n
SCHOPENHAUER. The World as Will and Idea, VOL n, SUP, CH 1-4

BROWN. Lectures on the Philosophy of the Human Mind, VOL i, pp 417-548; VOL n,
pp 90-152 J.MILL. Analysis of the Phenomena of the Human Mind, CH i W. HAMILTON.
Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, VOL i (21-28) BAIN. The Senses and the
Intellect FECHNER. Elemente der Psychophysilk WHEWELL. On the Philosophy of
Discovery, CH 19-21 HELMHOLTZ. Treatise on Physiological Optics . On the
Sensation of Tone as a Physiological

Basis for the Theory of Music

.

Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, vi HERSCHEL. Familiar Lectures on
Scientific Subjects, IX

E. HARTMANN. Philosophy of the Unconscious, (B) VIII

LOTZE. Metaphysics, BK HI, CH 2 GALTON. Inquiries into Human Faculty and Its
Development (Sensitivity, Sequence of Test

Weights, Whistles for Audibility of Shrill Notes,

Appendices c, D, E)

MACH. The Analysis of Sensations BRADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH i, 5
BERGS ON. Matter and Memory, CH 4 WUNDT. Principles ofPhysiological Psychology,
PARTI Outlines of Psychology, (6, 8-n)

. WOODWORTH. Psychological Issues, CH 5 McTAGGART. The Nature of Existence, CH
35 MOORE. Philosophical Studies, CH 2, 5, 7 BROAD. Perception, Physics, and
Reality, CH 4 The Mind and Its Place in Nature, CH 4

.

CHAPTER 84: BROAD. Scientific Thought, PART n PARSONS. An Introduction to the
Theory ofPerception

B. RUSSELL. Our Knowledge of the External World,

IH-IV

.

Mysticism and Logic, CH 8

.The Analysis of Mind, LECT 7-8

.The Analysis of Matter, CH 15-26 ADRIAN. The Basis of Sensation KOEHLER.
Gestalt Psychology, CH 5 WHITEHEAD. Process and Reality, PART in LOVEJOY. The
Revolt Against Dualism POWYS. In Defence of Sensuality

DEWEY. "Appearing and Appearance," "A Naturalistic Theory of Sense Perception,"
"Perception

and Organic Action," in Philosophy and Civilization PRICE. Perception BORING.
The Physical Dimensions of Consciousness, CH 2-8 HARTSHORNE. The Philosophy and
Psychology of Sensation KOFFKA. Principles of Gestalt-Psychology STRAUS. Vom
Sinn der Sinne BLANSHARD. The Nature of Thought, CH 1-6
