Chapter  85: SIGN A INTRODUCTION A A SIGN points to something. symbol stands for
or   takes   the   place  of  another  thing.  Sign  and  symbol  are  sometimes
differentiated  according  to  whether  emphasis  is  placed  on  that  which is
signified  or  pointed  out,  or  on  that  which  functions  as  a surrogate or
substitute.  Yet "sign" and "symbol" are often used interchangeably. We call the
notations  of  music or mathematics either "signs" or "symbols." Words, too, are
traditionally  spoken  of  as  signs  or  symbols.  Words and other conventional
notations  for expressing meaning both point to and stand for something else. It
is only in certain cases that one of these two functions e seems to predominate,
as the road marker w points out the direction to take, and paper money takes the
place  of  the  precious  metal  whose value it represents. On what is common to
signs  and symbols of all sorts there seems to be no disagreement throughout the
tradition of western thought. From Augustine's statement that "a sign is a thing
which,  over  and  above the impression it makes on the senses, causes something
else  to  come into mind as a consequence of itself," to Freud's analysis of the
symbolism of dreams, of symptoms, and symptomatic acts, the great books consider
sign  or symbol as one term in a relation, the relation being one of meaning or,
as  Freud  says,  of  "significance,  intention,  tend- c ency." The fundamental
problems  traditionally  discussed concern the nature of meaning itself, and the
modes  of  signification  which  vary  with the kinds of things that function as
signs  and  the  kinds  of things they signify. l A WITH RESPECT TO THINGS which
function  sym-  l  bolically, the primary distinction seems to be c that between
natural  and  conventional  signs.  m  Augustine  at  firsi suggests a threefold
division.  t  ND SYMBOL Some things are simply things, and not signs at all.Some
(for  example,  "the  ram  which Abraham offered up instead of his son") are not
only  things,  but "also signs of other things." And some things, such as words,
"are  never  employed except as signs." Augustine adds that words are not merely
signs.  "Every  sign,"  he  writes, "is also a thing, for what is not a thing is
nothing  at  all."  The distinction between natural and conventional signs falls
within this threefold division.

"Natural  signs,"  Augustine says, "are those which, apart from any intention or
desire  of  using  them as signs, do yet lead to the knowldge of something else,
as,  for  example, smoke hen it indicates fire. For it is not from any intention
of  making  it a sign that it is so, but through attention to experience we come
to  know  that fire is beneath, even when nothing but smoke can be seen. And the
footprint  of  an  animal  passing by belongs to this class of signs." Augustine
seems  to  find  natural  signs  in things that are related as cause and effect.
Berkeley,  on the other hand, tends to substitute the relation of sign and thing
signified  for  the  relation  of  cause  and effect. "The fire which I see," he
writes,  "is not the cause of the pain I suffer uponmy approaching, but the mark
that  forewarns  me.  In  like manner the noise that I hear is not the effect of
this  or  that  motion or ollision of the ambient bodies, but the sign thereof."
Every natural thing or event thus tends to become the sign of something else, so
that  the  whole  of nature constitutes a vast symbolism or anguage by which God
informs  us  of  his  plan.  ristotle  tends, in the opposite direction, to imit
natural  signs  to those things which, acording to our knowledge and experience,
perit  a necessary or probable inference to somehing else. The fact that a woman
is  giving milk CHAPTER 85: SIGN AND S he regards as an infallible sign that she
has  lately  borne  a  child;  the fact that a man is breathing fast is merely a
probable and refutable sign that he has a fever.

In  any  case,  signs  are  generally acknowledged to be natural if they satisfy
Augustine's  criterion  that  they were not intentionally devised by men for the
purpose  of signifying, "Conventional signs, on the other hand," he writes, "are
those  which living beings mutually exchange for the purpose of showing, as well
as  they  can,  the  feelings  of  their  minds,  or their perceptions, or their
thoughts." Of conventional signs, Augustine goes on to say, words hold the chief
place,  because  everything  which  can  be  expressed  by  gestures, or by such
non-verbal  symbols  as  flags  or  bugle calls, can also be expressed in words,
whereas  many thoughts which words readily express do not lend themselves easily
to  other  modes  of  expression.  Except  for  the hypothesis (discussed in the
chapter  on  LANGUAGE)  of  a  natural  form  of  speech  common  to all men and
consisting  of  words  perfectly  adapted  to the objects they name, it is never
proposed  that  words  are  anything  but conventional signs. As Aristotle says,
"nothing  is by nature a noun or a name it is only so when it becomes a symbol."
The audible sound or the visible mark becomes a symbol only by human institution
or  convention.  Yet not all the audible sounds which men and other animals make
to express their feelings or desires are, in Aristotle's opinion, to be regarded
as  words.  "Inarticulate  sounds,  such  as  those  which  brutes  produce, are
significant,  yet none of these constitutes a noun." Nor are such cries, whereby
one  animal  calls  another or communicates fear or anger, strictly conventional
signs;  for,  as Augustine points out, they are instinctive modes of expression,
and   so  are  natural  rather  than  conventional.  They  are  not  voluntarily
instituted.

IN  TERMS  OF  THE  ancient distinction between the conventional and the natural
that  which  changes  from  time  to  time  and place to place and that which is
everywhere  and  always  the  same  no one would question the conventionality of
words  and of all other non-verbal symbols which are peculiar to one people, one
culture,  or  one  epoch.  That  words are con- YMBOL ventional signs raises the
central  problem  concerning  their  meaning or significance. Utterly dissimilar
words  in different languages can have the same meaning, and identical sounds or
marks  in  different languages can mean quite different things. Since the sounds
or  marks  which  constitute  spoken  and  written  words do not possess meaning
naturally,  from  what  source  do such conventional signs get the meanings they
have  ?  The  usual answer, given by Aristotle, Locke, and others, is that words
get  their  meanings from the ideas, thoughts, or feelings which men use them to
express. "Spoken words," writes symbols of mental experiAristotle, "are the ence
and  written  words are the symbols of spoken words. Just as all men do not have
the  same writing, so all men do not have the same speech sounds, but the mental
experiences,  which  these directly symbolize, are the same for all, as also are
those things of which our experiences are the images." In addition to being able
to  make articulate sounds, it was necessary for man, Locke says, to "be able to
use  these  sounds  as  signs of internal conceptions, and to make them stand as
marks  for  the  ideas  within his own mind, whereby they might be made known to
others."  Thus words came to be used by men "as the signs of their ideas; not by
any  natural  connexion  that  there is between particular articulate sounds and
certain  ideas, for then there would be but one language amongst all men; but by
a voluntary imposition, whereby such a word is made arbitrarily the mark of such
an  idea.  The use then of words is to be sensible marks of ideas, and the ideas
they  stand  for  are  their  proper  and  immediate  signification." Locke goes
further.  Not  only  does  the immediate signification of words lie in the ideas
they  stand  for,  but  in his view words "can be signs of nothing else." Yet he
also  considers  the  fact  that men, because they "would not be thought to talk
barely  of  their  own  imaginations, but of things as they really are ... often
suppose  their  words  to  stand  also for the reality of things." Locke thinks,
nevertheless,  that  "obscurity  and  confusion" enter into the signification of
words  "whenever  we make them stand for anything but those ideas we have in our
own  minds."  But  though  the  meaning  of  a  word  may  come from the idea it
signifies,  the word which is thus made meaningful seems, in the common usage of
mankind,  to  serve  as the name or designation of some real thing. It refers to
something other than ideas or concepts in the human mind. Locke himself talks of
"the  application  of  names  to  things,"  and  in  his  consideration  of  the
distinction  between  proper  and  common  names is concerned to point out that,
though  they  differ in meaning (i.e., differ in the type of idea they signify),
both  refer  to  the  same  sort of reality individual existences. Aristotle and
other  writers  who  distinguish  between  things in the order of nature and the
concepts  we form of them, tend to take both views of the significance of words.
Words  signify  the  real  things  which  they  name  as well as the ideas whose
meanings  they  express.  If  we  waive for the moment the possibility that some
words  may signify only ideas, whereas others signify both ideas and things, two
questions may be asked. Are there any words which signify things alone ? What is
the  relation  between  the  idea  and  the  thing a word signifies, when a word
signifies  them  both;  that is, when a word has both sorts of significance, how
are they related to one another ?

Aquinas answers the second question by saying that since "words are the signs of
ideas, and ideas the similitudes of things, it is evident that words function in
the signification of things through the conceptions of the intellect." Ideas may
be the immediate or proximate object which words signify, but through them words
ultimately  signify  the  real things which are themselves the objects of ideas.
According to this theory, an idea may be both the object signified by a word and
the medium through which that word also signifies the thing of which we have the
idea.  Aquinas  seems  to  think  that  ideas  are always required as the medium
whereby  words  signify things. "We can give a name to anything," he says, "only
insofar  as  we  can  understand it." Accordingly, it is impossible for words to
signify things directly, i.e., without the mediation of ideas.

THIS  POSITION HAS A number of consequences for the theory of signs and raises a
number  of issues. Augustine's statement that "every sign is also a thing" has a
different meaning when it is said of the sensible things which also happen to be
signs  and  of  the things of the mind concepts or ideas which cannot be without
being  signs. The understanding of this difference helps to explain the relation
between  verbal  signs  and  the mental signs through which they signify or from
which  they  get  their  meanings.  Whereas  words  are  in  the  first instance
meaningless  marks  and  sounds  which  get meaning when men use them to express
their  thoughts  or  feelings,  ideas and images are at once meaningful, however
they  arise in the mind. They are natural signs in the sense that it seems to be
their  very  nature  to  signify. They do not get meaning. They do not even have
meaning, in the way in which smoke as a natural sign of fire has a meaning which
is  distinct  from,  though  a consequence of, its nature as smoke. An idea is a
meaning,  an intention of the mind, as it is sometimes called, a reference to an
object  thought  about. The idea of fire is the meaning the word "fire" has when
it  designates  the natural phenomenon which that word is conventionally used to
name;  and  as Aristotle suggests, the conventional signs of different languages
[e.g., "fire" and "fcuer"] have the same meaning because the idea of fire is the
same,  and the natural phenomenon experienced and thought about is the same, for
men  of  diverse tongues. That ideas or mental images are themselves meanings or
intentions  the  symbols  of  things  thought  about  seems  to be recognized in
different  ways  by  many  writers  in  the tradition of the great books. In the
Cratylus,  Socrates  suggests that signs should be like the things they signify.
Some conventional signs, he thinks, are better than others in this respect.

He  implies  that  all words are inferior to mental images, which, by their very
nature,  imitate  or  resemble  their  objects.  The act of memory, according to
Aristotle,  requires  a  memory  image which is "something like an impression or
picture"  of  the thing remembered. If the memory image, through its resemblance
to  something  once  experienced,  did  not  function as the sign of that absent
thing,  memory  would  not be memory, for, Aristotle argues, it would consist in
beholding  CHAPTER  85:  SIGN  the memory image itself, which is present, rather
than the absent thing it stands for.

Aquinas,  perhaps,  is  the  writer most explicit in his treatment of images and
ideas as in their very nature meanings or intentions of the mind.

His  calling  them  "mental words" seems to indicate that in his view they, like
physical  and sensible words, are signs; but the added qualification of "mental"
also  implies their difference. "The vocal sound which has no signification," he
writes, "cannot be called a word; wherefore the exterior vocal sound is called a
word  from  the  fact  that  it  signifies  the interior concept of the mind. It
follows  that,  first  and chiefly, the interior concept of the mind is called a
word."  The  mental  word or concept suffices "when the mind turns to the actual
consideration  of what it knows habitually," for then, he adds, "a person speaks
to himself." But unlike angels, who can make their concepts known to one another
immediately,  men  require the medium of external speech. They must use sensible
physical  signs  to  communicate  their  thoughts. Without referring to ideas as
mental  words,  Locke  docs appear to identify ideas with meanings and to regard
them  as  signs.  The definition of a word, he says, is an attempt to make known
"the  meaning or idea it stands for." Denying that the general and the universal
belong  to the real existence of things, he holds that they "concern only signs,
whether  words  or ideas. Words are general . . . when used for signs of general
ideas  .  .  .  and ideas are general when they set up as the representatives of
many particular things; but universality belongs not to things themselves, which
are all of them particular in their existence, even those words and ideas which,
in  their  signification,  are  general."  The  basic  issue  to  which Locke is
addressing  himself  is  discussed  in  the chapter on UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR.
Locke's  solution  seems to involve the affirmation of abstract ideas, which are
general  or  universal in their significance and through which common names come
to  have  a  different  sort of meaning from the meaning of proper names. "Ideas
become  general by separating them from the circumstances of time and place, and
any  other  ideas that may determine them to this or that particular existence."
Common   nouns   like  "man"  AND  SYMBOL  or  "cat"  become  general  in  their
significance, according to Locke, "by being made the signs of general ideas."

To  the  question  of  what kind of signification it is that general words have,
Locke replies: "As they do not signify barely one it is evident, that particular
thing;  for  then  they would not be general terms, but proper names; so, on the
other  side,  it is as evident, they do not signify a plurality; for man and men
would   then   signify  the  same.  That,  then,  which  general  words  .  .  .
signify,"Locke  declares,  "is  a  sort of things, and each of them docs that by
being a sign of an abstract idea in the mind."

It  seems  to  follow, therefore, that those who, like Hobbes and Berkeley, deny
the  existence  of  abstract ideas or universal concepts, must offer a different
explanation  of  the  meaning  of  common  nouns  or general names. "There being
nothing  in  the  world universal but names," Hobbes writes, a name is universal
when it "is imposed on many things for their similitude in some quality or other
accident; and whereas a proper name bringeth to mind one thing only, a universal
recalls any one of those many."

On  similar  grounds,  Berkeley  criticizes  Locke's theory of how words acquire
general significance. His own theory is that words become general "by being made
the  sign, not of an abstract general idea, but of several particular ideas, any
one  of  which it indifferently suggests to the mind." And, in another place, he
says that "an idea which, considered in itself, is particular becomes general by
being  made  to  represent  or  stand for all other particular ideas of the same
sort." He does not himself explain how we come by the notion of "the same sort,"
or  how  one  particular  idea  can represent the sort to which other particular
ideas belong. But he rejects Locke's explanation because it involves ideas which
are  not only general, but also abstract. The attempt to account for the meaning
of  general  names  is,  in  Berkeley's view, the cause of Locke's acceptance of
abstract  ideas. "If there had been no such thing as speech or universal signs,"
he  writes, "there never [would have] been any thought of abstraction." Not only
do  men  mistakenly  suppose  that  "every  name has, or ought to have, one only
precise  and settled signification, which inclines [them] 734 to think there are
certain  abstract, determinate ideas that constitute the true and only immediate
signification  of  each  general name"; but they also suppose that "it is by the
mediation  of  these  abstract  ideas  that  a general name comes to signify any
particular  thing.  Whereas,  in  truth,"  Berkeley concludes, "there is no such
thing  as  one  precise and definite signification annexed to any general name."
Where  Locke would say that a common name gets its general meaning by signifying
one  idea  which  itself  has  general  significance, Berkeley reiterates that a
general  name gets its meaning from "a great number of particular ideas," all of
which it signifies indifferently.

THE  RELATION  OF  WORDS  to  ideas raises still other problems in the theory of
signs,  problems  which  have  peculiar interest in the tradition of the liberal
arts.  One  of  these problems has already becnmentioned.Itisthequestion whether
some  words  signify  ideas alone, in contrast to words which signify ideas and,
through  them, things. This suggests the parallel problem of words which signify
words, in contrast to words which are the names of things.

In  his  little  Concerning  the  Teacher,  tract Augustine points out that some
words,  such  as  "noun"  and  "adjective,"  signify  kinds  of words, "man" and
"stone,"  just  as other words, such as signify kinds of things. Furthermore, in
the  sentence  "man  is  a  noun," the word "man" signifies itself as the object
referred  to;  whereas  in  the  sentence  "man  is  an  animal," the word "man"
signifies  a  living  organism  of a certain sort. The same word, therefore, may
signify  both  itself  and some thing other than itself. These differences which
Augustine  observes  in  the signification of words come to be formulated in the
traditional distinction between the first and second imposition of words. A word
is  used in the first imposition when it is used to signify things which are not
words,  as,  for example, the word "man" when it refers to a human being. A word
is used in the second imposition when it is applied to words rather than things,
as,  for  example,  the  word "noun" said of "man," or the word "man" when it is
used  to refer to itself in the sentence "man is a noun." A parallel distinction
is  that between words used in the first and the second intention. When the word
"man"  is used to signify a living organism of a certain sort, it is used in the
first  intention  because it signifies a reality, not an idea. A word is said to
be  used  in the second intention when it signifies an idea rather than a thing.
For example, in the sentence, "man is a species," the word "species" signifies a
logical  classification and so is in the second intention; and the word "man" is
also  in the second intention because it refers to the idea which is denominated
a  species. In some cases, an idea may not signify things at all, but only other
ideas,  such as the logical notions of genus and species. Words like "genus" and
"species," unlike the words "man" and "stone," can therefore be used only in the
second intention. The idea man is called a "first intention of the mind" because
its  primary  function  is to signify the living thing. Only secondarily does it
signify  itself  as  an  object  able to be considered. The idea species, on the
other  hand,  is  called  a  "second  intention" because its sole function is to
signify  ideas  which  stand  to  other  ideas  in  a certain relation. I lobbes
concisely  summarizes  most  of  these points when he points out that some words
"are  the  names  of the things conceived," whereas "others are the names of the
imaginations themselves, that is to say, of those ideas or mental images we have
of  all  the things we sec and remember. And others again are names of names ...
as  'universal,'  'plural,' 'singular,' are the names of names." The names which
we  apply  to particular species and genera, such as "man" and "animal," Aquinas
says,  "signify  the  common natures themselves, but not the intentions of these
common  natures,  which  are  signified  by the terms genus or species." ANOTHER
TRADITIONAL  distinction in the modes of signification is that between intrinsic
and  extrinsic denomination. A name is said to be an intrinsic denomination when
it  is  applied  to  a  thing  in  order  to  signify its nature or its inherent
properties  and  attributes,  as,  for example, when we call a thing "animal" or
"rational,"  "white" or "square." A name is said to be an extrinsic denomination
when  it  is  applied to a thing only in order to signify some relation in which
that  thing stands to some- CHAPTER 85: SIGN A thing else, as, for example, when
we call sunshine "healthy" because it helps to produce healthy organisms or when
we  apply  the names of animals, such as "pig" or "fox," to men because we think
the men bear certain resemblances to these animals. The same word can be used in
different  connections both as an intrinsic and as an extrinsic denomination. "I
lealthy" means an inherent quality when it is applied to living organisms, and a
causal  relation to organic health when it is applied to sunshine; "pig" means a
certain  kind of animal when it is applied to the four-footed mammal, and only a
resemblance to this animal in certain characteristics when it is applied to men.
This  double  use  of  the  same  word  exemplifies what is traditionally called
"equivocal speech" or the equivocal use of a name. Some writers tend to identify
equivocation  with  ambiguity, on the ground that both involve a multiplicity of
meanings for the same word. Others seem to think that a word is used ambiguously
only if its user is indefinite as to which of its several meanings he intends to
express;  but they hold that a word can be used equivocally without ambiguity if
its  user  makes  plain  that he is employing it now in this sense, now in that.
Aristotle  says that two things arc named equivocally "when though they have the
same name, the definition corresponding with the name differs for each"; and "on
the  other hand, things are said to be named univocally which have both the name
and  the  definition  answering to the name in common." When we call a man and a
pig  an "animal," we arc using that word univocally because we arc using it with
the same definition or meaning in both cases; but when we call a pig and a man a
"pig," we are using that word equivocally because we are using it with different
meanings, signifying having the nature of a pig in one instance and being Ifye a
pig in certain respects in the other.

Aristotle  distinguishes several types of equivocation, of which we have already
noted  two.  The use of the word "healthy" to describe an animal and sunshine is
that  type  of  equivocation  in which the same word is used to name an inherent
attribute  and  also  a  cause of that attribute; in other instances of the same
type,  it  might  be  used to name the nature or attribute and the effect rather
than the cause.

ND  SYMBOL  Speaking  of  a man and a pig as a "pig" represents the metaphorical
type  of  equivocation,  in  which the same word is used to name the nature of a
thing and something else of a different nature which has only a likeness to that
nature.  Metaphors,  in  turn,  can  be  divided into types. Some are based on a
direct  similitude  between two things in some accidental respect, e.g., the man
who  is  like  a  pig  in  manner  of eating. Some, Aristotle says, are based on
analogies  or  proportions,  as, for example, when we call a king the "father of
his people." Here the metaphor is based on the similarity of the relationship of
a  king  to  his  subjects and of a father to his children. The name "father" is
used  metaphorically  when it is transferred from one term in this proportion to
the  term  which  stands  in  an  analogous  position. A third kind of metaphor,
according  to  Aristotle,  consists  in  the  use of the same word now in a more
generic, now in a more specific sense, or with broader and narrower meanings. Of
this  he  gives  an  example in the Ethics when he discusses general and special
justice, using the word "justice" narrowly to signify one of the special virtues
and  broadly to mean all the virtues considered in their social aspect. There is
a  sense  of  the  word "justice," he writes, in which it signifies "not part of
virtue  but virtue entire"; "this form of justice is complete virtue, though not
absolutely,  but only in relation to our neighbor." The word "injustice" is also
used  in  a  correspondingly wide sense. But there is "another kind of injustice
which  is  a  part of injustice in the wide sense." This "particular injustice,"
Aristotle says, "shares the name and nature of the first, because its definition
falls  within  the same genus." As Aristotle treats this type of equivocation in
the  Rhetoric  and the Poetics, it includes three possibilities: the transfer of
the name of a genus to one of its species, the transfer of the name of a species
to its genus, and the transfer of the name of one species to another in the same
genus.  It  may  be  questioned  whether  this  type of equivocation is properly
classified as metaphorical, on Aristotle's own definition of metaphor as "giving
a  thing  a  name  that  belongs to something else." In the type of equivocation
exemplifiedby  the  use  of  the  word  "justice,"  now with a generic and now a
specific meaning, the name does not seem to belong to the genus any more than it
does to the species, or conversely.

In  contrast,  when  the  name  "father"  is  given to a king in relation to his
people,  the  usage  is  metaphorical,  because  the  name  "father'* belongs to
something else, i.e., the man who is a progenitor.

The  same  point  can  be made in terms of intrinsic and extrinsic denomination.
When  "justice"  is used as the name for the whole of virtue (regarded socially)
and  also  for  one  particular virtue, the word is an intrinsic denomination in
both  instances.  In all other types of equivocation, the equivocal word is used
once  as  an  intrinsic  and  once as an extrinsic denomination; for example, as
applied to the animal, the word "pig" is an intrinsic denomination, but it is an
extrinsic denomination when it is applied to a man in order to signify a certain
resemblance  to  the  animal  to which the name belongs. The same is true in the
case  of  the  word "healthy" as said of an animal and of sunshine. In all these
cases  of  equivocation,  the  two  meanings  of  the  same word are not totally
distinct.  On  the contrary, the two senses have something in common. One of the
meanings  seems  to  be  derived  from  the  other;  one appears to be secondary
(usually  the one involved in the extrinsic denomination) and the other primary.
What   is   traditionally  called  "equivocation  by  chance,"  in  contrast  to
equivocation by intention, is the extreme case in which the same word is used in
two  utterly  distinct senses, having no common element of meaning at all; e.g.,
the  word  "pen"  used  for  a  writing instrument and an enclosure for animals.
Equivocation  by  intention,  in  which  the  different  meanings of a word have
something  in  common,  thus  appears to be intermediate between equivocation by
chance  (in  which  the meanings share no common element) and univocal usage (in
which  the  meaning  is  exactly  the  same  each time the word is used). In the
Physics, Aristotle seems to discover still another type of equivocation. "A pen,
a  wine,  and the highest note in a scale are not commensurable," he writes. "We
cannot  say whether any one of them is sharper than any other . . . because only
equivocally  that  the it is same term 'sharp' is applied to them." This AS does
not  seem  to be equivocation by chance, for the word "sharp" seems to have some
common  meaning  as applied to the three objects which affect the diverse senses
of  touch, taste, and hearing; nor is it like all other cases of equivocation by
intention, in that no one of these three meanings of "sharp" seems to be primary
and  the  others  derived  from it. Furthermore, in all three meanings, the word
"sharp" is used as an intrinsic denomination. In the Metaphysics, Aristotle also
considers  the special pattern of meaning which words like "being" or "one" have
when  they  are  applied to such heterogeneous things as substances, quantities,
qualities,  etc.  He  refers to these words as ambiguous or equivocal, comparing
them  with  the  word  "healthy" as said of an animal, and of other things which
either  cause  health  or  are effects of health. It may be questioned, however,
whether  "being" is equivocal in the same way that "healthy" is, since it always
carries  the  significance  of an intrinsic, never of an extrinsic denomination.
"Being"  as  said  of heterogeneous things seems to be more like "sharp" said of
diverse  sensible qualitieshaving a meaning which remains somehow the same while
it  is  diversified  in  each  case according to the diversity of the objects to
which  it  applies. THESE CONSIDERATIONS of the univocal and the equivocal sign,
along  with the treatment of ambiguity and intrinsic and extrinsic denomination,
indicate  the  extent and manner in which the great books anticipate the kind of
analysis  which  in  our  time has come to be called "semantics." The chapter on
LANGUAGE  gives  further  evidence  of  the  fact  that  many  of the points and
distinctions made in contemporary semantics have a long history in the tradition
of  the  liberal  arts.  Furthermore,  as  the  chapter  on  LANGUAGE indicates,
contemporary  semantics  cannot  even  claim  novelty  for its great interest in
freeing  men from the tyranny of words or in serving as a critical instrument to
cut  through  the  "vicious  abstractions"  of  metaphysics.  Hobbes  and Locke,
frequently  dismiss  theories  not on the ground that they are false, but rather
because  they  think  that the statement of them consists in so many meaningless
words.

CHAPTER  85: SIGN AND In the tradition of the great books, the analysis of words
and  their  modes  of  signification seems to be motivated by other interests as
well  as these. The distinction between the univocal and the equivocal sign, for
example,  is considered in its bearing on the logical problems of definition and
demonstration  as  well  as  for  the  sake  of  proposing remedies to safeguard
discourse  against  ambiguity.  It  is also brought to bear upon the theological
problem  of  the  meaning  of the names men apply to God and on the way in which
they interpret the words of Sacred Scripture. The problem of the names of God is
discussed  in  the  chapter  on  SAME AND OTHER in terms of the kind of likeness
which  can  obtain  between  an  infinite  being  and finite creatures. As there
appears,  Aquinas takes the position that God and creatures are neither the same
in  any  respect,  nor  are  they  in  all  respects so diverse as to be utterly
incomparable.  Though  an  and  a  finite  being  are  in  his  view  ininfinite
commensurable,  yet  they can also have some sort of Mmilitudenot an unqualified
sameness,  but the kind of similarity which can be described as an intrinsically
diversified sameness.

Aquinas  holds,  therefore,  that  no  names can be applied to God and creatures
univocally,  for  "no  name  belongs to God in the same sense that it belongs to
creatures." Nor, he goes on, "are names applied to God and creatures in a purely
equivocal  sense,"  for it would follow then that "from creatures nothing at all
could  be  known  or  demonstrated about God," which supposition Aquinas denies.
Between  these  two extremes of the simply univocal and the purely equivocal, he
finds  a  middle  ground in a type of signification which he calls "analogical."
The  meaning of an analogical name, he says, "is not, as it is in univocals, one
and  the same; yet it is not totally diverse as in equivocals." What he means by
"pure  equivocation"  seems  to  be  what  earlier writers call "equivocation by
chance,"  and what he means by the "analogical" seems to correspond to what they
call  "equivocation  by  intention."  "Univocal  names  have absolutely the same
meaning,"  he  writes,  "while equivocal names have absolutely diverse meanings;
whereas  in  analogical, a name taken in one signification must be placed SYMBOL
in  the  definition  of  the  same  name  taken in other significations; as, for
instance,  "being"  which is applied to substance is placed in the definition of
"being"  as  applied  to accident', and "healthy" applied to animal is placed in
the definition of "healthy" as applied to urine and medicine."

But,  as  we  have  seen,  there are many types of equivocation by intention the
attributive,  based  on  cause and effect, as exemplified by the word "healthy";
that involving broader and narrower meanings, exemplified by the word "justice";
metaphors,  of the sort exemplifiedby calling a man "pig," and of the sort based
on  analogies,  when  we  speak  of  a  king as the "father" of his people; and,
finally,  the  very  special  type of equivocation found in "sharp" applied to a
tone,  a  taste,  and  a  touch.  If Aquinas places the kind of signification he
calls"analogical"  in  the  general area of equivocation by intention, it may be
asked  whether  the various names of God are all analogical in the same way. The
answer  seems to be negative, for he distinguishes those names which have only a
metaphorical sense when said of God, such as "angry" or "jealous"; and he denies
the  opinion  of  those who say that God is called "good" only in an attributive
sense,  i.e., signifying him to be the cause of the goodness found in creatures.
On the contrary, he thinks that words like "good" and "wise," and especially the
name  "being,"  are to be interpreted as intrinsic denominations when applied to
both God and creatures. For Aquinas, as for Aristotle, that would appear to make
the  pattern  of  meaning  exhibited  by  the  word  "sharp"  the  model for the
significance  of  "being"  rather  than  that  found  in  the merely attributive
equivocation  of  the  word  "healthy"  whether "being" is said of substance and
accidents, or of God and creatures. The point seems to be unaffected by the fact
that  Aquinas  calls  this type of signification "analogical," whereas Aristotle
always  refers  to  "being"  as  equivocal.  Aristotle  never  treatsany type of
equivocation  as  analogical except the metaphor which results from transferring
the  name  of one term in a proportion to another term standing in the same or a
similar relationship.

738 THE DISTINCTION BETWEEN literal and figurative or metaphorical speech seems
to be of prime importance in the theologian's rules for interpreting the word of
God. As indicated in the chapter on RELIGION, Augustine insists that the
language of Holy Writ must be read in many senses. Aquinas distinguishes a basic
literal sense from three modes of spiritual meaning. That signification "whereby
words signify things belongs to the first sense, the historical or literal. That
signification whereby things signified by words have themselves also a
signification is called the spiritual sense, which is based on the literal and
presupposes it." The spiritual sense Aquinas divides into the allegorical, the
moral, and the analogical. To grasp the various spiritual meanings, the reader
must understand that in Holy Scripture "divine things arc metaphorically
described by means of sensible things." As in the symbolism of the sacraments,
physical things serve as the outward and visible signs of an inward and
spiritual grace, so also "in Holy Scripture spiritual truths are fittingly
taught under the likeness of material things." A theologian like Aquinas thus
justifies metaphors not only in Scripture, but also in sacred doctrine or
theology, as "both necessary and useful," whereas in his view the poet's
employment of them is solely for the sake of pleasure.

Philosophers  and  scientists,  on  the other hand, often take the opposite view
that  metaphors  have  a  place  only  in  poetry  and  should be avoided in the
exposition of knowledge.

In  the  writing  of  poetry, "the command of metaphor," says Aristotle, "is the
mark of genius," but all his rules for the construction of

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
,   The theory of signs
   0a. The distinction between natural and conventional signs
   0b. The intentions of the mind: ideas and images as natural signs
   0c. The things of nature functioning symbolically: the book of nature
   0d. The conventional notations of human language: man's need for words
   0e. The invention of non-verbal symbols: money, titles, seals, ceremonies, courtesies
   0f. Natural signs
   as the source of meaning in conventional signs: thought as the
   medium through which words signify things

2. The modes of signification
   2a. The first and second imposition of words:        names signifying things and names
   signifying names
   2b. The first and second intention of names: words signifying things and words
   signi-
   fying ideas
   2c. Intrinsic and extrinsic denominations: the naming of things
   according to their
   natures or by reference to their relations
   2d. Proper and common names
   2e. Abstract and concrete names

3. The patterns of meaning in human discourse
   3a. Verbal ambiguity: indefiniteness or multiplicity of meaning
   3b. The distinction between univocal and equivocal speech
   3c. The types of equivocation
   (1) The same word used literally and figuratively: metaphors derived from
   analogies or proportions and from other kinds of similitude
   (2) The same word used with varying degrees of generality and specificity: the
   broad and narrow meaning of a word
   (3) The same word used to signify an attribute and its cause or effect
   3d. The significance of names predicated of heterogeneous things: the analogical as
   intermediate between the univocal and the equivocal

4. The determination of meaning in science and philosophy
   4a. The relation between univocal meaning and definition
   4b. The   dependence of demonstration on univocal terms: formal fallacies due to
   equivocation
   4c. The
   nature and utility of semantic analysis: the rectification of ambiguity; the
   clarification and precision of meanings
   4d. The use of metaphors and myths in science and philosophy
   4e. The    use of signs in reasoning: necessary and probable signs; the interpretation
   of symptoms in medicine

5. Symbolism in theology and religion
   5a. Natural things as signs of divinity
   5b. Supernatural signs: omens, portents, visitations, dreams, miracles
   5c. The symbolism
   of the sacraments and of sacramental or ritualistic acts
   50*.
   The symbolism of numbers in theology
   5<?.
   The interpretation of the word of God
   5/ The names of God: the use of words to signify the divine nature

6. Symbolism in psychological analysis
   6a. The symbolism of dreams: their latent and manifest content
   6b. The symbolism of apparently normal acts: forgetting, verbal slips, errors
   6c. The symbolism of anxieties, obsessions,       and other neurotic manifestations

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  The  theory of language, and for the distinction between
the natural and the conve

language, see LANGUAGE i-kc.

The conception of ideas as intentions of the mind, sec IDEA 6a.

The treatment of things or events in nature as signs or symbols, see LANGUA

3C

Another discussion of the distinction between first and second intentions,

Other discussions bearing on the distinction bet ween proper and common nam

abstract and concrete names, see IDEA 4b(i)~4b(2); UNIVERSAL AND PARTICUL

The problems of verbal ambiguity, and for the distinction between univocal

speech, see IDEA 4b(4); LANGUAGE 5-50.

Discussions relevant to the theory of analogical names, or to the problem o

signify what is common to heterogeneous things, see BEING i; IDEA 40(4);

SAME AND OTHER 311(5)" }b, 4c.

The relation of the univocal and the equivocal to definition and demonstrat

TION }; LANGUAGE la, 7; RI-ASONING 3Th); and for other logical considerati

language, see LANGUAGE 6-7; LOGIC }a.

Other discussions of the language of poetry, and of problems of style in th

knowledge, see LANGUAGE o/, POETRY 81; RHETORIC 2C.

The role of signs in divination and prophecy, see LANGUAGE 10; PROPHECY 3b-

The geneial theory of the sacraments, sec GOD ;c; RELIGION 2C.

The problem of the names of God and the problem of the interpretation of Sa

see GOD 6a; LANGUAGE 12; THIOLOGY 4Th).

Other discussions of the symbolism of dreams, see LANGUAGE 10; MEMORY AND I

8d(i)-8e; and for the theory of the neuroses and neurotic behavior releva

pretation of psychological signs, see DESIRE 4a-4d; EMOTION 33-34); MEMO

IMAGINATION 2e(2); OPPOSITION 4C.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofe of the Western World, b

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided int

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collection

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the wor

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

AQUINAS. Quacstiones Di

*

DANIE. Convivio (The Ba AUGUSTINE. Concerning the Teacher en i, 14-16

The Harmony of the Gospels

. .

Epistle  to  Can  Gra  AQUINAS.  Summa  Contra  Gentiles, BK i, CH 22-25 HOBBES.
Concerning Body ion, 42Sc-427a,c/ Unconscious, eral Introduction, 550d-557a; 59d
560a,  562b  c;  568a  569c;  -594c;  596d-597b;  609c-615b  a-b  / Inhibitions,
Symptoms,   8a-747b   esp  719b-c,  720a,  c,  724a-727c,  729a-b,  731d  /  New
Introductory  Lectures,  41b-d; 848b-849b; 852a-b ntional in GE 10; MEDICINE see
IDF  A $a. es and between AR 2c, 511. and equivocal f how names can RELATION 1d;
ion,  see DhriNions in the use of e exposition of 3c. cred Scripture, MAGINATION
nt to the inter- RY AND ut relevant to the o two groups: . ks cited, consult The
Great Ideas. sputatae, De Veritate, Q 4 nquet), SECOND TREATISE, nde della Scala
, PART i, en 2

752 J. S.MILL. A System of Logic, BK i FRLUD. The Psychopathology of Everyday
Life, CH

8-12

A Review of "The Antithetical Sense of Primal

.

Words"

. A Connection Between a Symbol and a Symptom

II.

PIIILODEMUS. On Methods of Inference

tory), BK vn, CH 9

QUINHLIAN. Institutio Oratona (Institutes of OraSux'ius KMPIRICUS. Against the
Logicians, BK 11, CH 2

MAIMONIDRS. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART i, CH 1-30, 37-45, 61-64

BONAVHNTURA.  Brcviloquium,  PROLOGUE . Itincranum Mentis in Deum (The Itinerary
of

the Mind to God}

DUNS  Scoius.  Opus  Oxoniense, BK iv OCKIIAM. Studies and Selections, Logic, CH
11-12  THOMAS  OP  KRUJRI.  Grammatica  Spcculativa  NICOLAS  OF  CUSA. De Docta
Ignorantia, BK i, en 12

CAJEI-AN.  De Nominum Analogia SUAKPZ. Disputationes Mctaphysicac, xxvm (3), xxx
(i$), XKXII (2), xxxix (3)

Bo   EH  VIE.  The  Signature  of  All  Things  JOHN  or  SAINT  THOMAS.  Cursus
Philosophicus Thomisticus, Ars Logica, PART i, OQ 1-3; PART n, QQ 21-22

ARNAULD. Logic or the Art of Thinking, PART i,

CH 11, 15 Lht UNITZ. Characteristica

. New Essays Concerning Human Undo standing, BK III

CON DILL AC. Essai sur Vorigine des connaissances humaines, PART n

J. HARRIS. Hermes,

or  A  Philosophical  Inquhy Concerning Universal Grammar VOLTAIKK "Allegories,"
"Figure in Theology," in A Philosophical Dictionary

T. REID. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, i,

CH i ; vi, en 5 CRP.UZER. Symbolil( und Mythologie dcr alien Voider

EMERSON. Nature

VENN,  Symbolic Logic C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL n, par 219-444; VOL v,
par  388-410 FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART i, CH 3, 8-21; PART II, CH 5-6; PART
III, CH 8| PART IV, BK I, CH 41 PART V, CH I-9 BRLAL. Semantics ROYCE. The World
and the Individual, SERIES i (7) ;

Supplementary  Essay  (2)  J.  C.  WILSON.  Statement and Inference, PART n (18)
WHITEHEAD  and  RUSSELL.  Pnncipia  Mathematica,  CH  3  WLLBY-GREGORY.  What Is
Meaning?

Signifies and Language

.  W.  E.  JOHNSON.  Logic, PART i, CH 6-8; PART n, cii3 WITTGENSTEIN. Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus  QGDEN  and  RICHARDS.  The  Meaning  of Meaning SANTAYANA.
Scepticism  and  Animal  Paith,  CH 18 EATON. Symbolism and Truth EUDINGFON. The
Nature  ofthe  Physical  Woild,  CH  12  WHITEHEAD.  An  Enquiry  Concerning the
Principles of Natural Knowledge, CH i

.

Symbolism, Its Meaning and Effects

.  Process  and Reality, PART n, CH 8 PENIDO. Lerole de I' analogic en theologie
dogmatique  RICHARDS.  Mencius on the Mind BUCHANAN. The Doctrine of Signatures,
CH 1-2, 5-6 DEWEY. Essays in Experimental Logic, iv

.

Experience and Nature, CH 5

.

Logic, the Theory of Inquiry, CH 18 B. RUSSELL. Principles of Mathematics, CH
4-8, 27

. The Analysis of Mind, LECT 10

. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, CH 1-6, 13-15,22 MARITAIN. The Degrees of
Knowledge, en 2

.

Ransoming the Time, CH 9 M. R. COHEN. A Preface to Logic, H-IV CASSIRER.
Language and Myth

. An Essay on Man

.The  Myth  of  the  State,  PART  i  (1-3)  AYER.  Thinking and Meaning CARNAP.
Foundations of Logic and Mathematics

. Introduction to Semantics

.

Meaning and Necessity DEWEY and BENTLEY. Knowing and the Known
