Chapter  86: SIN INTRODUCTION sin of Satan and the sin of Adam are THE among the
great  mysteries  of  the Christian religion. Satan is highest among the angels,
the  first  of  God's  spiritual  creatures.  lie  is  only less than God in the
perfection  of  his  nature. Adam is created with supernatural graces and gifts,
his  immortal  body  is completely responsive to his spirit, his appetite in all
things  is  submissive  to  his  reason,  and  his  reason is turned toward God,
according  to  the  original  justice  which  harmonized  his  faculties and the
elements  of his nature. The only evil latent in either Satan or Adam would seem
to  reside in the privation of infinite being, power, and knowledge. But this is
not a moral evil in them; it is neither a sin nor a predisposition to sin. Hence
the only cause of their sinning, if God himself docs not predestine them to sin,
must  be  a  free  choice on their part between good and evil. If God positively
predestines  them lo sin, then they would seem to be without responsibility, and
so  without  sin.  If  they  are  not  predetermined  to evil if, except for the
weakness  of  being  finite,  they  are  without  positive  blemish how does the
conflict  arise  in them which opens the choice between good and evil and impels
them, almost against the inclination of their natures, away from good and toward
evil ?

In  Milton's  Paradise  Lost,  God  says  of  Adam:  "I made him just and right,
sufficient  to  have stood, though free to fall." Of Satan and fallen angels, as
well  as  of  Adam,  God  observes:  They therefore as to right bclongd, So were
created,  nor  can justly accuse Thir maker, or thir making, or thir Fate; As if
Predestination  over-rul'd  Their  will,  dispos'd  by  absolute  Decree Of high
foreknowledge;  they  themselves decreed Thir own revolt, not I if I foreknew, :
Foreknowledge  had no influence on their fault, Which had no less prov'd certain
unforcknown.

Yet  there  is  a difference between Adam and Satan. The fallen angels "by their
own  suggestion  fell,  self-tempted,  dcprav'd."  Satan, having sinned, becomes
man's  tempter. "Man falls deceiv'd by the other first: Man therefore shall find
grace,  the other none." As Satan approaches the Garden of Eden to work his will
on man, he contemplates his plight. He docs not deny his sin, he does not repent
it,  he  docs not seem fully to understand it. Thus Milton has him speak: O thou
that  with surpassing Glory crowned, Look'st from the sole Dominion like the God
Of  this  new  World; at whose sight all the Starrs Hide thir dimimsht heads; to
thcc  I call, But with no friendly voice, and add thy name Sun, to tell thee how
I  hate  thy  beams  That  bring to my remembrance from \\liat state 1 fell, how
glorious  once  above  thy  Spheare; Till Pride and worse Ambition threw me down
Warring  in  Ilcav'n against Ilcav'ns matchless King; Ah whereforeTh he deserved
no  such return From me, whom he created what I was In that bright eminence, and
with  his good Upbraided none; nor was his service hard. What could be less than
to  afford him praise, The easiest recompense, and pay him thanks, How dueTh yet
all  his  good  prov'd  ill  in  me, And wrought but malice; lifted up so high I
sdeind subjection, and thought one step higher fl Would set me highest, and in a
moment quit The debt immense of endless gratitude, So burthensome, still paying,
still to owe . . . O had his powerful Destiny ordained Me some inferior Angel, I
had  stood Then happie; no unbounded hope had rais'd Ambition. Yet why not? some
other  Power As great might have aspir'd, and me through mean Drawn to his part;
but  other  Powers  as  great  Fell not, but stand unshak'n, from within Or from
without,  to all temptations arm'cl. Hads't thou the same free Will and Power to
stand? Thou hads't: whom has thou then or what to accuse, But Heav'ns free Love,
dealt  equally to all? Be then his Love accurst, since love or hate To me alike,
it  deals  eternal  woe. Nay cursed be thou; since against his, thy will 753 754
THE  GRE Chose freely what it now so justly rues. Me miserableTh which way shall
I flie Infinite wrauth, and infinite despaire ?

Which  way  I flie is Hell; my self am Hell; And in the lowest deep a lower deep
Still  threatmng  to  devour  me  opens wide, To which the Hell I suffer seems a
Heav'n.  O  then  at last relent: is there no place Left for Repentance, nor for
Pardon left ? None left but by submission; and that word Disdain forbids me, and
my  dread of shame Among the spirits beneath, whom I seduc'd With other promises
and  other vaunts Then to submit, boasting I could subdue Th' Omnipotent. Before
Satan  approaches  Eve, Adam reminds her of their debt of obedience, saying that
God  requires From us no other service than to keep This one, this casie charge,
of all the Trees In Paradise that bearc delicious fruit So various, not to taste
that  onely  Tree Of Knowledge, planted by the Tree of Life. So nccr grows Death
to  Life,  what ere Death is, Some dreadful thing no doubt; for well thou knowst
God  hath pronounc'd it death to taste that Tree, The only sign of our obedience
left Among so many signes of power and rule Conferrd upon us, and Dominion giv'n
Over  all  other  Creatures  that possesse Earth, Aire, and Sea. Then let us not
think  hard  One  easie prohibition, who enjoy Free leave so large to all things
else, and choice Unlimited of manifold delights.

The  temptation to disobey first moves Eve in a dream in which the apparition of
an  angel  speaks of the forbidden fruit as oncly fit For Gods, yet able to make
Gods  of  Men;  And why not Gods of Men, since good, the more Communicated, more
abundant growes, The Author not impair'd, but honourd more?

"Here, happie Creature," the vision says to her, Happier thou mayst be, worthier
canst  not  be: Taste this, and be henceforth among the Gods Thy self a Goddess,
not  to  Earth  confind,  But  sometimes in the Air, as wee, sometimes Ascend to
Heav'n,  by  merit  thine,  and see What life the Gods live there, and such live
thou.

Later  when  Satan in the guise of the Serpent actually addresses Eve, he argues
in  the same vein, that as he, by tasting of this fruit, speaks as a man, so Eve
and Adam, if they too partake, "shall be as Gods, knowing both Good AT IDEAS and
Evil  as  they know." Eve succumbs and, as Milton tells the story, Adam, knowing
fully the evil of his act, joins Eve in disobedience, not from envy of the gods,
but out of love for her, willing to die because unwilling to live ..ithout her.

Willing  "to incurr divine displeasure for her sake, or Death. . . . he scrupl'd
not  to cat Against his better knowledge, not deceav'd, But fondly overcome with
Femal  charm.  Earth  trembled  from her entrails, as again In pangs, and Nature
gave  a  second groan, Skie lowr'd, and muttering Thunder, som sad drops Wept at
complcating  of  the  mortal  Sin Original. IN THE POET'S expansion of the third
chapter  of Genesis, the basic elements in the JudaeoChristian conception of sin
seem  to  be  plainly accented: the pride and envy which move Satan and Eve, the
disobedience  which  results from the disorder of Adam's loving Eve more than he
loves  God.  In the Divine Comedy, another great poem of sin and salvation, Adam
speaks  to Dante in Paradise and tells him that "the tasting of the tree was not
by  itself  the  cause  of  so  great  an exile, but only the overpassing of the
bound." Earlier Beatrice explains why, in order to redeem man from sin, the Word
of  God  assumed  human  nature  "the nature which has estranged itself from its
Maker."  She tells Dante that "this nature, thus united with its Maker, was pure
and  good  such  as  it  was  created;  but  by itself it had been banished from
Paradise,  because it turned aside from the way of truth and from its own life."
Man  can fall from his nobility by "sin alone . . . which disfranchises him, and
makes  him unlike the Supreme Good, so that he is little illumined by Its light;
and  to  his  dignity  he never returns, unless where fault empties, he fills up
with  just  penalties against evil delight." In both the pagan and the Christian
conceptions  of  sin, man's pride and his disobedience of divine commandment are
usually  connected  with  the  very  notion  of  sin.  The  heroes  of the Greek
tragedies,  exhibiting  the  tragic  fault of pride, seem to forget that, though
they  strive  with  gods, they are only men, subject to laws they cannot disobey
without  catastrophe.  In  CHAPTER  86: S the Iliad Phoenix cautions Achilles to
"battle  with your pride and beat it; cherish not your anger for ever; the might
and  majesty  of heaven are more than ours, but even heaven may be appeased; and
if  a  man  has  sinned he prays the gods, and reconciles them to himself by his
piteous cries."

In  pride  and  disobedience we find the deep disorder of love which lies at the
heart of sin.

Pride  is self-love in excess of what the self deserves. Disobedience, as in the
case  of  Milton's Adam, may be prompted by a love which, too, exceeds the worth
of  the object loved. The measure of that worth, or the bounds put upon the love
of  self  or  other, is set by the Supreme Good which, ordering all other goods,
should  also  order  our loves in proportion to their goodness. This seems to be
the  central  insight  of  the Divine Comedy. It is given a summary statement in
Purgatory,  where  Virgil  explains how love the root both of virtue and of sin.
"Neither  is  Creator  nor  creature," he says to Dante, "was ever without love,
either  natural  or  of  the  mind, and this thou knowest. The natural is always
without  error;  but the other may err either through an evil object, or through
little  or  too much vigor. While love is directed on the primal goods, and with
due measure on the secondary, it cannot be the cause of ill delight. But when it
is  bent  to  evil, or runs to good with more zeal, or with less, than it ought,
against  the  Creator his own creature is working. I lence thou canst comprehend
that  love  is of necessity the seed in you of every virtue, and of every action
that deserves punishment."

Dostoevsky  offers  us further thoughts concerning the relation of love and sin.
In  the  Brothers Karamazov, Father Zossima makes lack of love the punishment as
well as the substance of sin. To those who ask, "What is Hell ?"

Father  Zossima replies: "I maintain that it is the suffering of being unable to
love.  .  . . They talk of hell fire in the material sense. I don't go into that
mystery  and  I  shun  it. But I think if there were fire in the material sense,
they  would  be  glad of it, for, I imagine, that in material agony, their still
greater  spiritual  agony  would  be forgotten for a moment. . . Oh, there are .
some  who  remain  proud  and  fierce  even  in  hell, in spite of their certain
knowledge  and  con- IN templation of the absolute truth; there are some fearful
ones  who have given themselves over to Satan and his proud spirit entirely. For
such,  hell  is  voluntary  and  ever  consuming; they are tortured by their own
choice.  For  they  have cursed themselves, cursing God and life." To avoid sin,
the  only  positive  commandment,  according  to  Father  Zossima, is to love in
accordance with God's love. "Love a man even in his sin," he counsels, "for that
is  the semblance of Divine Love and is the highest love on earth. . . . And let
not  the sin of men confound you in your doings. Fear not that it will wear away
your  work  and  hinder  its  being  accomplished.  There  is  only one means of
salvation; then take unto yourself, and make yourself responsible for, all men's
sins;  that  is  the truth, you know, friends, for as soon as you sincerely make
yourself  responsible  for everything and for all men, you will see at once that
it  is  really  so,  and  you  are to blame for everyone and for all things. But
throwing your own indolence and impotence on others, you will end by sharing the
pride of Satan and murmuring against God. Of the pride of Satan, what I think is
this:  it  is hard for us on earth to comprehend it, and therefore it is so easy
to  fall  into error and to share it, even imagining that we are doing something
grand and fine."

In  the  disorder  of love which leads to sin, sin is itself enjoyed for its own
sake,  and the disobedient act is pleasant because it is forbidden. In that also
there  is  the pride of supposing one's self to be a law unto one's self. In his
Confessionsk  concerned  most  immediately  with  his  own sinfulncss, Augustine
reflects upon the pears he stole in his youth, not, as he says, from "any desire
to enjoy the things I stole, but only the stealing of them and the sin." He asks
himself:  "What was it then that in my wretched folly I loved in you, O theft of
mine, deed wrought in that dark night when I was sixteen?" He had no need of the
pears.  "Once I had gathered them," he says, "I threw them away, tasting only my
own  sin and savouring that with delight; for if I took so much as a bite of any
one  of  those  pears,  it  was  the  sin that sweetened it." He keeps on asking
himself what it was that attracted him in that theft, what it was that THE GREAT
I he enjoyed in that childish act of stealing.

"Perhaps,"  he finally answers, "it was the thrill of acting against Your law at
least  in  appearance,  since  I  had  no  power to do so in fact, the delight a
prisoner  might have in making some small gesture of liberty getting a deceptive
sense   of   omnipotence   from  doing  something  forbidden  without  immediate
punishment.  I  was  that  slave,  who fled from his Lord and pursued his Lord's
shadow.  O  rottenness,  O  monstrousness of life and abyss of deathTh Could you
find pleasure only in what was forbidden, and only because it was forbidden?"

IN  THE  PAGAN  AND Judaeo-Christian conceptions of sin, the fundamental meaning
seems  to  depend  upon  the relation of man to the gods or to God, whether that
itself  be  considered in terms of law or love. The vicious act may be conceived
as  one which is contrary to nature or reason. The criminal act may be conceived
as  a  violation  of the law of man, injurious to the welfare of the state or to
its  members. Both may involve the notions of responsibility and fault. Both may
involve evil and wrongdoing. But unless the act transgresses the law of God, not
sinful.  The  divine law which is transit is gressed may be the natural law that
God  instills  in  human reason, but the act is sinful if the person who commits
the  act  turns  away  from  God  to  the  worship  or  love of other things. To
disbelieve in God, in divine law and divine punishment, is also to disbelieve in
sin  at  least  in  the  sense in which religious men have distinguished between
saints  and  sinners,  between  the righteous and the wicked in the eyes of God.
"There  are  only  two  kinds of men," writes Pascal: "the righteous who believe
themselves  sinners; the rest, sinners, who believe themselves righteous." Those
who  reject  the  religious  meaning of sin do not deny the wide prevalence of a
sense  of  sin, nor do they deny that many men suffer remorse for transgressions
which  they  suppose  to  be evil in God's eyes; but, with Freud, they interpret
these  feelings  of  guilt in terms of natural causes. They hold that the person
who  is  tormented  by  conscience  surfers from an illusion concerning the true
nature of his guilt.

When  the  sense  of  sin  is  intensely  active and is, in addition, apparently
unexplained  by  the  character  and  conduct  of the person, the guiltfeelings,
according  to  the  Freudian  view,  take  on  the  attributes  of  pathological
distortion  and  become  part  of  the  symptomology of ke neuroses. There is no
question  about the sincerity of the person who is thus agonized, but only about
the  true  causes  of  the  agony. "When one asks how a sense of guilt arises in
anyone,"  Freud  says,  "one  is  told something one cannot dispute: people feel
guilty  (pious  people call it 'sinful') when they have done something they know
to  be 'bad.' But then one sees how little this answer tells one." What accounts
for  the  judgment a man makes of himself as good or bad? Freud's answer is that
"what is bad is, to begin with, whatever causes one to be threatened with a loss
of love; because of the dread of this loss, one must desist from it. That is why
it  makes  little  difference  whether one has already committed the bad deed or
only  intends  to do so." The external authority of the father and, through him,
of  society  becomes,  according to Freud, "internalized by the development of a
super-ego.  The  manifestations of conscience are then raised to a new level; to
be  strict  one  should not call them conscience and sense of guilt before this.
... At this second stage of development, conscience exhibits a peculiarity which
was  absent  in  the  first.  That  is,  the  . . . more righteous a man is, the
stricter  and  more  suspicious will his conscience be, so that ultimately it is
precisely   those  people  who  have  carried  holiness  farthest  who  reproach
themselves  with  the  deepest  sinfulness. ... A relatively strict and vigilant
conscience  is  the  very sign of a virtuous man, and though saints may proclaim
themselves  sinners,  they  are  not  so  wrong,  in  view of the temptations of
instinctual  gratifications  to  which  they  are peculiarly liable since, as we
know,  temptations  do  but  increase  under  constant  privation,  whereas they
subside,  atany  rate,  temporarily,  if  they  are  sometimes gratified." Freud
applies  his  theory  of  the  origin  of  feelings  of  guilt (in "the dread of
authority"  first  and  later in "the dread of the super-ego,") to the religious
sense  of  sin.  "The  people  of Israel," he writes, "believed themselves to be
God's  favorite  child,  and  when  the  great  Father  hurled  visitation after
visitation  upon  CHAPTER  8  them,  it still never shook them in this belief or
caused  them to doubt His power and His justice; they proceeded instead to bring
their  prophets  into  the world to declare their sinfulness to them, and out of
their  sense  of  guilt  they  constructed  the  stringent commandments of their
priestly  religion."  In  general, Freud thinks, the great religions "have never
overlooked  the part played by the sense of guilt in civilization. What is more,
they  come  forward  with  a  claim ... to save mankind from this sense of guilt
which  they  call  sin.  We  have  drawn our conclusion from the way in which in
Christianity  this  salvation  is won the sacrificial death of one who therewith
takes  the  whole of the common guilt of all upon himself, about the occasion on
which this primal sense of guilt was first acquired." The conclusion referred to
is  developed  in two of Freud's works which are devoted to the consideration of
religion  and  sinthe Future of an Illusion andTotem and Taboo. In the latter of
these  books,  Freud  tells us, he had first "expressed a suspicion that perhaps
the  sense  of  guilt  in  mankind  as  a whole, which is the ultimate source of
religion  and  morality,  was  acquired  in the beginning of history through the
Oedipus  complex."  OTHER WRITERS, who approach the problem of sin in legalistic
rather  than  psychological  terms, either make no distinction between crime and
sin  or  make  the  distinction  without referring to God. Spinoza, for example,
prefaces his explanation of the meanings of "praise and blame, merit and crime,"
with  a  discussion  of  the  difference between "the natural and civil state of
man." In a state of nature, he says, no one is "bound by any law to obey any one
but  himself.Hence  in  a  natural  state sin cannot be conceived, but only in a
civil  state,  where it is decided by universal consent what is good and what is
evil,  and where everyone is bound to obey the State. Sin, therefore, is nothing
but disobedience, which is punished by the law of the State alone."

Though Hobbes does not identify crime and sin, his distinction between them does
not  seem  to be based on the contrast between the civil law and the divine law,
unless  the latter is equated with the law of nature. "A crime is a 6: SIN sin,"
he writes, "consisting in the committing (by deed or word) of that which the law
forbiddeth, or the omission of that which it hath commanded. So that every crime
is a sin, but not every sin a crime. To intend to steal or kill is a sin, though
it never appear in word or fact, for God that seeth the thoughts of man, can lay
it  to  his  charge; but till it appear by something done, or said, by which the
intention  may  be argued by a human judge, it hath not the name of crime. "From
this  relation  of sin to the law," Hobbes continues, "and of crime to the civil
law,  may  be  inferred, first, that where law ceaseth, sin ceascth. But because
the  law  of  nature is eternal, violation of covenants, ingratitude, arrogance,
and all facts contrary to any moral virtue, can never cease to be sin. Secondly,
that  the  civil  law  ceasing,  crimes  cease;  for  there  being  no other law
remaining, but that of nature, there is no place for accusation; every man being
his  own  judge,  and  accused  only  by  his own conscience, and cleared by the
uprightness  of  his  own  intention. When therefore his intention is right, his
fact is no sin; if otherwise, his fact is sin, but not crime." The more strictly
religious conception of sin seems to be exemplified by Pascal's remark that "all
that  God  does  not  permit  is  forbidden" and that "sins are forbidden by the
general declaration that God has made, that He did not allow them." Whatever God
docs  not  permit,  "we ought to regard as sin," for "the absence of God's will,
which  is  all  goodness and all justice, renders it unjust and wrong." With the
precision of a theologian in these matters, Aquinas defines the peculiar type of
evil  which  is sin. "Evil," he writes, "is more comprehensive than sin, as also
is  good  than  right.  .Now  in those things that are done by . . the will, the
proximate  rule  is the human reason, while the supreme rule is the eternal law.
When,  therefore,  a human act tends to the end according to the order of reason
and  of  the  eternal  law, then that act is right; but when it turns aside from
that  rectitude,  then  it  is  said to be a sin." Elsewhere he says that "every
created  will  has  rectitude of act only so far as it is regulated according to
the divine will. . . . Thus only in the divine will can there be no sin, whereas
in  the will of every creature, considered according to its nature, there can be
sin."

THE  THEOLOGICAL  DISCUSSION  of  sin involves a tremendous range of topics, and
problems  as  significant  as  they  are  subtle. The dogma of original sin, for
example,  raises  questions  not  only  about  the cause and character of Adam's
transgression,  but also about the punishment which is visited upon the children
of Adam in perpetuity, and about the conditions under which man can be reclaimed
from his bondage to sin, both original and actual or personal. There seems to be
some resemblance between the Christian doctrine that Adam's sin merits a penalty
to  be  paid  by  all  subsequent  generations,  and  the Jewish doctrine of the
collective  responsibility  of  the  people  of  Israel  for  the  sins of their
ancestors,  even  unto  the  third  and  fourth  generation.  But  the points of
difference  appear  to  be  more  fundamental  than the similarity. In the first
place,  the  sins  of  the  fathers  from which later generations suffer are the
individual  sins  of  men  whose natures are predisposed to before the fall, was
not. In the sin, as Adam's, second place, the punishment is visited not upon the
whole  human  race, but only upon the Chosen People, and in the form of temporal
scourges rather than in a corruption of human nature itself.

Furthermore,  the  Hebrew  prophet  FLzckiel questions the justice of collective
responsibility. "What mean ye," he asks, that yc use this proverb concerning the
land  of  Israel, saying, The fathers have eaten sour grapes, and the children's
teeth are set on edge?

As  I  live, saith the Lord God, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this
proverb  in Israel. . . . The soul that sinncth, it shall die. The son shall not
bear  the  iniquity of the father, neither shall the father bear the iniquity of
the  son:  the  righteousness  of  the  righteous  shall  be  upon  him, and the
wickedness of the wicked shall be upon him.

But  if  the wicked will turn from all his sins that he hath committed, and keep
all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall surely live, he
shall not die.

All  his transgressions that he hath committed, they shall not be mentioned unto
him: in his righteousness that he hath done he shall live.

Have  I  any pleasure at all that the wicked should die? saith the Lord God: and
not  that  he  should  return  from  his ways, and live ? But when the righteous
turncth away from his righteousness, and committeth iniquity, cl doeth according
to  all  the  abominations  that  the  wicked  man doeth, shall he live? All his
righteousness  that he hath done shall not be mentioned: in his trespass that he
hath  trespassed,  and  in  his  sin  that he hath sinned, in them shall he die.
According  to  Christian  teaching, the justice of individual punishment for the
sins  which  individuals  commit  in  their  own  lifetime does not apply to the
penalty  which  all  men must pay for the sin of Adam. "Wherefore, as by one man
sin  entered  into  the world," St. Paul writes to the Romans, and death by sin;
and  so  death passed upon all men, for that all have sinned: (For until the law
sin was in the world: but sin is not imputed when there is no law. Nevertheless,
death  reigned  from Adam to Moses, even over them that had not sinned after the
similitude  of  Adam's transgression, who is the figure of him that was to come.
But  not as the offence, so also is the free gift. For if through the offence of
one many be dead, much mote the grace of God, and the gift by grace, which is by
one  man,  lesus  Chiist, hath abounded unto many. And not as it was by one that
sinned,  so  is  the  gift: for the judgment was by one to condemnation, but the
free  gift  is  of many offences unto justification. For if by one man's offence
death icigned by one; much more they which receive abundance of grace and of the
gift of righteousness shall reign in life by one, Jesus Christ.) Therefore as by
the  offence  of  one judgment came upon all men to condemnation; even so by the
righteousness of one the free gift came upon all men unto justification of life.
For  as by one man's disobedience many were made sinners, so by the obedience of
one  shall  many  be made righteous. The Christian doctrine of original sin thus
appears  to  be  closely connected with the Christian doctrine of the need for a
divine  saviour  God Himself become man to redeem man from the taint of sin, and
through the sacraments He instituted to provide the instruments of healing grace
and  the means of repentance for, and absolution from, both original sin and the
individual's own personal sins.

CHAPTER 8

The  understanding  of  the  sacraments;  the theory of grace in relation to the
original and fallen nature of man; the issue concerning grace and good works, or
God's  justification  and  man's  merit,  in  the  achievement  of  sanctity and
salvation;  the  distinction  between  the everlasting perdition of Hell and the
expiatory  punishments  of  Purgatory all these fundamental theological problems
are involved in the consideration of sin and its consequences, both temporal and
eternal.  Some  of  these  problems are discussed in the chapters on MAN, ANGEL,
IMMORTALITY,  and  PUNISHMENT. Other matters, such as the classification of sins
according  to  the  distinction between spiritual and carnal, mortal and venial,
and  the enumeration of the various species of both mortal and venial sin in the
order  of  their  are  problems  of  moral theology. gravity, Though they belong
primarily  to  this  chapter,  they  are  also  related to the classification of
virtuesand vices, especially to the theory of the theological virtues; and among
the  theological  virtues,  especially  to  chanty,  which  is  the principle of
sanctity, even as pride is the principle of sin.

Of  all points in the consideration of sin, the distinction between original and
acquired  sin  is  perhaps  the  most  important,  not  only  because  inherited
sinfulness  is  conceived  as the predisposing cause of all other sins, but also
because  the  human  nature  corrupted  by  sin is conceived as fallen below the
perfection  of a purely natural man as well as below the state of grace in which
Adam  was  created.  As  Adam  had  gifts which made him superior to the natural
manimmortality,   infused  knowledge  and  freedom  from  error,  immunity  from
concupiscence,  exemption from labor and servility so the children of Adam, cast
out  of  Eden,  have  ingrained weaknesses which make them unable to achieve the
goods or attain the ends proportionate to their human nature.

According  to some theologians, the purely natural man, without either the gifts
of  grace  or  the  wounds of sin, has never existed. It is this mystery of man,
having  natural  aspirations  which  exceed  the  weakened  powers of his fallen
nature,  that  Pascal  seems  to  contemplate  in  all  his observations on "the
greatness  and  wretchedness  of  man" the "astonishing contradic- 6: SIN tions"
which  he thinks only the Christian religion explains. In the state in which men
now are, he writes, "there remains to them some feeble instinct of the happiness
of  their former state; and they are plunged in the evils of their blindness and
their  lust,  which have become their second nature." "As the result of original
justice,"  Aquinas  writes, "the reason had perfect hold over the lower parts of
the  soul, while reason itself was perfected by God in being subject to Him. Now
this  same  original justice was forfeited by the sin of our first parent ... so
that  all the powers of the soul are left, as it were, destitute of their proper
order, whereby they arc naturally directed to virtue. This destitution is called
a  wounding  of  nature. ... In so far as the reason is deprived of its order to
the  true, there is the wound of ignorance; in so far as the will is deprived of
Us  order  to the good, there is the wound of malice; in so far as the irascible
is  deprived of its order to the arduous, there is the wound of weakness; and in
so  far  as  the  concupisciblc  is  deprived  of its order to the delectable as
moderated by reason, there is the wound of concupiscence. Accordingly, these are
the  four wounds inflicted on the whole of human nature as a result of our first
parent's  sin."  Aquinas  rejects the supposition that "the entire good of human
nature  can  be  destroyed  by  sin,"  arguing  that what sin diminishes is "the
natural inclination to virtue, which is befitting to man from the very fact that
he  is  a  rational being." But "sin cannot entirely take away from man the fact
that  he  is  a  rational being, for then he would no longer be capable of sin."
Other  theologians  take  a  more  extreme view than Aquinas and Augustine. They
attribute  depravity  rather  than  weakness to human nature as a consequence of
original  sin.  "On the Calvinistic theory," Mill writes, "the one great offense
of  man  is self-will." Under the maxim that "whatever is not a duty, is a sin,"
men  are  left  with  no  choice.  "Human  nature being radically corrupt," Mill
continues,  "there  is  no  redemption  for any one until human nature is killed
within  him."  But,  according  to  Augustine and Aquinas, original sin does not
deprive  the individual man entirely of the power to cstab- 760 worth, though it
puts  him  in  need  of  lish  his  tion by the merit God's help to be worthy of
salvation.  Between Augustine and Aquin the one extreme which holds that men can
be  position,  according  savcd by God's grace alone, and the other ex- out good
works nor treme which supposes that men can win salva- will avail.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of sin: violation of divine law; disorder in man's relation to God

2. The kinds and degrees of sin
   2a. The distinction between original and actual sin
   2b. The distinction between spiritual and carnal sin
   2c. The distinction between mortal and venial sin
   (1) The classification and order of mortal sins
   (2) The classification and order of venial sins

3. The doctrine of original sin
   3a. The condition of       Adam before sin: his supernatural state of grace; his preter-
   natural gifts
   3b. The sin of Adam
   3c. The nature of fallen man in consequence of Adam's sin
   3d. The need for a mediator between God and man to atone for original sin
   3e. The remission of sin: baptism; the state of the unbaptized

4. Actual
or personal sin
   4a. The relation of original sin to actual sin
   4b. The causes and occasions of actual sin
   4c. Pride as the principle of sin: the tragic fault of hybris
   4<f.
   The consequences of actual sin: the loss of charity and grace
   4d. The   prevention and purging of sin: purification by sacrifice; the sacrament of
   penance; contrition, confession, and absolution
   The remorse of conscience and feelings of guilt: the psychogenesis and pathological ex-
   pression of the sense of sin

6. Guilt and the punishment of sin
   6a. Man's freedom in relation to responsibility and guilt for sin: divine predestina-
   tion or election
   6b. Collective responsibility for sin: the sins of the fathers
   6c. The temporal punishment of sin: divine scourges
   6d. The eternal punishment of sin: the everlasting perdition of the unrepentant in
   Hell
   6e. The purifying punishments of Purgatory

7. Grace and good works in relation to salvation from sin

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the Western World

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter

HOBBES. Philosophical

*

ment and Society, e PLUTARCH. "Of the Love of Wealth," in Moralia . The Elements
o AUGUSTINE. On Free Will, BK HI, CH 14 PART i, c 7

. On Baptism, Against the Donatists SPINOZA. Corresponden

.

Reply to Faustus, BK xxn (27) W. JAMES. The Varieti

. On the Merits and Remissions of Sins LECT vi-vn

. On the Grace of Christ and on Original Sin FREUD. Totem and Tabo

.

Against Two Letters ofthe Pelagians, BK iv, CH 7 . The Future of a

.

Of Marriage and Concupiscence, BK n (xxiv) AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK
HI, CH 139-

162; BK iv, CH 50-52 Ptrlp Aboth (Sayings

Qtiaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, Q 17;

. BENEDICT OF NURSIA. T

De Malo, QQ 2-5, 7-15 GREGORY THE GREAT. Mo

Summa Theologica, PART H-II, QQ 161-165

. SAADIA GAON. The Boof F. BACON. "Of Envy," in Essays TREATISE iv-v

7  4a-c; 362a ART n [11,934-941] 290b y of History, PART iv, dhers Karamazov, BK
vi,  ,  180a-191  :  y,  200b  crime  and vice, CE i, 8a-8b. AND EVIL 3f; MAN 's
atonement  for  3f; VIRTUE AND ce and good works, 4), 76(2). GION 3d; TEMtion to
divine  prernal,  see ETERNITY NT 2, 5d-5e(2); VIRTUE nd abnormal feelings , but
relevant  to the into two groups: on. works cited, consult of The Great Ideas. n
14  Rudiments  Concerning  Governf  Law, Natural and Politic, ce, xix, xxi es of
Religious Experience, o n Illusion ** of the Fathers), CH 4 (5)

he Rule rals, BK xxxi ( of Beliefs and Opinions,

CHAPTER 86 ANSELM OF CANTERBURY. Cur Deus Homo?

.  De  Conceptu Virginali et OriginalTh Peccato ABAILARD. Ethics (Scito Teipsum)
MAIMONIDES. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART HI,

CH  40-4 i FRANCIS OF ASSIST. The Rules BONAVENTURA. Breviloquium, PART HI, v R.
BACON. Opus Majus, PART vn ALBERTUS MAGNUS. Summa Theologiae, PART i,

Q  26,  MEMB  I, ART 2 (2) LANGLAND. Piers Plowman ALBO. The Boof( of Principles
(Sefer ha-lkfairim),

BK iv, CH 5-6 THOMAS A KEMPIS. The Imitation of Christ, BK i IGNATIUS OF LOYOLA.
Spiritual Exercises LUTHER. A Treatise on Christian Liberty

. The Schmalfyald Articles, PART m

. Table Talk CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK n,

CH 1-3, 6-17

, Commentaries on the Epistle of Paul the Apostle

to the Romans, CH 5 (12) SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xi (1-3), xix

MARLOWE.  The Tragical History of Doctor Faustus BAXTER. The Saints' Everlasting
Rest ]. TAYLOR. Of Holy Living

.

Of  Holy  Dying  RACINE.  Phedre MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la veritt, BK n
(i),

CH 7 (5) BUNYAN. Pilgrim's Progress

:  SIN  LEIBNITZ.  Discourse  on  Metaphysics,  xxx-xxxn  BOSSUET.  TraitS de la
concupiscence CLARKE. An Inquiry into the Cause and Origin ofEvil LAW. A Serious
Call  to  a  Devout  and  Holy  Life f. EDWARDS. The Great Christian Doctrine of
Original Sin Defended VOLTAIRE. "Conscience," "Original Sin," in A Philosophical
Dictionary COLERIDGE. The Rime of the Ancient Mariner SCHOPENHAUER. The World as
Will and Idea, VOL i,

BK iv (65) J. H. NEWMAN. Lectures on the Doctnne of Justification WHEWELL. The
Elements of Morality, BK n, CH 13- '7

KIERKEGAARD. The Concept of Dread The Sickness Unto Death, SECT n

,  HAWTHORNE.  The  Scarlet  Letter  BAUDELAIRE.  Flowers  of Evil FLAUBLRT. The
Temptation  of  Saint  Anthony NIETZSCHE. The Genealogy of Morals, n FRAZER. The
Golden  Bough,  PART n; PART vi; PART vn, CH 4-7 ROYCE. Studies of Good and Evil
PEGUY.  Men  and  Saints  (Mortal  Sin  and Leprosy) TENNANT. The Concept of Sin
JOYCE. A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man O'NEILL. Mourning Becomes Electra
TSANOFF.  The Nature of Evil NIEBUHR. The Nature and Destiny of Man, VOL i C. S.
LEWIS. The Screwtape Letters . Perelandra
