Chapter 88:

INTRODUCTION TN the language of the poets as well as in the discourse of the
philosophers, body and soul are correlative terms. Each affects the meaning of
the other. The words are used together in daily speech. Men who are unaware of,
or deny, the metaphysical and theological significance of having a soul,
nevertheless use the word "soul" with a sense of contrast to body, even if only
to refer to vague manifestations of spirit feelings and sympathies which seem to
be alien to the world of matter.

With few exceptions, traditional theories of the soul involve its distinction
from and relation to the body. Berkeley represents one of the major exceptions.
Denying the reality of matter, he conceives the soul as existing in and by
itself; souls or spirits differ from God as finite from infinite spiritual
beings. The something "which knows and perceives" and which "exercises divers
operations, as willing, imagining, remembering," Berkeley says, "is what I call
mind, spirit, soul, or myself." Berkeley, therefore, would not speak of himself
or other men as having souls, but rather as being souls. The other major
exception is exemplified by Lucretius. It is not that Lucretius denies soul as
Berkeley denies body. Nor does he deny that soul adds something to body which
differentiates living organisms from inorganic things. On the contrary, he
declares the mind to be "a part of man no whit less than hand and foot and eyes
are parts of the whole living being." Distinct from mind, soul is also part of a
living being. "Mind and soul are held in union one with the other, and form of
themselves a single nature," but whereas the mind is, as it were, the lord or
head of the whole body, "the rest of the soul, spread abroad throughout the
body, obeys and is moved at the will and inclination of the mind." But when
Lucretius refers to mind and soul as parts of the body, he means no more than is
implied in speaking of the hand and eye as parts of the body. "The nature of
mind and soul is bodily," he writes. Just as flesh and bones are composed of
atomic particles, so the mind is formed of atoms "exceeding small and smooth and
round," and the soul is "made of very tiny seeds linked together throughout
veins, flesh,and sinews." APART FROM THESE exceptions, the traditional
discussion of soul considers it as somehow conjoined with body to constitute a
whole of which it is the immaterial principle or part. Even those who, like
Descartes, define the soul as an immaterial substance, capable of existing by
itself, do not actually ascribe to the human soul complete independence of the
human body. Nor do the theologians who think of God as a purely spiritual being
and of angels as immaterial substances attribute soul to them. Precisely because
God and the angels do not have bodies, neither do they have souls. Whether
everything which has a body also has a soul is another question. It is variously
answered; but certainly those who, like Plato and Plotinus, speak of a
world-soul or a soul of the universe, confirm the point that soul is the
coprinciple or complement of body. The same point appears in theories of the
celestial bodies which conceive them as being alive and as therefore having
souls. Unfolding to Socrates the story of the creation, Timaeus says: "Using the
language of probability, we may say that the world became a living creature
endowed with soul and intelligence by the providence of God." To the world,
Timaeus explains, God "gave a body, smooth and even, having a surface in every
direction equidistant from the center, a body entire and perfect, and formed out
of perfect 791 792 bodies. And in the center, he put the soul which he diffused
throughout the body, making it also to be the exterior environment of it."
Comparing the magnetic force of the loadstone with the animation of a soul,
Gilbert says that "this one eminent property is the same which the ancients held
to be a soul in the heavens, in the globes, and in the stars, in sun and moon. .
. . The ancient philosophers ... all seek in the world a certain universal soul,
and declare the whole world to be endowed with a soul. Aristotle held that not
the universe isanimate, but the heavens only As for us," Gilbert writes, "we
deem the whole world animate, and all globes, stars, and this glorious earth,
too, we hold to be from the beginning by their own dcstinate souls governed . .
. Pitiable is the state of the stars, abject the lot of earth, if this high
dignity of soul is denied them, while it is granted to the worm, the ant, the
roach, to plants and morels; for in that case, worms, roaches, moths, were more
beauteous objects in nature and more perfect, inasmuch as nothing is excellent,
nor precious, nor eminent, that hath not a soul." On the question whether the
earth, each heavenly body, or the whole world is endowed with life,
intelligence, and soul, Kepler differs from Gilbert, Augustine from Plato and
Plotinus, Aquinas from Aristotle. Nevertheless, the many-sided controversy
indicates the traditional connection of soul with life and mind on the one hand,
and with animate or organic bodies on the other bodies which manifest certain
properties and tendencies to motion.

THE MAJOR ISSUES CONCERNING soul seem to follow from these traditional
associations. Does the soul which is somehow conjoined with a body exist as an
immaterial substance or principle, in such a way that the being composed of body
and soul consists of two distinct substances or entities, united as related
parts of a whole ? Or is the soul the substantial form of an organic body, with
the consequence that the form and matter together constitute a single composite
substance, which is the living thing? In the latter alternative the unity of
soul and body, according to Aristotle, is like that of "the wax and the shape
given to it by the die," On either conception of soul and its relation to body
or matter, further questions arise concerning the soul's existence apart from
the body. Does it exist before being united to the body ? Docs it exist after
the ion is dissolved ? How does it exist when it exists separately or apart from
matter? For those, like Lucretius, who conceive the soul as itself composed of
material particles within the framework of the body, such questions can have
little meaning. For those, like Plato and Descartes, who conceive the soul as an
immaterial entity having being in its own right, these questions can be
immediately answered in favor of the soul's capacity for separate existence.
Only when the soul is conceived as a form which, together with matter,
constitutes the substance of a living body, does there seem to be both meaning
and difficulty to the question whether the soul continues to endure separately
when a plant, an animal, or a man dies, t.e. t when such composite substances
decompose. If the individual soul ceases to be when the body with which it is
somehow united perishes, it is as mortal as the body. The traditional theories
of personal immortality such as the Platonic myths concerning the transmigration
or reincarnation of souls, and the Christian doctrine of man's immortal soul,
specially created for union with the body, but destined to survive its
separation from the body are theories which involve conceptions of the soul as
capable of self-subsistence. The controversy over these doctrines is dealt with
in the chapter on IMMORTALITY. Here are we concerned to see how different
implications for immortality necessarily follow from various theories of the
soul. Still other issues concerning soul arise in connection with other
chapters. For example, the question whether soul is to be found only in living
things, or only in animals but not in plants, or in man alone, is discussed in
the chapters on LIFE AND DEATH and on MIND. If soul, on any conception, is the
principle or cause of life, then the distinction between animate and inanimate
bodies is identical with the distinction between things which have and things
which do not have a soul. If, furthermore, the kind of life possessed by a
vegetable or plant is radically different from animal life, and that in turn
from human life, then souls, too, may have CHAPTER 88 to be differentiated in
kind according to the mode of life or the range of vital powers of which each
type is the principle.

Some writers, however, tend to equate "soul" with "mind" or "understanding."
When, as by Descartes, soul is identified with rational soul or thinking
substance, it is usually attributed to man alone. Soul is then not thought
necessary to explain the phenomena of life in plants and animals, at least in no
sense of soul which implies either an incorporeal or a formal principle; that
is, anything beyond the complex interaction of organic parts. Other authors,
like Locke, who conceive soul or understanding not merely in terms of rational
thought, but also in terms of sensation, imagination, and memory, may exclude
plants, but not animals, from the possession of soul or mind. Descartes takes
notice of these ambiguities in the traditional use of the word "soul." Probably
because "men in the earliest times," he writes, "did not distinguish in us that
principle in virtue of which we are nourished, grow, and perform all those
operations which are common to us with the brutes . . . from that by which we
think, they called both by the single name soul then, perceiving the distinction
between nutrition and thinking, they called that which thinks mind, believing
also that this was the chief part of the soul. But I, perceiving that the
principle by which we are nourished is wholly distinct from that by means of
which we think have declared that the name jow/when used for both is equivocal;
and I say that, when soul is taken to mean the primary actuality or chief
essence of man, it must be understood to apply only to the principle by which we
think, and I have called it by the name mind as often as possible to avoid
ambiguity; for I consider the mind not as part of the soul, but as the whole of
that soul which thinks." In another place, he uses the word "soul" to stand for
"that subtle fluid styled the animal spirits" which, pervading the organs of
brute animals, accounts for their peculiar type of animation. "We can recognize
no principle of motion in them beyond the disposition of their organs and the
continual discharge of the animal spirits that are produced by the beat of the
heart as it rarefies the blood." Soul in this sense is not to be confused with
"the incorporeal and : SOUL spiritual nature of man's soul." It is "something
corporeal, of a fine structure and subtle, spread throughout the external body,
and the principle of all sensation, imagination, and thought. Thus there are
three grades of being, Body, the Corporeal or soul, and Mind or spirit." IN THE
OPENING PAGES of his treatise On the Soul, Aristotle says that "to attain any
assured knowledge about the soul is one of the most difficult things in the
world." The difficulty seems to apply both to what the soul is and to whether it
exists. The questions are connected. Even Lucretius, who regards the soul as
material in nature, does not claim to know its existence by direct observation.
It is not, like the body itself or like other parts of the body, a sensible
object. It must be inferred to exist.

Just as the existence of unobscrvable atoms is inferred in order to explain the
constitution and change of all natural objects, so the existence of soul is
inferred in order to explain the constitution and motion of living things. Those
who conceive the soul as immaterial whether as substance, principle, or form
would seem to face an even greater difficulty in establishing its existence and
in describing its nature. Admittedly, the soul as some sort of immaterial being
cannot be discovered by observation and experiment. The alternatives, which
represent traditional solutions of the problem, seem to include the soul's
reflexive knowledge of its own existence, inferential knowledge about the soul
based on observed facts, various religious beliefs concerning the nature and
destiny of the soul, and the postulation of the soul's existence on practical,
not theoretic, grounds. Not all writers agree with Aristotle that the soul is an
object difficult to know, or with Kant that it is absolutely impossible for us
to reach any sound theoretic conclusions about the soul's existence. Descartes,
for example, says that if there arc "any persons who are not sufficiently
persuaded of the existence of God and of the soul by the reasons which I have
brought forward, I wish them to know that all other things of which they perhaps
think themselves more assured (such as possessing a body, and that there are
stars and an earth and so on) are less certain." The argument for the soul's
existence which precedes this remark is the famous Cogito, ergo sum "I think;
therefore, I am." From the fact that, in the very act of doubting the existence
of everything else, he could not doubt that he was doubting, and hence thinking,
Descartes assures himself of his own existence, or, more precisely, of the
existence of himself as a thinking being. "I knew," he writes, "that I was a
substance the whole essence or nature of which and that for its existence there
is no is to think, need of any place, nor does it depend on any material thing;
so that this 'me,' that is to say, the soul by which I am what I am, is entirely
distinct from body, and is even more easy to know than is the latter; and even
if the body were not, the soul would not cease to be what it is." Locke appears
to agree that "if I doubt of all other things, that very doubt makes me perceive
my own existence, and will not suffer me to doubt of that. ... I have as certain
perception of the existence of the thing doubting," he goes on, "as of that
thought which I call doubt. Experience then convinces us that we have an
intuitive knowledge of our own existence, and an internal infallible perception
that we are." But Locke does not turn the proposition that a thinking being
exists into the assertion that a spiritual being, the soul as an immaterial
substance, exists. "We have the idea of matter and thinking," he writes, "but
possibly shall never be able to know whether any mere material being thinks or
no; it being impossible for us, by the contemplation of our own ideas, without
revelation, to discover whether Omnipotency has not given to some systems of
matter fitly disposed, a power to perceive and think, or else joined and fixed
to matter so disposed, a thinking immaterial substance: it being, in respect of
our notions, not much more remote from our comprehension to conceive that God
can, if he pleases, superadd to matter a faculty of thinking, than that he
should superadd to it another substance with a faculty of thinking." For Locke,
however, our idea of soul is as clear as our idea of body. "Our idea of body,"
he says, "is an extended, solid substance capable of communicating motion by
impulse; and our idea of soul, as an immaterial spirit, is of a substance that
thinks, and has a power of exciting AS motion in body, by willing or thought ...
I know that people whose thoughts are immersed in matter, and have so subjected
their minds to their senses, that they seldo reflect on anything beyond them,
are apt to say, that they cannot comprehend a thinking thing; which, perhaps, is
true: but I affirm, when they consider it well, they can no more comprehend an
extended thing." And in another place, he adds: "If this notion of immaterial
spirit may have, perhaps, some difficulties in it, not easy to be explained, we
have, therefore, no more reason to deny or doubt the existence of such spirits,
than we have to deny or doubt the existence of body, because the notion of body
is cumbered with some difficulties, very hard, and, perhaps, impossible to be
explained or understood by us." Berkeley differs from Locke not only in
maintaining that we have no idea of matter at all, but also in holding that, if
we use the word "idea" for sense-impressions or the images derived from them, we
can have no idea of soul or spiritual substance. But we can, he thinks, form
what he calls a "notion" of the soul, which grasps the meaning of the word
"spirit" as signifying "that which thinks, wills, or perceives." He differs from
Locke further in proportion as he tends to agree with Descartes, asserting that
the existence of a spiritual substance, a thinking being, necessarily follows
from the undeniable existence of thinking itself. For both Descartes and
Berkeley, the immortality of the soul can be directly concluded from our
knowledge of the soul's existence and nature. "The soul," writes Berkeley, "is
indivisible, incorporeal, unextended, and it is consequently incorruptible.
Nothing can be plainer than that the motions, changes, decays and dissolutions
which we hourly see befall natural bodies . . . cannot possibly affect an
active, simple, uncompoundcd substance; such a being therefore is indissoluble
by the force of nature; that is to say, 'the soul of man is naturally
immortal,'" The arguments in Plato's Phaedo for the proper existence of the soul
before it joins a particular body, and for its existence after it leaves the
body to dwell apart before entering another body arguments, in short, for the
CHAPTER 88: soul's immortality seem to stem from a slightly different principle.
It is not merely that the soul is simple or uncompounded and hence indissoluble,
or that the knowledge we have of the absolute ideas requires us to posit a
principle of knowledge other than the bodily senses which can apprehend only
changing things. In addition, Socrates argues that the knowcr must be like the
known. If it is the soul which knows the unchangeable and eternal essences, it
must be as unchangeable and eternal as they are.

When the soul uses "the body as instrument of perception," Socrates says, it is
"then dragged by the body into the region of the changeable ... But when
returning into herself she reflects, then she passes into the other world, the
region of purity, and eternity, and immortality, and unchangeableness, which are
her kindred."

AGAINST ANY FORM of argument for the existence and immortality of the human soul
which proceeds from the nature of our thought or knowledge, Kant takes the
position that the premises do not warrant the conclusion. He claims to expose
the fallacies in what he calls the "paralogism of a rational psychology." The
"I" of the Cogito, ergo sum may be the necessary logical subject of all our
judgments, but this does not give us intuitive knowledge of a really existing
substance which has the attributes of simplicity, spirituality, and permanence
or immortality. "In all our thinking," Kant writes, "the I is the subject in
which our thoughts are inherent; nor can that I ever be used as a determination
of any other thing. Thus everybody is constrained to look upon himself as the
substance, and on thinking as the accident of his being."

But, he goes on, "though the I exists in all thoughts, not the slightest
intuition is connected with that representation by which it might be
distinguished from other objects of intuition. . . . Hence it follows that in
the first syllogism of transcendental psychology reason imposes upon us an
apparent knowledge only, by representing the constant logical subject as the
knowledge of the real subject in which that knowledge inheres. Of that subject,
however, we have not and cannot have the slightest knowledge. ... In spite of
this, the proposition that the soul is a substance may well be allowed to stand,
if only we see that this concept cannot help us on in the least or teach us any
of the ordinary conclusions of rational psychology, as, for instance, the
everlasting continuance of the soul amid all changes and even in death; and that
it therefore signifies a substance in idea only, and not in reality." Similarly
with respect to the simplicity of the soul, Kant contends that the absolute, but
merely logical, unity of apperception or thought is illegitimately converted
into the absolute unity of a real substance. The proposition, I am a simple
substancek he declares, "teaches us nothing at all with reference to myself as
an object of experience." Its only value is to enable us "to distinguish the
soul from all matter, and thus to exempt it from that decay to which matter is
at all times subject." To this extent, rational psychology may "guard our
thinking self against the danger of materialism." The concept of the soul as an
immaterial and simple substance may thus function regulatively, but we deceive
ourselves with the illusion of knowledge when we treat that concept as if it had
intuitive content when, as he says, we change "thoughts into things." Kant does
not deny that the "I" is substantial in concept or simple in concept. Though
these propositions arc "incontestably true," he says, "nevertheless, what we
really wish to know of the soul, becomes by no means known to us in that way,
because all these predicates are with regard to intuition non-valid, entailing
no consequences with regard to objects of experience, and therefore entirely
empty." The existence and immortality of the soul is, for Kant, a postulate or
demand of the practical reason. "Of the psychic substance, regarded as an
immortal soul, it is absolutely impossible to obtain any proof from a
theoretical point of view," but if such an object must be thought a priori in
order for "pure practical reason to be used as duty commands/' it becomes what
Kant calls "matter of faith." Immortality seems to him rationally required as
the practically necessary condition for the fulfillment of the moral law and the
endless progress of the soul toward holiness of will. William James questions
even such practical arguments for the soul. The imperishability of a simple
substance does not, he thinks, guarantee "immortality of a sort we carefor."
Nor, following Locke, does it seem to him that a substantial soul is required
for personal identity and moral responsibility. Writing as an empirical or
scientific psychologist, who feels "entirely free to discard the word Soul"
because he finds the concept useless "so far as accounting for the actually
verified facts of conscious experience goes," James tells those who may find
"any comfort in the idea" that they are "perfectly free to continue to believe
in it; for our reasonings have not established the nonexistence of the Soul;
they have only proved its superfluity for scientific purposes."

JAMES CONCLUSION THAT "the substantial Soul . . . explains nothing and
guarantees nothing," along with the arguments of Kant and Locke, may not apply
to the soul conceived as the principle of life rather than as the agent of
thought, or to the soul conceived as the form of an organic body rather than as
a spiritual being associated with or somehow imprisoned in the body. Precisely
because this other conception affirms reality of soul as something other than a
complete substance, precisely because it applies to plants and animals as well
as men, this other conception of soul would seem to require a different sort of
criticism. The Greek and Latin words psyche and anima which we translate by
"soul" seem to have life as their primary connotation. In the Cratylus, Socrates
suggests that "those who first used the name psyche meant to express that the
soul when in the body is the source of life, and gives the power of breath and
revival." Other dialogues express the Greek conception of the living thing as
that which has the power of self-motion, and ascribe this power to the soul as
source. In the Phaedo, for example, Socrates asks, "What is that the inherence
of which will render the body alive?" to which Cebes answers, "Soul," and agrees
with Socrates' further statement that "whatever the soul takes possession of, to
that she comes bearing life." In the Laws, Cleinias having identified the power
of self-motion with life, the Athenian Stranger gains his assent to the
proposition that whatever has life or self-motion also has soul.

AS To this much Aristotle also agrees. "What has soul in it," he says, "differs
from what has not, in that the former displays life"; to which he adds that
"living may n_..n thinking or perception or local movement, or movement in the
sense of nutrition and growth," so that we must "think of plants also as
living," and as having souls. But Aristotle goes further. In defining soul as
the cause of life, and in differentiating three kinds of souls vegetative,
sensitive, and rational according to the vital powers manifested by the
activities of plants, animals, and men, he uses his general theory of corporeal
substances to state precisely what the soul is and how it is related to the
body. Corporeal substances arc, according to him, all composite of two
principles, form and matter. "What is called matter is potentiality, what is
called form, actuality." As exemplified in works of art, wood is the matter
which has the potentiality for a certain shape and a certain function that is
the actuality or form of a chair. In the case of natural things, that which
determines "the essential whatness" of a body is its form or, as Aristotle
sometimes says, "its formulablc essence." If living things are essentially
distinct from inert bodies, as Aristotle supposes them to be, then the forms
which determine their essences must be different from the forms of inanimate
substances. It is this difference in forms which Aristotle appropriates the word
"soul" to signify. In each kind of living thing, the soul is the substantial
form or "the first grade of actuality of a natural body having life potentially
in it." He speaks of the first grade of actuality here to distinguish merely
being alive or bcsouled from the various acts which, as operations of the vital
powers, constitute living. If an axe or an eye had a soul, it would consist of
its power to cut or to see, not in its actually cutting or seeing. While
nourishing or thinking "is actuality corresponding to the cutting and the
seeing, the soul is actuality in the sense corresponding to the power of sight
and the power in the tool ... As the pupil plus the power of sight constitutes
the eye, so the soul plus the body constitutes the animal." From this conception
of soul as the form or actuality of a living substance, "it indubitably CHAPTER
88: follows,*' Aristotle says, "that the soul is inseparable from its body, or
at any rate certain parts of it are for the actuality of some of them is nothing
but the actualities of their bodily parts." Where Plato holds that the soul is
prior in existence to the body, Aristotle holds that soul and body come into
existence together when the organism is generated. Where Plato attributes an
independent mode of being to the soul, distinct in character from that of
bodies, Aristotle says that "the soul cannot be without a body. Yet it cannot be
a body; it is not a body, but something relative to a body. That is why it is in
a body and a body of a definite kind," being nothing more than "the actuality or
formulable essence of something that possesses the potentiality of being
besouled."

FURTHER CONSEQUENCES follow from these conflicting conceptions of soul. In the
Timaeus, Plato advances the view that only the lowest grade of soul the plant
soul is mortal, in contrast to the souls of animals and men. Aristotle would
seem to attribute mortality to every grade of soul. If any exception is to be
made, it is only for the human soul because it involves the power of rational
thought. Mind or the power to think, he writes, "seems to be a widely different
kind of soul, differing as what is eternal from what is perishable." The
critical point is whether thinking, unlike all other psychic powers, is an
activity of the soul alone. For the most part, "there seems to be no case in
which the soul can act or be acted upon without involving the body. Thinking. .
. seems most probable exception; but," the Aristotle adds, "if this too proves
to be a form of imagination or to be impossible without imagination, it too
requires a body as the condition of its existence. If there is any way of acting
or being acted upon proper to soul, soul will be capable of separate existence;
if there is none, its separate existence is impossible." there any way of acting
or being acted Is upon proper to soul? Aristotle seems to answer this question
affirmatively when he says that "insofar as the realities it knows are capable
of being separated from their matter, so is it also with the powers of mind." On
one interpreta- SOUL tion this means that the mind or intellect is as immaterial
in its mode of operation as some of its objects are in their mode of being; with
the further consequence that what is capable of acting apart from body is also
able to exist apart from body. But whether Aristotle's further statement that
"mind set free from its present conditions ... is immortal and eternal" applies
to the intellect alone or to the rational soul as a whole, has been disputed by
various interpreters. Adopting Aristotle's conception of soul as the form which
is the actuality of life in an organic body, Aquinas for one seems to think that
the immortality of a rational soul can be demonstrated from the special
character of its intellectual powers. A theory of the soul which regarded it as
a simple and incorporeal substance, or as having a being independent of the
body, would seem to harmonize more readily with the Christian belief in the
human soul's special creation and its individual survival after death. But
Aquinas rejects such a theory on the ground that then man would be two
substances or two beings, not one or else if the human person is identified ;
with the soul, man would be a soul using a body rather than a single substance
of composite nature.The doctrine of body and soul which holds them to be related
as matter and form, preserves the unity of man and, in the opinion of Aquinas,
fits the way in which man learns through his senses, experiences passions, and,
in thinking, depends upon imagination. But though he admits that men cannot
think without images, Aquinas also insists, contrary to Locke, that thinking,
insofar as it involves abstract concepts, cannot be performed by matter. To make
matter think is beyond even the power of God. Unlike nourishing or sensing,
understanding is not and cannot be "the act of a body, nor of any corporeal
power." This theory that the acts of understanding by which the intellect
abstracts and receives universal concepts cannot be accounted for by the motions
of the brain is further discussed in the chapter on UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR.
Here we are concerned simply to note that, for Aquinas, the fact that the
concepts with which men think are universal, means that they are abstracted from
matter; and the fact that they are abstracted from matter means that the THE
GREAT I various acts of understanding must also be immaterialthat is, not acts
of bodily organs like the brain. To these premises Aquinas adds one further
principle, namely, that a thing's mode of being is indicated by its mode of
operation. In these terms he concludes that, since the intelJect has "an
operation per se apart from the body," the human soul, which is called rational
because of its power of understanding, can have a being per se apart from the
body. Hence it is "something incorporeal and subsistent." Nevertheless,
according to Aquinas, though the human soul can subsist separately, it belongs
to its nature to be embodied, that is, to be the form of a material substance.
"The soul, as part of human nature," he writes, "has its natural perfection only
as united to the body. Therefore it would have been unfitting for the soul to be
created without the body." Furthermore, if the entire nature of man were to be a
soul the soul making "use of the body as an instrument, or as a sailor uses a
ship" there would be no need for the resurrection of the body after the Last
Judgment. The Christian dogma of the resurrected body more properly accords, in
Aquinas' view, with a conception of soul "united to the body as form to matter";
for, as he says in another place, "if it is natural to the soul to be united to
the body, it is unnatural for it to be without a body, and as long as it is
without a body it is deprived of its natural perfection." In the consideration
of the relation of body and soul, an opposite estimation of the body's role goes
with an opposite theory of the soul's nature. Socrates, in the Phaedo, describes
the body as the soul's prison-house, or worse, the

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
i .
Conceptions of soul
 0a. Soul as the ordering principle of the universe: the world soul and its relation to
 the intellectual principle; the souls of the heavenly bodies
 0b. Soul as the principle of self-motion or life in living things: soul as the form of
 an organic body
 0c. Soul as the principle of distinction between thinking and non-thinking beings:
 the identity or distinction between soul and mind or intellect
 0d. Soul as the principle of personal identity: the doctrine of the self; the empirical
 and the transcendental ego

2. The analysis of the powers of the soul
 2a. The distinction between the soul and its
 powers or acts
 2b. The order, connection, and
 interdependence of the parts of the soul: the id, ego,
 and super-ego in the structure of the
 psyche
 2c. The kinds of soul and the modes of life:
 vegetative, sensitive, and rational souls
 and their special powers
 (1) The vegetative powers: the powers proper to the plant soul
 (2) The sensitive powers: the powers proper to the animal soul
 (3) The rational powers: the powers proper to the human soul
 3.
 The immateriality of the soul
 2d. The soul as an immaterial principle, form, or substance
 2e. The immateriality of the human soul
 in comparison with the
 materiality of the
 plant and animal soul: the intellect as an incorporeal power
 2f. The relation of soul and body: the relation of formal and material principles, or
 of spiritual and corporeal substances
 2g. The denial
 of soul as an immaterial principle, form, or substance: the atomic
 theory of the soul
 2h. The corporeal or phenomenal manifestation of disembodied souls as ghosts,
 2i. or spirits

4. The being of the soul
 4a. The unity of the
 human soul: the human mode of the vegetative and sensitive
 powers
 4b. The issue concerning
 the self-subsistence or immortality of the human soul: its
 existence or capacity for existence in separation from the human body
 4c. The origin
 of the human soul: its separate creation; its emanation or derivation
 from the world soul
 4<f.
 The life of the soul apart from the body
 (1) The doctrine of transmigration
 or perpetual reincarnation
 (2) Comparison of separated
 souls with men and angels
 (3) The need of the soul
 for its body: the dogma of the body's resurrection for
 the soul's perfection
 (4) The contamination
 of the soul by the body: the purification of the soul by
 release from the body
 Our knowledge of the soul and its powers
 4d. The soul's knowledge of itself by reflection
 on its acts: the soul as a transcenden-
 tal or noumenal object; the paralogisms of rational psychology
 4e. The concept of the soul
 in empirical psychology: experimental knowledge of the
 soul

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions of the notion of a world soul and of the
theory that th

have souls, see ASTRONOMY 8b; WORLD la.

Another consideration of the soul as the principle of life, see ANIMAL

and for other considerations of the soul as identical with mind or i

ple of thought, see MIND 1b-1d, 1f.

The problem of personal identity, see ONE AND MANY 3b(5) SAME AND OTHE

;

Other discussions of the parts or powers of the soul, and for discussi

tinction of several kinds of soul, see ANIMAL i-1c(2); LIFE AND DEAT

4-53; SENSE ra, 2a-2c.

The treatment of specific powers of the soul and of their relation to

3-3d, 5-6c; EMOTION i-1a, 2-2C, 43; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION i-1d; MIN

1c-1f, 1g(2); ONE AND MANY 3b(5), 43; OPPOSITION 43; SENSE la-1d, 3-

'-3 b '

The controversy over the immateriality of the soul and its relation to

1c; BEING 7b(2), 7b(4); ELEMENT 5e-5f; FORM 2c-2c(i), 2d; LIFE AND D

33- 3c; MATTER 2d, 33, 4c-4d; MECHANICS 4c; MIND 2a-2e; ONE AND MANY

for the related controversy over the immortality of the soul, see IM

METAPHYSICS 2d.

Other discussions of the transmigration of souls, see IMMORTALITY 53.

Theories about the state and operations of the soul in separation from

IMMORTALITY 5b; MAN 3b; MIND 46; and for the doctrine of the resurre

sec GOD yg; IMMORTALITY 5g.

Other discussions relevant to the spiritual dignity of human nature wh

to be treated as ends, see JUSTICE 6, 6c; LIBERTY la; SLAVERY 2d, 3d

The nature and problems of psychology as the science of the soul or of

53(6); MAN 2a-2b(4); MIND 6; 3nd for discussions relevant to the dis

tionsTh and empirical, or philosophical and scientific psychology, se

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy of the Western Wor

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divide

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collect

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of th

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapte

DESCARTES. The Princi

*

7-8, 11-12, 52-53, PLUTARCH. "Concerning the Procreation of the HOBBES.
Concerning Bo

Soul, as Discoursed in Timaeus," in Moralia BERKELEY. Three Dialo AUGUSTINE. On
the Immortality of the Soul Philonous

. The Magnitude of the Soul HUME. A Treatise of H

. The Soul and Its Origin SECT v-vi AQUINAS. On Being and Essence, CH iv .

Of the Immor

. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK n, CH 56-90; .

Of Suicide

BK iv, en 79-95 KANT. Prolegomena to

. On Spiritual Creatures, \ 1 1 46-49

.

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, Q 19;

De Anima, AA 1-2, 6-15, 17-21

. The Unicity of the Intellect, n EPICURUS. Letter to H DANTE. Convivio (The
Banquet), THIRD TREATISE, TERTULLIAN. A Treatis

CH 5-8 G REGORY OF NYSS A. O e heavenly bodies la; LIFE AND DEATH 1-2; ntellect
and as the princiR 1b. H 3-3k- MAN i-1c, ons relevant to the disone another, see
DESIRE D 13-13(4), 36; WILL the body, see ANIMAL EATH 2; MAN 34); and MORTALITY
2-3 b; the body, see ANGEL 4; ction of the body, ich requires all men ; WILL 73.
man, see KNOWLEDGE e PHYSICS 2; SCIENCE 1c. tinction between rald, but relevant
to the d into two groups: ion. e works cited, consult r of The Great Ideas. ples
of Philosophy, PART i, 62-65; PART iv, 196-197 dy, PART n, en u gues Between
llylas and uman Nature, BK i, PART iv, tality of the Soul Any Future Metaphysic,
par ** '

erodotus e on the Soul the Soul and the Resurrection THE GREAT I PROCLUS. The
Elements of Theology, (N) SAADIA GAON. The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,

TREATISE VI-VII ALBERTUS MAGNUS. De Natura et Origine Animae

On the Intellect and the Intelligible, TREATISE

.

i-n MELANCHTHON. Commentarius de Anima JOHN OF THE CROSS. Spiritual Canticle

Dar{ Night of the Soul

.

The Living Plume of Love

. SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xin (14),

xxxiv (5)

BURTON. The Anatomy of Melancholy, PART i,

SECT I, MHMB II, SUB-SECT 5-I I JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus
Thomisttcns, Philo sophia Naturalis, PART iv, QQ 1-12

MARVJ-LL. Dialogue Between the Soul and the Body MALhBRANciiE. DC la recherche
de la verite, BK i, CH 10 (i, 3)

Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, i

.

LEIBNIT/. Discourse on Metaphysics, xxxm-xxxiv .

Philosophical Worlds, CH 12 (A New System of

the Interaction of Substances), 13 (The Reply of

M. Voucher Concerning the Interaction of Substances),23 (Considerations on the
Doctrines of a

Universal Spirit), 34 (The Principles of Nature and

ofGnuc)

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

BK IV, CH )
.

Monadology, par 19-28

LAMMTRIL. Uistoire naturelle de I'ame LAMETTRIE. Man a Machine VOLTAIRE. "Soul,"
in A Philosophical Dictionary HELVETIUS. Traite de I* esprit

. A Treatise on Man SCHF.LLING. Von der Weltseele EMERSON. "The Over-Soul," in
Essays, i GRATRY. Philosophic. De la connaissance de I'dme BAIN. Mind and Body
CLIFFORD. "Body and Mind," in VOL n, Lectures

and Essays LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK n-ni

.

Metaphysics, BK HI, CH i

.Outlines of Psychology FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART n; PART in, CH 7;

PART V, CH 1 6; PART VII, CH IO-I I BRADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH
9-10;

BK n, CH 23

. Collected Essays, VOL i (20) VONIER. The Human Soul and Its Relations with

Other Spirits DRIESCH. Mind and Body BERGSON. Matter and Memory, CH 4

.

Mind-Energy, CH 2 WHITEHLAD. Religion in the Making, CH 3

. Adventures of Ideas, CH 2 B. RUSSELL. Religion and Science, CH 5 JUNG. Modern
Man in Search of a Soul

.

Psychology and Religion SANTA YANA. Scepticism and Animal Faith, CH 24, 26

. The Realm of Matter, CH 8-9

. The Realm of Spirit, CH 1-3
