Chapter  89: SPACE INTRODUCTION the level of our everyday observations, ON space
and  time  seem  to  be the obvious, the common, and the connected properties of
physical  things.  We  distinguish  things from one another by their position in
space, as we mark happenings by the date of their occurrence. The where and when
of  a  thing  is  often used to identify it, for it is generally agreed that two
bodies  cannot occupy the same place at the same time, and that at the same time
two  distinct  places  cannot  be  occupied  by  the  same  body. According to a
theologian  like  Aquinas,  these  limitations  of  space and time apply even to
bodiless  things,  i.e.,  to  angels.  "An  angel and a body are said to be in a
place," he writes, "in quite a different sense."

Whereas  a  body is in the place which contains it, "an angel is said to be in a
corporeal  place by application of the angelic power ... not as being contained,
but as somehow containing it." It follows, nevertheless, that at a given time an
angel  "is  not  everywhere,  nor in several places, but in only one place." Nor
does  the  incorporeality of angels permit more than one angel to be at the same
time  in the same place. According to the manner in which an angel is at a place
by  the  action of his power "there can be only one angel in one place," Aquinas
declares, even as there can be only one body in one place at a time.

Location  or  position  in  space,  and spatial relationships such as higher and
lower,  nearer  and  farther, are so familiar and intelligible that they provide
terms  of  reference whereby men speak metaphorically of the moral hierarchy and
spiritual distances. The whole of Dante's Divine Comedy, for example, involves a
spatial  metaphor  which  sets  forth  the  gradations of sin and the degrees of
blessedness in terms of places beneath the earth and in the heavens above. As he
mounts  from  sphere to sphere in Para- dise, Dante meets Piccarda Donati in the
Heaven  of  the  Moon. She explains to him that this place "which appears so far
down,"  is  assigned  to  those who have violated their vows in some particular.
Dante  wonders  why  she  and the others do not "desire a more exalted place, in
order  to  see  more."  Piccarda replies: "Brother, virtue of charity quiets our
will, and makes us wish only for that which we have, and quickens not our thirst
for  aught  else.  .  .'.  So  that as we arc, from seat to seat throughout this
realm,  to  all  the  realm  is pleasing, as to the King who inwills us with His
will;  and  His  will is our peace." This speech of Piccarda's makes it clear to
Dante  "how  everywhere  in Heaven is Paradise, even if the grace of the Supreme
Good  does  not  there  rain  down  in one measure." These different measures of
beatitude  in  the  diffusion  of  God's  love  and light are represented by the
celestial  spheres  from  the earth-adjacent moon to the Crystalline Heaven, the
outermost  bound  of  the physical universe, of which Dante says that it "has no
other  Where  than in the Divine Mind." WHEN THE WHOLE EXPANSE of physical space
or  the  boundary  of  the  universe  is  considered,  Newton no less than Dante
conceives the omnipresence and eternity of God as that which somehow encompasses
all  space and time. God "is not duration or space," Newton writes at the end of
the  Principles,  "but He endures and is . . present .and by existing always and
everywhere, He constitutes duration and space." In the concluding queries of the
Optics,  Newton  appears  to  think of infinite space as the Divine Sensorium in
which  all  things  are at once present to God, who "being in all places is more
able  by His will to move the bodies within His boundless uniform sensorium, and
thereby  to  form and reform the parts of the Universe, than 811 812 THE GREAT I
We  are by our will to move the parts of our own bodies/* The physicist does not
have  to turn theologian, however, to be confronted with the mysteries of space.
Even  without the modern complication of the relation of its three dimensions to
time  as  a  fourth dimension, the physical concept of space raises difficulties
for analysis.

In  the  tradition  of  western thought conflicting definitions of space seem to
result from a fundamental difference in the object being definedwhether it is an
inseparable  property of bodies, perhaps even identical with unformed matter, or
a reality apart from the bodies which move and have their being in it. Sometimes
this  difference  is  signified  by a difference between the meaning of the word
"place"  or  "extension"  and  the  meaning  of  "space."  It appears also to be
involved in the contrast between filled space and empty space (i.e., the void or
vacuum); and it bears some relation to Aristotle's distinction between space and
place,  and  to  Newton's  distinction  between absolute and relative space. The
controversial  character of space in physical theory may be appreciated in terms
of  these  oppositions in meaning, and the issues which they raise. In addition,
physical  theory  is  confronted  with the problem of action-at-a-distance (/..,
action  through  a  void  or  through  an  ethereal  medium), the problem of the
infinity  of space (or the question of a bounded or unbounded universe), and the
distinction between one physical space and the variety of geometrical spaces.

Space,  which  at  first  seems  easily  apprehended by sense and susceptible to
measurement,  becomes  upon  examination  so  subtle as to be almost a vanishing
object.  Reason finds it difficult to say precisely what space is in itself, and
how  it  is  related  to  matter and motion. Even the familiar space of ordinary
sense-perception  seems  to  have  its  puzzles.  A  psychologist  like fames is
concerned  with  how the different fields of touch, vision, and hearing coalesce
to  form  the single space of our experience; and in dealing with the process by
which  we learn to perceive the spatial manifold of positions and directions, he
cannot  avoid  the  issue  of  innate  as  opposed to acquired space-perception.
PLATO'S  THEORY  OF  SPACE  is  set  forth in the Timaeus as part of "the likely
story"  which  TimaeUs  tells  about  the  prr  'uction  and constitution of the
universe,  Tne sensible things which come into being and pes away are, according
to  him,  patterned  after  the eternal forms. To the eternal patterns and their
copies  in the world of change, Timaeus finds it necessary to add a third factor
in order to account for the physical elements and their generation. This factor,
he  says, is "difficult to explain and dimly seen. ... It is the receptacle, and
in a manner the nurse, of all generation." In contrast to the elements which are
perpetually  changing into and out of one another, the receptacle "never departs
from her own nature, and never in any way assumes a form like that of any of the
things  which enter into her. . . . The forms which enter into and go out of her
are  the  likenesses  of  real  existences  modelled  after  their patterns in a
wonderful  and  inexplicable manner." Timaeus distinguishes the three principles
as that which conies to be and passes away in the process of generation, that in
which  the  generation takes place, and that which the generated thing resembles
and  which  is its source. He likens the receptacle or "receiving principle to a
mother,  the  source  to  a father, and the intermediate nature to a child," and
adds  that  "if  the  model is to take every variety of form, then the matter in
which  the  model  is fashioned will not be duly prepared, unless it is formless
and  free  from  the  impress  of  any  of those shapes which it is hereafter to
receive from without. . Wherefore, that which . . is to receive all forms should
have  no  form.  . . . The mother and receptacle of all created, visible, and in
any  way  sensible things, is not to be termed earth, or air, or fire, or water,
or  any of their compounds, or any of the elements from which these are derived,
but  is  an  invisible and formless being which receives all things, and in some
mysterious way partakes of the intelligible, and is most incomprehensible." This
third  factor which Timaeus sometimes calls "matter" as well as "receptacle," he
also  sometimes  calls  "space."  When matter and space are identified with each
other  under  the  conception  of  a  receptacle  for  the  forms, they have the
characteristics  of  being  absolutely CHAPTER 89: formless and imperceptible to
the  senses.  Nor  are they, as are the forms, genuinely intelligible to reason.
"The third nature, which is space, and is eternal," Timaeus says, "admits not of
destruction  and  provides  a  home  for  all created things, and is apprehended
without  the  help  of  sense, by a kind of spurious reason, and is hardly real;
which we beholding as in a dream, say of all existence that it must of necessity
be  in some place and occupy a space, but that which is neither in heaven nor on
earth has no existence."

The  precise meaning of this conception of space is difficult to determine. Does
it, for example, find an echo in Plotinus' statement that "space is a container,
a container of body; it is the home of such things as consist of isolated parts"
?  But  he  also  says  that  space "in a strict sense is unembodied and is not,
itself,  body," and that "body is not a void," but rather that "the void must be
that  in  which  body  is  placed,"  seeming  thereby  to  imply  that  space is
essentially  the  void.  The statement in the Timaeus that "there can be no such
thing as a vacuum," may apply only to the filled space of the created heaven and
earth.  May  it not also be said that space is a void when it is identified with
the  formless  matter  of the receptacle prior to creation ? This raises further
questions.  Is the receptacle space or matter? And is the conception of space in
the Timaeus rightly interpreted by Aquinas, in commenting on Augustine's reading
of  "the  earth  was void and empty" in Genesis 1:2? Augustine holds that by the
word "earth" in this passage formless matter is to be understood. Because of its
formlessness,  Aquinas  writes,  "the  earth  is  said  to be void and empty, or
invisible  and  shapeless,"  and,  he  adds,  "that  is why Plato says matter is
place."

HOWEVER  THESE  QUESTIONS  are  answered,  one  thing  seems to be clear. Space,
functioning  as  receptacle,  can be identified only with matter devoid of form,
not  with the matter of threedimensional bodies. The relation of space to matter
seems  to  be  differently  conceived  by  Descartes.  Space  is  for him not an
antecedent principle involved in the original production of sensible things, but
rather  as  the extension of bodies it is inseparable in existence from them. It
is  a  property  which signifies the essence of material substances, as thinking
signifies  the  essence  of  mind or soul. "By extension," Descartes writes, "we
understand  whatever has length, breadth, and depth, not inquiring whether it be
a real body or merely space." Nevertheless, he goes on to say that "by extension
we  do  not  here  mean  anything distinct and separate from the extended object
itself."  Descartes  considers  the significance of three statements: "extension
occupies  place, body possesses extension, and extension is not body'' The first
statement,  he  thinks,  means no more than "that which extended occupies place"
The  is  second  statement seems to imply that "the mean ing of extension is not
identical  with  that  oibody, yet," Descartes insists, "we do not construct two
distinct  ideas  in  our  imagination,  one of body, the other of extension, but
merely  a  single image of extended body and from the point of the view ; of the
thing  it is exactly as if I had said: body is extended, or better, the extended
is  extended"  Finally,  in  the  statement that extension is not body, the word
"extension,"  according  to  Descartes,  expresses  a purely abstract conception
nothing  which  in  itself  has any sensible reality. So far as its existence is
concerned, the thing conceived as extension cannot be separated from body. Those
who  think  otherwise,  Descartes asserts, are involved in "the contradiction of
saying  that  the same thing is at the same time body and not body" The point is
summarized  in his Principles of Philosophy by the statement that "the nature of
matter  or  of  body in its universal aspect, does not consist in being hard, or
heavy,  or  colored . . . but solely in the fact that it is a substance extended
in  length,  breadth,  and depth." But, it may be asked, are the dimensions of a
body  the  same  as  space?  Descartes  replies  that  "the same extension which
constitutes  the  nature  of a body constitutes the nature of space ... not only
that which is full of body, but also of that which is called a vacuum." If there
were  a  vacuum,  or  empty  space, extension might be separated from body. This
Descartes  flatly  denies.  "As regards a vacuum in the philosophic sense of the
word, /., a space in which there is no substance, it is evident that such cannot
exist,  because  the extension of space or internal place is not; different from
that  of  body." And even "when we take this word vacuum in its ordinary sense,"
Descartes goes on, "we do not mean a place or space in which there is absolutely
nothing,  but  only  a  place  in  which there are none of those things which we
expected  to  find  there."  These  points  made  in  the Principles confirm the
identification  of  three-dimensional space or extension with body which appears
in the Rules.

They  seem  to  be  further  confirmed  in  the Discourse by the reference to "a
continuous  body,  or  a space indefinitely extended in length, height or depth"
which is "the object of the geometricians." Descartes does not, however, neglect
the  distinction  between  space  as  the  extension  of  body, and place as the
position one body occupies in relation to another. According to common usage, he
says,  the  word "place" signifies that "in virtue of which a body is said to be
here  or  there."  He  objects to those who, like Aristotle, mean by "place" the
surrounding  surface  of  a  body.  Local  motion  or change of place is not, he
argues, a change in the body's surrounding surface, but a change in its relative
position.  IT  IS  PLACE  RATHER THAN Space which Aristotle seeks to define, and
place  in  the  sense of the circumference of a body rather than its position in
space.  He  rejects  the  notion that place is the extension of a magnitude, for
that  would,  he  thinks, identify it with matter. Place belongs to body, not as
matter  or  a  property of matter, but as its boundary. It is, Aristotle writes,
"the  innermost  motionless  boundary  ...  a kind of surface and, as it were, a
vessel,  /.*.,  a  container  of the thing." This boundary is itself made at the
surface  of  a body by a surrounding body or bodies. "If a body has another body
outside  it  and  containing it," Aristotle writes, "it is in place, and if not,
not." The consequences of this conception of place are, first, a denial of space
in  the sense of void or empty place, since place is always "coincident with the
thing"  contained or bounded; second, a denial of any infinite place, since that
would  presuppose  an actually infinite body to Aristotle, an impossibility; and
third,  the conclusion that the whole universe itself does not have a place, for
outside  the outermost heaven which bounds the world, there can be no containing
body by which the universe is bounded.

S Aristotle explains that by "heaven" he means "the extreme circumference of the
whole"  a  whole "composed of all r *ural perceptible body." The two words which
Einstein uses when he discusses "the possibility of a 'finite and yet Unbounded'
universe" seem to apply to Aristotle's conception of the world finite in body or
matter,  yet  unbounded,  /.,  without  anything  outside itself to determine or
define its boundary.

Aristotle's  view  of  the  world  seems  to  be directly opposed to that of the
ancient  atomists.  For  them, the whole of matter is discontinuous, existing in
indivisible  units or atoms, each of which is a plenum that is, a unit of matter
absolutely  continuous  without  void  in  it but between which there is void or
empty  space.  For  Aristotle,  the material world as a whole is a plenum, i.e.,
continuous  body without void. Hence if by "space" is meant not place but void a
bodyless  interval  between  or  within  bodies  there  is  no  space. Aristotle
considers  the  arguments  of Dcmocritus that without void local motion would be
impossible, but he thinks "there is no necessity for there being a void if there
is  movement." Following Democritus, Lucretius gives another reason for positing
void  or  empty  space.  As  the  indivisibility  of  the simple bodies or atoms
consists  in  their  absolute solidity their lack of void so the divisibility of
composite  bodies  derives  from their being constituted by both atoms and void.
"Wherever  space lies empty, which we call the void," Lucretius writes, "body is
not  there;  moreover  wherever body has its station, there is by no means empty
void. Therefore the first bodies are solid and free from void. ... If there were
nothing  which  was empty and void, the whole would be solid; unless . . . there
were  bodies  determined,  to  fill  all  the  places  that they held, the whole
universe  would  be  but  empty  void  space."  For  Aristotle, in contrast, the
divisibility  of  matter seems to depend upon its being continuous. On his view,
the  composite body, constituted by atoms separated from one another by void, is
not  divisible,  but  is  already actually divided; whereas the very thing which
Lucretius  regards  as  indivisible because it is continuousthe voidless atom is
for  Aristotle divisible. To call an atom divisible is, of course, CHAPTER 89 to
deny  that  it  is atomic or, in the language of Lucretius, an uncuttable bit of
"solid singleness." Thus diametrically opposite theories of space and place seem
to  be  connected  with  opposite theories of matter or body. Space as the empty
interval  or void between solid bodies goes along with atomism, whereas place as
"the  boundary  of  the  containing  body  at  which  it  is in contact with the
contained  body"  goes  along with the theory of the world as a material plenum.
The  atomic  theory  and  the plenum theory are opposed in one other fundamental
respect  concerning  space.  According  to  Aristotle,  the  impossibility of an
actually  infinite  body makes the largest place finite. According to Lucretius,
the  infinite  number  of  atoms requires an infinite space. Asking whether "the
void  that  we  have  discovered,  or room or space ... is altogether bounded or
spreads  out limitless and immeasurably deep," Lucretius answers that "the whole
universe  is bounded in no direction." His argument seems to be like Aristotle's
for an "unbounded universe." Since there can be "nothing outside the whole sum,"
he  writes,  "it  lacks therefore bound or limit." But where Aristotle's meaning
seems  to  be  that  the  universe  has no Lucretius place, since all places are
inside  it,  appears  to  mean  that  empty  space  extends  infinitely  in  all
directions.

MODERN  ATOMISTS like Newton and Locke hold a theory of space which accords with
the  view  of  matter existing in discontinuous units, separated by intervals of
emptiness.  Newton's  distinction,  for  example,  between absolute and relative
space  acknowledges  a  space  that  is  relative to bodies, but also affirms an
absolutely  independent  space,  which  has  being  in separation from matter or
bodies.  "Absolute  space,  in  its  own  nature,  without  relation to anything
external,"  he  writes, "remains always similar and immovable. Relative space is
some  movable  dimension  or  measure  of  the absolute spaces, which our senses
determine  by  its  position to bodies and which is commonly taken for immovable
space."  As for place in distinction from space, Newton holds that it is "a part
of  space  which a body takes up, and is according to the space, either absolute
or  relative."  In  opposing Aristotle's view, he adds that place is : SPACE 815
"not  the  situation,  nor  the  external surface of the body. For the places of
equal solids are always equal; but their surfaces, by reason of their dissimilar
figures,  are  often unequal." Locke also distinguishes between space and place,
the  one  consisting  in  "the  relation  of  distance between any two bodies or
points," the other in "the relation of distance betwixt any thing and any two or
more  points  which are considered as keeping the same distance one with another
and,  so  considered,  as  at  rest." With this conception of place, he holds in
apparent  agreement with Aristotle that "we can have no idea of the place of the
universe, though we can of all the parts of it." Yet he goes on to say that what
lies  beyond  the  universe is "one uniform space or expansion, wherein the mind
finds  no  variety or marks." This seems to indicate that Locke's idea of space,
like  that  of  Lucretius,  conceives  an  infinite  void. "Those who assert the
impossibility  of  space  existing  without  matter must," he writes, "make body
infinite."  Furthermore,  "those who dispute for or against a vacuum, do thereby
confess that they have distinct ideas of vacuum and plenum, i.e., that they have
an  idea  of extension void of solidity, though they deny its existence, or else
they  dispute about nothing at all. For they who so much alter the signification
of words, as to call extension, body, and consequently make the whole essence of
body to be nothing but pure extension, must talk absurdly whenever they speak of
vacuum,  since  it  is  impossible  for  extension  to be without extension: for
vacuum,  whether  we affirm or deny it, signifies space without body, whose very
existence  no one can deny to be possible who will not make matter infinite, and
take  from  God  a power to annihilate any particle of it." Precisely because he
thinks  no one can affirm an infinite body, and because he conceives space to be
a void, distinct from bodies, Locke finds it necessary to affirm the infinity of
space.  "I would ask," he says, "whether if God placed a man at the extremity of
corporeal  beings,  he  could not stretch his hand beyond his body. If he could,
then  he  would  put  his  arm  where  there  was  before  space  without body."
Furthermore,  if  "it  be impossible for any particle of matter to move but into
empty  space, the same possibility of a body's moving into a void space, be- 816
yond  the  utmost  bounds  of  body,  as  well as into a void space interspersed
amongst  bodies, will always remain clear and evident. ... So that, wherever the
mind  places itself by any thought, either amongst or remote from all bodies, it
can,  in  this  uniform idea of space, no where find any bounds, any end; and so
must necessarily conclude it ... to be actually infinite."

IT  MAY SEEM PARADOXICAL that pure space space existing without matter is denied
by  one  who also denies the existence of matter. "When I speak of pure or empty
space,"  Berkeley writes, "it is not to be supposed that the word 'space' stands
for an idea distinct from or conceivable without body or motion." What is meant,
he  suggests,  is merely that the resistance one body gives to another in motion
is  absent  when  space  is  relatively  empty. But this is always relative. "In
proportion as the resistance is lesser or greater," Berkeley says, "the space is
more or less pure" There would be absolutely pure space only if all bodies other
than  his  own  were  annihilated.  "If  that,  too, were annihilated," Berkeley
concludes, "then there could be no motion, and consequently no Space." All these
contradictions  concerning  space  enter  into  Kant's  statement  of  the first
cosmological antinomy, in which the thesis that the world is limited with regard
to  space  and  the  antithesis  that  the world is infinite in space seem to be
equally  susceptible to proof and so to disproofTh Both alternatives violate our
empirical  concepts.  If  space "is infinite and unlimited," Kant writes, "it is
too large for every possible empirical concept. If it is finite and limited, you
have  a  perfect  right to ask what determines that limit. Empty space is not an
independent  correlate of things, and cannot be a final condition, still less an
empirical  condition  forming  part  of possible experience for how can there be
experience  of  what  is  absolutely  void?  But in order to produce an absolute
totality   in   an   empirical  synthesis,  it  is  always  requisite  that  the
unconditioned  should  be  an  empirical concept. Thus it follows that a limited
world would be too small for your concept."

Space  itself,  however,  is  for  Kant "not an empirical concept which has been
derived  from  external  experience." Rather it "is a necessary representation a
priori  forming  the  very  foundation  of all external intuitions" and, as Kant
explains  in  his  Prolegomena,  it -stablishes geometry as an a priori science.
"Space  is  nothing  but the form of all phenomena of the external senses; it is
the subjective condition of our sensibility, without which no external intuition
is  possible  for  us. ... Nothing which is seen in space is a thing by itself,"
nor  is  "space  a form of things supposed to belong to them by themselves." The
external  objects which we perceive in space "are nothing but representations of
our  senses,  the  form of which is space." So far as the experience of space is
concerned,  William  James  seems  to  take  an  opposite  view.  Time and space
relations, he says, "are impressed from without" and "stamp copies of themselves
within"  To  the  Kantian  theory  that  space is "a quality produced out of the
inward resources of the mind, to envelope sensations which, as given originally,
are not spatial," James replies that he can find "no introspective experience of
mentally  producing  or  creating  space."  He  proposes two other alternatives:
"either (i) there is no spatial quality of sensation at all, and space is a mere
symbol  of succession; or (2) there is an extensive quality given immediately in
certain particular sensations." The second seems to James best suited to explain
the  development  of  our  perceptions  of  space,  and  he  does  not  think it
inconsistent  with  the  a  priori or non-empirical character of geometry, whose
necessary  truths  refer to ideal objects, not to experienced things in physical
space.  THE  CHAPTER  on MATHEMATICS considers the relation of the postulates of
diverse  geometries to the diversity of Euclidean and non-Euclidean spaces, such
as  that  of  the  flat  plane,  the  surface  of a sphere, and the surface of a
pseudosphere.  Just as different parallel postulates select different spaces for
geometrical  construction,  so a postulate like Euclid's concerning the equality
of  all  right  angles  seems  to  assume  a  uniformity  of space which permits
geometrical figures to be transposed without alteration. "If translation through
space  warped  or  magnified  forms,"  James  remarks,  "then  the  relations of
equality,  etc., would always have to be expressed with a position-qualification
added."

CHAPTER  89:  SP  Confronted  with  a variety of purely mathematical spaces, the
physicist  is concerned with the problem of which geometry is, as Einstein says,
in"correspondence  with  a 'real' object," or true of the real world. "According
to the general theory of relativity, the geometrical properties of space are not
independent,"  Einstein  writes, "but are determined by matter." It follows that
our  assumptions about the distribution of matter determine the character of the
world's space.

On  the  assumption  of  a  world "not inhabited by matter everywhere," in whose
infinite space "the average density of matter would necessarily be nil" Einstein
says  we  can imagine "a quasi-Euclidean universe" analogous to "a surface which
is  irregularly  curved  in  its  individual  parts,  but  which nowhere departs
appreciably  from a plane: something like the rippled surface of a lake." But if
the  "average  density  of  matter . . . differs from zero, however small may be
that  difference,  then  the  universe  cannot  be quasi-Euclidean." It would be
spherical  (or  elliptical) if the matter were uniformly distributed; but "since
in  reality  the  detailed  distribution  of  matter  is  not uniform," Einstein
concludes  that  "the  real  universe  will deviate in individual parts from the
spherical,   i.e.,  the  universe  will  be  quasi-spherical.  But  it  will  be
necessarily  finite."  The nature of the actual space of the universe thus seems
to  be related to the issue whether physical as opposed to mathematical space is
a  void or filled with matter. Defining a vacuum as "a space empty of all bodies
known  to  the senses," Pascal insists that "there is as much difference between
nothingness  and space, as there is between empty space and a material body," so
that   "empty   space   occupies  the  mean  between  matter  and  nothingness."
Torricclli's  experiments  seem  to  him complete proof against the disciples of
Aristotle, for they upset the belief that "nature abhors a vacuum." Gilbert's on
magnetic  influobservations  ences, Newton's observations on the transmission of
light  and  heat  as  well  as  gravitational  pull, and Faraday's on electrical
phenomena, all seem to admit the possibility of action at a distance, or through
a  vacuum. But the question remains whether the so-called physical vacuum ACE is
an absolute void or merely empty of "all bodies known to the senses."

"Is  not the heat of the warm room conveyed through the vacuum" Newton asks, "by
the  vibrations of a much subtiler medium than air which after the air was drawn
out remained in the vacuum ? And is not this medium the same with that medium by
which   light  is  refracted  and  reflected,  and  by  whose  vibrations  light
communicates  heat to bodies? . . . And is not this medium exceedingly more rare
and  subtile  than the air, and exceedingly more elastic and active? And docs it
not  readily  pervade all bodies ? And is it not (by its elastic force) expanded
through  all  the  heavens?"  Huygens  also  refers to an ethereal matter as the
medium  for the propagation of light. "One will see," he writes, "that it is not
the  same  that  serves for the propagation of sound ... It is not the same air,
but  another  kind of matter in which light spreads; since if the air is removed
from  the  vessel,  the light does not cease to traverse it as before." But this
ethereal  medium,  without which bodies would act at a distance upon one another
gravitationally,  magnetically,  electrically through an absolute void, seems to
have  contrary  properties.  It  is not only "subtiler" than air, but, as Newton
suggests,  it  may  be  "denser  than  quick-silver or gold," since "planets and
comets,  and  all  gross bodies perform their motions more freely, and with less
resistance  in  this  aetliereal medium than in any fluid, which fills all space
adequately  without  leaving  any  pores." And, in still another place, he asks:
"What  is  there in places almost empty of matter, and whence is it that the Sun
and  Planets gravitate towards one another, without dense matter between them ?"
Whatever may be thought of the ether as a physical hypothesis, the problem still
remains  whether  action  can  take  place  at a distance through a void or must
employ what Faraday calls"physical lines of force" through filled space. Faraday
thinks  the  evidences  support  the latter alternative for both electricity and
magnetism. He quotes a letter from Newton to Bentley to show that Newton was "an
unhesitating  believer  in physical lines of gravitating force." In that letter,
posthumously  discovered,  Newton  says: "That gravity should be innate, in- 818
herent and essential to matter, so that one body force may be conveyed f may act
upon another at a distance through a to me so great an absur vacuum, without the
mediation  of  anything man who has in philosop else, by and through which their
action and petent faculty of think

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
   0a. place, and matter
   i a.
   Space or extension as the essence or property of bodies: space, the receptacle,
   and becoming
   0b. Place as the envelope or container of bodies: place as a part of space or as relative
   position in space
   0c. The tridimensionality of bodies: the indeterminate dimensions of pure space or
   prime matter
   0d. The exclusiveness of bodily occupation of space: impenetrability
   0e. void, and motion
   0f. The role of space or place in local motion: the theory of proper places; absolute
   and relative space
   0g. The issue of the void or vacuum
   (1) The distinction between empty and filled space
   (2) The indispensability of void or vacuum for motion and division: the absence
   of void in atoms
   (3) The denial of void or vacuum in favor of a plenum
   0h. Space as a      medium of physical action: the ether and action-at-a-distance; the
   phenomena of gravitation, radiation, and electricity
   0i. quantity,
   and relation
   0j. The finitude or infinity of space: the continuity and divisibility of space
   0k. The relation of physical and mathematical space: sensible and ideal space
   0l. Geometrical space, its kinds and properties: spatial relationships and configura-
   tions
   3*/.
   The measurement of spaces, distances, and sizes: trigonometry; the use of paral-
   lax

4. The knowledge of space and figures
   4a. Space as the divine sensorium and space as a transcendental form of intuition:
   the a priori foundations of geometry
   4b. The controversy concerning innate and acquired space-perception
   4c. The perception of space: differences between visual, auditory, and tactual space;
   perspective and spatial illusions

5. The     mode of existence of geometrical objects: their character as abstractions; their
relation to intelligible matter

6. The spiritual significance of place, position, and space

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other  discussions  of the theory of the receptacle, see
FORM  1d(i);  MATTER  i; Other discussions of extension as a property of bodies,
see BEING 70(4) FOR

Other discussions of the doctrine of prime matter, see BEING 73) CHANGE 2a

INFINITY  4c;  MATTER la. The role of space or place in local motion, see CHANGE
7a; RELATION 6a.

Discussions bearing on the measurement of space, see MATHEMATICS 53; MECHAN

QUANTITY  6b-6c. Matters relevant to space as a transcendental form of intuition
and to the r

the foundations of geometry, see FORM 1c; MATHEMATICS 1c; MEMORY AND IMAG

6c(2);  MIND  1e(i),  4d(3); TIME 6c; and for other discussions bearing on s see
QUALITY 2b; SENSE 3c(3).

The  problem  of  the  mode  of being which is possessed by the objects of geome
7d(3); IDEA 2g; MATHEMATICS 2a-2b; MATTER 1c.

The issue concerning a void or vacuum, and for the related problem of actio

see ASTRONOMY 3b; CHANGE 73; ELEMENT 5c; MECHANICS 5d, 6d(2).

Other  considerations of the infinity or continuity of space, see INFINITY 3 2c;
ONE AND MANY 33(4); QUANTITY 2, 53; and for discussions of astronomic

and the size of the universe, see ASTRONOMY 5, pe; WORLD 6a, 7.

The analysis of geometrical space, spatial relationships and configurations

QUANTITY 3-36(2).

The relation of spiritual being or action to place or space, see ANGEL 3f;

GOD 7g; IMMORTALITY 5g; SOUL 36,

eologica,  PART  i,  Q  3,  A  Q 8, A i, REP 3 34d-35c; Q ; Q 66, A 347b-348d; Q
eologica,  PART  in  SUPPL,  984c-985d edy, HELL, v [1-15] 7a; ix [16-33] 12b-c;
PURGATORY,

xvm [22-33] 80a-b; xx 8c; c-85d; PARADISE, i

[64-142]  -90]  109d-110b;  iv  [28-48]  539] 146b-147a; BK vni [114- 194, 207b;
205-206  211a  eason,  360d-361d  ost, BK n [850-1009] 129b150b; xxx-xxxn 151dof
History, INTRO, troduction, 562c-d WORLD 40. M 2d; MATTER 2a. ; ; FORM 2c(3) ; ;
ICS   33;   elated   problem   of   INATION   pace-perception,  try,  see  BEING
n-at-a-distance, d; MATHEMATICS al space , see QUALITY 3b; ASTRONOMY 6;

CHAPTER 89: SP

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Booty of the W

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works

I. Works by authors represented

II. Works by authors not represen

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publica

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the l

B

I.

DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART n, H

4-19, 21 M HOBBES. Concerning Body, PART 11, CH 7 HUME. A Treatise of Human
Nature, BK i, PART P

ii BERKELEY. An Essay Towards a New Theory of

Vision C

. Siris KANT. On the First Grounds of the Distinction of }

Regions in Space

. De Mundi Sensibilis (Inaugural Dissertation) R

.

Metaphysical  Foundations  of  Natural  Science W W. JAMES. Collected Essays and
Reviews, xxi S

E

II.

W SEXTUS EMPIRICUS. Against the Physicists, BK n,

CH I

Outlines of Pyrrhonism, BK in, CH 1-20

. SuARhz. Disputationes Mctaphysicae, xxx (7), B

xxxix, XL (7), I.I-LIII

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding, BK II, CH I } E

Correspondence with Clarke

.

D'ALEMBERT. Traite de dynamique

VOLTAIRE.  "Space," in A Philosophical Dictionary WHEWLLL. The Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences, G VOL I, BK II, CH 2-6 S

RIEMANN,  IJber  die  Hypothesen  welche  der  Geometric  L zu Grunde hegcn (The
Hypotheses of Geometry)

HODGSON. Time and Space B HELMIIOLTZ. Popular Lectures on Scientific Subjects, n
CLIFFORD. The Common Sense of the Exact Sciences, B CH 2, 4

LOTZE. Metaphysics, BK n, CH 1-2; BK in, CH 4 STALLO. Concepts and Theories of
Modem Physics, CH 13-15

ACE  estern  World,  but  relevant  to  the arc divided into two groups: in this
collection. ted in this collection. tion of the works cited, consult ast chapter
of  The  Great  Ideas.  RADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH 4; BK n, CH 1 8
ILBERT.  The  Foundations  of  Geometry ACII. Space and Geometry in the Light of
Physiological,   Psychological   and   Physical  Inquiry  OINCARE.  Science  and
Hypothesis,  PART n . The Value of Science, PART i, CH 3-4 . Science and Method,
BK  11, CH i ASSIRLR. Substance and Function, PART i, CH 3; SUP iv-v . W. YOUNG.
Lectures  on  Fundamental  Concepts of Algebra and Geometry, LECT xvi-xvn OBB. A
Theory  of  Time  and Space LYL. Space Time Matter . ALEXANDER. Space, Time, and
Deity  DDINGTON.  Space,  Time,  and  Gravitation  HITEHEAD. The Organization of
Thought, CH 8 ral Knowledge, en 1 4

.  An  Enquiry  Concerning the Principles of Natu. The Concept of Nature, CH 5-6
ERGSON.  Time  and  Free  Will  .  Duree et simultaneite, a propos de la theorie
d'Einstein,  CH  6  INSTEIN.  Relativity:  The  Special and the General Theory .
Sidelights on Relativity . The Meaning of Relativity

. N. LEWIS. The Anatomy of Science, ESSAY n ANTA YANA. The Realm of Matter, CH 4
ENZEN.  The  Nature  of  Physical  Theory,  PART  n,  CH  II ORING. The Physical
Dimensions  of  Consciousness,  CH  4  ,  RUSSELL.  An  Essay on the Foundations
ofGeometry  .  Principles  of Mathematics, CH 44-52 . The Analysis of Matter, CH
28-29, 32, 36

. Human Knowledge, Its Scope and Limits, PART III, CH 6; PART IV, CH 6-7
