CHAPTER: STATE

INTRODUCTION

him as an organic part. For Hobbes it is the body politic— that Leviathan which dwarfs its members. For Rousseau it is the corporate person, having a general will more perfect than the individual will— infallible, or almost infallible. When to these images of the state is added the highest transfiguration— that by which the state becomes, according to Hegel, the image of God on earth or the embodiment of Absolute Spirit— the greatness of the state cannot be magnified further.

The passages in which these conceptions first appear are among the most famous in the literature of the theory of the state. In the

Republic, Socrates proposes that "we inquire into the nature of justice and injustice, first as they appear in the State and secondly in the individual, proceeding from the greater to the lesser and comparing them." After the structure of the state has been examined in terms of its constituent classes and their functions or relations to one another, Socrates returns to the individual. We may assume, he says, that "he has the same three principles in his own soul which are found in the state"; and in another place he adds that "there appear to be as many forms of the soul as there are distinct forms of the State."

Whereas Plato analogizes the social classes in the state with the parts of the soul, Aristotle compares the state in relation to the individual with the body in relation to its members. "The state is by nature clearly prior to the family and to the individual," Aristotle writes, "since the whole is of necessity prior to the part; for example, if the whole body be destroyed, there will be no foot or hand, except in an equivocal sense. . . . The proof that the state is a creation of nature and prior to the individual is that the individual, when isolated, is not self-sufficing; and therefore he is like a part in relation to the whole."

The analogical conception of the state takes a different turn with Hobbes. The state is a work of art, not a creation of nature. "Nature-ftne Art whereby God hath made and governs the world)," says Hobbes, "is by the Art of man, as in many other things, so in this also, imitated that it can make an Artificial Animal." The machines men make— "engines that move themselves by springs and wheels as doth a watch" seem to Hobbes to "have an artificial life." But "Art goes yet further, imitating that Rational and most excellent work of Nature, Man. For by Art is created that great Leviathan called a Commonwealth or State (in Latin Civitas) which is but an Artificial Man; though of greater stature and strength than the Natural, for whose protection and defense it was intended; and in which the Sovereignty is an Artificial Soul, as giving life and motion to the whole body."

Hobbes also speaks of the multitude being "united in one Person" as the "generation of that great Leviathan, or rather (to speak more reverently) of that Mortal God, to which we owe under the Immortal God, our peace and defence." It is both divine and human, for "that which is compounded of the powers of most men, united by consent in one person, natural or civil" is, according to Hobbes, "the greatest of human powers."

Rousseau has a number of different names for the "moral and collective body" formed by the association of individuals. "This public person," he says, "formerly took the name city, and now takes that of Republic or body politic, it is called by its members State when passive, Sovereign when active, and Power when compared with others like itself." But Rousseau's primary emphasis seems to be upon the personality of the State; it is a corporate person, with moral qualities and intellectual faculties. He refers repeatedly to the State "as a persona ficta" and as "a moral person whose life is in the union of its members."

Many of these comparisons or analogies recur in Hegel's theory of the state. But for Hegel they are no longer metaphors, they are the elements of a literal definition. "The state is an organism," says Hegel. It is the organic whole no part of which can have a separate life. As "occurs with life in the physical organism," he writes, "life is present in every cell" and "separated from that life, every cell dies. This is the same as the ideality of every single class, power, and Corporation as soon as they have the impulse to subsist and be independent. It is with them as with the belly in the organism. It, too, asserts its independence, but at the same time its independence is set aside and it is sacrificed and absorbed into the whole." But the state is not merely a living organism. "To the mature state," says Hegel, "thought and consciousness essentially belong. ... As high as mind stands above nature, so high does the state stand above physical life. Man must therefore venerate the state as the divine on earth, and observe that if it is difficult to comprehend nature, it is infinitely harder to understand the state." In saying this Hegel seems to go beyond analogy to the assertion of a definition. "The march of God in the world, that is what the state is," he declares. "The basis of the state is the power of the reason actualizing itself as will. In considering the Idea of the state, we must not have our eyes on particular states or on particular institutions. Instead we must consider the Idea, this actual God, by itself."

To those who object that the state is finite, Hegel replies that "to hold that mind on earth, i.e., the state, is only a finite mind, is a onesided view, since there is nothing irrational about actuality. Of course, a bad state is worldly and finite and nothing else. But the rational state is inherently infinite." As simply stated by Hegel in the Introduction to his Philosophy of History, "the State is the Divine idea as it exists on Earth." The diverse conceptions of the state raise major issues in political theory concerning the origin of the state and the ends it serves, in both of which is involved the problem of the individual's relation to the state. That problem is touched on in the chapter on Citizen, and wherever the problem of the common good or the general welfare is discussed. Here the question whether the state is made for man or man for the state, whether the state subordinates the individual in every phase of his life or only in those matters wherein the public welfare takes precedence over private interests, serves critically to test the practical significance of different theories of the state. Here also questions concerning the relation of the family to the state—discussed from the point of view of the domestic community in the chapter on Family— throw light on the nature and origin of the political community.

The word "community" and its synonym "society" seem to be more inclusive in meaning than "state." The family and the state are both communities—associations of individuals for a common purpose and sharing in a common life. The word "state" is customarily used only for the developed political society—whether a city-state, a feudal state, or a nation-state; the word "society" usually covers the tribal com- munity, the village, or any community which is politically primitive and has some of the characteristics of a large family. In addition there are within the state, at least in its modern formation, many organized groups which deserve the name "society"—economic corporations and other associations, religious, educational, professional, recreational; and more comprehensive than any particular political com- munity are the cities of God and man which, in Augustine's conception of them, are not to be identified with either the Church or the

State.

With the rise of the science of sociology in our time, the idea of society has come to be regarded as more general than that of state. But in the tradition of the great books, particularly those of political theory, the state seems to be considered the epitome of human society. All other forms of association are, for the most part, discussed only in their relation to the state, either as the antecedents from which the state develops, or as the subordinate organizations which it includes, or sometimes, as in the case of the church, a distinct but coordinate community.

The nature of society in general and the problem of different types of social organization and development are not treated in the great books except in their bearing on the family, the church, or the state— the three communities which seem to be taken as representative or basic. Hence there is no chapter on society or community as such. What for modern sociology is a unified subject matter here divides into a number of related yet distinct ideas— the domestic community being treated in the chapter on Family, the religious community in the chapter on Religion, the various forms of economic organization in the chapters on La- bor and Wealth. In this chapter, therefore, we shall confine our attention to the specifically political community, both in itself and in relation to these other communities or social groups.

Conceived in political terms, the problems of the state would seem to be inseparable from the problems of government. Yet the ideas of state and government may be separated to the extent that one signifies the political community as a whole and the other the organization of its members according to relationships of ruler and ruled. Furthermore, the state may in one sense remain the same while in another it changes with changes in its form of govern- ment.

Some writers, like Aristotle and Hegel, tend to identify state and government. Aristotle, for example, says that "the sameness of the state consists chiefly in the sameness of its constitution." Others, like Locke and Rousseau, seem to regard government as part of the state, the chief institution of a civil society or political community, but definitely a means for securing the ends for which the state is formed. For Locke government is primarily the legislative power, for Rousseau it is "the supreme administration, the legitimate exercise of the executive power," but for both it is a representative body—an organ of the whole body politic.

Insofar as the great political theorists distinguish problems of the external relation of states with one another from those which concern the internal organization of the state, and the relation of the state to its own members, they also tend to distinguish state from government.

Hegel's distinction between external and internal sovereignty, for example, conceives the whole community as a sovereign state in relation to other communities and the state as a sovereign government in relation to its own members.

Such questions of sovereignty, or more generally of the relation of states to one another, belong to this chapter as well as to the chapter on War and Peace; but the theory of govern- ment is for the most part treated elsewhere— in the chapters on Government and Constitution, and in all the chapters dealing with the special forms of government. Still other problems of government, which have a bearing on the nature of the state, its powers, and its limits, are dealt with in the chapters on Justice and Law. That it is somehow natural for men to associate politically is generally affirmed, even by those who also think the state is artificial or conventional. No one takes either of the possible extreme positions: that the state as a purely voluntary association is without any basis at all in man's nature and needs; or that the state, like the bee hive and the ant mound, is purely a production of instinct.

Saying that "man is by nature a political animal," Aristotle goes on to remark that "man is more of a political animal than bees or other gregarious animals." But the difference Aristotle points out between man and other social animals may make man the only political animal. It consists in the fact that man, being "the only it. animal . . . endowed with the gift of speech," can communicate with his fellows concerning "the expedient and inexpedient, and therefore likewise the just and the unjust." What characterizes human associations, according to Aristotle, is that they are built upon a shared sense of the expedient and the just. "Justice," he writes, "is the bond of men in states." Hobbes also distinguishes between human and animal societies, but seems to interpret the distinction differently "Bees and ants live socia' 'and yet have no bly one with another,

' he says, other direction than their particular judgments and appetites; nor speech, whereby one of them can signify to another what he thinks expedient for the common benefit." Inquiring "why mankind cannot do the same"— that is, live sociably without government and law—Hobbes offers a number of explanations, of which the last is that "the agreement of these creatures is natural; that of men is by covenant only, which is artificial; and therefore it is no wonder if there be somewhat else required (besides covenant) to make their agreement constant and lasting, which is common power to keep them in awe and to direct their actions to the common benefit."

But though Hobbes calls the state artificial because he holds it to be the product of a contract, he does not deny the natural necessity which drives men to the creation of a commonwealth. Man quits the state of nature, which is a "war of every man against every man," to achieve self-preservation, or at least to enjoy the security of civil peace and the freedom from fear of violence.

As natural as it may be for men to be "in that condition which is called war" when "they live without a common power to keep them all in awe," it is equally natural, according to Hobbes, for men to seek peace. "The passions that incline men to peace are fear of death, desire of such things as are necessary to commodious living; and a hope by their industry to obtain them. And reason suggesteth convenient articles of peace, upon which men may be drawn to agreement." The commonwealth is therefore natural, to the extent that man's needs and passions require it and man's reason recognizes certain natural laws for constructing

The state is naturally necessary, not as the effect of instinctive determinations, but as the rationally determined means to an end. If the end the state serves were not naturally sought, or if there were any other means which reason could devise for accomplishing that end, the state would be purely conventional—and dispensable. "The final cause, end, or design of men in the introduction of that restraint upon themselves (in which we see them live in com- monwealths) is," according to Hobbes, "the sight of their own preservation and of a more contented life thereby."

In this main particular Aristotle's account of the origin of the state seems to be the same. Though he does not attribute its formation to a contract, and does not make fear the pre- dominant motive, he does regard the state as natural only because of its indispensability as a means for achieving the ends men naturally seek. The family is natural, Aristotle suggests, because it is necessary for the perpetuation of the race and "for the supply of men's everyday wants." When men aim "at something more than the supply of daily needs, the first society to be formed is the village"— normally, an association of families. And "when several villages are united in a single complete community, large enough to be nearly or quite self-sufficing, the state comes into existence, originating in the bare needs of life, and continuing in existence for the sake of a good life. Therefore, if the earlier forms of society are natural, so is the state."

The implication seems to be that if men were not naturally impelled to seek a better life than the family or the tribal community can provide —in other words, if the family or village satisfied all of man's natural needs for society— the larger community, the state, would be neither natural nor necessary. That man is by nature a political animal does not, therefore, mean that men have always and everywhere lived in states.

Aristotle refers to the man who lives apart from society, describing the natural outcast "the 'tribeless, lawless, heartless one' whom Homer denounces"—as "a lover of war." He conceives the state as coming into being subsequent to more primitive forms of social life, each type of community being successively "established with a view to some good, for mankind always act in order to obtain that which they think good." Since he thinks that the state "aims at good in a greater degree than any other, and at the highest good," he praises the man "who first founded the state" as "the greatest of benefactors."

For Aristotle, then, there seems to be no inconsistency in saying that the state is as natural as the family and also that it is the result of a convention, i.e., a voluntary association ofmen. Nor does there seem to be any inconsistency between Hobbes' view that the state is produced by a "covenant of every man with every man" and his understanding of the naturalness of the state in terms of the impulses which lead men to enter into this contract. The same double note appears in the account of the state's origin which Locke, Rousseau, and Kant give. The issue raised by the contract theory thus seems to turn on the interpretation of the original convention—whether or not it has legal significance and what obligations or limitations it imposes. Where Hobbes, for example, interprets the contract as creating, along with the commonwealth, a sovereign person having absolute power, Locke seems to make majority rule the legal consequence of the original compact. God "designed man for a sociable creature," according to Locke, "with an inclination and under a necessity to have fellowship with those of his own kind." Yet even what he calls "the first society . . . between man and wife," Locke says, "is made by a voluntary compact." It makes no difference to Locke's theory whether political societies develop by expansion from the family (which he takes to be the normal course of events) or result from a voluntary association of independent men.

In either case, political as distinguished from domestic society does not begin until "every man, by consenting with others to make one body politic under one government, puts himself under an obligation to every one of that society, to submit to the determination of the majority. . . . This is done by barely agreeing to unite into one political society, which is all the compact that is, or needs be, between the individuals that enter into or make up a com- monwealth. And thus that which begins and actually constitutes any political society is nothing but the consent of any number of free men capable of a majority to unite and incorporate into such a society."

If it is "that, and that only, which did or could give beginning to any lawful government in the world," it seems to be equally evident to Locke that "absolute monarchy, which by some men is counted the only government in the world, is indeed inconsistent with civil society, and so can be no form of civil government at all."

Though Rousseau says that the most ancient of all societies, the family, is "the only one that is natural," he qualifies this by adding that it remains natural only so long as the children need the family for their preservation. If the members of the family remain united thereafter, "they continue so no longer naturally, but voluntarily; and the family itself is then maintained only by convention." By the same criterion, civil society would seem to be natural, at least on Rousseau's own supposition that "the obstacles in the way of their preservation in the state of nature" are greater than the power of isolated individuals or families to maintain themselves, and so "the human race would perish unless it changed its manner ofexistence."

Rousseau, furthermore, explicitly denies that the transition from a state of nature to astate of civil society can be treated as an historical fact. It is an hypothesis "calculated to explain the nature of things, [rather] than to ascertain their actual origin." The social contract, which

Rousseau sometimes calls the "first convention," is, therefore, the legal, not the historical, origin of the state. As he formulates the compact, "each of us puts his person and all his power in common under the supreme direction of the general will, and, in our corporate capacity, we receive each member as an indivisible part of the whole."

Though "all the qualities of the general will" may "reside in the majority," so that the general will can be discovered by a majority vote, unanimity is required to create the sovereign body politic, with the right as well as the power to compel "whoever refuses to obey the general will." Rousseau points out that "the law of majority voting is itself something established by convention, and presupposes unanimity, on one occasion at least." To this extent

Rousseau agrees with Locke about the juridical significance of the original convention or the universal consent which establishes a civil society; and just as Locke calls absolute monarchy inconsistent with the very nature of the state, so Rousseau uses the words "republic" and "body politic" interchangeably. "To be legitimate," he writes, "the government must be, not one with the sovereign, but its minister." But Rousseau identifies government with the executive, rather than primarily with the legislative as Locke does. He therefore denies that the original convention institutes government as well as the body politic itself— "the Sovereign having no force other than the legislative power." In consequence, Rousseau and Locke differ somewhat in their discussion of the dissolution of government as distinguished from the dissolution of society, or the death of the body politic. Rousseau regards no law as irrevocable, "not excluding the social compact itself; for if all the citizens assembled of one accord to break the compact, it is impossible to doubt that it would be very legitimately broken."

According to Kant, "a state is the union of a number of men under juridical laws"— the opposite of the state of nature, "in which there is no distributive justice." It is incumbent on men, says Kant, "to accept the principle that it is necessary to leave the state of nature, in which every one follows his own inclinations, and to form a union of all those who cannot avoid coming into reciprocal communication, and thus subject themselves in common to the external restraint of public compulsory laws."

Kant refers to this principle as the "postulate of public right" which obliges "all men to enter into the relations of a civil state of society." The state thus seems to be both necessary and voluntary; for though he says that "the act by which a people is represented as constituting itself into a state is termed the original contract" yet he also adds that "this is properly only an outward mode of representing the idea by which the rightfulness of the process of organizing the constitution may be made conceivable."

Against all these notions of the original contract, Hegel, criticizing Kant's treatment of marriage under the concept of contract, says that "it is equally far from the truth to ground the nature of the state on the contractual relation, whether the state is supposed to be a contract of all with all, or of all with the monarch and the government." Contract, according to

Hegel, belongs to the sphere of "relationships concerning private property generally." Hence "the intrusion of this contractual relation . . . into the relation between the individual and the state has been productive of the greatest confusion in both constitutional law and public life."

A contract, Hegel explains, "springs from a person's arbitrary will, an origin which marriage too has in common with contract. But the case is quite different with the state; it does not lie with an individual's arbitrary will to separate himself from the state, because we are already citizens of the state by birth. The rational end of man is life in the state, and if there is no state there, reason at once demands that one be founded. Permission to enter a state or leave it must be given by the state; this then is not a matter which depends on an individual's arbitrary will and therefore the state does not rest on contract, for contract presupposes arbitrariness. It is false to maintain that the foundation of the state is something at the option of all its members. It is nearer the truth to say that it is absolutely necessary for every individual to be a citizen."

Hegel dismisses all questions concerning historical origins in general or particular as "no concern of the Idea of the state." In the Idea itself, its antecedents are to be found. The family and civil society are the earlier— logical

—moments in the development of the Idea of the State. "Civil society," Hegel writes, "is the

[state of] difference which intervenes between the family and the state, even if its formation follows later in time than that of the state." The social contract theory applies only to what he calls "civil society," by which he means the modern conception of the state "as a unity which is only a partnership. . . . Many modern constitutional lawyers," Hegel goes on, "have been able to bring within their purview no theory of the state but this. In civil society each member is his own end" and, "except by contract with others, he cannot attain the whole compass of his ends, and therefore these others are means to the end of the particular members."

In another place, Hegel describes civil society as a system of complete interdependence for the attainment of selfish ends, "wherein the livelihood, happiness, and legal status of one man is interwoven with the livelihood, happiness, and rights of all." In still another, he observes that only when the state is confused with civil society, only when "its specific end is laid down as the security and protection of property and personal freedom," does "the interest of the individuals as such become the ultimate end of their association." Whence "it follows that membership in the state is something optional. But the state's relation to the individual is quite different from this. Since the state is mind objectified, it is only as one of its members that the individual himself has objectivity, genuine individuality, and an ethical life."

The unity of the state, unlike that of civil society, is, according to Hegel, "an absolute unmoved end in itself, in which freedom comes into its supreme right. . . . This final end has supreme right against the individual, whose su- preme duty is to be a member of the state."

It does not seem to be an inevitable corollary of the social contract theory that the state be conceived as serving the private interests of individuals. "The welfare of the state," Kant declares, "is its own highest good." It is not to be understood merely as "the individual well-being and happiness of the citizens of the state; for— as Rousseau asserts— this end may perhaps be more agreeably and more desirably attained in the state of nature." Kant and Locke both affirm a social contract, but where Kant makes the safety of the republic itself the highest law (salus reipublicae suprema lex), Locke makes it the security of the people (salus populi).

"The reason why men enter into society is the preservation of their property," writes Locke. The property of the individual is insecure in a state of nature; to avoid this insecurity "men unite into societies that they may have the united strength of the whole society to secure and defend their properties." When Locke says that the chief end of civil society is "the preservation of property," he does not refer solely to economic goods, but to all the goods to which he thinks man has a natural right— "his life, liberty, and estate." Men would not quit the state of nature, he writes, "were it not to preserve their lives, liberties and fortunes, and by stated rules of right and property to secure their peace and quiet."

In the light of Locke's conception of "property," his position resembles Hobbes' statement of the end which men seek in forming a com- monwealth: "to live peaceably amongst themselves and be protected against other men" and to get "themselves out from that miserable condition of war" in which life is "solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short."

It seems to be in a different sense of property that Rousseau holds that "the foundation of the social compact is property; and its first condition, that everyone should be maintained in the peaceful possession of what belongs to him." Restricting "property" to economic possessions, Rousseau asks, "Are not all the advantages of society for the rich and powerful?"

Society, he observes, "provides a powerful protection for the immense possessions of the rich, and hardly leaves the poor man in quiet possession of the cottage he builds with his own hands."

This and Adam Smith's statement that^cjyil government, so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is in reality instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or of those who have some property against those who have none at all," seem to anticipate the

Marxist view of the state as the bulwark of property rights and an instrument of class oppression. If the protection of property and the maintenance of economic inequalities is the sole purpose of the state, then the ultimate resolution of the class war in favor of a classless society will, in the opinion of Marx and Engels, be accompanied by what they call "the withering away of the state"—an atrophy from loss of function.

But even in a classless society, the state would not cease to function if its end were to secure not merely the individual's wealth, but his whole well-being. Then, however, we must face another question—whether the happiness of the individual is the end of the state. Plato, for example, seems to answer this question in opposite ways.

In the Protagoras, it is said that "the desire for self-preservation gathered men into cities."

This is part of the Promethean legend of the origin of civilization. As told by Aeschylus and in a similar account of early history by

Lucretius— the story intimates that men contract to live together for protection against violence and to enjoy a better life— the fruits of civil society or civilization.

But in the Republic, Socrates says that, in constructing the ideal state, the aim is "not the disproportionate happiness of any one class, but the greatest happiness of the whole." To the objection of Adeimantus that the citizens may be miserable in such a state, Socrates replies that we must consider whether "we would look to their greatest happiness individually, or whether this principle of happiness does not rather reside in the State as a whole." Later Socrates reminds Glaucon, who wonders whether the members of the guardian (or ruling) class will not be unhappy, that we are "fashioning the State with a view to the greatest happiness, not of any particular class, but of the whole."

Aristotle criticizes Socrates for depriving even the guardians of happiness and for saying that "the legislator ought to make the whole state happy." In his own view, "the whole cannot be happy unless most, or all, or some of its parts enjoy happiness. In this respect, happiness is not like the even principle in numbers, which may exist only in the whole, but in neither of the parts." When Aristotle asserts that "the state exists for the sake of a good life," he seems to have the happiness of individuals in mind, for he excludes slaves and brute animals from membership in the state on the ground that they can have "no share in happiness or in a life of free choice."

But Aristotle also seems to give the state pre- eminence over the individual. "Even if the end is the same for a single man and for a state," he writes, "that of the state seems at all events something greater and more complete, whether to attain or to preserve." This does not seem to him inconsistent with thinking that that "form of government is best in which every man, whoever he is, can act best and live happily." Nor is Hegel reluctant to embrace both horns of the dilemma. Civil society rather than the state in its perfect realization seems to be devoted to the "attainment of selfish ends," such as individual happiness. But Hegel also says it is "perfectly true" that "the end of the state is the happiness of the citizens. ... If all is not well with them, if their subjective aims are not satisfied, if they do not find that the state as such is the means to their satisfaction, then the footing of the state is itself insecure."

The foregoing considerations of the nature, origin, and end of political society enter into the various conceptions of the ideal state which appear in the tradition of western thought. They also have a bearing on the division of social classes in the state, on the duties of the statesman or prince, and the principles of statecraft— the art or science of the ruler. Finally, they have implications for the relation of states to one another and for the different historic formations of the state.

All the modern writers who make some distinction between the state of nature and the state of civil society seem to agree that inde- pendent or sovereign states in their relation to one another are in a state of nature. Identifying the state of nature with the state of war, Hobbes remarks that "though there had never been any time, wherein particular men were in a condition of war one against another, yet in all times, kings and persons of sovereign authority" are "in the state and posture of gladiators . . . which is the posture of war."

Similarly, to the question, "Where are or ever were there any men in a state of nature ?"

Locke replies, "all princes and rulers of independent governments all through the world are in a state of nature." Because "bodies politic" remain "in a state of nature among themselves," they experience, according to Rousseau, "all the inconveniences which had obliged individuals to forsake it." With the same intent, Montesquieu observes that "princes who live not among themselves under civil law are not free; they are governed by force; they may continually force or be forced."

In Kant's opinion, "states, viewed as nations in their external relations to one another— like lawless savages—are naturally in a non-juridical condition," and he adds that "this natural condition is a state of war." Similarly, Hegel writes that "since the sovereignty of a state is the principle of its relations to others, states are to that extent in a state of nature in relation to each other."

On any of the theories concerning the origin of the state, it may be asked why political society cannot be enlarged to include all mankind.

If, for example, in Aristotle's view, the state is a union of villages, as the village is a union of families, why may not a further expansion of political society be brought about by a union of states ?

The question is not simply one of geographical limits or extent of population. The modern national state, though normally larger than the ancient city-state, remains an individual state and in the same external relationship to other states. Even the expansion of a city-state like Rome, at the greatest extent of its imperial domain, does not exemplify the principle of the world-state unless it is proposed that the political unification of mankind be brought about by conquest and maintained by despotism.

Though Aristotle describes the state as formed by a combination of villages, he does not propose a combination of states to form a larger community. His reason may be that the essence of the state lies in its self-sufficiency. Consequently, "the best limit of the population of a state is the largest number which suffices for the purposes of life, and can be taken in at a single view"; and the territory need be no larger than one which enables the population to be "most entirely self-sufficing."

The moderns, in contrast, propose the ex- pansion of the political community by the amal- gamation of separate political units. Montesquieu, for example, suggests that by entering into a "confederate republic," a number of small states can obtain the security which none of them has by itself. "If a republic be small," he writes, "it is destroyed by a foreign force; if it be large, it is ruined by an internal imperfection." A confederate republic, he thinks, "has all the internal advantages of a republican, to- gether with the external force of a monarchical, government. . . . This form of government," Montesquieu continues, "is a convention by which several petty states agree to become members of a larger one, which they intend to establish. It is a kind of assemblage of societies, that constitute a new one, capable of increasing by means of further associations, till they arrive at such a degree of power as to be able to provide for the security of the whole body."

It is not security against external aggression, but internal peace, which leads Rousseau to propose an association more extensive than anything Montesquieu seems to have in mind— confederation of all the states of Europe. But he does not see beyond Europe to all the states of the world. He regards "the great city of the world" as something less than a political society with civil laws, for he speaks of it as "the body politic whose general will is always the law of nature."

Nor are the American Federalists, Hamilton,

Madison, and Jay, able, at the end of the 18th century, to envisage the unlimited extension of the principle of federal union. They content themselves with arguing for the possibility of so extensive a union as the projected United

States of America, against those who quoted "the observations of Montesquieu on the necessity of a contracted territory for a Republican

Government."

Before our own day Kant alone seems to con- tions to either, are discussed in the chapter on War and Peace. Here template the possibility of a world state through federal union. The he conclude with "cosmopolitical ideal," which says, is "a universal union of states analogous-to that by which a nation becomes a state." The postulate of reason which obliges men to quit the state of nature and form a civil union applies to states as well. "The natural state of nations, as well as of individual men," Kant writes, "is a state which it is a duty to pass out of, in order to enter into a legal state." But the ideal is impracticable in Kant's opinion—again because of the supposed limits of government with respect to extended territories and populations.

"With the too great extension of such a union of states over vast regions, any government of it, and consequently the protection of its individual members, must at last become impossible." Kant therefore proposes as an alternative a "permanent congress of nations," but one which, being "a voluntary combination of states . . . would be dissolvable at any time"— a mere league or confederacy, and not such a federal union "as is embodied in the United States of America, founded upon a political constitution, and therefore indissoluble."

The further implications of Kant's proposal, the alternative it replaces, and Hegel's objec-

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of human society
i a.
Comparison of human and animal gregariousness: human and animal societies
 1a. Comparison of the family and the state in orig in, structure, and government
 1b. Associations intermediate between the family and the state: the village or tribal
 community; civil society as the stage between family and state
 1c. Social groups other than the family or the state: religious, charitable, educational,
 and economic organizations; the corporation

2. The general theory of the state
 2a. Definitions of the state or political community: its form and purpose
 (1) Comparison of the state and the soul: the conception of the state as a living
 organism; the body politic
 (2) The state as a corporate person
 (3) The progressive realization of the state as the process of history: the state as
 the divine idea as it exists on earth; the national spirit
 2b. The state as a part or the whole of society
 2c. The source or principle of the state's sovereignty: the sovereignty of the prince;
 the sovereignty of the people
 2d. The economic aspect of the state: differentiation of states according to their
 economic systems
 2e. The political structure of the state: its determination by the form of government
 2/1 The primacy of the state or the human person: the welfare of the state and the
 happiness of its members
 2f. Church and state: the relation of the city of God to the city of man
 3.
 The orig in, preservation, and dissolution of the state
 2g. The development of the state from other communities
 2h. The state as natural or conventional or both
 (1) Man as by nature a political animal: the human need for civil society
 (2) Natural law and the formation of the state
 2i. The condition of man in the state of nature and in the state of civil society: the
 state of war in relation to the state of nature
 2j. The social contract as the orig in of civil society or the state: universal consent
 as the basis of the constitution or government of the state
 2k. Love and justice as the bond of men in states: friendship and patriotism
 3/~.
 Fear and dependence as the cause of social cohesion: protection and security
 2l. The identity and continuity of a state: the dissolution of the body politic or civil
 society

4. The physical
foundations of society: the geographical and biological conditions of the
state
 4a. The territorial extent of the state: its importance relative to different forms of
 government
 4b. The influence
 of climate and geography on political institutions and political
 economy
 4c. The size, diversity, and distribution of populations: the causes and effects of
 their increase or decrease
 The social structure or stratification of the state
 4d. The political distinction between ruling and subject classes, and between citizens
 and denizens
 4e. The family as a member of the state: its autonomy and its subordination
 4f. The classes or sub-groups arising from the division of labor or distinctions of
 birth: the social hierarchy
 5<af.
 The conflict of classes with in the state
 (1) The opposition of social groups: the treatment of national, racial, and re-
 ligious minorities
 (2) The clash of economic interests and political factions: the class war
 5*. The classless society

6. The ideal or best state: the contrast between the ideal state and the best that is his-
torically real or practicable
 6a. The political institutions of the ideal state
 6b. The social and economic arrangements of the ideal state

7. Factors affecting
the quality of states
 7a. Wealth and political welfare
 7b. The importance of the arts and sciences in political life
 7c. The state's concern with religion and morals: the cultivation of the virtues
 7d. The educational task of the state: the trained intelligence of the citizens

8. The offices of state: the statesman, king, or prince
 8a. The duties of publ'c office and the responsibilities of office holders: the relation
 of the statesman or king to the people he represents or rules
 8b. The qualities or virtues necessary for the good statesman or king
 8c. The education or training of the statesman or prince
 8d. Statecraft: the art or science of governing; political prudence
 (1) The employment of the military arts
 (2) The occasions and uses of rhetoric
 (3) The role or function of experts in the service of the state
 8e. The advantages and disadvantages of participation in political life

9. The relation of states to one another
 9a. Commerce and trade between states: commercial rivalries and trade agreements;
 free trade and tariffs
 9b. Social and cultural barriers between states: the antagonism of diverse customs
 and ideas
 9c. Honor and justice among states
 9d. The sovereignty of independent states: the distinction between the sovereignty
 of the state at home and abroad; internal and external sovereignty
 9e. War and peace between states
 (1) The military problem of the state: preparation for conquest or defense
 (2) Treaties between states: alliances, leagues, confederacies, or hegemonies
 o/.
 Colonization and imperialism: the economic and political factors in empire

10. Historic formations of the state: the rise and decline of different types of states
 10a. The city-state
 10b. The imperial state
 10c. The feudal state
 10d. The national state
 10e. The federal state: confederacies and federal unions
 10f. The ideal of a world state

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions bearing on the comparison of human and
animal socie

LANGUAGE i MIND 90.

;

Other treatments of the differences and relations between family and s

8a; FAMILY 2a-2c; GOVERNMENT 1b; MONARCHY 43; ONE AND MANY 5d; TYRAN

Discussions relevant to the analogy of state and soul, to the concepti

corporate person, and to the conception of the state as the historic

divine idea, see HISTORY 4a(3) LAW 7f; PROGRESS 4b.

;

The consideration of the various economic systems which are involved i

of states, see LABOR 5-5d; WEALTH 6a.

The consideration of the political institutions of the state, the natu

branches of government, and the forms of government, see ARISTOCRAC

TION i-}b, 5-5b; DEMOCRACY i-4d; GOVERNMENT i-1a, 2-2d, 3-36(2); JU

73; MONARCHY i-1b(2), 4-46(4); OLIGARCHY 1-2, 4-5; TYRANNY 1-5.

The consideration of the relation between church and state, and the re

of God and the city of man, seed HZEN 7; HISTORY kb; RELIGION 4-4k

The problem of the natural and the conventional in the formation of th

munity, and for the contrast between the state of nature and the st

CUSTOM AND CONVENTION i; GOVERNMENT la, 5; LAW 4Th); LIBERTY 1b; NATU

5c; WAR AND PEACE i.

The theory of the social contract in relation to the idea of a constit

TION 6.

The problem of the identity and continuity of the state, see REVOLUTIO

Other discussions of the physical foundations of society, and of its g

conditions, see DEMOCRACY 53; HISTORY 4,1(2); MAN 7b; MONARCHY 4C.

The motives or impulses underlying political association, see EMOTION

JUSTICE gb; LOVE 4-4Thk; WEALTH 7a.

The problem of the individual and the common good in the relation of m

CITIZEN i DUTY 10; GOOD AND EVIL 5d; HAPPINESS 5-5k LAW la; LIBERT

;

The political classification of men as citizens, subjects, and slaves,

43-43(1); JUSTICE pd; LABOR 7d; LIBERTY 1f; SLAVERY 5a-6c; TYRANNY 5

for discussions relevant to the formation of economic or social cla

ARISTOCRACY i; DEMOCRACY 20, 5b(4); LABOR 4b; OLIGARCHY i, 4; OPPOSI

SLAVERY 3-3k 43-4k

The conflict of classes with in the state, and especially for other dis

and the classless society, see DEMOCRACY 54); LABOR 7c-7c(3); OLIGA

TION 5b; REVOLUTION 5a-5c; WAR AND PEACE 2c; WEALTH ph.

Other discussions relevant to the ideal state or concerned with the fa

excellence of states, see ARISTOCRACY 6; CITIZEN 5-6; DEMOCRACY 4, 6

LIBERTY 1h; MONARCHY 4d (2)k(3); PROGRESS 43; RELIGION 4b; SCIENCE i

AND VICE 7a-7c; WEALTH pf.

The consideration of the duties or responsibilities, the qualities and

or prince, see ARISTOCRACY 5; CITIZEN 3-6; CONSTITUTION 93; DEMOCRAC

EDUCATION 8d; MONARCHY 33; VIRTUE AND VICE 7d; and for the art or sc

and the elements of statecraft, see ART 9c-9d; EMOTION 5d; KNOWLEDGE

PHILOSOPHY 2c; RHETORIC 1c; SCIENCE 33; WAR AND PEACE loa.

The relation of states to one another, politically and economically, i

CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 7b; GOVERNMENT 5-53; JUSTICE pf; WAR AND PEACE

nc; WEALTH 4g.

863 ties, see ANIMAL 1d; tate, sec EDUCATION NY 40. on of the state as a al
embodiment of the n the organization re of government, the Y i-2e; CONSTITUSTICE
pc; LAW lation between the city e political comate of civil society, see RE 2b,
N 2a, 2c, 6b. ution, see CONSTITUeographical or territorial 5a; GOVERNMENT 1c;
an to the state, see Y 1c. see CITIZEN 2b; DEMOCRACY-5b; and sses with in the
state, see TION 46, 53; cussions of the class war RCHY 5c; OPPOSIctors which
affect the ; GOVERNMENT 2e; b(2); VIRTUE virtues, of the statesman Y 5b; DUTY
10; ience of politics 8c; OPINION 73; n war and peace, see 33, log, THE GREAT I
For: The special relation of an imperial state to colonies

GOVERNMENT 5b; LIBERTY 6c; MONARCHY 5-5b; SLAV

The general theory of sovereignty as it applies

other states, and as it applies to a state, or

see DEMOCRACY 4b; GOVERNMENT 1d, 1g-1g(3), 5;

13(2), 46(3); ONE AND MANY 56; TYRANNY 5c.

Other discussions of confederacies and federal u

5d-5e; REVOLUTION 6b; and for discussions bear

CITIZEN 8; LOVE 4c; WAR AND PEACE nd.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represe

II. Works by authors not rep

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

I.

TACITUS. Germania

DANTE. Convivio (The Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE,

en 4-10

On World-Government or De Monarchia

.

F. BACON. "Of Faction," in Essays ment and Society, cu i 5 ,

HOBULS, Philosophical Rudiments Concerning GovernThe Elements of Law, Natural
and Politic

.

SPINOZA. Tractat us Theologico-Politicus (Theological-Political Treatise), CH
16-19

MONTESQUIEU. Considerations on the Causes of the Grandeur and Decadence of the
Romans ENGELS. The Orig in of the Family, Private Property

and the State

II.

JOHN OF SALISBURY. The Statesman's Boo{ Volsung Saga Njalssaga MARSILIUS OF
PADUA. Defensor Pacts T. MORE. Utopia LUTHER. Secular Authority BODIN. The Six
Bootes of a Commonweale

HOOKER. Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity ALTHUSIUS. Politica Methodice
Digesta Atque Exemplis Sacris et Profanis lllustrata CAMPANELLA. The City of the
Sun PENN. An Essay Towards the Present and Future

Peace of Europe DEFOE. Robinson Crusoe BURLAMAQUI. Principles of Natural and
Politic Law

VATTEL. The Law of Nations VOLTAIRE. "States-Governments," in A Philosophical
Dictionary GODWIN. An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice or subject peoples,
sec DEMOCRACY yb; ERY 6d; TYRANNY 6. to the state in its external relations with
its government, in relation to its own people, LAW 6b; LIBERTY 1b; MONARCHY
nions, see GOVERNMENT 5d; ONE AND MANY ing on the possibility of a world state,
see ofy of the Western World, but relevant to the These works are divided into
two groups: nted in this collection. resented in this collection. the
publication of the works cited, consult ollows the last chapter of The Great
Ideas. BENTHAM. A Fragment on Government, CH i (1-21,

36-48)

The Theory of Legislation

. J. G. FICHTE. Addresses to the German Nation,

iv-vin

The Science of Rights

. FOURIER. Traite de r association domestique-agricole LIEBILR. Manual of
Political Ethics WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK n, CH 20;

BK v, CH 1-6, 10-17 CALHOUN. A Disquisition on Government

. A Discourse on the Constitution and Government of the United States

THOREAU. Civil Disobedience HAWTHORNE. The Blithedale Romance COMTE. System of
Positive Polity, VOL n, Social Statics, CH 5 LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK vm, CH 5
FREEMAN. History of Federal Government in Greece and Italy

BAGEHOT. Physics and Politics BURCKHARDT. Force and Freedom, CH 2-3 S. BUTLER.
Erewhon RUSKIN. Munera Pulveris J. H. NEWMAN. A Letter to the Du{e of Norfolk,
L. H. MORGAN. Ancient Society T. H. GREEN. The Principles of Political
Obligation, (0

SPENCER. The Man Versus the State TONNIES. Fundamental Concepts of Sociology
NIETZSCHE. The Will to Power, BK in (3) W. WILSON. The State FRAZER. The Golden
Bough, PART i, CH 6 TREITSCHKE. Politics BOSANQUET. The Philosophical Theory of
the State KROPOTKIN. Mutual Aid, a Factor of Evolution The State, Its Historic
Role

.

CHAPTER 90: SANTAYANA. Reason in Society, CH 8 OPPENHEIMER. The State, Its
History and Development Viewed Sociologically

DEWEY and TUFTS. Ethics, PART in, CH 20-21 SOREL. Reflexions on Violence
PIRANDELLO. The Old and the Young BELLOC. The Servile State DUGUIT. Law in the
Modern State WALLAS. The Great Society

PARETO. The Mind and Society, VOL iv HOBHOUSE. The Metaphysical Theory of the
State LENIN. The State and Revolution T. VEBLEN. The Vested Interests and the
State of the Industrial Arts, en 6

WEBER. Essays in Sociology, PART n . Politics as a Vocation

HAUPTMANN. The Island of the Great Mother HOCKING. Man and the State CROCE.
Politics and Morals DEWEY. Reconstruction in Philosophy, CH 8 . The Public and
Its Problems

HSIAO. Political Pluralism M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK in, CH 3 A.
HUXLEY. Brave New World LASKI, The State in Theory and Practice STURZO. The
Inner Laws of Society

. Church and State MARITAIN. The Things That Are Not Caesar's, i-m

.

Ransoming the Time, CH 2 BORGESE. Common Cause KOHN. The Idea of Nationalism
CASSIRER. The Myth of the State, PART n KELSEN. Der soziologische und der
junstische Staatsbegriff .General Theory of Law and State

MLRRIAM. Systematic Politics EWING. The Individual, the State and World
Government A. J. TOYNBEE. Civilization on Trial, CH 5, 7 BoRGEst et al.
Preliminary Draft of a World Constitution

REFERENCES
============================================================

1. The nature of human society

7 PLATO: Republic, BK u, 316c-319c; BK v,
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIII, en 12 [ii6i b ii-i5J
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 23 128c d;
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK II, SECT i 256b,d;
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK II, en Li,161b- 664b-674a, 677a-678d, 684b-689b 162d; BK XH, CH 27 359c-360a,c; BK xix, CH 5 513d-514b; CH 13-17 519a-523a; CH 21 524a 525b; CH 24 528b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 96,
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-II, Q 94, 37] 134b; CH 2 136a-b; CH 40 149a-153a / A 2 221d-223a; 096, A 4, ANS 233a d; Q 100, Ethics, BK VIII, CH 12 [1162*16-25] 414c / A 2, ANS 252b-253a Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*7-1 8] 446b-c; BK III,
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vin [94- CH 9 [1280*31-34] 477d-478a 148] 118a-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 99a-101a \b to \d CHAPTER 90 .-STATE 839
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 35-37 433b- 356c; 363b-365d / Laws, BK III, 664a-666c 436a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 4c-d / Civil Government, 413d-414a / Politics, BK i, CH 1-2 445a-446d; CH vn 42b-46c; CH ix, SECT 128 54b-c BK II, CH 1-2 455b,d-456c; BK III, CH i
38 MONTESQUIEU -.Spirit of Laws, nx xi, 69a [i274 b 32-i275*3] 471b; CH 3 [i276 b i-i2]
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 369b-370a / 473b-c; CH 4 [i276 b i7~35] 473c-d; CH 6 Social Contract, BK II, 39Sa [i278 b i5-29] 475d-476a
40 GIBBON : Decline and Fall, 96a; 194a-b; 198d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 402c; 433d-434b; BK II, CH 20, 165a-d 435c-436b
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 460a-c BK iv, SECT 4 264a; BK v, SECT 16 271c-d;
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dick, 237a-b BK VII, SECT 13 280c; SECT 55 283b c; BK
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 685 d- vin, SECT 34 288a b; BK ix, SECT 9 292b-d; 686b SECT23 293c; BKXI, SECT8303a-b
54 FREUD: Group Psychology 664a-696a,c esp

1a. Comparison of human and animal gregariousness - human and animal societies

9 ARISTOTLE: History of Animals, BK i, CH i A 4 512d 513c [487 b 35- 4 88 ft i4] 8d-9a; BK ix, CH i [6o8 b 26-
12 AURELIUS: Meditations^ BK ix, SECT 9 292 b-d *
13 VIRGIL: Georgics, iv [149-227] 87a-89b / Aeneid, BK i [418-440] 114b-115a
23 HoBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 54c; PART 11, lOOa-c
25 MONTAIGNL: Essays, 228b-229a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Henry V, ACT i, sc n [175-220] 535d-536b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en vn, SECT 78-80 42b-43a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv 135a-184a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK r, ld-2a; 2d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 469c-d
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dicf(, 282a-284a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 304b-310d esp 308a-d, 310a-d; 321b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 499c-500c; BK xv, 634a; EPILOGUE 11, 683b-684a
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 669a-b; 684d- 686c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 791d- 792a

1b. Comparison of the family and the state in origin, structure, and government

5 ARISTOPHANES: Lysistrata [486-590] 589a- 590d
7 PLATO: Crito, 216d~217d / Republic, BK v, 360d-365d / Statesman, 581a-c / Laws, BK i, 641a-642b; BK HI, 664a-666c csp 666b-c; 670d-671a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK v, CH 6 [ii34 b 8 17] 382b-c; UK vi, CH 8 [i 14^28 -1142*11] 390d- 391a; BK VIII, CH 10 [n6o b 2^]-cn n [n6i h io] 413a-d; CH 12 [i 162*16-18] 414c / Politics, BK i, CH 1-2 445a-446d; CH 7 [i255 b i6-2o] 449b; cii n [i259 a $3] en 12 [i2<59 b i6] 453d-454a; BK II, CH 2 455d-456c; CH 5 [126^^0-^5] 459a; BK III, en 6 [i278 b 30-1279*2] 476a-b; CH 14 [1285^9 33|484a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 12, 517c-d; CH i \ 17 520a-523a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 92, A i, RI,P 2 488d-489d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 90, A 3, REP 3 207a-c; g 105, A 4, REP 5 318b-321a
23 HOBBLS: leviathan, PART i, 67d-68a; 86a; PARI n, 99b-d; 109c-lllb; 121a; 155b
30 BACON : Advancement of Learning, 34a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH i, SECT 2 25c; CH vi-vn 36a-46c; CH vm, SLCT 105-112 48c-51b; CH xiv, SECT 162 63a; CH xv 64c- 65d passim
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 216b; 410a-411a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 3b; BK iv, 13b; BK xvj, 118b-c; BK xix, 140a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 357a-b / Political Economy, 367a-368c; 377a / Social Contract, BK i, 387d-388a; BK HI, 411c-d; 414c
40 GIBBON : Decline and Fall, 412c-413b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 82b-83c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 170 60d; par 203 68a-c; par 256-257 79d-80b; par 303 101c-102a; par 349 llld-112a; ADDI- TIONS, 47 124a-b; 113 135a-b; 157 142b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 172b-d; PART i, 211a-212c; 246d-247b; PART in, 288c-289d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 308b-d
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 664b-d; 686c- 689a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 781d- 782d

1c. Associations intermediate between the family and the state - the village or tribal community; civil society as the stage between family and state

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK iv, 132a-b; 154b- 158d 6TnucYDiDEs - Peloponnesian War, BK u, 391c-d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a / Laws, BK i, 641a-b; BK HI, 664a-666c
9 ARISTOTLE-.: Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252 b io-3o] 445d-446a
14 PLUTARCH: Theseus, 9a-d/ Romulus, 22b
23 HORBES: leviathan, PART i, 85d-86a
35 LOCKE: Civil Got'einment, CH vm, SFCT 102 48a-b; SECT 105-112 48c-51b; CH x, SECT 133 55b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 267a-c
38 MONTESQUILU: Spirit of Laws, BK xvm, 126d-134d passim
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 349c-d / Social Contract, BK III, 411c-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 309c-311c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 91b-d; 95b-96c; 412c-413b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 33d-34b; 223c-224a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 434a; 452a-b
43 MILL: Representative Government, 352b-353a
46 HEcihL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 157 57d; par 172 61a; par 181-256 63c-80a esp par 181 63c-d, par 188 65c-d, par 256 79d 80a; ADDITIONS, 20 119d-120b; 109 134c; 116-117 135c-136a; 146 140b-c; 157 IWb-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 172b-d; 194c-195a; PART i, 237b-c; 245d-247b; PART II, 260c-261a; PART in, 287a-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 581a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 174d-175c
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 419b [fr,2]
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 686c-687d; 692a-b / Civilization and Its Discontents, 782c

1d. Social groups other than the family or the state - religious, charitable, educational, and economic organizations; the corporation

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 56d-57b
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 58c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, HI [97- 120] HOb-c; xi-xn 122a-125a 23HoBBEs - Leviathan, PART II, 117b-122b; PART HI, 198a-d; PART iv,.269b 840 (1. The nature of human society. Id. Social groups other than the family or the state - religious, charitable, educational and economic organizations; the corporation.)
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 4b-c
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART m, 106a-b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xx, 149a-c; BK xxi, 170d; BK xxin, 199b-200a,c
38 ROUSSEAU '.Political Economy, 369b-370a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 28b-d; 51a- 56b; BK v, 343b,d-346b; 357c
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 191c-200a esp 191c, 194a-195c, 198d-199a; 299b-304d esp 299c-d; 668d-670b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 389b-390b
42 KANT: Science of Right, 442c-d; 444a-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 201 68a; par 229 7Sb; par 235 76a; par 249-256 78c-80a; par 264 84a; par 288-289 97a-d; par 302-303 101a-102a; par 308 102c-103a; AD- DITIONS, 151 141b-c; 174 146d-147b / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 335a-336c; 340d- 341c; 342c-d
50 MARX: Capital, 149c-150a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 423c-d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 198b-203a; EPILOGUE n, 685d-686a
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 670b-c; 674b-676d

2. The general theory of the state

    [sem referências]

2a. Definitions of the state or political community - its form and purpose

7 PLATO: Republic, BK i-n, 301c-319a; BK iv, 342a-344a; BK v, 356c; 363b-365d / Laws, BK iv, 678b-c; BK ix, 754a-b; BK xn, 795b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 2 339b-d / Politics, BK i, CH i [1252*1-6] 445a; CH 2 [i252 b 27- 1253*39] 446a-d; BK II, CH i [i26o b 37)-cn 2 [i26i b i5] 455b,d-456c; CH 5 [i263 b 30-i264 B 10] 459a-b; BK III, CH i [i274 b 32-4o] 471b; CH 3 [i276 B 7]-GH 4 (i276 b 35) 473a-d; CH 6 [i278 b i5-29] 475d-476a; CH 9 [1280*31- 1281*2] 477d-478c; CH 12 [i282 b i5-i8] 480c; BK VII, CH 8 532c-533a
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK vi [847-853] 233b-234a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK II, CH 21 161b- 162d; BK iv, CH 4 190d; BK xix, CH 21-24 524a-528c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 90, A 2 206b-207a; Q 96, A i 230d-231c; Q 100, A 2 252b-253a V
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, INTRO, 47a-b; PART i, 71d-73a; 97c-d; PART II, 99a-104d; 116c~d; 148b; 153a
27 SHAKESPEARE : Troilus and Cressida, ACT i, sc m [75-137] 108d-109c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 34a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics ^ PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 3a; 16c*17a / Civil Government, CH vn, SECT 87-90 44a-45a; CH VHI, SECT 95-99 46c-47c; CH ix 53c-54d; CH x, SECT 133 55b; CH xi 55b-58b passim, esp SECT 136 56c-d; CH xix, SECT 217 75a; SECT 222 75d-76c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 3b-c; BK xi, 69a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 368d 369a; 370b-c; 374b-c; 380d-381a; 381c-382b / Social Contract, BK i, 391b-393b; BK II, 395a-b; 396d-398b; BK III, 417d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 91b; 96a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 408c-409c; 435a-436c; 438d-439a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 29, lOla; NUMBER 41, 132c; NUMBER 43, 141d; NUMBER 51, 164c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 256- 258 79d-81c; par 260 82a-83a; par 267 84b; par 270 84d-89c; ADDITIONS, 161-162 143a- 144c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 170c- 178a; PART i, 230a-c; PART iv, 321a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 780b-d
#2a(1)  Comparison of the state and the soul - the conception of the state as a living organism; the body politic
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II-iv, 316a-356a; BK v, 363b-364b; BK VIII 401d-416a esp 402b-c / Laws, BK III, 669d-670b; BK xn, 794b-796d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 5 [i254 B 24~ b 4] 447d-448a; CH 13 [1260*4-20] 454c-d; BK III, CH 4 [i277 a 5-i3] 474a; BK iv, CH 4 [1290^1- 40] 489d-490a; [1291*24-33] 490c; BK VII, CH 8 [i328 a 2i- b 5j 532c-d
14 PLUTARCH: Coriolanus, 177a-b / Agesilaus, 495c-d / Phocion, 605a-b / Agis, 648b,d- 649b / Aratus, 834d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK III, CH 10, 172d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, INTRO, 47a-b; PART II, 107d; 116c-d; 117b; 122b-124b; 126b-d; 148b-153a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 504c-505d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Coriolanus, ACT i, sc i [67- 167] 352a-353a
28 HARVEY: Motion of the Heart, 267a-b
32 MILTON: Areopagitica, 407b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xix, SECT 212 74a-b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 112a-115b
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 215b-216b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK x, 61b,d- 62a
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 368d-369a / Social Contract, BK HI, 407a; 418a-c; 419c- 420a
42 KANT: Judgement, 547b-c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 30, lOlb
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 269 84d; par 271 89c; par 278 92c-93a; ADDITIONS, 157 142b-c; 161 143a-b; 168 145c-d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 174d; 188a-b; PART i, 222a-c; PART in, 302d-303c; PART iv, 321a
#2a(2) The state as a corporate person
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 97c-d; PART II, lOOc-lOla; 101d-102c; 104a-b; 117b-120c; 122b-c; 130b-d; 132a-b
35 LOCKE: Cwil Government, CH viu, SECT 95- 99 46c-47c
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 368d-369a / Social Contract, BK i, 392a; 392c-393b; BK II, 395a<b; 396d-397a; BK III, 406b,d-409a passim, esp 406b,d-407a; 412c; 418a-c; 419c-420a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 452b; 454b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in 55a- 114a,c; ADDITIONS, 191 ISOa-c
#2a(3) The progressive realization of the state as the process of history - the state as the divine idea as it exists on earth; the national spirit
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 256-259 79d-82a; par 270 84d-89c; par 340- 360 110b-114a,c esp par 349 llld-112a; AD- DITIONS, 19-20 119c-120b; 152 141c-d; 164 144c-145a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 170c-178a esp 171b, 176d-177a; 180c-182c; 203b-206a,c; PART i, 230a-231b; 257c-258d; PART 11, 266a-267a; 271c-d; PART in, 287a- 288b; PART iv, 327d-328a; 333b-c; 351d- 354a; 357b-c

2b. The state as a part or the whole of society

7 PLATO: Republic, BK v, 364c-365d / Laws, BK xi, 776c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIII, CH 9 [1160*8-30] 412b-c / Politics, BK VII, CH 8 [i 328^-22] 532d-533a; BK VIII, CH i [1337*28-30] 542b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, en 17 522b- 523a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 21, A 4, REP 3 719d-720a,c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 96, A 4, ANS 233a d; PART II-n, Q 10, A 10 434c-435c; Q 12, A 2 443b-444b
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 2d-3c; 7c; 16a-c / Civil Government, CH xi, SECT 138-140 57b-58a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 299b-d
43 MILL: Liberty, 271c-d; 272d-273d; 302d- 312a; 320c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 162 143b-144c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 174a-d; 175d-176c; 177b-178a; 182d-183a; PART iv, 316a-d; 333b-c

2c. The source or principle of the state's sovereignty - the sovereignty of the prince; the sovereignty of the people

0 OLD TESTAMENT -.Judges, 8:22-23 / 1 Samuel, 8 (D) I Kings, 8 / // Samuel, 2'^-(D) II Kings, 2:4
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK III, CH i [i275*22- b 2i] 472a-c; CH 3 [i276 a 4O- b i] 473b; BK iv, CH 9 [94 b 34-39l 494d
14 PLUTARCH: Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK i, 197a-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 90, A 3 207a-c; Q 96, A 6, ANS 235a-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 71d-73a; 97c-d; PART II, 100c-105c; 109b-c; 117c-d; 130d; 149d-150b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vin, SECT 95-99 46c-47c; CH ix, SECT 127 54a-b; CH x, SECT 132 55a-b; CH xi, SECT 135 55d-56b; SECT 141 58a-b; CH xm, SECT 149 59b-d; CH xiv, SECT 163 63a-b; CH xv, SECT 171 65a-b; CH xvi, SECT 179 66d-67a; CH xvn, SECT 198 70d- 71a; CH xix, SECT 243 81d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 3b-c; BK 11, 4b; 7c-d; BK xv, 109c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 323d / Social Contract, BK i, 392a-393b; BK 11, 395a-d; 396d-397a; 399b-400c; BK III, 406b,d-409a; 424a-b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 51c-d; lOOd; 241b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 74c-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 436c; 437c-d; 439a- 441d; 445a-c; 448b-d; 450a-b; 451c-d
43 DLCLARATIONOF INDEPENDENCE : [1-25] la-b; [43-47] 2a; [109-121] 3a-b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: PREAMBLE lla,c; AMENDMENTS, IX-X 17d'18a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 22, 84d-85a; NUMBER 33, 108b-c; NUMBER 39, 126b-128b; NUMBER 46, 150b-c; NUMBER 49, 159c; NUMBER 84, 252b-c
43 MILL: Liberty, 267d-269c / Representative Government, 344d; 355b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 275 92a-b; par 279 93a-94d; par 320-321 106c-d; ADDITIONS, 167 145c / Philosophy of History, PART II, 272b-273a; PART iv, 355c-d; 365a- 366b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, EPILOGUE n, 680b- 684a passim

2d. The economic aspect of the state - differentiation of states according to their economic systems

6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350d- 351a; 352c-d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319c; BK III, 341c-d; BK v, 364c-365d / Laws, BK v, 692d- 697a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 11 [1259*23-36] 453c-d; BK II, CH i [i26o b }7-i26i a 8] 455b,d; CH 5 458a-460a; CH 6 [i265 ft 28- b i8] 460c- 461a; CH 7 461d-463c; CH 8 [1267^0-36] 463c-d; [i268 a i6- h 4] 464a-b; CH 9 [1270*15- b 6] 466b-c; BK III, CH 9 [1280^6-32] 478b-c; BK v, CH 9 [i309 b i 4- 1310*2] Slid 512b; BK vi, CH 4 522a-523b; CH 8 [i32i b i2~34] 525b-c; BK VII, CH 8-10 532c-534d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus 32a-48d / Solon 64b,d- 77a,c / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c / Caius Gracchus 681b,d 689a,c 842 2e to 2f (2. The general theory of the state. 24. The economic aspect of the state; differentiation of states according to their economic systems.)
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 94d-95a; PART ii, 124b-126d; 156c-157a
35 LOCKE : Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, CH v, SECT 38 33b-c; SECT 45 34d-35a; CH vi, SECT 72-73 40d-41a; CH vin, SECT 117 52b; SECT 120-121 52d-53b; CH xi, SECT 138-140 57b-58a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 215b-216b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv, 16a- 17b; BK v, 19a-21d; 23a-25c; 27d-28a; 29b- 30a; BK VII, 44a-48a; BK xiv, 105a; BK xv, 109a-b; 110d-112d; BK xx, 147a-d; BK xxxxi, 151b-153d; BK xxn, 174a-b; 183b-184b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 377b-385a,c / Social Contract, BK II, 405c-d; BK III, 415b 417c; 421c-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III 163a-181a,c esp 165a-166b, 176a-18la,c; BK iv 182a-300d csp 182a-b, 188a-190b, 193a, 195a, 225d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 21c-22c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 11-13 53b-60a passim; NUMBER 21, 79b-80c; NUMBER 30, lOlb; NUMBER 35 112a-114c; NUMBER 54 170a-172b passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 299 99c-100b
50 MARX: Capital, 163a-c; 171d-176a esp 174c- 175c; 275c-278a,c passim
50 MARX-ENCELS: Communist Manifesto, 416c-d
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 882c-884c

2e. The political structure of the state - its determination by the form of government

7 PLATO: Republic, BK VIII 401d-416a / Statesman, 598b-604b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH i 44Sa-b; BK 11, CH 1 455b,d; BK III, CH 3 473a-c; CH 6 [i278 b 6- 14] 475d; CH 13 [i283 b 5~7] 481c; CH 17 486c- 487a; BK iv, CH 3-4 488d-491d esp CH 4 [I290 b 2i-i29i b i3] 489d-490d; CH 11-12 495b- 497b; BK v, CH 9 [1309^4-1310*2] 511d-512b; BK VH, CH 8 532c-533a / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 4 [1360*17-36] 600c-d; CH 8 608a-c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK iv, 72a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, lOla-b; 104d- lOSc; 117b-124b; 138b; 151c-152a; PART m, 228a-b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vin, SECT 95-99 46c-47c; CH x, SECT i32-cn xi, SECT 134 55a-d; CH xix, SECT 211-212 73d-74b
38 MONTESQUIEU :S/wtf of Laws, BK i-n, 2d-4a; BK xi, 69d-70a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 359a-d / Social Contract, BK III, 406b,d-409a; 423a-424d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 436b-c; 441b-c; 450a- 452a
43 MILL: Representative Governmetit, 327b,d-332d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 273- 274 90c-92a; par 276 92b; ADDITIONS, 166 145b-c; 170 145d-146a; 178 147d-148a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 173a-175c; PART iv, 364d-365c

2f. The primacy of the state or the human person - the welfare of the state and the happiness of its members

5 AESCHYLUS: Seven Against Thebes 27a-39a,c esp [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c
5 SOPHOCLES: Antigone 131a-142d esp [162-210] 132c-d / Ajax [1047-1090] 152a-b / Philoctetes 182a-195a,c
5 EURIPIDES: Phoenician Maidens [834-1018] 385c-387b / Iphigenia at Aulis 425a-439d esp [1255-1275] 436c, [1368-1401] 437c-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 6c-7a
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK II, 397d- 398c; 402b-404a; BK vi, 520a-d
7 PLATO: Crito 213a-219a,c esp 216d-219a,c / Republic, BK i, 302c-306a; BK iv, 342a-d; 350b-d; BK v, 364c-365d; BK vi, 379d>380b; BK VH, 390b-391b; 401a-b / Statesman, 600d- 601b / Laws, BK III, 672d-676c; BK v, 692c- 693a; BK ix, 754a-b; BK xi, 776c; 777d-778b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 2 [1094^-10] 339c-d; BK v, CH i [ii29 b i5-i8] 377a / Politics, BK T, CH 2 [i253 B i9~29] 446c; BK II, CH 5 [i264 b i6-25] 459d-460a; BK III, CH 4 473c- 475a; CH 6 475d-476c; CH 12 [i282 b i5-i8] 480c; BK VII, CH 1-3 527a~530a; en 8 532c- 533a; CH 13 536b-537b; BK VIII, CH i [1337* 28-30] 542b
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 19 125b-126c; BK II, CH 10 148c-150a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK v, SECT i 268b,d; SECT 6 269b-d; SECT 16 271c-d; SECT 22 272b; BK vi, SECT 14 274d-275a; SECT 54 279c; BK ix, SECT 23 293c
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 44d-45c / Numa Pompihus, 51c-52b / Solon, 71d / De- mosthenes, 699c-700a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK II, CH 21 161b- 162d; BK xix, en 17 522b-523a; CH 21 524a- 525a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 60, A 5, ANS 313b-314c; Q 96, A 4 512d-513c; PART i-ii, Q 21, A 3 718d-719c; A 4, REP 3 719d-720a,c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 90, A 2 206b-207a; A 3, REP 3 207a-c; Q 92, A i, ANS and REP 1,3-4 213c-214c; Q 94, A 2, ANS 221d-223a; Q 96, A 3, ANS and REP 3 232b-233a; A 4, ANS 233a-d; Q 98, A i, ANS 239b-240c; Q 100, A 2, ANS 252b-253a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 93d-94a; PART II, 104a-b; 113d-115a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 48a-51a passim; 381a- 388c; 486b-489b
26 SHAKESPEARE: Henry V, ACT i, sc n [183-213] 535d-536a CHAPTER 90: STATE 843
27 SHAKESPEARE: Troilus and Cressida, ACT i, sc in [78-134] 109a-c / Coriolanus, ACT i, sc i [67-167] 352a-353a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 71a-76a passim
31 SPINOZA: Ethics ', PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
32 MILTON: Samson Agonistes [843-870] 358a b
35 LOCKE: Toleration, lib; 15d; 16d-17b / Civil Government, CH viu, SECT 95-99 46c-47c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv, 16c; BK v, 18d-19d; BK xi, 69a-c; BK xii, 92b-c; BK xxm, 199c; BK xxvi, 221c-222a
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 368d-369a; 372a-b; 374a-375b; 376a-b / Social Contract, BK i, 391d; 392b-393b; 393d-394d; BK 11, 396b-399a; BK III, 421c-423a
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 272d-273b / Science of Right, 438d-439b
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [1-15] la-b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: PREAMBLE lla,c; AMENDMENTS, I-X 17a-18a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 43, 143b-c; NUMBER 45, 147c-148a
43 MILL: Liberty, 267b,d-274a; 293b-323a,c esp 297a, 322d-323a,c / Representative Government, 337b; 338b-c; 392b-396d / Utilitarianism, 453a-454a; 460a-461c; 464d-476a,c passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 185 64b-d; par 187 65a-c; par 236 76a-c; par 258, 80c-d; par 260-261 82a-83d; par 270 84d-89c; par 288-289 97a-d; par 294 98b-d; par 323 107a; par 328 108b-c; par 337 109d-110a; AD- DITIONS, 47 124a-b; 116-118 135c-136b; 127 137b; 143 139d-140a; 145 140b; 154-156 142a-b; 158 142d; 162 143b-144c; 177 147d; 189 149d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 164b; 166b; 170c-172b; 192c-193a; PART II, 271c-d; 276a; PART in, 289b-d; 298c-299a; PART iv, 320c-321a; 365b-c; 366c-367a; 367d- 368a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 429c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a; BK xi, 505a-511b; 513d-521c csp 513d-515a; 527b-532a,c esp 527b-528b; BK xn, 537b-538a; BK xin, 577b-c; EPILOGUE i, 670d-671c
54 FREUD: War and Death, 757b-c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 799b-d

2g. Church and state - the relation of the city of God to the city of man

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Judges, 8:22-23 / / Samuel, 8; 10:18-19,24; 12:12-14,17-19; 13 (D) I Kings, 8; 10:18-19,24; 12:12-14,17-19; 13 / // Chronicles, 19:1 i(D) II Paralipomenon, 19:11 / Psalms, 2; 48:1-8; 72:8-11; 87; 127:1-2 (D) Psalms,2; 47:1-9; 71 :8-n ; 86; 126:1-2 / Isaiah, 43:i5-(>) Isaias, 43:15 / Daniel, 2:44; 4: ? (D) Daniel, 2:44; 4:14,22,29
0 APOCRYPHA: Rest of Esther, 14:3 (D) OT, Esther, 14:3 / Wisdom of Solomon, 6:1-4 (D) OT, Bool( f Wisdom, 6:2-5 / // Maccabees, 7:30 (D) OT, II Machabees, 7:30
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 17:24-27; 22:15-22 (D) Matthew, 17:23-26; 22:15-22 / Marl^ 12:13-17 / Lufe, 20:21-26 / Johtt, 18:33-37 / Acts, 5:27-29 / Romans, 13:1-8 / I Corinthians, 15:24-25 / Ephesians, 2:19 / / Timothy, 2:1-3 / Titus, 3:1 / Hebrews, 13:14 / / Peter, 2:13-17
7 PLATO: Laws, BK x, 757d-761b; 769d-771b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIIi, CH 9 [1160*19-29] 412b-c / Politics, BK III, CH 14 [1285*3-7] 483a-b; [1285^0-23] 484a; BK v, CH n [I3i4 b 36-i3i5*4] 517d; BK vi, CH 7 [1321*35- b i] 525a; CH 8 [i322 b i9-29] 526c; BK vii, CH 8 [i328 b 2-22] 532d-533a; CH 9 [1329*26-34] 533d; CH 10 [1330*8-14] 534c; CH 12 [1331*19- 28] 535d; [i33i b 4-7l 536a
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 30 138a,c; BK II, CH 5, 143d-144a; BK iv, CH 3 224b-d
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK xn [175-194] 358b-359a; [829-842] 376a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 52d-53a; 57b / Themistocles, 92a-c / Camillus, 114c-116a / Fabius, 142d-143a / Marcellus, 247c-248b / Cleomenes, 659d-660a
15 TACITUS : Annals, BK III, 59d-60c
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK III, par 15 17a-b / City of God, BK i, PREF-CH 6 129a-132d; BK iv, CH 33-34 206c-207a,c; BK v, CH 15-16 220d-221b; CH 25 228b-c; BK xi, CH i 322b,d- 323a; BK xv-xvni 397b,d-507a,c esp BK xv, CH 1-5 397b,d-400c, BK XVH, en 1-3 449a- 451c, BK xvni, CH 1-2 472b,d-473d; BK xix, CH 5 513d-514b; CH n 516d-517b; CH 14 520a-d; CH 17 522b-523a; CH 19-26 523b- 529a
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 96, A 4 233a-d; Q 100, A 2, ANS 252b-253a; PART ii-n, Q 10, AA lo-n 434c-436b; Q n, A 3 440b-441a; Q 12, A 2 443b-444b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, n [10-27] 2d; xxxiv [1-69] 51b-52a; PURGATORY, vi [58- 151] 61b-62c; xin [85-96] 72d; xvi [52-129] 77b-78a; xxxn [ioo]-xxxni [78] 103c-105a; PARADISE, VI [l-IIl] 113c-114d
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xi 16d-17d
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART i, 80d-81a; 82b- 83a; 83d-84c; PART II, lllb-112c; I51a-c; 155d-156b; 163c-d; PART in, 165a-167c; 171c- 172a; 177c-180a; 187c-188a; 191b; 193c-d; 198a-246a,c; PART iv, 248a-249b; 251c 252d; 266a-c; 273c-274a; 275a-278d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 306b-d
26 SHAKESPEARE: 1st Henry VI, ACT i, sc in 5b-6c; ACT in, sc i [1-145] 14b-15d / King John 376a<405a,c esp ACT in, sc i 386a-389d, ACT v, sc i [1-24] 399b-c, sc 11 400a-401d / 2nd Henry IV, ACT i, sc i [187-215] 470a-b; ACT iv, sc i [1-96] 487b-488b; sc 11 [1-42] 489d-490a / Henry V, ACT i, sc i 533a-d 844 (2. The general theory of the state. 2g. Church and state - the relation of the city of God to the city of man.)
27 SHAKESPEARE: Henry VIII 549a-585a,c esp ACT HI, sc ii 568b-573d
30 BACON: Advancement of learning, 27c
32 MILTON: New Forcers of Conscience 68a-b / Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-b / Paradise Lost, BK xn [485-551] 329b-331a / Areopagitica, 386b388a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 2d-21c csp 2d-3a, 7c, 13a-b, 16b, 20d-21c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK II, 7c-8c; BK v, 27d; BK XH, 85c-86a; BK xvm, 134c-d; BK xix, 144c-145a; BK xxnr, 196c-197c; BK xxiv-xxv 200a-214a,c; BK xxvi, 214b,d- 2l5a; 218a-219d; BK xxx, 284d-285c; BK xxxi, 298b 308c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 327a-c; 358d-359a / Social Contract, BK 11, 401c-402a; BK iv, 435a- 439c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 56b-57a; BK iv, 232b; BK v, 343b,d-356d; 357c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 13b-d; 197a-b; 229c-230a; 233d; 289b,d-294a; 299b-304d passim, csp 299b-d, 303c; 328c-330a,c; 349c- 351d; 382a-383b; 390c-393d passim, csp 392c; 443d-446b esp 444c-445b; 451d- 453a; 457b,d-460b passim; 582c; 611d-612a; 623d-624b; 631d-632a; 642c-643a; 863c |n68|
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 147d-148c; 195a; 199c-202d; 204b-207a csp 205d-206b; 212d- 213d; 214c-215c; 252c-d; 352b 353b - 360b- 361 b; 381d-383c; 417b-418d; 557c-562b esp 560d-561c; 567c-569d; 582c-589d esp 586a-c, 588b-589d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 442c-d; 444a-c
43 ARTICLES OF CON PL DERATION: in 5b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE vi [591- 599] 16d; AMENDMENTS, i 17a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 52, 165c; NUMBER 57, 177b
43 MILL: Liberty, 279a-d; 290c-291a / Representative Government, 341a-c; 437d-438b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 189c-d; 251c; 314c-315b; 445b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 270 84d-89c; ADDITIONS, 162 143b-144c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 175c-177b; 192c-d; 205d-206a,c; PART i, 216b-217c; 245d-247b; PART in, 308b c; 309d-310c; 311b-d; PART iv, 316a-d; 321b-322a; 325d-326b; 331b-d; 333b-c; 336c-337d; 345c-346c; 350b-c; 351b- 354a; 365b-c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [10,977-11,034] 267a- 268b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK ix, 354b-c; 374d-377b; BK x, 435c-436c; BK xin, 572d; 574a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov y BK II, 28d-32a; BK v, 127b-137c passim

3. The origin, preservation, and dissolution of the state

    [sem referências]

3a. The development of the state from other communities

6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK II, 391c-d
7 PLATO: Laws, BK HI, 666a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIH, CH 12 [1162*16-19] 414c / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252 b 9~i253 a i ) 445d-446b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [IOH- 1027] 74b-c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 96, A 4 512d-513c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 94, A 2 221d-223a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vm 46d-53c
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 410a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK HI, 411c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 181 63c-d; par 258, 80d; par 349 llld'112a / Philosophy of History, PART u, 260b-261a; PART in, 287a-d

3b. The state as natural or conventional or both

7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a / Laws, BK III, 663d-666c; BK x, 760a-761d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 2 445b-446d; BK III, CH 6 [i278 b i5-29] 475d-476a
12 AURLLIUS: Meditations, BK iv, SECT 4 264a; BK VH, SECT 13 280c; BK VIII, SECT 34 288a-b; BK ix, SECT 9 292b-d; BK x, SECT 6 297a-b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Thcologtca, PART i-n, Q 95, A 4, ANS 229b-230c 23HoBBEs - Leviathan, INTRO, 47a-b; PART II, lOOa-c; lOla-b; 113c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 462d-463a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 35-37 433b- 436a esp PROP ^7, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
33 PASCAL: Pensecs, 304 227b-228a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 14-15 28b-c; CH VH, SECT 87-89 44a-d; CH vm 46c-53c; CH xix, SECT 21 r 73d-74a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, lc-2d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 358b-c / Political Economy, 367b/ Social Contract, BK i, 387b,d-392a; BK ii, 399b-c; BK III, 419c-d; 423a-c; 424d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 412c-413a; 433c-434c; 435a-436b; 437c-d; 450d-451a
43 MILL: Liberty, 302d-303a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 75 31d-32b; PART HI, par 203 68a-c; par 280 94d-95a; ADDITIONS, 47 124a-b / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 164b-c
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 780 b-d
#3b(1) Man as by nature a political animal - the human need for civil society
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Republic, BK II, 316c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIII, CH 12 [1162*16-25] 33(2) to 3d 414c; BK ix, CH 9 [n69 b i8-22] 423b / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252 b 27-i 253*39] 446a-d; BK HI, CH 6 [i278 b i5-29] 475d-476a
12 EPICTETUS : Discourses, BK i, CH 23 128c-d
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK 11, SECT i 256b,d; BK iv, SECT 4 264a; SECT 29 266a; BK VH, SECT 13 280c; SECT 55 283b-c; BK viu, SECT 34 288a-b; SECT 56 290c; SECT 59 290d; BK ix, SECT 9 292b-d; SECT 23 293c; BK x, SECT 6 297a-b; BK xi, SECT 8 303a-b; BK xn, SECT 30 310a-b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xn, CH 27 359c- 360a,c; BK xix, CH 5 513d-514b; CH 17 522b- 523a
19 AQUINAS: Swnma Theologica, PART i, Q 96, A 4 512d-513c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 94, A 2 221d-223a; Q 96, A 4, ANS 233a-d
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, viu [91- 148] 117d-118c
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART i, 84c-86b; 93d-94a; PART II, 99a-100c; CONCLUSION, 279a-c
28 HARVEY: On Animal Generation, 454a
30 BACON: Advancement of learning, 20c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 18, SCHOL 429a-d; PROP 35, COROL 1-2 433c-d
35 LOCKE: CM Government, CH n, SECT 13-15 28a-c; CH vn, SECT 77 42b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 159a-163b esp 160a-b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, ld-3a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 330d-331d; 362c-d / Social Contract, BK i, 387d-388c; BK II, 397a-b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 6, 39a-b; NUMBER 10, 50b-c; NUMBER 15, 65b-d; NUMBER 17, 69c; NUMBER 34, llOc-d; NUMBER 49, 160a; NUM- BER 55, 174c-d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 460a-461c; 469c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART m, par 183 64a; par 188-195 65c-67a; ADDITIONS, 47 124a-b / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 361c-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 310a-d; 321b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 684d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 787a-c; 791 b-c
#3b(2) Natural law and the formation of the state
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 86c-87b; 91a-96b; PART II, 99a-d; 131a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH i-ix 25a-54d passim, esp CH ix 53c-54d; CH xi, SECT 136 56c-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, la-2d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-334a,c esp 330a- 331c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 433c-434c
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [1-15] la-b CHAPTER 90: STATE 845
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 43, 143b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 361c-d

3c. The condition of man in the state of nature and in the state of civil society - the state of war in relation to the state of nature

7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Laws, BK i, 641a
9 ARISTOTLE : Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*30-39] 446d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 51b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 12, 51 7d- 518c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 96, A 4 512d-513c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 84c-87b; 90b-d; 94b-c; 96a-b; PART II, 99a-b; 131a-c; 138c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 93b-94a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 20c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH i-ix 25a-54d esp CH H-III 25d-29d, CH ix 53c-54d; en xi, SECT 136-137 56c-57b; CH XH, SECT 145-146 58d- 59a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 2b-3a; BK viu, 52a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 329a-334a,c; 342c- 345c; 354a-b; 355b-c; 362a-366d / Political Economy, 374a-b / Social Contract, BK i, 389d- 390a; 391b; 393b c; BK II, 398a b; 399b c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 309a-311c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 86d-87b; 237c-d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 222b-c / Science of Right, 405d-406c; 408c-409c; 433c-434d; 435c-436b; 450d-451a; 452a-d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 51, 164c-d
44 Bos WELL: Johnson, 204d-205b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 187 65a-c; par 194 66c-d; par 333-334 109b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, I71c-172b; 199b-c; PART iv, 317d-318a

3d. The social contract as the origin of civil society or the state - universal consent as the basis of the constitution or government of the state

7 PLATO: Crito, 216d-219a,c / Republic, BK II, 311b-c / Laws, BK III, 666b-667d / Seventh Letter, 807a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 9 [i 270^20-22] 466d; BK iv, CH 9 [i294 b 34-39] 494d
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [1011- 1027] 74b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK iv, CH 4 190d; BK xix, CH 21 524a-525b; CH 24 528b-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 90, A 3 207a-c; Q 97, A 3 237b 238b; Q 105, A 2, ANS 309d-316a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 97c-d; PART II, 100c402c; 109b-c; 113c; ,133b; PART in, 200a-b 846 3e to 3f (3. The origin t preservation, and dissolution of the state. $d. The social contract as the origin of civil society or the state - universal consent as the basis of the constitution or government of the state.)
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 14-15 28b-c; en vn, SECT SJ-CH vm, SECT 122 44a- 53c; CH x, SECT 132 55a-b; CH xi, SECT 134 55b-d; SECT 141 58a-b; CH xv, SECT 171 65a-b; CH xvi, SECT 175 65d; SECT 192 69c-d; en xix 73d-81d passim, esp SLCT 211 73d-74a, SECT 243 81d
38 MONTFSQUIBU: Spirit of Laws, BK ix, 58b,d- 60a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 353c-355b; 358b-d / Political Economy, 367b; 370b-c / Social Contract, BK i 387b,d-394d esp 391b-392a; BK IT, 400a-c; BK JH, 423a-424d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 403b-c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 412c-413a; 434b-c; 435a-436c; 437c-d; 450d-452a
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [1-15] la-b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER i, 29a-b; NUMBER 22, 84d-85a; NUMBER 38, 121b-c; NUMBER 44, 144d-145a
43 MILL: Liberty, 302d-303a / Representative Government, 327b,d-332d passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 75 31d-32b; PART in, par 258, 80d 81b; ADDI- TIONS, 47 124a-b; 116 135c-d

3e. Love and justice as the bond of men in states - friendship and patriotism

5 SOPHOCLES: Antigone [332-375] 134a-b
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [286-364] 260d-261c / Phoenician Maidens [528-567] 382c-d; [991- 1018) 387a-b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK VII, 225d-226b; 255c-d; BK VIII, 273d 6TnucYDiDEs - Peloponnesian War, BK 11, 397d-398c; 402b-404a; BK vi, 513d-514b; 534b-c
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45a / Symposium, 152b-d; 154a-b / Republic, BK i, 308b-309b; BK iv, 346a-356a; BK v, 360d-365d / Laws, BK iv, 678d-679a; BK v, 692b-c; 694d; BK vi, 701a / Seventh Letter, 814b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIII, CH i [1155*22-28] 406d; CH 9-12 411d-414d passim; BK ix, CH 6 420c-421a / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*29-39] 446d; BK II, CH 4 [i262*25- b 23] 457b-d; en 5 [i263 a 23~ b 27] 458b-d; BK HI, CH 9 [1280*32- 1281*2] 477d-478c; BK iv, CH n [1295^-34] 495c-496a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK III, SECT n 262a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 20c-21a / Lycurgus, 36a-b; 44d-45c / Pelopidas, 238d-239d / Dion, 784d-785a
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK iv, 284c-285a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK II, CH 21 161b- 162d; BK iv, CH 4 190d; BK xix, CH 21 524a- 525a; CH 23-24, 528a-c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xi [13-90] 15b- 16a; xxxn-xxxiv 47c-52d; PURGATORY, vi [58-151] 61b-62c; xv 75b 76d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 75c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, APPENDIX, x-xvii 448a-d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vm, SECT 107 49b-d / Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 2 104a-b
36 Swii'T: Gulliver, PART iv, 165b 166a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, xxiia-d; BK v, 18d-19d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 323b-d / Political Economy, 373c-374a; 376a-b / Social Contract, BK III, 421c-422a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 4d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 14, 62a-d; NUMBER 17, 69c-70d; NUMBER 27, 95c-d; NUMBER 29, lOOa-b; NUMBER 46, 150c-15la
43 MILL: Representative Government, 343a; 424c- 425b; 428b c / Utilitarianism, 460a-461c; 464d-476a,c passim, esp 469c-d, 473d-474b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 267- 269 84b-d; par 289 97b-d; par 325 107d; ADDITIONS, 160-161 142d-143b / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 172b-d; PART in, 300c-301a; PART iv, 318a; 320c-321a; 334b-c; 365b-c
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 310c-d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK ix, 384c-388a,c; BK xi, 474a-b; 475b-476c
52 DOS-J-OEVSKY : Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 158b-159a
54 FREUD: Group Psychology, 672a-678d esp 674a, 678a-c; 685d-686c / Ego and Id, 707c-d / Civilization and Its Discontents, 780c; 785d; 791c

3f. Fear and dependence as the cause of social cohesion - protection and security

5 AESCHYLUS: Eumenides [681-710] 88b-c
5 SOPHOCLES : Antigone [162-210] 132c-d / Ajax [1047-1090] 152a-b
6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK II, 402b- 404a
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 44a-45b / Republic, BK II, 311b-c;316c-319a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK III, CH 6 [i278 b i5-29] 475d-476a; CH 9 [1280*32-1281*2] 477d-478c; BK v, CH 8 [1308*25-30] 510b-c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [ion1027] 74b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i, CH 30 147b-d
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH ix, 15b-c; CH xvii, 24a-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 77a; 77c; 84c-86b; 86d-87b; 90b-d; PART II, 99a-101a; 109b-c; 116c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 37, SCHOL 2 435b-436a 3g to CHAPTER 90: STATE 847
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 16a-c / Civil Government, CH n, SECT 13-15 28a-c; CH vm, SECT 95 46c-d; CH ix 53c-54d; en xi, SECT 136-137 56c-57b
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 262a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 2b-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 354c-355a / Political Economy, 370b-c; 374a-375b; 381c-382b / Social Contract, BK i, 391b-c; BK II, 398a-d; BKin,417d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 309a-311c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 91b
42 KANT: Science of Right, 435c-436b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 15, 65b-c; NUMBER 29, lOla; NUMBER 51, 163b-c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 42 2 b / Utilitarianism, 471a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 261, 83d / Philosophy of History, PART II, 283b-c; PART in, 285a-b; 287a-288b; 289b d; 300c- 301c; PART iv, 328b-330b; 342b-d; 344a-c
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 321b-c
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 884a

3g. The identity and continuity of a state - the dissolution of the body politic or civil society

9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK III, CH 3 473a-c
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK i, 21 2b 23HoBBEs - Leviathan, PART II, 116c-d; 148c- 153a; 154b-c; CONCLUSION, 280c-281a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 464c-465c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xvi, SECT 175 65d; CH xix 73d-81d passim, esp SECT 211 73d-74a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK x, 62d
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 374b / Social Contract, BK i, 392d; BK II, 395b; BK III, 407c; 408c; 418a-420a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 450d-451b
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [41-47] 2a
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: xn 9b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE vi [578- 582] 16d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 43, 142d-143a; NUMBER 84, 254b~c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 269 84d; par 272, 90b-c; par 347 lllb-c; ADDI- TIONS, 161 143a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 175c

4. The physical foundations of society - the geographical and biological conditions of the state

    [sem referências]

4a. The territorial extent of the state - its importance relative to different forms of government

7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 318c-319a; BK iv, 343d-344a / Laws, BK v, 691d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 6 [1265*10-18] 460b-c; BK III, CH 3 473a-c; BK iv, CH 4 [1291*19-21] 490b-c; CH 15 [i299 a p- b io] 500a-b; BK vi, CH 4 [i3i9 ft 20- b 2] 522d-523a; BK VII, CH 5 530d-531b
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 58a-b / Solon, 72d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 58a-b / Histories, BK ii, 224d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK III, CH 10 172d- 173c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 38 33b-c; SECT 45 34d-35a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv, 17a-b; BK VIIi, 56b-57c; BK ix, 58b,d-59b; BK xi, 83c-d; BK xvii, 124c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 323b-c / Political Economy, 380a-b / Social Contract, BK i, 394b-c; BK II, 403a-404c; BK III, 411a; 412a-b; 413a-d; 417b-c; 422d-423a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, lb-3c; 8b-lld; 33d-34a,c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 455c-456a
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: ix [262-274] 7d-8a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE iv,
43 FLDKRALIST: NUMBER i, 30d-31a; NUMBER 2, 31c-d; NUMBER 7, 41d-42d; NUMBER 9, 47c- 48d; NUMBER 10, 51c-53a; NUMBER 13 14 59a-62d passim, esp NUMBER 14, 60b-d; NUMBER 28, 97c-98b; NUMBLR $7, 120b-d; NUMBER 4$, 140d-141a; NUMBER 51, 164d- 165a; NUMBER 63, 192d-193a; NUMBER 84, 253d-254b
43 MILL: Liberty, 273b-c / Representative Government, 330a-c; 352a-353a; 432b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART III, par 296 99a-b / Philosophy of History, PART i, 243c-d; PART II, 273d-274a; PART iv, 342c-d

4b. The influence of climate and geography on political institutions and political economy

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK ix, 314a,c 6TnucYDiDEs - Pcloponnesian War, BK i, 349b-d; 352c-d; 372c-d
7 PLATO: Laws, BK iv, 677a-c; BK v, 696d-697a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 10 [i27i b 30-^8] 468a; [i272 a 4o- b 2] 468d; [i272 b i7-2o] 469a; BK v, CH 3 [i303 b 8-i8] 505a-b; BK VII, CH 5 [i326 b 26]-cn 7 [1327^2] 530d-532a; CH n [i3 3 o a 34- b i 7 ]535a-b
10 HIPPOCRATES: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a
14 PLUTARCH: Solon, 72d / Themistocles, 96b-c
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 224a-b; 295b-296b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 3c-d; BK VII, 46c-47a; BK xiv 102b,d-108d; BK xv, llla-c; BK xvi, 116a-120a; BK xvii-xvin 122a- 134d; BK xtx, 138b-c; 140c-d; 143d-144b; BK xxi, 153a-154a 848 Ac to 5a (4. The physical foundations of society - the geographical and biological conditions of the state. 4b. The influence of climate and geography on political institutions and political economy?)
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 325b / Social Contract, BK ii, 404b-c; 405c-d; BK III, 415b-417c; 422c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 8b-10b; BK III, 173b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 83c-d; 87d-91b esp 90c-91 b ; 236c-237a ;396b-398a passim ; 567a-d ; 655d-657c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 220b-225a passim, esp 221b-222d, 224b; 338b-c; 341c-343b passim; 355c-d; 427b-428a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 2, 31c-d; NUMBER 5, 38a; NUMBER 8, 46a-47a; NUMBER 11, 55b- 56b; NUMBER 12, 57b-58b; NUMBER 24, 88c- 89a; NUMBER 25, 89d-90a; NUMBER 38, 124c-d; NUMBER 41, 133c; 134d-135a
43 MILL: Representative Government, 424c-428a passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 247 78a-b / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 190b- 201a,c esp 194b-196a; PART i, 243d-244c; 248c-249d; 251c-252d; PART II, 259d-260a; 261a; 263d-264a; PART in, 286b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 323a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 253b-255a

4c. The size, diversity, and distribution of populations - the causes and effects of their increase or decrease

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 22d-23a
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 349b-d; BK II, 391c-392a; 399b-401b
7 PLATO: Republic, BK iv, 343d-344a / Laws, BK III, 663d-667a; BK v, 691d; 693a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK ix, CH 10 [ii7o b 29-34J 424c / Politics, BK II, CH 6 [1265*10-18] 460b-c; [i265*38- b i7] 460d-461a; CH 9 [i27o*i5- b 6] 466b-c; BK III, CH 15 [i286 b 8-22] 484d-485a; BK iv, CH 6 [i292 b 4 1-1293*11] 492c; CH n [1296*6-13] 496b; CH 13 [1297^2-28] 498a; BK v, CH 3 [i303 a 25~ b 4] 504d-505a; BK vi, CH 6 [i320 b 39-i32i*4] 524c; BK VH, CH 4 530a-d; CH 6 531b-d esp [1327*12-17] 531b
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 138b-139a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART 11, 157a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 330b-d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH XIH, SECT 157- 158 61c-62b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK VII, 46c- 47a; BK xvm, 127a-b; BK xxm 187b,d-200a,c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365c-366b / Political Economy, 367d; 378b / Social Contract, BK II, 404a-c; BK III, 407c-408b; 413d; 417b-418a; 420b-c; 422d-423a; BK iv, 428b-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 33c-34b; 71a-d; BK III, 163a-165b; BK iv, 243b,d-244a; BKV,384b-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 17d-18a; 88a-c; 90c-d;239a-d;486c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 108d-109a; 221b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 229d-230a
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [48-51] 2a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 2, 31d; NUMBER 10, 52a-53a; NUMBER 13, 59b-c; NUMBER 54 170a-172b passim; NUMBER 55, 172b-173c; NUMBER 56 174d-176d; NUMBER 58 179c-182a passim
43 MILL: Liberty, 319b-d / Representative Government, 424c~428a passim
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 172b-c; 373c-374a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 243 77b-c / Philosophy of History, PART II, 263b-d; PART in, 286b; PART iv, 318c-319b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 275d-277c; 323b- 327a; 383b-384d; 391d-394a,c
50 MARX: Capital, 172b-c; 249a-250a;312c-313a; 317c-319a; 348a-350d; 360a-364a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 421c-d

5. The social structure or stratification of the state

    [sem referências]

5a. The political distinction between ruling and subject classes, and between citizens and denizens

5 SOPHOCLES: Ajax [1226-1315] 153c-154b
5 ARISTOPHANES: Frogs [686-705] 572a-b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 28c-29a
7 PLATO: Republic, BK III-iv, 339b-350a / Laws, BK VIII, 742c-d; BK xi, 774d-775a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 13 [i 259^*33- 1260*20] 454b-d; BK 11, CH 5 [1264*1 i- b 25] 459b-460a; CH 6 [i265 b i8-2i] 461a; BK III, CH 1-5 471b,d-475d passim; BK iv, CH 4 489b- 491d; BK vii, CH 2 [1324*14-17] 528a; CH 4 [1326*17-24] 530b; CH 6 [i 327^-1 4] 531d; CH 8-9 532c-533d / Athenian Constitution, CH 7 555c-556a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 46c-47a / LycurgusNuma, 62b-c
15 TACITUS : Annals, BK xi, 106a-107b
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 98, A 6, REP 2 244c-245b; Q 104, A 4 306d-307c; Q 105, A 3, REP 2 316a-318b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 108d-109a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 9 27a-b; CH VIII, SECT 122 53b-C
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xv, 109a-b; HOa; 112c-d; 114c-115b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK i, 392b [fn i]; BK III, 420b-c; BK iv, 426b-c; 427c; 428b- 430a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 269d-271a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 14a-15c passim; 16c-17d; 147a-b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 81d-82b; 404d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 436d-437c
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: iv [17-36] 5b-c 5b to 5c
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [204-206] 13b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 42, 138d-139c; NUMBER 43, 142b-c; NUMBER 54, 171a-b
43 MILL: Representative Government, 345c-346a; 366a-370a; 380c-389b passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART 11, 273c

5b. The family as a member of the state - its autonomy and its subordination

5 AESCHYLUS: Seven Against Thebes [1011-1084] 38b-39a,c
5 SOPHOCLES: Antigone 131a-142d
5 FURIPIDES: Iphigenia at Aulis [1255-1275] 436c; [1368-1401] 437c-d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Ecclesiazusae [611-650] 622a-c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK iv, 139a-b; BK VII, 223cd
6 THUcvnwY.siPeloponnesian War, BK II, 398c-d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK v,360d-365d / Statesman, 608a-d / Laws, BK HI, 665d-666c; BK vi, 707b-708c; BK VII, 721d; BK xi, 775d-781c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 9 [n8o ft 25- b i3] 435a-b / Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1253*19-29] 446c; CH 13 [i26o l) 8-i9] 455c; BK II, CH 2-3 455d- 457a; CH 9 [i269 b i3-i27o b 6] 465d-466c; BK III, CH 9 [i28o b 3o-i28i a 2J 478c
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 21a-26b / Lycurgus, 39a-41a / Numa Pompilius, 58d / LyctirgusNuma, 62d-64a / Cato the Younger, 629a-c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 32b-d; BK HI, 51a; 51d-52a; BK xv, 162b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 16 521d- 522a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 90, A 3, REP 3 207a-c; Q 95, A i, ANS 226c-227c; Q 104, A 4, ANS 306d-307c; Q 105, A 4 318b- 321a
23 HOBBLS: Leviathan, PART II, 121a; 155b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 344a-c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vi 36a-42a; CH vn, SECT 83 43b-c; CH xvi, SECT 180-183 67b- 68b; SECT 188-192 69a-d
36 SWU-T: Gulliver, PART i, 29b-31a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv, 13b; BK v, 22d-23a; BK xix, 140a-c; BK xxm, 189b-c; 192d-199b; BK xxvi, 216c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 327c-d; 364d-365b / Political Economy, 376b-377a; 377d-378a / Social Contract, BK iv, 439b,d [fn 2]
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 175c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 73c; 82b-83c; 88d- 89a; 92 c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 420b-421c
43 MILL: Liberty, 317c-319d
44 BQSWELL: Johnson, 280c-281a;304a-b;355b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 166 59d-60a; par 174 61 b; par 180 62c-63c; par 238-239 76c-d; par 255-256 79d-80a; ADDI- TIONS, 127 137b; 146-147 140b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 172b-d; PART i, 246d-247a; PART II, 277c; PART in, 288c-289b CHAPTER 90: STATE 849
50 MARX: Capital, 241a-d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 427b- 428a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 783d- 784a

5c. The classes or sub-groups arising from the division of labor or distinctions of birth - the social hierarchy

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK 11, 59b-c; 84d-85b
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II-iv, 316a-350a esp BK II, 316c-319c; BK v, 358d-360d; BK VIII, 413a-c / Timaeus, 442b; 445c / Crams, 480a-481b / Laws, BK v, 695a-c; BK VII, 722d; BK VIII, 740d-741a; BK xi, 774a-775a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 2 [i26i a 24- b 6] 456a-b; CH 5 [i264 a i]-CH 6 [i265 tt 9J 459a- 460b; CH 8 [1267^0-36] 463c-d; [1268*16- b 4] 464a-b; BK HI, CH 4-5 473c-475d; BK iv, CH 3 [i289 b 27-i290 a i2] 488d-489a; CH \ [i29o b 2i- I29i b 29] 489d-491a; CH 12 [1296^0 -34] 496d- 497a; BK VII, CH 8-10 532c-534d / Athenian Constitution, en 7 555c-556a
14 PLUTARCH: Theseus, 9a-d / Romulus, 20c-21a / Numa Pompiltus, 57d-58c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, xvi 130a- 132a
22 CHAUCER: Prologue 159a-174a / Parson s Tale, par 64-67, 530b-532a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 131b-132a; 411a-d
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT iv 56a 64d csp sc n 57d-59d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Troilus and Crcssida, ACT i, sc in [75-136] 108d-109c
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 221d- 222d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 30a-31a; PART iv, 154b-155b; 158a-b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 134a-b; 297d-298a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK II, 5b-c; BK HI, llc-12a; BK xv, llla-112a; BK xx, 151b-152a; BK xxn, 184a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365d-366a / Political Economy, 381c-382b / Social Contract, BK III, 422a; BK iv, 428b-430a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 6d-8b; 51a- 62a passim; 109d-110d; BK HI, 169c-170b; BK iv, 269d-271a; BK v, 301a-309a,c passim; 309a-311c; 382a 383b; 391b-392a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 89d; 144a-b; 242a-c; 497a-501d passim
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 73b; 81c-d; 317b- 318b; 389b-c; 404c-d; 452d-456a,c esp 452d; 571a-572c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 436d>437c; 444c-445c / Judgement, 586a-c
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: vi [82-93] 6a-b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 9 [289-295], SECT 10 [300-303] 14a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 35, 113a-114a; NUMBER 36, 114c-115a; NUMBER 84, 252a 850 5dto5d(2) (5. The social structure or stratification of the state. 5c. The classes or sub-groups arising from the division of labor or distinctions of birth - the social hierarchy.)
43 MILL: Liberty ', 270a-b / Representative Government, 385a-d; 392b-399d passim, esp 398a-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 124d-126a; 127b-c; 140b- 141a; 211b-c; 247c-d; 299a-b; 383b; 470b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 201- 206 68a-69b; par 255 79d; par 288 97a-b; par 295 98d-99a; par 303 101c-102a; par 305 102b; par 308 102c-103a; par 326 107d-108a; ADDITIONS, 127-130 137b-d; 151 141b-c; 189 149d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 181d- 182a; 193b-c; PART i, 222a-223c; 237b-c; 250a-c; PART II, 275b-276a; PART in, 287d- 288b, 294c-297b; PART iv, 335a-336c; 356c- 357a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-c; 578b-c
50 MARX: Capital, 95d-96b [fn 2]; 164a-180d esp 16Sa-b, 165d-166a, 171a-c, 173b, 176b-d, 178c-179c; 218c-219d; 239d-240c; 303d; 317c- 321b esp 317c-319b, 319d-321b; 355a-364a passim, esp 364a; 366a-b; 368c-369a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 419b [fn ij; 419d-420b; 422c-424c; 430b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, la-lib; BK v, 204a-206c; BK VII, 278c; 281a-284a; BK ix, 347d-350d passim; 384c 388a,c; DK x, 403a- 405a; BK xi, 503a-505a; EPILOGUE n, 685d~ 686a
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 882c-d

5d. The conflict of classes within the state

#5d(1) The opposition of social groups - the treatment of national, racial, and religious minorities
7 PLATO: Laws, BK i, 641c-642b; BK iv, 678d- 679a; BK VIII, 742c-d; BK xi, 774d-775a; BK xii, 790a-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK III, CH 5 [i277 b 34- 1278*7] 475a-b; BK v, CH 3 [i303 a 25- b 4] 504d- 505a; BK VII, CH 10 [1330*25-33] 534d
14 PLUTARCH: Theseus, 9c / Romulus, 21a-27c / Numa Pompilius 49a 61d esp 58c
22 CHAUCLR: Prioress's Tale [13,418-620] 392a- 395b esp [13,418-424] 392a / Second Nun's 7fl/M63b-471b esp [15,826-16,021] 467b-471b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 108d-109a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Merchant of Venice, ACT i, sc in [106-143] 410c-411a
31 SPINOZA : Ethics, PART in, PROP 46 410c
32 MILTON : Sonnets, xv 66b
35 LOCKE: Toleration la-22d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 21b-23a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxiv, 206c
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK iv, 428b-c
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 12a-b; 13b-14a; 83a-b; 147a-b; 179d-180a; 206b,d-234a,c esp 207b-211a, 229c-232b; 290b-29lc; 348d- 361a,c esp 348d-349c, 352c-354d, 356b-d; 383a-b; 390c 391d; 607b-608a; 617a-b; 622b-d; 638d-639a; 643c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 138d; 285d-288a; 404 d; 480d-481a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 9 [260-266] 13d; ARTICLE vi [597-599] 16d; AMENDMENTS, I 17aj XV 19b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 42, 137b-c; NUMBER 52, 165c; NUMBER 54 170a-172b; NUMBER 57, 177b
43 MILL: Liberty, 270c-271a; 278a-282a; 307d- 312a passim / Representative Government, 366c-d; 424c-428a / Utilitarianism, 475b- 476a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 270, 86d-87b [fn i] / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 172d-173a; PART II, 276d-277a; PART in, 287d-288b
54 FREUD: War and Death, 755d-756a / Civilization and Its Discontents, 788c
#5d(2) The clash of economic interests and political factions - the class war
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [229-245] 260b c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK vi, 202c-203b; BK VII, 243 b-c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK III, 423a-c; 434c-438c esp 436d-437d; BK iv, 459a-c; 463a-469b; BK v, 482d-483a; 502d; 504a-b; BK vi, 520a-d; BK VIIi 564a-593a,c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK iv, 343c-d; BK VIIi, 405c- 406b / Laws, BK v, 695a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, en 7 461d-463c passim; BK III, CH 10 [i28i a n-29J 478d-479a; BK iv, en 3-4 488d-491d; en 11-12 495b- 497b; BK v, CH 3-8 503d-511c; en 9 [i309 b i4- 1310*11] 511d-512b; BK vi, en 7 [1321*5-27] 524c-525a / Athenian Constitution, CH 1-41 553a-572a passim, esp CH 2-6 553a-555c; CH 29-41 566b-572a
14 PLUTARCH: Solon, 68d-71c; 75c-76d / Coriolanus, 176b-177b; 179c-184c / Agis 648b,d- 656d / Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c / Caius Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c / Cicero, 708a-713b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 97b / Histories, BK II, 224d-225a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vi [58-75] 9a; x [34-93] 14a-c; xxvni 41b-43a; PURGATORY, vi [58-151] 61b-62c
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH ix, 14c-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 121b-122b
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT iv 56a- 64d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Coriolanus, ACT i, sc i 351a- 354d / Pericles, ACT 11, sc i [30-56] 427c-d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 21b-23a; PART II, 60a; 80a-b; PART iv, 154b-155b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 375b-d; 381c- 38 2 b / Social Contract, BK II, 396b-d; BK iv, 429c-431c 5e to 6b CHAPTER 90: STATE 851
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 28a-d; 109d- HOd; BK m, 170c-173b; 175b-179a; BK iv, 269d-271a; BK v, 309a-311c esp 309a-c; 420b- 421a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 144a-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 570d-572d passim; 574b-582c; 588a-589a; 594b-c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 10 49c-53a; NUMBER 51, 164a-165a; NUMBER 60, 185b-186c; NUMBER 85, 256b-c
43 MILL: Liberty, 289c-290a; 309b-c / Representalive Government, 345c-346a; 366a-370a; 376a-c; 387c-d;392b-399d passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 236 76a,-c; par 304 102a / Philosophy of History, PART i, 250a-c; PART 11, 263 b-d; 275b-276a; 283c-d; PART in, 294c-297b; PART iv, 335a- 336c; 356c-357a
50 MARX: Capital, 6d-7d; 9a-c; 63b-c; 113c; 127c-146c esp 131a, 134c-d, 141b-c, 144a-146c; 275a-c; 295a; 317b-c; 355d-368b passim, esp 356c-361d, 366a-368b; 377c-378d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto 415a- 434d esp 416c-d, 419b,d-420a, 422c, 423b- 424d, 425c, 429b-c, 434c-d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK x, 410c-421c
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d / New Introductory Lectures, 882c-d; 884a

5e. The classless society

50 MARX: Capital, 9c
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 416c-d; 429b-c

6. The ideal or best state - the contrast between the ideal state and the best that is historically real or practicable

6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK 11, 395d- 399a
7 PLATO: Republic 295a-441a,c esp BK v-vi, 368c-383a, BK VH, 401c-d / Timaeus, 442b- 443b / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws 640a- 799a,c esp BK v, 692c-693a, 696a-b, BK VII, 722d-723c, BK ix, 754a-b / Seventh Letter, 807b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK v, CH 7 [1135*2-4] 382d / Politics, BK II, CH i [i26o b 26]-cH 9 [1269*33] 455b,d-465c; BK iv, CH i 487a- 488b; en 2 [1289*30-35] 488b; CH 7 [1293^- 21] 493a-b; CH n 495b-496d esp [i295 tt 25- b i] 495b-c; BK vii-vm 527a-548a,c esp BK VII, CH 4 [i 3 25 b 34-3 9 ] 530a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK ix, SECT 29 294a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 48b-c / Numa Pompilius 49a-61d / Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c
23 MACHIAVELLI : Prince, CH xv, 22b
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART 11, 164a,c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 462c-465c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 94d-95a / New Atlantis 199a-214d
32 MILTON: Areopagitica, 393a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 323a-b / Social Contract, BK ii, 402b-403a; 405a-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 201b-c
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right, 450b-451d; 455c-458a,c / Judgement, 586a- 587a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 37-38 117d-125a passim; NUMBER 41, 132b-c; NUMBER 65, 200b-c; NUMBER 85, 257a-c; 258d-259a
43 MILL: Representative Government, 327b,d- 355besp341c-d,344d-345a, 350b-355b; 368c- d; 380c-381a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 185 64b-d; par 273 90c-92a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 173a-175c; PART i, 251b; PART in, 300c-d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 432d- 433d

6a. The political institutions of the ideal state

5 ARISTOPHANES: Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK 11, 396c- 397d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II-iv, 316a-350a / Statesman, 598b-604b / Laws 640a-799a,c esp BK HI, 669d-672b, BK iv, 679c-682c, BK v, 692c-693a, BK vi, 697a-706c, BK VIII, 733b- 734a, BK ix, 754a-b, BK xn 784b-799a,c /
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH i [i26o b 28-36] 455b; CH 2 [i26i ft 24- b i5] 456a-c; en 5 [i264 b 7-25] 459d-460a; en 6 [i265 b 26-i 266*30] 461b-d; en 8 463c-465b; BK iv, en n 495b- 496d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 34d-35d; 45c-46a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-ii, Q 105, A i 307d-309d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Tempest, ACT n, sc i [143-184] 532d-533b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 268c-269b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 323a 325b / Social Contract, BK III, 410d-411c; BK iv, 427d
42 KANT: Pure Reason, 114b-d / Science of Right, 450b-451d; 455c-456a
43 MILL: Representative Government, 338a; 341d- 350a; 369b-389b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 185 64b-d / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 174a- 175c; PART i, 251b; PART in, 300c-d; PART iv, 365c-366a
50 MARX-ENGELS : Communist Manifesto, 428d

6b. The social and economic arrangements of the ideal state

5 ARISTOPHANES: Birds 542a-563d / Ecclcsiazusae 615a-628d / Plutus 629a-642d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a; BK III-iv, 339b-344a; BK v, 356b-365d; BK vii, 401c-d / Timaeus, 442d / Critias, 481a-485c / Laws 640a-799a,c esp BK i, 645b-652d, BK 11, 655b-663d, BK iv, 677a-678c, BK v, 691b- 852 7to7c (6. The ideal or best state - the contrast between the ideal state and the best that is historically real or practicable. 6b. The social and economic arrangements of the ideal state) 697a, BK vi, 706d-713c, BK VII, 717b-728b, BK VIIi 731d-743a, BK xi 771b-784b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 1-8 455b,d- 465b; BK VII, CH 8-12 532c-536b
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-47a / Numa Pompihus, 58a-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 93d-94a
27 SHAKFSPLARE: Tempest, ACT n, sc i [146- 175] 533a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 299 99c-100b SO MARX: Capital, 292d; 377c-378d SO MARX-ENC.FLS: Communist Manifesto, 425b- 429c csp 428d-429c; 432b-433d passim
52 DOSTOEV&KY: Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 158bl59a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d- 788b / New Introductory Lectures, 883d-884c

7. Factors affecting the quality of states

    [sem referências]

7a. Wealth and political welfare

5 ARISTOPHANES: Plutus 629a-642d csp [415- 618] 633d 636d
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350b- 352c; BK II, 397b-c; BK VIII, 569d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a csp 318c- 319a; BK III-iv, 339b-344a esp 341c 344a; BK v, 364c-365d; BK VIII, 405c-408a / Cntias, 485b-c / Laws, BK HI, 665b; BK iv, 677a-c; BK v, 687d-688a; 694a-695c; BK VIII, 733b-d
9 ARISTOTLL: Politics, BK II, en 7 [1267*18-36] 462d-463a; BK VII, CH 4 [i ^25^3-1 326*4] 530a; CH 6 [i32725-3i] 531b-c; en 8~532c- 533a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b; 47d / Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-c / Coriolanus, 180b-d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b / Agis, 649b-c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 31a-b; BK HI, 57b-58d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i, CH 30-33 147b-149a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [1-60] 9c- lOa; xvi [64-78] 23a-b; PURGATORY, xx [34- 96] 83c-84a
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART iv, 267c-268b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 73b-76b; PART iv, 154b-155b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 19a-21d; 23a-25c; BK VII, 44a-48a; BK XIH, 96c; BK xx, 146b-147d; BK xxi, 153c-d; 154b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 325d; 327c-328a; 365c-366b / Political Economy, 375b-d; 377b- 385a,c / Social Contract, BK II, 405c-d; BK HI, 411a-b; 415b-417c; 421c-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 27b-31b; 33c-35c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 22b-23b; 88d-89d; 456d-457a,c; 498a-501d; 642a-c
43 FLDERALIST: NUMBER 21, 79b-80a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 210d-211b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 143 139d-140a
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-d
50 MARX: Capital, 292d; 319b-321b

7b. The importance of the arts and sciences in political life

5 ARISTOPHANES: Acharnians [497-508] 460d- 461a; [628 658] 462b-d / Wasps [1009-1059] 519d-520c / Birds [904-1057] 554a-555d / Frogs 564a-582a,c esp [1008-1098] 576b- 577c, [1411-15}}] 581a-582a,c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK ii-in, 320c-339a; BK iv, 344b-345a; BK VII 388a-401d; BK x 427c- 441a,c esp 432d-434c / Statesman, 604c-608d / Laws, BK II 653a-663d; BK III, 675c-676b; BK VII, 713c-730d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK VIII 542a-548a,c
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 43b-44b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i, CH 31-33 147d-149a; BK II, CH 8-14 153d-157c; BK iv, CH 26-27 202a-203c / Christian Doctrine, BK II, CH 25 649b-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 164c
30 BACON: New Atlantis 199a-214d esp 210d- 214d
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 5, 453a-b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART in, 104b-107a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv, 17b- 18d; BK xxin, 191a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365d-366b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 5d-6a; BK v, 308c-309a,c; 337d-339c; 347b-d
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 23b-24a,c; 88d; 158d-159a; 633b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 298a-300c; 326b-328a,c esp 327d-328a,c; 451d; 527d- 528a,c
42 KANT: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 253c / Judgement, 586a-587a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [214-217] 13b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 43, 139d-140a
44 Bosw ^ELL: Johnson, 180d-181a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 185a- 186a; PART i, 217c-218a; PART II, 277d-278a; PART iv, 346c-348a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontent 778a- 779d

7c. The state's concern with religion and morals - the cultivation of the virtues

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK VII, 232d-233d; BK ix, 294a-c 7cto7d CHAPTER 90: STATE 853
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 370a-c; BK II, 396b-d; 399a
7 PLATO: Apology ', 206a-207b / Gorgias, 287c- 290b / Republic, BK H-IV, 316a-356a / Timaeus, 442b-443b / Critias, 485b-c / Statesman, 605d-608d / Laws, BK III, 669b-670c; BK iv, 682c-683d; BK v, 687d-688a; BK VIII, 731d-732c; 735b-738c; BK x 757d-771b; BK xn, 794a-799a,c / Seventh Letter, 801b-c; 806b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK v, CH 2 [ii30 b i8-29J 378a-b; BK x, CH 9 [1179*33-1180*13] 434a-d / Politics, BK II, CH 5 [i263 b 36-i264 B i] 459a; [1264*26-32] 459c; CH 7 [i266 b 27-i267i7J 462b*d; [i267 a 36- b 9] 463b; BK v, CH 9 [1310* *3-3 6 ] 512b-c; BK VII, CH 1-3 527a-530a; CH 8 532c-533a; BK VII, CH I3-BK VIII, CH 7 536b-548a,c
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus 32a-48d esp 44d-45c / Numa Pompilius 49a-61d esp 52d-53a / Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c / Solon 64b,d-77a,c / Marcellus, 247c-248b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 60d-61a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i-v 129a-230a,c; BK xix, CH 23-24 525c-528c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 92, AA 1-2 213c-215a,c; Q 95, A i 226c-227c; Q 96, AA 2-3 231c-233a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, vi [58- 151] 61b-62c; xvi [52-129] 77b-78a; PARADISE, xv [97]-xvi [154] 129b-132a
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART II, 154b-155c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 74b-c
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 15d / Human Understanding BK I, CH II, SECT 6 105b-C
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT xi, DIV 113-114, 502d-503b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, xxiia-d; BKIII, 9b-lld; BK iv-v, 13b,d-19d; BK v, 21b-23b; BK vi, 40a-b; BK xix, 135d-142a; BK xxm, 196c-197c; BK xxiv 200a-208a,c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 327a-328a / Political Economy, 372a-377b / Social Contract, BK iv, 435a-439c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 337d-338c; 346c-347d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, lOOc-lOlb; 291d- 292d; 601b'd
42 KANT: Judgement, 509d-510a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: AMENDMENTS, xvin-xxi 19c-20a,c
43 MILL: Liberty, 302d-323a,c passim / Representative Government, 332 d -341 d passim
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 178b-c; 182c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 175c- 177b; PART i, 228d-229b; PART II, 279d- 281b; PART iv, 346a-c; 350b-c
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 32Sb-327b
52 DOSTOEVSKY : Brothers Karamazov , BK II, 28d- 32a; BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK vi, 164a- 170d passim

7d. The educational task of the state - the trained intelligence of the citizens

5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [399-462] 261d-262b; [857-917] 266a-b
5 ARISTOPHANES: Frogs [1008-1098] 576b-577c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i,370a-c; BK II, 397b-c
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 43a-47c / Crito 213a- 219a,c / Republic, BK II-iv, 316a-356a; BK v, 366a-c; BK vi, 380d-381a; BK vi-vn, 383 b- 401d / Statesman, 607b-608d / Laws, BK i-n 640a-663d esp BK i, 644b<645c; BK III, 675c- 676b; BK VII 713c-731d; BK VIII, 732b-735a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 2 [io94 H 28- b n] 339c-d; CH 9 [i099 b 29~32] 345b; BK v, CH 2 [ii30 b i8-29] 378a-b; BK x, CH 9 434a-436a,c esp [1179*33-1180*13] 434a-d / Politics, BK II, CH 5 [i263 b 36-i264 a i] 459a; [i264 B 26-32] 459c; CH 6 [i264 b 37-39] 460b; CH 7 [1266^7- 35] 462b-c; BK III, CH 4 [i277 a i4- b 29] 474a- 475a; BK iv, CH 9 [i294 b i9-24] 494c; BK v, CH 9 [1310*12-35] 512b-c; BK VII, CH I^-BK VIII, CH 7 536b-548a,c / Athenian Constitution, CH 42 572b-d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 33c-34a; 39a-45b / Lycurgus-Numa 61b,d-64a,c / Solon 64b,d- 77a,c passim / Agesilaus, 480b,d-48la
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vin [115- 148] 118b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 114b-115a; 150c- 151a; 153a-155c; PART iv, 273a-c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 66a; BK 11, 81d-83b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 60c-62a
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 23a; 79c- 80a
32 MILTON: Areopagitica, 384b-385b; 398a-b
35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT i, DIV 5, 4S3a-b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 76b-80b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv 13b,d- 18d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365d-366b / Political Economy, 372a-377b / Social Contract, BK II, 402b-403a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 303b-305c; 337d-338c; 340c-343d; 347c-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 6b; 669a-670b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 347a,c
42 KANT: Judgement, 586a-587a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 27, 95c-d; NUMBER 84, 253d-254b
43 MILL: Liberty, 283a-c; 317d-323a,c / Representative Government, 330a-b; 332d-341d passim, esp 339a-340c; 349a-350a; 381b-387d passim; 418b-d; 420b-d; 424b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 187 65a-c; par 239 76d; par 315 104c; ADDITIONS, 98 133a; 147 140c; 166 145b-c; 183 148d-149a / Philosophy of History, PART 11, 271d-272d 854 8/0 (7. Factors affecting the quality of states. Id. The educational task of the state - the trained intelligence of the citizens)
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 328c-d
50 MARX: Capital, 237d-240d
54 FREUD: Sexual Enlightenment of Children, 122c

8. The offices of state - the statesman, king, or prince

    [sem referências]

8a. The duties of public office and the responsibilities of office holders - the relation of the statesman or king to the people he represents or rules

0 OLD ThSTAMhNr - Genesis, 41:44 /Deuteronomy, 17:14-20 / / Samuel, 8:11-18 (D) I Kings, 8:11-18 / / Kings, 3.7-9 (D) 111 Kings, 3:7-9 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12 (D) II Parahpomenon, 1:7-12 / Psalms, 72 (D) Psalms, 71 / Proverbs, 16:12-15; 25:2; 28:15; 29:2,4,12,14 / Isaiah, 22:20-22 (D) Isaias, 22:20 22 / Jeremiah, 23:3-6 (D) Jeremias, 23:3-6
0 APOCRYPHA: I Maccabees, 14 (D) OT, IMachabees, 14
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [354-523] 5b- 7c / Seven Against Thebes [1-77] 27a-28a
5 SOPHOCLES: Oedipus the King [572-630] 104c-105a / Antigone [162-210] 132c-d; [633- 765] 136c-137d
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [286-358] 260d-261c
5 ARISIOPIIANI.S: Knights 470a-487a,c
6 TIIUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK II, 397b-c; 402a-404d; BK III, 427a-c; BK vi, 513a
7 PLATO: Republic, BK i, 301b-306b; BK III, 339b-341d; BK VH, 390b-391b; 401a-b / Statesman, 604c-608d / Laws, BK vi, 697a- 705c passim; BK xn, 794a-799a,c / Seventh Letter, 806d-807b; 814b c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH n [1259*23-36] 453c-d; BK III, CH 4 [1277*14 - b 3$| 474a-475a; CH 6 [i278 b 30 -1279*21] 476a-c; CH 17 486c- 487a; BK iv, CH 4 [i29i a 34- b 7J 490c-d; BK vi, CH 4 [i3i8 b 39-1 319*4] 522c; CH 8 525b-526d; BK VII, CH 2 528a-529a; CH 4 [i326 b i3-i5] 530d; en 9 [1329*3-39] 533b-d; en 14 [i332 b i3-i333 B i7l 537b-538a
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 51c-52c/ Marcus Cato 276b,d-290d / Crassus-Niaas, 455d- 456d / Agesilaus, 486d-487b / Cato the Younger 620a-648a,c esp 626d-627b, 632b-c / Agis, 648b,d-649b / Tiberius Gracchus, 678b-d / Demosthenes, 699c-700a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK III, 57b-58d; 61c-62a; BK xn, 112a-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 6 514b- 515a; CH 15-16 521a-522a
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 90, A 3, ANS 207a-c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xvi [52-129] 77b-78a
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xiv-xix 21b-30a
23 HoBBts - leviathan, PART II, 153a-159c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 7a-d; 24a-25c; 315c-d; 327d-329d; 381a-388c passim; 436c-438b
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry IV, ACT iv, sc v 494b 496d / Henry V, ACT i, sc i 533a-d; ACT iv, sc i [87-215] 552c-553d
27 SHAKESPEARE: King Lear, ACT HI, sc iv [26- 36] 264c / Conolanus, ACT n, sc in 366a- 369a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 340b- 348c; 352b-356d; 360d-364a
30 BACON: Advancement of learning, 74d-75a / New Atlantis, 208a-c
32 MILTON: Sr Henry Vane 69b / Paradise Lost, BK ii [430-456] 120b-121a
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 3a / Civil Government, CH vn, SECT 90-94 44d-46c;cH vin, SECT 105 -i 12 48c-51b; en xiv 62b-64c; CH xix, SECT 221- 222 75d-76c
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 157b-158a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK vi, 40a-b; 43c-d; BK xii, 93d-94a; 94c-95b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 367a-368c; 372c-373c / Social Contract, BK i, 388a; BK III, 412c-414d; BK iv, 427b; 427d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 194b-c; 199c-d;284d
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 26d-27a; 50a; 243a-245b; 288b-289a; 338d-339c; 342a-c, 343b-c; 437b 438a; 577a-578c; 639d-644a passim
41 GIBHON: Decline and Pall, 95a-c; 102d-103a; 320d-321b; 505a; 563d-564b; 586c-587b
42 KANT: Science of Right, 434a; 444c-445a
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [25-98] Ib- 3a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i-ni lla-16a passim; ARTICLE iv, SECT 3 16b; ARTICLE V 16c; AMENDMENTS, XVII 19b-C
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 19, 74a-c; NUMBER 20, 76b-d; NUMBER 22, 83b-d; NUMBER 35, 113a- 114c; NUMBhR 53, 168b-169d passim; NUMBER 56-57 174d-179b; NUMBER 64, 196d; NUMBER 70, 212c-214a; NUMBER 71, 214d-215a
43 MILL: Liberty, 298d-299a; 302b-c / Representalive Government, 341d-344d; 353b; 398d- 399d; 401a-406a passim; 410d-411b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 86a-b
46 HEGFL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 295 98d-99a; par 297 99b; par 303 101c-102a; par 305-311 102b-104a; ADDITIONS, 175 147b-c; 181 148b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 173a-c; PART iv, 361d-362a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 9c-10d; BK x, 465c-467a; BK xi, 507a; BK xiv, 611a-c

8b. The qualities or virtues necessary for the good statesman or king

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 41 ^3,39-40 / Exodus, 18:21-26 / Leviticus, 19:15 / Deuteronomy, 1:13; 16:18; 17:14-20 / / Samuel, 15:10-35 (D) I Kings, 15:10-35 / // Samuel, 23:3 CHAPTER 90: STATE 855 (D) // Kings 1 23 : 3 / 7 Kings, 3 15-28 ; 4 :29-34 (D) /// Kings, 3:5-28; 4:29-34 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12 (D) II Paralipomenon, 1:7-12 / Psalms, 72 (>) Psalms, 71 / Proverbs, 8:15-16; 16:10,12-13; 17:7; 20:26-28; 24:5-6; 25:2-5; 28:15-16; 29:2,4,12,14; 31:4-5 / Ecclesiastes, 10:16-17 / Isaiah, 16:5; 32:1 (D) Isaias, 16:5; 32:1 /Jeremiah, 23:3-6 (D}]eremias, 23:3-67 Ezefyel, 45:9 (D) Ezechiel, 45:9
0 APOCRYPHA: Wisdom of Solomon, 1:1; 6; 9 (D) OT, book of Wisdom, r :i ; 6; 9 / Ecclesiasiicus, 10:1-3; 41:17-18 (/)) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10: 1-3; 41:21-22 / / Maccabees, 14 (D) OT, 7 Machabees, 14
5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [623-680] 21c-22a; [852-908] 24b-d
5 SOPHOCLES: Antigone [162-210] 132c-d; [633- 765] 136c-137d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Knights 470a-487a,c esp [147- 222] 471d-472c / Peace [601-692] 532d-534a / Ecclesiazusac [173-247] 617a-d; [441-459] 619d-620a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK v, 164d-165a
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 383d- 384a; BK II, 404a-d; BK III, 425a-c; BK vi, 513a-514b
7 PLATO: Gorgias, 285a-292a / Republic, BK II, 319c-320c; BK III, 339b-340b; BK v-vi, 368c- 383c / Timaetis, 442b-d / Statesman, 604c- 608d / Laws, BK iv, 679c-682c; BK xn, 796b-d / Seventh Letter, 801b-802c; 804b- 805a; 806b-c; 807a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK vi, en 5 [ii40 b 4-ii] 389b; CH 8 [ii4i b 2?-ii42 a ii] 390d-391a / Politics, BK i, CH i [i252 a 7-i7] 445a-b; CH 13 454a 455a,c csp [i259 b 33-i26o u 2o] 454b-d; BK II, en 5 [i264 h 7 25] 459d-460a; en <> [1270* 7-1271*18] 466d-467b; cii 11 [i273 <l 2i- b if>] 469d-470b; BK III, en 4 473c-475a; CH 12-13 480c-483a; CH 17 486c-487a; BK iv, CH 4 [1291*34 - b 7] 490c-d; BK v, en 9 [i 309^33- b i4J 511c-d; BK vii, cii 2 528a-529a; CH 9 [i32 9 a 3-i7] 533b-c; en 14 [i332 b i3-i33* a i7] 537b-538a
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK i 253a-256d; BK III, SECT 5 261a; BK vi, SECT 30 276d- 277a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 45c-46a / Numa Pompilins 49a-61d esp 60a-b / Pericles 121a 141a,c / Coriolanus, 180d-181b / Alcibiades-Conolanus 193a-195a,c / Aristides 262b,d-276a,c esp 263d-267a, 273d-275c / Marcus Cato 276b,d-290d csp 279c, 282a / AristidesMarcus Cato 290b,d-292d / Lysander-Sulla, 387d-388a / Lucullus, 419a-b / Nicias, 423d- 430d / Crassus-Nicias 455b,d-457d / Phocion 604b,d-619d / Cato the 'Younger 620a-648a,c / Cleomenes, 661a-d / Cicero, 706c; 717a-b / Dion 781b,d-802a,c / Aratus, 829b-d
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK II, 215c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xiv, CH 28 397a-d; BK xix, CH 16 521d-522a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xn [100-139] 17b-d; xxvn [55-132] 40a-41a; PURGATORY, vi [58-151] 61b-62c; vii [6i-i^6| 63a-64a; vin [109-139] 65c-d; x [70 93] 68a-b; xvi [85-129] 77d-78a; xx [34-96] 83c-84a; P\R\- DISE, xin [91-108] 126b-c; xvin [7o]-xx [78] 134b-137c
23 MACIIIAVELLI: Prince, en xv-xvin 22b 26a
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK III, 132a-133b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 381a-388c; 436c-438b; 451d-453b
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard 77, ACT n, sc i 327c- 331a; ACT in, sc iv [29-66] 340c-d/ 1st Henry IV, ACT in, sc n [39-161] 453b-454c / 2nd Henry IV, ACT iv, sc v 494b 496d / Henry V, ACT i, sc i 533a-d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Measure for Measure, ACT i, sc i -in 174a-177d; ACT in, sc n [275-296] 192b / Macbeth, ACT iv, sc in 303b-306b / Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp ACT in, sc n [i 92] 373c-374c, ACT iv, sc vn [28-57] 384c-d
29 CERVANTFS: Don Quixote, PART II, 331a-336a 30 B\CON: Advancement of Learning, lb-2c; 4c- 7c; 20d-25c; 94b-95b
32 MILTON: Lord Gen. Cromwell 69a-b / Sr Hemy Vane 69b / Paradise Lost, BK II [430- 456]"l20b-121a 35 J.CH:KI-: Civil Government, cii vin, SECT 105- ii248c-51b
36 Swn r - Gulliver, PART i, 28b-29b; PART in, 112a-113b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 22a-b; BK vi, 40a b; BK xxi, 170a; BK xxvin, 2S9b; BK xxix, 262a-b
38 ROUSSFAU: Inequality, 327a / Social Contract, BK III, 414c-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 31d-32c; 61d-64c passim; 74a-b; 142b-c; 255b,d-257a passim; 284a-b; 338d-344a,c csp 338d-339c, 343c- 344a; 430a-d; 448c-449c; 534c; 577a-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 67d-68b; 103d- 104c; 504c-505a; 577d-579a
42 KANT: Judgement, 504a-b
43 CONSTITUTION 01? THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 2 [11-16] lib; SECT 3 [67-72] 12a; ARTICLE n, SECT i [375-382] 14d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 2, 32b-33b; NUMBER 52, 165c; NUMBER 57, 176d-177a; NUMBLR 62, 188d-189a; NUMBER 68, 206b-c; NUMBER 72, 217d; NUMBER 75, 223c-d
43 MILL: Representative Government, 336c-338c passim; 341d-344d; 353b-354b; 363b-366a; 398d-399d ; 406d ; 407d-408d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 178a-b; 374a c
46 HLGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 292 98a / Philosophy of History, PART II, 275d- 276d; 281c-282d; PART iv, 360b-c; 361d-362a; 366b; 368b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 9c-10d; BK x, 465c-467a; BK xiv, 611a-c; EPILOGUE i, 645a*646c 856

8c. The education or training of the statesman or prince

7 PLATO: Republic, BK H-III, 320c-341d; BK v, 366a-c; BK VI-VH, 383b-401d / Timaeus, 442c-d / Laws, BK III, 672d-676b; BK xn, 794a-799a,c / Seventh Letter, 801c-802d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 9 [n8o b 29~ n8i b 25] 435d-436a,c / Politics, BK III, CH 4 [i277 a i4- b 33] 474a-475a; CH 18 [1288*34^3] 487a,c; BK VH, CH 14 [1332^3-1333*17] 537b- 538a; BK VIII, CH 4 [i338 b 25~38] 544a-b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK i 253a-256d
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 122d-123c / Akibiades, 156c-158b / Agesilaus, 480b,d-481a / Alexander, 542d-544a / Cato the Younger, 625b- 626a / Dion, 781b,d-788b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 34c-d; BK xn, Hid; BK XIH, 125d-126a; BK xiv, 153d-155a / Histories, BK iv, 267c
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince la-37d esp CH xiv-xix 21b-30a
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, INTRO, 47b-d; PART II, 164a,c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 18b-19d; 26d-30c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 437b-c
26 SHAKESPEARE: 1st Henry IV, ACT i, sc n [119 -240] 436c-437d; ACT in, sc n [93-161] 453d-454c/ Henry V, ACT i, sc i [22-68] 533b-c
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 332c- 336a; 362a-c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 4c-7c; 23a-b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 73a-76b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK III, 414b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 32a; 62a-c; 86c; 245b-c; 260a-b; 275c-276a; 284a-c; 430a; 534a-c; 669b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 15b-c; 508c-509d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 27, 95c-d; NUMBER 35, 114b-c; NUMBER 53, 168b-169d passim; NUMBER 56, 175d-176d; NUMBER 62, 190b-d
43 MILL: Representative Government, 356b-359a; 407d-408d; 415a-417c passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 296 99a-b; ADDITIONS, 169 145d; 171 146b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 155b-d; PART i, 212d-213d; 243b-c; PART II, 281d; PART iv, 368b

8d. Statecraft - the art or science of governing; political prudence

5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [623-680] 21c-22a; [852-908] 24b-d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Knights 470a-487a,c esp [147- 222] 471d-472c / Lysistrata 583a-599a,c esp [486-590] 589a-590d / Ecclesiazusae 615a- 628d esp [173-247] 617a-d
7 PLATO: Euthydemus, 75c-76b / Meno, 188b- 190a,c / Republic, BK VI-VH, 383b-401d / Statesman 580a-608d esp 585c-d, 604c-608d / Laws, BK iv, 679a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 1-2 339a-d; BK vi, CH 7 [1141*20-33] 390a-b; CH 8 [im b 23- 28] 390d / Politics, BK II, CH 12 470b-471d; BK III, CH n [1281*39-1282*41] 479b-480b; BK iv, CH i 487a-488b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK i, SECT 14 254b-c
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus-Theseus, 30c-d / Poplicola, 80d-82a / PoplicolaSolon, 87b-d / Camillus, 102b,d / Pericles 121a-141a,c esp 137b-138b / Fabius, 143b-d; 145d-146a / Alcibiades 155b,d-174d passim, esp 167c-168a /Aristides 262b,d-276a,c esp 263d-267a, 273d- 275c / Agesilaus, 482a-c / Phocion, 604b,d- 605d / Cato the Younger, 625b-627b / Agis, 648b,d-649b / Caius and Tiberius GracchusAgis and Cleomenes 689b,d-691a,c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK iv, 72a-b
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK v, CH 12, 217d- 218a
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 104, A 4, ANS 306d-307c
23 MACHIAVELLI : Prince la-37d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 112d; 128d-129b; 158c-d; 164c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Richard II, ACT in, sc iv [29-66] 340c-d
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 4c-7c; 81d- 95b passim
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 9b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 78a-b; PART in, 112a-115b; PART iv, 157a-158a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK vi, 40a-b; 43c-d; BK xn, 93c-95b; BK xix, 137c-139c; BK xxix, 262a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK III, 413a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 48a; 142c-144a; 155a-d; 157c; 284a-c; 288b-289a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 176c-177c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 331b-c; 356b-359a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 275d- 276a; PART iv, 361d-362a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK 11, 65d~66d; BK vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 201a
#8d(1)  The employment of the military arts
5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [652-680] 21d-22a; [852- 1076] 24b-26d / Seven Against Thebes [1-77] 27a-28a
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [723-730] 264d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 6a-b; 41c-42b; 46a-48a; BK iv, 141b-c; BK VII, 225a-226b; 244a-245a; 257d-258d; BK VIII 260a 287d passim
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 369a-370d; 371b-372d; 384d-386b; BK II, 389d-391b; BK vi, 514d-516a; 517d-520d; 528b-c; BK VIII 564a-593a,c passim 8^(2) to Be
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 319a-c; BK v, 367b- 368c / Statesman, 605a-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 7 [ii77 h 2-25] 432a-c / Politics, BK II, CH 9 [1271*38-41] 467c; BK iv, CH 4 [1291*7-33] 490b-c; BK v, CH 9 [i309*33- b 8] 511c-d; BK VII, CH 2 [1324* 24-1325*15] 528b-529a; CH 5 [i 326*38-1327*7] 531a; CH 9 [1329*3-39] 533b-d; CH 14 [1333* 29-1334*11] 538a-d
14 PLUTARCH: Themistocles 88a-102a,c / Pericles, 130d-141a,c / Fabius 141a-154a,c / Aemilius Paulus, 214d / Caius Marius 332b,d-354a,c / Cimon 389b,d-399d / Lucullus 400a-421a,c / Pompey 499a-538a,c / Alexander 540b,d-576d / Caesar 577a-604d / Phocion, 607b-d / Antony 748a-779d
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH m-viii 3c-14c passim; CH x 16a-d; CH xn-xiv 17d-22a; CH xx 30a-31c; CH xxvi, 37a-c
23 HOBBES: Ijeviathan, PART II, 159a-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 327d-329d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 77a-78b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 31d- 32b; BK x, 65d-68a; BK xi, 74b-d; BK xin, lOOd-lOla
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 380a-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 305c- 309a,c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 4b-5c; 42b,d-43b; 47c-d; 50b-c; 56a; 63a-64b; 86a-d; 118d- 119a; 168b-171b esp 170c-d; 245d-248d; 284a-c; 365b-378d esp 373c-374a; 563a-567a; 639a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 126d-131d esp 128a; 311d-312a; 321b-323a; 509a-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 453d-454c / Judgement, 504a-b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE n, SECT 2 [409-413] 15a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 20, 76b-d; NUMBER 29, 99b-100a; NUMBER 74, 221c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 281d- 282d; PART iv, 359a-b; 366b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK II, 81c-93d; BK III, 138d; 144c; 146d; 153d-155a; BK v, 209a-c; BK ix, 342a-355c; BK x, 389a-391c; 404a-b; 430b-432c; 444a-450a; BK xn, 533a- 537b esp 535d-537b; BK xm, 563a-575a; BK xiv, 610d-611a; BK xv, 626d-630a
#8d(2) The occasions and uses of rhetoric
4 HOMER: Iliad, BK II [278-393] 12d-13d
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [399-425] 261d-262a / Orestes [852-956] 402d-403d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Peace [601-656] 532d-533c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK v, 180c-d; BK VIII, 264a-c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 384o 386c; BK II, 395d-399a; 402b-404a; BK III, 425a-d; 427a-c; BK vi, 511b-516a; 517d-520d; BK VII, 559d-560b
7 PLATO: Phaedrus, 129d-130c / Gorgias, 288b- CHAPTER 90: STATE 857 292b / Statesman, 604d-605a / Laws, BK iv, 684c-686b; BK x, 760a-761a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 9 [n8o b 28-n8i a 18] 435d-436a / Politics, BK iv, CH 4 [1292*4-38] 491b-d passim; BK v, CH 5 [1305*7-15] 506d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH i [i354 b 23~34] 593d-594a; CH 3-8 598b-608c; BK II, CH i [1377^4- 1378*19] 622b,d-623a; BK HI, CH 16 [i4i7 b i3- 17] 671d; CH 17 [I4i7 b 35-i4i8 b 23] 672b- 673b
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles, 129b-130b / Alcibiades, 159a-b / Phocion, 605a-d / Cato the Younger, 621c / Demosthenes 691b,d-704a,c / Cicero 704a-723d / Demosthenes-Cicero 724a-725d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK i, lOd-llb; 12c-13d; BK xni, 126a-b / Hisfories, BK iv, 290a-d
23 HOBBLS: leviathan, PART II, 106a-b; 127d- 128b; 128d; 129b d; 157c d; 158d-159a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 147b-148a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Julius Caesar, ACT in, so I [226-253] 582d-583a; sc a 583c-586c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Coriolanus, ACT HI, sc n [51-92] 374a-c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, Id 2b; 23a- 26a
32 MILTON: Areopagitica, 383a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy ', 290a-b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xii, 89c- 90c; BK xxix, 266b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 64a-c; 284b; 343a-b; 384d-385b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER i, 29d-30c; NUMBER 26, 93d-94a; NUMBER 58, 181b-c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 361b-362c
44 Bos WELL '.Johnson, 374a-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 153d- 154a; PART II, 273d-274a
#8d(3) The role or function of experts in the service of the state
7 PLATO: Protagoras, 43b-d / Gorgias, 287d- 288a / Republic, BK II, 316c-319c; BK v, 369c- 370a; BK vi, 373c-375b; BK vii, 390b-391b / Statesman, 598b-608d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK III, CH n [1281*39- 1282*41] 479b-480b; BK v, en 9 [i3o 9 ft 3 3- b 8] 511c-d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 36, 115a-c
43 MILL: Liberty, 320c-323a,c / Representative Government, 355b-362c; 363b-366a; 408a- 41 7c passim
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 289- 297 97b-99b passim; par 301 lOOb-lOla; ADDITIONS, 135 138c / Philosophy of History -, PART i, 213b-214d

8e. The advantages and disadvantages of participation in political life

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 23b-d
7 PLATO: Apology, 207b-208a / Republic, BK i, 305d-306b; BK vi, 379d-380b; BK VII, 390b- 391b 858 9/o (8. The offices of state; the statesman, king, or prince. Be. The advantages and disadvantages of participation in political life.)
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 7 431d-432c / Politics, UK i, CH 2 [i252 b 27-i 253*39] 446a-d; BK HI, CH 6 [i278 b i5~29] 475d-476a; BK VII, CH 1-3 527a-530a
12 LUCRETIUS : Nature of Things, BK III [59-86] 30d-31b; [995-1002] 42d-43a; BK v [1117- 1135] 75d
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, CH 19 125b- 126c; BK HI, CH 22 195a-201a
12 AuRhLius - Meditations, BK v, SECT 22 272b; BK xi, SECT 21 305d-306a
14 PLUTARCH: Numa Pompilius, 50a-52c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PARADISE, vin [91- 148] 117d-118c
23 HORDES: leviathan, PART i, 77a; 84c-86b; 86d- 87b; PART ii, 104b-d; 112b-c; PART iv, 267c-d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 46d; 107a-112d; 354a-b; 381a-388c; 480b-482b; 486b-497b csp 486b- 489b
26 SHAKESPEARE: As You Li^e It, ACT n, sc i 603c-604b
27 SHAKESPEARE: Timon of Athens, ACT iv 409c- 416d esp sc i 409c-d
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, PROP 73 446c-447a
33 PASCAL: Pcnse'es, 6 173a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH IT, SECT 15 28c; CH vn, SECT 90-94 44d-46c; CH ix 53c-54d passim; CH xv, SECT 171 65a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 359a~366d / Political Economy, 381c-382b / Social Contract, BK i, 391b-394d csp 393b-c; BK 11, 398a-b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 309a-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 521d
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [7-23] la-b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 37, 119a; NUMBER 51, 164c-d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 460a-461c
44 Bosw ELL: Johnson, 261c-d
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic^ 237a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 206d-207b; 216a; BK vi, 238c-243d; 260a-262a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 780b- 781 d; 788d-789b / "New Introductory Lectures, 853a-b

9. The relation of states to one another

    [sem referências]

9a. Commerce and trade between states - commercial rivalries and trade agreements; free trade and tariffs

5 ARISTOPHANES : Acharnians [719-999] 463c- 466d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK iv, 158b-c
6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350d-
35 la; 365b; 384b
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-318a / Laws, BK xn, 788d-789a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 9 [1257*17-40] 451a-b; BK III, CH 9 [i28o*36- b 3] 478a; BK VII, CH 6 531b-d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 4 [1360*12-18] 600b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 119d*120b; 124c-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xm, 98b- 99b; BK xix, 143c-144c; BK xx, 146a-150b; BK xx -xxi, 152a-173d; BK xxn, 177b-181a
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK II, 404a-b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK HI, 173b-175b; BK iv, 182b-192c; 197b-200a; 201b,d-204c; 209a-213d; 231d-232b; 233d-236a; 256a- 266d; BK v, 319b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 21c-23b; 151d; 656a-658b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 314c-315b; 342c- 343a; 355c-d; 427c-d
42 KANT: Judgement, 504a-b
43 ARTICLES OP CONFEDERATION: iv [24-36] 5b-c; vi [100-106] 6b; ix [173-185] 7a; [275- 285] 8a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [201-203] 13b; SECT 9 [276-282] 13d; SECT 10 [304-313] 14a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 4, 35c-36a; NUMBER 5, 38b-c; NUMBER 7, 42d-43c; NUMBER n 53b- 56b passim; NUMBER 22, 80d-81c; NUMBER 35, 112a-113a; NUMBER 41, 135b-c; NUMBER 42, 137d-138c; NUMBER 44, 145b-c
44 Bos WELL: Johnson, 281b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 246- 247 78a-b; par 339 11 Ob / Philosophy of PI istory, PART i, 243d-244c; PART iv, 368c
50 MARX: Capital, 66c-68a,c; 218d-219a; 221d- 223a; 372c-375c passim
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 420a-b; 421a-c; 428a-b

9b. Social and cultural barriers between states - the antagonism of diverse customs and ideas

5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [911-965] 12c-13b
5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [399-597] 261d-263c / Iphigenia at Aulis [1399-1401] 437d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 2a; 12d-13b; BK II, 57d-58a; BK iv, 137a-138c; 140d-141a; BK v, 163d-164a; BK VII, 216b-d; 232d-233d; 253b-254a; BK VIII, 264c; 287a-d; BK ix, 291c-292a; 298a-302c; 305d-306a; 308d-310c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350b-d; 366b-c; 370a-c; BK VIII, 589d-590a
7 PLATO: Cratylus, 106b-c / Republic, BK v, 357d-358a; 367b-368c / Statesman, 582d- 583b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 2 [1252^*5-9] 445d; CH 6 [1255*28-37] 448d-449a; BK III, CH 14 [1285*17-29] 483b-c; BK VII, CH 7 [i327 b i9-38] 531d-532a
10 HIPPOCRATES: Airs, Waters, Places, par 16 15d-16a; par 23 18a-c 9cto9d CHAPTER 90: STATE 859
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 46b-c / Themistocles, 99a-c / Marcellus, 254c-256b / Marcus Cato, 287d-288c / Plamininus, 303a-310d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 23d-24a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 7 515a-c / Christian Doctrine, BK III, en 14 663c-d
22 CHAUCER: Tale of Man of Law [4638-4644] 238a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 44b-c; 46b-47a; 91d- 98b; 477d-478a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 149b-150b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xv, llOa-c; BK xix, 139c-140a; BK xxiv, 207a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 355b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 224b; 423d-424a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER n, 55d-56b
43 MILL: Liberty, 300a-302c passim / Representative Government, 424c-428a passim; 436b-439c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 351 112a-b / Philosophy of History, PART II, 277d- 279b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 317c-d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 428a-b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK III, 150d-151b; BK iv, 170d-171c; BK ix, 362a-363a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 115a-116b
54 FRLUD: War and Death, 755c-757a; 761a-c; 766c / Civilization and Its Discontents, 788b-c

9c. Honor and justice among states

0 OLD TESTAMENT: // Samuel, 10 (D) II Kings, io/7 Chronicles, 19 (D) I Paralipomcnon, 19
5 AESCHYLUS: Suppliant Maidens [911-965] 12c- 13b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, la-2b; BK v, 177d- 180a; BK vi, 201c-d; BK VII, 237d-239a; 242c-d; BK VIII, 287a-d; BK ix, 289a-c 6THUCYDIDES: Pdoponnesian War, BK i, 355b-c; 358b-360c; 368a-d; 378c-380a; 386b-c; BK II, 396b-399a passim; 403c-404a; BK III, 426b-428d; 429b-434c; BK iv, 461d- 462a; 468a-469b; BK v, 504c-508a; BK VII, 542b-c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK v, 367b~368c / Laws, BK xn, 788d-789a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK viu, CH 4 [1157*25-30] 409a; BK x, CH 7 [i 177^-25] 432a-c / Politics, BK III, CH 9 [i28o a 34- b i2] 477d-478b; CH 13 [i284 a 38- b 3] 482c; BK VII, CH 2 [i324 b 2- 1325*15] 528c-529a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 44d / Histories, BK iv, 290a-d
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 95, A 4 229b-230c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 159c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 54a-56b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 95d-97a; 381 a-b; 387c- 388c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Troilus and Cressida, ACT n, sc n [113-213] 114d-115d
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK i, CH n, SECT 10 106d
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART H, 76b-78b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK x, 61b,d- 65c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 355b-c / Political Economy, 369a-b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 48a; 404a-b; 535d- 536b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 532d-533a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 452c-455c
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [220-222] 13b; ARTICLE III, SECT 2 [469-492] 15c-d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 3, 34d-35a; NUMBER 7, 44a-b; NUMBER 15, 63b-d; NUMBER 22, 84b; NUMBER 30, 102c-d; NUMBER 43, 142d-143a; 143d-144a; NUMBER 62, 190d 191a; NUMBER 80, 235b-c; NUMBER 81, 240b-c; NUMBER 83, 248b-c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 434c-435c passim
44 Bos WELL -.Johnson, 86c-d
46 HLGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 336 109d; par 338 HOa-b
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic^, 292a-295a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 228c-d; 230b; 232a233b
54 FREUD: War and Death, 756c-757c

9d. The sovereignty of independent states - the distinction between the sovereignty of the state at home and abroad; internal and external sovereignty

23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 86a; PART II, 114b-c; 121b-c; 159c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Cymbeline, ACT HI, sc i 463c-464c; sc v [1-27] 468d-469b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH n, SECT 14 28b-c; CH xn, SECT 145-148 58d-59b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxvi, 223c-224a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 355b-c / Political Economy, 368c-d; 369a-b / Social Contract, BK i, 392a~393d; BK HI, 406b,d- 409a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 427b-c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 435a-b; 452a-458a,c passim
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [1-6] la; [109-1 19] 3a-b
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: n 5a-b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 32 105c-107b; NUMBER 39, 126b-128b; NUMBER 75, 223b-c; NUMBER 81, 240d-241a
43 MILL: Representative Government, 344d; 355b-d; 428b-433b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 275- 279 92a-94d; par 321-322 106c-107a; par 329- 331 108c-109a; ADDITIONS, 153 141d; 191 150a-c; 194 150c-d / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 364d-365a 860

9e. War and peace between states

#9e(1)  The military problem of the state - preparation for conquest or defense
5 AESCHYLUS: Seven Against Thebes [1-77] 27a- 28a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 41c-d; 46a-48a; BK iv, 132a-b; 144b-148d; 158d-159d; BK vi, 206d-208d; BK VII-ix 214a-314a,c passim 6TnucvDiDEs - Peloponnesian War, BK i 349a- 386d passim; BK II, 389a-c; 396d-397a; 402b- 404d; BK iv, 469d-471a; BK vi, 518a-520d; 529b-534d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 318c-319c; BK iv, 343b-d; BK v, 357d-358b; 366a-368d / Laws, BK i, 640d-641a; BK iv, 677d-678c; BK vi, 701b-702a; BK viii, 732b-735a; BK xn, 784d- 786b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK x, CH 7 [r 177^-25] 432a-c / Politics, BK II, CH 6 [1265*19-27] 460c; CH 7 [1267*17-36] 462d-463a; BK iv, CH 4 [1291*7-33! 490b-c; BK vi, CH 7 [1321*5 -27] 524c-525a; BK VII, en 2 [i}24 b 2-i 325*15] 528c-529a; CH 4 [i326 a 23~24] 530b; CH 5 [i326 b }8]-cn 6 [i3~27 bl 7l 531a-d; en n 535a-d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 4 [i359 b 33~i36o a 12] 600a-b
14 PLUTARCH: Lycitrgus 32a-48d esp 41a-45c / Numa Pompilius, 59d-60b / Themistocles 88a- 102a,c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK i, 16b-21b; BK II, 23d- 29d; BK HI, 49d-50a; 52d-53d; 54b-56c; 62d- 63b; BK iv, 64d-65a; 69d-70c; 76a-77c; 82d- 83b; BK vi, 94d-96b; 97a-98a; BK xi, 102b- 103a; 104a-105c; BK xn, 112a-125c passim; BK xin, 134a-136c; 139c-141a; BK xiv, 147b- 148b; 148d'151b; BK xv, 157d-162a; 163c- 165a / Histories, BK HI, 253c-254c; BK iv, 269b-278c; 283b-292b; BK v, 294c-d; 297a- 302a
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, en xn-xiv 17d-22a; CH xx 30a-31c; CH xxi, 32a-d; CH xxiv 34c- 35a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 76d; 86a; PART II, 103b-c; 114b-c; 159c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK HI, 127b,d-130a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 299d-300c; 330b-331a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Henry V 532a-567a,c esp ACT i, sc n [234-310] 536b-537b, ACT n, sc iv 541d-543b, ACT in, sc in 545d-546b, ACT iv 551a-561d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xn, SECT 145- 148 58d-59b
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 77b-78b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK VIII, 52d- 53a; BK ix-x, 58b,d 62b; BK xin, lOOd-lOla
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 324c; 355c / Political Economy, 380a*d / Social Contract, BK i, 389d-390d; BK II, 403c-404a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 187c-190b; BK v, 301a-309a,c; 342c-343c 9e to 9e (2)
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 4b-8b esp 4b; 42b,d; 86b-d; 245d-248b; 495a-497a; 558a- 560d; 633b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 212c; 321b-325a; 509a-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 452b-458a,c passim / Judgement, 586c-d
43 DliCLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [l09~I2l] 3ab
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: in 5b; vi-ix 6a-9a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: PREAMBLE lla.c; ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [192-196] 13a; [220-253] 13b-c; SECT 10 14a-b; AMEND- MENTS, ii-in 17b; v 17b-c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 2, 31d-32a; NUMBER 4, 35d-37a; NUMBER 8 44c-47a; NUMBER n 53b- 56b passim; NUMBER 22, 81c-d; NUMBER 23- 29 85a-101a; NUMBER 30, 102d-103a; NUMBER 31, 104b; NUMBER 34, llOa-lllb; NUMBER 41 132a-136b passim; NUMBER 43, 141d; NUMBER 44, 144a-b
43 MILL: Representative Government, 330b; 425c- 426b; 428b-431a passim; 435b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 326 107d-108a; par 334 109c; par 338 HOa-b; ADDITIONS, 163 144c / Philosophy of History, PART i, 242d-243b; PART in, 297a-300a; PART iv, 325a-b; 343d-344a; 355d-356a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 33d-34c; BK VIII, 308b-309c; BK ix, 344b-355c; BK xiv, 588a-589c; BK xv, 629b-630a
#9e(2) Treaties between states - alliances, leagues, confederacies, or hegemonies
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Joshua, 9 (D) Josue, 9
0 APOCRYPHA: / Maccabees, 8 esp 8:17-32 (D) OT, / Machabees, 8 esp 8:17-32
5 ARISTOPHANES: Acharnians [61-173] 455d- 457b / Lysistrata [980-1321] 595c-599a,c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 6a-b; 15d-16a; BK iv, 144b-146a; BK v, 175b-c; 180c-d; BK vi, 193b; BK VH, 239a-242d; 243c-245b; 247a-c; BK VIII, 286b-287d; BK ix, 289a-290b; 310d- 311a
6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK i,353a-b; 353d; 356d-360d; 366d-371a; 373b-374a; BK II, 394c-395a; BK III, 418d-420c; 430c; 432c-d; BK iv, 461b-462d; 468a-469b; 476a- 477a; BK v, 486d-496d; 502d-504b; BK vi, 529a-534c; BK VIII, 568a-c; 572c-d; 578b- 579a
7 PLATO: Critias, 485a-b / Laws, BK HI, 667c- 668d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK HI, CH 9 [i28o*34- b i2] 478a-b; CH 13 [i28438- b 3] 482c
14 PLUTARCH: Romulus, 21a-24d / Pericles, 130d- 131a / Nicias, 427b-428c / Aratus, 834d
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xxi, 32a-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 121b-c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 36d-38a 9//o 10* CHAPTER 90:
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT i, sc i [1-103] 33b,d-34d / Henry V, ACT v, sc H 563b-567a,c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 45 34d- 35a; CH xn, SECT 145-146 58d-59a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK ix, 58b,d- 60a; BK x, 63d-64a; BK xxvi, 223c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 325c-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 103c-d; 119a-c; 150d-152c esp 151d-152c; 378b-381a; 491d- 492b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 48d-49c; 428a-d; 503a-c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 452c-d; 454d-455b
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: 5a-9d esp in 5b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 10 [296-297] 14a; ARTICLE II, SECT 2 [421-425] 15b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 5, 38b-d; NUMBER 6, 41c; NUMBER 7, 44b-c; NUMBER 15, 64c-65a; NUMBER 16 66c-68d passim; NUMBER 18-20 71a-78b passim; NUMBER 43, 143b-d; NUMBER 44, 144a-b; NUMBER 64 195b-198a; NUMBER 75, 223b-c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 428b-431a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 332- 3 33 109a-c; par 336-337 109d HOa; ADDITIONS, 153 141d; 188 149b-c / Philosophy of History, PART II, 278c-279b; PART iv, 357c-358b; 359c- 360a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK II, 85c-86a; BK v, 208d-209a; 230b; 234a,c; BK VIII, 309b; BK ix, 346a-355c STATE 861

9f. Colonization and imperialism - the economic and political factors in empire

5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [852-908] 24b-d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Wasps [655-724] 515c-516d / Peace [601-656] 532d-533c / Lysistrata [572- 586] 590c-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 22d-23a; BK III, 114b-c; BK iv t 150b-152c; BK vi, 189d; 193b- 194c; BK vii, 215c-216d
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 355d- 356a; 358a; 359b<360a; 363a-b; 368a-d; BK II, 403b-c; BK III 417a-446a,c passim; BK v, 504c- 508a; BK vi, 511c-516b; 529b-d; 530d-531b
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 318c-319a / Laws, BK iv 677a-686c esp 678c-679a; BK v, 693c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 10 [1271^0-38] 468a; [i272 b i7~2o] 469a; BK III, CH 13 [1284* 38- b 3] 482c; BK VII, CH 2 [1324^-1325*15] 528c-529a; CH 7 [i327 b i9-32J 531d-532a
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK vi [847-853] 233b-234a
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK i, 191d-192a; BK iv, 290ad
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK III, CH 10 172d- 173c; CH 14 175b-176d; BK v, CH 12, 216d- 218a; BK xix, CH 7 515a-c; CH 21, 524c-d
23 MACHIAYELLI: Prince, CH m-v 3c-8c; CH vin, 14b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 119a-c; 126d- 127a
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK III, 131b,d-]33b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 330b-331a; 440b-443d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xvi 65d-70c passim
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 23a-25b; PART II, 75a-b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK x, 61b,d- 68 d; BK xi, 83c-84c; BK xv, HOa-d; BK xix, 143c-144c; BK xxi, 170b-173d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 324a / Political Economy, 380a-b / Social Contract, BK i, 389d- 390d; 394a-b; BK II, 403c-404a; BK iv, 435a- 436a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 239a-279b; 288b-c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 14d-15c; 18a; 20b- 23d passim; 134d-135b; 420b-d; 522c-523a,c; 632d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 216c-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 413d; 456c-457a
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: la-3b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 4, 35b-36a
43 MILL: Representative Government, 353c; 431d- 432b; 433b-442d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 248 78b-c; ADDITIONS, 150 141a-b / Philosophy of History, PART i, 242d-243d; PART II, 261b-d; 263b-d; PART in, 297a-300a
50 MARX: Capital, 77a-b; 221d-222b;372c-374a; 379a-383d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK VIII, 308b-c

10. Historic formations of the state - the rise and decline of different types of states

    [sem referências]

10a. The city-state

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, lld-15c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 349b- 353d; BK 11, 391c-392a; 395d-399a; BK vi, 509a-510c
7 PLATO: Laws, BK III 663d-677a passim
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 9-12 465b-471d / Athenian Constitution, CH 1-41 553a-572a
14 PLUTARCH: Theseus, 9a-d; 13a-14c / Lycurgus 32a-48d / Solon 64b,d-77a,c / Flamininus, 303a-308a
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK v, 294c-295c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xvi [64-78] 23a*b; PURGATORY, xiv [16-126] 73d-75a; PARADISE, xv [97]-xvi [154] 129b-132a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK III, lOb-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK III, 418c-d [fn 2 ]
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 13d-15c passim; 64d-68a,c passim; 567a-d; 630b,d-631b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 427b-428a; 562b- 565a; 570d-571a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 18 71a-73c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 330a-b 862 10J/010/
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 240a- d; PART ii, 273d-274a; 275b-281b; 282d- 284a,c

10b. The imperial state

5 AESCHYLUS: Persians 15a-26d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 16c-20b; 30b-31a; BK HI, 109b-lllb
6 THUCYUIDFS: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 371b- 373c; BK ii, 403b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK IN, CEI 13 [128^38 b ]} 482c
13 VIRGIL: Aeneid, BK i [254-296] HOa-llla; BK vi [845 -853] 233b 234a; BK VIII [608-731] 275a278b
14 PLUTARCH: Pericles 121a-141a,c / Alctbnides 155b,d-174d / Lvsander, 359c-360d / Nicias 423a-438d / Age'stlaits 480b,d-499a,c / Pomfey 499a-538a,c / Alexander 540b,d-576d / Cacwr 577a-604d / Antony 748a-779d / Galba 859a-869d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK i, la-2a; BK xi, 106b d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK iv 188b,d- 207a,c; BK v, en 12-26 216d-230a,c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, n [10-27] 2d; PARADISE, vi [i -nil 113c-114d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Antony and Cleopatra 311a- 350d
38 MONTLSQUIKU: Spuit of Laws, BK x, 65d- 68a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 305d-308a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall csp la-34a,c, 79b-d, 523a-524a, 571a,c, 630a 633a
41 GIBBON: Decline and rail csp 35b-40a, 16 la163d, 209d-220a,c, 305b-310d, 312b-313c, 367b,d-377c, 479b,d-510a,c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 19, 73c-75c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 433b-442d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART i, 242 b- 2S8d; PART II, 281b-282d; PART in, 285a- 303c; 311d-314a,c; PART iv, 321d-326c

10c. The feudal state

38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxx-xxxi 269a-315d passim
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III, 165b- 173a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 83b-d; 619b-624c passim, esp 6l9c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 217d~220a,c csp 218c-219a; 403b-404d; 452d-453a,c; 570d- 571a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 17, 70a-d; NUMBER 19, 73d-74a; NUMBER 45, 148c-d
43 MILL: Representative Government, 351d-352b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 273, 91c-d; ADDITIONS, 174, 147a / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 316c-d; 324b-326c; 327c- 330a; 334d-335a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 419d- 420d

10d. The national state

39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK HI, 170c-173a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 103c-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 435a-b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 37-40 117d-132a passim
43 MILL: Representative Government, 351d-352b; 424c-428b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 35 21a-b; PART HI, par 181 63c-d; par 322 106d- 107a; par 331 108d-109a; par 344-360 llla114a,c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 177d- 178a; PART iv, 342a-345c
50 MARX-ENOPLS: Communist Manifesto, 421c-d
54 FRLUD: War and Death, 755b-757c

10e. The federal state - confederacies and federal unions

14 PLUTARCH: Philopoemen, 296a-b / Cleomenes, 658a-666a / Aratus, 834c-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK ix, 58b,d- 60a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 103c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 218c-219a
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: 5a-9d
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: lla-20a,c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER i, 29a-b; NUMBER 2 31a-33b; NUMBER 9, 49b-c; NUMBER i4,62a-d; NUMBER 18-20 71a-78b; NUMBER 37-40 117d- 132a; NUMBER 43, 143b-144a; NUMBER 45, 147d-148c; NUMBER 85, 258d-259a,c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 428b- 433b

10f. The ideal of a world state

12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK i, en 9, 114c-d; BK II, en 10, 148c-d; BK III, CH 24, 204a-b
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, KK in, SECT n 262a-b; BK iv, SECT 3-4 263b-264a; BK vi, SECT 44 278b-c
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 7 515a-c; CH 17, 522d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 471a-c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 34a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 355b-c / Political Economy, 369a-b
42 KANT: Science of Right, 455c-456a; 457a- 458a,c / Judgement, 586a-587a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 333 109b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK vi, 244d-245d
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 127b-137c passim; BK vi, 158b-159a; 166c- 167b
<ref_end>


ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represe

II. Works by authors not rep

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

I.

TACITUS. Germania

DANTE. Convivio (The Banquet), FOURTH TREATISE,

en 4-10

On World-Government or De Monarchia

.

F. BACON. "Of Faction," in Essays ment and Society, cu i 5 ,

HOBULS, Philosophical Rudiments Concerning GovernThe Elements of Law, Natural
and Politic

.

SPINOZA. Tractat us Theologico-Politicus (Theological-Political Treatise), CH
16-19

MONTESQUIEU. Considerations on the Causes of the Grandeur and Decadence of the
Romans ENGELS. The Orig in of the Family, Private Property

and the State

II.

JOHN OF SALISBURY. The Statesman's Boo{ Volsung Saga Njalssaga MARSILIUS OF
PADUA. Defensor Pacts T. MORE. Utopia LUTHER. Secular Authority BODIN. The Six
Bootes of a Commonweale

HOOKER. Of the Laws of Ecclesiastical Polity ALTHUSIUS. Politica Methodice
Digesta Atque Exemplis Sacris et Profanis lllustrata CAMPANELLA. The City of the
Sun PENN. An Essay Towards the Present and Future

Peace of Europe DEFOE. Robinson Crusoe BURLAMAQUI. Principles of Natural and
Politic Law

VATTEL. The Law of Nations VOLTAIRE. "States-Governments," in A Philosophical
Dictionary GODWIN. An Enquiry Concerning Political Justice or subject peoples,
sec DEMOCRACY yb; ERY 6d; TYRANNY 6. to the state in its external relations with
its government, in relation to its own people, LAW 6b; LIBERTY 1b; MONARCHY
nions, see GOVERNMENT 5d; ONE AND MANY ing on the possibility of a world state,
see ofy of the Western World, but relevant to the These works are divided into
two groups: nted in this collection. resented in this collection. the
publication of the works cited, consult ollows the last chapter of The Great
Ideas. BENTHAM. A Fragment on Government, CH i (1-21,

36-48)

The Theory of Legislation

. J. G. FICHTE. Addresses to the German Nation,

iv-vin

The Science of Rights

. FOURIER. Traite de r association domestique-agricole LIEBILR. Manual of
Political Ethics WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK n, CH 20;

BK v, CH 1-6, 10-17 CALHOUN. A Disquisition on Government

. A Discourse on the Constitution and Government of the United States

THOREAU. Civil Disobedience HAWTHORNE. The Blithedale Romance COMTE. System of
Positive Polity, VOL n, Social Statics, CH 5 LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK vm, CH 5
FREEMAN. History of Federal Government in Greece and Italy

BAGEHOT. Physics and Politics BURCKHARDT. Force and Freedom, CH 2-3 S. BUTLER.
Erewhon RUSKIN. Munera Pulveris J. H. NEWMAN. A Letter to the Du{e of Norfolk,
L. H. MORGAN. Ancient Society T. H. GREEN. The Principles of Political
Obligation, (0

SPENCER. The Man Versus the State TONNIES. Fundamental Concepts of Sociology
NIETZSCHE. The Will to Power, BK in (3) W. WILSON. The State FRAZER. The Golden
Bough, PART i, CH 6 TREITSCHKE. Politics BOSANQUET. The Philosophical Theory of
the State KROPOTKIN. Mutual Aid, a Factor of Evolution The State, Its Historic
Role

.

CHAPTER 90: SANTAYANA. Reason in Society, CH 8 OPPENHEIMER. The State, Its
History and Development Viewed Sociologically

DEWEY and TUFTS. Ethics, PART in, CH 20-21 SOREL. Reflexions on Violence
PIRANDELLO. The Old and the Young BELLOC. The Servile State DUGUIT. Law in the
Modern State WALLAS. The Great Society

PARETO. The Mind and Society, VOL iv HOBHOUSE. The Metaphysical Theory of the
State LENIN. The State and Revolution T. VEBLEN. The Vested Interests and the
State of the Industrial Arts, en 6

WEBER. Essays in Sociology, PART n . Politics as a Vocation

HAUPTMANN. The Island of the Great Mother HOCKING. Man and the State CROCE.
Politics and Morals DEWEY. Reconstruction in Philosophy, CH 8 . The Public and
Its Problems

HSIAO. Political Pluralism M. R. COHEN. Reason and Nature, BK in, CH 3 A.
HUXLEY. Brave New World LASKI, The State in Theory and Practice STURZO. The
Inner Laws of Society

. Church and State MARITAIN. The Things That Are Not Caesar's, i-m

.

Ransoming the Time, CH 2 BORGESE. Common Cause KOHN. The Idea of Nationalism
CASSIRER. The Myth of the State, PART n KELSEN. Der soziologische und der
junstische Staatsbegriff .General Theory of Law and State

MLRRIAM. Systematic Politics EWING. The Individual, the State and World
Government A. J. TOYNBEE. Civilization on Trial, CH 5, 7 BoRGEst et al.
Preliminary Draft of a World Constitution