Chapterk. THEOLO

INTRODUCTION

has  seldom  been disputed that the quesITtions with which theology deals are of
critical  significance  for all the rest of human knowledge. Even those who deny
that  theology  is  or  ran be a science might be willing to concede that, if it
were,  it  would  deserve its traditional title, "queen of the sciences." It has
been  said  that  the  great questions of theology are unanswerable. It has been
said  that  theological  dispute or controversy is futile because the issues are
not  resolvable  by  argument. But it has rarely been asserted, or even implied,
that our outlook would be unaltered and our actions unaffected if we could know,
in  any  degree,  the  answers  to  questions  concerning  the  existence of the
supernatural  and its relation to the visible world of nature. To Plato it is of
such  importance  that he asks: "Who can be calm when he is called upon to prove
the  existence  of  the gods?" The main controversy, not in, but about, theology
turns  on  the  use  of such words as "knowledge" and "science" for a discipline
which,  both  in  method and conclusion, seems compelled to go beyond experience
and  to push reason to (or even beyond) the limit of its powers. In the minds of
many, especially in our day, theology is associated with religion and is opposed
to science or, if not opposed, at least it is set apart from science as entirely
different. Those who conceive science as limited by its empirical methods to the
investigation  of  observable phenomena might not quarrel with the allocation of
theology  to  philosophy,  but  whether  or not they did would in turn depend on
their  conception  of  philosophy.  As  the  chapters  on SCIENCE and PHILOSOPHY
indicate,  these  two  terms  are identified through a large part of the western
tradition.  The  various sciences are regarded as branches of philosophy. But we
also  find a distinction being made GY in the i8th century between the empirical
and  rational  or  philosophical  sciences;  and  in  our  day  those who regard
philosophy  as  mere  speculation  or  opinion  contrast  it to the experimental
disciplines  which  are  thought to be the only established bodies of knowledge,
that  is,  sciences.  The question whether theology is a science may, therefore,
embrace  a  number  of  alternatives.  That  it  is an empirical or experimental
science  has  seldom  been proposed. It may be treated as a science, however, by
those  who  consider it as a part of philosophy or it may be ; denied that honor
precisely  because  it  belongs  to philosophy. A third alternative remains that
theology  is  separate  from  philosophy,  that  it  is a science as distinct in
character  from  the  philosophical  sciences  as they are from the experimental
disciplines.  In  this  third  alternative,  the  association  of  theology with
religion  or religious faith seems to determine the character of theology. It is
this third alternative which Hume seems to have in mind at the conclusion of his
Enquiry.  "Divinity  or  Theology, as it proves the existence of a Deity and the
immortality  of  souls . . . has," he writes, "a foundation in reason, so far as
it  is  supported by experience. But its best and most solid foundation is faith
or  divine  revelation."  To  the extent that its principles come from religious
faith,  theology  does not seem to fit perfectly into Hume's twofold division of
the sciences into those which involve "abstract reasoning concerning quantity or
number"  and  those  which  involve "experimental reasoning concerning matter of
fact and existence." When he says that he would commit to the flames "any volume
of  divinity  or  school  metaphysics which does not contain either of these two
kinds of reasoning" for then "it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion"
he can hardly be condemning the theology he has CHAPTER 92: himself described as
resting  primarily  on  faith or divine revelation, though it may also have some
foundation in reasoning from experience.

THE  DISCUSSION OF THE nature and scope of theology, its principles and methods,
may  refer  either  to  the  theology  which  is  a part of philosophy or to the
theology  which  is sometimes called "dogmatic" because it expounds and explains
the  dogmas  of  a  religious faith. Furthermore, those who make the distinction
between  the  two kinds of theology raise questions concerning their relation to
one  another.  In so doing they enter into the larger problem of the relation of
faith  and reason, and the limited part which reason can play in the development
of  a  theology  which  rests  on  faith. The distinction made by many itself is
writers  and  in  diverse ways. The theology which is entirely philosophical and
independent  of  any  religious  faith is usually called "natural theology." The
name  "sacred  theology"  is  given  to  a  body  of  doctrine  which  finds its
fundamentalprinciples  in the articles of a religious faith. The ultimate source
of  these articles of faith in Jewish, Christian, and Mohammedan theology is the
truth revealed in a sacred scripture the Old and New Testament or the Koran from
which, by interpretation, the articles of faith are drawn.

Bacon,  for  example,  defines  "divine philosophy or natural theology" as "that
knowledge  or rudiment of knowledge concerning God, which may be obtained by the
contemplation  of  his  creatures; which knowledge may be truly termed divine in
respect  of  the object, and natural in respect of the light. The bounds of this
knowledge are that it suffices to convince atheism, but not to inform religion."
In contrast, "inspired theology" or "sacred theology (which in our idiom we call
divinity)  is  grounded  only  upon the word and oracle of God, and not upon the
light of nature." Kant makes a similar distinction when he says that theology is
based  either  "on  reason  alone  (theologia  rationalis)  or  upon  revelation
(theologia  revelata)"  But for Kant "natural theology" designates only one kind
of  rational  theology. Another kind is "transcendental theology," which differs
from  the  first  in the method which reason employs. He also differentiates be-
THEOLOGY  tween  speculative  and  moral  theology.  Though both fall within the
sphere of reason, one is the work of the pure theoretic reason, the other of the
pure  practical reason. In the opening question of the Summa Theologica, Aquinas
tries  to  explain  why,  in  addition to the "philosophical science built up by
reason,  there  should  be  a  sacred science learned through revelation." To an
objection which claims that "there is no need of any further knowledge," because
philosophical  science  can  attain to knowledge even of God Himself, he replies
that "there is no reason why those things which may be learnt from philosophical
science,  so  far as they can be known by natural reason, may not also be taught
usby  another  science  so  far as they fall within revelation." Though they may
deal with the same object, "sciences are differentiated according to the various
means  through which knowledge is obtained. . . . Hence the theology included in
sacred doctrine differs in kind from that theology which is part of philosophy."
In  another  place,  Aquinas  refers  to  the  theological conclusions which the
philosopher  thinks  he  can  demonstrate  "the  exist Mcc of God and other like
truths  about  God  which can be known by natural reason." Of tlKse he says that
they  "arc  not  articles  of  faith,  but  are  preambles  to  the  articles. .
Nevertheless," he . . adds, "there is nothing to prevent a man, who cannot grasp
a  proof, accepting as a matter of faith,something which in itself is capable of
being  scientifically  known  and  demonstrated."  But  such propositions, which
belong  to both reason and faith, are only part of sacred doctrine. In addition,
there  are  the  propositions  which  belong to faith alone. "It is impossible,"
Aquinas  writes,  "to attain to the knowledge of the Trinity by natural reason."
The triune nature of the Godhead cannot be demonstrated philosophically; nor can
the  dogma  be  fully  comprehended  by human understanding. In Purgatory, Dante
learns  that  "Mad is he who hopes that our reason can traverse the infinite way
which  One  Substance  in  Three  Persons holds." Though it is not a theological
mystery in the same sense, another example of a dogma not demonstrable by reason
is  the  proposition  that the world began to be. "That the world did not always
exist,"  Aquinas  declares,  "we  hold  by  faith  alone;  it  cannot  be proved
demonstratively; which is what was said above of the mystery of the Trinity." We
find  in  Sacred  Scripture  the  words  In the beginning God created heaven and
earth,  "in  which words the newness of the world is stated" and so "the newness
of  the  world  is  known  only  by revelation." With respect to such matters as
belong  to faith alone, a theologian like Aquinas cautions against the misuse of
reason.  "When  anyone  in  the  endeavor to prove what belongs to faith, brings
forward  arguments  which  are  not  cogent,  he falls under the ridicule of the
unbelievers;  since they suppose that we base ourselves upon such arguments, and
that  we  believe  on their account. Therefore, we must not attempt to establish
what  is  of faith, except by authority alone" and only "to those who accept the
authority."  For  those  who  do not accept the authority of Scripture, the most
that  reason  can do concerning propositions peculiar to faith is "to prove that
what  faith  teaches  is  not  impossible."  Elsewhere  Aquinas  points out that
"although  the  argument  from authority based on human rea i(in is the weakest,
yet the argument from r i'iiority based on divine revelation is the strongest."

THE  FOREGOING  THROWS some light on Montaigne's defense of a book by Raimond de
Sebondc, bearing the title La fheologie naturelle.

Though he calls his work "natural theology," de Scbonde, according to Montaigne,
"undertakes  by human and natural reasons to establish and make good against the
atheists  all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  religion."  What his opponents
"reprehend  in  his  work  is  that Christians are to blame to repose upon human
reasons  their  belief,  which  is  only  conceived  by faith and the particular
inspiration  of  divine  grace."  Montaigne  agrees that it is "faith alone that
vividly  and  certainly  comprehends the deep mysteries of our religion." But he
also  thinks  that  it  is "a brave and very laudable attempt to accommodate the
natural  and  human  capabilities that God has endowed us with to the service of
our  faith. It is not to be doubted," he says, "that it is the most noble use we
can  put  them  to,  and  that there is no design or occupation more worthy of a
Christian man than to make it the aim and end of all of his thoughts and studies
to embellish, extend, and amplify the truth of his belief."

The  conception  of natural theology which Montaigne appears to entertain in his
"Apology  for  Raimond dc Sebonde" does not seem to differentiate it from sacred
theology,  insofar as all its principles are articles of faith. Quite apart from
de  Scbonde,  Montaigne  himself does not think that the existence of God or the
immortality  of  the soul can be demonstrated by reason. Montaigne observes "how
short  the  most constant and firm maintaincrs of this just and clear persuasion
of the immortality of the soul fall, and how weak their arguments are, when they
go  about to prove it by human reason. . . . Let us ingenuously confess that God
alone  has  dictated  it  to us, and faith; 'tis no lesson of nature and our own
reason."  Though  the  denial  of God's existence is, according to Montaigne, "a
proposition unnatural and monstrous, difficult also and hard to establish in the
human  understanding,"  he  thinks the affirmation to be no less beyond reason's
power to establish with certitude, for "all things produced by our own reasoning
and  understanding,  whether  true  or  false,  are  subject  to incertitude and
controversy."  In  this,  Montaigne  differs  not  only  from  a theologian like
Aquinas,  who  assigns  certain  truths  to natural theology as capable of being
demonstrated by reason without the aid of faith, but also from such philosophers
as  Descartes,  Spinoza, and Locke, who hold that we can know God by reason with
more  certainty,  and  even  (according to Spinoza) more adequately, than we can
know most other things.

"I have always considered," Descartes writes, "that the two questions respecting
God  and  the  Soul  were  the  chief  of those that ought to be demonstrated by
philosophical  rather than theological argument. For although it is quite enough
for  us  faithful  ones to accept by means of faith the fact that the human soul
does  not  perish with the body, and that God exists, it certainly does not seem
possible  ever to persuade infidels of any religion . . . unless, to begin with,
we prove these two facts by means of the natural reason." Descartes, it appears,
reserves  the  use of the CHAPTER 92: THEOL word "theology" for sacred doctrine.
What   others,  like  Bacon,  call  "natural  theology,"  he  treats  simply  as
philosophy,  or  that  branch of it which he calls "metaphysics." Dedicating his
Meditations  to  "the  dean  and  doctors  of  the sacred faculty of theology in
Paris,"  he  says: "I have noticed that you, along with all the theologians, did
not  only  affirm that the existence of God may be proved by the natural reason,
but also that it may be inferred from the Holy Scriptures, that knowledge of Him
is much clearer than that which we have of many created things, and, as a matter
of  fact, is so easy to acquire that those who have it not are culpable in their
ignorance."  But  Descartes  wishes  to  confess  the  limitations  of  the mere
philosopher's  knowledge  of  God.  When he came to inquire "how God may be more
easily  and  certainly  known than the things of this world," no matter how much
"certainty and evidence I find in my reasons," he could not persuade himself, he
says,  that "all the world is capable of understanding them. . . . There are not
so  many  in the world who are fitted for metaphysical speculations as there are
for  those  of  geometry." Answering a critic who quotes Aquinas against him, he
later writes: "I admit along with alltheologians that God cannot be comprehended
by  the human mind, and also that He cannot be distinctly known by those who try
mentally to grasp Him at once in His entirety. .

..  Wherever  I  have  said that God can be clearly and distinctly known, I have
understood  this  to  apply  only  to  this  finite  cognition of ours, which is
proportionate to the diminutive capacity of our minds."

So FAR WE HAVE considered the distinction between natural and sacred theology or
between  philosophy  and  theologyas  it  is  made in the Christian tradition by
writers  conscious of the difference between faith and reason, or revelation and
demonstration.  In  pagan  antiquity,  there seems to be no equivalent of sacred
theology.  "The  various  modes of worship, which prevailed in the Roman world,"
Gibbon  tells  us,  "were  all  considered by the people as equally true; by the
philosopher as equally false; and by the magistrate as equally useful. . . . The
superstition  of  the  people was OGY not embittered by theological rancour; nor
was  it  confined  by the chains of any speculative system." It was "the elegant
mythology of Homer," he says, not reasoning, which "gave a beautiful, and almost
a  regular  form  to  the  polytheism  of  the  ancient  world."  Of  the  Greek
philosophers, Gibbon remarks that "they meditated on the Divine Nature as a very
curious  and  important  speculation,"  but  only  the Stoics and the Platonists
"endeavored  to  reconcile  the  jarring interests of reason and piety." Plato's
criticism  of  the  poets  in  the  Republic for their impiety, and his rational
defense of piety in the Laws, accompanied by a demonstration of the existence of
the  gods,  may  be  taken as examples of ancient theological discourse within a
religious  context.  Another  example,  and from quite another point of view, is
Cicero's  De  Natura  Deorum,  which  Gibbon  praises  as  the best guide to the
opinions  of  the  philosophers concerning the tenets of polytheism. But neither
Cicero  nor Plato treats theology as a science. The ancient philosopher who does
and  who,  moreover,  regards  theology as the highest of the speculative sciem,
tti-  seems to proceed without reference to or i frnefit of prevailing religious
beliefs. Aristotledlismisses "the school of Hesiod and all the theologians [who]
thought  only  of  what was plausible to themselves."He refers to the legends of
the  gods  which  "our  forefathers  in the most remote ages have handed down to
their posterity ... in the form of a myth . with a view to the . . persuasion of
the  multitude  and  to  its  legal and utilitarian expediency." But the highest
science,  which  Aristotle  sometimes  calls  "first  philosophy," he also calls
"theology."  It  deals with the immaterial and the insensible, the immovable and
eternal.  We may call it "theology," he writes, "since it is obvious that if the
divine  is  present  anywhere, it is present in things of this sort." In another
place  he  says,  "there  are  three  kinds  of  theoretical  sciences  physics,
mathematics,  theology  .  . . and of these the last named is best, for it deals
with  the  highest  of  existing  things."  At the beginning of the Metaphysics,
Aristotle  gives  another reason for thinking that theology is a divine science:
not  that it is divinely inspired, but that, having the divine for THE GREAT its
object,  it  is  the  science  "most  meet for God to have. . . . Such a science
either God alone can have, or God above all others." The title given the book in
which Aristotle attempts to develop this science comes in the later tradition to
be   the   name  given  to  speculation  concerning  immaterial  and  insensible
substances.  What  Aristotle calls "theology," Descartes, as we have seen, calls
"metaphysics"  in order to distinguish it from the theology based on revelation.
Whether  the  theology of a pagan philosopher is commensurable with the theology
of  Jewish  or  Christian  thinkers,  even  when the latter attempt to be purely
philosophical  or  natural  theologians,  is  a question which deeply probes the
relation of reason to faith. For even when reason tries to proceed independently
of  faith,  the  religious  faith  of  a  community  may  tinge the concepts the
philosopher  uses  and define the problems he undertakes to solve. It may be one
thing to prove the existence of a Prime Mover, and another to know by reason the
nature  and  existence  of  the  God  who  in the beginning 3 created heaven and
earththe  God  of  Abraham,  I&a* tcajhd Jacob, the God of the Christians, whonu
ascal  distinguishes  from  the  God of the philosophers. Augustine explains his
attitude as a theologian toward the theories of the philosophers touching divine
matters.  "I  have not undertaken," he says, "to refute all the vain theological
opinions  of  all the philosophers, but only of such of them as, agreeing in the
belief  that  there is a divine nature, and that this divine nature is concerned
about  human  affairs,  do  nevertheless  deny  that  the  worship  of  the  one
unchangeable  God is sufficient for the obtaining of a blessed life after death,
as  well  as  at the present time." Since "Plato defined the wise man as one who
imitates,  knows,  and  loves  this  God,  and  who  is rendered blessed through
fellowship  with  Him  in  His  own  blessedness,  why  discuss  with  the other
philosophers? It is evident that none come nearer to us than the Platonists."

Plato,   according   to  Augustine,  "is  justly  preferred  to  all  the  other
philosophers of the Genamong his followers who show "the tiles" ; those greatest
acuteness  in  understanding  him  ... entertain such an idea of God as to admit
that  in  Him  are to be found the cause of existence, the IDEAS ultimate reason
for the understanding, and the end in reference to which the whole life is to be
regulated."  So amazing, to his mind, are the parallels between certain insights
expressed  by Plato and the wisdom of Sacred Scripture, that Augustine is almost
inclined to believe that "Plato was not ignorant of those writings." But he does
not  think  it  necessary  to  determine whether Plato had acquaintance with the
writings  of  Moses  and  the prophets, because certain basic truths, which were
revealed  to  the  Hebrews, were made known to the gentiles through the light of
nature and reason. "That which is known of God," the apostle had said, "has been
manifested  among them, for God hath manifested it to them." Therefore Augustine
feels  justified  in  taking  any  truth  from  Plato  which  is consistent with
Christian  faith.  Aquinas, borrowing much from Aristotle, explains that "sacred
doctrine  makes use of the authority of philosophers in those questions in which
they  were  able  to know the truth by natural reason." Sacred theology uses the
doctrines of the philosophers, h&cadds, "not as though it stood in need of them,
but  only  in  order  to  make  its  teaching clearer." It is in this sense that
Aquinas  calls  philosophy  the  handmaiden  of  theology. Others seem to take a
different  view  of this relationship. Montaigne wonders whether it would not be
better  if  "the divine doctrine, as queen and regent of the rest," kept herself
apart, and he quotes St. Chrysostom to the effect that philosophy has "long been
banished  from  the  holy schools as a handmaid altogether useless." Hobbes goes
further.  He  describes  the  traditional  theology as a mingling of Aristotle's
metaphysics  with Scripture, and claims that the "bringing of the philosophy and
doctrine  of  Aristotle  into  religion  by  the  Schoolmen"  caused  the  "many
contradictions and absurdities" which "brought the clergy into a reputation both
of  ignorance  and  of  fraudulent intention, and inclined people to revolt from
them." Hegel, however, dismisses the criticism that is often made concerning the
dependence  of  Christian  theology,  at least in its formative period, on pagan
philosophy.   "The   Fathers  of  the  Church  and  the  Councils,"  he  writes,
"constituted the dogma; but a chief element in this constitution was supplied by
the previous de- CHAPTER 92: THEOLO velopment of philosophy" That certain dogmas
were  introduced  into  the  Christian  religion through "the instrumentality of
philosophy . . . isnot sufficient ground for asserting that they were foreign to
Christianity  and  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  It  is  a  matter of perfect
indifference  where  a thing originated; the only question," Hegel insists, "is,
'Is  it  true in and for itself?' Many think that by pronouncing the doctrine to
be  Neo-Platonic,  they have ipso facto banished it from Christianity. Whether a
Christian doctrine stands exactly thus and thus in the Bible ... is not the only
question. The Letter kills, the Spirit makes alive."

COMPARED  WITH  SACRED  theology, the subject matter of natural theology and the
scope of its problems seem to be extremely narrow. At most, it is only a part of
philosophy,  and  some writers treat it as no more than one part of metaphysics.
Kant, for example, divides metaphysics into three parts theology, cosmology, and
psychology  according to his conception of metaphysics as having "for the proper
object  of its inquiries only three grand ideas: God, Freedom, and Immortality."
As  a branch of transcendental speculation, theology is concerned primarily with
the  problem  of  God's existence. Similarly, Aristotle's metaphysical inquiries
include  more than his theology. His theology begins only after he has discussed
the  nature and being of sensible substances. It is stated mainly in Book XII of
the  Metaphysics  where  he  considers the existence and character of immaterial
substances,  and  of  the  one  purely  actual  being  which  is God. Descartes'
conception  seems  to  be broader, for he regards the immortality of the soul as
well  as the existence and nature of God as being characteristically theological
problems  even  when  they  are treated in metaphysics and by the methods of the
philosopher.  Because  these  two  problems concern spiritual beings, Adam Smith
also  groups  them together under the name "pneumatics" or "pneumatology," which
he  with  metaphysics that part of identifies philosophy most emphasized "in the
universities  of  Europe  where  philosophy  was  taught  only as subservient to
theology."  Bacon  alone  seems  to  separate  natural theology entirely GY from
metaphysics, which, along with physics, is for him a part of natural rather than
divine  philosophy. But though he would limit natural theology to that knowledge
of  God  which  can  be  drawn from nature, and excludes attempts to induce from
nature "any verity or persuasion concerning the points of faith," he grants that
natural  as  well  as  divine  theology  may  treat of "the nature of angels and
spirits," as "neither inscrutable nor interdicted." The subject matter of sacred
theology,  or  what  he calls "divinity," is, according to Bacon's account, much
more  extensive.  He  first  divides  it  into "matter of belief" and "matter of
service  and  adoration";  and from these two derives the "four main branches of
divinity: faith, manners, liturgy, and government." The matter of faith contains
"the  doctrine  of the nature of God, of the attributes of God, and of the works
of  God."  Under  manners,  Bacon  lists the consideration of divine law and the
breach  of  it  by sin: liturgy concerns the sacraments and rituals of religion;
government,  the  organization, offices, and jurisdictions of the church. As its
title  indicates, the Summa Theologica of Aquinas endeavors to set forth the sum
of  theological  knowledge.  In  addition to the topics and problems peculiar to
sacred  doctrine, the subject matters treated in the Summa seem to represent the
whole  range  of human inquiry almost co-extensive with the scope of the natural
sciences  and  philosophy,  both  speculative  and  moral.  Aquinas explains the
encyclopedic  character  of  the  Summa  by pointing out that to have God as the
subject  matter  of theology means that sacred doctrine treats "all things under
the aspect of God, either because they are God Himself, or because they refer to
God  as  their  beginning  and end." The unity of theology in covering so wide a
diversity  of  matters  consists  in  the  single formality under which they are
considered  the formality of being divinely revealed. That is why "objects which
are the subject matter of different philosophical sciences can yet be treated by
this  one single sacred science under one aspect, namely, insofar as they can be
included  in  revelation." Thus, for example, in the preamble to his Treatise on
Man,  Aquinas writes: "The theologian considers the nature of man in relation to
THE  GREAT  I  the  soul; but not in relation to the body, except insofar as the
body  has  relation  to  the soul." This emphasis is dictated by the articles of
Christian  faith  which  concern  man,  in  both  body and soul. Similarly, with
respect  to moral matters, Aquinas explains that the theologian "considers human
acts  inasmuch as man is thereby directed to happiness," and he takes account of
the  circumstances  of  human  acts  because  they  may  excuse  from  sin, "the
consideration of which belongs to the theologian.'* It belongs to the theologian
only  when  sin  is  conceived  "as  an  offense  against God," but to the moral
philosophers when it is conceived "as something contrary to reason."

IT  APPEARS  FROM  THE  foregoing  that  sacred theology is both speculative and
practical  (or  moral). It deals with the nature of divine things and with human
acts,  but  with  the latter only so far as they have God for their rule or end.
"Although   among   the  philosophical  sciences,"  Aquinas  writes,  "some  are
speculative and others practical, sacred doctrine includes both." Even though it
is  made  on the level of the philosophical sciences, Kant's distinction between
speculative  and  moral theology seems to be based on a different principle. For
Aquinas  the speculative and the practical parts of theology deal with different
problems,  such  as  God, the Trinity, creation, and the angels on the one hand,
and beatitude, the virtues, divine law, sin, grace, and sacraments on the other.
But  for Kant both speculative and moral theology deal with the problem of God's
existence.  They  differ only according to the manner in which the theoretic and
the practical reason undertake to solve this problem. "All attempts of reason to
establish   a   theology   by  the  aid  of  speculation  alone  are  fruitKant.
Consequently, "a rational less," writes theology can have no existence unless it
is  founded  upon the laws of morality." The postulates of pure practical reason
of  immortality,  free  will,  and  the  existence  of God "all proceed from the
principle  of  morality,  which  is  not  a  postulate but a law by which reason
determines the will directly." The moral law involves, as a necessary condition,
"the existence of the summum bonum? and that in turn in- volves "the supposition
of  the  supreme  independent good, that is, the existence of God." According to
Kant,  a  Supreme  Being  is "for the speculative reason, a mere ideal, though a
faultless  onea  conception  which  perfects  and  crowns  the  system  of human
cognition,  but  the  objective  reality  of  which  can  neither  be proved nor
disproved  by pure reason." It is this defect which moral theology remedies. "We
must assume," he says, "a moral world-cause, that is, an Author of the world, if
we are to set before ourselves a final end in conformity to the moral law." But,
he  adds,  "this  moral  argument is not intended to supply an objectively valid
proof  of  the  existence  of God. It is not meant to demonstrate to the skeptic
that  there  is a God, but that he must adopt the assumption of this proposition
as a maxim of his practical reason, if he wishes to think in a manner consistent
with  morality."  THE PROBLEM OF THE proof of God's existence, though central in
theology,  is  more fully discussed in the chapter on GOD. Here we are concerned
with the nature of theology itself as a branch of learning or inquiry. Since the
chapter  on  METAPHYSICS  necessarily  touches  on  theology  as a philosophical
discipline,  it  seems  advisable to devote attention here to some of the things
which  are  peculiarly the concern of sacred theology. Heresy is one of these. A
scientist  or  philosopher  may  be  criticized  for  his  errors,  but  only  a
theologian,  only  the  man  who  tries to explain some article of faith, can be
called  a heretic in the strict sense of that word. According to his view of the
relation  between  church  and  state, Hobbes defines heresy in political terms.
"Heresy,"  he  writes,  "is  nothing  else  but  a  private opinion, obstinately
maintained,  contrary to the opinion which the Public Person" /.., the Sovereign
"has  commanded  to be taught." But, according to Pascal, "none but God was able
to  instruct  the  Church  in  the  faith,"  and  so "it is heresy to resist the
decisions of the faith, because this amounts to an opposing of our own spirit to
the  Spirit  of God." But, he adds, "it is no heresy, though it may be an act of
presumption,  to  disbelieve  certain  particular facts, because this is no more
than  opposing  reason  it may be enlightened reason CHAPTER 92: to an authority
which is great indeed, but in this matter is not infallible."

The  aspect  of  choice,  of  obstinately preferring one's own opinion against a
superior authority, is emphasized by Aquinas, but he adds the specification that
heresy  is  a  corruption of Christian faith, a species of unbelief in which the
heretic  defies  the  authority  of the Church, choosing "not what Christ really
taught, but the suggestions of his own mind." He quotes a statement by Augustine
that we should not accuse of heresy "those who, however false and perverse their
opinion may be, defend it without obstinate fervor" and are "ready to mend their
opinion  when  they  have  found  the truth because they do not make a choice in
contradiction  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Church." It is not the falsity of the
opinion  which makes it heresy, for until the point of faith has been defined by
the  authority  of  the  Church,  theologians  may differ, and even be in error,
without being heretical. The inference may be drawn that progress is made in the
refinement and precision of theological doctrine as the dogmas of a religion are
more fully stated and the line between orthodoxy and heresy becomes more clearly
defined.  Augustine,  who  is  one  of  the  great formative theologians for the
Protestant  as  well  as  the  Catholic  tradition,  devotes a large part of his
writing  to  the  criticism  of  heresies  the great Arian heresy concerning the
Trinity,  the  Ncstorian  or  Monophysite heresy concerning the Incarnation, the
Manichean  heresy  concerning  the  existence  of  evil, and the Pelagian heresy
concerning  grace  and  good  works.  "While  the hot restlessness of heretics,"
Augustine writes, "stirs questions about many of articles of the catholic faith,
the  necessity defending them forces us ... to investigate them more accurately,
to  understand  them more clearly, and to proclaim them more earnestly"; and the
question  mooted  by an adversary becomes the occasion of instruction. According
to  Aquinas,  "the  profit  that  ensues  from heresy is beside the intention of
heretics, for it consists in the constancy of the faithful being put to the test
and  makes  us  shake  off  our  sluggishness  and  search  the  Scriptures more
carefully."  To  Augustine  and  Aquinas,  theological  argu-  THEOLOGY ment and
controversy  seem to be serviceable in the propagation and defense of the faith.
Aquinas,  for  example,  distinguishes  the  various types of dispute in which a
Christian theologian can engage with heretics, with Jews, with infidels. "We can
argue with heretics from texts in Holy Scripture," he writes, "and against those
who  deny  one  article  of  faith  we  can  argue from another. If our opponent
believes  nothing  of divine revelation, there is no longer any means of proving
the articles of faith by argument, but only of answering his objectionsif he has
any  against  faith."  But  it  is  necessary  to add the qualification that the
reasons employed "to prove things that are of faith are not demonstrations; they
are  either  persuasive  arguments showing that what is proposed by faith is not
impossible;  or  else  they are proofs drawn from the principles of faith, i.e.,
from  the authority of Holy Writ. . .Whatever is based on these principles is as
.  well-proved  in  the  eyes  of  the  faithful,  as  a  conclusion  drawn from
self-evident principles is in the eyes of all." Furthermore, Aquinas points out,
"since  faith rests upon infallible truth, and since the contrary of a truth can
never be demonstrated, it is clear that the proofs brought against faith are not
demonstrations,  but  arguments that can be answered." Descartes seems to hold a
similar  view.  Defending his opinions in a letter to Father Dinet, he declares:
"As  to  theology,  as one truth can never be contrary to another, it would be a
kind  of  impiety to fear that the truths discovered in philosophy were contrary
to  those  of the true Faith." A SOMEWHAT CONTRARY view of the relation of faith
and  reason  seems  to be taken by Locke. "Whatever God hath revealed," he says,
"is  certainly  true;  no  doubt can be made of it. This is the proper object of
faith; but whether it be a divine revelation, or no, reason must judge." Reason,
not  faith, is the ultimate test of truth, in theology as in philosophy. "Reason
must  be  our last judge and guide in everything." If reason finds something "to
be  revealed  from  God,  reason  then declares for it, as much as for any other
truth,  and  makes it one of her dictates." In many of the great books we find a
less  favorable  view of the merit or profit in theolog- Protestant reformers, l
ical  controversy.  Its  excesses  and mumbo-jum- theology itself as detr bo are
travestied  and  caricatured by Rabelais Christian faith and the and Sterne; its
futility  and  folly are the subject this vein also that Bac of bitter complaint
by  Hobbes  and  Bacon;  its itable subtility or cur intolerance is condemned by
Locke  and  Mill, speculation or controve Gibbon, who reports the disputes which
raged  speaks  of  the  "extreme  through  ten  centuries of Christendom, seldom
religion and philosophy speaks kindly of the disputants. He refers to receive by
being commix "the exquisite rancor of theological hatred"; When the Student in F
and  in describing the fury of the conflict be- almost inclined to try twcen the
Arians  and the defenders of the Ni- eles replies: cenc creed, he says that, "in
the  midsts  of their l would not wish to fierce contentions, they easily forgot
the  doubt  in  what  this scienc which is recommended by philosophy, and the So
hard  to shun the submission which is enjoined by religion." So much of hidde j)
You  scarce can tdl In the Middle Ages, mystical theologians, like Peter Damiani
or  Bernard of Clairvaux, That, however, is attack as impious or irreligious the
kind  of  the-  from the point of view ology which borrows from the philosophers
and  conflict  between faith makes use of the liberal arts, especially the piety
and  inquiry,  the  techniqucs  of  the  dialectician. In similar vein gion from
theology ofte

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The subject matter of theology: the scope of its inquiry; the range of its problems
The distinction between natural and sacred theology: its relation to the distinction be-
tween reason and faith

3. Theology as
a philosophical discipline
   3a. Natural theology
   in relation toother parts of philosophy : philosophic* prima, meta-
   3b. natural philosophy
   3c. The distinction between speculative and moral theology: theology as a work of
   the practical reason
   3d. The limitations of speculative theology     :   the insoluble mysteries or antinomies

4. Sacred theology:
faith seeking understanding
   4a. The relation of sacred theology to philosophy: theology as the queen of the sci-
   ences
   4&. The principles of sacred theology: revealed truth; articles of faith; interpretation
   of Scripture
   4b. The
   roles of reason and authority in the development of sacred doctrine: theologi-
   cal argument and proof
   4</.
   Sacred theology as a speculative and practical science
   4*. The nature and forms of theological heresy

5. Criticisms
of theology: the dogmatic, sophistical, or over-dialectical character of theo-
logical controversy

CROSS-REFERENCES

For:  The consideration of topics or problems which fall OMY 6; BEAUTY 73; CAUSE
J-jd',  DESIRE  yb; ETERN EVIL 2-2b; HAPPINESS y-yd; HISTORY 5a-5b; HONOR ya-yd;
JUSTICE ii-iib; LIBERTY 5a-5d; LOVE 5a-5

MANY 1b, 6a-6c; OPPOSITION 2d-2e; PUNISHMENT 5e

20; SAME AND OTHER 6; SIN 3-30, 6a-6e; SOUL 4

8d-8d(3); WILL 4T-4b, 76-70(2); WISDOM 1d; WORL

Other discussions of the relation of reason and fa

see KNOWLEDGE 60(5); LOGIC 4Th"; OPINION 43; PHIL

TRUTH 43; WISDOM 1c.

The  relation  of philosophy to theology, and for th of philosophy, kMETAPHYSICS
33; PHILOSOPHY la;

Discussions bearing on sacred theology as a scienc

LOGIC 4f; REASONING 6a; RELIGION 6b, 6c(i); SCIE

Discussions bearing on the nature and extent of re

faith, see ANGEL 3-4; EVOLUTION 73; GOD

iia-iic;PROPHECY 4a-4d; SIN 3-36; SOUL 4d(3); V The problems of interpreting the
Word of God or Sa

SIGN AND SYMBOL 5e.

Considerations relevant to the relation of theolog

Various attacks on theological doctrines, and for

speculation which is theological, see DIALECTIC

EDGE 5c; METAPHYSICS 2d, 43; OPINION 4b; PHILOS WILL 5c; WORLD 43.

4?  to  5  5.  Criticisms  of  theology:  the  dogmatic,  sophistical,  or over-
dialectical character of theological controversy

23 HOBOES: Leviathan, PART i, 51d-52b; 54b-c; 71a-b; 84a; PART H, 163a-b; PART
in, 165b;

PART iv, 247d-248a; 269b-271c; 274a-c

24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagrucl, BK i, 9b; 21c-24a; BK n, 78b-80d;
101b-106a; BK

in, 172d-173c; 186d-188c

35 HUME: Human Understanding, SECT vin, niv 62, 478c; SECT xi, DIV 107 499c-500b

36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, 22b-23a 376a; 421b-422b 36STLRNK: Tristram Shandy,
222a-224a; 366a39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 336b-337a

40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 312b-313b; 345d346b; 347a; 439a; 441a-d; 670b-c 41
GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 134a; 143c-145d esp 145b-c; 148a-b; 149c-d; 156a;
328a-b;

422a-d; 476b-477a 46 HvxkA.'.Philosophy of History, iARTin,313b-c;

PART iv, 360c-d

47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [1982-2000] 47a-b within the scope of theology, see
ASTRONITY 3, 40Th; GOD 2b, 2d, 4-5Th; GOOD AND 6-6b; IMMORTALITY 2, 3a; INFINITY
c; MATTER 31Th; MIND log; ONE AND (i)-5e(2); RELATION 2-3; RELIGION b-4c; TIME
2b-2c; VIRTUE AND VICE D 3a-4c(3), 8. ith, or of the relation of theology to
religion, OSOPHY 6c; RELIGION la, 1b(i), 6b, 6g; e conception of natural
theology as a part RELIGION 6f-6g. e, and on its principles and methods, see NCE
2a. vealed truth and on the articles of religious 2a, 7-9k IMMORTALITY 3b; MAN
9b(i)~9b(3), IRTUE AND VICE 8e; WORLD 46(3). cred Scripture, see LANGUAGE 12; y
to jurisprudence, see LAW 3a-3b(2). criticisms directed against the kind of 3c;
GOD 10-13; IMMORTALITY 2; KNOWLOPHY 6b; RELIGION 6f-6g; SOUL 3d;

CHAPTER 92: THE

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boot

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. Th

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning t

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which fol

I.

AUGUSTINE. On the Profit of Believing

. On Faith in Things Unseen AQUINAS. On the Trinity ofBoethius, QQ 1-3

Summa Contra Gentiles, BK i, CH 1-9

.

.

Compendium of Theology

SPINOZA.  Tractatus  Theologico-Politicus  (Theological-Political  Treatise), en
14-15

KAN  r.  Untersuchung  liber  die  Deutlichkeit  der  Grundsdtze der naturlichen
Theologie und der Moral J. S. MILL. "Theism," in Three Essays

on Religion

II.

CICERO. De Natura Deorum (On the Nature of the

Gods), n PROCLUS. The Elements of Theology

SAADIA GAON. The Book of Beliefs and Opinions,

INTRODUCTORY TREATISE ABAILARD. Introductio ad Theologiam

MAIMONIDES.  The Guide for the Perplexed, INTRO BONAVENTURA. On the Reduction of
the Arts to Theology .

Breviloquium, PART i (i)

. Jtineranum Mentis in Deum (The Itinerary of

the Mind to God)

R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART n

ALBERTUS MAGNUS. Summa Theologize, PART i DUNS Scorus. Opus Oxoniense, PROLOGIUM
ALBO. The Bool( of Principles (Sefer ha-lkfarim)

CALVIN.  Institutes  of  the Christian Religion BOEHME. The Way from Darkness to
True Illumination

OLOGY y of the Western World, but relevant to the ese works are divided into two
groups:  ed in this collection. sented in this collection. he publication of the
works  cited,  consult  lows  the  last chapter of The Great Ideas. H. MORE. The
Antidote  Against  Atheism,  BK  i,  CH i-io R. BARCLAY. An Apology for the True
Christian

Divinity CUDWORTH. The True Intellectual System of the

Universe  MALEBRANCHE. Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, II, VIII LEIBNITZ.
Theodicy  J.BUTLLR.  The  Analogy  of  Religion  VOLTAIRE. "Figure in Theology,"
"Theologian," in // Philosophical Dictionary

PALEY.  Natural Theology COMTE. The Catechism of Positive Religion J. H. NEWMAN.
An Essay on the Development of Christian Doctrine

. The Idea of a University, DISCOURSE n-iv

An Essay in Aid of a Grammar of Assent

.  L.  STEPHEN.  An  Agnostic's  Apology  HARNACK.  History  of  Dogma STIRLING.
Philosophy and Theology WARD. Naturalism and Agnosticism A. E. TAYLOR. The Faith
of  a  Moralist.  SERIES  i (i) J. S. HALDANE. The Sciences and Philosophy, LECT
XVII

PENIDO.  Le  rdle de V analogic en theologie dogmatique WHITEHEAD. Adventures of
Ideas,  CH  10  MARITAIN.  Science  and  Wisdom,  pp  70-16 GILSON. The Unity of
Philosophical Experience, cu 2 Reason and Revelation in the Middle Ages

.  FEN  TON. The Concept of Sacred Theology JAEGER. Humanism and Theology EARTH.
Dogmatics in Outline
