Chapter 93:

INTRODUCTION

Time,"  "wasteful  Time,"  DEVOURING  "this  bloody  tyrant,  Time"  Time is the
predatory  villain  with  whom not only the lover, but all men must contend. The
sonnets  of Shakespeare make war upon Time's tyranny to stay "Time's scythe," to
preserve  whatever  of value can be kept from "the wastes of time," and to prove
that "Love's not Time's fool" entirely.

Yet, viewing the almost universal depredations of Time, the poet fears that love
may  not  escape  Time's  ruin. When I have seen by Time's fell hand defaced The
rich-  proud  cost  of  outworn  buried  age;  When  sometime lofty towers I sec
down-razed,  And  biass  ctrinal slave to mortal rage; When have seen the hungry
ocean gain I Advantage on the kingdom of the shoie, And the firm soil win of the
watery  main,  Increasing  store with loss and loss with store; When I have seen
such  interchange of state, Or state itself confounded to decay; Rum hath taught
me  thus to ruminate, That Time will come and take my love away. This thought is
as a death, which cannot choose But weep to have that which it fears to lose.

The  lover  knows  that  he cannot save his love from change and her beauty from
decay.  Time  is too much for him. But when the lover is also a poet he may hope
to defeat Time, not by making his love last forever, but by making the memory of
it  immortal.  "Do thy worst, old Time," he can say, "despite thy wrong, My love
shall  in  my  verse  ever  live  young." Or again : Since brass, nor stone, nor
earth,  nor  boundless sea, But sad mortality o'er-sways their power, I low with
this  rage  shall beauty hold a plea, Whose action is no stronger than a flower?
O,  how  shall  summer's  honey  breath  hold  out Against the wreckful siege of
battering  days,  When rocks impregnable are not so stout, Nor gates of steel so
strong,  but  Time  decays?  896  TIME O fearful meditation' where, alack, Shall
Time's  best  jewel  from Time's chest lie hid? Or what strong hand can hold his
swift foot back ? Or who his spoil of beauty can forbid ?

O,  none,  unless  this  miracle have might, That in black ink my love may still
shine  bright.  But  the  poet  may  have the cast of a theologian rather than a
lover. He may, as Milton docs, stand not in awe or fear but in contempt of Time,
willing  to  wait  while  Time  runs  out  its race. Milton bids Time . . . glut
thyself  with  what  thy  womb  devours, Which is no more than what is false and
vain, And merely mortal dross; So little is our loss, So little is thy gain. For
when  as  each  thing  bad  thou  hast entomb'd, And last of all thy greedy self
consum'd, Then long Eternity shall greet our bliss With an individual kiss . . .
Then  all this Earthly grossness quit, Attir'd with Stars, we shall forever sit,
Triumphing over Death, and Chance, and thee O Time.

A  philosopher  like  Marcus  Aurelius  neither He enjoins himself to defies nor
despises  time.  accept the mutability of all things as fitting and "suitable to
universal  nature.  Dost . . . thou not see," he asks himself, "that for thyself
also  to  change  is  just  the  same,  and  equally necessary for the universal
nature?"  To  him  it  seems  "no  evil for things to undergo change"; nor is he
oppressed  by  the image of Time as "a river made up of the events which happen,
and  a violent stream; for as soon as a thing has been seen, it is carried away,
and  another  comes in its place, and this will be carried away too." For man to
resign  himself  to  time's  passage, Pascal thinks, requires no special effort.
"Our nature consists in motion," he says; "complete restis death." Time fits our
nature,  not  only  because  it  "heals griefs and quarrels," but because time's
perpetual flow washes away the CHAPTER desperate ennui men suffer when they feel
themselves imprisoned in the present.

Just  as  we seek and multiply diversions as means to escape from ourselves, so,
according  to  Pascal, when we arc dissatisfied with the present, "we anticipate
the  future  as  too  slow  in coming ... or we recall the past, to stop its too
rapid flight. For the present is generally . . . painful to us. ... Let each one
examine  his  thoughts, and he will find them all occupied with the past and the
future.  .  . . The past and present are our means; the future alone is our end.
So  we  never  live,  but we hope to live; and, as we are always preparing to be
happy, it is inevitable we should never be so."

THESE  ARE  ONLY  SOME  of  the conflicting attitudes toward time and mutability
which express man's desire for permanence, for the eternity of a now that stands
still,  or  his  restless weariness, his avidity for the novelties time holds in
store. Wherever in the great books of poetry, philosophy, or history men reflect
upon  their  loves and aspirations, their knowledge and their institutions, they
face  man's  tempoman  alone  of  earthly  things  rality.  It is not that has a
time-ridden  existence,  but  that  his  memory  and  imagination  enable him to
encompass  time,  and  so  save him from being merely rooted in it. Man not only
reaches  out  to  the past and future, but he also sometimes lifts himself above
the   whole  of  time  by  conceiving  the  eternal  and  the  immutable.  Man's
apprehension  of  the  past and future is discussed in the chapter on MEMORY AND
IMAGINATION.  The  bent  of  his mind or his striving toward the unchanging, the
everlasting,  the  eternal,  is considered in the chapter on CHANGE. Here we are
concerned with his examination of time itself.

Though  the idea of time is traditionally linked with that of space, it seems to
be much more difficult to grasp. In addition to provoking opposite emotions from
the  poets,  it  seems  to  engage  the  philosophers  in  a  dispute  about its
intelligibility. This goes deeper than conflicting definitions or analyses, such
as  occur  in  the discussion of both space and time. Whereas time seems no less
clear  than  space  to  some  thinkers,  to  others  it is irremediably obscure.
Struggling to say what it is and how it exists, 93: TIME they are exasperated by
its evanescence as an object of thought.

Aristotle  indicates  some initial difficulties in the consideration of time. It
is  not  itself  a  movement, yet "neither does time exist without . . . change.
Time is neither movement nor independent of movement." Furthermore, according to
Aristotle,  time  is  a  continuous  quantity. "Time, past, present, and future,
forms a continuous whole." Hut the very nature of a continuous quantity is to be
divisible. The present moment, however the 'now' which is "the link of time" and
the dividing line between past and future seems to be an indivisible instant. If
the  present  had  an  extended duration, Aristotle points out, it would have to
include  parts,  some  of which would be past and some future. Ilencc though the
present seems to be a part of time, it is, unlike the rest of time, indivisible;
and  though  it  separates  past  and future, yet it must also somehow belong to
both,  for  otherwise  time  would not be continuous. "The 'now' is an end and a
beginning  of  time,  not of the same time however, but the end of that which is
past  and the beginning of that which is to come." "If we conceive of some point
of  time  which  cannot  be  divided  into  even the minutest parts of moments,"
Augustine  writes,  "that  is the only point that can be called the present; and
that  point  flees at such lightning speed from being future to being past, that
it  has  no  extent  of  duration at all." Only past lime and future time can be
called  long  or  short. Only they have duration. "But in what sense," Augustine
asks,  "can  that which does not exist be long or short ? The past no longer is;
the  future  is  not  yet."  The past and future, it seems, have duration, or at
least  extent,  but  no existence. The present exists but does not endure. "What
then  is time? If no one asks me," Augustine says, "I know; if 1 want to explain
it  to  a  questioner, I do not know." All the words with which we speak of time
and  times  "arc  the  plainest  and  commonest  of  words,  yet  again they are
profoundly  obscure  and  their  meaning  remains  to  be discovered." Augustine
returns  again and again to the point that "we measure time in its passing" But,
he  says, "if you ask me how I know this, my answer is that I know it because we
measure  TOE  GREAT IDE time, and we cannot measure what does not exist, and the
past  and  future do not exist. But how do we measure time present, since it has
no  extent";  and  "where does time come from, and by what way does it pass, and
where  does  it  go  to, while we are measuring it? Where is it from ? obviously
from the future. By what way does it pass? by the present. Where does itgo? into
the  past.  In  other words, it passes from that which does not exist, by way of
that which lacks extension, into that which is no longer."

The  more  he  reflects  on  time  and  its  measurement,  the more Augustine is
perplexed,  the more he is forced to say, "I still do not know what time is." He
realizes  that  he has been "talking of time for a long time, and this long time
would not be a long time unless time has passed. Bui how do I know this, since I
do not know what time is?" It seems to him true that we measure time, and yet he
must  say,  "I  do  not know what I am measuring." It seems to him that "time is
certainly extendcdncss but," he must add, "I do not know what it is extendcdncss
of." Berkeley suggests that the difficulties in understanding time may be of our
own making.

"Bid  your servant meet you at such a time in such a place, and lie .shall never
stay  to  deliberate  on  the  meaning  of those words. ... But if time be taken
exclusive  of  all  those  particular  actions and ideas that diversify the day,
merely  for  the  continuation of existence or duration in the abstract, then it
will  perhaps  gravel  even  a  philosopher to comprehend it. "For my own part,"
Berkeley  goes  on  to  say,  "whenever I attempt to frame a simple idea of time
abstracted  from  the  succession of ideas in my own mind, which flows uniformly
and  is  participated  by  all  beings, I am lost and embrangled in inextricable
difficulties. I have no notion of it at all."

To  THOSE  WHO  conceive  time  as  a  mathematical  magnitude  or as a physical
dimension,  there  seems  to  be no difficulty about its definition or a precise
statement  of  its  properties.  So  considered,  time  appears  to  be  no less
intelligible  than  space,  for  when  it  is  so considered it is being treated
exactly  like  space  not  as a property of things, not as relative to bodies or
their  AS  motions,  but  as  an extensive manifold capable of being occupied by
things,  and  in  which  they  exist  and  move.  As in what Einstein calls "the
four-dimensional  space-time continuum" (which comprises three space coordinates
and  one  time  coordinate)  time  is  merely  one dimension among others, so in
Newton's  theory  time  and  space are also given parallel treatment. "Times and
spaces,"  Newton writes, "are as it were, the places as well of themselves as of
all  other  things. All things are placed in time as to order of succession; and
in  space as to order of situation." Einstein criticizes Newtonian mechanics for
its  "habit  of  treating  time as an independent continuum," yet Newton no less
than Einstein appears to conceive time and space alike as dimensions, even if he
conceives  them  in  separation  from  one  another.  But  if time and space are
something to be occupied or filled, they can also be thought of as unoccupied or
empty.  The  opposition,  discussed  in  the chapter on SPACE, between those who
think of space in itself as empty, and those who deny a void or vacuum, seems to
be paralleled here by the issue concerning empty time time apart from all change
or motion, time in itself. Waiving for the moment the question whether such time
exists  or  is  only a mathematical abstraction,we can see that this time may be
more  susceptible  to  analysis  than  the time of ordinary experience, the time
which,  according  to  Lucretius,  no  one  feels "by itself abstracted from the
motion  and  calm rest of things." Newton explains that he docs not define time,
space,  place, and motion, because they are "well known to all." But he observes
that men commonly "conceive these quantities under no other notions but from the
relation  they  bear  to sensible objects." He finds it necessary, therefore, to
distinguish  each  of  them  "into  absolute  and  relative,  true and apparent,
mathematical  and  common."  By  "absolute, true, and mathematical time," Newton
means  that  which  "of  itself,  and from its own nature, flows equably without
relation  to  anything  external,  and  by  another name is called duration." In
contrast,  "relative,  apparent,  and common time, is some sensible and external
(whether  accurate  or  unequable)  measure  of duration by the means of motion,
which  CHAPTER  93:  T is commonly used instead of true time, such as an hour, a
day,  a  month,  a  year.'*  In  astronomy, Newton points out, absolute time "is
distinguished from relative, by the equation or correction of the apparent time.
For  the  natural days are truly unequal, though they are commonly considered as
equal,  and  used for measures of time; astronomers correct this inequality that
they may measure the celestial motions by a more accurate time." Newton seems to
be  saying  that time measures motion and also that it is measured by it. If his
distinction  between  absolute  and relative time is ignored, his theory of time
does not appear to be very different from that of Aristotle, who says, "not only
do  we  measure  the  movement  by the time, but also the time by the movement."
Insofar  as movement or change involves a sequence in which one part comes after
another, time measures it by numbering the befores and afters. But we also judge
the  length  of  the time according to the duration of the movement, and in this
sense  the  movement  measures  time. As both Aristotle and Augustine point out,
time measures rest as well as motion, for, in Aristotle's words, "all rest is in
time.  . . . Time 1 is not motion, but the 'number of motion and what is at rest
can be in the number of motion.

Not  everything  that is not in motion can be said to be 'at rest' but only that
which  can  be  moved, though it actually is not moved." But where Aristotle, in
defining  time  as  the  measure  of  motion or rest, makes time an attribute of
movement,  Newton  regards  absolute  time  as  the  perfect  measure  of motion
precisely  because  its  nature  is  independent  of  all  physical change. Only
relative  time  depends  on  motion,  and  that is the time which is measured by
motion,  not  the  measure of it. Those "who confound real quantities with their
relations  and  sensible  measures,"  Newton  declares,  "defile  the  purity of
mathematical and philosophical truths."

Distinguishing  between  duration  and  time, Locke expresses in another way the
difference  between  Newton  and  Aristotle.  Time  for Locke is that portion of
duration  which  consists  of  definite periods and is measured by the motion of
bodies.  "We must, therefore, carefully distinguish betwixt duration itself, and
the  meas- IME ures we make use of to judge its length. Duration in itself is to
be considered as going on in one constant, equal uniform course; but none of the
measures  which  we make use of, can be known to do so." It seems wrong to Locke
to define time as the measure of motion when, on the contrary, it is motion "the
motion  of  the great and visible bodies of the world" which measures time. What
Locke  calls "duration" seems to be the same as Newton's absolute time. It is in
no  way  relative  to the existence of bodies or motion. Just as space or, as he
calls  it,  "expansion," is not limited by matter, so duration is not limited by
motion.  As  place  is that portion of infinite space "which is possessed by and
comprehended  within  the  material world, and is thereby distinguished from the
rest of expansion," so time is "so much of infinite duration, as is measured by,
and  coexistent  with,  the  existence  and  motions  of the great bodies of the
universe."  MANY  ISSUES  ARE  RAISED  by  absolute  time  or  infinite duration
conceived   as  independent  of  all  bodily  motions.  Einstein,  for  example,
challenges  the  classical notion of simultaneity, according to which two events
taking  place  a  great  distance from one another are said to occur at the same
time  ,  that  is,  at the same moment in the absolute flow of time. "Before the
advent  of  the  theory  of  relativity," he writes, "it had always been tacitly
assumed  in  physics  that  the  statement of lime had an absolute significance,
i.e.,  that  it is independent of the state of motion of the body of reference."
But  if the world of physical events is a four-dimensional manifold in which the
time  coordinate  is  always  associated  with  the  space  coordinates  for any
reference-body  under  observation,  then  "every  reference-  body  (coordinate
system)  has  its  own particular time"; and, Einstein adds, "unless we are told
the reference-body to which the statement of time refers, there is no meaning in
a  statement  of the time of an event." There is also the issue of the emptiness
of  that  part of absolute time or infinite duration which comes before or after
the existence of the world, comparable to the issue concerning the void or empty
space  beyond  the  borders  of  the material universe. Those who regard time as
relative to and inseparable from motion deny the possibility of such empty time.

For  Plato, as for Christian theologians like Augustine and Aquinas, time itself
is  created  with  the creation of the heavenly bodies and their motions, As the
story  of  the  world's  becoming is told in the Timaeus, the maker "resolved to
have  a  moving  image of eternity, and when he set in order the heaven, he made
this  image  eternal but moving according to number, while eternity itself rests
in  unity;  and  this  image we call time. Time, then, and the . . . heaven came
into being at the same instant." Augustine undertakes to answer "those who agree
that  God  is  the Creator of the world, but have difficulties about the time of
its  creation."  He  asserts  that  "there  is  no time before the world. For if
eternity  and  time  arc rightly distinguished by this, that time does not exist
without  some movement and transition, while in eternity there is no change, who
docs not sec that there could have been no time had not some creature been made,
which  by  some  motion could give birth to change. ... I do not sec," Augustine
continues,  "how  God can be said to have created the world after spaces of time
had  elapsed,  unless it be said that prior to the world there was some creature
by  whose  movement  time  could pass." Hut the existence of a creature prior to
creation  is  impossible.  Hence  Augustine  concludes  that  "if in the world's
creation  change  and  motion  were  created,"  then  "the  world  and time were
simultaneously created."

Though  the  existence  of  a  creature  prior  to  creation  is impossible, not
impossible,  acit is cording to Aquinas, for the created world to be coeval with
its Creator. While he rejects the opinion of those who assert that the world now
exists without any dependence on God, and who deny that it was ever made by God,
he  entertains,  as  possible,  the view that "the world has a beginning, not of
time, but of creation." Those who hold this view, he explains, mean that "it was
always made. . . . For just as, if a foot were always in the dust from eternity,
there would always be a footprint which without doubt was caused by him who trod
on  it, so also the world always was, because its Maker always existed." It does
not necessarily follow, Aquinas ad- AS mits, that "if God is the active cause of
the world, He must be prior to the world in duration, because creation, by which
He  produced  the world, is not a successive change." But Aquinas docs not think
that  the  question whether the world and time began with creation or has always
co-existed  with  its  Creator,  can  be resolved by reason. "The newness of the
world,"  he  says, "is known only by revelation. . That the world did not always
exist  we  hold  .  .  by  faith alone; it cannot be proved demonstratively." In
saying  this,  he is not unmindful of the fact that Aristotle advances arguments
to  show  that  there  can be no beginning to either time or motion. "Since time
cannot  exist and is unthinkable apart from the moment, and the moment is a kind
of  middle  point,  uniting  as it does in itself both ... a beginning of future
time  and  an end of past time, it follows that there must always be time. . . .
But  if this is true of time, it is evident that it must also be true of motion,
time  being  an  attribute of motion." With one exception, all his predecessors,
according  to  Aristotle, are in agreement that time is uncreated. "In fact," he
says,  "it  is  just  this that enables Democntus to show that all things cannot
have had a becoming. . . . Plato alone asserts the creation of time, saying that
it had a becoming together with the universe." But Aristotle's own arguments for
the  eternity  of  time  and  motion  do  not  seem to Aquinas to be "absolutely
demonstrative, but only relatively so I'is.j as against the arguments of some of
the ancients who asserted that the world began to be in some actually impossible
ways." As for the present moment, or the notvot time, always requiring something
which  comes  before  as well Aquinas admits that "time cannot be as after, made
except  according to some now," yet "not because there is time in the first now,
but  because  from  it time begins." The position of Aquinas, that arguments for
the  initiation  or  the  endlessness  of time are only dialectical, seems to be
confirmed  by  Kant.  In  the  Transcendental  Dialectic of the Critique of Pure
Reason,  Kant  sets  forth  as  one  of  the cosmological antinomies the opposed
arguments  for the beginning of the world and for a world without beginning. The
reasoning  on either side being equal in its appearance of cogency, nei- CHAPTER
93: ther conclusion, according to Kant, is genuinely demonstrated.

But  those  who,  like  Newton  and  Locke,  separate  absolute time or infinite
duration  from  the  existence  of  a  world in motion, seem to be unaffected by
arguments  which  concern  only the time of the material world, the time that is
relative  to  motion. For them, absolute or infinite time is eternity. It may be
empty  of motion, but it is filled with God's everlasting being. "Though we make
duration  boundless, as certainly it is," Locke writes, "we cannot yet extend it
beyond  all  being.  God,  every  one easily allows, fills eternity." God is not
eternity, says Newton, but He is eternal. "His duration reaches from eternity to
eternity.  ...  He  endures forever, and is everywhere present; and, by existing
always  and  everywhere,  He constitutes duration and space." The issue is again
brought  into  focus  by  the  denial that God's eternity can be identified with
infinite  or  absolute time. "Even supposing that the world always was," Aquinas
writes,  it  would  not be eternal in the sense in which God is, "for the divine
being is all being simultaneously without succession." He distinguishes "the now
that  stands  still" as the eternal present from the continually shifting now in
the  flow  of  time's  passing moments. For him God's everlasting being does not
endure  through  endless  time,  but  rather  exists  unchanging  in the eternal
present.  "As  eternity  is  the  proper measure of being, so time is the proper
measure of movement; and hence," Aquinas writes, "according as any being recedes
from permanence in being, and is subject to change, it recedes from eternity and
is subject to time."

THE  TWO MEANINGS OF eternity infinite time and utter timelessness are discussed
in  the chapter on ETERNITY. The distinction between time and eternity, which is
considered  both there and here, seems to be understood differently by those who
contrast  timelessness  with  temporality  and by those who equate eternity with
endless  time. For the latter, the point of difference between eternity and time
seems to be only one of infinite as opposed to limited duration. Yet, as we have
just  observed,  writers  like  Newton  and  Locke  also distinguish absolute or
infinite  time  (which they tend to iden- TIME tify with eternity) from definite
periods  or  limited  spans of time, by making the one independent of, the other
relative  to and measured by, motion. The question remains whether absolute time
is  real  time  or only a mathematical abstraction, whether it exists apart from
perceived  time  the  experienced  duration of observable motions or the elapsed
time  of  events in succession. Considering this question, Kant says that "those
who  maintain  the  absolute  reality  of time and space, whether as essentially
subsisting,  or  only inhering, as modifications in things, must find themselves
at  utter variance with the principles of experience itself. For, if they decide
for the first view, and make space and time into substances, this being the side
taken  by mathematical natural philosophers, they must admit two self-subsisting
nonentities, infinite and eternal, which exist (yet without their being anything
real)  for  the  purpose of containing in themselves everything that is real. If
they adopt the second view of inherence, which is preferred by some metaphysical
natural  philosophers,  and  regard space and time as relations . . . abstracted
from experience they find . . . themselves in that case necessitated to deny the
validity  of  mathematical  doctrine  a  priori in reference to real things." On
Kant's  own  view, the synthetic judgments of mathematics can have the apodictic
certainty  of  a  priori  propositions  only  if space and time are themselves a
priori forms of intuition. As the a priori form of space makes possible the pure
science  of  geometry,  according  to  Kant,  so the a priori form of time makes
possible  the  pure science of numbers, i.e., arithmetic. But whereas "space, as
the pure form of external intuition is limited ... to external phenomena alone,"
time,  as  "the form of the internal sense," is for Kant "the formal condition a
priori  of  all phenomena whatsoever." Without sharing Kant's theory of a priori
forms  of  intuition,  or  of the foundations of pure mathematics, other writers
appear  to  agree to some extent with his denial of independent reality to time.
Aristotle  raises  the question "whether if soul did not exist, time would exist
or  not." He thinks the question may be fairly asked because "if there cannot be
someone  to  count,  there  cannot  be  anything  that  can  be counted, so that
evidently  there  cannot  be number" for number is the counted or the countable.
"But  if nothing but soul, or in soul reason, is qualified to count, there would
not  be  time  unless there were soul." Yet Aristotle qualifies this somewhat by
adding  that  kmovement  can  exist  without  soul, and the before and after are
attributes of movement," time may exist as "these qua numerable."

Augustine  takes  a  less qualified position. Asking what it is that time is the
"extendedness of," he answers: "Probably of the mind itself."

Insisting  that  neither  future  nor  past time can be measured because neither
exists,  Augustine  concludes  that  it is only passing time we can measure, and
that  we  can  measure  it only in the mind. "It is in you, O my mind," he says,
"that  I  measure  time.  . . . What I measure is the impress produced in you by
things  as  they  pass  and  abiding in you when they have passed . . . I do not
measure  the  things  themselves  whose  passage produced the impress; it is the
impress  that  I measure when I measure time." Yet William fames, while giving a
similar  analysis  of  our experience of time, insists that time is objective as
well  as  subjective.  Time  and space relations, he writes, "are impressed from
without." The time and space in which the objects of our thought exist, exist as
independently  of  the  mind  as  do  those  objects  themselves. "The time- and
space-relations  between  things do stamp copies within" \ as, for example, when
"things sequent in time impress their sequence on our memory."

WILLIAM  JAMES PROPOSES a solution of the mystery of how time existsat least how
it  exists  in  experience.  So  far as our experience goes, past and future can
exist only in the present. But how can these extended parts of time exist in the
present if the present is but a fleeting moment, without any extent of duration,
"gone,"  as  James says, "in the instant of becoming"? His answer is in terms of
something he calls "the specious present." Unlike the real present, the specious
present  is"no  knife-edge but a saddle- back, with a certain breadth of its own
on which we sit perched, and from which we look in two directions into time. The
unit  of  composition  of our perception of time is a duration, with a bow and a
stern,  as  it were a rearward- and a forwardlooking end. It is only as parts of
this  durationblock  that  the relation of succession of one end to the other is
perceived." On the basis of some experimental evidence, James estimates that the
specious  present  may  vary  in length "from a few seconds to probably not more
than a minute." It has "a vaguely vanishing backward and forward fringe; but its
nucleus  is  probably  the  dozen  seconds  or less that have just elapsed." The
irreversible  flow of time the succession of moments which constitute the motion
of  the future through the present into the past occurs in the specious present,
though  not,  according  to  James,  without  the  accompaniment  of observed or
experienced  change.  "Awareness  of  change  is  ... the condition on which our
perception  of  time's  flow depends." But that awareness must take place in the
specious  present "with its content perceived as having one part earlier and the
other  part  later." In consequence, James considers the specious present to be,
not  only  "the  original  intuition  of  time,"  but also "the original paragon
prototype  of all ' ' conceived times. THE PROBLEMS OF TIME, its own process and
being  as  well as its relation to all other existence and change, its character
as  an  aspect of experience and as an object of thought, seem to belong to many
subject  matters  to  psychology and to experimental or mathematical physics, to
the philosophy of nature, metaphysics, and theology. For some thinkersin our own
time  notably  Bergson,  Whitehead,  and  Dewcy  the  concept  of  time,  of the
burgeoning  future,  of  the  continuum  of  events,  seems to determine a whole
philosophical outlook. If it is not equally decisive throughout the tradition of
the  great  books, it is at least of critical significance in speculations about
the  origin and end of the world, in the contrast between physical and spiritual
modes  of  being,  in  the  consideration of the processes of life, thought, and
feeling,  and in the analysis of more inclusive concepts, such as that of order.
The  temporal  relationships of succession and simultaneity, for example, may be
the  source  from which we derive the notions of prior, pos- CHAPTER 93: terior,
and  simultaneous, but they are traditionally viewed as exemplifying rather than
exhausting  these  types  of  order.  When  Augustine  deals with the perplexing
theological  question of the priority of eternity to time, he finds it necessary
to  distinguish  "priority  in  eternity,  priority in time, priority in choice,
priority  in  1  origin.'  When  Aristotle  deals  with  metaphysical  questions
concerning  the  order  of  cause  and effect, of potentiality and actuality, of
essence  and  accident, he differentiates between temporal and logical priority,
and  between  priority  in  thought and priority in nature. When Harvey tries to
solve  the  familiar  biological  riddle  (which  came first, the chicken or the
egg?),  he  also  finds  his  solution  in  a distinction. "The fowl is prior by
nature," he writes, "but the egg is prior in time."

Space  and  spatial relationships, no less than time and the temporal, figure in
the  general  analysis  of  order  or  relatedness  and  have a bearing on other
problems  in  physics  and  philosophy.  But  in  addition to time's having more
significance  than  space  for the theologian, time also has peculiar importance
for  one  subject matter in which space is of much less concern, namely, history
and  the  philosophy  of  history.  Besides the general view which the historian
takes  of  time  as  the locus of history, or the medium in which the pattern of
history unfolds, the writer of history usually employs certain conventional time
divisions to mark the major phases or epochs of the story he has to tell. Clocks
and calendars record or represent the passage of time in conventional units, but
these  conventions  have  some  natural  basis  in  astronomical  time, solar or
sidereal. In contrast, the distinction between historic and prehistoric time, or
the  division  of  history  into such periods as ancient, mediaeval, and modern,
seems  to  be  purely  a  matter  of  social or cultural convention. With Hegel,
however,  the  division  of  the whole of history into three epochs, and of each
epoch  again  into  three periods, follows from the dialectical triad of thesis,
antithesis, and synthesis which is the indwelling form of history's development.
The  division of each of the three phasesofworld-history the Oriental, the Grae-
TIME  co-Roman,  and  the  German  worlds into a first, second, and third period
produces  in each case the same pattern of origin, conflict, and resolution. For
the  most  part,  Hegel  does  not  identify  these  three periods with ancient,
mediaeval,  and modern times; yet in one case, that of the German world, he does
refer  to  the  second  period as "the middle ages" and the third as "the modern
time."  Such  words as "ancient" and "modern" have conventional significance for
most  historians.  Furthermore,  the  meanings  of  modernity  and antiquity arc
themselves  subject  to  historical  relativity.  In  the tradition of the great
books,  this appears most plainly in the references made to ancients and moderns
by  writers  whom  we  today  classify as ancient and mediaeval. Thucydidcs, for
example,  begins his history with a description of what is for him the antiquity
of  Greece.  Nicomachus opens his Introduction to Arithmetic with a remark about
"the  ancients,  who  under  the  leadership  of  Pythagoras  first made science
systematic,  defined  philosophy  as the love of wisdom." Mathematics, Aristotle
says, "has come to be identical with philosophy for modern thinkers." In another
place,  Aristotle contrasts "the thinkers of the present day" with "the thinkers
of  old";  and  in  still  another  he  speaks of "ancient and truly traditional
theories."  Like Aristotle in the sphere of thought, so Tacitus in the sphere of
politics  frequently  compares  ancient and modern institutions or practices. In
the  Middle  Ages,  Aquinas  speaks of the "teachings of the early philosophers"
and,  as  frequently as Aristotle, he refers to ancient and modern doctrines. In
the  Renaissance,  Kepler  treats  as ancient a scientist who, in point of time,
comes  much later than those whom Aristotle and Aquinas call modern. Classifying
three  schools  of  astronomical thought, he distinguishes an ancient one, which
had  "Ptolemy  as  its coryphaeus," from two modern ones, respectively headed by
Copernicus  and  Tycho  Brahe. Such references, which have occurred in all three
periods  of  the  western tradition, suggest the probability that at some future
date the whole tradition with which we are now acquainted will be referred to as
the thought and culture of ancient times. 904

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of time: time as duration or as the measure of motion; time as a continuous
quantity; absolute and relative time

2. The distinction between        time and eternity: the eternity of endless time distinguished
from the eternity of timclessness and immutability
   2a. Aeviternity as intermediate between time and eternity
   2b. Arguments concerning the infinity of time and the eternity of motion or the world
   2c. The creation of time:    the priority of eternity to time; the immutability of the
   world after the end of time

3. The        mode of existence of time
   3a. The parts of time: its division into past, present, and future
   3b. The reality of the past and the future in relation to the existence of the present
   3c. The extent of the present moment: instantaneity

4. The measurement of time: sun, stars, and clocks

5. Temporal relationships:
time as a means of ordering
   5a. Simultaneity
   or coexistence: the simultaneity of cause and effect, action and pas-
   5b. knowledge and object known
   5c. Succession or priority and posteriority: the temporal order of cause and effect,
   potentiality and actuality
   5d. Succession and simultaneity in relation to the association of ideas
   5e. Comparison of temporal with non-temporal simultaneity and succession: the prior
   in thought, by nature, or in origin

6. The knowledge of time and         the experience of duration
   6a. The perception of time by the interior senses: the difference between the experi-
   ence and memory of time intervals
   6b. Factors influencing the estimate of time elapsed: empty and filled time; illusions
   of time perception; the variability of experienced durations
   6c. Time as a transcendental form of intuition: the a priori foundations of arithmetic;
   the issue concerning innate and acquired time perception
   6d. The signifying of time: the distinction between noun and verb; the tenses of the
   verb
   6e. Knowledge of the past: the storehouse of memory; the evidences of the past in
   physical traces or remnants
   6/!   Knowledge of the future: the truth of propositions about future contingents; the
   probability of predictions

7. The temporal course of the passions: emotional attitudes toward time and mutability

8. Historical      time
   8a. Prehistoric and historic time: the antiquity of man
   8b. The epochs of history: myths of a golden age; the relativity of modernity

CROSS-REFERENCES  For:  Other discussions of time as a quantity and its relation
to motion, see CHA

1c; QUANTITY 5b; RELATION 6a; and for the measurement of time, see ASTR

QUANTITY 6c.

Discussions relevant to the distinction between time and eternity, and to

infinity of time and the eternity of the world, see ASTRONOMY 8c(i);

NITY 1-2; INFINITY 36 ; WORLD 4,1, 8.

Time in relation to theories of creation, see ETERNITY la; WORLD 4e(2).

Another treatment of the relations of succession and simultaneity, see REL

for the temporal aspects of such relations as that between cause and eff

actuality, and the various acts of the mind, see BEING 7c(i); CAUSE 1b;

IDEA 5d-5e; RELATION 4f.

The analysis of memory and imagination as interior senses, see MEMORY AND

SENSE 30, 3d(2).

Considerations relevant to the conception of time as a transcendental form

the related problem of the foundations of arithmetic, see FORM 1c; MATH

MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 6c(2); MIND 1c(i), 4d(3); SPACE 4:1.

The general theory of the parts of speech which involves the distinction b

verb, see LANGUAGE 43.

Other considerations of our knowledge of the past and the future, see HIST

EDGE 5a(5); MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 3b; NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 4c; PRO

la-1b; TRUTH 3X2).

The influence of time on human development, see EXPERIENCE 6a; LIFE AND DE

MAN 6c; and for man's attitude toward time and change, kCHANGE i2b; PROG

Other treatments of the problem of time and free will in relation to God's

forcordination, see GOD yb, yf; HISTORY 53; LIBERTY 5a-5b; WILL yc.

Other discussions of historical time and the antiquity of man, see EVOLUTI

43(3), 4c; MAN PC.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Books of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided i

I. Works by authors represented in this collection.

II. Works by authors not represented in this collecti

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the w

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter o

KANT. De Mundi Scnsibi

*

Metaphysical Foun

.

AUGUSTINE. On Music DIV i AQUINAS. De Aeternitate Mundi HOBBES. Concerning Body,
PART  n,  CH  7  SPINOZA.  Cogita  Mctaphysica,  PART  i,  CH  4; PART n, SEXTUS
EMPIRICUS. Agai

en i Outlines of Pyrrh

.

HUME. A Treatise of Human Nature, BK T, PART n PROCLUS. The Elements

913  8c; PART i, 209b-c; 231b- RT n, 259c-d; 274a-275a; a,c; PART in, 286c-287a;
7d;  348a-b  6d [fn 4] Peace, BK vi, 265b NGE 53; MECHANICS ONOMY y; the problem
of  the  ATION  5a;  and  CHANGE  13;  ETERect,  potentiality  and EDUCATION 5d;
IMAGINATION i ; of intuition and to EMATICS 1c; etween noun and PHECY ATH 6b-6c;
RESS  5.  ORY 3.1; KNOWLforeknowledge and ON yc; HISTORY but relevant to the nto
two  groups:  on.  orks  cited,  consult  f  The  Great  Ideas.  lis  (Inaugural
Dissertation)  dations  of Natural Science nst the Physicists, BK n, CH 3 onism,
BK in, CH 1-20 ofThcologty, (F)

914 MAIMONIDES. The Guide for the Perplexed, PART 11,

CH 13 CRESCAS. Or Adonai, PROPOSITION 15

SUAREZ. Disputationes Metaphysicae, xv (3), xxxix,

XL (9), L JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophtcus

Thomisticus, Philosophia Naturalis, PART i, Q

18 standing BK n, CH 14-15

LEIBNITZ. New Essays Concerning Human UnderWHEWELL. The Philosophy of the
Inductive Sciences, VOL i, BK n, CH 7-10

}  IODGSON.  Time  and  Space  LOTZE. Metaphysics, BK n, CH 3 FRAZER. The Golden
Bough,  PART  iv, BK HI, CH 2 BRADLEY. Appearance and Reality, BK i, CH 4; BK n,
CH 18

BOSANQUET. Science and Philosophy, 7

ROYCE. The World and the Individual, SERIES n (3)

POINCARR.  The Value of Science, PART i, CH 2 MEYERSON. Identity and Reality, en
6 CASSIRER. Substance and Function, SUP v ROBB. A Theory of Time and Space WEYL.
Space Time Matter S. ALEXANDER. Space, Time, and Deity

PROUST. Remembrance of Things Past

AS WHITEHEAD. An Enquiry Concerning the Principles of

Natural Knowledge, CH 6

The Concept of Nature, CH 3

. EINSTLIN. Relativity: The Special and the General

Theory

.

Sidelights  on  Relativity  MARITAIN.  Theonas,  Conversations  of  a  Sage,  vi
MCTAGGART. The Nature of Existence, en 33 BERGSON. Time and Free Will

. Creative Evolution

. Duree et simultaneite, il propos de la thtorie

d*  Einstein,  CH  1-5 MANN. The Magic Mountain DEWEY. Experience and Nature, CH
1-3, 7, 9 G. N. LEWIS. The Anatomy of Science, ESSAY in HEIDEGGER. Sein und Zeit
EDDINGTON. Space, Time, and Gravitation

The Nature of the Physical World, CH 3

.  MEAD.  Philosophy of the Present SANTAYANA. The Realm of Matter, CH 4 BORING.
The Physical Dimensions of Consciousness,

CH 5 WFISS, Reality, BK ii, CH 6 B. RUSSELL. The Analysis of Matter, CH 28-29, 3
2

36

. Human Knowledge, Its

Scope and Limits,

PART III, CH 5; PART IV, CH 5, 7
