Chapter 94:

INTRODUCTION

everyone knows Josiah Royce's defiNOT nition of a liar as a man who willfully
misplaces his ontological predicates, but everyone who has ever told a lie will
recognize its accuracy. To restate the definition less elegantly, lying consists
in saying the contrary of what one thinks or believes. To speak truthfully we
must make our speech conform to our thought, we must say that something is the
case if we think it is, or that it is not, if we think it is not. If we
deliberately say "is" when we think is 1 not, or say "is not' when we think is,
we lie.

Of course, the man who speaks truthfully a may in fact say what is false, just
as the man o whose intent is to falsify may inadvertently speak the truth. The
intention to speak one's mind does not guarantee that one's mind is free from
error or in possession of the truth.

Herein lies the traditional distinction between truth as a social and as an
intellectual matter. What Dr. Johnson calls moral truth consists in the
obligation to say what we mean. In contrast what he calls physical truth depends
not on the veracity of what we say but on the validity of what we mean. The
theory of truth in the tradition of the great books deals largely with the
latter kind of truth. The great issues concern whether we can know the truth and
how we can ever tell wheth- g er something is true or false. Though the a
philosophers and scientists, from Plato to s Freud, seem to stand together
against the extreme sophistry or skepticism which denies the distinction between
true and false or puts truth utterly beyond the reach of man, they do not all
agree on the extent to which truth is attain- a able by men, on its immutability
or variability, p on the signs by which men tell whether they a have the truth
or not, or on the causes of error r and the means for avoiding falsity. a Much
that Plato thinks is true Freud rejects b as false. Freud searches for truth in
other quarters and by other methods. But the ancient controversy in which
Socrates engages with the sophists of his day, who were willing to regard as
true whatever anyone wished to think, seems to differ not at all from Freud's
quarrel with those whom he calls "intellectual nihilists." They are the persons
who say there is no such thing as truth or that it is only the product of our
own needs and desires. They make it "absolutely immaterial," Freud writes, "what
views we accept. All of them are equally true nd false. And no one has a right
to accuse anyne else of error." Across the centuries the arguments against the
skeptic seem to be the same. If the skeptic does not mind contradicting himself
when he tries to defend the truth of the proposition that all propositions are
equally true or false, he can perhaps be challenged by the fact that he does not
act according to his view. If all opinions are equally true or false, then why,
Aristotle asks, does not the denier of truth walk "into a well or over a
precipice" instead of avoiding such things. "If it were really a matter of
indifference what we believed," Freud similarly argues, "then we might just as
well build our bridges of cardboard as of stone, or inject a tenth of a ramme of
morphia into a patient instead of hundredth, or take tear-gas as a narcotic
intead of ether. But," he adds, "the intellectual anarchists themselves would
strongly repudiate such practical applications of their theory." Whether the
skeptic can be refuted or merely silenced may depend on a further step in the
rgument, in which the skeptic substitutes robability for truth, both as a basis
for action nd as the quality of all our opinions about the eal world. The
argument takes different forms ccording to the different ways in which
probaility is distinguished from truth or according to the distinction between a
complete and limited skepticism. Montaigne, for example, seems to think that the
complete skeptic cannot even acknowledge degrees of probability to be
objectively ascertainable without admitting the criterion of truth, whereas
Hume, defending a mitigated skepticism, offers criteria for measuring the
probability of judgments about matters of fact.

THE POSITION OP THE skeptic, in its bearing on truth and probability, is
discussed in the chapters on KNOWLEDGE and OPINION. Here we shallproceed to
other controversial questions concerning truth. But we must first observe that
there is one major question which does not seem to cause much dispute. Not only
do the great authors (with the possible exception of Montaigne and Hume) seem to
be unanimous in their conviction that men can attain and share the truth at
least some truths but they also appear to give the same answer to the question,
What is truth ? The apparently unanimous agreement on the nature of truth may
seem remarkable in the context of the manifold disagreements in the great books
concerning what is true. As already indicated, some of these disagreements occur
in the theory of truth itself in divergent analyses of the sources of error, or
in conflicting formulations of the signs of truth. But even these differences do
not affect the agreement on the nature of truth. Just as everyone knows what a
liar is, but not as readily whether someone is telling a lie, so the great
philosophers seem able to agree on what truth is, but not as readily on what is
true. That the definitions of lying and of truth arc intimately connected will
be seen from Plato's conception of the nature of truth as a correspondence
between thought and reality. If truthfulness, viewed socially, requires a man's
words to be a faithful representation of his mind, truth in the mind itself (or
in the statements which express thought) depends on their conformity to reality.
A false proposition, according to Plato, is "one which asserts the non-existence
of things which are, and the existence of things which are not." Since "false
opinion is that form of opinion which thinks the opposite of the truth," it
necessarily follows, as Aristotle points out, that "to say of what is that it
is, and of what is not that it is not, is true," just as it is false "to say of
what is that it is not, or of what is not that it is."

In one sense, the relation between a true statement and the fact it states is
reciprocal. "If a man is," Aristotle declares, then "the proposition in which we
allege that he is, is true; and conversely, if the proposition wherein we allege
that he is, is true, then he is." But the true proposition "is in no way the
cause of the being of the man," whereas "the fact of the man's being does seem
somehow to be the cause of the truth of the proposition, for the truth or
falsity of the proposition depends on the fact of the man's being or not being."
THIS SIMPLE STATEMENT about the nature of truth is repeated again and again in
the subsequent tradition of western thought. What variation there is from writer
to writer seems to be in phrasing alone, though the common insight concerning
truth as an agreement or correspondence between the mind and reality may occur
in the context of widely varying conceptions concerning the nature of the mind
and of reality or being. Plotinus may be an exception, insofar as his theory of
knowledge involves a relation of identity rather than of mere correspondence.
"The object known," he writes, "must be identical with the knowing act ... If
this identity docs not exist, neither docs truth . . . Truth cannot apply to
something conflicting with itself; what it affirms it must also be." But others,
like Augustine, Aquinas, Descartes,and Spinoza, adopt the conception of truth as
an agreement between the mind and reality. Falsehood occurs, says Augustine,
when "something is thought to be which is not." According to Aquinas, "any
intellect which understands a thing to be otherwise than it is, is false." Truth
in the human intellect consists "in the conformity of the intellect with the
thing." The same point is implied, at least, in Descartes' remark that if we do
not relate our ideas "to anything beyond themselves, they cannot properly
speaking be false." Error or, for that matter, truth can only arise in "my
judging that the ideas which are in me are similar or conformable to the things
which are out- CHAPTER 94: TRUTH 1 side me.' Spinoza states it as an axiom
rather than a definition that "a true idea must agree with that of which it is
the idea."

Making a distinction between verbal and real truth, Locke writes: "Though our
words signify nothing but our ideas, yet being designed by them to signify
things, the truth they contain, when put into propositions, will be only verbal,
when they stand for ideas in the mind that have not an agreement with the
reality of things." Precisely because he considers truth to consist "in the
accordance of a cognition with its object," Kant holds that, so far as the
content (as opposed to the form) of a cognition is concerned, it is impossible
to discover a universal criterion of truth. We shall return to Kant's point in a
subsequent discussion of the signs of truth, as also we shall have occasion to
return to Locke's distinction between real and verbal truth.

Neither affects the insight that truth consists in the agreement of our
propositions or judgments with the facts they attempt to state, unless it is the
qualification that truth so defined is real, not verbal. In his Preface to The
Meaning of'Truth James , comments on the excitement caused by his earlier
lectures on pragmatism, in which, offering the pragmatist's conception of truth,
he had spoken of an idea's "working successfully" as the sign of its truth. He
warns his critics that this is not a new definition of the nature of truth, but
only a new interpretation of what it means to say that the truth of our ideas
consists in "their agreement, as falsity means their disagreement, with reality.
Pragmatists and intellectualists," he adds, "both accept this definition as a
matter of course. "To agree in the widest sense with reality," James then
explains, "can only mean to be guided either straight up to it or into its
surroundings, or to be put into such working touch with it as to handle either
it or something connected with it better than if we disagreed. Better either
intellectually or practically . . . Any idea that helps us to deal, whether
practically or intellectually, with either the reality or its belongings . . .
that fas, in fact, and adapts our life to the reality's whole setting, will
agree sufficiently to meet the requirement. It will be true of that reality."
Without enlarging on its meaning as James does, Freud affirms that the ordinary
man's conception of truth is that of the scientist also. Science, he says, aims
"to arrive at correspondence with reality, that is to say with what exists
outside of us and independently of us. ... This correspondence with the real
external world we call truth. It is the aim of scientific work, even when the
practical value of that work does not interest us." THE DEFINITION OF TRUTH as
the agreement of the mind with reality leaves many problems to be solved and
further explanations to be given by those who accept it. As James indicates, the
theory of truth begins rather than ends with its definition. How do we know when
our ideas our statements or judgments correspond with reality? By what signs or
criteria shall we discover their truth or falsity? To this question the great
books give various answers which we shall presently consider. There are other
problems about the nature of truth which deserve attention first. For example,
one consequence of the definition seems to be that truth is a property of ideas
rather than of things. Aristotle says that "it is not as if the good were true
and the bad were in itself false"; hence "falsity and truth are not in things
but in thought." Yet he . . . also applies the word "false" to non-existent
things or to things whose appearance somehow belies their nature.Aquinas goes
further. He distinguishes between the sense in which truth and falsity are
primarily in the intellect and secondarily in things. The equation between
intellect and thing, he points out, can be looked at in two ways, depending on
whether the intellect is the cause of the thing's nature, or the nature of the
thing is the cause of knowledge in the intellect. When "things are the measure
and rule of the intellect, truth consists in the equation of the intellect to
the thing. . . . But when the intellect is the rule or measure of things, truth
consists in the equation of things to the intellect" as the product of human art
may be said to be true when it accords with the artist's plan or intention. Thus
"a house is said to be true that fulfills the likeness of the form in the
architect's mind." But, according to Aquinas, not only artificial things, but
natural things as well, can have truth when they are viewed in relation to the
intellect on which they depend. The divine intellect which is the creative cause
of natural things measures their truth, as the human intellectmeasures the truth
of artificial things. "Natural things are said to be true," Aquinas writes, "in
so far as they express the likeness of the ideas that are in the divine mind;
for a stone is called true, which possesses the nature proper to a stone,
according to the preconception in the divine intellect."

Aquinas' conclusion that "truth resides primarily in the intellect and
secondarily in things according as they are related to the intellect as their
source" at once suggests the profound difference between truth in the divine and
in the human intellect. The difference is more than that between infinite and
finite truth. The distinction between uncreated and created truth affects the
definition of truth itself. The definition of truth as an equation of thought to
thing, or thing to thought, does not seem to hold for the divine intellect. The
notion of "conformity with its source," Aquinas acknowledges, "cannot be said,
properly speaking, of divine truth." Divine truth has no source. It is not truth
by correspondence with anything else. Rather it is, in the language of the
theologian, the "primal truth." "God Himself, Who is the primal truth ... is the
rule of all truth," and "the principle and source of all truth."

IN THE HUMAN SPHERE, the definition of truth seems to be differently interpreted
according as truth is made a property of words or of ideas. "To form a clear
notion of truth," Locke writes, "it very necessary to consider truth of is
thought and truth of words distinctly from one another." The truth of signs, or
what is sometimes called "truth of signification," is "nothing but the joining
or separating of words in propositions as the ideas they stand for agree or
disagree in men's minds." In contrast to such verbal truth, what Locke calls
mental truth consists in the joining or separating of our ideas themselves in a
manner to accord with the realities they represent. For Locke, verbal truth is
"chimerical" or "barely nominal" because it can exist without any regard to
"whether our ideas are such as really have, or are capable of having, an
existence in nature." The signs we use may truly represent our thought even
though what we think or state in words is false in fact. Hobbes takes a somewhat
contrary view. "True and false" he writes, "are attributes of speech, not of
things. And where speech is not, there is neither truth nor falsehood." What is
the cause of truth in speech ? Hobbes replies that, since it consists "in the
right ordering of names in our affirmations," a man needs only "to remember what
every name he uses stands for." If men begin with definitions or "the settling
of significations," and then abide by their definitions in subsequent discourse,
their discourse will have truth. From want of definitions or from wrong
definitions arise "all false and senseless tenets." Agreement with reality would
seem to be the measure of truth for Hobbes only to the extent that definitions
can be right or wrong by reference to the objects defined. If definitions
themselves are merely nominal and have rightness so far as they may be free from
contradiction, then truth tends to become, more than a property of speech,
almost purely logistical a matter of playing the game of words according to the
rules. Reasoning is reckoning with words. It begins with definitions and if it
proceeds rightly, it produces "general, eternal and immutable truth. For he that
rcasoneth . . . aright in words he understandeth, can never conclude in error."
Hobbes' position seems to have a bearing not only on the issue concerning verbal
and real truth, but also on the question whether the logical validity of
reasoning makes the conclusion it reaches true as a matter of fact. Some
writers, like Kant, distinguish between the truth which a proposition has when
it conforms to the rules of thought and the truth it has when itrepresents
nature. Valid reasoning alone cannot guarantee that a conclusion is true in
fact. That depends on the truth of the premises upon their being true of the
nature of things. Aristotle criticizes those who, accepting certain principles
as true, "are ready to accept any consequence of their application.

CHAPTER 94:

As though some principles," he continues, "did not require to be judged from
their results, and particularly from their final issue. And that issue ... in
the knowledge of nature is the unimpeachable evidence of the senses as to each
fact."

BUT NOT ALL TRUTH may require or admit of such certification. The truths of
mathematics may be different from those of physics or metaphysics, and those of
philosophy or religion from those of the empirical natural sciences. It is
sometimes supposed, for example, that the truths of mathematics are purely
formal or without reference to real existence. That seems to be the position of
Ilobbes and Hume, both of whom take geometry as the model of truth.

For them statements of fact about real existence are at best probable opinions.
For others, like James, there can be truth in the natural sciences, but such
empirical truth is distinct in type from what he calls the "necessary" or "a
priori" truths of mathematics and logic. Does the definition of truth as
agreement with reality apply to all kinds of truth, or only to truths about the
realm of nature ? The question has in mind more than the distinction between
mathematics and physics. It is concerned with the difference between the study
of nature and the moral sciences, or between the theoretic and the practical
disciplines. "As regards nature," writes Kant, "experience presents us with
rules and is the source of truth," but not so in ethical matters or morality. A
theoretic proposition asserts that something exists or has a certain property,
and so its truth depends on the existence of the thing or its real possession of
an attribute; but a practical or moral judgment states, not what is, but what
should occur or ought to be. Such a judgment cannot be true by correspondence
with the way things are. Its truth, according to Aristotle, must consist rather
"in agreement with right desire." On this theory, all that remains common to
speculative and practical truth is the conformity of the intellect to something
outside itself to an existing thing or to desire, will, or appetite,Stressing
the difference, Aquinas declares that "truth is not the same for the practical
as for the speculative intellect." The "conformity with right appetite" upon
which practical truth depends, he goes on to say, "has no place in necessary
matters, which are not effected by the human will, but only in contingent
matters which can be effected by us, whether they be matters of interior action
or the products of external work." In consequence, "in matters of action, truth
or practical rectitude is not the same for all as to what is particular, but
only as to the common principles"; whereas in speculative matters, concerned
chiefly with necessary things, "truth is the same for all men, both as to
principles and as to conclusions." THE PROBLEM OF THE criteria or signs of truth
does not seem to be of equal concern to all who discuss the nature of truth. For
the ancients, at one extreme, it seems to be hardly a problem at all. For
William James, at the other extreme, it seems to be the central problem. In the
controversy over the pragmatic theory of truth, in which James engages with
Bradley and Russell, some confusion tends to result from the fact that fames
seldom discusses what truth is except in terms of how we know what is true,
while his opponents often ignore the signs of truth in discussing its nature.
The important point for James is not that truth consists in agreement with
reality, but that "true ideas are those we can assimilate, validate,
corroborate, and verify." Whether we can assimilate or validate or verify an
idea in turn depends upon its consequences, either for thought or action, or
what James calls "truth's cash-value in experiential terms." In his Psychology,
James suggests another aspect of his theory of the expediency of a true idea,
which he later developed in Pragmatism. Not only must our conceptions or
theories be "able to account satisfactorily for our sensible experience," but
they are also to be weighed for their appeal "to our aesthetic, emotional, and
active needs." Apart from this added criterion, which became the subject of much
dispute, the pragmatic theory of truth represents one of the traditional
solutions of the problem of how to tell whether something is true or false. It
looks mainly to extrinsic signs not to some feature of the idea or thought
itself, but to its consequences. "The test of real and vigorous thinking," THE
GREAT I writes J. S. Mill, "the thinking which ascertains truths instead of
dreaming, is successful application to practice." In similar vein, Bacon says
that "of all the signs there is none more certain or worthy than that of the
fruits produced, for the fruits and effects are the sureties and vouchers, as it
were, for the truth of philosophy." The man who supposes that the end of
learning lies in contemplation of the truth will "propose to himself as the test
of truth, the satisfaction of his mind and understanding, as to the causes of
things long since known." Only those who recognize that "the real and legitimate
goal of the sciences is the endowment of human life with new inventions and
riches," will submit truth to the test of its leading "to some new earnest of
effects." To take effects as "pledges of truth" is, for Bacon, equivalent to
declaring that truth and utility are "perfectly identical." Verification by
appeal to observation or sensible evidences may be regarded as one way of
testing the truth of thought in terms of its consequences, but it also involves
the principle of contradiction as a criterion of truth. When Aristotle
recommends, for example, that we should accept theories as true "only if what
they affirm agrees with the observed facts," he is saying that when the truth of
a particular perception is indisputable, because the observed fact is evident,
the general or theoretical statement which it contradicts must be false. But the
principle of contradiction as a criterion of truth goes further than testing
theories by their consistency with observation. One of two contradictory
statements must be false and the other must be true "if that which it is true to
affirm is nothing other than that which it is false to deny." Even a single
statement may show itself false by being self-contradictory, and in consequence
its opposite can be seen to be true. What Aristotle calls axioms, or
self-evident and indisputable truths, are those propositions immediately known
to be true, and necessarily true, because their contradictories, being self-con
tradicatory, are impossible statements, or necessarily false. The truth of any
proposition which is neither a self-evident axiom nor the statement of an
evident, perceived fact, is tested, according to the principle of contradiction,
by its consistency with axioms or perceptions. As opposed to consequences or
effects, contradiction or consistency as a sign of truth seems to be an
intrinsic criterion. But this criterion is not universally accepted.
"Contradiction," writes Pascal, "is not a sign of falsity, nor the want of
contradiction a sign of truth." Nor, even when accepted, is it always judged
adequate to solve the problem. It is, for Kant, a "merely logical criterion of
truth . . . the conditto sine qua non, or negative condition of all truth.
Farther than this logic cannot go, and the error which depends not on the form,
but on the content of the cognition, it has no test to discover." Some thinkers
seem to rely upon an intrinsic mark by which each idea reveals its own truth or
falsity. Augustine, for example, considers by what criterion he would know
whether what Moses said was true. "And if I did know it," he asks, "would it be
from him that I knew it? No," he replies, "but within me, in the inner retreat
of my mind, the Truth, which is neither Hebrew nor Greek, nor Latin nor
Barbarian, would tell me, without lips or tongue or sounded syllables: 'He
speaks truth.'" For Augustine, God is the warranty of the inner voice which
plainly signifies the truth. For Spinoza, the truth of an idea depends upon its
relation to God. Because "a true idea in us is that which in God is adequate, in
so far as He is manifested by the nature of the human mind," it follows,
according to Spinoza, that "he who has a true idea knows at the same time that
he has a true idea, nor can he doubt the truth of the thing"; for "he who knows
a thing truly must at the same time have an adequate idea or a true knowledge of
his knowledge, that is to say (as is self-evident) he must be certain." It is
impossible, Spinoza maintains, to have a true idea without at the same time
knowing that it is true. To the question, "How can a man know that he has an
idea which agrees with that of which it is the idea?" he replies that "he knows
it simply because he has an idea which agrees with that of which it is the idea,
that is to say, because truth is its own standard." For what can be clearer,
Spinoza asks, "or more certain than a true idea as the standard of truth ? Just
as light reveals both itself and the darkness, so truth is the standard of
itself and of the false."

CHAPTER 94: TRUTH Spinoza defines an adequate idea as one which, "in so far as
it is considered in itself, without reference to the object, has all the
properties or internal signs of a true idea." He explains, moreover, that by
"internal" he means to exclude even "the agreement of the idea with its object."
This, he thinks, meets the objection that "if a true idea is distinguished from
a false idea only in so far as it is said to agree with that of which it is the
idea, the true idea [would have] no reality or perfection above the false idea
(since they are distinguished by an external sign alone), and consequently the
man who has true ideas will have no greater reality or perfection than he who
has false ideas only."

Although Descartes and Locke also employ an intrinsic criterion of truthnot the
adequacy, but the clarity and distinctness, of ideas they do not seem to mean,
as Spinoza does, that a single idea, in and of itself, can be true or false.
Like Aristotle before them or Kant later, they regard a simple idea or concept
as, strictly speaking, incapable of being either true or false. "Truth and
falsity," writes Locke, "belong to affirmations or . . . only to propositions"
denials winch involve at least two ideas; or, as Kant says, "truth and error . .
. arc only to be found in a judgement," which explains why "the senses do not
err, not because they always judge correctly, but because they do notjudge at
air Nevertheless, for Locke the clarity and distinctness of the ideas which
enter into the formation of propositions enable the mind to judge intuitively
and certainly of their truth. When ideas arc clear and distinct, "the mind
perceives the agreement or disagreement of two ideas immediately by themselves.
. Such kind of . . truths the mind perceives at the first sight of the ideas
together by bare intuition , . . and this kind of knowledge is the clearest and
most certain that human frailty is capable of."

THE PROBLEM OF the criterion of truth is sometimes closely connected with the
problem of the causes of error. Descartes seems to pass by natural steps from
one to the other. Having decided that "the things which we conceive very clearly
and distinctly are all true," he reminds himself that there may be "some
difficulty in ascertaining which are those that we distinctly conceive." The
mystery of error looms large for Descartes because it seems to him that the
human intellect, being created by God, must have a kind of natural
infallibility, the infallibility of an instrument designed by God for knowing
the truth, not for ignorance or error. "If we did not know," Descartes reflects,
"that all that is in us of reality and truth proceeds from a perfect and
infinite being, however clear and distinct were our ideas, we should not have
any reason to assure ourselves that they had the perfection of being true." But
once we have "recognized that there is a God . and also recognized that all
things depend . . upon Him, and that He is not a deceiver," we can infer that
whatever we "perceive clearly and distinctly cannot fail to be true." What,
then, is the source of our errors? "I answer," writes Descartes, "that they
depend on a combination of two causes, to wit, on the faculty of knowledge that
rests in me, and on the power of choice or free will." Each perfect in its own
sphere, neither the will nor the understanding by itself causes us to fall into
error. "Since I understand nothing but by the power which God has given me for
understanding, there is no doubt," Descartes declares, "that all that I
understand, I understand as I ought, and it is not possible that I err in this."
The trouble lies in the relation of the will to the intellect. "Since the will
is much wider in itsrange and compass than the understanding, Ido not restrain
it within the same bounds, but extend it also to things which I do not
understand." It is not God's fault, says Descartes, if, in the exercise of my
freedom, I do not "wilhold my assent from certain things as to which He has not
placed a clear and distinct knowledge in my understanding." But as long as "I so
restrain my will within the limits of knowledge that it forms no judgment except
on matters which are clearly and distinctly represented to it by the
understanding, I can never be deceived." There are other accounts of error, less
elaborate than Descartes', which are similar to the extent that they place the
cause in some combination of human faculties rather than in their simple and
separate operation. Socrates explains to Theaetetus that false opinions' arise
when the senses and the mind do not cooperate properly. Aristotle suggests that
the imagination it is which frequently misleads the mind. Looking at the problem
from the point of view of the theologian, Aquinas holds that Adam, in his state
of innocence before the fall, could not be deceived. "While the soul remained
subject to God," he writes, "the lower powers in man were subject to the higher,
and were no impediment to their action." But man born in sin can be deceived,
not because the intellect itself ever fails, but as a result of the wayward
influence "of some lower power, such as the imagination or the like."

Lucretius, for whom sense, not mind, is infallible, attributes error to the
fault of reason, which misinterprets the veridical impressions of the senses.
"What surer test can we have than the senses," he asks, "whereby to note truth
and falsehood ?" He explains that the mind, not the senses, is responsible for
illusions and hallucinations. "Do not then fasten upon the eyes this frailty of
the mind."

Other writers, like Descartes, take the opposite view, that the senses are much
less trustworthy than the intellect. Still others, like

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The nature of truth
 1a. The signs or criteria of truth: methods of verification
 1b. The relation between truth and being or reality
 1c. The relation of truth, goodness, and beauty

2. The modes of truth and falsity
 2a. The distinction between truth and falsity in the mind and in things: logical and
 ontological truth
 2b. The distinction between truth of statement and truth of signification: the distinc-
 tion between real and verbal truth
 2c. The distinction between theoretical and practical truth: conformity to existence
 and conformity to right desire
 2d. The comparison of human and divine truth: finite truths and the infinite truth
 2e. The distinction between truth and probability: its relation to the distinction be-
 tween knowledge and opinion

3. Truth and error
in relation to human knowing and learning
 3a. Truth in the apprehensions of the sensitive faculty
 (1) The truth of sensations: judgments of perception
 (2) Truth in the memory and imagination
 3& Truth in the acts of the mind
 (1) The truth of ideas: concepts and definitions
 (2) The truth of propositions: the special problem of judgments about future
 contingencies
 (3) Truth in reasoning: the truth of premises in relation to the truth of conclu-
 sions; logical validity and truth about reality
 3*-.
 The principle of contradiction as the foundation of truth in judgment and in
 reasoning
 30?.
 The nature and causes of error
 (1) The infallibility of the senses and the mind: the respects in which they are
 incapable of error
 (2) The nature and sources of error in human perception and thought: the dis-
 tinction between error and ignorance
 (3) Rules for the correction or prevention of error in thought

4. Comparison
of the various disciplines with respect to truth
 4a. Truth in science and religion: the truth of reason and the truth of faith
 4b. Truth in science and poetry: the truth of fact and the truth of fiction
 4c. Truth
 in metaphysics, mathematics, and the empirical sciences: the truth of
 prin-
 4d. hypotheses, and conclusions in the several speculative disciplines
 4e. Truth and probability in rhetoric and dialectic

5. The eternal verities and the mutability of truth

6. The accumulation or accretion of truth, and the correction of error, in the progress of
human learning

7. The skeptical denial of truth
 7a. The impossibility
 of knowing the truth: the restriction of all human judgments to
 degrees of probability; the denial of axioms and of the possibility of demon-
 stration
 *jb.
 The defense of truth against the skeptic

8. The moral and political aspect of truth
 8a. Prevarication and perjury: the injustice of lying or bearing false witness
 8b. The expediency of the political lie
 8c. Truth in relation to love and friendship: the pleasant and the unpleasant truth
 8d. Civil liberty as a condition for discovering the truth: freedom of thought and dis-
 8<?. The love of truth and the duty to seek it: the moral distinction between the soph-
 ist and the
 philosopher; martyrdom to the truth

CROSS-REFERENCES For: Other discussions bearing on the nature of tr

beauty, see BEAUTY 1b; BEING 4-4k, GOOD AND Other discussions of the signs or
criteria of

PERIENCE /jb; HYPOTHESIS 4-d; IDEA 6c-6c; SE

The significance of the distinction between th

KNOWLEDGE 6e(i); PHILOSOPHY 23; PRUDENCE 23;

Discussions of what is involved in the compari

INFINITY yd; KNOWLEDGE 73; WISDOM 1d.

Matters surrounding the distinction between tr

tion between knowledge and opinion, see JUDG

NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 43; OPINION 3-3k

The consideration of truth and falsity in the

MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 2e(4), 5c; PRINCIPLE

The consideration of truth and falsity in the

JUDGMENT 10; NECESSITY AND CONTINGENCY 4c; P

TIME 6f.

Other discussions of the principle of contrad

reasoning, see LOGIC la; OPPOSITION 1d(i);

The theory of error, its nature and csuscs, a

fallible or infallible, see KNOWLEDGE 43; M

of vsrious methods of saving the mind from LOGIC 4; MIND 5b; REASONING 3b-3c;
SIGN AND

Discussions relevant to the contrast between

DIALECTIC 5; HISTORY 33; MATHEMATICS 1c; OP

THEOLOGY 4b.

The eternity or immutability of truth, and fo

tion of hurrmn learning, see CHANGE 153; ET

Various expressions of skepticism and of the

VENTION pb; KNOWLEDGE 5c-5d; OPINION jc; PR

AND PARTICULAR 73.

TRUTH 937 33 PASCAL: Pensees, 261 221a; 582-583 276b; 864

343b 35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, 87a-b; BK n,

CH xxi, SECT 74, 199c-d; BK in, CH x, SECT 34,

300a; BK iv, CH xix, SECT i 384c-d 38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK n, 395d-396a
220d;327d-328b

40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 217a-220d csp 219c41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall,
499c; 526c-d 42 KANT: Pure Reason, 187c-188b; 221c-222b / Practical Reason,
299d; 335b-c; 337c-338b /

Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 365b

[fn i] / Judgement, 551d-552a

43 MILL: Liberty, 278c-283c 44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 4b-c; 151b-c; 221d-224a 46
HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PREF, ld-2a; 4b-5c / Philosophy of History, INTRO,
158c160b; PART n, 276a-d; 279d-281a; PART in,

308b-c

47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [586-59 }] 16a-b

48 MELVILLL: Moby Dic{, 35b-36a; 78a-b 54 FRKUD: Psycho- Analytic Therapy,
125d-127a,c 875a esp 127a,c / New Introductory Lect tires, 874duth and its
relation to being, goodness, and EVIL 1c; KNOWLEDGE 1,43; OPINION 33. NSE 50.
truth and of methods of verification, see EXeoretic and practical truth, see
JUDGMENT 2; SCIENCE 33; WISDOM 1b. son of human and divine truth, see GOD 5f;
MENT 9; KNOWLEDGE 6d(i)-6d(3); uth and probability, and the related
distincapprehensions of the sensitive faculty, see 2b(i); SENSE 4d-4d(2). acts
of the mind, see DEFINITION 1c; IDEA 6f; RINCIPLE 2b(2); REASONING 3a-3c; iction
as the principle of truth in judgment and PRINCIPLE 33(3). nd the respects in
which the human mind is IND 53; SENSE 4d, 4d(2); and for the suggestion error,
see KNOWLEDGE 5d-5e; LANGUAGE 6; SYMBOL 4C. truth in one discipline and truth in
another, see INION 43; POETRY 83(2); RHETORIC 53; r the change or growth of
truth in the tradiERNITY 4c; KNOWLEDGE 10; PROGRESS 6c. answers to the skeptic,
see CUSTOM AND CONINCIPLE 5; RELATION 6b; UNIVERSAL For: Another consideration
of truth as a source of moral o

for freedom of thought and discussion as a con

EDGE pb; LIBERTY 2a-2b; OPINION 5b; PROGRESS 6

The love of truth and its pursuit as the disting

1d; PHILOSOPHY 6a; WISDOM 3.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Bo

idea and topics with which this chapter deals.

I. Works by authors represent

II. Works by authors not repre

For the date, place, and other facts concerning

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which f

AUGUSTINE. Concerning the Teacher

On Free Will, BK n

. AQUINAS. Quaestiones Disputatae, De Veritate, Q i F. BACON. "Of Truth," in
Essays DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART I,

1-5, 29-38, 42-44, 48-50, 70-76 HOBBES. Concerning Body, PART i, CH 5

SPINO/A. Correspondence, n

Of the Improvement of the Understanding

. KAN r. Introduction to Logic, VH HLGLL. Science of Logic, VOL H, SECT in, CH 2
(A) W. JAMES. Pragmatism, LECT vi-vii

The Meaning of Truth

.

n. CICERO. Academics SEXTOS EMPIRICUS. Against the Logicians, BK i

(Does a Criterion of Truth Exist ?, Concerning

the Criterion, Concerning Truth); BK n, CH i ANSLLM OF CANTERBURY. Dialogue on
Truth GROSS ETLSTE. On Truth

R. BACON. Opus Majus, PART i

DUNS Scorus. Oxford Commentary, BK i, DIST 3, Q 4 ALBO. The Book, of Principles
(Sefer ha-Hkarim), BK

n, CH 27 NICOLAS OF CUSA. De Docta tgnorantia, BK i, CH 3 SUAREZ. Disputationes
Metaphysicae, HI, VIH-IX,

x (i), xxxi (12) CAMPANELLA. The Defense of Galileo HERBERT OF CHERBURY. De
Veritate (Of Truth)

CORNEILLE. Polyeucte MOLIERE. Tartujfc

MALEBRANCHE. De la recherche de la veriti, BK i,

CH 3-9, n, 15-17; BK in (n), CH 9-11

Dialogues on Metaphysics and Religion, I-H

.

LEIBNITZ. Philosophical Worlds, CH 3 (Thoughts on

Knowledge, Truth and Ideas)

. New Essays Concerning Human Understanding,

BK II, CH 29, 32; BK IV, CH 5, 2O

Monadology, par 33-37

.

VOLTAIRE. "Falsity," "Truth," in A Philosophical

Dictionary

AS r spiritual freedom, see LIBERTY 30; and dition of discovering the truth, see
KNOWLe. uishing marks of the philosopher, see LOVE oks of the Western World, but
relevant to the These works are divided into two groups: ed in this collection.
sented in this collection. the publication of the works cited, consult ollows
the last chapter of The Great Ideas. VOLTAIRE. The Ignorant Philosopher, CH 33
T. REID. Essays on the Intellectual Powers of Man, vi, CH 5-6, 8 W. HAMILTON.
Lectures on Metaphysics and Logic, VOL ii (27-31) EMERSON. "Truth," in English
Traits WHEWELL. On the Philosophy of Discovery, CH 29 LOTZE. Microcosmos, BK
VHI, CH i Logic, BK in, CH 5

. CLIFFORD. "The Ethics of Belief," in VOL n, Lectures and Essays BOSANQUET.
Logic, VOL II, CH 9-IO C. S. PEIRCE. Collected Papers, VOL v, par 358-410,
464-496, 538-604 FRAZER. The Golden Bough, PART vn, CH 13 ROYCE. The World and
the Individual, SERIES i (6) DEWEY. "The Intellectual Criterion for Truth," "A
Short Catechism Concerning Truth," in The Influence of Darwin on Philosophy
JOACHIM. The Nature of Truth BRADLEY. The Principles of Logic, BK HI, PART n, CH
3-4; Terminal Essays, vin Appearance and Reality, BK n, CH 16, 24

. Essays on Truth and Reality, CH 4-5, 7-9, 1 1

. PEGUY. Basic Verities (The Search for Truth) BERGS ON. The Creative Mind, CH
i, 8 MCTAGGART. The Nature of Existence, CH 44-45 WITTGENSTEIN. Tractatus
Logico-Philosophicus CROCE. "On Telling the Truth," in The Conduct of Life
WHITEHEAD. Religion in the Making, CH 4 Adventures of Ideas, CH 16, 18

. SANTAYANA. Scepticism and Animal Faith, CH 25 The Realm of Truth

. B LAN SHARD. The Nature of Thought, CH 25-27 CASSIRER. The Myth of the State,
PART i (4), in (18) B. RUSSELL. Philosophical Essays, CH 5-7 The Problems of
Philosophy, CH 12-13

. . The Analysis of Mind, LECT 13

. An Inquiry into Meaning and Truth, CH 16-17, 21-23 . Human Knowledge, Its
Scope and Limits, PART

II, CH 8-1 1
