Chapter 96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR INTRODUCTION such speculative problems as
the existON ence of God, the immortality of the soul, the infinity of time and
space, or the limits of human knowledge, the conversation of philosophers seems
to make contact with the discourse of scientists, the language of poets, and the
speech of ordinary men. The philosophers usually begin at least by propounding
questions which correspond to those asked by men who do not profess to be
philosophers. But throughout the tradition of western thought, the problem of
the universal, unlike these others, seems to have the character of a
professional secret. The various solutions of the problem of the universal are
so many esoteric doctrines, each with its own sectarian name. The initiated can
distinguish themselves from the novices by their proficiency in this area; and
the outsider who overhears the discussion of professionals may be completely
left behind, wondering as much about how the question arose as about the meaning
of the conflicting answers.

No genuine philosophical problem, it seems reasonable to suppose, can be so
remote from questions intelligible to common sense. If it is not just a specious
riddle to amuse the experts, the problem of the universal, despite its technical
appearance, should raise issues from which, in some form or other, no one can
escape. Whether or not this is so can be tested by considering the various ways
in which the problem occurs in other chapters under different guises and in
different contexts. In the chapter on SAME AND OTHER, we find the question how
two individuals can be the same in some particular respect how in spite of their
separate existence they can share in the common nature or attribute. possession
of a Anyone who classifies things or tries to make definitions may be led to
wonder whether clas- sifications are entirely verbal and definitions fictions of
the mind, or whether things themselves belong together in some real community
based upon an inherent sameness or similarity. In the chapter on ONE AND MANY,
the question takes the form of asking how two or more things can be one in any
way. Again, both science and common sense seem able to deal with an infinite
number of individuals by applying a single name to them or apprehending them all
under a single concept or notion. But it may be asked what justifies the
denomination of many things by one name. What unity in the things verifies the
tendency of thought to unify them conceptually? Docs a real unity exist in
things, by virtue of their being somehow one as well as many, or as a result of
the many somehow participating in a one which exists separately from them ? In
the chapters on DEFINITION and SIGN AND SYMBOL the same questions are at least
implicit. In connection with the object of definition, one issue is whether what
Aristotle calls "the formulablc essence" exists as the common nature of many
individuals, or whether, as Locke suggests, definitions formulate only the
nominal, not the real, essences of things. As that and related issues are faced,
anyone who acknowledges the familiar distinction between proper and common names
may become involved in questioning what common or general names signify and how
they get the meanings with which they are used in everyday discourse. The
problem of the sameness of things distinct from one another, the problem of the
one in the many or the one and the many, the problem of essences and common
names, are other statements of the problem of the universal and 11 the
particular. Attention to the words themselves confirms this. The word "universal
connotes a unity the one as opposed to the many, ' 957 958 THE GREAT I the
common as opposed to the unique or special. The word "particular" connotes
participation the part as opposed to the whole, the member as opposed to the
class. As the reference already made to essence and individual indicates, these
are not the only pairs of terms which somehow correspond in significance to
universal and particular, but others, like model and imitation, form and matter,
abstract and concrete, are more obscure in meaning. The discussion of universal
and particular throws light on them rather than gains clarity from them. w T THE
READER OF THE great books can witness the origin of the problem of the universal
and particular as it occurs in a conversation, not between technical
philosophers, but between Socrates and his friends. In the Meno, Socrates and
Meno get into a discussion of how virtue is acquired. Socrates thinks it is
necessary to inquire first what virtue is. Meno responds by enumerating
different virtues, but Socrates is not satisfied. He wants a definition which
will cover all the virtues. Even if Meno could say what justice or temperance
is, that would not do, for each of these is, as Socrates says, a virtue, not
virtue & particular virtue or a part of virtue, not the whole of it. "In
searching after one virtue," Socrates tells Meno, "we have found many . . . but
we have been unable to find the common virtue which runs through them all." To
help Meno, who claims he is not able to follow Socrates in his "attempt to gel
at one common notion of virtue," Socrates shifts the discussion to colors and
figures. He warns Meno that color cannot be defined by naming colors, and that,
even if he could define a square, a circle, and all other figures, he would not
be saying what figure is. To proceed in this way is to be "landed in
particulars." "Tell me then," Socrates says, "since you call them by a common
name, and say that they are all figures, even when opposed to one another, what
is that common nature which you designate as figure?" If Meno were to reply, "I
do not know what you want," not much further explanation could be given. To
someone who remained perplexed at this point, we could only say, Socrates sug-
gests, "Do you not understand that we are looking for the same in the many?" Or,
put in another form, we might ask, he says, "What is that [one in many] which
you call figure, and which includes not only the round and straight figures, but
all?" Thus stated, the problem of the universal seems inescapable a problem for
everyone, not just for philosophers. But the philosophers complicate the problem
almost as soon as it is stated. Giving his version of the history of philosophy,
Aristotle offers an explanation of how the problem shifted to another level.
Socrates, he writes, "was busying himself about ethical matters'* and, "seeking
the universal in these ethical matters, [he] fixed thought for the first time on
definitions.Plato accepted his teaching, but held that the problem applied not
to sensible things, but to entities of another kind for this reason, that the
common definition could not be a definition of any sensible thing, as they were
always changing. Things of this other sort he called Ideas, and sensible things,
he said, were all named after these, and in virtue of a relation to these; for
the many existed by participation in the Ideas that have the same name as they."
It is at this point, according to Aristotle, that the great philosophical
controversy begins. Whereas "the thinkers of old ranked particular things as
substances, e.g., fire and earth, not what is common to both, body," the
Platonists or idealists "the thinkers of the present day" "tend to rank
universal as substances, for genera arc universal." Aristotle repeatedly tries
to distinguish between the Socratic inquiry and what he regards as the Platonic
doctrine the theory of Ideas. "The first to raise the problem of universal
definition Socrates," . . . he writes, "did not make the universals or the
definitions exist apart; they, however," the Platonists "gave them separate
existence, and this was the kind of thing they called Ideas." As between
Socrates and his disciple, Aristotle does not hesitate to take sides. "Socrates
gave the impulse to this theory of ideas ... but he did not separate universals
from individuals; and in not separating them," Aristotle adds, "he thought
rightly." The issue between Aristotle and his own teacher, Plato, cannot, how-
CHAPTER 96: UNIVERSAL AND PAR ever, be stated by so simple an affirmation and
denial.

On Aristotle's side, it involves the fundamental principles of his metaphysics,
especially his doctrine of substance, as well as his theory of what and how the
intellect knows, as contrasted with the perceptions of the senses. On Plato's
side, it involves many questions concerning the intelligible and the sensible,
being and becoming, the one and the many- questions the Aristotelian answers to
which would not satisfy Plato. Wherever the truth lies, Aristotle recognizes
that on this issue, perhaps more than on any other, he is most sharply opposed
to Plato. It is the one matter wherein he feels a conflict between devotion to
his teacher and to the .ru'S as he sees it. The consideration of the universal
good, he declares in the Ethics, is made difficult "by the fact that the Forms
have been introduced by friends of our own," but " while both are dear, piety
requires us to honor truth above our friends/' THE HISTORIANS OF PHILOSOPHY,
beginning with Aristotle, attribute one solution of the problem of universals to
Plato. That solution comes to be called "realism" because it affirms the
independent reality of univcrsals as separately existing Ideas or Forms. But all
the commentators do not, like Aristotle, dissent from Plato's solution. In our
own time, for example, Bertrand Russell, treating of "the world of universals"
in the Problems of Philosophy, says, "the problem with which we are now
concerned is a very old one, since it was brought into philosophy by Plato.
Plato's 'theory of ideas' is an attempt to solve this very problem, and in my
opinion it is one of the most successful attempts hitherto made. The theory to
be advocated in what follows is largely Plato's, with merely such modifications
as time has shown to be necessary." For one thing, Russell thinks "the word
'idea' has acquired in the course of time many associations which are quite
misleading when applied to Plato's 'ideas.' We shall, therefore," he writes,
"use the word 'universal' instead of the word 'idea' to describe what Plato
meant. ... We speak of whatever is given in sensation ... as a particular, by
opposition to this, a TICULAR universal will be anything which may be shared by
many particulars. . . . Broadly speaking, proper names stand for particulars,
while other substantives, adjectives, prepositions, and verbs stand for
universals."

Russell here calls attention to another point which he thinks has too seldom
been observed, namely, that universals arc not exclusively signified by common
nouns and adjectives, but that, in addition, there are relational universals
signified by prepositions and verbs. This sort of universal, according to him,
most readily shows that universals have being apart from particulars. It can
also be shown, he argues, "that their being is not merely mental . . . that
whatever being belongs to them is independent of their being thought of or in
any way apprehended by minds." If the word "existence" implies definite location
in time and space, then, Russell concludes, in the sense in which "thoughts and
feelings, minds and physical objects exist. . . univcrsals do not exist." We
must say instead that "they subsist or have being, where 'being' isopposed to
'existence' as being timeless. The world of universals, therefore, may also be
described as the wo rid of being. The world of being is unchangeable. . . . The
world of existence is fleeting. . According to our temperaments, . . we shall
prefer the contemplation of the one or the other. The one we do not prefer will
probably seem to us a pale shadow of the one we prefer, and hardly worthy to be
regarded as in any sense real. But the truth is that both have the same claim on
our impartial attention, both are real, and both are important to the
metaphysician. Indeed no sooner have we distinguished the two worlds than it
becomes necessary to consider their relations." IT is THIS CONSIDERATION which
seems to be for Plato the problem of the universal the central difficulty in the
theory of Ideas or separate Forms. As indicated in the chapters on FORM and
IDEA, the separation of the two worlds the sensible world of becoming and the
intelligible world of being always calls for some explanation of their
resemblance. Socrates sometimes refers to the doctrine of Ideas as if its truth
could be assumed, and sometimes argues the necessity of a realm of immu- 960 THE
GREAT table and intelligible being as the object of thought, comparable to
sensible, changing things as the object of perception. In the Phaedo, for
example, he gets Cebes to admit that the ideas, "which in the dialectical
process we define as essences or true existences," are not subject to change,
but that they are "always what they are, having the same simple self-existent
and unchanging forms." In contrast to absolute beauty or goodness, the many
beautiful or good things "are always in a state of change." These, Socrates
says, "you can touch and see and perceive with the senses, but the unchanging
things you can only perceive with the mind. Let us suppose then," he adds, "that
there are two sorts of existencesone seen, the other unseen." Later in the same
dialogue, Socrates repeats the assumption that "there is an absolute beauty and
goodness and greatness and the like." No other assumption seems to him to
provide as satisfactory an explanation of how particular things can be beautiful
or good or have any other characteristics. "Nothing makes a thing beautiful," he
declares, "but the presence and participation of beauty in whatever way or
manner obtained; for as to the manner I am uncertain, but I stoutly contend that
by beauty all beautiful things become beautiful." In later Platonic dialogues,
the question of the manner comes to the fore. Though the Eleatic Stranger in the
Sophist refers to the "endless conflict raging" between the materialists and the
idealists concerning the existence of the unseen world of ideas, he himself
seems to be doubtful only on the point of how the changing things of sense
participate in the immutable forms. One answer is suggested in the Timaeus.
According to the story of creation which Timaeus tells, the artificer of the
world made its sensible particulars copy an eternal pattern. When many things
seem to be of one nature or to share the same quality, they are so by virtue of
imitating the eternal forms, which are not only absolute essences in themselves,
but are also the models for created or generated things. But in the Parmenides
Socrates seems unable to defend the view that "the ideas are, as it were,
patterns fixed in nature, and other things are like them, and resemblances of
them for what is meant by the participation of other IDEAS things in the ideas,
is really assimilation to them." Nor can he meet other objections which
Parmenides raises, such as the difficulty of two or more individuals
participating in one idea; for if the idea is wholly in one individual, it
cannot be in another, and if each of the many partake of the idea only in part,
then the idea cannot be one and indivisible. "In what way, Socrates," Parmenides
asks, "will all things participate in ideas, if they are unable to participate
in them as parts or wholes?" In the course of the discussion Parmenides rebukes
Socrates for being squeamish about positing absolute essences for "such things
as hair, mud, dirt, or anything else which is vile and paltry," as well as for
things which are beautiful and good. But his main intention seems to be to leave
Socrates with an unresolved dilemma. On theonehand, the difficulties with the
theory of Ideas make the denial of their separate existence reasonable; on the
other, the denial of their existence seems to make thought and reasoning
impossible, because it deprives the mind of its proper objects. SOME OF
ARISTOTLE'S arguments against the separate existence of universals repeat the
objections raised by Parmenides, to which no answer is given in the dialogues of
Plato. If it were not for the fact that Aristotle attributes to Plato himself
the theory he criticizes, the dialogues would leave us in some doubt as to
whether it is Plato or his followers, the Platonists, who hold that theory. But
whether or not Aristotle's criticisms apply to Plato and even if they involve
some misunderstanding of his doctrine the objections Aristotle raises help
define his own position. To say that the Forms "are patterns and that other
things share in them," Aristotle writes, "is to use empty words and poetical
metaphors." In his view, "the most paradoxical thing of all isthe statement that
there are certain things besides those in the material universe, and that these
are the same as sensible things except that they are eternal while the latter
are perishable." To posit the separate being of the forms of things seems to him
a useless multiplication of existences. To say that "there must be Ideas of all
things that are spoken of universally" is to make substances of ideas.

CHAPTER 96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICUL Those who say the Forms exist would be right,
Aristotle concedes, "if .they are substances." He does not think it is
impossible to establish the existence of imperishable and insensible substances,
but such substances, if they exist, would not stand in relation to sensible
substances as universal to particular, or as one to many. His objection to the
theory of Ideas is that, in speaking of absolute beauty or beautyUself, of the
idea Man or man-itsclf, the Platonists do no more than add words like "absolute"
or "itself" to the names of sensible things, and posit the existence of these
absolutes or universals over and above the existence of the sensible particulars
having the same name. Aristotle's own position seems to be that only individual
substances exist, whether they are sensible or intelligible, perishable or
eternal, and that "no universal can be a substance" or exist separately in and
of itself. He docs not thereby deny the reality of the universal. On the
contrary, he holds that "without the universal it is not possible to get
knowledge," i.e.,scientific knowledge in distinction from mere sense-perception.
"\\\ knowledge is of the " universal and of the 'such,' he writes; yet in adding
that "substance is not a universal, but " is rather a 'this,' Aristotle
indicates what is for him the central problem of the universal. Aristotle's
theory that the mind abstracts universal concepts from the particulars of
senseexperience, and that such concepts arc the terms of the universal
propositions constituting scientificknowledge, leaves a question concerning the
object of science. If science is knowledge of real existence, not of our own
concepts, and if only individual things really exist, then how can the object of
science be the universal, not the individual ? What is the object apprehended by
the universal concept 'man' or 'horse' ? Aristotle's answer seems to be that if
the universal term 'man' can be truly predicated of an indefinite number of
individuals, it must signify something common to them all. The common nature or
properties shared by a number of individuals cannot be actually universal,
however, since, in Aristotle's opinion, whatever exists in the individual the
form as well as the matter of the concrete substance is itself individual. He
finds it necessary to say, therefore, that the universal exists potentially, not
actual- AR ly, whenever a number of individuals have something in common. The
form which constitutes human nature, for example, is an individual form in
Socrates and Callias; but it has the potentiality of being universal insofar as
it is capable of being separated from the individual matter of these two men by
the abstractive power of the mind. When the abstraction takes place and results
in the universal concept 'man,' the form thus received in the mind becomes
actually universal and enables the mind to apprehend the nature common to all
individual men. ARISTOTLE'S DOCTRINE THAT the universal exists potentially in
individual things and actually in the abstract concepts of the mind, later comes
to be called "moderate realism," in contrast to the extreme realism of the
position which asserts the actual subsistence of universal, outside of minds as
well as apart from individual things. It affirms that the universal has what
Russell calls "extra-mental reality," even though it severely qualifies the real
being of the universal by saying it is neither actual nor subsistent. As
Aristotle denies unqualified reality to universals, later philosophers deny that
they have any reality at all. Those who arc sometimes called "conceptualists"
admit the existence of universals only as abstract ideas in the mind. The
"nominalist" position, taken by Hobbes and Berkeley, goes further and even
denies abstract ideas or universal notions in the mind. It holds that
universality is a property of words alone, which manifests itself in the meaning
of general or common names. In the progressive complication of the controversy,
each of the theories which has acquired a traditional title undergoes
modification as it is reformulated in different contexts. This is especially
true of the two middle positions which tend to lean toward one or the other of
the extremes. Locke, for example, may be called a conceptualist because he
thinks that general names derive their universal significance from the abstract
ideas they signify. But though he denies that by means of our universal notions
or abstract ideas we can know the real essences of things, he does not deny real
essences. To this THE GREAT extent, he may lean toward moderate realism more
than a philosopher like William of Ockham, or a psychologist like William James
who " says, We must decide in favor of the conceptualists, and affirm that the
power to think things, qualities, relations .isolated and abstracted . . from
the total experience in which they appear, the ismost indisputable function of
our thought." Similarly, the development which Aquinas gives to Aristotle's
views, especially in the point he adds concerning ideas in the mind of God the
"eternal exemplars" may be a form of moderate realism which, more than
Aristotle's, has some affinity with the theory of self-subsistent ideas as the
eternal archetypes for sensible particulars. Aquinas presents his own theory in
the context of stating his understanding of the issue between Plato and
Aristotle. "Plato supposed," he declares, "that the forms of natural things
subsisted apart from matter, and consequently that they are intelligible, for a
thing is actually intelligible from the very fact that it is immaterial. And he
called such forms species or ideas. From a participation in these, he said that
even corporeal matter was formed, in order that individuals might be naturally
established in their . . . proper genera and species. But since Aristotle did
not allow that the forms of natural things exist apart from matter, and since
forms existing in matter are not actually intelligible, it follows that the
natures or forms of the sensible things which we understand are not actually
intelligible." Aquinas speaks of the forms (which exist only in union with
matter in individual things) as "universal forms," even though they arc not "We
abstract universal actually intelligible. forms from their particular
conditions," he says, and by doing so we "make them actually intelligible." The
Platonic error, in his opinion, consists in thinking that "the form of the thing
known must be in the knower in the same manner as in the thing known." From the
fact that "the form of the thing understood is in the intellect under conditions
of universality, immateriality, and immobility," Plato concluded, erroneously,
according to Aquinas, "that the things which we understand must subsist in
themselves under the same conditions of immateriality and immobility."

IDEAS As Aquinas states what he takes to be Aristotle's correction of this
error, it consists in distinguishing two ways in which the universal can be
considered. "First, the universal nature may be considered together with the
intention of universality.And since the intention of universality */., the
relation of one and the same to many is due to intellectual abstraction, the
universal thus considered is subsequent, in our knowledge. Secondly, the
universal . . . can be considered according to the nature itself (for instance,
animality or humanity) as existing in the individual." In the order of
generation and time, the potential universal precedes the actual universal; that
is, the universal form or common nature exists in individual things under
conditions of particularity before it exists in the human mind under conditions
of abstraction. Even as forms exist in things (though they are not actually
universal prior to their existence as universal concepts of the mind), so they
have a mode of being prior to their existence in things. Here Aquinas attributes
to Augustine the correction of a pagan error and the substitution for it of a
Christian truth. "Whenever Augustine, who was imbued with the doctrines of the
Platonists," he writes, "found in their teaching anything consistent with the
faith, he adopted it; and those things which he found contrary to faith, he
amended." Plato, positing "the forms of things subsisting of themselves apart
from matter," had supposed that, "just as corporeal matter, by participating in
the Idea of stone, becomes a stone, so our intellect, by participating in the
same Idea, has knowledge of the stone." But, according to Aquinas, "it seems
contrary to faith that the forms of things should subsist of themselves without
matter outside the things themselves. . . . Therefore, in place of the Ideas
defended by Plato, Augustine said that the exemplars of all creatures existed in
the divine mind. It is according to these that all things are formed, as well as
that the human soul knows all things."

THE SOLUTION TO THE problem of universals which Aquinas proposes seems to
involve a threefold distinction with respect to the being of forms: they are (i)
in the human mind by CHAPTER 96: UNIVERSAL AND PAR abstraction from our
experience of sensible particulars; (2) in individual things; and (3), prior to
their existence in things, in the divine mind. But Aquinas himself says that in
God there is no distinction between universal and particular; nor does knowledge
"exist in God after the mode of created knowledge, so as to be universal or
particular/* The divine ideas, whether considered as the exemplars by which God
creates things or as the types and likeness by which God knows them, are not
abstractions and so do not have the universality characteristic ofhuman
concepts. Whereas our abstract universals do not give us knowledge of individual
things in their singularity, the divine ideas, according to Aquinas, are the
principles whereby God at once knows the singular and the universal. If the
universal as such is not in the divine mind, neither, in Ockham's opinion, is it
really in things not even potentially. Everything that exists in an individual
its form and matter, all its parts and properties is the unique and singular
possession of that individual. If there were something common to two things, it
would have to be one and two at the same time. As common to both, it would have
to be somehow one and the same in both, yet as existing in each, it would have
to be distinct in each; it would have to be as singular in each as each
individual thing in which it existed. But since Ockham regards this as
impossible, he concludes that "no universal really exists outside the soul in an
individual substance; nor is it of the substance or the being of things, but is
only in the soul." The old riddle thus returns in another form. If abstract
concepts are in the mindor if, as Ockham suggests, the logical "terms 'animal'
and 'man are universals because predicable of many, not through themselves, but
for the things they signify" then what in reality is the object signified by the
universal term or concept? It cannot be the many unless the numerically distinct
individuals are also alike as men or animals; and how can they be really alike,
as opposed to being merely conceived as such, unless they have a common nature
or attribute and to that extent are one and the same? Locke puts the question
another way. "Since TICULAR all things are only particulars," he asks, "how come
we by general terms, or where find we those general natures they are supposed to
stand for?" He answers that "words become general,by being made the signs of
general ideas; and ideas become general by separating from them the
circumstances of time and place, and other ideas that may determine them to this
or that particular existence. By this way of abstraction, they are made capable
of representing more individuals than one; each of which having in it a
conformity to that abstract idea is (as we call it) of that sort." But if, as
Locke goes on to say, general natures (or genera and species) are "nothing else
but abstract ideas, more or less comprehensive, with names annexed to them,"
then in what way do the many individuals represented by one abstract idea have
in them "a conformity to that abstract idea"? Locke's position seems to avoid
this problem. "Abstract ideas," he writes, give us "no knowledge of existence at
all." Only particular propositions are about real existences. "Universal
propositions, of whose truth or falsehood we can have certain knowledge, concern
not existence." Such propositions express nothing but "the agreement or
disagreement of our abstract ideas." In addition to denying their reference to
reality, Locke regards abstract ideas as "fictions or contrivances of the mind,"
which are imperfect precisely to the extent that they succeed in being
universal. The general idea of triangle, he observes, must be neither
equilateral, isosceles, nor scalene, "but all and none of these at once. In
effect, it is something imperfect, that cannot exist." Where Locke seems to mean
only that there can be no counterpart in reality to our general ideas, Berkeley,
observing the same "imperfection" in what are supposed to be abstract ideas,
denies that they can exist even in the mind. "I deny," he writes, "that I can
abstract from one another, or conceive separately, those qualities which it is
impossible should exist so separated, or that I can frame a general notion by
abstracting from particulars." Berkeley admits that "a man may consider a figure
merely as triangular, without attending to the particular qualities of the
angles or relations of the sides. So far he may abstract; but THE GREAT I this
will never prove that he can frame an abstract, general, inconsistent idea of a
triangle." He recognizes also that all our common names have general
significance, but he rejects Locke's explanation of their general meaning. "A
word becomes general," he says, "by being made the sign, not of an abstract
general idea, but of several particular ideas, any one of which it indifferently
suggests to the mind."

Docs a nominalist like Berkeley escape the persistent riddle? Does it not
reappear in the question which must be asked: what is there in this set of
particular ideas, as opposed to some other set, which makes it possible for a
generalname to signify any one of them indifferently? If each particular idea
were absolutely unique and had nothing in common with any other, would the
universal have any truth even on the level of names? James thinks the
nominalists are somehow forced to "admit a kwaft-universal, something which we
think as if it were universal, though it is not; and in all that they say about
this something which they explain to be 'an indefinite number of particular
ideas/ the same vacillation between the subjective and objective points of view
appears. The reader never can tell," James continues, "whether an 'idea' spoken
of issupposed to be a knower or a known. The authors themselves do not
distinguish. They want to get something in the mind which shall resemble what is
out of the mind, however vaguely, and they think that when that fact is
accomplished, no farther questions will be asked."

SOME PHILOSOPHERS DEAL with the universal and particular in a manner which leads
away from rather than into the traditional problem. To Spinoza, for example,
universal terms, such as man, horse, dog, represent confused images drawn from
sense-experience. They provide us with an inadequate knowledge of things. To
know things adequately we must proceed "from an adequate idea of the formal
essence of certain attributes of God to the adequate knowledge of the essence of
things."

Quite opposite to the abstract universal (or indeterminate image from
experience), the adequate idea is universal in the totally different sense of
comprehending an infinite whole. Hegel also distinguishes between abstract
universalityand "true infinity or concrete universality." The former is
"something determinate; i.e., being abstraction from all determinacy, it is
itself not without determinacy; to be something abstract and one-sided
constitutes its determinacy, its dcfectiveness, its finitude." The antithesis of
the abstract universal is the particular, the determinate content implicitly
contained in an abstract universal. The synthesis is the individual ; not the
particular individual, but the infinite individual which is the concrete
universal. The concrete universal is neither "the universal as a common
characteristic, nor the abstract universality which stands outside and over
against the individual, the abstract identity of the Understanding." It is "the
universality which has the particular as its opposite, but the particular which
by its reflection into itself has been equalized with the universal. This unity
is individuality, not individuality in its immediacy as a unit . . . but
individuality in accordance with its concept." For Hegel, the concrete universal
is the immanent Idea itself. It is the manifestation of the Absolute Spirit or
God. HOWEVER IT is formulated and whether or not it is or can be solved, the
problem of the universal seems to have a critical bearing on the discussion of
many other great ideas. In addition to the chapters cnumeiatcd at the beginning,
we can now see that the universal, the particular, and the individual are
implicated in the consideration of BEING and INFINITY, FORM and IDEA, MATTER and
MIND, EXPERIENCE, INDUCTION, JUDGMENT, and SCIENCE. These chapters, in turn, do
more than throw light on the various solutions proposed to the problem of the
universal. They help us understand the importance of the problem certainly to
the philosophers of the western tradition. If in the broader context of
connected issues, it is discovered that the proof of man's distinctive
rationality, or even the possibility of an immortal soul, may depend on the
affirmation or denial of universals, at least as concepts in the mind, then,
perhaps, some tolerance and patience may be won for the burdensome
technicalities of the problem.

CHAPTER 96: UNIVERSAL AND PARTICULAR

OUTLINE OF TOPICS

1. The distinction and relation between universal and particular: essence and individual,
whole and part, class and member, one and many, same and other, the common
and the unique

2. The problem of the universal
 2a. The reality of universals: their actual existence as separate forms, or their poten-
 tial existence in the forms of things
 2b. Universals as abstractions or concepts in the human mind
 2c. The reduction of universals or abstractions to the meaning of general or common
 names

3. The problem of the individual: the principle of individuality; the concrete universal

4. Universals and particulars
in the order of knowledge
 4a. Universals as objects of knowledge: the intuitive or reflexive apprehension of uni-
 versals
 4b. Universals in relation to the angelic intellect and the divine mind
 4c. The abstraction of universal concepts from the particulars of sense
 4d. The distinction between particular and universal in relation to the distinction be-
 tween percept and concept, or between image and idea
 4<?.
 The inadequacy of our knowledge of individuals: their indefinability
 4e. The generality of science: the universality of its principles

5. Universal
and particular in relation to grammar and logic
 5a. The distinction between proper and common names
 5b. The classification of universals: their intension and extension; their degrees of
 generality
 5c. Particulars and universals in predications or judgments: the quantity of proposi-
 tions; the universal, the particular, and the singular judgment
 5d. Rules concerning the universality and particularity of premises in reasoning: the
 quantity of the conclusion in relation to the quantity of the premises

6. Applications of the distinction between universal and particular
 6a. Particular and universal in the analysis of matter and form
 6b. Universal and particular causes
 6c. The universality of law and particular dispensations of equity

7. Universality and particularity
in relation to the distinction between the objective and
the subjective, the absolute and the relative
 7a. The issue concerning the universality of truth
 7b. The issue concerning the universality of moral principles
 7c. The issue concerning the universality of aesthetic standards: the subjective uni-
 versal

CROSS-REFERENCES

For: Other general discussions of the distinction between the universal an

IDEA 4b(2) ONE AND MANY 1c.

;

The problem of the reality or existence of universals, see BEING 7d

AND OTHER 2a.

The character and conditions of individual existence, see IDEA 1f;

problem of our knowledge of individuals, see FORM 3b; KNOWLEDGE 5

Discussions relevant to the consideration of universals as objects

IDEA xa; KNOWLEDGE 63(3).

Various statements of the theory of abstraction and of the distinct

and abstract ideas, see IDEA 2g; MEMORY AND IMAGINATION 5b, 6c(i

the abstraction of universal concepts in relation to inductive g

RIENCE 2b; INDUCTION la.

The universality of scientific laws, see SCIENCE 4d.

Another discussion of proper and common names, see SIGN AND SYMBOL

The ordering of universal concepts according to their degrees of ge

5d; RELATION 5a(4); SAME AND OTHER 33(1).

Universal and particular in the logical theory of judgment and reas

REASONING 23(2).

Other discussions of the good in general and the order of goods, se

EVIL 5a-5d; HAPPINESS 2b-2b(7).

The conception of equity as rectifying the imperfection of laws whi

universality, see JUSTICE lod; LAW 5h.

Other comparisons of history, poetry, and philosophy, see HISTORY i

POETRY 5b; TRUTH 4b.

Other discussions of the true, the good, and the beautiful as objec

or relative, see BEAUTY 5; CUSTOM AND CONVENTION 53, pa-pb; GOOD

RELATION 6b-6c; TRUTH 7b.

973 PART i, APPENDIX, 371b-372d 105 193a rstanding, SECT xn, DIV n, 23d [fn i] /
Judgement, 9a-d; 480d-482b; 488a-492a , 202b; 362b-c y of History, INTRO, 185c-d
f Species, 95a-d / Descent of 462d-463a; 569c; 571c-577d , 577b-c; 595d-596a
13b-516b; 516d-517c; 524dy, 755a-757b; 886b-888a d the particular, see (2); FORM
2a, 3b; SAME MATTER 1c; and for the a(4) of knowledge, see FORM la; ion between
sensory images ); SENSE 53; and for eneralization, see EXPE- 2d. nerality, see
IDEA 43), oning, see JUDGMENT 6a; e BEING 3-3b; GOOD AND ch results from their ;
PHILOSOPHY 1d; tive or subjective, absolute AND EVIL 6d;

974 ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boofy ofthe Western World, but re

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divided into tw

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collec

For the date, place, and other facts concerning the publication of the works c

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of The

T. REID. Essays on t

I.

BROWN. Lectures on t AQUINAS. On Being and Essence, en m-iv Mind, VOL n, pp

Quaesttones Disputatae, De Amma, A 4

. W. HAMILTON. Lectur DESCARTES. The Principles of Philosophy, PART i, VOL i
(34-36)

58-59 ROYCE. The World an HcchL. Science of Logic, VOL n, SECT i, en i WHITEHEAD
and RUSSE J. S. MILL. A System of Logic,

BK i, CH 2; BK n, CH 3 PART I, SECT C, D

BRADLEY. The Princi

II.

v PORPHYRY. Introduction to Aristotle's Predicaments Essays on Trut

.

B oi. rums. In Isagogem Porphyri Commenta W. E. JOHNSON. Logi A n AI LARD.
Glosses on Porphyry MCTAGGART. The Natu JOHN oi- SALISBURY. Metalogicon, BK n,
CH 17 WHITEHEAD. An Introd ALHHUUS MAGNUS. On the Intellect and the Intel-
Science and th

.

ligible,

I'RLATISR I-II SANTAYANA. The Realm DuNb Scoius. Rcportata Parisiensia, BK i-n
DEWEY. Logic, the Th OCKHAM. Sumnia Totius Logicae BLANSHARD. The Natur

.

Evpositio Aurea et Admodum Utilis Super B. RUSSELL. Principl

Artem Vetcrcm, PART i-ii The Problems o

.

C \JM-AN. In De Ente et Essentia D. Thomae Aqui- t

Introduction t

natis Commentana '3 15-17 SUAREZ. Disputatwnes Metaphysicae, iv (4-8), v-vi, The
Analysi

.

XXV The Analysi

.

JOHN OF SAINT THOMAS. Cursus Philosophicus Tho- Human Knowl

.

mhticus, Ars Logica PART n, QQ 3-12 II, CH 3, 10 PA

levant to the o groups: . tion. ited, consult Great Ideas. he Intellectual
Powers of Man, v he Philosophy of the Human 458-497 es on Metaphysics and Logic,
d the Individual, SERIES i (9-10) LL. Prmcipia Mathematica, , EJ PART II, SECT A
ples of Logic, Terminal Essays, h and Reality, en 3 c, PART i, CH 8, 1 1 re of
Existence, BK in uction to Mathematics, CH 2 e Modern World, CH 10 of Essence,
en i-u eory of Inquiry, CH 13-14 e of Thought, CH 16-17 es of Mathematics, en
4-8 f Philosophy, CH 9-10 o Mathematical Philosophy, CH s of Mind, LLCT 1 1 s of
Matter, en 27 edge, Its Scope and Limits, PART RT IV, CH 8 ;
