CHAPTER: WEALTH

INTRODUCTION

also those who elevate wealth into the sort of end which justifies any means that can advance its pursuit.

The other approach is that of the economist. Two of the great books—Smith's Wealth of Nations and Marx's Capital—deal not with wealth as a means, but with the means to wealth. A third, though by title A Discourse on Political Economy, is concerned with the principles of government, and with wealth only insofar as, in Rousseau's conception, government includes "the administration of property" as well as the protection of persons. "Provision for the public wants," he writes, is "the third essential duty of government."

Rousseau explains the title of his treatise by reference to the etymology of the word "econ- omy," which "meant originally only the wise and legitimate government of the household for the common good of the whole family."

It is in this sense that Aristotle employs the word and that a work sometimes attributed to him bears it as the title. "The meaning of the term," Rousseau goes on, "was then extended to the government of that great family, the

State. To distinguish these two senses of the word, the latter is called general or political economy, the former domestic or particular economy."

Adam Smith uses the term more narrowly. Not only does he limit his inquiry to the nature and causes of wealth, but by specifying "the wealth of nations," he restricts himself to political economy which, he says, has "two distinct objects: first, to provide a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people, or more properly to enable them to provide such a revenue or subsistence for themselves; and secondly, to supply the state or commonwealth with a revenue sufficient for the public services." In saying that the political economist aims "to enrich both the people and the sovereign," and that "the great object of the political economy of every country is to increase the riches and power of that country," Smith takes wealth_as^ an end (though it may also be a means, "so far as power depends upon riches") and tries to formulate the natural laws of wealth-making.

Nowhere does he define the quantity of wealth which should satisfy a nation. The natural resources of a country, the size and industry of its population, and various unfavorable contingencies, may set certain bounds to themaximizationofwealth. Within these bounds the country which adopts and follows a sound system of political economy—one which accords with the right conception of wealth and its causes— can (and deserves to) become as wealthy as possible.

Yet Smith, in treating wealth as an end and its increase without limit as a good, does not make economics absolutely autonomous. He regards political economy as a part of politics "a branch of the science of a statesman or legislator"—and to that extent implies that other considerations than wealth may control the policies of a nation in its regulation of agriculture, industry, domestic commerce, and foreign trade.

Furthermore, the larger moral questions which accompany Smith's economic speculations in his Lectures on Jurisprudence and his earlier treatise Of the Moral Sentiments are not entirely absent from the Wealth of Nations. But to the extent that he writes purely as an economist concerned with securing "cheapness or plenty" or, what for him is the same, "wealth and abundance," he adheres to considerations of expediency and only infrequently permits himself obiter dicta on justice or questions of right and wrong.

Karl Marx also writes as an economist. He details the factors which govern the production and distribution of wealth as these manifest themselves in the great historic systems of production— the slave economy, the feudal econ- omy, and the bourgeois or capitalist economy. So far he is a scientist and, even more than Adam Smith, an historian who describes how wealth is acquired and how it multiplies by reproducing itself. But Marx is much less content than Smith to stop there. Smith tries to describe the economic process scientifically in order to prescribe the means a nation should use to become increasingly prosperous, but Marx undertakes to describe it in order to criticize the way in which some men get richer than they need be while others become poorer than they should be.

His critical purpose makes inevitable the expression of moral judgments concerning such inequities; and by implication they are every- where present. For example, a descriptive phrase like "surplus value" connotes "unearned increment"; an apparently neutral economic term like "profit" is given the invidious moral significance traditionally attached to "usury." Nor does Marx rest with criticism. He has an economic program to propose, a program he reveals more clearly in the Communist Manifesto than in Capital. The aim is not primarily to increase the production of wealth, but to remedy its inequitable distribution under all past eco- nomic systems. This program looks forward to the final revolution which will bring the necessary historic motion of progress to its culmination when socialism replaces capitalism. Smith and Marx, it appears, are not economists in the same sense. But it may be supposed that, in spite of their different purposes, they would as scientists agree in their description of economic phenomena. To some extent they do, yet the difference in their point of view and aim leads to a quarrel about facts, or at least about their interpretation. Classical economists in the tradition of Adam Smith dispute the consequences which Marx draws from the labor theory of value, especially with regard to the origin of profit from the surplus product of unpaid labor time. Profit seems to them as much a part of the natural price of commodities as the wages paid to labor and the rent paid to the landlord.

"In exchanging the complete manufacture either for money, for labor, or for other goods, over and above what may be sufficient to pay the price of the materials, and the wages of the workmen, something," writes Smith, "must be given for the profits of the undertaker of the work who hazards his stock in this adventure. The value which the workmen add to the materials, therefore, resolves itself in this case into two parts, of which the one pays their wages, the other the profits of their employer upon the whole stock of materials and wages which he advanced. He could have no interest to employ them, unless he expected from the sale of their work something more than what was sufficient to replace his stock to him; and he could have no interest to employ a great stock rather than a small one, unless his profits were to bear some proportion to the extent of his stock."

It is precisely on this point of profit as a return for risking one's capital stock that Marx charges Smith, and after him, Ricardo and

J. S. Mill, with being apologists for the capitalistic system. He quotes Mill's statement that "the cause of profit is that labor produces more than is required for its support." The fact that

Mill does not question the validity of this surplus value, which accrues as profit to the entrepreneur; the fact that Ricardo treats surplus value, according to Marx, "as a thing inherent in the capitalist mode of production, which mode, in his eyes, is the natural form of social production," is explicable, in Marx's view, only if we recognize that their economic theories mix special pleading with science. "These bourgeois economists instinctively saw, and rightly so," he says, "that it is very dangerous to stir too deeply the burning question of the origin of surplus value."

Though he distinguishes between its classical and vulgar forms, political economy for Marx is a bourgeois science, which "first sprang into being during the period of manufacture." Political economy "has generally been content to take, just as they were, the terms of commercial and industrial life," Engels remarks in a prefatory note to Capital, and so it "never went beyond the received notions of profit and rent, never examined this unpaid part of the product (called by Marx surplus-product) in its integrity as a whole, and therefore never arrived at a clear comprehension, either of its origin and nature, or of the laws that regulate the subsequent distribution of its value."

Marx's work is, in his own conception of it, at one and the same time a criticism of the capitalist economy and of the science of economics which accepts and defends that eco- nomic system. In his own preface to Capital, Marx tells the reader that the "volume which I now submit to the public forms the continu- ation" of an earlier work—A Contribution to the

Critique of Political Economy. Within the sphere of political economy as defined by the problem of augmenting a nation's wealth, the author of the Wealth of Nations similarly finds a critique of prevalent economic fallacies— those of the physiocrats and the mercantilists— inseparable from the constructive statement of his own theory.

Economists engage in controversy over technical points in the analysis of production, ex- change, and distribution, or in the development of theories of value and price, money and capital, property and poverty. Such controversy tends to become complicated both by the larger questions in which the economic issues are imbedded, and also by the different points of departure and the different objectives of the economists. What at first may look like a simple issue of fact often fails on closer examination to be capable of resolution by scientific inquiry, or simply by an accurate description of the phenomena.

Even when all relevant matters of fact are determined, conflicting interpretations of their significance remain. Behind these lie divergent presuppositions, often unexpressed. Those who start with different conceptions of the problem, and from different principles assumed rather than argued, tend to reach conclusions which may appear to be opposed but which do not really exclude one another—at least not totally. Each from its own point of view may be true, and from that point of view the other is not so much false as irrelevant. Smith may be right, for example, when he says that "the consideration of his own private profit is the sole motive which determines the owner of any capital to employ it either in agriculture, in manufactures, or in some particular branch of the wholesale or retail trade. The different quantities of productive labor which it may put into motion, and the different values which it may add to the annual produce of the land and labor of the society, according as it is employed in one or other of those different ways, never enter his thoughts." Smith may be right, not only as to the fact asserted, but also with regard to its implication for the increase of the nation's wealth: that the wealth of a society increases as owners of capital act from self-interest in a system of free enterprise which permits the possibility of profits to indemjiifp them against the risk of losses and to reward them for the thrift whereby they accumulated capital to invest productively.

But Marx may also be right when he says that the system of free enterprise and capitalistic production could not have started simply through the thrift of individuals, but required a primitive accumulation of capital. "The accumulation of capital," he says, "presupposes surplus-value; surplus-value presupposes capitalistic production; capitalistic production presupposes the existence of considerable masses of capital and labor-power in the hands of producers of commodities. The whole movement, therefore, seems to turn in a vicious circle, out of which we can only get by supposing a primitive accumulation (previous accumulation of Adam Smith) preceding capitalistic accumulation," a primitive accumulation which is "nothing else than the historical process of divorcing the producer from the means of production." He may be right, furthermore, when he goes on to say that "the economic structure of capitalistic society has grown out of the eco- nomic structure of feudal society. . . . The historical movement which changes the producers into wage-workers appears, on the one hand, as their emancipation from serfdom and from the fetters of the guilds . . . but, on the other hand, these new freedmen became sellers of themselves only after they had been robbed of all their own means of production, and of all the guarantees of existence afforded by the old feudal arrangements." It may be true that a capitalist who privately owns means of production would not invest them without the possibility of gaining a profit. It may be true, as Smith would insist, that he would not be justified in doing so. This, however, does not invalidate—as it is not invalidated by—Marx's theory of the "original expropriation" which, in his opinion, initiated capitalistic enterprise; nor does it conflict with Marx's insistence that the capitalist must exploit labor in order to make profits, since he can derive them only from the surplus value created by wage-laborers who produce more than is returned to them for their own needs or subsistence. The foregoing point and counter-point in economic theory must serve as one example of the way in which Smith and Marx pass each other, rather than meet, on many of the basic economic issues. It would be impossible, within the compass of this Introduction, to chart the intricate relationship of their thought, including their agreements and clear oppositions as well as the matters on which they simply diverge because they are discussing the same problem from different viewpoints. The reader can discover for himself in greater detail the pattern of conversation between these two great economists by studying the passages from their works which are cited in the References.

As a glance at the Outline of Topics will show, many of the headings represent technical problems or issues in economic theory, as that is narrowly conceived in modern times. Some, however, are more general. They state themes which place the discussion of wealth in the larger context of moral and political questions and which, throughout the whole tradition, engage poets, historians, and philosophers— not merely the economists of the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries.

To some extent the more general themes are treated in other chapters, such as Labor, Justice, Oligarchy, Virtue and Happiness, Family and State. Here we shall consider them for their bearing on the nature and kinds, the sources and uses, of wealth, and also its goodness and evil. The ancients conceive wealth as consisting in the variety ofexternal goods which sustain life —food, clothing, and shelter. But wealth may include more than the bare necessities. When Socrates in the Republic outlines a simple econ- omy which aims to satisfy only basic needs, Glaucon tells him that he is "providing for a city of pigs." More is required, he says, for "the ordinary conveniences of life. People who are to be comfortable are accustomed to lie on sofas, and dine off tables, and they should have sauces and sweets in the modern style." Socrates replies by projecting "a luxurious State"— "a State at fever heat"—which goes beyond the necessaries, "such as houses and clothes and shoes. The arts of the painter and the embroiderer," he says, "will have to be set in motion, and gold and ivory and all sorts of materials procured"; and the city will "have to fill and swell with a multitude of callings which are not required by any natural want."

This distinction between necessities and luxuries, which has many implications for ethics and economics as well as for politics, does not draw the line between natural and artificial wealth. Nor is natural wealth identified exclusively with natural resources in their pure state, unconverted by labor for use or consumption. Wealth is generally thought to comprise all consumable goods, whether necessities or luxuries, whether products of hunting, agriculture, or manufacture, and all the means of producing them. Only money is excluded. Only money is declared to be either not wealth at all or artificial wealth.

Yet the confusion of money with wealth seems to be prevalent at all times, as repeated attempts to correct the fallacy indicate. The use of money originates, according to Aristotle, with retail trade, which is "not a natural part of the art of getting wealth"; for, he goes on, "had it been so, men would have ceased to exchange when they had enough." What Aristotle calls retail trade replaces "the barter of necessary articles." Made possible by the use of coin, retail trade, he says, comes to be thought of as "the art which produces riches and wealth.

"Indeed," Aristotle continues, "riches is as- sumed by many to be only a quantity of coin." But he agrees with those who maintain, to the contrary, that "coined money is a mere sham, a thing not natural, but conventional only . . . because it is not useful as a means to any of the necessities of life, and he who is rich in coin may often be in want of necessary food. But how can that be wealth of which a man may have a great abundance and yet perish with hunger, like Midas in the fable, whose insatiable prayer turned everything that was set before him into gold?"

To say that money in itself cannot satisfy any natural need does not imply that it serves no economic purpose. Plato and Aristotle,

Hobbes, Locke, and Kant, as well as Smith and Marx, understand the utility of money as a medium of exchange, indispensable for "the circulation of commodities"— to use Marx's phrase—beyond the stage of barter. Money is not only a medium of exchange, according to

Plato; it "reduces the inequalities and incommensurabilities of goods to equality and com- mon measure"; and Aristotle seems to anticipate Marx's conception of money as the universal form in which all economic values can be expressed when he defines "wealth" to mean "all things whose value is measured by money."

The economic utility of money in exchange and as a measure of value, or even the fact that gold and silver coin may have some intrinsic value because of the labor involved in mining and minting the metals, does not alter the distinction between natural and artificial wealth. "Natural wealth," Aquinas explains, "is that which serves man as a remedy for his natural wants, such as food, drink, clothing, cars, dwellings, and such like; while artificial wealth, such as money, is that which is not a direct help to nature, but is invented by man for the convenience of exchange and as a measure of all things saleable."

The same point is restated by Locke in the seventeenth century, but it is still necessary for Smith a century later to argue against the mercantilist theory of national prosperity, on the ground that it confuses wealth with money.

"It would be too ridiculous to go about seriously to prove," Smith writes, "that wealth does not consist in money, or in gold or silver; but what money purchases, and is valuable only for purchasing. . . . Goods can serve many other purposes besides purchasing money, but money can serve no other purpose besides purchasing goods. Money, therefore, necessarily runs after goods, but goods do not always or necessarily run after money. The man who buys, does not always mean to sell again, but frequently to use or consume; whereas he who sells, always means to buy again."

Nevertheless, that "wealth consists in money, or in gold and silver, is a popular notion which naturally arises from the double function of money, as the instrument of commerce, and as the measure of value." The notion is so familiar that, Smith observes, "even they, who are convinced of its absurdity, are very apt to forget their own principles, and in the course of their reasonings to take it for granted as a certain and undeniable truth. Some of the best English writers on commerce set out with observing that the wealth of a country consists, not in its gold and silver only, but in its lands, houses, and consumable goods of all different kinds. In the course of their reasonings, however, the land, houses, and consumable goods seem to slip out of their memory, and the strain of their argument frequently supposes that all wealth consists in gold and silver, and to multiply these metals is the great object of national industry and commerce."

The two principles of the mercantilist policy are, according to Smith, that "wealth consisted in gold and silver, and that those metals could be brought into a country which had no mines only by the balance of trade, or by exporting to a greater value than it imported." A favorable balance of trade thus necessarily be- came the sole object of the mercantilists; and, Smith adds, "its two great engines for enriching the country, therefore, were restraints upon importation, and encouragements to exportation."

Since in his opinion the wealth of a nation consists in "the whole annual produce of its land and labor," Smith opposes all such restraints, and with them the protection of monopolies. He advocates free trade and the free competition of producers, within a country as well as between domestic and foreign producers, on the ground that "consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production; and the interest of the producer ought to be attended to, only so far as it may be necessary for pro- moting that of the consumer. But in the mercantile system," Smith claims, "the interest of the consumer is almost constantly sacrificed to that of the producer." A laissez-faire economy, he thinks, not only reverses this situation, but also, by preferring more consumable commodities to more gold and silver, tends to increase the real, not the artificial wealth of a nation.

Marx also criticizes the mercantilist error, but in terms of his theory that "since the production of surplus-value is the chief end and aim of capitalist production . . . the greatness of a man's or a nation's wealth should be measured, not by the absolute quantity produced, but by the relative magnitude of the surplusvalue."

Surplus value cannot be produced by exchange. Against the mercantilists who "derived the excess of the price over the cost of production of the product, from the act of exchange, from the product being sold above its value,'* Marx quotes Mill's statement that "profit arises, not from the incident of exchange, but from the productive power of labor; and the general profit of the country is always what the productive power of labor makes it, whether any exchange takes place or not."

But this is not the whole picture, according to Marx. Although it is impossible for capital or surplus value "to be produced by circulation," or the exchange of commodities, he also thinks it is "impossible that outside the sphere of circulation, a producer of commodities can, without coming into contact with other com- modity owners, expand value, and consequently convert money or commodities into capital." The two sides of the picture are brought together, in Marx's view, by the treatment of labor itself as a commodity, and the buying and selling of labor power in the open market. The distinction between real wealth and money and the distinction between necessities and luxuries have more than economic significance. They are basic to the moralist's strictures concerning the desire for wealth, its place in the order of goods, and the way it can be put to good use.

It is not only St. Paul who says that "the love of money is the root of all evil." It is not only Christian theologians like Augustine and Aquinas who explain how "lust of the eyes" or covetousness is a capital sin and as such the principle of many other transgressions. As Marx points out, the Greeks also "denounced money as subversive of the economical and moral order of things." In the passage in Sophocles' Antigone which he quotes, Creon declares: "Nothing so evil as money ever grew to be current among men. This lays cities low, this drives men from their homes, this trains and warps honest souls till they set themselves to works of shame; this still teaches folk to practice villainies, and to know every godless deed."

Plato condemns the oligarchical state by comparing it to the miser and money-maker among men. "Such a State," he says, "aims to become as rich as possible, a desire which is insatiable." In the Laws, the Athenian Stranger explains why the reasonable statesman should not aim to make "the state for the true interests of which he is advising ... as great and as rich as possible," if he also "desires to have the city the best and happiest possible"; for though each may be possible alone, they are not possible together. It is impossible, he holds, to be "good in a high degree and rich in a high degree at the same time."

What Plato says of the oligarch, Marx says of the capitalist: "He shares with the miser the passion for wealth as wealth." But, Marx adds, "that which in the miser is a mere idiosyncrasy is, in the capitalist, the effect of the social mechanism, of which he is but one of the wheels."

Involved as he is by the system in "the restless never-ending process of profit-making," the individual capitalist, like the miser, exhibits "this boundless greed after riches, this passionate chase after exchange-value."

The root of the evil in the love of money of "gold, yellow, glittering, precious gold." which Shakespeare calls the "common whore of mankind"— is the boundlessness of the lust. The hoarding of anything springs from an insatiable desire, but because money can be converted into every sort of commodity, it is, according to Marx, the ideal object of hoarding. "The antagonism between the quantitative limits of money and its qualitative boundlessness," he writes, "continually acts as a spur to the hoarder in his Sisyphus-like labor of accumulating."

In the light of such observations, Marx cites with approval Aristotle's distinction between "economic" and "chrematistic" or what Aristotle differentiates as the two arts of wealthgetting. Considering economics as the manage- ment of a household, Aristotle says that the art of acquisition which is a natural part of it "must either find ready to hand, or itself provide, such things necessary to life, and useful for the community of the family or state, as can be stored. They are the elements of true riches; for the amount of property which is needed for a good life is not unlimited." But "there is another variety of the art of acquisition which is commonly and rightly called an art of wealthgetting, and has in fact suggested that riches and property have no limit."

The two arts tend to become confused in men's minds. "Some persons are led to believe,"

Aristotle observes, "that getting wealth is the object of household management, and the whole idea of their lives is that they ought either to increase their money without limit, or at any rate not to lose it. The origin of this disposition in men is that they are intent upon living only, and not upon living well; and as their desires are unlimited, they also desire that the means of gratifying them should be without limit." Even "those who do aim at a good life seek the means of obtaining bodily pleasures; and, since the enjoyment of these appears to depend upon property, they are absorbed in getting wealth; and thus there arises the second kind of wealth-getting."

Plato, like Aristotle, while admitting the service of retail trade in effecting the exchange of commodities, condemns the tendency of its practitioners to make "gains without limit."

In the Laws, furthermore, he prohibits interest on loans; and in the Republic, he describes this form of money-making as a process in which "men of business . . . insert their sting— that is, their money— into someone else who is not on his guard against them, and recover the parent sum many times over multiplied into a family of children." This biological metaphor for making money out of money appears also in Aristotle. The term "interest," he says, "means the birth of money from money." Of all forms of money-making, this "breeding of money" is, in his opinion, the most unnatural.

"Usury, which makes a gain out of money itself," Aristotle writes, violates the natural object of money— "intended to be used in exchange, but not to increase at interest."

Interest and usury are not distinguished in the Old Testament. "Take thou no usury of him, or increase," is the command in Leviticus. But this rule does not apply to the stranger. "Unto a stranger thou mayst lend upon usury," Deuteronomy says, "but unto thy brother thou shalt not lend upon usury."

A theologian like Aquinas, following both

Scripture and Aristotle, condemns, for Christians, all interest as usury; and Luther also appeals to pagan precept as well as to Scriptural warrant. "The heathen were able, by the lrghToT reason, to conclude that a usurer is a double- dyed thief and murderer," Luther says in a passage which Marx quotes under the comment that the usurer is "that old-fashioned but ever renewed specimen of the capitalist." Castigating his feilow-Christians for holding usurers "in such honor that we fairly worship them for the sake of their money," Lutherdeclares that "whoever eats up, robs, and steals the nourishment of another, that man commits as great a murder (so far as in him lies) as he who starves a man or utterly undoes him. Such does a usurer."

It seems to be a later consequence of the Protestant reformation, as Weber and Tawney point out, that the exaction of interest for the loan of money or goods is defended, and only exorbitant rates of interest are denounced as usurious. The signs of the change may be seen in Pascal's diatribe against the specious casuistry which tries to exempt some forms of interest-taking from the charge of usury; and also in the fact that Montesquieu attributes to the schoolmen, "who adopted from Aristotle, a great many notions on lending upon interest," the mistake of condemning it "absolutely and in all cases." In his own opinion, "to lend money without interest is certainly an action laudable and extremely good; but is is obvious that it is only a counsel of religion, and not a civil law." Montesquieu thinks a price for the use of money is necessary for the carrying on of trade. If a fair rate of interest is not allowed, nobody will lend money; or rather, Montesquieu says, because "the affairs of society will ever make it necessary," moneylending will inevitably take the form of usury. "Usury increases in Moham- medan countries," he points out, "in proportion to the severity of the prohibition. The lender indemnifies himself for the danger he undergoes of suffering the penalty."

Smith agrees that prohibition, "instead of preventing, has been found from experience to increase the evil of usury." A fair rate of interest is justified, he thinks, because "as something can everywhere be made by the use of money, something ought everywhere to be paid for the use of it. ... In countries where interest is permitted, the law, in order to prevent the extortion of usury, generally fixes the highest rate which can be taken without incurring a penalty. This rate ought always to be somewhat above the lowest market price, or the price which is commonly paid for the use of money by those who can give the most undoubted security." Smith offers the British practice as a good example. "Where money is lent to gov- ernment at three per cent, and to private people upon good security at four, and four and a half, the present legal rate, five per cent, is perhaps as proper as any." Interest and profit, while not the same in Smith's view, are closely connected. As the revenue from land is rent, from labor wages, and "that derived from stock, by the person who manages or employs it, is called profit," interest is "the compensation which the bor- rower pays to the lender, for the profit which he has an opportunity of making by the use of the money. Part of that profit naturally belongs to the borrower, who runs the risk and takes the trouble of employing it; and part to the lender, who affords him an opportunity of making this profit." Conceiving interest as a derivative revenue, Smith holds it to be a maxim that "wherever a great deal can be made by the use of money, a great deal will be commonly given for the use of it," so that we may expect to find "the usual market rate of interest" to vary with "the ordinary profits of stock." The theory which places wealth lowest in the order of goods determines its contribution to human happiness accordingly, and leads to a disapproval of luxuries, on the part of both the individual and society. "Riches are for the sake of the body, as the body is for the sake of the soul. The latter are good," writes Plato, "and wealth is intended by nature to be for the sake of them, and is therefore inferior to them both, and third in the order of excellence." Aristotle similarly orders wealth, or external goods, to health and other goods of the body, as these in turn are subordinate to the virtues, or goods of the soul; and Hobbes, in somewhat different terms, holds that, of all goods, "those that are dearest to a man are his own life and limbs; and in the next degree (in most men), those that concern conjugal affection; and after them riches and means of living."

While Aristotle admits that happiness requires some external prosperity, he always adds that only a moderate amount of external goods is needed. "Happiness, whether consisting in pleasure or virtue, or both," he writes, "is more often found with those who are most highly cultivated in their mind and in their character, and have only a moderate share of external goods, than among those who possess external goods to a useless extent, but are deficient in higher qualities." Aristotle praises Solon lor telling Croesus, one of the world's wealthiest men, that happiness requires more than riches. The conversation is narrated by Herodotus. "What, stranger of Athens," Herodotus reports Croesus as saying, "is my happiness, then, valued so little by you, that you do not even put me on a level with private men?" To which, Solon replies: "Croesus, I see that you are wonderfully rich, and the lord of many nations," but "he who possesses a great store of riches is no nearer happiness than he who has what suffices for his daily needs, unless luck attends him, and so he continue in the enjoy- ment of all his good things to the end of his life." Aristotle adds the further observation that "one can with but moderate possessions do what one ought" and that "a good life requires a supply of external goods in a less degree when men are in a good state and in a greater degree when they are in a lower state."

Aquinas agrees with Aristotle so far as the happiness of the active life is concerned, but he holds that wealth "does not conduce to the happiness of the contemplative life; rather is it an obstacle thereto." With regard to achieving "the happiness of heaven" in the life hereafter,

Aquinas not only thinks wealth an obstacle, but he also explains why the religious orders take the vow of voluntary poverty. "Man is directed to future happiness by charity," he writes; and "in the attainment of the perfection of charity the first foundation is voluntary poverty, whereby a man lives without property of his own.

The opinion that wealth is an obstacle or that it should be sought in moderation does not seem to be universally shared. As Herodotus,

Plato, and Aristotle report the prevalence in the ancient world of the notion that "external goods are the cause of happiness," so Melville reflects that in modern society "the urbane activity with which a man receives money is really marvellous, considering that we so earnestly believe money to be the root of all earthly ills, and that on no account can a monied man enter heaven. Ah! how cheerfully we consign ourselves to perdition!" Marx quotes a still more extravagant claim. In a letter from Jamaica in 1503, Christopher Co- lumbus exclaims: "Gold is a wonderful thing! Whoever possesses it is lord of all he wants. By means of gold one can even get souls into Paradise."

Against Rousseau's attack upon opulence as the cause of civilization with all its miseries,

Dr. Johnson rises in the defense of luxuries and the advantages of wealth. "Rousseau's treatise on the inequality of mankind," Boswell writes, "was at this time a fashionable topick. It gave rise to an observation by Mr. Dempster that the advantages of fortune and rank were nothing to a wise man." To this, Dr. Johnson replies:

"If a man were a savage, living in the woods by himself, this might be true," but "in civilized society, external advantages make us more respected. . . . Sir, you may make the experiment. Go into the street, and give one man a lecture on morality, and another a shilling, and see which will respect you the most . . . "And, Sir," he continues, "if six hundred pounds a year procure a man more consequence, and, of course, more happiness than six pounds, the same proportion will hold as to six thousand, and so on as far as opulence can be carried.

Perhaps he who has a large fortune may not be so happy as he who has a small one; but that must proceed from other causes than from his having the large fortune ; for, ceteris paribus, he who is rich in a civilized society, must be happier than he who is poor." On one occasion, Dr. Johnson seems to share

Solon's view. When Boswell suggests that the proprietor of a great estate "must be happy," he exclaims: "Nay, Sir, all this excludes but one evil—poverty." But for the most part, his opinion is that "it is in refinement and elegance that the civilized man differs from the savage," and that it is right for every society to be as luxurious as it can be. from book to book," he says to General Oglethorpe, "and gain credit in the world. One of these is the cry against the evil of luxuryJslowthe truth is that luxury produces much good. You will hear it said, very gravely, Why was not the half-guinea, thus spent in luxury, given to the poor? To how many might it have afforded a good meal. Alas! has it not gone to the industrious poor, whom it is better to support than the idle poor? You are much surer that you are doing good when you pay money to those who work as the recompense of their labor, than when you give money in charity. . . . And as to the rout that is made about people who are ruined by extravagance, it is no matter to the nation that some individuals suffer. When so much general productive exertion is the consequence of luxury, the nation does not care though there are debtors in gaol." Dr. Johnson's pronouncements may silence Mr. Dempster and General Oglethorpe, but not Smith or Marx. To Smith, spendthrift extravagance squanders wealth which might have been capitalized for productive purposes; to Marx, the multiplication of luxury products diverts labor power that is socially necessary for producing the means of subsistence into what Veblen later calls forms of "conspicuous waste." Not only, in Marx's view, can the capitalistic system be charged with indifference as to whether its profits are made out of the production of luxuries or necessities; but the workers on starvation wages engaged in the luxury trades constitute a signal indictment of the inequitable distribution of wealth. As the needs of the individual are thought to set a natural limit to his acquisition of wealth, or at least to provide him with a rational standard for stopping short of wanton luxuries when he seeks the decencies or amenities of life, so the needs of society as a whole are thought to establish a criterion of justice in the distribution of wealth.

"God gave the world to men in common," says Locke, and "the measure of property nature has well set by the extent of man's labor and the convenience of life. . . . No man's labor could subdue or appropriate all; nor could his enjoyment consume more than a small part; so that it was impossible for any man, this way, to intrench upon the right of another, who would still have room for as good and as large a possession (after the other had taken out his) as before it was appropriated. Which measure did confine every man's possession to a very moderate proportion, and such as he might appropriate to himself without injury to anybody, in the first age of the world." This rule of property— "that every man should have as much as he could make use of" without prejudice or injury to others—worked well in the beginning when, as Locke puts it, "all the world was America." It "would still hold in the world without straitening anybody," Locke thinks, "since there is land enough in the world to suffice double the inhabitants, had not the invention of money . . . introduced (by consent) larger possessions and a right to them" for gold and silver being relatively imperishable, men can hoard excesses of them without appearing to waste them, as they would if they amassed perishable commodities which they could not consume or use. It is not money but property itself which Rousseau claims to be the origin of inequality among men and of the inequitable distribution of wealth. "The first man who, having enclosed a piece of ground, bethought himself of saying This is mine, and found people simple enough to believe him, was the real founder of civil society." Once established as a right, property tends to expand. The larger proprietors avoid the question, "Do you not know that numbers of your fellow-creatures are starving, for want of what you have too much of?" Instead, according to Rousseau, they conceive "the profoundest plan that ever entered the mind of man" to protect their possessions against invasion or plunder. They institute civil government, ostensibly for the security of all, but really to secure for themselves their property and power.

"Such was, or may well have been," Rousseau writes, "the origin of society and law, which bound new fetters on the poor, and gave new powers to the rich; which irretrievably destroyed natural liberty, eternally fixed the law of property and inequality, converted clever usurpation into unalterable right, and, for the advantage of a few ambitious individuals, subjected all mankind to perpetual labor, slavery, and wretchedness." Adam Smith seems to agree. "Where there is no property," he says, "or at least none that exceeds the value of two or three days labor, civil government is not so necessary. . . . Civil government, so far as it is instituted for the security of property, is in reality for the defense of the rich against the poor, or of those who have some property against those who have none at all."

But, unlike Smith, Rousseau has an alternative to propose. "Since it is plainly contrary to the law of nature . . . that the privileged few should gorge themselves with superfluities while the starving multitude are in want of the bare necessities of life," he thinks it is "one of the most important functions of government to prevent extreme inequalities of fortunes; not by taking away wealth from its possessors, but by depriving all men of means to accumulate it; not by building asylums for the poor, but by securing the citizens from becoming poor."

This states an end, but not the means for achieving it. The problem of poverty is not so easily solved, if it can be solved at all, once the right of property is admitted. Rousseau, for example, no less than Locke and others before him, affirms this right which, for Kant and Hegel later, is almost the whole substance of private or abstract right. "The right of property," says

Rousseau, "is the most sacred of all the rights of citizenship, and even more important in some respects than liberty itself." Yet it is difficult, he admits, "to secure the property of individuals on one side, without attacking it on another; and it is impossible that all the regulations which govern the order of succession, wills, contracts, etc., should not lay individuals under some constraint as to the disposition of their goods, and should not consequently restrict the right of property."

To Hegel, poverty seems to be an inevitable consequence of property, as war is an inevitable consequence of sovereignty, and in neither case can the cause be abolished. "When the masses begin to decline into poverty," as they must, they can be supported from public funds and private charities, thus receiving "subsistence directly, not by means of their work," or as an alternative, "they might be given subsistence indirectly through being given work." But, Hegel adds, "in this event the volume of production would be increased, but the evil consists precisely in an excess of production and in the lack of a proportionate number of con- sumers who are themselves also producers, and thus it is simply intensified by both of the methods by which it is sought to alleviate it." Hence, Hegel concludes, it "becomes apparent that despite an excess of wealth civil society is not rich enough ... to check excessive poverty and the creation of a penurious rabble. This inner dialectic of civil society thus drives it—or at any rate a specific civil society— to push beyond its own limits and seek markets, and

. . . its necessary means of subsistence, in other lands which are either deficient in the goods it has over-produced, or else generally backward in industry."

Imperialism, according to Marx, will not long work as a cure for what Tawney later calls "the sickness of an acquisitive society"— the inner frustration which Marx sees manifested in recurring economic crises and depressions of greater and greater magnitude. Nor does he propose the abolition of all private property as the remedy for poverty, when he calls for "the expropriation of the expropriators." On the contrary, only the possession by each individual of an adequate supply of consumer's goods can abolish poverty. Differentiating between individual and capitalist property, according as its owners are or are not laborers, and according as it consists in consumable goods or the means of production, Marx would transfer the latter from private property to public ownership.

The socialist economy he outlines also includes "abolition of property in land, and application of all rents of land to public purposes; a heavy progressive or graduated income tax; abolition of all right of inheritance." It includes "centralization of credit in the hands of the state, by means of a national bank with State capital and an exclusive monopoly," and also "centralization of the means of communication and transport." Last but not least, it includes "equal liability of all to labor."

More radical than Marx's socialism is the communism Plato proposes in the Republic.

Plato's aim is not to solve the problem of poverty or economic injustice. By abolishing for his guardian class all private property, he hopes that his guardians through sharing com- mon possessions (including wives and children) will have no cause for rivalry, dissension, personal ambition. Common possessions should mould them into a fraternity and free them from private interests to work for the common good. In this matter of property, the condition of Plato's imagined guardians was not so different from that of Jesus' disciples as recounted in the Book of Acts, or of the monastic orders whose vows include that of voluntary poverty.

Aristotle's criticisms of the arrangements for the guardian class in the Republic are largely directed against the community of women and children and the elimination of private property. "Property," he says, "should be in a certain sense common, but as a general rule private; for, when everyone has a distinct interest, men will not complain of one another, and they will make more progress, because everyone will be attending to his own business." He thinks "it is clearly better that property should be private, but the use of it common," in the sense that its use have the common welfare in mind.

OUTLINE OF TOPICS
PAGB

1. The elements of wealth: the distinction between natural and artificial wealth; the dis-
tinction between the instruments of production and consumable goods

2. The acquisition and management of wealth in the domestic and tribal community

3. The production of wealth in the political community
 3a. Factors in productivity: natural resources, raw materials, labor, tools and ma-
 3b. capital investments
 3c. The use of land: kinds
 of land or real estate; the general theory of rent
 3d. Agricultural production: the produce of land
 3</.
 Industrial production: domestic, guild, and factory systems of manufacturing

4. The exchange of wealth or the circulation of commodities: the processes of commerce
or trade
 4a. The forms of value: the distinction between use-value and exchange-value
 4b. Types of exchange: barter economies and money economies
 4c. Rent, profit, wages, interest as the elements of price: the distinction between the
 real and the nominal price and between the natural and the market price of
 commodities
 PAGB
 4*/.
 The source of value: the labor theory of value
 4*. Causes
 of the fluctuation of market price: supply and demand
 4/ The consequences of monopoly and competition
 4d. Commerce between states: tariffs and bounties; free trade

5. Money
 5a. The nature of money as a medium or instrument of exchange, and as a measure of
 equivalents in exchange
 5b. Monetary standards: the coining or minting
 of money; good and bad money
 5c. The price of money: the exchange rate of money as measured in terms of other
 commodities
 5*/.
 The institution and function of banks: monetary loans, credit, the financing of
 capitalistic enterprise
 5*. The
 rate of interest on money: the condemnation of usury

6. Capital
 6a. Comparison of capitalist production with other systems of production: the social
 utility of capital
 6b. Theories of the nature, orig in, and growth of capital stock: thrift, savings, ex-
 cesses beyond the needs of consumption, expropriation
 6c. Types of capital: fixed and circulating, or constant and variable capital
 6d. Capital profits
 (1) The distinction of profit from rent, interest, and wages
 (2) The source of profit: marginal or surplus value; unearned increment and
 the exploitation of labor
 (3) Factors determining the variable
 rate of capital profit
 (4) The justification of profit: the reward of enterprise and indemnification for
 risk of losses
 6e. The recurrence of crises in the capitalist economy: depressions, unemployment,
 the diminishing rate of profit

7. Property
 7a. The right of property: the protection
 of property as the function of government
 7b. Kinds of economic property
 (1) Chattel slaves as property
 (2) Property in land
 (3) Property in capital goods and in monetary wealth
 7c. The uses of property: for production, consumption,
 or exchange
 7d. The ownership of property: possession or title; the legal regulation of property
 (1) Private ownership: partnerships, joint-stock companies
 (2) Government ownership: eminent doma in
 7*. The inheritance of property: laws regulating inheritance

8. The distribution of wealth : the problem of poverty
 8a. The sharing of wealth: goods and lands held in common; public ownership of the
 means of production
 8b. The division of common goods into private property: factors influencing the
 increase and decrease of private property
 8c. The causes of poverty: competition, incompetence, indigence, expropriation,
 unemployment; the poverty of the proletariat as dispossessed of the instru-
 ments of production
 8d. Laws concerning poverty: the poor laws, the dole

9. Political economy: the nature of the science of economics
 9a. Wealth as an element in the political common good
 9b. Factors determining the prosperity or opulence of states: fluctuations in na-
 tional prosperity
 9c. Diverse economic programs for securing the wealth of nations: the physiocratic,
 the mercantilist, and the laissez-faire systems
 9d. Governmental regulation of production, trade, or other aspects of economic life
 9?. The
 economic support of government and the services of government
 (1) The charges of government: the cost of maintaining its services; elements
 in the national budget
 (2) Methods of defraying the expenses of government: taxation and other
 forms of levy or impost; confiscations, seizures, and other abuses of
 taxation
 /!
 Wealth or property in relation to different forms of government
 9e. Wealth and poverty in relation to crime and to war between states
 9/j.
 The struggle of economic classes for political power

10. The moral aspects of wealth and poverty
 10a. The nature of wealth as a good: its place in the order of goods and its relation to
 happiness
 10b. Natural limits to the acquisition of wealth by individuals: the distinction between
 necessities and luxuries
 10c. Temperance and intemperance with respect to wealth: liberality, magnificence,
 miserliness, avarice
 io</.The principles of justice with respect to wealth and property: fair wages and
 prices 1 066
 10d. The precepts of charity with respect to wealth
 (1) Almsgiving to the needy and the impoverished
 (2) The religious vow of poverty: voluntary poverty
 (3) The
 choice between God and Mammon: the love of money as the root of
 all evil

11. Economic determinism: the economic interpretation of history

12. Economic progress: advances with respect to both efficiency and justice

CROSS-REFERENCES For: The treatment of the domestic economy, see FAMILY 33-30.

Discussions bearing on the factors in productivity, see ART 6c, 90; KNOWLE

1b(a).

Another consideration of the concept of value, see GOOD AND EVIL 4d; and f

cussion of the labor theory of value, see LABOR 6d.

The political aspect of commerce between states, see STATE 93.

The issue concerning usury, see JUSTICE 8d.

Other comparisons of the capitalist economy with the slave, the feudal, an

economies, see LABOR 5a-5d.

The consideration of the nature of wages and of wages in relation to profi

6-6c; and for the theory of profit as derived from surplus value, see JU

The theory of property and property rights, see JUSTICE 6b, 8a; LABOR jbk

53; and for the conception of slaves as chattel or property, see LABOR 5

The doctrine of common as opposed to individual goods, see GOOD AND EVIL 4

Another discussion of the problem of poverty, see LABOR jc.

The consideration of economics as a science, see PHILOSOPHY 2c; SCIENCE 33

The problem of governmental regulation of the economic process, see LIBERT

The problem of the economic support of government, see GOVERNMENT 4.

The issue concerning the oligarchical conception of the political signific

DEMOCRACY 4a(i)~4a(2); OLIGARCHY 4-53.

The economic causes and effects of war, see WAR AND PEACE 5C.

Other discussions of the conflict between economic classes, or the class w

7c(3); OPPOSITION 53; REVOLUTION 53; STATE 5d(2); WAR AND PEACE 2c.

The general discussion of the order of goods, and for the relation of weal

other types of good, see GOOD AND EVIL 5-5d; HAPPINESS 2b(i); TEMPERANCE

VIRTUE AND VICE 6c.

Other discussions of the distinction between necessities and luxuries, see

SITY AND CONTINGENCY 56.

The consideration of the problems of economic justice, see JUSTICE 8-8d.

The discussion of the virtue of charity and the things which flow from cha

5b(2); VIRTUE AND VICE 8g.

Another statement of the economic theory of history, see HISTORY 43(2) and

ination of economic progress, see PROGRESS 3a-3c.

ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boo{s of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divi

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collec

For the date, and other facts concerning the publication of the wo

place,

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

F. BACON. "Of Riche

*

LOCKE. Some Conside AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK in, CH 131- Lowering the
Inte Money

.

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Malo, Q 13, A 4 FIELDING. Amelia

. Summa Theologica, PART II-H, Q 66, AA 1-2; HUME. Of the Balanc

PART II-H, Q 78 .

Of Commerc DGE 8a; SCIENCE or another disd the socialist ts, see LABOR STICE
8c(i)-8c(2). OLIGARCHY 4, 3; SLAVERY 43. 6. . Y 2c. ance of wealth, see ar, see
LABOR jcth to happiness and to 2, 5b; rity, see LOVE 50- NATURE 5b; NECESfor the
exam- ; but relevant to the ded into two groups: . tion. rks cited, consult The
Great Ideas. s," "Of Usury,'* in Essays rations of the Consequences of rest, and
Raising the Value of e of Trade e THE GREA HUME. Of Interest

.

Of Money

.

Of Refinement in the Arts

.

Of Taxes A. SMI rn. lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and

Arms J. S. MILL. Principles of Political Economy

. Socialism DOSTOEVSKY. A Raw Youth MARX. The Poverty of Philosophy, CH i, 2
(3-4)

. A Contribution to the Critique of Political

Economy

.

Critique of the Gotha Programme ENGELS, Herr Eugen Dtihring's Revolution in
Science,

PART II-IH

The Orig in of the Family, Private Property and

.

the State

II.

LANGLAND. Piers Plowman BIEL. Treatise on the Power and Utility of Moneys T.
MORE. Utopia, BK i

LUTHER. On Trading and Usury CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK
in,

CH 10 T. WILSON. A Discourse upon Usury MUN. A Discourse of Trade MOLIERE. Uwarc
(The Miser) MANDEVILLE. The Fable of the Bees FRANKLIN. Poor Richard's Almanack

VOLTAIRE. "Commerce," "Money," "Property,"

in A Philosophical Dictionary LESSING. Minna von Barnhelm TURGOT. Reflections on
the Formation and Distribution of the Riches

CRABBE. The Village BLNHIAM. Defence of Usury MALTHUS. An Essay on Population

SOUTHLY. Essays, Moral and Political, iv RICARDO. The Principles of Political
Economy and

Taxation

}. MILL. Elements of Political Economy BALZAC. Eugenie Grandet Old Goriot

.

The Rise and Fall of Cesar Birotteau

.

COURNOT. Researches into the Mathematical Princithe Theory of Wealth ples of

GOGOL. Dead Souls

PROUDHON. What Is Property? The Philosophy of Misery .

BASTIAT. Economic Sophisms

Harmonies of Political Economy .

THOREAU. Walden

DICKENS. Oliver Twist

. Great Expectations LESLIE. The Love of Money

WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK iv, CH 3-4; BK vi, CH 3 . Six Lectures on
Political Economy

T IDEAS LASSALLE. What Is Capital? MENGER. Grundsatze der Volfywirtschaftskhre
RUSKIN. Munera Pulveris JEVONS. The Theory of Political Economy

Money and the Mechanism of Exchange

. BAGEHOT. The Postulates of English Political Economy

L. H. MORGAN. Ancient Society GEORGE. Progress and Poverty T. H. GREEN. The
Principles of Political Obligation, (M)

HOWELLS. The Rise of Silas Lapham S.BUTLER. Note-Booty FRAZER. The Golden Bough,
PART v A. MARSHALL. Principles of Economics J. N. KEYNES. The Scope and Method
of Political Economy

HAUPTMANN. The Weavers KROPOTKIN. Anarchism BERNSTEIN. Evolutionary Socialism
J.B. CLARK. The Distribution of Wealth * ism, CH 2, 5

WEBER. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of CapitalSINCLAIR. The Jungle

PEGUY. Basic Verities (Destitution and Poverty; Socialism and the Modern World)
DEWEY and TUFTS. Ethics, PART in, CH 22-25

W. C. MITCHELL. Business Cycles T. VEBLEN. The Theory of the Leisure Class The
Place of Science in Modem Civilization, . pp 56-456 . The Instinct of
Workmanship, and the State of

the Industrial Arts, en 5

HAMSUN. Growth of the Soil

DEWEY. Reconstruction in Philosophy, CH 8 UNDSET. Krist in Lavransdatter TAWNEY.
The Acquisitive Society Religion and the Rise of Capitalism . SHAW. Widowers'
Houses . Major Barbara

. The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and

Capitalism

BEVERIDGE. Unemployment BERLE and MEANS. The Modern Corporation and Private
Property

E. CHAMBERLIN. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition MARITAIN. Freedom in the
Modern World, APPENDIX i

FANFANI. Catholicism, Protestantism and Capitalism BELLOC. The Restoration of
Property A. R. BURNS. The Decline of Competition J. M. KEYNES. A Treatise on
Money The General Theory of Employment, Interest .

and Money GILL. Workand Property STEINBECK. The Grapes of Wrath VON NEUMANN and
MORGENSTERN. Theory of

Games and Economic Behavior

REFERENCES
============================================================

1. The elements of wealth: the distinction between natural and artificial wealth; the distinction between the instruments of production and consumable goods

7 PLATO: Republic, UK n, 316c-318d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 8-10 449d-452d / Rhetoric, BK i, en 5 [i36i a i4-24J 601c-d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Thcologica, PART 1-11, Q 2, A i, ANS and REP 3 615d-616c
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART II, 124b-c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en v 30b-36a passim, esp SECT 40-50 33d-35d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spiiit of Laws, BK xvm, 128c; BKXX, 152a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 348b,d-355a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, INTRO, la-c; BK i, 8d-10b; 104b-105a; 106b-c; BK II, 121c-124c; 147c; BK III, 163a-d; BK iv 182a-300d esp 182b-183a, 186b-187c, 189b-190c, 191d-192a, 194a, 288c-296a
50 MARX: Capital, 13a-c; 88b-d; 150b-c; 253b- 255a; 279c-286a esp 279d-280c, 282c-d, 286a; 291a-b

2. The acquisition and management of wealth in the domestic and tribal community

7 PLATO: Republic, BK v, 360c-365d / Laws, BK III, 664a-666a; BK vi, 709a-710a; BK xi, 775d-778b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, en 3-13 446d-455a,c passim, esp CH 3 [i253 b i2-i4J 447a, CH 4 447b-c, en 7 [i255 b 3i-4o] 449c, en 8-n 449d- 453d; BK II, en 5 [i264 b i-7] 459d; BK III, en 4 [i277 b 2o-25] 474d
14 PLUTARCH: Solon, 72b-c / Pericles, 130b-d / Pelopidas, 233a-b / Marcus Cato, 278b-279c; 286b-287d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b / Crassits, 439a-c / Crassus-Ntcias, 455b,d / Agis, 650d-651b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 32b d
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK xix, CH 14 520a-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 105, A 4, ANS and REP 1-4 318b 321a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 122b-124c; 183c-191c passim; 458c-462c; 472a-473a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART i, 148b-149a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH vi, SECT 72-73 40d-41a; CH vn, SECT 79 80 42c-43a; CH xvi, SECT 182-183 67c-68b; SECT 190-192 69b-d
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 376b-379a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK VII, 50a-b; BK xviu, 129d-132b; BK xxm, 190a-b; BK xxvi, 216a-b; BK xxvn 225a-230d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 350a-b / Political Economy, 367a-368c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, INTRO, Ib-c; BK i, 50a-c; BK III, 165b-167a; BK v, 309d-311c passim; 383d-384d
3 to 3d CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1053
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 16c-17d; 66d-67b; 88d-90d passim; 498a-501b passim, esp 498b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 83a; 86d-89d 43MiLL:L
#<?rty,319b-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 147c-148b [fn 3]; 274b- 278a; 280c-281a; 282a-b; 289c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 170- 172 60d-61a; par 178-180 62a<63c; ADDITIONS, 109 134c; 114 135b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 194b-195a; PART in, 289a-b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-c
50 MARX: Capital, 34c-d; 163a-c; 171d-172b; 174d-175c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 211a-213a; BK vii 275a-302d passim, esp 275a-278a, 291a- 292b, 301b-302d; BK xv, 633a-d; EPILOGUE i, 650d-652a; 654a-655c

3. The production of wealth in the political community 3*. Factors in productivity: natural resources, raw materials, labor, tools and machines, capital investments

0 OLD TESTAMENT '.Proverbs, 6:6-1 1 ; 12:24; 13:4,11; 14:23; 20:4; 24:30-34; 28:19
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 51b-d; BK vi, 194a
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a; BK iv, 342d-343a / Critias, 482b-c; 483b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 4 447b-c; CH n [i258 b 27-33] 453a
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [1350-
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART 11, 124b-d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 32-44 32a-34c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xv, lllb-c; BK xx, 152a-d; BK xxrn, 191a c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 352a-353c / Social Contract, BK II, 404a-c; BK III, 415b-417a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, INTRO, la-c; BK i, 3a-8b esp 5b-6a; 8d-10b; 27b-28a; 33c-37b; 106b-c; BK 11, 142d-151c esp 142d-146a, 148c- 149a; 155b-157b esp 156b-c; 158a-159a; BK III, 163a-165b esp 163a-d; 173b-c; BK iv, 243b,d-244a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 367d-368a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 196 67a; par 198 67b; par 203 68a-c; ADDITIONS, 125-126 137a-b; 128 137b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 194b-195d
50 MARX: Capital, 16b-18d; 31b; 79c; 85a-89b; 96a-99d; 149c-150c; 157a-161b; 170c-171a; 180d-192c esp 183b-184a, 188c-189a; 197a- 198a; 216d-219b; 239c-d; 249a-250c; 251a- 252a; 253b-254b; 285a; 298d; 299b-300a; 303a
50 MARX-ENCELS: Communist Manifesto, 425a-b 3*. The use of land: kinds of land or real estate; the general theory of rent
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 70b-c; BK III, 101d-102a
35 LOCKE: CM Government, CH v, SECT 32-44 32a-34c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxm, 191a-b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 15a-16a; 20b-23b esp 21c; 62a-77a; BK II, 121c-122c; BK III 163a-181a,c; BK iv, 243b,d-244c; 246d- 247c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 90c-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 172c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 80, 34a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 37a; 63a-d; 65c-66a

3c. Agricultural production: the produce of land

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 43d-44b; BK II, 51d; 66d-67a; 67c-d; BK III, 112c; BK iv, 124b; 128a-b; 154c-d; 158d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 8 [1256*1 5~ b 8] 450a-b
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK v [1361- 1378] 78d-79a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 40-48 33d-35c passim
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK XIH, 96d- 97b; BK xiv, 105a; 105b-c; BK xvin, 125a- 126a; BK xxm, 191a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 352b-d; 365c-366a / Social Contract, BK m, 415b-417a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 6d-8b; 62a- HOd passim; BK II, 157a-b; 162a-d; BK HI, 163a-170c esp 163a-c; 175b-181a,c passim; BK iv, 288c-299d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 21c-22c; 367d- 368a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 12, 56b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 203 68a~c; ADDITIONS, 128 137b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 195a-b; PART iv, 352a
50 MARX: Capital, 210d-211a; 249a-250c; 298c; 318b-c; 333c-353a,c passim, esp 335b 336a, 343a-c; 368c-371c 3</. Industrial production: domestic, guild, and factory systems of manufacturing
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xiv, 105c; BK xxm, 191a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365c-366a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 3a-10b; BK III, 163a-165b esp 163a-c; 173a-175b; BK iv, 189b-d; 288c-299d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 3l4c~3\Sb
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 204 68c-d; par 243 77b-c / Philosophy of History, PART i, 243d-244c; PART iv, 335a- 336c
50 MARX: Capital, lllc-146c passim; 149c-d; 157a-250c esp 157a, 158a-c, 164a-165c, 175c- 176a, 184b-188c, 205a-209a, 226a-236c; 369c- 371c
50 MARX-NGELS : Communist Manifesto, 422d- 423a 1054

4. The exchange of wealth or the circulation of commodities: the processes of commerce or trade

    [sem referências]

4a. The forms of value: the distinction between use-value and exchange-value

9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 9 [1257*6-41] 451a-b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 37 33a-b; SECT 46-51 35a-36a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 12c-d; 13c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 63 28b-c; par 80, 34a; PART in, par 204 68c-d
50 MARX: Capital, 13b-27c esp 13b-14c; 37a-39c; 60c; 74c-76c; 89c-d; 98a-100c; 113d

4b. Types of exchange: barter economies and money economies

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK iv, 158b-c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK 11, 316c-319a / Sophist, 555a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 9 450d-452b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SLCT 46-51 35a-36a
38 MONTESSQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv,16d-17b; BK xvm, 128a-c; BK xxn, 174a-b; 176a-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, lOb 13a esp lOb-lla; 13d-14a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 89b-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 383b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 80, 34a
50 MARX: Capital, 37c-42b; 47a-52c; 74c-75a

4c. Rent, profit, wages, interest as the elements of price: the distinction between the real and the nominal price and between the natural and the market price of commodities

38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxn, 176a- 177a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 13a-27b; 62a- 63a,c; 73a-74d; BK II, 121c-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 425a
50 MARX: Capital, 27a-c; 42b-47a esp 44a-b, 45c-46c; 48b-49b; 74d-77b; 79b [fn i]; 153d- 156c; 265c; 270d-271a; 308b; 310a

4d. The source of value: the labor theory of value

35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 40-44 33d-34c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 353a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 13a-16a; 20b- 23b; 27b-37b; 52b-62a passim
42 KANT: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 274d / Science of Right, 424b-425a
50 MARX: Capital, 13a-22a esp 15a-16a, 19a-b, 20d-21a; 24c-25d; 32d-33b; 35d-36a [fn i]; 45c-46c; 78c-d; 79a-84a,c; 89d-102b esp 89d- 90a, 91c-d, 93b-94a; 152a-156d passim; 188c- 192c; 217c-d; 264a-267d esp 266c-d

4e. Causes of the fluctuation of market price: supply and demand

23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART i, 73b-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxn, 176a- 177a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 19d-20b; 23c- 27b; 36c-37b; 62d-63a; 74d-110d esp 74d- 77a; BK iv, 217a-220b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 656c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 593a-b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 11, 53c-55d passim; NUMBER 35, 112a-c passim
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 172c-d
50 MARX: C0/?/taA44c-d;54a-d;101c-102b;153d- 156c; 173c-174b; 198c-199b; 216a-c; 217c; 256b-262a passim, esp 258b-c, 258d-259b; 265c; 276b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xi, 490a-b; BK xni, 573a-b 4/. The consequences of monopoly and competition
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 26b-c; 63d- 64a; 67b-68d; HOd; BK II, 142d; BK iv, 263d- 264b; 272c-279b; 281d-282a; 287d-288c; BK v, 329d-330c; 394c-395a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 659d-660a
50 MARX: Capital, 130c; 154b-156d; 174a-c; 237c-d; 248c-d; 261d~262a; 270c-271c; 292d- 293a; 308d-311b; 373b-374a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 421c- 422a

4g. Commerce between states: tariffs and bounties; free trade

5 ARISTOPHANES: Acharnians 455a-469a,c esp [719-999] 463c-466d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK iv, 158b-c
6 THUCYDIDLS: Peloponnesian War, BK r, 350d- 351a; 365b; 384b
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-318a / Laws, BK XH, 788d-789a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 9 [1257^1-41] 451a-b; BK III, CH 9 [i28o tt 36- b 3J 478a; BK VII, CH 6 531b-d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 4 [i36o a i2- 18] 600b-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 119d-120c; 124c-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xni, 98b- 99b; BK xix, 143c-144b; BK xx-xxi 146a- 173d; BK xxn, 177b-184b
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK II, 404a-b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III, 173b-175b; BK iv, 182b-279b esp 245d-246b, 248b-252c, 256a-266d; BK v, 320b-330b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 21c-23b; 151d; 655d-658b esp 657d-658b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 222b-d; 314c-315b; 342c-343a; 355c-d; 427c-d
42 KANT: Judgement, 504a-b
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: iv [24-36] 5b-c; vi [100-106] 6b; ix [173-185] 7a; [275- 285] 8a 5/05,? CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1055
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 (201-203] 13b; SECT 9 [276-282] 13d; SECT 10 h4-3!3] 14a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 4, 35c-36a; NUMBER 5, 38b-c; NUMBER 7, 42d-43c; NUMBER 11-12 53b-58d; NUMBER 22, 80d-81c; NUMBER 35, 112a-113a; NUMBER 41, 135b-c; NUMBER 42, 137d-138c; NUMBER 44, 145b-c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 171a-b; 281b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 246- 247 78a-b; par 339 HOb / Philosophy oj 'History ', PART i, 243d-244c; PART II, 277b-c; PART IV, 368C
50 MARX: Capital, 67a-69a; 113d-114a; 218d- 219a; 221d-223a; 372c-375c passim 50 M ARX-ENGELS : Communist Manifesto , 420a-b ; 421a-c; 428a-b

5. Money

    [sem referências]

5a. The nature of money as a medium or instrument of exchange, and as a measure of equivalents in exchange

7 PLATO: Laws, BK xi, 774a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK iv, CH i [in 9^6-27] 366b; BK v, CH 5 [ii33 a 5~ b2 9l 380d-381c; BK ix, CH i 416b,d-417c passim / Politics, BK i, CH 9 450d-452b; CH 10 [i258 a 38- b 8] 452d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 126b-c
30 BACON: New Atlantis, 201d-202a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics^ PART iv, APPENDIX, xxvmxxix 450a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 37 33a-b; SECT 46-50 35a-d; CH xvi, SECT 184 68b-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xvm, 128c; BK XXH, 174a-175a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, lOb-lla; BK II, 121c-126d; 139a-b; BK iv, 182b-192c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 89b-d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 423d-425b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 12, 56b-d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 462c-463a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 80, 34a; PART HI, par 204 68c-d; par 299 99c- lOOb; ADDITIONS, 40 122d-123b; 177 147d
50 MARX: Capital, 19a-30d esp 19c, 23a-25d, 30a-d; 37c-79a esp 38c-39a, 39d-44b, 49b- 51c, 60c, 61c-62b, 71d-73d, 77c-78a

5b. Monetary standards: the coining or minting of money; good and bad money

9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 9 [i2ypy~4i] 451b; [i257 b 22-23] 451d / Athenian Constitution, CH 10 556d-557a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / Lysander, 361a-d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 126b-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK XXH, 174b- 175c; 177b-182c
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 382d-383a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 10b-12c; 16d- 20b; BK II, 124d-142d; 147a-c; BK iv, 182b- 192c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 89b-d; 127a-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 749d [n 49]
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: ix [275-279] 8a; [350-367] 8c-d
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [207-212] 13b; SECT 10 [296-300] 14a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 42, 138d; NUMBER 44, 144b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 277b-c
50 MARX: Capital, 43b-44a; 44d-45c; 52c-57c; 58a-60c; 66d-67b [fn 3]
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK XIH, 574b; EPILOGUE ii, 680a-b

5c. The price of money: the exchange rate of money as measured in terms of other commodities

38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxn, 175c- 182c
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 383b-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 12b<c; 14d- 20b; 77a-109b; BK iv, 203c-204c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 424a-425b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 79, 233d-234a
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 462c-463a
50 MARX: Capital, 40c-47a esp 41a 42a, 44b-d; 54a-d; 57d-58b [fn 3]; 59b-60c; 276b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xin, 574b; EPILOGUE n, 680a-b

5d. The institution and function of banks: monetary loans, credit, the financing of capitalistic enterprise

6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 77d-78a
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK ix, CH i [n64 b i3-22] 417c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 90a-c; BK xi, 103c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xx, 149a-b; BK xxi, 173a; BK xxn, 179c-180c; 182c; 183a-b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK II, 124d-142d; 151c-155b; BK iv, 204b-209a,c; BK v, 404d- 405a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 30, 103a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 62d-66c; 309a-310d; 374a- 375c

5e. The rate of interest on money: the condemnation of usury

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 22:25 / Leviticus, 25:35-37 / Deuteronomy, 23:19-20; 24:10-13 / Nehemiah, 5:1-12 (D) II Esdras, 5:1-12 / Psalms, 15:5 (D) Psalms, 14:5 / Proverbs, 28:8 /Jeremiah, 15:10 (D) Jeremias, 15:10 / Ezefc tel, 18:4-21 esp 18:8, 18:13, 18:17; 22:12 (D) Ezechiel, 18:4-21 esp 18:8, 18:13, I 8:I 7I 22:12
7 PLATO: Republic, BK VIH, 408c-d / Laws, BK v, 694c-d; BK xi, 775c-d 1056
6 to 7 a (5. Money. 5e. The rate of interest on money: the condemnation of usury.)
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 10 [i258 ft 38- b 8] 452d
14 PLUTARCH: Marcus Cato, 287c-d / Lucullus, 409b-d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 90a-c; BK xi, 103c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 105, A 2, REP 4 309d-316a; A 3, REP 3 316a-318b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xi [91-115] 16a-b; xvn [34-75] 24b-c
26 SHAKESPEARE: Merchant of Venice, ACT i, sc HI 409c-411b esp [41-103] 410a-c
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 55a-57a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 29c; BK xii, 92d-93c; BK xxi, 169a-170b; BK xxn, 175d-176a; 183a-187a,c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 22b-d; 37b- 41d; BK II, 154c-155a; BK v, 404d-405a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 498c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 90d-91a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 304b-c; 409a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 353b-c
50 MARX: Capital, 77c-78c; 252b; 293a-d [fn i]; 371c-372c

6. Capital

    [sem referências]

6a. Comparison of capitalist production with other systems of production: the social utility of capital

38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xin, 96d- 97a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, INTRO, Id; BK II, 148c-149a; 155b-162d; BK III, 165b 181a,c passim; BK iv, 239d-240a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 17b-c; 144b; 619b- 620c; 628c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 199 67c / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 335a-336c
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 33b-37a; 95a-b [fn i]; 104d- 105a; 113c-115c; 150b; 160d-164a esp 160d- 161b, 163a-c; 171d-176a; 239d-240c; 266c; 267c; 281a-b; 295d-296a; 354c-364a passim; 377c-383d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 419d- 423a;428d-429c

6b. Theories of the nature, origin, and growth of capital stock: thrift, savings, excesses beyond the needs of consumption, expropriation

35 LOCKE: Gunl Government, CH v 30b-36a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK II, 117a-c; 142d- 151c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 170 60d; par 199-208 67c-69c
50 MARX: Capital, 69b; 74a-79a; 89d-94c esp 93d-94a; lOla-b; 105b [fn ij; 221c-d; 279a- 377a esp 279a-282a, 286a-288a, 289b, 290c- 296a, 301b-302d, 319b-d, 354a-355d, 372a-d

6c. Types of capital: fixed and circulating, or constant and variable capital

39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK II, 118a-121c; 122b-124c; 151c-162d passim
50 MARX: Capital, 96a-102b esp lOla-c; 280d- 282a; 291c-d; 302d-303b; 307 c -309 b; 311c- 312c

6d. Capital profits

#6d(\) The distinction of profit from rent, interest, and wages
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 20b-23b esp 22d-23b; 28a; 47c-48a; 109d-110d
50 MARX: Capital, 255a-256a; 301b-302d
#6d(2) The source of profit: marginal or surplus value; unearned increment and the exploitation of labor
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 20b-21c; 27b- 28a; 109d-110d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART HI, par 24:, 77b-c
50 MARX: Capital, 69a-275c esp 71a-79a, 89c- 96a, 99d-100b [fn 2], lOOa-lOlb, 104b-105c, 112c, 113c-115c, 117c-129b, 154d-156d, 192d- 194b, 197a-200a, 251c-256a, 263c-d, 271b-c; 285c-286a; 314d-315c; 375c-376c
#6W(3) Factors determining the variable rate of capital profit
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 6d-8b; 21a-b; 37b-62a; HOb-d; BK II, 151c-15Sb esp 153a-b, 154b-c; 155b-162d passim
50 MARX: Capital, 102b-113c; 146c-151a,c; 255b- 263d; 296b-301b
#6d(4) The justification of profit: the reward of enterprise and indemnification for risk of losses
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 42a-b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 55a-57a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 20d-21c; BK II, 142d-151c passim; 155b-162d passim, esp 162a-b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 279b-280a

6e. The recurrence of crises in the capitalist economy: depressions, unemployment, the diminishing rate of profit

50 MARX: Capital, lid; 64c-d esp 64d [fn 2-3]; lOOa; 116c-d; 222d-225d; 311c-316d esp 312b, 313d 314a, 315c-316a; 319a; 330d-333c
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 422a-c

7. Property

    [sem referências]

7a. The right of property: the protection of property as the function of government

20 AQUINAS: Summa Theohgica, PART i-n, Q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d
35 LOCKE: Toleration, 16a-c / CM Government^ Ib to Id CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1057 CH v 30b-36a esp SECT 26 30d; CH vn, SECT 87-94 44a-46c; CH ix 53c-54d esp SECT 123 53c-d; CH xi, SECT 137-140 56d-58a; en xv, SECT 173-174 65c-d
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy ', 310a-311a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xii, 86c-d; BK xxvi, 221c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 348b; 353a-358c passim / Political Economy, 377c-d / Social Contract, BK i, 393b-394d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 309a-311c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 486c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and h'all, 86d-87c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 408c-409c; 411c-413b esp 412c-413b; 414a-c; 416a-b; 441d-443b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: AMENDMENTS, v [645-648] 17c; xiv, SECT i [748-750] 18d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 10, 50b-d; NUMBER 54, 171b-c
43 MILL: Representative Government, 366c-d;422b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 124b-c; 204b-c; 222d- 223a; 225a-c; 275d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 40 21d-22c; par 44-46 23c-24a; par 50 25a; par 66 29a-c; par 71 31b-c; PART in, par 208 69c; par 230 75c; ADDITIONS, 26-27 121a-b; 30 121c / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 364d
50 MARX: Capital, 83d-84a,c; 174b-c; 288c-d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 425c- 427b
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xui, 572d-573b
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d- 788b

7b. Kinds of economic property

#7b(1)  Chattel slaves as property
5 ARISTOPHANES: Plntus [507-526] 635a-b
7 PLATO: Laws, BK vi, 709a-710a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 2 [i252 a 26- b i3] 445c-d; CH 3-4 446d-447c; CH 8 [1256*1-3] 449d; BK VII, en 8 [1328*35-38] 532c; CH 10 [1330*25-34] 534d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 5 [1361*12-14] 601c
14 PLUTARCH: Marcus Cato, 278d-279a; 287b-d / Crassus, 439a-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 105, A 4, ANS and REP 1-4 318b-321a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, HOb-llla; PART iv, 261d-262a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xv, 109a-d;
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III, 167a-d; BK iv, 239c-240a; 253c-254a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 16c-17d; 144b; 620a-b; 628c-d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 404d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 42, 137b-c; NUMBER 54, 170b-171b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 364a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 48 24b-c; par 66 29a-c
50 MARX: Capital, 113c-114a; 128d-129a; 266b-c; 267c; 283c-d; 354c-355d
#7b(2) Property in land
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Leviticus, 25:23-24 / Deuteronomy, 19:14; 27:17
7 PLATO: Laws, BK v, 695c-696a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, en 9 [i27o*i5~ b 6] 466b-c; BK vi, CH 4 [1319*6-19] 522c-d; BK VII, CH 10 [I329 b 37-i330 a 25l 534b-d/ Rhetoric, BK i, CH 5 [1361*12-14] 601c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK xui, 140b-c
23 HOUSES -.Leviathan, PART II, 124d-125b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 31-34 31d-32c
38 MONTESQUIFU: Spirit of Laws, BK vi, 33b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 353a / Social Contract, BK i, 393d-394d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III, 163a-170c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Pall, 198a-b; 618d-619c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 87a-c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 411c-412c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 274c-278a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 195a-b; PART i, 226d-227b; PART 11, 277b-c; PART in, 295d-297a
50 MARX: Capital, 355d-364a; 368c-369a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 211a-213a 7^(3) Property in capital goods and in monetary wealth
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 9-10 450d- 452d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 5 [1361*12-14] 601c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK vi, 33b
50 MARX: Capital, 60d-62d esp 61d-62a; 69b; 150a-151a,c; 279a-290d esp 279a, 287a-b, 289d-290c; 371c-372b

7c. The uses of property: for production, consumption, or exchange

9 ARISTOILL: Politics, BK i, CH 4 [1254*1-7] 447c; CH 8- n 449d-453d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 5 [1361*12-24] 601c-d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v 30b-36a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK II, 118a-121c; 142d-151c esp 150b-151c; 155b-162d; BK III, 165c-166a; 176a-177d; BK v, 351a-c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 411c-413b esp 412c- 413b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 59-61 27a-c; ADDITIONS, 39 122d
50 MARX: Capital, 30c-32c; 38c-40a; 70d-72c; 89a-b; 282b-283c; 289d-290d; 291a-296a esp 291a-b, 293c-294a Id. The ownership of property: possession or title; the legal regulation of property
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 20:15; 2I :I 6-I9>33~36; 22:1-15; 23:4-5 / Leviticus, 6:2-5; 19:11,13; 24:18-21; 25:13-14,25-34,47-54 / Deuteronomy, 5:19; 19:14; 22:1-4; 24:7; 27:17 / Ruth, 4 : i-S/Jeremiah,$2 16-12 (D) Jeremias, 32 -.6-12 1058
#7d(\) to 7e (7. Property. *!d. The ownership of property: possession or title; the legal regulation of property.)
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 19:187 Mart(, 10:19 / Luke, 18:20 / Romans, 13:9
7 PLATO: Laws, BK VIII, 738d-740d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 5 458a-460a; CH 7 461d-463c; BK vi, CH 4 [1319*6-19] 522c-d IS TACITUS : Annals, BK xiu, 140b-c
20 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d 23HoBBEs: Leviathan, PART i, 86b; 91a-b; PART II, 124d-125c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xvi, SECT 176 66a-b; SECT 180-184 67b-68d; SECT 192-194 69c-70a
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 210b-213a; 310a-
31 la
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xn, 86c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 348b; 353a-356a / Political Economy, 377b-d / Social Contract, BK i, 393b-394d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III, 165b-175b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 86d-87c; 89d-90c; 404d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 404a; 407a-408b; 409d-410d; 412c-415c; 422b,d-425b; 426b- 428a; 431a-432a; 441d-443b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S. : AMENDMENTS, v [645 648] 17c; xiv, SECT i [748-750] 18d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 7, 41d-42d; NUMBER 43, 139d-140a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 45 23c-d; par 50 25a; par 55 25d-26a; par 64-65 28c-29a; par 69 30a-31a; par 80, 33d-34a; PART in, par 218 72c-d; par 230 75c; ADDI- TIONS, 26 121a-b; 30 121c; 34 122a-b / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 195a-b; PART i, 226d- 227b; PART in, 288c-289a; 310c
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic{, 292a~297a
50 MARX: Capital, 37c-d; 287b-290a esp 288b-d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 425d- 427b; 428d-429a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK XIH, 572d-573b
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d- 788b
#1d(1)   Private ownership: partnerships, jointstock companies
7 PLATO: Republic, BK III, 341c-d; BK v, 364c- 365d / Laws, BK v, 695a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 5 458a-460a; CH 7 461d-463c; BK VII, CH 10 [i329 b 37- I33o a 33l 534b-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, ISOa
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxvi, 221c- 222a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 348b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 319d-331d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 441d-443b
43 MILL: Liberty, 319d-320a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 46 23d-24a
50 MARX: Capital, 89a-b
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 425d- 426a; 426c-d
#7d(2) Government ownership: eminent domain
7 PLATO: Laws, BK v, 691b-696d
9 ARISTOTLE: Athenian Constitution, CH 47, par 2574c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 125c-d; 150a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxvi, 221c-222b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 378c-379d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK v, 357b,d-361d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 441d-443b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: AMENDMENTS, v [645-648] 17c; xiv, SECT i [748-750] 18d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 296b- 297a; PART iv, 355c-d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 428d- 429a

7e. The inheritance of property: laws regulating inheritance

0 OLD TESTAMENT: Numbers, 27:8-11; 36 (D) Numbers, 27.7-11; 36 / Deuteronomy, 21:15- 17 / Ruth, 4:1-8 / Jeremiah, 32:6-12 (D) Jeremias, 32:6-12
5 ARISTOPHANLS: Birds [1641-1670] 562 b-c
7 PLATO: Laws, BK xi, 775d-779b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIII, CH 10 [n6o b 33~ 1161*2] 413a-b / Politics, BK II, en 9 [1270 i5- b 6]466b-c
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xvn, 24b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 189c-190d
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART i, 148b-149a
30 BACON: New Atlantis, 209d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xvi, SECT 182- 184 67c-68d; SECT 190-194 69b-70a passim
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 19d-20d; 21c; 27d-28a; BK xvm, 129d-132a; BK xxvi, 216b-c; 217b; BK xxvn 225a-230d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 357b / Political Economy, 367b-d; 377d-378a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK III, 165b-173b; 179b-180c; BK iv, 246d-247c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 66d-67b; 619c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 83a; 87d-89d
42 KANT: Science of Right, 426b-428a esp 427c- 428a; 441d-443b esp 442c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 203c-d; 204c-205c; 274b- 278a esp 277d [fn i]; 280c-281a; 282a-b; 289c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 178- 180 62a-63c / Philosophy of History, PART II, 277b; PART in, 289a*b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-c CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1059
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 26a-30a; 38d- 41a; 45b-47b; BK VIII, 306a; 309d-310d; EPILOGUE I, 650d-652a

8. The distribution of wealth: the problem of poverty

7 PLATO: Laws, BK v, 691d-696d; BK VIII, 738d- 741d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 9 [i27o a i5~ b 6] 466b-c / Athenian Constitution, CH 12 557b- 558a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 31a-b
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 124d<126a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v 30b-36a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 154b-155b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 375b-d / Social Contract, BK II, 405b-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 20b-63a,c; BK II, 121c-d; 142d-151c esp 150b-151c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 22c; 89d; 486c-d; 501c
43 MILL: Liberty, 309a-c / Representative Government, 366c-367a / Utilitarianism, 472d-473a
44 Bosw ELL: Johnson, 124d-125c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 49 24c-25a; PART in, par 244-245 77c-d; ADDI- TIONS, 29 121c; 149 140d-141a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 193b-c; PART i, 226d-227b; PART II, 263b-d; 277b-c
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-c
50 MARX: Capital, 34d-35c: 218d-219d; 261d- 262a; 301b-302d; 319d-321b; 354b-c
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 425d- 426d; 428d-429a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 165b-166a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d- 788b [fn 3] Sa. The sharing of wealth: goods and lands held in common; public ownership of the means of production
0 NEW TESTAMENT: ^^,2:44-47; 4:32-5:11
5 ARISTOPHANES: Ecclesiazusae 615a-628d esp [395-476] 619b-620a, [553-729] 621b-623c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK III, 341c-d; BK v, 364c- 365d / Critias, 480a; 481a-b
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK VIII, CH 9 411d-412c / Politics, BK II, CH i [i26o b 36-i26i a 7) 455b,d; CH 5 458a-460a; CH 7 461d-463c; CH 10 [1272*12-20] 468b-c; BK III, CH 10 [1281*13-23] 478d-479a; BK v, CH 8 [1309*15-17] Sllb; BK VII, CH 10 [i329 b 37-i33o*33] 534b-d / Athenian Constitution, CH u, par 2 557a-b; CH 12, par 3 557c-d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / Numa Pompilius, 58a-d / Agis 648b,d-656d / Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus, 674c-681a,c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK xin, 140b-c / Histories, BK iv, 286c-287a
19 AQUINAS : Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 98, A i, REP 3 516d-517c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 94d
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT iv, sc n [68-82] 58c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, APPENDIX, xvn 448d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 24-29 30b-31c; SECT 34 32b-c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK iv, 16a-17b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 197b-c
44 BoswELL:/0te0tt, 222d-223a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 46 23d-24a; par 64-65 28c-29a; PART in, par 170-171 60d-61a; ADDITIONS, 27 121b / Philosophy of History, PART i, 226d-227b; 240d-241a
50 MARX: Capital, 34d-35a; 163a-d; 174d-175c; 377c-378d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 425d- 426a Sb. The division of common goods into private property: factors influencing the increase and decrease of private property
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Numbers, 26:52-56; 33:50-54
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 70b-c; BK III, 101d-102a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, CH 5 [i263 b 5-8] 458c; BK vi, CH 5 [i32o a 29- b 7] 523d-524a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 31a-b
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 98, A i, REP 3 516d-517c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d
23 HOBBES: leviathan, PART 11, 124d-125b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v 30b-36a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 19d-21d; BK xvni, 127c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 348b,d; 352a / Social Contract, BK i, 393d-394d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 20b-21c; 27b- 28a; BK iv, 239c-d; BK v, 309a-c; 311b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 87a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 414c-415c; 422b,d- 425b; 426b-428a; 431a-432a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 46 23d- 24a; par 64-65 28c-29a; PART in, par 178 62a-b; par 237 76c; ADDITIONS, 27 121b
50 MARX: Capital, 288b-d; 358a-361d; 368c- 369a; 377c-378d; 383d

8c. The causes of poverty: competition, incompetence, indigence, expropriation, unemployment; the poverty of the proletariat as dispossessed of the instruments of production

14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / LycurgusNuma, 62b-c / Lucullus, 409b-d
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK i, 194d-195a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 154b-155b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xx, 147a; xxin t 190a-b; 191b-c; 199b-200a,c 1060 Sd to 9a (8. The distribution of wealth: the problem of poverty. 8c. The causes of poverty: competition incompetence, indigence, expropriation, unemployment; the poverty of the proletariat as dispossessed of the instruments of production.)
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365c-366a / Political Economy, 375b-d / Social Contract, BK III, 415b-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 27b-37b esp 28a-d, 30b-31b; BK iv, 239c-240a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 501c-d
44 BoswEi,L:/oteow, 428b
46 HKC;F,L: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 195 66d-67a; par 240-241 76d-77a; par 243-244 77b-c; ADDIIIONS, 148-149 140c-141a
50 MARX: Capital, 150b c; 160d-162d; 209c- 225d esp 211a-d; 280c-286a csp 282b-c, 283bd, 285c-286a; 288b-d; 303b-305a; 307a-c; 315c 321b esp 319c-d; 325d-327b; 349a-350a; 354a-355d; 357a-358a; 360a-361c; 364a-c; 370a-371c; 375a-b
50 MARX-KNGM.S: Communist Manifesto, 424d- 425a; 426c-d Sd. Laws concerning poverty: the poor laws, the dole
0 OLD TES FAMEN r: Exodus, 23 :i i / Leviticus, 19:9- 10 ; 2$ -22; 25:25,35 54 / Deuteronomy, 15:7- n; 24:17 22; 26:12-1^
5 ARIS ropnANhs : Ecclesiazusae [408-426] 619b-c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK iv, 342a-344a / Laws, BK v, 695a-c; BK xi, 783b
9 ARIS ro ILL: Politics, BK vi, en 5 [i32o a 29- b i5] 523d-524b
14 PLUTARCH: Solon, 68d-70c / PoplicolaSolon, 87a / Pcrides, 127a-128a / Lucullus, 409b-d / Caesar, 581c-d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 32b-d
23 Ilomiks: leviathan, PART II, 142b-c; 157a
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, APPENDIX, xvu 448d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxm, 199b-200a,c
38 ROUSSLAU: Political Economy, 375b-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 59a-61b; BK iv, 200c 201a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Ml, 175c-d; 501d-502b
42 KANT: torn? o/%/z/,443b-444a
43 MILL: Liberty, 322a-d esp 322c-d / Representative Government, 383d-384a
44 BoswtLL-./oA/tto/z, 442d-443a
46 HKGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 245 77c-d
50 MARX: Capital, 21 Id [fn 3]; 358a-b esp 358b-d [fn 5]; 364a-366a

9. Political economy: the nature of the science of economics

9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 1-2 339a-d passim, csp CH i [1094*7-9] 339a / Politics, BK i, en 8 [i256 b 27-}9] 450c-d; CH 10 [1258*19-38] 452b-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy 367a-385a,c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, INTRO, ld-2a,c; BK iv, 182a
44 Bow ELL: Johnson, 281b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 189 65d-66a; ADDITIONS, 120 136b-c
50 MARX: Capital, 6a-d; 8a-lld passim; 33a-37c esp 36a-b [fn i]; 178d-179c; 305a-c [fn 2]

9a. Wealth as an element in the political common good

5 EURIPIDES: Phoenician Maidens [528-558] 382c-d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Plutus 629a 642d esp [415- 618] 633d-636d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK ix, 314a,c 6TnucYDiDts: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 352a-b; BK 11, 396d; 397b-c; BK VIIi, 569d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK IIi-iv, 341c-344a; BK v, 364c-365d; BK VIIi, 405c-408a / Critias, 485b-c / Laws, BK HI, 665b; BK v, 687d-688a; 694a-695c; BK VIIi, 733b-d
9 ARISTOTLL: Politics, BK i, CH 10 [1258*19-38] 452b-c; RK 11, en 7 [1267^8-^6] 462d-463a; CH 9 [i269 b i3 -i27o b 6J 46Sd-466c; [127^1-17] 467d; BK III, CH 12 [128^*12-20] 481a-b; BK VII, CH 2 [1324*8-10] 528a; CH 4 [ip5 l) 33~ ip6 a 4] 530a; CH 5-6 530d-531d; en 8 532c- 533a / R/ietonc, BK i, CH 4 [1359*^19-29] 599d- 600a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b; 47d / Lycurgus-Numa, 62b-c / Coriolanus, 180b-d / AristtdeS'Marcus Cato, 291b-292b / Lysandcr, 361a-d / Agis, 649b-c
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK 11, 31a-b; BK III, 57b- 58d; BKxni,140b-c///w/or/>.f, BKii,232d-233a
23 MACIIIAVELLI: Prince, CH xxr, 32d-33a
23 HOBBES: leviathan, INTRO, 47a-b; PART 11, 124b-127a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 19a 21d; 23a-25c; BK VII, 44a-48a; BK xin, 96c; BK xx, 146b-147d; BK xxi, 153c-d; 154b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 325d; 327c-328a; 352a-355a passim; 365c-366b / Political Economy, 375b-d; 377b-385a,c passim / Social Contract, BK III, 415b-417a; 421c-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 27b-31b; 33c- 35c
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 89c-d; 456d- 457a,c; 498a-501d; 642a-b; 655d-656a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 443b-d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 21, 79b-80a 44BoswELL: Johnson, 124d-125c; 172b-173a; 210d 211b; 281b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 143 139d-140a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 193b-c; PART II, 263b-d
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 324a-d
50 MARX: Capital, 292d; 320b-321b; 374a-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK xin, 572d-573b 9b to 9<?(1) CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1061

9b. Factors determining the prosperity or opulence of states: fluctuations in national prosperity

6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 352c-d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-317a / Laws, BK iv, 677a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK VII, CH 6 531b-d
23 HOB BBS: Leviathan, PART II, 154b-c
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 253a-b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK VII, 44a- 47c; BK XIH, 96b-d; BK xvm, 125d; 127a-b; 132a-b; BK xx, 152a-d; BK xxi, 154b-c; BK XXH, 174c-d; 183b-c; BK xxm, 191a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 352a-353a; 360b-361a; 365c-366a / Political Economy, 375b-d; 383b-c / Social Contract, BK II, 404a-c; BK HI, 415b-417a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i-iv 3a-300d esp BK i, 3a-10b, BK II, 142d-151c, 155b-162d, BK iv, 182b-192c, 279b-300d
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 21c-22c; 236c- 237a; 239b-d; 456d-457a; 501b-d; 642a-c; 655d-658d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 221b-222d; 314c- 315d esp 315b-d; 355c-d; 427c-d; 558c-d; 597c-598a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 2, 31c-d; NUMBER 5, 38a; NUMBER 11-12, 53b-56d passim; NUMBER 21, 79c-d
43 MILL: Representative Government, 335a-b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 171a-b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 243- 247 77b-78b / Philosophy of History, PART i, 243d-244c; PART II, 263b~d; PART in, 299a-c
50 MARX: Capital, 31a-37c passim; Ilia; 178c- 179a; 218c-219a; 253b-254b; 377c-378a
50 MARX-ENGELS : Communist Manifesto t 421b-c

9c. Diverse economic programs for securing the wealth of nations: the physiocratic, the mercantilist, and the laissez-faire systems

38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 365c-366a / Political Economy, 377b-385a,c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 104b-105a; BK iv 182a-300d esp 182b-192c, 279b-300d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 41c; 66b-c; 642b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 87b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER n, 55c-d
43 MILL: Liberty, 312c-313a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 280d-281a
50 MARX: Capital, 251c-252a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 426b-c

9d. Governmental regulation of production, trade, or other aspects of economic life

7 PLATO: Republic, BK iv, 342d-343a; BK VIII, 408b-d / Laws, BK VIII, 742a-d; BK xi, 771b- 775d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a~37b / LycurgusNuma, 61b,d-62c / Pericles, 127a-128a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 90a-c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 119d-120b; 125d- 126a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xx, 148c-d; 149c-150a; 152a-d; BK xxn, 176a-177a; 183a
38 ROUSSEAU: Social Contract, BK II, 405b-c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 51a-62a; BK II, 161a; BK III, 170b-c; BK iv 182a 300d; BK v, 315a-331d passim
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 66b-c; 198a; 249d- 250b; 392c-393a; 486c-d; 656c-658b esp 657d
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 87b-91a
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: iv [24-36] 5b-c; ix [173-185] 7a; [275-285] 8a
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 8 [201-203] 13b; SECT 9 [276-282] 13d; SECT 10 [304-313] 14a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 22, 80d 81c; NUMBER 42, 137b-138c; NUMBER 44, 145b-c; NUMBER 45, 149d-150a
43 MILL: Liberty, 312c-313a; 319d-320a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 235- 236 76a-c; par 240-242 76d-77b; par 248 78b-c; ADDITIONS, 145 140b; 148 140c-d; 150 141ab
50 MARX: Capital, 79d-80b [fn 4]; 108c-llla passim; 115c-122c; 127c-146c esp 146a-c; 174a-c; 193a-194b; 200a; 209a-d [fn 1-3]; 233c-235a; 236c-248d esp 236c-237d, 248c-d; 277d- 278a,c; 357a-358a; 366c-368b; 374a-375c
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 426c

9e. The economic support Of government and the services of government The charges of government: the cost of maintaining its services; elements in the national budget

5 ARISTOPHANES : Knights [773-835] 479b-480b / Wasps [653-724] 5l5c-516d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH n [1259*33-36] 453d; BK II, CH 9 [i27i b io-i7] 467d; BK vi, CH 5 [i32o a i7- b i6] 523d-524b; BK VII, CH 8 [i328 b n-i2] 532d / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 4 [i 359 b 23-33] 600a
14 PLUTARCH: Cato the Younger, 625b-626d
15 TACITUS: Histories, BK iv, 268c-d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH xi, SECT 140 58a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK XIH, 96a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 377b-380d / Social Contract, BK III, 415b-417a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 182b-192c passim; BK v, 301a-357c; 401d-403b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 41b-c; 65a-b; 155d- 156a; 249d-250a; 368a-b
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 177a-b; 315b-317a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 441d-444c; 451d- 452a
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: vin 6d-7a; xn 9b 1062 9e (2) to 9f (9e. The economic support of government and the services of government. 90(1) The charges of government: the cost of maintaining its services; elements in the national budget.)
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 6 [132-135] 12c; [143-148] 12c-d; SECT 8 [226- 229] 13b-c; [235-253] 13c passim; SECT 9 [283- 288] 13d-14a; ARTICLE n, SECT i [394-400] 15a; ARTICLE in, SECT i [463-468] 15c; AR- TICLE VI [578-582] 16d; AMENDMENTS, XIV, SECT 4 19a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 13 59a-60a; NUMBER 30-31 101a-107b csp NUMBER 30, lOla-b; NUMBER 34 109b-llld; NUMBER 43, 142d- 143a; NUMBER 73, 218d-219b; NUMBER 79, 233c-234a; NUMBER 84, 254c-256a
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 281d-282a
46 HP.GEL: Philosophy of History, PART iv, 365c-d
#9e(2) Methods of defraying the expenses of government: taxation and other forms of levy or impost; confiscations, seizures, and other abuses of taxation
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Genesis, 41:33-36
0 APOCRYPHA: / Maccabees, 10:25-31 (D) OT, 7 Machabces, 10:25-31
5 ARISTOPHANES: Wasps [653-724] 51Sc-516d / Birds [27-48] 542c-d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 43c; BK III, 109d- lllb; 114b-c 6TnucvDiDEs: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 373b-c; BK III, 420d-421b
7 PLATO: Laws, BK xn, 791d
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH n [1259*23-36 453c-d; BK vi, CH 5 [1320*20-22] 523d / Athenian Constitution, en 47-48 574b-575b
14 PLUTARCH: Aristides, 274c-d / Marcus Cato, 285c-d / Lucuttus, 409b-d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK iv, 82d-83a; BK xin, 139a c / Histories, BK i, 194d-195a; BK II, 236d-237a
23 MACIIIAVELLI: Prince, CH xvi, 22d-23b
23 HoBBfcs: Leviathan, PART i, 78c-d; PART II, 104b-d; 152a-b; 156c-157a
27 SHAKRSPLARE: Cymbeline, ACT m, sc i 463c- 464c / Henry VIII, ACT i, sc n [18-101] 552d- 553d
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, en xi, SECT 140 58a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART i, llb-12a; 29b-31a; PART II, 75a-b; PART in, 113b-114a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 23c-24b; BK xin 96a*102a,c; BK xix, 143b-c; BK xx, 149d-150a; BK xxn, 183b-184b
38 ROUSSEAU: Political Economy, 377b-385a,c / Social Contract, BK III, 415b-417a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 192c-288c esp 192c-233d, 279b-288c; BK v, 311c-313a; 315a-319d; 356d-421d csp 361b,d-401d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 41b-c; 64d-68a; 86a; 162c; 251d-255c; 368a-b; 41 3a; 577d- 578c; 658c-660c csp 659c-660c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 177a-b; 417b-c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 441d-444c
43 DECLARATION OF INDEPENDENCE: [63-70] 2b
43 ARTICLES OF CONFEDERATION: iv [24-36] 5b-c; vi [100-106] 6b; vm 6d-7a; ix [286-290] 8a; [299-318] 8b; [350-367] 8c-d passim
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 2 [17-40] llb-d; SECT 7 [152-155] 12d; SECT 8 [192-200] 13a; SECT 9 13d-14a passim; SECT 10 [296-313] 14a; AMENDMENTS, v 17b-c; xvi 19b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 7, 43c-44a; NUMBER 12, 56d-58d; NUMBER 21, 79b-80c; NUMBER 30-36 101a-117d; NUMBER 41, 135b-c; NUMBER 44, 145b-c; NUMBER 45, 149b-150b; NUMBER 83, 246b-c; NUMBER 84, 253b [fn i]
43 MILL: Liberty, 315c-d / Representative Government, 335a-b; 356c-d; 366d-367a; 383b-d / Utilitarianism, 473a-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART m, par 299 99c-100b; ADDITIONS, 177 147d / Philosophy of History, PART i, 226d-227b; 243b; PART HI, 299a-c; 310c; PART iv, 324b; 325b-c; 335a- 336c; 364d
50 MARX: Capital, 65c-66a; 375a-b
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 429a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK ix, 384c-388a,c 9/. Wealth or property in relation to different forms of government
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350d- 351a; 352c-d; BK VIII, 575d-576b; 579c-590c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a; BK VIII 401d-416a / Laws, BK v, 695a-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK v, CH 3 [1131*24-29] 378d; BK VIII, CH 10 [1160^11-16] 412d; [ii6o b 3$-ii6i a 2] 413a-b / Politics, BK II, CH ii [i273 R 3- b 7] 469c-470a; BK III, CH 7 476c- 477a csp [i279 b 4-io] 476d-477a; CH 8-10 477a-479a passim; CH n [1282*24-41] 480a-b; CH 13 [1283*2^-1284*2] 481b-482a; CH 15 [i286 b 8-22] 484d-485a; BK iv, CH 3 [1289^8- I290 B I3] 488d-489a; CH 4 [1290*30^20] 489b-d; [129 ^7-13] 490d; CH 6 [1293*12-34] 492d-493a; CH 9 [1294^*19-30] 494c-d; BK v, CH i 502a-503b; CH 8 [i3o8 b io-i309*3o] 510d-511c; CH 12 [i3i6 b i5-22] 519c-d; BK vi, CH 3-6 521c-524c / Athenian Constitution, CH 2-5 553a-555a; CH 11-12 557a-558a / Rhetoric, BK i, CH 8 [1366*3-6] 608b
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b; 47a-48a / Solon, 68d-71c / PoplicolaSolon, 87a / Pericles, 125b-130d / Coriolanus, 180b-d / Ly- sander, 361a-d / Lucullus, 400d-401a / Agis, 649c-650d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART I-H, Q 95, A 4, ANS 229b-230c; Q 105, A 2, ANS and REP 1-6 309d-316a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART II, 124d-125c; 150a; 154b-c
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH VH, SECT 85 43c-d; SECT 90-94 44d-46c passim; CH xi, SECT 138 57b-c; CH xv, SECT 173-174 65c-d
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK i, 3c-d; BK III, lOa; BK iv, 16d-17b; 17d-18a; BK v, 19a- 9g to 9h CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1063 21d; 23a-25c; 27d-28a; 29b-30a; 32b c; BK vii, 44d-46c; 50a-b; BK xm 96a-102a,c; BK xvni, 125a~c; 126b-d; BK xx, 147a-d; 149a-c; BK xxn, 174c-d
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 359a-d / Social Contract, BK III, 411a-b; 412b-c; 415b-417a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 243b,d- 255a,c; BK v, 356b,d; 401d-403a
40 GIB BON: Decline and Fall, 90d-91a; 144b; 413a; 619b-c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 73b; 403c-d; 404c-d; 427c-428a
42 KANT: Science of Right, 413d; 441d-443b esp 441d-442c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 85, 256b-c
43 MILL: Liberty, 309a-c / Representative Government, 369b-370a; 384a-386c passim, esp 385a-b; 393c-394d
44 Bos WELL: Johnson, 182c-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, INTRO, 193b-c; PART i, 226d-227b; PART iv, 335a-336c; 364d
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dicl(, 295a-297a

9g. Wealth and poverty in relation to crime and to war between states

5 ARISTOPHANES: Peace [601-648] 532d-533c; [1191-1264] 540a-d / Lysistrata [486-492] 589a
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 4b-c; 5a-b; 16b-c; 21b; BK II, 73b 74d; 79a-c; 87a-b; BK III, 115c-116a; BK iv, 146a-b; BK v, 160d-161a; 169a~c; BK vi, 194a; 211a-b; BK VII, 214d- 216b; BK VIII, 280b-d; BK ix, 288b; 297b-d; 305d-306a; 314a,c 6THUCYDiDEs: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 349b-d; 350d; 352a-b; 369b-370a; 378c-d; 384d-386b; BK II, 390c-391c; 402d-404a; BK III, 419d-420b; 420d-421b; BK iv, 461d-462a; BK v, 482d-483a; BK VII, 545b-546c
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 318c-319a; BK iv, 342d-344a; BK VIII, 406c-407a / Laws, BK xi, 771b-772b / Seventh Letter, 814b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK II, en 6 [i265 b io-i2] 461a; CH 7 [1267*2-8] 462c-d; en 9 [1270*15- b 3] 466b-c; [i27i b io-i7] 467d; BK v, en 7 [I3o6 b 32- 1307*3] 508d-509a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-c; 47d / Sulla, 374d-375b / Cleomenes, 667a-c / Marcus Brutus, 817d-818a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 89c / Histories, BK i, 195d; 201a-b; BK II, 223b-c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vi [58-75] 9a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 76d; PART II, 140c-d; 142b-c; 157a
26 SHAKESPEARE: Henry V, ACT v, sc n [23-76] 563c-564a
30 BACON: New Atlantis, 204d-205a
35 LOCKE: Cjvil Government, CH xvi, SECT 180- 184 67b-68d
36 STERNE: Tristram Shandy, 225a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 271c-273a,c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xn, 86c-d; BK xm, lOOd-lOla; BK xvni, 125d; BK xx, 152a-b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 353c-354b; 365d-366b / Social Contract, BK i, 389d-390a; BK II, 404c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK iv, 187c-190b; BK v, 301a-309a,c; 403a-b; 408a-411b
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 35a; 175c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 87b; 343b; 593a-c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 4, 35b-d; NUMBER 5, 38b-c; NUMBER 6, 40a-41a; NUMBER 7 41d- 44c; NUMBER 8, 45b-46a; NUMBER 28, 98b; NUMBER 30, 102d-103a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 124 137a; 148-149 140c-141a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [11,151-287] 271b- 274b
49 DARWIN: Descent of Man, 325d-326a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK x, 424b-c; 440d- 441a; BK xi, 475b-476c; 490a-b; 500d-502a; BK xm, 572d-573b; BK xv, 634a-635a

9k. The struggle of economic classes for political power

5 EURIPIDES: Suppliants [229-245] 260b-c
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK vi, 202c-203b; BK VII, 243b-c 6TnucYDiDEs: Peloponnesian War, BK III, 423a-b; 427d-428a; 428c-d; 434c-438c passim; BK iv, 459a-c; 463a-465c; BK v, 482d- 483a; 502d-504b; BK vi, 520b-c; BK VIII 564a- 593a,c passim
7 PLATO: Republic, BK iv, 342d-344a; BK VIII, 405c-406b esp 406b
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK III, CH 10 [1281*11 29] 478d-479a; CH 15 [1286^-22] 484d-485a; BK iv, CH 3 [1289^*28 -1290*13] 488d-489a; en 4 [i29i b 7~i3] 490d; CH 6 [129^12-^4] 492d- 493a; BK v, CH i 502a-503b passim; CH ^ [1303^-8] 505a; [i3o3 b i5-i8] 505a-b; CH 4 [i304*40- b 6] 506a; CH 5-6 506b-508c; CH 7 [i3o6 b 32-i307*3] 508d-509a; CH 9 [1310*22- 25] 51 2c; BK vi, CH 3 521c-522a / Athenian Constitution, CH 2-5 553a-555a; CH 11-12 557a-558a
14 PLUTARCH: Solon, 68d-71c; 75c-76d / Camillus, 117c-121a,c / Coriolanus, 176b-184c / Agis 648b,d-656d / Cleomenes, 657a-663c / Tiberius Gracchus 671b,d-681a,c / Caius Gracchus 681b,d-689a,c / Caius and Tiberius Gracchus-Agis and Cleomenes 689b,d-691a,c / Cicero, 708a-713b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 97b
26 SHAKESPEARE: 2nd Henry VI, ACT iv 56a-64d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Coriolanus 351a-392a,c esp ACT i, sc i [1-167] 351a-353a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xi, 77b-80a
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 352a-356a passim, esp 355a-356a
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 109d-110d; BK v, 309a-311c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 144a-d
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 10, 50b-51b
43 MILL: Representative Government, 345c-346a; 366c-367b; 369b-370a; 393c-394d; 398a-d
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 251a; 255d 1064
10 to 10* (9. Political economy: the nature of the science of economics. 9h. The struggle of economic classes for political power.)
46 HEGEL; Philosophy of Right, ADDITIONS, 149 140d-141a / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 193b-c; PART ii, 263b-d; 275b-276a; PART in, 295d-297a
50 MARX: Capital, 6d-7d esp 7b-d; 8a-9c; 63b-c; 113c; 134c-146c esp 145a
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto 415a- 434d esp 415b-c, 416c-d, 420b-c, 423b-425c, 429b-c, 434c-d
52 DOSTORVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 165b-166a
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 882b 884d

10. The moral aspects of wealth and poverty lOa. The nature of wealth as a good: its place in the order of goods and its relation to happiness

0 OLD TESTAMENT: / Kings, 3 :6-i4 (D) III Kings, 3:6-14 / // Chronicles, 1:7-12 (D) // Paralipomenon, 1:7-12 / Job, 21:7-13; 31:24-28; 36:18-19 / Psalms, 49; 52:7 (D) Psalms, 48; 51:9 / Proverbs, 1:19; 8:10-11; 10:2; 11:4,28; 13:7; 14:20; 15:16-17; 16:8; 17:1; 19:4,6-7; 22:1; 23:4-5; 27:24; 28:6,11,20,22 / Ecclesiastes, 2:3-11; 4:6-8; 5:9-6:2 esp 5:13-15, 5 :I 9~ 20, 6:2; 7:12; 10:19 (D) Ecclesiastes, 2:3-11; 4:6-8; 5:8-6:2 esp 5:12-14, 5:18-19, 6:2; 7:13; 10:19 / Jeremiah, 9:23-24 (D) Jeremias, 9:23-24 / Ezetyel, 7:19 (Z>) Ezechiel, 7:19 / Zephaniah, 1:18 (D) Sophonias, 1:18
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 4:21 (D) OT, Tobias, 4:23 / Wisdom of Solomon, 5:8-12; 7:7-11 (D) OT, Book of Wisdom, 5:8-12; 7:7-11 / EC- clesiasticus, 7:18-19; 8:2; 10:30-31; 11:18-27; 12:8; 13 esp 13:1-7, 13:19-24; 20:30; 29:22-23; 30:14-16; 31:1-11; 40:25-26 (D) OT, EC- clesiasticus, 7:20-21; 8:2-3; Io: 33~34> "n8- 29; 12:8; 13 esp 13:1-8, 13:23-30; 20:32; 29:28-29; 30:14-16; 31:1-11; 40:25-27 / Baruch, 3:16-19 (D) OT, Baruch, 3:16-19
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 6:19-34; 13:18-23; 19:16-30 / Mar\, 4:1-20 esp 4:19; 10:17-31 / Luty, 6:20-26; 8:5-15 esp 8:14; 12:13-34; 16:19-25; 18:18-30 / / Timothy, 6:6-12,17-19 /James, 5:1-6
5 AESCHYLUS: Persians [161-169] *7a
5 EURIPIDES: Electra [361-400] 330 b-d; [420- 431] 331a; [938-944] 335c / Hecuba [1206- 1232] 363b / Phoenician Maidens [383-442] 381a-d; [528-567] 382c-d / Cyclops [316-346] 443b
5 ARISTOPHANES: Birds [592-605] 550a-b / Plutus [76-197] 630a-631b; [415-618] 633d- 636d
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK i, 6c-8a; BK III, 121b-c; BK v, 169d-170a; BK VIII, 264c
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350d- 351a
7 PLATO: Euthydemus, 74b-c / Meno, 177d-178d / Apology, 206b-c / Gorgias, 254d-255b / Republic, BK i, 296c-297b; BK HI, 325b-c; BK III-iv, 341c-343b / Critias, 479d; 485b-c / Laws, BK ix, 751c
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK HI, CH i [116*1-7] 162a; [n6 b 22-ii7 a 4] 163b-c; CH 3 [n8 b i-9J 165b-c / Sophistical Refutations, CH 25 [i8o b 7- 11] 248d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 1-2 339a-d passim; CH 3 [io94 b i7-i9] 339d; CH 4 [1095*14- 29] 340b-c; CH 5 [1096*5-10] 341a-b; CH 7 [io97*i5- b 8] 342c-d passim, esp [1097*25-28] 342c; CH 8 [i 099*3 i- b 8] 344d-345a; BK iv, CH 3 [ii2 4 ft i3- b 6] 371a-b; CH 7 [ii27 b 9-22] 374d- 375a; BK v, CH 2 [ii3o"i3- b i7] 377c-378a; BK x, CH 3 [ii73 b 25-27] 428a / Politics, BK i, CH 9-10 450d-452d; BK III, CH 12 [1283*12-20] 481 a- b; BK VH, CH i [i323*22]-cn 2 [1324*10] 527a-528a; CH 8 532c-533a / Rhetoric, BK i, en i Ji355 b i-8] 594d; CH 5 [i36o b i4-3o] 601a-b; [1361*12-24] 601c-d; CH 6 [i362 b io28] 603b-c esp [i362 b i8-i9] 603c; BK II, CH 16 638b-c
12 LUCRETIUS: Nature of Things, BK II [1-54] 15a-d; BK v [1113-1135] 75c-d; BK vi [1-34] 80a~c
12 EPICTETUS: Discourses, BK II, CH 19 162c- 164b; BK iv, CH 6 230b-232c
12 AURELIUS: Meditations, BK VIII, SECT 33 288a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / Pericles, 130b-c / Pelopidas, 233a-b / Marcus Cato, 285c-d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b / Lysander, 361a d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK vi, 91c; BK xiv, 154a-c / Histories, BK 11, 232d-233a
18 AUGUSTINE: City of God, BK i, CH 8-10 133a- 136c
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 26, A 4, ANS and REP 2 151c-152a,c; PART I-H, Q i, A 7, ANS 614c-615a; Q 2, A i 615d~616c; A 5, REP i 618d-619c; Q 4, A 7 635b-636a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [1-96] 9c- lOc; PURGATORY, xv [40-81] 75d-76a; XVH [127-139] 79d; xix [7o]-xxn [114] 82b-87c
22 CHAUCER: Prologue of Man of Law's Talc [4519-4546] 235b-236a / Tale of Wife of Bath [6691-6788] 274b-276a / Tale ofMelibeus, par 49-53, 422a-425b; par 77, 430b-431a
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH XVH, 24b-c; CH xix, 26a-b; CH xxv, 35c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 74d-75a; 90c; PART II, 155b-c
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, HOa-c; 122a-124d; 126b- 131a passim
26 SHAKESPEARE: Romeo and Juliet, ACT v, sc i [66-86] 31Sb / King John, ACT 11, sc i [561- 598] 385c-386a / As You L% //, ACT n, sc v [40-59] 606d
27 SHAKESPEARE: Othello, ACT i, sc in [339-380] 212c-d; ACT HI, sc in [154-161] 223d / Timon of Athens 3Q3a-420d esp ACT iv, sc n 410a-c, sc in [24-47] 410d-411a, [382-462] 415a-d / to CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1065 Pericles, ACT i, sc iv 425c-426d / Cymbeline, ACT n, sc in [70-95] 460a-b; ACT HI, sc vi [1-36] 470d-471b / Sonnets, CXLVI 608c
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 222c; 338b-c
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 86b-c; 92a-b
35 LOCKE: Human Understanding, BK II, CH xxi, SECT 55-56 192c-193b
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 17c-d; 32a-d; 103c- 104a; 263c-d; 283a c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 19a-d; BK xin, 96c; BK xx, 146b-d; 150b-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 360b 361a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 22c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 297c-298a
42 KANT: Fund. Prin. Metaphysic of Morals, 256a-b / Practical Reason, 330d-331a / Pref. Metaphysical Elements of Ethics, 370b-d
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 462c-463b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 102d-103a; 124d-125c; 140b-141a; 189d-190b; 210d-211b; 300a-c; 349a-c; 403a; 491b; 492b-c; 493c; 498d-499a
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART i [2796-2804] 68a-b; PART II [5987-6171] 146b-151a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 30a-31a; 50b; BK III, llla-113a; BK v, 194d; BK vi, 250a- 251d; BK VIII, 311a-313a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK iv, 105c-107a; BK v, HOc-lllc; 130d-132b; BK vi, 158b-159a; 164b-166a; BK VIII 191b,d- 235d; BK xi, 308a-b
53 JAMES: Psychology, 188b-189b; 202b-203a; 725b-726a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 777a- 779a IQb. Natural limits to the acquisition of wealth by individuals: the distinction between necessities and luxuries
5 EURIPIDES: Helen [903-908] 306d-307a / Electra [420-431] 331a / Phoenician Maidens [528-567] 382c-d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK II, 316c-319a; BK VIII, 409d-410c / Timaeus, 442c-d / Critias, 479d
8 ARISTOTLE: Topics, BK III, CH 2 [118*6-16] 164d-165a
9 ARISTOTLE: Politics, BK i, CH 8 [i256 b 27-39] 450c-d; CH 9 [1257^7-1258*14] 451d-452b; BK VH, CH 5 [i326 b 26-38] 530d-531a 12RpicTETUs: Discourses, BK iv, CH 4 225a- 228a; CH 9 237d-238d
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / Marcus Cato, 285c-d / Aristides-Marcus Cato, 291b-292b
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK 11, 31a-b; BK III, 57b- 58d
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 2, A i, ANS and REP 3 615d-616c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART II-H, Q 32, AA 5-6 544a-546b
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xi [91-115] 16a-b; xvn [34-75] 24b-c
22 CHAUCER: Tale ofMclibeus, par 49-51 422a- 424a
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, HOa-c; 131b-132a; 216d- 218a; 489b-490c
27 SHAKESPEARE: King Lear, ACT n, sc iv [263- 274] 261c; ACT in, sc iv [27-36] 264c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, APPENDIX, xxvmxxix 450a
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 91a-94a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 30-39 31c-33c
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK VII, 44a-d; BK xin, 96a; BK xix, 145b
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 327c-328a; 337b; 350a c; 352a-353c; 365c 366b / Social Contract, BK i, 393c-394b
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 27b-37b passim; 63a-b; 70a-71d; 74d-75b; BK III, 163c- 164c; BK v, 383c-d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 22c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 451d-452a
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 30, 102a-b
43 MILL: Utilitarianism, 462c-463a; 470d-471b
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 124d-125c; 313a-b; 389d- 390a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 190- 191 66a-b; par 195 66d-67a; par 203 68a-c; ADDITIONS, 120 136b-c / Philosophy of History, INTRO, 193b-c; PART II, 267a-b
50 MARX: Capital, 16c-17a; 71d-72c; 81a-d; 88c; 112a-c; 147d-148b; 218d-219a; 251a-255a csp 253a-b, 254c; 261c-d; 282d-283c; 292c-296a esp 293c-294a
54 FRL.UD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d- 788a We. Temperance and intemperance with respect to wealth: liberality, magnificence, miserliness, avarice
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 18:20 21; 20:17 / Deuteronomy, 5:21; 17:16-17 / // Samuel, 12:1-6 (D) II Kings, 12:1-6 / / Kings, 21 (D) HI Kings, 21 / II Kings, ^^-^-(D) IV Kings, 5:20-27 / Job, 31:16-23 / Psalms, 62:10; 112:5; 119:36 (/)) Psalms, 61:11; 111:5; 118:36 / Proverbs, 1:10-19; 15:27; 23:4- 5; 28:22; 30:8-9 / Ecclesiastes, 5:10-6:12 (D) Ecclesiastes, 5:9-6:11 / Isaiah, 33:15-17; 57:17 (D) Isaias, 33:15-17; 57:17 / Jeremiah, 22:13-19 (D) Jeremias, 22:13-19 / Ezetycl, 22:12-13,25-29 (D) Ezechiel, 22:12-13,25-29 / Amos, 2:6-7; 5:11-12 / Micah, 3:9-11; 7:2-3 (D) Micheas, 3:9-11; 7:2-3 / Haba^ul^, 2:4-5,9 (D) Habacuc, 2:4-5,9
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 1:1-8; 4:7-11; 5:18-19 (D) OT, Tobias, 1:1-8; 4:7-12; 5:24-25 / Wisdom of Solomon, 15:12 (D) OT, Boo^of Wisdom, 15:12 / Ecclesiasticus, 10:9; 11:11,18-19; 12:1- 6; 14:3-10; 18:32-33; 20:30; 29:1-2,7-13,20- 28; 31:1-11,23-24 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 10:9-10; 11:10,18-20; 12:1-4; 14:3-10; 18:32- 33; 20:32; 29:1-2,10-17,26-34; 31:1-11,28-29 / Baruch, y.ib-ig-(D) OT, P&uch, 3:16-19 / // Maccabees, $~4-(D) OT, // Machabees, 3-4 1066 10f to 104 (10. The moral aspects of wealth and poverty.

10f. Temperance and intemperance with respect to wealth: liberality, magnificence, miserliness, avarice.)

0 NEW TESTAMENT: Lu%e, 6:34-35; 12:13-21 / Acts, 20:33-34 / / Corinthians, 5:10-11; 6:10 / Ephesians, 5:3/7 Timothy, 6:6-12 / Hebrews, 13:5 /James, 5:1-6
5 EURIPIDES: Hecuba [1206-1232] 363b
5 ARISTOPHANES: Wasps [653-724] 515c-516d / Plutus [144-197] 630d-631b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK III, 105b-c; BK vi, 208d-209c; 211a-b; BK VII, 221c-222a; BK ix, 305d-306a
6 THUCYDIDES: Peloponnesian War, BK vi, 512c- 513d
7 PLATO: Republic, BK VIII, 405c-408a / Critias, 485b-c / Laws, BK VIII, 733b-734a; BK ix, 751c-d
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK i, CH 3 [i094 b i7-i9J 339d; BK II, CH 7 [iio7 b 9~2i] 353a-b; BK iv, CH 1-2 366b,d-370b; CH 3 [1124*1 ] - b 6] 371a-b; BK v, CH 2 [1130*24-28] 377d; BK VII, CH 4 [ii47 b 24-i 148*4] 398a-b / Politics, BK u, CH 5 [i26j ft 22- b 26] 458b-d; CH 6 [i265 tt 28-37] 460c-d; CH 7 [i266 b 24-i267 b 9] 462b-463b; CH 9 [i269 b i3-i270 a i4] 465d-466b; [i27i b io17] 467d; BK v, CH 9 [1310*22-25] 512c; BK vi, CH 7 [i32i a 35~ b 2] 525a; BK VII, CH 5 [i326 b 26- 38 1 530d-531a / Athenian Constitution, en 5, par $ 554d-555a; CH 12, par 2 557c / Rlictoric, BK i, CH 9 [i}66 a 33- b 22] 608d-609a
12 LUCRLTIUS: Nature of Things, BK III [59-78] 30d-31a; BK v [1113-1135] 75c-d
12 HPICTETUS: Discourses, BK iv, CH 9, 237d- 238a
12 AUKIILIUS: Meditations, BK VII, SECT 27 281d; UK vin, SECT 33 288a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / LycurgusNuma, 62b-c / Corwlanus, 178c-179a / Aemilius Paulus, 218a-d; 223c-224a / Pelopidas, 233a-b / Marcus Cato 276b,d-290d esp 287c-d / AristidesMarcus Cato, 291b-292b / Lysander, 361a-d / Lysander-Sulla, 388b-c / Cimon, 394b-395a / Lucullus, 419a-420b / Crassus, 439a-c / Demetrius, 738c / Antony, 755d-758c / Marcus Brutus, 817d-818a
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 31a b; 35c-d; BK III, 57b-58d / Histories, BK i, 194d-195a
18 AUGUSTINE: Confessions, BK vi, par 16 40a-c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 60, A 5, ANS 53a-54d; Q 65, A i, REP 1-2 70b-72a; Q 84, A i 174b-17Sa
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [1-96] 9c- lOc; xi 15a-16b esp [91-115] 16a-b; xvn [34- 75] 24b-c; xix 26d-28b; xxix [121-139] 44b-c; PURGATORY, xix [7o]-xxn [114] 82b-87c
22 CHAUCER: Tale ofMelibeus, par 52-53 424a- 426a / Parson's Tale, par 27 512a-514b
23 MACHIAVELLI: Prince, CH xvi 22d-23c
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 73a; 75a
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 62c-d; BK III, 133b-140b
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, HOa-c; 122a-124d; 436c- 439c; 462b-c
27 SHAKESPEARE: Timon of Athens 393a-420d esp ACT i, sc n [197-211] 399b, ACT n, sc n 400c-403b
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART 11, 221d-222c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, APPENDIX, xxvmxxix 450a
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 91a~94a
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 30-39 31c-33c
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART II, 53a-56a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 68d; 87b-88a; 291d- 292a; 362c-363a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK HI, lOa; BK v, 19a-21d; BK VII,44d-45b; BK xix, 140c- d; BK xx, 146b-c; 152a-b; BK xxv, 211a-c 38RousstAu: Inequality, 360b-361a / Social Contract, BK 11, 405b-c; BK HI, 411a-b; 412b-c; 421c-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK 11, 142d-151c; BK iv, 189d-190a; BK v, 346c-347d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 139b-140c passim; 155d-156a; 339d-340c; 510b-c; 660d-661c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 194c-195a; 295c; 319b; 403a; 447b-c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 240 76d / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 353b-c
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [5646-5665] 139a-b; [5767-5796] 141b-142b
50 MARX: Capital, 60d-62b; 72a-c; 292d-295d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 25a-32a passim; BK v, 197b-c; BK VII, 275a-278c; 291a- 292b; BK vii-vin, 301b-303c; K vin, 329c- 332a; BK x, 414c-416c; BK xi, 490a-493d; 500d-503a; BK xni, 569c; 586c; BK xv, 633a-d; EPILOGUE i, 650d-652a; 664c-665a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 164b-165a
53 JAMES: Psychology, 725b-726a IQd. The principles of justice with respect to wealth and property: fair wages and prices
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 20:15,17 / Leviticus, 19:11,35-36; 25:35-37 / Deuteronomy, 5:19,21 ; 24:10-15; 25:13-16; 27:17 / // Samuel, 12:1-6 -(D) II Kings, 12:1-6 / / Kings, 2i-(D) HI Kings, 21 I II Kings, 5:20-27-(Z)) IV Kings, 5:20-27 / Nehemiah, 5:1-12 (D) II Esdras, 5:1-12 /Job, 24 / Proverbs, 1:10-19; 6:30-31; 11:1; 14:31; 16:11; 20:10; 21:6-7; 22:16,22- 23,28; 23:10-11; 28:8,24; 30:8-9 / Isaiah, 3:14-15; 10:1-2 (D) Isaias, 3:14-15; 10:1-2 /Jeremiah, 17:11 (D) Je remias, 17:11 / Ezel^- i/el, 22:12-13,25-29; 45:9-12 (D) Ezechiel, 22:12-13,25-29; 45:9-12 / Amos, 2:6-7; 5:11- 12; 8:1-7 esp 8:4-6 / Micah, 6:9-12 (D) Micheas, 6:9-12 / Zechariah, 5:3 (D) ZachaCHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1067
0 APOCRYPHA: Ecclesiasticus, 5:8,14; 20:25; 26:29; 27:2; 29:19; 34:18-22 (D) OT, Ecclesiasticus, 5:10,16-17; 20:27; 26:28; 27:2; 29:25; 34:21-27
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 10:10; 19:18 / MarJ(, 10:19 / ^fc 3 : i 2 -i3I i7; 18:20 / Acts, 2:44-47; 4:31-5:11 / Romans, 13:9 / / Corinthians, 6: 10 / Ephesians, 4:28/7 Timothy, 5:18 / II Timothy, 2:6
5 EURIPIDES: Helen [903-908] 306d-307a / Phoenician Maidens [528-567] 382c-d
5 ARISTOPHANES: Plutus 629a-642d csp [76-111] 630a-b
6 HERODOTUS: History, BK II, 73b-74d; 87a-b; BK iv, 158b-c; BK vi, 201d-202c; BK VII, 245 b; BK VIIi, 260d-261a
7 PLATO: Republic, BK i, 297a-c; BK II, 316a- 319b; BK III -iv, 340c-343a; BK v, 364c-365d / Laws, BK VIII, 738c-743a; BK xi, 772d-775d / Seventh Letter, 814b-c
9 ARISTOTLE: Ethics, BK v, CH 2 [ii30 a i3- b i7] 377c-378a; CH 4 [ii32 b ii]-cn 5 [i 133^9] 380b-381c; BK VIIi, CH 9 411d-412c; CH 13-14 414d-416d passim; BK ix, CH i 416b,d-417c / Politics, BK i, CH 3-11 446d-453d passim; BK II, CH 5 458a-460a; CH 7 461d-463c; BK v, CH i [i3oi a 25~ b 2] 502b c / Athenian Constitution, en 12 557b-558a
12 AURLLIUS: Meditations, BK VIII, SECT 33 288a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b / Solon, 68d- 70c / Poplicola-Solon, 87a / Crassus-Nicias, 455b,d
15 TACITUS: Annals, BK II, 31a-b / Histories, BK II, 236d-237a; BK iv, 286c-287a
19 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i, Q 21, A i 124b-125b; Q 98, A i, REP 3 516d-5l7c
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 94, A 5, REP 3 224d-225d; Q 95, A 4, ANS 229b- 230c; Q 105, A 2, ANS and REP 3-6 309d-316a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, xi 15a-16b passim
22 CHAUCER: Tale ofMelibeus, par 49-51 422a- 424a
23 HOBBES: Leviathan, PART i, 93b-c; 94d-95a; PART II, 124d-126a; 140d; 156b-157a
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK III, 133b-134d
25 MONTAIGNE: Essays, 42a-b
27 SHAKESPEARE: King Lear, ACT in, sc iv [26- 36] 264c / Coriolanus, ACT i, sc i [1-167] 351a- 353a
30 BACON : Advancement of Learning, 30c-d; 86b-c
31 SPINOZA: Ethics, PART iv, APPENDIX, xvn 448d
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 91a-94a; 97b-98b
35 LOCKE: Civil Government, CH v, SECT 30-39 31c-33c; SECT 51 35d-36a
36 SWIFT: Gulliver, PART iv, 154b-155b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK v, 19a-d; 23a-b; 29c; BK xn, 86c-d; BK xin, 96a-b; BK xvni f 128b; BK xx, 146b-d; BK xxm, 199b-200a,c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 348b; 353b; 354a- 355b; 360b-361a; 365b-366a / Political Economy, 375b-d; 377b-385a,c / Social Contract, BK III, 415b-417c
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK i, 13a-16a; 20b- 23b; 27b-37b csp 33c; 52b-62a; 106c-107a; BK iv, 225d-228a; BK v, 309a-311c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, lie
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 86d-87c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 424b-425a; 443b-d; 446a-b
43 CONSTITUTION OF THE U.S.: ARTICLE i, SECT 2 [17-29] lib; SECT 9 [273-275] 13d; ARTICLE VI [578-582] 16d; AMENDMENTS, V [645-648] 17c; vn 17d; xiv, SECT i [748-750] 18d; SECT 4 19a; xvi 19b
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 73, 218d-219b; NUM- BER 79, 233c-d
43 MILL: Liberty, 309a-c; 322c-d / Representative Government, 335a-b; 366c-367a / Utilitarianism, 467b; 470a-471b passim; 472d-473c
44 BOSWELL: Johnson, 124d-125c
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART i, par 49 24c-25a; PART in, par 236 76a-c; par 241 76d- 77a; ADDITIONS, 29 121c; 145 140b; 148 140c-d / Philosophy of History, PART iv, 353b-c
48 MELVILLE: Moby Dic%, 292a-297a
50 MARX: Capital, 13a-50a passim; 69a-84a,c; 89d-102b passim; 112c-113c; 150a-151a,c; 161b-162d; 171a-c; 256b-260c; 261d-262a; 264a-27Sc; 280c-286a; 296c-298a; 305c-307c; 324a-327b; 354b-c; 366a-368a; 376c-378d
50 MARX-ENGELS : Communist Manifesto, 423c-d; 425d-427b; 429b-c
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK v, 197b-c; 211a- 213a; BK xin, 572d-573b; BK xv, 633a-d; EPILOGUE i, 650d-652a
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK vi, 165b-166a
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 787d- 788a esp 787d-788b [fn 3] 10*. The precepts of charity with respect to wealth IQe(1)  Almsgiving to the needy and the impoverished
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 23:11 / Leviticus, 19:9- 10 ; 23:22; 25:35-37 / Deuteronomy, 15:7-11; 24:19-22; 26:12-13 / Ruth, 2 /Job, 29:12-17; 31 :i6-23 / Psalms, 41 :i~3 (D) Psalms, 40:2-4 / Proverbs, 14:21,31; 19:17; 21:13; 22:9; 28:27; 29:7 / Ecclesiastes, 11:1-2 / Isaiah, 58:1-12 (D) Isaias, 58:1-12 / Ezefyl, 18:4-21 (D) Ezechiel, 18:4-21
0 APOCRYPHA: Tobit, 1:1-8,16-17; 47~ IX ! 12:8-10; 14:10-11 (D) OT, Tobias, 1:1-8,19-20; 4:7- 12; 12:8-10; 14:10-11 / Ecclesiasticus, 3:30; 4:1-10; 7:10,32-33; 12:1-6; 14:13; 17:22; 29:1-2,7-13,20; 35:2; 40:24 (D) OT, EC- clesiasticus, 3:33; 4:1-11; 7:10,36-37; 12:1-7; 14:13; 17:18; 29:1-2,10-17,26; 35:4; 40:24 1068 10*(2) to 12 (10* The precepts of charity with respect to wealth. 10i(1)  Almsgiving to the needy and the impoverished^}
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew ', 5:42; 6:1-4; 10:8,40- 42; 19:16-22 / Mart(, 10:17-22 / Luty, 3:11; 6:30-38; 11:41; 12:33-34; 14:12-14; 18:18-25 esp 18:22 / Acts, 10:1-4; 11:27-30; 20:35 / / Corinthians, 13:3/77 Corinthians, 8-9 / Galatians, 2:io/7 Timothy, 6:17-19
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART ii-n, Q 32 540a-550a
22 CHAUCER: Parson's Tale, par 91 547a
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART II, 222b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 91a-94a
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xxm, 199c
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 198c-d; 392d-393a
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 233c
42 KANT: Science of Right, 443b-d
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of Right, PART in, par 242 77a-b; par 245 77c-d / Philosophy of History, PART in, 307b-308a; PART iv, 322b-c; 353b-c
#10e(2) The religious vow of poverty: voluntary poverty
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 8:19-20; 10:7-11; 19:16-30 csp 19:21, 19:27-30 / Mar\, 6:7-11; 10:17-31 esp 10:21, 10:28-31 / Lu^e, 9:1-5; 10:1-8; 12:22-30,33; 18:18-30 esp 18:22, 18:28-30
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 64, A i, REP 3 66d-67c; PART II-H, Q 186, A 3 652d-655b; AA 6-8 657d-661a; PART in SUPPL, Q 89, A 2 1006b-1007c
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, PURGATORY, xx [16- 33] 83b-c; PARADISE, xi 122a-123c
24 RABELAIS: Gargantua and Pantagruel, BK i, 61b
29 CERVANTES: Don Quixote, PART 11, 338b
30 BACON: Advancement of Learning, 7d
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 597a
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART in, 307b- 308a; PART iv, 333c; 340d-341a
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 50b
52 DOSTOEVSKY : Brothers Karamazov, BK iv, 85b- 86b; BK vi, 164d-165a
#10e(3) The choice between God and Mammon: the love of money as the root of all evil
0 OLD TESTAMENT: Exodus, 23:8 / Deuteronomy ; 16:19; 17:15-17 /Job, 31:24-28 / Psalms, 52:7 (D) Psalms, 51:9 / Proverbs, 17:23; 28:20; 30:8-9 / Jeremiah, 6:13; 8:10 (I)) Jeremias, 6:13; 8:10 / Ezcfyel, 22:25-29; 33:30-31 (D) Ezechiel, 22:25-29; 33:30-31 / Micah, 3:9-11; 7:2-3 (D) Micheas, 3:9-11; 7:2-3
0 APOCRYPHA: Eccksiasticus, 8:2; 10:9; 11:10,24- 26; 14:1-10; 20:29; 27:1-2; 31:5-11 (D) OT, Eccksiasticus, 8:2-3; 10:9-10; 11:10,26-28; 14:1-10; 20:31; 27:1-2; 31:5-11 .
0 NEW TESTAMENT: Matthew, 6:19-24; 13:8-23; 16:26; 19:16-30 / Mart^, 4:1-20; 8:36; 10:21- 30 / Luty, 8:5-15; 9:25; 12:13-21; 16:1-13; 18:22-30 / 7 Corinthians, 6:10 / Ephesians, 5:5 / I Timothy, 6:6-19 CS P 6:10
5 SOPHOCLES: Antigone [289-301] 133d
7 PLATO: Laws, BK VIII, 733b-d
20 AQUINAS: Summa Theologica, PART i-n, Q 84, A i 174b-175a
21 DANTE: Divine Comedy, HELL, vn [1-96] 9c- lOc; xix 26d-28b; PURGATORY, xix [7o]-xxii [114] 82b-87c; PARADISE, xi 122a<123c
22 CHAUCER: Prologue of Pardoner's Tale [12,263- 268] 372a / Tale ofMelibeus, par 18, 408a; par 76-77, 430b-431a / Parson's Tale, par 62-64 530a-531a
32 MILTON: Paradise Lost, BK i [670-692] 108a-b
33 PASCAL: Provincial Letters, 94a-97a
37 FIELDING: Tom Jones, 178b-d
47 GOETHE: Faust, PART II [5471-6171] 135a-151a esp [5987-6171] 146b-151a; [11,151-287] 271b- 274b
50 MARX: Capital, 61d
51 TOLSTOY: War and Peace, BK i, 50b
52 DOSTOEVSKY: Brothers Karamazov, BK v, 130b-132b; BK vi, 164b-166a

11. Economic determinism: the economic interpretation of history

50 MARX: Capital, 7c; lOb-lld; 25c-d; 35b-36c esp 36c-d [fn 2]; 86d [fn 4]; 181d [fn 3]; 187a-c; 239b-241a; 377c-378d csp 378c-d
50 MARX-ENGELS : Communist Manifesto, 416c-d; 421a; 421c-422c; 427a-b; 428b-d; 429b-c
54 FREUD: New Introductory Lectures, 834c; 882c- 883c

12. Economic progress: advances with respect to both efficiency and justice

6 THUCYDIDES : Peloponnesian War, BK i, 350d- 351a
14 PLUTARCH: Lycurgus, 36a-37b
38 MONTESQUIEU: Spirit of Laws, BK xv, lllb-c; BK xvin, 126c-d; 128a-c
38 ROUSSEAU: Inequality, 352a-d
39 SMITH: Wealth of Nations, BK II, 142d-151c; BK III 163a-181a,c; BK iv, 190b-191a
40 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 21c-23c; 498d; 633d-634a,c
41 GIBBON: Decline and Fall, 451d-452a; 452c- 453a,c
43 FEDERALIST: NUMBER 12, 56b-d
43 MILL: Representative Government, 335a-b / Utilitarianism, 452a~b
46 HEGEL: Philosophy of History, PART II, 263b-d; PART iv, 323c-d; 335a-336c; 368c
50 MARX: Capital, 377c-378d
50 MARX-ENGELS: Communist Manifesto, 421d; 428d-429c; 434c-d
54 FREUD: Civilization and Its Discontents, 777a-c; 778b-779a; 787d-788a / New Introductory Lectures, 882c-884c esp 883d-884c CHAPTER 99: WEALTH 1069 <ref_end>


ADDITIONAL READINGS

Listed below are works not included in Great Boo{s of the Western World,

idea and topics with which this chapter deals. These works are divi

I. Works by authors represented in this collection

II. Works by authors not represented in this collec

For the date, and other facts concerning the publication of the wo

place,

the Bibliography of Additional Readings which follows the last chapter of

F. BACON. "Of Riche

*

LOCKE. Some Conside AQUINAS. Summa Contra Gentiles, BK in, CH 131- Lowering the
Inte Money

.

Quaestiones Disputatae, De Malo, Q 13, A 4 FIELDING. Amelia

. Summa Theologica, PART II-H, Q 66, AA 1-2; HUME. Of the Balanc

PART II-H, Q 78 .

Of Commerc DGE 8a; SCIENCE or another disd the socialist ts, see LABOR STICE
8c(i)-8c(2). OLIGARCHY 4, 3; SLAVERY 43. 6. . Y 2c. ance of wealth, see ar, see
LABOR jcth to happiness and to 2, 5b; rity, see LOVE 50- NATURE 5b; NECESfor the
exam- ; but relevant to the ded into two groups: . tion. rks cited, consult The
Great Ideas. s," "Of Usury,'* in Essays rations of the Consequences of rest, and
Raising the Value of e of Trade e THE GREA HUME. Of Interest

.

Of Money

.

Of Refinement in the Arts

.

Of Taxes A. SMI rn. lectures on Justice, Police, Revenue and

Arms J. S. MILL. Principles of Political Economy

. Socialism DOSTOEVSKY. A Raw Youth MARX. The Poverty of Philosophy, CH i, 2
(3-4)

. A Contribution to the Critique of Political

Economy

.

Critique of the Gotha Programme ENGELS, Herr Eugen Dtihring's Revolution in
Science,

PART II-IH

The Orig in of the Family, Private Property and

.

the State

II.

LANGLAND. Piers Plowman BIEL. Treatise on the Power and Utility of Moneys T.
MORE. Utopia, BK i

LUTHER. On Trading and Usury CALVIN. Institutes of the Christian Religion, BK
in,

CH 10 T. WILSON. A Discourse upon Usury MUN. A Discourse of Trade MOLIERE. Uwarc
(The Miser) MANDEVILLE. The Fable of the Bees FRANKLIN. Poor Richard's Almanack

VOLTAIRE. "Commerce," "Money," "Property,"

in A Philosophical Dictionary LESSING. Minna von Barnhelm TURGOT. Reflections on
the Formation and Distribution of the Riches

CRABBE. The Village BLNHIAM. Defence of Usury MALTHUS. An Essay on Population

SOUTHLY. Essays, Moral and Political, iv RICARDO. The Principles of Political
Economy and

Taxation

}. MILL. Elements of Political Economy BALZAC. Eugenie Grandet Old Goriot

.

The Rise and Fall of Cesar Birotteau

.

COURNOT. Researches into the Mathematical Princithe Theory of Wealth ples of

GOGOL. Dead Souls

PROUDHON. What Is Property? The Philosophy of Misery .

BASTIAT. Economic Sophisms

Harmonies of Political Economy .

THOREAU. Walden

DICKENS. Oliver Twist

. Great Expectations LESLIE. The Love of Money

WHEWELL. The Elements of Morality, BK iv, CH 3-4; BK vi, CH 3 . Six Lectures on
Political Economy

T IDEAS LASSALLE. What Is Capital? MENGER. Grundsatze der Volfywirtschaftskhre
RUSKIN. Munera Pulveris JEVONS. The Theory of Political Economy

Money and the Mechanism of Exchange

. BAGEHOT. The Postulates of English Political Economy

L. H. MORGAN. Ancient Society GEORGE. Progress and Poverty T. H. GREEN. The
Principles of Political Obligation, (M)

HOWELLS. The Rise of Silas Lapham S.BUTLER. Note-Booty FRAZER. The Golden Bough,
PART v A. MARSHALL. Principles of Economics J. N. KEYNES. The Scope and Method
of Political Economy

HAUPTMANN. The Weavers KROPOTKIN. Anarchism BERNSTEIN. Evolutionary Socialism
J.B. CLARK. The Distribution of Wealth * ism, CH 2, 5

WEBER. The Protestant Ethic and the Spirit of CapitalSINCLAIR. The Jungle

PEGUY. Basic Verities (Destitution and Poverty; Socialism and the Modern World)
DEWEY and TUFTS. Ethics, PART in, CH 22-25

W. C. MITCHELL. Business Cycles T. VEBLEN. The Theory of the Leisure Class The
Place of Science in Modem Civilization, . pp 56-456 . The Instinct of
Workmanship, and the State of

the Industrial Arts, en 5

HAMSUN. Growth of the Soil

DEWEY. Reconstruction in Philosophy, CH 8 UNDSET. Krist in Lavransdatter TAWNEY.
The Acquisitive Society Religion and the Rise of Capitalism . SHAW. Widowers'
Houses . Major Barbara

. The Intelligent Woman's Guide to Socialism and

Capitalism

BEVERIDGE. Unemployment BERLE and MEANS. The Modern Corporation and Private
Property

E. CHAMBERLIN. The Theory of Monopolistic Competition MARITAIN. Freedom in the
Modern World, APPENDIX i

FANFANI. Catholicism, Protestantism and Capitalism BELLOC. The Restoration of
Property A. R. BURNS. The Decline of Competition J. M. KEYNES. A Treatise on
Money The General Theory of Employment, Interest .

and Money GILL. Workand Property STEINBECK. The Grapes of Wrath VON NEUMANN and
MORGENSTERN. Theory of

Games and Economic Behavior